Article Identifying the Target Cells and Mechanisms of Merkel Cell Polyomavirus Infection Graphical Abstract Highlights d Merkel cell polyomavirus ( MCPyV ) preferentially infects dermal ﬁbroblasts in human skin d Induction of MMPs by growth factors and WNT signaling stimulates MCPyV infection d Dermal ﬁbroblasts represent a cell culture model supporting the full MCPyV life cycle d FDA - approved kinase inhibitor trametinib efﬁciently blocks MCPyV infection Authors Wei Liu , Ruifeng Yang , Aimee S . Payne , . . . , Xiaowei Xu , Christopher B . Buck , Jianxin You Correspondence jianyou @ mail . med . upenn . edu In Brief Merkel cell polyomavirus ( MCPyV ) infection can lead to Merkel cell carcinoma , a lethal skin cancer . Liu et al . identify dermal ﬁbroblasts as the target of productive MCPyV infection in human skin . This study establishes a cell culture model and identiﬁes a kinase inhibitor as a potential therapeutic agent against MCPyV . Liu et al . , 2016 , Cell Host & Microbe 19 , 1 – 13 June 8 , 2016 ª 2016 Elsevier Inc . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . chom . 2016 . 04 . 024 Cell Host & Microbe Article Identifying the Target Cells and Mechanisms of Merkel Cell Polyomavirus Infection Wei Liu , 1 Ruifeng Yang , 2 Aimee S . Payne , 3 Rachel M . Schowalter , 4 Megan E . Spurgeon , 5 Paul F . Lambert , 5 Xiaowei Xu , 2 Christopher B . Buck , 4 and Jianxin You 1 , * 1 Department of Microbiology 2 Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine 3 Department of Dermatology Perelman School of Medicine , University of Pennsylvania , Philadelphia , PA 19104 , USA 4 Tumor Virus Molecular Biology Section , Laboratory of Cellular Oncology , National Cancer Institute , Bethesda , MD 20892 , USA 5 Department of Oncology , McArdleLaboratory for CancerResearch , University of WisconsinSchoolof Medicine and Public Health , Madison , WI 53706 , USA * Correspondence : jianyou @ mail . med . upenn . edu http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . chom . 2016 . 04 . 024 SUMMARY Infection with Merkel cell polyomavirus ( MCPyV ) can lead to Merkel cell carcinoma ( MCC ) , a lethal form of skin cancer . However , the skin cell type produc - tively infected by MCPyV remains a central question . We combined cell culture and ex vivo approaches to identify human dermal ﬁbroblasts as natural host cells that support productive MCPyV infection . Based on this , we established a cell culture model for MCPyV infection , which will facilitate investiga - tion of the oncogenic mechanisms for this DNA virus . Using this model , we discovered that induction of matrix metalloproteinase ( MMP ) genes by the WNT / b - catenin signaling pathway and other growth fac - tors stimulates MCPyV infection . This suggests that MCC risk factors such as UV radiation and aging , which are known to stimulate WNT signaling and MMP expression , may promote viral infection and thus drive MCC . Our study also introduces the FDA - approved MEK antagonist trametinib as an effective inhibitor for controlling MCPyV infection . INTRODUCTION Merkel cell polyomavirus ( MCPyV ) is the ﬁrst polyomavirus to be clearly associated with a human cancer , Merkel cell carcinoma ( MCC ) ( Feng et al . , 2008 ) . MCC metastasizes rapidly . It is one of the most aggressive skin cancers , with a high mortality rate of 33 % ( Lemos and Nghiem , 2007 ) ( which exceeds the mortality rate of melanoma ) and a < 45 % 5 - year survival rate ( Agelli and Clegg , 2003 ) . Clonal integration of the MCPyV genomic DNA into the host cell genome has been observed in at least 80 % of MCC cases ( Feng et al . , 2008 ) . Continued expression of MCPyV viral oncogenes is required for MCC tumor cells to survive ( Hou - ben et al . , 2010 ) . These ﬁndings provide strong evidence that MCPyV plays an important causal role in the development of MCC skin cancer . MCPyV is an abundant virus frequently detected on healthy human skin ( Foulongne et al . , 2012 ; Schowalter et al . , 2010 ) . Serological evidence conﬁrms that exposure to the virus is essentially ubiquitous in the general population ( Kean et al . , 2009 ; Tolstov et al . , 2009 ) . Excessive exposure to sunlight and ultraviolet ( UV ) radiation , immune suppression , and advanced age are the most important risk factors for MCPyV - associated MCC ( Chang and Moore , 2012 ) . MCC is therefore more frequently observed among people with fair skin , the elderly , and organ transplant or AIDS patients ( Engels et al . , 2002 ; Locke et al . , 2015 ) . The incidence of MCC has tripled over the past 20 years as the aging population with prolonged sun exposure increases ( Hodgson , 2005 ) . MCPyV has a circular , double - stranded DNA genome of (cid:1) 5 kb ( Gjoerup and Chang , 2010 ) . The viral genome contains the viral origin of replication and transcription regulatory elements , as well as the early and late coding regions ( Gjoerup and Chang , 2010 ) . The early region encodes large T ( LT ) antigen , small T ( sT ) antigen , the 57kT antigen , and a protein called alternative LT ORF ( ALTO ) ( Carter et al . , 2013 ; Gjoerup and Chang , 2010 ) . The late region encodes the capsid proteins , VP1 and VP2 ( Schowalter et al . , 2011 ) . Although it is well established that clonal integration of MCPyV genomic DNA into the host genome precedes development of the majority of MCC cases ( Chang and Moore , 2012 ) , the mechanisms by which MCPyV infection con - tributes to MCC development and many aspects of the MCPyV infectious life cycle remain poorly understood . Mechanistic studies to fully investigate MCPyV molecular biology and onco - genic mechanisms have been hampered by the lack of knowl - edge of which host cell types are naturally infected by MCPyV . Based on the expression of neuroendocrine markers , it has been suspected that MCC tumors arise from Merkel cells . Despite their neuroendocrine phenotype , Merkel cells are thought to be derived from the epidermal lineage ( Morrison et al . , 2009 ) and reside in the basal layer of the epidermis ( Chang and Moore , 2012 ) , whereas MCC tumors are usually isolated within the dermis or subcutis , without apparent connection to the epidermis ( Calder and Smoller , 2010 ) . This has led to specu - lation that MCC tumors may arise from pro - / pre - B cells whose gene expression patterns become deranged during the process of tumorigenesis ( Zur Hausen et al . , 2013 ) . An additional puzzle is Cell Host & Microbe 19 , 1 – 13 , June 8 , 2016 ª 2016 Elsevier Inc . 1 Please cite this article in press as : Liu et al . , Identifying the Target Cells and Mechanisms of Merkel Cell Polyomavirus Infection , Cell Host & Microbe ( 2016 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . chom . 2016 . 04 . 024 that Merkel cells are postmitotic ( Vaigot et al . , 1987 ) , and there are too few Merkel cells in the skin to account for the millions of copies of MCPyV DNA detected on healthy human skin ( Scho - walter et al . , 2010 ) . It is therefore believed that Merkel cells are unlikely to be the primary target of MCPyV infection or productive replication . Instead , the natural host cells of MCPyV could be one of the more abundant cell types in the human skin . An obvious hypothesis is that , analogous to skin - tropic papillomaviruses , new MCPyV virions are produced in terminally differentiated ker - atinocytes . This hypothesis has been difﬁcult to test because MCPyV replicates poorly in a wide range of cell types , including keratinocytes and other cell types tested in our studies ( Neu - mann et al . , 2011 ; Schowalter et al . , 2012 ; Tsang et al . , 2014 ) . We found that fewer than 0 . 1 % of cells in cultures of various cell lines support high - level MCPyV transcription and replication ( Tsang et al . , 2014 ) . Therefore , the host cells naturally infected by MCPyV are formally unknown . To tackle this fundamental ques - tion , we examined the MCPyV infectability of human skin cells using both MCPyV pseudovirus carrying a GFP reporter and MCPyV virions produced through cotransfection of sT / LT expression plasmids and religated recombinant MCPyV genome ( Schowalter et al . , 2011 ) . Here we report our results identifying the natural host cells in the human dermis that are productively infected by MCPyV . RESULTS MCPyV Infects a Subpopulation of Fibroblasts in the Human Dermis To identify the natural host cells of MCPyV in the human skin , we produced recombinant MCPyV and MCPyV - GFP pseudovirus using our reported methods ( Schowalter et al . , 2011 ) . MCPyV - GFP pseudovirus , which carries a GFP reporter construct instead of MCPyV genome within the viral capsid , is useful for visualizing the initial phase of viral infectious entry , whereas re - combinant MCPyV , which carries the native viral genome , allows detection of viral transcription and productive replication in the infected cells . Virions or reporter pseudovirions were applied to the total cell population isolated from human foreskin , including epidermal keratinocytes , dermal ﬁbroblasts , Merkel cells , and other types of skin cells . We then examined MCPyV infectious tropism by performing immunoﬂuorescent staining of cell type - speciﬁc markers to identify the GFP + cells in the reporter pseudovirus - treated population . In addition , MCPyV virion - treated cells were double stained with antibodies recognizing MCPyV LT and one ofthecelltype - speciﬁcmarkerstoidentifyMCPyV - infectedcells . We ﬁrst separately isolated epidermal and dermal cells from human foreskin . Because MCC tumors have sometimes been suspected of arising from the neural crest lineage ( Tang and Toker , 1978 ) , we initially speculated that the natural target of pro - ductive MCPyV infection in the skin could be derived from this lineage . Accordingly , we cultured the primary skin cells in me - dium containing growth factors such as epidermal growth factor ( EGF ) and / or ﬁbroblast growth factor ( FGF ) , but without fetal bovine serum ( FBS ) , which could induce neural crest stem cell differentiation ( Lee et al . , 2007 ) . Consistent with past reports that MCPyV pseudovirions can deliver encapsidated reporter DNA to a wide variety of different cell types ( Schowalter et al . , 2012 ) , GFP expression was observed in pseudovirus - exposed human foreskin keratino - cytes ( HFKs ) , marked by Cytokeratin 14 ( K14 ) , isolated from the epidermis , as well as in dermal cells ( Table 1 ; see Figure S1 avail - able online ) . In contrast , after treatment with MCPyV virions , LT + and VP1 + cells were only detected in the dermal cell population , and none of the MCPyV virion - treated HFKs or other epidermal cells showed LT or VP1 expression ( Figure 1A ; Table 1 ) . The re - sults conﬁrm that MCPyV infectious entry is relatively promiscu - ous but that viral gene expression is unexpectedly restricted to human dermal cells and not epidermal cells . Using immunoﬂuorescent microscopy , we found that MCPyV - infected cells were not stained with antibodies recognizing a number of markers for various skin cell types including nerve cells , melanocytes , neural crest - like cells , smooth muscle cells , Schwann cells , mesenchymal stem cells , adipogenic cells , oste - ogenic cells , lymphocytes , and endothelial cells ( Table 1 ) . When Table 1 . Skin Cell Markers Tested in This Study Cell Marker Cell Type MCPyV - GFP MCPyV Cytokeratin 14 Keratinocytes Positive Negative Cytokeratin 20 Merkel cells Negative Negative S100 Melanocytes / Schwann cells Negative Negative Sox10 Neural crest cells / melanocytes Negative Negative p75NTR Neural crest cells Negative Negative GFAP Schwann cells / glial cells Negative Negative MAP2 Neuron Negative Negative Neuroﬁlament - H Neuron Negative NA b 3 - tublin Neuron Negative Negative FABP4 Adipogenic cells Negative Negative Osteocalcin Osteogenic cells Negative NA CD73 Mesenchymal stem cells Negative NA CD105 Mesenchymal stem cells Negative NA STRO - 1 Mesenchymal stem cells Negative NA Vimentin Mesenchymal stem cells / ﬁbroblasts Positive Positive Collagen I Fibroblasts Positive Positive PDPN Fibroblasts Positive NA P4HB Fibroblast / keratinocytes Positive Positive MyoD Smooth muscle cells Negative NA a - SMA Smooth muscle cells Negative NA CD3 T cells Negative NA CD19 B cells Negative Negative CD11C DC cells Negative NA CD56 NK Negative NA CD146 Endothelial cell Negative NA CD31 Endothelial cell Negative NA 2 Cell Host & Microbe 19 , 1 – 13 , June 8 , 2016 Please cite this article in press as : Liu et al . , Identifying the Target Cells and Mechanisms of Merkel Cell Polyomavirus Infection , Cell Host & Microbe ( 2016 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . chom . 2016 . 04 . 024 stained with the antibody for Merkel cell marker Cytokeratin 20 ( CK20 ) , nearly no cells isolated from human foreskin were posi - tive . The sample extracted from human fetal scalp containing CK20 + cells was therefore used to test MCPyV infection . When these cells were treated with MCPyV - GFP pseudovirus , nearly all of the CK20 + cells were negative for GFP signal ( Figure S1B ) . However , one cell out of 122 CK20 + cells examined was transduced with MCPyV - GFP pseudovirus ( Figure S1B ) . For the MCPyV - treated samples , all of the 42 CK20 + cells examined were negative for MCPyV LT signal ( Figure S1C ) . This negative result could be due to the fact that the low number of CK20 + cells reduced the chance of detecting MCPyV LT + cells . It could also be that CK20 + cells do not support robust MCPyV entry and viral transcription . In any case , the data suggested that MCPyV most likely productively infects another cells type ( s ) besides Merkel cells and may enter Merkel cells at a very low rate , which is consistent with the low incidence of MCPyV + MCC tumors . In contrast , cells expressing GFP following infection with MCPyV - GFP pseudovirus were all positively stained for dermal ﬁbroblast markers including vimentin , PDPN , collagen I , and P4HB ( Fig - ure S1D ) . More importantly , in the mixture of primary dermal cells Figure 1 . MCPyV Preferentially Infects Dermal Fibroblasts Isolated from Human Foreskin Cells isolated from human foreskin epidermis and dermis ( A ) or from the dermis of human foreskin ( B ) were treated with recombinant MCPyV virions in DMEM / F12 with N2 , B27 , EGF , and bFGF , but without FBS , for 2 days . After switching to the same fresh medium for 3 more days , cells were immunostained using the indicated antibodies and counterstained with DAPI . Scale bar , 10 m m . Shown are representative images from eight independent experiments . See also Figure S1 . treated with MCPyV virions , all of the LT + cells were also positively stained for the dermal ﬁbroblast markers ( Figure 1B ) . These results suggest that dermal ﬁbro - blasts are likely the major cell type in the skin that is naturally infected by MCPyV . In previous studies , we showed that MCPyV LT colocalizes with BRD4 at MCPyV replication foci in cells cotrans - fected with MCPyV LT and origin con - structs to reconstitute an in vitro replica - tion system ( Wang et al . , 2012 ) . In many of the MCPyV - infected human dermal ﬁbroblasts , we also detected LT + foci resembling the MCPyV replication foci described in our earlier study ( Wang et al . , 2012 ) , with LT colocalizing with BRD4inthesefoci ( FigureS2A ) . Thisresult indicates that MCPyV - infected dermal cells can support viral replication . In addi - tion , human dermal ﬁbroblasts trans - fected with religated MCPyV genome could efﬁciently express LT and VP1 ( Fig - ure S2B ) . These studies suggest that dermal ﬁbroblasts are not only infectable by MCPyV but also support viral transcription and replication . Growth Factors and WNT Signaling Activation Stimulate MCPyV Infection As described above , human dermal cells tested for MCPyV infection were initially cultured in the presence of EGF and FGF , without FBS , in order to mimic the culture conditions for neural crest stem cells . However , because dermal ﬁbroblasts are normally cultured in FBS - supplemented medium , we tested whether FBS affects MCPyV infectious entry and gene expres - sion . We discovered that treating dermal cell cultures with MCPyV for 2 days in the presence of EGF and FGF ( without FBS ) followed by a transfer to medium containing FBS caused an increase in the percentage of cells showing both LT signal and MCPyV replication foci relative to the no FBS condition ( Figures 2A and 2B ) . Conversely , if the cells were ﬁrst treated with MCPyV in FBS - supplemented medium and either grown continuously in medium with FBS or switched to EGF / FGF - sup - plemented medium , we rarely detected either MCPyV LT / VP1 signals or replication foci ( Figures 2A and 2B ) . Both EGF and Cell Host & Microbe 19 , 1 – 13 , June 8 , 2016 3 Please cite this article in press as : Liu et al . , Identifying the Target Cells and Mechanisms of Merkel Cell Polyomavirus Infection , Cell Host & Microbe ( 2016 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . chom . 2016 . 04 . 024 Figure 2 . The Unique Growth Conditions that Support Effective MCPyV Entry and Transcription / Replication Events in Human Dermal Fibroblasts ( A ) For the top two panels , dermal cells isolated from human foreskins were treated with MCPyV in medium containing FBS for 2 days and then either replaced withthe samefreshmedium ( FBS ) or switched tomedium containing EGF and bFGF ( FBS / EGF / FGF ) for 3moredays . Forthebottom two panels , dermalcells weretreatedwithMCPyVinmediumcontainingEGFandbFGFfor2daysandtheneitherreplacedwiththesamefreshmedium ( EGF / FGF ) orswitchedtomedium containing FBS ( EGF / FGF / FBS ) for 3 more days . All cells were immunostained using the indicated antibodies and counterstained with DAPI . ( B ) The percentage of LT + cells in the samples described in ( A ) . ( legend continued on next page ) 4 Cell Host & Microbe 19 , 1 – 13 , June 8 , 2016 Please cite this article in press as : Liu et al . , Identifying the Target Cells and Mechanisms of Merkel Cell Polyomavirus Infection , Cell Host & Microbe ( 2016 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . chom . 2016 . 04 . 024 FGF could separately stimulate MCPyV infectivity , and there was an additive effect when both were used during the viral entry phase ( Figure S2C ) . To determine whether EGF and FGF enhance the infectious entry process or instead simply trigger an increase in MCPyV gene expression , we applied MCPyV - GFP pseudovirus to EGF / FGF - treated human dermal cells . Combination treatment increased the number of GFP - positive dermal cells by roughly 3 . 5 - fold ( Figure S2D ) . This suggests that the increased viral gene expression observed using MCPyV virions on EGF / FGF - treated dermal cells is due to an enhance - ment of infectious entry ( Figure 2C ) . FBS , on the other hand , stimulated MCPyV gene expression only if it was added after the initial entry stage ( Figures 2A and 2B ) , and a dose - dependent effectwasobservedwhen upto50 % FBS wasused ( Figure S2E ) . Together , the MCPyV data suggested that there are two different phases of ﬁbroblast proliferation ; the EGF - and FGF - induced phase supports MCPyV entry , while the FBS culture condition promotes MCPyV gene expression and replication only after the infectious entry process is completed ( Figure 2C ) . Under this condition , (cid:1) 2 % of the cells in the primary dermal culture were able to support viral entry and gene expression ( Table S1 ) . Human dermal cells cultured for multiple passages in medium containing 10 % FBS could be reactivated for viral entry by culturing in the presence of EGF and FGF ( without FBS ) before adding virus ( Figure 2D , column 2 ) . After switching the EGF / FGF - and virus - treated cells back into medium with 10 % FBS , we again detected robust viral transcription and replication ( Fig - ure 2D , column 2 ) . If these cells were treated with the virus in the medium containing only FBS , they again showed very low infec - tion efﬁciency ( Figure 2D , column 3 ) . In fact , preculturing human dermal cells in medium containing 10 % FBS appears to select for the dermal ﬁbroblasts that support MCPyV infection , as the percentage of cells showing LT and VP1 expression increased from (cid:1) 1 . 6 % in the primary dermal cells freshly isolated from human foreskin to (cid:1) 5 % in the cells precultured in the presence of FBS ( compare Figures 2B and 2D and Table S1 ) . In contrast , HFKs treated with the same conditions did not show any detect - able LT expression , suggesting that the stimulation effect of growth factors and FBS is speciﬁc for dermal ﬁbroblasts . Immu - noﬂuorescent staining showed that nearly 100 % of the human dermal cells precultured in medium containing 10 % FBS were positively stained for dermal ﬁbroblast markers , vimentin , and collagen I and negative for the HFK marker K14 ( Figure S2F ) , conﬁrming that the culture process enriched for dermal ﬁbro - blasts that support MCPyV infection . In light of the EGF / FGF stimulation effect on MCPyV infection of dermal ﬁbroblasts , a screen was performed to identify addi - tional chemical compounds and / or growth factors that might promote MCPyV infection . For this study , human dermal cells were ﬁrst inoculated with MCPyV in the presence of EGF , FGF , and one of the factors shown in Figure 2E for 2 days and then switched to medium with 10 % FBS . Among all of the reagents tested , CHIR99021 , a highly selective inhibitor of GSK3 , was the most efﬁcient at stimulating MCPyV infection ( Figure 2E ) . Adding CHIR99021 to cells treated with EGF and FGF but without subsequent FBS stimulation did not enhance MCPyV infection ( Figure 2F ) . In contrast , for cells treated with EGF / FGF beforeinfectionandFBS afterinfection , addingCHIR99021inhib - itor during MCPyV treatment dramatically increased the MCPyV infection efﬁciency . These results suggest that CHIR99021 func - tions to stimulate viral entry , but not the later events such as tran - scription and replication . When human dermal cells were treated with MCPyV in the presence of EGF , FGF , and CHIR99021 , the percentage of cells showing LT and VP1 expression was higher than 20 % ( Figures 2F and 2G ) , with the viral genome number reaching an average of about 12 , 000 copies per cell ( Figure 2H ) . CHIR99021 is known to inhibit GSK3 , thereby activating b - cat - enin in the WNT signaling pathway ( Bennett et al . , 2002 ) . The efﬁcacy of the drug on dermal ﬁbroblasts was conﬁrmed using a TOP - Flash reporter system ( Figure S3A ) . The reporter assays showed that CHIR99021 speciﬁcally stimulated the b - catenin associated TCF / LEF transcription activation of the TOP - Flash reporter by (cid:1) 8 , 000 - fold but had no signiﬁcant effect on a nega - tive control FOP - Flash reporter containing a mutated TCF bind - ing site ( Figure S3A ) . Another GSK3 inhibitor , BIO , which showed a similar effect in b - catenin activation assays ( Figure S3A ) , also enhanced MCPyV infection ( Figure S3B ) . Furthermore , GSK3 knockdown increased MCPyV infection ( Figures S3C and S3D ) . These results suggest that activation of the WNT / b - catenin signaling pathway is important for MCPyV infection . Induction of Matrix Metalloproteinase Genes Is Crucial for MCPyV Infection To understand how treating dermal ﬁbroblasts with EGF , FGF , and CHIR99021 stimulates MCPyV infection , we performed RT - qPCR to survey a large number of genes that might be involved in the process ( Figures 3A and S4 ) . Remarkably , several genes of the matrix metalloproteinase ( MMP ) family , including MMP1 , MMP3 , MMP7 , MMP9 , MMP10 , MMP11 , and MMP13 , were robustly induced in the dermal cells treated with EGF , FGF , and CHIR99021 ( Figure 3A ) . The MMP induction was also conﬁrmed using western blotting , which revealed that the active ( cleaved ) forms of MMP1 , MMP3 , and MMP10 were dramatically increased in the cells treated with EGF , FGF , and CHIR99021 , ( C ) MCPyV entry and transcription / replication occur in two different stages of dermal ﬁbroblast proliferation . ( D ) Human dermal cells cultured in medium containing 10 % FBS for multiple passages were treated with recombinant MCPyV in medium alone ( (cid:3) ) or supplemented with either EGF / bFGF or FBS for 2 days . After culturing with fresh medium containing 10 % FBS for 3 more days , the cells were stained with LT antibody . The percentage of LT + cells was quantiﬁed and the value for the ‘‘medium alone’’ sample was set as 1 . ( E – G ) Human dermal cells were treated with MCPyV in medium containing EGF / bFGF and additional components , as indicated , for 2 days and then switched to medium containing 10 % FBS for 3 more days . The cells were stained using LT and VP1 antibodies and counterstained with DAPI . The percentage of LT + cells in the sample treated with only EGF and bFGF ( Control ) was set as 1 . EDN3 , Endothelin 3 ; PD 0325901 , a MEK1 and MEK2 inhibitor ; BMP4 , bone morphogenetic protein 4 ; SB431542 : an inhibitor of TGF - b superfamily type I activin receptor - like kinase receptors ; CHIR99021 , the most selective inhibitor of GSK3 ; Y - 27632 , ROCK kinase inhibitor ; RA , retinoic acid ; XAV939 , tankyrase inhibitor . ( H ) Human dermal cells were treated with MCPyV in medium containing EGF , bFGF , and CHIR99021 before switching to medium containing 10 % FBS . MCPyV genome copy numbers were determined by qPCR and normalized to GAPDH DNA levels . Error bars represent SEM of at least three independent experiments . See also Figures S2 and S3 . Cell Host & Microbe 19 , 1 – 13 , June 8 , 2016 5 Please cite this article in press as : Liu et al . , Identifying the Target Cells and Mechanisms of Merkel Cell Polyomavirus Infection , Cell Host & Microbe ( 2016 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . chom . 2016 . 04 . 024 Figure 3 . Activation of MMP Genes Supports MCPyV Infection ( A ) Human dermal cells were cultured in DMEM / F12 alone or supplemented with either FBS or EGF , bFGF , and CHIR99021 . After 48 hr , the mRNA levels of the MMP genes were measured by RT - qPCR and normalized to GAPDH mRNA . The values for the sample grown in medium only were set as 1 . ( B ) Cell lysates of human dermal cells cultured as in ( A ) were immunoblotted with the indicated antibodies . ACTIN was used as a loading control . The experiment was performed at least three times with similar results . ( C ) HumandermalcellsculturedinDMEM / F12wereeitheruntreatedortreatedwithdifferentconcentrationsofcollagenasetypeIVbeforeincubationwithMCPyV for 2 days . After switching to fresh DMEM / F12 containing FBS for 3 more days , the cells were stained with LT antibody . The percentage of LT + cells in the untreated sample was set as 1 . ( D ) Human dermal cells were treated with MCPyV in medium containing EGF , bFGF , CHIR99021 and either DMSO ( Control ) or the inhibitors for 2 days . After switchingtofreshmedium containing FBSfor3moredays , thecellswere stainedwithLTantibody . Thepercentage ofLT + cells wascalculated . Thevalueforthe Control group was set as 1 . ( legend continued on next page ) 6 Cell Host & Microbe 19 , 1 – 13 , June 8 , 2016 Please cite this article in press as : Liu et al . , Identifying the Target Cells and Mechanisms of Merkel Cell Polyomavirus Infection , Cell Host & Microbe ( 2016 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . chom . 2016 . 04 . 024 compared to the untreated cells or cells treated with FBS ( Figure 3B ) . Because these MMP enzymes are capable of degrading extra - cellular matrix proteins ( Overall and Lo´pez - Otı´n , 2002 ) , we reasoned that they might stimulate MCPyV infection by disrupt - ing the extracellular matrix of the host cells . To test this hypoth - esis , we treated human dermal cells being infected with MCPyV usingcollagenase type IV , a member of the MMPfamily , to mimic the MMP induction . Indeed , collagenase treatment stimulated MCPyV infection in a dose - dependent manner ( Figure 3C ) . In contrast , treatment with MMPs inhibitors , Marimastat and Bati - mastat , dramatically inhibited MCPyV infection ( Figure 3D ) . Nearly 50 % of the cells expressed LT and VP1 at the optimum collagenase dose ( Figures 3E and 3F ) . Many of the infected cells not only had highly expressed LT and VP1 but also showed robust MCPyV LT + replication foci ( Figures 3E and 3F ) . This strong viral transcription and replication was not observed in any of the other cells we and others have examined ( Neumann et al . , 2011 ; Schowalter et al . , 2012 ; Tsang et al . , 2014 ) . Since all of the LT + cells were also positively stained for the dermal ﬁbroblast marker , vimentin ( Figure 3F ) , this result provides strong evidence to support the idea that human dermal ﬁbro - blasts are an important target of productive MCPyV infection . Human Dermal Fibroblasts Support the Full MCPyV Life Cycle Using the optimum MCPyV infection condition established above , including treatment with EGF , FGF , CHIR99021 , and collagenase before adding virus and FBS after viral entry , LT pro - tein was detected in the infected cells by western blotting ( Fig - ure 4A ) . The replicated viral genome was measured by qPCR to be (cid:1) 15 , 000 copies per cell ( Figure 4B ) . Fluorescence in situ hybridization ( FISH ) analysis using in situ DNA - hybridization chain reaction ( HCR ) technique also revealed high concentra - tions of MCPyV DNA around the putative replication foci in the infected cells ( Figure 4C ) . The replicated MCPyV genome and RNA were also detected in the infected cells using single - mole - cule ﬂuorescence in situ hybridization ( smFISH ) ( Figure S5A ) . More importantly , immuno - DNA HCR FISH that simultaneously detects viral protein and DNA showed that the replicated MCPyV genomes were enriched at the MCPyV LT + foci in the infected cells ( Figure 4D ) . This ﬁnding conﬁrmed that MCPyV sets up replication factories in the infected cells . Moreover , MCPyV LT and VP1 signals were still detected at 20 – 30 days after human dermal cells were treated with MCPyV ( Figure 4E ) . These results suggest that MCPyV can be maintained in human dermal ﬁbro - blasts for an extended period . To test if human dermal ﬁbroblasts allow MCPyV to complete its life cycle , we transfected these cells with religated MCPyV genome in medium containing 10 % FBS to stimulate viral tran - scription and replication . After lysing the cells , MCPyV virions were puriﬁed over an OptiPrep gradient ( Figure 4F ) . The MCPyV virions were used to infect fresh human dermal ﬁbroblasts treated with EGF , FGF , CHIR99021 , and collagenase . After culturing the infected cells in medium with FBS , we again de - tected LT and VP1 signals as well as the LT + replication foci in many of the infected cells ( Figure 4G ) . This experiment further demonstrated that human dermal ﬁbroblasts could support the completion of the MCPyV life cycle to produce infectious virions . Besides the primary dermal ﬁbroblasts isolated from human foreskin , dermal cells isolated from normal adult skin were also efﬁciently infected with MCPyV ( Figure S5B ) . Interestingly , MCPyV also expresses LT and VP1 in ﬁbroblast cell lines such as WI - 38 and IMR - 90 derived from lung tissues ( Figure S5C ) . MCPyV Infects Dermal Fibroblasts in Human Skin Cultured Ex Vivo We also tested how MCPyV - GFP pseudovirions and MCPyV vi - rions infect cells grown within the context of other cells in human skin ex vivo . In MCPyV - GFP pseudovirus - treated skin slices , GFP signal was detected in cells either at the boundary between epidermis and dermis or inside the dermis , whereas untreated skin slices showed negative GFP signal ( Figure 5A ) . We also examined MCPyV infection in the human skin slices . Again , we detected the signals of both LT and VP1 either at the border be - tween the epidermis and dermis or inside the dermis only in the infected skin slices ( Figure 5B ) . Much of the GFP signal was lost during immunoﬂuorescent staining of MCPyV - GFP pseudovirus - treated skin slices . However , we could clearly detect the remain - ing GFP + cells present within the vimentin + layer of the dermis ( Figure S6A ) . Although HFKs could be easily transduced by MCPyV - GFP pseudoviruses when cultured in dish ( Table 1 ; Fig - ure S1A ) , there were no detectable GFP + epidermal cells in the human skin slices cultured with pseudovirions ex vivo ( Figures 5A and S6A ) . These results conﬁrmed that both MCPyV - GFP pseudovirus and MCPyV preferentially infect dermal ﬁbroblasts in human skin cultured ex vivo . As shown in Figures 2 and S3 , activation of the WNT signaling pathway in cultured human dermal cells stimulates MCPyV infection . We next investigated how WNT signaling may contribute to MCPyV infection in the more physiological environment of the skin using ex vivo skin culture . It has been shown that WNT signals released from epidermal keratinocytes trigger the proliferation of dermal ﬁbroblasts beneath the basal keratinocytes ( Chen et al . , 2012 ) . This could explain why dermal ﬁbroblasts underlying the basal layer of the epidermis were efﬁ - ciently infected ( Figures 5A and 5B ) . In addition , there is also a layer of basal keratinocytes comprising the outer root sheath of hair follicles . WNT signaling in the keratinocyte compartment of hair follicles is critical for hair follicle formation and regenera - tion ( Chen et al . , 2012 ) . Therefore , we also tested if MCPyV pref - erentially infects the cells surrounding hair follicles compared to other dermal cells . Both MCPyV - GFP pseudovirions and MCPyV virions were used to treat slices of human scalp containing hair follicles . Remarkably , in MCPyV - GFP pseudovirus - treated sam - ples , GFP signal was found in the dermal cells surrounding hair ( E ) Human dermal cells cultured in DMEM / F12 containing EGF , bFGF , CHIR99021 , and 1 mg / ml collagenase type IV were either untreated ( Mock ) or treated ( Infected ) with MCPyV for 2 days . After switching to fresh DMEM / F12 containing FBS for 3 more days , the cells were costained with LT and VP1 antibodies and counterstained with DAPI . ( F ) HumandermalcellstreatedwithMCPyVasin ( E ) werecostainedwithLTandvimentinantibodiesandcounterstainedwithDAPI . Scalebar , 10 m m . Allerrorbars represent SEM of three independent experiments . See also Figure S4 . Cell Host & Microbe 19 , 1 – 13 , June 8 , 2016 7 Please cite this article in press as : Liu et al . , Identifying the Target Cells and Mechanisms of Merkel Cell Polyomavirus Infection , Cell Host & Microbe ( 2016 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . chom . 2016 . 04 . 024 Figure 4 . Human Dermal Fibroblasts Support the Full MCPyV Life Cycle ( A ) HumandermalcellsculturedasinFigure3Ewereeitheruntreated ( (cid:3) ) ortreated ( + ) withMCPyV . CelllysateswereimmunoblottedwithLTantibody . ACTINwas used as a loading control . The experiment was performed at least three times with similar results . ( B ) MCPyV copy numbers in the cells described in ( A ) were measured using qPCR and normalized to GAPDH DNA levels . ( C ) Human dermal cells treated with MCPyV as in Figure 3E were subjected to HCR FISH analysis . ( D ) Cellspreparedasin ( A ) weresubjectedtoimmuno - FISHusingLTantibodyandMCPyV - speciﬁcDNAprobes . HPV16probeswereusedasanegativecontrol . The cells were also counterstained with DAPI . ( E ) Humandermalcellsculturedinmedium containing EGF , bFGF , andCHIR99021were eitheruntreated ( Mock ) ortreated ( Infected ) withMCPyVfor2days . The cells were then cultured in medium with FBS . On day 20 , the cells were stained using the indicated antibodies and counterstained with DAPI . Shown are the representative images of the untreated and virus - infected dermal ﬁbroblasts . ( legend continued on next page ) 8 Cell Host & Microbe 19 , 1 – 13 , June 8 , 2016 Please cite this article in press as : Liu et al . , Identifying the Target Cells and Mechanisms of Merkel Cell Polyomavirus Infection , Cell Host & Microbe ( 2016 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . chom . 2016 . 04 . 024 follicles ( Figure 5C ) . Immunoﬂuorescent staining of these skin sli - ces using the antibody for the dermal ﬁbroblast marker , vimentin , clearly highlighted the layers of dermal ﬁbroblasts around hair follicles and revealed that the GFP signal was present in the dermal ﬁbroblasts encircling hair follicles ( Figure S6B ) . Similarly , in the samples infected with MCPyV virions , we detected LT expression in the cells near hair follicles ( Figure 5D ) . These cells were also positively stained for vimentin ( Figure 5D ) . Together , the data from both MCPyV - GFP pseudovirus and MCPyV virion demonstrated that the viruses preferentially infect the dermal ﬁbroblasts around hair follicles . Identiﬁcation of a Kinase Inhibitor that Efﬁciently Blocks MCPyV Infection Uncontrolled MCPyV infection in immunocompromised individ - uals is thought to pose signiﬁcant risk for the development of ( F ) HumandermalcellsweretransfectedwithreligatedMCPyVgenomeinDMEMcontaining10 % FBSfor1day . Afterswitchingtofreshmediumcontaining10 % FBS for 4 more days , the MCPyV virions were harvested and puriﬁed over an OptiPrep gradient . The viral genome copy number in each gradient fraction was measured using qPCR . ( G ) The virionspuriﬁed in ( F ) were usedtoinfect humandermalcells cultured asinFigure 3E . Thecells were stainedas in ( E ) . Allerrorbars represent SEM of three independent experiments . Scale bar , 10 m m . See also Figure S5 . Figure 5 . Both MCPyV - GFP Pseudovirus and MCPyV Infect Dermal Fibroblasts in Human Skin Cultured Ex Vivo Humanforeskin ( AandB ) andscalp ( CandD ) slicesculturedexvivoweretreatedwitheitherMCPyV - GFPpseudoviruses ( AandC ) orrecombinantMCPyV ( BandD ) . The MCPyV - infected slices ( B and D ) were stained using the indicated antibodies . Scale bar , 10 m m . Shown are the representative images of both infected and uninfected ( mock ) skin slices from three independent experiments . Arrows mark the MCPyV - infected cells . E , epidermis ; D , dermis . See also Figure S6 . Cell Host & Microbe 19 , 1 – 13 , June 8 , 2016 9 Please cite this article in press as : Liu et al . , Identifying the Target Cells and Mechanisms of Merkel Cell Polyomavirus Infection , Cell Host & Microbe ( 2016 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . chom . 2016 . 04 . 024 MCC ( Chang and Moore , 2012 ) . To explore possible ways to inhibit MCPyV infection , we set out to identify small molecules targeting the EGF , FGF , b - catenin , and FBS pathways that our work suggests are important for MCPyV infection . We screened a number of compounds , including several FDA - approved ki - nase inhibitors , for inhibitory effects on MCPyV infection . Trame - tinib , a MEK1 and MEK2 inhibitor , dramatically inhibited MCPyV infection , whereas the Bruton’s tyrosine kinase inhibitor Ibrutinib , the phosphoinositide 3 - kinase inhibitor Idelalisib , and many other compounds had no detectable inhibitory effect on MCPyV infection ( Figures 6A and 6B ) . In addition , trametinib did not affect MCPyV - GFP pseudovirus transduction of human dermal ﬁbroblasts ( Figure S7 ) , suggesting that this kinase inhibitor mainly blocks MCPyV transcription and / or replication in the infected cells . This speciﬁc inhibitory effect of the MEK1 and MEK2 inhibitor suggests that MCPyV infection may require acti - vation of the MAP kinase pathway , which could be induced by EGF , FGF , and / or FBS ( Katz et al . , 2007 ; Whitmarsh et al . , 1995 ) . DISCUSSION As the ﬁrst human polyomavirus clearly shown to cause human cancer , MCPyV represents an exciting opportunity to better un - derstand polyomavirus - induced tumorigenesis . However , the lack of knowledge of the natural host cell tropism of MCPyV and the technical difﬁculties in propagating the virus in cell Figure 6 . Identiﬁcation of a Kinase Inhibitor that Efﬁciently Blocks MCPyV Infection ( A ) Human dermal cells cultured as in Figure 3E were treated with recombinant MCPyV for 2 days . After switching to medium containing FBS , the inhibitors were added to the culture for 3 days . The cells were stained with LT antibody and counterstained with DAPI . Scale bar , 10 m m . ( B ) The percentageof LT + cells inthesamples treated as in ( A ) was calculated . Thevaluefor the DMSO ( Control ) group was set as 1 . Errorbars represent SEM of three independent experiments . ( C ) The working model for MCPyV infection of the human skin . See also Figure S7 . 10 Cell Host & Microbe 19 , 1 – 13 , June 8 , 2016 Please cite this article in press as : Liu et al . , Identifying the Target Cells and Mechanisms of Merkel Cell Polyomavirus Infection , Cell Host & Microbe ( 2016 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . chom . 2016 . 04 . 024 culture have hindered the discovery of its oncogenic mecha - nisms . In this study , we identiﬁed human dermal ﬁbroblasts as a human skin cell type that supports robust MCPyV infectious entry , gene expression , and productive replication . The discovery of human dermal ﬁbroblasts as MCPyV natural host cells was made after establishing the cell culture conditions that could potentially mimic specialized cellular growth signals in the skin . For example , we found that culturing dermal cells with EGF and FGF is needed to stimulate MCPyV entry ( Figures 2A – 2D ) . After the viral infectious entry process is completed , FBS becomes critical for stimulating MCPyV transcription and repli - cation . Furthermore , culturing human dermal cells in the pres - ence of FBS for multiple passages enriches for the type of cells that could readily be primed for MCPyV infectious entry by EGF and FGF ( Figure 2D ) . EGF and FGF are among the cocktail of growth factors induced in the proliferative ﬁbroblasts at the wound site of damaged human skin ( Martin , 1997 ) . They are physiologically upregulated in the dermis during wound healing and angiogenesis ( Werner and Grose , 2003 ) . These growth fac - tors provide the signals for initiating wound healing and angio - genesis ( Martin , 1997 ) . Thus , cellular signaling associated with recovery from wounding may induce the skin environments that promote MCPyV infection . The subsequent burst of ﬁbro - blast proliferation may also enhance the viral transcription and replication activities . In human skin , WNT signaling transduced through intercellular communication between epidermal keratinocytes and dermal ﬁbroblasts or follicular keratinocytes and the surrounding dermal ﬁbroblasts plays an important role in the proliferation of dermal cells and hair follicle regeneration , respectively ( Chen et al . , 2012 ) . Using chemical screening , we discovered that chemical compounds , such as CHIR99021 and BIO , which acti - vate the WNT / b - catenin signaling pathway , could further stimu - late MCPyV transduction of human dermal ﬁbroblasts in cell culture . Furthermore , in experiments using human skin slices cultured ex vivo to mimic the natural environment of the human skin , we showed that both MCPyV - GFP pseudovirus and recom - binant MCPyV infect dermal ﬁbroblasts located at the boundary between epidermis and dermis , and also in the regions surrounding hair follicles inside the dermis ( Figures 5 and S6 ) . Together , these results suggest that active WNT signaling in these skin locations may stimulate MCPyV infection in the phys - iological environment of the human skin . Our gene expression proﬁling analysis showed that one of the combined effects of EGF , FGF , and CHIR99021 is to robustly induce the expression of MMP genes ( Figures 3A and 3B ) . This result suggests that activation of these downstream MMP genes may contribute to MCPyV infection by disrupting the extracel - lular matrix of the host cells . Indeed , cells treated with collage - nase to degrade their extracellular matrix efﬁciently stimulated MCPyV infection ( Figures 3C and 3E ) . EGF , FGF , and b - catenin signaling have all been shown to stimulate MMP expression ( Aho et al . , 1997 ; Neth et al . , 2007 ; Van Meter et al . , 2004 ) . This could partly explain why these components activate MCPyV infection . In the physiological skin environment , skin damage induced by UV / ionizing radiation ( IR ) and wounding processes can activate both WNT signaling and MMP expression ( Cho et al . , 2009 ; Fisher et al . , 1996 ; Gill and Parks , 2008 ; Whyte et al . , 2012 ) . Aging skin also shows dramatically increased MMP expression and reduced collagen levels ( Quan and Fisher , 2015 ; Varani et al . , 2006 ) . Therefore , it is possible that these changes in physiological conditions of the skin could stimulate viral infection by inducing the expression of MMP genes ( Fig - ure 6C ) . Moreover , MMPs play a critical role in tumor invasion and metastasis ( Brown and Murray , 2015 ) . The dysregulated MMP gene expression that supports MCPyV infection could also contribute to the virus - induced oncogenesis . Interestingly , a recent study from the Chang and Moore laboratory discovered that several MMP genes are induced in cells expressing T anti - gens derived from MCC tumors ( Richards et al . , 2015 ) , which may further promote metastasis of MCPyV - induced MCC tumors . Shed MCPyV virions can readily be detected at the surface of human skin ( Schowalter et al . , 2010 ) . How MCPyV virions pro - duced in the dermis could get to the surface of the skin remains an interesting unresolved question . Because we found that MCPyV infects dermal ﬁbroblasts near hair follicles , it is possible that mature MCPyV virions could be released to the surface of human skin through hair follicles and / or associated sebaceous and sweat glands . This hypothesis is supported by the observa - tion that MCPyV is frequently detected in eyebrow hair bulbs ( Peretti et al . , 2014 ) . It is also possible that the infected dermal ﬁbroblasts might die and the released virions could be carried to the skin surface by the ﬂow of differentiating keratinocytes . This study provides evidence to support the concept that hu - man dermal ﬁbroblasts are the primary host cell type naturally and productively infected by MCPyV . This ﬁnding is consistent with the fact that most MCC tumors are detected in the human dermis ( Calder and Smoller , 2010 ) . Because Merkel cells located in the basal layer of the epidermis are in the immediate vicinity of MCPyV - infected dermal ﬁbroblasts ( Figures 5 and S6 ) , it is possible that MCPyV actively replicating in the dermal ﬁbroblasts may accidently enter Merkel cells , as shown in Figure S1B , and cause MCC simply because Merkel cells represent a dead - end replication environment that favors viral integration and transfor - mation over virally induced cell lysis . Alternatively , MCPyV infec - tion of dermal ﬁbroblasts could induce their transformation and activate gene expression proﬁles typical of MCC tumors under special physiological conditions that remain to be discovered . The cell culture system for MCPyV infection established in this study provides a platform to elucidate the largely unknown MCPyV life cycle and MCPyV - induced oncogenic mechanism in the context of its natural host . The MCPyV infection model we report here also laid the groundwork for investigating how UV , IR , and other major MCC risk factors alter the natural MCPyV life cycle and normal skin physiology to cause a highly aggres - sive skin cancer . Our identiﬁcation of trametinib as an effective inhibitor of MCPyV infection indicates that MCPyV infection requires activa - tion of the MAP kinase pathway . In fact , treating cells with EGF , FGF , or FBS all could lead to activation of the MAP kinase pathway ( Katz et al . , 2007 ; Whitmarsh et al . , 1995 ) . It is possible that trametinib inhibits MCPyV infection by antagonizing the ef - fects of these growth factors . Although MCC is a highly aggres - sive carcinoma , currently there is no effective drug for curing this cancer . Identiﬁcation of trametinib as an inhibitor for MCPyV infection could lead to the development of effective therapy for MCPyV infection . This ﬁnding could have an important impact Cell Host & Microbe 19 , 1 – 13 , June 8 , 2016 11 Please cite this article in press as : Liu et al . , Identifying the Target Cells and Mechanisms of Merkel Cell Polyomavirus Infection , Cell Host & Microbe ( 2016 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . chom . 2016 . 04 . 024 on reducing the MCPyV viral load in immunocompromised patients with the goal of preventing MCC development . EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES Cell Culture Human neonatal foreskins were obtained from Penn Skin Disease Research Center . Human fetal ﬁbroblasts were isolated from 20 - week - old fetal skin ( Advanced Bioscience Resources ; Alameda , CA ) . Adult human ﬁbroblasts were obtained from discarded normal skin after surgery . All the protocols were approved by the University of Pennsylvania Institutional Review Board . MCPyV Virion and MCPyV - GFP Pseudovirus Preparation Recombinant MCPyV virions and MCPyV - GFP pseudoviruses were prepared as previously described ( Schowalter et al . , 2011 ) , with minor modiﬁcations speciﬁed in the Supplemental Experimental Procedures . MCPyV Infection of Human Dermal Cells Human dermal cells cultured in 10 cm dishes were washed once with 1 3 DPBS and incubated with 0 . 05 % Trypsin - EDTA at 37 (cid:4) C for 5 min . The cells were examined under the microscope to ensure that they were coming off the dish . After adding 10 ml DMEM / F12 medium to the dish , the cell solution was transferred to a 15 ml tube and centrifuged at 180 g for 2 min . The cells were resuspended in DMEM / F12 medium containing 20 ng / ml EGF , 20 ng / ml bFGF , and 3 m M CHIR99021 . As indicated in the ﬁgure legends , in someoftheexperiments , MMPs inhibitors , marimastatand batimastat ; kinase inhibitors , trametinib , ibrutinib , and idelalisib ; or 1 mg / ml collagenase type IV was also used . This collagenase has very low tryptic activity and therefore can limit the damage to membrane proteins and receptors . A total of 2 3 10 4 cells resuspended in 500 m l medium were seeded into each well of a 24 - well plate , and 2 3 10 9 viralgenome equivalentsof MCPyV virions were added tothecells . Afterthecellswereincubatedat37 (cid:4) Cin5 % CO2for48 – 72hr , FBS wasaddedtoeachwelltoreach10 % – 50 % ﬁnalconcentration . After24hr , the medium was changed to DMEM / F12 medium with 10 % – 50 % FBS . The cells were incubated for 48 – 72 hr before immunoﬂuorescent staining . MCPyVandMCPyV - GFPPseudovirusInfectionofHumanSkin Slices Cultured Ex Vivo A human foreskin - ring specimen was cut open . After trimming off fat and sub - cutaneous tissue , the skin was cut into 300 m m - thick slices using a McIlwain TissueChopper . TheslicesweretransferredtoDMEM / F12mediumcontaining 1 % N2 supplement , 2 % B27 supplement without vitamin A , 20 ng / ml EGF , 20 ng / ml bFGF , 3 m M CHIR99021 , and Antibiotic - Antimycotic . A total of 5 3 10 9 viral genome equivalents of MCPyV or MCPyV - GFP pseudovirus were added to the slice culture to initiate the infection . After 5 – 7 days , the medium was changed to DMEM / F12 medium with 10 % FBS and incubated for 10 – 14 days before immunoﬂuorescent staining . For the human scalp experiments , the scalp samples were obtained from Advanced Bioscience Resources , Almeda , CA . The samples were cut into 300 m mslices , cultured , andinfectedwithMCPyVorMCPyV - GFPpseudovirus as described above . Immunoﬂuorescent Staining Cellswereﬁxedwith3 % paraformaldehydeinPBSfor20min . Immunoﬂuores - cent staining was performed as previously described ( Liu et al . , 2014 ) . In Situ DNA - Hybridization Chain Reaction and Immunoﬂuorescent - HCR Cells were ﬁxed with 4 % paraformaldehyde in PBS for 10 min . MCPyV FISH was performed using the HCR technique described previously ( Choi et al . , 2014 ) . A complete and more detailed description of the procedures performed in this study , including reagent catalog numbers and the speciﬁcs of how the re - combinant plasmid constructs were made , can be found in the Supplemental Experimental Procedures . Primer sequences are shown in Table S2 . SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION Supplemental Information includes seven ﬁgures , two tables , and Supple - mental Experimental Procedures and can be found with this article at http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . chom . 2016 . 04 . 024 . AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS W . L . , R . Y . , X . X . , C . B . B . , and J . Y . designed the experiments . W . L . , R . Y . , and M . E . S . performed the experiments and analyzed the data . A . S . P . , R . M . S . , C . B . B . , and P . F . L . provided reagents and feedback . W . L . and J . Y . wrote the paper . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The authors would like to thank Dr . Meenhard Herlyn ( Wistar Institute ) for skin cell marker antibodies , Dr . M . Celeste Simon ( University of Pennsylvania ) for providing TOF - ﬂash and FOP - ﬂash plasmids , Dr . Ling Li for technical support , andMargoMacDonaldforeditingthemanuscript . Wealsothankthemembers of our laboratories for helpful discussion . This work was supported by the National Institutes of Health ( NIH ) grants R01CA148768 , R01CA142723 , R01CA187718 , NIAMS AR064220 , R01AR054593 , and P50CA174523 and by the Intramural Research Program of the NIH , National Cancer Institute , Center for Cancer Research . Received : January 10 , 2016 Revised : March 10 , 2016 Accepted : April 15 , 2016 Published : May 19 , 2016 REFERENCES Agelli , M . , and Clegg , L . X . ( 2003 ) . Epidemiology of primary Merkel cell carci - noma in the United States . J . Am . Acad . Dermatol . 49 , 832 – 841 . Aho , S . , Rouda , S . , Kennedy , S . H . , Qin , H . , andTan , E . M . ( 1997 ) . Regulation of human interstitial collagenase ( matrix metalloproteinase - 1 ) promoter activity by ﬁbroblast growth factor . Eur . J . Biochem . 247 , 503 – 510 . Bennett , C . N . , Ross , S . E . , Longo , K . A . , Bajnok , L . , Hemati , N . , Johnson , K . W . , Harrison , S . D . , and MacDougald , O . A . ( 2002 ) . Regulation of Wnt signaling during adipogenesis . J . Biol . Chem . 277 , 30998 – 31004 . Brown , G . T . , and Murray , G . I . ( 2015 ) . Current mechanistic insights into the roles of matrix metalloproteinases in tumour invasion and metastasis . J . Pathol . 237 , 273 – 281 . Calder , K . B . , and Smoller , B . R . ( 2010 ) . New insights into merkel cell carci - noma . Adv . Anat . Pathol . 17 , 155 – 161 . Carter , J . J . , Daugherty , M . D . , Qi , X . , Bheda - Malge , A . , Wipf , G . C . , Robinson , K . , Roman , A . , Malik , H . S . , andGalloway , D . A . ( 2013 ) . Identiﬁcationofanover - printing gene inMerkel cell polyomavirus providesevolutionary insight into the birth of viral genes . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 110 , 12744 – 12749 . Chang , Y . , and Moore , P . S . ( 2012 ) . Merkel cell carcinoma : a virus - induced human cancer . Annu . Rev . Pathol . 7 , 123 – 144 . Chen , D . , Jarrell , A . , Guo , C . , Lang , R . , and Atit , R . ( 2012 ) . Dermal b - catenin activity in response to epidermal Wnt ligands is required for ﬁbroblast prolifer - ation and hair follicle initiation . Development 139 , 1522 – 1533 . Cho , S . , Shin , M . H . , Kim , Y . K . , Seo , J . E . , Lee , Y . M . , Park , C . H . , and Chung , J . H . ( 2009 ) . Effects of infrared radiation and heat on human skin aging in vivo . J . Investig . Dermatol . Symp . Proc . 14 , 15 – 19 . Choi , H . M . , Beck , V . A . , and Pierce , N . A . ( 2014 ) . Next - generation insituhybrid - ization chain reaction : higher gain , lower cost , greater durability . ACS Nano 8 , 4284 – 4294 . Engels , E . A . , Frisch , M . , Goedert , J . J . , Biggar , R . J . , and Miller , R . W . ( 2002 ) . Merkel cell carcinoma and HIV infection . Lancet 359 , 497 – 498 . Feng , H . , Shuda , M . , Chang , Y . , and Moore , P . S . ( 2008 ) . Clonalintegrationof a polyomavirus in human Merkel cell carcinoma . Science 319 , 1096 – 1100 . 12 Cell Host & Microbe 19 , 1 – 13 , June 8 , 2016 Please cite this article in press as : Liu et al . , Identifying the Target Cells and Mechanisms of Merkel Cell Polyomavirus Infection , Cell Host & Microbe ( 2016 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . chom . 2016 . 04 . 024 Fisher , G . J . , Datta , S . C . , Talwar , H . S . , Wang , Z . Q . , Varani , J . , Kang , S . , and Voorhees , J . J . ( 1996 ) . Molecular basis of sun - induced premature skin ageing and retinoid antagonism . Nature 379 , 335 – 339 . Foulongne , V . , Sauvage , V . , Hebert , C . , Dereure , O . , Cheval , J . , Gouilh , M . A . , Pariente , K . , Segondy , M . , Burguie ` re , A . , Manuguerra , J . C . , et al . ( 2012 ) . Human skin microbiota : high diversity of DNA viruses identiﬁed on the human skin by high throughput sequencing . PLoS ONE 7 , e38499 . Gill , S . E . , and Parks , W . C . ( 2008 ) . Metalloproteinases and their inhibitors : regulators of wound healing . Int . J . Biochem . Cell Biol . 40 , 1334 – 1347 . Gjoerup , O . , and Chang , Y . ( 2010 ) . Update on human polyomaviruses and cancer . In Advances in Cancer Research , F . V . W . George and K . George , eds . ( Academic Press ) , pp . 1 – 51 . Hodgson , N . C . ( 2005 ) . Merkel cell carcinoma : changing incidence trends . J . Surg . Oncol . 89 , 1 – 4 . Houben , R . , Shuda , M . , Weinkam , R . , Schrama , D . , Feng , H . , Chang , Y . , Moore , P . S . , and Becker , J . C . ( 2010 ) . Merkel cell polyomavirus - infected Merkel cell carcinoma cells require expression of viral T antigens . J . Virol . 84 , 7064 – 7072 . Katz , M . , Amit , I . , and Yarden , Y . ( 2007 ) . Regulation of MAPKs by growth fac - tors and receptor tyrosine kinases . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1773 , 1161 – 1176 . Kean , J . M . , Rao , S . , Wang , M . , and Garcea , R . L . ( 2009 ) . Seroepidemiology of human polyomaviruses . PLoS Pathog . 5 , e1000363 . Lee , G . , Kim , H . , Elkabetz , Y . , Al Shamy , G . , Panagiotakos , G . , Barberi , T . , Tabar , V . , and Studer , L . ( 2007 ) . Isolation and directed differentiation of neural crest stem cells derived from human embryonic stem cells . Nat . Biotechnol . 25 , 1468 – 1475 . Lemos , B . , and Nghiem , P . ( 2007 ) . Merkelcell carcinoma : moredeaths butstill no pathway to blame . J . Invest . Dermatol . 127 , 2100 – 2103 . Liu , W . , Stein , P . , Cheng , X . , Yang , W . , Shao , N . Y . , Morrisey , E . E . , Schultz , R . M . , and You , J . ( 2014 ) . BRD4 regulates Nanog expression in mouse embry - onic stem cells and preimplantation embryos . Cell Death Differ . 21 , 1950 – 1960 . Locke , F . L . , Rollison , D . E . , and Sondak , V . K . ( 2015 ) . Merkel cell carcinoma and immunosuppression : what we still need to know . J . Natl . Cancer Inst . 107 , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1093 / jnci / dju4227 . Martin , P . ( 1997 ) . Wound healing—aiming for perfect skin regeneration . Science 276 , 75 – 81 . Morrison , K . M . , Miesegaes , G . R . , Lumpkin , E . A . , and Maricich , S . M . ( 2009 ) . Mammalian Merkel cells are descended from the epidermal lineage . Dev . Biol . 336 , 76 – 83 . Neth , P . , Ries , C . , Karow , M . , Egea , V . , Ilmer , M . , and Jochum , M . ( 2007 ) . The Wnt signal transduction pathway in stem cells and cancer cells : inﬂuence on cellular invasion . Stem Cell Rev . 3 , 18 – 29 . Neumann , F . , Borchert , S . , Schmidt , C . , Reimer , R . , Hohenberg , H . , Fischer , N . , and Grundhoff , A . ( 2011 ) . Replication , gene expression and particle pro - duction by a consensus Merkel Cell Polyomavirus ( MCPyV ) genome . PLoS ONE 6 , e29112 . Overall , C . M . , and Lo´pez - Otı´n , C . ( 2002 ) . Strategies for MMP inhibition in cancer : innovations for the post - trial era . Nat . Rev . Cancer 2 , 657 – 672 . Peretti , A . , Borgogna , C . , Rossi , D . , DePaoli , L . , Bawadekar , M . , Zavattaro , E . , Boldorini , R . , De Andrea , M . , Gaidano , G . , and Gariglio , M . ( 2014 ) . Analysis of human b - papillomavirus and Merkel cell polyomavirus infection in skin lesions and eyebrow hair bulbs from a cohort of patients with chronic lymphocytic leukaemia . Br . J . Dermatol . 171 , 1525 – 1528 . Quan , T . , and Fisher , G . J . ( 2015 ) . Role of Age - associated alterations of the dermal extracellular matrix microenvironment in human skin aging : a mini - review . Gerontology 61 , 427 – 434 . Richards , K . F . , Guastaﬁerro , A . , Shuda , M . , Toptan , T . , Moore , P . S . , and Chang , Y . ( 2015 ) . Merkelcellpolyomavirustantigenspromotecellproliferation and inﬂammatory cytokine gene expression . J . Gen . Virol . 96 , 3532 – 3544 . Schowalter , R . M . , Pastrana , D . V . , Pumphrey , K . A . , Moyer , A . L . , and Buck , C . B . ( 2010 ) . Merkel cell polyomavirus and two previously unknown polyoma - viruses are chronically shed from human skin . Cell Host Microbe 7 , 509 – 515 . Schowalter , R . M . , Pastrana , D . V . , andBuck , C . B . ( 2011 ) . Glycosaminoglycans and sialylated glycans sequentially facilitate Merkel cell polyomavirus infec - tious entry . PLoS Pathog . 7 , e1002161 . Schowalter , R . M . , Reinhold , W . C . , and Buck , C . B . ( 2012 ) . Entry tropism of BK and Merkel cell polyomaviruses in cell culture . PLoS ONE 7 , e42181 . Tang , C . K . , and Toker , C . ( 1978 ) . Trabecular carcinoma of the skin : an ultra - structural study . Cancer 42 , 2311 – 2321 . Tolstov , Y . L . , Pastrana , D . V . , Feng , H . , Becker , J . C . , Jenkins , F . J . , Moschos , S . , Chang , Y . , Buck , C . B . , and Moore , P . S . ( 2009 ) . Human Merkel cell polyo - mavirus infection II . MCV is a common human infection that can be detected by conformational capsid epitope immunoassays . Int . J . Cancer 125 , 1250 – 1256 . Tsang , S . H . , Wang , X . , Li , J . , Buck , C . B . , andYou , J . ( 2014 ) . HostDNAdamage response factors localize to merkel cell polyomavirus DNA replication sites to support efﬁcient viral DNA replication . J . Virol . 88 , 3285 – 3297 . Vaigot , P . , Pisani , A . , Darmon , Y . M . , and Ortonne , J . P . ( 1987 ) . The majority of epidermal Merkel cells are non - proliferative : a quantitative immunoﬂuores - cence analysis . Acta Derm . Venereol . 67 , 517 – 520 . Van Meter , T . E . , Broaddus , W . C . , Rooprai , H . K . , Pilkington , G . J . , and Fillmore , H . L . ( 2004 ) . Induction of membrane - type - 1 matrix metalloproteinase by epidermal growth factor - mediated signaling in gliomas . Neuro - oncol . 6 , 188 – 199 . Varani , J . , Dame , M . K . , Rittie , L . , Fligiel , S . E . , Kang , S . , Fisher , G . J . , and Voorhees , J . J . ( 2006 ) . Decreased collagen production in chronologically aged skin : roles of age - dependent alteration in ﬁbroblast function and defec - tive mechanical stimulation . Am . J . Pathol . 168 , 1861 – 1868 . Wang , X . , Li , J . , Schowalter , R . M . , Jiao , J . , Buck , C . B . , and You , J . ( 2012 ) . Bromodomain protein Brd4 plays a key role in Merkel cell polyomavirus DNA replication . PLoS Pathog . 8 , e1003021 . Werner , S . , and Grose , R . ( 2003 ) . Regulation of wound healing by growth factors and cytokines . Physiol . Rev . 83 , 835 – 870 . Whitmarsh , A . J . , Shore , P . , Sharrocks , A . D . , andDavis , R . J . ( 1995 ) . Integration of MAP kinase signal transduction pathways at the serum response element . Science 269 , 403 – 407 . Whyte , J . L . , Smith , A . A . , and Helms , J . A . ( 2012 ) . Wnt signaling and injury repair . Cold Spring Harb . Perspect . Biol . 4 , a008078 . Zur Hausen , A . , Rennspiess , D . , Winnepenninckx , V . , Speel , E . J . , and Kurz , A . K . ( 2013 ) . Early B - cell differentiation in Merkel cell carcinomas : clues to cellular ancestry . Cancer Res . 73 , 4982 – 4987 . Cell Host & Microbe 19 , 1 – 13 , June 8 , 2016 13 Please cite this article in press as : Liu et al . , Identifying the Target Cells and Mechanisms of Merkel Cell Polyomavirus Infection , Cell Host & Microbe ( 2016 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . chom . 2016 . 04 . 024