Drosophila awd , the homolog of human nm23 , regulates FGF receptor levels and functions synergistically with shi / dynamin during tracheal development Vincent Dammai , Boris Adryan , Kim R . Lavenburg , and Tien Hsu 1 Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine , and Hollings Cancer Center , Medical University of South Carolina , Charleston , South Carolina 29425 , USA Human nm23 has been implicated in suppression of metastasis in various cancers , but the underlying mechanism of such activity has not been fully understood . Using Drosophila tracheal system as a genetic model , we examined the function of the Drosophila homolog of nm23 , the awd gene , in cell migration . We show that loss of Drosophila awd results in dysregulated tracheal cell motility . This phenotype can be suppressed by reducing the dosage of the chemotactic FGF receptor ( FGFR ) homolog , breathless ( btl ) , indicating that btl and awd are functionally antagonists . In addition , mutants of shi / dynamin show similar tracheal phenotypes as in awd and exacerbate those in awd mutant , suggesting defects in vesicle - mediated turnover of FGFR in the awd mutant . Consistent with this , Btl - GFP chimera expressed from a cognate btl promoter - driven system accumulate at high levels on tracheal cell membrane of awd mutants as well as in awd RNA duplex - treated cultured cells . Thus , we propose that awd regulates tracheal cell motility by modulating the FGFR levels , through a dynamin - mediated pathway . [ Keywords : awd / nm23 ; btl / FGFR ; shi / dynamin ; tracheal development ; Drosophila ; cell migration ] Supplemental material is available at http : / / www . genesdev . org . Received March 25 , 2003 ; revised version accepted September 9 , 2003 . Human nm23 encodes a nucleoside diphosphate kinase ( NDPK ) with tumor metastasis suppressing activity ( Steeg et al . 1988 ) . Reduced levels of nm23 expression correlate with high metastatic potential of certain tu - mors , including breast carcinoma and melanoma ( Steeg et al . 1988 ; Freije et al . 1997 ) . Conversely , overexpression of Nm23 can reduce the metastatic potential of these tumor cells in vivo ( Kantor et al . 1993 ; Leone et al . 1993 ; MacDonald et al . 1996 ) . There are eight related nm23 gene products in human ( Nm23H1 – H8 ) and two of them ( Nm23H1 and H2 ) have been widely studied ( for reviews , see Lacombe et al . 2000 ; Roymans et al . 2002 ) . The two proteins are 88 % identical . The Drosophila awd ( abnor - mal wing disc ) gene product is the homolog of Nm23H1 / 2 and is the source for about 98 % of the NDPK activity in embryos ( Biggs at al . 1990 ) . It is 78 % identical to either Nm23H1 or Nm23H2 . Earlier studies showed that loss - of - function awd mutants exhibited early pupal lethality in part due to defects in imaginal disc develop - ment ( hence the name ; Biggs et al . 1988 ; Dearolf et al . 1988 ) . Interestingly , the first known allele of awd , killer of prune ( K - pn ) , confers lethality to the otherwise benign eye color mutation prune ( Biggs et al . 1988 ) . It has been suggested that K - pn may acquire ectopic substrate or co - factor specificity that exacerbates the underlying defects in mutated prune ( Timmons and Shearn 2000 ) , which encodes a GTPase activating protein ( GAP ) - like protein ( Teng et al . 1991 ; Aravind and Koonin 1998 ) . The human Nm23 proteins display isotype - specific functions . For example , Nm23H1 , but not H2 , exhibits a single - stranded DNase activity that is activated by cyto - toxic T cell - delivered granzyme A and presumably me - diates apoptosis in the target cell ( Fan et al . 2003 ) . On the other hand , the lethality of awd embryos can be rescued by human nm23H2 but not H1 ( Xu et al . 1996 ) . There - fore , nm23 genes may be involved in various cellular functions relevant to different aspects of tumor progres - sion . One potential role for Nm23 as a metastasis inhibitor is regulation of cell motility ( Roymans et al . 2002 ) . We suspect that if Nm23 is involved in cell migration events , many of the developmental consequences arising 1 Corresponding author . E - MAIL hsut @ musc . edu ; FAX ( 843 ) 792 - 3940 . Article and publication are at http : / / www . genesdev . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1101 / gad . 1096903 . 2812 GENES & DEVELOPMENT 17 : 2812 – 2824 © 2003 by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press ISSN 0890 - 9369 / 03 $ 5 . 00 ; www . genesdev . org Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press on February 24 , 2016 - Published by genesdev . cshlp . org Downloaded from from lack of coordination during cell migration should be apparent in awd mutants and awd should genetically interact with the specific pathways that are activated in those subsets of migrating cells . The Drosophila tracheal system is an excellent model for studying guided cell migration . The tracheal system arises from clusters of ectodermal cells ( 10 on each side of embryonic segments ) . Each cluster invaginates from the ectoderm and forms an epithelial sac termed tracheal placode of ∼ 80 – 100 cells . After formation of tracheal placodes , the entire tracheal system is constructed by coordinated cell migration without further cell divisions ( Manning and Krasnow 1993 ; Metzger and Krasnow 1999 ) . The major chemotactic signaling that guides tra - cheal tube migration is mediated by the Drosophila FGFR encoded by breathless ( btl ; Glazer and Shilo 1991 ; Lee et al . 1996 ; Ohshiro and Saigo 1997 ) . Guided cell migration is achieved by expression of Branchless ( Bnl ; FGF homolog ) from the surrounding mesoderm and tar - get organs such as the guts ( Sutherland et al . 1996 ) . Forced expression of bnl can redirect tracheal cells to the ectopic source ( Sutherland et al . 1996 ; Ribeiro et al . 2002 ) whereas in the absence of Bnl no tracheal migra - tion or fusion of tracheal tubes is observed ( Sutherland et al . 1996 ; Wolf et al . 2002 ) . Here we investigate the role of awd during tracheal tube formation and report novel findings that awd con - trols tracheal cell migration by modulating the levels of Btl / FGFR . In awd mutants , the Btl / FGFR levels are dra - matically increased on the cell surface . Consequently , ectopic activation of downstream pathways and abnor - mal migration are evident in tracheal cells of awd mu - tants . Furthermore , the awd phenotypes are exacerbated by mutation in the Drosophila dynamin gene , shibire ( shi ; van der Bliek and Meyerowitz 1991 ) . Taken to - gether , these results show that awd is involved in at - tenuation of Btl / FGFR activity by vesicle - transport - me - diated turnover , thus directly influencing tracheal cell motility . This is the first direct in vivo demonstration of awd / nm23 participation in a major RTK pathway that is crucial for controlled cell migration . Results awd is expressed in tracheal cells and is required for proper cell migration We generated polyclonal antibodies against Drosophila Awd using bacterially expressed His - tagged version of Awd . The protein A affinity - purified antibody recognizes a single band slightly larger than the 17 - kD marker in Western blots of protein extracts from Drosophila em - bryos and Drosophila S2 cell line ( Fig . 1A ) . The apparent size is in agreement with the calculated molecular weight , 19 . 2 kD , of the Awd protein . This antiserum was then used to detect the in vivo expression pattern . awd RNA has been detected in multiple tissues ( Dearolf et al . 1988 ) . To better identify possible expression of Awd pro - tein in the tracheal system , we utilized a reporter trans - genic line 1 - eve - 1 that expresses lacZ in all tracheal cells ( Perrimon et al . 1991 ) . The lacZ insertion does not cause tracheal defects and the 1 - eve - 1 line will be used as wild type ( Wilk et al . 1996 ; also see below ) . Immunostaining of 1 - eve - 1 embryos with anti - (cid:1) - Gal and anti - Awd anti - bodies showed that Awd is expressed at low levels in most of the embryonic cells and at high levels in the Figure 1 . Awd expression in tracheal cells . ( A ) Affin - ity - purified rabbit polyclonal antibody against Dro - sophila Awd recognizes a single band by Western blot - ting in whole embryo and Drosophila S2 cell lysates . ( B ) The same antibody was used to detect Awd expression ( red ) in vivo . The genotypes of the embryos are 1 - eve - 1 ( wt ) ; y , w ; 1 - eve - 1 , awd j2A4 ( awd ) ; and y , w ; btl - GAL4 , UAS - awd ; 1 - eve - 1 , awd j2A4 ( UAS - awd + awd ) . Tracheal cells were visualized by mouse monoclonal anti - (cid:1) - Gal staining ( green ) . Arrows in the top left panel mark the anterior ( a ) and dorsal ( d ) sides of all the embryos shown . The top two rows of images are projections of five 1 . 5 - µm confocal sections and the close - up images are single sections . The bottom two rows are projec - tions of five 2 - µm sections . The two channels were re - corded sequentially to avoid bleed - through . Regulation of FGF receptor levels by nm23 / awd GENES & DEVELOPMENT 2813 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press on February 24 , 2016 - Published by genesdev . cshlp . org Downloaded from tracheal cells ( Fig . 1B ) . It is worth noting that concen - trated Awd staining in the trachea was observed only when the embryos were freshly prepared , treated with 0 . 5 % Nonidet - P40 , and handled gently . Examples of stage 12 and stage 15 embryos are shown in Figure 1B ; however , tracheal expression of Awd is detected as early as placode formation and persists until the entire tra - cheal system is constructed at stage 17 ( data not shown ) . Note that Awd is a constituent in all tracheal cells ex - amined , suggesting that chemotactic or other temporally and spatially specific signaling events do not regulate its expression . We next examined the potential tracheal phenotypes in awd mutant . Three independently isolated alleles were analyzed . ( 1 ) awd j2A4 , in the Drosophila Genome Project collection , has been characterized as a protein - null allele resulting from P - element insertion in the 5 (cid:1) untranslated region ( Krishnan et al . 2001 ) . ( 2 ) awd KRS6 is a 788 - bp deletion that removes the entire coding region ( Timmons et al . 1993 , 1995 ) . ( 3 ) Df ( 3R ) awd KRB is a small chromosome deficiency ( 100D1 : 100D3 – 4 ) encompass - ing awd ( at 100D2 ) . The embryos were stained with a tracheal lumen - specific monoclonal antibody 2A12 . As shown in Figure 2A , stage 16 wild - type embryo shows a stereotypical tubule network . By contrast , all three awd alleles show a complex array of abnormalities . These in - clude major disruption of the tracheal network accom - panied by ectopic branching and looping ( Fig . 2D , G ) , ap - pearance of a few extra branches or “knobs” ( Fig . 2E , F ) , and migration abnormalities ( Fig . 2H , I ) . All three homo - zygous awd alleles show 75 % – 80 % phenocopies . As shown in Supplementary Table 1 , the penetrance can be rescued ( down to 11 % – 15 % ) by a wild - type awd trans - gene expressed in the tracheal cells using the btl - enhancer - directed UAS / GAL4 binary system ( Fig . 1B ) . These tracheal defects in awd can be generally described as ectopic tu - bule formation and migration . They are therefore very different from the well - studied btl / FGFR mutant pheno - type , which is characterized by a lack of tubule migra - tion ( Fig . 2C ) . To visualize the tracheal cells , we also stained the embryos with antibody against a constituent PAS - domain transcription factor , Trachealess ( Trh ; Fig . 2J ) . There is no detectable effect of awd mutations on the subcellular localization or expression level of Trh ( Fig . 2K , L ) . In the examples shown , groups of dorsal trunk cells move ectopically ( arrows in Fig . 2K , L ) , making a 90° turn away from the normal dorsal trunk position . The lumen and nuclear markers documented above are useful for visualizing the tubule network and the tracheal cell positions , but they cannot provide correla - tion between the tubule phenotypes and the behavior of tracheal cells . To visualize the potential cellular defects in the tracheal system , the awd j2A4 allele was combined with the 1 - eve - 1 transgene and the embryos were stained with anti - (cid:1) - Gal antibody . The (cid:1) - Gal reporter protein in 1 - eve - 1 is expressed in both the nucleus and in cyto - plasm ( Fig . 1 ) , making it the best marker for visualizing simultaneously the position and the morphology of all tracheal cells . As such , the 1 - eve - 1 reporter gene has been used extensively as a general tracheal marker . Nonethe - Figure 2 . awd mutant alleles display distinct tracheal pheno - types . Embryos were collected at 25°C and double stained using the 2A12 monoclonal antibody against a lumen antigen and a FITC - conjugated polyclonal antibody against (cid:1) - Gal ( red ) ( A – I ) , or double stained using the rat polyclonal anti - Trh antibody ( green ) and mouse monoclonal anti - (cid:1) - GAL antibody ( J – H ) . btl and the three awd mutants are homozygotes ( see Materials and Methods ) . Stage 15 – 16 embryos are shown with anterior to the left . ( A ) Lateral view of a y , w embryo , representing wild type . Branches relevant to the following figures are marked . ( DT ) Dor - sal trunk ; ( LT ) lateral trunk ; ( DB ) dorsal branch . ( B ) Dorsal view of a y , w embryo . ( C ) Lateral view of a btl embryo . There is very little tubule formation . ( D ) Lateral view of an awd j2A4 embryo . There is a general disruption of the tracheal network with ec - topic branches emanating from the lateral trunk ( marked be - tween arrows in the enlarged section ) . Also , additional branches are seen sprouting out of the lateral region ( bracket ) . ( E ) Dorsal – lateral view of an awd j2A4 embryo . Two ectopic branches are shown ( arrowheads ) . ( F ) Lateral view of an awd KRS6 embryo . An ectopic “bulge” is indicated ( arrowhead ) . ( G ) Dorsal – lateral view of an awd KRS6 embryo . The region exhibiting abnormal branching and looping is highlighted . ( H ) Dorsal – lateral view of an awd KRB embryo . One dorsal branch ( DB ) shows an ectopic loop ( arrowhead ) and two other dorsal branches form abnormal axial connection ( arrow ) . ( I ) Dorsal – lateral view of an awd KRB embryo . The region exhibits ectopic branching and looping is indicated by a bracket . Also the dorsal trunk ( DT ) shows an abnormal 90° turn ( arrow ) . ( J ) Lateral view of a y , w embryo showing nuclear expression of the Trh protein in all tracheal cells . ( K ) Lateral view of an awd j2A4 embryo . Arrows point to dorsal trunk ( DT ) cells that migrate ectopically ( misallocated ) , resulting in gaps in dorsal trunk . ( L ) Lateral view of an awd KRS6 embryo . Arrows point to misallocated dorsal trunk ( DT ) cells and ectopic connection of two dorsal branches ( DB ) . White bars , 50 µm ; yellow bars , 20 µm . Dammai et al . 2814 GENES & DEVELOPMENT Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press on February 24 , 2016 - Published by genesdev . cshlp . org Downloaded from less , to ensure that it is a true “neutral” marker , we first examined a large number of 1 - eve - 1 embryos ( homozy - gous viable ) by anti - (cid:1) - Gal staining . There are less than 1 % of either awd - like or btl - like phenocopies ( Fig . 3K ) , well within the rate of spontaneous defects . Second , the phenotypes observed in awd j2A4 , 1 - eve - 1 embryos can be rescued by expressing a wild - type copy of awd in the tra - cheal cells directed by the btl enhancer ( Fig . 3K ) . Hence - forth , 1 - eve - 1 will be used as a wild - type control and awd j2A4 , 1 - eve - 1 will be the representative awd allele . The wild - type tracheal network ( Fig . 3A ) consists of 10 interconnected subunits on either side of the embryo . The initially stubby tubes migrate outward and are fully extended at the end of embryogenesis at stage 17 ( Fig . 3B ) . The largest tubes connect axially and form the major trunk ( dorsal trunk ) , while another set of tubes ( dorsal branches ) extends toward the dorsal midline and con - nects with its counterpart from the other side of the embryos ( arrow in Fig . 3C ) . The tracheal phenotypes of the awd mutant , at its most severe seen mainly in ho - mozygotes ( Fig . 3D ) , show complete disruption of the tracheal network . Fragments of the dorsal trunks scatter throughout the embryo with random , ectopic branches sprouting out . Note that the severe disruption of the tra - chea observed here is probably not secondary to a general embryonic patterning defect , as other late embryonic structures such as midgut are formed properly ( Fig . 3D ) . The milder phenotypes seen in heterozygotes follow the same but less severe pattern . First , a segment of the dorsal trunk is “misallocated” to the position of trans - verse connectives ( bracket in Fig . 3E ) , reminiscent of those observed earlier ( Fig . 2I , K , L ) . In addition , ectopic cellular projections are seen sprouting out of these mis - allocated branches ( insert in Fig . 3E ) . Second , two dorsal branches appear to fuse at the stalk , but the tips separate and connect with their counterparts across the dorsal midline ( asterisk in Fig . 3F ) . The fusion is usually accom - panied by the thickening at the base ( arrowhead in Fig . 3F ) . We suspect that such a defect is another manifesta - tion of misallocation of cells . In other instances , dorsal Figure 3 . awd mutant exhibits ectopic tracheal cell migration in contrast to the btl phenotype . All embryos were collected at 25°C and stained with mouse mono - clonal anti - (cid:1) - Gal antibody . Identification of homozy - gous and heterozygous awd and btl is described in Ma - terials and Methods . Unless noted , anterior is to the left and dorsal side is up . ( A ) Lateral view of a wild - type stage 14 embryo . One tracheal subunit is highlighted . Three tracheal branches relevant in the following fig - ures are marked . ( DB ) Dorsal branches ; ( DT ) dorsal trunk ; ( TC ) transverse connectives . ( B ) Dorsal – lateral view of a wild - type stage 17 embryo showing fully ex - tended tracheal tubes . ( C ) A dorsal close - up view of a wild - type stage 16 embryo showing connection of two dorsal branches across the dorsal midline ( arrow ) . ( D ) Dorsal view of a stage 16 homozygous awd j2A4 embryo showing disrupted dorsal trunk ( DT ) and sprouts of ec - topic branches ( sharp arrows ) . The first compartment of the properly formed midgut can be seen in this view ( the light , rounded internal structure in the middle ) . ( E ) Dorsal – lateral view of a stage 17 heterozygous awd j2A4 embryo . A segment of the dorsal trunk moves ventrally into the position of transverse connective ( bracket ) in - stead of connecting with the lateral neighbor . Ectopic small cellular processes are seen sprouting from the abnormal branches ( sharp arrows in the insert ) . ( F ) Dor - sal – lateral view of a stage 16 heterozygous awd j2A4 em - bryo . The highlighted region shows two dorsal branches fused at the base but separate at the tip ( as - terisk ) as well as misconnection of two neighboring dorsal branches ( sharp arrow ) , instead of crossing the dorsal midline . ( G ) Close - up view of dorsal branches of a wild - type embryo . Arrows point to the few filopodia extending from the tip cells of the dorsal branches . ( H ) Close - up view of dorsal branches of a heterozygous awd j2A4 embryo . Multiple , random cellular projections extend from the tip cells ( sharp arrows ) . ( I ) Lateral view of a stage 14 homozygous btl H82 (cid:2) 3 embryo . There is very little tubule migration as compared to the wild type . ( J ) Dorsal – lateral view of a stage 16 heterozygous btl H82 (cid:2) 3 embryo . The highlighted region shows lack of dorsal branch formation . ( K ) Quantitation of the recorded phenotypes as shown in A – J . The awd and btl alleles are awd j2A4 and btl H82 (cid:2) 3 . Note that to avoid complications from early embryonic patterning defects , only embryos older than stage 13 that showed proper germband retraction and , after stage 15 , proper gut formation , were tabulated . Construction of the btl - GAL4 , UAS - awd rescue chromosome is described in Materials and Methods . Regulation of FGF receptor levels by nm23 / awd GENES & DEVELOPMENT 2815 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press on February 24 , 2016 - Published by genesdev . cshlp . org Downloaded from branches from adjacent subunits are linked , rather than connecting with the counterparts across the embryonic midline ( arrow in Fig . 3F ) . Third , the tip cells of the dor - sal branches , which receive the chemotactic signal , usu - ally extend few stable cellular processes during the mi - gratory phase ( Fig . 3G ) . In awd heterozygotes , multiple filopodia - like projections are seen extending from the tip cells ; and they often do not point toward the direction of the normal migratory path ( Fig . 3H ) . Taken together , these phenotypes indicate that awd is required to regu - late guided tubule cell migration . Note that we also ana - lyzed an additional allele of awd ( awd KRS6 in combina - tion with 1 - eve - 1 ) and it showed the same tracheal defect ( data not shown ) . The awd mutant phenotypes shown here are again in contrast to that of btl . In the severe btl phenotype , there is very little branch migration ( Fig . 3I ) , as noted previously ( Kla¨mbt et al . 1992 ; Lee et al . 1996 ; Dossenbach et al . 2001 ) . In mild phenotypes , the overall tracheal network is formed but individual branches are often missing ( Fig . 3J ) . Thus , btl and awd appear to be antagonists in regulating tracheal tube migration . awd antagonizes btl and cooperates with shi / dynamin The clue to the cellular defects that underlie the awd phenotype was provided by a recent study on the func - tion of Drosophila dynamin homolog encoded by shibire ( shi ) . Dynamin is an essential component in vesiculation by “pinching off” the invaginated vesicles from the membrane domain ( reviewed in Brodin et al . 2000 ) . In Drosophila , the temperature - sensitive mutants of shi lead to paralysis at elevated temperatures due to failure of neurotransmitter uptake through synaptic vesicle in - ternalization at the nerve termini ( Kosaka and Ikeda 1983 ; Delgado et al . 2000 ) . Remarkably , in a genetic screen for mutants that exacerbate this effect , all three “enhancer” alleles isolated were awd mutants ( Krishnan et al . 2001 ) . It is therefore proposed that Awd , as a source of GTP , serves a guanine nucleotide exchange factor ( GEF ) - like function for the endocytotic activity of dyna - min GTPase . We reasoned that Shi – Awd - directed endosome forma - tion might also function in tracheal cells for recycling and turnover of the chemotactic Btl receptor . The mo - lecular function of dynamin has been linked to growth factor receptor internalization through endocytosis ( Sever et al . 1999 ; reviewed in Hinshaw 2000 ) . Further - more , endocytosis of activated growth factor receptor is known to be essential as a first step for receptor down - regulation ( Vieira et al . 1996 ) . As such , loss of shi or awd in tracheal cells could result in overaccumulation of FGFR , leading to ectopic tracheal tube migration . If this is the case , the first prediction would be that reduced dosage of btl should alleviate the severity of awd pheno - types . As shown in Figure 3K , heterozygous mutants of these two genes each give moderate penetrance of the respective phenotypes . However , when the two muta - tions were combined in transheterozygotes , the awd - like ( ectopic migration ) and btl - like ( lack of branching ) phe - notypes are reduced by 73 % and 71 % , respectively . We have also determined that the FGF ligand / bnl is not over - or ectopically expressed in the awd mutant ( Supplementary Fig . 1 ) . Thus , the antagonist genetic in - teraction between awd and btl is most likely autono - mous to the tracheal cells . We next examined whether shi mutants would exhibit awd - like phenotypes . The temperature - sensitive shi 1 al - lele was used ( Kitamoto 2001 ; Krishnan et al . 2001 ) . Be - cause shi is located on the X chromosome , we directly crossed shi 1 females with 1 - eve - 1 males . The progenies , consisting of heterozygous females and hemizygous males , were collected at permissive temperature ( 25°C ) for 7 h and then shifted to 34°C for another 7 h . As shown in Figure 4 , loss of shi function indeed results in ectopic migration phenotypes of differing severity . ( 1 ) A mild one with occasional ectopic branching ( sharp arrow in Fig . 4A ) and abnormal cellular projections from the tip cells ( arrows in the insert in Fig . 4A ) , similar to that seen in the mild awd phenotypes ; or ( 2 ) a more severe one characterized by misallocation of dorsal trunk cells into the position of transverse connectives ( Fig . 4B ) , into the dorsal branch domain ( Fig . 4C ) , or into forming an extra loop of dorsal trunk ( Fig . 4D ) . In many cases , ectopic cellular projections can be clearly identified at the tips of ectopic branches ( Fig . 4C , D ) . Therefore , the underlying defects in shi mutant appear to be similar to those in the awd mutant . We note that the ectopic branching ( mild ; Fig . 4A ) and misallocation ( more severe ; Fig . 4B – D ) of the shi phenotypes are approximately equal in numbers ( Fig . 4G ) , most likely reflecting the phenotypic outcomes of hetero - zygous females and the hemizygous males , respectively . The endocytosis model proposed above also predicted that awd and shi mutants would mutually exacerbate their phenotypic outcomes . This proved to be true . awd and shi transheterozygotes ( or heterozygote – hemizygote combinations ) show high phenocopy numbers of total disruption of the tracheal network , with breakaway branches and tracheal cells ( Fig . 4E ) . Note that in the example shown in Figure 4E , the underlying internal structures such as midgut are formed properly ( data not shown ) , indicating that the tracheal phenotype is not due to a general disruption of embryonic pattern formation . These extremely severe phenotypes resemble those ob - served in the most severe awd homozygous mutants and were observed very rarely in conditional shi hetero - or hemizygotes ( Fig . 4F ) . Also , these severe defects were not seen when awd heterozygotes were shifted to elevated temperatures ( data not shown ) , indicating that the re - sulting tracheal phenotypes are specific for awd – shi in - teraction and not due to effects of elevated temperatures on awd heterozygosity . FGFR is overexpressed in awd mutant Having established that awd and shi cooperate in guided tracheal cell migration , we next asked whether in awd mutant the FGFR was overexpressed , as the proposed endocytotic function of shi – awd would predict . A btl - GFP chimeric transgene ( Sato and Kornberg 2002 ) was expressed under the control of cognate btl promoter ( see Dammai et al . 2816 GENES & DEVELOPMENT Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press on February 24 , 2016 - Published by genesdev . cshlp . org Downloaded from Materials and Methods ) . In the wild - type genetic back - ground , the Btl - GFP fusion protein is barely detectable in the tracheal cells ( Fig . 5A ) , showing that expression of Btl - GFP by itself does not lead to overaccumulation of the fusion protein . This indicates that the expression level of btl - GFP is likely under the same stringent feed - back control as for the endogenous btl ( Ohshiro and Saigo 1997 ) . Significantly , at high magnification Btl - GFP - containing particles are seen internalized in all tra - cheal cells of wild - type embryo ( Fig . 5A – C ) , consistent with the notion that active internalization from the membrane domain prevents surface accumulation of Btl - GFP . This is further exemplified by lack of tracheal ab - normality in wild - type embryos expressing Btl - GFP . However , in awd mutant , Btl - GFP accumulates at very high levels in the periphery of all tracheal cells . Such accumulation can be seen in mild dorsal branch fusion ( Fig . 5D ) , in abnormal tubule migration involving mul - tiple dorsal branches ( Fig . 5E ) , or in ectopic branches emanating from severely disrupted tracheal network ( Fig . 5F ) . At higher magnification , Btl - GFP is seen out - lining very small cellular processes ( Fig . 5E ) . Also , large aggregates of Btl - GFP are observed only in awd mutant background ( Fig . 5D , E ) . Overaccumulation of Btl - GFP is confirmed by Western blot quantitation ( Fig . 5G ) . It is worth noting that the in vivo Btl - GFP is detected as a smear at the molecular weight of ∼ 150 kD ( Btl120 + GFP26 kD ) , indicating extensive posttranslational modi - fications . In addition , the overaccumulation effect is somewhat specific , as the level of EGF receptor ( EGFR ) is not increased . Also note that the shi – awd - directed turn - over of FGFR is a function of all tracheal cells , that is , not dependent on ligand binding , as the overaccumula - tion is not restricted to tracheal tip cells in proximity to the presumed source of FGF ligand ( Fig . 5E ) . We find that the btl - GFP chimeric gene is most likely functional in vivo because this transgene exacerbates the otherwise mild expressivity of the awd heterozygotes , resulting in significantly increased severe tracheal defects ( ∼ 20 % ; see Fig . 5F for an example ) . As mentioned previously , these very severe phenotypes are rare in the awd heterozygote alone and not seen in wild - type embryos upon Btl - GFP expression . Thus , the accumulation of Btl - GFP in tra - cheal cells and the phenotypic outcome of this accumu - lation correlate specifically with the loss of awd function . Significantly , the awd mutant effect on FGFR accu - mulation can be duplicated in the cultured cells . When the overall Awd protein levels are knocked down by RNA interference ( RNAi ; Fig . 6A ) , the overall FGFR lev - els increased dramatically ( Fig . 6B ) . When visualized by staining for GFP , the cells examined before the RNAi took effect showed only low - level , internalized signal ( Fig . 6C , D ) . When the Awd level was knocked down , a substantial number of the cells overaccumulate the Btl - GFP chimeric protein on the cell surface ( Fig . 6E , F ) . Most remarkably , these Btl - GFP overexpressing cells extend either multiple filopodia ( microspikes ) or lamellipodia . It is also worth noting that awd knock - down does not af - fect the levels of EGF receptor ( EGFR ; Fig . 6B ) , indicating that intracellular transport and turnover mechanism for EGFR and FGFR are likely different . MAPK is ectopically activated in awd mutant trachea Although the signaling events downstream of Btl are likely very complex , leading to cellular responses that alter gene expression and cytoskeletal structures , one ac - cessible indicator is the activation of MAP kinase Figure 4 . shi mutant shows migration phenotype similar to awd . Progenies of shi 1 homozygous females crossed with 1 - eve - 1 males ( A – D ) and of shi 1 homozygous females crossed with 1 - eve - 1 , awd j2A4 / TM3 , P { ry + t7 . 2 = HZ2 . 7 } DB2 , Sb males ( E ) . The embryos were collected at 25°C for 7 h , then incubated for 7 h at 34°C and stained with anti - (cid:1) - Gal antibody . Unless indicated , anterior is to the left and dorsal side is up . ( A ) Dorsal – lateral view . A sharp arrow points to the ectopic branching event . Also , abnormal cellular projections are seen extending from the dorsal branch tip cells ( arrows in the inset ) . ( B ) Lateral view . A segment of the dorsal trunk is seen moving ventrally ( bracket ) into the position normally occupied by transverse con - nectives , instead of anteriorly to connect with the lateral neigh - bor . ( C ) Dorsal – lateral view . A group of tracheal cells move dor - sally ( bracket ) at the expense of forming a proper dorsal trunk connection . Ectopic cellular extensions are also visible ( arrow ) . ( D ) Lateral view . An extra loop of dorsal trunk is formed ( bracket ) with ectopic small projections ( arrows ) . ( E ) Dorsal view of se - verely disrupted trachea . The enlarged section shows ectopic cellular projections and randomly migrating tracheal cells ( ar - rows ) . ( F ) Quantitation of the recorded phenotypes as shown in A – E . There is a nearly 30 - fold increase in the most severe phe - notype ( E ) when shi is combined with heterozygous awd mu - tant . Only embryos older than stage 13 that appear normal in segmental patterns were tabulated as described in Figure 3K . Regulation of FGF receptor levels by nm23 / awd GENES & DEVELOPMENT 2817 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press on February 24 , 2016 - Published by genesdev . cshlp . org Downloaded from ( MAPK ) . The Btl pathway is known to be the sole con - tributor for MAPK activation in tracheal cells from stage 11 onwards , when the cells just begin to migrate from the tracheal placodes towards the source of Bnl . For ex - ample , the extracellular domain of Btl , when fused to the C - terminal tyrosine kinase domains of other RTKs , is sufficient to activate MAPK and rescues tracheal pheno - types in btl mutants ( Dossenbach et al . 2001 ) . In Figure 7 we show the MAPK activation pattern at stages 12 and 15 when there is active branch migration . Note that after stage 12 there is no more EGFR - directed signaling that specifies tracheal cell fates along the anteroposterior axis ( Wappner et al . 1997 ) . The activated MAPK is detected using an antibody against a dually phosphorylated 11 - amino - acid peptide encompassing the ERK1 / 2 activation site ( designated dp - MAPK ; Gabay et al . 1997 ; Yao et al . 2000 ) . In wild - type stage 12 trachea , the activated MAPK is detected in some , but not all , of the migrating tips ( Fig . 7A ) in agreement with the dynamic pattern of MAPK activation documented by previous studies ( Dammai and Hsu 2003 ) . In wild - type stage 15 trachea , activated MAPK is detected exclusively in one migrating tip cell ( Fig . 7B ) . In awd mutant at stage 12 , by contrast , acti - vated MAPK is detected in multiple cells within the tra - cheal placodes ( Fig . 7C ) , whereas at stage 15 activated MAPK is detected throughout the abnormally fused dor - sal branches , including the stalk cells ( Fig . 7D ) . Discussion We explored the mechanism of awd , the Drosophila ho - molog of the putative metastasis inhibitor nm23 , in cell migration events during tracheal tube formation . The awd mutant phenotype does not resemble defects in other pathways that are known to be involved in pro - moting tracheal development , but are more consistent with loss of direction and increased motility of the tra - cheal cells due to hyperactivity of pathways involving FGFR . awd cooperates with shi / dynamin to down - regulate the Btl / FGFR levels Earlier studies established that awd participates in syn - aptic vesicle internalization likely by supplying GTP re - Figure 5 . Overaccumulation of Btl / FGFR in awd mutant . The genotypes of the indicated embryos are y , w ; btl - GAL4 / + ; 1 - eve - 1 , UAS - btl - GFP / + ( wt ) and y , w ; btl - GAL4 / + ; 1 - eve - 1 , UAS - btl - GFP , awd j4A2 / + ( awd / + ) . Embryos were double stained with anti - (cid:1) - Gal ( red ) and anti - GFP ( green ) antibodies . The two chan - nels were recorded sequentially . Anterior is to the left . ( A ) Dor - sal – lateral view of a wild - type stage 14 embryo . A projection of five 2 - µm confocal sections . The Btl - GFP chimeric protein is barely detectable . In the close - up image ( single confocal sec - tion ) , circles mark individual tracheal cells and sharp arrows point to examples of internalized Btl - GFP . ( B ) Lateral view of portion of a wild - type stage 12 tracheal subunit . Circles mark individual tracheal cells and sharp arrows point to examples of internalized Btl - GFP . Single confocal section . ( C ) Single confo - cal section of a wild - type stage 15 dorsal branch tip cell . Sharp arrows point to examples of internalized Btl - GFP . ( D ) Stage 13 awd / + tracheal subunits . A projection of five 1 - µm confocal sections . In the close - up image , arrows point to examples of large aggregates of Btl - GFP . ( E ) Lateral view of three dorsal branches from a stage 15 awd / + embryo . A projection of five 1 - µm confocal sections . Abnormal migration ( sharp arrows ) , ec - topic cellular projections ( asterisk ) , and high level of Btl - GFP are seen . In the close - up images ( single confocal section ) , Btl - GFP is seen outlining a very fine cellular projection ( bracket ) . Note that the close - up section is only partially included in the projected image . ( F ) Dorsal view of a stage 17 awd / + embryo . A projection of five 2 - µm confocal sections . The total disruption of the tra - cheal system is rarely seen in the awd heterozygotes . The prop - erly formed midgut can also be seen beneath the abnormal tra - cheal branches ( red auto - fluorescence ) . The enlarged view ( GFP stain only ) shows high level of Btl - GFP expression and ectopic cellular projections ( arrows ) . ( G ) Western blot quantitation of the Btl - GFP accumulation . Embryonic extracts from awd / + and wt embryos as described above were Western blotted and probed with antibodies indicated . Two independent lines of 1 - eve - 1 , UAS - btl - GFP , awd j2A4 were examined . Because the btl - GFP and the 1 - eve - 1 transgenes are located on the same chromosome , (cid:1) - Gal was used as a loading control . Btl - GFP is up - regulated by approximately fivefold whereas there is no concomitant in - crease in EGFR ( a slight decrease , in fact ) or the total MAPK levels in the awd mutant . Dammai et al . 2818 GENES & DEVELOPMENT Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press on February 24 , 2016 - Published by genesdev . cshlp . org Downloaded from quired for Shi / dynamin - mediated endocytosis ( Krishnan et al . 2001 ) . Our data strongly support the model in which Shi / dynamin and Awd / Nm23 are also recruited to modulate RTK signaling through endocytosis of Btl / FGFR . First , the awd tracheal phenotype ( Figs . 2 , 3 ) is alleviated by reducing the dosage of btl , indicating that awd may normally down - regulate the btl expression level ( Fig . 3K ) . Second , this assertion is supported by di - rect demonstration of overaccumulated Btl - GFP chi - meric protein in the awd mutant background ( Fig . 5D – F ) . Third , shi mutant phenotypes resemble those in the awd mutants ( Fig . 4A – D ) . In addition , awd and shi cooperate in the same pathway , as heterozygous awd combined with shi heterozygotes or hemizygotes exhibit exagger - ated phenotypes that are much more severe compared to awd or shi alone ( Fig . 4E , F ) . Fourth , using a btl - GFP chi - meric transgene controlled by the cognate btl promoter , we observed FGFR internalization in the wild - type tra - chea ( Fig . 5A – C ) . Finally , we show that one prominent downstream effector of the FGFR signaling , MAPK , is ectopically activated in multiple tracheal cells that nor - mally do not experience Bnl signaling ( Fig . 7 ) . These re - sults , coupled with our observation that bnl expression pattern in the stroma is not altered in awd mutant ( Supplementary Fig . 1 ) , indicate that internalization of membrane - bound FGFR , mediated by awd and shi / dy - namin , plays a major role in ensuring the proper level of chemotactic signal response in the tracheal cells . This notion is further supported by the observation in cul - tured cells , in which overaccumulation leads to dramatic formation of microspikes and lamellipodia ( Fig . 6 ) . It has been well established that excessive cell surface receptor density can lead to ligand - independent activa - tion of downstream pathways by lateral aggregation and propagation of receptor phosphorylation ( Verveer et al . 2000 ; Sawano et al . 2002 ) . Indeed , it has been shown that forced dimerization of the Btl protein devoid of the li - gand - binding domain can induce ectopic migration phe - notypes similar to those observed in awd and shi ( Lee et al . 1996 ) . Are there other potential targets of Awd – Shi action in tracheal development ? In developing Drosophila eye and wing imaginal discs , the extracellular domain ( ECD ) of the membrane - associ - ated Notch is cleaved upon binding to the membrane - bound ligand Delta on the neighboring cell . The Delta – Figure 6 . awd knock - down in S2 cells generates phe - notypes reminiscent of those in the awd trachea . Un - less specified , all confocal images are projection of five 1 - µm sections . ( A ) S2 cells stably expressing Drosophila EGFR ( S2 / DER ; Schnepp et al . 1998 ) were cotransfected with either awd - specific duplex RNA ( awd RNAi ) or duplex RNA corresponding to the pBlueScript multi - cloning sites ( control RNAi ) , and with pUC - HygMT vector or with pUC - HygMT - btl - GFP ( S2 / DER parental or S2 / DER - btl - GFP , respectively ) . Cells were then treated with CuCl 2 for inducing the metallothionein ( MT ) promoter . Cell extracts collected at the indicated time after transfection were Western blotted and probed with anti - Awd antibody and reprobed with an - tibody against total MAPK , which serves as a loading control . Significant reduction of the Awd protein levels was observed 3 d after RNAi treatment in both cell types , indicating the btl - GFP transgene has no effect on Awd expression . The reduction is not due to cell death , as no obvious decrease of cell numbers was noted . Also , the cells appeared to be healthy ( see below ) . ( B ) S2 / DER cells were transfected with RNA duplex and pUC - HygMT - btl - GFP as in A . Cell extracts were prepared at 1 , 2 , and 3 d after transfection and Western blotted with the indicated antibodies . There is a significant increase in the GFP levels in step with the decrease in the Awd levels . By contrast , reduction of Awd has only a slight negative effect on the EGFR levels . ( C , D ) Two fields of the S2 / DER - btl - GFP treated above at 2 d after transfec - tion , when no significant Awd reduction was observed . Low levels of Btl - GFP are mostly internalized . ( E , F ) Two fields of the S2 / DER - btl - GFP treated above at 3 d after transfection , when significant Awd reduction was observed . A large number of cells shows overaccumu - lation of Btl - GFP in the cell periphery . These Btl - GFP overexpressing cells extend multiple filopodia ( microspikes ; white sharp arrows ) or lamellipodia ( block yellow arrow ) , whereas nonoverexpressing cells remain rounded with no or very few protrusions ( open arrowhead ) . The insets in E are single confocal sections , showing the localization of overexpressed Btl - GFP in the cell membrane . White bars , 20 µm ; red bars , 10 µm . Regulation of FGF receptor levels by nm23 / awd GENES & DEVELOPMENT 2819 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press on February 24 , 2016 - Published by genesdev . cshlp . org Downloaded from Notch ECD complex is then internalized by endocytosis into the Delta - expressing cell . Removal of Notch ECD fa - cilitates the activation and dissociation of the Notch in - tracellular domain from the membrane by proteolytic cleavages . Interestingly , reduction of endocytosis due to shi mutation leads to reduced Notch signaling ( Parks et al . 2000 ) . In tracheal cells , Notch expression in one of the two tip cells suppresses the fusion cell fate whereas the other cell ( Delta - expressing ) goes on to fuse with its op - posing partner on the other branch ( Ikeya and Hayashi 1999 ; Llimargas 1999 ; Steneberg et al . 1999 ) . In Notch loss - of - function mutant , additional fusion cells are gen - erated and misconnection between neighboring tubes can be observed . Such a defect is also observed in awd mutants . However , in awd mutants , the most prominent defects are the result of misguided migration of tracheal tubes and individual tracheal cells , which are not ob - served in Notch mutant . We also argue that lateral fu - sion requires not only ectopic fusion cell fate but also misdirected migration . It has been suggested that Btl and Notch signaling can negatively modulate each other in the tip cells ( Ikeya and Hayashi 1999 ) . Thus , the miscon - nection and lateral fusion observed could be due to downstream events of hyperactive FGFR signaling . In - deed , we observed only reduction , not overaccumula - tion , of either Delta or N ecd in the fusion cells in awd mutant ( Supplementary Fig . 2 ; data not shown ) . Shi is also implicated in retrieval of Spitz ( an EGFR ligand ) and Sog ( a Dpp antagonist ) such that the spatial distribution and half - life of these extracellular ligands are restricted ( Lee et al . 2001 ; Srinivasan et al . 2002 ) . Although EGFR and Dpp signaling pathways are in - volved in tracheal cell fate determination ( Wappner et al . 1997 ) , they do not participate in guided cell migration . Another potentially relevant target of endocytosis is E - cadherin . Recently , it was shown that ARF - 6 ( ADP - Ribosylation Factor ) recruits Nm23H1 to mediate ad - herens junction disassembly , indicating that Nm23H1 is involved in turnover of the transmembrane protein E - cadherin ( Palacios et al . 2002 ) . However , in Drosophila trachea , E - cadherin is specifically required for fusion of two opposing branches ( Tanaka - Matakatsu et al . 1996 ) . Potential lack of E - cadherin internalization therefore cannot account for the misguided migration phenotypes observed in awd and shi mutants . We did , however , note that Awd is not a general regu - lator of RTK expression . In embryos as well in cultured S2 cells , the EGFR levels are not affected by awd muta - tion or down - regulation ( Figs . 5G , 6B ) . What confers the specificity warrants further investigation . The antimetastatic function of awd / nm23 Because awd / nm23 encodes a NDPK , it is believed that Awd / Nm23 may act as a GEF - like activator of GTPases . However , no definitive target GTPases have been iden - tified for human Nm23 that can fully account for its antimetastatic activity . In light of the recent finding that FGF signaling is one of the very few “signature events” that underlie the metastatic potential of breast cancer ( Kang et al . 2003 ) , our demonstration that awd / nm23 modulates cell migration via its participation in FGFR signaling provides one plausible mechanism for its anti - metastatic function . We have observed that neither the expression level nor the subcellular localization of Shi / dynamin was altered in awd / nm23 mutants ( V . Dammai and T . Hsu , unpubl . ) . It was also observed that Awd / Nm23 and Shi / dynamin did not form a stable complex in vivo ( Krishnan et al . 2001 ; V . Dammai and T . Hsu , unpubl . ) . Thus , Awd / Nm23 likely supplies GTP through additional bridging factors ( e . g . , ARF - 6 ; see above ) or by increasing the local GTP concentration . As we have noted in this report , awd mutant does not grossly affect the embryonic development . The awd mu - tant was originally described as early pupal lethal ( Biggs Figure 7 . Ectopic activation of MAPK in awd mutant . 1 - eve - 1 ( wt ) and awd j2A4 , 1 - eve - 1 / 1 - eve - 1 ( awd / + ) stage 12 and stage 15 embryos were double stained with anti - (cid:1) - Gal - FITC ( green ) and anti - dp - MAPK ( red ) antibodies . The two channels were recorded sequentially . Anterior is to the left . ( A ) Tracheal subunits of a stage 12 wild - type embryo . A projection of five 1 . 5 - µm confocal sections . Within the tracheal placodes , activated MAPK are de - tected in the two tips cells marked by circles . Lighter MAPK activation is also detected on the opposite tip ( arrow ) . Activated MAPK - expressing cells surrounding the tracheal placodes are of mesodermal origin , including cardiac precursors . ( B ) One dorsal branch of a wild - type stage 15 embryo . A single confocal sec - tion . Only one cell at the tip contains activated MAPK . ( C ) Tracheal subunits of a stage 12 awd heterozygote . A projection of five 1 . 5 - µm confocal sections . Multiple cells besides the mi - grating tips within the tracheal placodes express activated MAPK ( arrows ) . ( D ) Two laterally fused dorsal branches of a stage 15 awd heterozygote . A projection of five 1 . 5 - µm confocal sections . The stalks ( brackets ) ectopically express activated MAPK . Bars , 10 µm . Dammai et al . 2820 GENES & DEVELOPMENT Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press on February 24 , 2016 - Published by genesdev . cshlp . org Downloaded from et al . 1988 ; Dearolf et al . 1988 ) , although the embryonic viability may simply be the result of maternal contribu - tion of awd . In addition , embryos and larvae can tolerate quite well minor tracheal defects described in this report ( Guillemin et al . 1996 ; V . Dammai and T . Hsu , unpubl . ) . Why , then , is the awd mutant effect limited if awd is involved in regulating such important cellular process as endocytosis ? Our data showing the differential effects of awd mutant on FGFR and EGFR strongly suggest that Awd , unlike Shi / dynamin , is not a general regulator of endocytosis . Dynamin has been shown to regulate vesicle formation from various membrane domains , not restricted to the cell surface ( reviewed in Hinshaw 2000 ) . As such , Awd may selectively regulate a subset of vesicle transport events , perhaps depending on the availability of the cofactors or the “bridging factors” described above . Materials and methods Drosophila strains and genetics The awd j2A4 allele is a single P - element insertion , resulting in complete null genotype . It has been characterized ( Krishnan et al . 2001 ) and the insertion site has been mapped to the 5 (cid:1) untranslated region by the Drosophila genome project ( Sprad - ling et al . 1999 ) . y ; Df ( 3R ) awd KRB , e , ca 1 / TM3 , Sb , Ser is a small chromosomal deficiency uncovering 100D1 – 100D3 – 4 . y ; awd KRS6 / y + , TM3 , Sb , Ser was a gift from A . Shearn ( Johns Hop - kins University , Baltimore , MA ) . The shi 1 is a temperature - sensitive allele that has been described extensively ( see the FlyBase Web site for a complete list of reference : http : / / flybase . bio . indiana . edu / . bin / fbidq . html ? FBal0015610 ) . The btl H82 (cid:2) 3 al - lele , a hypomorph , is partial deletion of the btl 5 (cid:1) regulatory region ( Kla¨mbt et al . 1992 ) . The awd j2A4 , awd KRB , and shi 1 strains are obtained from the Bloomington Drosophila Stock Center and the btl H82 (cid:2) 3 strain is a gift from D . Montell ( Johns Hopkins University , Baltimore , MA ) . The transgenic line 1 - eve - 1 ( a gift from A . Brand , University of Cambridge , Cam - bridge , UK ) contains the lacZ reporter gene under control of the trachealess gene promoter that specifies expression in all tra - cheal cells at all stages . The 1 - eve - 1 marker was combined with either awd j2A4 or btl H82 (cid:2) 3 allele ( all three on the third chromo - some ) by simple genetic recombination . All awd and btl alleles were paired with the balancer chromosome containing another reporter lacZ line that specifies (cid:1) - Gal expression in the maxil - lary segment ( TM3 , P { ry + t7 . 2 = HZ2 . 7 } DB2 , Sb ; from the Bloomington Stock Center ) . Therefore , when embryos resulting from heterozygous intercross were stained with anti - (cid:1) - Gal an - tibody , expression in only tracheal cells and not in the anterior embryonic segments indicates homozygosity . The heterozy - gous mutants were the result of 1 - eve - 1 , awd j2A4 ( or btl H82 (cid:2) 3 ) / TM3 , P { ry + t7 . 2 = HZ2 . 7 } DB2 , Sb crossed with homozygous 1 - eve - 1 , to avoid complication from the mutations on the bal - ancer chromosome . In this case , no maxillary staining indicates heterozygosity . The btl - GAL4 and UAS - btl - GFP transgenic lines are gifts from T . Kornberg ( University of California , San Francisco ) and have been described ( Sato and Kornberg 2002 ) . The UAS - btl - GFP marker was combined with 1 - eve - 1 , awd j2A4 . The 1 - eve - 1 , UAS - btl - GFP , awd j2A4 / TM3 , P { ry + t7 . 2 = HZ2 . 7 } DB2 , Sb was then crossed with btl - GAL4 homozygotes to induce btl - GFP expression . Thus , only those embryos stained with (cid:1) - Gal in the trachea are relevant . For analysis of shi phenotypes , homozygous shi 1 ( on the X chromosome ) females were crossed with homozygous 1 - eve - 1 males . The resulting embryos were therefore either heterozy - gous females or hemizygous males , and all were stained by anti - (cid:1) - Gal in trachea . Because shi 1 allele is temperature sensitive , embryos were collected continuously at the permissive tem - perature ( 25°C ) for 7 h , that is , a collection of embryos encom - passing stages 1 – 11 . The embryos were then removed from egg - laying flies and incubated at restrictive temperature ( 34°C ) for another 7 h . Thus the final collection of embryos was about stages 11 – 16 , an approximation due to growth var - iations at high temperature . For shi – awd interaction , homozy - gous shi 1 females were crossed with 1 - eve - 1 , awd j2A4 / TM3 , P { ry + t7 . 2 = HZ2 . 7 } DB2 , Sb . To generate the awd transgenic strain , the wild - type awd open reading frame was cloned into the P - element transforma - tion vector pUAST , downstream from the yeast UAS enhancer element . The resulting DNA was injected into the y , w embryos and transgenic animals isolated using the established method - ology . Transgenics ( two independent strains ) carrying the trans - gene on the second chromosome were combined with the btl - GAL4 ( on the second chromosome ; see above ) . The resulting y , w ; btl - GAL4 , UAS - awd ( homozygous viable ) was used to rescue the phenotypes of the awd alleles ( see text ) . Antibodies Bacterially expressed , His - tagged Awd protein was purified us - ing Ni - NTA column ( Qiagen ) and the antibody raised in rabbits . Rabbit polyclonal antibody was affinity purified using protein A - agarose beads ( Bio - Rad ) . The final IgG concentration was 2 . 95 mg / mL . A 1 : 1000 dilution was used for fluorescence staining and 1 : 2500 was used for Western blotting . Mouse monoclonal anti - (cid:1) - Gal antibody ( Sigma ) was used at 1 : 1500 ( overnight in - cubation at 4°C ) for colorimetric staining and 1 : 500 for cofluo - rescence staining with anti - Awd antibodies . Rabbit polyclonal anti - (cid:1) - Gal - FITC conjugate ( Rockland ; at 1 : 500 ) was used for fluorescence costaining with anti - dp - MAPK . Rabbit polyclonal against ERK1 / 2 ( from Sigma ) was used at 1 : 1000 for Western . Goat polyclonal against Drosophila EGFR ( from Santa Cruz Bio - technology ) was used at 1 : 500 for Western . Mouse monoclonal antibody against dually phospohorylated ( dp - ) MAPK ( Sigma ) was used at 1 : 300 dilution for overnight incubation at 4°C . Rab - bit polyclonal anti - GFP was used at 1 : 200 dilution for overnight incubation at 4°C and 1 : 1000 for Westerns ( from AbCam and Stressgene , respectively ) . For fluorescence staining , Mouse monoclonal 2A12 was from Developmental Studies Hybridoma Bank ( DSHB ) and used at a 1 : 3 dilution . Mouse monoclonal anti - Delta and anti - N ecd antibodies were from DSHB and used at a 1 : 200 dilution . Rat polyclonal anti - Trh antibody was a gift from B . - Z . Shilo ( Weizmann Institute , Rehovot , Israel ) and used at a 1 : 1000 dilution . Alexafluor 488 - or 546 - conjugated second - ary antibodies were used ( Molecular Probes ) at a 1 : 200 dilution in a 2 - h incubation at room temperature . For color staining , biotin - conjugated secondary antibodies ( Vector ) were used at a 1 : 1000 dilution in a 2 - h incubation at room temperature . Color development used the VectaStain reagents following the manu - facturer’s instructions ( Vector ) . Western blotting and immunohistochemistry For Western blotting , embryos were collected , dechorionated in 50 % bleach ( Clorox ) and immediately sonicated in RIPA buffer with protease inhibitors ( Roche ) . S2 cell extracts were prepared as described before ( Hsu et al . 2001 ) . One hundred micrograms of total extracts were then subjected to 10 % – 15 % – 20 % step - Regulation of FGF receptor levels by nm23 / awd GENES & DEVELOPMENT 2821 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press on February 24 , 2016 - Published by genesdev . cshlp . org Downloaded from gradient SDS - PAGE . Blotting and protein detection followed standard procedures ( Hsu et al . 2001 ) . For immunostaining of embryos , the embryos were dechori - onated , fixed for 10 min in 0 . 1 M HEPES ( pH 6 . 9 ) / 20 mM MgSO 4 containing 4 % paraformaldehyde overlaid with heptane . After fixation , the embryos were recovered with methanol . Immuno - staining was performed as described ( Sato and Kornberg 2002 ) . The use of antibodies was described above . S2 cell culture assays S2 cell line stably expressing Drosophila EGFR ( S2 / DER ) is a gift from A . Simcox ( Ohio State University ) . The DNA sequence encoding the Btl - GFP chimeric protein was released from the UAS - btl - GFP construct ( a gift from Makoto Sato of the Univer - sity of Tokyo , Tokyo , Japan ) and recloned into the pUC - HygMT expression vector ( a gift from C . Thummel , the University of Utah , Salt Lake City , Utah ) downstream from the metallothio - nein promoter . Duplex RNAs were generated as follows : The pBS - awd cDNA clone containing the awd coding sequence was PCR amplified using T7 - and T3 - promoter sequence primers . The DNA fragment was then used for synthesizing RNAs from either T7 promoter or T3 promoter using reagents supplied by Promega . The two complementary RNA strands were heat de - natured at 80°C and annealed at 37°C in 1× TE ( 10 mM Tris - HCL at pH 7 / 1 mM Na - EDTA ) . Double - stranded RNA was gel purified . Control RNA duplex synthesis followed the same pro - cedure except that the empty pBS vector was used . Two micrograms of pUC - HygMT - btl - GFP was cotransfected with 4 µg of either control RNAi or awd full - length duplex RNA in 6 - well plates with 1 mL of serum - free M3 media ( from GIBCO ) . After 12 h , the transfection mixture was aspirated and prewarmed complete media was added . The cells were allowed to recover for 12 h . Ten micromolar CuCl 2 was added and samples were collected at 24 , 48 , and 72 h post - CuCl 2 treat - ment . For immunostaining , cells were identically treated as above except that the cells were grown on poly - lysine - treated coverslides and processed for immunohistochemistry as de - scribed ( Mantrova and Hsu 1998 ) . RNA in situ and immunohistochemistry double staining The procedures followed the published protocol ( Manoukian and Krause 1992 ) . The bnl RNA probe corresponds to the N terminus of the open reading frame ( 713 nt ) . Acknowledgments We wish to thank A . Brand , T . Kornberg , D . Montell , and A . Shearn for gifts of fly strains ; A . Simcox for the S2 / DER cells ; M . Sato for the btl - GFP cDNA ; and B . - Z . Shilo for the Trh antibody . The Bloomington Drosophila Stock Center is also indispensable for providing critical fly stocks . J . Ivey’s management of the fly facility at MUSC is greatly appreciated . This work is supported by grants from the NCI ( CA095888 ) , NIH ( RO1GM57843 ) , and VHL Family Alliance to T . H . ; an Abney Foundation Fellowship to K . R . L . ; and a grant from Lutz - E . - Adolf - Foundation to B . A . The publication costs of this article were defrayed in part by payment of page charges . This article must therefore be hereby marked “advertisement” in accordance with 18 USC section 1734 solely to indicate this fact . References Aravind , L . and Koonin , E . V . 1998 . A novel family of predicted phosphoesterases includes Drosophila prune protein and bacterial RecJ exonuclease . Trends Biochem . Sci . 23 : 17 – 19 . Biggs , J . , Tripoulas , N . , Hersperger , E . , Dearolf , C . , and Shearn , A . 1988 . Analysis of the lethal interaction between the prune and Killer of prune mutations of Drosophila . Genes & Dev . 2 : 1333 – 1343 . Biggs , J . , Hersperger , E . , Steeg , P . S . , Liotta , L . A . , and Shearn , A . 1990 . A Drosophila gene that is homologous to a mamma - lian gene associated with tumor metastasis codes for a nucleoside diphosphate kinase . Cell 63 : 933 – 940 . Brodin , L . , Low , P . , and Shupliakov , O . 2000 . Sequential steps in clathrin - mediated synaptic vesicle endocytosis . Curr . Opin . Neurobiol . 10 : 312 – 320 . Dammai , V . and Hsu , T . 2003 . EGF - dependent and independent activation of MAP kinase during Drosophila oogenesis . Anat . Rec . ( in press ) . Dearolf , C . R . , Hersperger , E . , and Shearn , A . 1988 . Developmen - tal consequences of awd b3 , a cell - autonomous lethal muta - tion of Drosophila induced by hybrid dysgenesis . Dev . Biol . 129 : 159 – 168 . Delgado , R . , Maureira , C . , Oliva , C . , Kidokoro , Y . , and Labarca , P . 2000 . Size of vesicle pools , rates of mobilization , and re - cycling at neuromuscular synapses of a Drosophila mutant , shibire . Neuron 28 : 941 – 953 . Dossenbach , C . , Rock , S . , and Affolter , M . 2001 . Specificity of FGF signaling in cell migration in Drosophila . Development 128 : 4563 – 4572 . Fan , Z . , Beresford , P . J . , Oh , D . Y . , Zhang , D . , and Lieberman , J . 2003 . Tumor suppressor NM23 - H1 is a granzyme A - acti - vated DNase during CTL - mediated apoptosis , and the nucleosome assembly protein SET is its inhibitor . Cell 112 : 659 – 672 . Freije , J . M . , Blay , P . , MacDonald , N . J . , Manrow , R . E . , and Steeg , P . S . 1997 . Site - directed mutation of Nm23 - H1 . Mutations lacking motility suppressive capacity upon transfection are deficient in histidine - dependent protein phosphotransferase pathways in vitro . J . Biol . Chem . 272 : 5525 – 5532 . Gabay , L . , Seger , R . , and Shilo , B . Z . 1997 . MAP kinase in situ activation atlas during Drosophila embryogenesis . Develop - ment 124 : 3535 – 3541 . Glazer , L . and Shilo , B . Z . 1991 . The Drosophila FGF - R homolog is expressed in the embryonic tracheal system and appears to be required for directed tracheal cell extension . Genes & Dev . 5 : 697 – 705 . Guillemin , K . , Groppe , J . , Ducker , K . , Treisman , R . , Hafen , E . , Affolter , M . , and Krasnow , M . A . 1996 . The pruned gene en - codes the Drosophila serum response factor and regulates cytoplasmic outgrowth during terminal branching of the tra - cheal system . Development 122 : 1353 – 1362 . Hinshaw , J . E . 2000 . Dynamin and its role in membrane fission . Ann . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 16 : 483 – 519 . Hsu , T . , McRackan , D . , Vincent , T . S . , and de Couet , H . G . 2001 . Drosophila Pin1 prolyl isomerase Dodo is a MAP kinase signal responder during oogenesis . Nat . Cell Biol . 3 : 538 – 543 . Ikeya , T . and Hayashi , S . 1999 . Interplay of Notch and FGF signaling restricts cell fate and MAPK activation in the Dro - sophila trachea . Development 126 : 4455 – 4463 . Kang , Y . , Siegel , P . M . , Shu , W . , Drobnjak , M . , Kakonen , S . M . , Cordon - Cardo , C . , Guise , T . A . , and Massague , J . 2003 . A multigenic program mediating breast cancer metastasis to bone . Cancer Cell 3 : 537 – 549 . Kantor , J . D . , McCormick , B . , Steeg , P . S . , and Zetter , B . R . 1993 . Inhibition of cell motility after nm23 transfection of human and murine tumor cells . Cancer Res . 53 : 1971 – 1973 . Kitamoto , T . 2001 . Conditional modification of behavior in Drosophila by targeted expression of a temperature - sensitive shibire allele in defined neurons . J . Neurobiol . 47 : 81 – 92 . Dammai et al . 2822 GENES & DEVELOPMENT Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press on February 24 , 2016 - Published by genesdev . cshlp . org Downloaded from Kla¨mbt , C . , Glazer , L . , and Shilo , B . Z . 1992 . breathless , a Dro - sophila FGF receptor homolog , is essential for migration of tracheal and specific midline glial cells . Genes & Dev . 6 : 1668 – 1678 . Kosaka , T . and Ikeda , K . 1983 . Possible temperature - dependent blockage of synaptic vesicle recycling induced by a single gene mutation in Drosophila . J . Neurobiol . 14 : 207 – 225 . Krishnan , K . S . , Rikhy , R . , Rao , S . , Shivalkar , M . , Mosko , M . , Narayanan , R . , Etter , P . , Estes , P . S . , and Ramaswami , M . 2001 . Nucleoside diphosphate kinase , a source of GTP , is required for dynamin - dependent synaptic vesicle recycling . Neuron 30 : 197 – 210 . Lacombe , M . L . , Milon , L . , Munier , A . , Mehus , J . G . , and Lam - beth , D . O . 2000 . The human Nm23 / nucleoside diphosphate kinases . J . Bioenerg . Biomembr . 32 : 247 – 258 . Lee , T . , Hacohen , N . , Krasnow , M . , and Montell , D . J . 1996 . Regulated Breathless receptor tyrosine kinase activity re - quired to pattern cell migration and branching in the Dro - sophila tracheal system . Genes & Dev . 10 : 2912 – 2921 . Lee , J . R . , Urban , S . , Garvey , C . F . , and Freeman , M . 2001 . Regu - lated intracellular ligand transport and proteolysis control EGF signal activation in Drosophila . Cell 107 : 161 – 171 . Leone , A . , Flatow , U . , VanHoutte , K . , and Steeg , P . S . 1993 . Transfection of human nm23 - H1 into the human MDA - MB - 435 breast carcinoma cell line : Effects on tumor metastatic potential , colonization and enzymatic activity . Oncogene 8 : 2325 – 2333 . Llimargas , M . 1999 . The Notch pathway helps to pattern the tips of the Drosophila tracheal branches by selecting cell fates . Development 126 : 2355 – 2364 . MacDonald , N . J . , Freije , J . M . P . , Stracke , M . L . , Manrow , R . E . , and Steeg , P . S . 1996 . Site - directed mutagenesis of nm23 - H1 . Mutation of proline 96 or serine 120 abrogates its motility inhibitory activity upon transfection into human breast car - cinoma cells . J . Biol . Chem . 271 : 25107 – 25116 . Manning , G . and Krasnow , M . A . 1993 . Development of the Dro - sophila tracheal system . In The development of Drosophila melanogaster ( ed . M . Bate and A . Martinez Arias ) , pp . 609 – 686 . Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press , Cold Spring Har - bor , NY . Manoukian , A . S . and Krause , H . M . 1992 . Concentration - depen - dent activities of the even - skipped protein in Drosophila em - bryos . Genes & Dev . 6 : 1740 – 1751 . Mantrova , E . Y . and Hsu , T . 1998 . Down - regulation of transcrip - tion factor CF2 by Drosophila Ras / MAP kinase signaling in oogenesis : Cytoplasmic retention and degradation . Genes & Dev . 12 : 1166 – 1175 . Metzger R . J . and Krasnow , M . A . 1999 . Genetic control of branching morphogenesis . Science 284 : 1635 – 1639 . Ohshiro , T . and Saigo , K . 1997 . Transcriptional regulation of breathless FGF receptor gene by binding of TRACHEALESS / dARNT heterodimers to three central midline elements in Drosophila developing trachea . Development 124 : 3975 – 3986 . Palacios , F . , Schweitzer , J . K . , Boshans , R . L . , and D’Souza - Scho - rey , C . 2002 . ARF6 - GTP recruits Nm23 - H1 to facilitate dy - namin - mediated endocytosis during adherens junctions dis - assembly . Nat . Cell Biol . 4 : 929 – 936 . Parks , A . L . , Klueg , K . M . , Stout , J . R . , and Muskavitch , M . A . 2000 . Ligand endocytosis drives receptor dissociation and activation in the Notch pathway . Development 127 : 1373 – 1385 . Perrimon , N . , Noll , E . , McCall , K . , and Brand , A . 1991 . Gener - ating lineage - specific markers to study Drosophila develop - ment . Dev . Genet . 12 : 238 – 252 . Ribeiro , C . , Ebner , A . , and Affolter , M . 2002 . In vivo imaging reveals different cellular functions for FGF and Dpp signal - ing in tracheal branching morphogenesis . Dev . Cell 2 : 677 – 683 . Roymans , D . , Willems , R . , Van Blockstaele , D . R . , and Slegers , H . 2002 . Nucleoside diphosphate kinase ( NDPK / NM23 ) and the waltz with multiple partners : Possible consequences in tumor metastasis . Clin . Exp . Metastasis 19 : 465 – 476 . Sato , M . and Kornberg , T . B . 2002 . FGF is an essential mitogen and chemoattractant for the air sacs of the Drosophila tra - cheal system . Dev . Cell 3 : 195 – 207 . Sawano , A . , Takayama , S . , Matsuda , M . , and Miyawaki , A . 2002 . Lateral propagation of EGF signaling after local stimu - lation is dependent on receptor density . Dev . Cell 3 : 245 – 257 . Schnepp , B . , Donaldson , T . , Grumbling , G . , Ostrowski , S . , Schweitzer , R . , Shilo , B . - Z . , and Simcox , A . 1998 . EGF do - main swap converts a Drosophila EGF receptor activator into an inhibitor . Genes & Dev . 12 : 908 – 913 . Sever , S . , Muhlberg , A . B . , and Schmid , S . L . 1999 . Impairment of dynamin’s GAP domain stimulates receptor - mediated endo - cytosis . Nature 398 : 481 – 486 . Spradling , A . C . , Stern , D . , Beaton , A . , Rhem , E . J . , Laverty , T . , Mozden , N . , Misra , S . , and Rubin , G . M . 1999 . The Berkeley Drosophila Genome Project gene disruption project : Single P - element insertions mutating 25 % of vital Drosophila genes . Genetics 153 : 135 – 177 . Srinivasan , S . , Rashka , K . E . , and Bier , E . 2002 . Creation of a Sog morphogen gradient in the Drosophila embryo . Dev . Cell 2 : 91 – 101 . Steeg , P . S . , Bevilacqua , G . , Kopper , L . , Thorgeirsson , U . P . , Tal - madge , J . E . , Liotta , L . A . , and Sobel , M . E . 1988 . Evidence for a novel gene associated with low tumor metastatic potential . J . Natl . Cancer Inst . 80 : 200 – 204 . Steneberg , P . , Hemphala , J . , and Samakovlis , C . 1999 . Dpp and Notch specify the fusion cell fate in the dorsal branches of the Drosophila trachea . Mech . Dev . 87 : 153 – 163 . Sutherland , D . , Samakovlis , C . , and Krasnow , M . A . 1996 . branchless encodes a Drosophila FGF homolog that controls tracheal cell migration and the pattern of branching . Cell 87 : 1091 – 1101 . Tanaka - Matakatsu , M . , Uemura , T . , Oda , H . , Takeichi , M . , and Hayashi , S . 1996 . Cadherin - mediated cell adhesion and cell motility in Drosophila trachea regulated by the transcrip - tion factor Escargot . Development 122 : 3697 – 3705 . Teng , D . H . , Engele , C . M . , and Venkatesh , T . R . 1991 . A product of the prune locus of Drosophila is similar to mammalian GTPase - activating protein . Nature 353 : 437 – 440 . Timmons , L . and Shearn , A . 2000 . Role of AWD / nucleoside diphosphate kinase in Drosophila development . J . Bioenerg . Biomembr . 32 : 293 – 300 . Timmons , L . , Hersperger , E . , Woodhouse , E . , Xu , J . , Liu , L . Z . , and Shearn , A . 1993 . The expression of the Drosophila awd gene during normal development and in neoplastic brain tu - mors caused by lgl mutations . Dev . Biol . 158 : 364 – 379 . Timmons , L . , Xu , J . , Hersperger , G . , Deng , X . F . , and Shearn , A . 1995 . Point mutations in awd Kpn which revert the prune / Killer of prune lethal interaction affect conserved residues that are involved in nucleoside diphosphate kinase substrate binding and catalysis . J . Biol . Chem . 270 : 23021 – 23030 . van der Bliek , A . M . and Meyerowitz , E . M . 1991 . Dynamin - like protein encoded by the Drosophila shibire gene associated with vesicular traffic . Nature 351 : 411 – 414 . Verveer , P . J . , Wouters , F . S . , Reynolds , A . R . , and Bastiaens , P . I . 2000 . Quantitative imaging of lateral ErbB1 receptor signal propagation in the plasma membrane . Science 290 : 1567 – 1570 . Regulation of FGF receptor levels by nm23 / awd GENES & DEVELOPMENT 2823 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press on February 24 , 2016 - Published by genesdev . cshlp . org Downloaded from Vieira , A . V . , Lamaze , C . , and Schmid , S . L . 1996 . Control of EGF receptor signaling by clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Science 274 : 2086 – 2089 . Wappner , P . , Gabay , L . , and Shilo , B . Z . 1997 . Interactions be - tween the EGF receptor and DPP pathways establish distinct cell fates in the tracheal placodes . Development 124 : 4707 – 4716 . Wilk , R . , Weizman , I . , and Shilo , B . Z . 1996 . trachealess encodes a bHLH - PAS protein that is an inducer of tracheal cell fates in Drosophila . Genes & Dev . 10 : 93 – 102 . Wolf , C . , Gerlach , N . , and Schuh , R . 2002 . Drosophila tracheal system formation involves FGF - dependent cell extensions contacting bridge - cells . EMBO Rep . 3 : 563 – 568 . Xu , J . , Liu , L . Z . , Deng , X . F . , Timmons , L . , Hersperger , E . , Steeg , P . S . , Veron , M . , and Shearn , A . 1996 . The enzymatic activity of Drosophila AWD / NDP kinase is necessary but not suffi - cient for its biological function . Dev . Biol . 177 : 544 – 557 . Yao , Z . , Dolginov , Y . , Hanoch , T . , Yung , Y . , Ridner , G . , Lando , Z . , Zharhary , D . , and Seger , R . 2000 . Detection of partially phosphorylated forms of ERK by monoclonal antibodies re - veals spatial regulation of ERK activity by phosphatases . FEBS Lett . 468 : 37 – 42 . Dammai et al . 2824 GENES & DEVELOPMENT Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press on February 24 , 2016 - Published by genesdev . cshlp . org Downloaded from 10 . 1101 / gad . 1096903 Access the most recent version at doi : 2003 17 : 2812 - 2824 Genes Dev . Vincent Dammai , Boris Adryan , Kim R . Lavenburg , et al . development during tracheal shi / dynamin levels and functions synergistically with , regulates FGF receptor nm23 , the homolog of human Drosophila awd Material Supplemental http : / / genesdev . cshlp . org / content / suppl / 2003 / 11 / 07 / 17 . 22 . 2812 . DC1 . html References http : / / genesdev . cshlp . org / content / 17 / 22 / 2812 . full . html # ref - list - 1 This article cites 56 articles , 25 of which can be accessed free at : Service Email Alerting click here . right corner of the article or Receive free email alerts when new articles cite this article - sign up in the box at the top http : / / genesdev . cshlp . org / subscriptions go to : Genes & Development To subscribe to Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press on February 24 , 2016 - Published by genesdev . cshlp . org Downloaded from