Biol . Rev . ( 2017 ) , 92 , pp . 1459 – 1474 . 1459 doi : 10 . 1111 / brv . 12291 Mitochondrial function , ornamentation , and immunocompetence Rebecca E . Koch ∗ , Chloe C . Josefson and Geoffrey E . Hill Department of Biological Sciences , Auburn University , Auburn , AL 36849 , U . S . A . ABSTRACT Understanding the mechanisms that link ornamental displays and individual condition is key to understanding the evolution and function of ornaments . Immune function is an aspect of individual quality that is often associated with the expression of ornamentation , but a general explanation for why the expression of some ornaments seems to be consistently linked to immunocompetence remains elusive . We propose that condition - dependent ornaments may be linked to key aspects of immunocompetence through co - dependence on mitochondrial function . Mitochondrial involvement in immune function is rarely considered outside of the biomedical literature , but the role of mitochondria as the primary energy producers of the cell and the centres of biosynthesis , the oxidative stress response , and cellular signalling place them at the hub of a variety of immune pathways . A promising new mechanistic explanation for correlations between a wide range of ornamental traits and the properties of individual quality is that mitochondrial function may be the ‘shared pathway’ responsible for links between ornament production and individual condition . Herein , we ﬁrst review the role of mitochondria as both signal transducers and metabolic regulators of immune function . We then describe connections between hormonal pathways and mitochondria , with implications for both immune function and the expression of ornamentation . Finally , we explore the possibility that ornament expression may link directly to mitochondrial function . Considering condition - dependent traits within the framework of mitochondrial function has the potential to unify central tenets within the study of sexual selection , eco - immunology , oxidative stress ecology , stress and reproductive hormone biology , and animal physiology . Key words : mitochondria , display trait , hormones , oxidative phosphorylation , OXPHOS , innate immune function , adaptive immune function , ROS . CONTENTS I . Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1460 II . Mitochondrial mediation of the immune system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1460 ( 1 ) Mitochondrial regulation of innate immune function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1461 ( a ) Mitochondria in innate immune responses to viral infection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1462 ( b ) Mitochondria in innate immune responses to bacterial infection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1463 ( 2 ) Mitochondrial involvement with adaptive immune function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1465 III . Hormones , ornamentation , and the immune system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1467 IV . Ornamentation as a signal of cellular respiration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1468 V . Mitochondria as the shared pathway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1469 VI . Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1470 VII . Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1470 VIII . References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1470 * Address for correspondence ( Tel : 334 844 9269 ; E - mail : rek0005 @ auburn . edu ) Biological Reviews 92 ( 2017 ) 1459 – 1474 © 2016 Cambridge Philosophical Society 1460 Rebecca E . Koch and others I . INTRODUCTION Hamilton & Zuk ( 1982 ) proposed the novel hypothesis that the key feature of an individual that is signalled by ornamentation is genetically inherited capacity to resist parasites . Since the publication of that seminal paper , biologists interested in sexual selection and mate choice have explored the idea that some ornamental traits may be signals of immune system function and the degree to which individuals are infected by pathogens ( Westneat & Birkhead , 1998 ; Baeta et al . , 2008 ) . Thirty years of empirical work in a variety of animals have shown that infecting an individual with a pathogen can reduce ornament expression ( reviewed in Møller , Christe & Lux , 1999 ; Hill , 2006 ) and that individuals with well - executed ornaments can have better immune system function ( Kelly et al . , 2012 ; Whittingham et al . , 2015 ) and better resistance to pathogens ( Lindstr¨om & Lundstr¨om , 2000 ; Hill & Farmer , 2005 ) compared to individuals with poorly executed ornaments . Correlative as well as experimental evidence for these relationships has been found for a wide range of ornaments in studies spanning disparate taxa , such as insects ( Ryder , 2000 ; Rantala et al . , 2003 ) , lizards ( Martín et al . , 2007 ; L´opez , Gabirot & Martín , 2009 ) , arachnids ( Ahtiainen et al . , 2004 ) , and birds ( Saks , Ots & H˜orak , 2003 ) . Despite widespread indications of connections between immune function and ornamental traits , the physiological and biochemical mechanisms that can make the expression of these ornaments honest signals of immune system function remain contentious ( Sild et al . , 2011 ; Hill , 2014 ) . One of the ﬁrst detailed explanations for how immune system function might link to the expression of ornamentation was the immunocompetence handicap hypothesis ( Folstad & Karter , 1992 ) , which proposed that hormonal mediation was the key to honest signalling . The immunocompetence handicap hypothesis proposed speciﬁcally that ornaments depend on high levels of circulating testosterone for production , but that elevated testosterone suppresses immunocompetence . Hence , only individuals that can withstand down - regulation of the immune system – individuals in good condition – can produce full ornamentation . This hypothesis has since been reﬁned ( Westneat & Birkhead , 1998 ; Buchanan , 2000 ) , but the immunocompetence handicap hypothesis has not succeeded as a general explanation for how ornaments may serve as honest indicators of health ; in particular , it cannot account for the many ornaments that are not regulated by testosterone or other steroid hormones ( Kimball & Ligon , 1999 ) and the fact that testosterone is not universally immunosuppressive ( Olsen & Kovacs , 1996 ; Ros , Groothuis & Apanius , 1997 ; Hasselquist et al . , 1999 ; Peters , 2000 ; Bilbo & Nelson , 2001 ; Lindstr ¨ om et al . , 2001 ; Roberts , Buchanan & Evans , 2004 ) . Nevertheless , it has become clear that hormones do play key roles in regulating the immune system and that they also frequently affect ornament production , so the immunocompetence handicap hypothesis has remained important to the discussion for how ornaments may serve as honest signals of health ( Rantala et al . , 2012 ; Desprat et al . , 2015 ) . In recent years , explanations for how ornaments may be reliable indicators of immune system function have shifted to the idea of resource allocation ( Morehouse , 2014 ) . Under the resource trade - off hypothesis , only individuals with large pools of resources can afford to allocate resources toward ornamentation as opposed to self - maintenance processes like immune function ( Lozano , 1994 ; von Schantz et al . , 1999 ; Møller et al . , 2000 ; Alonso - Alvarez et al . , 2008 ; McGraw et al . , 2010 ) . However , it is difﬁcult to make predictions based on this hypothesis because the resources in question – and , consequently , their availability and pathways of allocation – are often challenging to deﬁne and to measure experimentally . An alternative to resource trade - offs is the hypothesis that individual condition arises from core system functionality , which is a product of genetic , somatic , and epigenetic state ( Hill , 2011 ) . Under this shared pathway hypothesis , interdependencies on the same core pathways , rather than resource trade - offs , can explain correlations between the quality of ornamental traits and core system functions , including immunocompetence ( Hill , 2011 , 2014 ) . However , the speciﬁc shared pathways and biochemical connections between condition - dependent ornaments and immune system function remain to be explored . Here , we propose that mitochondrial function may be essential for both production of ornamentation and immunocompetence ( Hill , 2011 , 2014 ; Johnson & Hill , 2013 ; Fig . 1 ) . We put forth this mitochondrial function hypothesis because a large literature indicates that the physiological pathways that dictate immune function converge at the mitochondrion , with close integration with hormonal pathways and potential connections to ornament production . Herein , we synthesize the extensive biomedical literature describing the interconnectedness of mitochondrial pathways and mechanisms of immune function , including innate mechanisms of antiviral and antibacterial response and adaptive processes of memory and effector lymphocyte differentiation and activity . We then describe the bidirectional interactions between mitochondria and steroid and thyroid hormones , and we outline hypotheses for how condition - dependent ornamental traits may also be linked to mitochondrial function . Our goals are to highlight how mitochondria mediate a wide range of aspects of immune function that are of interest to behavioural ecologists and eco - immunologists and how shared mechanisms centred in mitochondria may explain associations between immunocompetence , hormones , and condition - dependent ornamentation . II . MITOCHONDRIAL MEDIATION OF THE IMMUNE SYSTEM Mitochondria are best known as the primary sites of ATP production , primarily via oxidative phosphorylation Biological Reviews 92 ( 2017 ) 1459 – 1474 © 2016 Cambridge Philosophical Society Mitochondrial function and immunocompetence 1461 antiviral immune function antibacterial immune function lymphocyteactivity energeticdisplays cognitivedisplays carotenoidcoloration HORMONES ORNAMENTATION IMMUNE FUNCTION PATHOGENS AND OTHER STRESSORS NON - HORMONAL PATHWAYS Fig . 1 . Diagram outlining proposed hypotheses for connections among hormones , ornamentation , immunocompetence , and mitochondrial function . Exposure to pathogens or other stressors stimulates hormonal and non - hormonal ( e . g . immune receptor ) signalling pathways that rely directly on mitochondrial proteins and processes for effective response . For example , several mitochondrial proteins [ mitochondrial antiviral signalling proteins ( MAVS ) , evolutionarily conserved signalling intermediate in Toll pathways ( ECSIT ) ] and mitochondrial mediation of oxidative phosphorylation and biosynthesis are critical to innate and adaptive immune function ( other pathways not shown ) . Mitochondria are also centres for the synthesis of steroid hormones , and the activities of both steroid and thyroid hormones rely on mitochondrial regulation of energy production , which in turn inﬂuences both immune system function and the expression of ornamentation . Moreover , recent hypotheses propose that the production of ornamental display traits also requires proper mitochondrial function ; for example , enzymes necessary for the conversion of ornamental carotenoid ( carot . ) pigments may reside in the inner mitochondrial membrane in close association with oxidative phosphorylation complexes , and carefully regulated ATP production as well as other mitochondrial signals may be essential to the regulation ( reg . ) of neurogenesis and expression of cognitively complex or athletic displays . Mitochondria therefore represent the ‘shared pathway’ through which correlations emerge among these processes – particularly immunocompetence and ornamentation ( dashed arrow ) . ( OXPHOS ) carried out by the electron transport chain . The energy produced from mitochondria is essential to the production of proteins and fuelling of processes required for mounting an immune response ( Demas , 2004 ; Lane & Martin , 2010 ; Demas et al . , 2012 ) , but energy and protein production are not the only connections between mitochondria and immune function . A growing body of empirical research has implicated mitochondria as key mediators of both innate and adaptive immune processes . Because mitochondria are both the source for the energy required to mount an immune response as well as the targets of many pathogens ( West , Shadel & Ghosh , 2011 b ; Weinberg , Sena & Chandel , 2015 ) , it is essential for immune systems to be responsive to the state of mitochondria and hence to have mitochondria intimately involved in immune signalling ( Lartigue & Faustin , 2013 ) . Indeed , a variety of immune signal cascades have been found to involve mitochondrial proteins , placing mitochondria at the centre of the regulation of immune responsiveness . In this section , we describe these mechanisms through which mitochondria are involved in mounting an effective immune response . We brieﬂy describe each aspect of immune system function and provide empirical evidence for mitochondrial involvement in that function . By outlining the speciﬁc biochemical interactions between mitochondria and different branches of immune function , we aim both to provide a detailed source of information for eco - immunologists investigating particular aspects of immunocompetence and to substantiate the claim that strong mitochondrial function is essential for highly functional immune system activity . ( 1 ) Mitochondrial regulation of innate immune function The innate immune response comprises both constitutive and rapidly induced components that enable immediate response to pathogen exposure and tissue damage ( Janeway & Medzhitov , 2002 ; Beutler , 2004 ; Akira , Uematsu & Takeuchi , 2006 ; Kawai & Akira , 2006 ; Takeuchi & Akira , 2010 ) . Innate defences against pathogens are triggered when pathogen - associated molecular patterns ( PAMPs ) are detected by the pattern recognition receptors ( PRRs ) of dendritic cells , macrophages , and a variety of nonprofessional immune cells ( Akira et al . , 2006 ; Takeuchi & Akira , 2010 ) . RecognitionofaPAMPbyaPRRinitiatescomplexsignallingcascadesthatpromotetherapideliminationofpathogensthroughinﬂammationandotherinnateimmuneprocesses . Signalling molecules from the innate response can have both localized and systemic effects , and cytokines produced downstream of PAMP recognition stimulate the activation of more speciﬁc and longer - term adaptive immune responses to pathogen infection ( Fearon & Locksley , 1996 ; Medzhitov & Janeway , 1997 ; Akira , Takeda & Kaisho , 2001 ; Le Bon & Tough , 2002 ) . Stimulating and / or measuring aspects of the innate immune response , such as by measuring inﬂammatory swelling after injection of a foreign substance ( e . g . Blount et al . , 2003 ; Alonso - Alvarez et al . , 2009 ) , injecting the isolated PAMP bacterial lipopolysaccharide ( LPS ) , or quantifying acute innate immune protein production ( Millet et al . , 2007 ) , is an important and widespread component of eco - immunology . The nature of the innate immune response depends on the properties of the activated PRR and its corresponding PAMP , so the signals that are induced will differ depending on the type of pathogen indicated by the molecular patterns detected . For example , the presence of viral or bacterial PAMPs triggers speciﬁc ( although sometimes overlapping ) signalling cascades to induce an appropriate response , and both pathways have been traced through mitochondrial Biological Reviews 92 ( 2017 ) 1459 – 1474 © 2016 Cambridge Philosophical Society 1462 Rebecca E . Koch and others proteins at one or more steps . Recent research has found that proper mitochondrial activity is necessary for the transduction of these signalling pathways and for mounting an effective innate immune response . ( a ) Mitochondria in innate immune responses to viral infection The antiviral immune response is triggered by the recognition of viral PAMPs , such as virus - speciﬁc nucleic acids , by one of two classes of PRRs : toll - like receptors ( TLRs ) or retinoic acid - inducible gene I ( RIG - I ) - like receptors ( RLRs ) . TLRs , found primarily within specialized immune cells , are transmembrane proteins that can recognize several types of viral PAMPs on the cell’s surface or in cytoplasmic vacuoles formed after phago - or endocytosis ; RLRs are present in a wide variety of cell types and detect cytoplasmic viral RNA ( Takeuchi & Akira , 2009 ; Dixit & Kagan , 2013 ) . Both initiate signalling cascades that converge to stimulate the production of type I interferons and other proinﬂammatory cytokines that facilitate both immediate innate and long - term adaptive antiviral defences ( Kawai & Akira , 2006 ; Takeuchi & Akira , 2009 ) . RLRs , particularly RIG - I and melanoma differentiated - associated gene 5 ( MDA5 ) , are speciﬁc to the antiviral immune response and are critical for detecting replicating viral double - stranded RNA ( dsRNA ) within infected cells ( Dixit & Kagan , 2013 ) . Both RIG - I and MDA5 are produced constitutively at low levels within most cell types , but are inactive until ligand binding causes a conformational change that exposes the caspase - activated recruitment domains ( CARDs ) needed for downstream signalling ( Dixit & Kagan , 2013 ) . Though RIG - I and MDA5 differ in ligand speciﬁcity ( short or long dsRNA , respectively ; Takeuchi & Akira , 2010 ) , the CARDs of both interact with the CARD of the mitochondrial antiviral signalling protein ( MAVS ) , a nuclear - encoded protein that is produced in most animal cells and that localizes to the outer mitochondrial membrane ( Seth et al . , 2005 ; Horner et al . , 2011 ; Koshiba , 2013 ; Weinberg et al . , 2015 ) . Once stimulated by RLR binding , MAVS recruits a variety of other signalling molecules , including tumor necrosis factor receptor - associated factor 6 ( TRAF6 ) , which together induce the production of nuclear factor - kB ( NF - kB ) and interferon regulatory factors ( IRF3 and IRF7 ; West et al . , 2011 b ) . NF - kB stimulates the transcription of genes for a variety of proinﬂammatory cytokines , and IRF3 and IRF7 enhance transcription of type I interferon ( IFN - I ) genes , both of which boost antiviral defences ( Seth et al . , 2005 ; Takeuchi & Akira , 2009 ; Koshiba , Bashiruddin & Kawabata , 2011 a ; Dixit & Kagan , 2013 ; Koshiba , 2013 ; Fig . 2 ) . While MAVS is not found exclusively on mitochondrial membranes , the signals it produces differ depending on subcellular location . Peroxisomal MAVS induces the expression of interferon - stimulated genes but not IFN - 1 itself , causing a more transient antiviral response ; a maximal antiviral response requires both mitochondrial and peroxisomal MAVS activation ( Dixit & Kagan , 2013 ; Odendall et al . , 2014 ; Weinberg et al . , 2015 ) . MAVS - enriched Fig . 2 . Main pathways of antiviral innate immune response that pass through the mitochondria . ( A ) Retinoic acid - inducible gene 1 / melanoma differentiated - associated gene 5 ( RIG1 / MDA5 ) - like receptors ( RLRs ) recognize viral double - stranded RNA in the cytosol , and their caspase - activated recruitment domains ( CARDs ) interact with the CARDs of mitochondrial antiviral signalling proteins ( MAVS ) . MAVS recruits signalling molecules , including tumor necrosis factor receptor - associated factor 6 ( TRAF6 ) , which initiate a signalling cascade culminating in transcription factors that stimulate the production of type 1 interferon ( IFN ) and proinﬂammatory cytokines . ( B ) Toll - like receptor 7 ( TLR7 ) , present in endosomal membranes , detects viral single - stranded RNA contained in vesicles and recruits the myeloid differentiation primary response gene 88 ( MyD88 ) protein as the ﬁrst step in a signalling cascade that ultimately overlaps with the RLR pathway . ( C ) Membrane - associated RING - CH 5 ( MARCH5 ) releases the signalling intermediate TRAF6 from the inhibitor TRAF - associated NF - kB activator ( TANK ) , potentiating the antiviral response ; MARCH5 is particularly important for TLR7 activity ( Shi et al . , 2011 ) . Other antiviral TLR pathways not shown . Purple boxes represent signalling intermediates ; blue boxes represent pattern recognition receptors ( PRRs ) ; red boxes represent CARD domains ; and green boxes represent mitochondrial proteins . IRF3 / 7 , interferon regulatory factors 3 / 7 ; NF - kB , nuclear factor kB . mitochondria further enhance defences against viruses by surrounding intracellular sites of viral replication , and failure to do so handicaps the antiviral response ( Onoguchi et al . , 2010 ; West et al . , 2011 b ; Dixit & Kagan , 2013 ) . These ﬁndings emphasize the importance of MAVS to the antiviral innate response , and the importance of mitochondrial MAVS speciﬁcally – indeed , mitochondria with MAVS inhibited by RNA interference ( RNAi ) do not induce proper IRF3 activity , and MAVS - deﬁcient mice do not mount a normal IFN - 1 response ( Sun et al . , 2006 ; Arnoult et al . , 2011 ; West et al . , 2011 b ; Dixit & Kagan , 2013 ) . Moreover , functional mitochondria are required for a strong antiviral response in general : damaged mitochondrial networks or mitochondria lacking membrane potential ( a critical component of mitochondrial activity ) decrease function of antiviral signalling pathways Biological Reviews 92 ( 2017 ) 1459 – 1474 © 2016 Cambridge Philosophical Society Mitochondrial function and immunocompetence 1463 ( Castanier et al . , 2010 ; Koshiba et al . , 2011 b ; Weinberg et al . , 2015 ) . Independently of the RLR pathways , TLRs can also induce antiviral innate immune responses ( West , Koblansky & Ghosh , 2006 ; Takeuchi & Akira , 2009 ; Koshiba , 2013 ) . Herein , we reference the TLRs of mammals ( TLR1 , TLR2 , etc . ) , which are best known and exemplify the diversity of TLR function , although homologous pathways are present in other taxa ( Hoffmann et al . , 1999 ; Beutler , 2004 ; Roach et al . , 2005 ; Werling et al . , 2009 ) . Among the TLRs involved in the antiviral response , TLR2 and TLR4 are present on the plasma membrane of the cell and recognize viral envelope proteins ( along with other , non - viral PRRs ) , while TLR3 , TLR7 , TLR8 , and TLR9 are present on endoplasmic reticulum ( ER ) and other endosomal membranes and detect viral nucleic acids ( Akira et al . , 2006 ; Kawai & Akira , 2011 ) . Like the RLR pathways , the TLR response induces increased production of IFN - I and other proinﬂammatory cytokines to combat viral infection ( Kawai & Akira , 2006 ; Takeuchi & Akira , 2009 ) ; the pathways initiated by TLR3 recognition of viral dsRNA in fact converge with RLR signalling pathways at the point of NF - kB and IRF production ( Takeuchi & Akira , 2009 ; Koshiba , 2013 ; Fig . 2 ) . Mitochondrial involvement in the antiviral TLR pathways is less clear than in the RLR pathways , and several responses may overlap with the signalling cascades of antibacterial TLRs ( see Section II . 1 b ) . However , a uniquely antiviral response mediated by mitochondrial involvement has recently been elucidated for the TLR7 pathway , which is stimulated exclusively in dendritic cells upon recognition of viral single - stranded RNA ( Kawai & Akira , 2006 ) . A protein expressed constitutively in the mitochondrial membrane , membrane - associated RING - CH 5 ( MARCH5 ) , boosts the antiviral effects of TLR7 by deactivating an inhibitor called TRAF - associated NF - kB activator ( TANK ) , which normally keeps the signalling intermediate TRAF6 in an inactive state ( Shi et al . , 2011 ; Fig . 2 ) . Importantly , MARCH5 is nonfunctional when mislocalized to the cytoplasm or the nucleus , emphasizing the necessity of mitochondrial involvement in the TLR7 antiviral pathway ( Shi et al . , 2011 ) . ( b ) Mitochondria in innate immune responses to bacterial infection Mitochondria are involved in the innate immune response to bacterial infection at several levels , including the regulation of antibacterial reactive oxygen species ( ROS ) production and the mediation of metabolic shifts within phagocytes to address their changing energetic needs ( West et al . , 2011 b ; Cloonan & Choi , 2013 ; Weinberg et al . , 2015 ) . Interestingly , TLRs are associated with an increase in mitochondrial ROS ( mROS ) production in response to bacterial but not viral recognition ( West et al . , 2011 a ) , indicating the potential role of mROS in the antibacterial ( but not antiviral ) response . ROS are known to be important to breaking down bacteria that have been engulfed by phagocytic cells into endosomes , where a process called ‘respiratory burst’ kills internalized bacteria with a ﬂood of highly reactive superoxide anions produced predominately by NADPH oxidases in the endosomal membrane ( Underhill & Ozinsky , 2002 ; Lambeth , 2004 ; West et al . , 2011 b ) . mROS stimulated by TLR signals have also been implicated as an important component of the respiratory burst response ( West et al . , 2011 b ) . Similar TLR activity is also important to eliminating fungal pathogens , although the speciﬁc role of mitochondria in these responses is not well understood ( West et al . , 2006 ; Netea & Mar´odi , 2010 ; Kawai & Akira , 2011 ; Romani , 2011 ) . In one of the most deﬁnitive experimental evaluations of the role of mitochondria and mROS in bacterial defence , West et al . ( 2011 a ) examined the response of isolated mouse macrophages to TLR stimulation by bacterial PAMPs , as well as the signiﬁcance of speciﬁc mitochondrial components in ultimately killing live bacterial pathogens . In an initial set of experiments , West et al . ( 2011 a ) found increased mitochondrial recruitment to phagosomes as well as increased mROS generation in macrophages with experimentally stimulated bacteria - sensitive TLRs ( TLR1 , TLR2 , and TLR4 ) . To understand better the molecular pathways responsible for these responses as well as their signiﬁcance to successful antibacterial defence , West et al . ( 2011 a ) then examined the activity of two critical mediators in the antibacterial TLR pathways : the signalling intermediate TRAF6 and the evolutionarily conserved signalling intermediate in Toll pathways ( ECSIT ) . ECSIT was originally described as a cytosolic intermediate in TLR pathways ( Kopp et al . , 1999 ) , although it has also been found to also be important in the bone morphogenic protein ( BMP ) pathway in mouse embryogenesis ( Xiao et al . , 2003 ) ; importantly , ECSIT has recently been found to play a role in Complex I assembly in the electron transport chain ( Vogel et al . , 2007 ; West et al . , 2011 a , b ) , implicating the signiﬁcance of ECSIT activity to mitochondria . West et al . ( 2011 a ) found that cytosolic ECSIT localizes speciﬁcally to the outer mitochondrial membrane upon interaction with TRAF6 during antibacterial TLR stimulation , where it causes an increase in mROS generation ( Fig . 3 ) . Hypothesizing that ECSIT might play a role in mROS generation because of its interactions with Complex I , West et al . ( 2011 a ) used genetic techniques to reduce ECSIT expression in either isolated macrophages or live mice and found signiﬁcantly reduced mROS production in both . Importantly , macrophages with knocked - out ECSIT function were found to contain signiﬁcantly more bacteria ( Salmonella typhimurium ) after experimental exposure than control cells at all time points examined ( West et al . , 2011 a ) , indicating the ultimate importance of mitochondrial ECSIT and mROS in defence against bacterial infection . These results are critical to establishing not only the importance of mROS to killing bacteria , but also the pivotal role of mitochondrial ECSIT to mounting an effective antibacterial response . Further , they demonstrate an important aspect of mitochondrial dynamics in mounting antibacterial defence by ﬁnding increased mitochondrial localization to macrophage phagosomes after TLR stimulation , indicating that mitochondria are speciﬁcally recruited to generate Biological Reviews 92 ( 2017 ) 1459 – 1474 © 2016 Cambridge Philosophical Society 1464 Rebecca E . Koch and others Fig . 3 . Mitochondrial activity in the antibacterial innate response . ( A ) Surface Toll - like receptors ( TLRs ) TLR1 , TLR2 and TLR4 detect bacterial pathogen - associated molecular patterns ( PAMPs ) ; for example , TLR4 recognizes bacterial lipopolysaccharide ( LPS ) and stimulates tumor necrosis factor receptor - associated factor 6 ( TRAF6 ) . ( B ) TRAF6 interacts with evolutionarily conserved signalling intermediate in Toll pathways ( ECSIT ) , which recruits mitochondria around sites of intracellular bacteria ( such as phagosomes ) and increases reactive oxygen species ( ROS ) production from the mitochondrial electron transport chain . ( C ) TLR4 stimulation also down - regulates the expression of a mitochondrial uncoupling protein ( UCP2 ) , which causes an additional increase in mitochondrial ROS ( mROS ) production . ( D ) mROS aids in defence against the intracellular bacteria . mROS in proximity to ingested pathogenic bacteria ( West et al . , 2011 a ; Fig . 3 ) . Other studies have isolated additional aspects of mitochondrial dynamics that are important both to mROS generation and the antibacterial response . For example , bacterial pathogens that speciﬁcally target mitochondrial function have been found to induce a mitochondrial unfolded protein response , which both stabilizes mitochondria during stress and promotes a defensive innate immune response ( Pellegrino et al . , 2014 ; Pellegrino & Haynes , 2015 ) . In addition , a mitochondrial uncoupling protein located on the inner mitochondrial membrane , UCP2 , has been found to mediate the antibacterial response by adjusting mROS production from OXPHOS such that decreasing expression of mitochondrial UCP2 during bacterial challenge increases production of mROS to be used in antibacterial defence ( West et al . , 2011 b ; Fig . 3 ) . Experimental evidence supports this relationship : mice with fully knocked - out UCP2 production are more resistant to challenge from an intracellular bacterium , and wild - type macrophages decrease UCP2 expression and consequently increase mROS production during LPS exposure ( Kizaki et al . , 2002 ; Emre et al . , 2007 ; West et al . , 2011 b ) . These studies are testament to the importance of carefully mediating mROS production to defending against bacterial pathogens . Inefﬁcient or otherwise inhibited mitochondria producing too much or too little mROS during bacterial challenge run the risks of either self - inﬂicting oxidative damage or failing to eliminate a bacterial challenge , respectively . Fine control of mitochondrial ROS production through UCP2 and innate immune signalling cascades is therefore an important component of an organism’s ability to defend against infection . The central role of mitochondria in metabolism also places them at the crux of several processes important to proper innate immune cell effector functions across pathogen types . For example , mitochondria mediate the metabolic changes that differentiate two main classes of macrophages : classically activated ( M1 ) , which primarily utilize aerobic glycolysis , and alternatively activated ( M2 ) , which utilize mitochondrial OXPHOS ( Huang et al . , 2014 ; Weinberg et al . , 2015 ) . The different polarizations of macrophages specialize for different roles within the immune system : M1 macrophages promote inﬂammation and are associated with response to microbial pathogens and tumors , while M2 macrophages are involved with tissue repair , metabolic homeostasis , and response to parasitic helminths ( Huang et al . , 2014 ) . Shifts in metabolism also characterize the maturation of dendritic cells , which rapidly upregulate glycolysis and suppress mitochondrial respiration in order to meet the anabolic demands of the differentiating cell ( Everts et al . , 2014 ; Weinberg et al . , 2015 ) . Metabolic intermediates themselves can also serve functions that extend beyond their roles in energy production . For example , succinate , an intermediate in the tricarboxylic acid ( TCA ) cycle occurring in the mitochondrial lumen , increases in concentration in macrophages stimulated by TLR4 recognition of bacterial LPS and enhances the production of proinﬂammatory cytokines ( Wang , Malo & Hekimi , 2010 ; Tannahill et al . , 2013 ; Chouchani et al . , 2014 ; Mills & O’Neill , 2014 ; Weinberg et al . , 2015 ) . In summary , mitochondria are involved in several key processes related to innate immune function , including : MAVS - mediated induction of inﬂammatory cytokines in response to antiviral stimulation of RLRs ; MARCH5 on the mitochondrial membrane promoting the antiviral signalling of TLR7 ; mitochondrial ECSIT mediating increased mROS production surrounding sites of intracellular bacterial infection ; and metabolic shifts and biosynthesis within mitochondria inﬂuencing immune cell differentiation and aiding in effector functions . These connections between mitochondria and the innate immune response are also Biological Reviews 92 ( 2017 ) 1459 – 1474 © 2016 Cambridge Philosophical Society Mitochondrial function and immunocompetence 1465 important to ensuring proper activation of adaptive immunity , providing a more long - term defence against persistent or repeated infections . Many innate immune responses are critical for the proper induction of an adaptive immune response . For example , IFN - I produced by RLR and TLR pathways – both of which have direct connections to mitochondrial function ( Cloonan & Choi , 2013 ) – can trigger the maturation of and stimulate the activity of dendritic cells , which in turn promote adaptive T cell activation through antigen presentation ( Le Bon & Tough , 2002 ) . However , the primary role of mitochondria in mounting an adaptive immune response lies in mediating the metabolic shifts necessary for the differentiation of adaptive immune cells . ( 2 ) Mitochondrial involvement with adaptive immune function Adaptive immune function is largely mediated by the actions of B and T lymphocytes , each of which comprises several specialized groups of cell types that initiate recognition and removal of speciﬁc extracellular pathogens ( e . g . through antibodies produced from humoral B cells ) or host cells infected with intracellular pathogens ( e . g . through cytotoxic T cells ) , or that remain dormant in preparation for future defence against a previously encountered pathogen ( memory cells ; Ahmed & Gray , 1996 ; Barry & Bleackley , 2002 ; McHeyzer - Williams & McHeyzer - Williams , 2005 ) . While a detailed discussion of the various components that function within the adaptive immune system is beyond the scope of this review , it is important to note that adaptive immunity largely involves a vast pool of inactive ( naïve ) T and B lymphocytes that , upon recognition of a non - host antigen , must rapidly differentiate into one of several mature forms , each requiring a metabolism ﬁne - tuned to carrying out a particular effector function ( Fox , Hammerman & Thompson , 2005 ; Jones & Thompson , 2007 ; Windt & Pearce , 2012 ; Walker et al . , 2014 ; Weinberg et al . , 2015 ) . Given howessential adaptive immunity is to preventing long - term infection and to resisting infection of a pathogen upon repeated exposures , adaptive immune function is also an important component of eco - immunology ; for example , studies may assess antibody production after vaccinating animals with a novel antigen ( e . g . Svensson et al . , 1998 ; Hasselquist et al . , 1999 ) . Interestingly , a study of house sparrows ( Passer domesticus ) used a morphological measurement of adaptive immune system function – the size of the bursa of Fabricius , the site of B cell development in young birds – and found a relationship with the size of a sexually selected plumage ornament , indicating a potential link between adaptive immunity and the expression of display traits ( Møller , Kimball & Erritzøe , 1996 ) . As with the metabolic changes noted in maturing macrophages and dendritic cells in innate immunity , mitochondria are intimately involved in how naïve T and B cells alter energetic and biochemical needs upon activation and maturation . Here , we primarily discuss the speciﬁc metabolic transitions of T cells , although comparable metabolic transitions occur in B cells ( Garcia - Manteiga et al . , 2011 ; Wheeler & DeFranco , 2012 ; Caro - Maldonado et al . , 2014 ; Walker et al . , 2014 ; Weinberg et al . , 2015 ) . Resting , naïve T cells require energy and biosynthesis only for basal cell maintenance and circulation through lymphoid tissue ; as such , inactive T cells rely primarily on oxidative phosphorylation for energy production ( Fox et al . , 2005 ; Jones & Thompson , 2007 ; Pearce , 2010 ; MacIver , Michalek & Rathmell , 2013 ) . Upon antigen recognition and T cell activation , T cells rapidly up - regulate glycolysis and biosynthetic pathways and down - regulate oxidative phosphorylation to meet increased energetic needs while shifting from a primarily catabolic to anabolic state . To support the structural changes associated with T cell differentiation into effector forms , mitochondria become primary energy producers as well as centres of biosynthesis through products of glycolysis and the TCA cycle ( Fox et al . , 2005 ; Jones & Thompson , 2007 ; Pearce , 2010 ; MacIver et al . , 2013 ; Fig . 4 ) . Beyond participating in metabolic shifts , mitochondria are also directly involved in the signals initiating and sustaining the transition of a naïve T cell into a mature effector T cell upon recognition of an antigen . Mitochondria localize to the immune synapse between a T cell receptor and an antigen on an antigen - presenting cell and appear critical to signal transduction via calcium ion ﬂux and mROS generation ( Jones & Thompson , 2007 ; Quintana et al . , 2007 ; Kami´nski et al . , 2010 ; Gill & Levine , 2013 ; Sena et al . , 2013 ; Martín - C´ofreces , Baixauli & S´anchez - Madrid , 2014 ; Weinberg et al . , 2015 ) . mROS production in particular has emerged as an important cellular signal during T cell differentiation ; for example , mice with knock - out mutations that reduce T cell mROS generation cannot initiate rapid T cell differentiation and proliferation upon antigen exposure ( Sena et al . , 2013 ) . Even after initial activation , mitochondrial dynamics are important to meeting the different metabolic needs of varying T cell types . Regulatory T cells , for example , rely on increased oxidative phosphorylation compared to helper T17 cells , which instead exhibit increased glycolytic activity to meet biosynthetic needs ( Michalek et al . , 2011 ; Walker et al . , 2014 ) . In addition , memory T cells have increased mitochondrial density compared to naïve T cells despite similar energetic needs between the two resting cell types ( Fig . 4 ) ; the large number of mitochondria in memory T cells gives them a ‘spare respiratory capacity’ , which allows them rapidly and drastically to upregulate ATP production upon future antigen stimulation in order to mount an immediate response against a repeated pathogen exposure ( Pearce , 2010 ; van der Windt et al . , 2012 ; Walker et al . , 2014 ) . Moreover , mitochondria play a direct role in providing energy to activated lymphocytes migrating towards sites of pathogen infection : mitochondrial ﬁssion and localization to the uropod region of activated lymphocytes is required for proper chemotaxis ( Campello et al . , 2006 ) . Overall , mitochondria are most important to adaptive immunity through their central functions in ATP production Biological Reviews 92 ( 2017 ) 1459 – 1474 © 2016 Cambridge Philosophical Society 1466 Rebecca E . Koch and others Fig . 4 . Changes in mitochondrial activity related to the maturation and activation of lymphocytes . ( A ) Naïve lymphocytes use primarily oxidative phosphorylation ( OXPHOS ) to produce ATP for general maintenance . ( B ) During activation , mitochondria localized around the immune synapse help stimulate differentiation . ( C ) Memory lymphocytes prioritize OXPHOS for general maintenance , similarly to naïve lymphocytes ; however , memory lymphocytes also possess an excess of mitochondria , which enables rapid up - regulation of energy production and biosynthesis upon activation . ( D ) Effector lymphocytes prioritize biosynthesis through glycolysis as well as the tricarboxylic acid cycle within mitochondria . and biosynthesis , critical for the effector function of differ - entiated cells as well as the successful maturation of naïve cells . When considered in tandem with the innate immune signalling pathways passing directly through mitochondrial intermediates and the other roles of effective mitochondrial activity in innate defences , it is clear that mitochondria play an integral role in a wide variety of immune system pathways . An understanding of how mitochondria are central to immune activity offers interesting future directions for study into how variation in the function of this organelle may have cascading effects on multiple aspects of immune defences – and on an animal’s overall immunocompetence , which is important to both eco - immunology and to the study of the condition dependence of traits . The biomedical literature is rapidly advancing our understanding of the sub - cellular biochemical interactions that deﬁne mitochondrial involvement in immune function ; however , extending these ﬁndings to explore their potential downstream effects on organism immunocompetence , condition - dependent display production , and individual ﬁtness is essential to providing ultimate signiﬁcance to these mitochondrial functions . Key to understanding the importance of mitochondria to these aspects of whole - organism biology is that the synthesis and effector functions of hormones also have critical connections to mitochondrial function . Given the involvement of sex steroids and other hormones in aspects of both ornament production and immunocompetence , the role of mitochondria in hormone activity provides a critical mechanistic link between the mitochondrial – immune connections described in this section , and the potential immune – ornament connections that are important to behavioural ecology . In Section III , we brieﬂy review these connections among hormones , ornamentation , and immune function , and describe how the role of mitochondria in hormonal pathways may be important to maintaining these connections . Biological Reviews 92 ( 2017 ) 1459 – 1474 © 2016 Cambridge Philosophical Society Mitochondrial function and immunocompetence 1467 III . HORMONES , ORNAMENTATION , AND THE IMMUNE SYSTEM Physiological ecologists have long recognized that hormones can affect both ornament production ( Møller , 1995 ; Owens & Short , 1995 ) and immune system function ( Braude , Tang - Martinez & Taylor , 1999 ; Verhulst , Dieleman & Parmentier , 1999 ) . Early work on the interactions among hormones , ornaments , and immune function was largely based within the framework of the immunocompetence handicap hypothesis ( see Section I ) , which posits that ornamentation serves as a signal of immunocompetence because of the dual effects of testosterone in stimulating ornament production while depressing the immune system ( Folstad & Karter , 1992 ) . Critics of the immunocompetence handicap hypothesis point out that many secondary sexual traits and behaviours are not controlled by androgens ( Wingﬁeld & Farner , 1993 ; Kimball & Ligon , 1999 ) , and so this hypothesis is therefore limited only to testosterone - dependent signals . In addition , the fundamental assumption of this hypothesis is that testosterone suppresses immune function , but many studies report either no relationship or immune - enhancing effects of testosterone ( Olsen & Kovacs , 1996 ; Ros et al . , 1997 ; Hasselquist et al . , 1999 ; Peters , 2000 ; Bilbo & Nelson , 2001 ) . Further confusing the relationship between testosterone and immunity is the ﬁnding that the stage of development may play a large role in the degree of the interactions ( Schuurs et al . , 1992 ) . We propose that the links among hormones , immuno - competence , and ornamentation may be better explained by hormonal mediation of key mitochondrial pathways and mitochondrial roles in hormone synthesis , which in turn affect aspects of both ornamentation and immune function ( Hill , 2014 ) . Mitochondria are a primary site of action for steroid and thyroid hormones , which have been shown to have intimate relationships with immunocompetence and ornamentation in a variety of vertebrate taxa ( Silva , 1999 ; Wingﬁeld , Lynn & Soma , 2001 ; Klein , 2004 ; Hau , 2007 ; Husak & Moore , 2008 ; Dhabhar , 2009 ) . Brieﬂy , steroid hormones include the sex hormones that are important to the physiological and behavioural changes associated with reproduction , and also stress - response hormones , like glucocorticoids , that mediate redistributing energy towards processes supporting immediate survival and away from non - essential processes . These hormones have varied effects on immune function and / or ornament production . For example , the sex hormone testosterone is often linked to increased intrasexual aggression ( i . e . territory defence or competition over mates ; Hau , 2007 ) and production of ornaments as varied as antlers in deer ( Bartos , Bubenik & Kuzmova , 2012 ) and bill redness in zebra ﬁnches ( Ardia , Broughton & Gleicher , 2010 ) , although this relationship is not without complications ( see Section I ) . In addition , glucocorticoids are generally immunosuppressive in nature , interacting with the nuclear genome to inhibit the synthe - sis , release , or efﬁcacy of immune mediators like cytokines and immunoglobulins ( Sapolsky , Romero & Munck , 2000 ) . Thyroid hormones are also closely linked with immune activity : low levels of thyroid hormones have been associ - ated with decreased thymic activity , splenic and lymph node changes , and depressed humoral and cell - mediated immune responses ( reviewed in Klecha et al . , 2006 ) . At the centre of these complex interactions among hormones , immune function , and ornamentation are mitochondria ( Fig . 1 ) . The interactions between mitochondria and hormones are bidirectional : mitochondria play a role in the biosynthesis and control of steroid hormones ( Bose , Lingappa & Miller , 2002 ) , and thyroid and steroid hormones regulate the expression of DNA involved in OXPHOS ( Psarra , Solakidi & Sekeris , 2006 ) . It is important for organisms to have this direct connection between hormonal activity and mitochondrial function because steroid and thyroid hormones are generally involved in energy - demanding metabolic , growth , and developmental processes ; hormones can modify mitochondrial activity to fuel physiological processes , while the role of mitochondria in hormone production ensures that energetically expensive processes can only be triggered if there is adequate mitochondrial function to support such processes ( Demonacos et al . , 1996 ; Gavrilova – Jordan & Price , 2007 ; Manoli et al . , 2007 ; Du et al . , 2009 ) . In order to coordinate an increase in energy production within the cell , steroid and thyroid hormones stimulate the up - regulation of nuclear and mitochondrial OXPHOS genes . Speciﬁcally , steroid and thyroid hormones belong to the nuclear receptor superfamily characterized by a central DNA - binding domain , which targets the receptor to speciﬁc DNA sequences in the genome ( hormone response elements ; HREs ; Beato , Herrlich & Sch¨utz , 1995 ; Mangelsdorf et al . , 1995 ; Chrousos & Kino , 2005 ) . HREs for steroid and thyroid hormones have been found on OXPHOS genes both within the nucleus ( Pillar & Seitz , 1997 ; Scarpulla , 1997 ; Weber et al . , 2002 ; Scheller & Sekeris , 2003 ) and the mitochondrion ( Ioannou , Tsawdaroglou & Sekeris , 1987 ; Demonacos et al . , 1995 ; Tsiriyotis , Spandidos & Sekeris , 1997 ; Psarra et al . , 2006 ) . Moreover , receptors for glucocorticoids ( Psarra et al . , 2003 ; Scheller , Seibel & Sekerist , 2003 ; Sionov et al . , 2006 ) , sex steroid hormones ( Chen et al . , 2004 ; Solakidi et al . , 2005 ; Pedram et al . , 2006 ; J¨onsson et al . , 2007 ) , and thyroid hormones ( Sterling , Campbell & Brenner , 1984 ; Ardail et al . , 1993 ; Scheller et al . , 2003 ; Morrish et al . , 2006 ) have been found on the mitochondrial membrane . The mitochondrial transcription factors regulated by these hormones have downstream effects on the biogenesis of mitochondria ( Tome et al . , 2012 ) as well as on mitochondrial ﬁssion ( Lee et al . , 2013 ; Picard , Juster & McEwen , 2014 ) , which are important to mediating mitochondrial energy and protein production . Consequently , steroid and thyroid hormones provide transcriptional control over mitochondrial mechanisms to enable a rapid response to changing energetic needs . Even as hormones regulate mitochondrial activity , mitochondria also play a role in regulating the production of hormones , particularly steroids . Because steroidogenic cells have little capacity to store hormones , steroid hormone Biological Reviews 92 ( 2017 ) 1459 – 1474 © 2016 Cambridge Philosophical Society 1468 Rebecca E . Koch and others levels are controlled primarily at the stage of synthesis , much of which takes place in mitochondria ( Bose et al . , 2002 ) . Generally , steroid hormone synthesis initiates in the mitochondria , moves to the endoplasmic reticulum , and then is ﬁnalized within the mitochondria of the cell ( Rosol et al . , 2001 ) . Biosynthesis of steroids therefore requires the coordi - nation of uptake , transport , and utilization of cholesterol , the molecular basis of steroid hormones , in the mitochondria , as most cells do not synthesize cholesterol for steroids de novo ( Papadopoulos & Miller , 2012 ) . Once cholesterol has reached the inner mitochondrial membrane , a set of enzymes within the mitochondria is responsible for further steroid hormone biosynthesis , which is tissue - speciﬁc ( reviewed in Stocco , 2001 ; Miller , 2013 ) . These hormones can then be used to transduce signals throughout the organism . Understanding the importance of mitochondria in hormone synthesis and response adds new perspective to the discussion of relationships between endocrine systems , other aspects of physiology , and behaviour . For example , the sex steroid testosterone , which has been central to the immunocompetence handicap hypothesis ( Folstad & Karter , 1992 ) , has been proposed not only as a potential immunodepressant and stimulant of male ornament production , but also as a cause of increased ROS production ( Alonso - Alvarez et al . , 2007 ; Mougeot et al . , 2009 ) . Indeed , high testosterone levels may be linked to increased metabolism ( e . g . Buchanan et al . , 2001 ) and locomotion ( e . g . Wikelski et al . , 1999 ) . If mitochondria are functioning properly , then a higher metabolic rate and increased muscular activity may impose no change – or even a decrease – in ROS production from OXPHOS ( Murphy , 2009 ; Jastroch et al . , 2010 ) . However , inefﬁcient or otherwise dysfunctional mitochondria produce ROS at higher rates than healthy mitochondria ( Lane , 2011 ) , so a testosterone - mediated boost in activity levels and ATP demand may exacerbate potential oxidative damage caused by poor mitochondrial function . With mitochondrial control of both synthesis of and response to sex steroids like testosterone , an organism could potentially avoid such costs because dysfunctional mitochondria would likely not properly facilitate sex steroid production and activity in the ﬁrst place , adding new mechanistic insight into why different individuals may vary in hormone response and the costs of that response . However , these connections remain to be tested directly ; robust , but separate , literatures describe the interactions between mitochondria and hormones or hormones and immune function as well as ornament production . Future empirical study into the speciﬁc mechanistic effects of mitochondrial mediation of hormone signalling on particular aspects of immune function and / or sexual display production will be important to further substantiating these important relationships . In summary , properly functioning mitochondria are essen - tial in both the response to hormone signals and the production of steroid hormones themselves , with consequen - tial effects on the hormonal mediation of immune activity and ornament expression . If mitochondrial activity is disrupted through inefﬁcient OXPHOS or other dysfunction , then the hormone - mediated up - regulation of energy production as well as the biosynthesis of steroids will be interrupted , result - ing in improper function of the myriad processes that respond to hormonal signals . Interactions between mitochondria and hormones therefore add indirect connections between mito - chondrial function , immunocompetence , and expression of ornamentation , in addition to the direct mechanistic path - ways described in Section II and proposed in Section IV . IV . ORNAMENTATION AS A SIGNAL OF CELLULAR RESPIRATION Hormone signalling provides an indirect but powerful link between mitochondrial function and ornament production , given how sex hormones are often involved in the expression of sexual displays . However , we propose that ornamentation itself may also be directly linked to mitochondrial function , independently of hormonal control ( Johnson & Hill , 2013 ) . Mechanisms relating to the expression of a host of condition - dependent ornaments , including carotenoid metabolic conversion ( Johnson & Hill , 2013 ; Lopes et al . , 2016 ) , neural development and cognitive function ( Cheng , Hou & Mattson , 2010 ; Wallace & Fan , 2010 ; Massaad & Klann , 2011 ; Morava & Kozicz , 2013 ) , motor function ( Podos , 1997 ) , chemiluminescent light displays ( Buck & Case , 2002 ; Carlson , 2004 ) , and large protein structures ( Ohlsson et al . , 2002 ; Rands , Evans & Johnstone , 2011 ) , can all be plausibly linked to the efﬁciency of cellular respiration and hence to mitochondrial function ( Hill , 2014 ) . Critically , mito - chondrial function may be reﬂected in ornamentation both because OXPHOS produces the ATP needed to fuel energet - ically expensive processes and to synthesize and fold proteins ( Lane & Martin , 2010 ) and because ornament expression can be sensitive to the redox homeostatic state of the organism , which is largely mediated by mitochondria ( Jeˇzek & Hlavat´a , 2005 ; Cecarini et al . , 2007 ; Hill & Johnson , 2012 ) . These latter relationships between oxidative stress and ornamentation are a growing component in the ﬁeld of oxidative stress ecology ( Monaghan , Metcalfe & Torres , 2009 ; McGraw et al . , 2010 ; Costantini , 2014 ) ; here , we focus on recent hypotheses that have proposed how the production of certain displays may be sensitive directly to mitochondrial function . In particular , the speciﬁc mechanisms that may connect mitochondrial activity to the expression of an ornamental trait are perhaps most directly described in carotenoid - based red colouration . Because animals cannot synthesize carotenoid pigments de novo , carotenoids used for coloration are acquired from the diet . The diets of most animals contain predominantly yellow rather than red carotenoids ( McGraw , 2006 ) , so red - colour displays require the metabolic conversion of yellow dietary carotenoids into red carotenoids via ketolation reactions ( Brush , 1990 ) . Recent evidence suggests that carotenoid ketolation occurs in mitochondria in association with complexes of the electron transport chain ( Johnson & Hill , 2013 ; Ge et al . , 2015 ; Biological Reviews 92 ( 2017 ) 1459 – 1474 © 2016 Cambridge Philosophical Society Mitochondrial function and immunocompetence 1469 Lopes et al . , 2016 ) . The ability of animals to generate red versus yellow colouration may therefore be directly dependent on the oxidative state and membrane potential of mitochondria , such that mitochondrial dysfunction disrupts ketolation and causes a loss of red ornamentation . In addition , energetic constraints during neural development have been proposed to be a key determinant in the quality of birdsong , a sexually selected trait whose expression can be linked directly to neurological quality ( Peters , Searcy & Nowicki , 2014 ) ; given that the production of ATP needed to support the energetically expensive process of neurogenesis depends almost exclusively on mitochondrial OXPHOS , mitochondrial function may also be key to condition dependence in displays like birdsong . Indeed , mitochondrial quality has been shown within biomedical literature to be a key determinant of cognitive ability ( Cheng et al . , 2010 ; Wallace & Fan , 2010 ; Massaad & Klann , 2011 ; Morava & Kozicz , 2013 ) , and birdsong quality has been proposed to be directly dependent on cognitive function ( Peters et al . , 2014 ) . However , explicit empirical links between mitochondria , neural development , and sexually selected displays remain to be tested . The critical role of mitochondria in many of the processes related to the production and maintenance of sexually selected displays , including ATP production , hormonal signalling , and potentially processes like carotenoid conversion , suggests that highly functional mitochondria may be necessary for the full expression of ornamental traits such that the quality of ornaments reliably signals mitochondrial function ( Hill , 2014 ) . These connections form the ﬁnal link between ornamentation and immunocompetence : if efﬁcient OXPHOS and effective mitochondrial signalling are important both to mounting a strong immune response and to expressing a high - quality ornament , then mitochondrial function can be considered the core condition that mediates the honesty of sexual display traits . The bidirectional links between hormone signalling and mitochondrial function serve to substantiate this relationship further by providing additional connections between mitochondria and hormonally controlled aspects of immunocompetence and ornamentation . Importantly , however , many of the speciﬁc mechanisms linking sexually selected traits to mitochondrial function remain to be tested experimentally . Future empirical study into the role of mitochondria in the expression of ornamen - tation is imperative to assessing whether these hypothesized direct connections – in addition to the indirect connections mediated via hormones – substantiate the correlations between immune performance and ornament quality . V . MITOCHONDRIA AS THE SHARED PATHWAY A trade - off in the allocation of resources is the current , widely embraced explanation for the often - observed links between ornamentation and immune function ( L ´ opez - Rull et al . , 2015 ) . At its most basic conception , this resource trade - off hypothesis proposes that animals maximize the accumulation of energy in the body and then distribute this pool of resources between body maintenance and ornamentation ( Rowe & Houle , 1996 ) . We propose that while this hypothesis recognizes the basic elements that dictate both ornament production and immune function , a simple trade - off of resources does not capture the mechanisms that link stress , condition , immune function and ornamentation . Biochemists , immunologists , and biomedical researchers have identiﬁed the mitochondrion as the central regulator of both innate and adaptive immunity , but this literature has thus far remained largely unknown to ecologists . By hypothesizing that the production of many condition - dependent ornaments is critically dependent on the same aspects of mitochondrial function that directly affect immune system function , we offer a new mechanistic explanation to close the circle between core system function , immunocompetence , and display traits . Having mitochondria at the centre of pathways involved in immune function is advantageous because mitochondria create the energy and proteins needed for an immune response ( Lane & Martin , 2010 ) . It is critical that the state of mitochondria and hence the availability of proteins and energy be taken into account when an individual initiates an immune response so that the response is within the scope of the body’s capabilities ( Cloonan & Choi , 2012 ; Lartigue & Faustin , 2013 ) . Mitochondrial dysfunction may cause unpredictable mROS production and otherwise handicap the metabolic and signalling capabilities of the mitochondria ( Lane , 2011 ) , interrupting critical immune signal cascades or disrupting lymphocyte function . If production of ornamentation is also dependent on mitochondrial function – through mitochondrial control of hormone signalling or through direct mechanistic pathways – then any impairment in mitochondrial function necessarily impacts ornamentation while it also necessarily impacts immune function . This new framework for understanding the connections between immune function and ornamentation offers a logical explanation for how females may beneﬁt from assessing male ornamentation . If females were only assessing a male’s resource pool through his display traits , then a male could – at least in the short term – manipulate his internal allocation of resources to produce a quality ornament that was a dishonest indicator of his true condition ( Getty , 2006 ; Morehouse , 2014 ) . On the other hand , if ornament production depended on the functionality of a fundamental cellular process like OXPHOS , then females that assess ornamentation would be assessing the core functionality of a prospective mate ; there would no potential for dishonest signalling because a male’s ability to produce an ornament would be inescapably constrained by the limits of his cellular physiology ( Hill , 2014 ) . This mitochondrial function hypothesis also provides an explanation for the often - observed associations between hormone levels , immune function , and ornamentation , as steroid and thyroid hormones are central regulators of mitochondrial function , Biological Reviews 92 ( 2017 ) 1459 – 1474 © 2016 Cambridge Philosophical Society 1470 Rebecca E . Koch and others linking perception of stressors like pathogens or extreme temperatures to the up - or down - regulation of mitochondrial protein components ( Psarra et al . , 2006 ; Psarra & Sekeris , 2009 ) . Thus , Folstad & Karter ( 1992 ) were correct in pointing out key connections between hormones , ornaments , and immune function , but they focused on the signals rather than on the biochemical pathways that are the targets of the signals . By recognizing the central place for mitochondria in this interconnectivity , the beneﬁts for females assessing honest signals of mitochondrial function become more clear . Altering the framework by which we examine the condition dependence of ornamental traits has important ramiﬁcations for how we interpret signal form , function , and evolution . The relationships among mitochondrial path - ways , hormones , the immune system , and ornamentation provide new , testable predictions for how environmental stressors or genetic incompatibilities may impact an animal’s performance – in terms of ﬁtness , health , and ability to produce attractive displays . Not all display traits are neces - sarily condition dependent or objects of female mate choice ( Prum , 2010 ) ; even within ornamental traits considered to be honest signals of male quality , variation often exists in what physiological parameters that trait appears to signal , and the potential relevance of those parameters to choosing females ( e . g . Dunn et al . , 2010 ; Freeman - Gallant et al . , 2010 ) . Whether or not females are assessing males according to mitochondrial quality , the consistent and widespread links between mitochondrial function and various other aspects of physiological quality are intriguing . As biomedical techniques continue to advance understanding of core processes like OXPHOS efﬁciency ( Weissig & Edeas , 2015 ) , empirical study into the relationships between these core underlying processes and the outcome parameters important to studies of eco - immunology , oxidative stress ecology , and sexual selection may offer new insight into currently observed patterns – and may present new patterns alto - gether . Isolating the key mechanisms driving variability in ornamentation and physiological condition is an important step toward uniting the wide range of correlational studies examining condition - dependent traits . VI . CONCLUSIONS ( 1 ) Many empirical studies have shown associations between ornamentation and immune system function , but the mechanisms that give rise to such relationships remain uncertain . While resource trade - offs are commonly invoked to explain condition - dependent ornaments , the size of pools of resources and differential resource allocation strategies are difﬁcult to measure and do not consistently predict relationships between the expression of display traits and measurements of individual condition . A shared dependence on mitochondrial pathways between physiological systems offers a new mechanistic explanation for correlations between sexually selected traits and immunocompetence . ( 2 ) The foundation of this mitochondrial function hypothesis is the rich biomedical literature linking immune system signalling pathways and effector functions to mitochondrial activity . We review the evidence that the function of mitochondrial biosynthesis , energy production , and signalling is essential to innate immune defences , speciﬁcally against viral and bacterial pathogens , and adaptive immune cell differentiation and activity . ( 3 ) Steroid and thyroid hormones can further inﬂuence both immune system activity and the expression of ornamental traits , and regulate and / or are regulated by mitochondrial pathways . Speciﬁcally , the synthesis of steroid hormones takes place largely within the mitochondria , and the downstream physiological changes induced by hormone signalling rely on functional changes in mitochondrial activity . The bidirectional relationship between mitochondrial function and hormone signalling provides a secondary link between mitochondria and immunocompetence , as well as inﬂuencing ornamentation . ( 4 ) We propose that the mechanisms responsible for the production of many display traits may also depend on proper mitochondrial function , through the activity of redox - sensitive pathways and the need for efﬁcient energy production and biosynthesis . Notably , the enzymatic conversion of dietary yellow to ornamental red carotenoid pigments may occur in close association with complexes of the electron transport chain , and the energy requirements as well as many cellular changes associated with neurogenesis and neural activity – needed for complex cognitive or athletic displays – require proper mitochondrial function . ( 5 ) A greater understanding of mitochondrial involve - ment provides new , testable predictions for the interrela - tionships between immune , hormone , and ornamentation pathways . Because proper mitochondrial function is essen - tial for many immune and hormone activities and may also be directly involved in the production of display traits , an organism’s mitochondrial genotype and phenotype can potentially link internal physiological condition to external sexual signals . We encourage future investigation into this promising new avenue of research to pursue clariﬁcation to longstanding questions within behavioural ecology . VII . ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS We thank two anonymous reviewers and members of the Hill and Hood labs at Auburn University for feedback on this manuscript . C . C . J . was supported by NSF GRFP ( National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship Program ) during manuscript preparation . VIII . REFERENCES Ahmed , R . & Gray , D . ( 1996 ) . Immunological memory and protective immunity : understanding their relation . Science 272 , 54 – 60 . Ahtiainen , J . J . , Alatalo , R . V . , Kortet , R . & Rantala , M . J . ( 2004 ) . Sexual advertisement and immune function in an arachnid species ( Lycosidae ) . Behavioral Ecology 15 , 602 – 606 . Biological Reviews 92 ( 2017 ) 1459 – 1474 © 2016 Cambridge Philosophical Society Mitochondrial function and immunocompetence 1471 Akira , S . , Takeda , K . & Kaisho , T . ( 2001 ) . Toll - like receptors : critical proteins linking innate and acquired immunity . Nature Immunology 2 , 675 – 680 . Akira , S . , Uematsu , S . & Takeuchi , O . ( 2006 ) . Pathogen recognition and innate immunity . Cell 124 , 783 – 801 . Alonso - Alvarez , C . , Bertrand , S . , Faivre , B . , Chastel , O . & Sorci , G . ( 2007 ) . Testosterone and oxidative stress : the oxidation handicap hypothesis . Proceedings of the Royal Society of London Series B : Biological Sciences 274 , 819 – 825 . Alonso - Alvarez , C . , Perez - Rodriguez , L . , Garcia , J . T . & Vi˜nuela , J . ( 2009 ) . Testosterone - mediated trade - offs in the old age : a new approach to the immunocompetence handicap and carotenoid - based sexual signalling . Proceedings of the Royal Society of London Series B : Biological Sciences 276 , 2093 – 2101 . Alonso - Alvarez , C . , Perez - Rodriguez , L . , Mateo , R . , Chastel , O . & Vi˜nuela , J . ( 2008 ) . Theoxidationhandicaphypothesisandthecarotenoidallocationtrade - off . Journal of Evolutionary Biology 21 , 1789 – 1797 . Ardail , D . , Lerme , F . , Puymirat , J . & Morel , G . ( 1993 ) . Evidenceforthepresence of alpha and beta - related T3 receptors in rat liver mitochondria . European Journal of Cell Biology 62 , 105 – 113 . Ardia , D . R . , Broughton , D . R . & Gleicher , M . J . ( 2010 ) . Short - term exposure to testosterone propionate leads to rapid bill color and dominance changes in zebra ﬁnches . Hormones and Behavior 58 , 526 – 532 . Arnoult , D . , Soares , F . , Tattoli , I . & Girardin , S . E . ( 2011 ) . Mitochondria in innate immunity . EMBO Reports 12 , 901 – 910 . Baeta , R . , Faivre , B . , Motreuil , S . , Gaillard , M . & Moreau , J . ( 2008 ) . Carotenoidtrade - offbetweenparasiticresistanceandsexualdisplay : anexperimental study in the blackbird ( Turdus merula ) . Proceedings of the Royal Society of London Series B : Biological Sciences 275 , 427 – 434 . Barry , M . & Bleackley , R . C . ( 2002 ) . Cytotoxic T lymphocytes : all roads lead to death . Nature Reviews Immunology 2 , 401 – 409 . Bartos , L . , Bubenik , G . A . & Kuzmova , E . ( 2012 ) . Endocrinerelationshipsbetween rank - related behavior and antler growth in deer . Frontiers in Bioscience 4 , 1111 – 1126 . Beato , M . , Herrlich , P . & Sch¨utz , G . ( 1995 ) . Steroid hormone receptors : many actors in search of a plot . Cell 83 , 851 – 857 . Beutler , B . ( 2004 ) . Innate immunity : an overview . Molecular Immunology 40 , 845 – 859 . Bilbo , S . D . & Nelson , R . J . ( 2001 ) . Sexsteroidhormones enhanceimmunefunction in male and female Siberian hamsters . American Journal of Physiology—Regulatory , Integrative and Comparative Physiology 280 , R207 – R213 . Blount , J . D . , Metcalfe , N . B . , Birkhead , T . R . & Surai , P . F . ( 2003 ) . Carotenoid modulation of immune function and sexual attractiveness in zebra ﬁnches . Science 300 , 125 – 127 . Bose , H . S . , Lingappa , V . R . & Miller , W . L . ( 2002 ) . Rapid regulation of steroidogenesis by mitochondrial protein import . Nature 417 , 87 – 91 . Braude , S . , Tang - Martinez , Z . & Taylor , G . T . ( 1999 ) . Stress , testosterone , and the immunoredistribution hypothesis . Behavioral Ecology 10 , 345 – 350 . Brush , A . H . ( 1990 ) . Metabolism of carotenoid pigments in birds . Federation of American Societies for Experimental Biology Journal 4 , 2969 – 2977 . Buchanan , K . L . ( 2000 ) . Stress and the evolution of condition – dependent signals . Trends in Ecology & Evolution 15 , 156 – 160 . Buchanan , K . L . , Evans , M . R . , Goldsmith , A . R . , Bryant , D . M . & Rowe , L . V . ( 2001 ) . Testosterone inﬂuences basal metabolic rate in male house sparrows : a new cost of dominance signalling ? Proceedings of the Royal Society of London Series B : Biological Sciences 268 , 1337 – 1344 . Buck , J . & Case , J . ( 2002 ) . Physiological links in ﬁreﬂy ﬂash code evolution . Journal of Insect Behavior 15 , 51 – 68 . Campello , S . , Lacalle , R . A . , Bettella , M . , Ma˜nes , S . , Scorrano , L . & Viola , A . ( 2006 ) . Orchestration of lymphocyte chemotaxis by mitochondrial dynamics . The Journal of Experimental Medicine 203 , 2879 – 2886 . Carlson , A . D . ( 2004 ) . Istheﬁreﬂyﬂashregulatedbycalcium ? IntegrativeandComparative Biology 44 , 220 – 224 . Caro - Maldonado , A . , Wang , R . , Nichols , A . G . , Kuraoka , M . , Milasta , S . , Sun , L . D . , Gavin , A . L . , Abel , E . D . , Kelsoe , G . & Green , D . R . ( 2014 ) . Metabolic reprogramming is required for antibody production that is suppressed in anergic but exaggerated in chronically BAFF - exposed B cells . The Journal of Immunology 192 , 3626 – 3636 . Castanier , C . , Garcin , D . , Vazquez , A . & Arnoult , D . ( 2010 ) . Mitochondrial dynamics regulate the RIG - I - like receptor antiviral pathway . EMBO Reports 11 , 133 – 138 . Cecarini , V . , Gee , J . , Fioretti , E . , Amici , M . , Angeletti , M . , Eleuteri , A . M . & Keller , J . N . ( 2007 ) . Protein oxidation and cellular homeostasis : emphasis on metabolism . Biochimica et Biophysica Acta ( BBA ) - Molecular Cell Research 1773 , 93 – 104 . Chen , J . Q . , Eshete , M . , Alworth , W . L . & Yager , J . D . ( 2004 ) . Binding of MCF - 7 cell mitochondrial proteins and recombinant human estrogen receptors α and β to human mitochondrial DNA estrogen response elements . Journal of Cellular Biochemistry 93 , 358 – 373 . Cheng , A . , Hou , Y . & Mattson , M . P . ( 2010 ) . Mitochondria and neuroplasticity . ASN Neuro 2 , e00045 . Chouchani , E . T . , Pell , V . R . , Gaude , E . , Aksentijevic , D . , Sundier , S . Y . , Robb , E . L . , Logan , A . , Nadtochiy , S . M . , Ord , E . N . J . , Smith , A . C . , Eyassu , F . , Shirley , R . , Hu , C . - H . , Dare , A . J . , James , A . M . , Rogatti , S . , Hartley , R . C . , Eaton , S . , Costa , A . S . H . , Brookes , P . S . , Davidson , S . M . , Duchen , M . R . , Saeb - Parsy , K . , Shattock , M . J . , Robinson , A . J . , Work , L . M . , Frezza , C . , Krieg , T . & Murphy , M . P . ( 2014 ) . Ischaemic accumulation of succinate controls reperfusion injury through mitochondrial ROS . Nature 515 , 431 – 435 . Chrousos , G . P . & Kino , T . ( 2005 ) . Intracellular glucocorticoid signaling : a formerly simple system turns stochastic . Science Signaling 2005 , pe48 . Cloonan , S . M . & Choi , A . M . ( 2012 ) . Mitochondria : commanders of innate immunity and disease ? Current Opinion in Immunology 24 , 32 – 40 . Cloonan , S . M . & Choi , A . M . ( 2013 ) . Mitochondria : sensors and mediators of innate immune receptor signaling . Current Opinion in Microbiology 16 , 327 – 338 . Costantini , D . ( 2014 ) . Oxidative Stress and Hormesis in Evolutionary Ecology and Physiology . Springer - Verlag , Berlin and Heidelberg . Demas , G . E . ( 2004 ) . The energetics of immunity : a neuroendocrine link between energy balance and immune function . Hormones and Behavior 45 , 173 – 180 . Demas , G . E . , Greives , T . J . , Chester , E . M . & French , S . S . ( 2012 ) . Theenergetics ofimmunity : mechanismsmediatingtrade – offsinecoimmunology . In Ecoimmunology ( eds G . E . Demas and R . J . Nelson ) , pp . 259 – 296 . Oxford University Press , New York . Demonacos , C . , Djordjevic - Markovic , R . , Tsawdaroglou , N . & Sekeris , C . E . ( 1995 ) . The mitochondrion as a primary site of action of glucocorticoids : the interaction of the glucocorticoid receptor with mitochondrial DNA sequences showing partial similarity to the nuclear glucocorticoid responsive elements . The Journal of Steroid Biochemistry and Molecular Biology 55 , 43 – 55 . Demonacos , C . V . , Karayanni , N . , Hatzoglou , E . , Tsiriyiotis , C . , Spandidos , D . A . & Sekeris , C . E . ( 1996 ) . Mitochondrial genes as sites of primary action of steroid hormones . Steroids 61 , 226 – 232 . Desprat , J . L . , Lengagne , T . , Dumet , A . , Desouhant , E . & Mondy , N . ( 2015 ) . Immunocompetence handicap hypothesis in tree frog : trade – off between sexual signals and immunity ? Behavioral Ecology 26 , 1138 – 1146 . Dhabhar , F . S . ( 2009 ) . Ahassleadaymaykeepthepathogensaway : theﬁght - or - ﬂight stress response and the augmentation of immune function . Integrative and Comparative Biology 49 , 215 – 236 . Dixit , E . & Kagan , J . C . ( 2013 ) . Intracellular pathogen detection by RIG - I - like receptors . Advances in Immunology 117 , 99 . Du , J . , Wang , Y . , Hunter , R . , Wei , Y . , Blumenthal , R . , Falke , C . , Khairova , R . , Zhou , R . , Yuan , P . & Machado - Vieira , R . ( 2009 ) . Dynamic regulation of mitochondrial function by glucocorticoids . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 106 , 3543 – 3548 . Dunn , P . O . , Garvin , J . C . , Whittingham , L . A . , Freeman - Gallant , C . R . & Hasselquist , D . ( 2010 ) . Carotenoid and melanin - based ornaments signal similar aspects of male quality in two populations of the common yellowthroat . Functional Ecology 24 , 149 – 158 . Emre , Y . , Hurtaud , C . , Nubel , T . , Criscuolo , F . , Ricquier , D . & Cassard - Doulcier , A . ( 2007 ) . Mitochondria contribute to LPS – induced MAPK activation via uncoupling protein UCP2 in macrophages . Biochemical Journal 402 , 271 – 278 . Everts , B . , Amiel , E . , Huang , S . C . - C . , Smith , A . M . , Chang , C . - H . , Lam , W . Y . , Redmann , V . , Freitas , T . C . , Blagih , J . & van der Windt , G . J . ( 2014 ) . TLR - driven early glycolytic reprogramming via the kinases TBK1 – IKK ε supports the anabolic demands of dendritic cell activation . Nature Immunology 15 , 323 – 332 . Fearon , D . T . & Locksley , R . M . ( 1996 ) . The instructive role of innate immunity in the acquired immune response . Science 272 , 50 – 54 . Folstad , I . & Karter , A . J . ( 1992 ) . Parasites , bright males , and the immunocompetence handicap . American Naturalist 139 , 603 – 622 . Fox , C . J . , Hammerman , P . S . & Thompson , C . B . ( 2005 ) . Fuel feeds function : energy metabolism and the T - cell response . Nature Reviews Immunology 5 , 844 – 852 . Freeman - Gallant , C . R . , Taff , C . C . , Morin , D . F . , Dunn , P . O . , Whittingham , L . A . & Tsang , S . M . ( 2010 ) . Sexual selection , multiple male ornaments , and age - and condition - dependent signaling in the common yellowthroat . Evolution 64 , 1007 – 1017 . Garcia - Manteiga , J . M . , Mari , S . , Godejohann , M . , Spraul , M . , Napoli , C . , Cenci , S . , Musco , G . & Sitia , R . ( 2011 ) . Metabolomics of B to plasma cell differentiation . Journal of Proteome Research 10 , 4165 – 4176 . Gavrilova – Jordan , L . P . & Price , T . M . ( 2007 ) . Actionsofsteroidsinmitochondria . Seminars in Reproductive Medicine 25 , 154 – 164 . Ge , R . , Johnson , J . D . , Cobine , P . A . , McGraw , K . J . , Garcia , R . & Hill , G . E . ( 2015 ) . High concentrations of ketocarotenoids in hepatic mitochondria of Haemorhous mexicanus . Physiological and Biochemical Zoology 88 , 444 – 450 . Getty , T . ( 2006 ) . Sexually selected signals are not similar to sports handicaps . Trends in Ecology & Evolution 21 , 83 – 88 . Gill , T . & Levine , A . D . ( 2013 ) . Mitochondria - derivedhydrogenperoxideselectively enhances T cell receptor - initiated signal transduction . Journal of Biological Chemistry 288 , 26246 – 26255 . Hamilton , W . D . & Zuk , M . ( 1982 ) . Heritable true ﬁtness and bright birds – a role for parasites . Science 218 , 384 – 387 . Hasselquist , D . , Marsh , A . J . , Sherman , W . P . & Wingﬁeld , C . J . ( 1999 ) . Is avian humoral immunocompetence suppressed by testosterone ? Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiology 45 , 167 – 175 . Biological Reviews 92 ( 2017 ) 1459 – 1474 © 2016 Cambridge Philosophical Society 1472 Rebecca E . Koch and others Hau , M . ( 2007 ) . Regulationofmaletraitsbytestosterone : implicationsfortheevolution of vertebrate life histories . Bioessays 29 , 133 – 144 . Hill , G . E . ( 2006 ) . Environmental regulation of ornamental coloration . In Bird Coloration , Volume1 : MeachanismsandMeasurements ( edsG . E . Hill andK . J . McGraw ) . Harvard University Press , Cambridge . Hill , G . E . ( 2011 ) . Condition - dependent traits as signals of the functionality of vital cellular processes . Ecology Letters 14 , 625 – 634 . Hill , G . E . ( 2014 ) . Cellular respiration : the nexus of stress , condition , and ornamentation . Integrative and Comparative Biology 54 , 645 – 657 . Hill , G . E . & Farmer , K . L . ( 2005 ) . Carotenoid - based plumage coloration predicts resistance to a novel parasite in the house ﬁnch . Naturwissenschaften 92 , 30 – 34 . Hill , G . E . & Johnson , J . D . ( 2012 ) . The vitamin A - redox hypothesis : a biochemical basis for honest signaling via carotenoid pigmentation . American Naturalist 180 , E127 – E150 . Hoffmann , J . A . , Kafatos , F . C . , Janeway , C . A . & Ezekowitz , R . ( 1999 ) . Phylogenetic perspectives in innate immunity . Science 284 , 1313 – 1318 . Horner , S . M . , Liu , H . M . , Park , H . S . , Briley , J . & Gale , M . ( 2011 ) . Mitochondrial - associated endoplasmic reticulum membranes ( MAM ) form innate immune synapses and are targeted by hepatitis C virus . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 108 , 14590 – 14595 . Huang , S . C . - C . , Everts , B . , Ivanova , Y . , O’Sullivan , D . , Nascimento , M . , Smith , A . M . , Beatty , W . , Love - Gregory , L . , Lam , W . Y . & O’Neill , C . M . ( 2014 ) . Cell - intrinsic lysosomal lipolysis is essential for alternative activation of macrophages . Nature Immunology 15 , 846 – 855 . Husak , J . F . & Moore , I . T . ( 2008 ) . Stress hormones and mate choice . Trends in Ecology & Evolution 23 , 532 – 534 . Ioannou , I . , Tsawdaroglou , N . & Sekeris , C . E . ( 1987 ) . Presenceofglucocorticoid responsive elements in the mitochondrial genome . Anticancer Research 8 , 1405 – 1409 . Janeway , C . A . Jr . & Medzhitov , R . ( 2002 ) . Innate immune recognition . Annual Review of Immunology 20 , 197 – 216 . Jastroch , M . , Divakaruni , A . S . , Mookerjee , S . , Treberg , J . R . & Brand , M . D . ( 2010 ) . Mitochondrial proton and electron leaks . Essays in Biochemistry 47 , 53 – 67 . Jeˇzek , P . & Hlavat´a , L . ( 2005 ) . Mitochondria in homeostasis of reactive oxygen species in cell , tissues , and organism . The International Journal of Biochemistry & Cell Biology 37 , 2478 – 2503 . Johnson , J . D . & Hill , G . E . ( 2013 ) . Is carotenoid ornamentation linked to the inner mitochondria membrane potential ? A hypothesis for the maintenance of signal honesty . Biochimie 95 , 436 – 444 . Jones , R . G . & Thompson , C . B . ( 2007 ) . Revving the engine : signal transduction fuels T cell activation . Immunity 27 , 173 – 178 . J¨onsson , D . , Nilsson , J . , Odenlund , M . , Bratthall , G . , Broman , J . , Ekblad , E . , Lydrup , M . - L . & Nilsson , B . - O . ( 2007 ) . Demonstration of mitochondrial oestrogen receptor β and oestrogen – induced attenuation of cytochrome c oxidase subunit I expression in human periodontal ligament cells . Archives of Oral Biology 52 , 669 – 676 . Kami´nski , M . M . , Sauer , S . W . , Klemke , C . - D . , S¨uss , D . , Okun , J . G . , Krammer , P . H . & G¨ulow , K . ( 2010 ) . Mitochondrial reactive oxygen species control T cell activation by regulating IL - 2 and IL - 4 expression : mechanism of ciproﬂoxacin - mediated immunosuppression . The Journal of Immunology 184 , 4827 – 4841 . Kawai , T . & Akira , S . ( 2006 ) . Innate immune recognition of viral infection . Nature Immunology 7 , 131 – 137 . Kawai , T . & Akira , S . ( 2011 ) . Toll - like receptors and their crosstalk with other innate receptors in infection and immunity . Immunity 34 , 637 – 650 . Kelly , R . J . , Murphy , T . G . , Tarvin , K . A . & Burness , G . ( 2012 ) . Carotenoid - based ornaments of female and male American Goldﬁnches ( Spinus tristis ) show sex - speciﬁc correlations with immune function and metabolic rate . Physiological and Biochemical Zoology 85 , 348 – 363 . Kimball , R . T . & Ligon , J . D . ( 1999 ) . Evolution of avian plumage dichromatism from a proximate perspective . American Naturalist 154 , 182 – 193 . Kizaki , T . , Suzuki , K . , Hitomi , Y . , Taniguchi , N . , Saitoh , D . , Watanabe , K . , Ono´e , K . , Day , N . K . , Good , R . A . & Ohno , H . ( 2002 ) . Uncoupling protein 2 plays an important role in nitric oxide production of lipopolysaccharide - stimulated macrophages . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 99 , 9392 – 9397 . Klecha , A . J . , Genaro , A . M . , Gorelik , G . , Arcos , M . L . B . , Silberman , D . M . , Schuman , M . , Garcia , S . I . , Pirola , C . & Cremaschi , G . A . ( 2006 ) . Integrative study of hypothalamus - pituitary - thyroid - immune system interaction : thyroid hormone - mediated modulation of lymphocyte activity through the protein kinase C signaling pathway . Journal of Endocrinology 189 , 45 – 55 . Klein , S . ( 2004 ) . Hormonalandimmunologicalmechanismsmediatingsexdifferences in parasite infection . Parasite Immunology 26 , 247 – 264 . Kopp , E . , Medzhitov , R . , Carothers , J . , Xiao , C . , Douglas , I . , Janeway , C . A . & Ghosh , S . ( 1999 ) . ECSIT is an evolutionarily conserved intermediate in the Toll / IL - 1 signal transduction pathway . Genes & Development 13 , 2059 – 2071 . Koshiba , T . ( 2013 ) . Mitochondrial - mediatedantiviralimmunity . BiochimicaetBiophysica Acta ( BBA ) - Molecular Cell Research 1833 , 225 – 232 . Koshiba , T . , Bashiruddin , N . & Kawabata , S . ( 2011 a ) . Mitochondriaandantiviral innate immunity . International Journal of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology 2 , 257 – 262 . Koshiba , T . , Yasukawa , K . , Yanagi , Y . & Kawabata , S . - I . ( 2011 b ) . Mitochondrial membrane potential is required for MAVS - mediated antiviral signaling . Science Signaling 4 , ra7 . Lambeth , J . D . ( 2004 ) . NOX enzymes and the biology of reactive oxygen . Nature Reviews Immunology 4 , 181 – 189 . Lane , N . ( 2011 ) . The costs of breathing . Science 334 , 184 – 185 . Lane , N . & Martin , W . ( 2010 ) . The energetics of genome complexity . Nature 467 , 929 – 934 . Lartigue , L . & Faustin , B . ( 2013 ) . Mitochondria : metabolic regulators of innate immune responses to pathogens and cell stress . The International Journal of Biochemistry & Cell Biology 45 , 2052 – 2056 . Le Bon , A . & Tough , D . F . ( 2002 ) . Links between innate and adaptive immunity via type I interferon . Current Opinion in Immunology 14 , 432 – 436 . Lee , S . - R . , Kim , H . - K . , Song , I . - S . , Youm , J . , Dizon , L . A . , Jeong , S . - H . , Ko , T . - H . , Heo , H . - J . , Ko , K . S . & Rhee , B . D . ( 2013 ) . Glucocorticoids and their receptors : insights into speciﬁc roles in mitochondria . Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 112 , 44 – 54 . Lindstr¨om , K . M . , Krakower , D . , Lundstr¨om , J . O . & Silverin , B . ( 2001 ) . The effects of testosterone on a viral infection in greenﬁnches ( Carduelis chloris ) : an experimental test of the immunocompetence - handicap hypothesis . Proceedings of the Royal Society of London Series B : Biological Sciences 268 , 207 – 211 . Lindstr¨om , K . & Lundstr¨om , J . ( 2000 ) . Male greenﬁnches ( Carduelis chloris ) with brighter ornaments have higher virus infection clearance rate . Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiology 48 , 44 – 51 . Lopes , R . L . , Johnson , J . D . , Toomey , M . B . B . , Ferreira , S . M . , Araujo , P . M . , Melo - Ferreira , J . , Andersson , L . , Hill , G . E . , Corbo , J . C . & Carneiro , M . C . ( 2016 ) . Genetic basis for red coloration in birds . Current Biology 26 , 1 – 8 . L´opez , P . , Gabirot , M . & Martín , J . ( 2009 ) . Immune activation affects chemical sexual ornaments of male Iberian wall lizards . Naturwissenschaften 96 , 65 – 69 . L´opez - Rull , I . , Hornero - M´endez , D . , Frías , ´O . & Blanco , G . ( 2015 ) . Age - related relationships between innate immunity and plasma carotenoids in an obligate avian scavenger . PLoS One 10 , e0141759 . Lozano , G . A . ( 1994 ) . Carotenoids , parasites , andsexualselection . Oikos 70 , 309 – 311 . MacIver , N . J . , Michalek , R . D . & Rathmell , J . C . ( 2013 ) . Metabolic regulation of T lymphocytes . Annual Review of Immunology 31 , 259 . Mangelsdorf , D . J . , Thummel , C . , Beato , M . , Herrlich , P . , Sch¨utz , G . , Umesono , K . , Blumberg , B . , Kastner , P . , Mark , M . & Chambon , P . ( 1995 ) . The nuclear receptor superfamily : the second decade . Cell 83 , 835 – 839 . Manoli , I . , Alesci , S . , Blackman , M . R . , Su , Y . A . , Rennert , O . M . & Chrousos , G . P . ( 2007 ) . Mitochondria as key components of the stress response . Trends in Endocrinology & Metabolism 18 , 190 – 198 . Martín , J . , Civantos , E . , Amo , L . & L´opez , P . ( 2007 ) . Chemical ornaments of male lizards Psammodromus algirus may reveal their parasite load and health state to females . Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiology 62 , 173 – 179 . Martín - C´ofreces , N . B . , Baixauli , F . & S´anchez - Madrid , F . ( 2014 ) . Immune synapse : conductor of orchestrated organelle movement . Trends in Cell Biology 24 , 61 – 72 . Massaad , C . A . & Klann , E . ( 2011 ) . Reactive oxygen species in the regulation of synaptic plasticity and memory . Antioxidants & Redox Signaling 14 , 2013 – 2054 . McGraw , K . J . ( 2006 ) . Mechanics of carotenoid coloration . In Bird Coloration , Volume 1 : Measurements and Mechanisms ( eds G . E . Hill and K . J . McGraw ) . Harvard University Press , Cambridge , 177 – 242 . McGraw , K . J . , Cohen , A . A . , Costantini , D . & H˜orak , P . ( 2010 ) . The ecological signiﬁcance of antioxidants and oxidative stress : a marriage between mechanistic and functional perspectives . Functional Ecology 24 , 947 – 949 . McHeyzer - Williams , L . J . & McHeyzer - Williams , M . G . ( 2005 ) . Antigen - speciﬁc memory B cell development . Annual Review of Immunology 23 , 487 – 513 . Medzhitov , R . & Janeway , C . A . ( 1997 ) . Innate immunity : impact on the adaptive immune response . Current Opinion in Immunology 9 , 4 – 9 . Michalek , R . D . , Gerriets , V . A . , Jacobs , S . R . , Macintyre , A . N . , MacIver , N . J . , Mason , E . F . , Sullivan , S . A . , Nichols , A . G . & Rathmell , J . C . ( 2011 ) . Cuttingedge : distinctglycolyticandlipidoxidativemetabolicprogramsareessential for effector and regulatory CD4 + T cell subsets . The Journal of Immunology 186 , 3299 – 3303 . Miller , W . L . ( 2013 ) . Steroidhormonesynthesisinmitochondria . MolecularandCellular Endocrinology 379 , 62 – 73 . Millet , S . , Bennett , J . , Lee , K . A . , Hau , M . & Klasing , K . C . ( 2007 ) . Quantifyingandcomparingconstitutiveimmunityacrossavianspecies . Developmental and Comparative Immunology 31 , 188 – 201 . Mills , E . & O’Neill , L . A . ( 2014 ) . Succinate : a metabolic signal in inﬂammation . Trends in Cell Biology 24 , 313 – 320 . Møller , A . P . ( 1995 ) . Hormones , handicaps and bright birds . Trends in Ecology & Evolution 10 , 121 . Møller , A . P . , Biard , C . , Blount , J . D . , Houston , D . C . , Ninni , P . , Saino , N . & Surai , P . F . ( 2000 ) . Carotenoid - dependent signals : indicators of foraging efﬁciency , Biological Reviews 92 ( 2017 ) 1459 – 1474 © 2016 Cambridge Philosophical Society Mitochondrial function and immunocompetence 1473 immunocompetence or detoxiﬁcation ability ? Avian and Poultry Biology Reviews 11 , 137 – 159 . Møller , A . P . , Christe , P . & Lux , E . ( 1999 ) . Parasitism , host immune function , and sexual selection . Quarterly Review of Biology 74 , 3 – 20 . Møller , A . P . , Kimball , R . T . & Erritzøe , J . ( 1996 ) . Sexual ornamentation , condition , and immune defence in the house sparrow ( Passer domesticus ) . Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiology 39 , 317 – 322 . Monaghan , P . , Metcalfe , N . B . & Torres , R . ( 2009 ) . Oxidative stress as a mediator of life history trade - offs : mechanisms , measurements and interpretation . Ecology Letters 12 , 75 – 92 . Morava , ´E . & Kozicz , T . ( 2013 ) . Mitochondria and the economy of stress ( mal ) adaptation . Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews 37 , 668 – 680 . Morehouse , N . I . ( 2014 ) . Condition - dependent ornaments , life histories , and the evolving architecture of resource - use . Integrative and Comparative Biology , 54 ( doi : 10 . 1093 / icb / icu103 ) . Morrish , F . , Buroker , N . E . , Ge , M . , Ning , X . - H . , Lopez - Guisa , J . , Hockenbery , D . & Portman , M . A . ( 2006 ) . Thyroid hormone receptor isoforms localize to cardiac mitochondrial matrix with potential for binding to receptor elements on mtDNA . Mitochondrion 6 , 143 – 148 . Mougeot , F . , Martínez - Padilla , J . , Webster , L . M . , Blount , J . D . , P´erez - Rodríguez , L . & Piertney , S . B . ( 2009 ) . Honestsexualsignallingmediated by parasite and testosterone effects on oxidative balance . Proceedings of the Royal Society of London Series B : Biological Sciences 276 , 1093 – 1100 . Murphy , M . P . ( 2009 ) . Howmitochondriaproducereactiveoxygenspecies . Biochemical Journal 417 , 1 – 13 . Netea , M . G . & Mar´odi , L . ( 2010 ) . Innate immune mechanisms for recognition and uptake of Candida species . Trends in Immunology 31 , 346 – 353 . Odendall , C . , Dixit , E . , Stavru , F . , Bierne , H . , Franz , K . M . , Durbin , A . F . , Boulant , S . , Gehrke , L . , Cossart , P . & Kagan , J . C . ( 2014 ) . Diverse intracellular pathogens activate type III interferon expression from peroxisomes . Nature Immunology 15 , 717 – 726 . Ohlsson , T . , Smith , H . G . , R˚aberg , L . & Hasselquist , D . ( 2002 ) . Pheasantsexual ornaments reﬂect nutritional conditions during early growth . Proceedings of the Royal Society of London Series B : Biological Sciences 269 , 21 – 27 . Olsen , N . J . & Kovacs , W . J . ( 1996 ) . Gonadal steroids and immunity . Endocrine Reviews 17 , 369 – 384 . Onoguchi , K . , Onomoto , K . , Takamatsu , S . , Jogi , M . , Takemura , A . , Morimoto , S . , Julkunen , I . , Namiki , H . , Yoneyama , M . & Fujita , T . ( 2010 ) . Virus - infection or 5 (cid:3) ppp - RNA activates antiviral signal through redistribution of IPS - 1 mediated by MFN1 . PLoS Pathogens 6 , e1001012 . Owens , I . P . F . & Short , R . V . ( 1995 ) . Hormonal basis of sexual dimorphism in birds : implications for new theories of sexual selection . Trends in Ecology and Evolution 10 , 44 – 47 . Papadopoulos , V . & Miller , W . L . ( 2012 ) . Roleofmitochondriainsteroidogenesis . Best Practice & Research Clinical Endocrinology & Metabolism 26 , 771 – 790 . Pearce , E . L . ( 2010 ) . Metabolism in T cell activation and differentiation . Current Opinion in Immunology 22 , 314 – 320 . Pedram , A . , Razandi , M . , Wallace , D . C . & Levin , E . R . ( 2006 ) . Functional estrogen receptors in the mitochondria of breast cancer cells . Molecular Biology of the Cell 17 , 2125 – 2137 . Pellegrino , M . W . & Haynes , C . M . ( 2015 ) . Mitophagy and the mitochondrial unfoldedproteinresponseinneurodegenerationandbacterialinfection . BMCBiology 13 , 22 . Pellegrino , M . W . , Nargund , A . M . , Kirienko , N . V . , Gillis , R . , Fiorese , C . J . & Haynes , C . M . ( 2014 ) . Mitochondrial UPR - regulated innate immunity provides resistance to pathogen infection . Nature 516 , 414 – 417 . Peters , A . ( 2000 ) . Testosteronetreatmentisimmunosuppressiveinsuperbfairy - wrens , yet free - living males with high testosterone are more immunocompetent . Proceedings of the Royal Society of London Series B : Biological Sciences 267 , 883 – 889 . Peters , S . , Searcy , W . A . & Nowicki , S . ( 2014 ) . Developmentalstress , song - learning , and cognition . Integrative and Comparative Biology 54 , 555 – 567 . Picard , M . , Juster , R . - P . & McEwen , B . S . ( 2014 ) . Mitochondrial allostatic load puts the ‘‘gluc’’ back in glucocorticoids . Nature Reviews Endocrinology 10 , 303 – 310 . Pillar , T . M . & Seitz , H . J . ( 1997 ) . Thyroid hormone and gene expression in the regulationofmitochondrialrespiratoryfunction . EuropeanJournalofEndocrinology 136 , 231 – 239 . Podos , J . ( 1997 ) . A performance constraint on the evolution of trilled vocalizations in a songbird family ( Passeriformes : Emberizidae ) . Evolution 51 , 537 – 551 . Prum , R . O . ( 2010 ) . The lande - kirkpatrick mechanism is the null model of evolution byintersexualselection : implicationsformeaning , honesty , anddesigninintersexual signals . Evolution 64 , 3085 – 3100 . Psarra , A . - M . G . , Bochaton - Piallat , M . L . , Gabbiani , G . , Sekeris , C . E . & Tsacopoulos , M . ( 2003 ) . Mitochondrial localization of glucocortocoid receptor in glial ( M¨uller ) cells in the salamander retina . Glia 41 , 38 – 49 . Psarra , A . M . G . & Sekeris , C . E . ( 2009 ) . Glucocorticoidreceptorsandothernuclear transcription factors in mitochondria and possible functions . Biochimica et Biophysica Acta – Bioenergetics 1787 , 431 – 436 . Psarra , A . M . G . , Solakidi , S . & Sekeris , C . E . ( 2006 ) . The mitochondrion as a primary site of action of steroid and thyroid hormones : presence and action of steroid and thyroid hormone receptors in mitochondria of animal cells . Molecular and Cellular Endocrinology 246 , 21 – 33 . Quintana , A . , Schwindling , C . , Wenning , A . S . , Becherer , U . , Rettig , J . , Schwarz , E . C . & Hoth , M . ( 2007 ) . T cell activation requires mitochondrial translocation to the immunological synapse . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 104 , 14418 – 14423 . Rands , S . A . , Evans , M . R . & Johnstone , R . A . ( 2011 ) . The dynamics of honesty : modelling the growth of costly , sexually - selected ornaments . PLoS One 6 , e27174 . Rantala , M . J . , Kortet , R . , Kotiaho , J . S . , Vainikka , A . & Suhonen , J . ( 2003 ) . Condition dependence of pheromones and immune function in the grain beetle Tenebrio molitor . Functional Ecology 17 , 534 – 540 . Rantala , M . J . , Moore , F . R . , Skrinda , I . , Krama , T . , Kivleniece , I . , Kecko , S . & Krams , I . ( 2012 ) . Evidence for the stress - linked immunocompetence handicap hypothesis in humans . Nature Communications 3 , 694 . Roach , J . C . , Glusman , G . , Rowen , L . , Kaur , A . , Purcell , M . K . , Smith , K . D . , Hood , L . E . & Aderem , A . ( 2005 ) . The evolution of vertebrate Toll - like receptors . ProceedingsoftheNationalAcademyofSciencesoftheUnitedStatesofAmerica 102 , 9577 – 9582 . Roberts , M . L . , Buchanan , K . L . & Evans , M . ( 2004 ) . Testing the immunocompetence handicap hypothesis : a review of the evidence . Animal Behaviour 68 , 227 – 239 . Romani , L . ( 2011 ) . Immunity to fungal infections . Nature Reviews Immunology 11 , 275 – 288 . Ros , A . F . , Groothuis , T . G . & Apanius , V . ( 1997 ) . The relation among gonadal steroids , immunocompetence , bodymass , andbehaviorinyoungblack - headedgulls ( Larus ridibundus ) . The American Naturalist 150 , 201 – 219 . Rosol , T . J . , Yarrington , J . T . , Latendresse , J . & Capen , C . C . ( 2001 ) . Adrenal gland : structure , function , andmechanismsoftoxicity . ToxicologicPathology 29 , 41 – 48 . Rowe , L . & Houle , D . ( 1996 ) . The lek paradox and the capture of genetic variance by condition dependent traits . Proceedings of the Royal Society of London Series B : Biological Sciences 263 , 1415 – 1421 . Ryder , J . J . ( 2000 ) . Male calling song provides a reliable signal of immune function in a cricket . Proceedings of the Royal Society of London Series B : Biological Sciences 267 , 1171 – 1175 . Saks , L . , Ots , I . & H˜orak , P . ( 2003 ) . Carotenoid - based plumage coloration of male greenﬁnches reﬂects health and immunocompetence . Oecologia 134 , 301 – 307 . Sapolsky , R . M . , Romero , L . M . & Munck , A . U . ( 2000 ) . How do glucocorticoids inﬂuence stress responses ? Integrating permissive , suppressive , stimulatory , and preparative actions . Endocrine Reviews 21 , 55 – 89 . Scarpulla , R . C . ( 1997 ) . Nuclear control of respiratory chain expression in mammalian cells . Journal of Bioenergetics and Biomembranes 29 , 109 – 119 . von Schantz , T . , Bensch , S . , Grahn , M . , Hasselquist , D . & Wittzell , H . ( 1999 ) . Good genes , oxidative stress and condition - dependent sexual signals . Proceedings of the Royal Society of London Series B 266 , 1 – 12 . Scheller , K . , Seibel , P . & Sekerist , C . E . ( 2003 ) . Glucocorticoid and thyroid hormone receptors in mitochondria of animal cells . International Review of Cytology 222 , 1 – 61 . Scheller , K . & Sekeris , C . E . ( 2003 ) . The effects of steroid hormones on the transcription of genes encoding enzymes of oxidative phosphorylation . Experimental Physiology 88 , 129 – 140 . Schuurs , A . , Dietrich , H . , Gruber , J . & Wick , G . ( 1992 ) . Effects of sex steroid analogsonspontaneousautoimmunethyroiditisinobesestrainchickens . International Archives of Allergy and Immunology 97 , 337 – 344 . Sena , L . A . , Li , S . , Jairaman , A . , Prakriya , M . , Ezponda , T . , Hildeman , D . A . , Wang , C . - R . , Schumacker , P . T . , Licht , J . D . & Perlman , H . ( 2013 ) . Mitochondria are required for antigen - speciﬁc T cell activation through reactive oxygen species signaling . Immunity 38 , 225 – 236 . Seth , R . B . , Sun , L . , Ea , C . - K . & Chen , Z . J . ( 2005 ) . Identiﬁcation and characterization of MAVS , a mitochondrial antiviral signaling protein that activates NF – kB and IRF3 . Cell 122 , 669 – 682 . Shi , H . - X . , Liu , X . , Wang , Q . , Tang , P . - P . , Liu , X . - Y . , Shan , Y . - F . & Wang , C . ( 2011 ) . Mitochondrial ubiquitin ligase MARCH5 promotes TLR7 signaling by attenuating TANK action . PLoS Pathogens 7 , e1002057 . Sild , E . , Sepp , T . , Manniste , M . & H˜orak , P . ( 2011 ) . Carotenoid intake does not affect immune - stimulated oxidative burst in greenﬁnches . Journal of Experimental Biology 214 , 3467 – 3473 . Silva , J . ( 1999 ) . Sex hormones and glucocorticoids : interactions with the immune system . Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 876 , 102 – 118 . Sionov , R . V . , Kﬁr , S . , Zafrir , E . , Cohen , O . , Zilberman , Y . & Yefenof , E . ( 2006 ) . Glucocorticoid - induced apoptosis revisited : a novel role for glucocorticoid receptor translocation to the mitochondria . Cell Cycle 5 , 1017 – 1026 . Solakidi , S . , Psarra , A . G . , Nikolaropoulos , S . & Sekeris , C . E . ( 2005 ) . Estrogen receptors α and β ( ER α and ER β ) and androgen receptor ( AR ) in human sperm : localization of ER β and AR in mitochondria of the midpiece . Human Reproduction 20 , 3481 – 3487 . Biological Reviews 92 ( 2017 ) 1459 – 1474 © 2016 Cambridge Philosophical Society 1474 Rebecca E . Koch and others Sterling , K . , Campbell , G . A . & Brenner , M . A . ( 1984 ) . Puriﬁcation of the mitochondrial triiodothyronine ( T3 ) receptor from rat liver . Acta Endocrinologica 105 , 391 – 397 . Stocco , D . M . ( 2001 ) . StAR protein and the regulation of steroid hormone biosynthesis . Annual Review of Physiology 63 , 193 – 213 . Sun , Q . , Sun , L . , Liu , H . - H . , Chen , X . , Seth , R . B . , Forman , J . & Chen , Z . J . ( 2006 ) . The speciﬁc and essential role of MAVS in antiviral innate immune responses . Immunity 24 , 633 – 642 . Svensson , E . , R˚aberg , L . , Koch , C . & Hasselquist , D . ( 1998 ) . Energetic stress , immunosuppression and the costs of an antibody response . Functional Ecology 12 , 912 – 919 . Takeuchi , O . & Akira , S . ( 2009 ) . Innate immunity to virus infection . Immunological Reviews 227 , 75 – 86 . Takeuchi , O . & Akira , S . ( 2010 ) . Pattern recognition receptors and inﬂammation . Cell 140 , 805 – 820 . Tannahill , G . , Curtis , A . , Adamik , J . , Palsson - McDermott , E . , McGettrick , A . , Goel , G . , Frezza , C . , Bernard , N . , Kelly , B . & Foley , N . ( 2013 ) . Succinate is an inﬂammatory signal that induces IL - 1 β through HIF - 1 α . Nature 496 , 238 – 242 . Tome , M . E . , Lee , K . , Jaramillo , M . C . & Briehl , M . M . ( 2012 ) . Mitochondria are the primary source of the H2O2 signal for glucocorticoid - induced apoptosis of lymphoma cells . Experimental and Therapeutic Medicine 4 , 237 – 242 . Tsiriyotis , C . , Spandidos , D . A . & Sekeris , C . E . ( 1997 ) . The mitochondrion as a primary site of action of glucocorticoids : mitochondrial nucleotide sequences , showingsimilaritytohormoneresponseelements , conferdexamethasoneinducibility to chimaeric genes transfected in LATK - cells . Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications 235 , 349 – 354 . Underhill , D . M . & Ozinsky , A . ( 2002 ) . Phagocytosis of microbes : complexity in action . Annual Review of Immunology 20 , 825 – 852 . Verhulst , S . , Dieleman , S . & Parmentier , H . ( 1999 ) . A tradeoff between immunocompetence and sexual ornamentation in domestic fowl . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 96 , 4478 – 4481 . Vogel , R . O . , Janssen , R . J . , vandenBrand , M . A . , Dieteren , C . E . , Verkaart , S . , Koopman , W . J . , Willems , P . H . , Pluk , W . , van den Heuvel , L . P . & Smeitink , J . A . ( 2007 ) . Cytosolic signaling protein Ecsit also localizes to mitochondriawhereitinteractswithchaperoneNDUFAF1andfunctionsincomplexIassembly . Genes & Development 21 , 615 – 624 . Walker , M . A . , Volpi , S . , Sims , K . B . , Walter , J . E . & Traggiai , E . ( 2014 ) . Powering the immune system : mitochondria in immune function and deﬁciency . Journal of Immunology Research 2014 . Wallace , D . C . & Fan , W . ( 2010 ) . Energetics , epigenetics , mitochondrial genetics . Mitochondrion 10 , 12 – 31 . Wang , D . , Malo , D . & Hekimi , S . ( 2010 ) . Elevated mitochondrial reactive oxygen species generation affects the immune response via hypoxia - inducible factor - 1 α in long - lived Mclk1 + / − mouse mutants . The Journal of Immunology 184 , 582 – 590 . Weber , T . , Zimmermann , U . , Winter , H . , Mack , A . , K¨opschall , I . , Rohbock , K . , Zenner , H . – . P . & Knipper , M . ( 2002 ) . Thyroid hormone is a critical determinant for the regulation of the cochlear motor protein prestin . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 99 , 2901 – 2906 . Weinberg , S . E . , Sena , L . A . & Chandel , N . S . ( 2015 ) . Mitochondria in the regulation of innate and adaptive immunity . Immunity 42 , 406 – 417 . Weissig , V . & Edeas , M . ( 2015 ) . Mitochondrial Medicine . Springer , New York . Werling , D . , Jann , O . C . , Offord , V . , Glass , E . J . & Coffey , T . J . ( 2009 ) . Variation matters : TLR structure and species - speciﬁc pathogen recognition . Trends in Immunology 30 , 124 – 130 . West , A . P . , Brodsky , I . E . , Rahner , C . , Woo , D . K . , Erdjument - Bromage , H . , Tempst , P . , Walsh , M . C . , Choi , Y . , Shadel , G . S . & Ghosh , S . ( 2011 a ) . TLR signalling augments macrophage bactericidal activity through mitochondrial ROS . Nature 472 , 476 – 480 . West , A . P . , Shadel , G . S . & Ghosh , S . ( 2011 b ) . Mitochondria in innate immune responses . Nature Reviews Immunology 11 , 389 – 402 . West , A . P . , Koblansky , A . A . & Ghosh , S . ( 2006 ) . Recognition and signaling by toll - like receptors . Annual Review of Cell and Developmental Biology 22 , 409 – 437 . Westneat , D . F . & Birkhead , T . R . ( 1998 ) . Alternative hypotheses linking the immunesystemand matechoiceforgood genes . ProceedingoftheRoyalSocietyofLondon Series B B265 , 1065 – 1073 . Wheeler , M . L . & DeFranco , A . L . ( 2012 ) . Prolongedproductionofreactiveoxygen species in response to B cell receptor stimulation promotes B cell activation and proliferation . The Journal of Immunology 189 , 4405 – 4416 . Whittingham , L . A . , Freeman - Gallant , C . R . , Taff , C . C . & Dunn , P . O . ( 2015 ) . Different ornaments signal male health and MHC variation in two populations of a warbler . Molecular Ecology 24 , 1584 – 1595 . Wikelski , M . , Lynn , S . , Breuner , J . , Wingﬁeld , J . & Kenagy , G . ( 1999 ) . Energy metabolism , testosterone and corticosterone in white - crowned sparrows . Journal of Comparative Physiology A 185 , 463 – 470 . van der Windt , G . J . , Everts , B . , Chang , C . - H . , Curtis , J . D . , Freitas , T . C . , Amiel , E . , Pearce , E . J . & Pearce , E . L . ( 2012 ) . Mitochondrial respiratory capacity is a critical regulator of CD8 + T cell memory development . Immunity 36 , 68 – 78 . Windt , G . J . & Pearce , E . L . ( 2012 ) . Metabolic switching and fuel choice during T - cell differentiation and memory development . Immunological Reviews 249 , 27 – 42 . Wingﬁeld , J . C . & Farner , D . S . ( 1993 ) . Endocrinology of reproduction in wild species . Avian Biology 9 , 327 . Wingﬁeld , J . C . , Lynn , S . & Soma , K . K . ( 2001 ) . Avoidingthe‘costs’oftestosterone : ecological bases of hormone – behavior interactions . Brain , Behavior and Evolution 57 , 239 – 251 . Xiao , C . , Shim , J . - H . , Kl¨uppel , M . , Zhang , S . S . - M . , Dong , C . , Flavell , R . A . , Fu , X . - Y . , Wrana , J . L . , Hogan , B . L . & Ghosh , S . ( 2003 ) . Ecsit is required for Bmp signaling and mesoderm formation during mouse embryogenesis . Genes & Development 17 , 2933 – 2949 . ( Received 24 February 2016 ; revised 11 June 2016 ; accepted 14 June 2016 ; published online 25 July 2016 ) Biological Reviews 92 ( 2017 ) 1459 – 1474 © 2016 Cambridge Philosophical Society