MICROFLUIDIC NETWORKING : MODELLING AND ANALYSIS RELATORE : Ch . mo Prof . Andrea Zanella LAUREANDO : Andrea Biral A . A . 2012 - 2013 UNIVERSIT(cid:18)A DEGLI STUDI DI PADOVA DIPARTIMENTO DI INGEGNERIA DELL’INFORMAZIONE TESI DI LAUREA MAGISTRALE IN INGEGNERIA DELLE TELECOMUNICAZIONI MICROFLUIDIC NETWORKING : MODELLING AND ANALYSIS RELATORE : Ch . mo Prof . Andrea Zanella LAUREANDO : Andrea Biral Padova , 10 dicembre 2012 Abstract Droplets microﬂuidics refers to manipulation and control of little amounts of ﬂu - ids ﬂowing into channels of micro - scale size . Our aim , pursued in the present thesis , is to design a network formed by such microchannels and deﬁne a model to properly route the droplets inside them . However , this kind of study relies on the preliminary deep knowledge of microﬂuidic ﬂow dynamics and typical prop - agation characteristics . Accordingly , we begin our dissertation by introducing the physical laws that govern microﬂuidics . Then , we discuss the current under - standings about droplets formation , transport and their behavior in bifurcating channels , corroborating all with simulative results . Furthermore , we show how such concepts can be integrated in our networking solution and , lastly , we imple - ment a microﬂuidic network with bus topology and illustrate its performance . Contents 1 Introduction 1 2 Basic microﬂuidic concepts 5 2 . 1 Viscosity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5 2 . 2 Capillary number . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6 2 . 3 Reynolds number . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7 2 . 4 Laminar ﬂow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8 2 . 5 Hagen - Poiseuille’s law . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9 2 . 6 Rayleigh - Plateau instability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12 2 . 7 Analogy between ﬂuidic and electric circuit . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13 3 Droplet generation 21 3 . 1 Breakup in co - ﬂowing streams . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21 3 . 2 Breakup in elongational strained ﬂows . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22 3 . 3 Breakup in cross - ﬂowing streams . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24 3 . 3 . 1 Forces anlysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25 3 . 3 . 2 Squeezing regime . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28 3 . 3 . 3 Dripping regime . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36 4 Characterization of droplet dynamics in a bifurcating channel 39 4 . 1 Droplet breakup in a bifurcating channel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39 4 . 1 . 1 Breakup regime . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40 4 . 1 . 2 Non - breakup regime . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41 4 . 1 . 3 Simulations and numerical results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44 4 . 2 Regulation of droplet traﬃc in a T - junction . . . . . . . . . . . . 45 4 . 2 . 1 Simulative example . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47 iii CONTENTS 5 Design and performance of a microﬂuidic bus network 51 5 . 1 Mechanism for droplet routing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51 5 . 2 Bus network dimensioning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53 5 . 2 . 1 Mathematical and physical constraints . . . . . . . . . . . 56 5 . 3 Bus network performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64 5 . 3 . 1 Numerical results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67 6 Future developments 73 6 . 1 Scheduling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73 6 . 2 Network topology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 74 A OpenFOAM 77 Bibliography 79 iv Chapter 1 Introduction Microﬂuidic is both a science and a technology that deals with the control of small amounts of ﬂuids ﬂowing through microchannels . These have dimension in the order of micrometers and are usually fabricated in PDMS , i . e . , Polydimethylsilox - ane , which is a silicon based organic polymer . In this thesis we are speciﬁcally interested in droplets microﬂuidics which is a science related to the control of the motion dynamics of droplets in such microchannels . In this scenario , small drops are dispersed into another ﬂuid , which is immiscible with them ; this is why in literature they are conventionally called dispersed phase , while the immiscible substance in which they are immersed is called continuous phase . This line of reserch has emerged strongly in the past few years but the ﬁeld is still at an early stage of development . Nevertheless its capabilities and advan - tages are already well known . The so called droplet microﬂuidics technology , in fact , exploits both its most obvious characteristic ( small size ) and less obvious characteristics of ﬂuid in microchannels ( such as laminar ﬂow ) to provide new capabilities in the control and concentrations of molecules in space and time . Moreover it has the potential to inﬂuence many subject areas from chemical syn - thesis and biological analysis to optics and information technology . Nowadays , applications of microﬂuidics span from inkjet printheads to DNA chips , from micro - propulsion to micro - thermal technologies . However , the most promising utilization of microﬂuidic technologies have just been in analysis , for which they oﬀer a number of useful capabilities : the ability to use very small quantity of samples and reagents and to carry out separations and detections with high resolution and sensitivity , low cost , short time for analysis and small 1 1 . INTRODUCTION footprint for the analytical devices . All these advantages however come at the price of raise a new set of ﬂuid dynamical problems that appear due to the de - formable interface of the droplets , the need to take into account interfacial tension and its variations , and the complexity of singular events such as splitting drops . In the physicist’s vocabulary , droplets introduce nonlinear laws into the otherwise linear Stokes ﬂows . Evidence of this nonlinearity can be found , for instance , by considering that diﬀerent ﬂow regimes can appear in the same channel and under similar forcing conditions . These transitions between widely diﬀerent behaviors are possible because modiﬁcations in the drop geometry couple back to the ﬂow proﬁles and amplify initially small variations . A large body of work has recently attempted to tackle these ﬂuid dynamical questions , leading along the way to cre - ative new design for microﬂuidic devices - e . g . , Labs - on - a - Chip ( see Figure 1 . 1 ) - and new physical approaches to control the behavior of drops . Figure 1 . 1 : Example of Lab - on - a - chip : a microﬂuidic chemostat used to study the growth of microbial populations . In the future , one may envision microﬂuidic systems with mazes of microchan - nels along which droplets conveying solutes , materials and particles undergo transformations and reactions . These devices could be used to perform all sort of bio - / physiochemical analysis or to produce novel entities by means of speciﬁc “mi - croﬂuidic machines” able to process ﬂuids at such a scale . This particular scenario 2 has inspired the following work . Indeed , our idea is to create a network , consisting of microchannels , in order to connect with each other more microﬂuidic machines . In this way , we could miniaturize and automate in a single device an entire labora - tory gaining , at the same time , in versatility and ﬂexibility . In fact , once a speciﬁc microﬂuidic machine has opportunely processed an incoming droplet , the latter might be reinjected in the network to reach another target microﬂuidic machine undergoing further transformations and so on . Moreover , we could parallelize the tasks undertaken by diﬀerent microﬂuidic machines obtaining a consequent , signiﬁcant time saving . Such a prospective requires , however , preliminarily , the control over elementary operations like droplet production , breakup , transport and redirection . This motivated us to structure the present thesis as described below . In Chapter 2 we introduce the main underlying concepts of droplets microﬂu - idics in order to let the reader familiarize with the notation and the physical ingredients typical of this science . Chapter 3 , instead , is dedicated to the study of droplet production in mi - crochannels . In particular , it contains a brief review of the three main approaches proposed , in this regard , in literature with a particular focus on the solution that satisfy our requirements the most . Furthermore , here we also present a set of simulative results obtained with the CFD software OpenFOAM ( see Appendix A ) in order to validate the theoretical basis introduced . In the ﬁrst half of Chapter 4 we treat the dynamics of droplet breakup in a junction . The latter is , of course , a founding part of our microﬂuidic network since it is an indispensable element to direct the droplets to the various target microﬂuidic machines . This topic is very important to us because we need to preserve the integrity of the droplets throughout the entire network and , thus , even when they face “sensitive points” like bifurcations . Therefore , here , we’ll analyze in details the conditions that allow us to transport droplets avoiding their splitting in the channels’ ramiﬁcations . Then , in the second part of the chapter , we present a model for the pro - grammable partitioning of droplets at a T - junction illustrating how we can direct 3 1 . INTRODUCTION them in the desired branch of the bifurcation . Once again , we corroborate our conclusions with corresponding numerical simulations obtained at the calculator . In Chapter 5 we ﬁnally introduce a microﬂuidic bus - shaped network , discuss the mathematical and physical constraints that we need to respect in order to correctly dimension it and then illustrate the performance of such a system . Lastly , Chapter 6 focuses on the possible future developments of the thesis , anticipating eventual improvements and alternative solutions . 4 Chapter 2 Basic microﬂuidic concepts The present chapter is intended to give an overview of the microﬂuidic’s physical basis by collecting and describing the main parameters and models which rule ﬂuid transport and droplet dynamics in microﬂuidic systems . Thus , the aim of this section is to allow the reader to familiarize with the principal concepts of microﬂuidic that will be recalled and further analyzed throughout the entire work . 2 . 1 Viscosity Viscosity is a measure of the resistance of a ﬂuid which is being deformed by either shear stress or tensile stress . In simple terms , it describes a ﬂuid’s internal resistance to ﬂow and may be thought of as a measure of ﬂuid friction : the greater the viscosity , the greater its resistance to ﬂow and vice versa . With the exception of superﬂuids , all real ﬂuids have some resistance to stress and therefore are viscous . In common usage , a liquid with a viscosity less than water is known as mobile liquid while , in the opposite case , it is called viscous liquid . Synthetically , the physical behavior associated with viscosity can be described as follows : in any ﬂow , molecule’s layers move at diﬀerent velocities and the ﬂuid’s viscosity arises from the shear stress between the layers that ultimately opposes any applied force . The relationship between the shear stress and the velocity gradient can be obtained by considering two plates closely spaced at a distance y , and separated by a homogeneous substance . Assuming that the plates are very large , with a large area A , such that edge eﬀects may be ignored , and that the lower plate 5 2 . BASIC MICROFLUIDIC CONCEPTS is ﬁxed , let a force F be applied to the upper plate . If this force causes the substance between the plates to undergo shear ﬂow with a velocity gradient u / y , it results : F = µAuy , ( 2 . 1 ) where µ [ P a · s ] is the proportionality factor called dynamic viscosity . It should be noted that viscosity is a function of temperature : ﬂuid become less viscous as temperature increases . In this thesis , however , we assume the temperature is constant during the operation of microﬂuidic devices . Water at 20 (cid:137) has a characteristic dynamic viscosity of 1 . 002 · 10 − 3 P a · s . Equation ( 2 . 1 ) can also be expressed in terms of shear stress ( τ = FA ) . In particular , as reported in diﬀerential form by Isaac Newton for straight , parallel and uniform ﬂow , the shear stress between layers is proportional to the velocity gradient in the direction perpendicular to the layers : τ = µ ∂u∂y . Newton’s law of viscosity , given above , is a constitutive equation which holds for the so called Newtonian ﬂuids . Non - Newtonian ﬂuids , instead , exhibit a more complicated relationship between shear stress and velocity gradient than simple linearity . The analysis of the latter , however , is beyond the scope of this work since we will be dealing only with Newtonian ﬂuid . Finally , in many situations we are concerned with the ratio between the dy - namic viscosity and the density of the ﬂuid : ν = µρ which is a coeﬃcient named kinematic viscosity . The SI physical unit of ν is [ m 2 / s ] . Water at 20 (cid:137) has a characteristic dynamic viscosity of about 10 − 6 m 2 / s . 2 . 2 Capillary number In ﬂuid dynamics , the Capillary number represents the relative magnitude of viscous forces versus surface tension acting across an interface between a liquid and a gas , or between two immiscible liquids . It is a dimensionless parameter deﬁned as : Ca = µu σ ( 2 . 2 ) where µ [ P a · s ] is the viscosity of the main liquid , u [ m / s ] is its mean velocity and σ [ N / m ] is the surface or interfacial tension coeﬃcient between the two ﬂuid phases . 6 2 . 4 REYNOLDS NUMBER With reference to the droplet microﬂuidic context : Ca = µ c u c σ ( 2 . 3 ) where µ c [ P a · s ] is the viscosity of the carrier ﬂuid in which droplets are immersed , u c [ m / s ] is its mean velocity and σ [ N / m ] is the interfacial tension coeﬃcient be - tween continuous and dispersed phase . Since viscous stress represents a destructive force while interfacial tension acts as a cohesive force , Capillary number may be thought of as a measure of the cohesion of the droplet : the greater is the Capillary number , the greater the probability of droplet splitting and vice versa . 2 . 3 Reynolds number In ﬂuid dynamics the Reynolds number is a dimensionless parameter that gives a measure of the ratio of inertial forces to viscous forces and consequently quantiﬁes the relative importance of these two types of forces for given ﬂow conditions . Reynolds numbers frequently arise when performing dimensional analysis of ﬂuid dynamics problems , and as such can be used to determine dynamic simil - itude between diﬀerent experimental cases . They are also used to characterize diﬀerent ﬂow regimes , such as laminar or turbulent ﬂow : laminar ﬂow ( see Section § 2 . 4 ) occurs at low Reynolds numbers , where viscous forces are dominant , and is characterized by smooth , constant ﬂuid motion ; turbulent ﬂow occurs at high Reynolds numbers and is dominated by inertial forces , which tend to produce chaotic eddies , vortices and other ﬂow instabilities . Mathematically , Reynolds number is deﬁned as follows : Re = ρuL µ ( 2 . 4 ) where µ [ P a · s ] is the viscosity of the liquid , u [ m / s ] is its mean velocity , ρ [ kg / m 3 ] is its density and L [ m ] is a characteristic linear dimension of the system . Declining it in the microﬂuidic context , L is conventionally considered equal to the hydraulic diameter of the channel ( D H = 4 A / P , where A is the cross sectional area of the channel and P is the wetted perimeter of the channel ) , µ is the viscosity of the carrier liquid ( µ c ) , u is its mean velocity ( u c ) and ρ is its density ( ρ c ) . Thus : Re = 4 Aρ c u c P µ c ( 2 . 5 ) 7 2 . BASIC MICROFLUIDIC CONCEPTS 2 . 4 Laminar ﬂow In ﬂuid dynamics , laminar ﬂow , sometimes known as streamline ﬂow , is a ﬂow regime characterized by high momentum diﬀusion and low momentum convection that involves a very orderly motion of ﬂuid’s particles which are organized in parallel layers ( or laminae ) . Although all the molecules move in straight lines , they are not all uniform in velocity : if the mean velocity of the ﬂow is u , then the molecules at the centre of the tube are moving at approximately 2 u , whilst the molecules at the side of the tube are almost stationary . Moreover , in this regime , the ﬂuid tends to ﬂow without lateral mixing , there are no cross currents perpendicular to the direction of ﬂow , nor eddies or swirls of ﬂuids . This kind of behavior occurs as long as the Reynolds number ( see Section § 2 . 3 ) is below a speciﬁc critical value Re CR ≃ 2000 that depends on the particular ﬂow geometry and can be sensitive to disturbance levels and imperfections present in a given conﬁguration . Bearing in mind this condition , laminar ﬂow is exactly the regime we would expect to see in typical microﬂuidic systems since their characteristic small length - scales ( L ≃ 10 − 6 m ) and slow ﬂuid velocities ( u ≃ 10 − 3 m / s ) lead to very low Reynolds number ( Re = ρuLµ ≃ 10 − 3 ) . Further , when Reynolds number is much less than 1 , which is the case of our competence , creeping motion ( or Stokes ﬂow ) occurs . This is an extreme case of laminar ﬂow where viscous ( friction ) eﬀects are much greater than inertial forces . This physical phenomenon entails two additional interesting properties in incompressible Newtoninan ﬂuids : (cid:136) Instantaneity : a Stokes ﬂow has no dependence on time other than through time - dependent boundary conditions . This means that , given the boundary conditions of a Stokes ﬂow , the ﬂow can be found without knowledge of the ﬂow at any other time ; (cid:136) Time - reversibility : a time - reversed Stokes ﬂow solves the same equations as the original Stokes ﬂow . Practically , it implies that it is diﬃcult to mix two ﬂuids using creeping ﬂow . 8 2 . 5 HAGEN - POISEUILLE’S LAW 2 . 5 Hagen - Poiseuille’s law In ﬂuid dynamics , the Hagen - Poiseuille equation is a physical law that relates the pressure drop in a ﬂuid ﬂowing through a long pipe with its volumetric ﬂow rate . The assumptions of the equation are that the ﬂuid is viscous and incompressible , the ﬂow is laminar through a channel of constant cross - section and there is no acceleration of ﬂuid . These hypotheses , as we already pointed out , are fully satisﬁed in the typical microﬂuidic systems . Now , in order to derive Hagen - Poiseuille’s law , let’s begin considering the incompressible Navier - Stokes equation for uniform - viscous Newtonian ﬂuids with no body forces : ρ ∂⃗u ∂t = − ρ⃗u ∇ ⃗u − ∇ p + µ ∇ 2 ⃗u ( 2 . 6 ) where ⃗u [ m / s ] is the velocity ﬁeld , which is the description of the velocity of the ﬂuid at a given point in space and time , and is denoted by ⃗u = ⃗u ( ⃗r , t ) , where ⃗r [ m ] is a position vector specifying a location in space and t [ s ] is time ; ρ [ kg / m 3 ] is the ﬂuid density ; µ [ P a · s ] is the dynamic viscosity and p [ P a ] is the pressure . More speciﬁcally , in Equation ( 2 . 6 ) , ρ ∂⃗u∂t represents the rate of change of momentum , − ρ⃗u ∇ ⃗u concerns convective force , −∇ p describes the pressure force while viscous force is indicated in the term µ ∇ 2 ⃗u . Let’s then consider a long cylindrical channel with the x - direction along the axis of the channel . In the steady - state of fully developed ﬂuid ﬂow in the channel , its velocity ﬁeld is unidirectional and laminar and there is no acceleration of the ﬂuid . Thus , the unsteady and convection terms are all zero , and Equation ( 2 . 6 ) becomes : ∇ p = µ ∇ 2 ⃗u ( 2 . 7 ) Equation ( 2 . 7 ) highlights the balance between the net pressure force and the net viscous force . Due to the geometric simpliﬁcations and the boundary conditions ( u = 0 at r = R ) , the pressure driven motion , named Poiseuille ﬂow , in the circular channel of radius R [ m ] is parabolic across the diameter : u = R 2 − r 2 4 µ ( − dp dx ) = u max ( 1 − r 2 R 2 ) ( 2 . 8 ) where u max is the maximum velocity : u max = R 2 4 µ ( − dpdx ) at r = 0 . The Poiseuille ﬂow is characterized by a parabolic velocity proﬁle ( see Figure 2 . 1 ) : the velocity of ﬂow in the center of the channel is greater than that toward the outer walls . 9 2 . BASIC MICROFLUIDIC CONCEPTS In contrast , electrically driven ﬂow that is a useful alternative to pressure - driven ﬂow of water , known as electro - osmotic ﬂow ( EOF ) , oﬀers a ﬂat velocity proﬁle across the channel . The next step requires the calculation of the total volumetric u r x r = R r = - R Figure 2 . 1 : Parabolic velocity proﬁle of the Poiseuille ﬂow . ﬂow rate Q [ m 3 / s ] in the circular channel . In order to get it , we need to spacially integrate the velocity contributions ( Equation ( 2 . 8 ) ) from each lamina . Accord - ingly , the volumetric ﬂow rate for the steady - state pressure - driven ﬂuid ﬂow in the channel , described by the Hagen - Poiseuille’s law , becomes : Q = πR 4 8 µ ( − dp dx ) . ( 2 . 9 ) Normalizing Equation ( 2 . 9 ) by the cross - sectional area , we generate the area - averaged velocity U [ m / s ] : U = Q πR 2 = R 2 8 µ ( − dp dx ) . ( 2 . 10 ) To be precise , the Hagen - Poiseuille’s law applies only for a channel that is per - fectly straight and inﬁnitely long . However , we can reasonably apply Equation ( 2 . 9 ) even to a channel with ﬁnite length L [ m ] as long as this is by far the prevalent dimension of the geometry . For most pressure - driven microﬂuidic devices , we can assume that the pressure gradient along the channel length is uniform . Then , we can approximate the term − dpdx to ∆ pL , where ∆ p [ P a ] is the pressure diﬀerence through a ﬁnite channel length L . With this approximation , Equation ( 2 . 9 ) becomes simply : Q = πR 4 8 µ ∆ p L ( 2 . 11 ) where Q is deﬁned as positive for ﬂow from inlet to outlet . 10 2 . 5 HAGEN - POISEUILLE’S LAW Equation ( 2 . 11 ) gives the ﬂow - pressure relation in pressure - driven channels and can be simpliﬁed as : Q = ∆ p R H ( 2 . 12 ) where the hydraulic resistance R H [ P as 3 / m ] is deﬁned , for a cylindrical tube , as : R H = 8 µL πR 4 . ( 2 . 13 ) In general , Equation ( 2 . 13 ) can be applied for non - circular channels , by replacing the channel radius R with the hydraulic radius r H or diameter D H = 2 r H . The hydraulic radius of the channel r H [ m ] is a geometric constant deﬁned as r H = 2 AP , where A [ m 2 ] is the cross - sectional area of the channel and P [ m ] is the wetted perimeter . In microﬂuidic networks , most channel geometries are rectangular . For a rectangular microchannel with a low aspect ratio ( w ≈ h ) , the reciprocal of the hydraulic radius becomes the sum of the reciprocals of the channel width w [ m ] and the channel height h [ m ] : 1 / r H = 1 / w + 1 / h or r H = wh / ( w + h ) . However , this estimate gives about 20 % error and thus it isn’t much satisfying . Actually , the solution to Equation ( 2 . 7 ) for a rectangular channel is quite complicated to derive , and it can be only calculated exactly as the summation of a Fourier series . The hydraulic resistance for the rectangular microchannel , in fact , is given by : R H = 12 µL wh 3 ( 1 − hw ( 192 π 5 ∑ ∞ n = 1 1 ( 2 n − 1 ) 5 tanh ( ( 2 n − 1 ) πw 2 h ) ) ) . ( 2 . 14 ) Note that when the aspect ratio is high 1 ( h / w < 1 ) , the Fourier series can be truncated at the ﬁrst harmonica ( n = 1 in Equation ( 2 . 14 ) ) since the other terms become negligible and we obtain the simpliﬁed formula : R H = 12 µL wh 3 [ 1 − 192 h π 5 w tanh ( πw 2 h ) ] − 1 . ( 2 . 15 ) This Equation is accurate to within 0 . 26 % for any rectangular channel that has wh < 1 , provided that the Reynolds number Re is below 10 3 . Finally , by reversing Equation ( 2 . 12 ) and combining it with Equation ( 2 . 15 ) , it results : ∆ p = 12 µLQ wh 3 [ 1 − 192 h π 5 w tanh ( πw 2 h ) ] − 1 . ( 2 . 16 ) 1 This condition is always veriﬁed in the microﬂuidic systems we considered . 11 2 . BASIC MICROFLUIDIC CONCEPTS which is the Hagen - Poiseuille’s law we’ll use hereafter to describe the ﬂow in our rectangular microﬂuidic channels . 2 . 6 Rayleigh - Plateau instability Rayleigh - Plateau instability explains why and how a falling stream of ﬂuid breaks up into smaller drops . The driving force of the process arises from the intrinsic tendency of the liquids to minimize their surface area . The explanation of this instability begins with the existance of tiny perturba - tions in the surface of the liquid . These are always present , no matter how smooth the stream is . If the perturbations are resolved into sinusoidal components , the equation for the radius of the stream can be written as : r ( z ) = r 0 + A k cos ( kz ) , where r 0 is the radius of the umperturbated stream , A k is the amplitude of the perturbation , z is the distance along the axis of the stream and k is the wave number ( a measure of how many peaks and troughs per meter are present in the liquid surface ) . We thus ﬁnd that some components grow with time while others decay with time . Among those that grow with time , some grow at faster rates than others . Whether a component decays or grows , and how fast it grows is entirely a function of its wave number k and the radius of the original cylindrical stream r 0 . By assuming that all possible components exist initially in roughly equal ( but minuscule ) amplitudes , the size of the ﬁnal drops can be predicted by determining , through wave number , which component grows the fastest . As time passes , in fact , the component whose growth rate is maximum will come to dominate and will eventually be the one that pinches the stream into drops . We observe that at the troughs the radius of the stream is smaller , hence , according to the Young - Laplace equation reported below , the pressure due to surface tension is increased : ∆ p = σ ( 1 r 1 + 1 r 2 ) ( 2 . 17 ) where σ is the so called surface tension coeﬃcient , r 1 is the radius of the stream and r 2 is the curvature of the sinusoidal wave describing the liquid surface proﬁle . Likewise , at the peaks the radius of the stream is greater and , by the same reasoning , pressure due to surface tension is reduced . 12 2 . 7 ANALOGY BETWEEN FLUIDIC AND ELECTRIC CIRCUIT If this were the only eﬀect , we would expect that the higher pressure in the trough would squeeze liquid into the lower pressure region in the peak , under - standing how the wave grows in amplitude with time . But the Young - Laplace equation is inﬂuenced by two separate radius coponents . In this case , one is the radius , already discussed , of the stream itself ( r 1 ) . The other is the radius of the curvature of the wave ( r 2 ) . Observe that the radius of curvature at the trough is negative meaning that , according to Yoiung - Laplace , it decreases the pressure in the trough . Likewise , the radius of curvature at the peak is positive and increases the pressure in that region . The eﬀect of these components is in opposite with the action of the radius of the stream itself . The two phenomena , in general , do not exactly cancel . One of them will have greater magnitude than the other , depending upon wave number k and the initial radius of the stream r 0 . In par - ticular , when the wave number is such that the radius of curvature of the wave dominates the stream’s one , such components will decay over time . Conversely , when the radius of the stream dominates the wave’s curvature , such components grow exponentially with time and promote drops formation . When all the math is done , it can be found that unstable components ( ie , the components that grow over time ) are only those where the product of the wave number with the initial radius is less than unity : kr 0 < 1 . 2 . 7 Analogy between ﬂuidic and electric circuit It is quite intuitive to consider the ﬂow of a ﬂuid like the ﬂow of electricity : indeed , the molecules of ﬂuid in a hydraulic circuit behave much like the electrons in an electrical circuit . On this purpose , the present Section is intended to highlight the main physical similarities between microﬂuidic circuits and electric circuits , mapping the electric circuit elements and theory onto corresponding microﬂuidic circuit elements and models . This well - known hydraulic - electric circuit analogy can be straightforwardly used to prescribe the ﬂow / pressure relation in complex microﬂuidic networks based on conventional electric circuit theory . Starting from the basics , in electronics , linear resistors are the simplest circuit element and their resistance R E [ Ω ] is predetermined by physical parameters : R E = ρ E L A ( 2 . 18 ) 13 2 . BASIC MICROFLUIDIC CONCEPTS where ρ E [ Ω m ] is the reisistivity of the conductor , L [ m ] is the length of the con - ductor and A [ m 2 ] is its cross - sectional area ( see Figure 2 . 2 ( a ) ) . The resistance of the resistors can be prescribed by Ohm’s law : V = R E I ( 2 . 19 ) where V [ V ] is the voltage across the conducting material and I [ A ] is the current ﬂowing through the conductor ( see Figure 2 . 2 ( b ) ) . This formulae and relations between voltage , current , electric resistance and conductor length are physically similar to those between pressure , ﬂow , hydraulic resistance and channel length in a microﬂuidic context . In particular , Ohm’s law ( Equation ( 2 . 19 ) ) ﬁnds its counterpart in the so called Hagen - Poiseuille’s law ( see Section § 2 . 5 ) : ∆ p = R H Q ( 2 . 20 ) where ∆ p [ P a ] is the pressure diﬀerence across a microﬂuidic channel , Q [ m 3 / s ] is the volumetric ﬂow rate that crosses the channel and R H [ P a · s / m 3 ] is the hydraulic resistance ( see Figure 2 . 2 ( d ) ) . Since we are interested in microﬂuidic channels of rectangular cross - section , the approximated formula for the hydraulic resistance to which we have to refer is the following : R H = aµL wh 3 ( 2 . 21 ) where L [ m ] is the length of the channel , w [ m ] is the width of the channel , h [ m ] is the height of the channel and a is a dimensionless parameter deﬁned as a = 12 [ 1 − 192 h π 5 w tanh ( πw 2 h ) ] − 1 ( see Figure 2 . 2 ( c ) ) . Continuing with the electric circuit analogy , if N ﬂuidic resistors ( microﬂuidic channels ) are collectively arranged in series , an equivalent single ﬂuidic resistor has a hydraulic resistance equal to the sum of the N hydraulic resistances : R H , s = R H , 1 + R H , 2 + . . . + R H , N . ( 2 . 22 ) This is due to series - connected ﬂuidic resistors carrying the same volumetric ﬂow from one terminal to the other . Similar simpliﬁcation can be applied to parallel - connected ﬂuidic resistors . In a circuit containing N ﬂuidic resistors in parallel , the equivalent single ﬂuidic resistor has a hydraulic resistance equal to the recip - rocal of the sum of reciprocals of each hydraulic resistance : R H , p = R H , 1 ∥ R H , 2 ∥ . . . ∥ R H , N R H , p = 1 1 RH ; 1 + 1 RH ; 2 + . . . + 1 RH ; N . ( 2 . 23 ) 14 2 . 7 ANALOGY BETWEEN FLUIDIC AND ELECTRIC CIRCUIT L A electric resistor ( a ) I R E V + V - ( b ) L w h microfluidic channel ( c ) Q R H p + p - ( d ) Figure 2 . 2 : Physical similarities between the ﬂow of a ﬂuid in a rectangular mi - crochannel and the ﬂow of electricity in a resistor . Another very useful ﬂuidic / electric similarity concerns sources . Most pressure - driven microﬂuidic devices , in fact , need to be powered using external pressure sources . Conventionally , external pumps such as syringe and peristaltic pumps are widely used to supply constant ﬂuid ﬂow to devices . The volumetric ﬂow supplied by the pumps is completely independent of the pressure drop across the inlet and outlet ports of a device . It cannot be known a priori the pressure drop across an independent ﬂuid ﬂow source , because it depends entirely on the equivalent hydraulic resistance of the circuit to which it is connected . In this case , an independent constant ﬂuid ﬂow source Q S is analogous to an independent DC current source . Actually , in order to introduce the intrinsic non - ideality of the sources , we need also to consider an internal resistance r i ≫ in parallel to the ideal current generator ( see Figure 2 . 3 ) . r i Q S Figure 2 . 3 : Analogy between constant ﬂuidic ﬂow source and current generator . 15 2 . BASIC MICROFLUIDIC CONCEPTS An alternative method is to connect an independent pressure source to in - let ports . Basically , the ﬂow is controlled by the gravity - driven ﬂow induced by the hydraulic head diﬀerence , ∆ h [ m ] , between the vertical source - inlet and drain - outlet reservoirs of microﬂuidic devices . For an independent and constant pressure source , ∆ h has to be held constant all the time . Alternatively , pres - surized reservoirs connected with external pneumatic sources are used to provide independent , constant and controllable pressure to a device . The independent constant pressure source p S is analogous to the corresponding independent DC voltage source . In this case the intrinsic non - ideality of the source is rendered once we add a series internal resistance r i ≪ to the ideal voltage generator ( see Figure 2 . 4 ) . r i Δp S + - Figure 2 . 4 : Analogy between constant ﬂuidic pressure source and voltage genera - tor . Most microﬂuidic network - based devices , however , are fed with two or more pumping sources for the source - inlet ports ( for example , continuous phase and dispersed phase pumps for droplet production ) physically disconnected from the drain - outlet ports . In electric circuit analogy , the latter can be treated as earth or ﬂoating ground since the output port is normally open to atmosphere pressure p atm . Another fundamental concept in electric circuit theory concerns charge con - servation which states that the algebraic sum of the currents entering any node is zero : N ∑ n = 1 I n = 0 . ( 2 . 24 ) 16 2 . 7 ANALOGY BETWEEN FLUIDIC AND ELECTRIC CIRCUIT This physical law is called Kirchhoﬀ’s current law ( KCL ) . Similarly , the conser - vation of mass in ﬂuidic circuits implies that the sum of the ﬂows into a node should be equal to the sum of the ﬂows leaving the node . Therefore the ﬂow relation for the mass conservation at a node , analogous to KCL , is : N ∑ n = 1 Q n = 0 . ( 2 . 25 ) Energy conservation , instead , imposes that , in an electric circuit , the energy required to move a unit charge from point X to point Y must have a value independent of the path chosen to get from X to Y . Any route must lead to the same value for the energy or the voltage . We may assert this fact through Kirchhof’s voltage law ( KVL ) : the algebraic sum of the voltages around any closed path is zero N ∑ n = 1 V n = 0 . ( 2 . 26 ) Similarly , conservation of energy in ﬂuidic networks implies that the sum of each pressure drop along the closed path is zero . Thus , the pressure drop relation for energy conservation in a closed path , analogous to KVL , is : N ∑ n = 1 ∆ p n = 0 . ( 2 . 27 ) Moreover , in electric circuit theory , the application of concepts such as voltage and current division can greatly simplify the analysis . Voltage division is used to express the voltage across one of several series resis - tors in terms of the voltage across the series combination . Thus , if a microﬂuidic network includes N series ﬂuidic resistors , we can apply this rule to obtain the general result for pressure division across the n - th ﬂuidic resistor : ∆ p n = R H , n R H , 1 + R H , 2 + . . . + R H , N ∆ p S ( 2 . 28 ) where ∆ p S = p S − p atm is the pressure drop across the inlet pump . The dual of voltage division in electric circuit theory is current division . It is used to describe the current across one of several parallel resistors in terms of the current across the parallel combination . Transferring this rule to the analogous microﬂuidic circuit , if a total ﬂow of Q S is supplied to N parallel ﬂuidic resistors , 17 2 . BASIC MICROFLUIDIC CONCEPTS then the volumetric ﬂow rate Q n through the ﬂuidic resistor R H , n is given by : Q n = 1 R H ; n 1 R H ; 1 + 1 R H ; 2 + . . . + 1 R H ; N Q S . ( 2 . 29 ) Notice that smaller ﬂuidic resistors in a parallel network carry proportionally larger ﬂows , thus providing shortcut path - ways through microﬂuidic networks . This concept is very useful in droplet based networks since drops in a bifurcation normally follow the path at least resistance ( see Chapter § 4 ) . In order to provide a more immediate overview of the parallelism between microﬂuidic and electric circuits we collected in Table 2 . 1 the similarities discussed so far . Micro(cid:13)uidics Electronics Fluid molecules Electrons Flow of ﬂuid Flow of electricity Volumetric ﬂow rate Q [ m 3 = s ] Electric current I [ A ] Pressure drop ∆ p [ Pa ] Voltage drop ∆ V [ V ] Microchannel segment ( ﬂuidic resistor ) Conductive wire ( electric resistor ) Hydraulic resistance R H [ Pa · s 3 = m ] Electric resistance R E [ Ω ] Hagen - Poiseuille’s law : ∆ p = R H Q Ohm’s law : V = R E I Equivalent series ﬂuidic resistors : Equivalent series electric resistors : R H ; s = R H ; 1 + : : : + R H ; N R E ; s = R E ; 1 + : : : + R E ; N Equivalent parallel ﬂuidic resistors : Equivalent parallel electric resistors : R H ; p = R H ; 1 ∥ : : : ∥ R H ; N R E ; p = R E ; 1 ∥ : : : ∥ R E ; N External pump Power supply or battery Independent , constant ﬂuid ﬂow source Independet , constant current generator Independent , constant pressure source Independet , constant voltage generator Atmospheric pressure p atm Earth or ﬂoating ground Law of mass conservation : Kirchhof’s current law ( KCL ) : ∑ Q n = 0 at a node ∑ I n = 0 at a node Law of energy conservation : Kirchhof’s voltage law ( KVL ) : ∑ ∆ p n = 0 in a closed path ∑ V n = 0 in a closed path Flow division Current division Pressure division Voltage division Table 2 . 1 : List of physical similarities between microﬂuidics and electronics It is worth to point out that we limited our analysis to the physical similari - ties which we’re interested in assessing , but , actually , the ﬂuidic / electric analogy 18 2 . 7 ANALOGY BETWEEN FLUIDIC AND ELECTRIC CIRCUIT involves many other aspects [ 1 ] . If taken too far , however , the electric circuit analogy can create misconceptions when analyzing a microﬂuidic system . Recall that Ohm’s law cannot explain the details of the miscroscopic transport of electrons in electrical systems . Rather , it describes an average eﬀect ( e . g . , current ﬂow ) that is consistent with the net ﬂux of electrons in a conductor . In the similar manner , Hagen - Poiseuille’s law , analogous to Ohm’s law , describes the average volumetric ﬂow in a microchannel . Thus , the application of electric circuits methods to microﬂuidics does not provide detailed information about the ﬂow ﬁeld itself ( e . g . , the spatial distribution of the velocity ﬁeld within a channel ) . Numerically based CFD simulations are reccomended to investigate the details of such behavior , expecially in 2D and 3D systems . The droplets based networks itself are examples where the electric circuit analogy must be veriﬁed carefully since there are multiple types of ﬂuids ( e . g . , dispersed and continuous phase ) but only one type of electron . 19 Chapter 3 Droplet generation In the study of a microﬂuidic network , the ﬁrst aspect to be analyzed is , of course , the method of generating and introducing droplets in the system . This is achieved through passive techniques which generate a uniform , evenly spaced , continuous stream . Not only should these devices produce a regular and stable monodisperse droplet stream , they also need to be ﬂexible enough to easily provide droplets of prescribed volume at prescribed rates . To this end , three main approaches have emerged so far based on diﬀerent physical mechanisms : (cid:136) breakup in co - ﬂowing streams ; (cid:136) breakup in elongational strained ﬂows ( ﬂow focusing devices ) ; (cid:136) breakup in cross - ﬂowing streams ( T - junction ) . 3 . 1 Breakup in co - ﬂowing streams The geometry of co - ﬂowing devices is reported in Figure 3 . 1 . It simply corre - sponds to a cylindrical glass tube that is coaxially aligned with a rectangular outer microchannel . In this system , the dispersed phase is ﬁrstly produced by the thin internal round capillary and then enters through a nozzle into the main rectangular chan - nel where the continuous phase ﬂows . Here the inner ﬂuid is subjected to the pressure due to the immiscible carrier ﬂuid which , together with the viscous shear stresses , deforms it and eventually leads to droplet pinch oﬀ . 21 3 . DROPLET GENERATION dispersed phase continuous phase w in w out Figure 3 . 1 : Example of droplet production in a co - axial injection device ( top view ) . As reported by Baroud et al . [ 2 ] , two distinct regimes , concerning liquid breakup , has emerged in co - ﬂowing streams devices : dripping , in which droplets pinch oﬀ near the capillary tube’s tip , and jetting , in which droplets pinch oﬀ from an extended thread downstream of the nozzle . In both cases , the physics at the origin of droplet production is related to a sort of Rayleigh - Plateau instabil - ity ( see Section § 2 . 6 ) . In particular , the transition from dripping to jetting can be interpreted as a transition from an absolute to a convective instability . This phenomenon occurs when the continuous phase velocity increases above a critical value U * . Recent studies [ 3 ] pointed out how this threshold decreases as the ﬂow rate of the dispersed phase increases and reported its further dependence on the viscosity of the inner and outer ﬂow , as well as on the interfacial tension between the two phases . The co - ﬂowing system for droplet production , however , shows a considerable weak point if applied in soft lithography Lab on Chips ( LoCs ) , which are nowadays the most common microﬂuidic devices . The cylindrical geometry of the injector , in fact , is a serious obstacle to its implementation in LoCs since the latter present a typical rectangular cross sectional geometry . In contrast , the two alternative geometries of ﬂow focusing and T - junction are well suited to planar geometries but introduce more complex ﬂuid dynamics , as detailed below . 3 . 2 Breakup in elongational strained ﬂows The typical geometry of ﬂow focusing devices is depicted in Figure 3 . 2 . As can be appreciated , the dispersed stream , once injected into the system through a rectangular microchannel , is immediately squeezed by two counter - ﬂowing streams of the continuous phase . The pressure exerted , in this way , by the continuous ﬂow on the interface with the dispersed stream leads to the progressive 22 3 . 2 BREAKUP IN ELONGATIONAL STRAINED FLOWS continuous phase continuous phase dispersed phase w d w c w L o D Figure 3 . 2 : Example of droplet production in a ﬂow - focusing device ( top view ) . thinning of the latter until breakup occurs . The droplet thus generated passes through an oriﬁce of width D and length L o and is then conveyed in a collector channel of width w . Given the complexity of the device , many geometrical parameters play a role in this system . Above these , ﬁve main quantities can be identiﬁed : the width of the continuous phase’s inlet channels w c , the width of the dispersed phase’s inlet channel w d , the length of the oriﬁce L o and its width D , as well as the collector channel width w . As these parameters are varied , four regimes can be observed : squeezing , dripping , jetting and thread formation . However , the large number of geometrical aspect ratios characterizing ﬂow - focusing devices has prevented the determination of simple scaling laws to predict the transition between various regimes , the droplet size , distribution and rate of emission as a function of the key parameters previously mentioned . Recent velocity ﬁeld measurements [ 4 ] suggest that the squeezing phenomenon is governed by the build up of a pressure diﬀerence as the advancing ﬁnger par - tially blocks the outlet channel , via a mechanism very similar to the one we will see in more details in T - junctions . Other reports [ 5 ] , however , state that squeezing / dripping droplet breakup depends solely on the upstream geometry and associated ﬂow ﬁeld , and not on the geometry of the channel downstream of the ﬂow focusing oriﬁce . By contrast , the elongation and breakup of the ﬁne 23 3 . DROPLET GENERATION thread during the thread formation mode of breakup seems to depend solely on the geometry and ﬂow ﬁeld in the downstream channel . In light of these pa - pers and despite the widespread use of ﬂow - focusing devices , it is clear that the understanding of their detailed dynamics still warrants further research . These issues , combined with the drawbacks already underlined for the co - ﬂowing devices , led us to choose the T - junction as the method for droplet pro - duction in our analyses and simulations of microﬂuidic circuits . Indeed , the mechanism of breakup in cross - ﬂowing stream ( T - junction ) has none of the dis - advantages emerged for co - ﬂowing and ﬂow - focusing devices : it is well suited for planar geometries and has clear - cut scaling laws for its physical behavior . Let us , then , examine carefully this method for droplet generation . 3 . 3 Breakup in cross - ﬂowing streams Figure 3 . 3 illustrate the geometry of a T - junction . Very simply , it consists of two channels merged at right angle . The main channel carries the continuous ( or carrier ) ﬂuid and the orthogonal channel supplies the ﬂuid that will be dispersed ( hereafter dispersed or discontinuous ﬂuid ) . The channels have rectangular cross sections , and there are only three geometrical parameters that deﬁne completely the size and shape of the T - junction : the width w c of the main channel , the width w d of the channel supplying the discontinuous ﬂuid and the height h of the channels . In this regard , we focused on planar geometries , with identical rectangular cross - section for every channel , in which the width is slightly greater than the height . Liquid ﬂows are commonly controlled via independent syringe pumps imposing the inlet volumetric ﬂow rates Q c and Q d for each phase . dispersed phase continuous phase w d w c Figure 3 . 3 : Example of droplet production in a T - junction ( top view ) . 24 3 . 3 BREAKUP IN CROSS - FLOWING STREAMS 3 . 3 . 1 Forces anlysis The process of droplet formation actually begins as soon as the dispersed phase starts penetrating into the outer channel . Here , three main forces act on the emerging interface and inﬂuence droplet breakup : the viscous shear - stress force ( F τ ) , the surface ( or interfacial ) tension force ( F σ ) and the force arising from the increased resistance to ﬂow of the continuous ﬂuid around the tip ( hereafter “squeezing force” , F S ) . The understanding of their balance is crucial for draw - ing the correct model of the breakup process so , in the next paragraphs , we will examine , one by one , the contribution given by these forces during droplet generation . Viscous shear - stress force A viscous shear stress is deﬁned as the component of stress co - planar with a material cross section . In our case , this kind of stress is exerted on the dispersed phase by the cross - ﬂow of the continuous phase . Its magnitude is estimated by the product µ c G , where µ c is the viscosity of the carrier ﬂuid and G is a characteristic rate of shear strain that is proportional to Q c and is a function of the T - junction and the emerging interface geometry . More in detail , we can approximate this stress as τ = µ c u gap / ϵ , where u gap = Q c / ( hϵ ) is the speed of the continuous ﬂuid ﬂowing through the gap , of characteristic thickness ϵ , between the interface and the wall of the channel ( see Figure 3 . 4 ) . In order to estimate the net force acting on the immiscible tip , we then multiply the shear stress τ = µ c Q c / ( hϵ 2 ) by the surface area of the interface in the gap A gap ∼ hw 1 , where we take w as the characteristic axial length - scale of the tip ( see Figure 3 . 4 ) . Finally , the corresponding net force on the tip is pointed downstream and has the magnitude of : F τ ≈ µ c Q c w ϵ 2 . ( 3 . 1 ) Squeezing force The so called squeezing force comes into play when the thread of the discontinuous ﬂuid almost obstructs the cross section of the main channel ( see Figure 3 . 4 ) . In this situation , the available area through which continuous ﬂuid can pass is signiﬁcantly restricted leading to an increased pressure directly upstream of the junction . As detailed below , the magnitude of the squeezing 1 The shear stress , in fact , is given by the ratio between the force applied and the surface aﬀected by the stress (cid:28) = F (cid:28) A . 25 3 . DROPLET GENERATION ε ratip raup ~ w dispersed phase continuous phase Figure 3 . 4 : Schematic illustration ( top view ) of the shape of the immiscible thread’s tip at an intermediate stage of break - up in a T - junction . pressure increases dramatically as the distance between the emerging interface and the opposing wall of the main microchannel ( ϵ ) decreases . For ϵ ∼ w , using the Hagen - Poiseuille’s law referred to a rectangular channel ( see Section § 2 . 5 ) , we can estimate the pressure drop ∆ p over the length ( ∼ w ) of the immiscible tip : ∆ p ≈ µ c Q c w / ( h 2 ϵ 2 ) . When ϵ ≪ w , instead , we evaluate ∆ p for a thin ﬁlm of typical thickness ϵ , width h and length w ( Figure 3 . 4 ) : ∆ p ≈ µ c Q c w / ( hϵ 3 ) , and the corresponding net force obtained , oriented downstream , is equal to : F S ≈ ∆ phw = µ c Q c w 2 ϵ 3 . ( 3 . 2 ) The exact value of the exponent n to which the thickness of the ﬁlm ϵ should be raised in the above expression can be derived from a detailed lubrication analysis [ 6 ] for ﬂow around objects near - ﬁlling the cross - sections of capillaries : n depends on the geometry of the cross - section of the capillary and on the geom - etry and material parameters of the object . Importantly , n is larger than 2 and consequently we can expect that F S > F τ when ϵ ≪ w . Interfacial tension force Surface tension is a contractile tendency of the sur - face of a liquid that allows it to resist an external force . The cohesive forces among liquid molecules are responsible for the phenomenon of surface tension . Very simply , it can be interpreted as follows : in the bulk of the liquid , each molecule is pulled equally in every direction by neighboring molecules , resulting in a net force of zero . The molecules at the surface , diﬀerently , are not surrounded by similar molecules on all sides and therefore are pulled inwards . 26 3 . 3 BREAKUP IN CROSS - FLOWING STREAMS In our case , in particular , the surface tension is ruled by the interaction between dissimilar liquid ( dispersed and continuous phase ) . This kind of sur - face tension is called interfacial tension , but its physics are almost the same . It resists deformation due to continuous ﬂuid by establishing a pressure jump across the curved edge of the growing droplet . In particular , the surface tension force is associated with the Laplace pressure jump ∆ p L across a static interface , ∆ p L = σ ( r − 1 a + r − 1 r ) where σ is the interfacial tension coeﬃcient ( sometimes de - noted γ ) , r a is the axial curvature ( in the plane of the device ) and r r is the radius of the radial curvature ( in the cross - section of the neck joining the inlet for the discontinuous ﬂuid with the tip ) . In the intermediate stage of the process of for - mation of a droplet ( Figure 3 . 4 ) the radial curvature is bounded by the height of the channels ( h < w ) and r r ≈ h / 2 ( or less ) everywhere . The axial curvature is more emphasized at the downstream tip of the immiscible thread ( r tipa ≈ w / 2 ) than at the upstream side of it ( r upa ≈ w ) : the interface on the downstream side of the thread acts on the liquid inside the thread with a stress p L ≈ − σ ( 2 / w + 2 / h ) ( the minus sign signiﬁes that the stress is oriented upstream ) , and the interface lo - cated upstream acts on the discontinuous liquid with a stress p L ≈ σ ( 1 / w + 2 / h ) ( oriented downstream ) . The sum of the two , multiplied by the cross - section of the channel gives the following estimation of the interfacial tension force : F σ ≈ − σh , ( 3 . 3 ) which has a stabilizing eﬀect on the tip : in the absence of any other stresses or forces , surface tension would position the tip symmetrically about the axis of the inlet channel for the dispersed phase . To summarize the order - of - magnitude estimates of the forces acting on the tip , we note that the only stabilizing force arises from the interfacial tension eﬀects ( see Equation ( 3 . 3 ) ) . On the other hand , there are two destabilizing forces ( see Equation ( 3 . 2 ) and ( 3 . 1 ) ) , both of which increase sharply upon the decrease of the separation ϵ between the interface and the opposing wall of the main channel . As stated by several studies [ 7 , 8 , 9 ] , the balance of these forces leads to the deﬁnition of two principal regimes of breakup in T - junction : (cid:136) squeezing regime ; (cid:136) dripping regime . 27 3 . DROPLET GENERATION Importantly , the transition between them is governed by the Capillary number ( Ca ) which is a dimensionless parameter that describes the relative magnitude of the viscous shear stress compared with the interfacial tension ( see Section § 2 . 2 ) . A simple deﬁnition for Ca in microﬂuidics is given in terms of the average velocity u c of the continuous phase , the dynamic viscosity µ c of the continuous phase and the interfacial tension coeﬃcient σ : Ca = µ c u c σ = µ c Q c σwh . ( 3 . 4 ) In particular , for low values of the Capillary number ( Ca < Ca CR ) , ie when the interfacial forces dominate the shear stress , the dynamics of breakup of immiscible thread in T - junction is dominated by the squeezing force across the droplet as it forms ( squeezing regime ) . In the opposite case ( Ca > Ca CR ) , the shear stress starts playing an important role and the system starts operating in the so called dripping regime . As reported in recent papers [ 8 ] and conﬁrmed in our numerical simulations , this threshold is given by : Ca CR ≈ 10 − 2 . ( 3 . 5 ) Let us now examine in more detail the two regimes mentioned above with a particular focus on the squeezing regime which is the one we will adopt later on for our microﬂuidic networks because it shows the best ﬂexibility and controllability over the shape of the droplets generated . 3 . 3 . 2 Squeezing regime The typical process of droplets formation via squeezing regime is visually de - picted in the simulation of Figure 3 . 5 where the principal geometrical and phys - ical parameters imposed are the following : h = 50 µm , w c = w d = 150 µm , Q c = 3 . 75 nL / s , Q d = 1 . 875 nL / s . Keeping it in mind and on the basis of the previous analysis and observations , the mechnism in question can be brieﬂy described as follows : the two immiscible ﬂuids form an interface at the junction of the dis - persed inlet channel with the main channel . The stream of the discontinuous phase starts penetrating into the main channel and a droplet begins to grow under the eﬀect of the viscous shear - stress force ( Figure 3 . 5 ( a ) ) . The latter , how - ever , is not suﬃcient to distort the interface signiﬁcantly because this operating regime works under the condition Ca < Ca CR ⇒ interfacial tension dominates 28 3 . 3 BREAKUP IN CROSS - FLOWING STREAMS shear stress . Consequently , the emerging droplet manages to ﬁll the junction and restricts the available area through which continuous ﬂuid can pass , leading to an increased pressure directly upstream of the junction ( Figure 3 . 5 ( b ) ) . When the corresponding squeezing force overcomes the interfacial tension force , the neck of the emerging droplet squeezes ( Figure 3 . 5 ( c ) ) , promoting its breakup . Finally , the disconnected liquid plug ﬂows downstream of the main channel , while the tip of the dispersed phase retracts to the end of the inlet and the process repeats ( Figure 3 . 5 ( d ) ) . The intrinsic high reproducibility shown by this mechanism is fundamental for the stable production of uniform droplets with identical length and shape ( Figure 3 . 5 ( e ) ) over a wide range of ﬂow rates . This is also the reason why we chose to work under squeezing regime in our simulations of T - shaped droplet inlet systems . ( a ) ( b ) ( c ) ( d ) ( e ) Figure 3 . 5 : Typical process of droplet formation in squeezing regime . 29 3 . DROPLET GENERATION Droplets length Applying the model of evolution of breakup at the T - junction in the squeezing regime presented so far , Garstecki et al . [ 8 ] obtain a simple for - mula for the length L d of the resulting droplets : L d = w ( 1 + αQ d Qc ) ( 3 . 6 ) where w is the width of the main channel , Q d is the ﬂow of the dispersed phase , Q c is the ﬂow of the carrier ﬂuid and α is a dimensionless parameter of order one . Equation ( 3 . 6 ) can be intuitively understood by arguing that detachment begins once the emerging discontinuous thread ﬁlls totally the main channel , i . e . when the squeezing force is stronger . At this moment , the length of the droplet is approximately equal to the width of the channel w and the thickness of the neck in the junction starts decreasing at a rate which depends on the mean speed of the continuous ﬂuid u c . So , the ﬂow of the carrier ﬂuid ( Q c = u c hw ) sets the time for the growth of the droplet because it determines the “squeezing time” necessary for the neck to break . This results in an inverse proportionality between droplet length and continuous phase ﬂow ( L d ∝ 1 Q c ) . In fact , considering an equal input discontinuous phase ﬂow , the greater the continuous ﬂow the lower the squeezing time and thus the length of the resulting droplets . On the other hand , there is a direct proportionality between droplet length and dispersed phase ﬂow ( L d ∝ Q d ) because Q d determines how much discontinuous ﬂuid manages to ﬂow in the droplet before the squeezing time imposed by the ﬂow of the carrier ﬂuid ends and breakup occurs . Interdistance between droplets Another physical parameter to be consid - ered , that’ll be useful later on , concerns the spacing δ [ m ] between droplets gener - ated in squeezing regime . Its scaling relation can be deduced , as reported below , thanks to the application of the mass conservation law . Let us consider a suﬃciently long time τ and the related distance x = u ′ d τ along the main channel ( being u ′ d the velocity of the dispersed ﬂuid in the main channel ) . The number of droplets along x in the time interval τ is given by : n d ( τ ) = x L d + δ = u ′ d τ L d + δ , ( 3 . 7 ) where L d is the length of the single droplet and δ is the interdistance between them ( see Figure 3 . 6 ) . 30 3 . 3 BREAKUP IN CROSS - FLOWING STREAMS dispersed phase continuous phase Ld Ld Ld δ δ Figure 3 . 6 : Schematic illustration of a train of droplets created by a T - junction . Now , the mass conservation law imposes that the volume of dispersed liquid injected by the discontinuous phase inlet channel throughout the time interval τ ( V ol d , in = Q d τ = u d whτ ) corresponds to the volume of dispersed ﬂuid along x in the main channel ( V ol d , x = L droplet whn d = L d wh u ′ d τ L d + δ ) : u d whτ = L d wh u ′ d τ L d + δ ⇒ u d ( L d + δ ) = L d u ′ d . ( 3 . 8 ) The next step requires the evaluation of the velocity of the dispersed ﬂuid in the main channel u ′ d . To determine it , we make the hypothesis that dispersed and continuous phase ﬂow at the same velocity ( u ′ d = u ′ c = u ) in the main channel , though it is not always true [ 10 ] . Then , we can exploit the parallelism that exist between the microﬂuidic and electrical circuit ( see Section § 2 . 7 ) as reported in Figure 3 . 7 : in particular , we can associate the ﬂow of the ﬂuids ( Q d , Q c , Q ) in the microchannels of the T - junction to the current in the analogous electrical circuit ( I d , I c , I ) . In this way , by applying Kirchhoﬀ’s law we obtain I = I d + I c and thus : Q = Q d + Q c ⇒ u = u d + u c . 2 ( 3 . 9 ) Substituting Equation ( 3 . 9 ) in ( 3 . 8 ) , it results : u d ( L d + δ ) = L d ( u d + u c ) ⇒ δ = L d u c u d = L d Q c Q d . ( 3 . 10 ) Finally , replacing ( 3 . 6 ) in ( 3 . 10 ) , we obtain the desired formula for the interdis - tance between droplets generated in a T - junction in the squeezing regime : δ = Q c Q d w ( 1 + α Q d Qc ) . ( 3 . 11 ) 2 The last implication follows from the fact that we always consider channels with identical cross section . 31 3 . DROPLET GENERATION Q d Q c Q I c I d I r i r i R Figure 3 . 7 : Analogy between microﬂuidic T - junction and electric circuit . Lingering on Equation ( 3 . 10 ) , it can be noted that droplets length and inter - distance are strictly correlated since δ depends on L d . Consequently , once ﬁxed the geometry of the system and the physical parameters of the liquids , bubbles with a speciﬁc length will have a corresponding precise interdistance between them . In order to decorrelate the two values and make δ independent of L d the solution proposed by Jullien et al . [ 11 ] can be adopted . Basically , it consists in arranging , downstream of the T - shaped droplet generator , a series of small entries forming a comb ( see Figure 3 . 8 ) which injects additional continuous phase , sepa - rating the droplets by variable lengths , typically several hundred of micrometers . On the contrary , if we want to near the bubbles , the comb can be employed to eject part of the continuous ﬂuid between the droplets . In this way , we are able to modulate droplet interdistance irrespective of their length . dispersed phase continuous phase continuous phase Figure 3 . 8 : Sketch of droplet generator and comb to modulate droplet interdis - tance . Simulations and numerical results In order to validate the theoretical anal - ysis presented so far , we made use of the cfd software OpenFOAM ( see Appendix A ) to implement a T - junction device for droplet generation . The microchannels geometries imposed in our simulations are listed in Table 3 . 1 while in Table 3 . 2 32 3 . 3 BREAKUP IN CROSS - FLOWING STREAMS are reported the common physical properties of the ﬂuids considered . System geometry Channels’ height h 50 µm Main channel’s width w c 150 µm Dispersed channel’s width w d 150 µm Table 3 . 1 : Geometrical properties of the reference system Fluids’ properties Continuous phase → water Dynamic viscosity µ c 1 . 002 mP a · s Density ρ c 1000 Kg / m 3 Kinematic viscosity ν c 1 . 002 mm 2 / s Dispersed phase → silicone oil Dynamic viscosity µ d 145 . 5 mP a · s Density ρ d 970 Kg / m 3 Kinematic viscosity ν d 150 mm 2 / s Interfacial tension coeﬃcient σ 46 mN / m Table 3 . 2 : Physical properties of the ﬂuids considered For this reference system , we plot the droplet length and interdistance as a function of the ﬂow rate ratio φ = Q d / Q c obtained in our simulations . In particular , we selected three diﬀerent ﬁxed inlet velocities for the continuous phase , namely u c = k · u c , st [ m / s ] such that Q c = k · whu c , st [ m 3 / s ] with u c , st = 0 . 0005 m / s and k = 0 . 5 , 1 , 2 and collected the relative results in Figure 3 . 9 , 3 . 10 and 3 . 11 respectively . For each ﬁxed continuous ﬂow , the quantity φ = Q d / Q c is varied in the range from 0 . 25 to 6 . 5 by opportunely incrementing the dispersed phase inlet ﬂow Q d . The simulative data ( denoted by markers in the graphs ) agrees very well , both for droplet length and droplet interdistance , with the theoretical model ( continuous lines in the ﬁgures ) expressed in Equations ( 3 . 6 ) and ( 3 . 11 ) . In addition , in Figure 3 . 12 we reported all together the graphs obtained for the three cases under examination . Analyzing the latter , it transpires the dependence of the ﬁtting parameter α of Equation ( 3 . 6 ) from the absolute velocity set for the continuous phase . The various slopes obtained for the theoretical curves , in fact , denote diﬀerent values of the prameter α : in particular , an increase in u c corresponds to a decrease in α . 33 3 . DROPLET GENERATION 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 0 0 . 5 1 1 . 5x 10 −3 Q d / Q c L d [ m ] droplet length for u c = 0 . 5mm / s ( a ) 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 0 0 . 1 0 . 2 0 . 3 0 . 4 0 . 5 0 . 6 0 . 7 0 . 8 0 . 9 1x 10 −3 Q d / Q c δ [ m ] droplet interdistance for u c = 0 . 5mm / s ( b ) Figure 3 . 9 : ( a ) Length and ( b ) spacing between droplets produced in a T - junction for a ﬁxed value of u c = 0 . 5 mm / s ⇒ Q c = 3 . 75 nL / s . Continuous lines represents the theoretical curves obtained from ( a ) Eq . ( 3 . 6 ) and ( b ) Eq . ( 3 . 11 ) with α = 1 . 3 . Markers corresponds to the simulative results obtained with OpenFOAM . 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 0 0 . 5 1 1 . 5x 10 −3 Q d / Q c L d [ m ] droplet length for u c = 0 . 25mm / s ( a ) 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 0 0 . 1 0 . 2 0 . 3 0 . 4 0 . 5 0 . 6 0 . 7 0 . 8 0 . 9 1x 10 −3 Q d / Q c δ [ m ] droplet interdistance for u c = 0 . 25mm / s ( b ) Figure 3 . 10 : ( a ) Length and ( b ) spacing between droplets produced in a T - junction for a ﬁxed value of u c = 0 . 25 mm / s ⇒ Q c = 1 . 875 nL / s . Continuous lines rep - resents the theoretical curves obtained from ( a ) Eq . ( 3 . 6 ) and ( b ) Eq . ( 3 . 11 ) with α = 1 . 5 . Markers corresponds to the simulative results obtained with Open - FOAM . 34 3 . 3 BREAKUP IN CROSS - FLOWING STREAMS 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 0 0 . 5 1 1 . 5x 10 −3 Q d / Q c L d [ m ] droplet length for u c = 1mm / s ( a ) 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 0 0 . 1 0 . 2 0 . 3 0 . 4 0 . 5 0 . 6 0 . 7 0 . 8 0 . 9 1x 10 −3 Q d / Q c δ [ m ] droplet interdistance for u c = 1mm / s ( b ) Figure 3 . 11 : ( a ) Length and ( b ) spacing between droplets produced in a T - junction for a ﬁxed value of u c = 1 mm / s ⇒ Q c = 7 . 5 nL / s . Continuous line represents the theoretical curves obtained from ( a ) Eq . ( 3 . 6 ) and ( b ) Eq . ( 3 . 11 ) with α = 1 . 1 . Markers corresponds to the simulative results obtained with OpenFOAM . 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 0 0 . 5 1 1 . 5x 10 −3 Q d / Q c L d [ m ] droplet length theoretical L d with u c = 0 . 5mm / s simulative L d with u c = 0 . 5mm / s theoretical L d with u c = 0 . 25mm / s simulative L d with u c = 0 . 25mm / s theoretical L d with u c = 1mm / s simulative L d with u c = 1mm / s ( a ) 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 0 0 . 1 0 . 2 0 . 3 0 . 4 0 . 5 0 . 6 0 . 7 0 . 8 0 . 9 1x 10 −3 Q d / Q c δ [ m ] droplet interdistance theoretical δ with u c = 0 . 5mm / s simulative δ with u c = 0 . 5mm / s theoretical δ with u c = 0 . 25mm / s simulative δ with u c = 0 . 25mm / s theoretical δ with u c = 1mm / s simulative δ with u c = 1mm / s ( b ) Figure 3 . 12 : Collection and comparison of the data ( a ) from Figure 3 . 9 ( a ) , 3 . 10 ( a ) , 3 . 11 ( a ) and ( b ) from Figure 3 . 9 ( b ) , 3 . 10 ( b ) , 3 . 11 ( b ) . 35 3 . DROPLET GENERATION Finally , we noted that for low values of φ = Q d / Q c the numerical results follows almost ideally our model while non linearity and anomalous behaviors emerge as soon as φ is increased too much . Indeed , when Q d > 7 Q c the squeez - ing regime further evolves in a sort of “parallel ﬂow” regime , visually repre - sented in the simulation of Figure 3 . 13 where the parameters considered are h = 50 µm , w c = w d = 150 µm , Q c = 3 . 75 nL / s , Q d = 37 . 5 nL / s . Remember - ing Equations ( 3 . 6 ) and ( 3 . 11 ) , this simulative evidence , translates in an upper bound for the droplet length and in a lower bound for the droplet interdistance achievable once imposed the reference geometry . Figure 3 . 13 : Degeneration of squeezing regime for high values of φ = Q d / Q c . 3 . 3 . 3 Dripping regime As already stated , the dripping regime occurs when we work under the condition Ca CR > 10 − 2 . In this case , contrary to the squeezing regime , droplet formation is entirely due to the action of the shear stress which is large enough to overcome the interfacial tension , analogous to spherical droplet breakup . The typical mechanism of bubble production under dripping regime is illus - trated step by step in the simulation reported in Figure 3 . 14 ( the reference system considered here has got h = 50 µm , w c = w d = 150 µm , the continuous phase is characterized by µ c = 145 . 5 mP a · s and Q c = 7 . 5 nL / s while for the dispersed phase we imposed µ c = 1 . 002 mP a · s and Q d = 7 . 125 nL / s ) . As soon as the dispersed phase enters the main channel ( Figure 3 . 14 ( a ) ) , it is aﬀected by the 36 3 . 3 BREAKUP IN CROSS - FLOWING STREAMS strong viscous shear - stress force F τ caused by the carrier ﬂuid . Accordingly , the emerging interface is sensitively distorted ( Figure 3 . 14 ( b ) ) and droplets are emitted before they can block the main channel ( Figure 3 . 14 ( c ) ) . This physical behavior , however , involves a strong limitation on the production of droplet which will consequently always be shorter than the width of the main channel w . For the same reason , the frequency of production of droplets is much higher than the corresponding one in the squeezing regime . This closeness between droplets can , in the worst case , entail the fusion of the same in the outer channel . ( a ) ( b ) ( c ) Figure 3 . 14 : Typical process of droplet formation in dripping regime . Scaling models [ 2 ] developed to describe this process also demonstrate that the droplet size depends predominantly on the capillary number Ca and not on the ﬂow rate ratio φ : de facto , it decreases strongly as the capillary number increases . Furthermore , larger viscosity ratios λ = µ d µ c lead to smaller droplets . As long as the inlet velocities imposed for the continuous and dispersed phase are quite low ( u c , u d < 10 − 2 ) , our simulations agrees well with the theoretical background presented ( see Figure 3 . 14 for a practical example ) . At greater orders of magnitude , instead , we observed that the dripping regime evolves into the formation of stable parallel ﬂowing streams , as reported in Figure 3 . 15 for a reference system with h = 50 µm , w c = w d = 150 µm , Q c = 97 . 5 nL / s , Q d = 71 . 25 nL / s . We conjecture that the origin of this phenomenon lies in the fact 37 3 . DROPLET GENERATION that , for the reference velocities , the frequency of droplet production is so high that it degenerates in a continuous stream . Figure 3 . 15 : Degeneration of dripping regime for high values of u d and u c . 38 Chapter 4 Characterization of droplet dynamics in a bifurcating channel After analyzing in detail the process of droplets generation , the next topic to be addressed , in order to understand the complex dynamics at the basis of microﬂu - idic systems , concerns the behavior of droplets once they meet a bifurcation along the network . Our interest in understanding the physics governing droplet dynamics in bi - furcating channels , stem from the fact that we wish to convey droplets to the microﬂuidic machines . The latters are , in fact , physically connected to the net - work by means of ramiﬁcations . On this purpose , we’ll divide the present chapter in two main section : in the former one we are going to outline the so called droplet’s breaking / non - breaking regions while in the latter we are going to point out how to passively pilot the droplets in a speciﬁc target arm of the bifurcation . 4 . 1 Droplet breakup in a bifurcating channel If we consider the droplets , in analogy with the world of telecommunications , as the “packets” we want to deliver to the “end users” ( microﬂuidic machines ) of our network , we need to preserve their integrity throughout the entire system and , thus , even when they pass through “sensitive points” such as bifurcating channel . Several studies , numerical simulations and experimental evidencies [ 12 , 13 , 14 ] 39 4 . CHARACTERIZATION OF DROPLET DYNAMICS IN A BIFURCATING CHANNEL have been published in literature on this subject . Most of the studies focus on the T - junctions , where a channel splits into two symmetric arms , forming a T . In such systems , as we are going to formalize , depending on droplet size , capillary number and viscosity ratio of the dispersed and continuous phase , droplets arriving at the junction may either split or ﬂow completely along one of the arm of the T . Hereafter , we’ll seek in particular to deﬁne the parameter range that controls the transition between breaking and non - breaking regime . Proceeding with order , we now describe the physics behind breakup and non - breakup regimes . 4 . 1 . 1 Breakup regime Figure 4 . 1 describes the temporal droplet evolution obtained from a simulation characterized by the reference geometrical and physical parameters listed in Ta - bles 3 . 1 and 3 . 2 and an inlet velocity of u c = 0 . 00075 m / s . ( a ) ( b ) ( c ) ( d ) Figure 4 . 1 : Typical droplet dynamics in breakup regime at the bifurcation . Figure 4 . 1 ( a ) shows the elongated droplet as it is just about to come in contact with the edge of the junction . Immediately , it deforms symmetrically forming two identical liquid ﬁngers in the upper and lower branch , which almost completely ﬁll the channel ( see Figure 4 . 1 ( b ) ) . Then , the droplet rear forms a curvature at the entrance of the bifurcation bulging in the upstream direction . In this 40 4 . 1 DROPLET BREAKUP IN A BIFURCATING CHANNEL process a neck forms in the central part of the junction with a width decreasing in time ( see Figure 4 . 1 ( c ) ) . This behavior is presumably due to the ﬂow of the carrier phase which actually ﬂattens the dispersed phase against the sidewall of the bifurcation . As the circumference of the thread becomes less than its normal length , the surface tension starts to contract it radially promoting the incipience and growth of an instability similar to the Rayleigh - Plateau ( see Section § 2 . 6 ) . This eventually results in a pinch - oﬀ and the formation of two almost equally sized daughter droplets that propagate downstream in the channel branches ( see Figure 4 . 1 ( d ) ) . 4 . 1 . 2 Non - breakup regime By reducing the Ca number , in comparison with the preceeding case , cohesion forces become more relevant ( see section 2 . 2 ) , and thus we observe a radically diﬀerent droplet behavior as reported in Figure 4 . 2 for a system with halved velocity u c compared to the previous one . Here , initially , the droplet reduces its speed and approaches the junction in a similar fashion as reported above ( see Figure 4 . 2 ( a ) ) . However , now , the dominating surface tension force reduces the ability of the inertia and viscous force to deform the droplet which obtains a quasi steady - state condition , with no internal ﬂow , as it sticks in the junc - tion . Due to the stronger interfacial force , a larger curvature is generated at the droplet rear , resulting in a larger radius of the liquid thread ( see Figure 4 . 2 ( b ) ) . This has a direct consequence on the resulting droplet dynamics , as the birth of a Rayleigh - Plateau instability is prevented . The incipience of a random distur - bance , generates a slightly asymmetric ﬂow in the ﬁlm formed between the droplet interface and the channel surface opening a tunnel on one side of the junction ( see Figure 4 . 2 ( c ) ) . As this perturbation grows , the droplet starts steering in the opposite arm ( see Figure 4 . 2 ( d ) ) and eventually migrates entirely in this direction ( see Figure 4 . 2 ( e ) ) . This leaves an asymmetric distribution of the phases in the daughter branches and the droplet wrapping generates a continuous phase’s ﬂow recirculation in the other arm . A mathematical formalization of the physical phenomena involved in breakup and non - breakup regimes has been proposed in a recent paper by Leshansky and Pismen [ 14 ] . Indeed , they developed an analytical theory that describes the 41 4 . CHARACTERIZATION OF DROPLET DYNAMICS IN A BIFURCATING CHANNEL ( a ) ( b ) ( c ) ( d ) ( e ) Figure 4 . 2 : Typical droplet dynamics in non - breakup regime at the bifurcation . 42 4 . 1 DROPLET BREAKUP IN A BIFURCATING CHANNEL breakup process in a symmetric two - dimensional T - junction driven by the obser - vation of the pressure evolution in the droplet at the bifurcation . Although this analysis works in a limited 2D setting , the formula derived by Leshansky and Pismen agrees well with both 2D and 3D simulations and experimental ﬁndings from literature [ 15 ] . In particular , they could determine the conditions under which stationary solutions exist . This range corresponds , physically , to non - breakup case that is , as already stated , the case we are interested in . On this purpose , the boundary between non - breakup and breakup regions is given by the following important formula ( continuous line in Figure 4 . 3 ) : L d w ≈ χCa − 0 . 21 ( 4 . 1 ) where L d [ m ] is the length of the droplet that approaches the T - junction , w [ m ] is the width of the channels , Ca is the Capillary number ( see Section § 2 . 2 ) and χ is a dimensionless parameter that depends on the ratio between the viscosities of dispersed and continuous phase λ = µ d µ c : experimental evidences [ 11 ] demon - strate that the ﬁtting χ decreases as λ increases . It can be noted that , once we ﬁx λ , the transition between non - breakup and breakup regions is ruled only by two parameters : Ca and L d ( w is , in fact , a ﬁxed geometrical parameter of the microﬂuidic system ) . In details , if we consider L d as a constant , lower Capillary numbers lead to a wider non - breakup region . This behavior can be intuitively explained by ascertaining that small Capillary numbers mean that interfacial ten - sion force dominates viscous force and thus it correspond to a situation of big cohesion between droplet’s molecules . On the other side , if we ﬁx Ca , the greater is the droplet’s length , the lower the corresponding non - breakup region . In turn , this phenomenon ﬁnds the following intuitive explanation : the least energy conﬁguration for a droplet corresponds to the spherical geometry . Now , since physical systems tend intrinsically to move to the minimum energy state , breakup will aﬀect more easily the most elongated drops ( which are also the most energetic ones ) in order to take them back to a spherical shape . 43 4 . CHARACTERIZATION OF DROPLET DYNAMICS IN A BIFURCATING CHANNEL 4 . 1 . 3 Simulations and numerical results In order to validate the theoretical background presented , we carried out a se - ries of simulations in symmetric 3D T - junctions using the ﬁnite volume based open - source code OpenFOAM ( see Appendix A ) . The breakup has been simu - lated in a conﬁned T - junction with uniform channels’ width w = 150 µm and height h = 50 µm at varying Capillary numbers Ca = µ c u c σ and diﬀerent initial length L d of the parent droplet . Our simulations almost successfully capture the transition between breaking and non - breaking regimes . It is shown ( Figure 4 . 3 ) that if Capillary number is smaller than a critical number given by Equation ( 4 . 1 ) , the droplet will move either to the left or right instead of breaking into two daughter droplets . Moreover , the critical Capillary number decreases with increasing droplet length . The χ parameter of Equation ( 4 . 1 ) considered in the theoretical curve of Figure 4 . 3 is equal to 0 . 187 . 1 1 . 5 2 2 . 5 3 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 1 . 2 1 . 4 1 . 6 1 . 8 2 x 10 −4 L d / w C a theoretical bound breakupnon−breakup Figure 4 . 3 : Phase diagram of numerical simulations for a drop in a symmetric T - junction . The solid line is the theoretical curve given by Equation ( 4 . 1 ) for χ = 0 . 187 . The symbols correspond to numerical results for nonbreaking ( ◦ ) and breaking ( (cid:3) ) drops . 44 4 . 2 REGULATION OF DROPLET TRAFFIC IN A T - JUNCTION 4 . 2 Regulation of droplet traﬃc in a T - junction The next logical step we need to deal with , is the deﬁnition of a method to precisely carry the non - splitting droplets in the desired arm of the T - junction . The solution to this problem is provided by a simple property of microﬂuidic droplet systems [ 16 , 17 ] at a T - junction ( neglecting splitting , direct interactions and collisions ) an arriving droplet follows the instantaneously leading ﬂow rate . So , if the total original ﬂow rate Q of the parent channel divides between Q 1 and Q 2 = Q − Q 1 in the two daughter branches ( see Figure 4 . 4 ( a ) ) , the sign of Q 1 − Q 2 decides in which arm the arriving droplet goes . More precisely , if Q 1 > Q 2 the choice falls on the daughter channel number 1 and vice versa . Accordingly , if we manage to create an asymmetry in the ﬂows of the two arms of a bifurcation , we are able to predict exactly the direction of the coming droplets . In order to do this , let’s start noting that the T - junction depicted in Figure 4 . 4 ( a ) corresponds , thanks to the electric circuit analogy ( see Section § 2 . 7 ) , to the parallel resistance reported in Figure 4 . 4 ( b ) . Q Q 1 Q 2 L 1 L 2 ( a ) Q 1 Q 2 Q R H , 2 R H , 1 ( b ) Figure 4 . 4 : ( a ) Microﬂuidic symmetric T - junction and ( b ) its analogous electric circuit . Moreover , we remember the concept of hydraulic resistance of a generical microﬂuidic channel introduced in Section § 2 . 7 , which is given by : R H , i = aµ c L i wh 3 ( 4 . 2 ) 45 4 . CHARACTERIZATION OF DROPLET DYNAMICS IN A BIFURCATING CHANNEL where µ c [ P a · s ] is the dynamic viscosity of the ﬂowing liquid , L i [ m ] is the length of the channel , w [ m ] is the width of the channel , h [ m ] is the height of the channel and a is a dimensionless parameter deﬁned as a = 12 [ 1 − 192 h π 5 w tanh ( πw 2 h ) ] − 1 . Premising that w , h and consequently a are normally identical for the two arms of a T - junction , we can opportunely change L 1 and L 21 ( see Figure 4 . 5 ( a ) ) in order to obtain R H , 1 ̸ = R H , 2 . In particular , L 1 > L 2 ⇒ R H , 1 > R H , 2 . In this way , we are able to achieve the desired initial unbalance between Q 1 and Q 2 that can be calculated using the current division law ( see Section § 2 . 7 ) : Q 1 = R H , 2 R H , 1 + R H , 2 Q Q 2 = R H , 1 R H , 1 + R H , 2 Q ( 4 . 3 ) Therefore , relying on the previous equation , the arm with the leading ﬂow rate Q i in the bifurcation is the one with lower hydraulic resistance R H , i ( channel 1 in ﬁgure Figure 4 . 5 ( a ) ) and the choice of the incoming non - splitting droplet will fall on this one ( see Figure 4 . 5 ( b ) ) . The last aspect left to evaluate concerns the analysis of the eﬀects induced by the presence of a droplet in one arm of the bifurcation . As we already pointed out in the non - breaking regime description , ﬂows involving non - splitting droplets are inherently asymmetric since the presence of the latter in one arm of the T - junction increases the volumetric ﬂow rate of the opposite channel . In this way , droplets act as a series ﬂow resistance in the branch they occupy . In order to quantify the additional resistance involved by droplets , we should notice that their presence in a channel change the dynamic viscosity µ d of the por - tion L d they occupy . Thus , referring to Equation ( 2 . 21 ) , the hydraulic resistance ascribable to the droplet is given by : R H , d = µ d L d a wh 3 ( 4 . 4 ) Then , the new resistance ( R ′ H , i ) of the channel , can be obtained by summing R H , d to the original hydraulic resistance ( R H , i ) of the same and subtracting the quantity µ c L d a wh 3 ( this is due to the fact that the original R H , i considered a channel completely ﬁlled by continuous phase which is not true anymore for the portion 1 For the moment , we exclude the presence of any droplets in the bifurcation , so (cid:22) 1 = (cid:22) 2 = (cid:22) c , because we are interested in the behavior of the ﬁrst drop that approach the T - junction . The opposite case is discussed later . 46 4 . 2 REGULATION OF DROPLET TRAFFIC IN A T - JUNCTION L d occupied by the droplet ) . So , we can rewrite R ′ H , i as follows : R ′ H , i = R H , i + δr = aµ c L i wh 3 + ( µ d − µ c ) L d a wh 3 ( 4 . 5 ) where δr = ( µ d − µ c ) L d a wh 3 is the additional resistance per droplet . Accordingly , in the case of Figure 4 . 5 ( b ) , the current division law returns : Q ′ 1 = R H , 2 R H , 1 + δr + R H , 2 Q Q ′ 2 = R H , 1 + δr R H , 1 + δr + R H , 2 Q ( 4 . 6 ) Finally , two diﬀerent cases may occur : (cid:136) if Q ′ 1 is still greater than Q ′ 2 in Figure 4 . 5 ( b ) , the next coming droplet will select , in turn , channel number 1 in the bifurcation ( see Figure 4 . 5 ( c ) ) ; (cid:136) if δr is great enough to invert the channel with the leading ﬂow rate ( Q ′ 2 > Q ′ 1 in Figure 4 . 5 ( b ) ) , the next coming droplet will select branch 2 diﬀerently from the ﬁrst bubble’s choice ( see Figure 4 . 5 ( d ) ) . From this examination , we can appreciate how the droplet sorting problem is intrinsically non linear and complex . The hydrodynamic resistance of each arm of the bifurcation depends , in fact , both from its geometrical properties and from the number and size of the droplets it contains . Consequently , the instantaneous “choice” of the droplets depends on the past hystory of the ﬂow . Such a nonlinear “memory kernel” renders the process very sensitive and complicates signiﬁcantly its analysis . 4 . 2 . 1 Simulative example In order to validate the model introduced for the droplet sorting problem , we ran several simulations using OpenFOAM , experiencing an almost perfect agreement with our theoretical solution . On this purpose , Figure 4 . 6 represent a signiﬁcant example . Here , we collect the results obtained from a simulation characterized by the following settings : We can observe , in accordance with the theory , that the ﬁrst droplet approach - ing the bifurcation ( Figure 4 . 6 ( a ) ) turns to the right channel ( lower channel in Figure 4 . 6 ( b ) ) : this branch , in fact , is shorter than the other one and has , conse - quently , the lowest initial hydraulic resistance ( see Equation ( 4 . 2 ) ) : R H , 1 = aµ c L 1 wh 3 ≈ 1 . 62 · 10 12 P a · s / m 3 R H , 2 = aµ c L 2 wh 3 ≈ 4 . 05 · 10 12 P a · s / m 3 ( 4 . 7 ) 47 4 . CHARACTERIZATION OF DROPLET DYNAMICS IN A BIFURCATING CHANNEL Q Q 1 Q 2 L 1 L 2 ( a ) Q Q ' 1 Q ' 2 L 1 L 2 ( b ) Q Q " 1 Q " 2 L 1 L 2 ( c ) Q Q " 1 Q " 2 L 1 L 2 ( d ) Figure 4 . 5 : Example of droplet sorting problem . 48 4 . 2 REGULATION OF DROPLET TRAFFIC IN A T - JUNCTION Simulation settings Dispersed phase viscosity µ d = 145 . 5 mP a · s Continuous phase viscosity µ c = 1 . 002 mP a · s Droplets’ length L d 1 = L d 2 = 200 µm Channels’ width w = 150 µm Channels’ height h = 50 µm First branch’s length L 1 = 2 mm Second branch’s length L 2 = 5 mm Input volumetric ﬂow rate Q = 2 . 625 nL / s Table 4 . 1 : Geometrical and physical properties of the reference system and thus the leading ﬂow rate ( see Equation ( 4 . 3 ) ) : Q 1 = R H ; 2 R H ; 1 + R H ; 2 Q ≈ 1 . 88 nL / s Q 2 = R H ; 1 R H ; 1 + R H ; 2 Q ≈ 0 . 75 nL / s ( 4 . 8 ) Immediately , the presence of the droplet in the right arm , increases its resistance in accordance with Equation ( 4 . 5 ) : R ′ H , 1 = R H , 1 + δr 1 = aµ c L 1 wh 3 + ( µ d − µ c ) L d 1 a wh 3 ≈ 2 . 50 · 10 13 P a · s / m 3 R ′ H , 2 = R H , 2 = aµ c L 2 wh 3 ≈ 4 . 05 · 10 12 P a · s / m 3 ( 4 . 9 ) This additional resistance is great enough to make Q ′ 2 > Q ′ 1 : Q ′ 1 = R ′ H ; 2 R ′ H ; 1 + R ′ H ; 2 Q ≈ 0 . 37 nL / s Q ′ 2 = R ′ H ; 1 R ′ H ; 1 + R ′ H ; 2 Q ≈ 2 . 26 nL / s ( 4 . 10 ) and , thus , the next coming droplet will move , contrary to the previous case , to the left channel ( upper channel in Figure 4 . 6 ( c ) ) . Our idea is to exploit this physical behavior to direct the droplets in our microﬂuidic network as illustrated in the next chapter . In conclusion , it is important to note that our theoretical model predicts an increase in the hydraulic resistance of the channel caused by the presence of a droplet if and only if µ d > µ c ( in accordance with Equation ( 4 . 5 ) ) . This phe - nomenon can be explained remembering that viscosity ( see Section § 2 . 1 ) describes the ﬂuid’s internal resistance to ﬂow : the greater the viscosity , the greater its re - sistance to ﬂow and vice versa . 49 4 . CHARACTERIZATION OF DROPLET DYNAMICS IN A BIFURCATING CHANNEL ( a ) ( b ) ( c ) Figure 4 . 6 : Simulation of droplet sorting problem . So , if droplets have a characteristic dynamic viscosity µ d > µ c we , eﬀectively , inject in the microﬂuidic system a substance that opposes strongly to the motion and ultimately increases the resistivity of the channel it occupies ( the term δr in Equation ( 4 . 5 ) is positive ) . Otherwise , if µ d < µ c , we inject a mobile liquid which decreases the hydraulic resistance of the carrier channel ( the term δr in Equation ( 4 . 5 ) becomes negative ) . This dynamic is consistent with the simulations we obtained with OpenFOAM though some experiments from research groups prove that there is an increase in channel resistance even if we inject a dispersed phase having µ d < µ c . On this purpose , we suppose that the lack of the occurrance of this behavior in our simulations is imputable to the limitations of the solver used ( see Appendix A ) . Most likely , in fact , it isn’t able to capture the friction’s sources diﬀerent from viscous force ( e . g . , the pressure exerted to the droplet by the thin ﬁlms of continuous phase that wrap the dispersed ﬂuid ) . Consequently , the model proposed may fail for situations in which viscous forces are not the dominant friction contribution and thus it is mainly applicable when µ d ≫ µ c . 50 Chapter 5 Design and performance of a microﬂuidic bus network As anticipated , our aim is to create a programmable LoC in which several ele - ments ( microﬂuidic machines ) , able to perform speciﬁc laboratory functions , are deployed in a single “unit” and connected together to form a network . Accord - ingly , it is possible to support diﬀerent complex laboratory processes in the same chip simultaneously , which has several advantages : cost of LoCs could be reduced , their reusability could be increased and their eﬀectiveness could be improved by supporting higher ﬂexibility and time saving . A crucial step in this direction is the identiﬁcation of an appropriate approach to transmit “packets” ( droplets ) to the “end users” ( microﬂuidic machines ) of the microﬂuidic network . In this chapter we’ll analyze a promising solution to this problem and discuss the performance obtained for a microﬂuidic network with bus topology . 5 . 1 Mechanism for droplet routing First of all , let’s then consider a microﬂuidic bus network topology as depicted in Figure 5 . 1 , where N is the number of microﬂuidic machines ( MM ) connected . Physically , it simply consists of a main “transmission channel” ramiﬁed several times in order to reach all the microﬂuidic machines . Let’s note that , for the sake of simplicity , we considered a uniform spacing ( L ) between the various branches . In such conﬁguration , a drop destined to the i - th MM is injected into the network 51 5 . DESIGN AND PERFORMANCE OF A MICROFLUIDIC BUS NETWORK through a generator ( see Section § 3 . 3 ) placed at the “input port” on the left , cross the main channel until it’s ﬁnally diverted in the i - th target branch . Q MM # 1 MM # 2 MM # 3 MM # N L L L L 1 L 2 L 3 L N Figure 5 . 1 : Design of a microﬂuidic network with bus topology . Once again , in order to fully understand the mechanism we developed for routing the drops , comes in handy the ﬂuidic / electric parallelism ( see Section § 2 . 7 ) . Accordingly , in Figure 5 . 2 we reported the electric circuit that correspond to the ﬂuidic network depicted in Figure 5 . 1 where R is the hydraulic resistance due to the linking stretches of length L , R n is the characteristic resistance of the n - th branch and R eq , n is the equivalent resistance seen downstream of the n - th branch in case of droplets’ absence . Another important premise , that will be understood later on , is to impose the common main channel to be the path with the starting leading ﬂow . R R R R 3 R 2 R 1 R N Q R eq , 2 R eq , 1 R eq , 3 R eq , N Figure 5 . 2 : Electric circuit analogous to the microﬂuidic bus network . Suppose , now , that we want to bring a droplet cargo with a certain volume at the i - th MM . Our solution to fulﬁll this goal requires the injection of two very close droplets in the system : a “header droplet” and a “payload droplet” . As already 52 5 . 2 BUS NETWORK DIMENSIONING discussed , the ﬁrst one ( hereafter header droplet ) will always follow the path with the original leading ﬂow , i . e . the main microchannel , due to the hypothesis just made . Furthermore , it will increment , time after time , the resistance of the duct it occupies in accordance with Equation ( 4 . 5 ) . This physical behavior may allow us to deﬂect the following droplet in the desired target branch . Let’s , in fact , focus on the generic i - th bifurcation which is constituted by two parallel arms with characteristic original hydraulic resistances respectively equal to R i and R eq , i = R + R i − 1 ∥ R eq , i − 1 ( see Figure 5 . 2 ) . The presence of the header droplet in the portion connecting ramiﬁcation i and i − 1 will change R eq , i as follows : R ′ eq , i = R + δr i + R i − 1 ∥ R eq , i − 1 ( 5 . 1 ) where δr i = ( µ d − µ c ) aL di wh 3 is the resistance increment due to the header droplet 1 . If δr i is large enough to reverse the leading ﬂow arm at the i - th bifurcation , the second drop ( hereafter payload droplet ) won’t ﬂow anymore in the main channel but it will rather enter in the i - th branch reaching the desired target microﬂuidic machine . The header droplet , in turn , continues along the main channel and it’s eventually discarded from the system via the output port on the right ( see Figure 5 . 1 ) : this droplet , in fact , doesn’t carry “useful ﬂuid” but it rather serves only to divert the actual payload droplet to the correct destination . So far , we have given a qualitative description of the routing process we devel - oped . Now , however , we have to mathematically formalize it in order to correctly model the microﬂuidic network of Figure 5 . 1 . 5 . 2 Bus network dimensioning First of all , we have seen that the header droplet must always ﬂow along the whole main channel without being deﬂected at any ramiﬁcations . Only in this way , in fact , it may opportunely aﬀect the payload droplets’ route deviating them in the correct branch . This requirement translates , ultimately , in the following 1 Note that we implicitly impose that the header droplet is in the channel connecting ramiﬁ - cation i and i − 1 when the payload droplet approaches the i - th bifurcation because we assume that they are injected very closely to each other . 53 5 . DESIGN AND PERFORMANCE OF A MICROFLUIDIC BUS NETWORK condition : R n > R eq , n , ∀ n = 1 , . . . , N ( 5 . 2 ) where R n is the characteristic hydraulic resistance of the n - th branch and R eq , n is the equivalent parallel resistance seen downstream of the n - th branch in case of droplet’s absence . Equation ( 5 . 2 ) can be rewritten by observing that the circuit conﬁguration of Figure 5 . 2 has an intrinsic redundancy . Indeed , the following recursive pattern can be identiﬁed : R eq , n = R + R n − 1 ∥ R eq , n − 1 , ∀ n = 1 , . . . , N ( 5 . 3 ) with R eq , 1 = R ( or equivalently R eq , 0 = 0 ) . This logical step allows us to calculate R eq , n as a function of R eq , n − 1 . Substituting it in Equation ( 5 . 2 ) , in fact , we obtain : R n > R + R n − 1 ∥ R eq , n − 1 , ∀ n = 1 , . . . , N ( 5 . 4 ) This condition imposes , therefore , a lower bound to the various R n which , con - sequently , can be calculated as follows : R n = αR eq , n = α ( R + R n − 1 ∥ R eq , n − 1 ) , ∀ n = 1 , . . . , N ( 5 . 5 ) with α being a dimensionless discretionary parameter strictly greater than 1 ( α > 1 ) . Now , we need to establish the correct resistance increment δr i caused by a header droplet in order to deﬂect the cargo in a generic i - th branch of the network . Thus , we have to impose two diﬀerent conditions : 1 . The payload droplet must select the branch containing the i - th microﬂuidic machine when it arrives at the corresponding bifurcation . Mathematically , it consists in having R ′ eq , i = R + δr i + R i − 1 ∥ R eq , i − 1 > R i , where R ′ eq , i is the equivalent resistance seen downstream of the i - th branch in case of i - th header droplet’s presence . Consequently , δr i > R i − R eq , i = R i − ( R + R i − 1 ∥ R eq , i − 1 ) . 2 . Moreover , we must ensure that the payload droplet doesn’t enter into any of the outreaches it encounters before the i - th bifurcation , which means that : R ′ eq , k = R + δr i + R k − 1 ∥ R eq , k − 1 < R k , ∀ k = i + 1 , . . . , N . It can be demon - strated that condition necessary and suﬃcient to satisfy this requirement 54 5 . 2 BUS NETWORK DIMENSIONING is : R ′ eq , i + 1 = R + δr i + R i ∥ R eq , i < R i + 1 . Therefore , δr i < R i + 1 − R eq , i + 1 = R i + 1 − ( R + R i ∥ R eq , i ) Generalizing the previous reasoning , we obtain both a lower and an upper bound for the various δr n , ∀ n = 1 , . . . , N ( i . e . the resistance increments that a header must entail in order to route the following payload droplet to the various n - th microﬂuidic machine of the bus network ) . In particular , condition number 1 . implies : δr n > R n − R eq , n , ∀ n = 1 , . . . , N ( 5 . 6 ) whereas , condition number 2 . entails : δr n < R n + 1 − R eq , n + 1 , ∀ n = 1 , . . . , N ( 5 . 7 ) Furthermore , substituting Equation ( 5 . 3 ) in Equations ( 5 . 6 ) and ( 5 . 7 ) , we obtain , respectively : δr n > R n − ( R + R n − 1 ∥ R eq , n − 1 ) , ∀ n = 1 , . . . , N ( 5 . 8 ) δr n < R n + 1 − ( R + R n ∥ R eq , n ) , ∀ n = 1 , . . . , N ( 5 . 9 ) Finally , δr n can be calculated as follows : δr n = β ( R n + 1 − R eq , n + 1 ) + ( 1 − β ) ( R n − R eq , n ) , ∀ n = 1 , . . . , N ( 5 . 10 ) with β being a dimensionless discretionary parameter between 0 and 1 ( 0 < β < 1 ) . For the sake of simplicity , we chose the convention to take the mean value between lower and upper bound thus always considering β = 0 . 5 . Let’s now remember ( see Section § 4 . 2 ) that δr n is linked to the geometrical and physical parameters of the system in accordance with the following formula : δr n = ( µ d − µ c ) aL d n wh 3 ( 5 . 11 ) where µ d is the viscosity of the header droplet , µ c is the viscosity of the continuous phase , w is the width of the channels , h is the height of the channels , a is a geometrical parameter which depends on the ratio w / h and L d n is the length of the header droplet . If we consider that µ d , µ c , w and h are normally ﬁxed , the only parameter we can change , in order to vary δr n , is L d n . So , we can create a header droplet able to divert the payload exactly at the desired ramiﬁcation just by modulat - ing opportunely its length L d n . Nonetheless , if we want the model introduced above to work correctly , we need to respect a series of mathematical and physical constraints that are the topic of the next Section . 55 5 . DESIGN AND PERFORMANCE OF A MICROFLUIDIC BUS NETWORK 5 . 2 . 1 Mathematical and physical constraints First of all , it is important to note that the two formulas in Equations ( 5 . 8 ) and ( 5 . 9 ) impose us to respect a very precise mathematical constraint . The lower bound , in fact , must always be smaller than the upper bound otherwise the problem won’t have solution : R n − R eq , n < R n + 1 − R eq , n + 1 , ∀ n = 1 , . . . , N ( 5 . 12 ) Substituting Equation ( 5 . 5 ) , we obtain : R n ( 1 − 1 α ) < R n + 1 ( 1 − 1 α ) ⇒ R n < R n + 1 , ∀ n = 1 , . . . , N ( 5 . 13 ) A transversal result deductible from Equation ( 5 . 13 ) is that L 1 < L 2 < . . . < L N . In fact , if we retrieve the concept of hydraulic resistance ( see Equation ( 4 . 2 ) ) , we can express R n as aµ c L n wh 3 . Then , Equation ( 5 . 13 ) becomes : aµ c L n wh 3 < aµ c L n + 1 wh 3 ⇒ L n < L n + 1 , ∀ n = 1 , . . . , N ( 5 . 14 ) leading us to the anticipated result ( indeed , it is no concidence that in Figure 5 . 1 we placed the branches , from left to right , in rigorous decreasing order of length ) . After this dutiful parenthesis , we shall continue our analysis expliciting Equa - tion ( 5 . 13 ) . In particular , availing of Equation ( 5 . 5 ) , we obtain : R n < α ( R + R n ∥ R eq , n ) , ∀ n = 1 , . . . , N ( 5 . 15 ) and , applying the well - known rule for parallel resistance : R n < α ( R + R n R eq ; n R n + R eq ; n ) = αR + α R n Rn(cid:11) R n + Rn(cid:11) = = αR + α 1 + α R n , ∀ n = 1 , . . . , N ( 5 . 16 ) Moreover , simplifying and inverting Equation ( 5 . 16 ) , it results : R > R n α ( 1 + α ) , ∀ n = 1 , . . . , N ( 5 . 17 ) Of course , we are writing the same thing if we substitute the previous equation with : R > max { R n } α ( 1 + α ) ( 5 . 18 ) 56 5 . 2 BUS NETWORK DIMENSIONING and , reminding Equation ( 5 . 13 ) , we can also infer that max { R n } = R N . So , Equation ( 5 . 18 ) becomes : R > R N α ( 1 + α ) ( 5 . 19 ) However , in this formula , we still have to render explicit R N which we know to be , in turn , a function of R and α . In order to get it , we may exploit the intrinsic redundancy of the system . Let’s , in fact , start calculating R 1 . Taking advantage of Equation ( 5 . 5 ) , it simply results : R 1 = αR ( 5 . 20 ) For the same reason , we obtain : R 2 = α ( R + R 1 ∥ R eq , 1 ) = α ( R + αR ∥ R ) = αR 1 + α [ ( 1 + α ) + α ] ( 5 . 21 ) R 3 = α ( R + R 2 ∥ R eq , 2 ) = αR ( 1 + α ) 2 { ( 1 + α ) 2 + α [ ( 1 + α ) + α ] } ( 5 . 22 ) and so on . The way we wrote the results highlights the common pattern recognizable at the basis of the previous formulas . In particular we can express a generic R i as : R i = αR ( 1 + α ) i − 1 [ ( 1 + α ) i − 1 + α ( 1 + α ) i − 2 + . . . + α i − 2 ( 1 + α ) + α i − 1 ] ( 5 . 23 ) Furthermore , we can compact the notation in Equation ( 5 . 23 ) by means of the following summation : R i = αR ( 1 + α ) i − 1 i ∑ k = 1 α k − 1 ( 1 + α ) i − k ( 5 . 24 ) Finally , we are now able to calculate the desired resistance R N as : R N = αR ( 1 + α ) N − 1 N ∑ k = 1 α k − 1 ( 1 + α ) N − k ( 5 . 25 ) Substituting this important result in Equation ( 5 . 19 ) , we gather : R > αR ( 1 + α ) N − 1 ∑ Nk = 1 α k − 1 ( 1 + α ) N − k α ( 1 + α ) = R ( 1 + α ) N N ∑ k = 1 α k − 1 ( 1 + α ) N − k ( 5 . 26 ) Thus , lastly , by simplifying the above formula , we obtain a constraint that de - pends solely by the parameter α and the number of microﬂuidic machine N in the system : ∑ Nk = 1 α k − 1 ( 1 + α ) N − k ( 1 + α ) N < 1 ( 5 . 27 ) 57 5 . DESIGN AND PERFORMANCE OF A MICROFLUIDIC BUS NETWORK For the sake of simplicity , hereafter we’ll indicate the quantity ∑ Nk = 1 α k − 1 ( 1 + α ) N − k ( 1 + α ) N with C 1 ( α , N ) so , the previous equation becomes : C 1 ( α , N ) < 1 ( 5 . 28 ) As we see in the next graph ( Figure 5 . 3 ) , this condition is always satisﬁed for any α > 1 and N . However , if C 1 is nearly equal to 1 , it means that the lower bound for δr n ( see Equation 5 . 8 ) is almost identical to its upper bound ( see Equation 5 . 9 ) and thus the system is very unstable and strongly susceptible to ”noise” due to fabrication or setting imperfections 2 . In order to improve its robustness we 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 α C 1 ( α , N ) N = 1 N = 5 N = 10 N = 20 N = 40 Figure 5 . 3 : Trend of C 1 ( α , N ) as a function of α for various N ( number of mi - croﬂuidic machines ) . thus need to impose a certain margin on C 1 that cannot be too close to 1 . Then , we have to strengthen the bond in Equation ( 5 . 28 ) by choosing a new threshold t 1 strictly less than 1 : C 1 ( α , N ) < t 1 ( 5 . 29 ) For example , if we ﬁx t 1 = 0 . 9 , it means that in Figure 5 . 3 we are interested in the portion of the curves located below t 1 = 0 . 9 . Essentially , this implies that , 2 This case occurs for for small values of (cid:11) as N increases . 58 5 . 2 BUS NETWORK DIMENSIONING for increasing values of N we are forced to select higher values of α in order to respect the condition above . This result is visually represented in Figure 5 . 4 where we plot , for various t 1 , the curve which represents the minimum value that α can assume in order to satisfy Equation ( 5 . 29 ) as a function of N . 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 N α m i n t 1 = 0 . 5 t 1 = 0 . 7 t 1 = 0 . 9 Figure 5 . 4 : Minimum value of α imposed by Equation ( 5 . 29 ) as a function of N for various thresholds t 1 . Another very important constraint , of physical nature , that we need to respect concerns the fact that the header droplets must be entirely contained in the connecting channels between the branches otherwise it couldn’t opportunely force the payload droplet to deviate towards the desired microﬂuidic machine . Only in this situation , in fact , the header droplet would increase the resistance of the duct it occupies in accordance with Equation ( 5 . 11 ) . Therefore , the condition that we need to impose is : L d n < L , ∀ n = 1 , . . . , N ( 5 . 30 ) which coincides with : max { L d n } < L ( 5 . 31 ) 59 5 . DESIGN AND PERFORMANCE OF A MICROFLUIDIC BUS NETWORK However , looking at Equation ( 5 . 11 ) , we can deduce that the longest header drop is the one with the greatest δr n , i . e . δr N . 3 So , max { L d n } = L d N and the previous formula turns into : L d N < L ( 5 . 32 ) Furthermore , inverting Equations ( 5 . 11 ) and ( 2 . 21 ) , and subtituting them in the formula above , we obtain : δr N wh 3 ( µ d − µ c ) a < Rwh 3 µ c a ⇒ δr N < ( µ d − µ c ) µ c R ( 5 . 33 ) Now , exploiting Equation ( 5 . 10 ) , it results : β ( R N + 1 − R eq , N + 1 ) + ( 1 − β ) ( R N − R eq , N ) < ( µ d − µ c ) µ c R ( 5 . 34 ) that , thanks to Equation ( 5 . 5 ) , corresponds to : β ( α − 1 ) ( R + 1 1 + αR N ) + ( 1 − β ) R N ( α − 1 α ) < ( µ d − µ c ) µ c R ( 5 . 35 ) Then , after some basic math , we gain : R > α 2 − βα + β − 1 α ( α + 1 ) [ ( µ d − µ c ) µ c + β ( 1 − α ) ] R N ( 5 . 36 ) Now , again , we have to express R N in explicit form as reported in Equation ( 5 . 25 ) . So , we obtain : R > α 2 − βα + β − 1 ( µ d − µ c ) µ c + β ( 1 − α ) R ( 1 + α ) N N ∑ k = 1 α k − 1 ( 1 + α ) N − k ( 5 . 37 ) Dividing both sides by R , it ﬁnally results : 1 > α 2 − βα + β − 1 ( µ d − µ c ) µ c + β ( 1 − α ) 1 ( 1 + α ) N N ∑ k = 1 α k − 1 ( 1 + α ) N − k ( 5 . 38 ) which is , once again , a condition that depends solely on α and N ( in fact , we always consider a ﬁxed β = 0 . 5 while µ d and µ c are physical parameters proper of the substances considered ) . Denoting the right member in Equation ( 5 . 38 ) with C 2 ( α , N ) , we can rewrite the formula above as : C 2 ( α , N ) < 1 ( 5 . 39 ) 3 This is a consequence of Equations ( 5 . 8 ) and ( 5 . 9 ) . 60 5 . 2 BUS NETWORK DIMENSIONING In Figure 5 . 5 we collected the results obtained for C 2 as a function of α and for various values of N . It can be noted that , contrary to C 1 , the curves characterizing C 2 start from 0 and are monotonically increasing : consequently , for low α the condition above is largely satisﬁed while when α exceeds a critical maximum value the constraint isn’t fullﬁlled anymore . Moreover , it results that , if N increases , this critical value decreases . Once again it is advisable to introduce a certain 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 α C 2 ( α , N ) N = 1 N = 5 N = 10 N = 20 N = 40 Figure 5 . 5 : Trend of C 2 ( α , N ) as a function of α for various N ( number of mi - croﬂuidic machines ) . tolerance on the constraint of Equation ( 5 . 38 ) by imposing a threshold t 2 strictly lower than 1 : C 2 ( α , N ) < t 2 ( 5 . 40 ) In fact , if C 2 is nearly equal to 1 , it means that the longest header droplet ﬁts exactly the linking channel of length L leaving no margin and thus making the system unstable . Suppose now that we ﬁx t 2 = 0 . 9 . This choice involves that in Figure 5 . 5 we are interested in the portion of the curves located below t 2 = 0 . 9 . Essentially , it implies that , for increasing values of N we’ll have lower upper bound on α in order to respect the condition of Equation ( 5 . 40 ) . This reasoning is conﬁrmed by looking at the graph in Figure 5 . 6 where we plot , for various t 2 , the curve which represents the maximum value that α can 61 5 . DESIGN AND PERFORMANCE OF A MICROFLUIDIC BUS NETWORK assume as a function of N . 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 N α m a x t 2 = 0 . 5 t 2 = 0 . 7 t 2 = 0 . 9 Figure 5 . 6 : Maximum value of α imposed by Equation ( 5 . 40 ) as a function of N for various thresholds t 2 . The two constraints analyzed so far are clearly in contraposition with each other : the former ( Equation ( 5 . 29 ) ) , in fact , imposes a minimum α while the latter ( Equation ( 5 . 40 ) ) ﬁxes a maximum value for the same prameter . In Figure 5 . 7 we report the graph obtained combining and processing both the curves in Figure 5 . 4 and in Figure 5 . 6 . The conclusions that can be drawn are that , ﬁxing the thresholds t 1 and t 2 , 4 there exists a speciﬁc region where the problem has solution ( i . e . , the area enclosed by the couples of curves with the same shape in Figure 5 . 7 ) . Beyond this range no solution can be found . Consequently , the point where the two curves above intersect discriminates between the systems with solution and with no solution : α min , in fact , must always stay under α max in order to respect both constraints . Therefore , for N higher than the value of the abscissa where the two 4 In our study we choose , for convenience , the same t 1 and t 2 though , obviously , they might be selected independently . 62 5 . 2 BUS NETWORK DIMENSIONING 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 N α t 1 = t 2 = 0 . 5 t 1 = t 2 = 0 . 7 t 1 = t 2 = 0 . 9 Figure 5 . 7 : Minimum and maximum values of α imposed respectively by Equation ( 5 . 29 ) and ( 5 . 40 ) as a function of N for various thresholds t 1 = t 2 . curves cross each other , no solution can be found and , in such a situation , we may only proceed in two ways : (cid:136) we can choose a lower number of microﬂuidic machine N for our network , losing , however , in system scalability ; (cid:136) we can loosen the bonds of Equations ( 5 . 29 ) and ( 5 . 40 ) selecting two new thresholds t 1 and t 2 greater than the previous ones . Accordingly , however , we’ll lose in system robustness . The last condition we have to satisfy in our model derives from the droplet generator we have chosen for our network . In fact , looking at the Equation ( 3 . 6 ) , which deﬁnes the droplets length achievable by means of a cross - ﬂowing generator in squeezing regime , it results that we cannot produce droplets shorter than w ( with w being the width of the channels ) . This means that all the header droplets we consider need to be longer than w : L d n > w , ∀ n = 1 , . . . , N ( 5 . 41 ) 63 5 . DESIGN AND PERFORMANCE OF A MICROFLUIDIC BUS NETWORK which corresponds to impose : min { L d n } > w ( 5 . 42 ) We have already seen that min { L d n } = L d 1 , so , it becomes : L d 1 > w ( 5 . 43 ) Now , substituting Equation ( 5 . 11 ) , we get : δr 1 wh 3 ( µ d − µ c ) a > w ⇒ δr 1 > ( µ d − µ c ) a h 3 ( 5 . 44 ) Remembering Equation ( 5 . 6 ) , it results that condition necessary but not suﬃcient to satisfy this constraint is : R 1 ( 1 − 1 α ) > ( µ d − µ c ) a h 3 ( 5 . 45 ) Finally , exploiting Equation ( 5 . 5 ) , we obtain R > ( µ d − µ c ) a ( α − 1 ) h 3 ( 5 . 46 ) So , once we select the suitable parameter α thanks to the graph of Figure 5 . 7 , we’ll consequently have a speciﬁc lower bound for the resistance of the linking channels in our network . It can be noted that if α increases it is easier to fullﬁl the previous condition . An increment in this parameter , in fact , corresponds to having more unbalancing between R n and R eq , n ( see Equation ( 5 . 5 ) ) , thus leading to use longer header droplets in order to deviate the payload in the right branch . In this way , it is more likely that we need header droplets longer than w . 5 . 3 Bus network performance In the previous section we focused our attention on studying the concepts and requirements useful to opportunely size a microﬂuidic bus network such as the one in Figure 5 . 1 . However , a key aspect is still missing before we can move to illustrate of the system performance . The latters , in fact , are strongly aﬀected by a parameter that we haven’t considered yet : the input velocity u of the liquid ﬂows in the network . It is patent that , as u increases we will have a corresponding higher “throughput” and vice versa . 64 5 . 3 BUS NETWORK PERFORMANCE Accordingly , we need to ﬁnd the physical constraints that rule the maximum input velocity ( u ) sustainable by our network , or , equivalently , the maximum ﬂow rate ( Q ) since Q = u ∗ w ∗ h where w is the width of the channel and h is its height . Of course , this quantity is inﬂuenced by both the necessity of having laminar ﬂow and , thus , low Reynolds number ( see Section § 2 . 3 ) in a microﬂuidic system and preventing ﬂow degeneration in droplet production ( see Section § 3 . 3 . 2 ) . However , for the typical ﬂow velocities of microﬂuidic devices ( up to tens of mm / s ) , these requirements are largely satisﬁed . Actually , there is another aspect which limits u the most , i . e . the requirement of maintaining the integrity of the drops in correspondence of the bifurcations ( see Section § 4 . 1 ) . 5 Let’s , in fact , consider Equation ( 4 . 1 ) which discriminates between breakup and non - breakup regime in a T - junction . Speciﬁcally , in order to avoid the split of the droplet , we need to satisfy the condition : L d w < χCa − 0 . 21 ( 5 . 47 ) Now , it is appropriate to express Ca as µ c uσ ( see Section § 2 . 2 ) . In this way , in fact , it is evident its dependance on u . So , substituting it in Equation ( 5 . 47 ) , we get : L d w < χ ( µ c u σ ) − 0 . 21 ( 5 . 48 ) and , inverting the previous formula , we ﬁnally obtain : u < σ µ c ( χw L d ) 10 : 21 ( 5 . 49 ) This result tells us that , in general , the maximum input velocity u is limited by both the physical properties of the dispersed and continuous phase ( σ , µ c , χ which depends on the ratio µ d µ c and L d ) and the geometry of the system ( w ) . However , realistically , the only parameters that may vary in the network are σ , χ and L d . The former two depends on the substance that constitutes the dispersed phase but , so as not to weigh down the notation , hereafter we’ll consider them constant and equal for both the header and the payload droplets . 6 Conversely , L d ( the length of the droplets ) is intrinsically a highly changeable parameter . 5 It is important to notice that , at the ﬁrst bifurcation of Figure 5 . 1 , u c = u d = u which is the velocity setted by the droplet generator . Furthermore , u c ≤ u throughout the entire network , as a consequence of Kirchhoﬀ’s current law . 6 The generalization of this case is , anyway , elementary . 65 5 . DESIGN AND PERFORMANCE OF A MICROFLUIDIC BUS NETWORK Following this reasoning , in Figure 5 . 8 we reported the typical trend of the maximum velocity ( u ) allowed by the system as a function of the droplets length ( L d ) in order to avoid their breakup at the bifurcations . The other reference parameters considered here are : µ c = 1 . 002 mP a · s , µ d = 145 . 5 mP a · s , χ = 0 . 187 , w = 150 µm and σ = 46 mN / m . 3 4 5 6 7 8 x 10 −4 0 . 5 1 1 . 5 2 2 . 5 3 3 . 5 4 4 . 5 5 5 . 5 x 10 −4 L d [ m ] u [ m / s ] Figure 5 . 8 : Maximum input velocity u allowed for the system as a function of the droplet’s length L d . Analyzing the graph in Figure 5 . 8 , we notice that u decreases drastically as soon as L d increases a bit . The latter parameter will , thus , impact strongly on the throughput of the network . On this purpose , we have seen in Section § 5 . 2 that the header droplet’s length varies depending on the number of microﬂuidic machines ( N ) in the network and the destination of the payload drop in accordance with Equation ( 5 . 11 ) . Speciﬁcally , we have realized that we need longer header droplets as N increases . Therefore , the system performance will expire quickly once we add microﬂuidic machines to the network . The payload droplet’s length , in turn , is deﬁned by the volume of liquid that we want to convey to the microﬂuidic machine . Now , referring to Equation ( 5 . 49 ) , it follows that the longest droplet injected in the system controls the maximum 66 5 . 3 BUS NETWORK PERFORMANCE inlet velocity u allowed . So , as long as the payload droplet is shorter than the header droplet ( L H ) the maximum u is ﬁxed by the condition : u < σ µ c ( χw L H ) 10 : 21 ( 5 . 50 ) while , if the length of the payload droplet L P exceeds L H , we get : 7 u < σ µ c ( χw L P ) 10 : 21 ( 5 . 51 ) 5 . 3 . 1 Numerical results At the end of this dissertation , we are ﬁnally able to completely conﬁgure the generical microﬂuidic bus network of Figure 5 . 1 by setting all its appropriate geometrical and physical parameters . Consequently , we can extract the time re - quired to forward any payload droplet to the target microﬂuidic machines and , thus , evaluate the “throughput” of the network which is the main aim of the present Section . However , we must ﬁrst choose a sensible way to deﬁne the con - cept of throughput in a microﬂuidic system . Reasoning by analogy with the world of telecommunications , the “packets” we want to deliver in a microﬂuidic network are represented by the droplets . Furthermore , remembering that packets in telecommunication networks are usually weighed according to the amount of information they transport ( number of bits ) , we’ll reasonably have to weigh the droplets in microﬂuidic networks by the amount of substance they carry ( volume of liquid ) . Hence , hereafter , we’ll express the throughput in the microﬂuidic con - text as the volume of ﬂuid delivered to the output nodes ( microﬂuidic machines ) per unit time denoting it with the symbol R [ m 3 / s ] . Another dutiful premise , before illustrating the results , concerns the protocol we used to commit resources in our system , i . e . the scheduling policy used to inject droplets in the network . In this regard , we chose the crudest but , at the same time , simplest possible solution which , in practice , consists in sending a couple of header / payload droplets at a time and wait until they have completely left the system before injecting the next one . This rule ( a sort of “Stop & Wait” protocol ) ensures that the droplets will follow the theoretical dynamics previously exposed . The presence of additional droplets in the systems may , in fact , aﬀect 7 This is true only if we use the same substances for header and payload droplets . 67 5 . DESIGN AND PERFORMANCE OF A MICROFLUIDIC BUS NETWORK negatively the behavior of the other bubbles , leading to unexpected results . In this regard , we remember that a droplet arriving at a junction , if it does not break , usually goes to the outlet characterized by the highest ﬂow rate . Since droplets can increase hydrodynamic resistance of a channel , the presence of addi - tional droplets downstream in each outlet arm can aﬀect the respective ﬂow rates and , therefore , the partitioning at the bifurcation . This collective hydrodynamic feedback modulated by the increased ﬂow resistance introduced by the droplets can alter the probability of partitioning and , thus , governs the traﬃc in capillary tubes . Thus , implementing the “Stop & Wait” protocol , in order to calculate the mean throughput of a generic network with N microﬂuidic machines we proceed in the following way : (cid:136) We ﬁx a uniform length for the payload droplets and size the network basing on the theoretical background seen in the previous sections . (cid:136) We reckon the times required to reach each microﬂuidic machine of the network applying the “Stop & Wait” protocol already described . This could be done by simulating , one at a time , the ﬂow of each pair header / payload . 8 In particular , we obtain , with the aid of Matlab , the so called busy period b i , ∀ i = 1 , . . . , N which is the time during which at least one the two droplets ( header and payload ) occupies the system . Clearly , it also coincides with the time we have to wait before injective the successive bubbles due to the “Stop & Wait” mechanism . (cid:136) We average these results out of all the destinations , obtaining the mean busy time to reach a microﬂuidic machines in the referring network : B = ∑ Ni = 1 b i p i , where p i is the probability of having a payload droplet destined to the i - th microﬂuidic machine . Hereafter we’ll assume a discrete uniform distribution whereby p i = 1 N , ∀ i = 1 , . . . , N . (cid:136) We make the ratio between the volume of the payload droplets and the mean busy period obtaining the desired mean throughput of the network : R = V olB . 8 We remember that we need diﬀerent header droplets in order to deviate the payload droplet to diﬀerent microﬂuidic machines . 68 5 . 3 BUS NETWORK PERFORMANCE In Figure 5 . 9 we collect the results obtained for systems with 2 , 3 , 4 and 5 microﬂuidic machines considering , from time to time , payload droplets with length equal to L d N , i . e . the length of the corresponding biggest header droplet of the network . This entails that the maximum input velocity ( u ) associated to the network is always limited by the payload length ( in fact , L P ≥ L d n ∀ n = 1 , . . . , N ) in accordance with Equation ( 5 . 51 ) . The general performance ahieved are quite low . This is because we used wide margins to comply the conditions expressed by Equations ( 5 . 29 ) and ( 5 . 40 ) , at the expense of throughput . Moreover , the dispersed phase chosen had a very high dynamic viscosity compared to the continuous phase . This implies that we inject in the network a ﬂuid very reluctant to motion ( see Section § 2 . 1 ) which increases considerably the resistance of the channel it occupies and thus decreases the corresponding ﬂow rate . Furthermore , as we already stated , since µ d ≫ µ c , the parameter χ in Equation ( 5 . 49 ) is accordingly quite low . This acts , again , as a detriment to performance by limiting signiﬁcantly the input velocity u of the system . 1 . 5 2 2 . 5 3 3 . 5 4 4 . 5 5 5 . 5 0 0 . 5 1 1 . 5 2 2 . 5 x 10 −15 N R [ m 3 / s ] Figure 5 . 9 : Mean throughput of the microﬂuidic bus network as a function of N for a single payload droplet . As we expected , the “capacity” of the network expires quickly as N increases . 69 5 . DESIGN AND PERFORMANCE OF A MICROFLUIDIC BUS NETWORK This is due to three main reasons : (cid:136) If we augment N we’ll necessarily have greater networks and , thus , the droplets will have to face longer paths before leaving the system . (cid:136) In turn , the “Stop & Wait” model adopted to manage the entry of droplets in the systems , strongly penalizes networks with many microﬂuidic ma - chines . In fact , as we already discussed , it doesn’t provide for the simulta - neous sending of multiple payload droplets . In this way , we’ll have to wait longer before injecting the next payload droplet , as N increases . (cid:136) Finally , we have already argued that , once we add microﬂuidic machines in the system , we’ll need corresponding longer header droplets according to Equation ( 5 . 11 ) . This will limit the maximum input velocity of the system ( see Equation ( 5 . 49 ) ) aﬀecting , once again , negatively the throughput of the network . To conclude our analysis , in Figure 5 . 10 has been reported the graph , analo - gous to that of Figure 5 . 9 , obtained by splitting the payload droplet previously considered in two sub - droplets with halved length . In practice , compared to the former case , we have transmitted the same volume of ﬂuid to the microﬂuidic ma - chines by injecting two bubbles with halved length . The latters , of course , have been sent in two separate sessions because of the “Stop & Wait” model adopted . The results show a fairly good improvement in the throughput ( see Fig - ure 5 . 11 ) . This could seem counterintuitive since , by halving the payload droplet , we need to forward the resulting pair of sub - droplets in two separate tranche due to the “Stop & Wait” protocol while , in the previous case , a single transmis - sion was suﬃcient to convey the same volume of ﬂuid to the desired microﬂuidic machine . However , the reduced dimension of the payload droplets allows us to increase the input velocity of the system in accordance with Equation ( 5 . 49 ) . Moreover , as we have already seen , by decreasing the length of the droplets we will also introduce “less resistance” in the channels they occupy and , consequently , the bubbles will move faster . In the case just described , the union of these two factors prevails over the burden of sending droplets in two rounds and , thus , is explained the throughput gain observed . Therefore , if we have a very long payload droplet , this result tells us that it is convenient to split it in numerous sub - droplets and send them one at a time along 70 5 . 3 BUS NETWORK PERFORMANCE 1 . 5 2 2 . 5 3 3 . 5 4 4 . 5 5 5 . 5 0 0 . 5 1 1 . 5 2 2 . 5 x 10 −15 N R [ m 3 / s ] Figure 5 . 10 : Mean throughput of the microﬂuidic bus network as a function of N for two halved payload droplets . 1 . 5 2 2 . 5 3 3 . 5 4 4 . 5 5 5 . 5 0 0 . 5 1 1 . 5 2 2 . 5 x 10 −15 N R [ m 3 / s ] halved droplet entire droplet Figure 5 . 11 : Comparison of the mean throughput obtained forwarding a single payload droplet or two halved drops . 71 5 . DESIGN AND PERFORMANCE OF A MICROFLUIDIC BUS NETWORK our network . Obviously , this rule applies up to a certain point . Indeed , if the granularity of the sub - droplets exceeds a certain threshold , the positive factors seen previously disappear and the splitting acts negatively on the throughput due to the increased number of transmissions required . This critical value is equivalent to the length of the header droplet forwarded with the payload itself . In fact , if we further divide the cargo droplet over this limit , we can’t consequently increase the input velocity of the system since , in this case , it is anyhow limited by the header . In the next chapter we’ll give additional tips in order to improve the perfor - mance analyzed and we’ll introduce alternative networking solutions . 72 Chapter 6 Future developments The topic covered in this thesis lends itself easily to improvements and future developments . Among them , a couple of interesting proposals will be brieﬂy discussed in this conclusive chapter . 6 . 1 Scheduling In order to enhance the performance of the bus network previously described , it might be thought to a more sophisticated scheduling algorithm , compared to the “Stop & Wait” one , able to manage opportunely the contemporaneous presence of more than one payload droplet in the system . This scenario , unfortunately , entails an exponential increment in the complexity of the system itself . In fact , we’ve already seen that every drop raises the hydrodynamic resistance of the channel that contains it . Therefore , whenever we inject additional droplets in the network , we vary the volumetric ﬂow rate of the corresponding channel and , cascading , the distribution of the ﬂow rates downstream in each parallel arm . This collective hydrodynamic feedback modulated by the increased ﬂow resistance introduced by the droplets can alter the probability of partitioning and , thus , governs the traﬃc in capillary tubes leading , in the worst case , to uncontrollable “ﬂuctuations” . However , if kept under control , we could exploit in our behalf such a presence of numerous droplets in the network . Suppose , in fact , that we want to deliver a single droplet to each microﬂuidic machine connected to the network of Figure 5 . 1 . With the “Stop & Wait” protocol introduced in the previous Chapter we would have to inject a pair of droplets header / payload at a time , wait until they left the 73 6 . FUTURE DEVELOPMENTS system and then forward the next one . Conversely , with a more sophisticated scheduler , we could achieve the same goal by injecting toghether all of the payload droplets in the network . This , in fact , would lead to the formation of a train of droplets where the ﬁrst ones can act as header droplets for the following ones redirecting them to the target microﬂuidic machines as we saw in Section § 4 . 2 . Obviously , this brainwave re - quires a more thorough analysis of the network and works only if we synchronize opportunely the forwarding of the droplets . On the other hand , the beneﬁts compared to the “Stop & Wait” algorithm are numerous : (cid:136) we can save in terms of physical resources because we don’t need anymore to employ a dedicated header droplet for each payload droplet but rather use the payload itself to deviate the following drops ; (cid:136) we can gain in terms of throughput because we are not forced anymore to wait for the payload droplet to reach its destination before forwarding a new one ; (cid:136) we are able to commit more eﬀectively the network resources . In this new scenario , in fact , we can convey simultaneously the droplets to the microﬂu - idic machines which can , thus , work in parallel . 6 . 2 Network topology Lastly , another interesting ﬂexibility aspect which characterizes a microﬂuidic network concerns its topology . The bus geometry introduced in this work , in fact , is only one of the conﬁguration that the system may assume . Indeed , at such scale , it is possible to reassemble the network in many diﬀerent ways de - pending on our purpose . For instance , a tree - shaped geometry ( see Figure 6 . 1 ) could be suitably implemented in order to arrange hierarchically the microﬂuidic machines in the system . At the end of this thesis it is evident how microﬂuidics oﬀers great - perhaps even revolutionary - new capabilities for the future . However , a great deal of work remains to be done before it can be claimed to be more than an active 74 6 . 2 NETWORK TOPOLOGY Q MM # 1 MM # 2 MM # 3 MM # 4 MM # 5 MM # 6 MM # 7 MM # 8 Figure 6 . 1 : Design of a microﬂuidic tree network . ﬁeld of academic research . Nonethless , the fundamentals of the ﬁeld are very strong : much of the world’s technology requires the manipulation of ﬂuids , and extending those manipulations to small volumes , with precise dynamic control over concentrations , while discovering and expoliting new phenomena occurring in ﬂuids at the microscale level must , ultimately , be very important . 75 Appendix A OpenFOAM OpenFOAM ( Open Source Field Operation and Manipulation ) is a free , open source software package developed by OpenCFD Ltd at ESI Group and dis - tributed by the OpenFOAM Foundation . Basically it works as a C + + toolbox for the creation of customized numerical solvers , and pre - / post - processing utilities for the solution of continuum mechanics problems , including computational ﬂuid dynamics ( CFD ) . In the present thesis , we presented a microﬂuidic study using OpenFOAM to simulate many of the processes described . In particular , the solver to which we have referred is called interFoam . We have used the Volume of Fluid ( VoF ) method to model the ﬂow of two immiscible ﬂuid ( dispersed and continuous phase ) . In VoF a single set of Navier - Stokes equations for both phases is combined with an advection equation for the ﬂuid fraction α of one of the ﬂuids . In the present work , it is important to underline that both phases are assumed incompressible and Newtonian and the ﬂow is assumed laminar . Hence the general governing equations can be written as :   ∇ U = 0 ∂ρU∂t + ∇ · ( ρUU ) = −∇ p + ∇ · µ ( ∇ U + ∇ U T ) + ρF + F S ∂α∂t + ∇ · ( αU ) − ∇ · ( α ( 1 − α ) U r ) = 0 ( A . 1 ) where U is the ﬂuid velocity , p is the pressure , ρ the density , µ the viscosity , F a body force and α the volume fraction , which is one in the the bulk of ﬂuid 1 ( dispersed phase ) , zero in the bulk of ﬂuid 2 ( continuous phase ) , and has an 77 APP . A OPENFOAM intermediate value in near the interface between the two ﬂuids . F S , instead , is the surface tension force , modeled as a volumetric force active in the vicinity of the interface only , as described below . The bulk density ρ and viscosity µ in the above Equation ( A . 1 ) are computed as weighted averages of two phase properties , based on the ﬂuid fraction α . The ﬂuid interface is sharpened by introducing the artiﬁcial compression term ∇ · ( α ( 1 − α ) U r ) in the last formula of Equation ( A . 1 ) , in which U r describes the artiﬁcial compression velocity . This term acts to counteract interface diﬀusion and is active only on the ﬂuid interface . The interfacial tension force is approximated as a body force active in inter - facial grid cells only , and is formulated as F S = σκ ( ∇ α ) where σ is the interfacial tension coeﬃcient and κ = ∇ · ( ∇ α / | ∇ α | ) is the curvature of the interface . The PIMPLE scheme is applied for pressure - velocity coupling . We used a ﬁrst order Euler scheme for the transient terms , controlling the time step by setting the Courant maximum number to 0 . 9 . Courant number reﬂects the portion of a cell that a solute will traverse by advection in one time step and is deﬁned as : Co = u ∆ t ∆ l ( A . 2 ) where ∆ l is the dimension of the grid cell at each location , u is the average linear velocity at that location and ∆ t is the maximum time step size . When advection dominates dispersion , designing a model with Co < 1 will decrease oscillations , improve accuracy and decrease numerical dispersion . Therefore , we are interested in satisfying this condition . A ﬁrst Gauss linear scheme was used for the discretization of the gradient terms . The geometry of the three - dimensional channel used has ﬁxed common param - eters . In particular , we imposed an uniform width and height for every channel equal to w = 150 µm and h = 50 µm respectively . The computational domains and meshes were generated with blockMesh , an internal mesh generator of Open - FOAM while the graphical results were viewed using ParaView ( an open source mutiple - platform application for interactive , scientiﬁc visualization ) . 78 Bibliography [ 1 ] W . O . Kwang , L . Kangsun , A . Byungwook and E . P . Furlani , “Design of pressure - driven microﬂuidic networks using electric circuit analogy” , Lab Chip , 12 , 515 - 545 , 2012 . [ 2 ] C . N . Baroud , F . Gallaire and R . Dangla , “Dynamics of microﬂuidic droplets” , Lab Chip , 10 , 2032 - 2045 , 2010 . [ 3 ] C . Cramer , P . Fischer and E . J . Windhab , “Drop formation in a co - ﬂowing ambient ﬂuid” , Chem . Eng . Sci . , 59 , 3045 - 3058 , 2004 . [ 4 ] D . Funfschilling , H . Debas , H . Z . Li and T . G . Mason , “Flow - ﬁeld dynamics during droplet formation by dripping in hydrodynamic - focusing microﬂu - idics” , Phys . Rev . E . , 80 , 15301 , 2009 . [ 5 ] W . Lee , L . M . Walker and S . L . Anna , “Role of geometry and ﬂuid properties in droplet and thread formation processes in planar ﬂow focusing” , Phys . Fluids , 21 , 032103 , 2009 . [ 6 ] H . A . Stone , “On lubrication ﬂows in geometries with zero local curvature” , Chem . Eng . Sci . , 60 , 4838 - 4845 , 2005 . [ 7 ] T . Thorsen , R . W . Roberts , F . H . Arnold and S . R . Quake , “Dynamic pattern formation in a vesicle - generating microﬂuidic device” , Phys . Rev . Lett . , 86 , 4163 - 4166 , 2001 . [ 8 ] P . Garstecki , M . J . Fuerstman , H . A . Stone and G . M . Whitesides , “For - mation of droplets and bubbles in a microﬂuidic T - junction - scaling and mechanism of break - up” , Lab Chip , 6 , 437 - 446 , 2006 . 79 BIBLIOGRAPHY [ 9 ] M . de Menech , P . Garstecki , F . Jousse and H . A . Stone , “Transition from squeezing to dripping in a microﬂuidic T - shaped junction” , J . Fluid Mech . , 595 , 141 - 161 , 2008 . [ 10 ] M . J . Fuerstman , A . Lai , M . E . Thurlow , S . S . Shevkoplyas , H . A . Stone and G . M . Whitesides , “The pressure drop along rectangular microchannels containing bubbles” , Lab Chip , 7 , 1479 - 1489 , 2007 . [ 11 ] M . C . Jullien , M . J . Tsang Mui Ching , C . Cohen , L . Menetrier and P . Tabel - ing , “Droplet breakup in microﬂuidic T - junctions at small capillary num - bers” , Phys . Fluids , 21 , 072001 , 2009 . [ 12 ] A . Carlson , M . Do - Quang and G . Amberg , “Droplet dynamics in a bifurcat - ing channel” , Int . J . Multiphase Flow , 36 , 397 - 405 , 2010 . [ 13 ] D . R . Link , S . L . Anna , D . A . Weitz and H . A . Stone , “Geometrically medi - ated breakup of drops in microﬂuidic devices” , Phys . Rev . Lett . , 92 , 054503 , 2004 . [ 14 ] A . M . Leshansky and L . M . Pismen , “Breakup of drops in a microﬂuidic T junction” , Phys . Fluids , 21 , 023303 , 2009 . [ 15 ] S . Afkhami , A . M . Leshansky and Y . Renardy , “Numerical investigation of elongated drops in a microﬂuidic T - junction” , Phys . Fluids , 23 , 022002 , 2011 . [ 16 ] E . De Leo , L . Galluccio , A . Lombardo and G . Morabito , “On the feasibility of using microﬂuidic technologies for communications in Labs - on - a - Chip” . To appear in Proc . of IEEE ICC 2012 . [ 17 ] D . A . Sessoms , M . Belloul , W . Engl , M . Roche , L . Courbin and P . Panizza , “Droplet motion in microﬂuidic networks : Hydrodynamic interactions and pressure - drop measurements” , Phys . Rev . E . , 80 , 016317 , 2009 . 80 Ringraziamenti Ci tengo innanzitutto a ringraziare i miei genitori , a cui dedico questa tesi , visto che senza il loro costante supporto e appoggio non sarei mai riuscito a rag - giungere questo importante traguardo . Grazie , in particolare , per avermi sempre sostenuto nelle mie scelte di vita , facili e diﬃcili , senza mai farmele pesare e per i saggi consigli e l’enorme aﬀetto che non mi avete mai fatto mancare . Ringrazio inoltre mia sorella , a cui tengo molto anche se non sempre lo dimostro a dovere , per essere sempre presente quando ho bisogno di lei e per le parole di conforto che sa dispensare nei momenti bui . Grazie anche a mio cugino Giovanni , con cui sono cresciuto assieme , per il suo carattere che lo rende unico ed insostituibile e a mia cugina Marina per le fenomenali ospitate a Bologna ( ovviamente , per questo , ringrazio anche a Massimo ) . Un doveroso ringraziamento va poi al prof . Andrea Zanella , che reputo una delle persone pi ` u competenti ed appassionate nello svolgimento del proprio la - voro . Lo ringrazio per gli utili suggerimenti e per le “lavagnate” di conti riempite assieme senza i quali non sarei certo riuscito a portare a termine questa tesi . Ringrazio Maria che , da quando ho ricordi , ha contribuito con grande aﬀetto a crescermi e a farmi diventare la persona che sono ora . Ringrazio Francesco P . ( Spazzola ) , Francesco L . ( Sonda ) e Chethan per la forte e sincera amicizia che ci lega , per i pomeriggi di svago trascorsi assieme e per le lunghe chiacchierate che hanno il notevole pregio di farmi dimenticare i miei problemi . Grazie anche all’ inseparabile ed insostituibile compagnia del mare che , anche se la vedo solo per un mese all’anno , riesce sempre a rendere indimenticabili le mie estati . Ringrazio inoltre i miei compagni di Universit ` a , sia della triennale ( soprat - tutto Calle , Michi , Pelle , Davide e Valentina ) che della magistrale ( in particolare Claudio , Silvia , Leo e Alex ) , per essere riusciti a rendere molto meno pesanti i faticosi anni di studio di Ingegneria , e tutti gli “apprendisti Telecom” per rendere il lavoro un’esperienza piacevole . Inﬁne , rivolgo un sincero ringraziamento alla persona con cui ho trascorso tutta la vita e che pi ` u di tutte mi capisce ( d’altronde c’ ` e “telepatia” ) , ovvero . . . a mio gemello Alessandro . Insomma , se ancora non si era capito , a tutti voi e a tutte le altre persone che mi hanno sopportato e supportato volevo semplicemente dire : “grazie di esistere” . 81