Getting in on the ( Inter ) Action : Exploring Affordances for Collaborative Learning in a Context of Informed Participation Hal Eden Center for LifeLong Learning & Design ( L 3 D ) University of Colorado at Boulder ABSTRACT Although considerable attention in the CSCL community has been on electronic - , Web - , or distance - learning applications , there is evidence suggesting that much of learning , particularly in open - ended problem - solving activities based large on tacit information , does not occur in isolation but in face - to - face settings . This has led my research to explore ways to develop technologies and media that enhance participation , collaboration , and learning in face - to - face , copresent settings . This paper explores the history of research on developing such technologies in the context of our Envisionment and Discovery Collaboratory at the Center for LifeLong Learning & Design at the University of Colorado at Boulder , and discusses my research on interface design to support learning and participation in collaborative settings . Keywords Interface design , augmented reality , atoms and bits , participatory design , face - to - face interaction INTRODUCTION Considerable attention in the CSCL community has been on electronic - , Web - , or distance - learning applications . Certainly , it is appropriate to explore the new landscape that is opened by the removal of barriers of required copresence , and to understand the far - reaching implications of ready access to widely dispersed sources of information . However , there is evidence suggesting that much of learning , particularly in open - ended problem - solving activities [ Arias , 1996 ] based on tacit information [ Collins et al . , 2000 ] , does not occur in isolation but in face - to - face settings . Indeed cooperative learning advocates Johnson and Johnson include face - to - face interaction as one of the key features of their approach in which students discuss , teach , and explain to each other in promotive ways that " assist , encourage , and support each other ' s efforts to learn " [ Johnson & Johnson , 1994 ] . Although it is possible to support such interaction at a distance , my research is exploring ways to develop technologies and media that enhance participation , collaboration , and learning in face - to - face , copresent settings . Often the ability to access new , abundant stores of information is seen as a major breakthrough . However , for learning situations where the answer does not exist , access to all existing answers may not be of much use . This is particularly true when the information needed to resolve a problem is tacit—part of the life experiences of multiple individuals who are impacted by the problem or may have crucial insights to bring to bear . Our work focuses on design problems that are typically “wicked” [ Rittel & Webber , 1984 ] —ill - defined , ill - structured , unique , no completion criteria , no single “right” answer , large universe of solutions and potential steps , each problem may be a symptom of another problem , solution path strongly influenced by framing . Resolving such problems involves drawing on various viewpoints and perspectives and requires collaborative learning where participants learn from each other . In such situations , access to information alone is not sufficient . It is also important to realize what the goals are for learning in a particular situation . Whereas much learning is focused on acquiring the skills and expertise necessary to operate within a domain in some competent , expert , or professional role , there are many situations where the goals for learning are quite different . Music appreciation does not necessarily have the goal of nurturing musicians , but of allowing people to enjoy the context , history , and to recognize various forms of music . Science and Technology Literacy ( STL ) has the goal of allowing a broader segment of the population to make these domains meaningful to their everyday lives—not necessarily to “do science . ” Our research has been exploring ways to support and encourage a similar form of learning in the area of citizen participation in decisions that affect their lives . A CONTEXT FOR CITIZEN PARTICIPATION IN DESIGN How can more than 261 million individual Americans define and reconcile their needs and aspirations with community values and the needs of the future ? Our most important finding is the potential power of and growing desire for decision processes that promote direct and meaningful interaction involving people in decisions that affect them . Americans want to take control of their lives . [ PCSD , 1996 ] In order to become engaged in activities that allow them to have greater say within their community and for communities to benefit from the valuable insights that its citizens have to contribute , individuals need to become involved in areas for which they have often had no training , and for things that they may have no desire to act in an expert or professional capacity . Focus : Informed Participation The key challenges for moving toward new forms of citizen participation include ( a ) the paradox that citizens cannot really be informed unless they participate , yet they cannot really participate unless they are informed [ Brown et al . , 1994 ] ; and ( b ) that participation has limits that are contingent on the nature of each citizen’s situation , the issues , the problems , and the institutional designs [ Arias , 1989 ] , as well as the available technology and media . However , a benefit of addressing these challenges is that informed participation leads to ownership and a stronger sense of community . Collaborative work vs . collaborative participation Much of the focus on computer - supported collaborative work has been on using technology to support existing work cultures , i . e . , communities of practice ( CoPs ) [ Brown & Duguid , 1991 ; Wenger , 1998 ] , which consist of practitioners who work as a community in a certain domain undertaking similar work . Examples of CoPs are : architects , urban planers , research groups , software developers , and end - users . Even approaches for interdisciplinary activities has tended to proceed from the assumption that those engaged in the activity are highly skilled in their respective field . However , the goal of collaborative participation is often different . Communities of interest ( CoIs ) [ Fischer , 2001 ] bring together stakeholders from different CoPs , as well as those who may not be members of any established CoP to solve a particular ( design ) problem of common concern . Examples of CoIs are : ( 1 ) a team interested in software development that includes software designers , marketing specialists , psychologists , and programmers , or ( 2 ) a group of citizens and experts interested in urban planning who are concerned with implementing new transportation systems . CoIs are characterized by their shared interest in the framing and resolution of a design problem . CoIs often are more temporary than CoPs : they come together in the context of a specific project and dissolve after the project has ended . CoIs have great potential to be more innovative and more transforming than a single CoP if can exploit the “symmetry of ignorance” [ Rittel , 1984 ] as a source of collective creativity . Although there is a need to become informed about a domain in order to participate in design , decision - making , and input - giving processes , the goal is not generally to become more of an expert in the domain nor to become a member of the culture of the domain . The goal is to gain enough of an appreciation for the domain to be able to communicate with members of that culture while retaining the valuable views and perspectives from the participant’s culture . Fundamental challenges facing CoIs are found in building a shared understanding of the task at hand , which often does not exist at the beginning , but is evolved incrementally and collaboratively and emerges in people’s minds and in external artifacts . Members of CoIs must learn to communicate with and learn from others [ Engeström , 2001 ] who have different perspectives and perhaps a different vocabulary for describing their ideas . Learning within CoIs is more complex and multi - faceted than legitimate peripheral participation [ Lave & Wenger , 1991 ] in CoPs , which assumes that there is a single knowledge system , in which newcomers move toward the center over time . This type of learning in CoIs requires externalizations [ Bruner , 1996 ] in the form of boundary objects [ Star , 1989 ] which have meaning across the boundaries of the individual knowledge systems . Boundary objects allow different knowledge systems to interact by providing a shared reference that is meaningful within both systems . Computational support for CoIs must therefore enable mutual learning through the creation , discussion , and refinement of boundary objects that allow the knowledge systems of different CoPs to interact . In this sense , the interaction between multiple knowledge systems is a means to turn the symmetry of ignorance into a resource for learning and social creativity A BRIEF HISTORY : EXPLORING SUPPORT FOR INFORMED PARTICIPATION We have found that an effective approach for understanding how to support participation is to look at other domains and how they have approached the problem . One of the foundations for our work on this project is in the approaches pioneered by our urban planning colleague , Ernesto Arias , in the creation of physical simulations and games for use in fostering community participation and as learning tools for students in that domain [ Arias , 1994 ] . Figure 1 shows a roadmap outlining the progression of our collaboration on this effort . u se ph ys i ca l m od e l s f o r d es i gn u se ph ys i ca l m od e l s c o mm un i t y d ec i s i on m ak i ng eva l u a t i ve , d esc r i p t i ve , p r esc r i p t i ve ph ases d eve l op g a m es t o t eac h i ss u es o f s u s t a i n a b ili t y u s e r i n t e r f a c e s k no w l edge - ba s ed sys t e m s l ea r n i ng on d e m a nd c on s t r u c t i v i s t l ea r n i ng a g e n t - b ase d c o m pu t a t i on a l s i m u l a t i on s w e b e x p l o r a t i on a nd c o ll a bo r a t i on t oo l s c o m pu t a t i on a l s i m u l a t i on g a m es a bou t s u s t a i n a b ili t y EDC new issues for interface(cid:1) design The(cid:1) Cole(cid:1) Neighborhood(cid:1) Experience Urban(cid:1) Design & Planning Computer Science(cid:1) Cognitive Science Mr . Roger ' s(cid:1) Sustainable(cid:1) Neighborhood e u se ph ys i ca l (cid:1) m od e l s f o r d es i gn u se ph ys i ca l m od e l s (cid:1) c o mm un i t y d ec i s i on m ak i ng eva l u a t i ve , d esc r i p t i ve , (cid:1) p r esc r i p t i ve ph ases add computational support : (cid:1) GIS systems , spreadsheets d eve l op g a m es t o t eac h (cid:1) i ss u es o f s u s t a i n a b ili t y u se r i n t e r f aces (cid:1) k no w l e dg e - b ase d sys t e m s l ea r n i ng on d e m a nd (cid:1) c on s t r u c t i v i s t l ea r n i ng a g e n t - b ase d (cid:1) c o m pu t a t i on a l (cid:1) s i m u l a t i on s w e b ex p l o r a t i on a nd (cid:1) c o ll a bo r a t i on t oo l s c o m pu t a t i on a l s i m u l a t i on (cid:1) g a m es a bou t s u s t a i n a b ili t y DynamicInformationSpaces Simula - tions PhysicalGames EDC BehaviorExchange Intersim WebQuest environments—to draw participants into interaction with the models and with each other and support new forms of learning and creativity . Although there are many examples of this approach , a notable example is the Cole Neighborhood Redevelopment Project [ Arias , 1996 ] . In this project , models of the neighborhood were collaboratively constructed providing citizens a way of participating in the design process by interacting with problem through physical models . Although there was computational support ( a geographical information system or GIS ) “on the side , ” the lack of integration resulted in the need to change focus from the face - to - face interaction around the model in order to address those issues that were supported by the GIS , which resulted in a cognitive interruption of switching to a separate computer and its user - interface . In addition , there was no support for modeling the dynamics of the neighborhood or the design process . Information generated in the process of the design sessions had to be manually gathered and recorded , which limited the ability to reuse and build on previous work . The unique nature of each neighborhood required construction of a new model to match that particular situation However , the creation of effective environment models can be viewed as developing languages of design that support human - to - human interaction , similar to Alexander’s pattern language approach [ Alexander et al . , 1977 ] . From this perspective , many components and issues specific to these neighborhoods can be generalized and used to support learning in community , classroom , and design studio settings . This led to the creation of games that modeled the processes that took place ( in the form of game rules ) and reused the languages that were developed ( the game pieces ) in the neighborhood settings The Mr . Roger’s Sustainable Neighborhood board game [ Spencer et al . , 1997 ] was developed by students in urban design and is an instance of such a game . By abstracting issues from real situations such as Cole neighborhood , a neighborhood board game was created that confronted players with decisions on the social , economic , and environmental decisions that are faced in addressing issues of neighborhood development . In this game , participants would convene around the board and take turns navigating through the neighborhood and being faced with various community design decisions ( should a parking lot be added here , should a neighborhood focus be created there ) that the players would have to address as a neighborhood team . The game was successful as a learning tool in that it exposed students to issues of community development and to the challenges of achieving consensus in a community . However , the game situations were static and there was no support for extended exploration of the issues facing the players in game situations and contexts , which limited the learning potential . Computational simulations As we began to explore how computational media might learn from and contribute to this work , an initial attempt was made to move the neighborhood game Figure 2 : Mr Roger ' s Sustainable Neighborhood board game Figure 3 : The Cole Neighborhood Redevelopment Project into the computer . As a result , the Mr Roger’s Sustainable Neighborhood simulation game [ Perrone et al . , 1997 ] was created . The game board was made into a dynamic simulation that updated neighborhood situations based on decisions that were made by the players . Web support that allowed the players to explore background information and argumentation related to the issues that confronted them in the game enhanced the learning experience . However , the face - to - face , around - the - table nature of the board game was displaced by a computer environment that more naturally supported one person “driving” while others looked over that individual’s shoulders . Based on the experiences and observations from our work with both the physical simulations and games along with our experiments in moving those into purely computational environments , it seemed that an approach that began to draw on the complementary nature of the strengths and weaknesses of both forms of media ( see Table 1 ) would be useful to explore further . Table 1 : Complementary strengths and weaknesses of physical and virtual models ( summarized from [ Arias et al . , 1997 ] ) and the implications that their blending have for learning . Physical Games & Simulations ComputationalSimulations Implications for learning Strengths Weaknesses Blending supports different modes of learning Direct , naïve manipulability and intuitive understanding Must learn and work the interface From learning about the interface to learning about the domain and the problem Tactile interaction Little or no tactile feedback Manipulative learning Mediation of communication and social interaction Individual interaction with computer is the usual focus Social learning Natural constraints of physical objects ( boundaries of the physical are enforced ) Complex modeling needed to realize all constraints Constraints can provide structure to learning , can point out conflicts Weaknesses Strengths The models are passive , incapable of changing representation without intervention by users . Well - suited for dynamic models… Learning aided by dynamic models Behavior is not easy to visualize : All interpretation of meaning has to come from users …and visualization of that behavior Visual learning Automatic feedback on the consequences of a decision is not provided , Dynamic models can reflect the results of decisions Learning by understanding consequences of decision Fidelity to reality is limited due to problems such as scaling . Virtual models can span scales… Learning effects of scale and interactions between levels of scales Alternate realities are not easy to model …and constraint systems Learning in alternate realities , relaxed constraints Management and capture of information is difficult Can capture information and design results for analysis and future use Seeds for learning can be built upon , evolved , and reseeded Traditional computer interface focus on single - user interaction Multiple users can interact with set of objects in parallel Collaborative learners can all interact with the environment Figure 4 : The Mr . Roger ' s Sustainable Neighborhood simulation game The Envisionment and Discovery Collaboratory ( EDC ) After some initial experiments with how horizontal worksurfaces and projection systems could used to accomplish our goals , we developed the EDC , which is shown in Figure 5 . By using a horizontal electronic whiteboard , participants work “around the table , ” incrementally creating a shared model of the problem . They interact with computer simulations projected onto the worksurface by manipulating the three - dimensional , physical objects that constitute a language for the domain [ Arias , 1996 ; Ehn , 1988 ] . The position and movement of these physical objects are recognized by means of the touch - sensitive projection surface . In Figure 5 , users are constructing a neighborhood through the use of a physical language appropriate for the problem by placing objects in the action space . This construction is a description of the setting of concern to the stakeholders and becomes the boundary object through which they can collaboratively evaluate and prescribe changes in their efforts to frame and resolve a problem . In the upper half of Figure 5 , a second vertical electronic whiteboard presents information related to the problem - at - hand for exploration and extension . In the figure , a user is filling out a survey constructed from the model presented on the horizontal worksurface . The results of this survey are stored ( for future exploration ) and are also fed to the simulation , where the ramifications of the decisions specified in the survey can be explored . This work is described in more detail in [ Arias et al . , 2000 ] and more issues related to this paper discussed in [ Arias et al . , 1999 ] . Informal assessment of the EDC . We have used this system in numerous demonstrations of our work to various transportation planners , urban designers , community members , researchers , and other visitors . The current state of development both at an overall system level and from the standpoint of low - level interaction has made it impractical to deploy in realistic settings , as was our initial goal . However , in the context of our demonstrations , we have engaged the observers as pseudo - participants asking them to perform some basic design interactions and have observed several aspects of the interaction that pose limitations to the usability of the system . These observed limitations include • Touch - screen technology of the SmartBoard was designed for single user at a time interaction . This required that users take turns ( simultaneous actions created error situations , e . g . , a row of houses between the two presses rather than just a single house ) . Indeed , this was not something that could simply be “programmed around”—there was no way to detect that there were simultaneous presses and simply ignore that input—the input was taken as a normal input—halfway between the two presses • The existence of only a single cursor and the use of interaction style characterized as “select - object / select - action / perform - action” causes the user to have to “work” that interface . This led to frequent “mode” errors [ Lewis & Norman , 1986 ] ( e . g . , the user tried to delete an object when the “add” mode was active ) . Certainly , there are alternate interaction techniques that could lessen the overhead for the users , but the limitation of a single cursor still requires that a linkage be made between the physical cursor and the current virtual object of interest and can lead to “cross linking” the object with the behavior of some other object . • User had to take explicit action to make the physical - virtual connection by pressing the object onto the touch screen rather than just placing it on top of it . • Taken together these require the user to have a more abstract mental model for how the interface works to guide how they interact with the system , separate from the model of how the object being manipulated behaves . Although individuals who are continuously engaged in these sorts of activities may be willing to learn this model as they work with the system , participants who have limited exposure to the system may not have the opportunity to build Figure 5 : The Envisionment and Discovery Collaboratory that model and may be left out of interaction if it is not made accessible to them . FOCUSING ON INTERACTION ISSUES Our work focuses on process—the content is an object to think with . Urban planning has been a wonderful domain to study as it gives us models that contain both content and process . Table 1 describes one of the strengths of physical models as “Mediation of communication and social interaction . ” What this is intended to describe is the observation that the physical pieces often become extensions of the speaker , allowing the speaker to provide emphasis or to extend her / his body language . In the envisioned hybrid environment , the interaction using physical objects may allow the speaker to project that sense of extension into the virtual space . In supporting a group interaction with the simulation , it is no longer just a user - computer interaction , but the simulation and the interaction with it becomes a form of media supporting conversations among participants ( i . e . , human - human communication mediated by the artifact ) as well as collaborative “conversations with the material . ” At one level this medium will have characteristics that are unique and stand apart . Other aspects will be the way that the medium is blended with the other media and blend into conversational patterns of the group . Parallel Interaction and Conversational Aspects of Media The question could be raised whether , if one views the interaction of the group using the EDC interface in terms of conversation , it might be better to take turns rather than support parallel interaction at all and that problems with that aspect of the current interface might not be better mitigated by using concurrency control ( e . g . , locking or other turn - taking approaches ) . Although a top - level view of the conversational paradigm is one of turn taking based on a need ( especially in larger groups ) to avoid everyone talking at once and allowing participants to hear and to be heard , a finer - grained look at conversations reveal that they are not strictly turn taking , sometimes there are back - and - forth volleys as meaning and understanding are negotiated and grounding is achieved [ Clark & Brennan , 1991 ] . Rather than being completely natural , it seems that strict turn taking is more often determined by specific needs of a situation and is often mediated by individual leaders , social and situational norms ( politeness or raising ones hand in classes ) , or external artifacts ( e . g . , talking sticks ) . Extra - verbal utterances ( nods , shrugs , hyphenated glances ) certainly happen without turn taking—and are important parts of grounding . Parallel Interaction and Non - Conversational Aspects In addition , not all interaction is conversational—there may be situations in which participant input that could happen in tandem ( e . g . , a group leader asks everyone indicate where their house is in the neighborhood and each person places their house ) ( again , this could happen sequentially and reasons that you might want to enforce the sequentiality , but there could also be cases where that might not be desirable ) It seems that the goal for interaction with the computational environment is to match the characteristics of the interface / medium as closely as possible to the characteristics of the rest of the face - to - face environment . It is highly doubtful that anyone would bring a group of people into the same room and then ask them to use the telephone to talk to each other . Based on limitations observed with the first prototype of the EDC at the interaction level , I have begun to investigate ways to extend the interaction to provide a better match to this goal . Using a DGT Electronic Chessboard I am prototyping the Participate - In - The - Action Board ( PITABoard ) ( see Figure 7 ) . The underlying technology consists of an 8 - by - 8 grid that can sense the location and identity of 15 distinct transducers . Although , as discussed later , there are some limitations to this system , it is proving useful in testing out some of the ideas presented here . The new forms of interaction support that I am investigating include • Parallel interactions ( rather than single - threads of interaction and errors when multiple accesses are attempted ) • Multiple “points of control” ( rather than a single interaction cursor ) • Sensing pieces automatically when placed on board ( rather than needing to explicitly press the piece onto the surface ) . In addition , I am studying ways to utilize these multiple “points of control” to create a broader repertoire of direct interaction styles more closely tuned to the type of domain object being represented to provide a medium that supports a more direct and natural interaction with the underlying simulation medium . For example some interactions that might be useful in the domain of transportation are • Tracking behavior : the virtual representation follows the physical piece ( this could represent an individual moving through the space or an object whose location is subject to change ) • Placing ( Rubber stamp ) behavior : placement of physical piece creates a virtual representation that remains when physical piece is removed ( used to place items with known , fixed location—a house , store , or school ) • Drawing behavior : piece is used to trace out a series of points that make up the object being created . ( e . g . , a road , a bus route—see Figure 6 ) • Launching behavior—placing a dynamic item : the physical piece indicates the initial location of an object that has dynamic behavior—if appropriate , the virtual object begins its dynamic behavior from that point . ( e . g . , bus , auto ) In addition to the interaction attached to domain - grounded objects , it will still be there might be interaction pieces that support control or inspection of the environment . For example , by having some virtual representations that no longer have corresponding physical pieces ( such as a “placed” object—a house , store , or school ) means that there needs to be some way to indicate that the virtual representation needs to be removed when it is no longer needed , which might require an “eraser” piece . A magnifying glass may be useful in some contexts to examine the attributes of an object . The underlying idea is that the system allows the creation of affordances that I believe are more natural to the situation being modeled and the design process being supported by the technology . The examples that are given here are only for purposes of illustration and were developed in an ad hoc manner ( though based on observation of prior interactions ) to demonstrate the concept . Future work will involve interaction with use communities to determine what affordances are best suited to the needs of users and to develop a repertoire of objects for a particular domain . Emerging limitations opportunities for future evolution The development of new ideas and approaches are generally accompanied by corresponding limitations that need to be acknowledged and understood . I will discuss some of the limitations that are generic to this approach as well as some that are related to the current technology being used . These limitations do not necessarily represent flaws or barriers to Figure 6 : This multiple - exposure photo shows the user tracing out a bus route ( enhanced for clarity ) using a bus - route - drawing object . Figure 7 : The Participate - In - The - Action Board ( PITABoard ) the use of this approach , but need to be understood as opportunities for further development and evolution . Generic limitations . : By introducing multiple physical objects into the interface , they now have to be kept track of ( where did that bus - drawing object go… ? ) —in the single - cursor interface the virtual palettes organize tools and objects very neatly , things are generally in the same place and can be found quickly . A possible solution might be to create a “tray” ( similar to the pen - tray in the SmartBoard ) —to organize and keep track of the items . This also points to the limits on how many interaction objects one could manage . For example , in virtual palettes , there can be techniques , such as pop - ups or multiple palettes that provide access to a large number of tools / objects . Attempting to provide more and more features under this approach would create an unmanageable proliferation of physical cursor objects . On the other hand , the general goal of this approach is not upon an “experts” interface where every feature that anyone ever wanted is available—rather on a “participants” interface , where the features important to the task at hand are there and directly accessible . One could argue that this approach violates some well - known principles of interface design , such as consistency of interaction : Why does this piece have one sort of behavior and another act differently ? As I have discussed , I believe this is a desirable feature , but I would think that careful application of this feature—matching the behavior with the sort of object represented—is critical to its success . Drawbacks specific to chessboard technology Since it was designed specifically as a chessboard , the granularity of resolution large . Even so I have been pleasantly surprise that it is still reasonably effective . This may be due to the fact that in group interaction it is less likely that we will attempt to design interactions that fine - motor tasks . The current system has a limited number of distinct sensors , which makes it difficult to have a large number of objects and track them reliably . Although I argued earlier that having a large number of types of objects is probably not desirable in a participants interface , there could still be situations in which having many of the same type of object would be useful ( e . g . , tracking pieces for each participant—all with the same underlying behavior , but each representing a distinct individual ) . Future device designs that would support a large number pieces would be very desirable . Given the nature of chess , it is quite natural to place the pieces in the center of the square , so the existence of dead spots when the piece is at the edge of a square or placed between two squares is not a problem . However , in our system these dead spots are problematic since the domain being modeled may not fit as neatly into a gridded representation . In our current system , we have tried to outline the grid to decrease the occurrence of problems , but it is not completely successful . These experiences with limitations will serve to guide future developments to better meet the goals that we have for participant interaction . CONCLUSIONS : This paper presents some promising approaches to interaction that focus on needs of face - to - face interaction among a group of users . Although it has been based on multiple prototyping cycles , there is still a need for closer evaluation and evolution with user communities . Limitations that we have encountered have resulted in tradeoff decisions , but strong initial indications that this may be well suited to face - to - face , participant interaction . My plan for future work on this system include assessment in more realistic settings using role - playing scenarios , application to actual community settings ( e . g . , the design of a new local bus route ) . Throughout these interaction with use communities there will be continued evolution of interaction techniques and studies of how the evolving systems supports social creativity and meta - design . In addition , I would like to study whether this system can be applied to non - locational design domains such as organizational design . ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS I would like to thank Gerhard Fischer , Ernesto Arias , Andy Gorman , Eric Scharffe , and Kyle Bygott for their collaboration in the development of the EDC concepts and prototypes and for feedback on drafts of this paper . Ben Bulsink of DGT Products , NL has been extremely helpful in providing us with materials to continue to develop the PITABoard further . All of the members of L 3 D have provided encouragement and feedback in the continued development of this work , which has been supported by NSF grants REC - 9631396 and CDA - 9529549 and the Coleman Family Initiative . REFERENCES Alexander , C . , Ishikawa , S . , Silverstein , M . , Jacobson , M . , Fiksdahl - King , I . , & Angel , S . ( 1977 ) A Pattern Language : Towns , Buildings , Construction , Oxford University Press , New York . Arias , E . G . ( 1984 ) " Resident Participation in Public Housing : A Conceptual Approach , " In Vogt & Mickle ( eds . ) , Part 1 : Geography - Regional Science , ISA , Research Triangle Park , NC , pp . 131 - 138 . Arias , E . G . ( 1989 ) " The Contingent Nature of Participation and Housing Research . , " Guru Nanak Journal of Sociology—Special Housing Policy Issue , 10 ( 1 - 2 ) , pp . 81 - 99 . Arias , E . G . ( 1994 ) " Decision Support in Locational Analysis : An Integrated Approach , " Proceedings of GIS ' 94 , pp . 129 - 143 . Arias , E . G . ( 1996 ) " Bottom - up Neighborhood Revitalization : Participatory Decision Support Approaches and Tools , " Urban Studies Journal—Special issue on Housing Markets , Neighborhood Dynamics and Societal Goals , 33 ( 10 ) , pp . 1831 - 1848 . Arias , E . G . & Eden , H . ( 1997 ) " InterSim : Supporting Face - to - Face Collaborative Design , " Proceedings of CSCL ' 97 . Arias , E . G . , Eden , H . , & Fischer , G . ( 1997 ) " Enhancing Communication , Facilitating Shared Understanding , and Creating Better Artifacts by Integrating Physical and Computational Media for Design , " Proceedings of Designing Interactive Systems ( DIS ' 97 ) , pp . 1 - 12 . Arias , E . G . , Eden , H . , Fischer , G . , Gorman , A . , & Scharff , E . ( 1999 ) " Beyond Access : Informed Participation and Empowerment , " Proceedings of the Computer Supported Collaborative Learning ( CSCL ' 99 ) Conference , pp . 20 - 32 . Arias , E . G . , Eden , H . , Fischer , G . , Gorman , A . , & Scharff , E . ( 2000 ) " Transcending the Individual Human Mind—Creating Shared Understanding through Collaborative Design , " ACM Transactions on Computer Human - Interaction , 7 ( 1 ) , pp . 84 - 113 . Brown , J . S . & Duguid , P . ( 1991 ) " Organizational Learning and Communities - of - Practice : Toward a Unified View of Working , Learning , and Innovation , " Organization Science , 2 ( 1 ) , pp . 40 - 57 . Brown , J . S . , Duguid , P . , & Haviland , S . ( 1994 ) " Toward Informed Participation : Six Scenarios in Search of Democracy in the Information Age , " The Aspen Institute Quarterly , 6 ( 4 ) , pp . 49 - 73 . Bruner , J . ( 1996 ) The Culture of Education , Harvard University Press , Cambridge , MA . Clark , H . H . & Brennan , S . E . ( 1991 ) " Grounding in communication , " In L . B . Resnick , J . M . Levine , & S . D . Teasley ( eds . ) , Perspectives on Socially Shared Cognition , APA Books , Washington , D . C . , pp . 127 - 149 . Collins , A . , Neville , P . , & Bielaczyc , K . ( 2000 ) " Toward a Design Theory of Media for Education , " International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education , 11 , pp . 144 - 162 . Ehn , P . ( 1988 ) Work - Oriented Design of Computer Artifacts , Almquist & Wiksell International , Stockholm , Sweden . Engeström , Y . ( 2001 ) " Expansive Learning at Work : toward an activity theoretical reconceptualization , " Journal of Education and Work , 14 ( 1 ) , pp . 133 - 156 . Fischer , G . ( 2001 ) " Communities of Interest : Learning through the Interaction of Multiple Knowledge Systems , " 24th Annual Information systems Research Seminar In Scandinavia ( IRIS ' 24 ) , Ulvik , Norway , pp . ( in press ) . Johnson , D . W . & Johnson , R . J . ( 1994 ) " Cooperative learning in the culturally diverse classroom . , " In R . A . DeVillar , C . J . Faltis , & J . P . Cummins ( eds . ) , Cultural Diversity in Schools : From Rhetoric to Practice , State University of New York Press , Albany , pp . 57 - 73 . Lave , J . & Wenger , E . ( 1991 ) Situated Learning : Legitimate Peripheral Participation , Cambridge University Press , New York . Lewis , C . H . & Norman , D . A . ( 1986 ) " Designing for Error , " In D . A . Norman & S . W . Draper ( eds . ) , User Centered System Design , New Perspectives on Human - Computer Interaction , Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , Hillsdale , NJ , pp . 411 - 432 . PCSD—President ' s Council on Sustainable Development ( 1996 ) Sustainable America : A New Consensus for Prosperity , Opportunity , and a Healthy Environment for the Future , President ' s Council on Sustainable Development , Washington , D . C . Perrone , C . , Spencer , S . , & Arias , E . ( 1997 ) " Mr . Roger ' s Sustainable Neighborhood : A Visual Language Case Study for Community Education , " In Visual Languages ' 97 ( Capri , Italy ) , pp . forthcoming . Rittel , H . ( 1984 ) " Second - Generation Design Methods , " In N . Cross ( ed . ) , Developments in Design Methodology , John Wiley & Sons , New York , pp . 317 - 327 . Rittel , H . & Webber , M . M . ( 1984 ) " Planning Problems are Wicked Problems , " In N . Cross ( ed . ) , Developments in Design Methodology , John Wiley & Sons , New York , pp . 135 - 144 . Spencer , S . , Perrone , C . , & Goldstein , M . ( 1997 ) " Mr . Roger ' s Sustainable Neighborhood , " In Environmental Design Research Association Conference ( EDRA ) ( Montreal , Canada ) , pp . 126 - 127 . Star , S . L . ( 1989 ) " The Structure of Ill - Structured Solutions : Boundary Objects and Heterogeneous Distributed Problem Solving , " In L . Gasser & M . N . Huhns ( eds . ) , Distributed Artificial Intelligence , Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc . , San Mateo , CA , pp . 37 - 54 . Wenger , E . ( 1998 ) Communities of Practice — Learning , Meaning , and Identity , Cambridge University Press , Cambridge , England .