Mechanotransduction describes the cellular pro­ cesses that translate mechanical stimuli into bio­ chemical signals , thus enabling cells to adapt to their physical surroundings . Extensive research over the past decades has identified several molecular players that are involved in cellular mechanotransduction ( BOX 1 ) . However , many components , and especially the identity of the primary mechanosensor ( s ) , remain incompletely defined . Research in mechanotransduction has often focused on sensory cells , such as hair cells in the inner ear . These specialized cells often have evolved specific cellular structures ( FIG . 1 ) that are tailored to transduce mechanical inputs into biochemical signals ( for exam­ ple , by opening ion channels in response to applied forces ) and thus provide a good model to study cellular mechanosensing . With these models , it has become apparent that mechanotransduction signalling has a crucial role in the maintenance of many mechanically stressed tissues , such as muscle , bone , cartilage and blood vessels . Consequently , research has expanded to diverse cell types such as myocytes , endothelial cells and vascular smooth muscle cells , which show that mechano transduction is involved in a broad range of cellular functions , not just in a subset of specialized cells and tissues . For example , stem cells can be steered towards specific fates during differentiation on the basis of the geometry and stiffness of the substrate on which the cells are grown 1 , and intercellular physical interactions such as tension and adhesion might be as important in embryonic development as concentration gradients of morphogenic factors ( see the Review by Wozniak and Chen 88 in this issue ) . In this Review , we discuss how mutations and modifi­ cations that interfere with normal mechanotrans duction and cellular sensitivity to mechanical stress could be implicated in a wide spectrum of diseases that range from loss of hearing to muscular dystrophies and cancer ( TABLE 1 ) . Many of these diseases share few similarities at first sight . How could muscular dystrophies be related to atherosclerosis or kidney failure ? We will highlight some of these disorders and discuss how they could be traced back , at least in part , to defects in mechano­ transduction , revealing some unexpected similarities . A common denominator of many mechanobiology diseases is a disruption in the intricate force transmission between the extracellular matrix ( ECM ) , the cytoskeleton and the interior of the nucleus ( FIG . 2 ) . Cellular mechano sensing is based on force­induced conformational changes in mechanosensitive proteins that are subject to molecular forces that result in opening of membrane channels or altered affinities to binding partners , thereby activating signalling pathways . Hence , any changes in normal intra­ cellular force transmission through changes in cellular ( or extracellular ) structure and organization can lead to altered molecular forces acting on these proteins , result­ ing in attenuated or increased mechanosensitive signals . In addition to the defects that affect cellular structure and organization , and thus cellular mechanosensing , muta­ tions in proteins that are involved in the downstream signalling pathways can also cause impaired mechano­ transduction . Examples include mutations in proteins that are involved in intracellular calcium signalling or members of the Rho or mitogen­activated protein kinase ( MAPK ) pathways 2 . Generally , any changes in cellular or extracellular structure , the cellular mechanosensing Brigham and Women’s Hospital , Harvard Medical School , Department of Medicine , Cardiovascular Division , 65 Landsdowne Street , Room 283 , Cambridge , Massachusetts 02139 , USA . Correspondence to J . L . e‑mail : jlammerding @ rics . bwh . harvard . edu doi : 10 . 1038 / nrm2597 Sensory cells Cells involved in the sensory reception of touch or hearing , often using specialized cellular structures such as hair bundles or proteins ( for example , stretch - activated ion channels ) to detect applied forces and deformations . Vascular smooth muscle cells Non - striated muscle cells found in the medial layer of arteries and arterioles . These cells are involved in regulating blood pressure and vessel tone . Mechanotransduction gone awry Diana E . Jaalouk and Jan Lammerding Abstract | Cells sense their physical surroundings through mechanotransduction — that is , by translating mechanical forces and deformations into biochemical signals such as changes in intracellular calcium concentration or by activating diverse signalling pathways . In turn , these signals can adjust cellular and extracellular structure . This mechanosensitive feedback modulates cellular functions as diverse as migration , proliferation , differentiation and apoptosis , and is crucial for organ development and homeostasis . Consequently , defects in mechanotransduction — often caused by mutations or misregulation of proteins that disturb cellular or extracellular mechanics — are implicated in the development of various diseases , ranging from muscular dystrophies and cardiomyopathies to cancer progression and metastasis . R E V I E W S nATuRE REvIEWs | Molecular cell Biology voluME 10 | jAnuARy 2009 | 63 f o c u S o n M E c h a n ot R a n S d u c t I o n © 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Fluid shear stress Tissue strain ECM Stretch - activated ion channels Cytoskeletalfilaments Cell – cell adhesioncomplex Nucleus Focal adhesion complex Glycocalix Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology c d e f g h b a Cell - signalling molecules and transcription factors Calcium and other ions Extracellular ligands Crosslinkingproteins Cell - surface receptor Mechanosensitive proteins Proteins that are directly involved in sensing forces or deformations . Microscopic forces result in conformational changes in these proteins , thereby altering their affinity to binding partners or ion conductivity and initiating downstream signalling pathways . process itself or the subsequent downstream signalling pathways can result in altered and abnormal mechano­ transduction and lead to disease ( FIG . 3 ) . Identifying the molecular details that are involved in normal and defec­ tive mechanotransduction will lead to a better under­ standing of the underlying disease mechanisms and normal cellular function and may provide us with new avenues of therapeutic approaches for these diseases . Cells need to feel the force All cells and organisms across the evolutionary spec­ trum , from the most primitive to the most complex , are mechanosensitive 3 , 4 . This ‘universal’ property allows cells to relay mechanical stimuli from their physical surroundings or from within the organism to electro­ chemical or biochemical signals , which then regulate a wide repertoire of physiological responses . As such , mechanotransduction — be it involved in sensing exter­ nally applied forces ( for example , in touch sensation ) or in regulating forces and tension in the body ( for example , in muscle tension or regulation of blood pressure ) — is essential to developmental pathways and to normal tissue homeostasis , primarily in the maintenance of tissues in which cellular adaptive responses are crucial to counter­ act substantial variations from normal conditions 4 , 5 . For example , muscle tissue responds to exercise with hyper­ trophic growth — that is , there is an increase in cell size . The vascular system can maintain a constant blood pres­ sure despite changes in cardiac output by vasoconstric­ tion and vasodilation ( the contraction or relaxation of the smooth muscle cells that surround blood vessels ) . one often cited example of mechanotransduction is its role in hearing and balance , which results from electro­ chemical responses to sound waves , pressure and gravity ( see Review by Chalfie 89 in this issue ) . These mechanical forces cause small displacements in the stereo cilia of hair cells in the inner ear . The deflection of the stereocilia causes tension in the tip links , small extracellular fila­ ments that connect the tips of stereocilia with adjacent stereocilia , thereby pulling open mechanically­gated ion channels ( FIG . 1 ) . The rapid influx of calcium and other ions can then initiate further downstream signalling . Motor proteins that are located at the distal ends of the tip links can relax or contract to restore resting tension , thus providing a mechanism to allow the system to adjust to dynamic stimulation 6 . similarly , mechanotransduction is pivotal to touch sensation and proprioception ( the internal sensing of the relative position of one’s body parts ) , which have similar underlying mechanisms for mechanotransduction signalling as hearing 7 , 8 . Mechanotransduction also has a fundamental role in regulating physiological phenomena in other specialized tissues that are not directly involved in sensory func­ tions . For example , skeletal and cardiac muscles can respond to increased load such as intensive resistance exercise , with hypertrophic growth , whereas immobil­ ized muscles will atrophy over time 9 . The role of regula­ tory mechanotransduction in the cardiovascular system is particularly fascinating . It is now well established that the morphology and physiology of the heart and vascu­ lature are influenced by pressure and shear stress that are generated from flowing blood 10 – 13 , and low inter­ stitial flow rates are sufficient to stimulate lymphangio­ genesis 14 . sophisticated in vivo studies in zebrafish embryos have revealed that distinct high­shear flow pat­ terns are present during crucial stages in the developing heart : artificially perturbing the shear forces by occlusion results in abnormally formed hearts ( for example , abnor­ mal third chamber , reduced looping or defective valves ) , with defects that are similar to those that are observed in some congenital heart diseases 15 . In the mature cardio­ vascular system , it is thought that laminar shear stress and circumferential vessel stretch exert an atheroprotec­ tive effect on endothelial cells . Consistent with this idea , atherosclerotic lesions are often found at specific sites of disturbed ( that is , turbulent ) flow patterns , characterized by low and oscillatory shear stress at the endothelium ( see the Review by Hahn and schwartz 90 in this issue ) . Box 1 | Cellular mechanotransduction Several biological components , not mutually exclusive , have been proposed to act as cellular mechanosensors and are schematically depicted in a representative cell ( see figure ) . Note that most of these features can be found in many cell types , although some ( for example , changes in intercellular space ) might only be relevant in a subset of cells . a | Stretch - activated ion channels in the plasma membrane open in response to membrane strain and allow the influx of calcium and other ions . b | In endothelial cells , the glycocalix , a layer of carbohydrate - rich proteins on the cell surface , can mediate mechanotransduc - tion signalling in response to fluid shear stress . c , d | Cell – cell junctional receptors or extracellular matrix ( ECM ) – cell focal adhesions allow cells to probe their environments . e | Force - induced unfolding of ECM proteins , such as fibronectin , can initiate mechano - transduction signalling outside the cell . f | Intracellular strain can induce conformational changes in cytoskeletal elements such as filaments , crosslinkers or motor proteins , thereby changing binding affinities to specific molecules and activating signalling pathways . g | The nucleus itself has been proposed to act as a mechanosensor . Intracellular deformations can alter chromatin conformation and modulate access to transcription factors or transcriptional machinery . However , direct evidence for this mechanism is still lacking . h | Compression of the intercellular space can alter the effective concentration of autocrine and paracrine signalling molecules . Additionally , changes in G - protein - coupled receptors , lipid fluidity and even mitochondrial activity have been proposed as mechanosensors . Generally , almost all cells respond to mechanical stimulation with adaptive changes in cell function . These changes include short - term responses ( such as increases ( or decreases ) in intracellular tension , adhesion , spreading or migration ) as well as changes in long - term effects ( such as in protein synthesis and secretion , structural reorganization , proliferation and viability ) . These effects are often mediated through multiple , overlapping and crosstalking signalling pathways . R E V I E W S 64 | jAnuARy 2009 | voluME 10 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio R E V I E W S © 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology a b Channels closed Channels open MembraneActin Linker Channel Tip link Stereocilia Finger - like cytoplasmic extensions that project from the apical end of the inner ear’s hair cells into the cochlear fluid . Stereocilia respond to fluid movement and changes in fluid pressure to mediate various sensory functions , including hearing . Motor proteins Proteins that generate the intracellular forces that are required for molecular transport or cell tension and contractility . Include dynein and kinesin . Cilia Hair - like projections on the outer surface of some cell types and unicellular organisms . Beating in unison in wave - like motion , cilia serve multiple functions including mechanosensing , motility and feeding . Deafness genes A set of genes , including the cadherin - 23 gene , that encode tip link proteins , which are found in the hair cells in the inner ear and play a central role in the conversion of physical stimuli into electrochemical signals . Mutations in these genes can cause deafness . Another example for the role of mechanotransduc­ tion in tissue maintenance is bone . Compact bone is comprised of concentric layers of bone matrix , in which small cavities known as lacunae are interspersed at regular intervals . These lacunae harbour osteocytes and are connected through canaliculi , a network of inter­ connecting canals . Gravity and compressive forces that are generated by muscle contractions during locomotion result in small deformations of the poro­elastic bone , resulting in pressure gradients that drive inter stitial fluid flow through the lacunae – canalicular network . This load­induced fluid flow is thought to stimulate localized bone remodelling and optimize the physical performance of the bone through mechanotransduction signalling 16 . likewise , chondrocytes ( the main cells that comprise cartilage ) adapt to widely varying stresses by secreting a glycosaminoglycan­rich ECM that gives cartilage its dynamic mechanical properties . Moreover , lung physiology from development through maturation is influenced by the continuously changing mechanical stress and strain that is caused by the cyclic distension and contraction of the lungs 17 . similarly , urine flow inside the kidney tubules has a central role in regulating kidney morphogenesis , as these cells sense fluid shear stress by the bending of primary cilia 18 . Mechanotransduction and disease The ability of cells to respond to changes in their physical environments is crucial in the development and main­ tenance of tissues that are exposed to varying mechani­ cal stress ( for example , muscle and bone ) , but also in physio logical processes that affect the entire organ­ ism ( for example , control of blood pressure and blood flow ) . on the cellular level , mechanotransduction can modulate diverse functions such as protein synthesis , secretion , adhesion , migration , proliferation , viability and apoptosis . Consequently , defects in cellular mech­ anotransduction — often through inherited or acquired mutations — can result in , or can at least contribute to , various human diseases ( TABLE 1 ) . Alternatively , changes in the cellular physical environment can elicit patho­ logical consequences , even when the cellular mechano­ transduction processes function properly . Examples for this scenario include disturbed fluid shear stress at bifurcations that trigger vascular remodelling , which can result in the development of atherosclerosis 19 , or the loss of bone mass in conditions of microgravity 20 . In these cases , it is the abnormal mechanical stress at the cellular level that — through ( normal ) mechanotransduction signalling — modulates cellular processes that can result in the breakdown of normal tissue function . so what diseases can arise from defects in mechano­ transduction ? As almost all cells rely on mechanotrans­ duction signalling for normal function , many tissues can be affected by impaired biomechanics or mechanosensing . An obvious example is loss of hearing that is caused by muta­ tions in the deafness genes that encode mechanosensi tive proteins 6 ( FIG . 1 ) . other examples of affected tissues include bone 16 , 20 , cartilage , the lung 21 – 23 , the immune sys­ tem 24 – 26 and the central nervous system 27 , 28 . Below , we focus on mechanotransduction defects in skeletal and car­ diac muscle that result in muscular dystrophy or cardio­ myopathies 29 – 31 , and also briefly discuss defects in the eye . Cardiac mechanosensing and hypertrophy . More than 400 different mutations have been identified in patients with cardiomyopathy , affecting 9 separate sarcomeric genes , including actin , α ­tropomyosin , troponin , titin and , most commonly , β ­myosin heavy chain 32 . To understand how mutations in these structural proteins can result in patho­ logical hypertrophy , it is helpful to view these proteins in the context of cardiac mechanotransduction . Figure 1 | Mechanotransduction in hair cells . a | A scanning electron micrograph of two hair bundles in the sensory macula of the bull frog saccule , showing the stereocilia arranged in bundles with centrally increasing heights . These bundles are ~ 8 µ m tall and contain 50 – 60 stereocilia . b | Schematic drawing of a hair bundle in resting ( green ) and deflected ( pink ) configuration . Deflection , that is shearing of the stereocilia relative to each other , causes the ~ 150 – 200 nm long tip links to pull directly on K + channels in the stereocilia , causing the channels to open . Myosin motors that link the channels to the actin core of the stereocilia can adjust the position to restore resting tension in the tip link , allowing adaptation to persistent stimulation . Mutations in the K + channel , the linker proteins or in the unconventional myosins , which keep the tip links under tension , can result in deafness . Figure is modified with permission from REF . 83  ( 2000 ) the National Academy of Sciences . R E V I E W S nATuRE REvIEWs | Molecular cell Biology voluME 10 | jAnuARy 2009 | 65 f o c u S o n M E c h a n ot R a n S d u c t I o n © 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Stretch - sensitive ion channels Ion channels that can change their conformation from closed to open in response to mechanical strain in the membrane . Sarcomeres Basic functional units in striated muscle cells , consisting mostly of thick myosin filaments and thin actin filaments to generate forces . Aortic stenosis A condition that is characterized by abnormal narrowing of the valve opening between the left ventricle and the aorta in the heart , restricting blood flow and impeding the ability of the heart to pump blood to the body . Ventricular wall stress The mechanical stress , that is force per unit area , in the myocardium . Decrease in wall thickness , following loss of myocytes after infarction can result in increased left ventricular stress and can damage the remaining myocytes . Cardiac myocytes can respond directly to mechani­ cal deformation or stretch through several internal mechanosensors , although the precise mechanosens­ ing mechanisms often remain incompletely understood . The presumptive mechanosensors include stretch - sensitive ion channels at the cell membrane , integrins and integrin­associated proteins ( such as melusin or integrin­linked kinase ( IlK ) ) sarcomeric proteins ( such as titin , myosin or the small lIM­domain protein MlP ) and cell­surface receptors ( such as G­protein­coupled receptors ( GPCRs ) and angiotensin II type 1 receptors ) that can be activated by stretch even in the absence of ligands . These mechanosensors activate multiple and overlapping cellular signalling pathways that include Ras / Rho and MAPK signalling , phospholipase C activ­ ation , calcium / calcineurin­mediated signalling and microRnAs 32 ( FIG . 4 ) . These pathways trigger the expres­ sion of hypertrophic genes and cause an increase in myocyte length and / or width ( reviewed in REFS 32 , 33 ) . These mechanotransduction pathways , along with often overlapping neurohormonal mechanisms ( for example , GPCR signalling that is activated by angiotensin or cat­ echolamines ) allow the heart to adapt to prolonged changes in the mechanical workload with an increase in cardiac myocyte size ( hypertrophy ) and modifica­ tion of the surrounding ECM , referred to as cardiac remodelling . The cardiac hypertrophic response is often catego­ rized into physiological or pathological hypertrophy . Physiological hypertrophy , which arises as a conse­ quence of aerobic exercise or pregnancy , is characterized by the addition of sarcomeres in series ( to lengthen the cells ) and in parallel ( to increase cell width ) , resulting in increased cardiac wall thickness and chamber dimen­ sions to adapt to the elevated haemodynamic load . By contrast , pathological hypertrophy is caused by abnormal changes in the cardiac workload , for exam­ ple through hypertension , aortic stenosis , myocardial infarction or by congenital defects that are due to muta­ tions in genes that encode sarcomeric proteins . As in physiological hypertrophy , cardiac myocytes sense the increased ventricular wall stress and respond with an increase in cell size . However , in pathological hyper­ trophy , myocytes often show a disproportional increase in either width , resulting in increased ventricular wall thickness , or length , leading to a dilated ventricle . The hypertrophic response is initially beneficial as it nor­ malizes ventricular wall stress and is thus often referred to as compensatory hypertrophy 9 , 34 . However , elevated stress levels that persist over extended time periods often lead to maladaptive remodelling of the myocytes and ECM , which is accompanied by myocyte apoptosis and necrosis and eventually results in cardiac failure 32 . The precise molecular mechanisms that govern the transition from compensatory hypertrophy to patho­ logical remodelling remain incompletely understood . several lines of evidence suggest that hypertrophy can further destabilize cardiac mechanics , as hypertrophic tissue is often characterized by impaired contract­ ility and relaxation dynamics . In addition , the cellular programme that is responsible for pathological hyper­ trophy results in the re­expression of genes that are normally associated with the embryonic myocardium . This causes disorganized cellular structure , impaired calcium dynamics and increased interstitial fibrosis , worsening the mechanical imbalance between cardiac function and haemodynamic load 35 . The maladaptive remodelling of the ECM can also result in slippage of cardiac myocytes , further exacerbating the mechanical imbalance in the myocardium . Encouraging findings in animal models of cardiac hypertrophy suggest that pathological hypertrophy can be prevented or even reversed by modulating signalling pathways that are involved in the hypertrophic response , motivating the search for specific pharmacological modulators 32 , 33 . The challenge in developing these therapeutic approaches lies in unravelling the dichotomy of physiological and compensatory hypertrophy on one hand and patho­ logical hypertrophy on the other , as significant overlap exists between the signalling pathways that are involved in these processes . Mechanotransduction and muscular dystrophies . In skeletal muscle cells , forces that are generated in the sarcomeres are transmitted to the ECM through a specialized protein complex that consists of dystrophin and the dystrophin­associated protein complex in the plasma membrane ( FIG . 2 ) , thereby shielding the cell membrane from excessive stress . In Duchenne muscular dystrophy , mutations in the dystrophin gene disrupt the force transmission between the cytoskeleton and the ECM , resulting in progressive muscle degeneration 36 . Importantly , the disruption of cytoskeletal – ECM cou­ pling not only renders cells more susceptible to mem­ brane damage , but also causes aberrant activation of MAPK extracellular signal­regulated kinase 1 ( ERK1 ) Table 1 | Diseases associated with defects in mechanotransduction Disease Primary cells / tissues affected Selected references Deafness Hair cells in the inner ear 6 Arteriosclerosis Endothelial and smooth muscle cells 10 – 13 , 19 Muscular dystrophies and cardiomyopathies Myocytes , endothelial cells and fibroblasts 35 , 36 , 41 , 85 Osteoporosis Osteoblasts 20 Axial myopia and glaucoma Optic neurons and fibroblasts 43 – 45 Polycystic kidney disease Epithelial cells 51 , 52 Asthma and lung dysfunction Endothelial cells and alveolar tissue 15 , 21 – 23 Premature ageing ( HGPS ) Multiple cell types and tissues 55 , 57 Developmental disorders Multiple cell types and tissues 46 – 50 , 86 Cancer Multiple cell types and tissues 2 , 58 – 60 , 68 , 71 , 73 , 87 Potential immune system disorders Leukocytes 24 – 26 Potential central nervous system disorders Neurons 27 , 28 HGPS , Hutchinson – Gilford progeria syndrome . R E V I E W S 66 | jAnuARy 2009 | voluME 10 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio R E V I E W S © 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology Plasmamembrane Nuclearenvelope Nucleus Cytoskeletalnetwork Extracellularmatrix Nuclearporecomplex Talin Vinculin Nesprin 1 , Nesprin 2 Nesprin 3 Collagen / fibronectin Intermediatefilaments Plectin Integrins Lamins Dystroglycancomplex Laminin Dystrophin Actin filaments SUN1 , SUN2 Chromatin Interstitial fibrosis A progressive condition that is characterized by fibrous connective tissue replacing normal tissue , such as muscle , that is lost by injury or by infection and infiltration of inflammatory cells into the small spaces between tissues . and ERK2 signalling in response to stretch 37 . This abnormal mechanotransduction signalling could fur­ ther impact cell function and viability . Recent experi­ ments indicate that in dystrophin­deficient muscle fibres , stress­induced rupture of the more fragile plasma membrane allows influx of extracellular calcium . This causes abnormal muscle contraction and , combined with the defective coupling between the cytoskeleton and the ECM , leads to physical damage of the cytoskel­ eton , which subsequently results in the loss of muscle cells 38 . Interestingly , dystrophin is also involved in the endothelial cell response that is necessary for the fluid­ shear­stress­mediated dilation of arteries . Consequently , endothelial cells from dystrophin­deficient mice have impaired mechanotransduction signalling in response to fluid shear stress , resulting in attenuated dilation of arteries and a decreased vascular density in cardiac mus­ cle , which could further contribute to the progressive loss of muscle 39 . similarly , mutations in the cytoskeletal proteins desmin , titin and myosin , which are important sarcomere components , result in disorganized sarcomeres and disturbed cellular mechanics , including impaired force generation and altered ( passive ) cytoskeletal stiffness , which can impair relaxation dynamics of myocytes . The deleterious effects of these mutations can result from direct changes in intracellular force distribution and / or generation due to ultrastructural disorganization , but can also arise from downstream effects of altered cell­ ular mechanosensing , as myosin and titin can function as mechanosensors 40 . Investigating the relative contri­ butions of these mechanisms to muscular dysfunction may provide important clinical insights , as defects in mechano transduction pathways could potentially be attenuated with pharmacological reagents . This research is hampered , however , by the fact that mechanotransduc­ tion can directly influence cellular structure and function , making it difficult to discern cause and effect . The recent findings that muscular dystrophies can arise from mutations in nuclear envelope proteins ( namely lamins A and C , emerin or nesprins ) further highlight the concept that disturbed intracellular struc­ ture and force transmission can contribute to muscu­ lar disease . Although these proteins are expressed in most differentiated cells , the resulting phenotypes are often muscle specific and suggest that cells of affected patients have an increased sensitivity to mechanical stress . new insights have come from a mouse model of Emery – Dreifuss muscular dystrophy that lacks lamins A and C . Cells from these animals are character­ ized by decreased nuclear stiffness , increased nuclear fragility and impaired activation of mechanosensitive genes , causing decreased viability in cells subjected to repetitive strain 41 . The increased nuclear fragility could result in nuclear rupture and cell death in mechani­ cally stressed tissues . However , nuclear rupture can only explain a fraction of the cell death that is observed during repetitive strain application , especially in cells from emerin­null mice , which have normal nuclear mechanics and increased strain­induced apoptosis 42 . Therefore , it is likely that the attenuated expression of mechanosensitive , anti­apoptotic genes , such as Iex1 , contributes to the increased cellular sensitivity to mechanical stress 41 , 42 . Currently , it remains unknown what causes the mechanotransduction defects in these cells . Although the nucleus has often been proposed as a cellular mechanosensor — for example , by altering chromatin accessibility in response to deformations — direct evidence for this function is still elusive , Figure 2 | Force transmission between the extracellular matrix and the nucleus . Extracellular forces are transmitted through the extracellular matrix ( ECM ) , which consists of tissue - specific proteins such as collagen , laminin and fibronectin . Adhesion complexes at the cell surface physically link the ECM to the cytoskeleton . For example , focal adhesions , comprised of integrins , talin , vinculin and other proteins , connect the ECM to actin filaments . In skeletal muscle , the dystrophin - associated protein complex links the ECM to actin filaments . The configuration and binding affinity of these complexes can be modulated through intra - and extracellular signalling . Intracellular forces are then transmitted through the cytoskeletal network ( that is , actin filaments , microtubules and intermediate filaments ) . The cytoskeleton is coupled to the nucleus through nesprins and possibly through other proteins on the outer nuclear membrane . The giant isoforms of nesprin 1 and nesprin 2 bind to actin filaments , whereas nesprin 3 can associate with intermediate filaments through plectin . Nesprins interact across the luminal space with inner nuclear membrane proteins ( for example , SUN1 and SUN2 ) that are retained there by interaction with other nuclear envelope proteins such as lamins and emerin 84 . Nuclear lamins and SUN proteins also bind to nuclear pore complexes , which could contribute to nuclear cytoskeletal coupling . Finally , lamins form stable nuclear structures and can bind to DNA , thus completing the force transmission between the ECM and the nuclear interior . Mutations in any of these components , as well as changes in cellular structure and organization or changes in the cellular environment , could disturb mechanotransduction signalling and result in altered cellular function . However , this has only been conclusively demonstrated for a subset of these molecules , motivating further research . R E V I E W S nATuRE REvIEWs | Molecular cell Biology voluME 10 | jAnuARy 2009 | 67 f o c u S o n M E c h a n ot R a n S d u c t I o n © 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology Extracellular environment Appied forces and deformations ( fluid shear stress ) ECM composition ( components , stiffness ) Transmembrane proteins ( integrins , dystroglycans , ion channels ) Cytoskeletal proteins ( desmin ) Cytoskeletal force generation ( myosin , troponin ) Nuclear envelope proteins ( lamins , nesprins , emerin ) Nuclear proteins ( histones ) Cellular mechanosensors ( stretch - activated ion channels , talin , titin , myosin ) Downstream signalling pathways ( MAPK , NF - κ B ) Cell structure and organization Altered mechanotransduction signalling Cellular sensing and signalling Disease Changes in Haemodynamic load The forces that are generated from cardiac output and physical resistances due to the flow of blood in circulation . Glaucoma A disease in which the optic nerve is permanently damaged due to abnormally high fluid pressure in the eye . Results in impaired or complete loss of vision . Axial myopia Near - or short - sightedness associated with an increase in the eye’s axial length . Intraocular pressure The pressure inside the eyeball that is generated by resistance to the outward fluid flow of aqueous humour . This pressure helps maintain the shape of the eye , but can result in glaucoma if it is too high . and future research has to address whether defects in mechano transduction signalling arise as a direct con­ sequence of altered nuclear stiffness or whether they mainly reflect broader defects in specific signalling pathways ( for example , in nuclear factor­ κ B signalling ) that are modulated by nuclear lamins . Trouble in the eye . Another unexpected organ that is affected by disturbed mechanotransduction is the eye . several recent findings suggest that modulated mechano transduction signalling due to increased mechanical stress could significantly contribute to the pathogenesis of glaucoma and axial myopia 43 . In glaucoma , elevated hydrostatic pressure and altered biomechanics of the optic nerve head could initiate mechanisms that result in loss of vision . Recent experi­ mental evidence suggests that human ( and monkey ) eye tissues deform in response to even minute changes in intraocular pressure 44 . In addition , ambient hydrostatic pressure elevations resembling intraocular conditions in glaucoma can induce apoptosis of retinal ganglion cells in vitro , consistent with in vivo findings 44 . Moreover , human scleral fibroblasts ( the primary cells that are implicated in the scleral remodelling that accompanies axial elongation during the development of myopia ) express many genes that are modulated by mechani­ cal strain application . These include genes that encode ECM proteins ( such as tenascin C ) , protein kinases ( such as human lymphocyte­specific protein tyrosine kinase ( lCK ) ) , cell receptors ( such as parathyroid hor­ mone ( PTH ) / PTH­related peptide ( PTHrP ) receptor ) , cell growth and differentiation factors ( such as fibro­ blast growth factors and bone morphogenetic proteins ) and transcription factors ( such as jun B ) 45 . Although the role of some of these proteins in ocular deve lop­ ment and axial elongation is obscure and rather specu­ lative , the contribution of others is more obvious . For example , activation of the PTH / PTHrP receptor by calcium­regulating hormones triggers several intra­ cellular signalling events including the activation of protein kinase C , which is directly involved in scleral remodelling . Moreover , tenascin C , which has been implicated in tissue remodelling during development , can act as a mediator of the scleral response to stretching by increasing the synthesis of proteolytic enzymes that affect ECM remodelling . These findings suggest that increased intraocular pressure — mediated by nor­ mal mechanotransduction signalling in scleral fibroblasts — can contribute to the abnormal remodelling that occurs in axial myopia . Figure 3 | unifying characteristics of mechanotransduction disorders . Altered cellular mechanotransduction signalling can be caused by changes in the extracellular environment ( for example , variations in the mechanical forces or deformations that are experienced by the tissue , or changes in extracellular matrix ( ECM ) composition that affect its stiffness and biochemical properties ) , the structure and organization of a cell , or the elements of the mechanotransduc - tion process itself . Changes in cellular structure and organization often result from inherited or de novo mutations in proteins that are part of the force - generating machinery , the cytoskeletal network or the nuclear envelope and interior . This category also includes transmembrane proteins that are involved in cell – cell or ECM – cell adhesion . Abnormal function of these proteins can alter the intracellular force distribution and thus mechanotransduction signalling . By contrast , defects in the cellular mechanosensors can disturb mechanotransduction signalling even in the case of normal force distribution . Many proteins can fall into more than one category , as structural proteins can also have mechanosensing capabilities and mechanotransduction signalling can in turn cause changes in cellular structure and organization as well as in the extracellular environment . Importantly , mechanical activation often initiates multiple signalling pathways at once , and these can have significant overlap and crosstalk , making it difficult to study specific pathways . Several of the signalling pathways are often shared with ‘classical’ receptor - mediated pathways . For example , the mitogen - activated protein kinase ( MAPK ) pathway can be turned on by mechanical strain as well as by receptor - linked tyrosine kinases ( for example , by the epidermal growth - factor receptor ) . Ultimately , excessive and prolonged disturbances in normal mechanotransduction signalling can result in disease conditions . NF - κ B , nuclear factor - κ B . R E V I E W S 68 | jAnuARy 2009 | voluME 10 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio R E V I E W S © 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology Integrins FAK Ras NOS NO IP3 + DAG PKC AKT / PKB MEK Raf MEKK PI3K JAK PLC Rho Rac PAK Actin c - Src Ca 2 + Calcineurin CaMKMLCK ERK1 / ERK2 JNKsp38 Activation of transcription factors NFAT , NF - κ B , AP1 , GATA4 , STATs Induction of mechanosensitive genes Egr1 , Iex1 , Fos , Jun , Cox2 Synthesis and release of autocrine and paracrine factors , proliferation , migration , differentiation , hypertrophy , apoptosis Cell response Growth - factor receptors G - protein - coupledreceptors Stretch - activatedion channels Mechanical load Plasmamembrane Nucleus Cytosol Extracellularmatrix gp130 Development and premature ageing Mounting evidence suggests that mechanotransduction also has a crucial role in development 46 – 49 . Thus , any disturbances to normal mechanotransduction mecha­ nisms or to a cell’s physical environment can result in broad developmental defects 50 . A classical example to illustrate this is Kartagener’s syndrome , which is char­ acterized by a left – right reversal of the primary vis­ ceral organs . left – right patterning in early mammalian embryos is dictated by cilia­driven leftward fluid flow during gestation , which — through mechanotrans­ duction signalling — differentially induces expression of nodal , a transforming growth factor ( TGF ) ­family molecule , and a signalling cascade of other factors in the left side of the embryo . Mutations in the dynein motor proteins that are primarily responsible for Kartagener’s syndrome block cilia motion in the epi­ thelium of a midline node in the embryo and thus pre­ vent the leftward fluid flow ; in the absence of flow , the left – right patterning becomes random . similarly , mutations in the genes that encode the ciliary proteins polycystin 1 or the transient receptor potential channel family protein polycystin 2 ( TRPP2 ) provide direct evidence for defects in mechanotrans­ duction that result in kidney disease 51 . Polycystins form mechanosensitive ion channels in the cilia of renal epithelial cells and allow influx of calcium in response to flow­induced bending of the cilia , thus act­ ing as a cellular flow­sensor in the kidney 51 . Polycystin mutations that are associated with loss of function leave cells unable to sense the fluid flow that normally regulates kidney morphogenesis , resulting in several types of polycystic kidney disease ( PKD ) that include autosomal dominant PKD , a disease characterized by progressive cyst formation that culminates in kidney destruction 51 , 52 . Disturbed mechanotransduction can also under­ lie several other diseases that are not traditionally approached from a biophysical perspective . one such example is Hutchinson – Gilford progeria syndrome ( HGPs ) , a progeroid disorder that is caused by muta­ tions in the LMNA gene , which encodes lamin A . Patients with HGPs appear normal at birth , but fail to thrive shortly thereafter and die in their early teens . Arteriosclerosis is the leading cause of death in patients with HGPs 53 , and post­mortem analysis of vascular tissue from patients with HGPs and from a mouse model of HGPs have revealed extensive loss of vascu­ lar smooth muscle cells and an unusual susceptibility to haemodynamic stress 54 , 55 . Mechanotransduction in vascular cells in response to fluid shear stress and strain from vessel expansion is a crucial protective mecha­ nism against arteriosclerosis and can mediate apoptosis , proliferation and ECM secretion in healthy vascular smooth muscle cells 56 . Recent experiments from our laboratory revealed that fibroblasts from patients with HGPs have decreased viability when subjected to repetitive mechanical strain , and that cells from patients with HGPs lack the strain­induced prolifera­ tion response that is seen in cells from healthy con­ trols 57 . These findings suggest that increased cellular sensitivity of vascular cells subjected to normal fluid shear stress and vessel expansion could be a possible mechanism for the progressive loss of smooth muscle cells and severe arteriosclerosis in patients with HGPs . Although increased cellular sensitivity to mechanical strain is certainly not the only factor in HGPs , our experiments suggest that it could have an important role in the development of severe arteriosclerosis that leads to lethal stroke or myocardial infarction in human patients 55 . Furthermore , it could contribute to defects in other mechanically loaded tissues , perhaps causing the bone abnormalities and skeletal muscle dystrophy that are characteristic of HGPs . Figure 4 | cardiac mechanotransduction signalling . Cardiac myocytes respond to altered haemodynamics by activating multiple intracellular signalling pathways that are implicated in the maintenance and regulation of cardiac myocyte function . Mechanical loading can be sensed by cardiomyocytes through a diverse group of membrane - anchored mechanosensors including stretch - activated ion channels , cell - membrane - spanning G - protein - coupled receptors , growth - factor receptors and integrins . This mechanical sensation is then converted to biochemical signals by triggering the multi - step activation of downstream partners in an array of signalling cascades in the cytoplasm . The highlights of such cascades include the three modules of the mitogen - activated protein kinase ( MAPK ) family underscored by the activation of Ras , the Janus - activated kinase ( JAK ) – signal transducer and activator of transcription ( STAT ) pathway , Rac activation , calcium ( Ca 2 + ) and nitric oxide ( NO ) signalling . The convergence of these pathways results in the activation of select transcription factors including nuclear factor - κ B ( NF - κ B ) and nuclear factor of activated T cells ( NFAT ) , which then translocate to the nucleus and modulate the expression of a panel of mechanosensitive genes including Egr1 and Iex1 . Ultimately , the net sum of gene - expression reprogramming in cardiomyocytes dictates the functional response of a cell to mechanical stress . R E V I E W S nATuRE REvIEWs | Molecular cell Biology voluME 10 | jAnuARy 2009 | 69 f o c u S o n M E c h a n ot R a n S d u c t I o n © 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology Soft matrix Rigid matrix Proliferation EGFR Ras ERK Focal adhesions Integrin activation Focal adhesion kinase Cytoskeletal tension Rho ROCK MLC Actin – myosin interaction ECM stiffness P Focal adhesions Dynamic protein complexes at the plasma membrane that connect the extracellular matrix to the actin cytoskeleton . Focal adhesions consist of integrins , talin , paxillin and signalling molecules such as focal adhesion kinase . Several of these proteins are thought to act as mechanosensors and to participate in mechanotrans - duction signalling . Cancer cells have lost their touch Perhaps the most intriguing of all of the mechano­ transduction diseases is cancer . In the past decade , sudden changes in ECM mechanics , ECM remodelling and the resultant disturbance in cytoskeletal tension and mechano transduction signalling have emerged as important factors that can promote malignant transform ation , tumorigenesis and metastasis 58 – 60 . In addition to a combination of genetic mutations and increased oncogene activity , cytoskeletal reorganiza­ tions — particularly those that are manifested by alter­ ations in the tensional force that is generated by the actin – myosin apparatus in the cell — play a pivotal role in the morpho logical changes that are adopted by tumour cells as they develop invasive phenotypes . one of the main regulators of cytoskeletal tension is the Rho family of GTPases . Among its many targets , Rho functions via Rho kinase ( RoCK ) to regulate myosin light chain phosphorylation through inhibitory phos­ phorylation of myosin phosphatase . Although studies on Rho activity in tumours have yielded contradictory results ( some reports provided substantial evidence supporting the notion that tumours have increased Rho activity and exhibit more cytoskeletal tension whereas others reported decreased Rho activity in solid tumours 61 – 66 ) it has become apparent that cytoskeletal tension significantly impacts signalling pathways that are implicated in cancer progression . Discrepancy in these studies may be partly attributable to the multi­ variant experimental conditions that were used and to the limitations that are associated with two dimensional ( 2D ) monolayer cell cultures . Furthermore , several studies have shown that cytoskeletal tension in tumours is influenced by ECM stiffness 2 , 58 , 67 . Tumours are generally much stiffer than the surrounding normal tissue . Concurrent changes in tissue stiffness , tumour growth due to proliferating cells and / or elevated interstitial fluid pressure all combine to affect the physical environment of cancerous cells inside the tumour and the adjacent normal cells 68 . This altered physical environment can modulate the fate of these cells through mechanotransduction ( FIG . 5 ) . For example , higher ECM stiffness can result in disrup­ tion of normal epithelial cell polarity , inducing mam­ mary epithelial cells to fill the cystic lumens in breast cancer 2 . Paszek and co­workers investigated whether the increased tissue stiffness that is observed in mam­ mary tumours in 3D matrices promotes the malig­ nant pheno type by influencing integrins , cell­surface receptors that connect specific ECM molecules to the cytoskeleton 2 ( FIG . 2 ) . They found that matrix stiffness ( exogenous force ) and cytoskeletal tension ( endogenous force ) functionally cooperate in a ‘mechano­circuit’ that modulates phenotypic transformations in tumours by coupling the mechanosensing role of integrins in relaying external physical cues to Rho and ERK sig­ nalling pathways . As such , the stiffer matrix disturbs epithelial morphogenesis by causing force­dependent aggregation and clustering of integrins , thus resulting in elevated Rho – RoCK­dependent cytoskeletal ten­ sion , which amplifies the formation and stabilization of focal adhesion assembly . This increase in cell­generated force and in focal adhesion assembly was accompanied by focal adhesion kinase signalling , RoCK­mediated Figure 5 | Mechanotransduction in cancer cells . Schematic representation of how increased extracellular matrix ( ECM ) stiffness and altered cytoskeletal tension can contribute to tumour formation . Increased ECM stiffness can arise from fibrosis or in response to increased cytoskeletal tension , caused , for examples , by oncogene ( Ras ) - driven extracellular - signal - regulated kinase ( ERK ) activation . The increased ECM stiffness is sensed by focal adhesions and activates integrins and focal adhesion kinase , thereby promoting focal adhesion assembly and stimulating the Rho – ROCK ( Rho kinase ) pathway . ROCK activation increases cytoskeletal tension by increasing myosin light chain ( MLC ) phosphorylation , which can result in further increases in ECM stiffness due to cellular mechanotransduction signalling , completing a self - enforcing ( positive ) feedback loop . Crosstalk between the Rho – ROCK pathway and the epidermal growth - factor receptor ( EGFR ) – Ras – ERK pathway , as well as modulation of growth - factor - dependent ERK activation by integrins , results in increased proliferation . ERK activation can also increase cytoskeletal tension through ROCK , further complementing the crosstalk between cytoskeletal tension and proliferative pathways . In breast cancer cells , the combined action of increased contractility and proliferation , triggered by increased ECM stiffness , may drive the undifferentiated and proliferative phenotype of mammary epithelial cancer cells and result in tumour formation . Decreasing Rho - mediated cytoskeletal contractility or ERK activity is sufficient to revert EGFR - transformed cells that form disorganized and invasive colonies into phenotypically normal cells that form polarized and growth - arrested acini in three - dimensional culture 2 . Figure is modified with permission from REF . 58  ( 2005 ) Elsevier . R E V I E W S 70 | jAnuARy 2009 | voluME 10 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio R E V I E W S © 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Pleural effusions Fluids that collect in the space between the lungs and the chest wall . disruption of adherens junctions , enhanced growth­ factor­dependent ERK activation driving tumour cell proliferation and disruption of basal polarity , hence abrogating lumen formation and remodelling mammary tissue architecture . Disrupting Rho or ERK signalling to reduce cytoskeletal tension to normal levels resulted in significant reduction in tumour cell proliferation and in repression of the malignant phenotype . Recent experi ments also demonstrated that both integrins and Rho­mediated regulation of intracellular tension are needed to promote the invasive behaviour of fibroblasts and cancer cells in co­cultures 69 , 70 . All cells , with the exception of haematopoietic cells , need to adhere to a solid substrate for normal cell­cycle progression and survival . notably , cancer cells lose this dependency on anchorage and cell­surface tension as they become able to invade other tissues 71 , 72 . This hall­ mark of metastatic cells , that is , their ability to break through the basal lamina , infiltrate blood vessels , exit the blood vessels and form new tumours , requires finely regulated biomechanical interactions between the cancer cell and its physical milieu . For example , adhesion of melanoma cells to the endothelial cells that line blood vessels ( a crucial step to extravasation and metastasis ) is in part regulated by the hydrodynamic shear rate , which mediates melanoma – leukocyte aggre­ gation thereby enhancing adhesion of tumour cells to the endothelium 73 . Moreover , although tumours are stiffer , metastatic cells can be distinguished from non­ invasive cancer cells and from normal cells by reduced cytoskeletal stiffness and increased deformability 60 , 74 , 75 . Recent evidence suggests that cell deformability strongly correlates with passage time through narrow pores and with enhanced metastatic potential in mouse melanoma cells 76 . Thus , increased cellular and nuclear deformability can enable the passage of metastatic can­ cer cells through size­limiting pores and blood vessels , resulting in enhanced metastatic spreading . Although some of these studies to measure the stiffness of cancer cells had technical limitations ( for example , measure­ ments of normally adherent cells were performed in suspension , or only a small number of cells were tested ) , the experiments illustrate that many cancer cells are characterized by altered physical properties and that biomechanical measurements of cells isolated from pleural effusions may have significant diagnostic and prognostic value . Clearly , cancer is not exclusively caused by defective mechanotransduction signalling , as deregulation of cell­ cycle control , defects in DnA­damage repair , suppression of apoptosis and altered adhesion and / or migration all contribute to this multifaceted disease . However , many of the cellular functions that are involved in tumor igenesis and metastasis are modulated by mechano transduction . Hence , altered mechanotransduction signalling may be an important component in tumour formation and metastatic progression . Improved cell culture modalities that would permit the study of tumour progression in a 3D context would greatly enhance our ability to deci­ pher the effects of mechanotransduction aberrations in cancer progression . Conclusions and future perspectives The above examples demonstrate that the mechano­ transduction feedback loops that couple cellular struc­ ture and function , and that modulate cellular structure and the extracellular environment , play an important role in the maintenance of normal tissue function . Moreover , events that disrupt these feedback loops , either by affecting cellular mechanosensing , intra­ cellular mechanotransduction signalling or intracellular or extracellular force distribution , can result in various clinical phenotypes . one challenge that remains is to determine the effects of defective structural or motor proteins on mechanotransduction . often , structure , function and mechanotransduction are tightly linked , as the examples of myosin , titin ( both recently identified as potential cellular mechanosensors ) , talin and lamins illustrate . Talin and vinculin are structural components of the focal adhesion complex , linking integrins to actin filaments ( FIG . 2 ) . Molecular dynamic models suggest that force­induced conformational changes in talin can activate a cryptic vinculin binding site , enabling subse­ quent recruitment of vinculin to reinforce focal adhe­ sion sites 77 . similarly , lamins were first identified as nuclear intermediate filaments , but were subsequently shown to have an important role in transcriptional regu lation as well as in DnA and RnA synthesis 78 . These examples highlight our still limited understand­ ing of the cellular structure – function relationships — that is , we still do not fully understand how the 3D organization of the cytoskeleton and the nucleus affect cellular functions such as DnA and RnA transcription . Future research should focus on how changes in intra­ cellular structure , through induced deformations or remodelling for example , can modulate these cellular functions and processes . understanding these processes may also provide us with new clues in the search for the elusive cellular mech­ anosensors and the question of how cells manage to sense their physical surroundings . The many reports of putative mechanosensing proteins suggest that multiple mecha­ nisms exist , even in single cell types , so that the interplay of redundant or complementary mechano transduction pathways has to be viewed in a ‘systems biology’ context 3 . This will be especially important when designing treat­ ment approaches for mechanotrans duction diseases . Although mutations in structural proteins may require the replacement of affected genes or cells by targeted gene or stem­cell therapy — currently a challenging and daunting task — an alternative approach for at least some of these diseases could be to correct downstream signal­ ling pathways that are disturbed by altered mechano­ transduction signalling . For some dominant­negative mutations , another strategy could be based on the pos­ sible redundancy of related proteins ; it might be possi­ ble to reduce levels of the mutant protein using RnA interference . such an approach has been proposed for a lamin A mutation that is associated with HGPs , as studies in a lamin A­deficient mouse model suggest that lamin C might be sufficient to maintain cellular function without an increase in cellular sensitivity 79 . Alternatively , some R E V I E W S nATuRE REvIEWs | Molecular cell Biology voluME 10 | jAnuARy 2009 | 71 f o c u S o n M E c h a n ot R a n S d u c t I o n © 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved cellular mechanical defects can potentially be directly addressed using small molecules approaches . For exam­ ple , the membrane sealant poloxamer 188 has been suc­ cessfully used to reduce damage to the plasma membrane in a mouse model of Duchenne muscular dystrophy , resulting in significant improvement in cellular function in cardiac and skeletal muscle 80 , 81 . The past years have provided increasing evidence that the finely tuned feedback between cells and their physi­ cal surroundings is crucial for many important cellular functions , ranging from differentiation to proliferation and viability . Events that interfere with these cellular mechanotransduction processes may thus result in dis­ eases that affect various tissues and organs . studying the mechanisms that underlie these diseases may lead us to new treatment strategies , improved tissue­engineering design and enhanced biomaterials , and will also provide us with an opportunity to learn more about mechano­ transduction and mechanobiology in normal cells and physiology . 1 . Engler , A . J . , Sen , S . , Sweeney , H . L . & Discher , D . E . Matrix elasticity directs stem cell lineage specification . Cell 126 , 677 – 689 ( 2006 ) . 2 . Paszek , M . J . et al . Tensional homeostasis and the malignant phenotype . Cancer Cell 8 , 241 – 254 ( 2005 ) . Presents an elegant study linking matrix stiffness and cytoskeletal tension to cancer progression . As a component of a ‘mechano - regulatory circuit’ that includes integrins , Rho and ERK , disruption of tensional homeostasis can promote a malignant phenotype in a model of breast cancer . 3 . Ingber , D . E . Cellular mechanotransduction : putting all the pieces together again . FASEB J . 20 , 811 – 827 ( 2006 ) . 4 . Orr , A . W . , Helmke , B . P . , Blackman , B . R . & Schwartz , M . A . Mechanisms of mechanotransduction . Dev . Cell 10 , 11 – 20 ( 2006 ) . 5 . Vogel , V . & Sheetz , M . Local force and geometry sensing regulate cell functions . Nature Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 7 , 265 – 275 ( 2006 ) . This is a comprehensive review of the literature on how physical cues in the microenvironment of a eukaryotic cell are sensed and converted to biochemical signals that define cell shape and regulate cell growth , differentiation and survival . 6 . Vollrath , M . A . , Kwan , K . Y . & Corey , D . P . The micromachinery of mechanotransduction in hair cells . Annu . Rev . Neurosci . 30 , 339 – 365 ( 2007 ) . Provides a detailed and mechanistic review of the process of mechanotransduction in hearing . It describes the constituents of this process from the mechanosensory elements in the inner ear to the genetic determinants ( mutations that are attributed to hearing loss ) . 7 . Eberl , D . F . , Hardy , R . W . & Kernan , M . J . Genetically similar transduction mechanisms for touch and hearing in Drosophila . J . Neurosci . 20 , 5981 – 5988 ( 2000 ) . 8 . Syntichaki , P . & Tavernarakis , N . Genetic models of mechanotransduction : the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans . Physiol . Rev . 84 , 1097 – 1153 ( 2004 ) . 9 . Lammerding , J . , Kamm , R . D . & Lee , R . T . Mechanotransduction in cardiac myocytes . Ann . NY Acad . Sci . 1015 , 53 – 70 ( 2004 ) . An overview of the signalling pathways that are implicated in cardiomyocyte mechanotransduction that discusses the diverse responses of a cardiac myocyte in its adaptation to alterations in its mechanical environment . 10 . Garcia - Cardena , G . , Comander , J . , Anderson , K . R . , Blackman , B . R . & Gimbrone , M . A . Jr . Biomechanical activation of vascular endothelium as a determinant of its functional phenotype . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 98 , 4478 – 4485 ( 2001 ) . 11 . Gimbrone , M . A . , Jr , Topper , J . N . , Nagel , T . , Anderson , K . R . & Garcia - Cardena , G . Endothelial dysfunction , hemodynamic forces , and atherogenesis . Ann . NY Acad . Sci . 902 , 230 – 240 ( 2000 ) . 12 . Haga , J . H . , Li , Y . S . & Chien , S . Molecular basis of the effects of mechanical stretch on vascular smooth muscle cells . J . Biomech . 40 , 947 – 960 ( 2007 ) . 13 . Li , Y . S . , Haga , J . H . & Chien , S . Molecular basis of the effects of shear stress on vascular endothelial cells . J . Biomech . 38 , 1949 – 1971 ( 2005 ) . 14 . Ng , C . P . , Helm , C . L . & Swartz , M . A . Interstitial flow differentially stimulates blood and lymphatic endothelial cell morphogenesis in vitro . Microvasc . Res . 68 , 258 – 264 ( 2004 ) . 15 . Hammerschmidt , S . , Kuhn , H . , Gessner , C . , Seyfarth , H . J . & Wirtz , H . Stretch - induced alveolar type II cell apoptosis : role of endogenous bradykinin and PI3K - Akt signaling . Am . J . Respir . Cell Mol . Biol . 37 , 699 – 705 ( 2007 ) . 16 . Burger , E . H . & Klein - Nulend , J . Mechanotransduction in bone — role of the lacuno - canalicular network . FASEB J . 13 , S101 – S112 ( 1999 ) . 17 . Wirtz , H . R . & Dobbs , L . G . The effects of mechanical forces on lung functions . Respir . Physiol . 119 , 1 – 17 ( 2000 ) . 18 . Serluca , F . C . , Drummond , I . A . & Fishman , M . C . Endothelial signaling in kidney morphogenesis : a role for hemodynamic forces . Curr . Biol . 12 , 492 – 497 ( 2002 ) . 19 . Cheng , C . et al . Atherosclerotic lesion size and vulnerability are determined by patterns of fluid shear stress . Circulation 113 , 2744 – 2753 ( 2006 ) . 20 . Klein - Nulend , J . , Bacabac , R . G . , Veldhuijzen , J . P . & Van Loon , J . J . Microgravity and bone cell mechanosensitivity . Adv . Space Res . 32 , 1551 – 1559 ( 2003 ) . 21 . Uhlig , S . Ventilation - induced lung injury and mechanotransduction : stretching it too far ? Am . J . Physiol . Lung Cell Mol . Physiol . 282 , L892 – L896 ( 2002 ) . 22 . Affonce , D . A . & Lutchen , K . R . New perspectives on the mechanical basis for airway hyperreactivity and airway hypersensitivity in asthma . J . Appl . Physiol . 101 , 1710 – 1719 ( 2006 ) . 23 . Ichimura , H . , Parthasarathi , K . , Quadri , S . , Issekutz , A . C . & Bhattacharya , J . Mechano - oxidative coupling by mitochondria induces proinflammatory responses in lung venular capillaries . J . Clin . Invest . 111 , 691 – 699 ( 2003 ) . 24 . Matheson , L . A . , Maksym , G . N . , Santerre , J . P . & Labow , R . S . Cyclic biaxial strain affects U937 macrophage - like morphology and enzymatic activities . J . Biomed . Mater . Res . A 76 , 52 – 62 ( 2006 ) . 25 . Coughlin , M . F . , Sohn , D . D . & Schmid - Schonbein , G . W . Recoil and stiffening by adherent leukocytes in response to fluid shear . Biophys . J . 94 , 1046 – 1051 ( 2008 ) . 26 . Ji , J . Y . , Jing , H . & Diamond , S . L . Hemodynamic regulation of inflammation at the endothelial – neutrophil interface . Ann . Biomed . Eng . 36 , 586 – 595 ( 2008 ) . 27 . Ostrow , L . W . & Sachs , F . Mechanosensation and endothelin in astrocytes—hypothetical roles in CNS pathophysiology . Brain Res . Brain Res . Rev . 48 , 488 – 508 ( 2005 ) . 28 . Jacques - Fricke , B . T . , Seow , Y . , Gottlieb , P . A . , Sachs , F . & Gomez , T . M . Ca 2 + influx through mechanosensitive channels inhibits neurite outgrowth in opposition to other influx pathways and release from intracellular stores . J . Neurosci . 26 , 5656 – 5664 ( 2006 ) . 29 . Lansman , J . B . & Franco - Obregon , A . Mechanosensitive ion channels in skeletal muscle : a link in the membrane pathology of muscular dystrophy . Clin . Exp . Pharmacol . Physiol . 33 , 649 – 656 ( 2006 ) . 30 . Holaska , J . M . Emerin and the nuclear lamina in muscle and cardiac disease . Circ . Res . 103 , 16 – 23 ( 2008 ) . 31 . Marian , A . J . Genetic determinants of cardiac hypertrophy . Curr . Opin . Cardiol . 23 , 199 – 205 ( 2008 ) . 32 . Barry , S . P . , Davidson , S . M . & Townsend , P . A . Molecular regulation of cardiac hypertrophy . Int . J . Biochem . Cell Biol . 40 , 2023 – 2039 ( 2008 ) . 33 . Heineke , J . & Molkentin , J . D . Regulation of cardiac hypertrophy by intracellular signalling pathways . Nature Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 7 , 589 – 600 ( 2006 ) . 34 . Grossman , W . , Jones , D . & McLaurin , L . P . Wall stress and patterns of hypertrophy in the human left ventricle . J . Clin . Invest . 56 , 56 – 64 ( 1975 ) . 35 . Palmer , B . M . Thick filament proteins and performance in human heart failure . Heart Fail . Rev . 10 , 187 – 197 ( 2005 ) . 36 . Heydemann , A . & McNally , E . M . Consequences of disrupting the dystrophin – sarcoglycan complex in cardiac and skeletal myopathy . Trends Cardiovasc . Med . 17 , 55 – 59 ( 2007 ) . Provides a neat example of how abnormalities in structural proteins that are implicated in intracellular force transmission and in cell - matrix coupling can result in disease . It describes how mutations in the dystrophin – glycoprotein complex contribute to the aetiology of cardiac and skeletal myopathy . 37 . Kumar , A . , Khandelwal , N . , Malya , R . , Reid , M . B . & Boriek , A . M . Loss of dystrophin causes aberrant mechanotransduction in skeletal muscle fibers . FASEB J . 18 , 102 – 113 ( 2004 ) . 38 . Claflin , D . R . & Brooks , S . V . Direct observation of failing fibers in muscles of dystrophic mice provides mechanistic insight into muscular dystrophy . Am . J . Physiol . Cell Physiol . 294 , C651 – C658 ( 2008 ) . 39 . Loufrani , L . et al . Absence of dystrophin in mice reduces NO - dependent vascular function and vascular density : total recovery after a treatment with the aminoglycoside gentamicin . Arterioscler . Thromb . Vasc . Biol . 24 , 671 – 676 ( 2004 ) . 40 . Hoshijima , M . Mechanical stress - strain sensors embedded in cardiac cytoskeleton : Z disk , titin , and associated structures . Am . J . Physiol . Heart Circ . Physiol . 290 , H1313 – H1325 ( 2006 ) . 41 . Lammerding , J . et al . Lamin A / C deficiency causes defective nuclear mechanics and mechanotransduction . J . Clin . Invest . 113 , 370 – 378 ( 2004 ) . 42 . Lammerding , J . et al . Abnormal nuclear shape and impaired mechanotransduction in emerin - deficient cells . J . Cell Biol . 170 , 781 – 791 ( 2005 ) . 43 . Tan , J . C . , Kalapesi , F . B . & Coroneo , M . T . Mechanosensitivity and the eye : cells coping with the pressure . Br . J . Ophthalmol . 90 , 383 – 388 ( 2006 ) . 44 . Johnstone , M . A . The aqueous outflow system as a mechanical pump : evidence from examination of tissue and aqueous movement in human and non - human primates . J . Glaucoma 13 , 421 – 438 ( 2004 ) . 45 . Cui , W . , Bryant , M . R . , Sweet , P . M . & McDonnell , P . J . Changes in gene expression in response to mechanical strain in human scleral fibroblasts . Exp . Eye Res . 78 , 275 – 284 ( 2004 ) . 46 . Hove , J . R . et al . Intracardiac fluid forces are an essential epigenetic factor for embryonic cardiogenesis . Nature 421 , 172 – 177 ( 2003 ) . 47 . Lecuit , T . & Lenne , P . F . Cell surface mechanics and the control of cell shape , tissue patterns and morphogenesis . Nature Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 8 , 633 – 644 ( 2007 ) . In addition to providing a concise review of the role of cell - surface mechanics in embryonic and tissue morphogenesis , this paper poses questions that are of vital importance to our understanding of developmental phenomena . 48 . Krieg , M . et al . Tensile forces govern germ - layer organization in zebrafish . Nature Cell Biol . 10 , 429 – 436 ( 2008 ) . 49 . Moore , K . A . et al . Control of basement membrane remodeling and epithelial branching morphogenesis in embryonic lung by Rho and cytoskeletal tension . Dev . Dyn . 232 , 268 – 281 ( 2005 ) . 50 . Patwari , P . & Lee , R . T . Mechanical control of tissue morphogenesis . Circ . Res . 103 , 234 – 243 ( 2008 ) . 51 . Nauli , S . M . et al . Polycystins 1 and 2 mediate mechanosensation in the primary cilium of kidney cells . Nature Genet . 33 , 129 – 137 ( 2003 ) . 52 . Delmas , P . Polycystins : from mechanosensation to gene regulation . Cell 118 , 145 – 148 ( 2004 ) . R E V I E W S 72 | jAnuARy 2009 | voluME 10 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio R E V I E W S © 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved This review sums up the literature on polycystin proteins and their roles as mechanically gated channels in mediating mechanosensation in kidney cells as well as in regulating gene expression . 53 . Al - Shali , K . Z . & Hegele , R . A . Laminopathies and atherosclerosis . Arterioscler . Thromb . Vasc . Biol . 24 , 1591 – 1595 ( 2004 ) . 54 . Stehbens , W . E . , Delahunt , B . , Shozawa , T . & Gilbert - Barness , E . Smooth muscle cell depletion and collagen types in progeric arteries . Cardiovasc . Pathol . 10 , 133 – 136 ( 2001 ) . 55 . Capell , B . C . , Collins , F . S . & Nabel , E . G . Mechanisms of cardiovascular disease in accelerated aging syndromes . Circ . Res . 101 , 13 – 26 ( 2007 ) . 56 . Davies , P . F . Flow - mediated endothelial mechanotransduction . Physiol . Rev . 75 , 519 – 560 ( 1995 ) . 57 . Verstraeten , V . L . , Ji , J . Y . , Cummings , K . S . , Lee , R . T . & Lammerding , J . Increased mechanosensitivity and nuclear stiffness in Hutchinson – Gilford progeria cells : effects of farnesyltransferase inhibitors . Aging Cell 7 , 383 – 393 ( 2008 ) . 58 . Huang , S . & Ingber , D . E . Cell tension , matrix mechanics , and cancer development . Cancer Cell 8 , 175 – 176 ( 2005 ) . 59 . Wolf , K . et al . Multi - step pericellular proteolysis controls the transition from individual to collective cancer cell invasion . Nature Cell Biol . 9 , 893 – 904 ( 2007 ) . 60 . Suresh , S . Biomechanics and biophysics of cancer cells . Acta Biomater . 3 , 413 – 438 ( 2007 ) . 61 . Clark , E . A . , Golub , T . R . , Lander , E . S . & Hynes , R . O . Genomic analysis of metastasis reveals an essential role for RhoC . Nature 406 , 532 – 535 ( 2000 ) . 62 . Sahai , E . & Marshall , C . J . RHO - GTPases and cancer . Nature Rev . Cancer 2 , 133 – 142 ( 2002 ) . 63 . Horiuchi , A . et al . Up - regulation of small GTPases , RhoA and RhoC , is associated with tumor progression in ovarian carcinoma . Lab . Invest . 83 , 861 – 870 ( 2003 ) . 64 . Lozano , E . , Betson , M . & Braga , V . M . Tumor progression : Small GTPases and loss of cell – cell adhesion . Bioessays 25 , 452 – 463 ( 2003 ) . 65 . Sahai , E . & Marshall , C . J . Differing modes of tumour cell invasion have distinct requirements for Rho / ROCK signalling and extracellular proteolysis . Nature Cell Biol . 5 , 711 – 719 ( 2003 ) . 66 . Burridge , K . & Wennerberg , K . Rho and Rac take center stage . Cell 116 , 167 – 179 ( 2004 ) . 67 . Paszek , M . J . & Weaver , V . M . The tension mounts : mechanics meets morphogenesis and malignancy . J . Mammary Gland Biol . Neoplasia 9 , 325 – 342 ( 2004 ) . 68 . Sarntinoranont , M . , Rooney , F . & Ferrari , M . Interstitial stress and fluid pressure within a growing tumor . Ann . Biomed . Eng . 31 , 327 – 335 ( 2003 ) . 69 . Hebner , C . , Weaver , V . M . & Debnath , J . Modeling morphogenesis and oncogenesis in three - dimensional breast epithelial cultures . Annu . Rev . Pathol . 3 , 313 – 339 ( 2008 ) . 70 . Gaggioli , C . et al . Fibroblast - led collective invasion of carcinoma cells with differing roles for RhoGTPases in leading and following cells . Nature Cell Biol . 9 , 1392 – 1400 ( 2007 ) . 71 . Huang , S . & Ingber , D . E . The structural and mechanical complexity of cell - growth control . Nature Cell Biol . 1 , E131 – E138 ( 1999 ) . 72 . Wang , H . B . , Dembo , M . & Wang , Y . L . Substrate flexibility regulates growth and apoptosis of normal but not transformed cells . Am . J . Physiol . Cell Physiol . 279 , C1345 – C1350 ( 2000 ) . 73 . Liang , S . , Slattery , M . J . , Wagner , D . , Simon , S . I . & Dong , C . Hydrodynamic shear rate regulates melanoma - leukocyte aggregation , melanoma adhesion to the endothelium , and subsequent extravasation . Ann . Biomed . Eng . 36 , 661 – 671 ( 2008 ) . 74 . Cross , S . E . et al . Nanomechanical properties of glucans and associated cell - surface adhesion of Streptococcus mutans probed by atomic force microscopy under in situ conditions . Microbiology 153 , 3124 – 3132 ( 2007 ) . 75 . Guck , J . et al . Optical deformability as an inherent cell marker for testing malignant transformation and metastatic competence . Biophys . J . 88 , 3689 – 3698 ( 2005 ) . 76 . Ochalek , T . , Nordt , F . J . , Tullberg , K . & Burger , M . M . Correlation between cell deformability and metastatic potential in B16 - F1 melanoma cell variants . Cancer Res . 48 , 5124 – 5128 ( 1988 ) . 77 . Lee , S . E . , Kamm , R . D . & Mofrad , M . R . Force - induced activation of talin and its possible role in focal adhesion mechanotransduction . J . Biomech . 40 , 2096 – 2106 ( 2007 ) . 78 . Mattout - Drubezki , A . & Gruenbaum , Y . Dynamic interactions of nuclear lamina proteins with chromatin and transcriptional machinery . Cell Mol . Life Sci . 60 , 2053 – 2063 ( 2003 ) . 79 . Fong , L . G . et al . Prelamin A and lamin A appear to be dispensable in the nuclear lamina . J . Clin . Invest . 116 , 743 – 752 ( 2006 ) . 80 . Yasuda , S . et al . Dystrophic heart failure blocked by membrane sealant poloxamer . Nature 436 , 1025 – 1029 ( 2005 ) . 81 . Ng , R . , Metzger , J . M . , Claflin , D . R . & Faulkner , J . A . Poloxamer 188 reduces the contraction - induced force decline in lumbrical muscles from Mdx mice . Am . J . Physiol . Cell Physiol . 295 , C146 – C150 ( 2008 ) . 82 . Perozo , E . Gating prokaryotic mechanosensitive channels . Nature Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 7 , 109 – 119 ( 2006 ) . 83 . Holt , J . R . & Corey , D . P . Two mechanisms for transducer adaptation in vertebrate hair cells . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 97 , 11730 – 11735 ( 2000 ) . 84 . Haque , F . et al . SUN1 interacts with nuclear lamin A and cytoplasmic nesprins to provide a physical connection between the nuclear lamina and the cytoskeleton . Mol . Cell . Biol . 26 , 3738 – 3751 ( 2006 ) . 85 . Chang , A . N . & Potter , J . D . Sarcomeric protein mutations in dilated cardiomyopathy . Heart Fail . Rev . 10 , 225 – 235 ( 2005 ) . 86 . Nonaka , S . et al . Randomization of left – right asymmetry due to loss of nodal cilia generating leftward flow of extraembryonic fluid in mice lacking KIF3B motor protein . Cell 95 , 829 – 837 ( 1998 ) . 87 . Dong , C . , Slattery , M . J . , Liang , S . & Peng , H . H . Melanoma cell extravasation under flow conditions is modulated by leukocytes and endogenously produced interleukin 8 . Mol . Cell Biomech . 2 , 145 – 159 ( 2005 ) . 88 . Wozniak , M . A . & Chen , C . S . Mechanotransduction in development : a growing role for contractility . Nature Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 23 Dec 2008 ( doi : 10 . 1038 / nrm2592 ) . 89 . Chalfie , M . Neurosensory mechanotransduction . Nature Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 23 Dec 2008 ( doi : 10 . 1038 / nrm2595 ) . 90 . Hahn , C . & Schwartz , M . A . Mechanotransduction in vascular physiology and atherogenesis . Nature Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 23 Dec 2008 ( doi : 10 . 1038 / nrm2596 ) . Acknowledgements We apologize to all those authors whose papers we could not cite because of space limitations . We thank R . T . Lee and P . Patwari for insightful discussions and helpful comments . This work was supported by National Institutes of Health grants HL082792 , NS059348 , the American Heart Association grant 0635359N and a research grant from the Progeria Research Foundation . DATABASES Entrez Gene : http : / / www . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / entrez / query . fcgi ? db = gene Iex1 oMIM : http : / / www . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / entrez / query . fcgi ? db = OMIM Duchenne muscular dystrophy | Emery – Dreifuss muscular dystrophy | Hutchinson – Gilford progeria syndrome | Kartagener’s syndrome uniProtKB : http : / / ca . expasy . org / sprot Emerin | ERK1 | ERK2 | tenascin C FURTHER INFORMATION Jan Lammerding’s homepage : http : / / vascular . bwh . harvard . edu / Lammerding all linkS are active in the online PDF R E V I E W S nATuRE REvIEWs | Molecular cell Biology voluME 10 | jAnuARy 2009 | 73 f o c u S o n M E c h a n ot R a n S d u c t I o n © 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved