a r X i v : 0709 . 2182v2 [ c ond - m a t . s o f t ] 16 J a n 2008 Rheology of two - dimensional F - actin networks associated with a lipid interface Robert Walder , 1 , Alex J . Levine 2 , 3 , and Michael Dennin 1 1 Department of Physics & Astronomy , University of California , Irvine , CA 92697 2 Department of Chemistry & Biochemistry , University of California , Los Angeles , CA 90095 3 California Nanosystems Institute , UCLA , Los Angeles , CA 90095 ( Dated : February 1 , 2008 ) We report on the surface rheology of cross - linked F - actin networks associated with a lipid mono - layer at the air - water interface of a Langmuir monolayer . The rheological measurements are made using a Couette cell . These data demonstrate that the network has a ﬁnite elastic modulus that grows as a function of the cross - linking concentration . We also note that under steady - state ﬂow the system behaves as a power law ﬂuid in which the eﬀective viscosity decreases with imposed shear . PACS numbers : 83 . 60 . Df , 68 . 08 . - p , 82 . 35 . Pq 82 . 70 . Gg , I . INTRODUCTION The cytoskeleton of eukaryotic cells is a chemically heterogeneous assemblage of ﬁlamentous proteins , cross - linking agents , and molecular motors . This stiﬀ ﬁlamen - tous network is mechanically linked to the plasma mem - brane and comprises the principal structural element of the cell . It confers mechanical stability and is the site of force generation and morphological control of the cell body . As such it is essential for such biologically impor - tant processes as intracellular traﬃcking , cell motility , and the measurement of applied stress . In the past great progress has been made in elucidating the underlying physical properties of the cytoskeleton by building highly simpliﬁed in vitro model systems , which provide controlled laboratories for exploring the mechan - ics of chemically well - controlled systems extracted from the complex cytoskeleton . From this work has emerged a well - developed model of semiﬂexible F - actin networks and solutions . While much is currently known about the mechanics of semiﬂexible networks [ 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 ] , less is un - derstood about the mechanical properties of this biopoly - mer network when mechanically associated with the ﬂuid plasma membrane of the cell . One reason for this is that the coupling of a semiﬂexible network to the cell mem - brane is a distinct feature of cellular mechanics [ 5 , 6 , 7 , 8 ] that has not been as well studied using simpliﬁed in vitro models . Previous work in this area has been done using indentation - based mechanical probes of F - actin coated lipid vesicles [ 9 ] and microrheology [ 10 , 11 ] . In this work we present a new biomimetic model for this composite structure that we believe is more amenable to detailed mechanical study and the visual - ization of the strain ﬁeld within it . We have developed a cross - linked F - actin network that is mechanically associ - ated with a DPPC monolayer in a Langmuir trough by biotin / streptavidin bonds . This coupling approximates the more complex linkage between the physiological cy - toskeleton and the plasma membrane eﬀected via special - ized protein complexes [ 12 ] . It is important to keep in mind that this is truly a minimal model of the composite membrane / cytoskeleton system . The full biological sys - tem includes signiﬁcantly more complex linkages between actin ﬁlaments and the actin - lipid connection . For ex - ample , there are multiple inter - ﬁlament cross - links , some of which introduce interesting elastic properties ( such as Filamin linkers ) [ 13 , 14 , 15 ] . Many physiologically rele - vant cross - linking proteins are labile generating transient bonds . The cross - linking scheme employed here , how - ever , creates permanent cross - links on the time - scale of the experiments . We brieﬂy speculate on the rheological signature of such labile cross - linkers in the summary of this work . Even though the choice of a simpler system of linkage molecules severely limits its chemical complexity , it is precisely this choice of system that allows for repro - ducible , quantitative measurements in a system that is more amenable to theoretical investigation [ 16 , 17 , 18 ] . We suspect that the rheological eﬀect of the mono - layer is indirect . In this work , the lipid monolayer is in a highly ﬂuid phase , so that it has no zero - frequency elas - tic modulus . We estimate that , at the frequencies probed here , the viscous stresses in the lipid monolayer are 2 - 3 orders of magnitude less than the elastic stresses in the actin network . Therefore , we do not expect it to make any direct contribution to the measured mechanical prop - erties of the complex . By creating a thin - layer of F - actin bound to the monolayer , however , we anticipate that we have likely generated an anisotropic network in which the long F - actin ﬁlaments are tangent to the lipid decorated surface . This anisotropic structure reﬂects the coarse ge - ometry of the cell’s dense cortical cytoskeleton , and we explore the mechanics of this highly anisotropic network . Additionally , the monolayer serves as a protective barrier for the actin , preventing denaturation at the air - water interface . The thin - ﬁlm geometry has other beneﬁts not fully exploited in this work : one can directly examine the resulting planar strain ﬁeld under stress . This fea - ture of the system will be more fully discussed elsewhere . Finally , one can consider the binding of the network to denser lipid monolayers whose elastic moduli can com - pete with those of the F - actin network . However , the impact of denser monolayers on the response of the sys - tem will be the subject of future work [ 19 ] . We rheologically probe this network using a newly de - veloped Couette - style , surface rheometer , the details of which will be presented elsewhere [ 20 ] . In this ﬁrst report 2 on the mechanics of the F - actin / monolayer system , we focus primarily on the steady - state shearing of the net - work . In this state we expect that the F - actin network ﬂows due to continual rearrangements of cross - linked or sterically jammed collections of ﬁlaments . These ﬁlament networks must transiently interpenetrate each other and then disengage during the ﬂow . Though this regime does not have direct biological applications , it is important for the complete material characterization of the system . It provides important baseline measurements on the bulk elastic and viscous properties that will be useful in future microrheological studies of the network . Under steady - state shear , we ﬁnd that the material is highly nonlinear in its rheological response behaving as a shear - thinning , power - law ﬂuid . The power - law expo - nent is weakly dependent on the density of permanent cross - links in the system . We ﬁnd no evidence for a yield stress , and the observed elastic modulus is weakly de - pendent on shear rate . Based on these data we believe that our network consists of permanently bonded patches of ﬁlaments that interpenetrate each other ; these patches exchange nearest neighbors during the shear . As such the network may be characterized as having many metastable states separated by low energy barriers . It has been sug - gested that such system should obey a type of universal “soft glassy rheology . ” We ﬁnd that our rheological data in this steadily ﬂowing state is indeed consistent with the predictions of this theory [ 21 ] . By examining the initiation and cessation of shear , we explore the time - dependent viscoelastic response of the material . We ﬁnd that features of the linear response of the F - actin network can be accounted for using a gener - alized Maxwell model having two stress relaxation times . Our data suggest that the elastic modulus of the network grows weakly , but in a linear fashion with cross - linker density ; it also plateaus at higher cross - linking densities suggesting that steric hinderances prevent the saturation of all available cross - linkers in the system . In the remainder of this article , we ﬁrst discuss brieﬂy the experimental design of the apparatus , as well our methods for analyzing the data in section II . We then present our data and discuss its interpretation in section III , before concluding with a discussion of the implica - tions of this work to future investigations in section IV . II . MATERIALS AND METHODS A . Preparation of actin - lipid composite material We create the F - actin monolayer in vitro by polymer - izing for one hour G - actin monomers along with the vari - able fraction of biotynlated actin monomers in a F - actin buﬀer ( Tris HCl buﬀer pH = 7 . 4 , 0 . 2 mM ATP , 3 mM MgCl 2 , 0 . 2 mM CaCl 2 ) . In each preparation we ﬁxed the concentration of the non - biotynlated actin to 2 mg / mL . We use the parameter R , which is the ratio of biotynlated actin monomers to G - actin monomers , to characterize the cross linking density of our actin ﬁlament networks . We polymerize the actin using this standard procedure to ensure that actin ﬁlaments are formed . With this proce - dure , we expect ﬁlaments that average 5 µ m in length . Because our apparatus requires relatively large volumes of ﬂuid , we diluted these actin solutions 100X and added Rhodamine phalloidin and streptavidin . The phalloidin stabilizes the F - actin ﬁlaments against depolymerization during the experiment [ 23 ] while the streptavidin cross - links the biotynlated monomers creating a permanent , stress - bearing semiﬂexible polymer network . Once di - luted , we estimate that the mesh size of the F - actin net - work is 2 . 7 µ m [ 22 ] . We waited 30 minutes for the com - pletion of the cross - linking reaction before transferring the protein solution into the Couette trough and adding a lipid solution ( 93 % DPPC , 7 % DPPE - Biotynl ) at the surface . We then allowed the system to equilibrate for one hour in order for the F - actin network to diﬀuse to and irreversibly bind to the biotynlated monolayer [ 24 ] . We then performed the rheological measurements over a period of about two hours . During this period we ob - served no evidence of a signiﬁcant change in rheological properties reﬂecting either continued cross - linking or net - work degradation . These measurements were made using a Couette surface viscometer designed speciﬁcally for this work . The depth proﬁle of actin - lipid composite materials formed at the air - water interface has been previously characterized by neutron reﬂectivity experiments [ 25 ] . These experiments show that that a monolayer of close packed actin ﬁlaments will bind to a layer of streptavidin and thus irreversibly bind to the lipid monolayer . There - fore , we expect that the we have created a low yield stress solid associated with the air - water interface due to a combination of biotyn – streptavidin cross - links and steric interactions between ﬁlaments . In this set of rheologi - cal measurements , we examine primarily the steady - state ﬂow properties of this network under time - independent shearing imposed at the boundaries . We will explore the small strain elastic behavior of this material in future work [ 19 ] . B . Couette Surface Rheology with Torsion Pendulum The Couette surface viscometer is a modiﬁed Couette rheometer ( see [ 26 ] for a description of the main prin - ciples of operation ) designed speciﬁcally to measure the viscosity of surface ﬁlms . The details of the instrument will be described in a separate publication [ 20 ] ; however , its main features are reviewed here . The apparatus con - sists of a teﬂon cylindrical container forming the outer barrier ( of radius r o = 3 . 75 cm ) of the sample and an teﬂon inner barrier ( of radius r i = 1 . 25 cm ) coupled to a torsion pendulum . A wire coil attached to the torsion pendulum is positioned within a second set of coils . An ac current in the second set of coils generates a high fre - 3 FIG . 1 : A schematic diagram of the Couette trough used in the experiments . The F - actin and lipid monolayer completely ﬁlls the surface between the inner and outer teﬂon cylinders . The outer cylinder is rotated at constant angular velocity and angular displacement of the inner cylinder is monitored via the magnet rigidly coupled to torsion wire . quency magnetic ﬁeld that induces a voltage in the coil attached to the torsion pendulum . The angular position of the torsion pendulum is detected by the magnitude of the induced voltage in the attached coil . A schematic diagram of the experiment is shown in Fig . 1 . We used a lock - in ampliﬁer to detect the small induced voltages at the same frequency but 90 ◦ out of phase with the reference signal powering the external magnetic ﬁeld . The angular position as a function of induced voltage is calibrated using an angular translation stage . From the angular displacement we calculate the torque T on the inner barrier using the torsion constant of the torsion pendulum , which we determined previously . The torque T measured at the inner rotor ( but constant throughout the system ) of radius r i can then be related to the shear stress there by geometry : σ rθ | r = r i = T 2 πr 2 i , ( 1 ) where r and θ are the radial and azimuthal coordinates respectively on the surface of the Langmuir monolayer . We suppress these indices hereafter . The raw data con - sists of torque versus time curves under constant rate of strain or after the cessation of applied strain . This data is converted into elastic modulus , viscosity , and relaxation time constants using well - deﬁned procedures . However , two aspects of this rheometer are non - standard : it op - erates in a wide - gap geometry and the inner cylinder is free to move . Therefore , it is worth summarizing the im - pact of these features on the measurements of the elastic modulus and the viscosity . These will be discussed in the next section in the context of an example torque versus time curve . III . RESULTS As previously discussed , we focus on steady - state , constant shear rate rheological studies to examine the changes in the rheology of the network as a function of cross - linker density . We also study the response of the system at the initiation and cessation of shear to examine the linear , time - dependent shear modulus . The studies of the initiation of ﬂow allow for determination of a lin - ear elastic modulus for the system , while examining the stress relaxation at the cessation of shear can be used to measure the stress relaxation time in the medium . We parameterize the linear , time - dependent stress response during the initiation and cessation of ﬂow by introduc - ing a simple Maxwell ﬂuid model [ 27 ] . Examining the steady - state rheology , we observe a strong shear - rate de - pendence of our results that is well - described by a power - law ﬂuid model [ 28 ] . Due to this nonlinear behavior , we do not expect that the simple Maxwell model will also capture the steady - state ﬂow . By varying the density of cross - linkers , we study how the nonlinearity of the mate - rial under steady - state shear and how the elastic modulus of the network changes due to changes in the density of cross - linkers . 0 20 40 60 80 100 120 0 5 10 0 2 4 6 0 5 10 S t r e ss ( 10 - 6 N / m ) Time ( sec ) s t r e ss ( 10 - 6 N / m ) time ( s ) FIG . 2 : Typical data set : The F - actin network has a cross linker density of R = 0 . 005 . At t = 0 the outer cylinder reaches a ﬁxed angular velocity of 0 . 4 rad / sec ( which cor - responds to a shear rate of 1 . 3 s − 1 ) . The measured torque rapidly reaches a plateau and returns to zero when the outer cylinder is stopped ( see Fig . 3 ) . Insert shows a closeup of the initial rise . All the data from the experiments performed using our Couette style apparatus share similar phenomenol - ogy . We show a typical example of the time evolution of the measured torque from the initiation of shear to steady - state in Fig . 2 . In Fig . 3 , we show stress decay at the cessation of shear and a linear ﬁt to the essentially exponential decay of stress on a semilog plot ( inset ) . At times before t = 0 , the outer barrier is at rest ; these data are used to zero the measurement of the torque . At t = 0 , the outer barrier begins to rotate at a ﬁxed angular veloc - ity . Given the temporal resolution of the instrument we may consider this change in angular velocity to be eﬀec - tively instantaneous . After a brief interval of stress over - shoot , the system relaxes to a steady - state torque , which 4 can be interpreted in terms of the steady - state viscous re - sponse of the surface ﬁlm . The observed ﬂuctuations in the torque at steady - state system are larger in magnitude than those found in the stationary system . Therefore , the torque ﬂuctuations in the steadily sheared state suggest the quasi - periodic build up and decay of internal stress - bearing structures associated with the monolayer . In this article , however , we focus on the time - averaged response of the material in the steady - state . Finally , once the ro - tation of the outer barrier ceases , the measured torque is observed to decay to zero in an exponential fashion – see Fig . 3 . We ﬁrst describe how each section of the stress response is analyzed , and then discuss the behavior as a function of cross - linker density . The growth of the shear stress immediately after the initiation of strain is used to extract information about the elastic modulus of the interface ( see insert in Fig . 2 ) . In this regime of small strains , the linear response of the stress is assured so we may write [ 29 ] σ ( t ) = Z t 0 dt ′ G ( t − t ′ ) γ ( t ′ ) , ( 2 ) where γ ( t ) is the strain history of the sample . We have implicitly assumed that there was no strain before t = 0 . Expressing this in the frequency domain , prescribing the strain to be γ ( t ) = ˙ γtθ ( t ) where ˙ γ is a constant , and θ ( t ) is the usual step function , and expanding for t −→ 0 + , we may write σ ( t ) = ˙ γ Z t 0 dt ′ Z ∞ −∞ dω 2 π G ∗ ( ω ) e iω ( t − t ′ ) t ′ = G ′ ( 0 ) ˙ γt + O ( t 2 ) , ( 3 ) where G ∗ ( ω ) = G ′ ( ω ) + iG ′′ ( ω ) is the Fourier transform of the viscoelastic shear modulus appearing in Eq . 2 . Thus , for an ideal apparatus , we may interpret the slope of the initial rise in the stress in terms of the integral of the time - dependent elastic modulus G ′ ( 0 ) = lim t − > 0 + Z ∞ −∞ G ′ ( ω ) e − iωt dω 2 π . ( 4 ) If the storage modulus is dominated by its long - time or low - frequency behavior , we may interpret the initial growth in the stress in terms of the elastic modulus of F - actin network associated with the Langmuir monolayer . It should be noted that because the inner cylinder moves during the initial shear , one has to deﬁne the ini - tial strain carefully . Therefore , in practice , the elastic modulus G ′ ( 0 ) ≡ G is measured using the following rela - tion [ 30 ] : G = ω Ω − ω (cid:16) κ 4 π (cid:17) (cid:18) 1 r 2 i − 1 r 2 o (cid:19) , ( 5 ) where Ω is the angular rotation speed of the outer cylin - der , ω is the angular rotation speed of the inner cylinder , κ is the torsion constant of the supporting wire , and r o is the outer cylinder radius . For more details on the this procedure , see Ref . [ 30 ] . Because the initial stress rise is approximately linear and the subsequent decay is exponential , it is reasonable to treat the material as a simple Maxwell ﬂuid having a single stress relaxation time τ , so that we may write G ∗ ( ω ) = G 0 1 − iωτ ( 6 ) for the viscoelastic shear modulus , then using Eqs . 3 and 4 , this allows us to identify our previously deﬁned elastic modulus ( based on the initial slope of the stress versus time curve ) with G 0 . The other element of the Maxwell model is the stress relaxation time τ . At the cessation of shear ( at time T ) , the stress relaxes as σ ( t ) = G 0 ˙ γτe − ( t − T ) / τ , ( 7 ) for times t > T . An example of the stress relaxation is given in Fig . 3 . By considering the log of the stress versus time , we are able to extract a relaxation time . Over the range of cross - linker densities studied , we observed no dependence of the relaxation time on cross - liner density . The value is τ = ( 1 . 58 ± 0 . 3 ) s . Closer examination of the stress relaxation reveals that it is better ﬁt by a double exponential decay and that there is no signiﬁcant im - provement in the ﬁt resulting from the use of additional exponential decays . There is a short relaxation time on the order of seconds for which the exponential has an amplitude roughly an order of magnitude larger than the second exponential . For the example in Fig . 3 , the short relaxation time is 1 . 9 s with amplitude 32 . 1 × 10 − 6 N / m and the long relaxation time is 15 . 4 s with an amplitude of 1 . 8 × 10 − 6 N / m . In the context of the Maxwell model , the steady - state viscosity is given by τG 0 . This provides a consistency check on the model . In our case , if we use the value of G 0 from the ﬂow start - up , the values of τG 0 range between 10 − 3 and 10 − 4 Ns / m over the shear rates studied . In contrast , the viscosity ranged from 10 − 4 and 10 − 5 Ns / m , roughly a factor of 10 smaller . Surprisingly , both quanti - ties had roughly the same scaling with shear - rate . Com - bining this particular break - down of the Maxwell model with the fact that the relaxation times τ are indepen - dent of cross - linker density suggests the following picture for the system . During the initial applied strain , the system is suﬃciently linear that we are able to measure the elastic response due to both stretching of cross - linked ﬁlaments and the interactions between domains of cross - linked ﬁlaments . Once the system ﬂows , the dissipation is dominated by the interaction between the domains . Like - wise , the dominant stress relaxation is between domains , and therefore , τ does not depend on the cross - linking concentration . Finally , the break up of the domains dur - ing steady shear explains the inconsistency between G 0 measured at start - up and from ﬂow cessation . It is the role played by the cross - linkers that results in a larger 5 2 . 0 2 . 5 3 . 0 3 . 5 4 . 0 4 . 5 0 . 3 0 . 6 0 . 9 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 0 2 4 6 8 s t r e ss ( 10 - 6 N / m ) time ( s ) s t r e ss ( 10 - 6 N / m ) time ( s ) FIG . 3 : ( color online ) The torque versus time for the cessation of ﬂow for the F - actin network with a cross linker density of R = 0 . 005 . The outer cylinder was rotated with a ﬁxed angular velocity of 0 . 4 rad / sec ( shear rate 1 . 3 ) , and stopped at t = 0 s . The solid line is a ﬁt to a double exponential decay as discussed in the text . Insert : Semi - log plot of the same data showing just the early time behavior and the dominant relaxation time . The solid red line is a ﬁt to the data with time constant 1 . 9 s . measured elastic modulus than one would expect for the Maxwell model . To further test this picture , we consider the steady - state viscosity in more detail . The steady - state viscos - ity of the system is strongly shear - rate dependent ( see Fig . 4 ) . This is another reason that we are not surprised at the failure of the Maxwell model to completely de - scribe the behavior , as the Maxwell model is a linear response model . We return to this point in our conclu - sions – see section IV . It is worth pointing out another sign of the failure of linear rheological models ; the ob - served stress overshoot at the initiation of ﬂow – see Figs . 2 . Stress overshoot has been observed in experi - ments [ 31 , 32 ] and in molecular dynamics simulations [ 33 ] of ﬂexible polymer melts and solutions although care must be taken to distinguish this eﬀect from system - atic errors introduced by the rheometer [ 34 ] . Theoret - ical models of this nonlinear rheological eﬀect have been proposed for polymeric liquids [ 35 , 36 ] and even metallic glasses [ 37 ] . Because our system operates in a wide - gap mode , we will review how the viscosity is measured . Before dis - cussing the nonlinear response of our system , it is useful to recall the response of a Newtonian ﬂuid in a Cou - ette rheometer with an arbitrary gap width . Solving the Navier - Stokes equations for the Couette ﬂow [ 38 ] in steady - state between a rotating outer cylinder of radius r o at speed v 0 = Ω r o and a stationary inner cylinder of radius r i we ﬁnd that the only non - vanishing component of the rate of strain tensor ˙ γ rθ = ˙ γ takes the form ˙ γ = 2Ω r 2 o r 2 o − r 2 i (cid:16) r i r (cid:17) 2 . ( 8 ) For a viscous , Newtonian ﬂuid with linear relationship between the shear stress and the shear rate of strain , we ﬁnd that the torque can be related to the viscosity and rotation rate of the outer cylinder by [ 28 ] T = 4 πηr 2 i r 2 o Ω ( r 2 o − r 2 i ) , ( 9 ) where , η is the surface viscosity . The aqueous subphase makes only a small contribution to the shear stresses in the system , so using the above relation Eq . 9 we can de - termine the eﬀective viscosity of the interface in steady - state . An important feature of this relationship is the fact that the torque is a linear function of the rotation rate . In Fig . 4 ( a ) we show the dependence of the torque T on the rotation rate of the outer cylinder in steady state for both the unlinked actin network and the high - est R value used . The ( red ) line is the best linear ﬁt to the data on this logarithmic plot demonstrating a power - law dependence of the measured torque upon the shear rate . Systems displaying this sort of nonlinear rheology are typically referred to as power - law ﬂuids [ 39 , 40 ] , in which case one has the following relation between stress and rate of strain : σ = η ′ ˙ γ n ∝ Ω n , ( 10 ) where n is the exponent of the power - law ﬂuid . In such a system , the torque versus rotation curve can be used to determine the exponent in the relation between stress and rate of strain . In this case , the eﬀective viscosity ( σ / ˙ γ ) depends on shear rate as η = η ′ ˙ γ n − 1 , ( 11 ) As discussed above for a case of a Newtonian ﬂuid , it is possible to extract the eﬀective viscosity from the mea - sured torque T at the inner cylinder and the imposed angular velocity of the outer cylinder Ω , once the value of n is determined . In this case , however , we must modify Eq . 9 to account for the nonlinear dependence of stress on shear rate given by Eq . 11 . For a power - law ﬂuid , the relationship between the measured stress at the inner rotor ( determined from Eq . 1 ) and the angular velocity of the outer rotor Ω is given by [ 28 ] σ = η ˙ γ = 2 η n Ω r 2 / n o r 2 / n o − r 2 / n i , ( 12 ) so the eﬀective viscosity can be calculated in terms of the experimentally measured parameters using Eqs . 1 and 12 . We ﬁnd that η = T ( r 2 / n o − r 2 / n i ) n 4 π Ω r 2 i r 2 / n o . ( 13 ) One does have to be concerned that slip at the walls may play a role in inﬂuencing the measured values of the viscosity . Based on previous work , however , we do not expect slip to play a role in this system [ 41 ] . 6 10 - 3 10 - 2 10 - 1 10 - 4 10 - 3 10 - 2 T o r que ( 10 - 6 N m ) Rotation Rate ( rad / sec ) 0 . 01 0 . 1 1 0 . 01 0 . 1 v i sc o s i t y ( g / s ) shear rate ( s - 1 ) FIG . 4 : ( color online ) Torque and surface viscosity measure - ments on an uncross - linked F - actin network ( R = 0 , black squares ) and a F - actin network with R = 0 . 04 cross linker density ( red circles ) at standard concentration associated with the lipid monolayer . ( a ) Torque vs . rotation rate of the outer cylinder showing a power - law dependence expected for a ﬂuid in which the viscosity decays as a power of shear rate . See Eq . 11 . The lines are the best ﬁts to the data . ( b ) The surface viscosity of the composite monolayer extracted from the data in ( a ) . See Eqs . 12 , 13 . The lines are the best ﬁt to the data . In Fig . 4 ( b ) we extract the eﬀective viscosity from these data using Eq . 13 . The ( red ) line again represents the best linear ﬁt to the data on a logarithmic plot and shows that the eﬀective viscosity indeed has a power - law depen - dence on shear rate . The F - actin network is shear thin - ning over all shear rates probed encompassing a range of 10 − 2 s − 1 to 1s − 1 . From these data we ﬁnd that the expo - nent is best ﬁt by n = 0 . 65 ± 0 . 02 for the uncross - linked sample and n = 0 . 52 ± 0 . 04 for the R = 0 . 04 . Notice , the variation in the magnitude of the viscosity from in - creasing the cross linking density is small in the range of shear rates studied , but there appears to be a small , but measurable , impact on the exponent . This will be discussed in more detail later . We vary the cross - linker concentration by increasing the fraction R of biotynlated to non - biotynlated G - actin in the polymerizing actin solution . As the concentra - tion of cross - linkers increases , we observe well - deﬁned trends in both the elastic response of the network at small strains and the steady - state , nonlinear rheology of the network . We expect that the actual number of 0 . 00 0 . 01 0 . 02 0 . 03 0 . 04 10 - 4 10 - 3 G ( N / m ) R = 0 . 005 s - 1 = 0 . 05 s - 1 = 0 . 4 s - 1 FIG . 5 : ( color online ) The elastic modulus as extracted from the data shown in Fig . 2 vs . cross - linker density as measured by R . cross - linkers in the network is proportional to the frac - tion of the these cross - linking molecules . Clearly , at high enough concentrations of cross - linkers this linear relation - ship fails as steric constraints prevent the saturation of the available biotyn - bonds . In Fig . 5 , we extract the elastic modulus Eq . 4 for a range of cross - linker concentrations . At each concentra - tion we study the system at three diﬀerent shear rates . At the lowest shear rate studied ( black squares ) , we see a roughly linear increase in elastic modulus with cross - linker concentration . At the highest concentration for which we took data , the modulus appears to have reached a plateau , which we attribute to the failure of the sys - tem to make use of the additional cross - linkers on the ﬁlaments . The linear dependence of the elastic modu - lus is expected in an aﬃnely deforming [ 17 , 18 ] network , and the eventual saturation is not unexpected for rea - sons discussed above . Turning to the data taken at the intermediate shear rate ( red circles ) we see that the lin - ear increase of the observed modulus with cross - linker concentration remains but at a smaller slope . Finally , at the highest shear rate used ( blue triangles ) , there is no observable dependence of the modulus on the cross - linker concentration . We also note from Fig . 5 that the magnitude of the elastic response of the network extracted from the initia - tion of shear decreases with increasing shear rate . This is illustrated in more detail in Fig . 6 The measured modulus decreases with imposed shear rate in a manner consistent with a power - law G ′ ( ˙ γ ) ∼ ˙ γ − 0 . 4 . ( 14 ) The data corresponding to higher shear rates is essen - tially independent of cross - link density . We interpret this behavior as suggesting that the observed modulus in this high shear rate regime is due to the mechanics of inter - acting domains of cross - linked ﬁlaments , and not elastic strain energy stored in individual cross - linked networks . For comparison , it is worth returning to the impact of the cross - link density on the viscosity . What is in - 7 10 - 3 10 - 2 10 - 1 10 0 10 - 4 10 - 3 G ( N / m ) Shear Rate ( s - 1 ) Actin Only R = 0 . 005 R = 0 . 01 R = 0 . 015 R = 0 . 02 R = 0 . 04 FIG . 6 : ( color online ) The elastic modulus vs . rotation rate of the outer cylinder for a range of cross - linker concentrations . The linear dependence ( best ﬁt line in red ) demonstrates a power law dependence of the elastic modulus on rotation rate with an exponent of − 0 . 4 . 0 . 00 0 . 01 0 . 02 0 . 03 0 . 04 - 0 . 55 - 0 . 50 - 0 . 45 - 0 . 40 - 0 . 35 - 0 . 30 n - 1 Cross Linker Concentration FIG . 7 : The dependence of the best ﬁt value of n − 1 for the dependence of the viscosity on rate of strain as a function of ratio of cross - linker to G - actin concentration . teresting is that even though the density of cross - linkers does not appear to impact the magnitude of the mea - sured viscosity signiﬁcantly , there is a weak eﬀect on the exponent n from the ﬁts to a power - law ﬂuid . In Fig . 7 , we plot the exponent for the viscosity ( n − 1 ) , where n is deﬁned in Eq . 11 . As the cross - linker concentration increases the exponent n decreases from n = 0 . 65 ± 0 . 02 to n = 0 . 52 ± 0 . 04 . Unlike the case of the elastic modu - lus , we do not ﬁnd any saturation of the exponent with increasing cross - linker concentration . Sollich et al . have proposed [ 21 ] this sort of power - law rheology can arise rather generically in the mechanics of structurally disordered , soft materials that exhibit at large number of metastable microstates consistent with a given applied stress . Given our microscopic picture of long F - actin ﬁlaments slipping past each other under the applied shear stress , this unifying picture of the rhe - ology of soft disordered materials appears applicable to the strongly sheared network . Due to steric interactions between the ﬁlaments we expect to ﬁnd such rheological behavior in both the cross - linked ( by biotyn - streptavidin ) and the uncross - linked samples . In the Sollich framework , we may interpret the power law exponent n in terms of as “eﬀective noise tempera - ture” x = n + 1 . Over the range of cross - linker concen - trations studied x ranges from x = 1 . 35 to x = 1 . 45 . Given these values of the eﬀective noise temperature , the system is predicted to exhibit power - law rheology in steady - state . Moreover , they predict that the sys - tem should have a vanishing yield stress . In other words it should ﬂow in the limit of vanishingly small applied shears . While we have focused on the steady - ﬂow behav - ior of the F - actin / monolayer material , our preliminary low shear stress data are are consistent with this pre - diction . We will report more fully on the extremely low shear regime elsewhere [ 19 ] . IV . CONCLUSIONS The complex mechanics of cross - linked F - actin net - works underlies the dynamics and mechanics of living cells . While there has been a great deal of recent work on development of in vitro semiﬂexible network models of the cytoskeleton and measurements of their rheology , comparatively little eﬀort has been expended on the de - velopment of analogous model systems to explore the me - chanical interaction of the cytoskeleton with the plasma membrane . Here we have reported on just such a sim - pliﬁed model system that incorporates a mechanical cou - pling between a cross - linked semiﬂexible network and a lipid monolayer that mimics one leaﬂet of the plasma membrane of the cell . This model is clearly a minimal description of cytoskeletal networks mechanically associ - ated with a liquid lipid phase boundary . We have characterized the steady - state shear response of this composite material and found it to be well - described at higher shear rates by a power - law ﬂuid model with an exponent consistent with those obtained from the soft glassy rheology picture of soft disordered materials . Such a correspondence is not entirely unex - pected since , at the ﬁlament densities studied we imag - ine the system to consist of cross - linked and sterically conﬁned long ﬁlaments that have numerous mechanical equilibria associated with moving uncross - linked strands of the network around each other . We ﬁnd at higher shear rates the eﬀective viscosity de - creases as η ∼ ˙ γ − 0 . 4 and the elastic modulus decreases as G ′ ∼ ˙ γ − 0 . 4 . The impact of the cross - linker density is interesting . At lower shear rates the elastic modu - lus depends roughly linearly upon cross - linker concen - tration although at higher shear rates we ﬁnd essentially no rheological eﬀect of the cross - linker concentration – see Fig . 5 . The relaxation time after the cessation of ﬂow is independent of the cross - linker density . The magni - tude of the viscosity does not depend in any systematic way on cross - linker density , but the power - law used to de - scribe the steady state viscosity decreases as a function of cross - linker density as shown in Fig . 7 . Combining these 8 facts strongly suggests the following picture . The system is composed of clusters of cross - linked ﬁlaments . Our results implies that the observed mechanics are due to cross - linked ﬁlaments for low shear rates and strains ( the elastic modulus ) , but at higher shear rates and strains , we are probing the interaction between clusters of cross - linker ﬁlaments ( viscosity measurements , relaxation time after shear , and high shear rate elastic modulus ) . ¿From this picture , one is not surprised that the soft - glassy rheology ideas are appropriate for describing the steady state behavior , as the clusters will act as the fundamental mechanical elements in the soft glassy sys - tem . However , the dependence on the power - law expo - nent on cross - linker density provides an interesting di - rection for further study . This suggests that the details of the cluster - cluster interaction depend on the intrinsic mechanical properties of the clusters themselves . These are clearly dependent on the cross - linker density , as indi - cated by the low shear rate measurements of the elastic modulus . This presents us with an interesting system to study the impact of local mechanical properties on the macroscopic properties . A detailed study of the inter - nal cluster properties will be the subject of future work using microrheological probes of the network associated with the lipid monolayer . Microrheological studies will also be important as fu - ture studies incorporate additional complexity of linkers . For example , when one considers linkers that modify the local structure of the network ( e . g . cause bundling ) it will be important to have simultaneous access to both the local elastic response of the network and the system - size , macroscopic elasticity of the gel . Additionally , a combination of traditional ( Couette ) rheometry and mi - crorheological studies will be helpful in accessing the rhe - ological eﬀect of labile , physiological cross - linkers . It is clear that the low - frequency linear response of a network cross - linked by such transient bonds will be dramatically diﬀerent from our biotin / streptavidin cross - linked sys - tem . In our case the network is a soft solid , having a ﬁnite elastic response at zero frequency . The network with labile cross - linkers , however , must ﬂow like a liquid on time scales longer than the typical binding lifetime of a transient cross - linker . To probe this low - frequency rheology , the traditional Couette cell approach can be used . The addition of microrheology allows one to ex - plore the higher frequency response of the system that is inaccessible to the macroscopic measurements . These high frequency data should show that the presence of la - bile cross - linkers aﬀect only the low frequency response of the system . The eﬀect of labile cross - linkers on the non - linear rheology of the system at high strains also remains to be considered . V . ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS We acknowledge the support of NSF - DMR - 0354113 and Christoph Schmidt for helpful discussions . R . Walder acknowledges support through a travel fellowship from the Institute for Complex Adaptive Matter . [ 1 ] P . A . Janmey , S . Hvidt , J . Lamb , T . P . Stossel Nature 345 , 89 ( 1990 ) . [ 2 ] F . C . MacKintosh and P . A . Janmey , Curr . Opin . Sol . St . and Mat . Sci . 2 , 350 ( 1997 ) . [ 3 ] M . L . Gardel , J . H . Shin , F . C . MacKintosh , L . Madade - van , P . Matsudaira , and D . A . Weitz , Science 304 , 1301 ( 2004 ) . [ 4 ] M . L . Gardel , F . Nakamura , J . H . Hartwig , J . C . Crocker , T . P . Stossel , and D . A . Weitz , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 103 , 1762 ( 2006 ) . [ 5 ] N . Desprat , A . Richert , J . Simeon , A . Asnacios , Biophy . J . 88 , 2224 ( 2005 ) . [ 6 ] M . F . Coughlin , M . Puig - de - Morales , P . Bursac , M . Mellema , E . Millet , J . J . Fredberg , Biophys . J . 90 , 2199 ( 2006 ) . [ 7 ] K . M . Van Critters , B . D . Hoﬀman , G . Massiera , and J . C . Crocker , Biophys . J . 91 , 3946 ( 2006 ) . [ 8 ] X . Trepat , L . H . Deng , S . S . An , D . Navajas , D . J . Tschumperlin , W . T . Gerhoﬀer , J . P . Butler , and J . J . Fredberg , Nature 447 , 592 ( 2007 ) . [ 9 ] E . Helfer , S . Harlepp , L . Bourdieu , J . Robert , F . C . MacKintosh , and D . Chatenay , Phys . Rev . Lett . 87 , 088103 ( 2001 ) . [ 10 ] E . Helfer , S . Harlepp , L . Bourdieu , J . Robert , F . C . MacKintosh , and D . Chatenay , Phys . Rev . Lett . 85 , 457 ( 2000 ) . [ 11 ] E . Helfer , S . Harlepp , L . Bourdieu , J . Robert , F . C . MacKintosh , and D . Chatenay , Phys . Rev . E 63 , 021904 ( 2001 ) . [ 12 ] V . G . Brunton , I . R . J . MacPherson , M . C . Frame , Biochim . et Biophys . Acta – Mol . Cell Res . 1692 , 121 ( 2004 ) . [ 13 ] B . A . DiDonna and Alex J . Levine , Phys . Rev Lett . 97 , 068104 ( 2006 ) . [ 14 ] B . A . DiDonna and Alex J . Levine , Phys . Rev E 75 , 041909 ( 2007 ) . [ 15 ] C . P . Broederaz , C . Storm , and F . C . MacKintosh , arXiv : 0710 . 3951 ( 2007 ) . [ 16 ] F . C . MacKintosh , J . K¨as , and P . A . Janmey , Phys . Rev . Lett . 75 , 4425 ( 1995 ) . [ 17 ] David A . Head , A . J . Levine , and F . C . MacKintosh , Phys . Rev . Lett . 91 , 108102 ( 2003 ) . [ 18 ] J . Wilhelm and E . Frey , Phys . Rev . Lett . 91 , 108103 ( 2003 ) . [ 19 ] R . Walder , A . J . Levine , and M . Dennin , unpublished ( 2007 ) . [ 20 ] R . Walder and M . Dennin , unpublished ( 2007 ) . [ 21 ] P . Sollich , F . Lequeux , P . H´ebraud , and M . E . Cates , Phys . Rev . Lett . 78 , 2020 ( 1997 ) . [ 22 ] C . F . Schmidt , M . B¨armann , G . Isenberg , and E . Sack - mann , Macromol . 22 , 3638 ( 1989 ) . [ 23 ] J . Wehland , M . Osborm , and K . Weber , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . ( USA ) 74 , 5613 ( 1977 ) 9 [ 24 ] M . A . Dichtl and E . Sackmann , N . J . Phys . 1 , 1 ( 1999 ) . [ 25 ] K . Sengupta , L . Limozin , M . Tristl , I . Haase , M . Fischer , E . Sackmann Langmuir 22 , 5776 ( 2006 ) . [ 26 ] R . S . Ghaskadvi and Michael Dennin , Rev . Sci . Instr . , 69 , 3568 ( 1998 ) . [ 27 ] L . D . Landau and E . M . Lifshitz , Theory of Elasticity 3 rd Edition ( Pergamon Press , Oxford , 1986 ) . [ 28 ] R . B . Bird , R . C . Armstrong , and O . Hassager , Dynamics of Polymeric Liquids ( Wiley , New York , 1977 ) . [ 29 ] M . Doi and S . F . Edwards , Theory of Polymer Dynamics , ( Clarendon Press , Oxford , 1986 ) . [ 30 ] M . Dennin , Phys . Rev . E 70 , 041406 ( 2004 ) . [ 31 ] T . Raible , A . Demarmels , J . Meissner , Poly . Bull . 1 , 397 ( 1979 ) . [ 32 ] K . Osaki , T . Inoue , and T . Isomura , J . Polym . Sci . Part B : Polym . Phys . 38 , 2043 ( 2000 ) . [ 33 ] J . D . Moore , S . T . Cui , H . D . Cochran , P . T . Cummings , Phys . Rev . E 60 , 6956 ( 1999 ) . [ 34 ] J . Meissner , J . Appl . Polym . Sci . 16 , 2877 ( 1972 ) . [ 35 ] N . Murayama , Coll . & Poly . Sci . 258 , 1354 ( 1980 ) . [ 36 ] D . Pearson , E . Herbolzheimer , N . Grizzuti , and G . Mar - rucci , J . Polym . Sci . : Part B : Poly . Phys . 29 , 1589 ( 1991 ) . [ 37 ] H . - S . Chen , H . Kato , and A . Inoue , Jpn . J . Appl . Phys . 39 , 1808 ( 2000 ) . [ 38 ] L . D . Landau and E . M . Lifshitz , Fluid Mechanics 2 rd Edi - tion ( Elsevier , Amsterdam , 2004 ) . [ 39 ] H . A . Barnes , J . F . Hutton , and K . Walters , An Introduc - tion to Rheology ( Elsevier , Amsterdam , 1989 ) . [ 40 ] S . D . Holdsworth , Trans . Inst . Chem . Eng . 71 , 139 ( 1993 ) . [ 41 ] M . Twardos and M . Dennin , Langmuir , 19 , 3542 ( 2003 ) . [ 42 ] W . P . Cox , E . H . Merz J . Polym . Sci . 28 , 619 ( 1958 ) .