ABSTRACT The Structure of Hypertext Activity Jim Rosenberg R . D . # 1 BOX 236 Grindstone , PA 15442 ( 412 ) 785 - 9398 E - mail : j @ amanue . pgh . net A framework for discussion of hypertext activity is intro - duced using the concepts acteme , episode , and session , Acteme is a low - level unit such as link - following ; episode is a collection of actemes that cohere in the reader’s mind , session is the entirety of contiguous activity . Well known issues in hypertext rhetoric are recastin this framework and generalized to all varieties of acteme . We consider whether the episode is a virtual document , user interface issuesper - taining to the episode , multi - episode structure , concurrency issues , and reader - as - writer activity , with a frequent empha - sis on hypertext gathering . KEYWORDS : hypertext , rhetoric , acteme , episode , session , gathering , contour , emergent structure . INTRODUCTION A hypertext is a document in which interactive structure operations are intermingled with the tex ~ hypertext struc - ture is usually investigated from the point of view of the “real” structure connecting theseoperations . E . g . in a classi - cal node - link hypertext , asmight be descriked by the Dexter Hypertext Reference Model ( [ 14 ] ) , a graph cart be con - structed on the set of nodes where each edge is identified with a linlG structure discussions typically take place with respect to this graph . This overall structure graph may not be apparent to the reader . Readers dircover structure through activities provided by the hypertext . This paper will present a framework for discussing the structure of these activities , explicitly based on the reader’s point of view . We present a three - layer schemefor discussing hypertext activi - ty : Acteme / Episode / Session . The acteme is an extremely low - level unit of activity , such asfollowing a link , Multiple actemesare combined into an intermediate level uni ~ which we call the episodel , and at the the high end we will investi - gate a unit called the session . We will focus much of our discussion on the episode , emergence of the episode from the acteme , the structure of multiple episodes , and how these relate to familiar issues of hypertext rhetoric . The pri - mary focus of this paper will be on literary hypertext , but many of the concepts may be applicable to hypertext gen - erally . Permission to make digital / hard copies of all or part of this material for personal or claaaroom use is granted without fee provided that the copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage , rhe copy - right notice , the title of the publication and ita date appear , and notice is given that copyright is by permission of the ACM , Inc . To copy otherwise , to republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires specific permission and / or fee . Hypertext ’96 , Washington DC USA @ 1996 ACM 0 - 89791 - 778 - 2 / 96 / 03 . . $ 3 . 50 ACTEMES This paper takes a broad view of what constitutes hypertext — often narrowly defined as text with embedded links . However , many other structure models have been proposed sets [ 29 ] , relations [ 20 ] , Petri nets [ 34 ] , etc . We will count as hypertext any kind of system in which text contains embedded interactive structure operations . The lowest level of hypertext activity is to execute such an operation , e . g . following a link . We coin the term ‘acteme’ to describe this level of activity . Types of Acteme The most familiar form of acteme is link - following — clearly a directional form of acteme . A link may be fol - lowed by ( 1 ) clicking on au anchor either graphically visible or inferred by the reader ; ( 2 ) operating an intermediate interactive device showing all possible links , such as a menu of link names ; ( 3 ) clicking on an overview map ( this is really a special case of ( l ) ) and perhaps others . A link menu may contain other information than a link rtamq in MacWeb [ 28 ] , link menus contain type information . There are other actemes pertaining to links . Nearly every form of link - based hypertext allows the user to go back . Hypertext backtracking has been discussed in detail by Bieber , [ 1 ] . Bieber asks : “Should backtracking trigger an ‘undo’ operation or simply reflect the current state of the departure nodes ? ” This is an important question , with seri - ous implications for hypertext rhetoric . The simple act of going back may have multiple types . One may revisit a lex - irt simply to read it again , or it may be a genuine “undo” : perhaps the reader didn’t mean to follow that link at all . These are arguably different actemes , though typically not distinguished by hypertext user interface behavior , Aquanet [ 20 ] uses relations rather than links ; for a literary example of relations see Intergrms [ 30 ] . A relation slot is opened or closed , opening a slot is the acteme analogous to following a link . Closing a relation slot somewhat resem - bles going back for links , but the situation is much more complex . A relation maybe n - ary , i . e . may include an arbi - trary number of slots . Thus a relation slot maybe closed to open other slots , with a clear connotation of continuing lBolter [ 7 ] used rite term ‘episode’ the way the term ‘lexia’ [ 19 ] is now conventionally used , but his use of the term episode did not catch or , apologies if this new use of the term episode causes confusion . It was tempting to borrow Douglas’s [ 10 ] term ‘strand’ — but this seems to pre - judge the issue of whether dte episode is tinear attd to be mote rtarrnwly suited to the specifics of the ttede - tink model . 22 rather than backtracking . While a link ( even a bidirectional one ) is clearly directional , a relation is non - directional , since the relation slots appear in the substructure as peers . There is a mild sense of directionality to relations in the sensethat slot contents are “related together” , with a direc - tionality inwards from all slots to a central point — one rea - son why relational substructuring and spatial hypertext are so closely related . ( For more on this point see [ 32 ] , [ 24 ] , [ 22 ] , [ 21 ] . ) Also , to use the terminology of [ 32 ] , links may be described as disjunctive substructuring , in contrast to relations which are conjunctive : whereas one may typically choose any link out from a lexia ( from Iexia L one may choose link A or link B or link C , etc . ) a relation exists among all of its slots ( relation R has slot A and slot B and slot C , etc . ) . Disjunctive substructuring is “or - based” but conjunctive substructuring is “and - based” . Similar to relations , [ 30 ] and [ 31 ] use a concept called simultaneities , which have unnamed structurally equal slots ( VW ; the acterneconsists of moving the mouse cursor among different no - click hot - spots , each of which opens a different slot , or moving the mouse cursor out of all of these hot - spots , which closes the simultaneity . VIKI ( [ 23 ] ) includes spatial aggregates ( i . e . piles ) . The actemehete is to click on a partially obscured element of a spatial aggregate , bringing it forward where the whole object is visible . Both spatial aggregates and simultaneities are conjunctive and non - directional . Storyspace ( [ 6 ] ) offers , in addition to conventional links , spatial placement of “spaces” in a map view ; when opened a spacemay reveal a lexia or a further map . Spacesused in this way resemble piles ; the acteme is opening a space . A space can be closed by clicking on an icon from a floating palette . ( For a literary example of spacesused this way , see Gess [ 12 ] . ) Another form of hypertext substructure is the set . HyperSet [ 29 ] used an explicit formal set paradigm , and VIKI incor - porates sets ( collections ) as a substructuring method . 2 Set - basedactemesinclude choosing a sttperset ( possibly closing the current element ) or opening one of the elements of a set . Sets offer a quite complicated picture . There is a clear notion of “up” and “down” ( up to superse ~ down from set to element ) making sets somewhat cbctional . Chcmsing a superset is arguably disjunctive ; whether opening an ele - ment is conjunctive or disjunctive will depend on the specif - ic hypertext . ISthe Acteme Indivisible ? Kathryn Cramer [ 9 ] asks the haunting question , “What’s inside a link ? ” Following a link is usually so effortless that it seemsnearly automatic . If indeed a link has content then perhaps this calls into question whether link - following 2Tltis author knows of no literary hypertext explicitly based on sets as a substructtrring method . The complete absence of set - based literary hypertext is both striking and hard to explain ( though set - based substructuring is not usuatly present as an off - the - shelf abstraction in commercially available hyptcxt software . ) should always be considered an acteme . This issue becomes considerably more thorny where links are chosen from a menu . Arguably here the actual acteme is menu - choice , and link - foJlowing is a higher - level unit of activity . A menu of possible link names is itself a display of text . A completely open attitude toward text and linking in hypertext would hold that one should be able to make a link to any form of text anywhere text is visible . What if a menu of link names itself contains an anchor ? What about links to links ? Similar issues have been raised in the past concerning dematerial - ization of the Iexia . ( See [ 26 ] , [ 32 ] ) . Aeteme “Boundary Cases” What shall we do , in this analysis , with the lexia ? Does lin - ear reading inside the Iexia contain / consist of actemes ? Should we consider reading a lexia a single unitary acteme ? Should perusing the Iexia be considered the “ntdl acteme” ? ( See [ 32 ] on the Iexia as the “null navigation choice” . ) Whether the lexia must be linear is controversial ( [ 25 ] and [ 32 ] . ) A lexia can contain numerous user interface devices ( e . g . scroll - bars ) . Behaviorrdly , operating a scroll - bar is as complicated as following a link . However , a link is an explicitly structural device in a way that the within - compo - nent scroll - bar is not . 3 We will leave the issue of within - lex - ia actemes open . Reading the lexia might be considered a single acteme , or the lexia might be considered devoid of “internal” actemes . At the opposite extreme , hypertext maybe used to carry the very infrastructure of language itself , e . g . syntax . ( [ 30 ] , [ 311 ) . In this case the parallel acteme w morpheme becomesexact . THE HYPERTEXT EPISODE Multiple actemes may combined into a higher - level unit which we call the episode . An episode is simply whatever group of actemescohere in the reader’s mind as a tangible entity . In a node - link hypertext , the episode will probably consist of all or part of a trail or path . Whereas the acteme typically hasan identity which is clear from the hypertext’s user interface , the identity of the episode may not be so clear . The user may follow a chain of links as part of a pro - cess of exploration that may or may not prove fruitful . Simply following a chain of links does not necessarily make thesevisitations cohere into a tangible entity . The episode is not simply a unit of hypertext history — where any act is necessarily part of some episod % rather , the hypertext expe - rience consists of executing multiple actemes , some collec - tions of which will resolve into episodes , and some of which may not be part of any episode at all . Indeed , part of the hypertext experience may be described as foraging for episodes . 3Trtdl . is ( [ 34 ] , [ 1 1 ] ) provides a format basis for dealing with such ques - tions . For a Tretlis hypertext one may describe an acteme as any form of hypertext activity which causes the Petri net to fire . If within - component scroll - bars are devices maintained entirely by a ctient which does not fire the net when they are operated , they wordd not be considered actemes . 23 Whether an instance of backtracking is really an “undo” may be rephrased Does backtracking revoke membership of actemes in an episode ? It depends on the circumstances , both of the hypertext and the reader’s frame of mind . The reader might revisit a previous lexia to read it again — per - haps for a sheerly “musical” repetition , or to reread a prior lexia based on some resonance or reference in the present lexia . Here one might argue that all of the backtracking his - tory is part of the episode . Or , the reader maybe backtrack - ing to undo having arrived at the current lexia by mistake — backtracking to remove from the episodethe actemethat causedarrival at the current Iexia . The episodeis thus a combination of history through the hypertext , the reader’s intention , and the reader’s impression of what “hangs together” . Of course the reader may arrive at a previously read lexia via a different pathway than simple backtracking in this casemost likely arrival at this lexia should be part of the episode . An episode is obtained from the composition of actemes . For hypertext using n - ary relations , the nature of the episode can become quite complex . If the slots of a relation do not themselves contain further actemesthen the opening of all of the slots of a relation in turn may constitute or be part of one episode . However , more typically a relational slot will contain further actemes , perhapsnestedseveral lay - ers deep . For a highly nestedrelational structure with a sin - gle root relation , shall we say that traversing the entire structure must necessarily constitute a single episode ? That seems arbitrary . We may have relations where visitation of the slots in that relation belong to different episodes . Relational structures inherently lend themselves to a / hierar - chical episode structure . For set - based hypertext the episode is likely to consist of both closing elements to open a superset and opening ele - ments of a set . Similarly , where a Storyspace author has chosen to allow the map view to be visible , the episode may be very heterogeneous indeed , consisting of link traversals , spaceopenings and spaceclosings , Identity / integrity of the Episode Numerous well known issues in hypertext rhetoric can be rephrased as issues pertaining to determining the identity and maintaining the integrity of the episode . Take for instance the infamous “lost in hyperspace” issue . Disorientation in a hypertext may be described as having “lost ( irrecoverably ) the thread” of the episode . Even though , as Bernstein argues in [ 3 ] , it maybe explicitly part of an author’s artistic purpose not to provide a ready “geo - graphic” form of navigation , ( indeed , discovery of the geog - raphy without “help” from the author may be a deliberate intended effect , ) one may still speak of a reader’s discom - fort in having suddenly lost all episodes . Although even this may be part of the author’s intended purpose , most authors are tikely to consider it a flaw if “the spell becomes bro - ken” . If a reader has “lost track” of an episode but another readily comes to hand , yielding to the new episode and resisting the temptation to “possess” the former episode is one aspect of what the hypertext experience has to offer . One is in some difficulty asa reader , however , if no episode at all comes to hand . The rfider is then likely to begin for - aging for an episode . Foraging will be a worthy aesthetic experience i ~ ( and only if ) it succeeds . Integrity of the episode is also an issue for conjunctive hypertext . Becoming lost in a nested spatially substructure spacemay not be an issuq the nesting may provide a clear enough orientation that it is virtually impossible to “get ( navigationally ) lost” . Still , the reader here maybe subject to a problem parallel to the disjunctive difficulty of losing all episodes : the integrity of the conjunctive episode may fail if the reader is unable to resolve into a single whole “the components of the and” — i . e . if the conjunction fails to come off . This is particularly a danger with heavily nested structures . In [ 17 ] , George Landow appeals to the hypertext author not to link the reader into a place where no inviting links will take the reader out . This may be rephrased as the injunction : Don’t leave the reader stranded without an episode . A more open - minded approach to the idea of an “episode vortex” would be to appeal to authors to : ( 1 ) be conscious of where theseplaces ar ~ ( 2 ) be aesthetically comfortable with them ; ( 3 ) understand how you expect episode foraging experi - ences to work when the reader hits them ; ( 4 ) understand how the reader might come out of the episode foraging experience . Is the Episode a Virtual Document ? Various hypertext systems — e . g . MacWeb [ 27 ] , ( see also [ 13 ] ) , have provided for the possibility of virtual docu - ments : documents which are generated “on the fly” by the operation of the hypertext . Here we ask whether we should not consider the episode to be a kind of virtual document . Despite the vast amount of discussion about linkage , there is still a strong temptation to be “lexia - centric” concerning what constitutes “the document” . By contrast , consider a common unit of discourse which may span many para - graphs : the argument . Argumentation structure has been a popular topic for hypertext researchers ; ( e . g . gIBIS [ 8 ] , Aquanet [ 20 ] , Sepia [ 35 ] ) . One of the early usesof Aquanet was to interactively implement Toulmin structures [ 36 ] to model argumentation . In laying out such an argument , numerous relations are likely to be required , i . e . “the argu - ment” spans many lexia . Likewise in laying out a Sepia Argumentation Space , numerous links are likely to be required . To fully visit an argument is to carry out hypertext activity at least at the level of the episode , and perhaps even beyond to the session . If operating multiple actemes is nec - essaryto fully visit an argumentation stmctum , we may tru - ly say meaning is derived through operation of these actemes . I . e . meaning cannot be confined to the within - component Dexter layer ( the lexia ) ; meaning derives from hypertext activity in the large . In node - link hypertext , meaning happens through links . ( At its most extreme , even 24 the sentenceitself can transcend the lexia [ 32 ] ) . Figure 1 illustrates the episode as a virtual document ? . This concept poses some obvious questions : What structures the episode ? Should it have a title ? Should it have parts ? Should the user be able to give it a title ? Shouldn’t the user be able to save it ? ( Saving is what we normally do in soft - ware with documents we want to keep . . . ) ( User interface questions will be considered in detail below . ) One possibility for how to structure the episode as a virtual document is creation of an explicit gathering inte ~ ace . [ 24 ] illustrates the use of the hypertext system VIKI as a WWW gathering interface . ( VIKI is especially suited to this pur - pose by the richness of its implicit and spatial structuring methods . ) Numerous hypertext systems save “global history lists” in which are recorded all Iexia traversed for a true gathering interface this facility needs to be expanded signif - icantly to allow the reader to edit and mark the history for episodes , provide graphical collection of episodes , and so on . At its simplest , such a gathering interface would have commands “begin episode” and “end episode” similar to “record” and “stop” commands common in numerous appli - cation program macro recorders . “Playing back” the episode would inject the results into a graphical hypertext browsers The availability and characteristics of a gathering interface are directly related to a major question What is the stmc - turc of the episode ? Is it in fact linear ? With no gathering interface , there is an unfortunate tendency for the episode to linearize — by default — but there is no reason in principle to suppose that the structure of the episode is any less gen - eral than the possible structure of hypertext as a whole : the structure of the episode is what the user makes of it given the available tools of the gathering interface . Absent art explicit formal gathering interface , the main tool used in structuring the episode is simply the user’s memory . FROM ACTEME TO EPISODE In [ 17 ] ( or see also [ 18 ] ) , George Landow initiated the study of the relationship among episode , acteme and lexia ( though not using that terminology ) particularly in regard to such questions as : How does the episode emerge from the actemes ? How should the Iexia and / or acteme be coded for episodes ? Landow introduced his “rhetoric of arrival and departure” with reference to the specific acteme of follow - ing a hypertext link . Here we generalize these questions to all forms of acteme . Relational or spatial actemescall for a different terminology than arrival and departure , but the general questionspertain - ing to episode / acteme / lexia remain . Consider n - ary rela - tions . Does opening each of the slots of a relation in turn 4Figure 1 as drawn implies that the lexia is “atomic” with respect to episodes — i . e . a Iexia is either entirely in or entirely out of an episode . Of course an episode may include only patt of a lexi . x there is no guarantee the reader witl read dte whole thing . 5Zetlweger [ 37 ] discusses implementation of a similar concept , though her park are constructed by the author rather than the reader . A = retwt Figure 1 : The episode as a virtual document . In this illustration each Iexia is depicted as linea ~ the actemes are familiar link - followings . Lexia out - side of the curve are not part of the episode . Links marked “revisit” are backtrackings for the purpose of reading the Iexia again , and are thus part of the episode ; the link marked “recur” is a new path that happens to arrive at a previously visited Iexia . belong to the sameepisode ? Where relational structures are nested , the logical way to read them might be by depth - fwst traversal . The degree to which different slots of the same relation would belong to different episodes would tend to depend on the complexity of the structure of the slots . If each slot is a Iexia with no internal structure , opening all of the slots might naturally fall into one episode . If two slots each have highly complex nested substructure they might fall into separateepisodes . Should a hypertext be coded for this difference ? When an acteme involves opening a space , should the reader be given a clear graphical cue as to how complex that space is ? b This may be implemented using icons which are miniature graphics of their entire nested structure . ( See Figure 2 . ) Such a miniature prepares the readerfor what will happenwhen the slot is opened . For spatial hypertext , spatial proximity is one way actemes may be coded for grouping into art episode — if this use of spatial proximity is not preempted by some other structural 6At the Spatiat Metaphor . Workshop at ECHT’94 , Mark Bernstein raised the question of how the user of a hypertext might be able to estirruzfe the cosz of fotlowing a link . Should actcmcs be coded so that the reader can estimate the cosl of activating them ? 25 purpose . Regions containing spatial actemes can be enclosed in a graphic device , such as VIKI’S collection frame . Where a node - link hypertext offers a graphical view , links can be coded for episode , either graphically , through names , or both . However , where hybrid methods are used the situation is much more complicated . Consider a Storyspace hypertext in which the “map” view is enabled . Coding for an episode that visits multiple spaces is now much more difficult . Likewise , in set based hypertext the episode is likely to consist of multiple transitions between “up” navigation and “down” navigation . How should art author code for episode in this case ? Given that the episode is really the reader’s structure , to what extent should the writer code for episode at all ? This is an aesthetic issue , likely to yield a variety of points of view . ( And even a single writer in the context of one work might choose to vary the extent to which episodes are coded . ) Figure 2 : Nested relational structure from “lntergram 8 , [ 30 ] . This is a ternary relation in which each slot is itself a relation , shown iconographically . The button at the right closes the relation slot . MULTI - EPISODE STRUCTURE In most cases , reading a hypertext will result in several episodes . We now pursue the question of what type of strnc - ture might relate some of these episodes . Multi - Episode Structure is Emergent The episode itself emerges from reading activity ; although the writer may employ coding devices or hints to guide the reader in forming an episode , ultimately the episode is more the reader’s structure than the writer’s . Structure among multiple episodes is even more likely to be emergent , and is most likely not specifically embodied in formal structural devices of the kind articulated in the Dexter Hypertext Reference Model . Hypertext systems for expressing emer - gent structure have been studied in detail by Marshall and her colleagues . ( [ 22 ] , [ 23 ] , [ 24 ] . ) They have found consis - tently that where a gatherer is unsure about final structure , spatial methods tend to be prefemed — often even when more formal structures , such as relations , are available . Even if the formal structure underlying a hypertext usesthe familiar node - link model , and is completely disjunctive ( as in the section “Types of Acteme” above ) , where multiple episodesare being gathered using ( say ) spatial methods , the structure that IWS . ultsfrom this gathering maybe conjunctive rather than disjunctive , or maybe a complex combination of conjunctive and disjunctive substructures . I . e . : Even assnm - ing that purely disjunctive methods are sufficient for the author’s purpose , the availability of a richer structure palette — specifically including conjunctive substmctnring meth - ods — maybe of serious benefit to the reader . The appeal for a gathaing inte ~ ace issued above must be reissued in even stronger terms as we consider how the reader is to work ont the structure among episodes . Contour and Gap : The Geography of Episode Michael Joyce has written frequently about hypertext con - [ ours ( [ 4 ] , [ 16 ] ) . Contour is a multifaceted concept ( [ 33 ] ) . Some aspects of contour may be rephrased as questions : How does the reader perceive the episode density of the lex - ia ? HOWdoes the reader associate multiple episodes with a map view of the hypertext ? How does the reader locate lex - ia which are particularly rich “hinge points” joining multi - ple episodes ? Fascinatingly , in [ 15 ] , Terence Harpold inves - tigates what may be described as the “skew - symmetrically opposite” concept . He describes a model of a hypertext as knotted threads ; in a kind of counterpoint to Joyce’s con - tour , he describes a concept of gap which we might para - phrase as a void around which episodes may bend but into which no episode reaches . Both concepts concern the geog - raphy of episode : in the case of contour , where the episodes ure ; in the case of gap , where they are not . Where a node - Iink hypertext hasa strong geographical map view interface , the episode yields a trace on this map . Visually associating multiple such traces is an obvious method of structuring multiple episodes . There may be no map view at all in the hypertext system in which a document is read . Should the reader then create such a map — at least conceptually ? Should a gathering interface provide a map display for the reader’s gathering activities , even if the “original” hypertext system in ques - tion doesn’t ? Where a map display is available , it is likely to show the writer’s “inherent” underlying structure , e . g . for node - link hypertext the node - link map itiself . 7 How is the trace of episode to be made visible on this map ? Bread crumbs ( [ 2 ] ) are a standard device for exhibiting hypertext history on a map view ( MacWeb does this , for instance ) — but history and episode are two different things altogether . Clearly the reader could use some help here . 71rr [ 10 ] Douglas refers to such maps as “cognitive maps” . To calt the “actual” map of the node - link stmcture a “cognitive” map is a serious con - fusion . The map may be structural more than it is cognitive . One might in some cases call a rea & r’s map in the context of an overt gathering inter - face cognitive ; whether the writer’s structure map is cognitive or not depends on the circumstances . 26 What of the geography of episode for non - link hypertext ? Both sets and relations may give the reader a three - dimen - sional feeling as a set or Elation slot is opened , the region of hypertext thereby made visible may appear — conceptu - ally at least — in a different plane & hind or in front of the plane where the user was . The episode may be a kind of tube that transcends multiple planes — possibly zigzagging “forward” and “backward” ( or “up” and “down” in the case of set navigation ) multiple times . As in the case of the node - link model , episodes may intersect . A particular lexia may be very rich in episodes , or they may be planes that are strangely bypassed . For relational hypertext where the rela - tion slots are visited in separate episodes , the relation struc - ture itself may be said to relate these episodes ; Harpold’s metaphor of hypertext as knots seems particularly apt — though the knots may be nested , like layers of an onion . Narration — A Logic Structure of Epieode Narmtion is an immense issuq a discussion of narration as a whole is beyond the scope of this paper . We only note a few issues here . In attempting to put a narrative structure to a hypertext , surely the reader is attempting to relate not just Iexia , but episodes as well . Indeed , the whole concept that a sequence of hypertext activities works together as a single story fragment may be one of the ways by which the reader constructs a concept of episode in the fiist place . ( See [ 10 ] for examples . ) Whereas above we were concerned with the geographical relationship among episodes , here we are con - cerned with a logical relationship . ( These may or may not be the same . ) An emerging logical or narrative schema may have a great deal to do with how the reader forages for episod ~ as Douglas observes , an emerging narrative picture may have gaps ; it is precisely to fill those gaps that the reader may forage for more episodes . ( And as Harpold observes , not only is there no gmtee of success , the writ - er may intentionally make it impossible to find such a “missing key” . ) USER INTERFACE ISSUES PERTAINING TO THE EPISODE The user interface implications of the concept of episode range from very small - scale ( e . g . minor details concerning how bread crumbs should work ) all the way to a full - scale gathering interface . Consider bread crumbs . A typical bread crumb device shows only history . It is typically oblivious to the question raised above of whether backtracking is an undm it treats every lexia visited equally , whether the read - er is in the midst of a very intense episode or has lost the thread completely and is foraging for a new episode . Clearly it would be useful for bread crumbs to be typed . Just as MacWeb allows links to be typed , the reader may need typing as well : visitations may need to be typed . Visually this could be indicated in many ways : color coding , icons , etc . A related issue : does the reader need the ability to nume the episode ? Surely in some cases this woutd be useful . For named episodes , a bread crumb could be a filly clickable icon which would expand to show ( or accept ) the episode name . The go back command found in almost every hypertext sys - tem should allow for qualification Whether backtracking is an “undo” or not must be answered by the user ! Likewise , the user must determine whether backtracking should or shouldn’t be recorded in the trace of the episode . The typicai save command needs considerable enhance - ment . In most hypertext systems , the only things which can be saved are : ( 1 ) References to particular lexia ( book - marks ) ; ( 2 ) the state of the entire hypertext session . We argued above that the episode may function as a virtual doc - umenc if so then the reader should have the ability to save it . It is ironic in the extreme that despite all the emphasis on linkage over decades of hypertext research , it is the lexia which is typically saved , not the linkage ! The ability to save an episode provides an opportunity to name it , of course . More elaborately , gathering must be regarded as an impor - tant aspect of the hypertext act . Alas , the requirements of a full gathering interface are considerable . l A gathering interface must provide a rich palette of structuring methods , specifically including spatial struc - turing methods such as those implemented in VIKI . l A gathering interface must be at least partially automat - ic . It should have facilities similar to common macro recorders , so that when the user has indicated that an episode should be started , further activity is automatical - ly assigned to the episode without the user having to do so manually . “ The history mechanism should be available for retroac - tive editing allowing an episode to be reconstructed after the fact . This is importrum just as the episode is emer - gent structurally and spatially , it is emergent in time as welk you may not realize you are in the midst of an episede until well after it has already begun . The reader must thus be able to edit the history list and gather into an episode actemes already performed . l A gathering interface is explicitly one hypertext system operating on anotheq ideally the authors of the hyper - text systems at both ends of this transaction would be sensitive to the needs of being plugged into a compan - ion . The writer’s hypertext system should have suffi - cient hooks that an off - the - shelf third party gathering interface can be plugged into i ~ the reader’s gathering system should use sufficiently general system mecha - nisms as to allow for operation of a variety of hypertext systems . THE HYPERTEXT SESSION There is a clear break in hypertext activity when the user quits . An excellent discussion of issues pertaining to the hypertext session may be found in [ 10 ] . Douglas’s main focus is the issue of closure : how does reading a hypertext 27 “come to an end ? ” There are all manner of reasons why the hypertext session may end . We examine some of theses ( 1 ) The session may end due to accident m - external circum - stance . Perhaps the phone rings , or the power fails , or the computer crashes . It is tempting to simply dismiss this as a not very interesting null case , but it is precisely by measur - ing the sense of loss at an @ lcial termination that we may properly assess what needs to be saved from the session . How does the reader recover not only the Iexia but the episode as well ? Can the episode be recovered ? If the read - er is associating multiple episodes , can that be recovered ? Should it be recovered ? ( 2 ) The reader may simply give up after a fruitless search for episode . Similarly the reader may suffer sheer episode fatigue : episodes are at hand , but they seem so similar to episodes already undertaken that the reader simply quits for want of “something fresh” . ( 3 ) By contrast , the reader may have achieved a complete sense of episode satiation . This is not necessarily the same concept as closure , as discussed by Douglas . Particularly in a large poetic work , the reader may have no sense of com - pletion in a logical or narrative sense , but maybe satiated in a purely imagistic way that makes it seem fruitful to put the work aside for a time . There are some interesting aesthetic issues here . If I have reached episode satiation , I might not want to resume in a subsequent session exactly where I left off , but might instead want to forage “as far away as possi - ble” . ( Returning in a subsequent session to the same neigh - borhood where I left off might actually be overtly disap - pointing . ) How do I as a reader do this ? ( 4 ) The reader may have reached a tangible “success point” in gathering . ( This is probably the closest concept to Douglas’s description of closure . ) Of course , the reader may not have a formal gathering interface ; the gathering in ques - tion may simply be formation of a mental map . To borrow Michael Joyce’s topographical bent the reader may quit because of a feeling of having reached a point on the land - scape from which the vista seems complete . Or as Douglas puts it , the reader is satisfied that enough logical questions are answered that there is no need to continue . With the lux - ury of a formal gathering interface , the reader may obtain a sense of completion about the gathering ~ i . e . the reader’s sense of completion is exactly a writer’s sense of comple - tion : the gathered result “works” artistically as - is , now is a good time to stop . CONCURRENCY OF EPISODE Some hypertext systems are explicitly designed for concttr - rent operation by multiple users . ( See e . g . [ 81 , [ 351 , [ 111 . ) The study of actual concurrency in literary hypertext is surely a worthy subject of research , but here we will investi - gate the metaphor of concurrency of episode in the context ‘This section is heavity indebted to Douglas’s paper . While it should not be taken as simply a restatement of her work , most of the ideasin this sec - tion were the direct result of reading her very stimulating discussion . of activity by a single user . In [ 5 ] , Bernstein makes the intriguing proposal that we personify episodes , endowing a hypertext with what he describes as characters . Characters , of course , exist in a narrative space concurrently ( as do Bernstein’s ) . Does it help the reader to imagine episodes as occurring concurrently , even if they are not experienced that way ? While this might seem to be stretching a point , con - sider that as gatherer , the reader may be assembling a new hypertext containing the gathered results . In this case we have not only the episodes in the original hypertext , there may be potential episodes in the gathered product . Concurrency here is quite literally real in that ( 1 ) potential episodes in the gathered result exist concurrently with the episode in the “original” hypertext ( 2 ) a formal gathering interface may make it exceptionally easy to keep multiple potential episodes “open” at once . THE READER - AS - WRITER’S ACTIVITY STRUCTURE It is a commonplace in hypertext rhetoric that the reader is also concurrently a write ~ we now explore this from the standpoint of activity . The activity of following a link ( the reader’s link ! ) we classified above as an acteme — a low - level unit of hypertext activity . What of a link created by the reader ? Shall we describe creation of a link as an acteme ? Creation of a link might consist ofi ( 1 ) selecting the text in the source lexia to serve as the source anchoq ( 2 ) telling the system we want to create a lti , ( 3 ) navigating to the target lexi ~ ( 4 ) selecting the text to serve as a target anchoq ( 5 ) informing the system we are completing the Ii & , ( 6 ) choosing a name for the lti , ( 7 ) perhaps choosing a type for the link . This is hardly a low - level unit of activi - ty ! The supposed symmetry between reading and writing , from the standpoint of activity structure , is completely illu - sory in the sense that it may take nearly an order of magni - tude more effort to create as a writer what the reader experi - ences as a simple acteme . What does it take for the writer to create an episode ? What has happened to the reader’s episode while the reader - as - writer is creating a link ? This is a most unpleasant question ! Is the episode “in suspension” ? Is creation of the link simply a part of the episode ? What is the risk that creation of the link will “break the spell” of the episode ? In place of reader - as - writer , consider the concept of reader - as - gatherer ( given a formal gathering interface ) . A gather - ing interface , particularly one that implements spatial meth - ods such as VIKI , may serve as a much more light - weight interface than a full - scale authoring environment . For instance , adding a lexia to a pile already open in a gathering interface is likely to involve no more activity than dragging the Iexia onto the pil ~ with a gathering interface designed as such it may even be simpler . A true symmetry in com - plexity between the reader’s acteme and the gatherer’s acteme may in fact be achievable . Given that creation of a simple link may be so much more laborious than following one , one is tempted to ask how much hypertext gathering is actively discouraged by asking the reader to use a full heavy - weight hypertext authoring environment instead of lighter - weight gathering tools . 28 REFERENCES 1 . 2 . 3 . 4 . 5 . 6 . 7 . 8 . 9 . 10 . 11 . 12 . 13 . Bieber , Michael and Wang , Jiangling , “Backtmcking in a Multiple - Window Hypertext Environment” , ECHT’94 Proceedings , ACM , New York , 1994 . Bernstein , Mark , “The Bookmark and the Compass : Orientation Tools for Hypertext Users” , ACM SIGOZS BuUetin 9 , 1988 . Bernstein , Mark , “The Navigation Problem Reconsidered” , The Hypertext I Hypermedia Handbook , ed , Emily Berk and Joseph Devlin , McGraw - Hill , New York 1991 . Bernstein , Mark , Joyce , Michael , and Levine , David , “Contours of Constructive Hypertexts” , ECHT ’92 Proceeding of the ACM Conference on Hypertext , ACM , New York , 1992 . Bernstein , Mark , “Conversations with Friends : Hypertexts with Characters” , lWHD’95 Proceedings , Springer - Verlag , to appear . Bolter , Jay David , Joyce , Michael , Smith , John B . , and Bernstein , Mark , Story space Hypertext Writing Environment , Eastgate Systems , Watertown MA , 1991 . Bolter , Jay David , Writing Space , The Computer , Hypertext , and the History of Writing , Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , I - Mlsdale , New Jersey , 1991 . Conklin , Jeff , and Begeman , Michael , “gIBIS : A hypertext tool for team design deliberation” , Hypertext’87 Proceedings , ACM , New York , 1987 . Cramer , Kathryrt , “Ritual Celebrations” , E - mail mes - sage < Pine . SUN . 3 . 9 1 . 950414093446 . 11422C - 1000OO @ panix . tom > , April 14 , 1995 , ht _ lit Mailing List , ftp : / / journal . biology . carleton . ca / pub / ht _ lit / . Douglas , J . Yellowlees , “’How Do I Stop This Thing ? ’ : Closure and Indeterminacy in Interactive Narratives” , Hyper I Text I Theory , ed . George Landow , Johns Hopkins Unive ~ ity Press , Baltimore , MD . , 1994 . Furuta , Richard , and Stotts , P . David , “Trellis : A Formally - defined hypertextual basis for integrating task and information” , Department of Computer Science Technical Report TAMU - HRL 94 - 007 , Texas A & M University , College Station , TX , 1994 , http : / / bush . cs . tamu . edu / ftp / pubs / tech _ reports ~ ANKJ - HRL - 94 - oo7 / 94 - oo7 . ps . z , Gess , Richard , Mahasukha Halo , Eastgate Systems , Watertown MA , 1995 , Halasz , Frank G . , “Reflections on NoteCards : Seven Issues for the Next Generation of Hypermedia 14 . 15 . 16 . 17 . 18 . 19 . 20 . 21 . 22 . 23 . 24 . 25 . 26 . Systems” , Hypertext’87 Proceedings , Chapel Hill , NC , 1987 . Hrd . asz , Frank G . , and Schwartz , Mayer , “The Dexter Hypertext Reference Model” , Hypertext Standardization Workshop , NIST , 1990 . Harpold , Terence , “Threnody : Psychoanalytic Digressions on the Subject of Hypertexts” , Hypermedia and Literary Studies , ed . Paul Delany and George Landow , The MIT Press , Cambridge , MA , 1991 . Joyce , Michael , Of Two Minds : Hypertext Pedagogy and Poetics , The University of Michigan Press , Ann Arbor , 1995 . Landow , G . P . , “Relationally encoded links and the rhetoric of hypertext” , Hypertext ’87 Proceedings , Chapel Hill , NC , 1987 . Landow , G . P . , “The Rhetoric of Hypermedia Some Rules for Authors” , Hypermedia and Literary Studies , @ . Paul Delany and George Landow , The MIT Press , Cambridge , MA , 1991 . Landow , G . P . , Hypertext : The Convergence of Contemporary Critical Theory and Technology , Johns Hopkins University Press , 1992 . Marshall , Catherine C . , Halasz , Frank G . , Rogers , Russell A . , and Janssen , William C . Jr . , “Aquanefi a hypertext tool to hold your knowledge in place” , Proceedings of Hypertext ’91 , ACM , New York , 1991 . Marshall , Catherine C . and Rogers , Russell A . , “Two Years before the Mist Experiences with Aquanet” , ECHT ’92 Proceeding of the ACM Conference on Hypertext , ACM , New York , 1992 . Marshall , Catherine C . , and Shipman , Frank M . III , “Searching for the Missing Link Discovering Implicit Structure in Spatial Hypertext” , Hypertext ‘ 93 Proceedings , ACM , New York , 1993 . Marshall , Catherine C . , Shipman , Frank M . III , and Coombs , James H . , “VIKI : Spatial Hypertext Supporting Emergent Structure” , ECHT’94 Proceedings , ACM , New York , 1994 . Marshall , Catherine C . , and Shipman , Frank M . III , “Spatial Hypertext : Designing for Change” , Communications of the ACM 38 , & August 1995 . Moulthrop , Stuart , “Shadow of the Informand : A Rhetorical Experiment in Hypertext” , Perforations 3 , Public Domain , Atlanta , GA , 1992 . Moulthrop , Stuart , “Toward a Rhetoric of Informating Teas” , ECHT’92 Proceeding of the ACM Conference on Hypertext , ACM , New York , 1992 . 29 27 . Nanard , Jocelyne , and Nanard , Marc , “Using Structured Types to Incorporate Knowledge in Hypertext” , Proceedings of Hypertext ’91 , ACM , New York , 1991 . 28 . Nanard , Jocelyne , and Nanard , Marc , “Should Anchors Be Typed Too ? An Experiment with MacWeb” , Hypertext’93 Proceedings , ACM , New York , 1993 . 29 . Parnnak , H . Van Dyke , “Don’t Link Me In : Set Based Hypermedia for Taxonomic Reasoning” , Proceedings of Hypertext ’91 , ACM , New York , 1991 . 30 . Rosenberg , Jim , Intergrams , Eastgate Systems , Watertown MA , 1993 . 31 . Rosenberg , Jim , Dlj ? actions through : Thirst weep ran - sack ( frailty ) veer tide elegy , Eastgate Systems , Watertown MA , to appear . 32 . Rosenberg , Jim , “Navigating Nowhere / Hypertext In frawhere” , SIGLINK Newsletter 3 , 3 , December 1994 , http : / / www . well . com / user / jer / NNHI . ht . ml . 33 . Rosenberg , Jim , “ Wng Way for Making Way : Co - striation Act Topographer of the Mingle Scriptor Transform Dance” SIGLINK Newsletter , to appear . 34 . Stotts , P . David , and Fnrnta , Richard , “Petri - net based hypertext Document structure with browsing seman - tics” , ACM Trans . Ofl . InjL $ yst . , 7 , 1 , ( Jannary ) , 1989 . 35 . Streitz , Norbert , Haake , Jdrg , Hannemann , JOrg , Lemke , Andreas , Schuler , Wolfgang , Schutt , Helge , and Thiiring , Manfred , “SEPIA : a Cooperative Hypermedia Authoring Environment , ECHT ’92 Proceeding of the ACM Conference on Hypertext , ACM , New York , 1992 . 36 . Toulmin , S . , The uses of argument , Cambridge University Press , Cambridge , 1959 . 37 . Zellweger , Polle T . , “Scripted Documents : A Hypermedia Path Mechanism” , Hypertext’89 Proceedings , ACM , New York , 1989 . 30