R EVIEW Chromatin Fibers , One - at - a - time Jordanka Zlatanova 1 * and Sanford H . Leuba 2 1 Department of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering Polytechnic University , 6 Metro Tech Center , Brooklyn NY 11201 , USA 2 Department of Cell Biology and Physiology , School of Medicine , University of Pittsburgh , Hillman Cancer Center , University of Pittsburgh Cancer Institute Research Pavilion , Pittsburgh PA 15213 , USA Eukaryotic DNA is presented to the enzymatic machineries that use DNA as a template in the form of chromatin ﬁbers . At the ﬁrst level of organiz - ation , DNA is wrapped around histone octamers to form nucleosomal particles that are connected with stretches of linker DNA ; this beads - on - a - string structure folds further to reach a very compact state in the nucleus . Chromatin structure is in constant ﬂux , changing dynamically to accommodate the needs of the cell to replicate , transcribe , and repair the DNA , and to regulate all these processes in time and space . The more conventional biochemical and biophysical techniques used to study chromatin structure and dynamics have been recently complemented by an array of single - molecule approaches , in which chromatin ﬁbers are investigated one - at - a - time . Here we describe single - molecule efforts to see nucleosomes , touch them , put them together , and then take them apart , one - at - a - time . The beginning is exciting and promising , but much more effort will be needed to take advantage of the huge potential that the new physics - based techniques offer . q 2003 Elsevier Ltd . All rights reserved Keywords : chromatin ﬁbers ; nucleosome unraveling ; chromatin ﬁber assembly ; single - molecule approaches ; force spectroscopy * Corresponding author Introduction It has been known for decades that the genomes of eukaryotic cells are organized in interphase as chromatin , a complex between DNA and small , highly basic proteins , histones . 1 – 4 The basic repeat - ing unit of chromatin structure , the nucleosome , is now well characterized . 5 – 8 We have also acquired signiﬁcant knowledge of how nucleosomes form linear arrays , with individual particles connected with stretches of linker DNA . In vivo , these nucleo - somal arrays bind other proteins , such as linker histones or high mobility group ( HMG ) proteins , which contribute to the further levels of folding of the chromatin ﬁber . These levels of folding remain largely unknown . The recent resurrection of interest in chromatin structure and its dynamics came with the realiz - ation that chromatin is much more than just a venue of highly packaged genetic material in the conﬁnes of the cell nucleus . Chromatin turned out to be intimately involved in the regulation of the numerous activities of DNA : replication , transcrip - tion , repair , and recombination . It came as no sur - prise that chromatin needs to undergo signiﬁcant structural changes when the cellular machineries that perform all these functions are to access their template , the double - helical DNA . What was not so obvious was that these structural transform - ations are highly regulated in time and space , and , in turn , regulate DNA functioning . How is chromatin structure regulated , to regulate gene activity ? Or are some of the changes in chromatin structure observed upon DNA functioning a mere consequence of gene activity ? Actually , there is no a priori reason to think that these two scenarios are mutually exclusive ; most probably they could each occur in different situations . The challenge to understand chromatin structure and dynamics and to link chromatin structure to function is enormous . Numerous laboratories worldwide are applying a huge range of biochemi - cal and biophysical approaches in an attempt to unravel chromatin secrets . The research effort nowadays seems to focus on the post - synthetic modiﬁcations of both the histones and the DNA . Numerous modiﬁcations of individual amino acid residues at speciﬁc sites along the histone poly - peptide chains are being described , and the enzymatic machineries carrying these reactions are being identiﬁed . Attempts are being made to 0022 - 2836 / $ - see front matter q 2003 Elsevier Ltd . All rights reserved E - mail address of the corresponding author : jzlatano @ duke . poly . edu Abbreviations used : AFM , atomic force microscopy ; EM , electron microscopy . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0022 - 2836 ( 03 ) 00691 - 0 J . Mol . Biol . ( 2003 ) 331 , 1 – 19 understand the functional consequences of these modiﬁcations and the molecular mechanisms through which they act . Equally intriguing are the mechanisms via which methylation of speciﬁc CpG dinucleotides in different gene regions is achieved , maintained , and inherited , to affect gene transcription . The complexities of chromatin structure and its dynamic alterations in response to external and internal stimuli will remain one of the main foci of molecular biology in the years to come . New approaches are being sought and added to the arsenal of existing , more conventional methods used in chromatin research . A whole new battery of single - molecule methods is now emerging in which molecular populations are studied molecule - by - molecule , one - at - a - time . 9 , 10 These techniques overcome the drawbacks of the population - averaged measurements , in which the differences between individual molecules are masked in the ensemble average ; moreover , since the stochastic nature of most biochemical reactions leads to extremely fast loss of synchrony , even when the starting population is synchronized at a certain step of the biochemical pathway , real - time observations of the reaction kinetics are not possible . The new physics - based methods allow unprecedented insights into a host of biochemical reactions involving DNA , RNA and proteins . The aim of this review will be to describe the kinds of single - molecule methods that have been used so far in chromatin research , the questions asked , and the ﬁrst answers . A glimpse at this emerging ﬁeld of chromatin research will , we hope , reveal the power of the new methodology in understand - ing chromatin structure and dynamics . High - resolution imaging techniques The ﬁrst attempts at applying single - molecule approaches to chromatin research involved high - resolution imaging techniques . In these techniques , native , biochemically manipulated , or reconsti - tuted chromatin ﬁbers are imaged and measured , one by one , to give statistically valid data through the observation of huge numbers of individual ﬁbers . Although , strictly speaking , high - resolution electron microscopy ( EM ) belongs to this class of techniques , we focus here on the more recent atomic force microscopy ( AFM ) and cryo - EM studies . Atomic force microscopy AFM is one of several recent instruments that use sharp probes to obtain images of individual molecules . 11 The AFM uses a sharp tip mounted at the end of a ﬂexible cantilever to raster - scan samples immobilized on an atomically ﬂat imaging surface , like mica , glass , or gold ( Figure 1a ) . Atoms on the apex of the AFM tip interact with atoms on the sample causing deﬂections of the ﬂexible canti - lever ; the direction and extent of cantilever deﬂec - tion at each point of the sample depends on whether the interaction at this speciﬁc point is attractive or repulsive , and on its strength . 12 – 14 These deﬂections are registered by a laser beam reﬂected off the back of the cantilever into a photo - diode position detector , and the signal is used to produce digital topographic images . The AFM generally has a nanometer lateral resolution when imaging soft biological samples ( the resolution is truly atomic with hard materials ) . In addition , imaging is performed under conditions likely to preserve the structures under investigation : both ambient air and liquid imaging are possible . Even when imaging is done in air , there is a thin layer of liquid water above the sample , thus allowing the imaged molecules to preserve the structurally important water molecules , and thus , their native Figure 1 . Principle of operation of the AFM , optical tweezers , and magnetic tweezers . ( a ) AFM . The tip / cantilever raster - scans the biological sample on an atomically ﬂat surface , and a topographic image is created from the changes in the laser signal caused by the deﬂections of the cantilever ; these , in turn , are caused by atomic - level tip / sample interactions . For force spectroscopy , the cantilever is moved in the z - direction only , and the deﬂection of the cantilever is followed as a function of the distance between the tip and the sample . Force is the product of the cantilever deﬂec - tion and its spring constant ( see Figure 6 and its legend ) . ( b ) Optical trap . Force is determined by F ¼ k D x ; where k is the spring constant of the trap , and D x is the displacement of the bead from the focus of the trap . ( c ) Magnetic tweezers . A single DNA molecule is tethered between a superparamagnetic bead and a surface . Based on the equi - partition theorem , force is determined by F ¼ lk B T = k D x 2 l ; where l is the distance between the DNA - tethered bead and the surface , k B is Boltzmann’s constant , T is the temperature , and k D x 2 l is the Brownian ﬂuctuations of the bead . 2 Review : Chromatin Fibers , One - at - a - time structure . The AFM can be used to also mechani - cally manipulate macromolecules , an application which will be discussed below . We have recently reviewed in detail the litera - ture on AFM imaging of chromatin . 15 , 16 Here we will limit ourselves to tabulating some of the more important studies ( Table 1 ) and listing some of the new ﬁndings and insights . AFM imaging of native chromatin ﬁbers solu - bilized from chicken erythrocyte nuclei by brief micrococcal nuclease treatment and deposited on glass or mica from low - ionic strength buffers revealed ﬁbers with a loose , quite irregular , three - dimensional organization of individual , well - resolved nucleosomes ( Figures 2 and 3 ) . Although the path of the linker DNA was only rarely visualized in these images ( due to the well - known broadening effect of the AFM tip , which artiﬁcially enlarges the nucleosomes ) , it was clear that the structures were truly three - dimensional , with individual nucleosomes at different heights above the imaging surface . Thus , even at low ionic strength , at their most extended state , chromatin ﬁbers fold in a certain , albeit rather irregular , way . This three - dimensional morphology is quite different from the morphology seen under similar ionic conditions under the EM ( Figure 3 ) , presum - ably due to the better preservation of the native structure in AFM imaging . Chromatin ﬁber images similar to those obtained by AFM were also recorded by cryo - EM 17 , 18 ( see below ) ; this similarity is of particular importance , since it negates the possibility that the irregular ﬁber morphology in AFM images may be an artifact of sample / surface interactions . In an interesting , and , we believe , important twist , chromatin ﬁbers were mathematically modeled based on known structural parameters and assuming straight linkers ( similar modeling with similar outcome was ﬁrst reported by Woodcock et al . 19 ) . The mathematical models were then turned into “fake” AFM images by ﬁrst simu - lating the surface deposition process , and then introducing the broadening effect of the AFM tip . Gratifyingly , the simulated AFM images of the mathematical models turned out very similar to ( almost indistinguishable from ) the actual AFM images of real chromatin ﬁbers . 20 – 22 Thus , the views that chromatin ﬁbers are organized in a much more irregular way than envisaged by the canonical solenoidal model 23 , 24 of the “30 - nm” ﬁber gained additional strength . ( The term “30 - nm ﬁber” has been widely used to denote the structure of the chromatin ﬁber at its ﬁrst level of compac - tion , beyond the beads - on - a - string morphology observed by EM for ﬁbers deposited from low ionic strength buffers . This term is , however , mis - leading , since the diameter of the ﬁber at its most extended state also measures , 30 nm ; the actual parameter that distinguishes the extended ﬁber from the compacted one is the linear nucleosomal density , i . e . the number of nucleosomes per unit ﬁber length ( see below ) . 22 , 25 – 28 Combining biochemical manipulations of chro - matin ﬁbers with AFM imaging of the resulting structures has made some important contributions to our knowledge of the role of individual histone molecules or portions thereof in chromatin struc - turing . Thus , stripping of linker histones from native ﬁbers results in transforming ﬁber morphology , from the irregular , three - dimensional arrangement of nucleosomes to a beads - on - a - string appearance 20 , 21 , 29 ( Figures 2 and 3 ) . Conversely , reconstitution of linker histones onto linker - histone depleted ﬁbers leads to recovery of the native structure . 29 Another series of reconstitution experi - ments aimed at deﬁning some other molecular determinants of native ﬁber structure . To that end , ﬁbers mildly digested with membrane - immobi - lized trypsin were stripped of linker histones to produce substrates that lacked both linker histones and the 26 amino acid residues from the N - tails of histone H3 . When isolated linker histones or their globular domains were reconstituted onto such ﬁbers and the reconstitution products were analyzed by AFM imaging , it became clear that the linker histone tails and the N - terminal tails of histone H3 could substitute for each other in recovering the native ﬁber structure . Either of these tails , in conjunction with the globular domain of linker histones , was necessary and sufﬁcient to reconstruct the original structure . 29 The reconstitu - tion data conﬁrmed and extended the conclusions obtained upon imaging of partially trypsinized chromatin ﬁbers . 30 Several recent reports used AFM imaging to reveal structure – function connections in chroma - tin . One report studied the structural consequences of treating reconstituted nucleosomal arrays with the chromatin remodeling complex SWI / SNF , directly demonstrating a change from evenly spaced nucleosomes into disorganized structures . 31 Another important study revealed cooperation between DNA methylation and linker histone binding in compacting methylated ﬁbers . 32 Still another study compared nucleosomal arrays reconstituted on circular templates with either intact or tailless histones , with no apparent difference in overall appearance or in center - to - center internucleosomal distances ( Figure 2 ) . 33 The contribution of such studies to our overall knowl - edge of chromatin structure and function will obviously grow in the future . The successful future application of AFM to chromatin studies will require further improve - ment of the spatial resolution in AFM images . So far , the highest resolution reported allowed visualization of individual histone molecules within disrupted nucleosomes , 34 and occasional visualization of the DNA wrapped around the histone octamer . 35 Linker histone binding was observed by cryo - AFM as increased mass at the DNA entry / exit point 36 ( see Figure 2 ) , and linker histone addition to stripped mono - , di - and oligonucleosomes from chicken erythrocytes caused the formation of recognizable stem Review : Chromatin Fibers , One - at - a - time 3 Table 1 . Major results and conclusions from AFM and cryo - EM imaging of chromatin Major results References A . AFM imaged substrate Chicken erythrocyte ( CE ) a chromatin ﬁbers First beads - on - a - string AFM images 115 Nucleosomal arrays reconstituted from histone octamers and 208 - 18 b DNA Beads - on - a - string morphology ; center - to - center distances of , 37 nm 112 Hypotonically spread CE nuclei ; detergent - treated nuclei from human B lymphocytes ; native , dry , or rehydrated samples Beads - on - a - string morphology in hypotonic spreads ; the detergent spreads are supranucleosomal chains ; image processing ( extraction of cross - sections of nucleosomes at half - maximum height ) reveals ellipsoid shape of nucleosomes with an aspect ratio of 1 . 2 – 1 . 4 and a rela - tively smooth perimeter ; the orientation of the virtual ellipsoids is correlated with the direction of the ﬁber axis , with . 50 % of nucleosomes aligned with the axis ( could be partly due to interaction with glass and / or drying ) 116 – 119 CE chromatin ﬁbers at different salt concentrations ; unﬁxed or glutaraldehyde - ﬁxed chromatin ﬁbers ; native or LH - depleted ﬁbers Loose , three - dimensional , 30 nm irregular structures even in the absence of salt ; beads - on - a - string ﬁbers seen only in H1 / H5 - depleted ﬁbers . At 10 mM NaCl the ﬁber condenses slightly ; at 80 mM NaCl highly compacted , irregularly segmented ﬁbers 20 , 21 , 120 rDNA minichromosomes from Tetrahymena thermophila Condensed 30 nm ﬁbers near center of mica ; extended ﬁbers at mica periphery with partially dissociated nucleosomes ; clusters of smaller particles within these nucleosomes suggested to be individual histone molecules 34 Progressively trypsinized CE chromatin ﬁbers ; reconsti - tution of CE chromatin ﬁbers depleted of LH or of LH and the N - tails of H3 with either intact H5 or GH5 Cleavage of LH tails results in ﬁber lengthening whereas cleavage of H3 N - tails ﬂattens the ﬁber ; zigzag morphology persists at later stages of digestion and is attributed to retention of the globular domain of LH in ﬁber ; the three - dimensional organization of nucleo - somes in extended ( low ionic strength ) chromatin ﬁbers requires the globular domain of LHs and either the tails of LH or the N - terminal tails of H3 29 , 30 LH - stripped mono - , di - , and oligonucleosomes from CE Occasional visualization of the DNAwrapped around the histone octamer and of linker DNA ; occasional superbeads observed 35 Nucleosomes reconstituted on linearized plasmids and HeLa core histones Nucleosome positioning recognized ; H1 addition report - edly compacts the dinucleosome and forms stem structures 37 Chicken erythrocyte chromatin Cryo - AFM gives higher resolution of chromatin ﬁbers ; at DNA entry / exit point , added mass suggests visualiza - tion of linker histone 36 Chromatin ﬁbers from control or poly ( ADP - ribosyl ) ated CE nuclei ; in vitro poly ( ADP - ribosyl ) ated ﬁbers Poly ( ADP - ribosyl ) ation induces decondensation of chromatin structure which remains signiﬁcantly decondensed even in the presence of Mg 2 þ : Mg 2 þ can - not substitute for linker histones to induce compaction 121 HeLa mononucleosomes ; nucleosome arrays reconsti - tuted from modiﬁed 208 - 12 and core histones ; the arrays remodeled with hSWI / SNF Dimers from SWI / SNF - treated mononucleosomes have , 60 bp more weakly bound by histones than those from control mononucleosomes ; control arrays with evenly spaced nucleosomes are disorganized by SWI / SNF ; compact dimers could not be positively identiﬁed within these arrays 31 Chromatin ﬁbers isolated from cells with normal or elevated levels of m 5 C ; nucleosome arrays reconsti - tuted from either unmethylated or in vitro methylated 208 - 12 and core histones ; additional reconstitution of LH DNA methylation induces chromatin compaction only in the presence of bound LH ; AFM results substantiated by MNase digestion patterns and sucrose gradient centrifugation . AFM imaging can visualize alternative nucleosome positioning on adjacent 208 - bp repeats ( the distribution of center - to - center distances on 208 - 12 is bimodal ) 32 Nucleosome arrays reconstituted from 208 - 18 and either histone octamers , H3 / H4 tetramers or the histone - fold protein HMf from Archaea The HMf - nucleoprotein complexes are bona ﬁde chroma - tin structures . The HMf - containing mononucleosomes are less stable than the canonical octasomes 113 Nucleosomal arrays reconstituted from a 5 . 4 kbp circular template and control or totally tailless recombinant histones Beads - on - a - string ; center - to - center distance frequency distributions indistinguishable for control and tailless reconstitutes 33 Control and hyperacetylated mononucleosomes isolated from HeLa cells Low force images of control and hyperacetylated mono - nucleosomes appear to be the same ; large imaging force causes ﬂattening of mononucleosomes ; reduction to normal force allows control mononucleosomes to regain original heights , whereas hyperacetylated mononucleosomes fail to do so 122 ( continued ) 4 Review : Chromatin Fibers , One - at - a - time structures 37 ( for more on the stem structure , see below ) . Cryo - electron microscopy In cryo - EM , samples are observed in their fully hydrated , unperturbed three - dimensional struc - ture , freely suspended in a layer of vitriﬁed water ; vitriﬁcation ( solidiﬁcation without ice crystal formation ) is achieved by an extremely rapid plunging of the sample holder into liquid nitrogen . 38 , 39 The biological samples are neither stained nor ﬁxed ; possible artifacts due to inter - actions of the sample with the imaging surface ( as in conventional EM , or the AFM ) are totally avoided . The main drawback of the technique is that the image contrast cannot be boosted by stain - ing or shadowing , and sophisticated image analysis and reconstruction is often required for obtaining detailed high - resolution images . The technique and its application to chromatin research have been recently reviewed . 40 Cryo - EM was used as early as 1986 for imaging of chromatin ﬁbers . 41 Although the number of laboratories in the chromatin ﬁeld that are using this technique is very small , its contribution is signiﬁcant ( for a list of published work , see Table 1 , and for some representative images , see Figure 4 ) . Cryo - EM images of mono - , di - , and higher oligo - nucleosomes , isolated from cells or reconstituted in vitro , have provided , together with AFM - acquired images , a major incentive to rethink our ideas of Table 1 Continued Major results References B . Cryo - EM imaged substrate SV40 minichromosomes In high - salt buffer ( 130 mM NaCl ) , condensed globules of , 30 nm in diameter , composed of closed packed nucleosomes . At low salt , the globules open , ﬁrst into 10 nm ﬁlaments , then into nucleosome strings ; a liquid drop model for the condensed minichromosomes is suggested 41 Mononucleosomes reconstituted on a 256 bp fragment with duck erythrocyte histone octamers ; no linker his - tone Particle with 1 . 61 ( ^ 0 . 15 ) left - handed superhelical turns ; DNA arms bend away from the core particle ; entry / exit angle , 33 8 123 Small oligonucleotides from CE at different ionic strength Salt - induced compaction of trinucleosomes occurs by a reduction in the entry / exit angle ; the distance between consecutive nucleosomes is not reduced . The three - dimensional zigzag appearance of polysomes is preserved even at 40 mM ; no evidence of solenoidal arrangements is found 17 CE and COS - 7 cell chromatin ﬁbers ; nucleosome arrays reconstituted on 208 - 6 by salt dialysis The stem - like organization of the entering and exiting linker DNA segments clearly visualized in the presence of linker histones ; the stem motif is proposed to direct the arrangement of nucleosomes and linker DNA within the ﬁbers , establishing the basic three - dimen - sional zigzag folding pattern at all levels of compaction 18 Transcribing SP6 RNA polymerase arrested at unique positions in a nucleosome core reconstituted on 227 bp fragments DNA remains wrapped on the histone octamer during passage of polymerases . Two intermediates identiﬁed : “open transcriptional intermediate” , in which RNA polymerase is located on DNA partially displaced form histones ; and “closed transcriptional intermediate” , in which the same DNA segment harbors both the polymerase and the octamer 124 Polynucleosomes isolated from chicken granulocytes and from COS - 7 cells imaged in 20 mM NaCl Differentiated granulocytes : very compact ﬁbers , with nucleosome disks predominantly at the periphery ; entry / exit sites oriented towards ﬁber interior ; thicker ﬁbers originating from folding of a ﬁber back on itself ( see Figure 4 ) . Actively proliferating COS - 7 cells : open zigzag organization , no thick ﬁbers ( see Figure 4 ) 49 Isolated core particles from calf thymus ( 146 bp of DNA ) Spermidine and salt led to formation of dense aggregates of variable supramolecular organization : amorphous , stacked core particle columns , or liquid crystalline phases , in which the columns are either aligned in parallel or form hexagons 125 167 bp or 146 bp linker histone depleted - mono - nucleosomes from CE or calf thymus A new lamellar mesophase of particles is described , in which columns of core particles align in bilayers sep - arated from each other by a solvent layer ; an attempt is made to link the formation of these bilayers to the tails of H2B and H2A protruding from the crystal structure of the core particle 126 a CE , chicken erythrocyte . b 208 - 18 , a tandemly repeated DNA sequence that has a nucleosome - positioning 208 bp sequence repeated 18 times . 127 Review : Chromatin Fibers , One - at - a - time 5 how the chromatin ﬁber is organized at levels higher than the level of linear arrangements of nucleosomes ( see also above ) . 22 , 25 – 28 Although a detailed discussion of this issue falls outside the scope of this review , we will brieﬂy mention it because of its overall importance to the entire chromatin structure ﬁeld . Both AFM and cryo - EM images showed that the chromatin ﬁber appears , at low ionic strength , as a loose three - dimensionally organized , irregular , zig - zag arrangement of nucleosomes , with no substan - tial evidence for the formation of regular solenoids . The ﬁber can be successfully modeled on the basis of a few known structural parameters of the core Figure 2 . Some example AFM images of chromatin ﬁbers . Left - hand column ( a – c ) , ﬁbers isolated from nuclei ; right - hand column ( d – g ) reconstituted nucleosomal arrays . a , Unﬁxed chicken erythrocyte chromatin ﬁber imaged on glass in air ( S . Leuba & G . Yang , unpublished ) . b , Upper panel , cryo - AFM image of a chicken erythrocyte chromatin ﬁber on mica . 36 Nucleosomes are well resolved along with linker DNA . Lower panel , zoom of a portion of the ﬁber in the upper panel , suggesting visualization of linker histone . Arrows point to increased mass at DNA entry / exit sites . ( Courtesy of Z . Shao ) . c , Linker histone - depleted chicken erythrocyte chromatin ﬁber on mica in air ( S . Leuba , unpub - lished ) . d , Nucleosomal array , reconstituted from 208 - 18 DNA and core histones by salt dialysis , and imaged on mica in air . Reprinted with permission from Allen et al . 112 Copyright 1993 American Chemical Society ( courtesy of M . Allen ) . e , A similar sample imaged under similar conditions in another laboratory . 113 f , Circular plasmids reconstituted with recombinant assembly factors and intact recombinant core histones ( left - hand panel ) , or core histones missing their N - terminal extensions ( right - hand panel ) . Reprinted from An et al . , 33 with permission from Elsevier Science . g , H3 / H4 tetrasome array , reconstituted from 208 - 18 DNA and H3 / H4 tetramers by salt dialysis , imaged on mica in air . h , Nucleo - somal array , reconstituted from 208 - 18 DNA and archaeal - histone HMf ( histone from Methanothermus fervidus ) by salt dialysis , imaged on mica in air . e , g , h , Reprinted from Tomschik et al . , 113 with permission from Elsevier Science . 6 Review : Chromatin Fibers , One - at - a - time particle , variable linker lengths , and a variable angle between entering and exiting linker segments . 17 , 19 – 21 , 42 – 46 The trajectory of the linker DNA in the model is straight , as directly visualized in cryo - EM images . The ﬁrst level of salt - induced compaction of such ﬁbers occurs by decreasing the entry / exit angle . 17 , 18 , 25 The importance of linker histones in chromatin structure has also been directly demonstrated in both AFM and cryo - EM images . 18 , 20 , 21 Using cryo - EM , Woodcock and co - workers 17 , 18 ( reviewed by Grigoryev 47 ) , were able to convincingly visualize the stem structure formed by the nucleosome linkers at the entry / exit DNA site in a nucleosome array . The linker stem formation is due to linker histone binding at the entry / exit DNA site . 48 This structure gives nucleosomes in a ﬁber a “tennis - racket” type of appearance : the DNA segments form an inter - section zone about 8 nm from the center of the nucleosomes , and this zone ( stem ) extends for 3 – 5 nm before the linker DNA segments diverge from each other . The linker DNA stem together with the linker histone are suggested to form a unique motif that directs the higher - order folding and compaction of chromatin along the 30 nm ﬁber axis in an accordion - like manner . 18 Another highly signiﬁcant insight that came from cryo - EM imaging concerns the clear - cut differences seen in stem formation and compaction above the “30 - nm” level in proliferating versus differentiated cells . As Grigoryev et al . 49 demon - strated , chromatin from proliferating cells that contains a normal amount of linker histones seems to form shorter stems and more open linkers resulting in a more extended chromatin ﬁber . In addition , this chromatin does not self - associate but remains in an open three - dimensional zigzag conformation . On the other hand , ﬁbers from highly differentiated cells , like chicken granulo - cytes for example , contain extended linker stems and have the tendency to fold - back on themselves , forming highly interdigitated structures ( Figure 4 ) . Lateral ﬁber association is also possible in vivo , and may explain the absence of distinct chromatin ﬁbers in many types of nuclei with extensively repressed genomes . 26 Forces in Biology Nature and magnitudes Chemists have been studying intramolecular forces for many years . The importance of forces for the functioning of every living cell has been recognized more recently 50 – 52 and has led to a sig - niﬁcant research effort to measure them , and to understand how the energy stored in chemical bonds can be transformed into mechanical energy of movement . The processes that involve intra - cellular forces are numerous : the reversible struc - tural transformations of chromatin and chromosomes during the cell cycle , the movements of chromosomes during mitosis and meiosis , of DNA and RNA polymerases along template DNA during replication and transcription , of myosin along actin ﬁlaments during muscle contraction , of kinesin along microtubules during vesicle trafﬁcking . Thus , intermolecular forces govern protein – protein and protein – nucleic acid inter - actions , whereas intramolecular forces ensure the proper structuring of biological macromolecules so that they can function properly . The two DNA strands need to be held together in the double - helical structure ; RNA molecules have to form the numerous hairpins that deﬁne their function ; and protein molecules have to fold properly in space to perform whatever function they have . The magnitude of biologically relevant forces varies within a very broad range ( Figure 5 ) . The Langevin ( thermal agitation ) forces are ubiquitous and random in nature ; for objects a couple of microns in size ( the dimensions of a typical cell ) in water at room temperature , they are in the femtonewton ( fN ) range . These seemingly minute forces are actually huge in the micro - world : according to Strick et al . , 53 a cell experiences a thermal knock equal to its weight every second . Figure 3 . Comparison between AFM ( a and b ) and EM ( c ) images . a , Unﬁxed chicken erythrocyte chromatin ﬁber imaged on glass in air . 20 b , Linker - histone stripped chicken erythrocyte chromatin ﬁber on mica in air . 20 Images ( a ) and ( b ) copyright ( 1994 ) National Academy of Sciences , USA ( c ) EM micrograph of rat liver chromatin ﬁbers . Reprinted from De Murcia & Koller , 114 with permission from Elsevier Science . In all three cases , the ﬁbers were deposited onto the imaging surfaces from low - ionic strength buffers , with no added salt . Review : Chromatin Fibers , One - at - a - time 7 The entropic forces within biological macro - molecules , with magnitudes of a few piconewtons , are connected to the reduction of the number of possible conﬁgurations accompanying the for - mation of secondary and tertiary structures . The entropy is maximal when the DNA forms a random coil , or when a protein is denatured : intro - ducing order into these molecules requires work against entropy to be done , and thus depends on the application of force . Forces of the order of a few piconewtons have been experimentally deter - mined upon stretching of DNA in the low force regime ( see below ) . Molecular motors such as myo - sin , kinesin , and RNA / DNA polymerases develop forces in the same range , from a few piconewtons to tens of piconewtons . 9 , 54 , 55 The forces involved in speciﬁc intermolecular interactions ( ligand / receptor , antigen / antibody ) form the next force magnitude group ( Figure 5 ) . When molecular partners interact with each other , many new non - covalent bonds ( van der Waals , hydrogen , electrostatic ) are created , while many of the pre - existing bonds within each partner are broken to allow a better intermolecular ﬁt . These modiﬁcations in the structure of the partners require signiﬁcant energies , and hence the input of signiﬁcant forces , usually in the range of 200 – 300 pN . 14 Similar forces are needed to unfold individually folded domains in polypeptide chains . 56 – 58 It should be noted that these forces were measured in experiments where the force loading rate , d F = d t ; was very high . Experiments that applied the pulling force at much lower load - ing rate gave lower unfolding forces , 59 in agree - ment with theoretical considerations on strength of bonds subjected to external force ﬁelds . 60 , 61 Finally , the forces underlying covalent bonds are almost two orders of magnitude larger than those involved in multi - bond inter - or intramolecular interactions . The phosphodiester bonds in the sugar - phosphate backbone of double - stranded DNA are broken at , 1 nN . 54 , 62 , 63 Silicon – carbon bonds are ruptured at , 2 . 0 nN , and sulfur – gold bonds break at , 1 . 4 nN . 64 How interaction forces are measured The ﬁrst measurements of intermolecular forces were done with the surface force apparatus ( SFA ) back in 1973 . 65 SFA measures forces between two Figure 4 . Some example cryo - EM images of chromatin ﬁbers . a , Tennis - racket shaped nucleosomes from Bednar et al . 18 Arrows indicate stem structure , and arrowheads show the two DNA gyres around the histone octamer . Copyright ( 1998 ) National Academy of Sciences , USA ( courtesy of C . Woodcock ) . b – d , Chromatin ﬁbers from COS - 7 cells in a low ionic strength buffer . e , Nucleosome model with diverging linker arms , corresponding to the example images of b – d . f – h , Chromatin ﬁbers , with closely apposed linker DNA stems , from chicken granulocyte cells under similar low ionic strength conditions . i , Nucleosome model with linker arms forming a stem upon exiting , correspond - ing to the example images of f – h . j , Polynucleosome ﬁbers isolated from COS - 7 cells are open 3D zigzag arrangements of nucleosomes . k , Polynucleosome ﬁber model corresponding to the COS - 7 chromatin ﬁber images . l , Chromatin ﬁbers isolated from differentiated chicken granulocyte cells are highly compact and laterally self - associated . m , Poly - nucleosome ﬁber model corresponding to the differentiated chicken granulocyte chromatin ﬁber images . b – m , From Grigoryev 47 , with permission of the publisher , courtesy of S . Grigoryev . 8 Review : Chromatin Fibers , One - at - a - time macroscopic surfaces as a function of their separ - ation . The distance can be measured with high resolution ( 1 A˚ ) , and the force sensitivity is , 1 nN . The large contact areas between the sur - faces allow only ensemble measurements of forces . The instruments for measuring forces at the single - molecule level can be divided into two major categories : mechanical force transducers and external ﬁeld manipulators . 9 In the mechanical force transducers , forces are applied or sensed through the deﬂections of a bendable beam . In the AFM , it is the ﬂexible cantilever to which the AFM tip is attached that serves as a force trans - ducer / sensor . When the AFM is used to measure forces , the x – y movement of the cantilever is dis - abled , and it is moved only in the z - direction ; upwards and downwards . The deﬂection of the cantilever is measured as a function of the distance of the tip from the surface , to produce the so - called force curves . A typical AFM force curve is depicted schematically in Figure 6a ( with a description in the Figure legend ) ; however , as the reader will see from Figures 7 – 9 , the force curves have a generally similar appearance and are interpreted in similar ways independently of the type of instrument used . Figure 6b – e exemplify the appearance of force curves in several well understood cases . When there is no speciﬁc interaction between the probe ( the AFM tip ) and the sample , a small blip is seen in the withdrawal curve : the tip stays attached to the sample slightly beyond the point of initial con - tact upon approach , reﬂecting the physical adhesion of the tip to the sample ( see the legend to Figure 6 ) . 12 , 14 In the cases of speciﬁc interactions ( e . g . avidin – biotin , antibody – antigen ) , this blip turns into a peak , whose magnitude is indicative of the interactive force : the higher the interaction force , the more the cantilever is deﬂected ( see stage 4 in Figure 6a ) , before it eventually snaps off the sample . If short fragments of double - stranded DNA are stretched , with one strand being attached to the surface and the complementary strand to the tip , the peak changes its shape due to the confor - mational transition in the double helix before its melting ( strand separation ) . The cantilever deﬂec - tion measured for a while is less than expected ( the peak deviates from a straight line ) , since the molecule yields to the applied pulling force by stretching beyond its contour length . This over - stretching transition has been seen using different stretching approaches but its exact nature is still a point of contention . 15 , 66 Finally , when the stretched substrate is a poly - peptide chain that contains a number of indi - vidually folded domains , the force curves have the saw - tooth appearance presented in Figure 6e . 56 – 58 The ascending portion of each peak ( note the deviation from linearity ) corresponds to the entropic stretching of the domain of the poly - peptide chain that has unfolded in a preceding peak ; at the peak value of force , the domain yields as a whole , abruptly lengthening the molecule with a corresponding precipitous drop in the force . The next peak corresponds to unraveling of another domain , and so on , until all domains unfold . Let us now go back to the instrumentation used for measuring forces . As already stated , the AFM belongs to the category of mechanical force trans - ducers . Other representatives of this category are microneedles and optical ﬁbers to which the manipulated molecule is attached via one of its ends ( the other end is attached to a bead held by a glass pipette ) . The bending of these beams is measured in direct microscopic observations 67 or by photodiode detection of light projected from the optical ﬁber . 68 , 69 In the second category of instruments , the external ﬁeld manipulators , the molecule is acted upon from a distance , by applying external ﬁelds : photonic in optical tweezers , magnetic in magnetic tweezers , and hydrodynamic in ﬂow - ﬁeld apparatuses . The ﬁeld may be applied to the molecule itself , as is the case of a ﬂow ﬁeld ( see , for example , the chromatin assembly experiments of Ladoux et al . , 70 described below , and Figure 11a ) , or to an appropriate handle to which the molecule is attached ( transparent polystyrene beads are used in optical tweezers , whereas beads with mag - netic properties are utilized in magnetic tweezers ) . The other end of the molecule to be manipulated is attached to a surface or an additional bead : this second bead is often held by a micropipette . 71 , 72 In optical tweezers , 73 a laser beam is focused through an objective ( Figure 1b ) . A dielectric bead placed in the light path experiences force from multiple photons hitting it : as a photon hits the bead , its momentum changes as a result of the difference in refractive indexes of the medium and the bead ; by conservation of momentum , the bead is pushed into a direction opposite to that of the refracted photon . The resultant force from all ( refracted and scattered ) photons creates a potential Figure 5 . Forces in biology and the force range capa - bilities of the various single - molecule instruments . The line represents the range of forces encountered in biology , with the ﬁlled squares above the line denoting the speciﬁc force ranges characteristic of the different types of forces . The arrows below the line illustrate the ranges of forces that can be sensed or applied to biologi - cal macromolecules using different techniques . Review : Chromatin Fibers , One - at - a - time 9 well slightly below the waist of the beam that holds the bead suspended indeﬁnitely . If a bead is moved out of this equilibrium position ( by the application of an external force ) , it will experience a restoring force that will bring it back to this position . If a macromolecule attached to the bead is pulled or twisted at its other end ( e . g . by holding it in a pipette ) , it will displace the bead from its equilibrium position . Since the force causing the displacement will be counterbalanced by the optical trap , the bead displacement from its equi - librium position can be used to measure the force applied to the molecule . In magnetic tweezers 53 , 74 – 76 force can be applied to a macromolecule tethered between a surface and a paramagnetic bead through the action of an external magnetic ﬁeld ( Figure 1c ) . The bead , when placed in the magnetic ﬁeld , acquires a net magnetic moment so that it can now respond to controlled changes in the external ﬁeld . The distance between the external magnet and the Figure 8 . a , Schematic of the experimental approach used by Bennink et al . 72 to mechanically stretch chromatin ﬁbers directly assembled in the ﬂow cell from a single l DNA molecule and Xenopus cell - free extracts . b , A representative force curve . c , A blow - up of the boxed region of the curve in b . For further explanation , see the text . Figure 7 . a , Schematic of the experimental approach used by Cui & Bustamante 92 to mechanically stretch isolated chicken erythrocyte chromatin ﬁbers . b , Force curves obtained in consecutive stretch - relaxation cycles ( redrawn from Cui & Bustamante ) . 92 Figure 6 . Schematic of a typical force – distance curve recorded by AFM and stylized appearance of force curves reﬂecting different kinds of interactions . 12 , 14 a , Explanation of the appearance of a typical force curve . The numbers correspond to different states of the cantilever during the approach and retraction portions of the cycle : ( 1 ) AFM tip is not in contact with surface ; ( 2 ) tip is being pushed into the surface , bending the cantilever ; ( 3 ) tip is being withdrawn from surface ; ( 4 ) tip adheres to surface ; ( 5 ) tip “jumps off contact” from surface ; ( 6 ) tip is not in contact with surface . b , Non - speciﬁc interactions . c , Rupture of bonds between strongly interacting molecular partners , such as avidin – biotin , antibody – antigen . d , DNA stretching force curve . e , Saw - tooth pattern in a force curve obtained upon stretching of multi - domain proteins . For further explanation , see the text . 10 Review : Chromatin Fibers , One - at - a - time bead controls the magnitude of force applied to the molecule . Moreover , the alignment of the acquired magnetic moment of the bead with the external ﬁeld allows controlled rotation of the bead , in syn - chrony with a controlled rotation of the external magnet ( s ) . This rotation allows the application of a controlled torque to the molecule suspended between the bead and the surface , given that the molecule is attached in a topologically constrained way so that it cannot swivel about its anchoring points . Thus , in a series of experiments , the laboratory of David Bensimon and Vincent Croquette 75 , 77 , 78 was able to introduce controlled positive or negative supercoiling in DNA molecules attached to the surfaces via multiple con - tacts on all four ends . By recording force - extension curves at ﬁxed values of superhelical density and constant forces ( ranging from 6 fN to 20 pN ) and replotting the data as extension - superhelical density curves , the authors revealed intriguing differences in the behavior of positively versus negatively supercoiled molecules , at intermediate and high forces . At intermediate forces ( , 1 . 2 pN ) , the negatively supercoiled molecules did not form plectonemes upon pumping of superhelicity ; instead , the torsional stress was absorbed by local denaturation . In the high force regime ( . 3 pN ) , no plectoneme formation was observed for either negatively or positively supercoiled DNA ; the positively supercoiled DNA underwent a transition to a new structure ( called P - DNA , for Pauling - DNA ) , in which the phosphate - sugar backbone is winding inside the structure and the bases are exposed to the solution . The same group applied magnetic tweezers to study the action of several topoisomerases . 79 – 81 In ﬂow ﬁeld experiments , the ﬂow force can be applied either directly to the molecule or through a bead handle . The forces are estimated using Stokes’ law , which requires precise knowledge of ﬂow rates . The main advantages of the ﬂow ﬁeld approach lie in the wide range of forces that can be readily applied and the ease of changing buffers and biofactors needed for particular biochemical reactions to take place ( for further details on this technique , see Bustamante et al . 9 ) . Figure 5 schematically presents the range of forces that can be applied by the different single - molecule manipulation techniques . Chromatin disassembly under applied force DNA was the ﬁrst biological macromolecule to be studied under applied force . Fragments of DNA several micrometers long have been stretched by a combination of magnetic and ﬂow forces , 74 optical tweezers , 71 , 82 glass needles / optical ﬁbers , 68 , 83 and AFM 84 , 85 ( AFM has been also used to stretch short double - stranded oligonucleotides ) . 86 , 87 In general , the DNA molecule behaves in a different way under differ - ent force regimes . 15 , 54 , 66 Under tensile forces of up to , 10 pN , DNA behaves as an elastic rod , accurately described by an inextensible worm - like chain model . This purely entropic behavior changes above 10 pN , when the molecule lengthens beyond its B - form contour length , i . e . it behaves as a stretchable solid with a certain elastic stretch modulus . This stretching must result from changing of the chemical structure itself in response to the relatively high tensile force applied . When the force exceeds , 65 pN , the mol - ecule suddenly yields and overstretches to , 1 . 7 times its contour length ( the overstretching force plateau occurs at 110 pN for dsDNA molecules not containing nicks 83 ) . The overstretching tran - sition force is a function of the salt concentration , 82 and is highly sequence - dependent . 84 The force rises rapidly again following the overstretching transition , to reach a new smaller plateau at Figure 9 . a , Schematic of the experimental approach used by Brower - Toland et al . 93 to mechani - cally stretch pre - assembled , fully saturated nucleosomal arrays con - taining 17 positioned nucleosomes . b , A force curve obtained upon moving the coverslip at a constant velocity relative to the bead , whose position was kept constant by modulating the light intensity of the trapping laser ( velocity clamp mode of operation ) ; the low force range and high force range are designated , with discrete opening events seen only in the high force range . c , The suggested three - stage model for the mechanical disruption of the nucleosomal par - ticle ( redrawn or modiﬁed from Brower - Toland et al . 93 ) . Review : Chromatin Fibers , One - at - a - time 11 , 150 pN , after which the force curve for dsDNA overlies the force curve for ssDNA . The exact nature of the structural transformations during the different stages of stretching remains controversial , with the possible exception of the very ﬁrst entropic stage and the very last stage where com - plete melting of the helix seems to occur ( for a detailed discussion , see Zlatanova & Leuba 15 ) . Attempts to mechanically stretch chromatin ﬁbers have considerably lagged behind such studies on naked DNA . The initial attempts used AFM to stretch both isolated native ﬁbers and reconstituted nucleosomal arrays . 88 , 89 The force - extension curves had the multi - peak , saw - tooth pattern expected to be seen as a result of consecu - tive disassembly of individual nucleosomes in the ﬁber : the unraveling of the DNA from around each histone octamer was expected to lengthen the ﬁber in a jump , to be accompanied by an abrupt drop in the force ( this expectation was based on the known behavior of multi - domain proteins sub - jected to stretching ; 90 , 91 see Figure 6e ) . Careful analysis of the force curves , however , suggested that the force jumps corresponded to removal of successive intact nucleosomes from the glass sur - face , followed by stretching of the naked DNA between the nucleosomes attached to the tip and the surface . The surface attachment artifact could be , in principle , overcome by suspending the chromatin ﬁber between the AFM tip and the surface ; however , such experiments have not been reported . Single chromatin ﬁbers have been successfully stretched with optical tweezers . Cui and Bustamante 92 used a dual - beam optical trap to pull on isolated chicken erythrocyte chromatin ﬁbers suspended between the trapped bead and a bead held by a glass micropipette ( Figure 7a ) . The force curves showed that up to 20 pN the ﬁbers underwent reversible stretching , whereas appli - cation of forces above this value led to irreversible alterations interpreted in terms of histone dis - sociation , with recovery of the mechanical properties of naked DNA ( Figure 7b ) . The optical tweezers set - up used by Bennink et al . 72 was quite similar ( Figure 8a ) , but the experi - mental approach was different . Rather than using chromatin ﬁbers isolated from cells ( by deﬁnition these ﬁbers are somewhat heterogeneous in length and may also be compositionally heterogeneous depending on which part of the genome they orig - inate from ) , these authors resorted to assembling the nucleosomal arrays to be stretched directly in the ﬂow cell . To that end , a single l DNA molecule was attached via its biotinylated 5 0 ends to strepta - vidin - coated beads , and nucleosome assembly was carried out by ﬂowing in cell - free Xenopus extracts that contained core histones and the protein assembly factors needed for proper nucleo - some formation . The transformation of the naked DNA into a chromatin ﬁber was followed by the shortening of the distance between the pipette - held bead and the “free” bead attached to the other end of the DNA molecule ( technical con - siderations demanded the use of the optical trap to be discontinued during the assembly step , to be again turned on during the stretching phase ; see more below ) . Once the chromatin ﬁber was assembled , it was stretched by moving the pipette away from the trapped bead and force - extension curves were recorded . The high speed of data acquisition in these experiments resulted in force curves with a large number of easily discernible , discrete peaks ( Figure 8b and c ) . Each peak reﬂects the opening ( unraveling ) of an individual nucleo - some ( or small groups of two , three or four nucleo - somes ) , as judged by the increments in ﬁber length from one stretching intermediate to the next ( see Figure 8c for illustration of this measurement ) . The ﬁber lengthens in increments of , 65 nm or multiples thereof ( see Figure 4 of Bennink et al . , 72 for the original analysis ) , that roughly correspond to the change in ﬁber length as a result of unwrap - ping of two full turns of the DNA superhelix from around the histone octamer . Importantly , the forces required to break the histone / DNA bonds are in the range between 20 pN and 40 pN , in agreement with the data of Cui & Bustamante . 92 Recently , the laboratory of M . Wang reported another optical tweezers study , in which a nucleo - somal array containing 17 positioned nucleosomes on an artiﬁcial DNA construct was assembled in solution , and then attached to a bead in an optical trap and to a coverslip ; the array was stretched by controlled movement of the coverslip 93 ( Figure 9a ) . Analysis of the force - extension curves suggested that approximately one half of each nucleosome was disrupted at low forces ( with no characteristic discrete , single - nucleosome signature identiﬁed in this force regime ) , while the remaining half unraveled at forces exceeding 20 pN , with each nucleosome giving an individual peak in the force curve . Such a step - wise unraveling process would be possible if the nucleosomal particle structure were held together by histone – DNA interactions of rather different strengths at different locations along the DNA . Indeed , such variability in contact strength along the length of the core particle DNA has been inferred from the crystal structure , with the weakest interactions occurring at the ends , and the strongest interactions occurring at the dyad axis . 6 , 94 This pattern of differential strength of histone – DNA interactions along the core par - ticle DNA may be the structural basis for the dynamic “breathing” of the DNA ends , 7 to give the nucleosomal particle the ﬂexibility needed for its proper functioning . 95 The step - wise model for nucleosome unraveling is illustrated in Figure 9c . It should be noted that although the model suggests simultaneous unraveling of both ends of the nucleosomal DNA until the relatively strong contacts at positions þ 4 and 2 4 of the DNA super - helix are reached , an alternative step - wise model may be conceivable , in which one half of the particle unravels unilaterally , with the strong contacts at the dyad serving as a roadblock to a 12 Review : Chromatin Fibers , One - at - a - time total quick release of the entire DNA from the his - tone surface ( J . Widom , personal communication ) . In this scenario , the release of the ﬁrst half may occur gradually ( to concur with the lack of discrete lengthening peaks in the low force regime ) , whereas the second half of each nucleosome may be released in a jump , following the rupture of the contacts at the dyad ( to explain the discrete peaks in the high force regime ) . Thus , the opening events described by Bennink et al . 72 would correspond to unraveling of the entire particle at once ( , 65 nm steps ) , while the discern - ible opening events described by Brower - Toland et al . 93 would correspond only to the second phase of the DNA unwrapping from around the histone core ( , 27 nm ) . Understanding the reason for this different behavior of the nucleosomal particle will require additional studies ( now in progress in our laboratories ) . Importantly though , all three reports agree on the magnitude of forces required to unravel nucleosomes , , 20 – 40 pN . What may the physiological relevance of these results be ? It turns out that the forces measured for RNA and DNA polymerases 96 – 99 are in exactly the same range as those keeping the integrity of the nucleosomal particle . Can it then be postulated that the DNA - tracking enzymes may be capable of clearing nucleosomes out of their way by them - selves , without the help of auxiliary factors ? Before jumping to conclusions , it is important to note that the enzymes used in these studies are of pro - karyotic or phage origin , i . e . they never encounter nucleosomes in their physiological environment . On the other hand , though , recent high - resolution crystal structures of a phage polymerase ( T7 ) , 100 , 101 a bacterial enzyme ( Thermus aquaticus ) 102 and a eukaryotic Pol II ( yeast ) 103 , 104 show an amazing degree of evolutionary conservation of structure , especially in and around the active centers in the catalytic subunits . These structural similarities , together with the numerous shared functional characteristics , 105 – 108 make it rather probable that the forces that are exerted by the enzymes on the DNA threaded through their active centers are of similar magnitudes . Finally , it is instructive to directly compare the behavior of naked DNA with that of chromatin ﬁbers stretched under identical conditions . As Figure 10 indicates , the force - relative extension curves for l DNA and l chromatin are quite different , and so are the numerical values for the persistence length and stretch modulus extracted from these curves . The molecular features of the two stretching substrates that give rise to these differences are difﬁcult to assess at present . Chromatin assembly under applied force Studying nucleosomal strength and the forces needed to break down the nucleosome is obviously an important , physiologically relevant issue . What about studying chromatin assembly under applied force ? Chromatin assembly in vivo takes place massively at the newly formed double helices , immediately following DNA replication . Nucleo - somes have to assemble also in the wake of the transcriptional machinery , since the mechanism of DNA transcription requires temporal removal of all proteins bound to the template DNA , including the histones of the core particle . The upstream ( already transcribed ) naked DNA stretches that emerge from the polymerase must , within a reasonable time , recover their chromatin structure to allow resumption of the roles chromatin plays in DNA compaction and regulation of its function . This reformation of nucleosomes in the wake of RNA polymerase ( and , for that matter , of other DNA - tracking enzymes as well ) occurs while the DNA molecule is still under tension as a result of the pulling exerted by the stationary polymerase on the transcribed DNA . As already alluded to , polymerases are bona ﬁde molecular motors developing pretty high forces ( up to 30 – 40 pN ) . 97 , 98 If the forces measured in vitro are physiologically relevant , then it is important to understand how and under what conditions nucleosomes assemble , i . e . what the force depen - dence of the assembly process is . Three laboratories have approached this issue at the single - molecule level . Viovy and his co - workers followed chromatin formation in real time by recording the shortening of a single l DNA molecule attached to a glass surface , and subjected to deﬁned ﬂow ﬁelds 70 ( Figure 11a ) . The Figure 10 . Comparison of naked l DNA and l - chromatin ﬁber stretch curves . Naked DNA force - relative extension curve redrawn from Bustamante et al . 54 ( diamonds ) or plotted from the data of Bennink et al . 72 ( circles ) using a contour length for the stretched l DNA of 16 m m . The force - relative extension curve of the l chromatin ﬁber ( squares ) was calculated from the data of the completely reversible portion of the stretch curve in the low force regime ( see 2 – 3 m m portion in Figure 8b ) , using a contour length of 2 . 3 m m ( determined as the x - intercept of a linear ﬁt to the data ) . The numeri - cal values for the stretch modulus ð S Þ and the persistence length ð P Þ for both naked l DNA and l chromatin ﬁber are listed in the graph . Review : Chromatin Fibers , One - at - a - time 13 molecule was ﬂuorescently labeled by intercalation of YOYO - 1 , and chromatin assembly was achieved by ﬂowing in Xenopus or Drosophila cell - free extracts . Bennink et al . 109 used a similar biological system ( l DNA and Xenopus extracts ) in an optical trap / ﬂow ﬁeld set - up ( Figure 11b ) . The optical trap was used for the initial attachment of the single DNA molecule between two beads , but was subsequently turned off during the assembly ( the presence of cell debris in the extract precluded the use of the optical trap for force measurements ) . Forces were applied via the ﬂow ﬁeld , and were estimated either by Stokes’ law or by measurement of the Brownian motion of the freely suspended bead . Finally , Leuba et al . 110 used magnetic twee - zers to study the force dependence of chromatin assembly in an approach depicted in Figure 11c . Nucleosomes were formed on l DNA molecules suspended between a paramagnetic bead and the inner surface of a glass cuvette by the addition of puriﬁed histone octamers and recombinant nucleo - some assembly protein 1 ( NAP - 1 ) . Once the short - ening of DNA became visible , the ﬂow was stopped , and assembly was performed only under the magnetic force . All three groups reported qualitatively similar results ; we will illustrate them by the example of the magnetic tweezers approach . Curves of the travel of the bead across the video - screen as a function of time were ﬁrst recorded at a constant force ( for a representative curve , see Figure 12a ) . From each of these curves , we Figure 12 . Example of experi - mental data on chromatin assembly with magnetic tweezers . 110 a , Raw assembly curve recorded at 0 . 6 pN in a ﬂow - stopped experiment . b , A rheostat experiment , with step - wise changes of the distance between the external magnet and the cuvette , hence of the force applied to the magnetic bead . c , Data from 18 individual assembly experiments performed at different forces : each point is the initial assembly rate at a given force . The dotted curve is an exponential ﬁt to the data . d , An assembly curve recorded at 7 . 6 pN . Note the upward steps on the otherwise descending curve . These steps appear as a result of the dynamic equilibrium between nucleosome assembly and disassembly ( for further details , see the text , and Leuba et al . 110 ) . Figure 11 . Schematics of methods applied to study the force depen - dence of nucleosome assembly on long single DNA molecules using : a , ﬂow ; 70 b , optical tweezers / ﬂow ; 109 c , magnetic tweezers / ﬂow . 110 14 Review : Chromatin Fibers , One - at - a - time estimated the initial assembly rate at the speciﬁed force . In addition , we performed “rheostat” experi - ments in which the force applied to the bead , and hence to the DNA molecule , was changed step - wise during the course of a single assembly experi - ment . This rheostat control over the force was easily achieved through changing the distance between the external magnet and the cuvette ( hence the bead ) . An assembly curve recorded in such an experiment is illustrated in Figure 12b ; it shows clearly that the assembly rate is dependent on the applied force : the higher the force , the slower the assembly . Importantly , it also indicates that the response of the system to changes in force is instantaneous . Figure 12c is a plot of the data from many individual experiments and shows , in agreement with the previous reports , that forces around 10 pN effectively prevent nucleosome formation . It remains to be seen how the forces “stalling” nucleosome formation are related to the forces developed by the transcriptional machinery as a function of the rate of transcription . One last point from these experiments deserves mentioning . A careful look at the portion of the assembly curve presented in Figure 12d reveals upward jumps on the otherwise monotonous downward assembly curve . Such jumps are more frequent in curves recorded at higher forces and must reﬂect occasional spontaneous disassembly of nucleosomes ( probably several at a time ) . This is the ﬁrst real - time demonstration of the dynamic equilibrium between nucleosome formation and dissociation in the ﬁber context ; the existence of such equilibrium at the mononucleosome level has been previously suggested from bulk experi - ments and theory . 1 , 111 It should be noted that all three assembly studies made use of DNA molecules that were not topo - logically constrained , i . e . were free to swivel around their attachment points . It is obviously necessary to study the force dependence of nucleo - some assembly on topologically constrained DNA molecules , to more closely mimic the in vivo situation of chromatin ﬁbers organized in loops attached to components of the nuclear matrix . What’s next ? The brief description of the single - molecule studies in the chromatin ﬁeld may leave the reader with mixed feelings . Intriguing , maybe enchanting , but is this all ? Is this just another example of “much ado about nothing” ? What other questions can be approached ? What other techniques can be used ? We believe that the possibilities are endless . Think of any system , any process you want to study . Is there a better way to really understand what is going on than looking at one molecule / molecular complex at a time , so that crucial charac - teristics are not lost , masked by the average measurements of huge populations of molecules ? Is there a better way to follow the kinetics of intrinsically asynchronous processes , like tran - scription , for example , where synchrony is quickly lost even if you initiate the biochemical reaction in a synchronized molecular population ? Think about the complexities of transcription through nucleosomes superimposed on the complexities of transcription on naked DNA templates . Think about how much we can learn if we could tran - scribe individual nucleosomes one - at - a - time , for example . What about understanding replication , repair , recombination in the chromatin context ? We believe that the single - molecule chromatin ﬁeld is just making its ﬁrst steps . Still , the power of the single - molecule techniques in approaching important structural and functional chromatin issues cannot be overstated . The chromatin research community will need to embrace these techniques wholeheartedly , in the realization that only by combining the new single - molecule tools with the more traditional biochemical and bio - physical approaches can we hope to achieve any major breakthrough in our understanding of chro - matin structure and function . The future is thrilling and bright , though not necessarily easy . Acknowledgements We thank Drs M . Allen , S . Grigoryev , Z . Shao and C . Woodcock for images , and S . Grigoryev for comments . Our research has been supported by a NCI K22 grant ( to S . H . L . ) , University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine startup funds ( to S . H . L . ) , and Polytechnic University startup funds ( to J . Z . ) . References 1 . van Holde , K . E . ( 1988 ) . Chromatin , Springer Series in Molecular Biology , Springer , New York . 2 . Tsanev , R . , Russev , G . , Pashev , I . & Zlatanova , J . ( 1992 ) . Replication and Transcription of Chromatin , CRC Press , Boca Raton . 3 . Wolffe , A . P . ( 1998 ) . Chromatin : Structure and Function , Academic Press , New York . 4 . Turner , B . M . ( 2002 ) . Chromatin and Gene Regulation : Mechanisms in Epigenetics , Blackwell Science , Oxford . 5 . Arents , G . & Moudrianakis , E . N . ( 1993 ) . Topo - graphy of the histone octamer surface : repeating structural motifs utilized in the docking of nucleo - somal DNA . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA , 90 , 10489 – 10493 . 6 . Luger , K . , Mader , A . W . , Richmond , R . K . , Sargent , D . F . & Richmond , T . J . ( 1997 ) . Crystal structure of the nucleosome core particle at 2 . 8 A˚ resolution . Nature , 389 , 251 – 260 . 7 . van Holde , K . & Zlatanova , J . ( 1999 ) . The nucleo - some core particle : does it have structural and physiologic relevance ? Bioessays , 21 , 776 – 780 . 8 . Harp , J . M . , Hanson , B . L . , Timm , D . E . & Bunick , G . J . ( 2000 ) . Asymmetries in the nucleosome core particle at 2 . 5 A ˚ resolution . Acta Crystallog . sect . D , 56 , 1513 – 1534 . Review : Chromatin Fibers , One - at - a - time 15 9 . Bustamante , C . , Macosko , J . C . & Wuite , G . J . ( 2000 ) . Grabbing the cat by the tail : manipulating molecules one by one . Nature Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 1 , 130 – 136 . 10 . Leuba , S . H . ; Zlatanova , J . ( eds ) ( 2001 ) . Biology at the single - molecule level . , Amsterdam , Pergamon . 11 . Binnig , G . , Quate , C . F . & Rohrer , C . ( 1986 ) . Atomic force microscope . Phys . Rev . Letters , 56 , 930 – 933 . 12 . Cappella , B . & Dietler , G . ( 1999 ) . Force – distance curves by atomic force microscopy . Surf . Sci . Rep . 34 , 1 – 104 . 13 . Heinz , W . F . & Hoh , J . H . ( 1999 ) . Spatially resolved force spectroscopy of biological surfaces using the atomic force microscope . Trends Biotechnol . 17 , 143 – 150 . 14 . Zlatanova , J . , Lindsay , S . M . & Leuba , S . H . ( 2000 ) . Single molecule force spectroscopy in biology using the atomic force microscope . Prog . Biophys . Mol . Biol . 74 , 37 – 61 . 15 . Zlatanova , J . & Leuba , S . H . ( 2002 ) . Stretching and imaging single DNA molecules and chromatin . J . Muscle Res . Cell Motil . , 23 . 16 . Zlatanova , J . & Leuba , S . H . ( 2003 ) . Chromatin structure and dynamics : lessons from single molecule approaches . In Chromatin Structure and Dynamics : State - of - the - Art ( Zlatanova , J . & Leuba , S . H . , eds ) , Elsevier , Amsterdam . 17 . Bednar , J . , Horowitz , R . A . , Dubochet , J . & Woodcock , C . L . ( 1995 ) . Chromatin conformation and salt - induced compaction : three - dimensional structural information from cryoelectron microscopy . J . Cell Biol . 131 , 1365 – 1376 . 18 . Bednar , J . , Horowitz , R . A . , Grigoryev , S . A . , Carruthers , L . M . , Hansen , J . C . , Koster , A . J . & Woodcock , C . L . ( 1998 ) . Nucleosomes , linker DNA , and linker histone form a unique structural motif that directs the higher - order folding and compac - tion of chromatin . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA , 95 , 14173 – 14178 . 19 . Woodcock , C . L . , Grigoryev , S . A . , Horowitz , R . A . & Whitaker , N . ( 1993 ) . A chromatin folding model that incorporates linker variability generates ﬁbers resembling the native structures . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA , 90 , 9021 – 9025 . 20 . Leuba , S . H . , Yang , G . , Robert , C . , Samori , B . , van Holde , K . , Zlatanova , J . & Bustamante , C . ( 1994 ) . Three - dimensional structure of extended chromatin ﬁbers as revealed by tapping - mode scanning force microscopy . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA , 91 , 11621 – 11625 . 21 . Yang , G . , Leuba , S . H . , Bustamante , C . , Zlatanova , J . & van Holde , K . ( 1994 ) . Role of linker histones in extended chromatin ﬁbre structure . Nature Struct . Biol . 1 , 761 – 763 . 22 . van Holde , K . & Zlatanova , J . ( 1995 ) . Chromatin higher order structure : chasing a mirage ? J . Biol . Chem . 270 , 8373 – 8376 . 23 . Finch , J . T . & Klug , A . ( 1976 ) . Solenoidal model for superstructure in chromatin . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA , 73 , 1897 – 1901 . 24 . Thoma , F . , Koller , T . & Klug , A . ( 1979 ) . Involvement of histone H1 in the organization of the nucleosome and of the salt - dependent superstructures of chromatin . J . Cell Biol . 83 , 403 – 427 . 25 . van Holde , K . & Zlatanova , J . ( 1996 ) . What deter - mines the folding of the chromatin ﬁber ? Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA , 93 , 10548 – 10555 . 26 . Woodcock , C . L . & Horowitz , R . A . ( 1995 ) . Chroma - tin organization re - viewed . Trends Cell Biol . 5 , 272 – 277 . 27 . Zlatanova , J . , Leuba , S . H . & van Holde , K . ( 1998 ) . Chromatin ﬁber structure : morphology , molecular determinants , structural transitions . Biophys . J . 74 , 2554 – 2566 . 28 . Zlatanova , J . , Leuba , S . H . & van Holde , K . ( 1999 ) . Chromatin structure revisited . Crit . Rev . Eukaryot . Gene Expr . 9 , 245 – 255 . 29 . Leuba , S . H . , Bustamante , C . , van Holde , K . & Zlatanova , J . ( 1998 ) . Linker histone tails and N - tails of histone H3 are redundant : scanning force microscopy studies of reconstituted ﬁbers . Biophys . J . 74 , 2830 – 2839 . 30 . Leuba , S . H . , Bustamante , C . , Zlatanova , J . & van Holde , K . ( 1998 ) . Contributions of linker histones and histone H3 to chromatin structure : scanning force microscopy studies on trypsinized ﬁbers . Biophys . J . 74 , 2823 – 2829 . 31 . Schnitzler , G . R . , Cheung , C . L . , Hafner , J . H . , Saurin , A . J . , Kingston , R . E . & Lieber , C . M . ( 2001 ) . Direct imaging of human SWI / SNF - remodeled mono - and polynucleosomes by atomic force microscopy employing carbon nanotube tips . Mol . Cell Biol . 21 , 8504 – 8511 . 32 . Karymov , M . A . , Tomschik , M . , Leuba , S . H . , Caiafa , P . & Zlatanova , J . ( 2001 ) . DNA methylation - depen - dent chromatin ﬁber compaction in vivo and in vitro : requirement for linker histone . FASEB J . 15 , 2631 – 2641 . 33 . An , W . , Palhan , V . B . , Karymov , M . A . , Leuba , S . H . & Roeder , R . G . ( 2002 ) . Selective requirements for histone H3 and H4 N termini in p300 - dependent transcriptional activation from chromatin . Mol . Cell , 9 , 811 – 821 . 34 . Martin , L . D . , Vesenka , J . P . , Henderson , E . & Dobbs , D . L . ( 1995 ) . Visualization of nucleosomal sub - structure in native chromatin by atomic force microscopy . Biochemistry , 34 , 4610 – 4616 . 35 . Zhao , H . , Zhang , Y . , Zhang , S . B . , Jiang , C . , He , Q . Y . , Li , M . Q . & Qian , R . L . ( 1999 ) . The structure of the nucleosome core particle of chromatin in chicken erythrocytes visualized by using atomic force microscopy . Cell Res . 9 , 255 – 260 . 36 . Shao , Z . ( 1999 ) . Probing nanometer structures with atomic force microscopy . News Physiol . Sci . 14 , 142 – 149 . 37 . Sato , M . H . , Ura , K . , Hohmura , K . I . , Tokumasu , F . , Yoshimura , S . H . , Hanaoka , F . & Takeyasu , K . ( 1999 ) . Atomic force microscopy sees nucleosome positioning and histone H1 - induced compaction in reconstituted chromatin . FEBS Letters , 452 , 267 – 271 . 38 . Dubochet , J . , Adrian , M . , Dustin , I . , Furrer , P . & Stasiak , A . ( 1992 ) . Cryoelectron microscopy of DNA molecules in solution . Methods Enzymol . 211 , 507 – 518 . 39 . Dubochet , J . ( 1993 ) . Twisting in a crowd . Trends Cell Biol . 3 , 1 – 3 . 40 . Bednar , J . & Woodcock , C . L . ( 1999 ) . Cryoelectron microscopic analysis of nucleosomes and chroma - tin . Methods Enzymol . 304 , 191 – 213 . 41 . Dubochet , J . , Adrian , M . , Schultz , P . & Oudet , P . ( 1986 ) . Cryo - electron microscopy of vitriﬁed SV40 minichromosomes : the liquid drop model . EMBO J . 5 , 519 – 528 . 42 . Ehrlich , L . , Munkel , C . , Chirico , G . & Langowski , J . ( 1997 ) . A Brownian dynamics model for the chro - matin ﬁber . Comput . Appl . Biosci . 13 , 271 – 279 . 43 . Katritch , V . , Bustamante , C . & Olson , W . K . ( 2000 ) . 16 Review : Chromatin Fibers , One - at - a - time Pulling chromatin ﬁbers : computer simulations of direct physical micromanipulations . J . Mol . Biol . 295 , 29 – 40 . 44 . Hammermann , M . , Toth , K . , Rodemer , C . , Waldeck , W . , May , R . P . & Langowski , J . ( 2000 ) . Salt - depen - dent compaction of di - and trinucleosomes studied by small - angle neutron scattering . Biophys . J . 79 , 584 – 594 . 45 . Schiessel , H . , Gelbart , W . M . & Bruinsma , R . ( 2001 ) . DNA folding : structural and mechanical properties of the two - angle model for chromatin . Biophys . J . 80 , 1940 – 1956 . 46 . Wedemann , G . & Langowski , J . ( 2002 ) . Computer simulation of the 30 - nanometer chromatin ﬁber . Biophys . J . 82 , 2847 – 2859 . 47 . Grigoryev , S . A . ( 2001 ) . Higher - order folding of heterochromatin : protein bridges span the nucleo - some arrays . Biochem . Cell Biol . 79 , 227 – 241 . 48 . Hamiche , A . , Schultz , P . , Ramakrishnan , V . , Oudet , P . & Prunell , A . ( 1996 ) . Linker histone - dependent DNA structure in linear mononucleosomes . J . Mol . Biol . 257 , 30 – 42 . 49 . Grigoryev , S . A . , Bednar , J . & Woodcock , C . L . ( 1999 ) . MENT , a heterochromatin protein that mediates higher order chromatin folding , is a new serpin family member . J . Biol . Chem . 274 , 5626 – 5636 . 50 . Khan , S . & Sheetz , M . P . ( 1997 ) . Force effects on bio - chemical kinetics . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 66 , 785 – 805 . 51 . Leckband , D . ( 2000 ) . Measuring the forces that control protein interactions . Annu . Rev . Biophys . Biomol . Struct . 29 , 1 – 26 . 52 . Leckband , D . & Israelachvili , J . ( 2001 ) . Intermolecu - lar forces in biology . Quart . Rev . Biophys . 34 , 105 – 267 . 53 . Strick , T . R . , Allemand , J . F . , Bensimon , D . & Croquette , V . ( 2000 ) . Stress - induced structural tran - sitions in DNA and proteins . Annu . Rev . Biophys . Biomol . Struct . 29 , 523 – 543 . 54 . Bustamante , C . , Smith , S . B . , Liphardt , J . & Smith , D . ( 2000 ) . Single - molecule studies of DNA mechanics . Curr . Opin . Struct . Biol . 10 , 279 – 285 . 55 . Thomas , N . , Imafuku , Y . , Kamiya , T . & Tawada , K . ( 2002 ) . Kinesin : a molecular motor with a spring in its step . Proc . Roy . Soc . ser . B , 269 , 2363 – 2371 . 56 . Clausen - Schaumann , H . , Seitz , M . , Krautbauer , R . & Gaub , H . E . ( 2000 ) . Force spectroscopy with single bio - molecules . Curr . Opin . Chem . Biol . 4 , 524 – 530 . 57 . Fisher , T . E . , Oberhauser , A . F . , Carrion - Vazquez , M . , Marszalek , P . E . & Fernandez , J . M . ( 1999 ) . The study of protein mechanics with the atomic force microscope . Trends Biochem . Sci . 24 , 379 – 384 . 58 . Carrion - Vazquez , M . , Oberhauser , A . F . , Fisher , T . E . , Marszalek , P . E . , Li , H . & Fernandez , J . M . ( 2000 ) . Mechanical design of proteins studied by single - molecule force spectroscopy and protein engineer - ing . Prog . Biophys . Mol . Biol . 74 , 63 – 91 . 59 . Merkel , R . , Nassoy , P . , Leung , A . , Ritchie , K . & Evans , E . ( 1999 ) . Energy landscapes of receptor – ligand bonds explored with dynamic force spectroscopy . Nature , 397 , 50 – 53 . 60 . Evans , E . & Ritchie , K . ( 1997 ) . Dynamic strength of molecular adhesion bonds . Biophys . J . 72 , 1541 – 1555 . 61 . Evans , E . ( 2001 ) . Probing the relation between force – lifetime – and chemistry in single molecular bonds . Annu . Rev . Biophys . Biomol . Struct . 30 , 105 – 128 . 62 . Bensimon , A . , Simon , A . , Chiffaudel , A . , Croquette , V . , Heslot , F . & Bensimon , D . ( 1994 ) . Alignment and sensitive detection of DNA by a moving inter - face . Science , 265 , 2096 – 2098 . 63 . Bensimon , D . , Simon , A . J . , Croquette , V . V . & Bensimon , A . ( 1995 ) . Stretching DNA with a receding meniscus : experiments and models . Phys . Rev . Letters , 74 , 4754 – 4757 . 64 . Grandbois , M . , Beyer , M . , Rief , M . , Clausen - Schaumann , H . & Gaub , H . E . ( 1999 ) . How strong is a covalent bond ? Science , 283 , 1727 – 1730 . 65 . Israelachvili , J . N . ( 1992 ) . Intermolecular and Surface Forces , Academic Press , New York . 66 . Williams , M . C . & Rouzina , I . ( 2002 ) . Force spec - troscopy of single DNA and RNA molecules . Curr . Opin . Struct . Biol . 12 , 330 – 336 . 67 . Kishino , A . & Yanagida , T . ( 1988 ) . Force measure - ments by micromanipulation of a single actin ﬁlament by glass needles . Nature , 334 , 74 – 76 . 68 . Cluzel , P . , Lebrun , A . , Heller , C . , Lavery , R . , Viovy , J . L . , Chatenay , D . & Caron , F . ( 1996 ) . DNA : an extensible molecule . Science , 271 , 792 – 794 . 69 . Leger , J . F . , Robert , J . , Bourdieu , L . , Chatenay , D . & Marko , J . F . ( 1998 ) . RecA binding to a single double - stranded DNA molecule : a possible role of DNA conformational ﬂuctuations . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA , 95 , 12295 – 12299 . 70 . Ladoux , B . , Quivy , J . P . , Doyle , P . , du Roure , O . , Almouzni , G . & Viovy , J . L . ( 2000 ) . Fast kinetics of chromatin assembly revealed by single - molecule videomicroscopy and scanning force microscopy . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA , 97 , 14251 – 14256 . 71 . Smith , S . B . , Cui , Y . & Bustamante , C . ( 1996 ) . Over - stretching B - DNA : the elastic response of individual double - stranded and single - stranded DNA molecules . Science , 271 , 795 – 799 . 72 . Bennink , M . L . , Leuba , S . H . , Leno , G . H . , Zlatanova , J . , de Grooth , B . G . & Greve , J . ( 2001 ) . Unfolding individual nucleosomes by stretching single chromatin ﬁbers with optical tweezers . Nature Struct . Biol . 8 , 606 – 610 . 73 . Ashkin , A . ( 1997 ) . Optical trapping and manipu - lation of neutral particles using lasers . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA , 94 , 4853 – 4860 . 74 . Smith , S . B . , Finzi , L . & Bustamante , C . ( 1992 ) . Direct mechanical measurements of the elasticity of single DNA molecules by using magnetic beads . Science , 258 , 1122 – 1126 . 75 . Strick , T . R . , Allemand , J . F . , Bensimon , D . , Bensimon , A . & Croquette , V . ( 1996 ) . The elasticity of a single supercoiled DNA molecule . Science , 271 , 1835 – 1837 . 76 . Strick , T . , Allemand , J . , Croquette , V . & Bensimon , D . ( 2000 ) . Twisting and stretching single DNA molecules . Prog . Biophys . Mol . Biol . 74 , 115 – 140 . 77 . Strick , T . R . , Allemand , J . F . , Bensimon , D . & Croquette , V . ( 1998 ) . Behavior of supercoiled DNA . Biophys . J . 74 , 2016 – 2028 . 78 . Strick , T . R . , Croquette , V . & Bensimon , D . ( 1998 ) . Homologous pairing in stretched supercoiled DNA . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA , 95 , 10579 – 10583 . 79 . Strick , T . R . , Croquette , V . & Bensimon , D . ( 2000 ) . Single - molecule analysis of DNA uncoiling by a type II topoisomerase . Nature , 404 , 901 – 904 . 80 . Crisona , N . J . , Strick , T . R . , Bensimon , D . , Croquette , V . & Cozzarelli , N . R . ( 2000 ) . Preferential relaxation of positively supercoiled DNA by E . coli topo - isomerase IV in single - molecule and ensemble measurements . Genes Dev . 14 , 2881 – 2892 . 81 . Dekker , N . H . , Rybenkov , V . V . , Duguet , M . , Crisona , N . J . , Cozzarelli , N . R . , Bensimon , D . & Review : Chromatin Fibers , One - at - a - time 17 Croquette , V . ( 2002 ) . The mechanism of type IA topoisomerases . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA , 99 , 12126 – 12131 . 82 . Wenner , J . R . , Williams , M . C . , Rouzina , I . & Bloomﬁeld , V . A . ( 2002 ) . Salt dependence of the elasticity and overstretching transition of single DNA molecules . Biophys . J . 82 , 3160 – 3169 . 83 . Leger , J . F . , Romano , G . , Sarkar , A . , Robert , J . , Bourdieu , L . , Chatenay , D . & Marko , J . F . ( 1999 ) . Structural transitions on a twisted and stretched DNA molecule . Phys . Rev . Letters , 83 , 1066 – 1069 . 84 . Rief , M . , Clausen - Schaumann , H . & Gaub , H . E . ( 1999 ) . Sequence - dependent mechanics of single DNA molecules . Nature Struct . Biol . 6 , 346 – 349 . 85 . Clausen - Schaumann , H . , Rief , M . , Tolksdorf , C . & Gaub , H . E . ( 2000 ) . Mechanical stability of single DNA molecules . Biophys . J . 78 , 1997 – 2007 . 86 . Lee , G . U . , Chrisey , L . A . & Colton , R . J . ( 1994 ) . Direct measurement of the forces between comp - lementary strands of DNA . Science , 266 , 771 – 773 . 87 . Noy , A . , Vezenov , D . V . , Kayyem , J . F . , Meade , T . J . & Lieber , C . M . ( 1997 ) . Stretching and breaking duplex DNA by chemical force microscopy . Chem . Biol . 4 , 519 – 527 . 88 . Leuba , S . H . , Karymov , M . A . , Liu , Y . , Lindsay , S . M . & Zlatanova , J . ( 1999 ) . Mechanically stretching single chromatin ﬁbers . Gene Ther . Mol . Biol . 4 , 297 – 301 . 89 . Leuba , S . H . , Zlatanova , J . , Karymov , M . A . , Bash , R . , Liu , Y . - Z . , Lohr , D . , Harrington , R . E . & Lindsay , S . M . ( 2000 ) . The mechanical properties of single chromatin ﬁbers under tension . Single Mol . 1 , 185 – 192 . 90 . Rief , M . , Gautel , M . , Oesterhelt , F . , Fernandez , J . M . & Gaub , H . E . ( 1997 ) . Reversible unfolding of indi - vidual titin immunoglobulin domains by AFM . Science , 276 , 1109 – 1112 . 91 . Oberhauser , A . F . , Marszalek , P . E . , Erickson , H . P . & Fernandez , J . M . ( 1998 ) . The molecular elasticity of the extracellular matrix protein tenascin . Nature , 393 , 181 – 185 . 92 . Cui , Y . & Bustamante , C . ( 2000 ) . Pulling a single chromatin ﬁber reveals the forces that maintain its higher - order structure . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA , 97 , 127 – 132 . 93 . Brower - Toland , B . D . , Smith , C . L . , Yeh , R . C . , Lis , J . T . , Peterson , C . L . & Wang , M . D . ( 2002 ) . Mechanical disruption of individual nucleosomes reveals a reversible multistage release of DNA . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA , 99 , 1960 – 1965 . 94 . Luger , K . & Richmond , T . J . ( 1998 ) . DNA binding within the nucleosome core . Curr . Opin . Struct . Biol . 8 , 33 – 40 . 95 . Widom , J . ( 1998 ) . Structure , dynamics , and function of chromatin in vitro . Annu . Rev . Biophys . Biomol . Struct . 27 , 285 – 327 . 96 . Yin , H . , Wang , M . D . , Svoboda , K . , Landick , R . , Block , S . M . & Gelles , J . ( 1995 ) . Transcription against an applied force . Science , 270 , 1653 – 1657 . 97 . Wang , M . D . , Schnitzer , M . J . , Yin , H . , Landick , R . , Gelles , J . & Block , S . M . ( 1998 ) . Force and velocity measured for single molecules of RNA polymerase . Science , 282 , 902 – 907 . 98 . Wuite , G . J . , Smith , S . B . , Young , M . , Keller , D . & Bustamante , C . ( 2000 ) . Single - molecule studies of the effect of template tension on T7 DNA polymer - ase activity . Nature , 404 , 103 – 106 . 99 . Maier , B . , Bensimon , D . & Croquette , V . ( 2000 ) . Replication by a single DNA polymerase of a stretched single - stranded DNA . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA , 97 , 12002 – 12007 . 100 . Tahirov , T . H . , Temiakov , D . , Anikin , M . , Patlan , V . , McAllister , W . T . , Vassylyev , D . G . & Yokoyama , S . ( 2002 ) . Structure of a T7 RNA polymerase elongation complex at 2 . 9 A˚ resolution . Nature , 420 , 43 – 50 . 101 . Yin , Y . W . & Steitz , T . A . ( 2002 ) . Structural basis for the transition from initiation to elongation tran - scription in T7 RNA polymerase . Science , 298 , 1387 – 1395 . 102 . Zhang , G . , Campbell , E . A . , Minakhin , L . , Richter , C . , Severinov , K . & Darst , S . A . ( 1999 ) . Crystal struc - ture of Thermus aquaticus core RNA polymerase at 3 . 3 A˚ resolution . Cell , 98 , 811 – 824 . 103 . Cramer , P . , Bushnell , D . A . & Kornberg , R . D . ( 2001 ) . Structural basis of transcription : RNA polymerase II at 2 . 8 angstrom resolution . Science , 292 , 1863 – 1876 . 104 . Gnatt , A . L . , Cramer , P . , Fu , J . , Bushnell , D . A . & Kornberg , R . D . ( 2001 ) . Structural basis of transcrip - tion : an RNA polymerase II elongation complex at 3 . 3 A˚ resolution . Science , 292 , 1876 – 1882 . 105 . Uptain , S . M . , Kane , C . M . & Chamberlin , M . J . ( 1997 ) . Basic mechanisms of transcript elongation and its regulation . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 66 , 117 – 172 . 106 . von Hippel , P . H . ( 1998 ) . An integrated model of the transcription complex in elongation , termination , and editing . Science , 281 , 660 – 665 . 107 . Myers , L . C . & Kornberg , R . D . ( 2000 ) . Mediator of transcriptional regulation . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 69 , 729 – 749 . 108 . Ebright , R . H . ( 2000 ) . RNA polymerase : structural similarities between bacterial RNA polymerase and eukaryotic RNA polymerase II . J . Mol . Biol . 304 , 687 – 698 . 109 . Bennink , M . L . , Pope , L . H . , Leuba , S . H . , de Grooth , B . G . & Greve , J . ( 2001 ) . Single chromatin ﬁbre assembly using optical tweezers . Single Mol . 2 , 91 – 97 . 110 . Leuba , S . H . , Karymov , M . A . , Tomschik , M . , Ramjit , R . , Smith , P . & Zlatanova , J . ( 2003 ) . Assembly of single chromatin ﬁbers depends on the tension in the DNA molecule : magnetic tweezers study . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA , 100 , 495 – 500 . 111 . Widom , J . ( 1999 ) . Equilibrium and dynamic nucleo - some stability . In Methods in Molecular Biology ( Becker , P . B . , ed . ) , vol . 119 , pp . 61 – 77 , Humana Press , Totowa , NJ . 112 . Allen , M . J . , Dong , X . F . , O’Neill , T . E . , Yau , P . , Kowalczykowski , S . C . , Gatewood , J . et al . ( 1993 ) . Atomic force microscope measurements of nucleo - some cores assembled along deﬁned DNA sequences . Biochemistry , 32 , 8390 – 8396 . 113 . Tomschik , M . , Karymov , M . A . , Zlatanova , J . & Leuba , S . H . ( 2001 ) . The archaeal histone - fold protein HMf organizes DNA into bona ﬁde chromatin ﬁbers . Struct . Fold . Des . 9 , 1201 – 1211 . 114 . De Murcia , G . & Koller , T . ( 1981 ) . The electron microscope appearance of soluble rat liver chromatin mounted on different supports . Biol . Cell . 40 , 165 – 174 . 115 . Vesenka , J . , Hansma , H . , Siegerist , C . , Siligardi , G . , Schabtach , E . & Bustamante , C . ( 1992 ) . Scanning force microscopy of circular DNA and chromatin in air and propanol . SPIE , 1639 , 127 – 137 . 116 . Fritzsche , W . , Schaper , A . & Jovin , T . M . ( 1994 ) . Probing chromatin with the scanning force micro - scope . Chromosoma , 103 , 231 – 236 . 117 . Fritzsche , W . , Schaper , A . & Jovin , T . M . ( 1995 ) . 18 Review : Chromatin Fibers , One - at - a - time Scanning force microscopy of chromatin ﬁbers in air and in liquid . Scanning , 17 , 148 – 155 . 118 . Fritzsche , W . & Henderson , E . ( 1996 ) . Scanning force microscopy reveals ellipsoid shape of chicken erythrocyte nucleosomes . Biophys . J . 71 , 2222 – 2226 . 119 . Fritzsche , W . & Henderson , E . ( 1997 ) . Chicken erythrocyte nucleosomes have a deﬁned orientation along the linker DNA—a scanning force microscopy study . Scanning , 19 , 42 – 47 . 120 . Zlatanova , J . , Leuba , S . H . , Yang , G . , Bustamante , C . & van Holde , K . ( 1994 ) . Linker DNA accessibility in chromatin ﬁbers of different conformations : a reevaluation . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA , 91 , 5277 – 5280 . 121 . d’Erme , M . , Yang , G . , Sheagly , E . , Palitti , F . & Bustamante , C . ( 2001 ) . Effect of poly ( ADP - ribosyl ) - ation and Mg 2 þ ions on chromatin structure revealed by scanning force microscopy . Biochemistry , 40 , 10947 – 10955 . 122 . Dunker , A . K . , Lawson , J . D . , Brown , C . J . , Williams , R . M . , Romero , P . , Oh , J . S . et al . ( 2001 ) . Intrinsically disordered protein . J . Mol . Graph . Model . 19 , 26 – 59 . 123 . Furrer , P . , Bednar , J . , Dubochet , J . , Hamiche , A . & Prunell , A . ( 1995 ) . DNA at the entry / exit of the nucleosome observed by cryoelectron microscopy . J . Struct . Biol . 114 , 177 – 183 . 124 . Bednar , J . , Studitsky , V . M . , Grigoryev , S . A . , Felsenfeld , G . & Woodcock , C . L . ( 1999 ) . The nature of the nucleosomal barrier to transcription : direct observation of paused intermediates by electron cryomicroscopy . Mol . Cell , 4 , 377 – 386 . 125 . Leforestier , A . , Fudaley , S . & Livolant , F . ( 1999 ) . Spermidine - induced aggregation of nucleosome core particles : evidence for multiple liquid crystal - line phases . J . Mol . Biol . 290 , 481 – 494 . 126 . Leforestier , A . , Dubochet , J . & Livolant , F . ( 2001 ) . Bilayers of nucleosome core particles . Biophys . J . 81 , 2414 – 2421 . 127 . Simpson , R . T . , Thoma , F . & Brubaker , J . M . ( 1985 ) . Chromatin reconstituted from tandemly repeated cloned DNA fragments and core histones : a model system for study of higher order structure . Cell , 42 , 799 – 808 . Edited by P . Wright ( Received 10 January 2003 ; received in revised form 20 May 2003 ; accepted 22 May 2003 ) Review : Chromatin Fibers , One - at - a - time 19