T H E J O U R N A L O F C E L L B I O L O G Y JCB : ARTICLE © The Rockefeller University Press $ 15 . 00 The Journal of Cell Biology , Vol . 177 , No . 4 , May 21 , 2007 683 – 694 http : / / www . jcb . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200701006 JCB 683 Introduction Cell migration is a key step in many physiological and patho - logical processes , such as wound repair , embryonic develop - ment , tissue regeneration , angiogenesis , and metastasis ( Ridley et al . , 2003 ; Vicente - Manzanares et al . , 2005 ) . In an attempt to understand this complex process , migration has been viewed as a multiple - step cycle , where migrating cells become highly polarized and display sequential morphological changes ( Sheetz et al . , 1999 ; Ridley et al . , 2003 ) . These include extension of pro - trusions at the cell front , formation of stable adhesions at the leading edge , reorientation of the Golgi and the microtubule or - ganizing center ( MTOC ) toward the leading edge , translocation of the cell body in the direction of the movement , and focal adhesion ( FA ) release and retraction at the cell rear ( Vicente - Manzanares et al . , 2005 ) . These steps are easily observed in slow - moving cells , such as fi broblasts and endothelial cells ( Ridley et al . , 2003 ) . The acquisition of a highly polarized phenotype is not generally regarded as a step in the migration process but , rather , as a concomitant and essential event to cell migration ( Sánchez - Madrid and del Pozo , 1999 ; Vicente - Manzanares et al . , 2005 ) . Migration is a very complex process that requires the spa - tial and temporal integration of different signaling components ( for reviews see Ridley et al . , 2003 ; Vicente - Manzanares et al . , 2005 ) , many of which are not yet understood . Among them , the Rho family of small GTPases is one of the master regulators of cell motility , as they control both actin cytoskeleton remodeling as well as FA formation and turnover . FAs are one of the key elements in migration ( Geiger and Bershadsky , 2001 ; DeMali et al . , 2003 ; Ridley et al . , 2003 ; Carragher and Frame , 2004 ; Vicente - Manzanares et al . , 2005 ) . They are formed by the recruit - ment of cytoskeletal and signaling proteins to the sites where integrins attach to the ECM . FAs serve as anchorage points for stress fi bers ( Wehrle - Haller and Imhof , 2002 ; Carragher and Frame , 2004 ) . Highly regulated , polarized actin polymerization is involved in the protrusion formation at the leading edge of the cell , whereas detachment and retraction of the cell rear involves myosin - dependent contraction of stress fi bers in the tail ( Ridley et al . , 2003 ; Vicente - Manzanares et al . , 2005 ) . Both FAs and stress fi bers are regulated by Rho GTPases . By coordinating the activation of several effectors and , ultimately , actin polymeriza - tion , Cdc42 triggers fi lopodia and Rac regulates lamellipodia Caveolin - 1 regulates cell polarization and directional migration through Src kinase and Rho GTPases Araceli Grande - García , 1 Asier Echarri , 1 Johan de Rooij , 2 Nazilla B . Alderson , 1 Clare M . Waterman - Storer , 2 José M . Valdivielso , 1 and Miguel A . del Pozo 1 1 Integrin Signaling Laboratory , Department of Vascular Biology and Inﬂ ammation , Centro Nacional de Investigaciones Cardiovasculares , 28029 Madrid , Spain 2 Department of Cell Biology , The Scripps Research Institute , La Jolla , CA 92037 D evelopment , angiogenesis , wound healing , and metastasis all involve the movement of cells in re - sponse to changes in the extracellular environment . To determine whether caveolin - 1 plays a role in cell migra - tion , we have used ﬁ broblasts from knockout mice . Caveolin - 1 – deﬁ cient cells lose normal cell polarity , exhibit impaired wound healing , and have decreased Rho and increased Rac and Cdc42 GTPase activities . Directional persis - tency of migration is lost , and the cells show an impaired response to external directional stimuli . Both Src inactiva - tion and p190RhoGAP knockdown restore the wild - type phenotype to caveolin - 1 – deﬁ cient cells , suggesting that caveolin - 1 stimulates normal Rho GTP loading through inactivation of the Src – p190RhoGAP pathway . These ﬁ ndings highlight the importance of caveolin - 1 in the es - tablishment of cell polarity during directional migration through coordination of the signaling of Src kinase and Rho GTPases . Correspondence to Miguel A . del Pozo : madelpozo @ cnic . es J . de Rooij’s present address is Netherlands Cancer Institute , 1066 CX Amsterdam , Netherlands . J . M . Valdivielso’s present address is Hospital Universitario Arnau de Vilanova , Universidad de Lleida , 25198 Lleida , Spain . Abbreviations used in this paper : Csk , C - terminal Src kinase ; EF , elliptical factor ; FA , focal adhesion ; Fn , ﬁ bronectin ; ID , index of directionality ; MEF , mouse embryonic ﬁ broblast ; MTOC , microtubule organizing center ; shRNA , short hairpin RNA ; WT , wild - type . The online version of this article contains supplemental material . on J une 28 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published May 21 , 2007 / content / suppl / 2007 / 05 / 18 / jcb . 200701006 . DC1 . html Supplemental Material can be found at : JCB • VOLUME 177 • NUMBER 4 • 2007 684 protrusion and membrane ruffl es , whereas Rho regulates for - mation of stress fi bers and cell contractility in the cell body , and hence Rho activity is high at the cell contractile tail ( Raftopoulou and Hall , 2004 ; Vicente - Manzanares et al . , 2005 ) . Importantly , it has recently been reported that Rho activity is also high at a sharp band immediately adjacent to the leading edge of cells migrating out of a wounded monolayer ( Kurokawa and Matsuda , 2005 ; Pertz et al . , 2006 ) . On the other hand , Rac and Cdc42 regulate the initial recruitment of cytoskeletal and signaling proteins into small focal complexes , whereas Rho controls the maturation of these complexes into bigger FAs , as well as FA lifetime ( Rottner et al . , 1999 ; Burridge and Wennerberg , 2004 ; Raftopoulou and Hall , 2004 ; Vicente - Manzanares et al . , 2005 ) . Many other players are involved in the complex regulation of cell migration ( Ridley et al . , 2003 ; Vicente - Manzanares et al . , 2005 ) , among them , caveolae and caveolin ( Navarro et al . , 2004 ) , although in a controversial manner . Caveolae are spe - cialized plasma membrane microdomains with a fl ask - shaped , invaginated morphology , highly enriched in cholesterol and sphingolipids ( Parton et al . , 2006 ) . Caveolin is their principal structural component . There are three proteins encoded by the caveolin gene family ( caveolin - 1 , - 2 , and - 3 ) . Caveolin - 1 and - 2 are coexpressed in numerous cell types , whereas caveolin - 3 is muscle specifi c . It has been proposed that caveolin - 1 could play an important role in cell motility by controlling polariza - tion of signaling molecules ( Shaul and Anderson , 1998 ; Isshiki et al . , 2002 ) . Supporting this notion , caveolin - 1 is linked to the actin cytoskeleton through fi lamin ( Stahlhut and van Deurs , 2000 ) and has been proposed to associate with a certain subset of inte - grins ( Wary et al . , 1998 ; Wei et al . , 1999 ) . On the other hand , caveolin - 1 and caveolae present a polarized distribution in migrat - ing endothelial cells ( Parat et al . , 2003 ; Beardsley et al . , 2005 ) . Moreover , several reports have shown that migration is affected by changes in caveolin - 1 expression levels , although in a contro - versial manner . Some data suggest that caveolin - 1 promotes cell migration . Thus , knock down of caveolin - 1 expres sion cor - related with a decrease in the chemotaxis of endothelial cells , astrocytes , and multiple myeloma cells ( Galvez et al . , 2004 ; Ge and Pachter , 2004 ; Podar et al . , 2004 ) . However , other studies indicate that caveolin - 1 could be a negative regulator . For instance , restoration of caveolin - 1 expression in MTLn3 cells reduces lamel - lipodia formation and chemotactic migration ( Zhang et al . , 2000 ) . Likewise , caveolin - 1 knockdown increased directed migration toward sphingosine - 1 phosphate in bovine aortic endothelial cells ( Gonzalez et al . , 2004 ) . Although some of these discrep - ancies could be ascribed to technical or cell type specifi city issues , it seems important to ascertain what kind of role , if any , caveolin - 1 plays in the coordinated processes of polarization and migration . We decided to explore this issue by using fibroblasts from caveolin - 1 – defi cient mice . These cells do not express any cave - olins , as caveolin - 2 is degraded in the absence of caveolin - 1 through the proteasomal pathway ( Razani et al . , 2001 ) , and caveolin - 3 is muscle specifi c . Our results demonstrate that caveolin - 1 plays an essential role in the acquisition of a polari - zed phenotype and , accordingly , in directional cell migration , includ ing both intrinsic persistence of migration and chemotaxis . It does so by regulating the activation of Src , which in turn reg - ulates signaling by Rho GTPases . Results Caveolin - 1 is required for the acquisition of a normal polarized phenotype in ﬁ broblasts We compared the morphological phenotype of wild - type ( WT ) and caveolin - 1 – defi cient mouse embryonic fi broblasts ( MEFs ; Razani et al . , 2001 ) spread on fi bronectin ( Fn ) by immunofl uo - rescence confocal analysis . As shown in Fig . 1 a , Cav1 − / − MEFs displayed a remarkable morphological change . Most of the WT MEFs exhibited a polarized morphology , with an elongated , polygonal shape ( see Fig . 7 g , left ) . However , Cav1 − / − MEFs adopted a nonpolarized , rounded shape and displayed an aber - rant architecture of the actin cytoskeleton . Stress fi bers pre - sented a peripheral , concentric localization , creating cortical Figure 1 . Cav1 − / − MEFs show a defect in stress ﬁ ber architecture and FAs . ( a ) WT and Cav1 − / − MEFs were plated on Fn , ﬁ xed , and stained with rhodamine phalloidin to reveal the morphology of the actin cytoskeleton . FAs were stained with a mAb to vinculin followed by FITC - conjugated anti - rabbit IgG . Bars , 20 μ m . ( b ) The EF ( length / breadth ) , used as a measure of cell polarization , was calculated for WT MEFs ( n = 797 ) , Cav1 − / − MEFs ( n = 663 ) , Cav1 - reconstituted knockout MEFs ( n = 481 ) , and knock - out MEFs stably transfected with the empty vector ( mock ; n = 450 ) plated on Fn . Error bars indicate SEM from ﬁ ve separate experiments . ( c ) The per - centage of cells with EF > 2 was calculated for each cell line . Error bars in - dicate SEM . ( d ) WT MEFs , Cav1 − / − MEFs , and Cav1 − / − MEFs reconstituted with empty vector ( mock ) , caveolin - 1 , or caveolin - 1 Y14F were lysed and immunoblotted against caveolin - 1 and tubulin . Exogenous caveolin - 1 is ﬂ ag tagged . on J une 28 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published May 21 , 2007 CAVEOLIN IN DIRECTIONAL MIGRATION VIA SRC AND RHO • GRANDE - GARCÍA ET AL . 685 actin ring structures , whereas in WT MEFs , stress fi bers were organized in bundles aligned along the long axis of the cell . We also detected an alteration in the formation of vinculin - stained FAs . These structures were smaller , much like focal complexes ( Geiger and Bershadsky , 2001 ) , and more abundant compared with normal fi broblasts . In addition , adhesions were distributed over the entire ventral surface , whereas in WT MEFs , FAs were mostly located at cell edges . Interestingly , Cav1 − / − MEFs pre - sented abundant homogeneously distributed vinculin , i . e . , not associated with adhesive complexes ( Fig . 1 a , top middle ) , con - sistent with the altered , immature focal complexes phenotype observed in these cells . Paxillin staining was very similar to that of vinculin ( see Fig . 7 g and Fig . S4 , available at http : / / www . jcb . org / cgi / content / full / jcb . 200701006 / DC1 ) . To quantify mor - phological changes detected in Cav1 − / − MEFs , we calculated the elliptical factor ( EF ) , which is defi ned as the ratio between the longest and the shortest axis in the cell . In WT MEFs , EF was signifi cantly higher than that of Cav1 − / − MEFs ( Fig . 1 b ) . Importantly , a much higher WT population displayed an EF > 2 ( indicative of a polarized morphology ) compared with the Cav1 − / − population ( Fig . 1 c ) . Similar results were obtained with fi broblasts prepared from a Cav1 conditional knockout mouse ( Valasek et al . , 2005 ) versus their WT littermates ( see Fig . 7 g , bottom ; quantifi ed in Fig . S3 , b and c ) . Fibroblasts prepared from these two strains of Cav1 − / − mice ( Razani et al . , 2001 ; Valasek et al . , 2005 ) have been used throughout this study . Cell area measurements showed that Cav1 − / − cells do not ex - hibit a delay in cell spreading , and the morphological changes described were still present at late time points after spreading ( Fig . S1 ) . Reexpression of caveolin - 1 in Cav1 − / − MEFs ( Fig . 1 d ) restored the normal EF ( Fig . 1 , b and c ; and see Fig . 7 g ) , thus showing that caveolin - 1 is required for elongation . Altogether , these results suggest that caveolin - 1 is required for the acquisi - tion of an elongated morphology , stress fi ber architecture , and FA formation in fi broblasts . Polarization usually correlates with , but is not equivalent to , elongation . To directly measure cell polarity stimulated by a directional stimulus , we assayed for MTOC polarization in fi broblasts migrating out of a wounded monolayer . MTOC re - orientation toward the leading edge was substantially reduced in Cav1 − / − MEFs , and Cav1 reexpression restored polarity to levels achieved in WT cells ( Fig . 2 a ; quantifi ed in Fig . 2 b ) . Collectively , these results demonstrate a defect in the establish - ment of cell polarity in the caveolin - 1 – defi cient fi broblasts and establish a correlation between elongation defects and polariza - tion changes in these cells . Figure 2 . Polarity is impaired in Cav1 − / − MEFs . ( a ) MEF monolayers were ﬁ xed 2 , 4 , 6 , and 8 h after scratching and immunostained for DNA ( blue ) , actin ( red ) , and peri - centrin ( green ) , a marker for the MTOC . Representative wound - edge WT and Cav1 − / − MEFs are shown . The cri - teria for MTOC polarization is explained in the diagram . Bar , 20 μ m . ( b ) The percentage of cells in the front row showing reoriented MTOC was measured at the indicated times after wounding . For each time point , 150 – 300 cells were scored . Values represent means ± SEM of three in - dependent experiments . ( c ) Graphical representation of wound closure in WT MEFs , Cav1 − / − MEFs , and Cav1 − / − MEFs reconstituted with caveolin - 1 or caveolin - 1 Y14F are shown . The percentage of closure was measured at 4 and 8 h after wounding . Error bars show SEM from six inde - pendent experiments . For 4 h , p values are as follows : * , P = 0 . 024 ( Cav1 − / − versus WT MEFs ) ; # , P = 0 . 033 ( Cav1 − / − + Cav1 versus Cav1 − / − MEFs ) ; ζ , P = 0 . 039 ( Cav1 − / − + Cav1Y14F versus WT MEFs ) . For 8 h , p values are as follows : * , P = 0 . 020 ( Cav1 − / − versus WT MEFs ) ; # , P = 0 . 042 ( Cav1 − / − + Cav1 versus Cav1 − / − MEFs ) ; ζ , P = 0 . 049 ( Cav1 − / − + Cav1Y14F versus WT MEFs ) . ( d ) WT and Cav1 − / − MEF monolayers were scraped with a plastic pipette tip and photographed immediately ( t = 0 ) or after 24 h ( t = 24 ) . on J une 28 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published May 21 , 2007 JCB • VOLUME 177 • NUMBER 4 • 2007 686 Caveolin - 1 regulates GTP loading of Rho GTPases and their downstream biological consequences Impaired polarization and defects in the stress fi ber and FA pat - tern in Cav1 − / − fi broblasts suggest alterations in the activity of the GTPases of the Rho family , as they are the principal reg - ulators of these processes ( Burridge and Wennerberg , 2004 ; Raftopoulou and Hall , 2004 ; Vicente - Manzanares et al . , 2005 ; Pertz et al . , 2006 ) . To test this hypothesis , we performed pull - down assays to determine the level of activation of Rho , Rac , and Cdc42 in WT and Cav1 − / − MEFs . We found that caveolin - defi cient MEFs showed a notable decrease in basal Rho activity and a signifi cant increase in Rac and Cdc42 activity ( Fig . 3 ) . To confi rm these biochemical observations , we performed several assays designed to test biological consequences downstream of GTPases , namely , protrusion formation and lifetime of nascent adhesions at protruding areas . Time - lapse video recording of paxillin - GFP – expressing MEFs revealed that the lifetime of newly forming adhesions at protruding regions was twofold shorter in Cav1 − / − MEFs compared with WT cells ( Fig . 4 and Videos 1 and 2 , available at http : / / www . jcb . org / cgi / content / full / jcb . 200701006 / DC1 ) and was rescued by caveolin - 1 expression ( Fig . 4 ) . Increased adhesion turnover speed at cell protrusions in Cav1 − / − MEFs is consistent with reduced Rho activity , which could be essential for the maturation of small focal complexes into FAs . In this regard , increased Rac and Cdc42 activity fi ts with the higher number of immature focal complexes observed in the Cav1 − / − MEFs ( Fig . 4 a , magnifi ed areas ) . To test whether hyperactivation of Rac and Cdc42 has con - sequences in membrane protrusion , we performed time - lapse analysis of the protrusive – retractile activity at cell edges . Both protrusive and retractile activities were signifi cantly higher in Cav1 − / − MEFs ( Fig . 5 and Videos 3 and 4 ) . Careful observation Figure 3 . Cav1 − / − MEFs show alterations in the activity of Rho GTPases . WT and Cav1 − / − MEFs were lysed , and pull - down assays were performed as described in Materials and methods . Proteins bound to GST - PAK bind - ing domain ( for Rac and Cdc42 ) or GST - Rhotekin binding domain ( for Rho ) were separated by 13 % SDS - PAGE , transferred to a polyvinylidene diﬂ uo - ride membrane , and immunoblotted with one of the following antibodies : anti - Rho , anti - Rac1 , or anti - Cdc42 . Representative Western blots of each GTPase are shown . The diagrams illustrate densitometric analysis of the relative activities of Rho , Rac , and Cdc42 , normalized for whole cell lysates and expressed as a ratio to WT MEFs ( means ± SEM of ﬁ ve to six independent experiments ) . * , Statistically signiﬁ cant versus WT MEFs . Figure 4 . Cells lacking caveolin - 1 show accelerated turnover of nascent adhesions at protruding areas . ( a ) Cells were transiently transfected with pEGFP - paxillin and plated on an Fn matrix , and turnover of newly forming adhesions in protruding areas was monitored by time - lapse video micros - copy . Seven frames of two representative cells are shown . The lifetime of several adhesions was followed and pointed with colored arrowheads . Each color indicates a different adhesion . Bars , 20 μ m . ( b ) The lifetimes of adhesions were determined in 16 WT cells ( 274 FAs ) , 15 Cav1 − / − MEFs ( 376 FAs ) , and 10 Cav1 − / − MEFs reconstituted with caveolin - 1 ( 354 FAs ) . Values are means ± SEM . * , Statistically signiﬁ cant versus WT MEFs ; # , statistically signiﬁ cant versus Cav1 − / − MEFs . on J une 28 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published May 21 , 2007 CAVEOLIN IN DIRECTIONAL MIGRATION VIA SRC AND RHO • GRANDE - GARCÍA ET AL . 687 of these videos revealed that protrusive activity in WT MEFs is highly directional , i . e . , it only occurs in the direction of move - ment , whereas retraction occurs preferentially at the rear end . However , in Cav1 − / − MEFs , protrusion and retraction is higher and occurs concomitantly throughout the cell perimeter ( Fig . 5 and Videos 3 and 4 ) . Quantifi cation of the protrusive and retrac - tile area showed a signifi cant increase in Cav1 − / − MEFs com - pared with WT MEFs ( Fig . 5 , b and c ) . Altogether , these results indicated that changes in the ac - tivity of Rho GTPases could be responsible for the morpho - logical defects observed in Cav1 − / − fi broblasts . To test this hypothesis , we reconstituted the normal GTPase pattern of ac - tivity by expressing a constitutively active mutant of Rho ( GFP - Rho G14V ) or dominant - negative mutants of Rac ( GFP - Rac T17N ) or Cdc42 ( GFP - Cdc42 T17N ) in Cav1 − / − fi broblasts . Expression of each individual construct was able to restore the WT elongated phenotype ( Fig . S2 , available at http : / / www . jcb . org / cgi / content / full / jcb . 200701006 / DC1 ) . This result most likely refl ects the fact that alteration of the proper reciprocal balance between Rho GTPases could account for the polariza - tion defects of Cav1 − / − cells . Directional migration is impaired in cells lacking caveolin - 1 A role for caveolin - 1 in cell motility has been previously sug - gested , although contradictory effects have been reported . In an attempt to elucidate this issue , we performed several migration assays with Cav1 − / − MEFs . As a fi rst approach , we measured the velocity of random migration of these cells on a Fn matrix , using time - lapse microscopy . We found that Cav1 − / − MEFs moved subtly faster compared with WT MEFs ( Fig . 6 , a and b ) . However , important differences were observed in the pattern of migration of Cav1 − / − versus WT MEFs ( Videos 5 and 6 , avail - able at http : / / www . jcb . org / cgi / content / full / jcb . 200701006 / DC1 ) . WT cells showed an intrinsic directionality or persistency of migration , i . e . , they tend to migrate in the same direction for a sustained period of time without turning even in the absence of a chemotactic gradient , whereas Cav1 − / − MEFs completely lost directionality . This observation was confi rmed by measuring the trajectory of each individual cell during a 10 - h migration period by tracking its centroid from the time - lapse video . To clearly visualize the differences , cell movement paths were re - produced on composite panels ( Fig . 6 c ) . Interestingly , we found that Cav1 − / − MEFs displayed much shorter net translocation ( the shortest linear distance from the starting point to the end point of the time - lapse recording ) than the WT cells , which showed longer paths and migrated on a straighter way . To quan - tify these differences , we measured the directional persistence of the cells as estimated by the index of directionality ( ID ; i . e . , the ratio of the net distance divided by the total distance traveled by the cell ) . The Cav1 − / − MEFs showed a signifi cant reduction in the ID ( Fig . 6 d ) that was restored by caveolin - 1 reexpression ( Fig . 6 , c and d ; and Video 7 ) . These results show that caveolin - 1 contributes to persistent migration , i . e . , the cell’s internal sense of directionality . To explore directional migration stimulated by external stimuli , we performed wound - healing and chemotaxis assays . Both wound closure ( Fig . 2 , c and d ; and Videos 8 and 9 ) and the chemotactic response in a transwell assay ( Fig . 6 e ) were hampered in caveolin - 1 – defi cient MEFs , and reconstitut - ing caveolin - 1 expression rescued both responses ( Video 10 ) . Collectively , these data demonstrate that caveolin is required in fi broblasts for persistency of migration in the absence of an external chemotactic cue and for directional migration in the presence of an external stimulus , whereas it slightly slows down the velocity of random migration . Src and p190RhoGAP are involved in the loss of polarity of the Cav1 − / − cells Caveolin - 1 is a substrate for nonreceptor tyrosine kinases , in - cluding Src . In fact , caveolin - 1 was fi rst described as the major substrate for Src in v - src transformed cell lines ( Glenney and Zokas , 1989 ) . Furthermore , it has been described that caveolin phosphorylated on Tyr 14 ( pY14 - Cav1 ) can inhibit Src through the recruitment of C - terminal Src kinase ( Csk ; Cao et al . , 2002 ; Radel and Rizzo , 2005 ) . Thus , we hypothesized that in the Figure 5 . Cells lacking caveolin - 1 show enhanced protrusive activity . ( a ) The time - lapse paxillin videos ( Fig . 4 ) were used to calculate cell protru - sion as described in Materials and methods . Six subtracted consecutive frames of two representative cells are shown . White areas are the pro - truded edges , and black areas are retracted edges between two consecu - tive frames . White arrows indicate the direction of cell movement in the WT cell , and asterisks point to large protrusive areas . Note that Cav1 − / − MEFs did not persistently move in a deﬁ ned direction . Areas of protrusions ( b ) and retractions ( c ) were meas ured and plotted . Data shown are means ± SD . * , Statistically signiﬁ cant versus WT MEFs . Bars , 20 μ m . on J une 28 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published May 21 , 2007 JCB • VOLUME 177 • NUMBER 4 • 2007 688 absence of caveolin - 1 , Src activity could be affected . We evalu - ated the Tyr 418 phosphorylation state of Src in Cav1 − / − MEFs and found an increase in the basal activation of Src ( Fig . 7 a ; quantifi ed in Fig . 7 b ) , accompanied by a reduction in the abun - dance of this protein ( Fig . 7 , a and c ) , consistent with the re - ported increased degradation of active versus inactive Src ( Hakak and Martin , 1999 ) . Increased Src activity in Cav1 − / − MEFs suggested that Src could be involved in the morphologi - cal changes observed in the absence of caveolin - 1 . To test this hypothesis , we blocked Src activation by treating the Cav1 − / − MEFs with two inhibitors of Src family kinases , PP2 and SU6656 . Interestingly enough , Src inhibition restored the mor - phological phenotype of the WT MEFs ( Fig . 7 , d and e ; and Fig . S4 ) . Because Src regulates caveolin - 1 through phosphory - lation of Tyr 14 , one requirement of our hypothesis is that ex - pression of a nonphosphorylable mutant of caveolin - 1 in Cav1 − / − MEFs should not restore the normal phenotype . Accordingly , cells stably transfected with the Y14F caveolin - 1 mutant ( Fig . 1 d ) did not restore the cell morphological changes ( Fig . 7 g ) , MTOC polarization ( Fig . 2 b ) , wound closure ( Fig . 2 c ) , direc - tionally persistent migration ( Fig . 6 , c and d ) , or the chemotactic response ( Fig . 6 e ) , which were restored by WT Cav1 in all cases . These results highlight the importance of caveolin - 1 Tyr 14 phosphorylation by Src in the polarization and directed motility of mouse fi broblasts . Several links have been reported between the activity of Src kinase and Rho GTPases . Thus , Src is involved in activa - tion of Rac ( Servitja et al . , 2003 ; Kawakatsu et al . , 2005 ) and Cdc42 ( Miyamoto et al . , 2003 ; Tu et al . , 2003 ; Fukuyama et al . , 2005 ) and can inhibit Rho through activation of p190RhoGAP ( Arthur et al . , 2000 ; Brouns et al . , 2001 ; Meng et al . , 2004 ) . Therefore , increased Src activity could explain the reduction in Rho GTP levels observed in Cav1 − / − fi broblasts through activation of p190RhoGAP . Both total protein and tyrosine phosphorylated p190RhoGAP levels are mildly elevated in Cav1 − / − cells ( Fig . S5 , available at http : / / www . jcb . org / cgi / content / full / jcb . 200701006 / DC1 ) , supporting this notion . To test this hypo - thesis , we expressed a dominant - negative mutant of p190RhoGAP in Cav1 − / − fi broblasts and measured the EF . Importantly , GFP - p190 R1283A – expressing Cav1 − / − fi broblasts showed an elongated shape ( Fig . S3 ) . Moreover , knocking down p190RhoGAP expression using RNA interference ( Fig . 7 f ) led to a recovery of the morphological changes ( Fig . 7 , d and e ; and Fig . S4 ) and persistent migration defects ( Fig . 6 c ; quantifi ed in Fig . 6 d ) . Both Src inhibition and RhoGAP knockdown indi - vidually were able to rescue the various phenotypes to the levels achieved in WT cells , and they did not display an addi - tive effect when combining both treatments ( Fig . 7 , d and e ; and Fig . S4 ) . These results suggest that a linear pathway of Src and p190RhoGAP activities drives Rho down - regulation in cells lacking caveolin - 1 . In this regard , expression of WT caveolin - 1 , but not the Y14F caveolin - 1 mutant , restored Rho GTP loading in Cav1 − / − MEFs ( Fig . 7 , h and i ) . These fi ndings suggest an important role of caveolin - 1 and Src in the establishment of cell polarity by regulating the activity of Rho . Our results sup - port a model in which , in the absence of caveolin - 1 expression , Src activity may become insensitive to Csk modulation ; in - creased Src could inactivate Rho in a p190RhoGAP - dependent manner , resulting in profound defects in cell polarization and directed migration . Figure 6 . Directional migration is impaired in Cav1 − / − MEFs and can be rescued by WT Cav1 and p190RhoGAP knock - down , but not by Cav1Y14F . WT and Cav1 − / − MEFs plated on Fn were recorded in random migration by time - lapse video microscopy during a 10 - h period ( 8 - min frame interval ) . ( a ) Instantaneous velocities of 580 – 600 cells of each type were quantiﬁ ed and plotted over time on Fn . Cell densities of both populations were equivalent ( not depicted ) . ( b ) Histo - grams represent the mean velocities over the 90 – 330 - min period , at which time steady - state velocities were reached . ( c ) White lines show representative migration tracks of the cell lines indicated at the top of each panel . Composite migration ﬁ gures were created by coping randomly selected individual migration paths and combining them into a single ﬁ gure to avoid empty spaces ( Pankov et al . , 2005 ) . ( d ) The ID was quantiﬁ ed with Matlab and MetaMorph software . Histograms display the percentage of cells with ID > 0 . 3 in each cell line . This value ( 0 . 3 ) was the highest mean ID displayed in all ex - perimental conditions tested , and therefore the percentage of cells with ID > 0 . 3 represents highly directional migratory cells . Data represent means ± SEM based on six independent experiments . n = 300 – 500 cells of each line . ( e ) Transwell ﬁ lters coated with Fn were used to measure the chemotactic response of WT MEFs , Cav1 − / − MEFs , and Cav1 − / − MEFs reconstituted with caveolin - 1 or caveolin - 1 Y14F using serum as a stimulus . Cells that had migrated during 4 h to the lower surface of the ﬁ lters were counted in ﬁ ve random ﬁ elds . Means ± SD from four independent experiments are shown . * , Statistically signiﬁ cant versus WT MEFs ; # , statistically signi - ﬁ cant versus Cav1 − / − MEFs . on J une 28 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published May 21 , 2007 CAVEOLIN IN DIRECTIONAL MIGRATION VIA SRC AND RHO • GRANDE - GARCÍA ET AL . 689 Impaired skin wound healing in caveolin - 1 – deﬁ cient mice To explore whether the differences in the migratory behavior observed ex vivo have any correspondence in vivo , we performed wound - healing experiments in the skin of 11 - wk - old WT and Cav1 − / − mice . Wound healing is a complex process involving growth factors , ECM , and epidermal and mesenchymal cells undergoing directional migration , proliferation , and differentia - tion events ( Singer and Clark , 1999 ) . Two 3 . 5 - mm - diameter cir - cular punch biopsies were performed on the back skin of fi ve WT and fi ve Cav1 − / − mice . The rate of wound healing was mon - itored as the percentage of the initial wound area left open with time after the punch was made . Cav1 − / − mice showed a signifi - cantly slower wound healing rate compared with WT littermates ( Fig . 8 a ) . As examples , Fig . 8 b shows representative images of WT and Cav1 − / − wounds 1 and 7 d after the wounds were made . These results indicate that the skin of Cav1 − / − mice has an im - pairment in wound healing . Provided the hyperproliferative phenotype of Cav1 − / − mice ( Drab et al . , 2001 ; Razani et al . , 2001 ) , these in vivo fi ndings support our ex vivo observations that caveolin - 1 is required for directional migration . Discussion Caveolin - 1 is one of the numerous intracellular signaling mol - ecules that have been implicated in cell migration . However , there is no consensus on its role in controlling cell motility , as both positive ( Galvez et al . , 2004 ; Ge and Pachter , 2004 ; Podar et al . , 2004 ) and negative ( Zhang et al . , 2000 ; Gonzalez et al . , 2004 ) regulatory effects have been reported . Technical or cell type specifi city issues most likely account for this discrepancy . However , provided the relevance of both caveolin - 1 and cell mi - gration in both physiology and many pathological conditions , it seems important to further investigate this controversy . In this study , we analyze fi broblasts prepared from two types of Cav1 − / − mouse ( Razani et al . , 2001 ; Valasek et al . , 2005 ) in a variety of polarization and migration assays , including random and directional migration approaches . We have obtained evi - dence for the requirement of caveolin - 1 for the establishment of a polarized and elongated morphology , internal persistency of migration , and externally stimulated directional migration . We show that caveolin - 1 regulates polarity and directional migra - tion by affecting the activation patterns of Src and Rho GTPases . Figure 7 . Altered phenotype of Cav1 − / − ﬁ broblasts is de - pendent on Src and p190RhoGAP . ( a ) Activated and total Src were assayed by Western blotting with anti - Src ( pY418 ) phos - phospeciﬁ c antibody and anti - Src pan antibody , respectively . Each of the illustrated blots is representative of ﬁ ve experi - ments . ( b ) Src activity was determined densitometrically and expressed as the Src ( pY418 ) / Src ratio . ( c ) Src protein levels were normalized to tubulin levels in each sample . Values de - pict means ± SEM of ﬁ ve independent experiments . ( d ) Both Src inhibition and p190RhoGAP knockdown in Cav1 − / − MEFs restore the WT morphology pattern . EF was calculated for Cav1 − / − MEFs treated with two different Src inhibitors , PP2 and SU6656 . PP3 was used as a negative control . Data indicate means ± SEM ( n = 3 ) . ( e ) Percentages of cells with EF > 2 are shown for each population ( n > 100 cells per con - dition ) . Values represent means ± SEM from three inde - pendent experiments . ( f ) Cav1 − / − MEFs were infected with retroviruses encoding for control ( control KD ) or p190RhoGAP shRNA ( p190 KD ) . Positive cells were sorted , and knock down was conﬁ rmed by a Western blot against p190RhoGAP . As a loading control , anti - tubulin immunoblot is shown . 95 % reduction in p190RhoGAP levels was obtained . ( g ) Cells were plated on Fn - coated plates for 4 h , ﬁ xed , and stained with anti - paxillin antibodies . Representative images of each cell line are shown . Fibs , thymus ﬁ broblasts . Bars , 20 μ m . ( h ) Cav1 − / − MEFs reconstituted with empty vector ( mock ) , caveolin - 1 , or caveolin - 1 Y14F were lysed , and pull - down assays were performed as described in Materials and methods . Pro - teins bound to GST - Rhotekin binding domain ( top ) and whole cell lysates ( bottom ) were separated on a 13 % SDS - PAGE , transferred to a polyvinylidene diﬂ uoride membrane , and immunoblotted with anti - Rho antibodies . ( i ) The histograms illustrate densitometric analysis of the relative activity of Rho normalized for whole cell lysates and relative to control cells . Means ± SEM of six independent experiments are shown . # , Statistically signiﬁ cant versus Cav1 − / − MEFs transfected with the empty vector . on J une 28 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published May 21 , 2007 JCB • VOLUME 177 • NUMBER 4 • 2007 690 Our results suggest a model in which the modulation of Src acti - vation by the caveolin - 1 – Csk module ( Cao et al . , 2002 ; Radel and Rizzo , 2005 ) is crucial for the establishment of cell polarity and directional migration . In caveolin - 1 – defi cient cells , Src activity is constitutively high , leading to a p190RhoGAP - dependent decrease in the levels of GTP - loaded Rho and sub - sequent defects in the arrangement of the actin cytoskeleton . The fi rst and evident feature we observed in the Cav1 − / − fi broblasts is a profound change in their morphology and in the actin cytoskeleton architecture . Most of them were rounded and showed stress fi bers localized in the cell periphery , creating concentric cortical actin rings . This phenotype suggested alter - ations in the activity of the GTPases of the Rho family , as they are the principal regulators of polarity and cytoskeletal re - arrangements ( Burridge and Wennerberg , 2004 ; Raftopoulou and Hall , 2004 ; Vicente - Manzanares et al . , 2005 ; Pertz et al . , 2006 ) . We found that Cav1 − / − fi broblasts showed a dramatic decrease in basal Rho activity and a signifi cant increase in Cdc42 and Rac activity , the latter consistent with the reported data for Rac activity upon caveolin - 1 silencing ( Gonzalez et al . , 2004 ) . On the other hand , Cav1 − / − fi broblasts presented shorter lifetime of nascent adhesions at protrusive areas , compared with the con - trol cells . This is consistent with the low levels of Rho GTP loading , as adhesion turnover inversely correlates with Rho ac - tivity ( Ren et al . , 2000 ) . In addition , these adhesive complexes were smaller and more abundant in Cav1 − / − than in WT fi broblasts . This fact indicates a possible blockage in the maturation of these structures , which is also dependent on Rho ( Rottner et al . , 1999 ; Geiger and Bershadsky , 2001 ) . The increase in Rac and Cdc42 GTP levels also supports this phenotype , as both GTPases are involved in the creation of new substrate contacts and recruitment of cytoskeletal and signaling proteins into nascent small focal complexes ( Rottner et al . , 1999 ; Vicente - Manzanares et al . , 2005 ) . Likewise , we found an enhanced , nondirectional protrusive activity in the whole periphery of caveolin - 1 – defi cient cells , in agreement with the altered pattern of activity of Rho GTPases . In fact , both Rho inactivation ( Arthur and Burridge , 2001 ) and Rac activation promote membrane protrusion ( Machesky and Hall , 1997 ; Raftopoulou and Hall , 2004 ) , and there is evidence of a mutual antagonism between both GTPases ( Rottner et al . , 1999 ; Sander et al . , 1999 ; Nimnual et al . , 2003 ; Xu et al . , 2003 ; Burridge and Wennerberg , 2004 ) . Interestingly , the use of a fl uorescence resonance energy trans - fer biosensor to measure local activation of Rho has recently es - tablished that Rho is active in a sharp band immediately adjacent to the leading edge of migrating cells , both randomly and in a wounded monolayer ( Kurokawa and Matsuda , 2005 ; Pertz et al . , 2006 ) . This suggests that Rho is also required for direc - tional migration , and not only for cell contraction , as it was pre - viously established . The dramatic decrease of Rho activity in caveolin - 1 – defi cient cells together with the lack of directional - ity in these cells is consistent with these reports . The fact that each individual Rho GTPase mutant ( active Rho or inactive Rac / Cdc42 ) restore the normal polarized phenotype is intrigu - ing . The pattern of activity of all three Rho GTPases is altered in caveolin - defi cient cells , which complicates the interpretation of this result . It could be explained by the mutual inhibition be - tween the frontness ( Rac / Cdc42 dependent ) and backness ( Rho dependent ) pathways ( Li et al . , 2003 ; Meili and Firtel , 2003 ; Xu et al . , 2003 ) . Therefore , this result does not necessarily imply that alterations in the GTP loading of each GTPase play a direct role in the phenotype observed in Cav1 − / − fi broblasts , as this could be an indirect effect , through a negative feedback on the opposing pole of the cell . For Rac , apart from increased GTP loading , enhanced plasma membrane targeting in caveolin - 1 – defi cient cells ( Del Pozo et al . , 2005 ) could be partially respon - sible for the phenotype observed . In any case , alteration of the normal reciprocal balance between Rho GTPases most likely contributes to the aberrant cellular morphology and migratory behavior of Cav1 − / − cells . Consistent with the morphological phenotype , Cav1 − / − fi broblasts show a remarkable defect in directional migration , both externally stimulated and internally persistent . Persistence is the intrinsic propensity of the cells to continue migrating in the same direction in the absence of exogenous stimuli ( Huttenlocher , 2005 ) . Recently , Pankov et al . ( 2005 ) showed that high Rac activity renders a random migration pattern , whereas decreasing Rac activity switches cell migration from random to directionally persistent . Consistently , we found a mild but signifi cant increase in the velocity of random migra - tion and a dramatic switch toward random migration in Cav1 − / − fi broblasts , concomitant with increased Rac GTP levels . Thus , increased Rac activity and / or enhanced Rac membrane targeting Figure 8 . Wound healing in skin of WT and Cav1 − / − mice . Two wounds were created per mouse in ﬁ ve Cav1 − / − mice and ﬁ ve WT mice ( n = 10 ) . ( a ) The graph represents the percentage of initial wound area left at the in - dicated days after the punch was made ( mean ± SEM ) . Statistical analysis shows that the healing rate is signiﬁ cantly different between genotypes 1 – 4 , 6 , and 7 d after wound creation ( p - values ) . ( b ) Representative images of wounds 1 and 7 d after wound creation are shown . on J une 28 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published May 21 , 2007 CAVEOLIN IN DIRECTIONAL MIGRATION VIA SRC AND RHO • GRANDE - GARCÍA ET AL . 691 in caveolin - 1 – defi cient cells ( Del Pozo et al . , 2005 ) would render nonpolarized increased protrusive activity throughout the whole cell perimeter and , consequently , loss of directionally persistent cell migration . Previous reports where caveolin - 1 expression in - hibited cell migration ( Zhang et al . , 2000 ; Gonzalez et al . , 2004 ; Hassan et al . , 2006 ) fi t with our result that Cav1 − / − cells migrate slightly faster in the absence of an external chemotactic cue . Therefore , previous contradictory results could be reconciled by a detailed analysis of random versus directional migration in caveolin - 1 – defi cient cells . In other cases , divergent results can be ascribed to technical or cell - specifi c issues . In this regard , a recent report showed that caveolin - 1 – defi cient aortic smooth muscle cells are slightly more migratory than the control cells ( Hassan et al . , 2006 ) . However , these cells express caveolin - 3 , which could compensate the absence of caveolin - 1 . Moreover , these cells were isolated from Ink4a − / − mice , which show in - creased proliferation ( Hassan et al . , 2006 ) , which could infl u - ence the observed results . The phenotypic defi ciencies reported in Cav1 − / − fi bro - blasts are dependent on caveolin - 1 , as restoring its expression rescues the WT phenotype . Importantly , this recovery is depen - dent on caveolin - 1 Tyr 14 , which is the substrate for Src phos - phorylation ( Glenney and Zokas , 1989 ) . This phosphorylation is important for fi ne - tuning of Src activation , as pY14 - Cav1 binds to and activates Csk , which phosphorylates inhibitory Tyr 527 , resulting in Src inactivation , closing a negative feed - back loop ( Cao et al . , 2002 ; Radel and Rizzo , 2005 ) . These results predict that in the absence of pY14 - Cav1 , Src should be insensitive to modulation by Csk . Accordingly , we fi nd in - creased Src activation in Cav1 − / − fi broblasts , and when these cells were reconstituted with a Src - insensitive Y14F caveolin - 1 mutant , the normal phenotype was not restored . Increased Src activation was accompanied by a reduction in the protein levels , consistent with previous reports that Src activation leads to increased polyubiquitination and proteasome - dependent degra - dation ( Hakak and Martin , 1999 ) . In spite of protein reduction levels , increased Src activation is functionally relevant because pharmacological inhibition of Src in Cav1 − / − fi broblasts restored the normal phenotype . Mechanistically , we have found that alterations in the sig - naling of both Src kinase and Rho GTPases are responsible for the aberrant morphology and migratory pattern of Cav1 − / − cells . Our results and previous reports allow us to envisage a model in which caveolin - 1 infl uences signaling of Rho GTPases through activated Src . Src regulates the activity of the three major Rho GTPases studied here . It can activate Cdc42 through many pathways , including the exchange factors FRG ( Miyamoto et al . , 2003 ) , Vav2 ( Tu et al . , 2003 ) , and C3G ( in collaboration with Crk , Rap1 , and FRG ; Fukuyama et al . , 2005 ) . It activates Rac through the exchange factors Dock180 ( in collaboration with p130Cas and Crk ; DeMali et al . , 2003 ) , Tiam1 , Vav2 ( Servitja et al . , 2003 ) , and FRG ( through Cdc42 and Vav2 ; Kawakatsu et al . , 2005 ) . However , Src inhibits Rho activity through activa - tion of p190RhoGAP ( Arthur et al . , 2000 ; Brouns et al . , 2001 ; Meng et al . , 2004 ) . We present evidence that p190RhoGAP is involved in caveolin - mediated alterations of the cell polarity , allowing us to propose this model . The ex vivo migratory defects reported here are most likely related to the in vivo impaired angiogenic response dis - played by Cav1 − / − mice ( Woodman et al . , 2003 ; Sonveaux et al . , 2004 ) and could account for it . Angiogenesis is a complex phe - nomenon involving both migration and proliferation of endothe - lial cells ( Woodman et al . , 2003 ) . In spite of increased cellular proliferation , Matrigel plugs implanted in Cav1 − / − mice showed reduced blood vessel formation ( Woodman et al . , 2003 ) , sug - gesting that decreased migration is most likely responsible for the angiogenic defects . In good agreement , knocking down caveolin - 1 expression diminishes the chemotactic response in endothelial cells in vitro ( Galvez et al . , 2004 ) . We also report here an impaired in vivo wound healing in Cav1 − / − mice . Wound healing is also a complex process that depends on directional migration , proliferation , and differentiation of epidermal and mesenchymal cells ( Singer and Clark , 1999 ) . Because enhanced cell proliferation of Cav1 − / − mice ( Drab et al . , 2001 ; Razani et al . , 2001 ) would favor the wound - healing process , our results sup - port the notion that decreased directional migration accounts for decreased wound healing observed in vivo . However , caveolin - 1 appears to be dispensable for normal embryonic development , as Cav1 − / − mice are viable ( Drab et al . , 2001 ; Razani et al . , 2001 ) . Although embryonic development of these animals has not been studied in detail , most likely other signaling pathways involved in the complex migratory process ( Ridley et al . , 2003 ; Vicente - Manzanares et al . , 2005 ) are compensating for caveolin - 1 absence . Caveolin - defi cient animals display a wide range of phenotypes ( Le Lay and Kurzchalia , 2005 ) , and it seems feasible that some of them might be related to the migratory defi ciencies reported here . Elucidating such phenotypes is an interesting goal for future work . Materials and methods Handling of mice Caveolin - 1 – deﬁ cient mice strain Cav - 1 tm1Mls / J and their WT littermates were obtained from The Jackson Laboratory . Mice were housed and main - tained in a barrier facility at our institute ( Centro Nacional de Investigaciones Cardiovasculares , Madrid , Spain ) , which approved the animal protocols . Pathogen - free procedures are used in all mouse rooms . Quarterly health - monitoring reports have been negative for all pathogens in accordance with Federation of European Laboratory Animal Science Associations rec - ommendations . Mice were kept on a 12 : 12 - h light – dark cycle , with ad libitum access to food and water . Cell culture MEFs ( Razani et al . , 2001 ) and thymus ﬁ broblasts ( Valasek et al . , 2005 ) from Cav1 − / − and Cav1 + / + littermate mice have been used throughout this study . M . P . Lisanti ( Thomas Jefferson University , Philadelphia , PA ) and R . G . W . Anderson ( University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center , Dallas , TX ) provided MEFs and thymus ﬁ broblasts from Cav − / − and Cav + / + littermate mice , respectively . All experiments were performed with both cell types , except from the MTOC polarization assay , Rho GTPase pull downs , and FA lifetime estimations , which were performed only with the MEFs . Cells were maintained in culture in DME supplemented with 10 % FBS , 100 U / ml penicillin , and 100 μ g / ml streptomycin . DNA plasmids and constructs Plasmids encoding pEGFP - p190RhoGAP R1283A ( Noren et al . , 2003 ) ; pEGFP - paxillin ( Nishiya et al . , 2005 ) ; and GFP - tagged Rac T17N , Cdc42 T17N , and Rho G14V ( del Pozo et al . , 1999 ) were previously described . K . Burridge ( University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill , Chapel Hill , NC ) provided GFP - p190 R1283A . C - terminal Flag - tagged mouse caveolin - 1 was cut with BamH1 – EcoRI , blunt - ended , and ligated to blunt - ended MIGR1 on J une 28 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published May 21 , 2007 JCB • VOLUME 177 • NUMBER 4 • 2007 692 EcoRI , a bicistronic , GFP - expressing retroviral vector ( Pear et al . , 1998 ) . C - terminal Flag tag caveolin - 1 Y14F was cut with BglII – BamH1 and ligated to BglII site in MIGR1 . Generation of stable cell lines by retroviral infection NIH 3T3 or 293T / 17 cells were transfected ( using Lipofectamine 2000 or calcium phosphate method ) with MIGR1 , MIGR1 – caveolin - 1 or MIGR1 – caveolin - 1Y14F and packaging plasmid pSV ψ 2 . 48 h later , supernatants were ﬁ ltered and added to Cav1 − / − MEFs in DME plus 10 % FBS contain - ing 4 μ g / ml polybrene . 48 h later , GFP - positive cells were sorted using a cell sorter ( DakoCytomation ) . Levels of caveolin - 1 and caveolin - 1 Y14F were similar to endogenous caveolin - 1 in MEFs ( Fig . 1 d ) . RNA interference – mediated knock down of p190RhoGAP Mouse p190RhoGAP ( available from GenBank / EMBL / DDBJ under accession no . NM _ 172739 ) targeting sequence ( nucleotides 2935 – 2953 , 5 ′ - gttatggac - gcaacattaa - 3 ′ ) and control , nontargeting sequence ( 5 ′ - gcgcgctttgtaggattcg - 3 ′ ) were cloned into short hairpin RNA ( shRNA ) vector pSuper . Retro . Neo + GFP ( Oligoengine ) to generate pSuperRetroGFP - p190 - 2935 and pSuperRet - roGFP - Control vectors . Retroviral supernatants were generated by trans - fecting 293T / 17 cells with each shRNA and pSV ψ 2 vector using Fugene 6 ( Roche ) transfection reagent . Cav - 1 − / − MEFs were infected with retroviral supernatants as previously indicated , and high GFP - expressing cells were sorted ( (cid:11) 15 % of the cell population ) . Antibodies and reagents mAb against p190RhoGAP was purchased from BD Biosciences . pAb against Cdc42 and mAb against Rho were purchased from Santa Cruz Biotechnology , Inc . Anti - Rac , anti - Src and anti - phosphotyrosine ( 4G10 ) mAbs were obtained from Upstate Biotechnology , mAb for vinculin was obtained from Sigma - Aldrich , and anti - Src ( pY418 ) phosphospeciﬁ c pAb was purchased from Biosource International . Anti - paxillin mAb was pur - chased from Invitrogen . Rhodamine phalloidin and wheat germ agglutinin labeled with tetramethyl rhodamine were purchased from Invitrogen . Alexa 594 and FITC - conjugated antibody and peroxidase - conjugated goat anti – rabbit and anti – mouse IgG were obtained from Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratories . Src kinase inhibitors SU6656 and PP2 , as well as PP3 con - trol , were obtained from Calbiochem . Fn was puriﬁ ed from human plasma as described previously ( del Pozo et al . , 2000 ) . Fluorescence microscopy Cells were attached to glass coverslips precoated with 5 μ g / ml Fn for dif - ferent times . Cells were ﬁ xed with 2 % formaldehyde - PBS for 20 min , per - meabilized in 0 . 2 % Triton X - 100 in PBS for 10 min , and blocked with 10 % normal goat serum before staining . Anti - vinculin / paxillin antibodies fol - lowed by FITC / Alexa594 - conjugated anti - IgG were used to stain FAs . Actin cytoskeleton was stained with rhodamine phalloidin . For polarity determination , membrane of ﬁ xed cells was stained with 10 μ g / ml wheat germ agglutinin for 30 min at RT . Images were acquired using a confocal microscope ( Radiance 2100 ; Bio - Rad Laboratories , Inc . ) . Then , cells were outlined using the Kirsch edge detection algorithm , which is included in MetaMorph software ( Universal Imaging Corp . ) . Outlines were checked and corrected by hand if necessary . Using MetaMorph’s integrated mor - phometry analysis function , we determined the EF ( length / breadth ) of cells as a measure of elongation . Chemotaxis assays Transwell cell culture chambers containing polycarbonate membrane with 8 - μ m pore size ( Corning Costar Corp . ) were coated with 5 μ g / ml Fn . Cells were starved for 24 h before experiments . After trypsinization and dilution , 15 , 000 cells in DME plus 0 . 2 % BSA were added to the top Transwell cham - ber . The bottom compartment was ﬁ lled with 500 μ l DME plus 10 % FBS , and the assembly was incubated at 37 ° C for 4 h , to allow cell migration . In the negative controls , bottom chambers were ﬁ lled with DME plus 0 . 2 % BSA . After incubation , the membranes were washed with PBS , and cells were ﬁ xed in 2 % formaldehyde and stained with Hoechst 33342 ( Sigma - Aldrich ) according to the manufacturer’s protocols . Cells that did not migrate were gently removed from the top surface , and cells that had migrated to the bot - tom of the membrane were counted in ﬁ ve random ﬁ elds using a ﬂ uorescence microscope ( Axiovert 200 M SP LSM5 ; Carl Zeiss MicroImaging , Inc . ) . Time - lapse video microscopy and FA lifetime analysis Cells were transiently transfected with pEGFP - paxillin 2 d before the experi - ment and were plated on a chambered coverglass ( eight chambers ; Lab - Tek ) coated with 5 μ g / ml Fn . After 45 min , chambers were ﬁ lled with Optimem ( Invitrogen ) supplemented with 10 % FBS , sealed using vacuum grease and a glass plate , and transferred to a microscope heated to 37 ° C . Image series of FA dynamics were acquired using a 60 × 1 . 4 NA Plan Apo objective lens on an inverted microscope ( Eclipse TE300 ; Nikon ) heated with an airstream incubator ( Nevtek ) to 37 ° C . The microscope was equipped with a robotic stage with linear position feedback encoders on the x , y , and z axes ( MS - 2000 ; Applied Scientiﬁ c Instruments ) to allow image series to be collected at different stage positions over time . Images were captured using an cooled charge - coupled device camera ( Orca II ; Hamamatsu ) . Fluores - cent and phase - contrast images were taken in rapid succession at multiple positions , evenly distributed over the chambers to exclude differences due to experimental variation , at 2 . 5 - min intervals for 2 . 5 h . Phase - contrast image series of cell migratory behavior were collected on a similar microscope sys - tem , except using a 20 × 0 . 5 NA Plan objective lens and a 0 . 5 NA extra - long working distance condenser , and were captured with a 10 - bit chilled charge - coupled device camera ( Orca 285 ; Hamamatsu ) . For image pro - cessing and analyses , we used MetaMorph software . Individual FAs were clearly distinguishable in the GFP - paxillin time - lapse image series . The time of formation and disappearance of the nascent adhesions from protruding areas of different cell types were monitored by eye and double - blind method . From the noted times of appearance and disappearance , the lifetimes of nascent adhesions in WT versus Cav1 − / − cells were determined , averaged , and plotted , with the error bars indicating the SEM ( Videos 1 and 2 ) . To de - termine cell trajectories in phase - contrast time - lapse image series ( cells ﬁ lmed at 8 - min intervals for 10 h ) , the centroids of the cell nuclei were followed ( Videos 5 – 7 ) . To automate this and allow the unbiased analysis of many cells in multiple time lapses , a program was written in Matlab ( Mathworks ; de Rooij et al . , 2005 ) , which segments images based on pixel intensity and determines the presence of nuclei based on phase density , size , and shape . Nuclei are then linked in consecutive frames using a neural network algo - rithm , and cells tracked for less than ﬁ ve consecutive frames are automati - cally discarded . Detection ﬁ delity in our experiments was usually > 90 % , which was conﬁ rmed by eye for each individual time lapse . To prevent er - ratic conclusions because of false results generated by this automated analy - sis , a smaller number of random cells from several videos was tracked using the track objects function in MetaMorph , leading to the same results . Protrusion – retraction analysis Fluorescence time - lapse images of GFP - paxillin were used to outline cells by thresholding for pixels with high intensity . Areas covered by cells in consecutive images in the time series were subtracted to determine the per - centage change of the total cell area contributing to protrusion or retraction occurring in the 2 . 5 min elapsed between the two images ( Videos 3 and 4 ) . Plotted are means of protrusion over the ﬁ rst 1 . 5 h of imaging from six different WT and seven different Cav1 − / − cells . In vitro wound - healing assay and determination of MTOC polarization Cells were grown to conﬂ uence on coverglass chambers . Conﬂ uent mono - layers were scraped with a 0 . 1 – 2 μ l pipette tip . Wound closure was moni - tored by time - lapse video microscopy . Images were taken at 45 - min intervals for 48 h ( Videos 8 – 10 ) . For MTOC polarization assay , cells were seeded on coverslips , and wounded monolayers were ﬁ xed 2 , 4 , 6 , and 8 h after scraping . MTOC were localized by immunolabeling using anti - pericentrin antibodies . Only the ﬁ rst row of the wound edge was measured . Cells in which MTOC was contained by the quadrant facing the wound were scored positive ( Fig . 2 a , diagram ) . Wound - healing experiments in vivo Two full - thickness punch biopsies extending through the epidermis and der - mis ( punch diameter 3 . 5 mm ) were performed on the back of ﬁ ve WT and ﬁ ve Cav1 − / − mice ( 11 wk of age ) after depilation . Mice were anesthetized before wound creation . The wound - healing rate was calculated as the per - centage of initial wound area with time . After capturing the images with a digital camera ( DFC490 ; Leica ) , we determined the area of the wound with image analysis software ( Leica IM50 Image Manager ) . Pull - down assays and Western blot analysis Rho , Rac , and Cdc42 activity were determined by pull - down assays as described before ( del Pozo et al . , 2000 ; Ren et al . , 2000 ) . Src activity was assayed by Western blotting . Immunoprecipitation of p190RhoGAP Low - density WT and Cav1 − / − MEFs were lysed in RIPA buffer ( 10 mM Tris - HCl , pH 7 . 2 , 1 % Triton X - 100 , 0 . 5 % sodium deoxycholate , 0 . 1 % sodium dodecyl sulfate , 150 mM NaCl , 5 mM EDTA , and 3 mM EGTA ) with phos - phatase inhibitors ( 10 mM Na 4 P 2 O 7 , 1 mM Na 3 VO 4 , 30 mM NaF , and 3 mM on J une 28 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published May 21 , 2007 CAVEOLIN IN DIRECTIONAL MIGRATION VIA SRC AND RHO • GRANDE - GARCÍA ET AL . 693 β - glycerophosphate ) and protease inhibitors ( 1 μ g / ml aprotinin , 1 μ g / ml leupeptin , and 10 mM PMSF ) . Lysates were spun down at 13 , 000 g for 10 min , and 500 μ g of total lysate was used to immunoprecipitate p190RhoGAP with a mAb against it for 2 h . Protein G – Sepharose was added for another 2 h , and immunocomplexes were washed ﬁ ve times and run on an SDS - PAGE . Tubulin , phosphorylated , and total p190RhoGAP bands were quantiﬁ ed with ImageGauge 4 . 0 ( FujiFilm ) . Statistical analysis Statistical signiﬁ cance was determined using a t test with OriginPro7 soft - ware ( OriginLab Co . ) . P values < 0 . 05 were considered signiﬁ cant . Online supplemental material Fig . S1 shows that absence of caveolin - 1 does not delay cell spreading . Fig . S2 shows that constitutively active Rho and dominant - negative mutants of Rac and Cdc42 restore normal polarity in Cav1 − / − ﬁ broblasts . Fig . S3 shows that a dominant - negative p190RhoGAP construct rescues polarity in Cav1 − / − ﬁ broblasts . Fig . S4 demonstrates that Src inhibition and p190RhoGAP knockdown in Cav1 − / − MEFs restore the WT morphology pattern . Fig . S5 shows that total and tyrosine phosphorylated p190RhoGAP are elevated in Cav1 − / − MEFs . Video 1 shows adhesion turnover in WT MEFs . Video 2 shows adhesion turnover in Cav1 − / − MEFs . Video 3 shows protrusion – retraction analysis in WT MEF S . Video 4 shows protrusion – retraction analysis in Cav1 − / − MEFs . Video 5 displays random migration of WT MEFs . Video 6 demonstrates random migration of Cav1 − / − MEFs . Video 7 shows random migration of Cav1 − / − MEFs reconstituted with Cav1 . Video 8 shows in vitro wound - healing assays in WT MEFs . Video 9 shows in vitro wound - healing as - says in Cav1 − / − MEFs . Video 10 demonstrates in vitro wound - healing assays in Cav1 − / − MEFs reconstituted with Cav1 . Online supplemental material is available at http : / / www . jcb . org / cgi / content / full / jcb . 200701006 / DC1 . We thank Michael P . Lisanti and Richard G . W . Anderson for MEFs and thymus ﬁ broblasts from Cav1 − / − and Cav1 + / + littermate mice , respectively , and Keith Burridge for GFP - p190 R1283A . We are grateful to A . Cerezo , M . Guadamillas , and I . Flores for advice and assistance in in vivo wound - healing experiments ; J . C . García ( Research Computing , Centro Nacional de Investigaciones Car - diovasculares ) for software assistance ; and M . C . Montoya , A . G . Arroyo , and J . M . Redondo for critical reading of the manuscript . This work was supported by the Spanish Ministry of Science and Edu - cation ( grants SAF2005 - 00493 and GEN2003 - 20239 - C06 - 04 to M . A . del Pozo ) , a predoctoral fellowship ( BEF - 2003 - 2712 to A . Grande - García ) , the Ramón y Cajal Program ( to A . Echarri and M . A . del Pozo ) , and the European Union ( Marie Curie International Reintegration grant MIRG - CT - 2005 - 016427 to M . A . del Pozo ) . M . A . del Pozo is an EMBO Young Investigator and the recipient of an EURYI ( European Young Investigator ) award . Submitted : 2 January 2007 Accepted : 23 April 2007 References Arthur , W . T . , and K . Burridge . 2001 . RhoA inactivation by p190RhoGAP reg - ulates cell spreading and migration by promoting membrane protrusion and polarity . Mol . Biol . Cell . 12 : 2711 – 2720 . Arthur , W . T . , L . A . Petch , and K . Burridge . 2000 . Integrin engagement sup - presses RhoA activity via a c - Src - dependent mechanism . Curr . Biol . 10 : 719 – 722 . Beardsley , A . , K . Fang , H . Mertz , V . Castranova , S . Friend , and J . Liu . 2005 . Loss of caveolin - 1 polarity impedes endothelial cell polarization and directional movement . J . Biol . Chem . 280 : 3541 – 3547 . Brouns , M . R . , S . F . Matheson , and J . Settleman . 2001 . p190 RhoGAP is the prin - cipal Src substrate in brain and regulates axon outgrowth , guidance and fasciculation . Nat . Cell Biol . 3 : 361 – 367 . Burridge , K . , and K . Wennerberg . 2004 . Rho and Rac take center stage . Cell . 116 : 167 – 179 . Cao , H . , W . E . Courchesne , and C . C . Mastick . 2002 . A phosphotyrosine - dependent protein interaction screen reveals a role for phosphorylation of caveolin - 1 on tyrosine 14 : recruitment of C - terminal Src kinase . J . Biol . Chem . 277 : 8771 – 8774 . Carragher , N . O . , and M . C . Frame . 2004 . Focal adhesion and actin dynamics : a place where kinases and proteases meet to promote invasion . Trends Cell Biol . 14 : 241 – 249 . de Rooij , J . , A . Kerstens , G . Danuser , M . A . Schwartz , and C . M . Waterman - Storer . 2005 . Integrin - dependent actomyosin contraction regulates epi - thelial cell scattering . J . Cell Biol . 171 : 153 – 164 . del Pozo , M . A . , M . Vicente - Manzanares , R . Tejedor , J . M . Serrador , and F . Sánchez - Madrid . 1999 . Rho GTPases control migration and polarization of adhesion molecules and cytoskeletal ERM components in T lympho - cytes . Eur . J . Immunol . 29 : 3609 – 3620 . del Pozo , M . A . , L . S . Price , N . B . Alderson , X . D . Ren , and M . A . Schwartz . 2000 . Adhesion to the extracellular matrix regulates the coupling of the small GTPase Rac to its effector PAK . EMBO J . 19 : 2008 – 2014 . del Pozo , M . A . , N . Balasubramanian , N . B . Alderson , W . B . Kiosses , A . Grande - Garcia , R . G . Anderson , and M . A . Schwartz . 2005 . Phospho - caveolin - 1 mediates integrin - regulated membrane domain internalization . Nat . Cell Biol . 7 : 901 – 908 . DeMali , K . A . , K . Wennerberg , and K . Burridge . 2003 . Integrin signaling to the actin cytoskeleton . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 15 : 572 – 582 . Drab , M . , P . Verkade , M . Elger , M . Kasper , M . Lohn , B . Lauterbach , J . Menne , C . Lindschau , F . Mende , F . C . Luft , et al . 2001 . Loss of caveolae , vascular dysfunction , and pulmonary defects in caveolin - 1 gene - disrupted mice . Science . 293 : 2449 – 2452 . Fukuyama , T . , H . Ogita , T . Kawakatsu , T . Fukuhara , T . Yamada , T . Sato , K . Shimizu , T . Nakamura , M . Matsuda , and Y . Takai . 2005 . Involvement of the c - Src - Crk - C3G - Rap1 signaling in the nectin - induced activa - tion of Cdc42 and formation of adherens junctions . J . Biol . Chem . 280 : 815 – 825 . Galvez , B . G . , S . Matias - Roman , M . Yanez - Mo , M . Vicente - Manzanares , F . Sanchez - Madrid , and A . G . Arroyo . 2004 . Caveolae are a novel pathway for membrane - type 1 matrix metalloproteinase traffi c in human endo - thelial cells . Mol . Biol . Cell . 15 : 678 – 687 . Ge , S . , and J . S . Pachter . 2004 . Caveolin - 1 knockdown by small interfering RNA suppresses responses to the chemokine monocyte chemoattractant protein - 1 by human astrocytes . J . Biol . Chem . 279 : 6688 – 6695 . Geiger , B . , and A . Bershadsky . 2001 . Assembly and mechanosensory function of focal contacts . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 13 : 584 – 592 . Glenney , J . R . , and L . Zokas . 1989 . Novel tyrosine kinase substrates from Rous sarcoma virus - transformed cells are present in the membrane skeleton . J . Cell Biol . 108 : 2401 – 2408 . Gonzalez , E . , A . Nagiel , A . J . Lin , D . E . Golan , and T . Michel . 2004 . Small interfering RNA - mediated down - regulation of caveolin - 1 differen - tially modulates signaling pathways in endothelial cells . J . Biol . Chem . 279 : 40659 – 40669 . Hakak , Y . , and G . S . Martin . 1999 . Ubiquitin - dependent degradation of active Src . Curr . Biol . 9 : 1039 – 1042 . Hassan , G . S . , T . M . Williams , P . G . Frank , and M . P . Lisanti . 2006 . Caveolin - 1 - defi cient aortic smooth muscle cells show cell autonomous abnormalities in proliferation , migration , and endothelin - based signal transduction . Am . J . Physiol . Heart Circ . Physiol . 290 : H2393 – H2401 . Huttenlocher , A . 2005 . Cell polarization mechanisms during directed cell migration . Nat . Cell Biol . 7 : 336 – 337 . Isshiki , M . , J . Ando , K . Yamamoto , T . Fujita , Y . Ying , and R . G . Anderson . 2002 . Sites of Ca 2 + wave initiation move with caveolae to the trailing edge of migrating cells . J . Cell Sci . 115 : 475 – 484 . Kawakatsu , T . , H . Ogita , T . Fukuhara , T . Fukuyama , Y . Minami , K . Shimizu , and Y . Takai . 2005 . Vav2 as a Rac - GDP / GTP exchange factor responsible for the nectin - induced , c - Src - and Cdc42 - mediated activation of Rac . J . Biol . Chem . 280 : 4940 – 4947 . Kurokawa , K . , and M . Matsuda . 2005 . Localized RhoA activation as a re - quirement for the induction of membrane ruffl ing . Mol . Biol . Cell . 16 : 4294 – 4303 . Le Lay , S . , and T . V . Kurzchalia . 2005 . Getting rid of caveolins : phenotypes of caveolin - defi cient animals . Biochim . Biophys . Acta . 1746 : 322 – 333 . Li , Z . , M . Hannigan , Z . Mo , B . Liu , W . Lu , Y . Wu , A . V . Smrcka , G . Wu , L . Li , M . Liu , et al . 2003 . Directional sensing requires G beta gamma - mediated PAK1 and PIX alpha - dependent activation of Cdc42 . Cell . 114 : 215 – 227 . Machesky , L . M . , and A . Hall . 1997 . Role of actin polymerization and adhesion to extracellular matrix in Rac - and Rho - induced cytoskeletal reorganiza - tion . J . Cell Biol . 138 : 913 – 926 . Meili , R . , and R . A . Firtel . 2003 . Two poles and a compass . Cell . 114 : 153 – 156 . Meng , W . , M . Numazaki , K . Takeuchi , Y . Uchibori , Y . Ando - Akatsuka , M . Tominaga , and T . Tominaga . 2004 . DIP ( mDia interacting protein ) is a key molecule regulating Rho and Rac in a Src - dependent manner . EMBO J . 23 : 760 – 771 . Miyamoto , Y . , J . Yamauchi , and H . Itoh . 2003 . Src kinase regulates the activation of a novel FGD - 1 - related Cdc42 guanine nucleotide exchange factor in the signaling pathway from the endothelin A receptor to JNK . J . Biol . Chem . 278 : 29890 – 29900 . Navarro , A . , B . Anand - Apte , and M . O . Parat . 2004 . A role for caveolae in cell migration . FASEB J . 18 : 1801 – 1811 . Nimnual , A . S . , L . J . Taylor , and D . Bar - Sagi . 2003 . Redox - dependent downregu - lation of Rho by Rac . Nat . Cell Biol . 5 : 236 – 241 . on J une 28 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published May 21 , 2007 JCB • VOLUME 177 • NUMBER 4 • 2007 694 Nishiya , N . , W . B . Kiosses , J . Han , and M . H . Ginsberg . 2005 . An alpha4 integrin - paxillin - Arf - GAP complex restricts Rac activation to the leading edge of migrating cells . Nat . Cell Biol . 7 : 343 – 352 . Noren , N . K . , W . T . Arthur , and K . Burridge . 2003 . Cadherin engagement inhibits RhoA via p190RhoGAP . J . Biol . Chem . 278 : 13615 – 13618 . Pankov , R . , Y . Endo , S . Even - Ram , M . Araki , K . Clark , E . Cukierman , K . Matsumoto , and K . M . Yamada . 2005 . A Rac switch regulates random versus directionally persistent cell migration . J . Cell Biol . 170 : 793 – 802 . Parat , M . O . , B . Anand - Apte , and P . L . Fox . 2003 . Differential caveolin - 1 polar - ization in endothelial cells during migration in two and three dimensions . Mol . Biol . Cell . 14 : 3156 – 3168 . Parton , R . G . , M . Hanzal - Bayer , and J . F . Hancock . 2006 . Biogenesis of caveolae : a structural model for caveolin - induced domain formation . J . Cell Sci . 119 : 787 – 796 . Pear , W . S . , J . P . Miller , L . Xu , J . C . Pui , B . Soffer , R . C . Quackenbush , A . M . Pendergast , R . Bronson , J . C . Aster , M . L . Scott , and D . Baltimore . 1998 . Effi cient and rapid induction of a chronic myelogenous leukemia - like myeloproliferative disease in mice receiving P210 bcr / abl - transduced bone marrow . Blood . 92 : 3780 – 3792 . Pertz , O . , L . Hodgson , R . L . Klemke , and K . M . Hahn . 2006 . Spatiotemporal dynamics of RhoA activity in migrating cells . Nature . 440 : 1069 – 1072 . Podar , K . , R . Shringarpure , Y . T . Tai , M . Simoncini , M . Sattler , K . Ishitsuka , P . G . Richardson , T . Hideshima , D . Chauhan , and K . C . Anderson . 2004 . Caveolin - 1 is required for vascular endothelial growth factor - triggered multiple myeloma cell migration and is targeted by bortezomib . Cancer Res . 64 : 7500 – 7506 . Radel , C . , and V . Rizzo . 2005 . Integrin mechanotransduction stimulates caveolin - 1 phosphorylation and recruitment of Csk to mediate actin reorganization . Am . J . Physiol . Heart Circ . Physiol . 288 : H936 – H945 . Raftopoulou , M . , and A . Hall . 2004 . Cell migration : Rho GTPases lead the way . Dev . Biol . 265 : 23 – 32 . Razani , B . , J . A . Engelman , X . B . Wang , W . Schubert , X . L . Zhang , C . B . Marks , F . Macaluso , R . G . Russell , M . Li , R . G . Pestell , et al . 2001 . Caveolin - 1 null mice are viable but show evidence of hyperproliferative and vascular abnormalities . J . Biol . Chem . 276 : 38121 – 38138 . Ren , X . D . , W . B . Kiosses , D . J . Sieg , C . A . Otey , D . D . Schlaepfer , and M . A . Schwartz . 2000 . Focal adhesion kinase suppresses Rho activity to pro - mote focal adhesion turnover . J . Cell Sci . 113 : 3673 – 3678 . Ridley , A . J . , M . A . Schwartz , K . Burridge , R . A . Firtel , M . H . Ginsberg , G . Borisy , J . T . Parsons , and A . R . Horwitz . 2003 . Cell migration : integrating signals from front to back . Science . 302 : 1704 – 1709 . Rottner , K . , A . Hall , and J . V . Small . 1999 . Interplay between Rac and Rho in the control of substrate contact dynamics . Curr . Biol . 9 : 640 – 648 . Sánchez - Madrid , F . , and M . A . del Pozo . 1999 . Leukocyte polarization in cell migration and immune interactions . EMBO J . 18 : 501 – 511 . Sander , E . E . , J . P . ten Klooster , S . van Delft , R . A . van der Kammen , and J . G . Collard . 1999 . Rac downregulates Rho activity : reciprocal balance between both GTPases determines cellular morphology and migratory behavior . J . Cell Biol . 147 : 1009 – 1022 . Servitja , J . M . , M . J . Marinissen , A . Sodhi , X . R . Bustelo , and J . S . Gutkind . 2003 . Rac1 function is required for Src - induced transformation : evidence of a role for Tiam1 and Vav2 in Rac activation by Src . J . Biol . Chem . 278 : 34339 – 34346 . Shaul , P . W . , and R . G . Anderson . 1998 . Role of plasmalemmal caveolae in signal transduction . Am . J . Physiol . 275 : L843 – L851 . Sheetz , M . P . , D . Felsenfeld , C . G . Galbraith , and D . Choquet . 1999 . Cell migra - tion as a fi ve - step cycle . Biochem . Soc . Symp . 65 : 233 – 243 . Singer , A . J . , and R . A . Clark . 1999 . Cutaneous wound healing . N . Engl . J . Med . 341 : 738 – 746 . Sonveaux , P . , P . Martinive , J . DeWever , Z . Batova , G . Daneau , M . Pelat , P . Ghisdal , V . Gregoire , C . Dessy , J . L . Balligand , and O . Feron . 2004 . Caveolin - 1 expression is critical for vascular endothelial growth factor - induced ischemic hindlimb collateralization and nitric oxide - mediated angiogenesis . Circ . Res . 95 : 154 – 161 . Stahlhut , M . , and B . van Deurs . 2000 . Identifi cation of fi lamin as a novel ligand for caveolin - 1 : evidence for the organization of caveolin - 1 - associated membrane domains by the actin cytoskeleton . Mol . Biol . Cell . 11 : 325 – 337 . Tu , S . , W . J . Wu , J . Wang , and R . A . Cerione . 2003 . Epidermal growth factor - dependent regulation of Cdc42 is mediated by the Src tyrosine kinase . J . Biol . Chem . 278 : 49293 – 49300 . Valasek , M . A . , J . Weng , P . W . Shaul , R . G . Anderson , and J . J . Repa . 2005 . Caveolin - 1 is not required for murine intestinal cholesterol transport . J . Biol . Chem . 280 : 28103 – 28109 . Vicente - Manzanares , M . , D . J . Webb , and A . R . Horwitz . 2005 . Cell migration at a glance . J . Cell Sci . 118 : 4917 – 4919 . Wary , K . K . , A . Mariotti , C . Zurzolo , and F . G . Giancotti . 1998 . A requirement for caveolin - 1 and associated kinase Fyn in integrin signaling and anchorage - dependent cell growth . Cell . 94 : 625 – 634 . Wehrle - Haller , B . , and B . Imhof . 2002 . The inner lives of focal adhesions . Trends Cell Biol . 12 : 382 – 389 . Wei , Y . , X . Yang , Q . Liu , J . A . Wilkins , and H . A . Chapman . 1999 . A role for caveolin and the urokinase receptor in integrin - mediated adhesion and signaling . J . Cell Biol . 144 : 1285 – 1294 . Woodman , S . E . , A . W . Ashton , W . Schubert , H . Lee , T . M . Williams , F . A . Medina , J . B . Wyckoff , T . P . Combs , and M . P . Lisanti . 2003 . Caveolin - 1 knockout mice show an impaired angiogenic response to exogenous stimuli . Am . J . Pathol . 162 : 2059 – 2068 . Xu , J . , F . Wang , A . Van Keymeulen , P . Herzmark , A . Straight , K . Kelly , Y . Takuwa , N . Sugimoto , T . Mitchison , and H . R . Bourne . 2003 . Divergent signals and cytoskeletal assemblies regulate self - organizing polarity in neutrophils . Cell . 114 : 201 – 214 . Zhang , W . , B . Razani , Y . Altschuler , B . Bouzahzah , K . E . Mostov , R . G . Pestell , and M . P . Lisanti . 2000 . Caveolin - 1 inhibits epidermal growth factor - stimulated lamellipod extension and cell migration in metastatic mam - mary adenocarcinoma cells ( MTLn3 ) . Transformation suppressor effects of adenovirus - mediated gene delivery of caveolin - 1 . J . Biol . Chem . 275 : 20717 – 20725 . on J une 28 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published May 21 , 2007