LETTERS Rapid formation and selective stabilization of synapses for enduring motor memories Tonghui Xu 1 * , Xinzhu Yu 1 * , Andrew J . Perlik 1 , Willie F . Tobin 1 , Jonathan A . Zweig 1 , Kelly Tennant 2 , Theresa Jones 2 & Yi Zuo 1 Novel motor skills are learned through repetitive practice and , once acquired , persist long after training stops 1 , 2 . Earlier studies have shown that such learning induces an increase in the efficacy of synapses in the primary motor cortex , the persistence of which is associated with retention of the task 3 – 5 . However , how motor learning affects neuronal circuitry at the level of individual synapses and how long - lasting memory is structurally encoded in the intact brain remain unknown . Here we show that synaptic connections in the living mouse brain rapidly respond to motor - skill learning and permanently rewire . Training in a forelimb reaching task leads to rapid ( within an hour ) formation of post - synaptic dendritic spines on the output pyramidal neurons in the contralateral motor cortex . Although selective elimination of spines that existed before training gradually returns the overall spine density back to the original level , the new spines induced during learning are preferentially stabilized during subsequent training and endure long after training stops . Furthermore , we show that different motor skills are encoded by different sets of synapses . Practice of novel , but not previously learned , tasks further promotes dendritic spine formation in adulthood . Our findings reveal that rapid , but long - lasting , synaptic reorganiza - tion is closely associated with motor learning . The data also sug - gest that stabilized neuronal connections are the foundation of durable motor memory . Fine motor movements require accurate muscle synergies that rely oncoordinatedrecruitmentofintracorticalsynapsesontocorticospinalneurons 6 , 7 . Obtaining new motor skills has been shown to strengthen the horizontal cortical connections in the primary motor cortex 4 , 5 . In this study , we taught mice a single - seed reaching task ( Supplementary Movie 1 ) . The majority of 1 - month - old mice that underwent training gradually increased their reaching successrates duringtheinitial 4 days , and then levelled off ( n 5 42 , Fig . 1a , b ) . There were a few mice ( n 5 5 ) that engaged in extensive reaching , but continually failed to grasp the seeds . Thesemicenormallygaveupreachingafter4 – 8days ( Fig . 1b ) . To investigate the process of learning - induced synaptic remodelling in the intact motor cortex , we repeatedly imaged the same apical dendrites of layer V pyramidal neurons marked by the transgenic expression of yellow fluorescent protein ( YFP - H line ) in various cortical regions during and after motor learning , using transcranial two - photon micro - scopy 8 ( Supplementary Fig . 1 ) . Dendritic spines are the postsynaptic sites of most excitatory synapses in the brain and changes in spine morphology and dynamism serve as good indicators of synaptic plasticity 9 , 10 . Spines that were formed and eliminated were identified bycomparingimagesfromtwotimepoints , andthennormalizedtothe initial images . Imaged regions were guided by stereotaxic measure - ments , ensuring the imaged neurons resided in the primary motor cortex . In several experiments , intracortical microstimulation was performed at the end of repetitive imaging to confirm that images were taken from the functionally responding motor cortex ( Fig . 1c , Sup - plementary Notes and Supplementary Fig . 2 ) . * These authors contributed equally to this work . 1 Department of Molecular , Cell and Developmental Biology , University of California Santa Cruz , Santa Cruz , California 95064 , USA . 2 Institute for Neuroscience , Department of Psychology , University of Texas at Austin , Austin , Texas 78712 , USA . 0 5 10 15 0 10 20 S p i n e f o r m a t i o n ( % ) Successful reaches 0 5 10 15 Formation Elimination S p i n e s ( % ) General control Shaping control Activity control Training ( > 10 successes ) Food reward * * * a b d c e Motor response Imagingregion No response Bregma Anterior d0 d0 d1 d1 g f Control Training Lateral 0 10 20 30 40 50 0 4 8 12 16 S u cce ss r a t e ( % ) Days Training ( learner ) Training ( no learner ) Figure 1 | Motor skill learning in adolescent mice promotes immediate spine formation in the contralateral motor cortex . a , A cartoon of motor training . b , Average success rates during training for learning and non - learning mice ( mean 6 s . e . m . , 42 learners and 5 no learners ) . c , An intracortical microstimulation map indicates that the imaged region is within the motor cortex . Scale bar , 1mm . d , e , Repeatedimagingof the same dendriticbranchesover one - dayintervalsreveals spine elimination ( arrows ) and formation ( arrowheads ) , and filopodia ( asterisks ) in a general control ( d ) and a trained ( e ) mouse . Scale bar , 2 m m . f , Percentage of spines formed and eliminated under various control and training conditions immediately following the first training session ( mean 6 s . d . , * * * P , 0 . 001 ) . g , The degree of spine formation observed following the first training session is linearly correlated with the number of successful reaches during this session ( r 2 5 0 . 77 ) . Vol 462 | 17 December 2009 | doi : 10 . 1038 / nature08389 915 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved ©2009 Unexpectedly , we found that motor learning led to rapid forma - tion of dendritic spines ( spinogenesis ) in the motor cortex contra - lateral to the reaching forelimb . One - month - old mice that finished 30 reaches with more than 10 successes in the first day of training were imaged within 1 h of the training session and showed 10 . 6 6 1 . 1 % new spines which were not in the images acquired the day before training . This spine formation was more than double that found in age - matched controls , which were handled similarly and imaged over the same period of time , but not trained ( Fig . 1d – f , 4 . 7 6 0 . 6 % in general controls , P , 0 . 001 ) . In contrast , spine elimi - nation measured in the same images was not significantly altered by motor learning during single training sessions ( Fig . 1f , P . 0 . 9 ) . In addition , mice that went through shaping but not training ( shaping controls ) or mice that were trained to reach for a seed too far away to grasp ( activity controls ) did not show an increase in spine formation rates ( Fig . 1f , P . 0 . 1 with general control , P , 0 . 001 with trained mice ; see Methods for all control conditions ) . This suggests that refinement of fine motor movements , rather than other training - related experiences or unskilled motor activity , drives robust spine formation . Furthermore , the percentage of spines formed immedi - ately after the first training session is linearly correlated with the number of successful reaches during the training session , revealing a direct link between learning and spine formation ( Fig . 1g , r 2 5 0 . 77 ) . Perfection of a motor skill often requires persistent practice over time . To examine how prolonged learning affects spine dynamics , we trained and imaged mice over different periods of time ( that is , from 2 to 16 days ) . We found that training for 2 days and longer resulted in significant increases , not only in spine formation , but also in spine elimination ( Fig . 2a , b , P , 0 . 005 at all time points ) . Although delayed , this increase in spine elimination ultimately resulted in the total spine density in the trained animals returning to control levels by day 16 ( Fig . 2c ) . As a control , we measured spine formation and elimination over a 4 - day training period in the ipsilateral ( to the trained limb ) primary motor cortex and the contralateral posterior sensory cortex , and found no significant increase in spine formation or elimination in either case ( Fig . 2a , b , d , e , P . 0 . 2 ) . In addition , mice that failed to learn also failed to show an increase in either spine formation or elimination in the contralateral motor cortex ( Figs 1b and 2a , b , f , P . 0 . 6 ) . Therefore , the observed changes in spine dynamics are region - and learning - specific , indicating that motor learning causes synaptic reorganization in the corresponding motor cortex . The enhanced spine loss after rapid spinogenesis reflects a rewiring of the neuronal circuitry in response to learning , rather than a simple addition of newspines . Toexamine howlearning reorganizessynaptic connections , we imaged the same mice three times , classified imaged spines into new and pre - existing spines based on their appearance in the initial two images , and then quantified their survival percentages in the third images ( Fig . 3a ) . Our data show that new spines are less stable than pre - existing spines in general ( Fig . 3b , c ) . Specifically , in control mice , 43 . 8 6 3 . 1 % , 25 . 8 6 5 . 3 % and 19 . 2 6 4 . 6 % of the spines that formed between days 0 and 4 remained by days 6 , 8 and 16 , respectively . During the same period of time , 96 . 7 6 0 . 5 % , 94 . 9 6 1 . 1 % and 92 . 8 6 1 . 9 % of the pre - existing spines remained ( Fig . 3d , P , 0 . 001 compared to new spines ) . These results suggest that new spines are initially unstable and undergo a prolonged selec - tion process before being converted into stable synapses . In addition , we found that new spines were significantly more stable in trained mice , with 64 . 1 6 2 . 2 % , 55 . 3 6 4 . 1 % and 51 . 0 6 4 . 8 % of the spines that formed during the initial 4 - day training remaining by days 6 , 8 and 16 , respectively ( Fig . 3d , P , 0 . 001 compared to new spines in control mice ) . In contrast , pre - existing spines in trained mice were significantly less stable than control mice over the same time periods ( Fig . 3d , P , 0 . 05 ) . More importantly , when the fate of the new b a c * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * d e d0 d4 Training ( ipsilateral motor cortex ) Training ( contralateral sensory cortex ) Fail to learn ( contralateral motor cortex ) f d0 d0 d4 d4 90 95 100 105 110 0 4 8 12 16 To t a l s p i n e nu m b e r ( % ) Days TrainingControl 0 5 10 15 20 25 0 5 10 15 20 25 2 4 8 16 S p i n e f o r m a t i o n ( % ) Imaging intervals ( days ) ControlTraining ( contralateral forelimb motor cortex ) Training ( > 500 μ m outside contralateral forelimb motor cortex ) Training ( ipsilateral motor cortex ) Training ( contralateral sensory cortex ) Fail to learn ( contralateral motor cortex ) 2 4 8 16 S p i n e e li m i n a t i o n ( % ) Imaging intervals ( days ) Figure 2 | Enhanced spine dynamics during adolescent motor training is region - and learning - specific . a , b , Percentage of spines formed ( a ) and eliminated ( b ) under control and training conditions . c , Total spine number increasesduringinitiallearning , butreturnstonormallevelswithprolonged training . d , e , Imaging of the same dendritic branches over 4days in the ipsilateral primary motor cortex ( d ) and the contralateral sensory cortex ( e ) ofthetrained mice . f , Imagingof thesamedendriticbranchesover4 days inthecontralateralmotorcortexofamousethatfailedtolearnthetask . Data arepresentedasmean 6 s . d . , * P , 0 . 05 , * * P , 0 . 01 , * * * P , 0 . 001 . Scalebar , 2 m m . LETTERS NATURE | Vol 462 | 17 December 2009 916 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved ©2009 spines formed during initial learning ( day 0 – 4 ) was examined months later ( day 120 ) , we found that 42 . 3 6 2 . 9 % of new spines persisted in the mice trained for 16 days during adolescence , whereas only 13 . 5 6 1 . 7 % of new spines remained in the control mice ( Fig . 3d , P , 0 . 001 ) . In addition , we found that spine formation and stabiliza - tion were associated with behaviouralimprovement . More newspines were formed daily during the learning acquisition phase ( days 1 – 4 ) than during the learning maintenance phase ( days 5 – 16 ) ; the new spines that were formed during learning acquisition , but not during maintenance , were preferably stabilized with continuous training ( Supplementary Notes and Supplementary Fig . 3 ) . Taken together , these data indicate that motor learning selectively stabilizes learning - induced new spines and destabilizes pre - existing spines . The pro - longed persistence of learning - induced synapses provides a potential cellular mechanism for the consolidation of lasting , presumably per - manent , motor memories . Dendrites in the mammalian brain contain not only spines but also filopodia . Filopodia are long , thin protrusionswithout bulbousheads , and make up , 10 % of the total dendritic protrusions in the motor cortex of 1 - month - old mice . Previous studies suggest that filopodia are precursors of dendritic spines 11 , 12 . We found that filopodia were very dynamic in the mouse motor cortex in vivo . Most of them turned over within 1day in control mice ( 79 . 3 6 12 . 8 % formation and 87 . 6 6 5 . 9 % elimination ) , and motor learning had no effect on filo - podial formation and elimination ( 91 . 0 6 15 . 3 % formation and 86 . 5 6 8 . 8 % elimination , P . 0 . 2 ) . Among the filopodia observed in theinitialimages , fewof them becamespinesover thefollowing day in control mice ( 6 . 3 % ) . However , this filopodium - to - spine transition was enhanced by motor skill learning ( 13 . 1 % ) . Furthermore , 25 % of new spines formed from filopodia on training day 1 persisted after another4daysoftraining , indicatingacontributionoffilopodiatothe rewired neuronal circuitry . Furthermore , when filopodia and spines were pooled together for analysis , there was a , 10 % increase in the dynamics of both control and training categories . Thus , the conclu - sion of motor learning on total protrusions was consistent with the spine analysis alone ( Supplementary Fig . 4 ) . One of the important characteristics of motor learning is that , once the skill is well learned , its further maintenance does not require constant practice . To test whether lasting motor memories might be contained within structurally stable neural circuits , we trained young mice for 8 – 16 days to acquire the reaching skill , housed them in control cage conditions for 4 months , and retrained them on the same task in adulthood . We found that these pre - trained mice main - tained skilful performance with high success rates even on the first day of reintroducing the reaching task ( Fig . 4a ) . Imaging of these pre - trained adult mice showed that spine formation and elimination during retraining were similar to those of naive adults without train - ing ( Fig . 4b , e , g , P . 0 . 1 for 4 and 8 days ) . In contrast , naive adults learning the reaching task for the first time had a learning curve similar to adolescent mice , and showed significantly higher spine formation and elimination than control adults ( Fig . 4a – c , g , 4 and 8 days , P , 0 . 01 with control for both formation and elimination ) . Next , we asked if learning a novel motor skill continued to drive synaptic reorganization in the pre - trained brain . To do this , we trained mice that had been pre - trained on the reaching task with a new motor task—the capellini handling task , which also requires fine forelimb motor skills ( see Methods ) . We found that pre - trained mice , similartonaiveadults , hadenhancedspineformationandelimination during the training of this novel skill task ( Fig . 4d , f , g , P , 0 . 001 compared to control adults ) . Despite high spine dynamics induced by novel skill learning , most spines that were formed during adoles - cent learning of the reaching task and maintained in adults persisted after training with the capellini handling task ( 95 . 6 6 7 . 7 % ) , suggest - ingthatalreadystabilizedsynapsesarenotperturbedbynovellearninginadults . These results indicate that synaptic structural coding out - laststheearlylearningexperienceandpersistsinadulthoodtosupportlatermaintenanceofmotorskills . The fact that novel learning experi - ences continue to drive synaptic reorganization without affecting the stability of synapses formed during previous learning further suggests that different motor behaviours are stored using different sets of synapses in the brain . Our study investigated the process of synapse reorganization in the living brain during natural learning , distinguishing it from several studies where changes were triggered by non - physiological sensory manipulation 13 – 18 . Although rapid synapse formation has been observed during long - term potentiation in vitro 19 , 20 , we show , for the first time , that synapse formation in the neocortex begins immediately as animals learn a new task in the living brain ( within 1h of training initiation ) . Such high spine formation does not occur with motor activity alone or later practice of the established skill . The rapidity of the response contradicts the general assumption that significant syn - aptic structural remodelling in motor cortex takes days to occur , fol - lowing more subtle cellular activity and changes in synaptic efficacy 4 , 21 , 22 . One recent study on brain slices shows that glutamate - sensitive currents expressed in newly formed spines are indistinguish - able from mature spines of comparable volumes 23 , further suggesting 0 4 6 8 16 Imaging day Pre - existingspines Newspines Persistent Persistent Eliminated Eliminated 1st 2nd 3rd a ( 1 month old ) AbsentPresent ~ 120 ( 5 months old ) / / 4 months b c d0 d0 d4 d4 d120 d120 Control Training / / / / d * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * ( 4 ) ( 4 ) ( 6 ) ( 5 ) ( 4 ) ( 5 ) ( 4 ) ( 5 ) 0 20 40 60 80 100 4 8 12 16 S p i n e s u r v i v a l ( % ) Days Control new spines Training new spines Control pre - existing spines Training pre - existing spines ~ 120 / / 4 months ( no training ) Figure 3 | Motor skill learning stabilizes newly formed spines . a , Timeline of experiments , showing possible outcomes . b , c , Repeated imaging of dendritic branches at 0 , 4 and 120days in a control ( b ) and a trained ( c ) mouse . Scale bar , 2 m m . d , Percentages of surviving new and pre - existing spines , as a function of time , for control and trained animals ( mean 6 s . d . , * P , 0 . 05 and * * * P , 0 . 001 ) . Numbers of animals examined at each time point are indicated below new spine data points . NATURE | Vol 462 | 17 December 2009 LETTERS 917 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved ©2009 that the new spines formed during learning are probably active . Furthermore , the persistence of new spines over months provides a long - lasting structural basis for the enhanced synaptic strength that is retained even when the task performance is discontinued . Many previous studies have used fixed tissue preparation to investigate changes in synapse number and dendritic complexity after motor skill learning 24 – 28 . Our in vivo imaging of superficial dendrites from layer V pyramidal neurons revealed that postsynaptic dendritic spine addition was rapid , but eventually counteracted by the loss of pre - existing spines , resulting in a time - dependent spine density change during motor learning . Although the synaptogenesis observed in our study is compatible with earlier results , its temporal relationship with behavioural improvement and the contribution of synapse elimination in circuitry reorganization in other brain layers and regions during motor learning require further investigation . This eventual balancing of synapse number could be a homeostatic mech - anism by which the output layer V neurons integrate converging inputs into superficial cortical layers to govern precise fine motor control . METHODS SUMMARY Young ( 1month old ) andadult ( . 4monthsold ) miceexpressingYFP ina small subsetofcorticalneurons ( YFP - Hline 29 ) wereusedinalltheexperiments . Young mice were trained on the single - seed reaching task for up to 16days and dis - played a stereotypical learning curve ( Fig . 1b ) . Naive adult mice and mice that had been previously trained with the single - seed reaching task in adolescence were trainedwitheitherthe same reachingtaskor a novelcapellinihandling task for up to 8days ( see Methods ) . Apical dendrites of layer V pyramidal neurons , 10 – 100 m m below the cortical surface , were repeatedly imaged in mice under ketamine – xylazine anaesthesia with two - photon laser scanning microscopy . Spine dynamics in the motor cortex and other regions were followed over various intervals . Imaged regions were initially guided by stereotaxic measure - ments . In 14 mice , intracortical microstimulation ( see Methods ) was performed at the end of repetitive imaging to determine the location of acquired images relative to the functional forelimb motor map ( Supplementary Fig . 2 ) . In total , 32 , 079 spines from 209 mice were tracked over 2 – 4 imaging sessions , with 121 mice imaged twice , 79 mice three times and 9 mice imaged four times . Spine formation and elimination rates in each mouse were determined by comparing images of the same dendrites acquired at two time points ; all changes were expressed relative to the total number of spines seen in the initial images . The number of spines analysed and the percentage of spine elimination and forma - tion under various experimental conditions are summarized in Supplementary Table 1 . To quantify spine size , calibrated spine head diameters were measured overtime 30 ( SupplementaryNotes ) . All dataarepresentedas mean 6 s . d . , unless otherwise stated . P - values were calculated using the Student’s t - test . A non - parametric Mann – Whitney U - test was used to confirm all conclusions . Full Methods and any associated references are available in the online version of the paper at www . nature . com / nature . Received 7 April ; accepted 6 August 2009 . Published online 29 November 2009 . 1 . Luft , A . R . & Buitrago , M . M . Stages of motor skill learning . Mol . Neurobiol . 32 , 205 – 216 ( 2005 ) . 2 . Karni , A . et al . Functional MRI evidence for adult motor cortex plasticity during motor skill learning . Nature 377 , 155 – 158 ( 1995 ) . 3 . Rioult - Pedotti , M . S . , Donoghue , J . P . & Dunaevsky , A . Plasticity of the synaptic modification range . J . Neurophysiol . 98 , 3688 – 3695 ( 2007 ) . 4 . Rioult - Pedotti , M . S . , Friedman , D . & Donoghue , J . P . Learning - induced LTP in neocortex . Science 290 , 533 – 536 ( 2000 ) . 5 . Harms , K . J . , Rioult - Pedotti , M . S . , Carter , D . R . & Dunaevsky , A . Transient spine expansion and learning - induced plasticity in layer 1 primary motor cortex . J . Neurosci . 28 , 5686 – 5690 ( 2008 ) . 6 . Monfils , M . H . , Plautz , E . J . & Kleim , J . A . In search of the motor engram : motor map plasticity as a mechanism for encoding motor experience . Neuroscientist 11 , 471 – 483 ( 2005 ) . 7 . Sanes , J . N . & Donoghue , J . P . Plasticity and primary motor cortex . Annu . Rev . Neurosci . 23 , 393 – 415 ( 2000 ) . 8 . Grutzendler , J . , Kasthuri , N . & Gan , W . B . Long - termdendriticspinestabilityinthe adult cortex . Nature 420 , 812 – 816 ( 2002 ) . 9 . Yuste , R . & Bonhoeffer , T . Morphological changes in dendritic spines associated with long - term synaptic plasticity . Annu . Rev . Neurosci . 24 , 1071 – 1089 ( 2001 ) . 10 . Gray , E . G . Electron microscopy of synaptic contacts on dendrite spines of the cerebral cortex . Nature 183 , 1592 – 1593 ( 1959 ) . 11 . Ziv , N . E . & Smith , S . J . Evidence for a role of dendritic filopodia in synaptogenesis and spine formation . Neuron 17 , 91 – 102 ( 1996 ) . 12 . Dailey , M . E . & Smith , S . J . The dynamics of dendritic structure in developing hippocampal slices . J . Neurosci . 16 , 2983 – 2994 ( 1996 ) . 13 . Zuo , Y . , Yang , G . , Kwon , E . & Gan , W . B . Long - term sensory deprivation prevents dendriticspinelossinprimarysomatosensorycortex . Nature 436 , 261 – 265 ( 2005 ) . 14 . Trachtenberg , J . T . et al . Long - term in vivo imaging of experience - dependent synaptic plasticity in adult cortex . Nature 420 , 788 – 794 ( 2002 ) . 15 . Holtmaat , A . , Wilbrecht , L . , Knott , G . W . , Welker , E . & Svoboda , K . Experience - dependent and cell - type - specific spine growth in the neocortex . Nature 441 , 979 – 983 ( 2006 ) . 16 . Hofer , S . B . , Mrsic - Flogel , T . D . , Bonhoeffer , T . & Hubener , M . Experienceleaves a lasting structural trace in cortical circuits . Nature 457 , 313 – 317 ( 2009 ) . 17 . Keck , T . et al . Massive restructuring of neuronal circuits during functional reorganization of adult visual cortex . Nature Neurosci . 11 , 1162 – 1167 ( 2008 ) . 18 . Lendvai , B . , Stern , E . A . , Chen , B . & Svoboda , K . Experience - dependentplasticityof dendritic spines in the developing rat barrel cortex in vivo . Nature 404 , 876 – 881 ( 2000 ) . 19 . Engert , F . & Bonhoeffer , T . Dendritic spine changes associated with hippocampal long - term synaptic plasticity . Nature 399 , 66 – 70 ( 1999 ) . 20 . Toni , N . , Buchs , P . A . , Nikonenko , I . , Bron , C . R . & Muller , D . LTP promotes formation of multiple spine synapses between a single axon terminal and a dendrite . Nature 402 , 421 – 425 ( 1999 ) . 21 . Kleim , J . A . etal . Corticalsynaptogenesisandmotormapreorganizationoccurduring late , but not early , phase of motor skill learning . J . Neurosci . 24 , 628 – 633 ( 2004 ) . 0 5 10 15 Formation Elimination S p i n e s ( % ) Control Adult naive training with reaching task Adult naive training with capellini task Retraining with reaching task Retraining with capellini task / / 4m Control Adult naive training with reaching task Retraining with reaching task Retraining with capellini task a b c d f * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * Adult naive training with capellini task e d0 d0 d0 d0 d0 d4 d4 d4 d4 d4 g 0 10 20 30 40 50 0 2 4 6 8 S u cce ss r a t e ( % ) Days 0 2 4 Retraining with reaching task Adult naive training with reaching task Figure 4 | Novel motor skill training promotes spine formation and elimination in adult mice . a , Pre - trained mice start with high success rates during adult retraining ( mean 6 s . e . m . , 10 naive trained and 14 retrained adults ) . b – f , Repetitiveimagingofdendriticbranchesover4daysinacontrol adult ( b ) , naive adults training with the reaching task ( c ) and capellini handling task ( d ) , and pre - trained adults retraining with the same reaching taskandthenewcapellinihandlingtask ( f ) . Scalebar , 2 m m . g , Percentagesof spines formed and eliminated over 4days in adult mice under different conditions ( mean 6 s . d . , * * * P , 0 . 001 ) . LETTERS NATURE | Vol 462 | 17 December 2009 918 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved ©2009 22 . Adkins , D . L . , Boychuk , J . , Remple , M . S . & Kleim , J . A . Motor training induces experience - specific patterns of plasticity across motor cortex and spinal cord . J . Appl . Physiol . 101 , 1776 – 1782 ( 2006 ) . 23 . Zito , K . , Scheuss , V . , Knott , G . , Hill , T . & Svoboda , K . Rapid functional maturation of nascent dendritic spines . Neuron 61 , 247 – 258 ( 2009 ) . 24 . Kleim , J . A . , Vij , K . , Ballard , D . H . & Greenough , W . T . Learning - dependentsynaptic modifications in the cerebellar cortex of the adult rat persist for at least four weeks . J . Neurosci . 17 , 717 – 721 ( 1997 ) . 25 . Greenough , W . T . , Larson , J . R . & Withers , G . S . Effects of unilateral and bilateral training in a reaching task on dendritic branching of neurons in the rat motor - sensory forelimb cortex . Behav . Neural Biol . 44 , 301 – 314 ( 1985 ) . 26 . Withers , G . S . & Greenough , W . T . Reach training selectively alters dendritic branching in subpopulations of layer II – III pyramids in rat motor - somatosensory forelimb cortex . Neuropsychologia 27 , 61 – 69 ( 1989 ) . 27 . Kleim , J . A . et al . Motor learning - dependent synaptogenesis is localized to functionally reorganized motor cortex . Neurobiol . Learn . Mem . 77 , 63 – 77 ( 2002 ) . 28 . Kolb , B . , Cioe , J . & Comeau , W . Contrasting effects of motor and visual spatial learningtasksondendriticarborizationandspinedensityinrats . Neurobiol . Learn . Mem . 90 , 295 – 300 ( 2008 ) . 29 . Feng , G . et al . Imaging neuronal subsets in transgenic mice expressing multiple spectral variants of GFP . Neuron 28 , 41 – 51 ( 2000 ) . 30 . Zuo , Y . , Lin , A . , Chang , P . & Gan , W . B . Development of long - term dendritic spine stability in diverse regions of cerebral cortex . Neuron 46 , 181 – 189 ( 2005 ) . Supplementary Information is linked to the online version of the paper at www . nature . com / nature . Acknowledgements We thank D . States , W . Thompson , L . Hinck , D . Feldheim , J . Ding , X . Li , A . Lin and C . Cirelli for critical comments on this manuscript ; A . Sitko for her pilot studies of skilled reaching in mice , and D . Adkins , J . Kleim and N . Thomasfortheirassistancewithintracorticalmicrostimulationprocedures . This work was supported by grants from the Ellison Medical Foundation , the DANA Foundation , and the National Institute on Aging to Y . Z . Author Contributions T . X . and X . Y . contributed equally to this work . Both of them performed in vivo imaging , analysed the data , made figures and participated in the discussion . A . J . P . , W . F . T . and J . A . Z . trained all the mice used in the experiments . K . T . and T . J . developed behavioural methods , performed the intracortical microstimulation experiments , and provided comments for the manuscript . Y . Z . initiated the project , did data analysis and wrote the manuscript . Author Information Reprints and permissions information is available at www . nature . com / reprints . Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to Y . Z . ( zuo @ biology . ucsc . edu ) . NATURE | Vol 462 | 17 December 2009 LETTERS 919 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved ©2009 METHODS Single - seed reaching task . Mice were food - restricted to maintain 90 % of free feeding weight before the start of training . The training chamber was constructed as a clear Plexiglas box 20cm tall , 15cm deep and 8 . 5cm wide into which each individualmouse wasplaced . Threeverticalslits 0 . 5cmwide and13cmhigh were located on the front wall of the box : in the centre , on the leftside , and on the right side ( SupplementaryFig . 5 ) . A1 . 25 - cm - tallexteriorshelfwas affixedtothe wall in front of the slits to hold millet seeds for food reward . The training included two phases : ‘shaping’and‘training’ . Theshapingphase ( 2 – 5daysinduration ) wasused to familiarize mice with the training chamber and task requirements and also to determinetheirpreferredlimbs . Duringtheshapingphasemilletseedswereplaced in front of the centre slit and mice used both paws to reach for them . Shaping was considered finished when 20reach attemptswere achieved within 20min , andthe mouseshowed . 70 % limbpreference . Training startedthe dayafter shaping , and eachtrainingdayconsistedofonesessionof30trialswithpreferredlimbor20min ( whicheveroccurredfirst ) . Seedswerepresentedindividuallyinfrontofthesliton the side of preferred limb . Occasionally a mouse used the non - preferred limb ; however , because of the difficulties presented by reaching angle , such reaches usually were unsuccessful . Mice displayed three reach attempt types : fail , drop and success ( Supplementary Movie 1 ) . A ‘fail’ was scored as a reach in which the mousefailedtotouchtheseedorknockeditaway . A‘drop’wasareachinwhichthe mouseretrievedthe seed , butdroppeditbeforeputtingintoitsmouth . A‘success’ was a reach in which the mouse successfully retrieved the seed and put it into its mouth . Success rates were calculated as the percentage of successful reaches over total reachattempts . About halfofthe micein our experiments were right handed ( 55 right handed out of a total of 109 mice , 50 . 6 % ) . All data collected from both left - and right - handed mice were pooled for analysis in this study . No significant difference was found in the reaching performance of left - and right - handed mice . Allourcontrolmicewerelittermatesthatunderwentthesamefoodrestriction . All mice were handled ( that is , removed from their cages and placed temporarily in the training chamber into which some seeds were dropped ) by the same experimenters . To ensure that the increase seen in spine dynamics was learning specific , three different controls were used in our study . The first control group wasgeneral controlscomprisingmice withneither trainingnor shaping , butwith food restriction , food reward and handling . The second was shaping controls in which mice received similar shaping as trained mice . During training , they were placed into the training chamber for 20min daily , with , 15seeds periodically dropped into the training chamber . This control group was used to determine whether the shaping period and / or experience of the training environment had any effect on spine dynamics . The third control group was activity controls in whichmiceweregivensimilarshapingastrainedmice . Duringtraining , micewere placedintothetrainingchamberandtrainedtoreachforaseedplacedoutsidetheslitfor20mindaily . However , theseedwasplacedoutofreach , sothattheycould neverobtainitand , therefore , didnotlearnskilfulreachingmovements ( asshown by testing their performance occasionally ) . Thus , both trained mice and activity control mice experienced similar amounts of forelimb activity , but only trained mice developed the motor skill . The activity control was used to determine whether enhanced spine dynamics were caused by increased motor activity or werespecifictomotorskilllearning . Ourresultsindicatethatthereisnodifference in the spine dynamics between the activity controls and general controls . Capellini handling task . This task was similar to the vermicelli handling tasks previously described for rats 31 . Mice were food - restricted to maintain 90 % of free feeding weight before training began . A daily training session consisted of 10 trials with uncooked capellini pasta pieces ( 2 . 5cm ) , given one piece per trial . Mice learned to use coordinated forepaw movements to eat the pasta . The average con - sumption time for one piece of capellini pasta decreased from 3 . 44 6 0 . 18min on day1to1 . 98 6 0 . 29minonday4 ( mean 6 s . e . m . , P , 0 . 005 , 7mice ) . Therewasno significantbehaviouraldifferenceinthecapellinihandlingtaskbetweennaiveadultsandadultspre - trained in the reaching task in adolescence . In vivo imaging of superficial dendrites . The procedure for transcranial two - photon imaging has been described previously 8 . Mice aged 1 – 6months were anaesthetized with an intraperitoneal injection ( 5 . 0ml per kg body weight ) of 17mgml 2 1 ketamine and 1 . 7mg ml 2 1 xylazine in 0 . 9 % NaCl . The skull was exposed with a midline scalp incision and imaged regions were located based on stereotactic coordinates . A small region of skull ( , 300 m m in diameter ) was manually thinned down to , 20 m m in thickness using both a high - speed drill and a microknife . To reduce respiration - induced movements , the skull was glued to a 400 - m m - thick stainless steel plate with a central opening for skull access . The plate was screwed to two lateral bars located on either side of the head and fixed to a metalbase . The brain of the mouse was then imaged through the thinned skull using a Prairie Ultima IV multi - photon microscope with a Ti - sapphire laser tuned to the excitation wavelength for YFP ( 925nm ) . Stacks of image planes were acquired with a step size of 0 . 70 m m using a water - immersion objective ( 3 60 , NA 1 . 1 infrared Olympus objective ) at a zoom of 3 . 0 . For relocation of the same dendrites at subsequent imaging times , an image stack containing the dendritic structures of interest was taken without zoom with a step size of 2 . 0 m m and the surrounding blood vessels were imaged with a CCD camera . The patterns of blood vessels and neuronal processes in this low - reso - lution image stack were used for relocating the same dendrites at each sub - sequent imaging session ( Supplementary Fig . 1 ) . After imaging , the plate was detached from the skull , the scalp sutured , and the animal was returned to its home cage until the next imaging session . Spine and filopodium identification . All analysis of spine dynamics was done manually using ImageJ software , blind with regard to experimental conditions . Briefly , the same dendritic segments ( , 5 – 20 m m in length ) were identified from three - dimensional image stacks selected from all views having high image quality ( signal - to - background - noise ratio . 4 - fold ) . Individual dendritic protrusions were tracked manually along dendrites . Three - dimensional stacks , instead of two - dimensional projections , were used for analysis to ensure that tissue move - ments and rotation between imaging intervals did not influence identification of dendriticprotrusions . The numberandlocation of dendriticprotrusions ( protru - sion length . 1 / 3 dendritic shaft diameter ) were identified in each view . Filopodia wereidentifiedaslongthinstructureswithheaddiameter / neckdiameter , 1 . 2and length / neck diameter . 3 . The remaining protrusions were classified as spines . Analysis of spine and filopodial dynamics . Notations of the formation and elimination of spines and filopodia were based on comparison of the images collectedattwodifferenttimepoints . Spinesorfilopodiawereconsideredthesame between twoviewsiftheywere within 0 . 7 m moftheir expectedpositions , based on their spatial relationship to adjacent landmarks and / or their position relative to immediately adjacent spines . A stable spine is a spine that was present in both images . An eliminated spine is a spine that appeared in the initial image , but not the second image . A newly formed spine is a spine that appeared in the second image , but wasabsent from the initialimage . Percentagesof stable , eliminatedand formed spines were all normalized to the initial image . Percentage changes in the totalspinenumberoveragivenintervalwererelativetothefirstviewandcalculatedaspercentageofformationminuspercentageofeliminationmeasuredoverthatinterval . Data on spine dynamics are presented as mean 6 s . d . . Image processing and presentation . Two - dimensional projections of three - dimensional image stacks containing in - focus dendritic segments of interest were used for all figures . We chose very sparsely labelled regions as examples andmaximumprojectionsweremadefromimagesfrom2 – 4focusplanes . There were normally few crossing structures in the projected images from such a shallow stack , and the presented branches could be clearly isolated . Finally , images were thresholded , Gaussian filtered and contrasted for presentation . Mapping of motor cortex by intracortical microstimulation . This method was adapted from those used in rat experiments 21 . Mice were anaesthetized with an initial cocktail of ketamine ( 150mgkg 2 1 , intraperitoneal ) and xylazine ( 10mgkg 2 1 , intraperitoneal ) and supplemented with additional ketamine and isofluorane ( 0 . 5 – 1 % inoxygen ) asnecessary . Themousewasplacedintoamouse stereotaxic frame ( Stoelting ) , lidocaine ( 2mgkg 2 1 , subcutaneous ) was injected into thescalp , anda midlineincisionwas made . The cisternamagna wasdrained to prevent cortical swelling and the skull and dura overlying the motor cortex were removed . The craniotomy was then filled with warm ( 37 u C ) silicone oil to prevent drying . A picture of the cortical surface was taken and overlaid with a 250 m m square grid in Canvas software . Intracorticalpenetrationsofaglassmicroelectrode ( diameterof20 - 25 m m ) with a platinum wire were made at 250 m m intervals in a systematic order throughout the cortex at a depth of 790 – 800 m m ( corresponding to deep layer V / shallow layer VI ) with a hydraulic micropositioner until the entire extent of the forelimb rep - resentation was resolved . A 40 - ms train of 13 200 - m s monophasic cathodal pulses wasdeliveredat350Hzfromanelectricallyisolated , constantcurrentstimulatorat arateof1Hzstimulationandcurrentwasincreasedtoamaximumof60 m Auntila visible movement was evoked . If a movement was evoked at or below 60 m A , the threshold current was determined by gradually decreasing the stimulation until the movement stopped . The lowest current that evoked a movement was taken as the threshold current . If no movement was seen at 60 m A , the site was considered non - responsive . Incaseswherestimulationevokedmorethanone movement , the site was considered responsive to the movement that was determined to have the lowestthreshold . ToverifythatthestimulationpositionwaslocatedwithinlayerV , we injected DiI in seven mice at the end of the experiments and found that all injectionsleftdepositsextendingthroughmidlayerVtomidlayerVI . Inaddition , penetrating electrode tracts could be observed in Nissl - stained coronal sections in mostmice . Most ( 81 . 3 6 4 . 7 % ) ofthese tractsterminatedinlayerVatameasured depth of 782 6 137 m m , with the remainder terminated in upper layer VI . 31 . Allred , R . P . et al . The vermicelli handling test : a simple quantitative measure of dexterous forepaw function in rats . J . Neurosci . Methods 170 , 229 – 244 ( 2008 ) . doi : 10 . 1038 / nature08389 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved ©2009