Original Article HackathonsandtheMaking of Entrepreneurial Citizenship Lilly Irani 1 Abstract Today the halls of Technology , Entertainment , and Design ( TED ) and Davos reverberate with optimism that hacking , brainstorming , and crowdsourcing can transform citizenship , development , and education alike . This article examines these claims ethnographically and historically with an eye toward the kinds of social orders such practices produce . This article focuses on a hackathon , one emblematic site of social practice where techniques from information technology ( IT ) production become ways of remaking culture . Hackathons sometimes produce technologies , and they always , however , produce subjects . This article argues that the hackathon rehearses an entrepreneurial citizenship celebrated in transnational cultures that orient toward Silicon Valley for models of social change . Such optimistic , high - velocity practice aligns , in India , with middle - class politics that favor quick and forceful action with socially similar collaborators over the contestations of mass democracy or the slow construction of coalition across difference . 1 Department of Communication and Science Studies Program , University of California , San Diego , La Jolla , CA , USA Corresponding Author : Lilly Irani , Department of Communication and Science Studies Program , University of California , San Diego , 9500 Gilman Dr # 0503 , La Jolla , CA 92093 , USA . Email : lirani @ ucsd . edu Science , Technology , & Human Values 1 - 26 ª The Author ( s ) 2015 Reprints and permission : sagepub . com / journalsPermissions . nav DOI : 10 . 1177 / 0162243915578486sthv . sagepub . com Keywords development , futures , entrepreneurialism , citizenship , technology Introduction In the last decade , work practices associated with software production have come to signify collaboration , voluntarism , optimism , and wealth , tested in software practice and ready to enter new domains of public life . Technol - ogy , Entertainment , and Design ( TED ) talk curator and ex - Wired editor Chris Anderson ( 2012 ) wrote : The past ten years have been about discovering new ways to create , invent , and work together on the Web . The next ten years will be about applying those lessons to the real world . Anderson’s prediction—one which he pursues through his own enterprises in innovation evangelism—voices a broader enthusiasm for bringing Sili - con Valley’s practices of hacking , designing , and crowdsourcing to the practice of public life . This celebration of scientific and engineering ethos in everyday life in the United States and Europe lags behind formerly colonized countries like India , where modernizing nationalists have long held up scientists and engineers as model citizens ( S . Roy 2007 ; Abraham 2006 ) . Scientific and technological practices do not only make knowledge and things , people also draw on the legitimacy of technoscience to remake culture . This article focuses on a hackathon , one emblematic site of social prac - tice where techniques from the Web make their way into ‘‘the real world . ’’ Hackathons bring software programmers and designers together for multi - day , voluntary software production sprints . Although hackathons ostensibly produce ‘‘demos’’ ( software prototypes ) , this article argues that hackathons more powerfully produce entrepreneurial subjects . They manufacture urgency and an optimism that bursts of doing and making can change the world . Participants in hackathons imagine themselves as agents of social progress through software , and these middle - class efforts to remake culture draw legitimacy from the global prestige of technology industry work prac - tices . The article uses ethnographic and historical methods to make the case . Hackathons sometimes produce technologies , and they always , however , produce subjects . Science and technology studies ( STS ) has long examined the subjects and social orders reproduced and valorized in practices of 2 Science , Technology , & Human Values scientific and technological production . These forms of technologically productive social life emerge at the intersection of systems of gender , econ - omy , and politics ( Philip , Irani , and Dourish 2012 ; Mukerji 2009 ; Daston and Galison 2007 ; Helmreich 2000 ; Traweek 1988 ; Haraway 1985 ) . These analyses show how features of the social world—from networks ( Latour 1993 ; Collins 1974 ) to staid fashion ( Traweek 1988 ) —bear on the produc - tion of science and technology . A number of scholars have inquired into the forms of personhood , from parents ( Cussins 1996 ) to open - source programmers ( Kelty 2008 ) , brought into being when people enter into relations with one another and the world mediated by technology and scientific knowledge . At hackathons , epistemology and the emergence of technologies— strengths of STS analysis—are both at play . However , this article argues that STS expand its attention to how technological practices themselves become models extending into other parts of public life . This article focuses on one instantiation of this extension , that is , a hackathon . This article argues that the hackathon rehearses an entrepreneurial citizenship cele - brated in transnational cultures that orient toward Silicon Valley for models of social change . A hackathon is not just a place where technology gets made . I will show that its conveners propose it as a pedagogy of entrepre - neurialism to manage the politics and energies of Indian development . In projects of Indian nation - building and transnational development alike , projects to promote entrepreneurialism promised that individual aspirations and productive activity could produce social surplus , national development , and global progress . In this milieu , the hackathon celebrated an ethos of driving toward software demos , curtailing debate , and limiting difference among participants . This ethos is one mode of anticipation , as characterized by Adams , Murphy , and Clarke ( 2009 , 247 ) , ‘‘a way of actively orienting oneself temporally . . . a regime of being in time’’ ( see also Cross 2014 ) . The hackathon celebrates the entrepreneurial actor who experiments in a world characterized by complexity and drives past contestation toward demos that mark experiments in progress . Such optimistic , high - velocity practice aligns , in India , with middle - class politics that favor quick and forceful action with socially similar collaborators over the contestations of mass democracy or the slow construction of coalition across difference . The Promise of Entrepreneurs The hackathon is one of a number of spaces that have become transnation - ally legible emblems of innovation , from the design studio to the fab lab . Irani 3 Innovation promises to generate material and financial abundance , increas - ing the size of the economic pie as an alternative to redistributing it . In debates on how to stimulate innovation , a turn to the promise of entrepre - neurs is rarely far behind—both in Indian nation - building projects and in international development agendas . The social category of entrepreneur is a focus of Indian debates about economic and cultural development . The ascendance of the entrepreneur represents a shift from the early decades of independence , when the Indian nationalist economic project celebrated producer citizens , that is , farmers ( Philip in press ) , factory workers , and small village producers . These national masses would produce goods for an industrializing , import - substituting domestic economy ( S . Roy 2007 ) , while the country’s middle classes were to act as planners , administrators ( Deshpande 2003 ) , and rural reformers ( Blom Hansen 1999 , 52 ) . As Indian policy makers liberalized the economy , entrepreneurship rose to public prominence as an engine of economic growth through events both at home and abroad . At home , the growth of IT companies such as Infosys and Wipro became symbols of new industries that could spring forth when skilled Indians don’t ‘‘wait for the government’’ to plan growth ( Upadhya 2009 , 79 - 83 ) . 1 Abroad , successful Indians in Silicon Valley became nation - alist symbols of masculine , technical , and business achievement ( Chakra - vartty and Sarkar 2013 ; Dasgupta 2008 ; Chakravartty 2001 ) . These achievements signaled fuller participation in a modernity defined through colonial and developmental projects ( Upadhya 2009 ; Dasgupta 2008 ; Red - field 2002 ; Pigg 1996 ; Escobar 1995 ; Adas 1989 ) . While IT success legit - imized entrepreneurialism as a modern project , the capaciousness of entrepreneurialism as a social category accommodates India’s rural and informal economies . In this project , Indians dispossessed of land and liveli - hood become instead ‘‘billions of entrepreneurs’’ ( as one Harvard professor optimistically puts it ; Khanna 2013 ) . If India’s large population once seemed a drain on state resources , policy makers now saw it as a source of generative value—‘‘from sink to source’’ ( Gupta 2006 ) . International development foundations , nongovernmental organizations ( NGOs ) , and agencies have also mobilized around the idea of the entrepre - neur as a driver of grassroots , large - scale social change . Major players in transnational development , including the Gates Foundation , Rockefeller Foundation , and US Agency for International Development , support micro - finance , education programs , and even innovation labs to promote enter - prise formation in Africa and Asia . These projects cast entrepreneurs as collaborative rather than agonistic , technical rather than political , and 4 Science , Technology , & Human Values constructive rather than complaining ( see Drayton 2011 ; Bornstein 2007 ) . The US Department of State has even turned to entrepreneurship as a way of producing a civilian ‘‘development community’’ abroad , inoculating people around the world against the temptations of terrorism by enlisting them in the promise of entrepreneurial growth ( Clinton 2010 , 21 ) . The devolution of development from national governments or major construc - tion projects to cohorts of entrepreneurs accompanies the expansion of finance capital into poorer countries through microlending ( A . Roy 2010 ; Elyachar 2005 ) , as well as a response to critiques of development expertise ( Escobar 1995 ; Ferguson 1994 ) as oppressive and universalizing ( Elyachar 2012 , 117 ) . The emphasis on entrepreneurship particularly accompanies the infusion of high technology industry wealth into the work of development through philanthropies such as the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation and Google . org . In projects of Indian nation - building and transnational development alike , projects to promote entrepreneurialism promised that individual aspirations and productive activity could produce social surplus , national development , and global progress . A Brief History of Hackathons The spread of hackathons over the last decade , out of open - source software production and into corporate and nonprofit worlds is symptomatic of the promise of entrepreneurialism at work . In its most basic form , a hackathon is an intense , multiday event devoted to rapid software production . Hackathon organizers invite programmers , designers , and others with relevant skills to spend one to three days addres - sing an issue by programming and creating prototypes . Organizers offer a space , power , wireless Internet , and often food . Participants bring their computers , their production skills , and their undivided attention . Hacka - thons usually happen at night , on weekends , or during conferences—times away from routine obligations to family , managers , or long - term plans . Par - ticipants form work groups , explore ways to address the focal theme , and push toward a ‘‘demo’’—a piece of software that supports storytelling around future technologies and use ( see also Smith 2009 ) . At the end of a hackathon , those who managed to build demos might show them off , spec - ulate about their futures , promise to continue the work , or just shake hands and say good - bye . Hackathons developed first in open - source cultures as a way for par - ticipants in globally distributed open - source projects to work together , Irani 5 face - to - face for short periods of time . These open - source hackathons were a way for programmers already familiar with one another to take advantage of rare moments of geographic copresence . Face - to - face , programmers nor - mally only connected online could quickly locate and fix bugs in project code by pointing , talking , and guiding with their whole bodies . These hackathons allowed for intense collaboration among programmers with already deep ties to the open - source community ( Coleman 2013 , 209 ) . The name hackathon has only stabilized in recent years ; early instances of such events included varied names such as Hack - a - Ton , Codeathon , and Hacking Days . The label hackathon has grown in use as the appeal of these short - term production sprints has spread . In recent years , companies , NGOs , universities , and even government agencies have taken up hackathons as a means to recruit volunteer labor , generate interest in social or technological platforms , and use participants to explore possible futures for a host organization . In 2013 , for example , nonprofits and government bodies across the United States participated in a National Civic Day of Hacking , an intense Saturday of coordinated digital volunteerism . While early open - source hackathons often focused on improving , repairing , and maintaining shared infrastructures , the hacka - thons have also grown to cultivate speculation about technological futures . The company Facebook regularly hosts hackathons to explore future proj - ects and also to inculcate in employees the ability to ‘‘move fast and break things’’ ( Fattal 2012 , 940 ) . 2 Institutions as large as the United Nations or as small as a co - work space might put on hackathons to brainstorm the orga - nizations’ problem , energizing volunteers to generate large numbers of approaches to the issue . Such hackathons might generate ideas for social ventures , tools for mapping water in crisis regions , or prototypes of future startup offerings . These hackathons are more than just a way of exploring possible futures ; they can also become rehearsals for future employment , partnerships , or investments . The events often end with participants showing off their work to venture capitalists , philanthropists , or recruiters— those with the power to invest money , time , and connections into the software futures on display . Much of what people build in speculative hackathons never gets built at all . Hacking Citizenship in Delhi I encountered the hackathon that is the focus of this article and the broader promise of entrepreneurialism during fourteen months of ethnographic fieldwork in design studios in Delhi , India . Fieldwork consisted of five 6 Science , Technology , & Human Values phases , namely , a two - month pilot study of a design studio in Delhi , fol - lowed by nine months of intensive fieldwork spanning 2010 – 2011 , fol - lowed by one - month visits in 2012 , 2013 , and 2014 . For nine months , I observed the design studio almost daily and participated in its work , much of which hinged upon enacting and promoting entrepreneurial work prac - tices that combined product design , management , and media production expertise . Over the course of fieldwork , I generated detailed field notes con - taining thick description of daily activities , as well as video and audio recordings of collaborative design sessions , including those of the hacka - thon that I focus on in this article . This hackathon was organized by a senior member of a Delhi design stu - dio . I participated in the hackathon and also spoke with each participant in the hackathon outside the convener’s presence to understand participants’ varied perspectives . I analyzed the hackathon by drawing on these conver - sations , on the contexts of the studio’s other activities , and on histories of Indian development and nation - building participants drew on in organizing social practices of production . The hackathon exemplified and celebrated the forms of entrepreneurial technology work upon which a range of profes - sional and policy actors hinged their hopes for Indian development . Evangelizing Entrepreneurialism The hackathon that is the focus of this article took place at a Delhi festival celebrating design , entrepreneurship , and media activism as practices of national development and citizenship . The festival , which I will call Open - Lab here , celebrated ‘‘action’’ across various professional domains—busi - ness , sociology , development studies , engineering , and even literature , for example . Like the well - known TED conference , the festival showcased inspirational stories of small group achievement . Speakers took the stage to talk about projects across a range of social causes , including education reform , domestic violence prevention , sanitation , and even feminist litera - ture . Organizers encouraged speakers to talk about the messiness of their work processes and project failures , along with successes . As a graphic designer organizing the lineup explained , ‘‘We want to show that all this design thinking is not just idealistic ; it’s something you can actually do . ’’ Organizers sought to transform attendees from spectators of action to practitioners of action . To this end , the festival included not only TED - style presentations , but group workshops ranging from hours to days during and in the run - up to the festival . Participants in these pre - festival workshops would spend up to a week together producing prototypes , films , and demos Irani 7 that they would display in a busy , glass - walled gallery next to the festival’s main stage . Festival goers moving between the entrance and the stage would walk past and through the artifacts ; organizers hoped that these projects would symbolize seeds of future change from the cohorts of entrepreneurial professionals participating in the festival . The hackathon themed around ‘‘open governance’’—the focus of this article—was one such workshop , designed to turn participants on to innovation as a civic practice . 3 Yoking Entrepreneurialism to Nation - building OpenLab festival organizers posed participants as agents of cultural trans - formation . Banners hung around the festival site labeled the events trans - piring as ‘‘activism , ’’ ‘‘heritage , ’’ and ‘‘reform . ’’ These key words linked entrepreneurial technology production practices at the festival with more familiar language of post - Independence nation - building . Planners linked nationalism with design , management , and technology practices in day - to - day life at the studio as well . For example , the hackathon convener pre - pared a slide deck to drum up support for various social and policy design initiatives . The deck moved from managerial box - and - arrow diagrams on one page to an iconic sculpture of Gandhi leading Indian masses on the next . These symbolic practices placed the hackathon , and the festival more broadly , only partly in a genealogy of software production . Organizers also placed these practices within nationalist histories that located the individual as the seed of mass transformation . The hackathon was one opportunity for participants to experiment in such transformative practices . Organizers tethered the disparate design , music , and media projects together under the banner of ‘‘alternate paths to creative thinking and action’’ to transform India and the world . ‘‘Alternate’’ was an adjective rarely explained or defined in everyday talk at the studio . The sensibility expressed with that word only became available to me , as an ethnographer in passing comments and moments of breakdown . The professionals with whom I worked used ‘‘alternate’’ to mark a difference from state - and private - sector development practices that they critiqued . They saw design and social entrepreneurship as alternatives to centralized state planning schemes that privileged the technical and administrative without accounting for consumer desires or market forces , to political leadership that seemed populist rather than efficient , and to a culture of the ‘‘argumentative Indian’’ ( see Sen 2006 ) that privileged ‘‘cerebral’’ analysis and ‘‘talk , talk , talk’’ over proposition and action . Their critique was not limited to the public sec - tor . They also saw design and social entrepreneurship as an alternative to 8 Science , Technology , & Human Values export - oriented , for - profit ventures that commodified Indian lives and labor with no thought for Indians’ aspirations and identities ( See also Nadeem 2011 ; Mankekar 2011 ; Aneesh 2006 ) . Their frustrations with politics and development expressed a particularly middle - class outlook toward Indian politics and what ailed it , but also overlapped with transnational diagnoses that prescribed entrepreneurialism as a cure for ailments of globalized capitalism . The alternatives showcased at OpenLab consisted of private sector , civil society , and public – private partnership projects that demonstrated a ‘‘bias to action’’—a member category used by professionals during my fieldwork to mark the tendency to make rather than debate and to experiment rather than plan . The phrase ‘‘bias to / for / toward action’’ was routinely used to describe the figure of an entrepreneurial doer who cut through bureaucratic red tape and lengthy deliberations in pursuit of efficient , inspired progress . Progress , in this professional discourse , often amounted to visible out - comes—services , infrastructures , businesses , and public order—rather than procedural justice or distributions of rights ( Truelove and Mawdsley 2011 ; Lukose 2009 ; Baviskar , Sinha , and Philip 2006 ) . The bias to action aligned with the celebration of ‘‘speed’’ and ‘‘vision’’ Kaushik Sunder Rajan ( 2006 , 87 - 88 ) identified in Indian state efforts to court biotechnology firms to Andhra Pradesh . ‘‘Vision , ’’ Sunder Rajan observes , ‘‘is the distant promis - sory horizon to set for oneself , whereas speed is the means to narrow that distance as energetically as possible’’ ( 2006 , 88 ) . The hackathon was one site where participants could fix on a vision and energetically pursue it . The Practices of the Delhi Hackathon On the morning of the hackathon , I arrived at the design studio to ready to spend five days on a project . I had come not for any passion for entrepre - neurialism , but for an interest in technologies that mediate politics . The convener came in , threw his bags on the table , and asked the studio staff to bring us tea as we took our seats in wicker chairs around the table . Aspirations for a Hackathon Vipin , the convener , sat down and asked each of us to introduce ourselves by explaining what we hoped to do at the hackathon . Our stated motivations were varied , but we shared a common desire to ‘‘make a difference . ’’ Each of us , in different ways , sought to intervene in the operations of the world through ‘‘action’’ and ‘‘making . ’’ We differed in how we understood the significance of our technical practices . Irani 9 Vipin was a senior partner at the design studio that organized OpenLab . Like several of his colleagues , Vipin had escaped from tech startups and management consulting to pursue design and development . The hackathon was one of Vipin’s many ideas for social enterprises ; unlike his larger proj - ect ideas , the hackathon was only a few days’ commitment . Vipin recruited other hackathon applicants through an English language call on the festival website , through nonprofit sector mailing lists , and through European ‘‘knowledge economy’’ distribution lists . Not surpris - ingly , all thirty applicants to the event were professionals or university students , fluent in English , and all except for one were involved in design or software work . Of those , Vipin selected us seven . Dev , a young web developer from Bangalore , explained that he wanted to see if he could improve the functioning of the Indian state . He explained that with ‘‘all the complaining’’ he heard about how the government ‘‘doesn’t work , ’’ he saw this as ‘‘a chance to see if we can make a differ - ence . ’’ Nikhil , an ex - startup founder turned software consultant , wanted to introduce government officials to the virtues of technology design more generally : ‘‘This could be just jamming the door . Getting the technology in . Ease their lives a bit with technology . So then in the future , even if it is not [ this demo ] , they’ll be more receptive [ to other technology initiatives ] . ’’ Dev and Nikhil both echoed broader middle - class Indian optimism about the potential of using new technologies , but they differed in how they char - acterized that potential . For Prem , a legal anthropologist , the world of software production prom - ised a more immediate and direct way to make social change than was avail - able to him in his own career : ‘‘anthropologists sit and critique things but they never get around to doing anything . ’’ All the speech act theory Prem used in his own research could not compete with the seeming tangibility of software production . Benoy , a design graduate student from Mumbai , had also gravitated toward design’s promise of tangible intervention , but he had found that design school and paying clients rarely delivered on that promise . ‘‘I want to see if design can actually save the world instead of just making posters for clients about it , ’’ he explained . 4 I was there because I wanted to see what my training in software design could offer when not commissioned by a tech company or a multinational philanthropy , the cases I usually studied and the work I had done prior to getting a PhD . I was inspired by Suchman’s ‘‘human - machine reconfigura - tions’’ ( 2007 ) as well as ‘‘values’’ approaches to design ( Knobel and Bow - ker 2011 ; Borning and Muller 2012 ) . I entered the hackathon thinking it 10 Science , Technology , & Human Values would be a site to translate critiques and commitments into persistent things . Our hopes , in varied ways , were to change the world from the design stu - dio , though each of us subtly imagined different ways technology might travel and affect the world . In the social script of the hackathon , demos were the vehicle by which the focused , short - term work of a few could launch out of the studio and into the world , whether by charming government officials , attracting grants , or traveling into activists’ hands . These varied futures mobilized our participation , but our task would be to produce the conduit for that future by converging on a vision for a demo . Code as Change : Codework over Footwork We began our work by familiarizing ourselves with the workings of the Indian state ; the hackathon’s theme , after all , was ‘‘open governance . ’’ A think - tank friend of Vipin’s explained protocols of bill drafting in the Indian parliament . He quickly zoomed in on a committee process where the parlia - ment already seeks feedback as a place where our demo could expand pub - lic access to the process . As we discussed our experiences with policy news and talked about design possibilities , Vipin pushed a stack of books on ‘‘Open Government , ’’ exclusively on American case studies , toward me and instructed me to skim for inspiration . These attempts to familiarize ourselves with the workings of government were interwoven with eruptions of time anxiety . Someone , most often one of the software engineers , would ask us to sketch a production schedule . How long could we talk about the law ? Could we set a limit on the time of debate to assure ourselves that we could produce ‘‘the demo ? ’’ As we negotiated milestone deadlines , Vipin pushed sticky notes around the board representing a provisional agreement for milestones such as ‘‘features decided , ’’ ‘‘first working demo , ’’ and ‘‘refinement of features . ’’ The Sun passed over the sky , casting shifting shadows on the studio whiteboard . Breaks for snacks and dinner were a constant reminder that time was passing . It quickly became clear that we held very different views of how political processes should work . Vipin , the convener , saw the law as a sort of code determining the actions of the governed , but riddled with logical loopholes . What if we made a website where citizens could read and point out weak - nesses in bill drafts ? Redressing loopholes would , by Vipin’s argument , refine incentive and punitive structures and hence better manage India’s population in turn . This deterministic understanding of the law grounded Irani 11 Vipin’s belief that improving the text of Indian laws would improve India itself . Prem , however , was more skeptical about such an approach , and he shared stories that turned Vipin’s account of the law on its head , and with it Vipin’s imaginary of agency . Prem’s fieldwork tracked land rights law from the ministries of Delhi to the village outposts of Maharashtra . He described the laws as ambiguous and conflicting resources for local power contests between mining companies , police officers , landless peasants , and land rights activists . ‘‘At the local level , ’’ Prem concluded , ‘‘these guys can do pretty much whatever they want [ with the law ] . ’’ Prem’s account of the law in practice dispelled any fantasy that improving the text of the law alone would improve Indians’ lives . Working with and through these stories , we pursued the demo in inter - actions peppered with ‘‘what if we’’ and ‘‘what could we do . ’’ Prem empha - sized that one of the things we could do was to help people keep their elected politicians accountable to them rather than other kinds of interests . Unlike the electorally tiny Indian ‘‘middle class , ’’ Prem pointed out that poorer Indians were usually highly involved with local politicians . The poor needed the politicians to get basic needs ; politicians , in turn , needed to turn out votes and many , many Indian voters were poor . There was one big barrier , Prem pointed out , to taking a web - based approach to opening up politics . Only about 10 percent of Indians , accord - ing to one 2012 report , access the Internet ( Sengupta 2012 ) , though Silicon Valley companies have been working to extend their reach globally through industry - wide initiatives such as Internet . org ( Rosenberg 2013 ; see also Fat - tal 2012 ) . Without the Web to connect publics , how could we build software that connected Indians with these legal processes ? We discussed possibili - ties . What if we could get the drafts into existing NGO and activist networks who could organize people around the process ? Could we work with them as a way of getting ‘‘noise’’ and voice into the bill drafting process ? We began to collectively describe a website to alert activists and NGOs to drafted bills . The site could then collect photographic and digitized paper evidence of constituency demands in response . The responses would then be challenged to the elected official . In other words , we imagined software to elicit and represent deliberations and demands as electoral pressure . Yet Prem warned us , it would require ‘‘some REAL footwork’’ to get ‘‘on the street’’ and work with existing organizations already thinking in terms of political mobilization . For that week , however , we weren’t on the street . We were in the studio . The time , tools , and skills in the room were geared toward ‘‘code work , ’’ not 12 Science , Technology , & Human Values ‘‘footwork . ’’ Even the kinds of code work we could undertake were limited . Krish , a software engineer , explained to us that in the long term the project could get into rural areas through interactive voice response phone systems , rural kiosks , or short - message - service - based systems . ‘‘In Andhra , there’s a women’s radio station , ’’ he told us , ‘‘The scope of what we want to envision is THAT . What we implement in five days is probably a website . So we’re going to go to a conversation where we’ll chop off everything . Cut . Cut . Cut . Cut . ’’ Felicity Conditions for a Hackathon Krish’s recommendation underscored the kinds of work that did and did not fit in the space of the hackathon in two ways . First , the hackathon’s poten - tial was premised on taking advantage of the proliferation of the Internet industries’ software libraries , cheap servers , and skilled programmers . Soft - ware consultants well versed in platforms such as Drupal , Wordpress , and Ruby on Rails could whip up web - based applications quickly . An experi - enced programmer could get a Ruby on Rails website with a working user - authentication system , forms to enter data , and web - based displays of the data in thirty minutes so long as they adopted Rails’ default presen - tations . The growth of new media industries meant that we had at our fingertips masses of already - built web application code modules and soft - ware engineers with the skills to use them . Kiosk and radio prototypers , and tools to support them , were by contrast in far shorter supply . Web infrastructures torqued ( Bowker and Star 1999 ) the visions our hacking could manifest while generating a bandwagon ( see Fujimura 1988 ) of digital entrepreneurialism . Second , the hackathon relied on easy , fast social relations to proceed . ‘‘Moving forward’’ toward the demo only required getting people in the stu - dio on board . Although we could build some software over the next few days , there was no time for ‘‘real footwork’’ : building coalitions , aligning frames ( Snow , Worden , and Benford 1986 ) , and building trust with acti - vists , NGO workers , landless villagers , or frustrated city dwellers . To get to the demo in five days , the people coming together had to be sufficiently similar , sufficiently flexible , and sufficiently few . The participants all spoke English fluently , 5 had obtained at least college undergraduate degrees , and had trained as engineers—with the exception of the anthropologist , Prem . What the hackathon lacked in duration , it demanded in intensity . Although there was no time to build alliances or shared agendas , the hacka - thon demanded the privilege of uninterrupted blocks of time cloistered in Irani 13 the studio . Prem was shocked that the group saw unpaid work morning - to - night as fun . Those of us with engineering training , by contrast , were well practiced in this cloistered rhythm of code work and casual partnership . Trained as a computer scientist , I found it easy to walk the walk , talk the talk , and keep the pace at the hackathon . My undergraduate life was a long string of group projects in which we urgently coaxed machines and code into compliance . These were the very habits and skills celebrated at the hackathon . These commitments to hacking hard foreclosed other kinds of wage work or care work . All of us had jobs that more or less allowed us time to participate in the hackathon . Prem had both grantwriting obligations and family obligations weighing on him as he gave each day to the project . The privilege of deferring other responsibilities underwrote the entrepreneurial intensity celebrated at the event . I was forced to reckon with these presumptions of hackathons when , after a particularly straining debate with the convener , Prem grew frustrated and walked out . He had family to care for and grants to write . Prem decided that the convener was a stubborn technocrat who was mistrustful of democ - racy . I implored Prem to stay , optimistic that the broader group leaned toward his politics rather than the convener’s ; he told me he did not trust the convener to follow through on our visions once the demo was done . With Prem’s departure , those who remained struggled to make sense of what had happened . Rather than recognizing the political and structural lim - its of the hackathon , reactions around the studio instead focused on the ways his departure ran afoul of the ethos of the hackathon and the festival that hosted it . One festival - goer diagnosed Prem as politically inflexible ; she had trained at India’s prestigious National Institute of Design and explained that political inflexibility was a well - known issue in that college . ‘‘Hard - core’’ and ‘‘ideological’’ people , as she put it , were a known danger to design projects , so much so that her school filtered such students out during admissions interviews . Students with strong commitments were ‘‘mentally and politically self - destructive , ’’ she explained ; further , they sowed discord and threatened the completion of group projects . Counterposed against the imperative to produce design , political contestation became a pathology that endangered the demo . Vipin made sense of Prem’s departure by concluding that his anthropo - logical perspective—once valued for its empirical grounding in the law— now was too far out from the group . Vipin explained that he routinely selected workshop participants to create ‘‘comfort . . . because there isn’t time . When there isn’t time , you don’t want to bring people into the room 14 Science , Technology , & Human Values who are too different from you , who see things differently , or you think might create conflict . ’’ While he sought diversity in perspective to draw information and resources into projects , he had to make sure diversity did not become inconvenient difference . Although the hackathon might have seemed a space of participatory pro - duction , the form of the event constrained both participation and technolo - gical imagination . These constraints were more than an unfortunate practicality ; this commitment to building , fluent collaboration , and political pragmatism underpinned entrepreneurial citizenship . Outcomes : A Broken Demo , a Story , and Some Business Cards What became of the hackathon after Prem’s departure ? Despite Vipin and Prem’s conflict , the rest of the team backed Prem’s vision for a system to help poorer Indians , as collectives , communicate with and hold their elected officials accountable . I worked with the other designer to put together a set of graphical renderings of what such a software interface might look like . The software engineers worked on coding pieces of what they hoped would become a database - driven , interactive software demo . We scheduled mile - stones to test the software before the demo’s launch at the festival . The night before the launch , neither I nor the other designer had seen a working demo . By the morning , the engineers had built a page with some broken links , some sample text , and a database that didn’t seem to do much . Benoy and I quickly jumped into rescue mode , resuscitating our graphical renderings into a slide presentation we could walk through in the festival gallery—an illustration if not quite a demo . Over the next two days , we took shifts in the festival gallery and walked attendees through our software con - cept . We gathered some business cards , basked in the interest of festival attendees , and went off to see design talks . Two years since the festival , the demo sits stored on my laptop . The demo spawned no projects , no grants , and no working software systems . The dispersed participants stay connected through LinkedIn and Facebook and can list themselves as ‘‘Fellows’’ at the festival . The failure to spawn a working system might seem disappointment , but it surprised no one ; by the time of publication , none of the OpenLab fellowship projects spawned last - ing projects . Nikhil e - mailed me more than a year later , asking if I still had the mock - ups . He had some free time , he told me , and wanted to tinker with building a working version of our demo . Although I sent him the mock - ups , he had not built a prototype to date . Irani 15 The hackathon did spawn some durable relationships and reinforced oth - ers . Vipin and Nikhil began working together on a separate global health contract about a year after the event . Benoy went on to teach design ; upon reading the working draft of this hackathon paper , he invited me to give a workshop introducing his Bangalore design students to STS . Optimism in the Face of Probable Failure The hackathon’s lack of concrete results did not deter entrepreneurial citi - zens from continuing to try . Days later , Krish spoke on the festival stage and proposed a traveling bus full of educated Indians who could go from village to village , pursuing a series of small , fast reform projects—like a hackathon on wheels . Beyond the festival , hackathons continued to proliferate , as do social philanthropic , corporate , and state efforts to stimulate entrepreneurial citizenship as a vehicle for economic and social development . How Do We Explain Such Persistence ? During the hackathon , the space of the studio protected the group from uncertainties of working with others so we could stay in the flow of technol - ogy design work at least for a few days . This seclusion allowed us to focus on the craft of working with things we understood rather than people we didn’t . The hackathon was a microworld filled with representations of the world beyond its walls , such as stories about future use and sample govern - ment data . Within the studio , programming tools and networked servers linked us from the studio out into the world . The studio , the ecology of net - worked computing , and simplified representations of the real world enabled us to build , design , and hope . This organization of space and social life allowed us to focus on the authorship of technologies . Further , the hacka - thon consolidated our claims on authoring these technological futures by excluding unfamiliar others who might dilute our visions , make claims on authorship , or slow down work toward the demo . The system adminis - trators , code library authors , future maintainers , or even the users who shape the meanings and purposes remained beyond the studio walls—beyond the theater of authorship . Networked computing infrastructures and black boxed computing labors sustain the hackathon participants’ belief in tech - nological authorship ( see Philip 2005 ) as something that can come out of a design studio in just a few days . 6 Users may matter ( Oudshoorn and Pinch 2003 ) , but the hackathon organized technological production as if they did 16 Science , Technology , & Human Values not matter as much as the initiators . The studio is a space for the production of participants’ agency as technological authors . STS scholars have theorized agency as an effect of material - semiotic processes . Examining the act of programming , Paul Edwards has argued that agency through coding depends on the pleasures of immediate control through the representations programming languages make available ( Edwards 1990 ) . These pleasures only became available after automated code compilation that removing female computer operators from the man – machine loop ( Jain 2006 ; Chun 2005 ) . The space of the hackathon is considerably larger scale than the man – machine relations theorized by Edwards and Suchman , as it includes multiple people in interactions over a number of days . At the hackathon , we inherited the agencies and excitement of coding , but they became a vehicle for collectively imagininghow wemight changethe worldbeyondthe screen . Our relationships with code and representations offered pleasures of dreaming about possible futures , but our hopes that the demo would change the world relied on yet other forms of black boxed automated labors beyond code compilers—those of server administration , code maintenance , computer manufacture , and repair ( Jackson 2013 ; Philip et al . 2012 , 10 - 11 ) . These were the media ecologies that enabled us to imagine our agencies as instigators of futures . These infrastructures of entrepreneurialism sustained our optimism that bygivingshapetopixels and code , we mightprovokesomekindofchange in the world beyond the studio . A cosmology of complexity also sustained hope in entrepreneurial , rapid , and experimental approaches to change . The hackathon , the festival , and design and management theories in its surround described the world as an interconnected system of actors ; this systems perspective enabled entre - preneurial citizens to imagine that small actions could create effects by sending perturbations through extended networks and across scales . One India TEDx , for example , explored the theme ‘‘the butterfly effect , ’’ by which a butterfly can flap its wings in one part of the world and create a storm in another . A well - respected design theory book The Design Way was subtitled Intentional Change in an Unpredictable World ( Nelson and Stol - terman 2012 ) . While this view enabled individuals to imagine that they might provoke large - scale change outside of social movements or formal politics , the view also suggested that people could not predict , control , or confidently model users or nature . Instead , subjects in a complex world must work between order and chaos , trying and learning as complex adap - tive systems ( Merchant 2003 , 201 ; Maurer 1995 , 114 ) . The approach locates the capacity to adapt in individuals , proposing decisive action , exe - cution , iteration , and flat hierarchies over either participation or autocracy Irani 17 in organizations ( Wood 1989 ) . The bias to action described this way of orienting toward the world . Business schools and the expanding new media industries have institu - tionalized this bias to action . A Danish business school called KaosPilots most vividly illustrated this worldview : the school claimed to train students who could pilot the chaos of rapidly changing markets and operating envir - onments . By the time of my fieldwork , these understandings of action and adaptation had gained influence in India through McKinsey consulting pub - lications , Harvard Business Review , and the cache of globally visible design consultants who prescribed the bias to action . In their job ads , the design studio that convened that hackathon even included the bias for action among desirable characteristics of aspiring employees . The design studio followed in the footsteps of digital media giant Google , which also hired along these lines . Google’s human resource site instructed readers that ‘‘Googley’’ hires are those who have a ‘‘collaborative nature’’ and a bias to action . 7 Facebook similarly privileges mistakes and experimentation over analysis , as it enjoins its employees to ‘‘move fast and break things’’ ( Fattal 2012 , 940 ) . The hackathon rehearsed and celebrated this style of pro - duction—move fast and rely on extant labor and infrastructure . Subjects in this complex world saw any action as having multiple possi - ble effects as it perturbed a multiple systems . At the same time , failure to achieve desired effects was no cause to critique one’s own process in wider systems understood as capricious and difficult to predict . Seen through the lens of complexity , entrepreneurial citizens’ mistakes were hardly cause for critique . Rather , they were expected costs of experimenting in pursuit of social progress . The Politics of Speed and Vision The high - velocity , demo - driven collaboration of the hackathon , I have argued , embodied a broader middle - class Indian attraction to fast develop - ment with a visionary’s hand . The politics of entrepreneurial citizenship were politics of speed and vision , legitimized by IT myths and expanding into other domains of public life . The politics of speed and vision were legitimized , first , by commonly circulating understandings of how software and design projects succeed . At two different nonprofit meetings I attended in Delhi , for example , jour - nalists and consultants cited ‘‘the Steve Jobs model’’ of designing policy and infrastructure . To these well - off Delhi - ites , Jobs symbolized a strong hand with an aesthetic vision that reorganized the world to produce beauty , 18 Science , Technology , & Human Values efficiency , and value . In everyday work talk , people invoked ‘‘design by committee’’ to elicit fears of aesthetic disorder and irrational production resulting from democratic processes . Although many of these professionals were familiar , or even enthusiastic , about legacies of participatory design , they debated how participation ought to be cultivated to provide feedback while still allowing designers to speak for what is ultimately good design . In this view , the hackathon’s lack of openness to community or activist involvement was not a drawback ; it instead enabled participants to focus and execute a vision . This social organization of production allowed parti - cipants to understand themselves not only as code workers but as authors and originators of the project . This idealization of speed and vision also followed from an Indian middle - class apathy for slower and messier electoral democracy . At a time when the low - caste groups have mobilized electorally , Indian middle classes advocated for a stronger administrative government modeled after Singapore’s and China’s single - party systems ( Fernandes and Heller 2006 , 497 - 98 ) . This middle - class political argument cast popular mobiliza - tions based on caste , regional linguistic identities , or trade unionism as a barrier to rapid infrastructural and economic development . Software hacka - thons , and the design projects showcased by the OpenLab festival more broadly , allowed Indian participants to imagine filling these gaps through civil society volunteerism . This professional volunteerism lifted the techno - logical imagination out of the domain of popular politics and into the con - fines of the design studio . The hackathon’s proposition was that small groups could move fast and possibly accomplish great things . Often , as in this case , nothing came of that possibility . Such failure did not cast doubt on the process of urgent , colla - borative , and frequent production of the seeds of futures . Rather , the studio was steeped in cosmologies of complexity that rendered success unlikely , but also made any assessments of failure uncertain at best . Conclusion In a 2008 talk , Bruno Latour spoke to a group of design historians in praise of design . He reflected on the role designers play in the production of mate - rial and , especially , technological culture . To design , he argued , was to act as ‘‘a cautious prometheus’’—that figure of Greek myth who stole fire from Olympus for the benefit of humans . Latour’s comparison is not out of line . Design theorists and professors recurrently located design’s originary Irani 19 moment in humans’ ‘‘design’’ of fire itself ( e . g . , Ranjan 2012 ; Nelson and Stolterman 2012 , 11 ) . By Latour’s criteria , the hackathon is a moment of design . Like Latour’s designer , hackathon participants proceeded with humility—a tentativeness about the outcomes of their design . Like Latour’s designer , we attended to the details , the meanings , and the ethical dimensions of the demo we hoped to create . And , like Latour’s designer , we started with the world—stories of users in it and the extant infrastructures ready - to - hand—rather than attempting to begin from scratch . The value of design , to Latour , is that it makes objects into things—into gathering places where politics can play out over ‘‘matters of concern’’ ( Latour 2008 , 3 - 6 ) . ‘‘The more objects are turned into things—that is , the more matters of facts are turned into matters of con - cern—the more they are rendered into objects of design through and through’’ ( 2008 , 2 ) . Such images of design promise norms and forms of craftsmanship , innovation , and concern . These norms , Latour argues , offer a means of social progress for a world where much is in need of redesign , for the sake of people , objects , and the relations among them . I participated in the hackathon much in the spirit of a critique that had run out of steam ( see Latour 2004 ) . I concerned myself to coconstruct knowledge—to make a thing . Although the hackathon did draw people together in a Latourian spirit around a matter of concern , in a very Latourian spirit , this actually existing site of design practice revealed that its politics were in its forms and norms—in its manufactured urgency , in the distance between the studio and the world , and the media ecologies that made it pos - sible to promise to cross that distance without walking it . The hackathon brought people together around a matter of concern , indeed . Festival orga - nizers celebrated that assembly , and those with the privilege to participate , as entrepreneurial citizens who could build the nation and change the world . The care work of footwork , of building shared agendas , or even of caring for kin was kept safely beyond the studio walls so we could drive toward the demo and imagine ourselves as forces for mediated change . Some of the very forms of care that Puig de la Bellacasa ( 2011 ) highlights in her response to Latour are the kinds of work devalued in the hackathon—pre - sumed as costs of entry and presumed as conditions for the demo’s future sustenance . Through the course of the hackathon , it became clear that the event could not accommodate those for whom it claimed to care . There was no time to care by drawing in those who have been silenced , as de la Bel - lacasa suggests ( 2011 ) , and drawing out the time of engagement . There was only time for the entrepreneurial spirit—the spirit by which information economy middle classes could do politics in entrepreneurial time . 20 Science , Technology , & Human Values Author Note This article benefited from close readings by Alessandro Delfanti , Carl DiSalvo , Paul Dourish , Megan Finn , Mary Gray , Melissa Gregg , Seda Gurses , Silvia Lindt - ner , Karl Mendonca , Anil Menon , Chandra Mukerji , Geeta Patel , Kavita Philip , Winifred Poster , Fernando Dominguez Rubio , Christo Sims , Johan Soderberg , and two anonymous reviewers . Declaration of Conflicting Interests The author ( s ) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research , authorship , and / or publication of this article . Funding The author ( s ) disclosed receipt of the following financial support for the research , authorship , and / or publication of this article : Funding from the Fulbright - Nehru Fellowship and NSF grant 1025761 enabled this fieldwork . Notes 1 . Free market advocates neglect to recognize that India’s computing industries were seeded by Indian government research , educational , and business invest - ments well before liberalization ( Philip in press ) . 2 . Hackathons became a global media event with an MTV documentary on Face - book ( MTV 2011 ) . 3 . Several of the organizers specifically used psychedelic metaphors to explain their goals for using media , music , and festivals to transform the consciousness of attendees . 4 . Turner ( 2009 ) argues that Burning Man functions much in this way for Google employees—as a place to learn the skills of creative information technology ( IT ) work and to make up for the ways commoditized IT work falls short of the promise of self - actualizing creative production . 5 . Despite India’s global visibility as an English - language service exporter , English skills were rare . Only 4 percent of Indians of age between eighteen and sixty - five spoke English fluently in 2005 and those fluent speakers are primarily members of the upper castes ( Azam , Chin , and Prakash 2010 ) . The English language of this hackathon—that rare and casted skill in India—is the lingua franca of the inter - national software ‘‘world of practice’’ ( Takhteyev 2012 , 21 - 24 ) . 6 . See ‘‘The Cultural Work of Microwork’’ for another example of how computing infrastructures support entrepreneurial subjectivities ( Irani 2013 ) . 7 . http : / / www . google . com / about / careers / lifeatgoogle / hiringprocess / . Irani 21 References Abraham , I . 2006 . ‘‘The Contradictory Spaces of Postcolonial Techno - science . ’’ Economic and Political Weekly 41 ( 3 ) : 210 - 17 . Adams , V . , M . Murphy , and A . E . Clarke . 2009 . ‘‘Anticipation : Technoscience , Life , Affect , Temporality . ’’ Subjectivity 28 ( 1 ) : 246 - 65 . Adas , M . 1989 . MachinesastheMeasureofMen . Ithaca , NY : CornellUniversityPress . Anderson , C . 2012 . ‘‘The Internet Has Created a New Industrial Revolution . ’’ The Guardian . Accessed October 31 , 2014 . http : / / www . theguardian . com / technol - ogy / 2012 / sep / 18 / chris - anderson - internet - industrial - revolution . Aneesh , A . 2006 . Virtual Migration : The Programming of Globalization . Duke Uni - versity Press . Azam , M . , A . Chin , and N . Prakash . 2010 . ‘‘The Returns to English - language Skills in India . ’’ IZA Discussion Papers No . 4802 , Bonn , Germany . Baviskar , A . , S . Sinha , and K . Philip . 2006 . ‘‘Rethinking Indian Environmentalism : Industrial Pollution in Delhi and Fisheries in Kerala . ’’ In Forging Environment - alism : Justice , Livelihood , and Contested Environments , edited by J . Bauer , 189 - 256 . Armonk , NY : M . E . Sharpe . Blom Hansen , T . 1999 . The Saffron Wave : Democracy and Hindi Nationalism in Modern India . Princeton , NJ : Princeton University Press . Borning , A . , and M . Muller . 2012 . ‘‘Next Steps for Value Sensitive Design . ’’ In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 1125 - 34 . New York : ACM . Bornstein , D . 2007 . How to Change the World : Social Entrepreneurs and the Power of New Ideas . New York : Oxford University Press . Bowker , G . , and S . L . Star . 1999 . Sorting Things Out . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Chakravartty , P . 2001 . ‘‘Flexible Citizens and the Internet : The Global Politics of Local High - tech Development in India . ’’ Emergences : Journal for the Study of Media & Composite Cultures 11 ( 1 ) : 69 - 88 . Chakravartty , P . , and S . Sarkar . 2013 . ‘‘Entrepreneurial Justice : The New Spirit of Capitalism in Emergent India . ’’ Popular Communication 11 ( 1 ) : 58 - 75 . Chun , W . H . K . 2005 . ‘‘On Software , or the Persistence of Visual Knowledge . ’’ Grey Room ( 18 ) : 26 - 51 . Clinton , H . R . 2010 . ‘‘Leading through Civilian Power : Redefining American Diplo - macy and Development . ’’ Foreign Affairs 8 ( 6 ) : 13 - 24 . Coleman , E . G . 2013 . Coding Freedom . Princeton , NJ : Princeton University Press . Collins , H . M . 1974 . ‘‘The TEA Set : Tacit Knowledge and Scientific Networks . ’’ Science Studies 4 ( 2 ) : 165 - 85 . Cross , J . 2014 . Dream Zones : Anticipating Capitalism and Development in India . London , UK : Pluto Press . 22 Science , Technology , & Human Values Cussins , C . 1996 . ‘‘Ontological Choreography : Agency through Objectification in Infertility Clinics . ’’ Social Studies of Science 26 ( 3 ) : 575 - 610 . Dasgupta , S . 2008 . ‘‘Success , Market , Ethics : Information Technology and the Shifting Politics of Governance and Citizenship in the Indian Silicon Plateau . ’’ Cultural Dynamics 20 ( 3 ) : 213 - 44 . Daston , L . , and P . Galison . 2007 . Objectivity . Brooklyn , NY : Zone Books . de la Bellacasa , M . P . 2011 . ‘‘Matters of Care in Technoscience : Assembling Neglected Things . ’’ Social Studies of Science 41 ( 1 ) : 85 - 106 . Deshpande , S . 2003 . Contemporary India : A Sociological View . Delhi , India : Viking . Drayton , B . 2011 . ‘‘Collaborative Entrepreneurship : How Social Entrepreneurs Can Tip the World by Working in Global Teams . ’’ Innovations 6 ( 2 ) : 35 - 38 . Edwards , P . N . 1990 . ‘‘The Army and the Microworld : Computers and the Politics of Gender Identity . ’’ Signs 16 ( 1 ) : 102 - 27 . Elyachar , J . 2005 . Markets of Dispossession : NGOs , Economic Development , and the State in Cairo . Durham , NC : Duke University Press . Elyachar , J . 2012 . ‘‘Next Practices : Knowledge , Infrastructure , and Public Goods at the Bottom of the Pyramid . ’’ Public Culture 24 ( 1 66 ) : 109 - 29 . Escobar , A . 1995 . Encountering Development : The Making and Unmaking of the Third World . Princeton , NJ : Princeton University Press . Fattal , A . 2012 . ‘‘Facebook : Corporate Hackers , a Billion Users , and the Geo - politics of the ‘‘Social Graph . ’’’’ Anthropological Quarterly 85 ( 3 ) : 927 - 56 . Ferguson , J . 1994 . The Anti - politics Machine : ‘‘Development , ’’ Depoliticization , and Bureaucratic Power in Lesotho . Minneapolis : University of Minnesota Press . Fernandes , L . , and P . Heller . 2006 . ‘‘Hegemonic Aspirations : New Middle Class Politics and India’s Democracy in Comparative Perspective . ’’ Critical Asian Studies 38 ( 4 ) : 495 - 522 . Fujimura , J . H . 1988 . ‘‘The Molecular Biological Bandwagon in Cancer Research : Where Social Worlds Meet . ’’ Social Problems 35 ( 3 ) : 261 - 83 . Gupta , A . K . 2006 . ‘‘From Sink to Source : The Honey Bee Network Documents Indigenous Knowledge and Innovations in India . ’’ Innovations 1 ( 3 ) : 49 - 66 . Haraway , D . 1985 . ‘‘A Manifesto for Cyborgs : Science , Technology , and Socialist - feminism in the 1980s . ’’ Socialist Review 15 ( 2 ) : 65 - 108 . Helmreich , S . 2000 . Silicon Second Nature : Culturing Artificial Life in a Digital World . Berkeley : University of California Press . Irani , L . 2013 . ‘‘The Cultural Work of Microwork . ’’ New Media & Society . Jackson , S . J . 2013 . Rethinking Repair . Media Meets Technology . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Jain , S . L . 2006 . Injury : The Politics of Product Design and Safety Law in the United States . Princeton , NJ : Princeton University Press . Irani 23 Kelty , C . 2008 . Two Bits : The Cultural Significance of Free Software . Durham , NC : Duke University Press . Khanna , T . 2013 . Billions of Entrepreneurs : How China and India Are Reshaping Their Futures and Yours . Cambridge , MA : Harvard Business Press . Knobel , C . , and G . C . Bowker . 2011 . ‘‘Values in Design . ’’ Communications of the ACM 54 ( 7 ) : 26 - 28 . Latour , B . 1993 . ‘‘Ethnography of a High - tech Case . ’’ In Technological Choices : Transformation in Material Cultures since the Neolithic , edited by P . Lemonnier , 372 - 98 . London , UK : Routledge . Latour , B . 2004 . ‘‘Why Has Critique Run out of Steam ? From Matters of Fact to Matters of Concern . ’’ Critical Inquiry 30 ( 2 ) : 225 - 48 . Latour , B . 2008 . A Cautious Prometheus ? A Few Steps toward a Philosophy of Design ( with Special Attention to Peter Sloterdijk ) . Paper presented at Networks of Design Meeting of Design History Society Falmouth , Cornwall , September 3 , 2008 . Accessed November 30 , 2010 . http : / / www . bruno - latour . fr / articles / article / 112 - DESIGN - CORNWALL . pdf . Lukose , R . 2009 . Liberalization’s Children : Gender , Youth , and Consumer Citizen - ship in Globalizing India . Durham , NC : Duke University Press . Mankekar , P . 2011 . ‘‘Becoming Entrepreneurial Subjects : Neoliberalism and the Media . ’’ In The State in India After Liberalization : Interdisciplinary Perspec - tives , edited by A . Gupta & K . Sivaramakrishnan , 213 - 233 . London : Routledge . Maurer , B . 1995 . ‘‘Complex Subjects : Offshore Finance , Complexity Theory , and the Dispersion of the Modern . ’’ Socialist Review 25 ( 3 - 4 ) : 113 - 45 . Merchant , C . 2003 . Reinventing Eden : The Fate of Nature in Western Culture . New York : Routledge . MTV . 2011 . ‘‘The Diary of Facebook . ’’ Accessed February 22 , 2014 . http : / / www . mtv . com / videos / news / 637648 / meet - the - faces - behind - facebook . jhtml # id ¼ 1661009 . Mukerji , C . 2009 . Impossible Engineering : Technology and Territoriality on the Canal du Midi . Princeton , NJ : Princeton University Press . Nadeem , S . 2013 . Dead Ringers : How Outsourcing is Changing the Way Indians Understand Themselves . Princeton : Princeton University Press . Nelson , H . , and E . Stolterman . 2012 . The Design Way—Intentional Change in an Unpredictable World . 2nd ed . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Oudshoorn , N . , and T . Pinch . 2003 . How Users Matter : The Co - construction of Users and Technology . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Philip , K . 2005 . ‘‘What Is a Technological Author ? The Pirate Function and Intel - lectual Property . ’’ Postcolonial Studies 8 ( 2 ) : 199 - 218 . Philip , K . In press . ‘‘Telling Histories of the Future : The Imaginaries of Indian Techno - science . ’’ Identities 23 . 24 Science , Technology , & Human Values Philip , K . , L . Irani , andP . Dourish . 2012 . ‘‘PostcolonialComputing : ATacticalSurvey . ’’ Science , Technology , & Human Values 37 ( 1 ) : 3 - 29 . Pigg , S . L . 1996 . ‘‘The Credible and the Credulous : The Question of ‘‘Villagers’ Beliefs’’ in Nepal . ’’ Cultural Anthropology 11 ( 2 ) : 160 - 201 . Rajan , K . S . 2006 . Biocapital : The Constitution of Postgenomic Life . Durham , NC : Duke University Press . Ranjan , M . P . 2012 . ‘‘History of Design Model . ’’ Accessed February 22 , 2014 . https : / / www . academia . edu / 3626560 / History _ of _ Design _ Model _ Stool _ and _ Fire . Redfield , P . 2002 . ‘‘The half - life of empire in outer space . ’’ Social Studies of Sci - ence , 32 ( 5 - 6 ) : 791 - 825 . Rosenberg , E . 2013 . ‘‘Zuckerberg Latest to Aim for Universal Internet Access . ’’ US News and World Report , August 21 . Accessed February 22 , 2014 . http : / / www . usnews . com / news / articles / 2013 / 08 / 21 / zuckerberg - latest - to - aim - for - universal - internet - access - facebook - founders - internetorg - initiative - partners - with - tech - giants - to - extend - access - to - 5 - billion - people . Roy , A . 2010 . Poverty Capital : Microfinance and the Making of Development . New York : Routledge . Roy , S . 2007 . Beyond Belief : India and the Politics of Postcolonial Nationalism . Durham , NC : Duke University Press . Sen , A . 2006 . The Argumentative Indian : Writings on Indian History , Culture , and Identity . New York : Farrar , Straus , and Giroux . Sengupta , D . 2012 . ‘‘India Achieves a 10 . 2 % Internet Penetration Rate . ’’ Economic Times of India , April 12 . Accessed February 22 , 2014 . http : / / articles . economic times . indiatimes . com / 2012 - 04 - 10 / news / 31318824 _ 1 _ internet - users - penetration - number - of - facebook - users . Smith , W . 2009 . ‘‘Theatre of Use a Frame Analysis of Information Technology Demonstrations . ’’ Social Studies of Science 39 ( 3 ) : 449 - 80 . Snow , D . A . , S . K . Worden , and R . D . Benford . 1986 . ‘‘Frame Alignment Processes , Micromobilization , and Movement Participation . ’’ American Sociological Review 51 ( 4 ) : 464 - 81 . Suchman , L . 2007 . Human - machine Reconfigurations : Plans and Situated Actions . Cambridge , UK : Cambridge University Press . Takhteyev , Y . 2012 . Coding Places : Software Practice in a South American City . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Traweek , S . 1988 . Beamtimes and Life Times . The World of High Energy Physicists . Cambridge , MA : Harvard University Press . Truelove , Y . , and E . Mawdsley . 2011 . ‘‘Discourses of Citizenship and Criminality in Clean , Green Delhi . ’’ In A Companion to the Anthropology of India , edited by I . Clark - Dece ` s , 407 - 25 . Oxford , UK : Wiley - Blackwell . Irani 25 Turner , F . 2009 . ‘‘Burning Man at Google : A Cultural Infrastructure for New Media Production . ’’ New Media & Society 11 ( 1 - 2 ) : 73 - 94 . Upadhya , C . 2009 . ‘‘Imagining India : Software and the Ideology of Liberalisation . ’’ South African Review of Sociology 40 ( 1 ) : 76 - 93 . Wood , S . J . 1989 . ‘‘Review Article : New Wave Management ? ’’ Work , Employment & Society 3 ( 3 ) : 379 - 402 . Author Biography Lilly Irani is an assistant professor of Communication and Science Studies at the University of California , San Diego . She examines the cultural politics of transna - tional innovation , technology labor , and development both ethnographically and through engaged design . She has a PhD in Information and Computer Science from the University of California , Irvine . 26 Science , Technology , & Human Values