Since January 2020 Elsevier has created a COVID - 19 resource centre with free information in English and Mandarin on the novel coronavirus COVID - 19 . The COVID - 19 resource centre is hosted on Elsevier Connect , the company ' s public news and information website . Elsevier hereby grants permission to make all its COVID - 19 - related research that is available on the COVID - 19 resource centre - including this research content - immediately available in PubMed Central and other publicly funded repositories , such as the WHO COVID database with rights for unrestricted research re - use and analyses in any form or by any means with acknowledgement of the original source . These permissions are granted for free by Elsevier for as long as the COVID - 19 resource centre remains active . Journal Pre - proof Precautionary breaks : Planned , limited duration circuit breaks to control the prevalence of SARS - CoV2 and the burden of COVID - 19 disease Matt J . Keeling , Glen Guyver - Fletcher , Louise Dyson , Michael J . Tildesley , Edward M . Hill , Graham F . Medley PII : S1755 - 4365 ( 21 ) 00070 - 0 DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . epidem . 2021 . 100526 Reference : EPIDEM 100526 To appear in : Epidemics Received date : 9 January 2021 Revised date : 1 September 2021 Accepted date : 11 November 2021 Please cite this article as : M . J . Keeling , G . Guyver - Fletcher , L . Dyson et al . , Precautionary breaks : Planned , limited duration circuit breaks to control the prevalence of SARS - CoV2 and the burden of COVID - 19 disease . Epidemics ( 2021 ) , doi : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . epidem . 2021 . 100526 . This is a PDF file of an article that has undergone enhancements after acceptance , such as the addition of a cover page and metadata , and formatting for readability , but it is not yet the definitive version of record . This version will undergo additional copyediting , typesetting and review before it is published in its final form , but we are providing this version to give early visibility of the article . Please note that , during the production process , errors may be discovered which could affect the content , and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain . © 2021 Published by Elsevier B . V . This is an open access article under the CC BY - NC - ND license ( http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by - nc - nd / 4 . 0 / ) . Jo u r n a l P r e - p r o o f Journal Pre - proof Precautionary breaks : planned , limited duration circuit breaks to control the prevalence of SARS - CoV2 and the burden of COVID - 19 disease . Matt J Keeling 1 , 2 ∗ , Glen Guyver - Fletcher 1 , 3 , Louise Dyson 1 , 2 ‡ , Michael J Tildesley 1 , 2 ‡ , Edward M Hill 1 , 2 ‡ , Graham F Medley 5 , 1 The Zeeman Institute for Systems Biology & Infectious Disease Epidemiology Research , School of Life Sciences and Mathematics Institute , University of Warwick , Coventry , CV4 7AL , United King - dom . 2 Joint UNIversities Pandemic and Epidemiological Research , https : / / maths . org / juniper / . 3 Midlands Integrative Biosciences Training Partnership , School of Life Sciences , University of War - wick , Coventry , CV4 7AL , United Kingdom . 4 Mathematics for Real World Systems Centre for Doctoral Training , Mathematics Institute , Univer - sity of Warwick , Coventry , CV4 7AL , United Kingdom . 5 London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine , Keppel St , Bloomsbury , London WC1E 7HT , United Kingdom . ‡ These authors contributed equally to this work . ∗ To whom correspondence should be addressed ; E - mail : m . j . keeling @ warwick . ac . uk . 1 Jo u r n a l P r e - p r o o f Journal Pre - proof Abstract COVID - 19 in the UK has been characterised by periods of exponential growth and decline , as diﬀerent non - pharmaceutical interventions ( NPIs ) are brought into play . During the early uncontrolled phase of the outbreak ( March 2020 ) there was a period of prolonged exponential growth with epidemiological observations such as hospitalisation doubling every 3 - 4 days . The enforcement of strict lockdown measures led to a noticeable decline in all epidemic quantities that slowed during the summer as control measures were relaxed . From August 2020 , infections , hospitalisations and deaths began rising once more and various NPIs were applied locally throughout the UK in response . Controlling any rise in infection is a compromise between public health and societal costs , with more stringent NPIs reducing cases but damaging the economy and restricting freedoms . Typically , NPI imposition is made in response to the epidemiological state , are of indeﬁnite length and are often imposed at short notice , greatly increasing the negative impact . An alternative approach is to consider planned , limited duration periods of strict NPIs aiming to purposefully reduce prevalence before such emergency NPIs are required . These “precautionary breaks” may oﬀer a means of keeping control of the epidemic , while their ﬁxed duration and the forewarning may limit their societal impact . Here , using simple analysis and age - structured models matched to the UK SARS - CoV - 2 epidemic , we investigate the action of precautionary breaks . In particular we consider their impact on the prevalence of SARS - CoV - 2 infection , as well as the total number of predicted hospitalisations and deaths caused by COVID - 19 disease . We ﬁnd that precautionary breaks provide the biggest gains when the growth rate is low , but oﬀer a much needed brake on increasing infection when the growth rate is higher , potentially allowing other measures to regain control . 1 Introduction The novel coronavirus virus strain that arose in Wuhan city in China in late 2019 has had a dramatic eﬀect on the lives of people worldwide . By 1st October 2020 , we had passed the grim milestone of 1 million deaths worldwide and over 30 million cases 1 . In the absence of disease speciﬁc treatments or prophylactic measures , most countries have adopted social distancing measures ( reducing the number of potentially risky contacts ) and a range of other interventions ( such as mask use and promoting good hand hygiene ) as a means of control 2 . The optimal level of such non - pharmaceutical interventions ( NPIs ) requires a careful balance between public health and economic needs , from which it could be argued that the optimal strategy is one that minimises economic disruption while still preventing exponential growth of infection 3 . In the UK , the ﬁrst cases of COVID - 19 were reported on 31st January 2020 in the city of York . Cases continued to be reported sporadically throughout February and by the end of the month guidance was issued stating that travellers from the high - risk epidemic hotspots of Hubei province in China , Iran and South Korea should self - isolate upon arrival in the UK . By mid - March 2020 , as the number of cases clearly began to rise , there was advice against all non - essential travel and , over the coming days , several social - distancing measures were introduced including the closing of schools , non - essential shops , pubs and restaurants . This culminated in the introduction of a UK “lockdown” , announced on the evening of 23rd March 2020 , whereby the public were asked to remain at home with four exceptions : shopping for essentials ; any medical emergency ; for one form of exercise per day ; and to travel to work if absolutely necessary . By mid - April 2020 , these stringent mitigation strategies began to have a noticeable eﬀect , as the number of conﬁrmed cases , hospitalisations and deaths as a result of the disease began to decline 4 , 5 . As the number of daily conﬁrmed cases continued to decline during April , May and into June 2020 6 , measures to ease lockdown restrictions began , with the re - opening of some non - essential businesses and allowing small groups of individuals from diﬀerent households to 2 Jo u r n a l P r e - p r o o f Journal Pre - proof meet up outdoors , whilst maintaining some measure of social distancing and compliance with NPIs . This was followed by gradually re - opening primary schools in England from 1st June 2020 and all non - essential retail outlets from 15th June 2020 . The dynamics throughout the summer of 2020 were characterised by the emergence of hot - spots of persistent infection and higher than average growth rates , with such areas facing additional local controls . Notably , Leicester and the Greater Manchester conurbation were identiﬁed as regions where the number of identiﬁed cases per hundred thousand had increased to high levels , while the infection in many other areas was still in decline . By mid to late August 2020 , there was some evidence that the national underlying growth rate had become positive 6 , and by the end of September exponential growth had returned in almost all regions 7 , 8 . Like many countries , the UK attempted to curtail growth by introducing stricter controls in the form of localised measures , as a national “lockdown” can be very disruptive to multiple elements of society 9 , 10 , especially given that the duration of lockdown restrictions is largely unpredictable to the local populous and businesses . One potential mechanism of regaining control is to introduce a short period of intense measures to substantially reduce cases — this has been dubbed a ‘circuit breaker’ although “precautionary break” is a more apposite name . It is hoped that by driving infections to a suﬃciently low level , other measures such as test - trace - and - isolate will have greater capacity to prevent the spread of infection 11 . In common with other resource limited controls 12 , we expect test - trace - and - isolate to be most eﬀective when the level of infection is relatively low 13 . Alternatively , driving infections to low levels would give time for a concerted vaccination programme to build suﬃcient population - level immunity 14 . Additionally , a short lockdown period would limit the economic costs of such a measure 15 , 16 . In this paper , we consider the application of precautionary breaks to the UK , aligning a two - week period of intense control to school half - term holidays in order to minimise educational disruption . We retain the context of the initial analysis , focusing on control of the second wave of infection in late 2020 , but also consider the implications for contemporary control . We utilise both a simple illustrative analysis and an age - structured SARS - CoV - 2 transmission model ﬁtted to the UK data , to investigate the likely impact of a break on the trajectory of infection and the subsequent numbers of hospitalised cases and deaths . 2 Simple Analysis Under the simplifying assumption that without additional control measures cases will increase expo - nentially at rate r ( > 0 ) , but during the period of the precautionary break cases will decrease at a rate − s ( < 0 ) , we can develop a simple model for the dynamics : I ( t ) =    I 0 exp ( rt ) t ≤ T start I 0 exp ( rT start ) exp ( − s ( t − T start ) T start ≤ t ≤ T end I 0 exp ( rt ) exp ( − ( r + s ) ( T end − T start ) ) t ≥ T end where T start and T end deﬁne the start and end dates of the breaks . From this analysis , we observed two key eﬀects of a short - term lockdown . Firstly , it causes a relative reduction in the level of infection by a factor B = 1 − exp ( − ( r + s ) ( T end − T start ) ) , compared to not having the precautionary break . In principle , this should translate into a similar reduction in the daily number of hospitalisations and deaths - the two epidemiological measures of most concern . We can also conceptualise this reduction as taking the epidemic back in time to when there were fewer cases ; this temporal reset , T R , is given by : T R = ( T end − T start ) (cid:16) 1 + s r (cid:17) . 3 Jo u r n a l P r e - p r o o f Journal Pre - proof Taken together these two metrics B and T R imply that such breaks , unsurprisingly , have the greatest impact when they are long in duration and lead to a rapid decline in cases ( s large ) . The impact of the uncontrolled growth rate , r , is more ambiguous . When r is large the impact of the precautionary break on the level of infection is more pronounced as it prevents a period of high exponential growth . In contrast , large r reduces the size of the temporal reset as it does not take many days of exponential growth to cancel the decline expected during the break . 3 Age - structured model description We now wish to increase the realism of the modelling framework to more accurately capture the impact of such precautionary breaks on the number of hospitalisations and deaths as a result of infection , which requires an age - structured model matched to the wealth of epidemiological data 17 , 18 . Even though we have dramatically increased the complexity of the model , the two simple metrics ( B and T R ) remain of key interest . The age - structured SARS - CoV - 2 transmission model and its matching to the UK data has been described in detail elsewhere 17 , 18 from which a simpliﬁed version of the code is now available 19 . Here , for completeness , we provide a basic review of the main salient points with more detail given in the Supplementary Material . The model is an ODE formulation based around SEIR - type dynamics and incorporating ﬁve - year age classes . The infectious class is subdivided into symptomatic and asymptomatic infections , with symptomatic infections having greater transmission and being more common in older individuals . In addition , we base transmission between age - groups on POLYMOD - style age - mixing matrices 20 , together with age - dependent susceptibility to generate the observed age distribution of cases . The model also includes additional structure to account for quarantining of identiﬁed cases and isolation of their household 17 . The model is calibrated against diﬀerent sources of epidemiological data including hospital admis - sions and occupancy , ICU occupancy , deaths within 28 - days of a positive COVID test , age - structured serology from blood donors and the proportion of pillar 2 ( community ) tests that are positive 18 . This matching is done separately for the seven NHS regions in England ( East of England , London , Midlands , North East & Yorkshire , North West , South East and South West ) and for the three devolved nations ( Northern Ireland , Scotland and Wales ) ; although some parameters which we believe are properties of the pathogen and not host behaviour ( such as the relative transmission rate from asymptomatic infections ) are the same across all regions . We performed the parameter inference within a Bayesian MCMC framework , with the likelihood ( our objective function ) determined by assuming the daily epi - demiological observations are Poisson distributed ( for hospital admissions , hospital occupancy , ICU occupancy and deaths ) or binomially distributed ( for serology and pillar 2 test ) with a mean given by the ODEs 18 . Of particular note , to achieve a match to the historical and changing pattern of regulations , restrictions and behaviour in each region we employ a single parameter that changes on a weekly basis and rescales the transmission matrix to generate diﬀerent growth rates . The model has been used for a variety of purposes and has been shown to be in close agreement with the available epidemiological data 14 , 17 , 18 . However , the purpose here is to show that a more complex high - dimensional model generates results that are in broad agreement with the simpler results rather than generate detailed policy predictions , which would require a precise set of time - lines , policy objectives and future scenarios . As such , we consider two distinct forms of simulation . In the ﬁrst , we tightly constrain the dynamics ( by rescaling the transmission matrix ) to have a given growth rate r from 1st September 2020 , with the growth rate being estimated by an eigenvector approach . During the two - week break ( 24th October - 7th November 2020 ) we again rescale the transmission matrix to achieved the desired rate of decay 4 Jo u r n a l P r e - p r o o f Journal Pre - proof − s , before returning to the pre - break matrix . We performed all simulations using the median of the posterior parameter estimates from model ﬁtting performed in September 2020 . In the second set of simulations , we allow more regional heterogeneity by fully exploring the posterior parameter estimates . We chose 1000 samples from the posterior distribution 18 , for each region of the UK , and vary the level of NPIs ( outside of the precautionary break ) to achieve a range of growth rates ( r ) . A two - week break is enacted on 24th October 2020 , with the rate of decline ( − s ) determined by the maximal level of NPIs over the full epidemic from March to September 2020 ( as estimated in the posterior parameter distribution ) ; hence introducing far more variability into the process . We again looked at the temporal reset ( T R ) , deﬁned as the time diﬀerence between the end of the precautionary break and the previous time when a similar level of infection occurred . 4 Numerical results Fig . 1 . Impact of a two - week precautionary break during half - term on the infection dynamics . For a range of assumed growth rates in September and October 2020 ( and associated R values , assuming a generation time of around 4 . 3 days ) , we illustrate both the reduction in infection ( B ) and the temporal reset ( T R ) of a break starting on 24th October 2020 . Each line corresponds to a diﬀerent strength of control during the two week precautionary break , which is linked to observed epidemic declines . To illustrate the simple analytical behaviour in more detail , we pick a deﬁnitive case ( Figure 1 ) : a two - week break from 24th October - 7th November 2020 to coincide with school half - terms ( thereby 5 Jo u r n a l P r e - p r o o f Journal Pre - proof minimising educational disruption ) . We consider the relative reduction B and the temporal reset T R across a range of positive growth rates r , from 0 . 01 to 0 . 22 , with the upper bound corresponding to the highest growth in March 2020 before controls were enacted . We consider ﬁve diﬀerent intensities of break ( s = 0 , 0 . 02 , 0 . 045 , 0 . 06 and 0 . 1 ) with the ﬁrst four approximating the observed exponential decline over diﬀerent periods of control ( August 2020 UK average , June 2020 UK average , late April 2020 UK average , late April 2020 London estimate ) , and the latter corresponding to the observed decline in continental Europe where the lockdown restrictions were more intense . We ﬁnd that , as shown earlier analytically , the greatest eﬀects are found for stricter controls during the precautionary break ; lower intrinsic growth ( r ) outside of the break leads to a longer temporal reset , whereas a higher growth rate is associated with a bigger relative decline in infection . For the age - structured model , we initially focus on the temporal dynamics over the period from August to the end of 2020 ( Figure 2 and 3 ) . The log - scaled version ( Figure 2 ) makes it clearer to see the exponential dynamics ( which are revealed as straight lines ) , whereas the linear - scaled version ( Figure 3 ) provides a more intuitive picture of the scale of the outbreak . For four rates of decline during the break ( s = 0 , 0 . 02 , 0 . 045 and 0 . 06 ) , which correspond to rates used in Figure 1 ( using the same colour scheme ) , we approximate exponential declines in reported cases observed in the ﬁrst lockdown ( late April , s ≈ 0 . 045 in the UK , s ≈ 0 . 06 in London ) , during June ( s ≈ 0 . 02 in the UK ) and in August ( s ≈ 0 in UK ) . These rates of exponential decline are generated by imposing a suﬃciently high level of NPIs during the two week break . For comparison we also show the dynamics without a two - week break , but including the standard 1 - week half term break for school children ( black dashed line ) . Although the historic dynamics of the full age - structured model are matched to the reported pattern of hospitalisations , cases and deaths , we initially investigate the situation where the intrinsic growth rate from 1st September to 24th October 2020 is set to one of four diﬀerent growth rates ( r ≈ 0 . 02 , r ≈ 0 . 03 , r ≈ 0 . 05 and r ≈ 0 . 07 , columns of Figures 2 and 3 ) . To calibrate the model to the speciﬁed growth rate , we scaled the level of NPIs during this time period to achieve the desired exponential growth ; this level of NPIs is continued after the precautionary break . Given the extra realism of the age - structured model , we project not just the number of infections ( top row ) , but the number of daily hospitalisations and deaths ( middle and bottom row respectively ) . We also give the total number of infections , hospitalisations and deaths between 1st October 2020 and 1st January 2021 as numerical values . These results from the age - structured model mirror the ﬁndings from the simple analytical framework , but provide greater clarity on the impact of these breaks on the key epidemiological quantities of hospitalisations and deaths . Both of these measures lag behind the changes in infection , and the drop in both quantities after the half - term break is far smoother than is observed for infection . For all three measures , it is clear that the temporal reset increases with the strength of controls during the precautionary break , but decreases with the growth rate ; the reset is also longer and more clearly deﬁned for infection than for the lagged measures of hospitalisations and deaths . Looking at the medium term impact of the break ( as measured by the total number of deaths between 24th October 2020 and 1st January 2021 ) , we observe that for low growth rates the strongest levels of NPIs during the break reduces deaths by approximately 37 % . In contrast , when the growth is high the reduction is approximately 52 % . The results of Figure 3 artiﬁcially constrain the dynamics to achieve ﬁxed rates of growth and decline . In Figure 4 we explore the posterior parameter set ( showing 1000 random samples ) and constrain the 2 - week break ( from 24th October to 7th November 2020 ) to have the maximal level of NPIs estimated for each parameter set - which generally occurs during the main UK lockdown ( March and April 6 Jo u r n a l P r e - p r o o f Journal Pre - proof Fig . 2 . Impact of a two - week precautionary break during half - term on the dynamics of the full age - structured model . Results are from a single simulation using the median of the posterior parameter estimates from model ﬁtting performed in September 2020 . The columns are for four diﬀerent underlying epidemiological growth rates ( r ≈ 0 . 02 , 0 . 03 , 0 . 05 and 0 . 07 , while within each panel the colours correspond to diﬀerent rates of decline during the half - term break ( dashed black , no - control s = − r ; blue s = 0 ; green s = 0 . 02 ; purple s = 0 . 045 ; gold s = 0 . 06 ) . The top row shows the number of new infections in the UK , which experiences the most immediate impact of the break ; the middle row shows the number of daily hospitalised infections ; while the lower row shows the daily mortality . Inset into each ﬁgure are the number of infections , hospitalisations and deaths over the period 24th October 2020 to 1st January 2021 . 7 Jo u r n a l P r e - p r o o f Journal Pre - proof Fig . 3 . Impact of a two - week precautionary break during half - term on the dynamics of the full age - structured model . Showing the same results as Figure 2 but on a linear scale to highlight the magnitude of the projected epidemics . 8 Jo u r n a l P r e - p r o o f Journal Pre - proof 2020 ) . We again looked at the temporal reset ( T R ) deﬁned as the time diﬀerence between the end of the pre - cautionary break and the previous time when a similar level of infection occurred . The results of these replicates that include natural parameter and intervention uncertainty show remarkable agreement with the simple analysis ( depicted by the red line , Figure 4a ) . The exception is for the very highest levels of considered growth rates ( r > 0 . 07 ) ; allowing this level of increase since early September 2020 leads to depletion of the susceptible population , which brings a greater temporal reset than expected . However , allowing a growth rate of r > 0 . 07 ( a doubling time of less than 10 days ) for a long period is not a viable public health option . We ﬁnd a similar pattern when examining the relative reduction in deaths ; in keeping with simple theory there is a rise in the reduction that can be obtained as the growth rate increases , but this again suﬀers from the non - linear eﬀects of susceptible depletion for growth rates above r = 0 . 07 . ( a ) ( b ) Fig . 4 . Impact of a two - week precautionary break during half - term on the dynamics of the full age - structured model . Each point is from the posterior parameter distribution , with the level of NPIs from 1st September 2020 onwards varied to generate diﬀerent underlying growth rates . The decline during the precautionary break is the maximum level of NPI at any time for the associated posterior parameter set . ( a ) The temporal reset that captured the time gained by the precautionary break ; the red line is the theoretical result from the simple theoretical model based on the average rate of decline during the precautionary break across all replicates . ( b ) Relative reduction in deaths between 1st October 2020 and 1st January 2021 . 5 Discussion The pandemic of SARS - CoV - 2 , and the number of severe cases of COVID - 19 worldwide , has necessi - tated the adoption of a range of control measures in diﬀerent countries . In the absence of a vaccine or other medical approaches during the early stages of the pandemic , control had to rely on often very disruptive non - pharmaceutical interventions to break the chains of transmission . In the UK , the imple - mentation of such NPIs during the lockdown period ( 23rd March - 13th May 2020 ) reversed the early national increase in hospitalisations and deaths ( r ≈ 0 . 2 ) and led to a steady decline ( r ≈ − 0 . 05 ) 4 , 5 . The gradual relaxing of NPIs generated a slowly increasing growth rate , which we estimate became positive again ( leading to exponential growth ) in mid - August 2020 7 . Against this backdrop of rising cases , we investigated the beneﬁts of a planned two - week precautionary break ( or ’circuit - break’ ) , where strict rules are reapplied in an attempt to drive down cases before their imposition becomes necessary to prevent health system overload . Such breaks are not in themselves long - term solutions , 9 Jo u r n a l P r e - p r o o f Journal Pre - proof but may allow other methods that work best with low numbers of cases ( such as test - trace - and - isolate ) to reassert control . In addition , obtaining low levels of infection before the start of a vaccination cam - paign would allow population - level immunity to be developed through immunisation and thus suppress further rises in cases . Both simple analytical approaches and an age - structured model ﬁt to a range of UK data show that planned precautionary break could be highly eﬀective short - term control measures . Compared to an absence of such controls , precautionary breaks generate a reduction in infection , hospitalisations and deaths , which is most pronounced when the growth rate is moderately high . This reduction in infection can also be interpreted as a temporal reset , taking the level of infection back ( in time ) to a lower value , allowing greater opportunity for additional public health measures to be enacted or take eﬀect . One clear practical question is whether these results are speciﬁc to SARS - CoV - 2 infections and how generalisable the ﬁndings are to other epidemiological setting and hence parameters . If we are deal - ing with a single homogeneously mixing population ( for example simple SIR - type models ) then the instantaneous reduction in mixing during the precautionary break will translate into an instantaneous reduction in transmission and hence a reduction in incidence . Although , as shown in Figure 3 , the im - plications for other important health measures ( such as hospital admissions , or deaths ) is inﬂuenced by the distribution of delays between infection and severe health consequences . For more complex models ( including the SEIR - type models or age - structured models ) then there can be an additional time delay , even for the incidence of infection , while the system converges to the new dominant eigen - vector ; for most epidemiological systems this should be relatively quick , occurring within one or two generations . However , none of these issues are speciﬁc to the SARS - CoV - 2 pandemic and we expect that planned precautionary breaks could be of beneﬁt in many epidemic scenarios , allowing more time for other measures to come into eﬀect . Short periods of intense control of SARS - CoV - 2 have been examined by other researchers . These include : the regular periodic use of planned breaks to minimise SEIR - type infection dynamics 21 and economic disruption 15 ; the optimal timing of a single short - duration break to minimise an epidemic 22 which is shown to correspond to the epidemic peak ; and the interaction between vaccination and precautionary breaks 23 . Taken together with our ﬁndings these results point to some important policy implications : 1 . Precautionary breaks that generate the most stringent application of NPIs are associated with the greatest immediate rates of declines and , as a consequence , the greatest public health beneﬁts . Therefore , the success of any action is highly contingent on the adherence of the populous to the recommendations and rules ; a precautionary break is only eﬀective if there is an average increase in the level of non - pharmaceutical interventions across the country . 2 . If only a single break can be used to mitigate against an otherwise uncontrolled epidemic , then the break should be carefully timed to occur close to the peak 22 , eﬀectively splitting the outbreak into two and reducing the peak pressure on health services . 3 . On shorter time scales ( such that the growth of the epidemic remains exponential ) , we consis - tently ﬁnd that the optimal time for a break is always now ; there are no good epidemiological reasons to delay the break as this will simply push back any beneﬁts until later , leaving more time for additional cases to accumulate . 4 . The number and timing of any precautionary breaks is always going to be a compromise between their epidemiological beneﬁts and the societal and economic disruption they cause . This is one reason we focused on combining the precautionary break with the half - term school holidays . However , to deﬁne the optimal balance between reducing infection and disruption requires a uniﬁed objective function 16 , which is likely to be disease speciﬁc . 10 Jo u r n a l P r e - p r o o f Journal Pre - proof Some practical implementation of these breaks has already been trialled . Israel began a short - term precautionary break on 18th September 2020 , to coincide with their Rosh Hashanah holiday period , with stricter measures introduced on 25th September 2020 . This came to an end on 18th October 2020 , and led to low numbers of cases throughout October and November with an associated lower number of deaths after the appropriate lag . Within the UK , Wales started its 16 - day ﬁre - break controls on 23rd October 2020 , while Northern Ireland began a series of tighter restrictions on 16th October 2020 . Examination of the Welsh ﬁre - break ( Figure 5 ) shows that cases follow a similar pattern to that illustrated in Figures 2 and 3 , with the precautionary break leading to a period of exponential decay ( s ≈ 0 . 04 ) separating two periods of exponential growth ( r ≈ 0 . 04 and r ≈ 0 . 06 ) . While the signal is not as clean as theoretical model results , the impact of the break is clear , although there is a lag due to the delay between infection , symptoms and being swabbed . Of more concern is the evidence of a slightly steeper rise in cases following the break compared to before the break ; whether this is attributable to the break ( individuals ’compensating’ for two weeks of limited interactions ) or would have occurred regardless ( for example due to climatic or other factors ) remains unclear . Ultimately , such short - term precautionary breaks will only be eﬀective if ( i ) their planned nature helps to minimise the associated societal harms and economic losses , ( ii ) there is good compliance with the measures across all regions and sections of society , and ( iii ) the reduction in cases is used to regain control and bring the growth rate back below zero . Fig . 5 . Impact of the Welsh ﬁre - break on reported COVID - 19 cases . The blue dots show the reported new COVID - 19 cases by date that the specimen was taken ( the majority of these are Pillar 2 swabs of suspected cases in the community ) ; while the blue curve gives the 7 - day moving average and the dashed lines provide the best exponential ﬁt to the three distinct intervals . The black bar shows the timing of the ﬁre - break , while the red bar shows the likely timing of the impact of the break on reported cases due to the lag between infection and symptoms . Data from the UK government COVID dashboard 24 . 11 Jo u r n a l P r e - p r o o f Journal Pre - proof Author contributions Conceptualisation : Matt J . Keeling ; Graham F . Medley . Data curation : Matt J . Keeling ; Glen Guyver - Fletcher ; Alexander Holmes . Formal analysis : Matt J . Keeling . Investigation : Matt J . Keeling . Methodology : Matt J . Keeling . Software : Matt J . Keeling ; Edward M . Hill ; Louise Dyson ; Michael J . Tildesley . Validation : Matt J . Keeling ; Edward M . Hill ; Louise Dyson ; Michael J . Tildesley . Visualisation : Matt J . Keeling . Writing - original draft : Matt J . Keeling ; Graham F . Medley ; Edward M . Hill ; Michael J . Tildesley ; Louise Dyson . Writing - review & editing : Matt J . Keeling ; Graham F . Medley ; Edward M . Hill ; Glen Guyver - Fletcher ; Alexander Holmes ; Louise Dyson ; Michael J . Tildesley . Patient and public involvement This was an urgent public health research study in response to a Public Health Emergency of Inter - national Concern . Patients or the public were not involved in the design , conduct , or reporting of this rapid response research . Financial disclosure This work has been supported by the UKRI through the COVID - 19 Rapid Response Rolling Call funding the JUNIPER modelling consortium [ grant number MR / V038613 / 1 ] , the UKRI through the COVID - 19 Rapid Response Rolling Call [ grant number MR / V009761 / 1 ] , and the Biotechnology and Biological sciences Research Council through the Midlands Integrative Biosciences Training Part - nership ( MIBTP ) [ grant number BB / M01116X / 1 ] . The funders had no role in study design , data collection and analysis , decision to publish , or preparation of the manuscript . Ethical considerations Data from the CHESS database were supplied after anonymisation under strict data protection pro - tocols agreed between the University of Warwick and Public Health England . The ethics of the use of these data for these purposes was agreed by Public Health England with the Government’s SPI - M ( O ) / SAGE committees . Data availability Data on cases were obtained from the COVID - 19 Hospitalisation in England Surveillance System ( CHESS ) data set that collects detailed data on patients infected with COVID - 19 . Data on COVID - 19 deaths were obtained from Public Health England . These data contain conﬁdential information , 12 Jo u r n a l P r e - p r o o f Journal Pre - proof with public data deposition non - permissible for socioeconomic reasons . The CHESS data resides with the National Health Service ( www . nhs . gov . uk ) whilst the death data are available from Public Health England ( www . phe . gov . uk ) . Competing interests The authors declare no competing interests . 13 Jo u r n a l P r e - p r o o f Journal Pre - proof References 1 World Health Organization . Novel Coronavirus ( 2019 - nCoV ) Weekly Epidemiological Update . , 2020 . URL : https : / / www . who . int / docs / default - source / coronaviruse / situation - reports / 20201005 - weekly - epi - update - 8 . pdf . 2 Thomas Hale , Anna Petherick , Toby Phillips , and Samuel Webster . Variation in government re - sponses to covid - 19 . Blavatnik school of government working paper , 31 , 2020 . 3 Robert Rowthorn and Jan Maciejowski . A cost – beneﬁt analysis of the covid - 19 disease . Oxford Review of Economic Policy , 36 ( Supplement 1 ) : S38 – S55 , 2020 . 4 Seth Flaxman , Swapnil Mishra , Axel Gandy , H Juliette T Unwin , Thomas A Mellan , Helen Cou - pland , Charles Whittaker , Harrison Zhu , Tresnia Berah , Jeﬀrey W Eaton , et al . Estimating the eﬀects of non - pharmaceutical interventions on COVID - 19 in Europe . Nature , 584 ( 7820 ) : 257 – 261 , 2020 . 5 Nicholas G Davies , Adam J Kucharski , Rosalind M Eggo , Amy Gimma , W John Edmunds , Thibaut Jombart , Kathleen O’Reilly , Akira Endo , Joel Hellewell , Emily S Nightingale , et al . Eﬀects of non - pharmaceutical interventions on covid - 19 cases , deaths , and demand for hospital services in the uk : a modelling study . The Lancet Public Health , 5 ( 7 ) : e375 – e385 , 2020 . 6 Steven Riley , Kylie EC Ainslie , Oliver Eales , Caroline E Walters , Haowei Wang , Christina J Atchison , Claudio Fronterre , Peter J Diggle , Deborah Ashby , Christl A Donnelly , et al . Resur - gence of SARS - CoV - 2 in England : detection by community antigen surveillance . medRxiv , page 2020 . 09 . 11 . 20192492 , 2020 . doi : 10 . 1101 / 2020 . 09 . 11 . 20192492 . 7 Roy M Anderson , T D´eirdre Hollingsworth , Rebecca F Baggaley , Rosie Maddren , and Carolin Vegvari . Covid - 19 spread in the uk : the end of the beginning ? The Lancet , 396 ( 10251 ) : 587 – 590 , 2020 . 8 Steven Riley , Kylie EC Ainslie , Oliver Eales , Caroline E Walters , Haowei Wang , Christina J Atchi - son , Claudio Fronterre , Peter J Diggle , Deborah Ashby , Christl A Donnelly , et al . High prevalence of SARS - CoV - 2 swab positivity in England during September 2020 : interim report of round 5 of REACT - 1 study . medRxiv , page 2020 . 09 . 30 . 20204727 , 2020 . doi : 10 . 1101 / 2020 . 09 . 30 . 20204727 . 9 Matthias Pierce , Holly Hope , Tamsin Ford , Stephani Hatch , Matthew Hotopf , Ann John , Evangelos Kontopantelis , Roger Webb , Simon Wessely , Sally McManus , et al . Mental health before and during the covid - 19 pandemic : a longitudinal probability sample survey of the uk population . The Lancet Psychiatry , 7 ( 10 ) : 883 – 892 , 2020 . 10 Oﬃce for National Statistics . Coronavirus and the impact on output in the UK economy : August 2020 , 2020 . URL : https : / / www . ons . gov . uk / economy / grossdomesticproductgdp / articles / coronavirusandtheimpactonoutputintheukeconomy / august2020 . 11 Emma L Davis , Tim CD Lucas , Anna Borlase , Timothy M Pollington , Sam Abbott , Diepreye Ayabina , Thomas Crellen , Joel Hellewell , Li Pi , Graham F Medley , et al . An imperfect tool : contact tracing could provide valuable reductions in covid - 19 transmission if good adherence can be achieved and maintained . medRxiv , page 2020 . 06 . 09 . 20124008 , 2021 . doi : 10 . 1101 / 2020 . 06 . 09 . 20124008 . 12 BS Cooper , GF Medley , SP Stone , CC Kibbler , BD Cookson , JA Roberts , G Duckworth , R Lai , and S Ebrahim . Methicillin - resistant staphylococcus aureus in hospitals and the community : stealth dynamics and control catastrophes . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 101 ( 27 ) : 10223 – 10228 , 2004 . 14 Jo u r n a l P r e - p r o o f Journal Pre - proof 13 Mirjam E Kretzschmar , Ganna Rozhnova , Martin CJ Bootsma , Michiel van Boven , Janneke HHM van de Wijgert , and Marc JM Bonten . Impact of delays on eﬀectiveness of contact tracing strategies for covid - 19 : a modelling study . The Lancet Public Health , 5 ( 8 ) : e452 – e459 , 2020 . 14 Sam Moore , Edward M Hill , Michael J Tildesley , Louise Dyson , and Matt J Keeling . Vaccination and non - pharmaceutical interventions for covid - 19 : a mathematical modelling study . The Lancet Infectious Diseases , 21 ( 6 ) : 793 – 802 , 2021 . 15 O Karin , YM Bar - On , T Milo , I Katzir , A Mayo , Y Korem , B Dudovich , Yashiv E , Zehavi AJ , Davidovitch N , Milo R , and Alon U . Cyclic exit strategies to suppress covid - 19 and allow economic activity . medRxiv , page 20053579 , 2020 . doi : 10 . 1101 / 2020 . 04 . 04 . 20053579 . 16 Michael J . Tildesley , Anna Vassall , Steven Riley , Mark Jit , Frank Sandmann , Edward M . Hill , Robin N . Thompson , Benjamin D . Atkins , John Edmunds , Louise Dyson , and Matt J . Keeling . Optimal health and economic impact of non - pharmaceutical intervention measures prior and post vaccination in england : a mathematical modelling study . medRxiv , page 2021 . 04 . 22 . 21255949 , 2021 . URL : https : / / www . medrxiv . org / content / early / 2021 / 04 / 25 / 2021 . 04 . 22 . 21255949 , doi : 10 . 1101 / 2021 . 04 . 22 . 21255949 . 17 Matt J Keeling , Edward Hill , Erin Gorsich , Bridget Penman , Glen Guyver - Fletcher , Alex Holmes , Trystan Leng , Hector McKimm , Massimiliano Tamborrino , Louise Dyson , and Michael Tildesley . Predictions of COVID - 19 dynamics in the UK : short - term forecasting and analysis of potential exit strategies . PLoS Comp . Biol . , 17 ( 1 ) : e1008619 , 2021 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1008619 . 18 Matt J Keeling , Louise Dyson , Glen Guyver - Fletcher , Alex Holmes , Malcolm G Semple , Michael J Tildesley , and Edward M Hill . Fitting to the UK COVID - 19 outbreak , short - term forecasts and estimating the reproductive number . medRxiv , page 2020 . 08 . 04 . 20163782 , jan 2020 . doi : 10 . 1101 / 2020 . 08 . 04 . 20163782 . 19 Sam Moore , Edward M Hill , Michael J Tildesley , Louise Dyson , and Matt J Keeling . Vaccination and non - pharmaceutical interventions for covid - 19 : a mathematical modelling study , 2021 . URL : https : / / github . com / sammoore25 / Vaccination - and - Non - Pharmaceutical - Interventions - a - mathematical - modelling - study . 20 Kiesha Prem , Yang Liu , Timothy W Russell , Adam J Kucharski , Rosalind M Eggo , Nicholas Davies , Stefan Flasche , Samuel Cliﬀord , Carl A B Pearson , James D Munday , Sam Abbott , Hamish Gibbs , Alicia Rosello , Billy J Quilty , Thibaut Jombart , Fiona Sun , Charlie Diamond , Amy Gimma , Kevin van Zandvoort , Sebastian Funk , Christopher I Jarvis , W John Edmunds , Nikos I Bosse , Joel Hellewell , Mark Jit , and Petra Klepac . The eﬀect of control strategies to reduce social mixing on outcomes of the COVID - 19 epidemic in Wuhan , China : a modelling study . Lancet Public Health , 5 ( 5 ) : E261 – E270 , 2020 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S2468 - 2667 ( 20 ) 30073 - 6 . 21 Jason Hindes , Simone Bianco , and Ira B Schwartz . Optimal periodic closure for minimizing risk in emerging disease outbreaks . PloS ONE , 16 ( 1 ) : e0244706 , 2021 . 22 Francesco Di Lauro , Istv´an Z Kiss , and Joel C Miller . Optimal timing of one - shot interventions for epidemic control . PLoS Computational Biology , 17 ( 3 ) : e1008763 , 2021 . 23 Michael B Bonsall , Chris Huntingford , and Thomas Rawson . Optimal time to return to normality : parallel use of covid - 19 vaccines and circuit breakers . medRxiv , page 2021 . 02 . 01 . 21250877 , 2021 . doi : 10 . 1101 / 2021 . 02 . 01 . 21250877 . 24 Public Health England . Coronavirus in the UK , 2021 . URL : https : / / coronavirus . data . gov . uk / . 15 Jo u r n a l P r e - p r o o f Journal Pre - proof Highlights : Precautioarry breaks : plaooed , limited duratio circuit breaks ti ciotril the prevaleoce if SARS - CiV2 aod the burdeo if COVID - 19 disease .  Simple midels shiw that shirt - duratio precautioarry breaks are efectve io reduciog the burdeo if COVID - 19 disease .  Mire cimplex age - structured midels , matched ti available data , suppirt this cioclusiio .  Precautioarry breaks privide the greatest shirt - term reductio io cases wheo the griwth rate wiuld itherwise be large .  These breaks are oit a liog - term silutio but alliw ither measures ti regaio ciotril if the epidemic . Jo u r n a l P r e - p r o o f Journal Pre - proof Author contributonn ntatement Conceptualisation : Mat J Keeling ; Graham FJ MedleyJ Data curation : Mat J Keeling ; Glen Guyver - Fletcher ; Alexaander ololmesJ Formal analysis : Mat J KeelingJ Investigation : Mat J KeelingJ Methodology : Mat J KeelingJ Software : Mat J Keeling ; Edward MJ olill ; oouise Dyson ; Michael J TildesleyJ Validation : Mat J Keeling ; Edward MJ olill ; oouise Dyson ; Michael J TildesleyJ Visualisation : Mat J KeelingJ Writing - original draft : Mat J Keeling ; Graham FJ Medley ; Edward MJ olill ; Michael J Tildesley ; oouise DysonJ Writing - review & editing : Mat J Keeling ; Graham FJ Medley ; Edward MJ olill ; Glen Guyver - Fletcher ; Alexaander ololmes ; oouise Dyson ; Michael J TildesleyJ Patent ane public inooloement This was an urgent public health research study in response to a Public olealth Emergency of Inter - national ConcernJ Patients or the public were not involved in the design , conduct , or reporting of this rapid response researchJ Financial einclonure This work has been supported by the UKRI through the COVID - 19 Rapid Response Rolling Call funding the UNIPER modelling consortium grant number MR / V038613 / 1 ] , the UKRI through the COVID - 19 Rapid Response Rolling Call grant number MR / V009761 / 1 ] , and the Biotechnology and Biological sciences Research Council through the Midlands Integrative Biosciences Training Partnership ( MIBTP ) grant number BB / M01116X / 1 ] J The funders had no role in study design , data collection and analysis , decision to publish , or preparation of the manuscriptJ Ethical connieeratonn Data from the ColESS database were supplied after anonymisation under strict data protection protocols agreed between the University of Warwick and Public olealth EnglandJ The ethics of the use of these data for these purposes was agreed by Public olealth England with the Government’s SPI - M ( O ) / SAGE commiteesJ Jo u r n a l P r e - p r o o f Journal Pre - proof SBIDER , Maths Institute & School of Life Sciences Mathematical Sciences Blding University of Warwick Coventry CV4 8UW UK T ( 0 ) 24 7615 24618 E M . J . Keeling @ warwick . ac . uk www . warwick . ac . uk / SBIDER 1 | 1 Submission of Precautionary breaks : planned , limited duration circuit breaks to control the prevalence of COVID - 19 9 January 2021 Dear Epidemics , All authors declare that there are no conflicts of interest . Many thanks for your time in considering this paper , Yours Matt Keeling On behalf of all authors