A physical sciences network characterization of non - tumorigenic and metastatic cells The Harvard community has made this article openly available . Please share how this access benefits you . Your story matters Citation Agus , David B . , Jenolyn F . Alexander , Wadih Arap , Shashanka Ashili , Joseph E . Aslan , Robert H . Austin , Vadim Backman , et al . 2013 . A physical sciences network characterization of non - tumorigenic and metastatic cells . Scientific Reports 3 : 1449 . Published Version doi : 10 . 1038 / srep01449 Citable link http : / / nrs . harvard . edu / urn - 3 : HUL . InstRepos : 11370206 Terms of Use This article was downloaded from Harvard University’s DASH repository , and is made available under the terms and conditions applicable to Other Posted Material , as set forth at http : / / nrs . harvard . edu / urn - 3 : HUL . InstRepos : dash . current . terms - of - use # LAA A physical sciences network characterization of non - tumorigenic and metastatic cells The Physical Sciences - Oncology Centers Network * To investigate the transition from non - cancerous to metastatic from a physical sciences perspective , the Physical Sciences – Oncology Centers ( PS - OC ) Network performed molecular and biophysical comparative studies of the non - tumorigenic MCF - 10A and metastatic MDA - MB - 231 breast epithelial cell lines , commonly used as models of cancer metastasis . Experiments were performed in 20 laboratories from 12 PS - OCs . Each laboratory was supplied with identical aliquots and common reagents and culture protocols . Analyses of these measurements revealed dramatic differences in their mechanics , migration , adhesion , oxygen response , and proteomic profiles . Model - based multi - omics approaches identified key differences between these cells’ regulatory networks involved in morphology and survival . These results provide a multifaceted description of cellular parameters of two widely used cell lines and demonstrate the value of the PS - OC Network approach for integration of diverse experimental observations to elucidate the phenotypes associated with cancer metastasis . T he conversion from a non - tumorigenic state to a metastatic one is of critical interest in cancer cell biology , as most deaths from cancer occur due to metastasis 1 . Typically , we think of the activation of metastasis as one of the hallmarks of cancer 2 and as a highly regulated , multistep process defined by a loss of cell adhesion due to reduced expression of cell adhesion molecules such as E - cadherin , degradation of the extracellular matrix ( ECM ) , conversion to a motile phenotype , vascular infiltration , exit and colonization to a new organ site ( i . e . , intra - and extravasation ) , dormancy , and re - activation . From a physical sciences perspective , metastasis can be viewed as a ‘‘phase’’ transition , albeit occuring far from thermodynamic equilibrium 3 . Though this transition has been the focus of much cancer biology research , there is still an incomplete understanding of this phase change , in particular , the physical biology of the metastatic state of a cell compared to its pre - malignant state . Understanding the physical forces that metastatic cells experience and overcome in their microenvironment may improve our ability to target this key step in tumor progression . The newly formed Physical Sciences - Oncology Centers ( PS - OC ) Network , sponsored by and under the auspices of the Office of Physical Sciences - Oncology at the National Cancer Institute ( OPSO / NCI ) , is a multi - disciplinary network of twelve research centers across the US formed , in part , to test the fundamental hypothesis that physical processes ( e . g . , mechanics , dynamics ) play a critical role in cancer initiation and metastasis . The PS - OC Network brings analytic techniques and perspectives from the physical sciences to the interpretation of biological data and consists of physicists , engineers , mathematicians , chemists , cancer biologists , and computa - tional scientists . The goal of the PS - OC Network is to better understand the physical and chemical forces that shape and govern the emergence and behavior of cancer at all length scales . The study described in this manu - script focused on physical changes associated with metastasis . A controlled set of comparative studies of two cell lines that are extensively used as cell models of cancer metastasis and straddle the metastatic transition was undertaken by the PS - OC Network . The cell lines analyzed were the immortalized human breast epithelial cell line MCF - 10A , representing a non - tumorigenic state , and the human metastatic breast cell line MDA - MB - 231 , representing a malignant state . Distinguishing features of the adherent , non - transformed , MCF - 10A cells are their lack of tumorigenicity in nude mice , lack of anchorage - independent growth , and dependence on growth factors 4 . In contrast , MDA - MB - 231 cells 5 form highly malignant , invasive tumors in vivo , are resistant to chemotherapy drugs such as paclitaxel , exhibit anchorage - independent growth , and grow independently of growth factors . Although MCF - 10A cells have wild - type p53 and MDA - MB - 231 cells have mutant p53 , both cell lines are negative for the estrogen receptor ( ER ) , progesterone receptor ( PR ) , and human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 ( HER2 ) 6 , 7 . To ensure that data generated across the multiple PS - OC laboratories could be integrated , culture guidelines , common culture reagents , and the two fully characterized , karyotyped cell lines were distributed to PS - OC laboratories . This minimized phenotypic and genotypic drift . After demonstration of growth uniformity , the SUBJECT AREAS : BIOPHYSICS CANCER ENGINEERING BIOTECHNOLOGY Received 1 August 2012 Accepted 7 January 2013 Published 26 April 2013 Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to D . W . ( wirtz @ jhu . edu ) * A comprehensive list of authors and affiliations appear at the end of the paper . SCIENTIFIC REPORTS | 3 : 1449 | DOI : 10 . 1038 / srep01449 1 cells were evaluated by a battery of physical measurements , as out - lined in Table 1 , encompassing complementary physical , biochem - ical , and molecular assays , to establish a metastatic signature across multiple length scales , including the molecular , subcellular , cellular , and tumor length scales . Novel biophysical techniques interrogated classic phenotypic ‘hallmark’ properties of the two cell lines ( e . g . , morphology , motility , stress responses ) and physical cell properties ( e . g . , shear rheology ) . A novel model - based regulatory network approach was used to generate hypotheses of linkages between molecular and physical signatures of the cell lines . By interrogating this one - of - a - kind dataset , this pilot study provides insight into intrinsic differences in the physical properties of metastatic cancer cells vs . their non - tumorigenic counterparts , while demonstrating the importance of the technologies employed from the physical sciences and the value of a network approach to the study of cancer biology . Results In order to generate integrated data across the PS - OC Network , the MCF - 10A and MDA - MB - 231 cell lines were characterized , expanded , and distributed to each PS - OC with common protocols and reagents to standardize culturing procedures for each cell line ( Suppl . Fig . 1a ) . Each PS - OC expanded the cells and was required to submit predetermined annotations that included phase - contrast microscopic images at specified passage numbers , seeding densities , and culturing times to ensure phenotypic uniformity of starting material ( Suppl . Fig . 1b ) . Each of the laboratories then initiated experiments using different methodologies to explore cell morpho - logy , motility and mechanics , stress responses and survival ( drug and hypoxia ) , and molecular networks . Comparative cancer cell morphology . Cancerous cells are often described as having an altered appearance and morphology ; cancer pathologists and oncologists routinely use cell and nuclear morph - ology to stage cancer and propose treatments . Clinical studies have linked properties of tumor cell mass and patient survival to variations in individual cells 8 and nuclear morphology 9 . In particular , breast cancer cell line morphologies have been correlated to invasiveness and gene expression profile 10 . In this study , morphological parameters of the MCF - 10A and MDA - MB - 231 cells , including cell and nuclear shape , nuclear disorder strength , membrane lipid raft abundance , and cell growth in response to matrix stiffness were characterized . To determine the two - ( 2D ) and three - dimensional ( 3D ) properties of the two cell lines , MCF - 10A and MDA - MB - 231 cells were grown as monolayers and imaged in 2D by differential interference contrast microscopy ( Fig . 1a ) . The MDA - MB - 231 cells hada higher width - to - length aspect ratio of 1 : 1 . 77 compared with the smaller , rounder MCF - 10A cells’ width - to - length aspect ratio of 1 : 1 . 39 ( Fig . 1a ) . Three - dimensional cellular and nuclear shapes were determined using single - cell optical computed tomography and volumetric image analysis 11 . Representative pseudo - color renderings of 3D cell volumes are shown in Fig . 1b . Detached MDA - MB - 231 cells exhibited consistent kidney - bean shaped nuclei with a relatively consistent extent of concavity , whereas nuclei of MCF - 10A cells were more heterogeneous in shape . Nuclear sphericity parameters calculated from phase - contrast images were 1 . 42 and 1 . 39 for the MDA - MB - 231 and MCF - 10A cells , respectively , demonstrating the significantly non - spherical shapes of the nuclei of both cell types ( Fig . 1b iii ) . This is contrary to the popular notion of suspended cells having spherical nuclei and is a novel observation of nuclear shape for these two otherwise well - characterized cell lines . Partial wave spectroscopic ( PWS ) microscopy is a recently intro - duced high - resolution approach to characterize cancer cell morpho - logy and the nanoscale architecture of the nucleus 12 . PWS employs back - scattered light to quantify the spatial variations of the refractive index or macromolecular mass density . Measurements of macromo - lecular compaction are reported as the nuclear disorder strength , L d , where an increase in the disorder strength of the cell nanoarchitec - ture is used as an indicator of early events in carcinogenesis 12 . Nuclear regions of the MDA - MB - 231 and MCF - 10A cell lines were analyzed and L d calculated for each cell line and normalized to MCF - 10A values as baseline , as illustrated in Fig . 1c ( PWS images are shown on the right and the bright field reflectance ( BFR ) images , from which PWS images were computed , are on the left ) . Metastatic MDA - MB - 231 cells exhibited a statistically significant ( p , 0 . 0004 ) 80 % increase in nuclear disorder strength relative to the non - tumori - genic MCF - 10A cells . This difference in nuclear L d indicates that the Table 1 | Cell physical parameters , methods and measurements Cell physical parameter Technology name / Physical method Measurement Morphology Cell and nuclear shape , volume 2D : Differential interference contrast microscopy 2D : Shape ; length 3D : Optical computed tomography 3D : Volume ; characteristic nuclear shape ( nuclear sphericity parameter ) Nuclear architecture Partial wave spectroscopy Nuclear disorder strength ( L d ) Cell growth as a function of matrix stiffness Immunofluorescence ; confocal microscopy Cell proliferation ; cell morphology Cell surface Total internal reflection fluorescence ; epifluorescence microscopy CD44 expression patterns ; lipid raft distribution Motility and Mechanics Cell motility 1D , 2D , and 3D motility assays Speed ; radial displacement Cell adhesion and rolling HA Micropatterns ; flow chamber adhesion assay Cell binding to HA pattern ; rolling velocity Mechanical flexibility Atomic force microscope - based nano - indentation Elastic modulus Internal fluidity Ballistic injection nanorheology Mean square displacement Endogenous force generation Traction force microscopy Tension maps , force magnitudes Stress Response and Survival Hypoxic conditions Microscopic imaging of 3D cultures ( intracellular Ca 2 1 and DNA ) 2D Cell viability ; 3D O 2 consumption ; CEA expression Chemical stress As above Cell viability Abbreviations : 2D : 2 - dimensional ; 3D : 3 - dimensional ; CEA , carcinoembryonic antigen ; HA , hyaluronic acid . Footnote : Additional PS - OC methods are noted in the results and given in the supplementary information . www . nature . com / scientificreports SCIENTIFIC REPORTS | 3 : 1449 | DOI : 10 . 1038 / srep01449 2 metastatic and non - tumorigenic cells have very different nuclear architectures . There is increasing evidence of a functional relationship between tissue rigidity and tumor progression ; indeed , tumors are often stiffer than normal tissues 13 . An investigation of whether cell matrix stiff - ness modulates cell growth and morphology was carried out with the two cell lines using ECM - crosslinked polyacrylamide gels of varying stiffness ( Fig . 1d ) . The substrate stiffness was measured by shear rheology ( the study of the flow of matter ) 14 . When MCF - 10A cells were grown for more than 15 days on a soft matrix ( with sub - strate stiffness of either 75 Pa or 140 Pa ) , the cells formed well - differentiated , hollow , growth - arrested acini . When the cell matrix stiffness was increased to 6000 Pa , the stiffer substrate induced an increase in cell growth but cells formed poorly differentiated mono - layers ( Fig . 1d ) with nearly 70 % of cells highly proliferative as evidenced by Ki - 67 positive - staining . Conversely , MDA - MB - 231 cells exhibited similar morphology and growth rate regardless of substrate , suggesting that these cells have a significantly reduced mechano - sensitivity . This insensitivity to matrix stiffness may be beneficial during metastasis as metastatic cells encounter different substrates during the dissemination process , and the lack of sensitiv - ity to matrix stiffness allows these cells to proliferate in a wide variety of environments . The expression and distribution of cell surface glycoproteins are a major determinant of cellular response to the microenvironment 15 . One of these glycoproteins , CD44 , is a hyaluronic acid ( HA ) receptor involved in cell - cell adhesion and cell - matrix interactions , which are critical to the metastatic process . Variant isoforms have been assoc - iated with cancer metastasis , particularly in tumors originating from epithelia , including breast cancer 16 , 17 . Investigation of the surface receptor expression on MCF - 10A and MDA - MB - 231 cells using epifluorescence microscopy ( EFM ) images ( Fig . 1e ) revealed that the macroscopic CD44 distributions of the two cell lines did not differ significantly ( p . 0 . 75 ) ( data not shown ) . This confirms a previous report using confocal microscopy , which showed a similar localization of CD44 on MDA - MB - 231 cells 18 . In contrast , total internal reflection fluorescence ( TIRF ) images of the same cells ( Fig . 1e ) indicated that CD44 was abundantly present at the point Figure 1 | Comparative cell morphology . ( a ) Differential interference contrast ( DIC ) microscopy . ( i , ii ) Left : Volume rendering from DIC micrographs of each cell type ( gray , H & E stained ) . Right : Same as left with EFM images of DAPI stained nuclei ( blue ) superposed . ( iii ) Aspect ratios of cell bodies ( mean 6 s . e . m . ) . ( b ) 3D cytometry . ( i , ii ) Pseudo - colored volume rendering of suspended and fixed H & E stained cells imaged by optical cell CT . Cytoplasm is grey and nucleus is blue . ( iii ) Nuclear sphericity of the cell nuclei ( mean 6 s . e . m . ) . ( c ) Nuclear disorder strength . ( i , ii ) Left : Bright field reflectance ( BFR ) images . Right : PWS microscopic images . Color shows the magnitude of the nuclear disorder strength ( L d ) ( low : blue , high : red ) . L d values normalized to 1 . 0 for MCF - 10A cells . ( iii ) Nuclear disorder strength ( mean 6 s . e . m . ) . ( d ) Substrate stiffness . ( i , ii ) Confocal immunofluorescence of cells grown for 15 days in 3D on soft ( Left , 75 Pa ) and hard ( Right , 6000 Pa ) reconstituted basement membrane - conjugated polyacrylamide gel matrix . Cells stained for Ki - 67 cell proliferation marker ( red ) and DNA using DAPI . ( iii ) Fraction of Ki - 67 positive cells as function of substrate stiffness ( mean 6 s . e . m . ) . ( e ) CD44 distribution . ( i , ii ) CD44 distribution visualized by anti - CD44 antibodies using ( Left ) epifluorescence microscopy ( EFM ) and ( Right ) total internal reflection fluorescence ( TIRF ) . ( iii ) Fluorescent area in m m 2 calculated from TIRF images ( mean 6 s . e . m . ) . Bar graph compares significant difference in immunofluorescence intensity between TIRF images for MDA and MCF cells , not the EFM images . ( f ) Lipid raft distribution . ( i , ii ) Left : Lipid raft distribution visualized by anti - CT - B antibodies using EFM . Right : raft distribution visualized by anti - CT - B antibodies using TIRF . ( iii ) Fluorescent area in m m 2 calculated from TIRF images ( mean 6 s . e . m . ) . All scale bars are 5 m m . All p - values are indicated according to the Michelin guide scale ( p # 0 . 001 : [ * * * ] ; 0 . 001 , p # 0 . 01 : [ * * ] ; 0 . 01 , p # 0 . 05 : [ * ] ; 0 . 05 , p : ns ) . www . nature . com / scientificreports SCIENTIFIC REPORTS | 3 : 1449 | DOI : 10 . 1038 / srep01449 3 of contact between the cell membrane and the substrate surface in the MCF - 10A but was observed at markedly lower levels ( by a factor of , 4 . 5 ) in the MDA - MB - 231 cells ( Fig . 1e iii ) . Interestingly , CD44 expression and distribution were not affected in either MCF - 10A or MDA - MB - 231 cells when cells were grown in 3D on substrates of differing stiffness . CD44 was mainly present at cell - cell junctions and was evenly distributed along the plasma membrane in both cell types ( data not shown ) . When the cells were treated with a fluor - escent probe specific to membrane lipid rafts , enhanced labeling of the MDA - MB - 231 cells relative to MCF - 10A cells was observed ( Fig . 1f ) , suggesting the presence of lipid rafts only in the metastatic breast cancer cells . This finding is consistent with reports of elevated levels of cholesterol - rich lipid rafts in breast and prostate cancer cells compared to their normal counterparts 17 . Taken together , these experiments suggest that although the general topography of the two cell lines are similar , the surface presentation of the cell adhesion protein CD44 and formation of lipid raft domains containing addi - tional cell surface receptors are significantly different . Comparative cancer cell motility and mechanics . Cell migration . One of the distinguishing hallmarks of metastatic cells is their capacity to steer through multiple physical microenvironments such as the ECM of the stromal space and , following intravasation , along vasculature walls . Traditionally cell motility studies have been performed in 2D environments ( i . e . , flat substrates ) . Here , cell motility was evaluated in one - dimensional ( 1D ) , 2D , and 3D environments 19 – 21 . These multidimensional experiments revealed that regulation of cell speed and maximum displacement were critically dependent on the dimensionality of the environment . In a 1D environment where a cell is constrained to move only forward or backward ( 13 m m wide by 25 m m deep silicon - etched fibronectin - coated channels ) , MCF - 10A cells traveled more than three times faster than MDA - MB - 231 cells ( Fig . 2a iii ) . However , consistent with their metastatic potential , MDA - MB - 231 cells traveled farther ( based on radial displacement from their original position ) than MCF - 10A cells along the same 1D channels ( Fig . 2a iii ) . In a 2D environment , MCF - 10A cells moved in a circular or pin - wheel style of motility—the leading edge swung in an arc while the lagging edge often remained pinned in place ( data not shown ) . MDA - MB - 231 cells moved more linearly , though more slowly , and MCF - 10A cells were found to travel farther than MDA - MB - 231 cells on the 2D collagen matrix ( Fig . 2a iii ) . MCF - 10A cells also exhibited slightly faster migration in a wound healing assay ( see Suppl . Fig . 5 ) . MCF - 10A cells also moved in a circular motion around the 3D void in which they were embedded , but MDA - MB - 231 cells again traveled farther than MCF - 10A cells when embedded inside 3D collagen matrices ( data not shown ) . Thus , given the dimensional con - straints of the cellular environment , the non - tumorigenic cells tended to move faster than the metastatic cells , but remained within a limited circular area , whereas MDA - MB - 231 cell motility was linear and did not exhibit the same distance limitations . ECM matrix components are known to potentiate breast tumor metastasis by enhancing cell invasion 22 , therefore , the functional relationship between cell motility and ECM molecules such as lami - nin ( a primary ECM component of the basement membrane in breast tissue ) , hyaluronic acid ( HA , an anionic non - sulfated glyco - saminoglycan spatially distributed in the ECM ) , and cell surface adhesion molecule E - selectin were investigated . Traction force microscopy ( TFM ) was used to measure the pulling forces exerted by single cells on substrates with different concentrations of laminin . MDA - MB - 231 cells generated more traction forces than MCF - 10A cells at all tested laminin concentrations ( 0 . 1 m g / ml , 10 m g / ml , and 50 m g / ml ) ( Fig . 2b iii , intermediate concentration data not shown ) , suggesting that laminin interactions may play a role in promoting breast tumor cell aggressiveness . Cell adhesion to HA substrates and CD44 expression in the two cell types were compared by growing cells on micropatterned arrays with covalently linked HA ( Fig . 2c ) . Immunofluorescence and flow cytometry experiments confirmed that MDA - MB - 231 cells had approximately two - fold more CD44 expression than MCF - 10A cells ( Fig . 2e iii ) . Nevertheless , MCF - 10A cells adhered preferentially to HA , whereas MDA - MB - 231 cells showed no preference ( Fig . 2c iii ) . The lack of HA adhesion preference of the metastatic cells is likely due to the lack of CD44 in the membrane . This is evident in the TIRF data ( Fig . 1e iii ) . Whereas the EFM analysis ( data not shown ) shows 1 : 1 bulk CD44 levels , by TIRF , levels of CD44 are 2 : 1 , a difference presumably due to the presence / absence of external HA in the environment . The comparative role of E - selectin in the cell migration of meta - static and non - malignant cells may play a critical role in the ability to adhere to vasculature walls for efficient extravasation to secondary organs 23 . For example , in trans - endothelial migration of circulating tumor cells ( CTC ) , endothelial cell surface ligands increase the adhesive forces and hence the residence time and extravasation of CTCs from the circulatory system . Fluid shear forces due to blood flow can counteract these forces . Shear stresses from 1 – 4 dyn / cm 2 are typical of veins , whereas higher stresses ranging from 4 – 30 dyn / cm 2 can occur in arteries 1 . Here , flow - chamber experiments showed that MDA - MB - 231 cells neither adhered nor rolled on either 5 m g / mm 2 or 10 m g / mm 2 E - selectin - coated surfaces over a range of physio - logical wall shear stresses from 1 – 8 dyn / cm 2 ( data not shown ) . In contrast , MCF - 10A cells adhered and rolled on 5 m g / mm 2 E - selectin - coated surfaces over the entire range of stresses ranging from 1 to 8 dyn / cm 2 ( Fig . 2d iii ) . These results differ from those of Zen et al . 18 , who found that MDA - MB - 231 cells were able to traverse a model endothelial monolayer in the absence of shear forces in a CD44 - and E - selectin - dependent manner 17 . Given the expression of CD44 on MDA - MB - 231 cells , the CD44 / E - selectin binding interaction ( affin - ity and / or expression ) on the cell surface may be insufficient to increase the residence time in the presence of significant shear forces , and other ECM ligands or adhesion molecules may compensate in vivo . In spite of an apparent lack of HA and E - selectin binding by MDA - MB - 231 cells , both MDA - MB - 231 and MCF - 10A cells exhib - ited an ECM deposition similar to that of Nuff fibroblast cells ( data not shown ) , however the ECM structures appear to be distinct ( Fig . 2e i ) . Cell mechanics . Consistent with observations of amoeboid move - ment of invasive cancer cells , the ability of a cell to move through multiple tissue compartments , often via small portals , relies on amoeba - like deformability . The mechanical deformability of MCF - 10A and MDA - MB - 231 cells was measured by an atomic force microscope ( AFM ) aligned with a confocal fluorescence microscope lens ( AFM - CLSM ) for fluorescence lifetime imaging measurements ( FLIM ) ( Fig . 2f ) 24 . Cells stained with nuclear and nucleolar dyes were indented at distinct points over the lamella , nucleus , and nucleoli . The resulting force - indentation curves were fitted to a modified Hertz model in 100 - nm intervals , yielding depth - dependent elastic moduli . At shallow indentation depths , the two cell lines had similar elastic moduli ( , 200 Pa ) . Cytoplasmic and nuclear stiffness of MDA - MB - 231 cells increased only slightly with increasing indenta - tion depth , whereas cytoplasmic and nuclear stiffness of MCF - 10A cells both increased - though with different strain - hardening profiles - about four - fold to an elastic modulus of , 1 . 6 kPa . At indentation points over nucleoli , both cell lines showed stiffening with increasing depth , with MDA - MB - 231 and MCF - 10A cells rising to elastic mod - uli of , 1 kPa and , 1 . 5 kPa , respectively , at 0 . 8 m m . These findings suggest that mechanical loads are transduced through the cytoskele - ton differently in the two cell lines . The decreased elastic modulus and increased deformability of MDA - MB - 231 cells is consistent with their ability to traverse narrow matrices . Cytoplasmic viscoelasticity is also an important feature of amoeb - oid movement . Subcellular viscoelasticity was investigated by bal - listic injection nanorheology ( BIN ; movement of nanoparticles in a www . nature . com / scientificreports SCIENTIFIC REPORTS | 3 : 1449 | DOI : 10 . 1038 / srep01449 4 Figure 2 | Motility and mechanics . ( a ) Three substrates used to monitor cell motility : 2D collagen - coated glass substrate , 3D collagen matrix , and 1D fibronectin - coatedmicrochannels ( 13 m mwide , 25 m mdeep ) etchedinsilicon . Motiontrackingbasedontime - lapseimaging . ( i ) Schematic . ( ii ) Tracking data . ( iii ) Speed ( m m / min ) and maximum invasion distance ( mean 6 s . e . m . ) . ( b ) TFM quantified traction stresses exerted by cells on 5kPa 2D polyacrylamide substrate mimicking mammary tumor stiffness by measuring displacement of embedded fluorescent polystyrene beads . Phase image followed by fluorescent images of bead field under stressed and unstressed ( post - trypsinization ) conditions . Bead displacement yields magnitude ( | T | ) and distribution of traction stresses 42 . ( i ) Schematic . ( ii ) Tension maps ( Left ) ; phase images ( Right ) ; MCF - 10A ( Top ) ; MDA - MB - 231 ( Bottom ) . Scale bars : 50 m m . ( iii ) Force magnitudes exerted by cells at different surface laminin concentrations ( mean 6 s . e . m . ) . ( c ) Microprinted Covalent HA array . ( i ) Schematic . ( ii ) CD44 expressing MCF - 10A and MDA - MB - 231 cells ( red ) attached to FL - HA micro - patterned substrates ( green ) after 24h culture . Scale bars : 50 m m . ( iii ) CellsattachedtoHAsquares ( mean 6 s . e . m . ) . ( d ) CellsrollingonE - selectinsurfaces . ( i ) Schematic . ( ii ) Phaseimages . Scalebars : 50 m m . ( iii ) Rolling velocities and numbers of MCF - 10A cells captured on surface under physiological wall shear stresses ( mean 6 s . e . m . ) . ( e ) ( i ) SEM reveals distinct ECM structures deposited by MCF - 10A ( Left ; scale bar : 4 m m ) compared to MDA - MB - 231 ( Right ; Scale bar : 5 m m ) . ( ii ) IF imaging of cells stained with fluorescein - tagged HA demonstrate expression of HA in both MCF - 10A and MDA - MB - 231 . Scale bars : 50 m m . ( iii ) Flow cytometry shows higher CD44 expression in MDA - MB - 231 compared to MCF - 10A ( left : histogram ; right : quantified MFI ) . ( f ) AFM probe aligned with confocal fluorescence lifetime microscope scans points of interest over cytoplasm , nuclei , and nucleoli . Force - indentation curves used to calculate elastic moduli . ( i ) Schematic . ( ii ) Curves ( middle ) and corresponding images ( top , bottom ) . Scale bars : 10 m m ( top ) ; 2 m m ( middle , horizontal ) , 0 . 2nN ( middle , vertical ) ; 4 m m ( bottom ) . ( iii ) Depth - dependent elastic moduli ( mean 6 s . e . m . ) . ( g ) Fluorescent nanoparticles injected into cells and trajectory monitored over time . ( i ) Schematic . ( ii ) Cell monitored in real time . Inset : nanoparticle trajectory . Scale bars : 10 m m ( main ) ; 0 . 2 m m ( inset ) . ( iii ) MSD valuesovercumulative time ( mean 6 s . e . m . ) . All p - values indicated byMichelin guidescale ( p # 0 . 001 : [ * * * ] ; 0 . 001 , p # 0 . 01 : [ * * ] ; 0 . 01 , p # 0 . 05 : [ * ] ; 0 . 05 , p : ns ) . www . nature . com / scientificreports SCIENTIFIC REPORTS | 3 : 1449 | DOI : 10 . 1038 / srep01449 5 viscoelastic material ) 25 , 26 . Fluorescently labeled , 100 nm diameter microspheres were ballistically injected into the cytoplasm and , after overnight incubation , their random intracellular displacement was followed over time ( Fig . 2g ) . Mean squared displacement ( MSD ) of the microspheres was obtained from the 20 s trajectory of each microsphere with 30 ms temporal resolution . Consistent with the above AFM results , the ensemble - averaged MSD of microspheres in MDA - MB - 231 cells was greater than that of MCF - 10A cells , indi - cating that the MDA - MB - 231 cytoskeleton was substantially softer than that of MCF - 10A cells . Comparative cancer cell stress response and survival . Preferential survival under stressful conditions is a characteristic of metastatic cancer cells ; therefore , the two model cell lines were subjected to external stresses characteristic of the tumor microenvironment , such as hypoxia ( in 2D and 3D ) and low pH . Cell viability , recovery , oxygen consumption ( of single cells and populations ) , and expression of the surface biomarker carcinoembryonic antigen ( CEA ) were measured . Hypoxia . Within the primary tumor , oxygen availability can vary dramatically due to location within the tumor and its vascularity ; oxygen availability also varies temporally ( e . g . , due to clots ) . The effects of hypoxia on cell viability , growth and recovery , and oxygen consumption were tested in a 2D environment as well as in a patho - logically relevant 3D culture environment . In a hypoxic ( 1 % O 2 ) 2D environment , populations of both cell lines experienced relatively small decreases in viability over a span of three days ( Fig . 3a , top ) . In a 3D culture environment , viability of both cell lines was appar - ently more sensitive to hypoxia ( Fig . 3a , bottom ) . The normalized MCF - 10A cell viability under ambient and hypoxic conditions at day 6 were 100 ( 6 20 ) % and 40 ( 6 10 ) % , respectively . The normalized MDA - MB - 231 cell viability under ambient and hypoxic conditions at day 6 were 150 ( 6 30 ) % and 76 ( 6 20 ) % , respectively . The apparent differences of viability in hypoxic 2D and 3D environments require further study but may involve oxygen permeability ( surface vs . bulk effects in 3D ) , dead cells remaining caught in 3D scaffolding , or changes in cell adhesion . O 2 media concentrations were also mea - sured in the 3D cultures and the normalized bulk oxygen consump - tion rate at day 6 was determined for both cell lines ( Fig . 3b , left ) . Under ambient conditions , MCF - 10A and MDA - MB - 231 cells exhibited similar O 2 consumption rates ; however , their response to hypoxic ( 1 % O 2 ) treatment differed with no changes in MCF - 10A O 2 consumption , whereas MDA - MB - 231 cells dramatically reduced O 2 consumption ( four - fold ) when cultured in hypoxia ( Fig . 3b , left ) . The observed reduction of O 2 consumption by MDA - MB - 231 cells may be due to an increased plasticity or adaptability related to their tumorigenic potential . An alternative explanation may be the preex - istence of variant MDA - MB - 231 cells in the population with reduced O 2 metabolism that are positively selected for under hypoxic stress . To examine these possibilities , oxygen consumption rates of single cells isolated in hermetically sealed chambers were measured in nor - moxic ( 17 % O 2 ) conditions ( Fig . 3b , right ) . In these measurements , MDA - MB - 231 cells had a lower mean OCR but comparable hetero - geneity ( mean : 2 . 1 fmol / min , CV : 0 . 72 ) than the MCF - 10A cells ( mean : 4 . 1 fmol / min , CV : 0 . 82 ) . The histogram suggests a glycolytic subpopulation of the metastatic cells may become dominant in hyp - oxic conditions , but further studies are required . This hypothesis is sketched out in Fig . 3c . In addition , measurements of the expression of selected cell surface proteins thought to be involved in metastasis , such as CEA ( Fig . 3d ) , PCLP , and CD44 ( Suppl . Fig . 2d ) , as a function of a normal or hypoxic environment showed that MDA - MB - 231 cells increased expression of CEA in response to hypoxic conditions . Future investigations may clarify the effect of hypoxic conditions on the expression of these proteins . Figure 3 | Comparative cell stress responses . ( a ) Viability under hypoxia in 2D and 3D . Top : ( 2D ) Cells grown in wells ( triplicate ) for 3 days in 1 % O 2 . Viability was determined every 24 h and imaged with an inverted microscope . Cell viability ( mean 6 s . e . m . ) normalized to day 1 samples . Bottom : ( 3D ) DNA content per scaffold ( normalized to day 1 samples ) over 6 days growth in normoxic ( 17 % O 2 ) and hypoxic ( 1 % O 2 ) conditions in 3D culture ( alginate discs ) . ( b ) Oxygen consumption rates . Left : bulk OCR ( normalized to DNA content , mean 6 s . e . m . ) of cells after 6 days growth in normoxic ( 17 % O 2 ) or hypoxic ( 1 % O 2 ) conditions in 3D culture ( alginate discs ) ; Right : histogram of OCR of single cells measured in hermetically sealed chambers ( 17 % O 2 ) . ( c ) Schematic of a hypothetical model in which phenotypic diversity of MDA - MB - 231 cellsis relatively enhanced with respect to MCF - 10A due to enhanced population recovery after hypoxia - induced cell death . ( d ) Carcinoembryonic antigen ( CEA ) . Mean fluorescence intensity minus isotype ( MFI ) of cells grown in 17 % or 1 % O 2 ( mean 6 s . e . m . ) . ( e ) pH - induced stress . Percentages of viable cells grown in media with pH 6 . 8 ( mean 6 s . e . m . ) . ( f ) Paclitaxel - induced stress . Percentages of viable cells after 24 , 48 , and 72 h incubation with various concentrations of paclitaxel ( mean 6 s . e . m . ) . All p - values are indicated according to the Michelin guide scale ( p # 0 . 001 : [ * * * ] ; 0 . 001 , p # 0 . 01 : [ * * ] ; 0 . 01 , p # 0 . 05 : [ * ] ; 0 . 05 , p : ns ) . www . nature . com / scientificreports SCIENTIFIC REPORTS | 3 : 1449 | DOI : 10 . 1038 / srep01449 6 Chemical stress . Changes in the interstitial chemistry of the micro - environment can also have a profound impact on cancer cell res - ponse and metastasis . Low interstitial pH is typical in the tumor microenvironment due to increased lactic acid secondary to anaero - biosis within anoxic tumors . When cells were grown under acidic conditions , pH 6 . 8 vs . neutral pH 7 . 4 , and cell proliferation was monitored at fixed time points ( microscopic imaging of calcein - AM and ethidium homodimer - 1 staining every 24 h for 72 h ) , MCF - 10A viability dropped to 70 % of control by 24 h and remained there through 72 h ( Fig . 3e ) , whereas viability of the metastatic cell line was not significantly affected . Additionally , viability of the cell lines was measured after 24 h , 48 h , and 72 h exposure to a range of doses of the mitotic inhibitor paclitaxel ( Fig . 3f ) . Although a clear dose - dependent decrease in viability was observed in both cell lines , the MDA - MB - 231 cells were considerably less sensitive to the drug than the MCF - 10A cells . Molecular network signatures for morphology , motility , and stress . The goals of our studies were to broaden the set of features that differentiate between metastatic and non - tumorigenic cells to include physical / mechanical properties and to generate hypotheses about how molecular - scale factors ( e . g . , protein and transcript level changes ) impact or are impacted by these properties . The following molecular network analysis attempts to identify putative molecular origins of the data from Fig . 1 and Fig . 2 . Notably , in addition to the transcriptomic data , proteomics datasets from each cell line were collected both unperturbed and perturbed by various antagonists that could potentially alter parameters such as stress response ( e . g . paclitaxel ) and motility and morphology ( ROCK Inhibitor Y - 27632 ) . This allowed us to further refine our estimates of definition of genes from the network that were putatively connected to particular phenotypic characteristics . To connect the molecular and the biophysical , we proceeded in three steps : 1 ) we identified relevant transcriptome data ( 224 experimental conditions from the Gene Expression Omnibus ) for the two cell lines and generated quantitative differential proteomics data ( see Methods ) ; 2 ) we derived a computational model of cellular regulation ; and 3 ) we identified subsets of that model that are likely related to physical properties of the cells . Our transcriptional regulatory network model ( Suppl . Fig . 3 ) con - tains 1866 genes , 220 of which encode transcription factors ( TFs ) and highlights factors that differentiate between metastatic and pre - malignant cell types ( see Methods ) . In this model , each gene is repre - sented as a ‘node’ . If a gene’s abundance is regulated by another gene , this is denoted with an ‘edge’ between those genes . In Fig . 4a , we show the transcription factor subset . Yellow nodes or edges indicate spe - cificity to MCF - 10A cells , whereas blue nodes or edges are more specific to MDA - MB - 231 cells . This network shows a substantial bias towards MDA - MB - 231 specific nodes and edges . We interrogated our derived total network ( Suppl . Fig . 3 ) to identify sub - networks whose regulation was both highly differen - tiated between cell types and likely connected to physical cell prop - erties ( morphology , motility , and stress ) . Proteomics measurements were overlaid onto these networks . In Figs . 4b – d , we show some of the 1 - hop sub - networks ( i . e . , one degree of separation between genes ) selected from the millions of 1 - hop sub - networks identified . These particular networks contain one or more interesting features : connections are specific to one cell line ; the genes are of interest to the PS - OC community and / or implicated in cell biophysical properties ; and / or the genes correspond to differ - entiating proteomics data . As noted above , there were numerous morphologic differences between our cells , including factors like width - to - length ratio and nuclear disorder factors . Notably , for the morphology sub - network ( Fig . 4b ) , we observe strong connections among FBN1 ( encoding fibrillin , a major extracellular microfibril in connective tissues ) , ZEB1 ( encoding a zinc finger transcription factor that represses T - lymphocyte - specific IL2 gene ) , and TWIST1 ( encoding a basic helix - loop - helix transcription factor ) . The inferred network connects these genes , whose products are known to impact the morphology of cells . FBN1 is of particular interest because it has a large number of MDA - MB - 231 - specific edges . It is a connective protein that provides structural support for surrounding tissue . The large number of spe - cific edges suggests that FBN1 plays a role in the deformability of the MDA - MB - 231 cells . The network analysis further infers that FBN1 has regulatory interactions with gene products involved in cellular differentiation , adhesion , structure , and integrity , such as TGF b 3 ( encoding transforming growth factor b 3 ) , MMP2 ( encoding matrix metalloproteinase - 2 ) , LOX ( encoding lysyl oxidase ) , and ACTA2 ( encoding smooth muscle aortic a - actin ) . TGF b - 3 , MMP - 2 , and LOX have previously been shown to be involved in tumor growth and metastasis 27 , 28 , whereas to our knowledge ACTA2 has not . An analysis of motility network signatures in MCF - 10A and MDA - MB - 231 cells identified ITG b 4 ( encoding integrin b 4 ) as a central node ( Fig . 4c ) . Integrin b 4 is a member of the integrin family necessary for cell - matrix and cell - cell adhesion and for motility 29 , 30 . Our model suggests that it is a potential regulator of many gene products involved in adhesion , migration , and invasion . This par - ticular network also contains a large number of differentially abund - ant gene products based on proteomics , most notably SERPINB5 ( encoding serpin peptidase inhibitor , clade B , member 5 ) , which is upregulated in the non - malignant MCF - 10A cells and is known to act as a tumor suppressor and block the metastatic properties of mammary tumors , further suggesting a role in differential regulation . In the survival network , we focused initially on HIF1 a ( hypoxia - inducible factor - 1 a ) , as it encodes a transcription factor known to be involved in cell response to hypoxia 31 . We focused on this gene because it is over - expressed in the metastatic cells able to survive in areas of low O 2 within a tumor ( Fig . 4d ) . Products of genes in this regulatory network ultimately affect the survival of a cell through proliferation or apoptosis . Our model suggests that c - Met has reg - ulatory relationships with both HIF1 a and ITG b 4 in the transcrip - tion factor regulatory network , consistent with the reports from Schelter et al . 32 and Giancotti 33 respectively . In addition , we suggest that HIF1 a regulates LOX , which has been shown to be critical for hypoxia - induced metastasis 34 – 36 . Discussion This trans PS - OC laboratory network study demonstrates that cell lines can be cultured with genotypic and phenotypic uniformity across geographically and technologically disparate institutions to be used in comparative studies . The results from each laboratory can be pooled with confidence , given the known uniformity in cell maintenance and thus the phenotypic and genotypic make - up of the cells . This is in contrast to typical comparisons with results from literature that are fraught with the pitfalls inherent in the use of different experimental conditions and materials . In the present work , the physical differences between a non - tumorigenic cell line ( MCF - 10A ) and a metastatic cell line ( MDA - MB - 231 ) that are both exten - sively used in research were characterized . The integrated results generate a composite and multifaceted picture ( detailed in Table 2 ) that is more complete than one or a few experimental approaches would have provided . In proposing to develop a laboratory network approach to study the physical properties of cancer cells , there was concern about the inherent mutator genotype of the cell lines as well as phenotypic plasticity due to variant culturing conditions , which could result in differing cell lineages and phenotypes potentially confounding interpretation and integration of results across the twelve PS - OCs . Consequently , considerable work was done to ensure that the two cell lines , culture media , and growth conditions were standardized and that cell growth and overall morphology were documented at regular intervals for quality control . Subsequently , www . nature . com / scientificreports SCIENTIFIC REPORTS | 3 : 1449 | DOI : 10 . 1038 / srep01449 7 each lab employed their own unique procedures for cell character - ization as provided in Table 1 and the supplemental information . Integration of the results across the study highlights the similar - itiesand differences between thecell types . For example , the apparent phenotypic plasticity of the metastatic MDA - MB - 231 cells compared with the non - tumorigenic MCF - 10A cells is illustrated at the 20 nm scale , at which an increase in nuclear disorder strength indicative of more variable nuclear heterochromatin structure was seen in Figure 4 | Comparative molecular signatures for morphology , motility , and stress . ( a ) The largest connected subnetwork of transcription factors from the master network ( Suppl . Fig . 3 ) with nodes colored to provide a " summary " of the entire network . Node size shows the number of edges ( connecting lines ) in the master network that were above a cutoff for specificity to either cell line . Larger nodes have more cell - line - specific edges ; the largest , IKZF1 , has 67 edges above the threshold . Node color is determined by the ratio of above - cutoff edges specific to MCF - 10A vs . MDA - MB - 231 , with yellow denoting more MCF - 10A edges and blue more MDA - MB - 231 edges . Nodes with many edges specific to one cell line or the other are therefore large and brightly colored , such as IKZF1 or COPS2 . ( b - d ) One - hop networks from transcription factor regulators ( n ) to their targets ( # ) . Each gene is represented as a ’node’ . If a gene’s abundance is regulated by another gene , this is denoted with an ’edge’ between those genes . Color of an edge indicates thespecificity ofthatregulatoryrelationship toeitherMCF - 10Acells ( yellow ) orMDA - MB - 231 cells ( blue ) . Relationships thatareequallypresentinboth cell types are demarked grey . Node border color indicates differential proteomics results . Yellow border nodes are upregulated in MCF - 10A cells . Blue border nodes are upregulated in MDA - MB - 231 cells . Grey bordered nodes were quantified and found to be equivalent in both cell types . ( b ) Morphology network . The 1 - hop morphology network from FBN1 and TWIST1 , LOX and LOXL1 , both putatively regulated by FBN1 . Both FBN1 and T WIST1 are putatively regulated by ZEB1 . Also shown are the large number of MDA - MB - 231 edges from FBN1 and a fairly even distribution of edges from ZEB1 . ( c ) Motility network . The 1 - hop network from ITGB4 . ITGB4 is itself a gene of interest and is inferred to regulate EGFR and several laminins . ( d ) Stress response network . The1 - hop network from HIF1A , a transcription factorand gene of interest . Itis putatively regulated by MET ( uppertriangle ) , which is also inferred to regulate ITGB4 . HIF1A putatively regulates two more genes of interest , LOX ( also a putative target of FBN1 and SATB2 ) . www . nature . com / scientificreports SCIENTIFIC REPORTS | 3 : 1449 | DOI : 10 . 1038 / srep01449 8 MDA - MB - 231 cells , and at the m m scale , at which the cellular deformability of the metastatic cells was found to be four - fold more elastic than the non - tumorigenic cells as measured by AFM ( Table 2 ) . These results are consistent with the role of the cytoskele - ton in malignancy . The cytoskeleton functions not only as the cell backbone but also plays an active role in cell division , differentiation and signal transduction ; modifications in the cytoskeleton have been associated with early carcinogenesis 37 . In addition , the nuclear dis - order strength is currently under evaluation as a potential early dia - gnostic marker of metastasis 38 and thus may be an indicator of early events in carcinogenesis . Measured values for L d have been found to be elevated with higher neoplastic behavior in genetically altered but microscopically indistinguishable human colon cancer cell lines 12 . One benefit of this kind of trans - network study is the ability to look at relationships between observations . For example , the AFM data presented suggests that metastatic cells are softer . Interestingly , the TFM data suggests that metastatic cells are able to exert increased force . This compound observation is both phenotypically intuitive and surprising . One of the unanticipated findings was that motility of metastatic MDA - MB - 231 cells is profoundly different than that of MCF - 10A cells . MDA - MB - 231 cells , in spite of exhibiting a slower overall speed , traveled farther and more linearly in the more pathologically relevant 3D motility assay than MCF - 10A cells , which move in a circular manner . Previously , motility measurements for these cells were performed in a 2D environment ; in this milieu , MCF - 10A cells traveled farther than MDA - MB - 231 cells . Motility was further explored through measurements of adhesion and rolling on matrices with different surface ligands . The MDA - MB - 231 cell surface is very different from that of MCF - 10A cells , and these differences impact interactions with the microenvironment . CD44 distribution on the two cell lines differs ; MCF - 10A cells exhibit abundant CD44 at the cell - substrate interface , whereas the MDA - MB - 231 cells had less detectable CD44 at the cell - substrate interface . In addition , lipid rafts were detectable on the metastatic cells but not on the MCF - 10A cells . These results suggest that although the general topography of the two cell types is similar , the surface presentation of the cell adhesion protein CD44 and formation of lipid raft domains containing addi - tional cell surface receptors differ . These results are consistent with previous findings of elevated levels of cholesterol - rich lipid rafts in breast and prostate cancer cells compared with their normal counter - parts 13 , 22 . The metastatic cells exhibited less adhesion and rolling on E - selec - tin and HA surfaces , consistent with the lower expression of CD44 detected at the substrate / membrane contact areas in TIRF images of the cells . The labeling experiments support the idea that the general topographies of the two cell lines are similar . The exclusion of CD44 from the near - surface contact area in MDA - MB - 231 cells or lack of proper post - translational CD44 modification may explain their lack of binding to the HA micro - patterned surface . These results differed substantially from those of Afify et al . 39 who found that CD44 was required for breast cancer cell adhesion since anti - CD44 antibodies disrupted cell adhesion to HA - coated wells . In their study , Afify et al . only investigated the adhesion of two breast cancer cells lines : an MDA - MB - 468 cell line that expresses high levels of CD44 , and a T47D cell line with low to negligible expression of CD44 ; Table 2 | Comparative experimental physical parameters for non - tumorigenic and metastatic cells Cell Physical Parameter Non - tumorigenic MCF - 10A Metastatic MDA - MB - 231 Morphology Cell shape and volume ( 2D a , 3D , and nuclear shape ) b N Smaller cell volume , spherical cell shape N Larger cell width / length ratio and volume N Heterogeneous , non - spherical nuclear shape N Kidney bean , non - spherical nuclear shape Nuclear architecture Baseline 80 % increased nuclear disorder Effect of matrix stiffness on cell proliferation and morphology Sensitive ( increased proliferation with increased stiffness ) Insensitive Cell surface ( CD44 expression patterns and lipid raft distribution ) N Abundant CD44 at cell surface - substrate interface N Reduced CD44 at cell surface - substrate interface N No measurable lipid rafts N Detectable lipid rafts Motility 1D motility in fibronectin channel Less displacement More displacement 2D motility on collagen More displacement Less displacement 3D motility in collagen Less displacement ( circular motion ) More displacement ( linear motion ) Traction force on laminin Less traction force More traction force Rolling on E - selectin Yes No Adhesion on hyaluronic acid Yes No Mechanics Deformability , elasticity ( AFM nanoindentation ) Less deformable , less elastic More deformable , more elastic Internal fluidity ( microparticle displacement ) Less fluidity More fluidity Stress response and survival Hypoxia N Low cell viability , slow population recovery N Low cell viability , subpopulation survival with fast recovery and greater proliferation N No significant change in O 2 consumption N Fourfold reduction in O 2 consumption N Low nominal CEA expression with small increase N Low nominal CEA expression with moderate increase Low pH environment Greater toxicity Sensitive Paclitaxel Greater sensitivity Sensitive a Abbreviations used : 1D : one - dimensional ; 2D : 2 - dimensionional ; 3D : 3 - dimensionional ; CEA : carcinoembryonic antigen . b See text for additional explanation of experimental results . www . nature . com / scientificreports SCIENTIFIC REPORTS | 3 : 1449 | DOI : 10 . 1038 / srep01449 9 MDA - MB - 231 cells were shown toexpress CD44 , but ata lowerlevel , and their adhesion was not examined . In the Afify et al . analysis , HA was presented singularly , whereas in our studies HA was presented adjacent to PEG - ylated regions . Some of the present authors have previously shown that adhesion preference to HA - presenting region depends on the presentation of adjacent molecules 40 . When subjected to stressors such as low O 2 and acidosis , both MDA - MB - 231 and MCF - 10A cells exhibited reduced viability as compared with culture under ambient O 2 and physiological pH ; MDA - MB - 231 cell numbers were maintained to a greater degree than MCF - 10A , illustrative of the metabolic flexibility exhibited by metastatic cells compared to the non - tumorigenic cell line . MCF - 10A cells tolerated low O 2 better in 2D as compared with 3D culture , with total cell numbers dropping by more than 50 % after six days of culture in 3D . This finding was unexpected , and may point to different mechanisms of stress response mediated by culture dimensionality . In hypoxic conditions , the four - fold reduction in O 2 consumption by the 3D - cultured MDA - MB - 231 cells , in contrast to the unchanged MCF - 10A consumption , may be due either to increased phenotypic plasticity or to the preexistence of an emergent subpopulation with reduced O 2 metabolism that survive under hyp - oxic stress . These results demonstrate that it is important to monitor not only the whole cell population but also single cells . The single cell studies of oxygen consumption support the idea that a subset of MDA - MB - 231 cells restored the population after these microenvir - onmental stress - caused evolutionary bottlenecksa hypothesis that is also consistent with the results of the viability studies . Taken together , these results confirm and extend prior observations of the inherent capacity of metastatic cells to respond to microenviron - ment stressors of low O2 partial pressure and acidic pH . Proteomic network analysis of MCF - 10A and MDA - MB - 231 cells confirmed changes in cell morphology and motility and identified genes that are involved in multiple metastatic hallmark features . For example , LOX , which is regulated in the morphology and survival networks by FBN1 and HIF1 a , respectively , is involved in extracellular matrix remodeling and is a hypoxia - responsive gene that represses E - cadherin , leading to cellular transformation and invasion . Through a combination of regulatory network inferences and proteomic studies , we interrogated the molecular origins of several classic phenotypic ‘‘hallmark’’ properties of tumor progression and metastasis . Clearly , an important next step is to bring the biophysical assays presented in this paper to the in vivo realm . Some of these assays could be modified and readily extended to the in vivo case , such as quantitative single - cell migration , traction force microscopy , and particle tracking microrheology . Other measurements cannot be readily conducted in vivo , such as 3D cytometry . In sum , the results of experiments comparing parameters of cell lines chosen to model the non - tumorigenic and metastatic states generated internally consistent results . The metastatic cells were more physically flexible and viable under a wider range of stresses than the non - tumorigenic cells . In addition , cell surface protein expression was related to the motility parameters measured . This pilot study validates the laboratory network approach and the use of physical sciences techniques to investigate cancer cell biology . Methods Cell lines . Cells were grown with standardized media and culture conditions described by Guise et al . 41 for MCF - 10A cells and Debnath et al . 4 for MDA - MB - 231 cells . Additional specific cellgrowth conditions for specific assays are provided inthe supplementary information ( SI Methods ) . Cell morphology assays . Specific assay conditions are provided in SI Methods . Cell motility and mechanics assays . Specific assay conditions are provided in SI Methods . Cell stress response and survival assays . Specific assay conditions are provided in SI Methods . Gene andprotein expressionand analysis . Specific assay conditions are provided in SI Methods . 1 . Wirtz , D . , Konstantopoulos , K . & Searson , P . C . The physics of cancer : the role of physical interactions and mechanical forces in metastasis . Nature reviews . Cancer 11 , 512 – 522 ( 2011 ) . 2 . Hanahan , D . & Weinberg , R . A . Hallmarks of cancer : the next generation . Cell 144 , 646 – 674 ( 2011 ) . 3 . Davies , P . C . , Demetrius , L . & Tuszynski , J . A . Cancer as a dynamical phase transition . Theor Biol Med Model 8 , 30 ( 2011 ) . 4 . Debnath , J . , Muthuswamy , S . K . & Brugge , J . S . Morphogenesisandoncogenesisof MCF - 10A mammary epithelial acini grown in three - dimensional basement membrane cultures . Methods 30 , 256 – 268 ( 2003 ) . 5 . Cailleau , R . , Mackay , B . , Young , R . K . & Reeves , W . J . , Jr . Tissueculture studieson pleural effusions from breast carcinoma patients . Cancer research 34 , 801 – 809 ( 1974 ) . 6 . Subik , K . etal . TheExpressionPatternsofER , PR , HER2 , CK5 / 6 , EGFR , Ki - 67and ARbyImmunohistochemicalAnalysisinBreastCancerCellLines . Breastcancer : basic and clinical research 4 , 35 – 41 ( 2010 ) . 7 . Akkiprik , M . et al . Dissection of signaling pathways in fourteen breast cancer cell linesusingreverse - phase proteinlysatemicroarray . Technologyincancerresearch & treatment 5 , 543 – 551 ( 2006 ) . 8 . Prvulovic , I . , Kardum - Skelin , I . , Sustercic , D . , Jakic - Razumovic , J . & Manojlovic , S . Morphometry oftumorcellsindifferent gradesandtypesofbreast cancer . Collegium antropologicum 34 , 99 – 103 ( 2010 ) . 9 . Nafe , R . , Franz , K . , Schlote , W . & Schneider , B . Morphologyoftumorcellnucleiis significantly related with survival time of patients with glioblastomas . Clinical cancer research : an official journal of the American Association for Cancer Research 11 , 2141 – 2148 ( 2005 ) . 10 . Kenny , P . A . et al . The morphologies of breast cancer cell lines in three - dimensional assays correlate with their profiles of gene expression . Molecular oncology 1 , 84 – 96 ( 2007 ) . 11 . Nandakumar , V . , Kelbauskas , L . , Johnson , R . & Meldrum , D . Quantitative characterization of preneoplastic progression using single - cell computed tomography and three - dimensional karyometry . Cytometry . Part A : the journal of the International Society for Analytical Cytology 79 , 25 – 34 ( 2011 ) . 12 . Damania , D . et al . Role of cytoskeleton in controlling the disorder strength of cellular nanoscale architecture . Biophysical journal 99 , 989 – 996 ( 2010 ) . 13 . Butcher , D . T . , Alliston , T . & Weaver , V . M . A tense situation : forcing tumour progression . Nature reviews . Cancer 9 , 108 – 122 ( 2009 ) . 14 . Yeung , T . et al . Effects of substrate stiffness on cell morphology , cytoskeletal structure , and adhesion . Cell motility and the cytoskeleton 60 , 24 – 34 ( 2005 ) . 15 . Shain , K . H . , Landowski , T . H . & Dalton , W . S . Thetumormicroenvironmentasa determinant of cancer cell survival : a possible mechanism for de novo drug resistance . Current Opinion in Oncology 12 , 557 – 563 ( 2000 ) . 16 . Sneath , R . J . & Mangham , D . C . The normal structure and function of CD44 and its role in neoplasia . Molecular pathology : MP 51 , 191 – 200 ( 1998 ) . 17 . Brown , R . L . etal . CD44spliceisoformswitchinginhumanandmouseepithelium is essential for epithelial - mesenchymal transition and breast cancer progression . The Journal of clinical investigation 121 , 1064 – 1074 ( 2011 ) . 18 . Zen , K . et al . CD44v4 is a major E - selectin ligand that mediates breast cancer cell transendothelial migration . PloS one 3 , e1826 ( 2008 ) . 19 . Fraley , S . I . etal . Adistinctiveroleforfocaladhesionproteinsinthree - dimensional cell motility . Nature cell biology 12 , 598 – 604 ( 2010 ) . 20 . Fraley , S . I . , Feng , Y . , Giri , A . , Longmore , G . D . & Wirtz , D . Dimensional and temporal controls of three - dimensional cell migration by zyxin and binding partners . Nat Commun 3 , 719 ( 2012 ) . 21 . Balzer , E . M . etal . Physical confinementalters tumor celladhesion and migration phenotypes . FASEB J 26 , 4045 – 4056 ( 2012 ) . 22 . Provenzano , P . P . etal . Collagendensitypromotesmammarytumorinitiationand progression . BMC medicine 6 , 11 ( 2008 ) . 23 . Bresalier , R . S . et al . Enhanced sialylation of mucin - associated carbohydrate structures in human colon cancer metastasis . Gastroenterology 110 , 1354 – 1367 ( 1996 ) . 24 . Lee , M . H . et al . Mismatch in mechanical and adhesive properties induces pulsatingcancercellmigration inepithelialmonolayer . Biophys J 102 , 2731 – 2741 ( 2012 ) . 25 . Wirtz , D . Particle - Tracking Microrheology of Living Cells : Principles and Applications . Annual Review of Biophysics 38 , 301 – 326 ( 2009 ) . 26 . Wu , P . - H . et al . High - throughput ballistic injection nanorheology to measure cell mechanics . Nat . Protocols 7 , 155 – 170 ( 2012 ) . 27 . Egeblad , M . & Werb , Z . Newfunctionsforthematrixmetalloproteinasesincancer progression . Nature reviews . Cancer 2 , 161 – 174 ( 2002 ) . 28 . Erler , J . T . et al . Lysyl oxidase is essential for hypoxia - induced metastasis . Nature 440 , 1222 – 1226 ( 2006 ) . 29 . Sonnenberg , A . et al . Integrin alpha 6 / beta 4 complex is located in hemidesmosomes , suggestingamajorroleinepidermalcell - basementmembrane adhesion . The Journal of cell biology 113 , 907 – 917 ( 1991 ) . 30 . Ru¨egg , C . et al . Role of integrin alpha 4 beta 7 / alpha 4 beta P in lymphocyte adherence to fibronectin and VCAM - 1 and in homotypic cell clustering . The Journal of cell biology 117 , 179 – 189 ( 1992 ) . www . nature . com / scientificreports SCIENTIFIC REPORTS | 3 : 1449 | DOI : 10 . 1038 / srep01449 10 31 . Lee , J . W . , Bae , S . H . , Jeong , J . W . , Kim , S . H . & Kim , K . W . Hypoxia - inducible factor ( HIF - 1 ) alpha : itsproteinstabilityandbiologicalfunctions . Experimental & molecular medicine 36 , 1 – 12 ( 2004 ) . 32 . Dews , M . etal . TheMyc - miR - 17similarto92AxisBluntsTGFbetaSignalingand Production of Multiple TGF beta - Dependent Antiangiogenic Factors . Cancer research 70 , 8233 – 8246 ( 2010 ) . 33 . Giancotti , F . G . Targeting integrin beta 4 for cancer and anti - angiogenic therapy . Trends in pharmacological sciences 28 , 506 – 511 ( 2007 ) . 34 . Erler , J . T . & Giaccia , A . J . Lysyl oxidase mediates hypoxic control of metastasis . Cancer research 66 , 10238 – 10241 ( 2006 ) . 35 . Erler , J . T . et al . Lysyl oxidase is essential for hypoxia - induced metastasis . Nature 440 , 1222 – 1226 ( 2006 ) . 36 . Erler , J . T . et al . LOX is essential for hypoxia - induced metastasis . Radiotherapy and Oncology 78 , S5 – S5 ( 2006 ) . 37 . Bernstein , B . W . & Bamburg , J . R . A proposed mechanism for cell polarization with no external cues . Cell motility and the cytoskeleton 58 , 96 – 103 ( 2004 ) . 38 . Jun Soo , K . , Prabhakar , P . , Vadim , B . & Igal , S . The influence of chromosome density variations on the increase in nuclear disorder strength in carcinogenesis . Physical biology 8 , 015004 ( 2011 ) . 39 . Afify , A . , Purnell , P . & Nguyen , L . Role of CD44s and CD44v6 on human breast cancer cell adhesion , migration , and invasion . Exp Mol Pathol 86 , 95 – 100 ( 2009 ) . 40 . Dickinson , L . E . , Ho , C . C . , Wang , G . M . , Stebe , K . J . & Gerecht , S . Functional surfaces for high - resolution analysis of cancer cell interactions on exogenous hyaluronic acid . Biomaterials 31 , 5472 – 5478 ( 2010 ) . 41 . Guise , T . A . Parathyroid hormone - related protein and bone metastases . Cancer 80 , 1572 – 1580 ( 1997 ) . 42 . Paszek , M . J . et al . Tensional homeostasis and the malignant phenotype . Cancer Cell 8 , 241 – 254 . Acknowledgements We thank Jack R . Staunton and Denis Wirtz for taking leadership in preparing this manuscript , and we thank Thea D . Tlsty and Barbara L . Hempstead for their input on the choiceofcelllinesforthisproject . Thisworkwassupportedbythefollowinggrantsfromthe United States National Cancer Institute : U54CA143862 to P . C . W . D . , U54CA143876 to M . L . S . , U54CA143798 to F . M . , U54CA143970 to R . A . G . , U54CA143868 to D . W . , U54CA143874toA . V . O . , U54CA143837toM . F . , U54CA143869toT . V . O . , U54CA143803 to R . H . A . , U54CA143906 to P . K . , U54CA143836 to J . T . L . , and U54CA143907 to W . D . H . ThecontentissolelytheresponsibilityoftheauthorsanddoesnotnecessarilyrepresenttheofficialviewsoftheNationalCancerInstituteortheNationalInstitutesofHealth . Author contributions The PS - OC Network members listed at the end of the paper all contributed to the PS - OC Cell Line Project . The following PS - OC Network members contributed significantly to the writingofthismanuscriptandthepreparationoffigures : JackR . StauntonandDenisWirtz . The PS - OC Publication Team conceptualized the paper , the PS - OC Data Analysis Team Leadersanalyzedthedataandpreparedpreliminaryfigures , thePS - OCDataAnalysisTeam Members conducted experiments and analyzed the data , and the PS - OC Network conducted experiments , analyzed data , and provided scientific input . Authorship leaders Jack R . Staunton , Denis Wirtz . Atomic force microscopy ( Arizona State University PS - OC members ) Jack R . Staunton , Alexander Fuhrmann , Robert Ros ; Ballistic intracellular nanorheology ( Johns Hopkins University PS - OC members ) Pei - HsunWu , Wei - ChiangChen , YiiderTseng , DenisWirtz ; Brightfieldandfluorescence microscopy imaging ( University of Southern California PS - OC members ) Shannon M . Mumenthaler , Nathan C . Choi ; Cell line propagation and network - wide distribution ( PrincetonUniversityPS - OCmembersatUniversityofCalifornia , SanFrancisco ) Philippe Gascard , Chira Chen - Tanyolac , Steve Oh , Luis Estevez - Salmeron , Thea D . Tlsty ; Cell surface receptor expression levels ( Johns Hopkins University PS - OC members ) Matthew Dallas , Konstantinos Konstantopoulos ; Computational analysis , network inference , and visualization ( UniversityofSouthernCaliforniaPS - OCmembersatNewYorkUniversity ) Christopher S . Poultney , Alex Greenfield , Richard Bonneau ; Data sharing platform development ( University of Southern California PS - OC member ) Carl Kesselman ; Differential interference contrast microscopy ( The Scripps Research Institute PS - OC members at Oregon Health & Science University ) Kevin G . Philips , Garth W . Tormoen , Owen J . T . McCarty ; LC - MS / MS proteomics ( University of Southern California PS - OC members ) ShannonM . Mumenthaler , JennyC . Wan , AhyoungJoo , JonathanE . Katz , Parag Mallick ; Micro - patterning and extracellular matrix secretion ( Johns Hopkins University PS - OC members ) Abigail Hielscher , Laura Dickinson , Sharon Gerecht ; Nanoparticle delivery ( The Methodist Hospital Research Institute PS - OC members ) Biana Godin , Srimeenakshi Srinivasan , Jenolyn F . Alexander , Paolo Decuzzi , Wadih Arap , Renata Pasqualini ; ( W . Arap and R . Pasqualini are at the MD Anderson Cancer Center ) One - dimensional cell migration and stress gradients ( Princeton PS - OC members ) Guillaume Lambert , Liyu Liu , David Liao , Robert H . Austin ; Paclitaxel dose curves ( University of Southern California PS - OC member ) Shannon M . Mumenthaler ; Partial wave spectroscopic microscopy ( Northwestern University PS - OC members ) Dhwanil Damania , Yolanda Stypula , Christine Will , Hariharan Subramanian , John Marko , Vadim Backman ; RNA fluorescent in - situ hybridization Kevin Kung , Anna Lyubimova , Alexander van Oudenaarden ; Scientific input Joseph E . Aslan ; Single - cell oxygen consumption ( Arizona State University PS - OC members ) Laimonas Kelbauskas , Shashanka Ashili , Patti Senechal , Courtney Hemphill , Deirdre R . Meldrum ; Single - cell tomographic imaging and three - dimensional morphometry ( Arizona State University PS - OC members ) Vivek Nandakumar , Laimonas Kelbauskas , Patti Senechal , Courtney Hemphill , Roger H . Johnson , Deirdre R . Meldrum ; Substrate stiffness and growth ( University of California , Berkeley PS - OC members at University of California , San Francisco ) Christian Frantz , Johnathon N . Lakins , Matthew J . Paszek , Valerie M . Weaver ; Two and three - dimensional cell migration ( Johns Hopkins University PS - OC members ) Stephanie I . Fraley , Denis Wirtz ; Three - dimensional hypoxia and oxygen consumption studies ( Cornell University PS - OC members ) Scott S . Verbridge , Brian Kwee , Claudia Fischbach ; Total internal reflection fluorescence microscopy and cell rolling ( Cornell University PS - OC members ) Yue Geng , Kuldeepsinh Rana , Michael R . King ; Traction force microscopy and wound healing assay ( Cornell University PS - OC members ) Casey M . Kraning - Rush , Cynthia A . Reinhart - King ; Viability , pH and O 2 stress ( H . Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research Institute PS - OC members ) Jonathan Wojtkowiak , Veronica Estrella , ArigIbrahim - Hashim , MarkC . Lloyd , RobertA . Gatenby , RobertJ . Gillies ; Center Leadership ArizonaStateUniversityPS - OC : PaulC . W . Davies , WilliamM . Grady ; Cornell UniversityPS - OC : MichaelL . Shuler , BarbaraL . Hempstead ; Dana - FarberCancerInstitute PS - OC : Franziska Michor , Eric C . Holland ; H . Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research Institute PS - OC : Robert A . Gatenby , Robert J . Gillies ; Johns Hopkins University PS - OC : Denis Wirtz , Gregg L . Semenza ; Massachusetts Institute of Technology PS - OC : Alexander van Oudenaarden , Tyler Jacks ; The Methodist Hospital Research Institute PS - OC : Mauro Ferrari , Steven A . Curley ; Northwestern University PS - OC : Thomas V . O’Halloran , Jonathan Widom , JonathanD . Licht ; PrincetonUniversityPS - OC : RobertH . Austin , Thea D . Tlsty ; The Scripps Research Institute PS - OC : Peter Kuhn , Kelly J . Bethel ; University of California , Berkeley PS - OC : Jan T . Liphardt , Valerie M . Weaver ; University of Southern California PS - OC : W . Daniel Hillis , David B . Agus ; PS - OC Data Analysis Team Leaders Owen J . T . McCarty , Cynthia A . Reinhart - King , Sharon Gerecht , Parag Mallick , Roger H . Johnson ; PS - OC Data Analysis Team Members Richard Bonneau , Matthew Dallas , Dhwanil Damania , Veronica Estrella , Claudia Fischbach , Jasmine Foo , Stephanie I . Fraley , Christian Frantz , Robert A . Gatenby , Yue Geng , Sharon Gerecht , Biana Godin , Alex Greenfield , Arig Ibrahim - Hashim , Roger H . Johnson , Casey M . Kraning - Rush , Guillaume Lambert , DavidLiao , ParagMallick , OwenMcCarty , DeirdreMeldrum , Franziska Michor , Shannon M . Mumenthaler , Vivek Nandakumar , Kevin Phillips , Christopher S . Poultney , JackR . Staunton , GarthTormoen , ScottS . Verbridge , JonathanWojtkowiak , Pei - HsunWu ; PS - OC Data Integration Leaders Valerie M . Weaver , Denis Wirtz ; PS - OC Publication Team Robert H . Austin , Parag Mallick , Owen J . T . McCarty , Thea D . Tlsty , Valerie M . Weaver , Denis Wirtz . Additional information Supplementary information accompanies this paper at http : / / www . nature . com / scientificreports Data : All data files are deposited and viewable at the Physical Sciences - Oncology Centers Network Data Coordinating Center ( http : / / opso . cancer . gov / data ) . Cell Lines : MCF - 10A and MDA - MB - 231 cell lines used for the pilot study are available at the PS - OC Bioresource Core Facility ( http : / / opso . cancer . gov / pbcf ) . Competing financial interests : The authors declare no competing financial interests . License : This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution - NonCommercial - NoDerivs 3 . 0 Unported License . To view a copy of this license , visit http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by - nc - nd / 3 . 0 / How to cite this article : The Physical Sciences - Oncology Centers Network . A physical sciencesnetworkcharacterizationofnon - tumorigenicandmetastaticcells . Sci . Rep . 3 , 1449 ; DOI : 10 . 1038 / srep01449 ( 2013 ) . www . nature . com / scientificreports SCIENTIFIC REPORTS | 3 : 1449 | DOI : 10 . 1038 / srep01449 11 David B . Agus 1 , Jenolyn F . Alexander 2 , Wadih Arap 3 , Shashanka Ashili 4 , Joseph E . Aslan 5 , 6 , Robert H . Austin 7 , Vadim Backman 8 , Kelly J . Bethel 9 , Richard Bonneau 10 , Wei - Chiang Chen 11 , Chira Chen - Tanyolac 12 , Nathan C . Choi 1 , Steven A . Curley 13 , Matthew Dallas 11 , Dhwanil Damania 8 , Paul C . W . Davies 14 , Paolo Decuzzi 2 , Laura Dickinson 11 , Luis Estevez - Salmeron 12 , Veronica Estrella 15 , Mauro Ferrari 2 , Claudia Fischbach 16 , Jasmine Foo 17 , Stephanie I . Fraley 11 , Christian Frantz 18 , Alexander Fuhrmann 19 , Philippe Gascard 12 , Robert A . Gatenby 15 , Yue Geng 16 , Sharon Gerecht 11 , Robert J . Gillies 15 , Biana Godin 2 , William M . Grady 20 , 21 , Alex Greenfield 10 , Courtney Hemphill 4 , BarbaraL . Hempstead 22 , AbigailHielscher 11 , W . Daniel Hillis 1 , 23 , Eric C . Holland 24 , Arig Ibrahim - Hashim 15 , Tyler Jacks 25 , 26 , Roger H . Johnson 4 , Ahyoung Joo 1 , Jonathan E . Katz 1 , Laimonas Kelbauskas 4 , Carl Kesselman 27 , Michael R . King 16 , Konstantinos Konstantopoulos 11 , Casey M . Kraning - Rush 16 , Peter Kuhn 28 , Kevin Kung 29 , Brian Kwee 16 , Johnathon N . Lakins 18 , Guillaume Lambert 7 , David Liao 12 , Jonathan D . Licht 30 , Jan T . Liphardt 31 , 32 , Liyu Liu 7 , Mark C . Lloyd 15 , 33 , Anna Lyubimova 29 , Parag Mallick 1 , 34 , John Marko 35 , Owen J . T . McCarty 5 , 6 , Deirdre R . Meldrum 4 , Franziska Michor 36 , Shannon M . Mumenthaler 1 , Vivek Nandakumar 4 , Thomas V . O’Halloran 37 , Steve Oh 12 , Renata Pasqualini 3 , Matthew J . Paszek 18 , Kevin G . Philips 5 , Christopher S . Poultney 10 , Kuldeepsinh Rana 16 , Cynthia A . Reinhart - King 16 , Robert Ros 19 , Gregg L . Semenza 38 , Patti Senechal 4 , Michael L . Shuler 16 , 39 , Srimeenakshi Srinivasan 2 , Jack R . Staunton 19 , Yolanda Stypula 8 , Hariharan Subramanian 8 , Thea D . Tlsty 12 , Garth W . Tormoen 5 , Yiider Tseng 11 { , Alexander van Oudenaarden 25 , 29 , Scott S . Verbridge 16 { , Jenny C . Wan 1 , Valerie M . Weaver 18 , 40 , Jonathan Widom 35 , Christine Will 30 , Denis Wirtz 11 , Jonathan Wojtkowiak 15 & Pei - Hsun Wu 11 1 Center for Applied Molecular Medicine , Keck School of Medicine , University of Southern California , Los Angeles , CA 90033 , 2 Department of Nanomedicine , The Methodist Hospital Research Institute , Houston , TX 77030 , 3 David H . Koch Center , The University of Texas M . D . Anderson Cancer Center , Houston , TX 77030 , 4 CenterforBiosignaturesDiscoveryAutomation , BiodesignInstitute , ArizonaStateUniversity , Tempe , AZ85287 , 5 DepartmentofBiomedicalEngineering , Schoolof Medicine , Oregon Health & Science University , Portland , OR 97239 , 6 Department of Cell and Developmental Biology , School of Medicine , Oregon Health & Science University , Portland , OR 97239 , 7 Department of Physics , Princeton University , Princeton , NJ 08544 , 8 Biomedical Engineering Department , Northwestern University , Evanston , IL60208 , 9 DepartmentofPathology , ScrippsClinic , LaJolla , CA92037 , 10 DepartmentofBiology , DepartmentofComputerScience , NewYork University , NewYork , NY10003 , 11 Department ofChemical andBiomolecular Engineering , TheJohnsHopkins University , Baltimore , MD21218 , 12 Departmentof Pathology and UCSF Helen Diller Family Comprehensive Cancer Center , University of California at San Francisco , San Francisco , CA , 94143 , 13 Department of Surgical Oncology , The University of Texas M . D . Anderson Cancer Center , Houston , TX 77030 , 14 Beyond Center for Fundamental Concepts in Science , Arizona State University , Tempe , AZ 85287 , 15 Departments of Radiology and Integrated Mathematical Oncology , H . Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research Institute , 12902Magnolia Drive , Tampa , FL33612 , 16 Department ofBiomedicalEngineering , CornellUniversity , Ithaca , NY14853 , 17 SchoolofMathematics , Universityof Minnesota Twin Cities , Minneapolis , MN 55455 , 18 Department of Surgery and Center for Bioengineering and Tissue Regeneration , University of California at San Francisco , San Francisco , CA 94143 , 19 Department of Physics , Arizona State University , Tempe , AZ 85287 , 20 ClinicalResearch Division , Fred Hutchinson Cancer ResearchCenter , Seattle , WA98109 , 21 DepartmentofMedicine , UniversityofWashington , Seattle , WA98195 , 22 DepartmentofMedicine , WeillCornellMedical College , New York , NY 10065 , 23 Applied Minds , Inc . Glendale , CA 91201 , 24 Cancer Biology and Genetics Program , Department of Neurosurgery , Memorial Sloan - KetteringCancerCenter , NewYork , NY10065 , 25 DepartmentofBiology , MassachusettsInstituteofTechnology , Cambridge , MA02139 , 26 KochInstitutefor IntegrativeCancerResearchandHowardHughesMedicalInstitute , MassachusettsInstituteofTechnology , Cambridge , MA02139 , 27 InformationSciencesInstitute , University of Southern California , Los Angeles , 90292 , 28 Department of Cell Biology , The Scripps Research Institute , La Jolla , CA 92037 , 29 Department of Physics , Massachusetts Institute of Technology , Cambridge , MA 02139 , 30 Division of Hematology / Oncology , Robert H . Lurie Comprehensive Cancer Center , Feinberg SchoolofMedicine , NorthwesternUniversity , Chicago , IL60611 , 31 DepartmentofPhysics , BiophysicsGraduateGroup , UniversityofCalifornia - Berkeley , Berkeley , CA 94720 , 32 Physical Biosciences Division , Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory , Berkeley , CA 94720 , 33 Department of Analytic Microscopy , H . Lee Moffitt CancerCenterandResearchInstitute , 12902MagnoliaDrive , Tampa , FL33612 , 34 DepartmentofRadiology , SchoolofMedicine , StanfordUniversity , Stanford , CA 94305 , 35 Department of Biochemistry , Molecular Biology , and Cell Biology , Northwestern University , Evanston , IL 60208 , 36 Department of Biostatistics and Computational Biology , Dana - Farber Cancer Institute , and Department of Biostatistics , Harvard School of Public Health , Boston , MA 02115 , 37 Department of Chemistry , Chemistry of Life Processes Institute , Northwestern University , Evanston , IL 60208 , 38 Vascular Program , Institute of Cell Engineering and McKusick - Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine and the Departments of Pediatrics , Medicine , Oncology , Radiation Oncology , and Biological Chemistry , The Johns Hopkins UniversitySchool ofMedicine , Baltimore , MD21205 , 39 SchoolofChemical and Biomolecular Engineering , Cornell University , Ithaca , NY14853 , 40 Departmentof Anatomy , Department of Bioengineering and Therapeutic Sciences , Eli and Edythe Broad Center of Regeneration Medicine and Stem Cell Research at UCSF , and Helen Diller Comprehensive Cancer Center , University of California at San Francisco , San Francisco , CA 94143 . * Current address : Department of Chemical Engineering , University of Florida , Gainesville , FL , 32611 . { Current address : School of Biomedical Engineering and Sciences , Virginia Tech - Wake Forest University , Blacksburg , VA , 24061 . { www . nature . com / scientificreports SCIENTIFIC REPORTS | 3 : 1449 | DOI : 10 . 1038 / srep01449 12