Baby CROINC : An Online , Crowd - Based , Expert - Curated System for Monitoring Child Development Ayelet Ben - Sasson University of Haifa , Israel asasson @ univ . haifa . ac . il Eli Ben - Sasson Technion , Haifa , Israel eli @ cs . technion . ac . il Kayla Jacobs Technion , Haifa , Israel kayla @ cs . technion . ac . il Eden Saig Technion , Haifa , Israel edens @ cs . technion . ac . il ABSTRACT Baby CROINC ( CROwd INtelligence Curation ) is an online early - childhood development tracker designed to be both per - sonalized and objective . To meet these goals , we rely on Curated Crowd Intelligence ( CCI ) , a process in which experts curate personalized inputs to connect with the crowd’s aggre - gate data , providing parents with objective and personalized feedback on their children’s development . In this paper , we describe Baby CROINC’s design , with a focus on CCI , and as - sess the extent to which it meets its design goals of objectivity and personalization . In Baby CROINC , parents create a diary by adding develop - mental milestones to a timeline . Visual statistics are presented per milestone . Expert curators clarify , merge , and classify milestones which are new to the system . Diary personalization was evident through users’ rich and diverse milestone choices , and by the continuous system in - crease in new canonical developmental concepts . Findings demonstrate the objectivity of the crowd - based percentiles extracted from Baby CROINC , based on consistency of de - velopmental differences in preterm vs . fullterm and boys vs . girls with established research , and the correlation between medians reported in our system and those appearing on the U . S . Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s Milestones webpage . 1 CCI led to a dramatic increase in users’ ability to view crowd - based statistics , indicating that CCI is critical for enabling objectivity while maintaining personalization . Author Keywords early child development ; crowd sourcing ; health informatics 1 www . cdc . gov / ncbddd / actearly / milestones , adapted from [ 27 , 12 ] . INTRODUCTION Developmental screening of young children is important for detecting developmental delays . This can facilitate referral for early intervention [ 23 ] when support resources are more effective [ 6 ] , as well as reassurance and education of parents of normally developing children . Early childhood develop - mental screening is typically performed by pediatricians and baby - wellness specialists , and requires the administration of complex , expensive , and time - consuming standardized tests ; properly interpreting the results requires additional time and expertise [ 19 ] . Without expert help , the average parent faces challenges both in administering tests and in deciphering their outcomes . These challenges are particularly relevant to devel - oping countries and lower socio - economic strata , where they become more acute due to the limited availability of screening and patient - provider time [ 7 ] . New technologies provide new opportunities for parents to monitor and learn about their children’s development . Many parents of young children search the Internet for information regarding their children’s health and development , and use so - cial media to record developmental milestones [ 17 , 25 , 30 , 4 ] . However , it is difﬁcult for parents to obtain information that is both objective and based on quantitative data while still being personalized and catering to speciﬁc , parent - driven interests and concerns . With a few notable exceptions described below , there is a shortage of tools that lie between the two extreme points of standardized tests , which are objective but not per - sonalized , and parenting forums and social media , which are personalized but not objective . Baby CROINC and CCI Baby CROINC ( CROwd INtelligence Curation ) is a free early childhood development tracker available as a website 2 and as iPhone 3 and Android 4 mobile apps . It aims to resolve the tension between objective feedback and personalization , using what we call Curated Crowd Intelligence ( CCI ) . 2 baby . croinc . org 3 itunes . apple . com / lt / app / baby - croinc / id1185899162 4 play . google . com / store / apps / details ? id = com . babycroic . croinc Permission (cid:1) to (cid:1) make (cid:1) digital (cid:1) or (cid:1) hard (cid:1) copies (cid:1) of (cid:1) all (cid:1) or (cid:1) part (cid:1) of (cid:1) this (cid:1) work (cid:1) for (cid:1) personal (cid:1) or (cid:1) classroom (cid:1) use (cid:1) is (cid:1) granted (cid:1) without (cid:1) fee (cid:1) provided (cid:1) that (cid:1) copies (cid:1) are (cid:1) not (cid:1) made (cid:1) or (cid:1) distributed (cid:1) for (cid:1) profit (cid:1) or (cid:1) commercial (cid:1) advantage (cid:1) and (cid:1) that (cid:1) copies (cid:1) bear (cid:1) this (cid:1) notice (cid:1) and (cid:1) the (cid:1) full (cid:1) citation (cid:1) on (cid:1) the (cid:1) first (cid:1) page . (cid:1) Copyrights (cid:1) for (cid:1) components (cid:1) of (cid:1) this (cid:1) work (cid:1) owned (cid:1) by (cid:1) others (cid:1) than (cid:1) ACM (cid:1) must (cid:1) be (cid:1) honored . (cid:1) Abstracting (cid:1) with (cid:1) credit (cid:1) is (cid:1) permitted . (cid:1) To (cid:1) copy (cid:1) otherwise , (cid:1) or (cid:1) republish , (cid:1) to (cid:1) post (cid:1) on (cid:1) servers (cid:1) or (cid:1) to (cid:1) redistribute (cid:1) to (cid:1) lists , (cid:1) requires (cid:1) prior (cid:1) specific (cid:1) permission (cid:1) and / or (cid:1) a (cid:1) fee . (cid:1) Request (cid:1) permissions (cid:1) from (cid:1) permissions @ acm . org . (cid:49)(cid:70)(cid:83)(cid:87)(cid:66)(cid:84)(cid:74)(cid:87)(cid:70)(cid:41)(cid:70)(cid:66)(cid:77)(cid:85)(cid:73)(cid:1)(cid:104) 17 , (cid:1)(cid:46)(cid:66)(cid:90)(cid:1)(cid:19)(cid:20) – (cid:19)(cid:23) , (cid:1) 2017 , (cid:1)(cid:35)(cid:66)(cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:77)(cid:80)(cid:79)(cid:66)(cid:13)(cid:1)(cid:52)(cid:81)(cid:66)(cid:74)(cid:79) © (cid:1) 2017 (cid:1) Association (cid:1) for (cid:1) Computing (cid:1) Machinery . ACM (cid:1) ISBN (cid:1) 978 - 1 - 4503 - (cid:23) 36 (cid:20) - 1 (cid:16)(cid:18)(cid:24)(cid:16)(cid:17)(cid:22) . (cid:1) . (cid:1) . (cid:1) $ 15 . 00 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / (cid:20)(cid:18)(cid:22)(cid:21)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:19)(cid:15)(cid:20)(cid:18)(cid:22)(cid:21)(cid:25)(cid:25)(cid:24) In Baby CROINC , the parent or caregiver creates a custom developmental diary for their child via a sequence of person - alized , age - dated milestones like “ﬁrst smile” at ﬁve weeks old or “eating with a spoon” at seven months old . For each diary - recorded event the system provides the user with objec - tive statistical information about the milestone associated with it . In addition , parents / caregivers can view ages predicted for achievement of future milestones . This parent - driven system achieves the goal of personalization because caregivers choose what to record and track , and are encouraged to author new milestones as well as select from suggestions of common existing milestones . Simultaneously , information displayed regarding each milestone is quantita - tively based on aggregated statistics gathered from all users’ children , thereby achieving the goal of objectivity . To seamlessly integrate these two seemingly contradictory goals , and to ensure the statistics’ high quality , the CCI ap - proach involves child - development experts cleaning and curat - ing the personalized parent - authored data , as explained later in the “Design Goals and Curated Crowd Intelligence ( CCI ) ” section . Related Work When designing Baby CROINC , we have beneﬁted from lessons learned from existing child development educational resources and prior interactive and web - based developmental trackers , several of which are described below . Static , curated data Static , curated information on child de - velopment is already available online , and frequently sought out by parents of young children [ 17 , 30 , 15 ] . For example , the United States Centers for Disease Control and Preven - tion ( CDC ) publishes lists of milestones for children aged 0 - 5 years , categorized by developmental domains , in an effort to increase parental knowledge of age - appropriate milestones and red ﬂags . These lists are based on two developmental guideline books for caregivers by the American Academy of Pediatrics [ 27 , 12 ] . Parenting forums Many parents are active on various online parenting forums , social media networks , and Q & A commu - nities , asking questions and raising concerns of their own . Sometimes health care professionals and developmental ex - perts respond as well . But overall , this online interaction is limited , biased , and narrow in terms of the data provided by parents and experts [ 3 , 22 ] . Our CCI approach is further motivated by existing work that stresses the need to improve the quality of general crowd - sourced wisdom using real - time expert guidance [ 5 , 21 ] . Popular apps and websites Many technologies allow parents of young children to track their infant’s activities , schedule , and / or physical growth . Examples include Trixie Tracker™ [ 20 ] , Text4Baby™ [ 14 ] and MyPreemie [ 8 ] . Baby CROINC differs from these by ( i ) expanding its focus beyond the physi - cal aspects of early childhood development ; and ( ii ) its unique CCI approach . An interesting use of hand - held electronic devices to obtain precise and objective data regarding early childhood devel - opment is reported in [ 9 ] . In that experiment , a cohort of 40 expectant mothers was trained to identify important motor milestones and report them on a Palm Pilot . This provided ex - cellent quantitative results but , in contrast with Baby CROINC , required rigorous training and does not support user - driven authoring of new milestones . @ BabySteps is another inﬂuential system , and the ﬁrst inter - active Twitter - based developmental tracker [ 29 ] . This system prompts parents via Twitter messages to answer age - relevant developmental questions drawn from the Ages & Stages Ques - tionnaire [ 28 ] screening tool . It yields quantitative results [ 29 , 18 ] but is not as personalized as Baby CROINC . PatientsLikeMe ® ( PLM ) is a popular platform sharing concep - tual and technological similarities with Baby CROINC , though it does not focus on early childhood development [ 11 ] . PLM is a social network for people with common health conditions , where users share their symptoms and treatment schedules , mainly through built - in surveys , and track their health status relative to the crowd . Numerous visualization tools assist users in interpreting the data . Research indicates that PLM is associated with increased patient health knowledge and improved well - being and decision - making capabilities [ 31 ] . Baby CROINC addresses a similar need but caters to parents of young children , offering developmental knowledge and tracking that can similarly empower them and inform their decisions . Paper Organization In the next section we explain our two design goals and CCI in more detail , followed by a fuller description of Baby CROINC’s features and usage patterns . In the Assessment section , we examine the extent to which our goals are achieved and the impact of CCI . We conclude with a Discussion of our ﬁndings and thoughts for future work . BABY CROINC DESIGN GOALS The main purpose of Baby CROINC is to help parents and caregivers track and understand their child’s unique early de - velopmental trajectory in a personalized and objectively mean - ingful way , achieving both these seemingly - divergent goals through CCI . Design Goal : Personalization Standardized tests achieve high levels of validity , reliability , and replicability . These advantages come at the price of ( i ) speciﬁcity to particular child development histories and tra - jectories , ( ii ) rigidity of the test format regardless of changing times and ethnic / cultural environments , and ( iii ) considerable research effort required to calibrate test scores and interpret them [ 26 , 16 ] . Personalized , non - standardized assessments are more ﬂexible and can adapt quickly to changing environments and parent interests . ( See , e . g . , [ 1 ] and references within for more discussion of the ongoing “standardized vs . personalized” testing / assessment debate . ) Our Baby CROINC system offers a high level of personaliza - tion by encouraging users to choose and author the milestones recorded for their children ( see Figure 1 ) . The diaries thus Figure 1 . Screenshots from a developmental diary in the Baby CROINC mobile app . On the left is the personal diary display ; in the middle is the interface for adding a new milestone to a diary , including autocomplete suggestions towards the bottom half of the screen ; on the right are a list of future milestones the child can likely anticipate . Figure 2 . Exploring statistics for the “started to smile” milestone with the Baby CROINC mobile app . In the ( simulated ) example above , the child is late for this milestone ( 21st percentile , with sample size of n = 119 ) , having a reported age of 2 months . Notice the implementation of the system’s design goals ( see section “Baby CROINC Design Goals” ) : a personalized graphical display , providing objective , non - parametrized , percentile - based statistics . cater to parents’ and caregivers’ speciﬁc interests and con - cerns . Additionally , the statistical data is presented to users in a child - focused manner ( see Figure 2 ) , so that the parent can easily interpret what the data says about his or her child . Design Goal : Objectivity The level of personalization we offer in Baby CROINC could lead to a biased and subjective assessment of child develop - ment . To compensate for this risk , Baby CROINC is also based on a quantitative research approach , pooling together data from across children’s individual diaries , and presents only non - parametric statistics to avoid making any assump - tions about the underlying distribution . Design Goals and Curated Crowd Intelligence ( CCI ) Personalization and objectivity lead to seemingly contradictory data collecting procedures ; personalization means that users log whatever milestones they ﬁnd interesting or relevant , while objectivity and quantitative analysis typically require data from large populations that answer the same set of questions . We have resolved this tension in Baby CROINC with a new process in which experts curate the data provided by users ( the crowd ) . Caregivers may add to their child’s diary any milestone written in whichever words or style they like , in keeping with the goal of personalization . In order to provide objective statistical feedback , expert curators work behind the scenes to connect the milestone to others that are concep - tually synonymous , even if the text is different . For exam - ple , different children might have milestones in their diaries with unique texts like “began walking , ” “he started walking , ” “Sophie is walking already ! ”—all of which collectively draw from a shared pool of statistical data . We call this collection of conceptually synonymous milestones with pooled statistics canonical milestone concepts . DESCRIPTION OF Baby CROINC User Input and Engagement Baby CROINC aims to provide users with an intuitive and engaging interface . Parents and caregivers simply add devel - opmental milestones their child currently or retrospectively achieved to a dated timeline . Milestone texts are short phrases with a mean length of 6 . 90 words ( median = 6 . 00 words , SD = 3 . 56 words , range = 1 – 27 words ) , and can be either selected from a list of suggestions or authored uniquely by the user . In addition , users may view anticipated upcoming future milestones as reported by older children , as well as milestone - focused parenting tips provided by other caregivers . See Figure 1 for screenshots of the interface . Automatic e - mail notiﬁcations update users after extended periods of inactivity , encouraging them to update their chil - dren’s diaries with a suggested list of age - relevant milestones . Additionally , users are notiﬁed when statistics are available for milestones previously without viewable statistics . System Output For each milestone , such as “started crawling , ” Baby CROINC calculates aggregated information from all other users who added that same milestone to their children’s diaries . Sim - ple percentile - based statistics are presented to users using an intuitive graphical user interface , including the child’s per - centile and the overall age distribution for all children ( see Fig - ure 2 ) . The statistics are percentile / median - based as opposed to mean - focused , to make them less sensitive to undue inﬂu - ence from statistical outliers ( severely delayed or advanced children whose ages lie at extreme values ) Statistics are only shown for milestones which have appeared in at least ﬁve children’s diaries . For milestones below this threshold , an e - mail notiﬁcation is sent to users once the thresh - old is reached , alerting them to the availability . The chosen cut - off balances ( i ) the desire to provide statistics for as many milestones as possible without an overly long delay , against ( ii ) the need for the statistics to be numerically meaningful and based on a non - trivial sample size . We always provide users with the sample size so they can evaluate the strength of the statistics , to distinguish between milestones with few vs . many children . As Baby CROINC continues to expand , the sample sizes for most milestones will increase as they are added for more children , and statistical relevance will increase . System Initialization When the system was launched , before any users joined , 252 canonical milestone concepts were seeded for the introductory Baby CROINC suggestion list . These milestones were drawn from a list of published developmental milestones from the U . S . CDC ( described above in the Related Work section ) . Curated Crowd Intelligence ( CCI ) Expert Review Process The high quality statistical output provided to users is depen - dent on behind - the - scenes expert curation . The team of experts performing this regular curation has a background in child de - velopment and were trained to consistently and reliably curate milestone texts . The ﬁrst author , a research academic spe - cializing in child development , conducts periodic reviews of milestone classiﬁcation to ensure quality and to provide team members with additional feedback . When a user adds a milestone to their child’s diary via a system suggestion of an existing milestone , that child’s age is automatically included in the milestone’s pool of statistics . However , for new milestone texts authored by users , expert curation is required . If the milestone’s underlying idea already exists in the system as a canonical milestone concept , but the user’s milestone uses text that varies somewhat in language , the expert merges the milestone with the existing canonical milestone concept to associate them together . For example , a new milestone text “Bobby can ride a three - wheeled bike” could be merged with the existing “learned to use a tricycle . ” This reduces redun - dant milestone concepts and provides aggregated statistics , independent of minor variations in text language . For milestones that represent an entirely new concept in the system , the expert approves the creation of a new canonical milestone concept . Before it is added to the system - wide list of milestone suggestions , the expert may lightly edit the text if needed to ﬁx typos , remove any references to gender or the child’s name to make it more universal , translate to English if originally written in a non - English language , etc . These language edits always stay true to the original intended meaning of the milestone text , but make it more accessible to other users who may want to add it to their children’s diaries . Additionally , the new canonical milestone concept is assigned one or more developmental domain categories like gross motor , ﬁne motor , language comprehension , etc . ( described further in the Developmental Domains of Milestones section below ) . If the milestone does not qualify as a developmental milestone ( e . g . “ﬁrst visit to Grandma” ) , or is gibberish , the expert ﬂags the milestone to ensure it is not suggested to other users or included in overall developmental statistics . This expert curation process ensures clean , reliable , aggregated statistics for milestones and high - quality suggestions , while preserving the user’s unique , personalized language choices and authorship within their own diaries . Current User Base The current user base ( as of December 27 , 2016 ) comprises 490 users who completed the registration process for a total of 518 children . Users were recruited through advertising on social media , especially targeting groups supporting parents of young children , and through media exposure about the project . A small number of users were recruited as participants in studies performed by university students and researchers in child development , afﬁliated with the ﬁrst author . Most ( 95 . 10 % ) users registered one child , and almost all ( 99 . 03 % ) identiﬁed themselves as the children’s biological mothers . The average age of children at registration was 16 . 15 months ( median = 10 . 37 months , SD = 18 . 34 months , range = 3 days – 13 . 29 years ; see Figure 3 ) . As ﬁtting for the early child - hood focus of the project , 95 . 75 % were under age 4 years , 91 . 70 % were under age 3 years , and 81 . 27 % were under age 2 years . We found the few ( 4 . 25 % ) older children in the system tended to fall into one of two categories : ( 1 ) older children who were the siblings of young children , added by users who focused primarily on the younger sibling ( s ) but also created diaries for the older sibling ( s ) ; and ( 2 ) children with signiﬁcant developmental delays , whose parents continued to closely monitor their milestones past the young ages at which typically - developing children are routinely monitored . It is important to note that since the statistics shown to users are based on percentiles , which are insensitive to outliers , any developmentally - delayed children do not noticeably skew statistics for typically - developing children . About half ( 50 . 97 % ) of children were boys , and the average pregnancy length was 38 . 90 weeks ( median = 39 weeks , SD = 1 . 94 ) , with 8 . 16 % of the sample born preterm ( deﬁned as < 37 weeks of gestation ) . For those who provided extra elective information , on average birth weight was 3 . 25 kg ( median = 3 . 27 kg , SD = 0 . 63 kg , range = 1 . 30 – 5 . 19 kg ) , 3 . 28 % of children were part of a multiple - order pregnancy like twins or triplets . A majority ( 67 . 67 % ) were the ﬁrst - born children in their families , and another 19 . 23 % second - born . Figure 3 . Child ages at registration ( 0 - 4 years ) . User Activity Patterns Counted together , users added a total of 5 , 894 milestones to their children’s diaries , corresponding to 537 canonical mile - stone concepts ( for example , “started walking” and “began to walk” counted as two milestones but as a single canonical milestone concept ) . The mean number of diary milestones per child , after accounting for some deletions , is 10 . 99 ( median = 5 . 00 , SD = 23 . 63 , range = 1 – 142 , see Figure 4 ) . Figure 4 . Number of milestones per child’s developmental diary . An ad - ditional 8 . 97 % of diaries have over 25 milestones , up to 142 ( not shown ) . Users added milestones to their diaries in any of three main ways ( see Figure 5 ) : 1 . selecting from a list of suggested existing milestones ( 58 . 16 % of milestones ) ; 2 . entering their own unique , original milestone text ( 16 . 74 % ) ; or 3 . starting to type their own milestone text and then selecting an existing milestone from an “auto - complete” suggestion matching their partial text to a list of existing milestones ( 14 . 93 % ) . No matter the method , users always recorded the age ( or , equivalently , date ) at which their child achieved that milestone . Figure 5 . The various methods users chose to add milestones to their children’s diaries . Users mostly add milestones from the accumulating suggestion lists . The age at which a milestone was achieved was typically not the same day the milestone was recorded in Baby CROINC— in fact , only 4 . 13 % of milestones were recorded the same day , though 10 . 26 % were recorded within a week . The lag time between a milestone’s achievement and its addition to the diary could be because the user reported a child’s milestones retrospectively for ages prior to Baby CROINC registration , or because they only thought to record it later ( perhaps after seeing it on the list of suggested milestones ) . The median time lag is 2 . 47 months ( mean = 5 . 96 months , SD = 11 . 10 months ) . As is common for websites and mobile apps , most users did not subsequently return to Baby CROINC to add additional milestones to their children’s diaries after their initial visits . ( Users may have returned to view the existing diary and statis - tics while not entering additional milestones , but such behavior is not currently logged , and hence is not included in the visit count . ) However , 22 . 10 % of users did return for additional diary entries ; of these , over half came back for a single ad - ditional visit , and the rest up to 43 times . The overall user activity time range—that is , the time between the dates of the user’s ﬁrst and last / latest active visit—averaged 73 . 56 days ( median = 39 days , SD = 88 . 19 days , range = 1 day – 1 . 25 years ; see Figure 6 ) with 88 . 70 % within 6 months . Figure 6 . User activity time range ( 0 – 6 months ) . ASSESSMENT We now examine how Baby CROINC performs with regard to the two design goals of personalization and objectivity , and explore the impact of CCI . Assessment of Personalization Goal Users personalized their children’s diaries in several ways . Milestone Choices Which milestones to include in their children’s diaries was entirely up to the user , and their choices are highly diverse . For example , consider the three most popular milestones in the system : 1 . “began to smile at people” in 115 ( 22 . 20 % ) diaries , 2 . “started walking alone” in 100 ( 19 . 31 % ) diaries , and 3 . “started crawling” in 96 ( 18 . 53 % ) diaries . Of the 518 children in the system , only 9 ( 1 . 74 % ) had all three milestones in their diaries , while 326 ( 62 . 93 % ) did not have any of them . 15 ( 2 . 89 % ) children had ( 1 ) and ( 2 ) but not ( 3 ) ; another 15 ( 2 . 89 % ) children had both ( 1 ) and ( 3 ) but not ( 2 ) ; and 31 ( 5 . 98 % ) children had both ( 2 ) and ( 3 ) but not ( 1 ) . Developmental Domains of Milestones Part of the user’s choices about which milestone to record is also which aspect of child development to focus on , whether more physical or communicative . Figure 7 shows the dis - tribution of all diary milestones as categorized by develop - mental domain . Gross motor ( e . g . , “started crawling” ) is the most popular domain , followed by ﬁne motor ( “started eat - ing with a spoon” ) , cognitive ( “follows things with eyes” ) , speech ( “began to babble” ) , social ( “shows affection to par - ents” ) , emotional ( “shows fear of strangers” ) , and language comprehension ( “follows simple instructions” ) . Figure 7 . Percentages of diary milestones by developmental domain . About a third of diary milestones are devoted to motor development . Additional lower - frequency developmental domains , not shown in the ﬁgure , include self - care activities ( “began to help undress himself” ) , non - verbal communication ( “points at what she wants” ) , events ( “ﬁrst day of nursery school” ) , regulation ( “sleeping through the night” ) , medical ( “ﬂu vaccination” ) , and behavior problems ( “started throwing food intentionally” ) . A few parents also chose to record attributes ( “loves music” ) and physical features ( such as weight measurements ) . Ages of Milestones Another part of the user’s choices about which milestone to record is also which age to focus on . Most milestones were reported during the child’s ﬁrst year of life : the overall median milestone age is 229 days ( SD = 308 . 02 , range = birth – 10 . 4 years , see Figure 8 ) , and 97 . 17 % of milestones were reported for under the age of four years . As expected , this milestone age distribution followed the general shape of the distribution of ages at registration ( Figure 3 ) . Figure 8 . The child ages ( 0 – 4 years ) for which milestones were reported . For those children with at least two diary milestones , the av - erage age range of reported milestones—i . e . , the time gap between the youngest to the oldest milestone within the diary— is 9 . 52 months ( median = 6 . 08 months , SD = 12 . 17 months , range = 1 day – 10 . 42 years ; see Figure 9 ) . Of course , the overall age of the child 5 is important to consider when under - 5 We calculated a child’s overall age at the date of the last diary activ - ity , thus preventing skewing from the children’s natural continuation standing this diary age range . For example , a 6 month diary range for a 6 - month - old child covers 100 % of the child’s life - time , whereas the same 6 month diary range for a 2 - year - old child covers only 25 % of the child’s lifetime . On average , the diary covered 56 . 32 % of the child’s lifetime ( median = 58 . 50 % , SD = 27 . 66 % , range = 1 . 08 – 100 % ; see Figure 10 ) . Figure 9 . The range of time covered within a child’s diary . Figure 10 . The percentage of a child’s life covered by his or her diary . Assessment of Objectivity Goal Internal Validity for Baby CROINC Percentiles Child development research ( detailed in the Discussion sec - tion ) shows developmental differences between preterm chil - dren and full - term children , as well as between boys and girls . We analyzed Baby CROINC for these patterns . An indepen - dent samples t - test showed that preterm children ( deﬁned as being born before 37 weeks of gestation ) had signiﬁcantly lower median percentiles , relative to full - term children , in the gross motor ( 22 % difference , t ( 305 ) = 4 . 10 , p ≤ 0 . 001 ) and social ( 17 % difference , t ( 238 ) = 2 . 70 , p = 0 . 008 ) domains . Independent samples t - tests for the developmental domains , indicated that girls had higher median percentiles than boys in the social domain ( 10 % difference , t ( 238 ) = 2 . 76 , p = . 006 ) . of aging even after the parent has ceased or paused using the system to record milestones . Note the date of the last diary activity is always later than ( or occasionally , the same as ) the date of the last recorded milestone , as milestones are always recorded as having happened in the past ( or occasionally , the present day ) . External Validity for Baby CROINC Percentiles For the 252 canonical milestone concepts in Baby CROINC which corresponded to published CDC milestones ( described previously in the System Initialization section ) , we investi - gated the average age difference between the published CDC ages and the children’s ages in CROINC for that milestone . We expected a skew towards positive age differences— meaning the Baby CROINC milestone was achieved earlier ( at a younger age ) than the published CDC age . This is because the CDC age does not indicate the age at which the milestone was achieved ( as the Baby CROINC age does ) but rather the age by which the CDC recommends pediatricians start being concerned , if the milestone was not achieved anytime ear - lier . Additionally , CDC ages are purposefully published to correspond to typical well - baby visit ages ( 2 , 4 , 6 , 9 , 12 , 18 months and 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 years ) , which may not correspond to the milestone’s “natural” age range . On the other hand , any Baby CROINC children with developmental delays contribute towards a skew in the opposite direction . The results show that the median difference between the CDC age and the Baby CROINC age , across all milestones in all developmental domains , is 2 . 96 months ( SD = 8 . 40 months ) . See Figure 11 for age differences between CDC and Baby CROINC per domain . Spearman correlations were high ( r = 0 . 72 – 0 . 95 across domains ) and signiﬁcant ( p < 0 . 001 ) between the median age reported for milestones in Baby CROINC across children and the age cutoff set by the CDC for corresponding milestones in each of the seven main devel - opmental domains . Figure 11 . Median age difference between Baby CROINC age and CDC age , per developmental domain . The age difference is between 2 . 29 and 6 . 05 months with more complex domains showing the largest gap Assessment of Curated Crowd Intelligence ( CCI ) Learning New Concepts Using the Crowd In exploratory research , the amount of meaningful collected data grows over time . Milestones reported by users in Baby CROINC are considered novel when they represent new canon - ical milestone concepts which didn’t previously exist in the system , as opposed to simply a different language formula - tion of an existing context . For example , consider when a user adds a milestone like “David began to smile” when the “started smiling” canonical milestone concept already exists in the system—this does not add novel information to the system ( even though the exact language of the milestone is new ) . How - ever , novel information is added when a user creates a “David began interacting with videoconferencing” if no prior “began interacting with videoconferencing” - like canonical milestone concept existed . After some minor language edits from the expert curator , there is now a new canonical milestone concept in the system , available for other users to add to their own children’s diaries . As described in the User Activity Patterns section , the system was initialized with 252 canonical milestone concepts drawn from a published CDC list . Over time , user input increased the number of canonical milestone concepts in the system by 285 , to reach the current total of 537—i . e . , 238 % of the original number of canonical milestone concepts . Figure 12 shows that the amount of meaningful knowledge in the system grows steadily as the users interact with it , demonstrating that our system is able to harness crowd intelligence to extensively create new , meaningful insights . Of especial interest , the average slope of Figure 12 does not signiﬁcantly decrease or plateau over time . This indicates that the system has not yet reached a “saturation” point . As a result , we anticipate that there is still a signiﬁcant amount of child - hood development milestone concepts that Baby CROINC has not yet captured . This evidence shows the importance of personalized , parent - authored and expert - curated recording systems like Baby CROINC , which greatly expand upon the existing knowledge base devised only by child development experts . Figure 12 . Exploratory data accumulation over time . The ﬁgure shows the growth of canonical milestone concepts in the system over time as users interact with the system , relative to the amount the system had when initially launched . The growth does not appear to have plateaued to a maximum value , indicating even more concepts are likely to be added in the future . Making Milestone Statistics More Signiﬁcant Baby CROINC only shows its users statistics for milestones which have been recorded in the diaries of at least ﬁve chil - dren ; below this threshold we consider the statistics as essen - tially meaningless . Merging equivalent milestones together makes it possible to display signiﬁcant statistics , even when the data for each individual milestone text is relatively sparse . For example , if essentially identical milestones like “started walking” and “began to walk” were treated as separate canoni - cal milestone concepts , instead of being merged through the CCI process , then only 12 . 80 % of milestones would contain enough data to provide users with signiﬁcant statistics . By grouping equivalent milestone texts as canonical milestone concepts , the number of milestones which have signiﬁcant statistics increased to 68 . 35 % —an increase of 534 % . This emphasizes the value of the CCI process . Quantifying the Amount of Expert Curation Effort Although very beneﬁcial to Baby CROINC’s ultimate quality , the CCI approach does add to the cost of running the system . To date , 1 , 013 milestone texts were created by the experts as clariﬁcations for new user milestone texts ( 46 % of all unique milestone texts in the system ) . In addition , 745 user - created milestones have been identiﬁed by the experts as equivalent to existing canonical milestone concepts . This level of curation requires regular review time by the trained expert team . Analysis of system logs shows that curator work amounts to 1 – 2 hours during normal weeks , and 6 – 8 hours during peak weeks ( e . g . , time spent translating content when native speakers of a new language are introduced to the system ) . During normal weeks , the amount of curation work has a linear relation to the amount of user - created milestones in the system ( R 2 = 0 . 977 ) . Assuming that user - created milestones are the main factor driving the need for expert curation , linear regression analysis shows that curators spend an average time of 4 minutes and 11 seconds ( ± 4 seconds ) on each user - created milestone . DISCUSSION Baby CROINC is a crowd - based platform for child develop - ment tracking and screening , which integrates expert - curated crowd data using a CCI process to achieve its two main design goals , personalization and objectivity . Baby CROINC facil - itated the creation of personalized developmental diaries , as demonstrated by the rich array of milestone choices and devel - opmental domains focuses seen in different users’ diaries . Parents’ activity patterns show the value of allowing free se - lection and narration of a personal developmental proﬁle that matches the stage , context and interests of each child and fam - ily . Parents tended to describe milestones in the context of speciﬁc activities , objects , or family ( e . g . , “Jim started playing with shape sorter” ) . From a health care perspective , this de - velopmental documentation can highlight areas of particular concern for a given family and milestones of which parents may be unaware . At the same time , personalization makes it difﬁcult to meaningfully compare diaries containing such different behaviors , ages , time frames , and language choices . Baby CROINC relies on the power of crowd wisdom in over - coming these challenges , as well as the CCI approach for identifying common milestones across diaries despite varia - tions in parent language . The most common milestones were in the gross - and ﬁne - motor domains . This is probably because these domains are easily observable and constantly changing during the ﬁrst year of life . Tracking motor milestones is important , as they are often the ﬁrst warning signs observed at an early age even if the disorder is not neuro - muscular ( e . g . , [ 24 ] ) . However , it is important to increase parental awareness of milestones at - tained and expected in social - communication domains as well . This awareness is critical for identifying delays and helping parents meet and enrich their child’s social - communication development . It is possible to facilitate the creation of de - velopmentally diverse diaries by tweaking the pool of sug - gested milestones presented to parents ; however , this may compromise the crowd - based approach Baby CROINC takes . The development of a design balancing both considerations is needed . These ﬁndings call for providing parents with more information regarding early childhood development , to promote awareness of age - appropriate development in the social - communication domain . Of course , Baby CROINC is meant to support and augment , not replace , real - world health care professional evaluations when they are available . In the absence of such evaluations , whether because of time gaps between doctor check - ups or because of insufﬁcient resources in developing or lower socio - economic communities , inaccurate information risks leading to unnecessary parental anxiety , and possibly resulting in false positive diagnoses of developmental delays—or worse , false negatives ( where the child needs intervention but is not prop - erly diagnosed ) . Considering these risks , research validating crowd - based percentiles is important to promote conﬁdence in their accuracy . The ﬁndings presented in this paper start this process by demonstrating “real - world” patterns . The data in the Internal Validity for Baby CROINC Percentiles sec - tion show girls were in higher communication percentiles than boys , ﬁndings which are in line with traditional child development data [ 2 ] . Similarly , our ﬁndings about the lower developmental percentiles of preterm versus full - term children are in line with existing evidence [ 13 ] . In the External Validity for Baby CROINC Percentiles section , the Baby CROINC percentiles were also validated against the published CDC age norms for comparable milestones . While most Baby CROINC percentiles tend to present a more advanced developmental pic - ture than the CDC , this is expected because the former records “ﬁrst achieved” while the latter lists “when to worry” which is generally later . This difference was greatest for milestones in the emotional , speech , and cognitive domains . We offer two plausible hypotheses : ( 1 ) milestones in these domains have a higher threshold for clinical concern and a wider range of what is considered typical ; or ( 2 ) parents may be less equipped to precisely characterize these abstract domains . Similar dif - ferences were demonstrated in previous research , where motor milestones were recorded earlier by mothers via electronic diary methods than they were observed clinically [ 9 ] . This pattern of differences between modes of assessment can be attributed to standardized assessment’s goal of minimizing “false positives . ” One of the potential threats to the objectivity of such a platform is its sample bias . However , our user base shows encourag - ing indications of sample representation , as seen in the equal distribution of boys and girls and the reported rate of preterm births amongst Baby CROINC children ( 8 . 16 % ) , which corre - sponds to the population rate [ 10 ] . The correlations between Baby CROINC percentiles and CDC - published norms in cor - responding developmental domains indicate that the sample is not biased in terms of a greater percentage of children with a developmental delay . Further work is needed to look at sample representation across other demographic features in a diverse population . Finally , results from this study indicate that CCI is a feasible and critical approach , given the personalized nature of the crowd data entered . Expert curators were highly involved in merging new milestones with existing ones and in classifying milestones into developmental domains . Figure 12 shows a continuous increase in new information entered by users over time , information that required curation . The experts’ work on merging and clarifying milestones directly affected the crowd’s adoption of existing milestones and signiﬁcantly increased the users’ chances of viewing statistics for their children’s milestones . Our study is consistent with previous research showing that expert facilitators using a dashboard to manage real - time crowd data increased the quality of the information entered [ 5 , 21 ] , and in our case also the information provided . As with any manual process , there is a cost to the use of hu - man experts in terms of scalability and on - going resources . Enhancing the efﬁciency of the experts’ decision making is needed through the integration of automatic algorithms and assistance using natural language processing ( NLP ) and ma - chine learning tools , and potentially with a crowd of experts . The manual work done so far by curators provides a natural source of high - quality training and evaluation examples to aid the development of such algorithms . For Baby CROINC’s purposes , the curation must be of extremely high quality to maintain user trust . As automatic algorithms are likely to fall short of human quality , the tools will initially assist the curator behind the scenes in providing time - saving top suggestions to curators , which will then be conﬁrmed or overridden . Only when , or if , the tools are assessed as reliable enough to ap - proach perfect performance ( as compared to the human gold standard ) will we consider replacing some or all of the expert curators’ tasks with automatic algorithms . In the meantime , however , as a helpful guide for humans , we expect them to increase the efﬁciency and scalability of the curators’ work . Limitations While we believe that the user - driven approach is beneﬁcial and needed in today’s online environment , it doesn’t allow control of the number and type of milestones entered by par - ents , thus posing new challenges when seeking to compare different developmental trajectories for children in our system . In addition , showing statistics to parents and particularly the skewness of the entries to early achievement may create a bias in data entry ; parents may wish to modify their reported milestone dates to improve their child’s statistics and present them as “early achievers , ” or reluctant to record milestones for which their children are more delayed . Adding information about standardized norms for each milestone can assist parents in interpreting skewed statistics . Characterizing parents who use the system—in terms of their technological proﬁciency , personal impact , and their user experience—may improve its applicability to diverse socio - economical backgrounds . For re - search in child development , studies looking at Baby CROINC percentiles’ correlation with traditional developmental test scores would be highly informative and would improve our understanding of the value of our system as a pre - screening tool . In absence of a clinical sample of children with known developmental disorders , the validity of Baby CROINC as a pre - screening tool has yet to be demonstrated . Finally , the amount of expert curation currently grows lin - early with system size , making it too costly for massive - scale systems . However , the effectiveness of automatic and curator - assisting algorithms utilizing NLP and machine learning tends to increase as the amount of data grows , and therefore we believe that an algorithm - assisted CCI approach will remain feasible even as the system continues to grow in size . Potential design improvements This study raises several ideas for further improvements to Baby CROINC : 1 . Integrating NLP and machine learning tools to improve the scalability of the crowd - curating process ( either as an aid to the expert and / or to automate aspects of the curation ) ; 2 . Prompting parents to add milestones in developmental do - mains that they have not thought to focus on yet ; 3 . Presenting age - corrected statistics for children born preterm ; 4 . Increasing the amount of demographical / background infor - mation collected from parents , to improve the personaliza - tion of statistics and for child development research ; 5 . Providing ways to share the developmental conclusions in Baby CROINC with the children’s health care providers . Conclusions Baby CROINC is a crowd - based platform for child develop - ment tracking and screening , which integrates expert - curated crowd data . Its two main design goals are personalization and objectivity , using CCI to resolve the tension between them . Unlike pre - deﬁned developmental screening tools based on a ﬁxed number and type of milestones , Baby CROINC provides parents with an opportunity to describe development from their perspective , in their own words , and focus on their own interests and concerns . Yet unlike completely free - form narra - tives , like those on online parenting forums or social media , Baby CROINC provides objective statistical data to educate parents about their child’s development . Our work demonstrates the value of expert involvement in curating crowd - based child development data to provide high - quality , personalized statistics to parents . Further research is important for measuring the impact of using the system on advancing parental knowledge , parenting practices , and for early detection of developmental delays . Acknowledgements We thank the team members for their contribution to the Baby CROINC system design and maintenance : Gal Agmon , Tal Bussel , Daniel Moran , Elisheva Rotman Argaman , Ori Sberlo , Yael Schwartz , Gal Shachaf , Danielle Wolinski , Matan Yechieli , Almog Zimelman , and Ohad Zohar . The research of the ﬁrst author received funding from a Yigal Alon Fellowship ; research of the last three co - authors received funding from the European Research Council ( under grant agreement 240258 ) and the Israeli Science Foundation ( grant 1501 / 14 ) . REFERENCES 1 . Paul Beatty . 1995 . Understanding the standardized / non - standardized interviewing controversy . Journal of Ofﬁcial Statistics 11 , 2 ( 1995 ) , 147 . 2 . Ayelet Ben - Sasson and Alice S Carter . 2012 . The application of the ﬁrst year inventory for ASD screening in Israel . Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders 42 , 9 ( 2012 ) , 1906 – 1916 . 3 . Ayelet Ben - Sasson and Elad Yom - Tov . 2016 . Online Concerns of Parents Suspecting Autism Spectrum Disorder in Their Child : Content Analysis of Signs and Automated Prediction of Risk . J Med Internet Res 18 , 11 ( 22 Nov 2016 ) , e300 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 2196 / jmir . 5439 4 . Jay M Bernhardt and Elizabeth M Felter . 2004 . Online pediatric information seeking among mothers of young children : results from a qualitative study using focus groups . Journal of Medical Internet Research 6 , 1 ( 2004 ) , e7 . 5 . Joel Chan , Steven Dang , and Steven P . Dow . 2016 . Improving Crowd Innovation with Expert Facilitation . In Proceedings of the 19th ACM Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing ( CSCW ’16 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 1223 – 1235 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2818048 . 2820023 6 . Geraldine Dawson , Sharon B Ashman , and Leslie J Carver . 2000 . The role of early experience in shaping behavioral and brain development and its implications for social policy . Development and Psychopathology 12 , 04 ( 2000 ) , 695 – 712 . 7 . Deborah Dobrez , Anthony Lo Sasso , Jane Holl , Madeleine Shalowitz , Scott Leon , and Peter Budetti . 2001 . Estimating the cost of developmental and behavioral screening of preschool children in general pediatric practice . Pediatrics 108 , 4 ( 2001 ) , 913 – 922 . 8 . Mia Wechsler Doron , Emma Trenti - Paroli , and Dana Wechsler Linden . 2013 . Supporting parents in the NICU : A new app from the US , ‘MyPreemie’ : A tool to provide parents of premature babies with support , empowerment , education and participation in their infant’s care . Journal of Neonatal Nursing 19 , 6 ( 2013 ) , 303 – 307 . 9 . Kate Ellis - Davies , Elena Sakkalou , Nia C Fowler , Elma E Hilbrink , and Merideth Gattis . 2012 . CUE : The continuous uniﬁed electronic diary method . Behavior Research Methods 44 , 4 ( 2012 ) , 1063 – 1078 . 10 . C . Ferre , W . Callaghan , C . Olson , A . Sharma , and W . Barﬁeld . 2016 . Effects of Maternal Age and Age - Speciﬁc Preterm Birth Rates on Overall Preterm Birth Rates - United States , 2007 and 2014 . MMWR Morb . Mortal . Wkly . Rep . 65 , 43 ( Nov 2016 ) , 1181 – 1184 . 11 . Jeana Frost and Michael Massagli . 2008 . Social uses of personal health information within PatientsLikeMe , an online patient community : what can happen when patients have access to one anotherâ ˘A´Zs data . Journal of Medical Internet Research 10 , 3 ( 2008 ) , e15 . 12 . Joseph Hagan . 2008 . Bright futures : guidelines for health supervision of infants , children , and adolescents . American Academy of Pediatrics , Elk Grove Village , IL . 13 . Mary L Hediger , Mary D Overpeck , W Ruan , and James F Troendle . 2002 . Birthweight and gestational age effects on motor and social development . Paediatric and Perinatal Epidemiology 16 , 1 ( 2002 ) , 33 – 46 . 14 . Voxiva Inc . 2017 . Text4Baby™ . ( 2017 ) . https : / / www . text4baby . org / 15 . Juyoung Jang , Jodi Dworkin , and Jessie Connell . 2012 . Babycenter . com : New parent behavior in an online community . ( 2012 ) . 16 . Thomas Kellaghan . 1982 . The Effects of Standardized Testing . Springer Netherlands , Dordrecht . 17 . Kaylyn Khoo , Penny Bolt , Franz E Babl , Susan Jury , and Ran D Goldman . 2008 . Health information seeking by parents in the Internet age . Journal of Paediatrics and Child Health 44 , 7 - 8 ( 2008 ) , 419 – 423 . 18 . Julie A . Kientz , Rosa I . Arriaga , and Gregory D . Abowd . 2009 . Baby Steps : Evaluation of a System to Support Record - keeping for Parents of Young Children . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’09 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 1713 – 1722 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1518701 . 1518965 19 . Ana M Leon , Shannon Holliker , and Julie Pepe . 2015 . The importance of the ﬁrst 5 years : Pediatrician identiﬁcation of developmental delays and other related concerns . Journal of Social Service Research 41 , 4 ( 2015 ) , 425 – 444 . 20 . Ben MacNeill . 2017 . Trixie Tracker™ . ( 2017 ) . https : / / www . trixietracker . com / 21 . David Merritt , Jasmine Jones , Mark S . Ackerman , and Walter S . Lasecki . 2017 . Kurator : Using The Crowd to Help Families With Personal Curation Tasks . In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing ( CSCW ’17 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 1835 – 1849 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2998181 . 2998358 22 . Janet M Morahan - Martin . 2004 . How internet users ﬁnd , evaluate , and use online health information : A cross - cultural review . CyberPsychology & Behavior 7 , 5 ( 2004 ) , 497 – 510 . 23 . Committee on Children with Disabilities and others . 2001 . Developmental surveillance and screening of infants and young children . Pediatrics 108 , 1 ( 2001 ) , 192 – 195 . 24 . Sally Ozonoff , Gregory S Young , Mary Beth Steinfeld , Monique M Hill , Ian Cook , Ted Hutman , Suzanne Macari , Sally J Rogers , and Marian Sigman . 2009 . How early do parent concerns predict later autism diagnosis ? Journal of Developmental and Behavioral Pediatrics : JDBP 30 , 5 ( 2009 ) , 367 . 25 . Lars Plantin and Kristian Daneback . 2009 . Parenthood information and support on the internet : A literature review of research on parents and professionals online . BMC Family Practice 10 , 34 ( 2009 ) , 1 – 12 . 26 . Peter Sacks . 1999 . Standardized minds : the high price of America’s testing culture and what we can do to change it . Perseus Books , Cambridge , Mass . 27 . Steven Shelov . 2009 . Caring for your baby and young child : birth to age 5 . Bantam , New York . 28 . Jane Squires . 2009 . Ages & stages questionnaires : a parent - completed child monitoring system . Paul H . Brookes Publishing Company , Baltimore , Maryland . 29 . Hyewon Suh , John R . Porter , Alexis Hiniker , and Julie A . Kientz . 2014 . @ BabySteps : Design and Evaluation of a System for Using Twitter for Tracking Children’s Developmental Milestones . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’14 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 2279 – 2288 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2556288 . 2557386 30 . Brynn K Wainstein , Katy Sterling - Levis , Sally A Baker , Jonathan Taitz , and Michael Brydon . 2006 . Use of the Internet by parents of paediatric patients . Journal of Paediatrics and Child Health 42 ( 2006 ) , 528 – 532 . 31 . Paul Wicks , Michael Massagli , Jeana Frost , Catherine Brownstein , Sally Okun , Timothy Vaughan , Richard Bradley , and James Heywood . 2010 . Sharing health data for better outcomes on PatientsLikeMe . Journal of Medical Internet Research 12 , 2 ( 2010 ) , e19 .