The extracellular matrix ( ECM ) is a collection of bio - macromolecules that are present in intercellular space . The ECM provides cells with structural support and biochemical cues to direct cell growth and phenotype 1 . In vivo , most ECMs are formed by a hydrogel - like net - work of fibrous proteins , for example , collagen , fibronec - tin and elastin , which are embedded in a soft matrix of proteoglycans and polysaccharides 1 , 2 . The filamentous nature of the ECM strongly influences its physical prop - erties and its response to mechanical stress 3 . Tension exerted by cells on the fibrils affects cell fate through mechanotransduction 4 , 5 . The fibrillar structure also affects the signalling of growth factors , which bind to the fibre surface . This interaction alters growth factor signal transduction pathways 6 , 7 . The large pore size of fibril - lar networks ( up to several micrometres 8 ) enables facile transport of nutrients and waste . Furthermore , in sev - eral tissue types , including muscle 9 , skin 10 and articular cartilage 11 , fibre alignment results in ECM structural anisotropy , which influences function , differentiation and the direction of cell migration within tissues . Man - made ECM - mimetic hydrogels are promising materials for tissue engineering and 3D cell culture 12 because they can be used to recreate in vivo ECM properties and to provide biophysical and biochemi - cal cues . Biomimetic hydrogels can reproduce not only the structure of the ECM but also other essential fea - tures , such as mechanical properties and biochemical functionalization . Among a broad range of available biomimetic hydrogels , Matrigel ( reconstituted base - ment membrane ) is currently the gold standard for 3D cell culture ; however , it suffers from batch - to - batch variations and the inability to fine - tune its properties . Furthermore , Matrigel does not have a fibrillar structure and therefore cannot completely recreate the microen - vironment of fibrillar ECMs . Collagen and fibrin are fibrillar hydrogels that are routinely used for 3D cell culture , but composition variability and difficulties in purifying the proteins from growth factors and other biomolecules are drawbacks of such naturally derived ECM proteins . By contrast , synthetic hydrogels offer precise control over composition and biophysical properties 13 . Unfortunately , commonly used synthetic hydrogels that are formed from crosslinked networks of polymer molecules ( molecular hydrogels ) fail to mimic the fibrous architecture of the ECM , which limits their biological relevance . Man - made fibrillar hydrogels are a sub - class of hydrogels that can be obtained from the supramolecu - lar assembly of building blocks . These hydrogels have a fibrous structure that mimics the filamentous architec - ture of the ECM , and they benefit from the same pre - cision and control that can be achieved with synthetic molecular hydrogels . The fibrillar structure of these hydrogels determines their mechanical properties , pore size and transport properties 8 . Because of their ability to recapitulate the filamentous nature of in vivo ECMs , fibrillar hydrogels have biological relevance . However , fibrillar morphology alone is not sufficient to mimic all properties of an in vivo ECM owing to the complex relationship between structure , biophysical properties , such as mechanical properties or permeability , the Design and applications of man - made biomimetic fibrillar hydrogels Elisabeth Prince 1 and Eugenia Kumacheva 1 , 2 , 3 * Abstract | Many extracellular matrices ( ECMs ) have a filamentous architecture , which influences cell growth and phenotype and imparts tissues with specific properties . Man - made fibrillar hydrogels can function as biomimetic materials to reproduce the filamentous nature and properties of ECMs and to serve as scaffolds for 3D cell culture and tissue engineering . Different types of synthetic nanofibrillar hydrogels have been developed , with diverse mechanisms of assembly and a variety of physical properties and applications . In this Review , we explore the design and properties of biomimetic man - made nanofibrillar hydrogels . We discuss the assembly of peptides , block copolymer worm - like micelles and filamentous nanoparticles into fibrillar hydrogels and investigate the relationship between structure and physical as well as biochemical properties . Potential applications for 3D cell culture and tissue engineering are examined , and the properties and structure of natural and man - made fibrillar hydrogels are compared . Finally , we critically assess current challenges and future directions of the field . 1 Department of Chemistry , University of Toronto , Toronto , ON , Canada . 2 Institute of Biomaterials and Biomedical Engineering , University of Toronto , Toronto , ON , Canada . 3 Department of Chemical Engineering and Applied Chemistry , University of Toronto , Toronto , ON , Canada . * e - mail : eugenia . kumacheva @ utoronto . ca https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41578 - 018 - 0077 - 9 REVIEWs NAtuRe Reviews | MATERiAlS volume 4 | FeBRu ARY 2019 | 99 organization of adhesive ligands and the way that cells interact with the ECM . Biomimetic fibrillar hydrogels are generally formed by the hierarchical assembly of molecular or nanocol - loidal building blocks into fibrils , followed by bundling , branching , crosslinking and / or entanglement . Possible building blocks are peptides 14 – 17 , block copolymers 18 – 20 , cellulose 21 , 22 , chitosan 23 , 24 nanowhiskers and cellulose nanofibres 22 , 25 . Alternatively , fibrillar hydrogels can be fabricated by electrospinning 26 , 27 or extrusion 28 of polymer fibres , which entangle to form a network and , ultimately , a hydrogel . Biomimetic man - made fibrillar hydrogels can be used as scaffolds for tissue engineering and for 3D cell culture . In this Review , we discuss the design , types , struc - ture , anisotropy , chemical functionalization , proper - ties and applications of fibrillar hydrogels . We focus on hydrogels that are prepared by a bottom - up approach , wherein molecular or nanoparticle structural units are hierarchically assembled into fibrils that form a filamen - tous hydrogel , as opposed to fibrillar hydrogels prepared by electrospinning or extrusion 27 , 29 . We investigate the fibrillar components of natural ECMs and highlight the importance of mimicking the ECM structure in biomi - metic man - made hydrogel matrices . Different types of building block and assembly mechanism are examined , and the structure and properties of biomimetic fibrillar hydrogels are compared . In this Review , fibrils are defined as individual entities with discrete diameters on the order of several nanometres , whereas a fibre is defined as a bundle formed by multiple fibrils . The diameter of fibres varies , depending on the number of fibrils , and can be in the range of tens to hundreds of nanometres . Fibrillar nature of the ECM Nanofibrillar components The three main fibrous proteins of the ECM are elastin , collagen and fibronectin 2 . In the ECM , fibres are formed by the coordinated supramolecular assembly of the indi - vidual proteins 30 . Following assembly , the fibres are often stabilized through enzymatic crosslinking or the forma - tion of disulfide bonds between the proteins ( Fig . 1 ) . The diameters of ECM fibres vary depending on the tissue type ( Table 1 ) and can range from 10 nm to 300 μm . Each of the three fibrillar proteins has a distinct structure , which determines its specific function in the ECM . Elastin primarily forms elastic fibres ( Fig . 1a ) but can also exist as a highly branched fine network in connective tissues 31 . Elastic fibres consist of a core of bundled elastin fibrils , surrounded by a sheath of fibrillar glycoproteins ( mostly , fibrillin and fibulin ) 32 , 33 . Elastic fibres are the most thermally and chemically stable component of the ECM . They are formed during embryonic development and have very low turnover rates ( for example , a half - life a b Mechanotransduction Collagen ﬁbre Elasticﬁbre Growth factor binding Integrins Cytoskeleton actin ﬁlament Tension ( cell contractility ) Nucleus MAPK RHO Action at a distance through cytoskeleton Signalling cascades initiated by forces at the cell surface Increased proximity to cell surface Integrins acting as cofactors in growth factor signalling Fig . 1 | Nanofibrillar extracellular matrices . a | Images of extracellular matrix ( ECM ) fibres in vivo . Top panel : scanning electron microscopy ( SEM ) images of elastic fibres in the mouse aortic adventitia at × 9 , 100 magnification ( left ) and × 55 , 000 magnification ( right ) . Middle panel : SEM image of collagen fibres in a collagen hydrogel . Scale bar = 200 nm . Bottom panel : confocal microscopy image of immunofluorescence - stained fibronectin in a cell - derived 3D matrix ; an individual fibre is indicated by the arrow . Scale bar = 5 μ m . b | Effect of the fibrillar structure on mechanotransduction and growth factor signalling . Cells can exert forces on the fibres through cell - surface proteins and the cytoskeleton , which are both mechanically coupled to the ECM , initiating signalling pathways via mitogen - activated protein kinase ( MAPK ) and the RHO family of GTPases ( RHO ) . Growth factors bind to the fibre surface , which increases their proximity to the cell membrane . Furthermore , integrins can act as cofactors for fibre - bound growth factors . Top image in panel a is adapted with permission from ReF . 163 , Archives of Histology and Cytology . Middle image in panel a is adapted from ReF . 179 , CC - BY - 4 . 0 . Bottom image in panel a is adapted with permission from ReF . 180 , AAAS . www . nature . com / natrevmats R e v i e w s 100 | FeBRu ARY 2019 | volume 4 of 50 – 70 years in human arteries 33 ) . Elastic fibres are not formed during adulthood and thus mechanical damage or proteolytic degradation of elastin results in a perma - nent change in the mechanical properties of the ECM and the tissue 34 . Collagen promotes tissue stiffness and strength and is the most abundant fibrous ECM protein in the human body 34 . Collagen fibrils are hierarchically assembled from individual collagen molecules and have a length of 300 nm and a diameter of 1 . 5 nm . The fibrils are assembled into fibres of tens of micrometres in length and 10 – 200 nm in diameter 35 ( Fig . 1a ) . Unlike elastic fibres , collagen fibre networks have short half - lives and are constantly degraded , synthesized and remodelled , and as a result , collagen fibrils and fibres are responsible for maintaining homeostasis of the mechanical properties of the ECM 34 . Fibronectin fibres facilitate cell adhesion and migration through interactions with integrins — the major ECM receptors of cells 36 . Fibronectin fibres are ubiquitously expressed in the ECMs of all cell types . Fibronectin supports the organization of ECM fibre networks by acting as a temporary matrix during embry - onic development and wound healing 37 – 39 . Fibronectin interacts with different binding partners , including cell - surface integrins 40 and a variety of growth factors 36 . Many of its binding sites are cryptic domains that are revealed only when fibronectin is strained and elon - gated , from a relaxed state to a stretched state and on to a state near the point of failure 41 , 42 . Thus , the stress – strain behaviour of fibronectin fibres impacts their function . Properties of fibrillar ECM The concentration of the different ECM fibres plays a central role in determining the mechanical properties of the ECM and tissues . Elastic fibres are responsible for the elasticity of tissues that are generally subjected to stretching , for example , blood vessels , muscles and skin 32 , 33 , whereas collagen fibres , which are substantially less extensible than elastic fibres , endow tissues with stiffness and strength 34 . Changes in collagen and elas - tin levels in the ECM alter the mechanical properties of tissues and can compromise tissue function 32 , 33 , 43 . For example , loss in the integrity of elastic fibres with age changes the mechanical properties of tissues and is the cause of age - related skin wrinkling and stiffening of arteries 32 . The structure , dimensions and arrangement of ECM fibres vary in different tissues and disease states . For example , excessive deposition of fibrillar ECM com - ponents ( in particular , collagen ) occurs during fibrosis and causes ECM stiffening , which is also characteristic of a tumour stroma 43 , 44 . Fibre alignment occurs in many tissues , for example , muscles 9 , the heart myocardium , skin 10 and articular cartilage 11 , determining the struc - tural anisotropy of the ECM . ECM anisotropy is required to ensure the correct aligned morphology of cells , for example , cardiomyocytes and myotubes in cardiac and muscle tissue , respectively . Fibre alignment also occurs in the tumour stroma . In metastatic tumours , fibres align perpendicular to the boundary of the tumour , which has been suggested to facilitate metastasis 45 – 47 . The fibrillar structure of the ECM also influences growth factor signalling ( Fig . 1b ) . Growth factors bind to the surface of ECM fibres , which brings them in close proximity to the cell surface 7 and facilitates interactions between growth factors and integrins 6 . The surfaces of collagen and fibronectin fibrils bind vascular endothe - lial growth factor ( VEGF ) , bone morphogenic protein ( BMP ) , transforming growth factor - β ( TGFβ ) and epidermal growth factor ( EGF ) , which subsequently interact with cells as solid - phase ligands 6 , 7 . The binding of growth factors to ECM fibres is often necessary for their function owing to the requirement of juxtaposi - tion between integrins and growth factor receptors 6 . The extensibility of ECM fibres also affects growth factor binding ; for example , the stretching of fibronectin leads to the exposure of cryptic domains that can bind either growth factors or the cell surface 48 . Table 1 | Diameters of extracellular matrix fibres in vivo Fibre type Tissue or organ Fibre diameter Characterization method Refs Collagen fibrils Stroma of carcinoma 30 – 50 nm EM of sectioned KAT - 4 ( cell line ) model carcinomas in mice 182 Scleral fibrils ( collagen type I ) 25 – 230 nm AFM and EM of human scleral tissue 183 , 184 Dermis 59 . 2 ± 2 . 5 nm EM of sectioned human dermis 185 Reticular fibres : basement membranes of epithelial tissues ; surface of adipose tissue ; muscle ; Schwann cells ; fibrous reticulum of lymphoid tissues 20 – 40 nm EM of reticular fibres in different organs in rats ( individual fibrils or small bundles found throughout the body ) 163 Collagen fibres Connective tissues ( tendons and ligaments ) 1 – 300 μ m EM of mammalian connective tissue ( bundles of highly oriented collagen fibrils ) 186 Elastin Laminae in the aorta , blood vessel walls 100 – 200 nm EM of sectioned rat aorta 31 Loose connective tissue 0 . 2 – 1 . 5 μ m EM of human connective tissue ( elastin forms a highly branched network ) 187 Fibronectin All mammalian 10 – 1 , 000 nm Fibronectin of various tissue ( different imaging methods ) 188 , 189 AFM , atomic force microscopy ; EM , electron microscopy . NAtuRe Reviews | MATERiAlS R e v i e w s volume 4 | FeBRu ARY 2019 | 101 The nonlinear mechanical behaviour is one of the most important and somewhat unique characteristics of fibrous protein networks . Gels formed by semiflexi - ble proteins respond to shear and tensile deformation by strain stiffening and by exerting negative normal stresses 49 . Cells sense the mechanical properties of the surrounding matrix by exerting tension on ECM fibres via integrins , which triggers mechanotransduction mechanisms that can cause changes in cell phenotype 4 , 5 ( Fig . 1b ) . Mechanotransduction can be initiated by signal - ling cascades at the cell surface or through cytoskeletal actin filaments , which mechanically link ECM fibres to the nucleus 50 . Therefore , forces exerted on ECM fibres are transferred to the nucleus through load - bearing cytoskel - etal actin filaments . In vitro studies and theoretical mod - elling show that the nonlinear stress – strain behaviour of fibril networks may influence mechanosensing and faci - litate cell - to - cell communication through specific fibre position and orientation 51 – 53 . Therefore , fibre architecture is important in the creation of biomimetic ECMs . Fibrillar hydrogels Assembly Fibrillar hydrogels form in a hierarchical process that can proceed via different pathways ( Fig . 2 ) . Although the hydrogels are all formed by fibrils or fibres , the mechanism of gel formation depends on the types of building block and their interactions . The building blocks can be molecules , for example , peptides or block copolymers , or colloidal particles . Organization into fibrils or fibres can be governed by hydrogen bonding , hydrophobic interactions , ionic interactions or π – π stacking , as well as combinations thereof . The first step of assembly usually involves the organization of molec - ular building blocks into thin nanofibrils ( 1 – 30 nm in diameter ) ( Fig . 2a ) , triggered by the attraction between particular segments of the molecules , while the rest of the molecule acts as a stabilizer . Attractive fragments are often aligned perpendicular to the long axis of the nanofibril . Nanofibrils have well - defined dimensions , which are controlled by the size of the fibril - forming a b Molecular building blocks Nanoparticle building blocks Entanglement Branching Association of ﬁbres and ﬁbrils Fibril assembly Fibril Fibre Peptides , block copolymers Cellulose nanoﬁbres , cellulose nanocrystals , chitin nanocrystals Fibre assembly Fibril entanglement and crosslinking Fibre entanglement and crosslinking Fibril bundling into ﬁbres ; ﬁbre entanglement and crosslinking Fibrillar hydrogel Fibrils have uniform diameters Fibrillar hydrogel Fibres have polydispersediameters Fig . 2 | Assembly of man - made nanofibrillar hydrogels . a | Fibrillar hydrogels are assembled by molecular building blocks , including peptides and block copolymers , and by nanoparticles , such as cellulose nanofibres , cellulose nanocrystals or chitin nanocrystals . b | The different mechanisms of hydrogel formation are entanglement , branching and the association of fibres or fibrils . www . nature . com / natrevmats R e v i e w s 102 | FeBRu ARY 2019 | volume 4 molecules and the mechanism by which they pack into fibrils . Following the formation of fibrils , there are two possible scenarios ( Fig . 2a ) . The fibrils can either form a hydrogel as individual uniform - diameter entities , owing to association and / or entanglement 18 , 20 , 54 – 56 , or the fibrils can bundle to form fibres , which subsequently branch and / or entangle to form a hydrogel 16 , 57 – 59 . In the latter case , the fibres can adopt a broad range of diameters . In principle , bundling can take place in parallel with gel formation or even after gelation has occurred , which leads to a further increase in fibre diameter . Importantly , for applications in 3D cell culture and tissue engineer - ing , hydrogel formation has to occur around cells to establish a 3D scaffold , and thus fibre assembly and gelation have to be cytocompatible 12 . The first step of fibre formation , that is , the assembly of fibrils , can be skipped if high - aspect - ratio nanoparti - cles , such as cellulose nanofibres , cellulose nanocrystals or chitosan nanocrystals , are used as building blocks . The nanoparticles aggregate both end - to - end and side - by - side , thereby forming fibres 21 , 60 ( Fig . 2a ) . Alternatively , they can form hydrogels without bundling 61 , 62 . The formation of a network of fibrils or fibres can occur by entanglement , by branching , via the asso - ciation of fibrils or fibres or through a combination of these mechanisms ( Fig . 2b ) . The exact contribution of each mechanism in hydrogel formation has yet to be established 63 and is likely to vary between different types of fibrillar hydrogels 63 . For example , fibrillar hydrogels formed by β - hairpin peptides may establish a network owing to hydrophobic interactions between the fibrils , which act as physical crosslinks 64 ( Fig . 2b ) . Conversely , branching points between fibres were observed in hydrogels formed by cellulose nanocrystals 21 , 60 , 65 ( Fig . 2b ) . The properties of nanofibrillar hydrogels and their assembly kinetics largely depend on the fibril - forming building blocks and the mechanism of crosslinking . Peptide hydrogels Peptides are composed of two or more amino acids that are linked by amide bonds 15 . They associate to form fibrils owing to a variety of attractive non - covalent interactions , including hydrogen bonding , electrostatic forces , π – π stacking , hydrophobic interactions and van der Waals forces 65 . Once the length and concentra - tion of fibrils are sufficiently high , they form a hydro - gel . Hydrogel formation can occur through branching , entanglement or the association of fibrils or fibres 15 ( Fig . 2b ) . Structural motifs of natural proteins , such as β - sheets , β - turns and α - helices , are often exploited for the assembly of peptides into fibrils . Peptide folding into secondary structures is governed by the sequence of the amino acids , and the conformation of peptides determines the way in which they pack into fibrils ( Fig . 2a ) . For example , α - helices can assemble into coiled coils , which subsequently assemble into fibrils owing to hydrophobic interactions or hydrogen bond - ing between specific amino acids that are located on the outer surface of the coiled coil 67 . The key advantage of peptide - based nanofibrillar hydrogels is that they are modular and , therefore , their properties can be fine - tuned by changing the sequence of the amino acids in the peptide molecules 64 , 68 . Fibrillar peptide - based hydrogels can be formed using peptides with different amino acid sequences 15 , 69 . Despite their diversity , peptide - based hydrogels can be divided into two groups : hydrogels assembled by peptides with nature - inspired structures ( primarily β - sheets and α - helices , with the α - helix formation being less common ) and hydrogels in which the peptides are modified with non - native functionalities to promote self - assembly . Assembly via natural structures . Many natural proteins and peptides assemble into fibrillar structures through the formation of β - sheets , including amyloid fibrils , which play a role in Alzheimer disease , Parkinson dis - ease and prion diseases . The assembly and nanomechan - ics of these fibrils have been thoroughly investigated 70 and have inspired the development of synthetic fibrillar materials from amyloid - like β - sheet - forming peptides . Many fibril - forming β - sheet peptides possess alternating hydrophilic and hydrophobic amino acids . The peptides fold into sheets with a hydrophobic and hydrophilic face and assemble into fibrils owing to interactions between the faces 15 . For example , the RADA - 16 peptide has the peptide sequence RARADADARARADADA , in which the arginine ( R ) and aspartic acid ( D ) residues form the hydrophilic face and alanine ( A ) forms the hydrophobic face 58 , 59 . In RADA - 16 hydrogels , the fibrils are bundled into fibres with diameters ranging from tens to hundreds of nanometres 71 ( Fig . 3a ) . β - Hairpins provide a building block for a β - sheet - forming system . They consist of two β - sheet sequences connected by an additional sequence that creates a turn or kink in the peptide molecule 54 , 55 , 64 . β - Hairpins fold in half and then assemble into a fibril , with the β - sheets oriented parallel to the long axis of the fibril 54 – 56 . In hydrogels formed by β - hairpin units , the fibrils do not bundle , but the hydrogels are formed from individual fibrils 54 . The diameter of the fibrils in the hydrogel is 3 nm , which corresponds to the length of an individual folded β - hairpin . The fibrils undergo physical crosslinking owing to interfacial hydrophobic interac - tions between the fibrils 64 ( Fig . 2b ) . Fibrillar hydrogels can also be created with peptides forming α - helices 67 , 72 , 73 . For example , collagen - mimetic peptides form triple - helical coiled coils that assemble side - by - side into fibrils . These fibrils branch and entangle to form hydrogels 72 , 73 ( Fig . 3a ) . Assembly via synthetic motifs . Nanofibrillar peptide hydrogels can also be formed by peptides that are mod - ified with synthetic functional groups , enabling peptide self - assembly ; for example , aromatic groups , such as fluorenylmethyloxycarbonyl groups , enable π – π stack - ing 74 , 75 , and alkyl chains trigger hydrophobic interactions in water 76 , 77 . Peptide amphiphiles are the best - studied peptide subunits for fibrillar peptide hydrogels . Peptide amphiphiles contain three domains : a hydrophobic alkyl tail , a peptide segment with a propensity to form β - sheets and a hydrophilic charged head group . In the presence of metal cations or with decreasing pH , the charge of the head groups is screened , and the peptide NAtuRe Reviews | MATERiAlS R e v i e w s volume 4 | FeBRu ARY 2019 | 103 amphiphiles self - assemble into fibrils 16 , 78 ( Fig . 3a ) . Fibril assembly is guided by the peptide bonds in the β - sheet domains , with the hydrogen bonds forming the β - sheets that are oriented parallel to the long axis of the fibril 17 , 79 . The diameter of the fibrils is equal to approximately two lengths of the peptide amphiphile building block 57 . Subsequently , the fibrils associate side - by - side into thicker fibres governed by electrostatic attraction and Interfacialinteractions a Fibrillar hydrogels Fibrils Peptide amphiphile nanoﬁbril Peptide amphiphiles Alkyl tails O N N H NH NH H NH NH H 2 N O O O – O – O – β - Sheet peptides β - Sheet ﬁbril Hydrophobic face Corona block Core block Collagen - mimetic ﬁbril Collagen - mimetic peptides β - Sheet along ﬁbril long axis β - Sheet β - Sheet region Charged head groups Building blocks 2 μm 1 μm 2 μm Peptides b Block copolymers Fibrilassembly Fibril assembly Fibril assembly α - Helix Fibril assembly 100 nm Fibril bundling and entanglement of ﬁbres Fibril bundling and entanglement of ﬁbres Fibril entanglement Fibril entanglement Hydrophilic face Worm - like micelle O O O OH O O O O O O O R R R R R NH NH NH NH Fig . 3 | Assembly of fibrillar hydrogels from molecular building blocks . a | Peptides ( peptide amphiphiles , β - sheet peptides and collagen - mimetic peptides ) can be assembled into fibrils and subsequently into hydrogels . Scanning electron micrographs ( SEMs ) show the corresponding hydrogel structures . b | Block copolymers assemble into worm - like micelles ( fibrils ) , which then entangle to form a fibrillar hydrogel . The transmission electron micrograph ( TEM ) shows the structure of worm - like micelles . Upper SEM image in panel a is adapted with permission from ReF . 16 , ACS . Middle SEM image in panel a is adapted from ReF . 72 , Springer Nature Limited . Bottom SEM image in panel a is adapted with permission from ReF . 181 , Wiley - VCH . TEM image in panel b is adapted with permission from ReF . 18 , ACS . www . nature . com / natrevmats R e v i e w s 104 | FeBRu ARY 2019 | volume 4 hydrogen bonding 16 , 57 . Hydrogels formed by peptide amphiphile fibrils can be used in tissue engineering and regenerative medicine 69 , 80 . For example , they can serve as injectable scaffolds for the regeneration of cartilage 81 , bone 76 , 82 or the myocardium 83 . Furthermore , π – π stacking peptides can assemble into fibrillar hydrogels through non - natural motifs . In this case , very short peptides ( usually 2 – 3 amino acids in length ) are functionalized with an aromatic group , for example , 9 - fluorenyl - methoxycarbonyl ( Fmoc ) chlo - ride 74 , 75 . π – π Stacking among the aromatic groups of the peptide molecules then causes the formation of fibrils , which associate into a hydrogel . Block copolymer worm - like micelles In fibrillar hydrogels formed by worm - like micelles , the initial building blocks are amphiphilic block copoly - mer mol ecules . These molecules assemble into worm - like micelles with a core formed by the hydrophobic blocks and a micellar corona formed by the hydrophi - lic blocks , stabiliz ing the micelles in water ( Fig . 3b ) . Generally , block copolymer assembly into micelles can be triggered by reducing the quality of the solvent for one of the blocks . The formation of a micelle core from the solvo - phobic block leads to a decrease in the surface free energy of the system through the reduction in unfavourable inter - actions of the block with a poor solvent 84 . Block copoly - mer worm - like micelles with a diameter of 20 – 30 nm and a length on the order of several micro metres 18 , 85 can act as gel - forming fibrils . Such fibrillar hydrogels have been reported with block copolymer worm - like micelles of poly ( ethylene oxide ) - b - poly ( butadiene ) , poly ( glycerol monomethacrylate ) - b - poly ( 2 - hydroxypropyl monomethacrylate ) 18 , poly ( ethylene glycol ) - b - poly ( 2 - hydroxypropyl monomethacrylate ) 19 , 20 , 86 and poly ( ethylene oxide ) - b - poly ( butadiene ) 85 , 87 . The cylindrical shape of block copolymer worm - like micelles originates from the ratio of the dimensions of the core - forming and corona - forming blocks . The shape of micelles , for example , spheres , cylinders or vesicles , is governed by the packing parameter , P . For block copolymers , P = V / ( a 0 l c ) , where V is the vol - ume of the core - forming block , l c is the length of the core - forming block and a 0 is the cross - sectional area of the corona - forming block 88 . Worm - like micelles are formed when 1 / 3 > P ≥ 1 / 2 ( ReF . 89 ) . The mechanism of hydrogel formation from block copolymer worm - like micelles is yet to be fully eluci - dated , but it is likely a combination of entanglement and physical association between the worms , with the for - mer mechanism being favoured with increasing micelle length and flexibility . Recently , it was proposed that the physical association of worms is the dominant mecha - nism of gelation , with multiple contacts forming between the worms until a percolation threshold is reached 90 . Importantly , block copolymer worm - like micelles do not bundle side - by - side into fibres . Small - angle X - ray scattering of hydrogels has shown that the gels are formed by cylindrical species with diameters corre - sponding to the diameter of a micelle 18 . Furthermore , on the basis of electron microscopy images , the diameter of fibrils corresponds to the diameter of an individual block copolymer worm - like micelle , indicating that the micelles do not form bundles 18 – 20 . An interesting and potentially useful feature of nanofibrillar hydrogels formed by block copolymer worm - like micelles is their reversible structural trans - formations , which can be triggered by an external stimulus 18 , 86 , 91 , 92 . For example , temperature - responsive poly ( glycerol monomethacrylate ) - b - poly ( 2 - hydroxy - propyl monomethacrylate ) forms block copolymer worm - like micelles at 21 °C but spherical micelles at 4 °C ( ReF . 18 ) . This transformation is a result of the decrease in solvent quality for the core - forming block upon a change in temperature , which leads to a reduc - tion in the volume of the core block and a change in P . Such a temperature - induced sphere - to - worm trans - formation results in a sol – gel transition . This prop - erty makes temperature - responsive block copolymer worm - like micelles a useful building block for hydro - gels , because it allows cell encapsulation and subsequent ( on demand ) release . Filamentous nanoparticles Nanofibrillar hydrogels can also be formed by the hier - archical assembly of filamentous nanoparticles ( Fig . 2a ) , for example , cellulose nanofibres , cellulose nanocrystals and chitin nanocrystals 93 – 95 . All three types of nanopar - ticles have a biological origin , are shape - anisotropic and are biocompatible . They have abundant surface func - tional groups , which makes them amenable to surface functionalization with polymer molecules , cell - adhesive ligands and growth factors . Gelation of suspensions of filamentous nanoparticles can be triggered by changing the ionic strength , temperature or pH of the liquid med ium 21 , 22 , 60 , 65 , 96 ; however , these methods are often not cyto - compatible . Alternatively , filamentous nanoparticles can be assembled into hydrogels by mixing them with gelling polymers or monomers or by attaching a gelling polymer to their surface ( Fig . 4a ) . Cellulose nanofibres . Cellulose nanofibres can be extracted from plant and bacterial cell walls using high - pressure homogenizers 95 , 97 , 98 . Cellulose nanofibres contain crystalline and amorphous regions , with the degree of crystallinity varying between 65 % and 95 % , depending on the source 99 – 104 . They exist primarily as bundles of narrow fibrils with a length on the order of several micrometres and a diameter of 5 – 40 nm ( ReF . 105 ) . Unlike block copolymers and peptide - based hydrogels , cellulose nanofibres are supramolecular fibrils ; thus , the first step in gel formation can be avoided ( Fig . 2a ) , and instead , hydrogels are formed through entanglement and bundling ( leading to thicker branching fibres ) . Individual cellulose nanofibre fibrils ( non - bundled ) can be obtained by TEMPO ( 2 , 2 , 6 , 6 - tetramethylpip - eridine - 1 - oxyl ) oxidation , which leads to the formation of anionic carboxylate groups on the nanofibre sur - face 99 , causing repulsion between the fibres . Fibrillar hydrogels derived from cellulose nanofibres can be used as 3D scaffolds for different cell types , for exam - ple , for the growth of spheroids from liver cells 61 and for human embryonic and induced pluripotent stem cells 62 . NAtuRe Reviews | MATERiAlS R e v i e w s volume 4 | FeBRu ARY 2019 | 105 Cellulose and chitin nanocrystals . Cellulose and chi - tin nanocrystals are rod - shaped nanoparticles with a length of 100 – 300 nm and a diameter of 5 – 30 nm , depending on their origin 23 , 98 . In contrast to cellulose nanofibres , these nanocrystals are not sufficiently long to form a network by entanglement , but they undergo hierarchical assembly into fibres 23 , 95 ( Fig . 2a ) . The nano - crystals thereby associate side - by - side and end - to - end into fibres with a range of diameters 21 , 60 . Assembly of the fibres into hydrogels can be controlled by sur - face modification of the nanoparticles or by changes in the environment ( for example , pH , ionic strength or temperature ) . Cellulose nanocrystals are highly crystalline nano - particles that are typically formed by acid hydrolysis of cellulose nanofibres , which causes the selective dissolution of their amorphous regions and leaves behind rod - shaped crystalline regions 106 . The nano - crystals are mechanically strong , with a Young’s mod - ulus of 100 – 130 GPa ( ReF . 98 ) and a bending strength of ~ 10 GPa ( ReF . 107 ) . Sulfuric acid hydrolysis intro - duces charged anionic sulfate half - ester groups on the nanocrystal surface , which renders them colloi - dally stable in aqueous suspensions 108 , 109 . Combining cellulose - nanocrystal - derived hydrogels with a gelling polymer is a cytocompatible approach to forming a hydrogel . The surface of the nanocrystals can thereby be functionalized with polymer molecules , which asso - ciate to physically crosslink the nanocrystals 22 , 65 . For example , poly ( N - isopropyl acrylamide ) ( pNIPAM ) - grafted and poly ( N - isopropyl acrylamide - co - 2 - ( dimethylamino ) ethyl methacrylate ) - grafted cellu - lose nanocrystals assemble into fibres that form a gel above the lower critical solution temperature of the polymer 22 , 65 ( Fig . 4a ) . The formation of these hydro - gels is reversible ; upon cooling , the polymer grafts are solubilized and the hydrogel disintegrates , mak - ing the gel thermoreversible . These hydrogels can be used to culture fibroblasts and T cells 65 and to grow breast cancer spheroids 22 . Alternatively , cellulose nanocrystals can be mixed with a hydrogel - forming polymer and subsequently chemically crosslinked 110 , 111 . In these hydrogels , the nanocrystals act as nanofill - ers , and they associate into fibres at sufficiently high concentration 111 ( Fig . 4a ) . Chitin nanocrystals have dimensions similar to those of cellulose nanocrystals , and they can assem - ble into fibrillar hydrogels by side - by - side association and branching 24 , 93 ( Fig . 4b ) . However , chitin nanocrys - tals have poor dispersibility in water and , therefore , applications as building blocks for hydrogels are not as developed as they are for cellulose nanocrystals . Similar to cellulose nanocrystals , gelation of chitosan nanocrystals can be achieved either by association of pristine chitin nanocrystals or by mixing them with a gelling polymer . The gelation of pristine chitin nano - crystals can be triggered by heating to 180 °C for 4 hours 24 , resulting in the assembly of nanocrystals into fibres and subsequent gelation . The drawback of this approach is the lack of cytocompatibility . Therefore , mixing chitin nanocrystals with a gelling polymer is a more promising approach for the preparation of hydrogels for cell culture . For example , composite hydrogels can be formed by mixing chitin nanocrys - tals and chitosan 23 , 93 , which can be used for the culture of osteoblasts 23 . Gelation of non - modiﬁed NPs Mixing NPs with gelling polymers a b 20 μm 1 μm 5 μm Filamentous NPs Cellulose and chitin nanocrystals Grafting polymers to NPs Fibre formation Cellulose nanoﬁbres Fibrillar hydrogel Fig . 4 | Assembly of fibrillar hydrogels from colloidal particles . a | The three methods for the gelation of filamentous colloidal nanoparticles ( NPs ) are shown : grafting of a gelling polymer to the NP surface ; the corresponding scanning electron micrograph ( SEM ) shows a hydrogel formed from cellulose nanocrystals grafted with poly ( N - isopropyl acrylamide ) ( pNIPAM ) . Direct gelation of non - modified NPs ; the corresponding SEM image shows a hydrogel obtained by cellulose nanocrystal gelation in a 50 mM solution of Sr 2 + ions . Mixing of cellulose nanocrystals with a gelling polymer ; the corresponding SEM image shows a cellulose nanocrystal – gelatin hydrogel . b | Gelation of cellulose nanocrystals , chitin nanocrystals and cellulose nanofibres . Upper SEM image in panel a is adapted with permission from ReF . 22 , Wiley - VCH . Middle SEM image in panel a is adapted with permission from ReF . 21 , ACS . Bottom SEM image in panel a is adapted with permission from ReF . 111 , ACS . www . nature . com / natrevmats R e v i e w s 106 | FeBRu ARY 2019 | volume 4 Hydrogel anisotropy Fibrillar hydrogels with aligned fibrils or fibres mimic the structure of anisotropic ECMs , for example , of aligned collagen and elastin fibres in muscle 9 , skin 10 or articular cartilage 11 , which plays a key role for ECM and tissue function . Furthermore , tumour ECM fibre alignment may impact cancer metastasis 45 – 47 . Thus , anisotropic hydrogels can be used as scaffolds for engi - neering anisotropic tissues and for fundamental studies of the role of fibre alignment in tumour progression . Fibre alignment in fibrillar hydrogels directs the migra - tion , alignment and phenotype of encapsulated cells 57 , presumably through the establishment of cell – fibre contacts along the oriented matrix 112 ( known as con - tact guidance ; Fig . 5a ) . For example , cardiomyocytes form cell – cell contacts and propagate an action poten - tial across a macroscopic hydrogel 57 if grown in an anisotropic peptide amphiphile filamentous hydrogel . Fibre alignment also causes the alignment of human mesenchymal stem cells 57 , fibroblasts 113 and myotubes 25 . Structurally anisotropic fibrillar hydrogels are gen - erally fabricated by aligning constituent fibrils or fibres during hydrogel assembly ( Fig . 2a ) or after formation of the hydrogel . Aligning fibres in fibrillar hydrogels and thus establishing structural anisotropy can be achieved by a variety of methods , for example , by applying shear 57 , 111 , 114 , magnetic 25 or electric 115 fields or by direc - tional ice crystallization ( freeze - casting ) 116 ( Fig . 5b ) , which is a key advantage over their molecular hydrogel counterparts . In molecular hydrogels , the polymer chains rapidly relax after the stimulus is removed 115 , which causes breaking of the alignment . Generally , structural anisotropy is caused by stretch - ing of the hydrogel 117 or directional ion diffusion 118 . The requirement for the method to be cytocompatible elim - inates the possibility to use strong electric fields , strong shear , directional ion diffusion or ice crystallization . Shear - induced fibre alignment is the most common approach to produce anisotropic fibrillar hydrogels . Syringe injection of a precursor suspension of fibrils or fibres 57 , 119 or extrusion of fibres through the print head of a 3D printer can trigger the alignment of fibres 111 , 114 . Shear - induced alignment can be used to generate aniso - tropic fibrillar hydrogels from cellulose nanofibres 114 , 120 , cellulose nanocrystals 111 , peptide amphiphile fibres 57 , 119 and π – π stacking peptide fibres 121 . However , shear forces cannot be homogeneously applied to large hydrogel samples , and manual application lacks reproducibility , constituting a drawback of shear - induced alignment 115 . Properties of fibrillar hydrogels Mechanical properties The mechanical properties of the ECM impact gene expression through mechanotransduction path - ways 4 , 5 , 34 , 122 ( Fig . 1a ) ; for example , matrix stiffness influ - ences the differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells 123 , and stiffening of the tumour stroma is associated with malignant phenotypes 124 , 125 in certain cancer types . Many tissues , for example , cartilage , bone , tendons and blood vessel walls , are exposed to substantial mechanical loads , which makes their mechanical properties crucial for their function and structural integrity . Similarly , the mechanical properties of hydrogels affect the fate and phenotype of encapsulated cells and therefore must be considered in the design of hydrogels for 3D cell culture and tissue engineering . The stiffness of fibrillar hydrogels is generally char - acterized by shear storage and loss modulus ; however , compressional Young’s modulus , tensile strength and toughness can also be used to describe the mechanical properties of hydrogels . The mechanical properties of hydrogels are typically in the regime of linear visco - elasticity , in which the storage modulus , G ʹ , and the loss modulus , Gʹʹ , are invariant with increasing shear strain and frequency 126 . Hydrogels , in contrast to highly vis - cous liquids , are characterized by G ʹ > G ʹʹ over several decades of oscillatory shear frequency , with the ratio G ʹ / G ʹʹ ≥ 10 ( ReFs 127 , 128 ) . Natural fibrillar networks have different mechanical properties than their molecular counterparts . Almost all biological fibrils are semiflexible filaments 3 . Filamentous extracellular protein networks show nonlinear visco - elastic responses to shear deformation , including stiff - ening with increasing shear strain ( that is , the strain hardening effect that may be observed at relatively low strains ) 3 , 129 , 130 . This effect can be caused by collective rearrangements , by alignment of the filaments at the net - work level or by molecular structural rearrangements . Furthermore , the nonlinear stress – strain behaviour of biological fibrillar hydrogels manifests itself in an effec - tive inward force upon shear strain , which is termed a b Isotropic ﬁbres Cell alignment and formation of cell – cell contacts Anisotropic ﬁbrillar hydrogel Shear , electric or magnetic ﬁelds during gelation b Directional growth through contact guidance along the ﬁbres Fig . 5 | Anisotropy of fibrillar hydrogels . a | Contact guidance within anisotropic fibrillar matrices directs cell growth , which leads to cell alignment and facilitates the formation of cell – cell contacts . b | Fibre alignment can be achieved by exposing the hydrogel precursor solution to directional shear , electric or magnetic fields during the gelation process . NAtuRe Reviews | MATERiAlS R e v i e w s volume 4 | FeBRu ARY 2019 | 107 negative normal stress 6 , 80 , 131 . Therefore , biological fibril - lar hydrogels soften and contract when exposed to shear strain . This nonlinear stress response has not yet been investigated for most man - made filamentous hydrogels ; however , fibrillar polyisocyanopeptide hydrogels have been shown to recapitulate the nonlinear stress response of biological fibrillar hydrogels 131 , indicating that other man - made fibrillar hydrogels may also exhibit this behaviour . The storage modulus G ʹ of biological fibril - lar hydrogels further shows a stronger dependence on polymer density than that of gels formed by flexible polymer molecules 80 . The storage modulus G ʹ of semiflexible networks depends on fibre stiffness and network mesh size ( that is , the average distance between constituent fibres ) . In networks of semiflexible filaments , ξ ≤ l p , where ξ is the network mesh size and l p is the filament persistence length 3 . The storage modulus G ʹ of fibrillar hydro - gels and densely crosslinked networks of semiflexible filaments scales as 3 , 16 ′ G κ kT ξ ≈ ( 1 ) 2 −5 where κ is the bending modulus of the filament and k and T are the Boltzmann constant and temperature , respectively . Thus , an increase in κ ( for stiff fibres ) and a decrease in ξ ( for dense networks ) lead to an increase in G ʹ , making the hydrogel stiffer ( Fig . 6a ) . By contrast , for molecular gels , G ʹ scales as 132 ′ G kTξ ≈ ( 2 ) −3 Therefore , molecular gels exhibit a weaker depend - ence on mesh size . Equation 1 can also be expressed in terms of the concentration of the fibril building blocks ( c a ) , because the mesh size for networks of fibrils is given by ξ ≈ ac 1 a , where a is the size of the fibril building blocks . The relationship between G ʹ and building block concentration is 3 ′ G κ kT ac ≈ ( ) ( 3 ) a 2 52 There are several examples of man - made fibrillar hydrogels that follow the scaling of G ʹ with c a that is described by equation 3 , including peptide amphiphiles 16 and β - hairpin peptides 133 . In man - made fibrillar hydrogels , an increase in hydrogel concentration ( and thus a decrease in mesh size ) leads to an increase in storage modulus G ʹ 16 , 55 , 133 , 134 . For example , in hydrogels formed by β - hairpin peptides , increasing the peptide concentration from 0 . 5 to 2 wt % results in a decrease in mesh size from 49 nm to 22 nm and a corresponding increase in G ʹ from 40 Pa to 2 , 080 Pa . Of note , this 52 - fold increase in G ʹ is close to the increase in G ʹ predicted by equation 1 ( 55 - fold ) . Therefore , the model described in equation 1 accurately predicts the scaling of G ʹ for fibrillar hydrogels , such as β - hairpin peptide hydrogels ( Fig . 6b ) . Importantly , the dependence of G ʹ on mesh size is not universal and can be counterbalanced by an increase in fibre stiffness . For example , the addition of metal cations to a precursor cellulose nanocrystal suspension results in a hydrogel with increased ξ but not the expected decreased G ʹ . This result is caused by the increase in concentration and charge of metal cations , which promotes the asso - ciation of nanocrystals into stronger and thicker fibres 21 with an increased bending modulus κ , as compared with gels with no additional cations . As a result , the hydrogel stiffens if the mesh size is increased . The bending modulus of fibres in man - made hydro - gels can be increased by strengthening the interac - tions between constituent fibrils 16 , providing control over the mechanical properties of fibrillar hydrogels . Alternatively , the bending modulus of fibrils can be increased by introducing chemical crosslinks between constituent molecules . In hydrogels derived from block copolymer worm - like micelles , the core - forming 85 , 87 , 135 or corona - forming 19 , 20 blocks can be crosslinked within the micelles . For example , crosslinking the corona of poly ( glycerol monomethacrylate ) - b - poly ( 2 - hydroxy - propyl monomethacrylate ) micelles with disulfide bonds increases G ʹ from 120 Pa to 650 Pa ( ReFs 19 , 20 ) . Similarly , in peptide amphiphile hydrogels , the strength of hydro - gen bonding in the β - sheets that run parallel to the long axis of the fibre substantially impacts G ʹ ( ReFs 17 , 68 , 79 ) . By contrast , introducing branched groups into the pep - tide amphiphile building blocks weakens the hydrogen bonds , which results in a decrease in G ʹ from 22 . 9 kPa to 7 . 3 kPa ( ReF . 17 ) . Furthermore , reducing the length of the β - sheet - forming sequence in the building blocks leads to weaker hydrogels , owing to the reduced number of hydrogen bonds 68 . Notably , many man - made fibrillar hydrogels are shear - thinning , that is , a decrease in viscosity in response to increasing shear strain , which is generally caused by the breaking of physical bonds between the hydrogel building blocks 136 . Shear - thinning is a desirable property for tissue engineering applications , because it enables the injection of hydrogels into the body with a syringe as well as 3D printing 136 , followed by rapid recovery of the mechanical properties of the hydrogel . Mass transport properties The mass transport properties of hydrogel scaffolds are important for 3D cell culture and tissue engineer - ing to ensure the delivery of nutrients , growth factors and drugs , as well as for the removal of waste products . Molecular hydrogels have mesh sizes in the range of ~ 4 – 30 nm ( ReFs 137 – 139 ) , whereas fibrillar hydrogels can have mesh sizes up to micrometres 140 . Owing to the sub - stantially larger pore size , the mass transport in fibrillar hydrogels is better than in molecular hydrogels 12 . Currently , the mass transport properties of fibrillar and molecular hydrogels are determined by measuring hydrogel permeability 137 , 139 , 141 or the diffusion coefficients of probe molecules or nanoparticles within the hydro - gel 55 , 142 ( Fig . 6c ) . Permeability is a measure of the ability of a liquid ( typically water ) to flow through the hydrogel network under a constant pressure difference Δ P . According to Darcy’s law 143 , K = QμL A P Δ , where K is the Darcy permeability coefficient or permeability , Q is the volu - metric flow rate of the liquid , L and A are the hydrogel www . nature . com / natrevmats R e v i e w s 108 | FeBRu ARY 2019 | volume 4 length and cross - sectional area , respectively , and μ is the intrinsic viscosity of a liquid at a specific temper - ature . In these experiments , it is important to ensure a linear relationship between Q and ΔP 111 because the hydrogel structure may change at high values of ΔP . The permeability of typical hydrogels , such as collagen and fibrin , is on the order of 10 −9 – 10 −8 cm 2 , whereas molecular hydrogels have permeabilities on the order of 10 −13 – 10 −12 cm 2 ( ReFs 137 , 139 , 142 ) . A thorough characteri - zation of the permeability of man - made fibrillar hydro - gels remains elusive thus far . However , the permeabilities of fibrillar hydrogels formed by cellulose nanocrystals and gelatin with different porosities have recently been determined , with a permeability K = 1 . 78 × 10 −10 cm 2 for the most porous hydrogel 111 . Diffusion coefficients of probe molecules or nanopar - ticles within hydrogels can be determined to characterize the impact of the hydrogel network on the diffusion of solutes 142 ( Fig . 6c ) . The diffusion coefficient of a probe within the hydrogel is thereby compared with the dif - fusion coefficient of the same probe in water . Diffusion coefficients can be assessed by examining fluorescence recovery after photobleaching ( FRAP ) 55 , 144 , 145 or by pulsed field gradient NMR 21 . The diffusion coefficients generally decrease with decreasing pore size 142 ; however , the size of the probes is important , because for small Log ξ ( nm ) L o g G ' ( P a ) 5 0 1 2 3 4 1 . 2 1 . 4 1 . 6 1 . 8 Fibrillar hydrogel Molecularhydrogel a b c d Increasing hydrogel strength Q = Volumetric ﬂow rate Functionalized ﬁbril building block D = Diffusion coefﬁcient Δ P Fibre stiffening Decreasing mesh size Darcy permeability Diffusion coefﬁcients Low ligand density High ligand density Fig . 6 | Structure and properties of fibrillar hydrogels . a | The relationship between hydrogel structure and mechanical properties is shown . b | The scaling storage modulus ( G ʹ ) is plotted against the mesh size ξ for β - hairpin peptide hydrogels and for molecular hydrogels . Values are taken from ReF . 55 . The blue line shows the predicted scaling of G ʹ with ξ for fibrillar hydrogels ( equation 1 ) , and the green line shows the predicted scaling for molecular hydrogels ( equation 2 ) . The bending modulus κ can be calculated on the basis of the persistence length of β - hairpin fibrils ( 55 nm ) and the measurement temperature ( 25 °C ) 55 using κ ≈ kTl p , where k and T are the Boltzmann constant and temperature , respectively , and l p is the persistence length . c | Transport properties of fibrillar hydrogels . Hydrogel transport is characterized by the Darcy permeability or the diffusion coefficient of a solute within the hydrogel . Δ P is the pressure difference during the measurement . d | Biochemical functionalization of fibrils with ligands and / or growth factors . A high concentration of functionalized building blocks during assembly leads to high ligand density , whereas a low concentration of functionalized building blocks during assembly leads to low ligand density . NAtuRe Reviews | MATERiAlS R e v i e w s volume 4 | FeBRu ARY 2019 | 109 probes that are not comparable to the size of the pores , there is no hindrance of diffusion . In addition , adhesion of probes to the hydrogel network has to be avoided . Biochemical properties Biomimetic hydrogels should contain cell - adhesive lig - ands to allow cells to recognize and interact with the matrix . Cell – ligand interactions facilitate cell - matrix adhesion , which is crucial for cell proliferation . Cell - adhesive ligands are also important for cell migra - tion 146 . In contrast to molecular hydrogels , cell - adhesive ligands are clustered on the fibre surface 147 in fibrillar matrices , recreating in vivo conditions for cell attach - ment and matrix - mediated migration . The modular nature of fibrillar hydrogels enables the straightforward incorporation of ligands ; the fibril building blocks can be functionalized with ligands before their assembly into hydrogels ( Fig . 6d ) . The peptide Arg - Gly - Asp ( RGD ) is a fibronectin - derived integrin - binding peptide and the most com - monly used ligand for cell adhesion in hydrogels . Cell - adhesive ligands can be attached to peptide amphi - philes 148 , RADA - 16 peptides 58 , 149 , block copolymers 150 and π – π stacking peptides 151 , 152 . The ligand density on the fibre surface is an important factor for cell adhe - sion . If the ligand density is too high , steric hindrance can reduce cell adhesion 153 , 154 . Ligand density can be fine - tuned by the co - assembly of ligand - functionalized fibrillar building blocks and non - functionalized building blocks at specific ratios ( Fig . 6d ) . Similarly , growth factors and other signalling mole - cules can be incorporated into fibrillar hydrogels using the same approach as for cell - adhesive peptides , which is particularly useful for tissue engineering applica - tions 146 . For example , peptide amphiphile nanofibres functionalized with BMP2 can be injected into a rat posterolateral lumbar intertransverse spinal fusion model to promote osteogenesis and arthrodesis 155 . Hydrogels can also be functionalized with specific mol - ecules that recruit and bind growth factors after injec - tion into the body . For example , heparin - functionalized peptide amphiphile hydrogels recruit angiogenic growth factors , such as VEGF and fibroblast growth factor 2 ( FGF2 ) , which trigger the regeneration of blood vessels 77 . Fibrillar gels as biomimetic ECMs One of the most promising applications of biomimetic fibrillar hydrogels is 3D cell culture , which can provide a biologically relevant alternative to traditional 2D cell culture 156 . Biomimetic 3D matrices allow the recreation of the chemical and physical cues provided by ECMs and thus can serve as a good ECM model for fundamental cell biology research and drug screening 157 , 158 . Fibrillar hydrogels mimic the structure and certain properties of fibrillar ECMs better than their molecular counterparts . In comparison with biologically derived matrices , such as Matrigel , collagen or fibrin , man - made scaffolds offer better control over the chemical and physical properties of the scaffold 12 . Many artificial fibrillar matrices have been explored for 3D cell culture , with promising results for a variety of cell types . In particular , block copolymer worm - like micelles have been used to culture human pluripotent stem cells 159 and lung epithelial cells 19 . Cellulose - nanocrystal - based hydrogels have been used to culture T cells 65 , fibroblasts 65 , myotubes 25 and tumour spheroids , derived from several different breast and ovarian cancer cell lines 22 , 59 , 157 . Cellulose nanofibres have been applied for the 3D cell culture of liver cells 61 and mesenchymal stem cells 62 . Fibrillar hydrogels are also relevant for applications in tissue engineering and regenerative medicine by serv - ing as a matrix for the replacement and / or regeneration of damaged tissues . Hydrogels provide a provisional artificial ECM that can support cell adhesion and pro - liferation and control cell differentiation and function . Typically , the hydrogel is first loaded with cells and then injected into the damaged tissue 146 . Alternatively , hydro - gels can be designed to promote the infiltration of cells after injection 160 . Furthermore , the fibrillar architecture has several advantages for tissue engineering 161 . The large pores favour the transport of nutrients and the removal of waste , which improves cell survival and growth 29 . Furthermore , the ability to align the fibrils within the hydrogel is particularly useful for the regeneration of tissues and cells that require anisotropic matrices , such as cardiomyocytes 57 and myoblasts 25 . Man - made hydrogels versus ECMs The complex composition and hierarchical structure of the ECM complicate the design of truly biomimetic artificial hydrogels . Notably , ECM composition and structure substantially vary between different tissues and organs ( Table 1 ) . Moreover , many ECMs are dynamic and change over time and in disease . Therefore , hydro - gels need to be designed with specific compositions , fibre dimensions , structures and properties to match specific ECMs . Man - made fibrillar hydrogels can be designed , syn - thesized and assembled with a broad range of structures and properties ( Table 2 ) . Specifically , man - made fibril - lar hydrogels can be made with a broad range of fibre diameters , allowing the recreation of a variety of fibril - lar ECMs . For example , the fibril diameters of hydrogels formed by cellulose nanofibres 61 , 162 , peptide amphi - philes 16 , 78 and block copolymer worm - like micelles 18 – 20 are in the range of 20 – 40 nm . This diameter range is comparable to the diameters of reticular collagen fibres ( thin type - III collagen fibres ) , which are found in many tissues and organs 163 , for example , on the surface of mus - cle and Schwann cells , and in the fibrous reticulum of lymphoid tissues . Importantly , the man - made fibrillar hydrogels dis - cussed in this Review do not have fibre diameters in the range of 1 – 300 μm , which are the typical values of colla - gen fibres found in tendons and ligaments . Similarly , the several - micrometre - thick elastin and the elastic fibres of connective tissues have not been recreated in these artificial fibrillar matrices 31 . However , synthetic fibres with diameters at this scale can be prepared by elec - trospinning 29 , 164 , but cells embedded in hydrogels with fibres thicker than tens of micrometres treat the fibres as a 2D substrate and adopt a flat morphology 12 , 165 . By www . nature . com / natrevmats R e v i e w s 110 | FeBRu ARY 2019 | volume 4 contrast , fibrils derived from β - hairpin peptides have fibres with a diameter of 3 nm ( ReFs 54 – 56 ) , which is sub - stantially thinner than the diameter of ECM fibres in vivo . However , β - hairpin peptide hydrogels and electrospun nanofibre scaffolds have been successfully applied for 3D cell culture for a variety of cell lines and primary cells 64 , 166 , 167 . Matching the fibre diameter of ECMs is only one aspect of mimicking ECM structure and function . Mesh size , fibre extensibility , type and density of ligands and transport , and mechanical properties are also important factors . These properties have not yet been thoroughly explored for man - made fibrillar systems ( Table 2 ) , and they are difficult to characterize in vivo . For example , ECM stiffness can be measured by atomic force micros - copy ( AFM ) 168 , 169 ; however , AFM cannot be used to assess the contribution of individual ECM components to the stiffness of the matrix without destroying the ECM structure . Conclusions and outlook Fibrillar hydrogels are excellent scaffolds for tissue engineering , regenerative medicine and 3D cell cul - ture . They can be made with mechanical proper - ties similar to those of ECMs in vivo , and they show improved mass transport compared with molecular hydrogels . Moreover , fibrillar hydrogels can be easily functionalized with growth factors and cell - adhesive ligands . Various building blocks of fibrillar hydrogels are being explored , including peptides , block copoly - mers and filamentous nanoparticles , which will enable diverse applications . However , a better understand - ing of the properties of fibrillar hydrogels and of their impact on cell growth and phenotype will be required Table 2 | Structure and physical properties of hydrogels formed from purified ECM proteins and man - made fibrillar hydrogels Hydrogel building block Fibre or fibril diameter ( nm ) Permeability ( cm 2 ) Diffusion coefficient ( cm 2 s − 1 ) Mesh size Stiffness Notes Refs Hydrogel formed from purified ECM fibres Fibrin 44 – 147 0 . 11 × 10 − 9 – 7 . 5 × 10 − 9 11 × 10 − 8a 1 – 10 μ m 90 – 1 , 050 Pa b Measurements on either pure fibrin or gels formed from patient plasma 52 , 190 – 193 Collagen 70 – 150 1 × 10 − 8 4 . 7 × 10 − 9 – 7 . 8 × 10 − 9c 5 – 12 μ m 10 – 600 Pa b Properties vary depending on collagen concentration and temperature during gelation 140 , 145 , 179 , 194 , 195 Man - made fibrillar hydrogels : peptides β - Hairpin 3 – 2 . 6 × 10 − 7 – 4 . 3 × 10 − 7d 18 – 49 nm 40 – 4 , 800 Pa b Concentration of building blocks from 0 . 5 to 2 wt % 55 Peptide amphiphile ~ 10 nm fibrils ; 30 – 40 nm fibres – – 20 – 102 nm 100 – 10 , 000 Pa ( in most cases , 10 3 Pa range ) b Properties change with length and sequence of peptide 16 , 78 Fmoc - FF 14 – 70 – – – 10 4 Pa b Hydrogel concentration is 20 mM Fmoc - FF 74 Man - made fibrillar hydrogels : block copolymers pGMA - b - pHPMA 30 – – – 90 – 650 Pa b Hydrogel becomes stiffer at higher corona crosslinking density 18 – 20 Man - made fibrillar hydrogels : colloidal particles Cellulose nanocrystals ( not modified ) – – 1 . 3 × 10 − 7 – 2 . 0 × 10 − 7e 85 – 156 nm 0 . 6 – 13 . 9 kPa b Gelation induced by adding cations of varying charge and size or by varying the density of sulfate groups on nanocrystals 21 , 60 Polymer - grafted cellulose nanocrystals 67 – 91 – – – 30 – 750 Pa b Polymer is end - grafted to the nanocrystal surface 22 , 65 Chitin nanocrystals – – – – 2 . 8 – 40 kPa f Composite of chitin nanocrystals and chitosan 23 Cellulose nanofibres 12 – 50 – 0 . 3 × 10 − 7 – 1 × 10 − 7g – 10 1 – 10 5 Pa b Properties change with increasing fibre content ( 0 . 5 – 10 wt % ) 61 , 162 , 196 Electrospun fibre scaffolds PCL fibres 295 – 701 1 . 437 × 10 − 7 – 0 . 24 – 0 . 8 μ m 13 – 264 kPa f Properties change depending on conditions during electrospinning 197 – 200 – Indicates that no data are available for this system . ECM , extracellular matrix ; Fmoc - FF , 9 - fluorenyl - methoxycarbonyl – Phe - Phe - OH ; Ig , immunoglobulin ; PCL , polycaprolactone ; pGMA - b - pHPMA , poly ( glycerol monomethacrylate ) - b - poly ( hydroxy propylmethacrylate ) . a Diffusion coefficient measured with Fab Ig protein ( 11 . 2 nm hydrodynamic radius ) . b Shear storage modulus ( G ' ) . c Diffusion coefficient measured with 2 , 000 kDa dextran ( 27 nm hydrodynamic radius ) . d Diffusion coefficient measured with 20 kDa dextran ( 6 . 1 nm hydrodynamic radius ) . e Diffusion coefficient measured by pulsed field gradient NMR with 14 . 8 kDa dextran probe . f Compressional Young’s modulus . g Diffusion coefficient measured by fluorescence recovery after photobleaching with dextran probes ( 20 – 250 kDa ) . NAtuRe Reviews | MATERiAlS R e v i e w s volume 4 | FeBRu ARY 2019 | 111 to better mimic ECMs and tailor these hydrogels for specific applications . The complexity and dynamics of the ECM make it very challenging to perfectly recreate ECMs in man - made materials . Therefore , identifying the ECM properties that are most important for cell fate and decoupling the impact of the different proper - ties on tissue function will enable improved designs of biomimetic hydrogels . Most studies on the effect of the mechanical prop - erties of fibrillar hydrogels on cell growth and pheno - type have focused on the elastic modulus , neglecting the viscoelastic behaviour . It was reported that the rate of stress relaxation of an alginate hydrogel matrix influ - ences the differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells 170 . Similarly , alginate hydrogels with faster stress relaxation favour the osteogenesis of mesenchymal stem cells as compared with gels with slower relaxation , independent of the elastic modulus . However , stress relaxation and its impact on cell behaviour have not yet been explored for fibrillar hydrogels . The effect of the nanoscale structure on stress relaxation and how the viscoelastic properties of fibrillar hydrogels affect cell phenotype and growth remain elusive thus far . The structural origin of the nonlinear strain stiff - ening behaviour of fibrillar gels also needs to be fur - ther investigated , because nonlinear elasticity may influence mechanosensing and long - distance cell – cell communication 52 . It is interesting to explore whether this behaviour can be recapitulated in synthetic fibril - lar hydrogels formed by different building blocks . Another question of fundamental importance is the relationship between the mechanisms of gelation of fibrillar hydrogels ( Fig . 2b ) and their impact on hydro - gel properties . Modelling of the viscoelasticity and the mechanical properties of fibrillar ECM proteins , such as collagen 171 , 172 and elastin 173 , has provided insight into the correlation of hierarchical structure and material prop - erties . Similarly , modelling approaches can be applied to man - made fibrillar hydrogels to better understand the structure – property relationship . The transport properties of man - made fibrillar hydrogels need to be studied to establish the relation - ship between hydrogel structure and permeability . Standardization of methods for the evaluation of trans - port properties will enable the comparison of different hydrogel types . Moreover , the influence of anisotropy on mass transport is a question of not only fundamen - tal but also practical importance . Importantly , hydrogel aniso tropy can create diffusion anisotropy . Hydrogel anisotropy has not yet been investigated for man - made fibrillar hydrogels ; however , it is known that in collagen gels with a high degree of fibre alignment , the diffusion coefficient parallel to the fibres is higher than the coeffi - cient in the transverse direction 174 , 175 . This effect may influence the delivery of drugs and nanomedicines to specific locations in the body . Dynamic fibrillar hydrogels would be practically useful and better mimic the properties of ECMs in vivo . In particular , hydrogels that can undergo liquification on demand could be used for cell encapsulation and subsequent release , which would enable further inves - tigations , such as genetic and / or molecular analysis , imaging or flow cytometry . Dynamic fibrillar hydro - gels would address the issue of light scattering within fibrillar hydrogels , which makes accurate cell charac - terization by optical microscopy difficult . The use of temperature - responsive scaffolds for the culture and subsequent release of cells can also be expanded from cellulose - nanocrystal - derived hydrogels 22 , 65 to other fibrillar hydrogel systems . Moreover , the development of fibrillar hydrogels that change their physical proper - ties or display different signalling molecules in response to an external stimulus will expand the range of possible applications . Dynamic hydrogels are also useful for the culture of organoids , which require different microenvi - ronments at different stages of development 13 . Dynamic fibrillar hydrogels could mimic the behaviour of ECMs , in which collagen fibres are being degraded , synthesized and remodelled at different stages of development and in different diseases 34 , 44 . The ECM contains both fibrillar and molecular components 1 ; however , man - made fibrillar hydrogels do not mimic the structure of molecular ECM compo - nents , such as glycosaminoglycans . This shortcoming can be overcome by using composites of fibrillar and molecular hydrogels . New methods for the fabrication of fibrillar hydrogels are also being developed . In particular , 3D bioprinting provides a powerful tool to pattern hydrogels and fab - ricate artificial tissues with complex architectures 176 . Similarly , such fabrication methods can be explored for the alignment of fibres and for the engineering of ani - sotropic hydrogels to create complex architectures and patterns , for applications in tissue engineering and to develop more accurate in vitro models for drug devel - opment . To enable the use of fibrillar hydrogels as inks for 3D bioprinting , the hydrogel precursors have to be either shear - thinning or crosslinked immediately after extrusion . Finally , fibrillar hydrogels may provide useful biomimetic tools for the growth of spheroids and orga - noids from patient - derived cells for drug screening and for fundamental biological studies 177 , 178 . Published online 8 January 2019 1 . Theocharis , A . D . , Skandalis , S . S . , Gialeli , C . & Karamanos , N . K . Extracellular matrix structure . Adv . Drug Deliv . Rev . 97 , 4 – 27 ( 2016 ) . 2 . Bosman , F . T . & Stamenkovic , I . Functional structure and composition of the extracellular matrix . J . Pathol . 200 , 423 – 428 ( 2003 ) . 3 . MacKintosh , F . C . , Kas , J . & Janmey , P . A . Elasticity of semiflexible biopolymer networks . Phys . Rev . Lett . 75 , 4425 – 4428 ( 1995 ) . In this study , the authors develop a model for fibrillar gels that explains the elastic properties of these networks , including the concentration dependence of their storage modulus . 4 . Wozniak , M . A . & Chen , C . S . Mechanotransduction in development : a growing role for contractility . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell . Biol . 10 , 34 – 43 ( 2009 ) . 5 . Dufort , C . C . , Paszek , M . J . & Weaver , V . M . Balancing forces : architectural control of mechanotransduction . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell . Biol . 12 , 308 – 319 ( 2011 ) . 6 . Alam , N . et al . The integrin—growth factor receptor duet . J . Cell . Physiol . 213 , 649 – 653 ( 2007 ) . 7 . Hynes , R . O . The extracellular matrix : not just pretty fibrils . Science 326 , 1216 – 1219 ( 2009 ) . This review discusses how extracellular matrix fibres influence growth factor signalling . 8 . Chau , M . , Sriskandha , S . E . , Thérien - Aubin , H . & Kumacheva , E . in Advances in Polymer Science Vol . 268 167 – 199 ( Springer , NY , 2015 ) . 9 . Huxley , A . F . Muscular contraction . J . Physiol . 243 , 1 – 43 ( 1974 ) . 10 . Madison , K . C . Barrier function of the skin : ‘La Raison d’Être’ of the epidermis . J . Invest . Dermatol . 121 , 231 – 241 ( 2003 ) . 11 . Sophia Fox , A . J . , Bedi , A . & Rodeo , S . A . The basic science of articular cartilage : structure , composition , and function . Sports Health 1 , 461 – 468 ( 2009 ) . 12 . Lutolf , M . P . & Hubbell , J . A . Synthetic biomaterials as instructive extracellular microenvironments for www . nature . com / natrevmats R e v i e w s 112 | FeBRu ARY 2019 | volume 4 morphogenesis in tissue engineering . Nat . Biotechnol . 23 , 47 – 55 ( 2005 ) . 13 . Gjorevski , N . et al . Designer matrices for intestinal stem cell and organoid culture . Nature 539 , 560 – 564 ( 2016 ) . 14 . Morgan , C . E . et al . Tissue - factor targeted peptide amphiphile nanofibers as an injectable therapy to control hemorrhage . ACS Nano 10 , 899 – 909 ( 2016 ) . 15 . Ulijn , R . V . & Smith , A . M . Designing peptide based nanomaterials . Chem . Soc . Rev . 37 , 664 – 675 ( 2008 ) . 16 . Greenfield , M . A . , Hoffman , J . R . , Olvera de la Cruz , M . & Stupp , S . I . Tunable mechanics of peptide nanofiber gels . Langmuir 26 , 3641 – 3647 ( 2010 ) . 17 . Sur , S . , Newcomb , C . J . , Webber , M . J . & Stupp , S . I . Tuning supramolecular mechanics to guide neuron development . Biomaterials 34 , 4749 – 4757 ( 2013 ) . 18 . Blanazs , A . et al . Sterilizable gels from thermoresponsive block copolymer worms . J . Am . Chem . Soc . 134 , 9741 – 9748 ( 2012 ) . 19 . Simon , K . A . et al . Disulfide - based diblock copolymer worm gels : a wholly - synthetic thermoreversible 3D matrix for sheet - based cultures . Biomacromolecules 16 , 3952 – 3958 ( 2015 ) . 20 . Warren , N . J . , Rosselgong , J . , Madsen , J . & Armes , S . P . Disulfide - functionalized diblock copolymer worm gels . Biomacromolecules 16 , 2514 – 2521 ( 2015 ) . 21 . Chau , M . et al . Ion - mediated gelation of aqueous suspensions of cellulose nanocrystals . Biomacromolecules 16 , 2455 – 2462 ( 2015 ) . In this study , the authors report the structure – property relationships of ionically gelled cellulose nanocrystal hydrogels , including how the strength and number of interactions between building blocks influence the stiffness and mesh size of the hydrogels . 22 . Li , Y . et al . Supramolecular nanofibrillar thermoreversible hydrogel for growth and release of cancer spheroids . Angew . Chemie Int . Ed . 55 , 1 – 6 ( 2016 ) . 23 . Liu , M . et al . Chitosan - chitin nanocrystal composite scaffolds for tissue engineering . Carbohydr . Polym . 152 , 832 – 840 ( 2016 ) . 24 . Nata , I . F . , Wang , S . S . - S . , Wu , T . - M . & Lee , C . - K . β - Chitin nanofibrils for self - sustaining hydrogels preparation via hydrothermal treatment . Carbohydr . Polym . 90 , 1509 – 1514 ( 2012 ) . 25 . De France , K . J . et al . Injectable anisotropic nanocomposite hydrogels direct in situ growth and alignment of myotubes . Nano Lett . 17 , 6487 – 6495 ( 2017 ) . 26 . Prabhakaran , M . P . , Venugopal , J . & Ramakrishna , S . Electrospun nanostructured scaffolds for bone tissue engineering . Acta Biomater . 5 , 2884 – 2893 ( 2009 ) . 27 . Lim , S . H . & Mao , H . Electrospun scaffolds for stem cell engineering . Adv . Drug Deliv . Rev . 61 , 1084 – 1096 ( 2009 ) . 28 . Lu , A . , Zhu , J . , Zhang , G . & Sun , G . Gelatin nanofibers fabricated by extruding immiscible polymer solution blend and their application in tissue engineering . J . Mater . Chem . 21 , 18674 – 18680 ( 2011 ) . 29 . Kumbar , S . G . , James , R . , Nukavarapu , S . P . & Laurencin , C . T . Electrospun nanofiber scaffolds : engineering soft tissues . Biomed . Mater . 3 , 034002 ( 2008 ) . 30 . Mouw , J . K . , Ou , G . & Weaver , V . M . Extracellular matrix assembly : a multiscale deconstruction . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell . Biol . 15 , 771 – 785 ( 2014 ) . 31 . Ushiki , T . Preserving the original architecture of elastin components in the formic acid - digested aorta by an alternative procedure for scanning electron microscopy . J . Electron . Microsc . ( Tokyo ) . 41 , 60 – 63 ( 1992 ) . 32 . Baldwin , A . K . , Simpson , A . , Steer , R . , Cain , S . A . & Kielty , C . M . Elastic fibres in health and disease . Expert Rev . Mol . Med . 15 , e8 ( 2013 ) . 33 . Arribas , S . M . , Hinek , A . & González , M . C . Elastic fibres and vascular structure in hypertension . Pharmacol . Ther . 111 , 771 – 791 ( 2006 ) . 34 . Humphrey , J . D . , Dufresne , E . R . & Schwartz , M . A . Mechanotransduction and extracellular matrix homeostasis . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell . Biol . 15 , 802 – 812 ( 2014 ) . 35 . Gelse , K . , Pöschl , E . & Aigner , T . Collagens - structure , function , and biosynthesis . Adv . Drug Deliv . Rev . 55 , 1531 – 1546 ( 2003 ) . 36 . Zollinger , A . J . & Smith , M . L . Fibronectin , the extracellular glue . Matrix Biol . 60 – 61 , 27 – 37 ( 2017 ) . 37 . Pereira , M . et al . The incorporation of fibrinogen into extracellular matrix is dependent on active assembly of a fibronectin matrix . J . Cell Sci . 115 , 609 – 617 ( 2002 ) . 38 . Moriya , K . et al . A fibronectin - independent mechanism of collagen fibrillogenesis in adult liver remodeling . Gastroenterology 140 , 1653 – 1663 ( 2011 ) . 39 . Singh , P . , Carraher , C . & Schwarzbauer , J . E . Assembly of fibronectin extracellular matrix . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 26 , 397 – 419 ( 2010 ) . 40 . Bachman , H . , Nicosia , J . , Dysart , M . & Barker , T . H . Utilizing fibronectin integrin - binding specificity to control cellular responses . Adv . Wound Care 4 , 501 – 511 ( 2015 ) . 41 . Baneyx , G . , Baugh , L . & Vogel , V . Coexisting conformations of fibronectin in cell culture imaged using fluorescence resonance energy transfer . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 98 , 14464 – 14468 ( 2001 ) . 42 . Ohashi , T . , Kiehart , D . P . & Erickson , H . P . Dynamics and elasticity of the fibronectin matrix in living cell culture visualized by fibronectin - green fluorescent protein . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 96 , 2153 – 2158 ( 1999 ) . 43 . Fang , M . , Yuan , J . , Peng , C . & Li , Y . Collagen as a double - edged sword in tumor progression . Tumour Biol . 35 , 2871 – 2882 ( 2014 ) . 44 . Cox , T . R . & Erler , J . T . Remodeling and homeostasis of the extracellular matrix : implications for fibrotic diseases and cancer . Dis . Model . Mech . 4 , 165 – 178 ( 2011 ) . 45 . Rybinski , B . , Franco - Barraza , J . & Cukierman , E . The wound healing , chronic fibrosis , and cancer progression triad . Physiol . Genom . 46 , 223 – 244 ( 2014 ) . 46 . Conklin , M . W . et al . Aligned collagen is a prognostic signature for survival in human breast carcinoma . Am . J . Pathol . 178 , 1221 – 1232 ( 2011 ) . 47 . Malik , R . , Lelkes , P . I . & Cukierman , E . Biomechanical and biochemical remodeling of stromal extracellular matrix in cancer . Trends Biotechnol . 33 , 230 – 236 ( 2015 ) . 48 . Klotzsch , E . et al . Fibronectin forms the most extensible biological fibers displaying switchable force - exposed cryptic binding sites . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 106 , 18267 – 18272 ( 2009 ) . 49 . Kouwer , P . H . J . et al . Responsive biomimetic networks from polyisocyanopeptide hydrogels . Nature 493 , 651 – 655 ( 2013 ) . In this work , polyisocyanopeptide fibrils are used to explore how fibril stiffness and the degree of fibril bundling impact the elastic properties of the resulting hydrogels . 50 . Vogel , V . Mechanotransducion involving multimodular proteins : converting force into biochemical signals . Annu . Rev . Biophys . Biomol . Struct . 35 , 459 – 488 ( 2006 ) . 51 . Notbohm , J . , Lesman , A . , Rosakis , P . , Tirrell , D . A . & Ravichandran , G . Microbuckling of fibrin provides a mechanism for cell mechanosensing . J . R . Soc . Interface 12 , 20150320 ( 2015 ) . 52 . Winer , J . P . , Oake , S . & Janmey , P . A . Non - linear elasticity of extracellular matrices enables contractile cells to communicate local position and orientation . PLOS ONE 4 , e6382 ( 2009 ) . 53 . Aghvami , M . , Billiar , K . L . & Sander , E . A . Fiber network models predict enhanced cell mechanosensing on fibrous gels . J . Biomech . Eng . 138 , 101006 ( 2016 ) . 54 . Worthington , P . et al . β - hairpin hydrogels as scaffolds for high - throughput drug discovery in three - dimensional cell culture . Anal . Biochem . 535 , 25 – 34 ( 2017 ) . 55 . Branco , M . C . , Pochan , D . J . , Wagner , N . J . & Schneider , J . P . Macromolecular diffusion and release from self - assembled β - hairpin peptide hydrogels . Biomaterials 30 , 1339 – 1347 ( 2009 ) . 56 . Altunbas , A . , Lee , S . J . , Rajasekaran , S . A . , Schneider , J . P . & Pochan , D . J . Encapsulation of curcumin in self - assembling peptide hydrogels as injectable drug delivery vehicles . Biomaterials 32 , 5906 – 5914 ( 2011 ) . 57 . Zhang , S . et al . A self - assembly pathway to aligned monodomain gels . Nat . Mater . 9 , 594 – 601 ( 2010 ) . This work demonstrates that the alignment of fibres enables human mesenchymal stem cell alignment and facilitates the formation of action potentials between cardiomyocytes . 58 . Cheng , T . - Y . , Chen , M . - H . , Chang , W . - H . , Huang , M . - Y . & Wang , T . - W . Neural stem cells encapsulated in a functionalized self - assembling peptide hydrogel for brain tissue engineering . Biomaterials 34 , 2005 – 2016 ( 2013 ) . 59 . Yang , Z . & Zhao , X . A . 3D model of ovarian cancer cell lines on peptide nanofiber scaffold to explore the cell – scaffold interaction and chemotherapeutic resistance of anticancer drugs . Int . J . Nanomed . 6 , 303 – 310 ( 2011 ) . 60 . Lewis , L . , Derakhshandeh , M . , Hatzikiriakos , S . G . , Hamad , W . Y . & MacLachlan , M . J . Hydrothermal gelation of aqueous cellulose nanocrystal suspensions . Biomacromolecules 17 , 2747 – 2754 ( 2016 ) . 61 . Bhattacharya , M . et al . Nanofibrillar cellulose hydrogel promotes three - dimensional liver cell culture . J . Control . Release 164 , 291 – 298 ( 2012 ) . 62 . Lou , Y . - R . et al . The use of nanofibrillar cellulose hydrogel as a flexible three - dimensional model to culture human pluripotent stem cells . Stem Cells Dev . 23 , 380 – 392 ( 2014 ) . 63 . Raghavan , S . R . & Douglas , J . F . The conundrum of gel formation by molecular nanofibers , wormlike micelles , and filamentous proteins : gelation without cross - links ? Soft Matter 8 , 8539 – 8546 ( 2012 ) . 64 . Haines - Butterick , L . et al . Controlling hydrogelation kinetics by peptide design for three - dimensional encapsulation and injectable delivery of cells . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 104 , 7791 – 7796 ( 2007 ) . 65 . Thérien - Aubin , H . et al . Temperature - responsive nanofibrillar hydrogels for cell encapsulation . Biomacromolecules 17 , 3244 – 3251 ( 2016 ) . 66 . Schneider , J . P . et al . Responsive hydrogels from the intramolecular folding and self - assembly of a designed peptide . J . Am . Chem . Soc . 124 , 15030 – 15037 ( 2002 ) . 67 . Banwell , E . F . et al . Rational design and application of responsive α - helical peptide hydrogels . Nat . Mater . 8 , 596 – 600 ( 2009 ) . 68 . Pashuck , E . T . , Cui , H . & Stupp , S . I . Tuning supramolecular rigidity of peptide fibers through molecular structure . J . Am . Chem . Soc . 132 , 6041 – 6046 ( 2010 ) . 69 . Stupp , S . I . Self - assembly and biomaterials . Nano Lett . 10 , 4783 – 4786 ( 2010 ) . 70 . Knowles , T . P . J . & Buehler , M . J . Nanomechanics of functional and pathological amyloid materials . Nat . Nanotechnol . 6 , 469 – 479 ( 2011 ) . 71 . Yokoi , H . , Kinoshita , T . & Zhang , S . Dynamic reassembly of peptide RADA16 nanofiber scaffold . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 102 , 8414 – 8419 ( 2004 ) . 72 . O’Leary , L . E . R . , Fallas , J . A . , Bakota , E . L . , Kang , M . K . & Hartgerink , J . D . Multi - hierarchical self - assembly of a collagen mimetic peptide from triple helix to nanofibre and hydrogel . Nat . Chem . 3 , 821 – 828 ( 2011 ) . 73 . Sarkar , B . , O’Leary , L . E . R . & Hartgerink , J . D . Self - assembly of fiber - forming collagen mimetic peptides controlled by triple - helical nucleation . J . Am . Chem . Soc . 136 , 14417 – 14424 ( 2014 ) . 74 . Smith , A . M . et al . Fmoc - diphenylalanine self assembles to a hydrogel via a novel architecture based on π – π interlocked β - sheets . Adv . Mater . 20 , 37 – 41 ( 2008 ) . 75 . Jayawarna , V . et al . Introducing chemical functionality in Fmoc - peptide gels for cell culture . Acta Biomater . 5 , 934 – 943 ( 2009 ) . 76 . Hartgerink , J . D . , Beniash , E . & Stupp , S . I . Self - assembly and mineralization of peptide amphophile nanofibers . Science 294 , 1684 – 1688 ( 2001 ) . This article is the first to report the self - assembly of peptide amphiphiles into nanofibres , demonstrating their potential use as a scaffold for bone mineralization . 77 . Rajangam , K . et al . Heparin binding nanostructures to promote growth of blood vessels . Nano Lett . 6 , 2086 – 2090 ( 2006 ) . 78 . Stendahl , J . C . , Rao , M . S . , Guler , M . O . & Stupp , S . I . Intermolecular forces in the self - assembly of peptide amphiphile nanofibers . Adv . Funct . Mater . 16 , 499 – 508 ( 2006 ) . 79 . Paramonov , S . E . , Jun , H . - W . & Hartgerink , J . D . Self - assembly of peptide − amphiphile nanofibers : the roles of hydrogen bonding and amphiphilic packing . J . Am . Chem . Soc . 128 , 7291 – 7298 ( 2006 ) . 80 . Newcomb , C . J . et al . Supramolecular nanofibers enhance growth factor signaling by increasing lipid raft mobility . Nano Lett . 16 , 3042 – 3050 ( 2016 ) . 81 . Shah , R . N . et al . Supramolecular design of self - assembling nanofibers for cartilage regeneration . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 107 , 3293 – 3298 ( 2010 ) . 82 . Mata , A . et al . Biomaterials Bone regeneration mediated by biomimetic mineralization of a nanofiber matrix . Biomaterials 31 , 6004 – 6012 ( 2010 ) . 83 . Webber , M . J . et al . Capturing the stem cell paracrine effect using heparin - presenting nanofibres to treat cardiovascular diseases . J . Tissue Eng . Regen . Med . 4 , 600 – 610 ( 2010 ) . 84 . Bates , C . M . & Bates , F . S . 50th anniversary perspective : block polymers - pure potential . Macromolecules 50 , 3 – 22 ( 2017 ) . NAtuRe Reviews | MATERiAlS R e v i e w s volume 4 | FeBRu ARY 2019 | 113 85 . Won , Y . - Y . , Davis , H . T . & Bates , F . S . Giant wormlike rubber micelles . Science 283 , 960 – 963 ( 1999 ) . 86 . Warren , N . J . , Mykhaylyk , O . O . , Mahmood , D . , Ryan , A . J . & Armes , S . P . RAFT aqueous dispersion polymerization yields poly ( ethylene glycol ) - based diblock copolymer nano - objects with predictable single phase morphologies . J . Am . Chem . Soc . 136 , 1023 – 1033 ( 2014 ) . 87 . Won , Y . - Y . , Paso , K . , Davis , H . T . & Bates , F . S . Comparison of original and cross - linked wormlike micelles of poly ( ethylene oxide - b - butadiene ) in water : rheological properties and effects of poly ( ethylene oxide ) addition . J . Phys . Chem . B 105 , 8302 – 8311 ( 2001 ) . 88 . Nagarajan , R . Molecular packing parameter and surfactant self - assembly : the neglected role of the surfactant tail . Langmuir 18 , 31 – 38 ( 2002 ) . 89 . Israelachvili , J . N . , Mitchell , D . J . & Ninham , B . W . Theory of self - assembly of hydrocarbon amphiphiles into micelles and bilayers . J . Chem . Soc . Faraday Trans . 2 72 , 1525 – 1568 ( 1975 ) . 90 . Lovett , J . R . et al . Can percolation theory explain the gelation behavior of diblock copolymer worms ? Chem . Sci . 9 , 7138 – 7144 ( 2018 ) . 91 . Penfold , N . J . W . et al . pH - Responsive non - ionic diblock copolymers : protonation of a morpholine end - group induces an order – order transition . Polym . Chem . 7 , 79 – 88 ( 2016 ) . 92 . Lovett , J . R . , Warren , N . J . , Ratcliffe , L . P . D . , Kocik , M . K . & Armes , S . P . pH - responsive non - ionic diblock copolymers : ionization of carboxylic acid end - groups induces an order - order morphological transition . Angew . Chemie Int . Ed . 54 , 1279 – 1283 ( 2015 ) . 93 . Araki , J . , Yamanaka , Y . & Ohkawa , K . Chitin - chitosan nanocomposite gels : reinforcement of chitosan hydrogels with rod - like chitin nanowhiskers . Polym . J . 44 , 713 – 717 ( 2012 ) . 94 . Zhang , X . et al . Structure and properties of polysaccharide nanocrystal - doped supramolecular hydrogels based on cyclodextrin inclusion . Polymer ( Guildf ) 51 , 4398 – 4407 ( 2010 ) . 95 . De France , K . J . , Hoare , T . & Cranston , E . D . Review of hydrogels and aerogels containing nanocellulose . Chem . Mater . 29 , 4609 – 4631 ( 2017 ) . 96 . Way , A . E . , Hsu , L . , Shanmuganathan , K . , Weder , C . & Rowan , S . J . pH - responsive cellulose nanocrystal gels and nanocomposites . ACS Macro Lett . 1 , 1001 – 1006 ( 2012 ) . 97 . Abe , K . & Yano , H . Formation of hydrogels from cellulose nanofibers . Carbohydr . Polym . 85 , 733 – 737 ( 2011 ) . 98 . Dufresne , A . Nanocellulose : a new ageless bionanomaterial . Mater . Today 16 , 220 – 227 ( 2013 ) . 99 . Saito , T . , Kimura , S . , Nishiyama , Y . & Isogai , A . Cellulose nanofibers prepared by TEMPO - mediated oxidation of native cellulose . Biomacromolecules 8 , 2485 – 2491 ( 2007 ) . 100 . Wada , M . , Okano , T . & Sugiyama , J . Synchrotron - radiated X - ray and neutron diffraction study of native cellulose . Cellulose 4 , 221 – 232 ( 1997 ) . 101 . Sugiyama , J . , Vuong , R . & Chanzy , H . Electron diffraction study on the two crystalline phases occurring in native cellulose from an algal cell wall . Macromolecules 24 , 4168 – 4175 ( 1991 ) . 102 . Saxena , I . M . & Brown , R . M . Cellulose biosynthesis : current views and evolving concepts . Ann . Bot . 96 , 9 – 21 ( 2005 ) . 103 . Baker , A . A . , Helbert , W . , Sugiyama , J . & Miles , M . J . High - resolution atomic force microscopy of native valonia cellulose I microcrystals . J . Struct . Biol . 119 , 129 – 138 ( 1997 ) . 104 . Jakob , H . F . , Tschegg , S . E . & Fratzl , P . Hydration dependence of the wood - cell wall structure in picea abies . A small - angle X - ray scattering study . Macromolecules 29 , 8435 – 8440 ( 1996 ) . 105 . Sehaqui , H . , Zhou , Q . & Berglund , L . A . Nanostructured biocomposites of high toughness — a wood cellulose nanofiber network in ductile hydroxyethylcellulose matrix . Soft Matter 7 , 7342 – 7350 ( 2011 ) . 106 . Habibi , Y . , Lucia , L . A . & Rojas , O . J . Cellulose nanocrystals : chemistry , self - assembly , and applications . Chem . Rev . 110 , 3479 – 3500 ( 2010 ) . 107 . Sanna , R . et al . Poly ( N - vinylcaprolactam ) nanocomposites containing nanocrystalline cellulose : a green approach to thermoresponsive hydrogels . Cellulose 20 , 2393 – 2402 ( 2013 ) . 108 . Dong , X . M . & Gray , D . G . Effect of counterions on ordered phase formation in suspensions of charged rodlike cellulose crystallites . Langmuir 13 , 2404 – 2409 ( 1997 ) . 109 . Lin , N . & Dufresne , A . Surface chemistry , morphological analysis and properties of cellulose nanocrystals with gradiented sulfation degrees . Nanoscale 6 , 5384 – 5393 ( 2014 ) . 110 . De France , K . J . , Chan , K . J . W . , Cranston , E . D . & Hoare , T . Enhanced mechanical properties in cellulose nanocrystal – poly ( oligoethylene glycol methacrylate ) injectable nanocomposite hydrogels through control of physical and chemical cross - linking . Biomacromolecules 17 , 649 – 660 ( 2016 ) . 111 . Prince , E . et al . Patterning of structurally anisotropic composite hydrogel sheets . Biomacromolecules 19 , 1276 – 1284 ( 2018 ) . 112 . Fernández - Colino , A . , Arias , F . J . , Alonso , M . & Rodríguez - Cabello , J . C . Self - organized ECM - mimetic model based on an amphiphilic multiblock silk - elastin - like corecombinamer with a concomitant dual physical gelation process . Biomacromolecules 15 , 3781 – 3793 ( 2014 ) . 113 . Marelli , B . , Ghezzi , C . E . , James - Bhasin , M . & Nazhat , S . N . Fabrication of injectable , cellular , anisotropic collagen tissue equivalents with modular fibrillar densities . Biomaterials 37 , 183 – 193 ( 2015 ) . 114 . Gladman , A . S . , Matsumoto , E . A . , Nuzzo , R . G . , Mahadevan , L . & Lewis , J . A . Biomimetic 4D printing . Nat . Mater . 15 , 413 – 418 ( 2016 ) . 115 . Sano , K . , Ishida , Y . & Aida , T . Synthesis of anisotropic hydrogels and their applications . Angew . Chem . Int . Ed . Engl . 57 , 2 – 14 ( 2018 ) . 116 . Chau , M . et al . Composite hydrogels with tunable anisotropic morphologies and mechanical properties . Chem . Mater . 28 , 3406 – 3415 ( 2016 ) . 117 . Lin , P . , Zhang , T . , Wang , X . , Yu , B . & Zhou , F . Freezing molecular orientation under stretch for high mechanical strength but anisotropic hydrogels . Small 12 , 4386 – 4392 ( 2016 ) . 118 . Prang , P . et al . The promotion of oriented axonal regrowth in the injured spinal cord by alginate - based anisotropic capillary hydrogels . Biomaterials 27 , 3560 – 3569 ( 2006 ) . 119 . Sleep , E . et al . Injectable biomimetic liquid crystalline scaffolds enhance muscle stem cell transplantation . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 114 , E7919 – E7928 ( 2017 ) . 120 . Håkansson , K . M . O . Online determination of anisotropy during cellulose nanofibril assembly in a flow focusing device . RSC Adv . 5 , 18601 – 18608 ( 2015 ) . 121 . Mawer , P . J . et al . Small - angle neutron scattering from peptide nematic fluids and hydrogels under shear . Langmuir 19 , 4940 – 4949 ( 2003 ) . 122 . Jaalouk , D . E . & Lammerding , J . Mechanotransduction gone awry . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell . Biol . 10 , 63 – 73 ( 2009 ) . 123 . Engler , A . J . , Sen , S . , Sweeney , H . L . & Discher , D . E . Matrix elasticity directs stem cell lineage specification . Cell 126 , 677 – 689 ( 2006 ) . 124 . Ng , M . R . & Brugge , J . S . A . Stiff blow from the stroma : collagen crosslinking drives tumor progression . Cancer Cell 16 , 455 – 457 ( 2009 ) . 125 . Truong , D . et al . Breast cancer cell invasion into a three dimensional tumor - stroma microenvironment . Sci . Rep . 6 , 34094 ( 2016 ) . 126 . Anseth , K . S . , Bowman , C . N . & Brannon - Peppas , L . Mechanical properties of hydrogels and their experimental determination . Biomaterials 17 , 1647 – 1657 ( 1996 ) . 127 . Almdal , K . , Dyre , J . , Hvidt , S . & Kramer , O . Towards a phenomenological definition of the term ‘gel’ . Polym . Gels Networks 1 , 5 – 17 ( 1993 ) . 128 . De Rosa , M . E . & Winter , H . H . The effect of entanglements on the rheological behavior of polybutadiene critical gels . Rheol . Acta 33 , 220 – 237 ( 1994 ) . 129 . Münstera , S . et al . Strain history dependence of the nonlinear stress response of fibrin and collagen networks . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 110 , 12197 – 12202 ( 2013 ) . 130 . Brown , A . E . X . , Litvinov , R . I . , Discher , D . E . , Purohit , P . K . & Weisel , J . W . Multiscale mechanics of fibrin polymer : gel stretching with protein unfolding and loss of water . Science 325 , 741 – 744 ( 2009 ) . 131 . Janmey , P . A . et al . Negative normal stress in semiflexible biopolymer gels . Nat . Mater . 6 , 48 – 51 ( 2007 ) . 132 . Gennes , P . - G . Scaling Concepts in Polymer Physics ( Cornell Univ . Press , 1979 ) . 133 . Ozbas , B . , Rajagopal , K . , Schneider , J . P . & Pochan , D . J . Semiflexible chain networks formed via self - assembly of β - hairpin molecules . Phys . Rev . Lett . 93 , 268106 ( 2004 ) . 134 . Verber , R . , Blanazs , A . & Armes , S . P . Rheological studies of thermo - responsive diblock copolymer worm gels . Soft Matter 8 , 9923 – 9932 ( 2012 ) . 135 . Lovett , J . R . et al . A robust cross - linking strategy for block copolymer worms prepared via polymerization - induced self - assembly . Macromolecules 49 , 2928 – 2941 ( 2016 ) . 136 . Guvendiren , M . , Lu , H . D . & Burdick , J . A . Shear - thinning hydrogels for biomedical applications . Soft Matter 8 , 260 – 272 ( 2012 ) . 137 . White , J . A . & Deen , W . M . Agarose - dextran gels as synthetic analogs of glomerular basement membrane : water permeability . Biophys . J . 82 , 2081 – 2089 ( 2002 ) . 138 . Wallace , D . G . & Rosenblatt , J . Collagen gel systems for sustained delivery and tissue engineering . Adv . Drug Deliv . Rev . 55 , 1631 – 1649 ( 2003 ) . 139 . Johnson , E . M . & Deen , W . M . Hydraulic permeability of agarose gels . AIChE J . 42 , 1220 – 1224 ( 1996 ) . 140 . Yang , Y . , Motte , S . & Kaufman , L . J . Pore size variable type I collagen gels and their interaction with glioma cells . Biomaterials 31 , 5678 – 5688 ( 2010 ) . 141 . Serpooshan , V . , Quinn , T . M . , Muja , N . & Nazhat , S . N . Hydraulic permeability of multilayered collagen gel scaffolds under plastic compression - induced unidirectional fluid flow . Acta Biomater . 9 , 4673 – 4680 ( 2013 ) . 142 . Amsden , B . An obstruction - scaling model for diffusion in homogeneous hydrogels . Macromolecules 32 , 874 – 879 ( 1999 ) . 143 . Whitaker , S . Flow in porous media I : a theoretical derivation of Darcy’s law . Transp . Porous Media 1 , 3 – 25 ( 1986 ) . 144 . Erikson , A . , Anderson , N . H . , Naess , S . N . , Sikorski , P . & de Lange Davies , C . Physical and chemical modification of collagen gels : impact on diffusion . Biopolymers 89 , 135 – 143 ( 2007 ) . 145 . Ramanujan , S . et al . Diffusion and convection in collagen gels : implications for transport in the tumor interstitium . Biophys . J . 83 , 1650 – 1660 ( 2002 ) . 146 . Boekhoven , J . & Stupp , S . I . 25th anniversary article : supramolecular materials for regenerative medicine . Adv . Mater . 26 , 1642 – 1659 ( 2014 ) . 147 . Maheshwari , G . , Brown , G . , Lauffenburger , D . A . , Wells , A . & Griffith , L . G . Cell adhesion and motility depend on nanoscale RGD clustering . J . Cell Sci . 113 , 1677 – 1686 ( 2000 ) . 148 . Mata , A . et al . Micropatterning of bioactive self - assembling gels . Soft Matter 5 , 1228 – 1236 ( 2009 ) . 149 . Taraballi , F . et al . Glycine - spacers influence functional motifs exposure and self - assembling propensity of functionalized substrates tailored for neural stem cell cultures . Front . Neuroeng . 3 , 1 ( 2010 ) . 150 . Zupancich , J . A . , Bates , F . S . & Hillmyer , M . A . Synthesis and self - assembly of RGD - functionalized PEO - PB amphiphiles . Biomacromolecules 10 , 1554 – 1563 ( 2009 ) . 151 . Cheng , G . , Castelletto , V . , Jones , R . R . , Connon , C . J . & Hamley , I . W . Hydrogelation of self - assembling RGD - based peptides . Soft Matter 7 , 1326 – 1333 ( 2010 ) . 152 . Zhou , M . et al . Self - assembled peptide - based hydrogels as scaffolds for anchorage - dependent cells . Biomaterials 30 , 2523 – 2530 ( 2009 ) . 153 . Storrie , H . et al . Supramolecular crafting of cell adhesion . Biomaterials 28 , 4608 – 4618 ( 2007 ) . 154 . Webber , M . J . et al . Development of bioactive peptide amphiphiles for therapeutic cell delivery . Acta Biomater . 6 , 3 – 11 ( 2010 ) . 155 . Lee , S . S . et al . Gel scaffolds of BMP - 2 - binding peptide amphiphile nanofibers for spinal arthrodesis . Adv . Healthc . Mater . 4 , 131 – 141 ( 2015 ) . 156 . Griffith , L . G . & Swartz , M . A . Capturing complex 3D tissue physiology in vitro . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 7 , 211 – 224 ( 2006 ) . 157 . Li , Y . & Kumacheva , E . Hydrogel microenvironments for cancer spheroid growth and drug screening . Sci . Adv . 4 , eaas8998 ( 2018 ) . 158 . Ranga , A . , Gjorevski , N . & Lutolf , M . P . Drug discovery through stem cell - based organoid models . Adv . Drug Deliv . Rev . 69 – 70 , 19 – 28 ( 2014 ) . 159 . Canton , I . et al . Mucin - inspired thermoresponsive synthetic hydrogels induce stasis in human pluripotent stem cells and human embryos . ACS Cent . Sci . 2 , 65 – 74 ( 2016 ) . 160 . Kambe , Y . , Murakoshi , A . , Urakawa , H . , Kimura , Y . & Yamaoka , T . Vascular induction and cell infiltration into peptide - modified bioactive silk fibroin hydrogels . J . Mater . Chem . B 5 , 7557 – 7571 ( 2017 ) . 161 . Dvir , T . , Timko , B . P . , Kohane , D . S . & Langer , R . Nanotechnological strategies for engineering complex tissues . Nat . Nanotechnol . 6 , 13 – 22 ( 2011 ) . 162 . Pääkko , M . et al . Enzymatic hydrolysis combined with mechanical shearing and high - pressure www . nature . com / natrevmats R e v i e w s 114 | FeBRu ARY 2019 | volume 4 homogenization for nanoscale cellulose fibrils and strong gels . Biomacromolecules 8 , 1934 – 1941 ( 2007 ) . 163 . Ushiki , T . Collagen fibers , reticular fibers and elastic fibers . A comprehensive understanding from a morphological viewpoint . Arch . Histol . Cytol . 65 , 109 – 126 ( 2002 ) . 164 . Sill , T . J . & von Recum , H . A . Electrospinning : applications in drug delivery and tissue engineering . Biomaterials 29 , 1989 – 2006 ( 2008 ) . 165 . Oberpenning , F . , Meng , J . , Yoo , J . J . & Atala , A . De novo reconstitution of a functional mammalian urinary bladder by tissue engineering . Nat . Biotechnol . 17 , 149 – 155 ( 1999 ) . 166 . Yan , C . et al . Injectable solid hydrogel : mechanism of shear - thinning and immediate recovery of injectable β - hairpin peptide hydrogels . Soft Matter 6 , 5143 – 5156 ( 2010 ) . 167 . Zhang , M . et al . Self - healing supramolecular gels formed by crown ether based host – guest interactions . Angew . Chem . Int . Ed . Engl . 124 , 7117 – 7121 ( 2012 ) . 168 . Acerbi , I . et al . Human breast cancer invasion and aggression correlates with ECM stiffening and immune cell infiltration . Integr . Biol . 7 , 1120 – 1134 ( 2015 ) . 169 . Engler , A . J . , Richert , L . , Wong , J . Y . , Picart , C . & Discher , D . E . Surface probe measurements of the elasticity of sectioned tissue , thin gels and polyelectrolyte multilayer films : correlations between substrate stiffness and cell adhesion . Surf . Sci . 570 , 142 – 154 ( 2004 ) . 170 . Chaudhuri , O . et al . Hydrogels with tunable stress relaxation regulate stem cell fate and activity . Nat . Mater . 15 , 326 – 334 ( 2016 ) . 171 . Gautieri , A . , Vesentini , S . , Redaelli , A . & Buehler , M . J . Viscoelastic properties of model segments of collagen molecules . Matrix Biol . 31 , 141 – 149 ( 2012 ) . 172 . Buehler , M . J . Nature designs tough collagen : explaining the nanostructure of collagen fibrils . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 103 , 12285 – 12290 ( 2006 ) . 173 . Tarakanova , A . , Yeo , G . C . , Baldock , C . , Weiss , A . S . & Buehler , M . J . Molecular model of human tropoelastin and implications of associated mutations . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 115 , 201801205 ( 2018 ) . 174 . Stylianopoulos , T . , Diop - frimpong , B . , Munn , L . L . & Jain , R . K . Diffusion anisotropy in collagen gels and tumors : the effect of fiber network orientation . Biophys . J . 99 , 3119 – 3128 ( 2010 ) . 175 . Shi , C . , Wright , G . J . , Ex - Lubeskie , C . L . , Bradshaw , A . D . & Yao , H . Relationship between anisotropic diffusion properties and tissue morphology in porcine TMJ disc . Osteoarthr . Cartil . 21 , 625 – 633 ( 2013 ) . 176 . Murphy , S . V . & Atala , A . 3D bioprinting of tissues and organs . Nat . Biotechnol . 32 , 773 – 785 ( 2014 ) . 177 . Lee , J . et al . Tumor stem cells derived from glioblastomas cultured in bFGF and EGF more closely mirror the phenotype and genotype of primary tumors than do serum - cultured cell lines . Cancer Cell 9 , 391 – 403 ( 2006 ) . 178 . Birgersdotter , A . , Sandberg , R . & Ernberg , I . Gene expression perturbation in vitro — a growing case for three - dimensional ( 3D ) culture systems . Semin . Cancer Biol . 15 , 405 – 412 ( 2005 ) . 179 . Moreno - Arotzena , O . , Meier , J . , del Amo , C . & García - Aznar , J . Characterization of fibrin and collagen gels for engineering wound healing models . Materials ( Basel ) . 8 , ( 1636 – 1651 ( 2015 ) . 180 . Cukierman , E . Taking cell - matrix adhesions to the third dimension . Science 294 , 1708 – 1712 ( 2001 ) . 181 . Yamamoto , K . , Yokoi , H . & Otani , A . Hierarchical structure of the fibrillar hydrogel network of a self - assembled synthetic peptide revealed by x - ray scattering and atmospheric scanning electron microscopy . Macromol . Symp . 358 , 85 – 94 ( 2015 ) . 182 . Oldberg , A . et al . Collagen - binding proteoglycan fibromodulin can determine stroma matrix structure and fluid balance in experimental carcinoma . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 104 , 13966 – 13971 ( 2007 ) . 183 . Yamamoto , S . et al . Atomic force microscopic studies of isolated collagen fibrils of the bovine cornea and sclera . Arch . Histol . Cytol . 60 , 371 – 378 ( 1997 ) . 184 . Komai , Y . & Ushiki , T . The three - dimensional organization of collagen fibrils in the human cornea and sclera . Invest . Ophthalmol . Vis . Sci . 32 , 2244 – 2258 ( 1991 ) . 185 . Barton , S . P . & Marks , R . Measurement of collagen - fibre diameter in human skin . J . Cutan . Pathol . 11 , 18 – 26 ( 1984 ) . 186 . Silver , F . H . , Kato , Y . P . , Ohno , M . & Wasserman , A . J . Analysis of mammalian connective tissue : relationship between hierarchical structures and mechanical properties . J . Long . Term . Eff . Med . Implants 2 , 165 – 198 ( 1992 ) . 187 . Ushiki , T . & Murakumo , M . Scanning electron microscopic studies of tissue elastin components exposed by a KOH - collagenase or simple KOH digestion method . Arch . Histol . Cytol . 54 , 427 – 436 ( 1991 ) . 188 . Singer , I . I . The fibronexus : a transmembrane association of fibronectin - containing fibers and bundles of 5 nm microfilaments in hamster and human fibroblasts . Cell 16 , 675 – 685 ( 1979 ) . 189 . Chen , L . B . , Murray , A . , Segal , R . A . , Bushnell , A . & Walsh , M . L . Studies on intercellular LETS glycoprotein matrices . Cell 14 , 377 – 391 ( 1978 ) . 190 . He , S . , Cao , H . , Antovic , A . & Blombäck , M . Modifications of flow measurement to determine fibrin gel permeability and the preliminary use in research and clinical materials . Blood Coagul . Fibrinolysis 16 , 61 – 67 ( 2005 ) . 191 . Gersh , K . C . , Nagaswami , C . & Weisel , J . W . Fibrin network structure and clot mechanical properties are altered by incorporation of erythrocytes . Thromb . Haemost . 102 , 1169 – 1175 ( 2010 ) . 192 . Ryan , E . A . , Mockros , L . F . , Weisel , J . W . & Lorand , L . Structural origins of fibrin clot rheology . Biophys . J . 77 , 2813 – 2826 ( 1999 ) . 193 . Piechocka , I . K . , Bacabac , R . G . , Potters , M . , Mackintosh , F . C . & Koenderink , G . H . Structural hierarchy governs fibrin gel mechanics . Biophys . J . 98 , 2281 – 2289 ( 2010 ) . 194 . Allen , P . , Melero - Martin , J . & Bischoff , J . Type I collagen , fibrin and PuraMatrixmatrices provide permissive environments for human endothelial and mesenchymal progenitor cells to form neovascular networks . J . Tissue Eng . Regen . Med . 5 , e74 – e86 ( 2011 ) . 195 . Jansen , K . A . et al . The role of network architecture in collagen mechanics . Biophys . J . 114 , 2665 – 2678 ( 2018 ) . 196 . Chen , W . et al . Revealing the structures of cellulose nanofiber bundles obtained by mechanical nanofibrillation via TEM observation . Carbohydr . Polym . 117 , 950 – 956 ( 2015 ) . 197 . Rabionet , M . , Yeste , M . , Puig , T . & Ciurana , J . Electrospinning PCL scaffolds manufacture for three - dimensional breast cancer cell culture . Polymers ( Basel ) 9 , ( 328 ( 2017 ) . 198 . Vaquette , C . & Cooper - White , J . A simple method for fabricating 3D multilayered composite scaffolds . Acta Biomater . 9 , 4599 – 4608 ( 2013 ) . 199 . Vaquette , C . & Cooper - White , J . J . Increasing electrospun scaffold pore size with tailored collectors for improved cell penetration . Acta Biomater . 7 , 2544 – 2557 ( 2011 ) . 200 . Haj , J . , Haj Khalil , T . , Falah , M . , Zussman , E . & Srouji , S . An ECM - mimicking , mesenchymal stem cell - embedded hybrid scaffold for bone regeneration . Biomed Res . Int . 2017 , 8591073 ( 2017 ) . Acknowledgements The authors are grateful to the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council ( NSERC ) of Canada ( Discovery Grant ) for their financial support . E . K . thanks the Canada Research Chairs Program . E . P . is grateful to the NSERC of Canada Graduate Scholarship - Doctoral Program . Author contributions E . P . and E . K . wrote and edited the manuscript . E . P . researched data for the article . Competing interests The authors declare no competing interests . Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations . NAtuRe Reviews | MATERiAlS R e v i e w s volume 4 | FeBRu ARY 2019 | 115