Article https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 023 - 36627 - 5 Variable microtubule architecture in the malaria parasite Josie L . Ferreira 1 , 2 , 3 , 10 , 11 , Vojt ě ch Pra ž ák 1 , 2 , 4 , 11 , Daven Vasishtan 1 , 2 , 4 , Marc Siggel 1 , 5 , Franziska Hentzschel 6 , 7 , Annika M . Binder 6 , Emma Pietsch 1 , 3 , 8 , Jan Kosinski 1 , 5 , 9 , Friedrich Frischknecht 6 , 7 , Tim W . Gilberger 1 , 3 , 8 & Kay Grünewald 1 , 2 , 4 , 8 Microtubules are a ubiquitous eukaryotic cytoskeletal element typically con - sisting of 13 proto ﬁ laments arranged in a hollow cylinder . This arrangement is considered the canonical form and is adopted by most organisms , with rare exceptions . Here , we use in situ electron cryo - tomography and subvolume averaging to analyse the changing microtubule cytoskeleton of Plasmodium falciparum , the causative agent of malaria , throughout its life cycle . Unex - pectedly , different parasite forms have distinct microtubule structures coor - dinated by unique organising centres . In merozoites , the most widely studied form , we observe canonical microtubules . In migrating mosquito forms , the 13 proto ﬁ lament structure is further reinforced by interrupted luminal helices . Surprisingly , gametocytes contain a wide distribution of microtubule struc - tures ranging from 13 to 18 proto ﬁ laments , doublets and triplets . Such a diversity of microtubule structures has not been observed in any other organism to date and is likely evidence of a distinct role in each life cycle form . This data provides a unique view into an unusual microtubule cytoskeleton of a relevant human pathogen . Microtubules are a vital cytoskeletal component across all branches of eukaryotes , forming tracks for intracellular transport , structural sup - port for locomotion and spindles for chromosome segregation . The polymerisation of α - / β - tubulin heterodimers forms proto ﬁ laments which interact laterally to assemble into a hollow cylinder . The 13 - proto ﬁ lament microtubule is considered canonical as this structure has been most commonly observed within widely studied eukaryotic supergroups . While early electron microscopists found multiple examples of non - canonical microtubules 1 , the dif ﬁ culty in purifying functional native tubulin from some species , and the overreliance on model organisms , resulted in our understanding of microtubule biology being based primarily on the study of metazoan microtubules . Non - canonical examples , such as the 11 - proto ﬁ lament microtubules of specialised cells in nematodes 2 , 3 and the 15 - proto ﬁ lament micro - tubules of inner - earpillar cells 4 , 5 , areconsidered to be curious outliers . The result is that , although protozoa are a large and diverse group , much of our hypotheses about their microtubules have been inferred from metazoan studies . The eukaryotic protozoan parasites of Plasmodium spp . , rely on a scaffold of ordered subpellicular microtubules ( SPMTs ) as their main structural cytoskeletal components . P . falciparum , the causative agent of malaria , has a complex life cycle alternating between mosquito Received : 7 November 2022 Accepted : 9 February 2023 Check for updates 1 Centre for Structural Systems Biology , Hamburg , Germany . 2 Leibniz Institute for Virology ( LIV ) , Hamburg , Germany . 3 Bernhard Nocht Institute for Tropical Medicine , Hamburg , Germany . 4 Division of Structural Biology , Wellcome Centre for Human Genetics , University of Oxford , Oxford , UK . 5 European Molecular Biology Laboratory , Hamburg , Germany . 6 Integrative Parasitology , Centre for Infectious Diseases , Heidelberg University Medical School , Heidelberg , Germany . 7 German Center for Infection Research , DZIF Partner Site Heidelberg , Heidelberg , Germany . 8 University of Hamburg , Hamburg , Germany . 9 Structural and Computational Biology Unit , EMBL , Heidelberg , Germany . 10 Present address : Institute of Structural and Molecular Biology , Birkbeck , University of London , London , UK . 11 These authors contributed equally : Josie L . Ferreira , Vojt ě ch Pra ž ák . e - mail : kay . gruenewald @ cssb - hamburg . de Nature Communications | ( 2023 ) 14 : 1216 1 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 ( ) : , ; 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 ( ) : , ; vector and human host ( Fig . 1 ) . Extensive coevolution with the two hosts has resulted in the pathogen utilising a multitude of highly specialised and morphologically distinct cell types , here referred to as forms . Although each form is a master of a distinct niche and mor - phologicallyvaried , thepresenceofSPMTsisaunifyingfeature . SPMTs lie below and interact with a double membrane known as the inner membrane complex ( IMC ) located beneath the plasma membrane . Together these structures are referred to as the pellicle which is found across Apicomplexa , including , for example , Toxoplasma gondii . The pellicle is broken down in transition and then rebuilt during the maturation of each life cycle form , and each time it is accompanied by a different set of associated proteins 6 , 7 . This de novo re - organisation is a driving force behind the parasite ’ s substantial morphological chan - ges and SPMTs play a key role in this process 8 . Although eukaryotic tubulins are highly conserved , there are appreciabledifferenceswhichmakeapicomplexanmicrotubulesstand out . The parasite ’ s SPMTs are extremely stable , resistant to most classical depolymerisation protocols such as cold treatments 9 , addi - tion of microtubule depolymerising drugs 10 and detergents 11 , 12 . Another feature unique to apicomplexan tubulin is its formation of L - shaped semi - tubules which , with accessory proteins , form a helical structure termed the conoid 13 , 14 . The conoid is a specialised structure involved in invasion . Although characterised in Toxoplasma , homo - logues of some conoid components are expressed in Plasmo - dium spp . 15 . Microtubules assembled in vitro , from puri ﬁ ed tubulin , consist of 9 to 16 proto ﬁ laments , with different distributions of proto ﬁ lament numbers depending on the species and conditions used 1 , 16 . As these variations are not normally found in cells , stipulation of a uniformly 13 - proto ﬁ lament microtubule population therefore needs to be estab - lished during nucleation by external factors . There are four common mechanisms for controlling the number of proto ﬁ laments in a micro - tubule : templating via the γ - tubulin ring complex ( γ TuRC ) 17 , 18 , setting a speci ﬁ c inter - proto ﬁ lament angle through lateral binding of proteins such as doublecortin 19 , 20 , expression of different tubulin isoforms 21 or post - translational modi ﬁ cations 22 . In metazoans , nucleation of micro - tubules usually occurs at centrosomes ( microtubule organising cen - tres , MTOCs ) . In the invasive forms of apicomplexan parasites , a structurally diverse MTOC located at their apical end , the Apical Polar Ring ( APR ) , coordinates the higher order spatial control of SPMTs 23 , but the speci ﬁ c mechanism remains unknown . To directly visualise the diversity of microtubules in Plasmodium spp , we image four different parasite life cycle forms under native conditions using cryogenic focussed ion beam ( FIB ) - milling , electron tomography ( cryo - ET ) and subvolume averaging ( SVA ) ( Fig . 1 ) . By revealing these structures in their native context , in 3D , we uncover an unusual cytoskeletal architecture , where each parasite form has a distinct , specialised microtubule structure , some being substantially different from the canonical microtubule . Results Visualisation of native microtubules throughout the Plasmo - dium life cycle by in situ electron cryo - tomography To determine the in situ structures of microtubules in different Plas - modium forms , we performed FIB - milling and cryo - ET on two mos - quito ( sporozoites and ookinetes ) and two human forms ( merozoites andgametocytes , Fig . 1 ) . WeperformedtargetedFIBmilling ( Fig . 1b ) to produce lamella with thicknesses between 50nm and 300 nm at locations containing parasites . Initially , correlative light and electron microscopy ( CLEM ) wasusedtoidentifyparasitesvitri ﬁ edonEMgrids . We later found that their distinctive shapes in SEM ( Fig . 1c , column 2 ) allowed targeting without correlation . For each stage we acquired between 50 and 100 tomograms from ~ 20 lamellae , to obtain good coverage of different subcellular regions . We performed manual picking in order to perform SVA exhaustively on all microtubules , thus generating complete ultrastructural models and allowing statistical analysis . Toavoidpotentialbias , all ~ 850individualmicrotubulesinthe dataset were analysed independently with SVA . This allowed us to investigate structural variability , including the number of proto ﬁ la - ments and relative polarity 24 , both within each cell and between the four life cycle forms . Sporozoite and ookinete SPMTs are canonical microtubules with a twist : an interrupted luminal helix We started our study by imaging parasite forms isolated from the mosquito vector : sporozoites and ookinetes . These motile forms are elongated with a dense SPMT scaffold underneath the IMC . At ﬁ rst glance , the lumen of SPMTs in both sporozoites and ookinetes con - tained a ( pseudo - ) helical density with ~ 8 nm periodicity , consistent with previous predictions ( Figs . 2 , 3 ) 11 . To generate an unbiased EM density maps , 422 sporozoite and 177 ookinete SPMTs were analysed by SVAwithout applying any ( pseudo - ) symmetry . Both of the resulting structures showed 13 - proto ﬁ lament microtubules with twice - interrupted luminal helices ( Figs . 2b – d , 3c ) . Similar structures , named Interrupted Luminal Helices ( ILH ) , were ﬁ rst observed in ﬂ a - gellar ends of human spermatozoa 25 , and more recently in equine and porcine spermatozoa 26 , and tachyzoites of Toxoplasma gondii 14 , 27 . We adopted the nomenclature of Zabeo et al 25 . The T . gondii ILH consists of thioredoxin - like proteins 1 and 2 ( TrxL1 , TrxL2 ) and subpellicular microtubule protein 1 ( SPM1 ) . We hypothesised that the ILH in Plas - modium and Toxoplasma likelyconsist ofhomologousproteins : ﬁ rstly , Plasmodium spp . have homologues of TrxL1 ( PfTrxL1 ) and SPM1 ( PfSPM1 ) but lack TrxL2 , which in the Toxoplasma ILH is present in both , and completely ﬁ lls one of the two interruptions . Consistently , we exclusively observed twice - interrupted luminal helices in Plasmo - dium . Secondly , compatible with the ILH being composed of SPM1 and TrxL1 in Plasmodium , we saw high expression in Plasmodium berghei ( Pb ) of PbSPM1 - GFP and PbTrxL1 - GFP in our endogenously - tagged sporozoite lines ( Fig . S2 ) . Finally , Plasmodium and Toxoplasma TrxL1 andSPM1arehighlyconserved 12 ( Fig . S1a , b ) , andthemodelof T . gondii SPMT assembly ( pdb 7MIZ ) ﬁ ts well into our EM maps ( Fig . 2c , d ) . Due to the asymmetric nature of the ILH , there is only one way that the ILH structure from T . gondii can be ﬁ tted into the EM density of Plasmodium SPMTs . We therefore suggest that P . falciparum ILH consists of 10 copies of PfTrxL1 , likely with an equivalent number of PfSPM1 separated into two half - crescents ( Fig . 2c ) . This also provided us with a reliable method of identifying both the seam position and alpha - beta tubulin location in our structure ( Fig . 2c , d ) . Although most microtubule structures solved to date are close to circular in cross section , Plasmodium microtubules with ILH and to a lesser extent T . gondii microtubules with ILH ( Fig . S1c , d ) are ﬂ attened along an imaginary axis roughly between proto ﬁ laments 2 and 9 . This implies that the ILH stabilises the inter - proto ﬁ lament angle at ~ 26° , deviating by ~ 2° from the theoretical 27 . 7° of canonical 13 - proto ﬁ lament microtubules ( Fig . S1c , d ) . The deviation from circular cross - section accumulates over 5 subunits and is then compensated for by 37°relative angle between proto ﬁ laments 6and7 , and 12 and 13 . Comparisons of the predicted structure of Plasmodium ’ s TrxL1 to that of T . gondii showedthatthelargestdifferenceisattheN - terminalhelix ( Fig . S1e ) , which is responsible for a large part of the subunit - subunit interface and may play a role in the increased ellipticity . Ookinetes contain a conoid At the apical end of the ookinete , we observed a structure consistent with a classical conoid made up of a unique tubulin structure ( N = 1 , Fig . 3e ) . The average volume cross section is consistent with the L - shaped tubulin - based conoid described in T . gondii 14 . The ookinete conoidmeasured 70nm in height and 300 nmin diameter , resembling a retracted state . Until recently , Plasmodium ( belonging to the class Aconoidasida , meaning conoid - less ) was thought to not possess a Article https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 023 - 36627 - 5 Nature Communications | ( 2023 ) 14 : 1216 2 conoid . Our data validate previous genetic , ﬂ uorescence microscopy , and classical EM data hinting at the presence of a conoid - like structure at the ookinete apex 15 , 28 . Merozoite microtubules are canonical and lack an interrupted luminal helix Based on our mosquito form data and the recent structures from T . gondii , it seemed plausible that the ILH is an ubiquitous feature of apicomplexan microtubules . To verify that this is a universal feature in all life cycle forms , we next analysed P . falciparum forms from the human host . Furthermore , to assess whether the presence of an ILH is speci ﬁ c to SPMTs or a general microtubule component , we imaged at two timepoints of schizont development . For SPMTs , we imaged fully segmented schizonts ( merozoites ) , while for spindle microtubules we aimed for dividing schizonts . The asexual blood stage , the merozoite , which egresses from a mature schizont , is a small cell with only two to three SPMTs ( Fig . 4 ) . Merozoites are short - lived ; to avoid imaging non - viable cells , we stalled schizonts prior to egress using a well - Fig . 1 | Imaging parasites across the Plasmodium life cycle : from live parasites to high - resolution 3D volumes . a Simpli ﬁ ed Plasmodium life cycle of parasite forms studied here . Sporozoites are injected into the host . After differentiating in the liver , merozoites are released into the blood . The majority enter an asexual replication cycle ( merozoites ) and a small percentage commit to becoming gametocytes . Gametocytesaretakenupbyamosquitoandafterfusionofmaleand female gametes in the mosquito gut , zygotes transform into ookinetes . Ookinetes cross the mosquito midgut , develop into oocysts and form thousands of sporozoites , which migrate to the salivary glands . b Schematic representation of our work ﬂ ow : ( i ) live parasites are vitri ﬁ ed on EM grids . ( ii ) cells are thinned into lamellaandthen ( iii ) imagedbyelectroncryo - tomography ( cryo - ET ) . Tilt - seriesare collected and computationally reconstructed into 3D volumes . c Columns 1 – 4 : representative images of parasites at different work ﬂ ow steps . 1 : compositions of ﬂ uorescence images of cells highlighting overall parasite shape . Inset : cartoon representation of each stage . 2 : Scanning Electron Microscopy ( SEM ) micrographs showing Plasmodium parasites ( some false - coloured in yellow and green ) sur - rounded by host cells ( green asterisks ) . 3 : micrographs showing overviews of lamellae . 4 : slices through example tomograms . Article https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 023 - 36627 - 5 Nature Communications | ( 2023 ) 14 : 1216 3 Fig . 2 | Sporozoite subpellicular microtubules ( SPMTs ) contain a periodic luminal density inside 13 proto ﬁ lament microtubules . a Slice through a tomo - gram illustrating the overall architecture of the pellicle within a cell . One SPMT is seen weaving in and out of the slicing plane . Insets : slices through EM map ( shown in B , C , D ) placed back into the tomogram at positions determined by SVA . b Orthogonal slices through the EM map . c Isosurface representation of the EM map with pseudoatomic model ( 7MIZ ) ﬁ tted into the EM density . p1 - p13 = proto ﬁ lamentnumbers , dottedline = seamposition . d Top : sectionthroughtheEM map showing the position of an α / β tubulin dimer relative to TrxL1 . Bottom : radial projectionwithoneperiodoftheILHhighlightedinpurple . e Theapicalpoleofa P . falciparum sporozoite withafullsetofmicrotubules ( 13blue + 1 green ) . TheAPRis represented by an isosurface , the SPMTs as pin models , where the pinhead marks thecentreandthelineisorientedtowardstheseam . f Segmentedsporozoiteapical pole . Thetubulindensity ( 13proto ﬁ laments ) oftwoSPMTswashiddentorevealthe ILH . Unannotated slicethroughtomogramshowninFig . S3aand the fullvolumein supplemental movie S1 . Article https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 023 - 36627 - 5 Nature Communications | ( 2023 ) 14 : 1216 4 Fig . 3 | Ookinete SPMTscontain interrupted luminal helicesand are organised inacomplexapicalpole . a Tomogramslicethroughtheapicalendofanookinete with SPMTs oriented along the apico - basal axis . A cartoon of an ookinete on the rightshowsapproximatecentrepositionsoflamellaina , bandd . b Slicethroughan ookinete apex proximal region with SPMTs cut transversally , the annotation col - ours are the same as in a . SPMTs get closer to the IMC as inner apical collar tapers off ( from left to right ) . The rotational orientation of SPMTs ( centre to seam ) is indicated with arrows . c Orthogonal sections through EM map determined by SVAofookineteSPMTs . d Segmentationofanapexproximalregionofanookinete with transversally cut SPMTs , highlighting the two apical collar layers between the SPMTsandIMC . Theconoidisshowningreen . e Segmentationoftheapicalpoleof an ookinete . The tubulin density of one SPMT was hidden to reveal the ILH . Inset shows a slice through an average volume of the conoid periodic structure . Unan - notatedslicethroughtomogramshowninFig . S3bandfullvolumeinsupplemental movie S2 . Article https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 023 - 36627 - 5 Nature Communications | ( 2023 ) 14 : 1216 5 characterised protease inhibitor ( E64 ) 29 , resulting in merozoites in erythrocyte membrane sacks . Unexpectedly and in contrast to mosquito forms , there was no ILH in merozoite SPMTs ( Fig . 4a , c ) . Analysis by SVA showed that merozoite SPMTs are canonical , i . e . made of 13 proto ﬁ laments . Simi - larly , spindlemicrotubules from dividingschizontswerecanonical and lacked an ILH ( Fig . 4b ) . However , in contrast to SPMTs which were uncapped , spindle microtubules contained a capping density at their minus ends which resembled γ TuRC ( Fig . S4c ) 30 . This indicated that Plasmodium ’ s microtubule cytoskeleton structures are altered depen - dent on the life cycle stage and that different populations of micro - tubules may be nucleated by distinct mechanisms . Gametocyte microtubules are non - canonical 13 - to 18 - proto ﬁ lament singlets , doublets and triplets After revealing that microtubule structures are different between the mosquito forms and asexual merozoite blood form , we next set out to study the SPMTs in the sexual gametocytes . The P . falciparum gametocyte develops from a round , to an elongated , and eventually falciform shape through ﬁ ve morphological stages . SPMTs start polymerising in stage II and by stage IV they completely surround the cytoplasm . We enriched gametocytes at different stages in the maturation process and investigated their microtubules . The pellicle coverage increased with subsequent developmental stages and with it the number of SPMTs in each cell . In all gametocyte stages , SPMT cross sections had noticeably large and variable dia - meters , ranging from 27 to 37nm , and consisted of a mixture of singlets , doublets , triplets ( often with unusual geometries ) , and even a quadruplet ( Figs . 5 , S5 ) . This was unexpected as in all organisms stu - died to date , cytoplasmic microtubules are single tubes ( singlet microtubules ) and previous studies reported smaller diameter microtubules 31 . Doublets ( canonically consisting of 13 + 10 proto ﬁ la - ments ) andtripletsarefoundinciliaand ﬂ agella 26 , 32 , withtripletsbeing hallmarks of centrioles . Consistent with merozoite SPMTs , we found no evidenceof anILH in these giant microtubules . SVA was performed independentlyoneachofthe ~ 170singletand ~ 30A - tubulesofdoublet SPMTs and amazingly showed thatthey consisted of13 , 14 , 15 , 16 , 17 or 18 proto ﬁ laments ( Fig . 5c , Table S1 ) . Although some canonical microtubules were present , these only accounted for 9 % of the population , while 17 - proto ﬁ lament microtubules were the most Fig . 4 | Merozoites have canonical subpellicular ( SPMTs ) and nuclear spindle microtubules . a Slice through a tomogram of an apical pole . Inset : slice through themicrotubulesubvolumeaverageshowing13proto ﬁ laments . b Segmentationof a nucleus in a dividing schizont with a partial spindle body . All four nuclear pore complexes observed in this section of the nucleus are in proximity of the spindle . Inset : slice through an isosurface of the SPMT EM map . c Segmentation of a single merozoite within a fully segmented schizont . Note : for simpli ﬁ cation the IMC is segmented as a continuous double membrane although multiple discontinuities were observed . Unannotated slice through tomogram shown in Fig . S3c and full volume in supplemental movie S3 . Article https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 023 - 36627 - 5 Nature Communications | ( 2023 ) 14 : 1216 6 frequent ( 40 % ) ( Fig . 5c ) . Doublets were also giant and their A - tubules had a similar distribution , with 17 proto ﬁ laments being the most common ( Fig . S5b , c ) . Surprisingly , considering the ubiquity of a 13 - proto ﬁ lament A - tubule in other organisms , there were no A tubules with 13 proto ﬁ laments . The diversity in proto ﬁ lament numbers sets the gametocyte SPMT population clearly apart from all other forms . Whether this is due to a gametocyte speci ﬁ c SPMT nucleation or a different mechanism could be investigated by comparison to microtubules in other cellular compartments . OtherthanSPMTs , therearetwomoremicrotubulepopulationsin gametocytes : nuclear spindle ( or hemi - spindle 33 ) and cytoplasmic . Cytoplasmic microtubules are short - lived and only appear in early stagegametocytesontheoppositesideofthecellfromthedeveloping pellicle 34 . Consequently , cytoplasmic microtubules are relatively rare . We observed a mixture of proto ﬁ lament numbers ( 13 to 16 , Fig . S5e ) and while there was an indication of clustering by proto ﬁ lament size , thiscouldnotbecon ﬁ rmedduetolownumbers . Nuclearmicrotubules were seen frequently in gametocyte stage III / IV parasites and a full spindle pole body was present in one tomogram ( Fig . 5b ) . Spindle microtubules ranged from 13 to 17 proto ﬁ laments , with 15 being most common ( Fig . 5b , c ) . This was unexpected as , irrespective of proto - ﬁ lament number , all minus ends were clearly capped with a structure whichcould be γ TuRC ( althoughitis ﬂ attened relative tothe canonical form ) . Notably , γ TuRC has , so far , been exclusively described in Fig . 5 | Gametocyte subpellicular microtubules ( SPMTs ) have a wide range of proto ﬁ lament numbers with random polarity . a Micrograph showing a row of singlet and doublet SPMT cross sections and highlighting the range of sizes . Pro - to ﬁ lament numbers are indicated ( for doublets of the A tubule ) . Micrographs at two different tilt angles were stitched to show SPMT transversal views . b Segmentation of a stage III gametocyte nucleus with a spindle pole body at a nuclear pore complex . Microtubulecolourscorrespond to proto ﬁ lament numbers asshowninc , d . c . Barchartof thedistributionofdifferentproto ﬁ lamentnumbers in SPMTs ( blue ) N = 155 and nuclear spindles ( lilac ) N = 31 . Distributions are sig - ni ﬁ cantly different ( p = 5×10 − 8 , chi - squared ) . d Isosurfaces of microtubules from subvolume averaging with proto ﬁ lament numbers from 13 to 18 . e Schematic representation of the differences in microtubule diameter . f Segmentation of a stage III gametocyte with transversely sectioned SPMTs . Microtubule colours cor - respond to proto ﬁ lament numbers as shown in c , d . ‘ + / − ’ indicates the polarity of eachmicrotubule . UnannotatedslicethroughtomogramshowninFig . S3dandfull volume in supplemental movie S4 . Article https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 023 - 36627 - 5 Nature Communications | ( 2023 ) 14 : 1216 7 canonicalmicrotubules ( Fig . S4d ) . Together thisdata suggests thatthe wide distribution of proto ﬁ lament numbers may be a result of differ - ential isoform expression or post - translational modi ﬁ cation , rather than a nucleation mechanism . Structurally diverse apical polar rings coordinate microtubules in Plasmodium invasive forms Having observed substantial structural differences among micro - tubule populations between the four individual forms , we focused our analysis on the apicalassemblies wherenucleation of SPMTs occurs . In the invasive parasite forms ( merozoites , sporozoites and ookinetes ) proteinaceous rings ( APR ) at the apical pole act as unique MTOCs , coordinating SPMTs in addition to terminating the IMC . Consistent with this , all SPMTs in both mosquito forms and merozoites had the same polarity , with their minus ends at the apical pole and their plus ends reaching towards the basal cell pole . In all invasive forms , their minus ends were blunt and lacked a γ TuRC cap , although there maybe additional microtubule associated proteins ( MAPs ) in the lumen of ookinete minus ends ( Fig S4a ) . However , despite all three forms con - taining 13 - proto ﬁ lament SPMTs with the same polarity , there were large - scale differences in the architecture of their apical poles ( Figs . 2 – 4 ) . The merozoite ’ s apex was the simplest , with only two to three microtubules radiating from the APR ( Fig . 4c ) . Rather than being distributedequallyaroundtheAPR , allSPMTsoriginatedonthesame side of the ring . Sporozoites contained a larger number of SPMTs . In two tomograms we could see full sporozoite APRs with a complete set of 13 closely spaced and a single opposing SPMT ( Figs . 2e , f , S6 ) . SPMT minus ends were in an apparent direct contact ( Fig . S6a ) and ﬂ ush with the apical edge of the APR . However , each SPMT had a different angle - of - attack relative to the ring rotational symmetry axis which is tilted by roughly 45° 35 from the parasite apico - basal axis ( Fig . S6c , d ) . The SPMT - APR contact , therefore , needs to allow a high degree of ﬂ exibility . In contrast , the SPMT radial orientation was constrained , with proto ﬁ laments 6 to 9 preferentially in contact with the APR ( Fig . S6c ) . The most elaborate apex was observed in ookinetes , with two concentric layers of amorphous protein , rather than a single ring ( Fig . 3 ) . Due to the large difference in morphology , we favour the term apical collar ( AC ) 15 , but APR is equally appropriate due to functional similarity . Both rings separated into tentacles on their basal side ( Fig . 3b , d , e ) , with the inner AC being in direct contact with and fol - lowing individual SPMTs for up to ~ 1 µ m . To accommodate the large number of SPMTs present in this form ( ~ 50 – 60 ) in the narrow apical end , the microtubule minus ends originated at staggered positions from the AC apical rim ( Fig . 3e ) . Gametocyte SPMTS are nucleated independently from an APR Gametocyte cells do not have clear cellular polarity , unlike the dis - tinctly polar cells of the three invasive forms described above ( Figs . 2 – 4 ) . We observed no evidence of an APR - like structure or other structure that could act as a MTOC at gametocyte poles , and SPMTs originated at apparently uncoordinated positions along the celllength . UnlikeintheinvasiveformswhereallSPMTshadthesame polarity with minus ends at the apical end , gametocyte SPMTs had an apparent random polarity ( Fig . 5f , Table S1 ) . Furthermore , there was no discernible pattern in the distribution of SPMTs along the IMC with respect to the number of proto ﬁ laments or secondary tubules ( Fig . 5f , Table S1 ) . Considering that SPMTs in the three earlier forms lacked a γ TuRC cap , we had initially hypothesised that SPMT nucleation factors may be physically associated with the APR or AC . However , focused analysis of the gametocyte SPMT minus ends showed that they too were uncapped ( Fig . S4 ) . Together , this sug - gests a γ TuRC - independent nucleation mechanism that is not uniquely associated with the APR . SPMT to IMC distance is conserved in all parasite forms , indicating a universal linker protein Although Plasmodium parasites alter their microtubule structure , MTOCs , and higher order microtubule organisation at each step in their life cycle , one unifying feature is the interaction of SPMTs with the IMC . To elucidate whether the SPMT - IMC interaction is mediated in the same manner in all parasite forms , we measured the shortest distance ( d IMC ) from the surface of each SPMT to the inner IMC membrane ( Fig . 6 ) . A similar d IMC in all parasite forms would suggest that the same proteins are involved in tethering SPMTs to the IMC . Excluding the apical assemblies , there was no signi ﬁ cant difference in the d IMC between the four parasite forms ( with a common median of 18 nm and standard deviation of 10nm , Fig . 6d ) . This distance increased at the ookinete apex to ~ 50 and ~ 100nm in order to accommodate the AC , but the distance from the SPMT surface to the closest surface , the inner AC , was comparable to d IMC ( ~ 13 nm , Fig . 6a ) . Thus , we show that , although each stage has a unique SPMT structure , the distance between the SPMTs and IMC remains consistent between stages . We therefore hypothesise that the same proteins link the SPMTs to the IMC in all parasite forms analysed . The interrupted luminal helix likely controls the rotational orientation of SPMTs with respect to the IMC With the hypothesis that a common linker is tethering the SPMTs to the IMC in all forms , and with the knowledge that mosquito form SPMTs have a preferred radial orientation ( Figs . 2e , 3b , S6b , c , S7 ) , we set out to look for the linker binding site . A clear candidate , due to it being a distinct asymmetric structural feature , was the seam . We measured the angle , φ IMC , between the seam , the microtubule centre and the closest point on the IMC surface ( see supplemental informa - tion for details of seam orientation ) . Analysing the mean φ IMC forall possibleSPMTs revealed thatonly mosquitostageSPMTshaveasetradialpolarity . Surprisingly , theseam points away from the IMC with proto ﬁ lament 8 oriented towards it instead ( Figs . 6a , b , S6 , S7 ) . In contrast to the mosquito forms , no clusteringof φ IMC wasobservedingametocytes , suggestingthatinthis life cycle form the linker protein does not have a speci ﬁ c binding position ( Fig . 6c ) . Although these results did not ﬁ nd a universal binding site for the linkeronall SPMTs , they suggested thattheILH was involved in setting the radial orientation with respect to the IMC . We inspected the mosquito stage SPMT EM density map for possible clues . Even at low contour levels there was no linking density between the SPMT and IMC , indicating that any linker protein is ﬂ exible or present at a low occupancy . Nevertheless , there was some evidence of radially - asymmetric decoration with an unknown protein density between proto ﬁ laments 10 , 11 and 12 , with additional density emanating radially outwards from proto ﬁ laments 11 and 12 ( Fig . S8 ) . If these densities correspond to a part of the SPMT - IMC linker , there would likely need to be additional SPMT - IMC connections ( possibly at proto ﬁ lament 6 or 7 ) to establish the observed radial orientation of proto ﬁ lament 8 pointingtowardsthe IMC . Thus , althoughtheprecisedetailsofalinker are yet to be elucidated , we present evidence for asymmetric dec - oration and radial polarity , which are likely ILH - dependent , in the mosquito form microtubules . Discussion The P . falciparum parasite has evolved a complex life cycle , moving through multiple different tissues within its human host and mosquito vector . For each new environmental niche , the parasite undergoes extreme morphological changes . As the parasite morphs into new specialised shapes for each niche , its microtubules are disassembled and subsequently reassembled into multiple unique , ﬁ t - for - purpose structures , coordinated by unusualMTOCs ( Fig . 7 ) . While the ookinete apical end is the most elaborate and includes a tubulin - based conoid , Article https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 023 - 36627 - 5 Nature Communications | ( 2023 ) 14 : 1216 8 Fig . 6 | Microtubule distance from the IMC is consistent in all forms , but the interrupted luminal helix may be needed to uniquely determine their radial orientation . Panels a – c left : scatter plots of individual SPMT distance ( dIMC ) and radial orientation ( φ IMC ) with respect to the IMC . Each point represents the median along a single SPMT . Ookinete and sporozoite SPMTs have a de ﬁ ned polaritywhereasgametocyteorientationsarerandom ( seeFig . S7for2Dhistogram representationofthesedata ) . Parasiteformcartoonsindicatesubcellularlocations where data points were sampled : at the cell body or the apex . Right : average volumes of SPMTs sampled at the indicated subcellular locations . Although the subvolume averaging was focused on SPMTs , IMC and APR components can be seen in the EM maps after extracting large subvolumes ( 200nm edges ) . This is a consequence of the consistent SPMT - IMC distance and orientation . Cartoons below average volumes are models of the pellicle architecture at each location . Note thatsincethe IMC wraps around the torus - shaped sporozoite APR , itwasnot possibletomeasureasingleapicaldIMC ( apical φ IMCanglesareshowninFig . S6b ) . Gametocyte panel ( c ) shows sections through individual SPMTs rather than an average , to indicate their inconsistent orientations and different number of pro - to ﬁ laments . * See supplementary materials for details and assumptions made in gametocyteorientationassignment . d ViolinplotcomparingdIMC betweenforms , widths are scaled according to the amount of data . Article https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 023 - 36627 - 5 Nature Communications | ( 2023 ) 14 : 1216 9 gametocytes stand out among the other forms with their lack of an APR and diverse population of microtubule structures ( Figs . 5 , 7 ) . Gametocytes have a large range and variety of microtubule structures including singlets with 13 to 18 proto ﬁ laments and giant doublets , triplets and quadruplets . Such large structural diversity is so far unprecedented , which raises questions about the underlying mechanism and the physiological role . According to our current understanding , proto ﬁ lament number is tightly controlled , but this apparently isn ’ t the case in gametocytes . Microtubules have the pro - pensity to self - assemble in vitro , albeit at concentrations considerably higher than physiological . This spontaneous self - assembly results in microtubule populations with a wide distribution of proto ﬁ lament numbers ( 9 – 16 for bovine braintubulin ) 1 , 16 . However , a nucleation - free self - assembly is unlikely to be responsible for the giant non - canonical SPMTs in gametocytes as their polymerisation is restricted to the surface of growing IMC plates , rather than spontaneously in the cytoplasm . Furthermore , we occasionally observed groups of cyto - plasmic microtubule populations , possibly clustered according to diameter ( Fig . S5e ) which suggests that a level of control is available . An increased number of proto ﬁ laments could be due to altered post - translational modi ﬁ cations or the expression of a novel MAP or tubulin isoform . Plasmodium spp . express one β - and two α - tubulin isoforms . Although α 1 - and α 2 - tubulin exhibit ~ 95 % sequence identity , there are several amino acid substitutions at key regions . α 2 - tubulin , for example , is missing 3 amino acids at its C - terminus ( often a target for posttranslational modi ﬁ cations ) and the least conserved region in the sequence corresponds to a loop which may mediate intra - proto ﬁ lament interactions . These small changes could ultimately result in alterations in the microtubule lattice and promote B - tubule formation leading to doublets and triplets 36 . Furthermore , previous studies into tubulin isoforms in humans have shown that the relative fraction of an isoform within a microtubule can modulate the micro - tubule lattice 37 , providing a possible explanation for the range in proto ﬁ lament numbers observed . Although α 2 - tubulin is likely expressed in all life cycle forms , its relative expression is highest in sexual stages 38 , 39 . This isoform was not present in microtubules puri ﬁ ed from asexual stages 40 , is not essential in asexual forms 41 , and can only partially replace α 1 - tubulin in P . berghei sporozoites 42 . P . falciparum is the only Plasmodium species that produces elongated gametocytes 43 , and their SPMTs have been shown to be polyglutamated , which may play a role in their stability 28 , 44 . The maturing gametocyte has decreased deformability 45 which plays a role in inhibiting premature release of gametocytes from sequestration sites in the bone marrow , therefore avoiding splenic clearance 46 . Gametocytes are at their most rigid at stage IV , when all microtubules areassembled . However , thecellsbecomedeformableagaininstageV , when the majority of the SPMTs have been disassembled , hinting at a link between cell rigidity and SPMTs . We expect that giant microtubules will be signi ﬁ cantly stiffer ( less likely to bend ) than the canonical form . The transition from 13 pro - to ﬁ laments to 17 or 18 proto ﬁ laments is expected to greatly increase the stiffness of an individual microtubule , as a change from 13 to 15 proto ﬁ laments was predicted to result in a 35 % increase in stiffness 47 . This increased rigidity is evidenced in , for example , mechanosensory cells where their 15 - proto ﬁ lament microtubules are implicated in mechanotransduction . As the gametocyte periphery has a limited surface area , a limited number of microtubules can ﬁ t onto the inner surfaceoftheIMC . Therefore , maximisingthenumberofmicrotubules as well as assembling larger , more rigid microtubules may allow P . falciparum gametocytes to grow into their extended , rigid form and develop undisturbed in their human hosts until mature . The two mosquito forms , on the other hand , have their own unique SPMTs made of 13 proto ﬁ laments and characteristically rein - forced with an ILH . Our observations contribute to a growing list of organisms that make use of an ILH in their microtubule cytoskeleton , which now includes the SPMTs of apicomplexans 14 , 27 and the cilia and ﬂ agella of some mammals 25 , 26 . With our observations it seems likely that ILH consisting of TrxL1 - and SPM1 - like proteins are conserved across the Apicomplexa , but only in some life cycle forms . The TrxL1 expressionpro ﬁ leinpublisheddataisconsistentwithourobservation , with its transcription strongly upregulated in ookinetes and spor - ozoites and very little relative expression in blood stages 38 , 48 . In our TrxL1 - GFP and SPM1 - GFP lines , we saw high levels of expression in sporozoite ( Fig . S2 ) . Intriguingly , in mammals , there is a homologue of TrxL1 that localises to lung cilia and sperm ﬂ agella ( thioredoxin - like Txl - 2 49 ) and a homologue of SPM1 in axonemes ( stabilizer of axonemal microtubules SAXO2 50 ) , suggesting that the ILH may be a common eukaryotic trait . The ILH has been hypothesised to limit turnover at the micro - tubule plus end and strengthen SPMTs in both the longitudinal ( via SPM1 ) and transversal direction ( TrxL1 ) 25 , 26 . An SPM1 - null mutant in T . gondii had reduced ﬁ tness 12 . This was not seen in a second study , Fig . 7 | Structural diversity of Plasmodium microtubules across its life cycle . a Cartoon representations of the four Plasmodium forms analysed . b Table sum - marising the main architectural differences in the four forms . Solid outlines indicate properties that are likely correlated : the presence of an apical polar ring setstheSPMTpolarityandILHisdirectlylinkedtosettingtheseamorientationwith respect to the IMC . Article https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 023 - 36627 - 5 Nature Communications | ( 2023 ) 14 : 1216 10 although microtubules were more susceptible to chemical treatments when missing SPM1 or TrxL1 27 . It is conspicuous that ILH occurs in locomotive structures , such as cilia , ﬂ agellar ends and apicomplexan gliding forms . Thus , we postulate that the ILH provides stability with - out sacri ﬁ cing ﬂ exibility , and if breakages occur , SPM1 keeps the ends together , allowing SPMT repair or self - healing . Where solely rigidity is required , Plasmodium gametocytes have evolved a dense sheet of SPMTs with a large number of proto ﬁ laments , doublets and triplets . The function of SPMTs as cytoskeletal elements relies on a phy - sical connection to the IMC . Studying the linkage between the SPMTs andtheIMC , wefoundthattherotationalorientationofILH - containing SPMTs with respect to the IMC was set . Surprisingly , the seam was not oriented towards the IMC . This is consistent with and clari ﬁ es previous data on seam orientation from ﬂ attened detergent solubilised T . gondii 14 , but remains surprising as the seam is the only truly asym - metric microtubule feature that can be accessed by externally binding MAPs . Instead , the ILH could be setting the rotational orientation directly . Gametocytes , which lack an ILH , have an apparently random radial polarity . Our evidence for this was the large variance of doublet φ IMC , but beyond this it is also dif ﬁ cult to reconcile the supertwist of non - canonical microtubules with a linker having a preference for a speci ﬁ c proto ﬁ lament ( as different proto ﬁ laments are directed towards the IMCasthe microtubuletwists ) . We proposethat the radial polarity of 13 - proto ﬁ lament SPMTs in merozoites is also random , due to the supposed lack of an asymmetric feature like the ILH . There are two conceivable mechanisms for how the ILH could be orienting SPMTs . Either a direct contact between an ILH component and an external MAP , or by forcing SPMTs into elliptical cross sections ( Fig . S1 ) , where the inconsistent inter - proto ﬁ lament angles could be recognised as binding sites . We observed weak densities emanating from proto ﬁ laments 11 and 12 and in the ridges between proto ﬁ la - ments 9 to 12 ( Fig . S8 ) . These densities are not consistent with known MAPs such as kinesin or doublecortin , but the resolution of our C1symmetry EMdensitymapsisnothighenoughtobeconclusive . Itis not clear whether they correspond to a putative SPMT - IMC linker , consideringthattheyare notorientedtowards theclosest pointonthe IMC . A framework for understanding the evolution of asymmetric rotational orientation of SPMTs may be a recently proposed hypoth - esisthatSPMTsoriginatefromanancient ﬂ agellum 51 , 52 . Theorientation of ILH containing SPMTs is roughly consistent with the orientation of the A - tubule in axonemes with respect to the membrane . Whether this radial polarity is important for orchestration of directional gliding will need to be tested . The variations in microtubule structures among Plasmodium forms pose the obvious question ; how are these different micro - tubules being nucleated ? It has been suggested that SPMTs with ILH could be nucleated by SPM1 27 . TrxL1 could then set the proto ﬁ lament number to 13 through the curvature of its oligomeric state . This seems plausible in isolation , but not in light of our new data . It does not explain how the giant microtubules of gametocytes or merozoite 13 - proto ﬁ lament SPMTs , which lack the ILH , are nucleated . Furthermore , the curvature of TrxL1 - bound proto ﬁ laments departs from that of a canonical 13 - proto ﬁ lament microtubule ( Fig . S1 ) and there is a gap in the ILH between proto ﬁ laments 13 and 1 where additional proto ﬁ la - ments could conceivably be inserted . γ TuRC is an unlikely nucleation mechanism as SPMT minus ends were uncapped in all microtubules observed from all forms ( Fig . S4 ) . Although it is possible that the γ TuRC caps could have been disassembled ( γ - tubulin is expressed in schizonts , for example 53 ) , this would be surprising due to the stability of Plasmodium microtubules . Itisdif ﬁ culttospeculateonthenatureof giant microtubule nucleation in gametocytes . On one hand one could speculateabouta γ TuRC - independentnucleationofSPMTsthatallows proto ﬁ lament numbers from 13 to 18 . But on the other , is the presence of a γ TuRC - like structure on spindle microtubules , which nevertheless is unable to generate a homogeneous microtubule population . Recent data suggests that , at least initial SPMTs in gametocytes , are nucleated at a nuclear membrane - located centriolar - plaque 44 . How different diameter microtubules and our observed random polarity of SPMTs can be achieved with this model will still need to be explored . Toge - ther , these data may hint at a novel SPMT nucleation mechanism and with it , a potential target for antimalarials . In this work we reveal the metamorphosis of microtubule struc - tures throughout the life cycle of P . falciparum . On the highest level , the remarkable structural diversity forces us to re - evaluate our pre - conceptions about the canonical microtubule resulting from the overreliance on a small number of model organisms . The high reso - lution and optimal structuralpreservation ofthe in situ data presented here provide a framework for integrating ﬁ ndings from other , more reductionist methods , in order to gain a complete picture of an organism ’ s cytoskeleton . We expect that as more cell types are stu - died , using these techniques available now , the true diversity of eukaryotic microtubule structures and their niche functions will be larger than currently anticipated . Methods Cell culture P . falciparum blood forms were cultured in human red blood cells ( O + or B + , Universitätsklinikum Eppendorf , Hamburg , Germany ) at 5 % haematocrit , 1 % O 2 , 5 % CO 2 , and 94 % N 2 at 37°C , in RPMI complete medium containing 0 . 5 % Albumax II 54 . Parasite synchronisation Schizonts were harvested using 60 % prewarmed Percoll 55 , washed once with prewarmed RPMI , resuspended in 5 % uninfected red blood cells in prewarmed RPMI and cultured for 3 h , until parasites egressed and reinvaded . Unruptured schizonts were lysed with 5 % sorbitol . The remaining culture contained young rings with a 3 - h synchronicity window . P . falciparum schizonts Tightly synchronised 3D7 schizonts expressing endogenously GFP - tagged GAPM2 ( glideosome - associated protein with multiple mem - brane spans 2 56 , 57 ) were isolated from a 10 – 20mL culture ( 5 – 10 % parasitaemia ) using 60 % Percoll 55 , washed twice in pre - warmed RPMI , and treated with 1 µ M of the PKG - inhibitor compound 2 ( provided by Dr . Mike Blackman , The Francis Crick Institute , UK ) 58 , 59 , and incubated for6h . Segmentedschizontswerewashedonceandthenresuspended in pre - warmed RPMI without Albumax or phenol red but with the addition of 1 µ M E64 ( Sigma ) to allow the parasitophorous vacuole to rupture but prevent rupture of the red blood cell membrane . This helped us identify very late stage schizonts in the SEM . Cells were kept warm and vitri ﬁ ed within an hour . P . falciparum gametocytes Gametocyte stages were generated by targeted overexpression of the sexual commitment factor GDV1 ( Gametocyte development 1 ) using a 3D7 inducible gametocyte producer line ( iGP ) as previously described 60 overexpressing a GFP - tagged version of the suture inner membrane complex protein PF3D7 _ 1345600 ( plasmid from 57 ) . GDV1 - GFP - DD expression was achieved by the addition of 2 or 4 µ M Shield - 1 toaparasiteculturecontaining2 – 3 % rings . Shield - 1wasmaintainedfor a further 48 h until reinvasion . The sample was adjusted to 10 % para - sitaemia and cultured in RPMI supplemented with 10 % human serum ( blood group AB + ) for 10 days to allow gametocyte maturation . To deplete non - committed asexual forms , gametocytes were treated with 50 mM N - acetyl - d - glucosamine ( GlcNac ) for at least 4 days . Culture medium was changed at least once per day on a 37 °C heating plate . Gametocyte stages II , III , IV and V wereisolated at different time points during gametocyte maturation from a 20 mL culture using 60 % pre - warmed Percoll . Isolated gametocytes were washed twice and then Article https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 023 - 36627 - 5 Nature Communications | ( 2023 ) 14 : 1216 11 resuspended in pre - warmed RPMI without albumax , serum or phenol red and kept warm ( for between 15 min and 45min ) until immediately prior to freezing . P . falciparum sporozoites P . falciparum sporozoites ( strain : NF54 - Δ Pf47 - 5 ’ csp - GFP - Luc : expres - sing a GFP - Luciferase fusion protein ) under the control of the csp promoter , genomic integration , no selection marker 61 were prepared atTropIQ ( Nijmegen , Netherlands ) . Gametocyteswerefedto2daysold female Anopheles stephensi mosquitoes . Mosquito infection was con - ﬁ rmed 7 days post infection by midgut dissection . At 7 days post infection , the infected mosquitoes received an extra non - infectious blood meal to boostsporozoite production . Twoweeks post infection , sporozoites were isolated using salivary gland dissection and shipped to Hamburg at room temperature . P . berghei ookinetes Ookinetes were produced using the P . berghei line PbRFP , a P . berghei ANKA line that constitutively expresses RFP . Two female Swiss mice were injected intraperitoneally with 200 µ l phenylhydrazine ( 6mg / ml in PBS ) to stimulate reticulocytosis . Two days later , the mice were infected intraperitoneally with 20 * 10 6 iRBC PbRFP . Mice were bled three days post infection and 500 µ l blood was transferred to 10 ml ookinete medium ( RPMI supplemented with 20 % ( v / v ) FCS , 50 µ g / ml hypoxanthine , and 100 µ M xanthurenic acid , adjusted to pH 7 . 8 – 8 . 0 ) at 19 °C . After 22h of culture , ookinete cultures were underlaid with 5ml 55 % Nycodenz / PBS and centrifuged for 25min at 210 xg without brake . The interphase containing puri ﬁ ed ookinetes was collected , washed in PBS and immediately plunge frozen for EM . Plunge freezing Cells were kept warm in a 37°C heat block next to the plunge freezer . 3 µ l of enriched parasites were applied onto a freshly plasma - cleaned UltrAufoil R1 . 2 / 1 . 3 300 mesh EM grid ( Quantifoil ) in a humidity con - trolled facility . Excessliquid was manually back - blotted and grids were plunged into a reservoir of ethane / propane using a manual plunger . Grids were stored under liquid nitrogen until imaging . Cryo FIB milling Grids were clipped into autogrids modi ﬁ ed for FIB preparation 62 and loaded into either an Aquilos or an upgraded Aquilos2 cryo - FIB / SEM dual - beam microscope ( Thermo ﬁ sher Scienti ﬁ c ) . Overview tile sets were recorded using MAPS software ( Thermo ﬁ sher Scienti ﬁ c ) before being sputter coated with a thin layer of platinum . Good sites with parasites were identi ﬁ ed for lamella preparation before the coincident pointbetweentheelectronbeamandtheionbeamwasdeterminedfor each point by stage tilt . Prior to milling , an organometallic platinum layer was deposited onto the grids using a GIS ( gas - injection - system ) . Lamellae were milled manually until under 300 nm in a stepwise series of decreasing currents . Milling was performed at the lowest possible angles to increase lamella length in thin cells . Finally , polishing of all lamella was done at the end of the session as quickly as possible but always within 1 . 5h tolimit ice contamination from water depositionon the surface of the lamellae . Before removing the samples , the grids were sputter coated with a ﬁ nal thin layer of platinum . Grids were stored in liquid nitrogen for a maximum of 2 weeks before imaging in the TEM . Cryo - EM FIB - milled grids were rotated by 90° and loaded into a Titan Krios microscope ( Thermo ﬁ sher ) equipped with a K2 or K3 direct electron detector and ( Bio - ) Quantum energy ﬁ lter ( Gatan ) . Tomographic data wascollectedwithSerialEM 63 withtheenergy - selectingslitsetto20eV . Datasets were collected using the dose - symmetric acquisition scheme at a± 65°tilt range with 3° tilt increments . Forall datasets , 5 – 10 frames were collected and aligned on the ﬂ y using SerialEM and the total ﬂ uence was kept to less than 120e − / Å 2 . Defoci between 3 and 8 μ m underfocus were used to record the tilt series ’ . Tomogram reconstruction Frames were aligned on the ﬂ y in SerialEM ; CTF estimation , phase ﬂ ipping and dose - weighting was performed in IMOD 64 . Tilt - series ’ were aligned in IMOD either using patch - tracking or by using nano - particles ( likely gold or platinum ) on lamella surfaces as ﬁ ducial markers . Tomograms were binned 4x and ﬁ ltered in IMOD or by using Bsoft 65 . Sub - volume averaging For all averages . SVA was performed in PEET 66 with tomograms at progressively lower binning . Initial 3D coordinates ( model points or particle coordinates ) for SVA were generated by interpolating between manually traced microtubule centres in IMOD , using scripts based on TEMPy 67 and using Python libraries Numpy , Scipy and Matplotlib 68 – 70 . The vectors between pairs of points were used to set initial particle Y axis orientation ( microtubule pseudosym - metry axis ) . Each microtubule was processed separately , aligned to a unique reference ( raw average ) generated by averaging the respective particles with initial orientations ( Fig . S9 ) . In order to determine its polarity and the number of proto ﬁ laments , the initial rotations around the Y axis ( here referred to as φ rotation ) were randomised ( Fig S9 , step 2 ) . Particles from the same forms with the same number of proto ﬁ laments were then combined for further processing . The progress of SVA was monitored by inspecting pin models in UCSF Chimera ( Fig . 2e ) where each particle ’ s position and orientation were represented by a pair of markers . This allowed us to e . g . : identify and remove outliers from the linear geometry . Particles were pruned if they overlapped with others , had low cross - correlation coef ﬁ cient or drifted too far from their initial positions . SPMT maps were sharpened using arbitrary B - factors using Bsoft 65 . Sporozoite and ookinete SPMTs Having determined the relative polarity , the necessary step for com - bining is ﬁ nding the relative φ rotation ( rotation around the symmetry axis ) between individual microtubules . This could be done by aligning each individual particle to a common reference , but would result in a large number of errors due to the low signal to noise ratio . We devel - oped a method analogous to that of Zabeo et al . , 25 where the micro - tubule average volumes are aligned together in order to ﬁ nd their relative φ rotation ( Fig . S9step4 ) . These φ rotationswerethenapplied to their respective particles and aligned to a common reference . SVA was subsequently performed with volumes binned 4 and 2 times . Only sporozoite data were aligned with unbinned volumes ; the ﬁ nal step was to replace volumes reconstructed with the whole sets of tilts by volumes reconstructed with tiltsbetween ±24° . Norotation search was performed with the restricted tilt range . The resulting C1 EM map was anisotropic around the pseudosymmetry axis due to an uneven dis - tribution of microtubule rotational orientations . To address this , par - ticles were separated into classes by orientation and particles with the lowestcrosscorrelationcoef ﬁ cientsinthemostabundantclasseswere removed . Thisreducedthenumberof particlesfrom24028to13263 in sporozoite and 8377 to 1851 in ookinete datasets . Other microtubules Gametocyte and merozoite singlet microtubules . Approximately 200 microtubules from 25 tomograms were processed individually , with random initial φ rotations . Data were then manually classi ﬁ ed by proto ﬁ lament number , rotated to the same polarity and aligned with volumes binned 4 and 2 times . Helical parameters were measured directly using class averages with the exception of 13 - and 15 - proto ﬁ lament classes where tubulin subunits were not resolved and Article https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 023 - 36627 - 5 Nature Communications | ( 2023 ) 14 : 1216 12 published parameters were used ( Table S2 ) 71 . Helical symmetry was applied , followed by SVA alignment . Gametocyte doublet microtubules . SPMT doublets were processed inamanneranalogoustoookineteandsporozoitedata , whereaverage volumes were used to determine relative φ rotations . SPMTs with differentnumbersofproto ﬁ lamentsinAandBtubuleswerecombined together , resulting in an ensemble average volume . Half map generation . Particles were split into two halves ( even and odd numbered particles ) . Random coordinate offsets of up to ±2nm and random angular offsets of up to ±3° were added to each particle and the resulting parameters were used to re - generate a raw average for each half data set . Alignment of the two halves was then done independently with twice binned and then unbinned volumes , fol - lowing the same procedure as the whole dataset . Fourier Shell Corre - lation was measured using Bsoft . Structure visualisation . EM maps and atomic models were visualised with UCSF ( University of California San Francisco ) Chimera 72 or UCSF ChimeraX 73 . Computational sections were generated in IMOD . Multiple sequence alignment . ClustalOmega 74 , 75 was used to align TrxL1 protein sequences and JalView was used for visualisation 76 . Col - ours are based on ClustalX colouring . Tomogram segmentation for visualisation . Segmentation was per - formed manually in IMOD , using drawing tools followed by linear interpolation . The resulting models were used to extract segmented volumes . SPMTs , ookinete conoid and sporozoite APR were back - plotted : average volumes were placed into 3D volumes using coordi - nates determined by SVA . SPMT and APR particles were spline ﬁ tted to smooth alignment errors for visualisation . Segmented and back - plotted volumes were visualised using UCSF ChimeraX 73 . Tomogram segmentation for IMC - MT distance and angular mea - surements . Tomograms were bandpass ﬁ ltered using Bsoft . Segmen - tations of the ﬁ ltered tomograms were guided by a tensor voting algorithm using TomoSegMemTV 77 , 78 . The parameters were optimised for each dataset , respectively . Clusters containing the IMC segmenta - tions were manually extracted by visual analysis . The clusters were then converted to a 3D point cloud and further processed using the Open3D library 78 . Statisticaloutlier analysis wasused to remove excess noise from the segmentations . Subsequently , the DBSCAN algorithm was used to separate individual membrane sections and the outer side of the IMC was selected manually for subsequent distance mea - surements . The angle φ IMC was measured between two vectors for each SPMT particle : a vector of the SPMT particle X axis and a vector from the particle centre to the nearest segmented IMC coordinate ( roughly equivalent to IMC normal vector intersecting the SPMT par - ticle ) . Particles outside segmented membrane patches were excluded . Measurements from individual microtubules were reduced to a med - ian value for plotting and statistical analyses . The requirement for a clear membrane density for automated segmentation substantially reduced the number of microtubules available for analysis . Thus , due to the rarity of SPMTs in merozoites , doublets in gametocytes and minus termini in ookinetes , a small number of tomograms were segmented manually in IMOD . Atomic model alignment and ﬁ tting . Initially , T . gondii SPMT model ( PDB 7MIZ ) was ﬁ tted to the P . falciparum sporozoite SPMT EM map as a rigid body in Chimera 72 , the ﬁ t was then visualised in ChimeraX 73 . The resulting ﬁ t was unambiguous with TgTrxL2 ( which is not expressed in Plasmodium but is part of the Toxoplasma ILH ) outside and the remaining protein chains inside the map . Due to the difference in ellipticitybetweenthe P . falciparum and T . gondii maps , proto ﬁ laments and TrxL1 / SPM1 half arcs were ﬁ tted as separate units . Structural pre - diction of PfTrxL1 ( https : / / alphafold . ebi . ac . uk / entry / Q8I2W0 ) 79 was aligned with TgTrxL1 ( PDB 7MIZ ) using matchmaker 80 in ChimeraX . Proto ﬁ lament angle measurements . Inter - proto ﬁ lament angles were determined by measuring the angle between C α atoms of the same pair of residues in neighbouring proto ﬁ laments . Median values of roughly 200 measurements were used . Plasmodium berghei parasite line generation . Endogenous tagging was performed essentially as described before using single - crossover integration 81 . As both SPM1 and TrxL1 show an overall gene length of less than 1 kilobase , the entire open - reading frame was ampli ﬁ ed from Pb ANKA wildtype genomic DNA . The resulting DNA fragment was cloned into the pL18 vector 82 using EcoRI and BamHI restriction sites . The reverse primer encoded for six alanines that were used as a linker . The pL18 vector harbours the hDHFR gene for positive selection using the drug pyrimethamine . Prior to transfection , the vector was linear - ized using SwaI ( SPM1 ) and BsmI ( TrxL1 ) , respectively , followed by ethanol - precipitation . All oligonucleotides used to generate DNA frag - ments as well as those used for genotyping PCRs are listed in Table 1 . The linearized pL18 - SPM1 - GFP / pL18 - TrxL1 - GFP vectors were each transfected into an unmodi ﬁ ed P . berghei ANKA strain using standard protocols 83 . Parasites that integrated the desired DNA construct were Table 1 | Oligonucleotides used for cloning and genotyping PCR Primer - ID Primer name 5 ’ → 3 ’ sequence Cloning primers P2229 SPM1 - fw - EcoRI CCGGAATTCATGGAAATAATAGGCGCAAAAC P2230 SPM1 - rev - 6Ala - BamHI CGCGGATCC CGCCGCCGCCGCCGCCGC ATACCACGCTTTTTTTACATCATC P2233 TrxL1 - fw - EcoRI CCGGAATTCATGTCTTGTGCTAATTTTAATTCCC P2234 TrxL1 - rev - 6Ala - BamHI CGCGGATCC CGCCGCCGCCGCCGCCGC TAAACCTTTTTTATTTAAAGAATAAATATTATTTCTG Genotyping primers P210 TestprimerGFPreverse TTAACATCACCATCTAATTCAACAAG P650 QCR2 _ 81070 ACGTGCATTTCTTAGCGTTCCT P862 GFPtestR TCCAGTGAAAAGTTCTTCTCCT P2219 PBANKA _ 082020 _ GT AGCGCGCATTAGCCAATTCT P2221 PBANKA _ 082020 _ QCR2 ACGTTCTCCACATTGGCAAA P2224 PBANKA _ 0810700 _ GT2 CACAACACATAAAAAATGCGCACC P2239 pL18 - tgdhfr - seq - AB ACTTTAGAGGCCATGAAGAG Bases encodingfor the 6 - alaninelinker are inblod . Article https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 023 - 36627 - 5 Nature Communications | ( 2023 ) 14 : 1216 13 selected by oral administration of pyrimethamine ( 0 . 07mg / ml ) viathe mouse drinking water one day post transfection . Once mice showed between 1 – 3 % infected red cells , blood was collected via cardiac puncture from anesthetized mice ( 100 mg / kg ketamine and 3 mg / kg xylazine , Sigma - Aldrich ) . For permanent parasite line storage , aliquots of 100 µ l whole blood mixed with 200 µ l freezing solution ( 10 % Gly - cerol in Alsever ’ s solution , Sigma - Aldrich ) were stored in liquid nitrogen . To verify correct integration , genomic DNA was isolated from whole blood and tested for correct construct integration by geno - typing PCR . For this , erythrocytes were ﬁ rst lysed in 1 . 5 ml phosphate buffered saline ( PBS ) containing 0 . 03 % saponin . After centrifugation and two washing steps , the genomic DNA was isolated using the Blood and Tissue kit ( Qiagen Ltd ) according to the manufacturer ’ s protocol . Parasites from these transfections resulted in mixed ( parental ) popu - lations were used for mosquito infections . Plasmids and oligonucleotides were designed using SnapGene Software Version 3 . 2 . 1 ( Insightful Science , available at snapgene . com ) . Images were analyzed with Fiji ( Version : 2 . 0 . 0 rc 64 / 1 . 51 s ) 84 . Mosquito infection . Frozen ( non - clonal ) parasite stocks were thawed and directly injected intraperitoneally ( 100 – 150 µ l ) into one mouse ( 6 – 8 - week - old female Swiss mice ) with the infection monitored by blood smears . Once the infected mouse reached 2 – 3 % infected red cells , the mouse was anesthetized ( 100mg / kg ketamine and 3 mg / kg xylazine , Sigma - Aldrich ) , bled and 20 million parasites transferred into two naïve recipient mice by intraperitoneal injection . Three days after fresh blood transfer mice were anesthetized ( 120mg / kg ketamine and 16mg / mlxylazine ) andplacedonacagecontainingaround200female Anopheles stephensi mosquitoes , which were starved for 3 to 5h by removal of sugar and salt pads . Mosquitoes were allowed to feed on mice for 15min to 30min . Following infection , mosquitos were kept at 21 °C and 70 % humidity . Sporozoite isolation and ﬂ uorescent imaging of live P . berghei sporozoites . Salivary gland sporozoites were isolated on day 19 post mosquito blood meal . To this end , salivary glands were dissected on ice in RPMI and crushed with a pestle . Subsequently the tube was ﬁ lled up to 1 ml with RPMI and the solution carefully underlaid with 3 ml of 17 % Accudenz ( Accurate chemical & scienti ﬁ c cooperation ) . Cen - trifugation at 1600xg for 20min at room temperature separated sporozoites from cell debris . The sporozoite containing interphase wascollected ( totalvolume of 1 . 4 ml ) andsporozoites werespun down for 3 min at 100 xg ( Thermo Fisher Scienti ﬁ c , Biofuge primo ) . Resus - pension of pelleted sporozoites in RPMI containing 3 % bovine serum albumin ( ROTH ) resulted in activated sporozoites . The resulting mix - ture was transferred into a well of an optical bottom 96 - well plate ( Thermo Fisher Scienti ﬁ c ) and the plate was centrifuged for 3 min at 200xg ( Multifuge S1 - R , Heraeus ) . Sporozoites were imaged using an epi ﬂ uorescence microscope ( CellObserver , Zeiss ) and a 25× ( NA 0 . 8 , water ) objectivewithanexposureof80ms . Imagesweretakenuntil1 h post sporozoite activation . Fluorescence microscopy of all other stages . Fluorescence images were taken of live parasites on a Leica D6B ﬂ uorescence microscope equipped with a Leica DFC9000 GT camera and a Leica Plan Apoc - hromat 60× or 100× / 1 . 4 oil objective . Contrast and intensities were linear adjusted to present clear parasite shapes using Fiji and cropped images were assembled into a composition of cells for Fig . 1 using Adobe Illustrator CC 2021 . Statistics and Reproducibility . Five preparations of P . falciparum gametocytes were generated of which six grids were imaged , ﬁ ve preparations of P . falciparum schizonts were generated of which six grids were imaged , two preparationsof P . falciparum sporozoites were generated of which four grids were imaged and two preparations of P . berghei ookinetes were generated of which three grids were imaged . Reporting Summary Further information on research design is available in the Nature Portfolio Reporting Summary linked to this article . Data availability The subvolume averages generated in this study have been deposited in the EMDB under accession codes Sporozoite MT ( EMD - 15532 ) , Gametocyte MTs : 13pf ( EMD - 15534 ) , 14pf ( EMD - 15535 ) , 15pf ( EMD - 15536 ) , 16pf ( EMD - 15537 ) , 17pf ( EMD - 15538 ) , 18pf ( EMD - 15539 ) . The distance measurement data generated in this study are provided in the Source Data ﬁ le . All strains and plasmids are available upon request . Source data are provided with this paper . References 1 . Chaaban , S . & Brouhard , G . J . A microtubule bestiary : structural diversity in tubulin polymers . Mol . Biol . Cell 28 , 2924 – 2931 ( 2017 ) . 2 . Chal ﬁ e , M . & Thomson , J . N . Structural and functional diversity in the neuronal microtubules of Caenorhabditis elegans . J . Cell Biol . 93 , 15 – 23 ( 1982 ) . 3 . Davis , C . & Gull , K . Proto ﬁ lament number in microtubules in cells of two parasitic nematodes . J . Parasitol . 69 , 1094 – 1099 ( 1983 ) . 4 . Saito , K . & Hama , K . Structural diversity of microtubules in the supporting cells of the sensory epithelium of guinea pig organ of corti . J . Electron Microsc . ( Tokyo ) 31 , 278 – 281 ( 1982 ) . 5 . Tucker , J . B . , Paton , C . C . , Richardson , G . P . , Mogensen , M . M . & Russell , I . J . A cell surface - associated centrosomal layer of microtubule - organizingmaterialintheinnerpillarcellofthemouse cochlea . J . Cell Sci . 102 , 215 – 226 ( 1992 ) . 6 . Ferreira , J . L . et al . The dynamic roles of the inner membrane complex in the multiple stages of the malaria parasite . Front . Cell . Infect . Microbiol . 10 , 611801 ( 2021 ) . 7 . Harding , C . R . & Frischknecht , F . The riveting cellular structures of apicomplexan parasites . Trends Parasitol . 36 , 979 – 991 ( 2020 ) . 8 . Harding , C . R . & Meissner , M . The inner membrane complex through development of toxoplasma gondii and plasmodium . Cell . Microbiol . 16 , 632 ( 2014 ) . 9 . Liu , J . et al . An ensemble of speci ﬁ cally targeted proteins stabilizes cortical microtubules in the human parasite toxoplasma gondii . Mol . Biol . Cell 27 , 549 – 571 ( 2016 ) . 10 . Morrissette , N . S . & Sibley , L . D . Cytoskeleton of apicomplexan parasites . Microbiol . Mol . Biol . Rev . 66 , 21 – 38 ( 2002 ) . 11 . Cyrklaff , M . et al . Cryoelectron tomography reveals periodic material at the inner side of subpellicular microtubules in apicom - plexan parasites . J . Exp . Med 204 , 1281 – 1287 ( 2007 ) . 12 . Tran , J . Q . , Li , C . , Chyan , A . , Chung , L . & Morrissette , N . S . SPM1 stabilizes subpellicular microtubules in toxoplasma gondii . Eukaryot . Cell 11 , 206 – 216 ( 2012 ) . 13 . Hu , K . , Roos , D . S . & Murray , J . M . A novel polymer of tubulin forms the conoid of toxoplasma gondii . J . Cell Biol . 156 , 1039 – 1050 ( 2002 ) . 14 . Sun , S . Y . et al . Cryo - ET of Toxoplasma parasites gives sub - nanometer insight into tubulin - based structures . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 119 , e2111661119 ( 2022 ) . 15 . Koreny , L . etal . Molecularcharacterizationoftheconoidcomplexin Toxoplasma reveals its conservation in all apicomplexans , includ - ing Plasmodium species . PLOS Biol . 19 , e3001081 ( 2021 ) . 16 . Pierson , G . B . , Burton , P . R . & Himes , R . H . Alterations in number of proto ﬁ laments in microtubules assembled in vitro . J . Cell Biol . 76 , 223 – 228 ( 1978 ) . 17 . Oakley , B . R . , Paolillo , V . & Zheng , Y . γ - Tubulin complexes in microtubule nucleation and beyond . Mol . Biol . Cell 26 , 2957 – 2962 ( 2015 ) . Article https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 023 - 36627 - 5 Nature Communications | ( 2023 ) 14 : 1216 14 18 . Wieczorek , M . et al . Asymmetric molecular architecture of the human γ - tubulin ring complex . Cell 180 , 165 – 175 . e16 ( 2020 ) . 19 . Manka , S . W . & Moores , C . A . Pseudo ‐ repeats in doublecortin make distinctmechanisticcontributionstomicrotubuleregulation . EMBO Rep . 21 , e51534 ( 2020 ) . 20 . Moores , C . A . et al . Mechanism of microtubule stabilization by doublecortin . Mol . Cell 14 , 833 – 839 ( 2004 ) . 21 . Fukushige , T . et al . MEC - 12 , an alpha - tubulin required for touch sensitivity in C . elegans . J . Cell Sci . 112 , 395 – 403 ( 1999 ) . 22 . Cueva , J . G . , Hsin , J . , Huang , K . C . & Goodman , M . B . Post - translational acetylation of α tubulin constrains proto ﬁ lament number in native microtubules . Curr . Biol . CB 22 , 1066 – 1074 ( 2012 ) . 23 . Russell , D . G . & Burns , R . G . The polar ring of coccidian sporozoites : a unique microtubule - organizing centre . J . Cell Sci . 65 , 193 – 207 ( 1984 ) . 24 . Sosa , H . & Chrétien , D . Relationship between moiré patterns , tubulin shape , and microtubule polarity . Cell Motil . Cytoskelet . 40 , 38 – 43 ( 1998 ) . 25 . Zabeo , D . et al . A lumenal interrupted helix in human sperm tail microtubules . Sci . Rep . 8 , 2727 ( 2018 ) . 26 . Leung , M . R . et al . The multi - scale architecture of mammalian sperm ﬂ agella and implications for ciliary motility . EMBO J . 40 , e107410 ( 2021 ) . 27 . Wang , X . et al . Cryo - EM structure of cortical microtubules from human parasite toxoplasma gondii identi ﬁ es their microtubule inner proteins . Nat . Commun . 12 , 3065 ( 2021 ) . 28 . Bertiaux , E . et al . Expansion microscopy provides new insights into the cytoskeleton of malaria parasites including the conservation of a conoid . PLOS Biol . 19 , e3001020 ( 2021 ) . 29 . Salmon , B . L . , Oksman , A . & Goldberg , D . E . Malaria parasite exit from the host erythrocyte : a two - step process requiring extra - erythrocytic proteolysis . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . 98 , 271 – 276 ( 2001 ) . 30 . Simon , C . S . etal . An extendedDNA - freeintranuclearcompartment organizes centrosome microtubules in malaria parasites . Life Sci . Alliance 4 , e202101199 ( 2021 ) . 31 . Dearnley , M . K . etal . Origin , composition , organization andfunction of the inner membrane complex of plasmodium falciparum gametocytes . J . Cell Sci . 125 , 2053 – 2063 ( 2012 ) . 32 . Fisch , C . & Dupuis - Williams , P . Ultrastructure of cilia and ﬂ agella – back to the future ! Biol . Cell 103 , 249 – 270 ( 2011 ) . 33 . Sinden , R . E . , Canning , E . U . , Bray , R . S . , Smalley , M . E . & Garnham , P . C . C . Gametocyte and gamete development in Plasmodium falci - parum . Proc . R . Soc . Lond . B Biol . Sci . 201 , 375 – 399 ( 1978 ) . 34 . Schneider , M . P . et al . Disrupting assembly of the inner membrane complex blocks plasmodium falciparum sexual stage develop - ment . PLOS Pathog . 13 , e1006659 ( 2017 ) . 35 . Kudryashev , M . et al . Structural basis for chirality and directional motility of plasmodium sporozoites . Cell . Microbiol . 14 , 1757 – 1768 ( 2012 ) . 36 . Schmidt - Cernohorska , M . et al . Flagellar microtubule doublet assembly in vitro reveals a regulatory role of tubulin C - terminal tails . Science 363 , 285 – 288 ( 2019 ) . 37 . Ti , S . - C . , Alushin , G . M . & Kapoor , T . M . Human β - tubulin isotypes can regulate microtubule proto ﬁ lament number and stability . Dev . Cell 47 , 175 – 190 . e5 ( 2018 ) . 38 . López - Barragán , M . J . et al . Directional gene expression and anti - sense transcripts in sexual and asexual stages of plasmodium fal - ciparum . BMC Genom . 12 , 587 ( 2011 ) . 39 . Zanghì , G . et al . A speci ﬁ c PfEMP1 is expressed in P . falciparum sporozoites and plays a role in hepatocyte infection . Cell Rep . 22 , 2951 – 2963 ( 2018 ) . 40 . Hirst , W . G . et al . Puri ﬁ cation of functional plasmodium falciparum tubulin allows forthe identi ﬁ cation of parasite - speci ﬁ c microtubule inhibitors . Curr . Biol . 32 , 919 – 926 . e6 ( 2022 ) . 41 . Zhang , M . et al . Uncovering the essential genome of the human malaria parasite plasmodium falciparum by saturation mutagen - esis . Science 360 , eaap7847 ( 2018 ) . 42 . Spreng , B . et al . Microtubule number and length determine cellular shape and function in plasmodium . EMBO J . 38 , e100984 ( 2019 ) . 43 . Dixon , M . W . A . & Tilley , L . Plasmodiumfalciparumgoesbananasfor sex . Mol . Biochem . Parasitol . 244 , 111385 ( 2021 ) . 44 . Li , J . et al . Repurposing the mitotic machinery to drive cellular elongation and chromatin reorganisation in plasmodium falci - parum gametocytes . Nat . Commun . 13 , 5054 ( 2022 ) . 45 . Tibúrcio , M . et al . A switch in infected erythrocyte deformability at the maturation and blood circulation of plasmodium falciparum transmission stages . Blood 119 , e172 – e180 ( 2012 ) . 46 . Duez , J . et al . Splenic retention of plasmodium falciparum game - tocytes to block the transmission of malaria . Antimicrob . Agents Chemother . 59 , 4206 – 4214 ( 2015 ) . 47 . Gittes , F . , Mickey , B . , Nettleton , J . & Howard , J . Flexural rigidity of microtubules and actin ﬁ laments measured from thermal ﬂ uctua - tions in shape . J . Cell Biol . 120 , 923 – 934 ( 1993 ) . 48 . Gómez - Díaz , E . et al . Epigenetic regulation of plasmodium falci - parum clonally variant gene expression during development in Anopheles gambiae . Sci . Rep . 7 , 40655 ( 2017 ) . 49 . Sadek , C . M . et al . Characterization of human thioredoxin - like 2 . A novelmicrotubule - bindingthioredoxinexpressedpredominantlyin the cilia of lung airway epithelium and spermatid manchette and axoneme . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 13133 – 13142 ( 2003 ) . 50 . Miranda - Vizuete , A . etal . Themammaliantestis - speci ﬁ cthioredoxin system . Antioxid . Redox Signal . 6 , 25 – 40 ( 2004 ) . 51 . de Leon , J . C . et al . A SAS - 6 - like protein suggests that the tox - oplasma conoid complex evolved from ﬂ agellar components . Eukaryot . Cell 12 , 1009 – 1019 ( 2013 ) . 52 . Wall , R . J . et al . SAS6 - like protein in plasmodium indicates that conoid - associated apical complex proteins persist in invasive stages within the mosquito vector . Sci . Rep . 6 , 28604 ( 2016 ) . 53 . Fowler , R . E . et al . Microtubule associated motor proteins of plas - modium falciparum merozoites . Mol . Biochem . Parasitol . 117 , 187 – 200 ( 2001 ) . 54 . Trager , W . & Jensen , J . B . Continuous culture of plasmodium falci - parum : its impact on malaria research . Int . J . Parasitol . 27 , 989 – 1006 ( 1997 ) . 55 . Rivadeneira , E . M . , Wasserman , M . & Espinal , C . T . Separation and concentration of schizonts of plasmodium falciparum by percoll gradients1 . J . Protozool . 30 , 367 – 370 ( 1983 ) . 56 . Bullen , H . E . et al . A novel family of apicomplexan glideosome - associated proteins with an inner membrane - anchoring role . J . Biol . Chem . 284 , 25353 – 25363 ( 2009 ) . 57 . Kono , M . et al . Evolution and architecture of the inner membrane complex in asexual and sexual stages of the malaria parasite . Mol . Biol . Evol . 29 , 2113 – 2132 ( 2012 ) . 58 . Baker , D . A . et al . A potent series targeting the malarial cGMP - dependent protein kinase clears infection and blocks transmission . Nat . Commun . 8 , 430 ( 2017 ) . 59 . Donald , R . G . K . etal . Anticoccidialkinaseinhibitors : identi ﬁ cationof protein kinase targets secondary to cGMP - dependent protein kinase . Mol . Biochem . Parasitol . 149 , 86 – 98 ( 2006 ) . 60 . Boltryk , S . D . et al . CRISPR / Cas9 - engineered inducible gametocyte producer lines as a valuable tool for plasmodium falciparum malaria transmission research . Nat . Commun . 12 , 4806 ( 2021 ) . 61 . Winkel , B . M . F . et al . Quanti ﬁ cation of wild - type and radiation attenuated plasmodium falciparum sporozoite motility in human skin . Sci . Rep . 9 , 13436 ( 2019 ) . 62 . Schaffer , M . et al . Cryo - focused ion beam sample preparation for imaging vitreous cells by cryo - electron tomography . Bio - Protoc . 5 , e1575 ( 2015 ) . Article https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 023 - 36627 - 5 Nature Communications | ( 2023 ) 14 : 1216 15 63 . Mastronarde , D . N . Dual - axis tomography : an approach with align - ment methods that preserve resolution . J . Struct . Biol . 120 , 343 – 352 ( 1997 ) . 64 . Kremer , J . R . , Mastronarde , D . N . & McIntosh , J . R . Computer visualization of three - dimensional image data using IMOD . J . Struct . Biol . 116 , 71 – 76 ( 1996 ) . 65 . Heymann , J . B . Bsoft : image and molecular processing in electron microscopy . J . Struct . Biol . 133 , 156 – 169 ( 2001 ) . 66 . Heumann , J . M . , Hoenger , A . & Mastronarde , D . N . Clustering and variance maps for cryo - electron tomography using wedge - masked differences . J . Struct . Biol . 175 , 288 – 299 ( 2011 ) . 67 . Cragnolini , T . et al . TEMPy2 : a python library with improved 3D electron microscopy density - ﬁ tting and validation work ﬂ ows . Acta Crystallogr . Sect . Struct . Biol . 77 , 41 – 47 ( 2021 ) . 68 . Harris , C . R . et al . Array programming with NumPy . Nature 585 , 357 – 362 ( 2020 ) . 69 . Hunter , J . D . Matplotlib : a 2D graphics environment . Comput . Sci . Eng . 9 , 90 – 95 ( 2007 ) . 70 . Virtanen , P . et al . SciPy 1 . 0 : fundamental algorithms for scienti ﬁ c computing in Python . Nat . Methods 17 , 261 – 272 ( 2020 ) . 71 . Sui , H . & Downing , K . H . Structural basis of inter - proto ﬁ lament interaction and lateral deformation of microtubules . Struct . Lond . Engl . 1993 18 , 1022 – 1031 ( 2010 ) . 72 . Pettersen , E . F . et al . UCSF Chimera — A visualization system for exploratory research and analysis . J . Comput . Chem . 25 , 1605 – 1612 ( 2004 ) . 73 . Pettersen , E . F . et al . UCSF chimeraX : structure visualization for researchers , educators , and developers . Protein Sci . 30 , 70 – 82 ( 2021 ) . 74 . Goujon , M . et al . A new bioinformatics analysis tools framework at EMBL – EBI . Nucleic Acids Res 38 , W695 – W699 ( 2010 ) . 75 . Sievers , F . et al . Fast , scalable generation of high - quality protein multiple sequence alignments using clustal omega . Mol . Syst . Biol . 7 , 539 ( 2011 ) . 76 . Waterhouse , A . M . , Procter , J . B . , Martin , D . M . A . , Clamp , M . & Barton , G . J . Jalview version 2 — a multiple sequence alignment editorand analysis workbench . Bioinformatics 25 , 1189 – 1191 ( 2009 ) . 77 . Martinez - Sanchez , A . , Garcia , I . , Asano , S . , Lucic , V . & Fernandez , J . - J . Robust membrane detection based on tensor voting for elec - tron tomography . J . Struct . Biol . 186 , 49 – 61 ( 2014 ) . 78 . Zhou , Q . - Y . , Park , J . & Koltun , V . Open3D : a modern library for 3D data processing . ArXiv180109847 Cs ( 2018 ) . 79 . Jumper , J . et al . Highly accurate protein structure prediction with AlphaFold . Nature 596 , 583 – 589 ( 2021 ) . 80 . Meng , E . C . , Pettersen , E . F . , Couch , G . S . , Huang , C . C . & Ferrin , T . E . Tools for integrated sequence - structure analysis with UCSF Chi - mera . BMC Bioinforma . 7 , 339 ( 2006 ) . 81 . Wichers - Misterek , J . S . et al . A Microtubule - Associated Protein Is Essential for Malaria Parasite Transmission . mBio . 14 , e0331822 ( 2023 ) . 82 . Kehrer , J . et al . APEX - based proximity labeling in Plasmodium identi ﬁ es a membrane protein with dual functions during mosquito infection . bioRxiv https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1101 / 2020 . 09 . 29 . 318857 ( 2022 ) . 83 . Janse , C . J . , Ramesar , J . & Waters , A . P . High - ef ﬁ ciency transfection and drug selection of genetically transformed blood stages of the rodent malaria parasite Plasmodium berghei . Nat . Protoc . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nprot . 2006 . 53 ( 2006 ) . 84 . Schindelin , J . et al . Fiji : an open - source platform for biological - image analysis . Nat . Methods 9 , 676 – 682 ( 2012 ) . Acknowledgements We would like to thank the CSSB Cryo - EM and ALFM facilities for their support . We thank Till Voss for the 3D7 - iGP parasites , TropIQ for pro - viding the P . falciparum sporozoites and Andrew Waters and Katie Hughes for sharing the PbRFP line . Thanks to Lindsay Baker for critical feedback on the results and John Heumann and Carolyn Moores for helpfuldiscussions and advice . Thanks to the Stackover ﬂ ow community for being a seemingly bottomless and sanity restoring repository of knowledge . This work was funded by : HFSP long - term postdoctoral fellowship LT000024 / 2020 - L ( JLF ) , Infrastructures for the control of vector - borne diseases ( Infravec2 ) funded by the EU ’ s Horizon 2020 programme ( grant agreement No 731060 ) ( JLF ) , EMBL Interdisciplinary Postdoc Programme under Marie Curie COFUND actions MSCA - COFUND - FP ( grant agreement number : 847543 ) ( MS ) , German Center forInfectionResearch , DZIF ( FH ) , DFG - FR2140 / 10 - 1 ( AMB ) , DFGresearch networks SFB 1129 , SPP 2332 and grant FR 2140 / 10 - 1 ( FF ) , CSSB KIF - 002 ( TWG and KG ) , DFG research networks SPP 2225 ( TWG ) , Wellcome Trust grants 107806 / Z / 15 / Z and 209250 / Z / 17 / Z ( KG ) , BMBF grant 05K18BHA ( KG ) , DFG INST 152 / 772 - 1 , 774 - 1 , 775 - 1 , 777 - 1 FUGG ( CSSB cryoEM facility ) . Author contributions JLF and EP cultured blood stage parasites , AMB and FH prepared mos - quito stage parasites . AMB generated transgenic P . berghei lines and performed ﬂ uorescence localisation experiments . JLF performed ﬂ uor - escence microscopy , EM grid preparation , FIB - milling and electron microscopy data collection . JLF and VP performed tomography data processing , subvolume averaging and polarity analysis . VP and DV performed additional analysis on tomography data including ellipticity analysisand ﬁ tting . VPand MSconducteddistance and angle analysis in tomography data . JLF , VP and MS performed tomogram segmentation . JLF , VP , AMB and EP prepared ﬁ gures . JK , FF , TWG and KG supervised the project . JLF and VP wrote the original manuscript text and it was reviewed and edited by JLF , VP , DV , MS , FH , EP , JK , FF , TWG , KG . Funding Open Access funding enabled and organized by Projekt DEAL . Competing interests The authors declare no competing interests . Ethics statement For in vivo experiments including parasite propagation and mos - quito infections , 8 – 10 - week - old female Swiss mice obtained from Janvier labs were used . All animal experiments were performed according to European regulations concerning FELASA category B and GVSOLAS standard guidelines . Animal experiments were approved by German authorities ( Regierungspraesidium Karlsruhe , Germany ) , § 8 Abs . 1 Tierschutzgesetz ( TierSchG ) under the license G - 111 / 20 and were performed according to National and European regulations . Additional information Supplementary information The online version contains supplementary material available at https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 023 - 36627 - 5 . Correspondence andrequestsformaterialsshouldbeaddressedtoKay Grünewald . Peer review information Nature Communications thanks Andreas Hoenger , LeannTilley , andLi - AvSegevZarkofortheircontributiontothe peer review of this work . Peer reviewer reports are available . Reprints and permissions information is available at http : / / www . nature . com / reprints Publisher ’ s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional af ﬁ liations . Article https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 023 - 36627 - 5 Nature Communications | ( 2023 ) 14 : 1216 16 Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4 . 0 International License , which permits use , sharing , adaptation , distribution and reproduction in any medium or format , as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author ( s ) and the source , provide a link to the Creative Commons license , and indicate if changes were made . The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article ’ s Creative Commons license , unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material . If material is not included in the article ’ s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use , you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder . To view a copy of this license , visit http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by / 4 . 0 / . © The Author ( s ) 2023 Article https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 023 - 36627 - 5 Nature Communications | ( 2023 ) 14 : 1216 17