F U LL P A P E R © 2016 WILEY - VCH Verlag GmbH & Co . KGaA , Weinheim 1025 wileyonlinelibrary . com Programming Mechanical and Physicochemical Proper - ties of 3D Hydrogel Cellular Microcultures via Direct Ink Writing Joselle M . McCracken , Adina Badea , Mikhail E . Kandel , A . Sydney Gladman , David J . Wetzel , Gabriel Popescu , Jennifer A . Lewis , and Ralph G . Nuzzo * 3D hydrogel scaffolds are widely used in cellular microcultures and tissue engineering . Using direct ink writing , microperiodic poly ( 2 - hydroxyethyl - methacrylate ) ( pHEMA ) scaffolds are created that are then printed , cured , and modiﬁ ed by absorbing 30 kDa protein poly - L - lysine ( PLL ) to render them biocompliant in model NIH / 3T3 ﬁ broblast and MC3T3 - E1 preosteo - blast cell cultures . Spatial light interference microscopy ( SLIM ) live cell imaging studies are carried out to quantify cellular motilities for each cell type , substrate , and surface treatment of interest . 3D scaffold mechanics is investigated using atomic force microscopy ( AFM ) , while their absorption kinetics are determined by confocal ﬂ uorescence microscopy ( CFM ) for a series of hydrated hydrogel ﬁ lms prepared from prepolymers with different homopoly mer - to - monomer ( M r ) ratios . The observations reveal that the inks with higher M r values yield relatively more open - mesh gels due to a lower degree of entanglement . The biocompatibility of printed hydrogel scaffolds can be controlled by both PLL content and hydrogel mesh properties . stochastically distributed scaffold porosity and compositionally sensitive modiﬁ ca - tions of mechanical properties . [ 3 ] Though useful for cellular cultures , these scaf - folds lack well - controlled 3D spatial , geo - metric , and physicochemical cues that can be exploited to enhance cell migration , networking , elongation , and alignment . [ 4 ] Direct ink writing , an extrusion - based 3D printing method , provides a promising plat - form for the programmable fabrication of microperiodic scaffolds for applications in tissue engineering , in which extruded ﬁ la - ment diameter , pitch , macroporosity , and material composition can each be inde - pendently controlled . [ 5 ] Optimization of ink rheology is crucial for the development of 3D printed scaffolds , requiring high vis - cosity , shear - thinning ﬂ uids that readily ﬂ ow through small diameter printheads and exhibit shape retention after printing . [ 6 ] In an earlier report , poly ( 2 - hydroxyethyl methacrylate ) ( pHEMA ) inks were optimized for 3D printing by incorporating high - molecular - weight pHEMA chains , which served as a viscosifying agent , into prepolymer solution containing HEMA monomer that yielded smooth , fast - drying , UV - curable polymer ﬁ laments upon printing . [ 7 ] Tunable compositions of these pHEMA - HEMA ( pHH ) inks , coupled with well - deﬁ ned architectures enabled by direct ink writing , provided an interesting route toward modulating hydrogel scaffold physicochemical properties and mechanics while preserving the macroporosity necessary for efﬁ cient nutrient / metabolite diffusion in cellular cultures . [ 8 ] A central challenge to synthesizing complex 3D hydrogel scaffolds on which cellular behaviors and morphologies can be analyzed is the effective characterization of 3D scaffold materials’ physicochemical properties . Confocal ﬂ uorescence microscopy ( CFM ) has been shown previously to be especially useful for imaging studies of pHH hydrogel scaffolds seeded with primary hippocampal neurons , and for characterizing the periodicity - dependent nature of their cellular responses to the scaffold geometry . [ 9 ] In the present study , CFM imaging methods are used to characterize how homopolymer additives inﬂ uence both the hydrogel mesh properties and the chemical modiﬁ cation steps needed to afford robust activities for cell attachment and growth on the printed 3D scaffolds . To do so , microscale protein sorption kinetics were measured using DOI : 10 . 1002 / adhm . 201500888 J . M . McCracken , A . Badea , D . J . Wetzel , Prof . R . G . Nuzzo School of Chemical Sciences University of Illinois Urbana - Champaign Urbana , IL 61801 , USA E - mail : r - nuzzo @ illinois . edu M . E . Kandel , Prof . G . Popescu Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering University of Illinois Urbana - Champaign Urbana , IL 61801 , USA A . S . Gladman , Prof . J . A . Lewis Wyss Institute School of Engineering and Applied Sciences Harvard University Cambridge , MA 02138 , USA 1 . Introduction Hydrogel materials are exceptionally useful substrates for studying processes of cells grown in culture . [ 1 ] These materials can be patterned in three dimensions by myriad fabrication techniques , including electrospinning , electrohydrodynamic jet printing , micromolding , and stereolithography . [ 2 ] Alter - nately , hydrogel scaffolds can be produced by varying the sol - vent or cross - linker ratios in prepolymeric mixtures , yielding Adv . Healthcare Mater . 2016 , 5 , 1025 – 1039 www . advhealthmat . de www . MaterialsViews . com F U LL P A P E R 1026 wileyonlinelibrary . com © 2016 WILEY - VCH Verlag GmbH & Co . KGaA , Weinheim arrays of pHH hydrogel thin ﬁ lms fabricated from inks with different polymer to monomer ( M r ) ratios . Table 1 lists the ink compositions used in this work , materials with M r values chosen to bracket that of the original ink ( pHH - 0 ) used in prior studies of 3D neuronal cultures . [ 7 ] Correlated measurements using atomic force microscopy ( AFM ) are carried out to charac - terize the surface topographies of the ﬁ lms and the mechanics associated with adhesive interactions occurring at their sur - faces . [ 10 ] These results are analyzed and compared in the con - text of cell growth activities evidenced in two classes of model 2D and 3D cellular microcultures carried out on scaffolds pre - pared using these materials . The rigorous characterization of cellular responses to the pHH hydrogels is performed using a suite of imaging tech - niques that includes ﬂ uorescent assays on both living and ﬁ xed cell cultures , and , most notably , spatial light interfer - ence microscopy ( SLIM ) , a long - term imaging modality for characterizing live cell dynamics that is at once label - free and quantitative . SLIM is a powerful imaging tool that combines principles of phase - contrast microscopy and holography to produce interferometric data capable of resolving quantitative features of subcellular dynamics . SLIM imaging has been pre - viously used in numerous studies to measure motility , mass growth , or mass transport properties of numerous cell types . [ 11 ] In the present work , we combine the morphological and struc - tural information derived from ﬂ uorescence assays with the cel - lular motility information afforded by SLIM imaging . We use these tools to describe a coherent narrative in which ﬁ broblasts and preosteoblasts react to their environments in ways that , while cell line speciﬁ c , are strongly impacted by the physico - chemical attributes of the ﬁ lms and the modiﬁ cations afforded by surface treatments that vary in nature as a consequence of differences in their underlying compositions . The study reported here provides insights into features important for designing 3D scaffolds that can promote strong cellular viability — factors related to both the design rules of direct - write scaffolds and the physicochemical characteristics of the ﬁ laments used to construct them . Though pHEMA is a bio - inert polymer with low cytotoxic character , it does little to actively promote cellular attachment in model cultures . [ 12 ] The absorption of the cationic polymer ε - poly ( lysine ) ( ε PL ) improves the biocompatibility of many material surfaces , [ 13 ] a form of chemical modiﬁ cation adopted in several of our studies of cells supported in microﬂ uidic cultures . [ 14 ] In contrast to the effects engendered by nonspeciﬁ c protein surface adsorption , in which cell function may be impeded by thickly accumulated protein - aceous layers , the absorption of ε PL within a hydrogel sub - strate can be strongly activating and elicit improved attributes of biological compliance . [ 15 ] The current study shows that the compositional features of the pHEMA inks do impact the dynamics of an otherwise strongly preferential pHEMA – PLL interaction , with impacts on biological function . [ 16 ] These prop - erties demonstrate a broader usefulness for application in the direct - write fabrication of bioactive 3D scaffolds that modulate kinetic attributes and the associated physicochemical features of protein sorption within the hydrogel material structures and the properties of cellular cultures in contact with them . 2 . Results and Discussion 2 . 1 . NIH / 3T3 and MC - 3T3 - E1 Attachment and Growth on PLL - Treated Films As noted in our earlier work , the attachment and subsequent development of cellular networks on 3D printed pHEMA – HEMA scaffolds ( a composition herein referred to as pHH - 0 ) requires a prior activating protein treatment to confer biocom - patibility and facilitate on - ﬁ lament growth . [ 7 , 17 ] The NIH / 3T3 ( 3T3 ) and MC - 3T3 - E1 ( E1 ) model cell cultures , examined here using four additional ink compositions that bracket the pHH - 0 system , mirror the compositional sensitivities noted in that work . As expected , when pHH ﬁ lms are not treated with PLL , cells attach sparsely and generally migrate off ( or fail to adhere to ) the hydrogel , preferring to develop on the supporting glass substrate ( S1 , Supporting Information ) . We ﬁ nd that the com - positional ( M r ) differences in PLL - treated pHH ﬁ lms ( Table 1 and described quantitatively in later sections ) impact how both cell lines respond to the ﬁ lm scaffolds , and in speciﬁ c cases improve their activities towards cell attachment and growth . Adv . Healthcare Mater . 2016 , 5 , 1025 – 1039 www . advhealthmat . de www . MaterialsViews . com Table 1 . Mass fraction composition of pHH gels and solutions . Type Phase Polymer Curable components Solvents M r pHEMA HEMA EGDMA DMPA dH 2 O EtGly EtOH [ mass % ] 78 . 5 : 2 . 5 : 1 mol ratio pHH - 1 Film 8 . 00 49 . 56 2 . 40 1 . 24 18 . 80 10 . 00 10 . 00 0 . 15 Gel 10 . 00 61 . 95 3 . 00 1 . 55 23 . 50 – – pHH - 2 Film 8 . 00 8 . 83 0 . 43 0 . 22 5 . 37 38 . 57 38 . 57 0 . 84 Gel 35 . 00 38 . 65 1 . 88 0 . 97 23 . 50 – – pHH - 3 Film 8 . 00 3 . 40 0 . 16 0 . 08 3 . 58 42 . 35 42 . 35 2 . 19 Gel 52 . 50 22 . 35 1 . 08 0 . 55 23 . 50 – – pHH - 4 Film 8 . 00 0 . 69 0 . 03 0 . 02 2 . 69 44 . 28 44 . 28 10 . 7 Gel 70 . 00 6 . 05 0 . 29 0 . 15 23 . 50 – – pHH - 0 Film 8 . 00 9 . 10 0 . 22 0 . 11 5 . 37 38 . 6 38 . 6 0 . 85 Gel 35 . 00 40 . 00 1 . 00 0 . 50 23 . 50 – – F U LL P A P E R 1027 wileyonlinelibrary . com © 2016 WILEY - VCH Verlag GmbH & Co . KGaA , Weinheim The results of Live / Dead assays of 3T3 and E1 cultures on PLL - treated and untreated pHH - 2 ﬁ lms ( a composition similar to the pHH - 0 system and here compared against glass ) are shown in Figure 1 a , b after 24 h in culture . The pHH - 2 ﬁ lm’s performance , when compared to PLL - treated pHH - 0 and other ﬁ lm composi - tion types 1 , 3 , and 4 , shows an improved biological compliance for the PLL - treated pHH - 2 ﬁ lms . Even so , all PLL - treated ﬁ lms show more cell attachment and growth than their untreated ( immersed in PBS only ) counterparts , data for which are shown in detail in Figure S2 ( Supporting Information ) . The degree to which PLL treatment enhances cell growth is different across 3T3 and E1 cell types , however , with E1 cells surviving well on untreated pHH - 1 and pHH - 2 ﬁ lm types , unlike 3T3 cells . There was no cell type , treatment , or length in culture tested that was found to induce even modest cell proliferation on pHH - 3 and pHH - 4 ﬁ lm types . Cell surface area coverage measurements from Live / Dead ﬂ uorescence assays in Figure 1 c conﬁ rm the composi - tional dependence of the growth and attachment proﬁ les found for 3T3 cells after 96 h in culture . Figure 1 d shows the quantita - tive differences in live 3T3 and E1 cell surface area coverage after 24 h as well as those that emerge in 3T3 cells after 96 h in culture . Rigorous statistical analyses of ﬁ lm type and treat - ment - speciﬁ c properties across all data for each experimental condition show that both ﬁ lm properties and protein surface Adv . Healthcare Mater . 2016 , 5 , 1025 – 1039 www . advhealthmat . de www . MaterialsViews . com Figure 1 . Live / Dead assays for NIH / 3T3 ( 3T3 ) murine ﬁ broblasts and MC3T3E1s ( E1 ) murine preosteoblasts cultured on pHH ﬁ lm types 1 – 4 , ﬁ lm type 0 , and glass ( G ) , that were either untreated ( PBS ) or treated ( PLL ) over the ﬁ rst days in culture . a ) High growth compliance of 3T3 and b ) E1 cell lines on treated and untreated glass and pHH - 2 ﬁ lms after 24 h in culture and lower growth compliance of 3T3 and E1 cell lines on PLL - treated pHH ﬁ lm types 0 , 1 , 3 , and 4 , after 24 h in culture ( scale bar 60 µm ) . c ) Highest growth compliance substrates compared for PLL - treated pHH - 2 , pHH - 0 ﬁ lms and PLL - treated glass for 3T3s after 96 h in culture ( scale bar 50 µm ) . d ) Cell coverage percentages are quantiﬁ ed for all ﬁ lm types for 3T3s ( left ) and E1s ( center ) after 24 h and 3T3s ( right ) after 96 h in culture with PLL treatment ( ﬁ lled markers ) and without treatment ( PBS , open markers ) . F U LL P A P E R 1028 wileyonlinelibrary . com © 2016 WILEY - VCH Verlag GmbH & Co . KGaA , Weinheim treatment play signiﬁ cant roles in dictating cell growth out - comes . Within the context of an ANOVA analysis , individual ﬁ lm pairs ( or groups ) were speciﬁ cally contrasted to verify their relative signiﬁ cance following a Box - Cox normalization of the data series and White’s test for homoscedasticity . A complete description of the statistical methods used is given in S3 ( Supporting Information ) . From this analysis , it follows that , for early time points ( 24 h ) in the 3T3 ﬁ broblast cell cul - tures , cell growth on PLL - treated pHH - 2 and pHH - 0 ﬁ lms is at or near the threshold for signiﬁ cance ( p < 0 . 05 ) . The relative signiﬁ cance for PLL - treated pHH - 2 is increasingly revealed during longer culture intervals ( 96 h ) , with PLL - treated pHH - 1 ﬁ lms showing growth compliance to a lesser extent , and pHH - 0 lagging signiﬁ cantly behind these . A parallel growth compli - ance proﬁ le for ( in decreasing order of growth compliance ) pHH - 2 , pHH - 1 , and pHH - 0 was observed for the E1 cell cultures , which were seen to emerge at earlier culture intervals ( 24 h ) than for the 3T3 cells . These data , when taken together with that given in S4 ( Supporting Information ) , show conﬂ uence within the ﬁ rst week of growth , with healthy cell morphology , networking , and spreading consistently seen for pHH ﬁ lm compositions 0 , 1 , and 2 and generally reduced or inconsistent cell attachment and growth evidenced for pHH ﬁ lm types 3 and 4 ( with stable cul - tures maintained for 2 weeks ) . These trends suggest that phys - icochemical features of the hydrogel , and perhaps the density of PLL presentation within it , the ﬁ lm mechanics , or a combination of these factors , must contribute to directly impact patterns of cell growth . We examine these features in the sections that follow . 2 . 2 . Spatial Light Interference Microscopy Comparisons of 3T3 and E1 Motility Substrate - dependent growth trends that are revealed by quan - titative cell surface area coverage measurements generally overlapped between the two cell lines but did manifest some cell - speciﬁ c differences . For example , while the pHH - 2 ﬁ lm type is consistently the hydrogel most promotive of cell growth for 3T3 ﬁ broblasts , a PLL treatment is essential for sustaining it robustly . For E1 preosteoblasts , this same treatment enhances growth but its absence does not proscribe it . As we show in the sections that follow , where we examine the morphological , structural , and motile differences that emerge in both cell lines’ responses to 3D printed hydrogel scaffolds , the 3T3 cell networks develop on these materials in ways that are distinct from E1 cell networks . To address the origin of the differences seen in cellular responses to the hydrogel ﬁ lms in a mechanistic way , we ﬁ rst compared representative images of live cellular morphologies of 3T3 ﬁ broblast and E1 preosteoblast cells grown on treated and untreated pHH - 2 ﬁ lms and glass ( Figure 2 a ) . Both 3T3 and E1 cell lines spread the most on the glass controls , as expected for comparisons made to cell spreading on soft , low modulus substrates . Of note are the comparable overall morphologies we observe for both cell types on PLL - treated pHH - 2 ﬁ lms . On untreated pHH - 2 ﬁ lms , the 3T3 ﬁ broblast cells typically adhere poorly with a minimal surface area projection being noted . In comparison , the preosteoblast E1 cell morphologies seen on untreated pHH - 2 ﬁ lms appear stunted , but still extend ﬁ lopodia into their environments . These data demonstrate that the PLL treatment promotes attachment and growth for both cell types , albeit somewhat more beneﬁ cially for the 3T3 ﬁ broblasts . To examine the structural differences manifested in the cytoskeleton development between the cell lines on the gel sub - strates , we ﬂ uorescently stained the actin in each as cultured on the treated and untreated pHH - 2 , and glass controls ( Figure 2 b , with additional data for these and for less growth permissive substrates ( pHH - 4 ) given in S5 , Supporting Information ) . We ﬁ nd that there is a dispersed , relatively weak , actin signal seen within the cytoplasm of 3T3 ﬁ broblast cells on the treated pHH - 2 ﬁ lm . The formation of actin bundles in 3T3 cells , typi - cally along their periphery , develops in a more pronounced form in their culture on glass substrates . Pronounced actin bundles , by way of comparison , develop in a more evident way within E1 cells when they are cultured on both PLL - treated and untreated pHH - 2 ﬁ lms ( as well as on glass controls ) . We believe the robust actin cytoskeleton seen for E1 cells during their cul - ture on pHH - 2 ﬁ lms points to a higher E1 cellular motility rela - tive to 3T3 cells , since the development of these structures is associated with cellular migration and therefore the effective cell - to - gel adhesion that facilitates that motion . The latter point is established more quantitatively in the sections below . To address how physicochemical differences resulting from underlying ﬁ lm compositions affect cellular motility , we monitored 3T3 and E1 cell lines in real time over their ﬁ rst 96 h in culture with SLIM imaging . This information - rich method measures quantitative / mechanistic properties of cel - lular dynamics through an improvement brought to the tradi - tional phase contrast microscopy . [ 18 ] The excerpted data shown in Figure 2 c illustrates the nature of the motility seen for single , yet representative , 3T3 ﬁ broblast and E1 preosteoblast type cells , here using data starting at 48 h and extending for up to 2 h more with images extracted as exemplars of larger , interval - frame - rate data sets . Qualitatively speaking , the E1 cells extend projections to as much as double the length as seen for similar motions of the 3T3 cells , and dynamically alter their cel - lular geometry at rates signiﬁ cantly exceeding similar processes of the 3T3 ﬁ broblast cells . Representative high growth regions of PLL - treated pHH - 2 ﬁ lms that were tracked from between 48 and 55 h in culture show a tendency for 3T3 cells to alternate within / between small clusters of cells , whereas E1 cells more often move independently with highly elongated but spreading morphologies being noted ( Figure 2 d , panel 1 , 3 ) . These data illustrate that the 3T3 and E1 cells respond to their hydrogel substrates in mechanistically distinctive ways that are likely driven by innate cell line properties and afﬁ nities . We next speciﬁ cally probed how cell - speciﬁ c motilities are impacted by differences in the underlying physicochemical properties of the pHH ﬁ lms by tracking the cell motilities on PLL - treated pHH - 4 ﬁ lms ( Figure 2 d , panel 2 , 4 ) —a less growth - permissive material—and comparing motilities to those observed on PLL - treated pHH - 2 ﬁ lms . The quantitative differences in cell motility for each of these cases were measured by tracking each cell present within the representative frame ( Figure 2 e ) , with cell motility values found to be signiﬁ cant in all cases except for 3T3 motility on pHH - 2 ﬁ lms ( Figure 2 f ) , which was not signiﬁ - cantly different from the reference 3T3 motility seen on the glass controls . Cells were also tracked on PLL - treated pHH - 2 , pHH - 4 , Adv . Healthcare Mater . 2016 , 5 , 1025 – 1039 www . advhealthmat . de www . MaterialsViews . com F U LL P A P E R 1029 wileyonlinelibrary . com © 2016 WILEY - VCH Verlag GmbH & Co . KGaA , Weinheim Adv . Healthcare Mater . 2016 , 5 , 1025 – 1039 www . advhealthmat . de www . MaterialsViews . com Figure 2 . a ) Individual calcein - AM - stained 3T3 and E1 cell morphologies on treated and untreated pHH - 2 and glass substrates ( scale bar 10 µm ) . b ) Actin ﬁ laments of representative individual 3T3 and E1 cell morphologies on pHH - 2 and glass after 72 h in culture ( scale bar 20 µm ) . c ) Spatial light interference microscopy ( SLIM ) tracking a single representative 3T3 ( scale bar 20 µm ) and E1 cell ( scale bar 28 µm ) over 2 and 1 h , respectively on PLL - treated pHH - 2 ﬁ lms . d ) SLIM tracking of representative regions in culture at 48 and 55 h for 3T3 and E1 cells on PLL - treated pHH - 2 ﬁ lms ( scale bar 100 µm ) with e ) relative motility data for 3T3 and E1 cell lines from 48 to 55 h in culture for PLL - treated pHH - 2 and pHH - 4 ﬁ lms . Scaling for cell motility plots is 1 . 59 pixel per µm . f ) Quantiﬁ cation of relative motility and relative tracking time for E1 and 3T3 cells on PLL - treated pHH - 2 , pHH - 4 , and glass . F U LL P A P E R 1030 wileyonlinelibrary . com © 2016 WILEY - VCH Verlag GmbH & Co . KGaA , Weinheim and glass substrates to monitor how long they remained within the ﬁ eld of view . From this analysis , we found that 3T3 cells on PLL - treated pHH - 4 ﬁ lms were generally immobile ( long tracking times ) . E1 cells on the same substrate were found to be generally transient ( short tracking times ) , suggesting poorer attachment to their substrates . [ 19 ] The statistical analysis , as well as details of the tracking data , including studies on glass controls is given in S6 ( Supporting Information ) . Additional excerpts of the SLIM data are given in S7 ( Supporting Information ) and the Movies S1 – S2 ( Supporting Information ) . For the 3T3 system on PLL - treated pHH - 4 ﬁ lms , very few cells attached . Of those that did , there were insufﬁ cient nearby adhered cells to promote the formation of cellular networks , and the 3T3 ﬁ broblasts generally remained immobile . Cooperative interactions between 3T3 cells are cru - cial for sustaining the relatively poor development of cells seen in these cultures . The surface area coverage of the E1 system on PLL - treated pHH - 4 ﬁ lms were qualitatively similar , with — as before — very few cells attached . Of those that did , we saw more evidence of motile dynamics in which E1 cells would attach transiently , migrate , and more often detach again to appear as spherical live cell bodies lying at or near the ﬁ lm surface . Finally , we note that the results presented in later sections illustrate similar attachment and growth tendencies that are evidenced in 3D printed scaffold contexts as well . The substrate dependen - cies noted here — speciﬁ cally the greater viability of the pHH - 2 supported culture — are found to be strongly correlated with underlying physicochemical properties of the materials that serve to inﬂ uence their PLL absorptive capacities and therefore the degree of PLL available for promoting cellular attachment . In the sections that follow , we examine this point in detail . 2 . 3 . NIH / 3T3 and MC - 3T3 - E1 Attachment and Growth on PLL - Treated 3D Scaffolds We characterized cellular growth and attachment on 3D - printed scaffolds using the optimized pHH - 2 material as a benchmark . These studies were carried out using an open - mesh scaffold comprising a four - layer pyramid printed as shown in Figure 3 a , immersed in a PLL solution , seeded with 3T3 or E1 cells , and Adv . Healthcare Mater . 2016 , 5 , 1025 – 1039 www . advhealthmat . de www . MaterialsViews . com Figure 3 . a ) A 4 layer open - mesh pyramid ( schematic on left ) is 3D printed ( right ) with pHH - 2 ink ( scale bar 200 µm ) . b ) Live / Dead assays show differences in on - scaffolds growth for 3T3 cells cultured on PLL - treated ( top ) and untreated ( PBS ) pHH - 2 pyramids after 7 d in culture ( scale bar 50 µm ) . c ) E1 cells cultured on PLL - treated ( top ) and untreated ( bottom ) pyramids integrate onto scaffolds , with E1s on treated pyramids growing on scaffold ﬁ laments , and E1 cells on untreated pyramids growing adjacent to scaffold ﬁ laments ( scale bar 100 µm ) . d ) Line traces for representative image cross - sections show overlap of cell ( green ) and scaffold ( red ) ﬂ uorescence ( PLL - treated , left ) and alternation of cell and scaffold ﬂ uorescence ( untreated , right ) . F U LL P A P E R 1031 wileyonlinelibrary . com © 2016 WILEY - VCH Verlag GmbH & Co . KGaA , Weinheim maintained in culture for 7 d . Figure 3 b ( top ) shows the robust on - scaffold 3T3 proliferation and spreading seen on a PLL - treated scaffold , a pattern that contrasts markedly with growth seen on an untreated scaffold ( Figure 3 b , bottom ) . Figure 3 c shows a parallel trend in E1 cells seeded on the pyramid scaf - folds and sustained in culture for 7 d , in which the E1 cells are found to attach and spread on scaffold ﬁ laments treated with PLL . The pattern of attachment and growth is very different on untreated scaffolds in this case . Here we see cells proximal to the scaffold fall to the supporting glass substrate , where they then align along the ﬁ laments . This tendency is directly com - pared for representative image cross - sections ( line traces of which are shown as white arrows in Figure 3c ) in Figure 3 d where ﬂ uorescence signal distributions for both cells ( green ) and scaffold ( red ) are plotted for each case . The supported 3T3 cells visualized with scanning electron microscopy ( SEM , which examines the morphologies of terminated cultures after dehydration ) follows the trends in ﬂ uorescent studies , in which on - scaffold cellular growth is characterized by robust intercel - lular connections with morphologies that develop in close con - tact with the scaffold ﬁ laments ( Figure 4 a ) . The 3T3 cells are seen to frequently bridge ﬁ lament gaps to interconnect with neighboring cells ( Figure 4 b , top ) as well as to extend their ﬁ lo - podia in parallel to the long axes of the ﬁ lament on which they are adhered ( Figure 4 b , bottom ) . The morphology of ﬁ ne ﬁ lo - podia microstructure adhering to the underlying pHH hydrogel scaffold matrix is illustrated in the exemplary images given in Figure 4 c . Additional SEM images are given in S8 ( Supporting Information ) . Due to geometric effects present in the open - mesh pyramid scaffold , a second type of pyramid was 3D printed with identical lateral dimensions except for the ﬁ lament diameter , which was sufﬁ ciently large to eliminate open space between ﬁ laments . This yielded a gel pyramid several hundred microns in height , as shown schematically and during printing in Figure 5 a . To illustrate the dynamical attributes of the PLL absorption , and the attendant formation of time - dependent infusive gradients , a cured pHH - 2 pyramid scaffold was immersed in ﬂ uores - cently - labeled PLL ( FPLL ) solution and the resulting spatial ﬂ uorescence distribution within it measured ( Figure 5 b ) . The temporal evolution of ﬂ uorescence intensity gradients is clearly evidenced throughout the scaffold , and with features of comparatively high surface - area to volume ratios ( e . g . , at the exterior vertices ) exhibiting high ﬂ uorescence intensities . Detailed kinetics studies show that the quantitative details of the PLL - absorption within the gel change as the length of the incubation is increased . This feature is discussed in detail in the sections that follow . A Live / Dead ﬂ uorescence assay performed on an untreated control scaffold ( layer 1 of the pyramid ) showed only a modest ingress and attachment of 3T3 cells after 7 d in culture ( Figure 5 c ) . For a PLL - treated scaffold , 3T3 on - scaffold growth is more advanced even after 4 d in culture , and by 18 d , 3T3 cell networks are apparent on every level of the PLL - treated pHH - 2 pyramid including the apex as shown in Figure 5 d . Additional images and supporting data for growth on other scaffold geometries are given in S9 ( Supporting Information ) . Data from CFM imaging studies of the ﬁ broblast growth ( here ﬁ xed after 18 d in culture ) conclusively establish that the 3T3 cells grow and in - ﬁ ll on all tiers of the PLL - treated pHH 3D platforms , with representative data shown in Figure 5 e for a pyramidal scaffold using ﬂ uorescently labeled nuclei to characterize axial ( top ) and lateral ( bottom ) ﬁ broblast growth , respectively . 2 . 4 . Composition ( M r ) Dependence of FPLL Absorption by pHH Materials To compare how compositional variations within a class of printable pHH ink affects the absorption of PLL into the Adv . Healthcare Mater . 2016 , 5 , 1025 – 1039 www . advhealthmat . de www . MaterialsViews . com Figure 4 . a ) SEM imaging of 3T3 ﬁ broblasts on a PLL - treated pHH - 2 pyramidal scaffold ( inset ) with ﬁ broblast spreading and on - ﬁ lament growth and attachment ( scale bar 10 µm ) . b ) Fibroblast cells span gaps in the scaffold ( top ) to interconnect with neighboring cells and ( bottom ) ﬁ lopodia project along the pHH - 2 ﬁ lament ( scale bars 10 µm ) . c ) Fine ﬁ lopodia microstructure attach to pHH - 2 microstructure ( scale bars 1 µm ) . F U LL P A P E R 1032 wileyonlinelibrary . com © 2016 WILEY - VCH Verlag GmbH & Co . KGaA , Weinheim hydrogel , pHH - 0 and pHH - 2 ﬁ laments and ﬁ lament junctions were printed and incubated in FPLL . Representative post - incubation ﬂ uorescence micrographs for the two ink com - positions are shown in Figure 6 a . These data reveal that the equilibrium uptake of the FPLL is lower in the pHH - 0 ink material . Extended quantitative analyses suggest an apparent relative equilibrium uptake of the absorbed FPLL in the ratio of approximately 2 : 5 . Variances in ﬁ lament dimensions of the pHH - 0 and pHH - 2 materials are too small to account for the intensity differences seen . This suggests that the matrix proper - ties of the materials prepared from these chemically identical , but constitutively distinct , ink compositions directly impacts equilibrium protein absorption by them , a sensitivity examined in quantitative form in the sections that follow . 2 . 5 . pHH Films from Rheologically Optimized Inks To study the properties of the pHH materials , and the kinetics of PLL absorption into them , we prepared castable forms of the inks . The pHH - 0 ink , a composition optimized for direct - write printing in an earlier study , was used here as a reference ( and for which the rheological data are given in S10 , Supporting Information ) . The range of M r values selected for the cast series of pHH solutions was picked to bracket the compositional range of this optimized pHH - 0 ink . To eliminate cross - linker effects on ﬁ nal hydrogel mesh properties , the relative mole ratios of HEMA : EGDMA : DMPA were kept constant across all pHH compositions . The mass ratio ( M r ) used to distinguish these compositions is described by Equation ( 1 ) : r p1 p2 m x M m m m m = + + ( 1 ) where m p1 + m p2 is the total homopolymer mass and m m + m x is the total mass of HEMA monomer and EGDMA cross - linker incorporated into the prepolymer mixtures . The range of M r values examined here corresponds to a broad range of pHH materials properties that required the addition of the solvents ethylene glycol and ethanol to render them uni - formly castable for cell growth and kinetics studies . Viscosities and densities of pHH solution compositions were compared in two cases : 1 ) with equal solvent mass fractions ; and 2 ) with equal pHEMA mass fractions due to varied solvent additions . The data given in S11 - 12 ( Supporting Information ) comparing these properties conﬁ rm that equal pHEMA mass fractions of 0 . 08 yield pHH solutions that make highly uniform ﬁ lms upon spin - casting . After curing but prior to hydration , these Adv . Healthcare Mater . 2016 , 5 , 1025 – 1039 www . advhealthmat . de www . MaterialsViews . com Figure 5 . a ) A four - layer closed - mesh gel pyramid ( schematic on left ) is 3D printed ( right ) with a pHH - 2 ink . b ) A light micrograph of the pyramid after curing ( left ) absorbs FPLL ( right ) . c ) LIVE / DEAD assays on an untreated closed - mesh gel scaffold ( pyramid layer 1 ) allows for some 3T3 growth and attachment after 7 d in culture . d ) Light images show robust on - scaffold growth for a PLL - treated pyramid after 96 h ( left ; scale bar ) and 18 d ( right ; scale bar 150 µm ) . e ) DAPI - stained nuclei of 3T3s grow over multiple layers of the pyramid scaffold ( scale bar 60 µm ) . F U LL P A P E R 1033 wileyonlinelibrary . com © 2016 WILEY - VCH Verlag GmbH & Co . KGaA , Weinheim glassy , optically clear ﬁ lms 1 – 4 had comparable thicknesses of ≈ 1 . 6 ± 0 . 1 µm ( S13 , Supporting Information ) . Exhaustive extraction of unreacted components into water over 72 h pro - duced only minor reductions in the ﬁ lm thicknesses measured in the dehydrated state ( S14 , Supporting Information ) . For the kinetics experiments , we selectively patterned the ﬁ lms , mounting them in a custom sample holder for CFM , as shown schematically in Figure 6 b ( left and middle ) , to allow a single ﬁ lm to be used within a kinetic experiment to minimize the effects of inter - sample variation . A micrograph of a repre - sentative ﬁ lm array , with its hydrophobic spacers , is shown in Figure 6 b ( right ) . 2 . 6 . Mechanical Analysis of Thin - Film Substrates Numerous studies have established that complex , and currently incompletely understood , relationships exist between cellular adhesion on scaffolds and the features of their underlying materials chemistry , especially the spatial presentation of adhe - sion - promotive proteins ( of which PLL is one example ) , as well as the role that material mechanics serve in affecting cellular behaviors . [ 20 ] For this reason , we ﬁ rst carried out AFM studies of the ﬁ lms described above to quantify the mechanical properties of the various composition pHH materials . Deﬂ ection curves generated from AFM indentation experiments were converted to force curves using the relationship given in Equation ( 2 ) : ( ) n c 1 F k d d = − ( 2 ) which relates the normal force F n applied at the surface to the cantilever spring constant , k c , and the deﬂ ection , d , where d 1 corresponds to the zero - deﬂ ection position of the cantilever . The experimental force curves were analyzed using a Hert - zian model commonly applied to AFM indentation data for elastic , non - adhesive materials including gels . [ 21 ] Controls , Adv . Healthcare Mater . 2016 , 5 , 1025 – 1039 www . advhealthmat . de www . MaterialsViews . com Figure 6 . a ) Relative ﬂ uorescence intensities for pHH - 0 ( left ) and pHH - 2 ( right , enhanced equally for visualization , scale bar 50 µm ) . b ) Microreaction chamber schematic for CFM kinetics experiments to measure composition - dependence of FPLL uptake by pHH ﬁ lm grids ( left , scale bar 10 mm ) with schematic ( middle , scale bar 6 mm ) and colorized thin - ﬁ lm pHH grid array ( right , scale bar 2 mm ) . c ) Single indent Hertzian AFM force curves for pHH 1 – 4 ( left ) . Apex of indent force curves ( middle ) . Elastic moduli from three 100 - point force curves for pHH 1 – 4 ( right ) . d ) Average integrated adhesion areas for pHH 1 – 4 . e ) Single FPLL - uptake experiment background - corrected ﬂ uorescence intensity distributions from images taken for pHH - 1 ( left ) . Peak ﬂ uorescence intensities for all images and time points of a pHH - 1 kinetic experiment ( right ) . F U LL P A P E R 1034 wileyonlinelibrary . com © 2016 WILEY - VCH Verlag GmbH & Co . KGaA , Weinheim based on an extensive analyses of replicate measurements , showed adhesive interactions were statistically negligible ( shown in S15 , Supporting Information ) . [ 22 ] Representative force curve data for a single indent of each ﬁ lm type are given in Figure 6 c ( left ) , with the axes expanded to illustrate the subtle differences seen between the ﬁ lm types ( middle ) . Fits of the AFM indentation data were made on 100 - indent force maps taken in three discrete areas for each pHH ﬁ lm type using the generalized force - indentation Equation ( 3 ) : F λδ = β ( 3 ) where F is the force applied to the indenter , δ is the indentation depth , and λ and β are quantities dependent on indentation tip geometry . [ 23 ] A detailed discussion of the force measurement methods and indentation depth parameters ( as well as approxi - mations used for the mechanical analyses ) is given in S16 ( Supporting Information ) . The parameters of note in this anal - ysis include the Poisson’s ratio for the indenter tip ν i ( 0 . 25 ) , the contact area radius R ( assigned an approximate value of 100 nm ) , and the reduced elastic modulus , E r . Taken together these parameters can be used to calculate the sample’s elastic modulus using Equation ( 4 ) : 1 ( 1 ) ( 1 ) r i2 i s2 s E v E v E = − + − ( 4 ) where E i and E s are the elastic moduli for the indentation tip and the sample , respectively , and ν s = 0 . 29 is the pHEMA Pois - son’s ratio reported in the literature . [ 24 ] The results for the pHH hydrogel thin ﬁ lm series shown in Figure 6 c ( right ) yielded quantitative values for the ﬁ lm elastic moduli , with the highest elastic modulus observed for pHH - 1 and the lowest elastic modulus for pHH - 4 . Film types 2 and 3 exhibited mechanical properties bounded by these limiting values . Optimal environments for cellular adhesion require a bal - ance between migration and attachment , so that cells ﬂ atten onto their substrates but are not bound such that they form islands or fail to network with neighboring cells . [ 25 ] A sepa - rate adhesion analysis was performed to study this property from the retraction portion of the AFM force curves , due to the considerable depth and contribution of adhesion for this section of the mean force curves . Our aim was to determine what , if any , role surface energies may have in biocompliance outcomes . The average adhesion well depth calculated from the mean deﬂ ection distance for all axial points on the retraction curves ( n = 300 per ﬁ lm type ) was found to increase in order from pHH type 1 to type 4 ﬁ lms , with pHH ﬁ lm types 2 and 3 again exhibiting intermediate behaviors . The adhesion force illustrated a complementary trend , one in which an increase in adhesion corresponded to a decreasing elastic modulus . The integrated area of the average adhesion curve for each mate - rial type was determined and plotted against the pHEMA mass fraction of the corresponding ﬁ lm , the results of which are pre - sented in Figure 6 d . Though the axial indentation depth was approximately constant for all force curves , the proportional scaling of the adhesion forces for these ﬁ lms lead us to con - clude that higher degrees of adhesion were associated primarily with indent geometry differences due to the deformation of the lower elastic modulus materials and not from fundamental changes in the hydrogel surface energies . We ﬁ nally note that many of the individual adhesion curves exhibited complex pro - ﬁ les that may reﬂ ect dynamics involving decohesive bonding upon retraction ( S17 , Supporting Information ) . [ 26 ] These dynamical attributes appeared to be much more pronounced ( and common ) for the pHH - 4 ﬁ lms — those with the highest pHEMA mass fraction and the lowest number of structural crosslinks . From these analyses , we ﬁ nd it unlikely that differ - ences in cellular growth and attachment across pHH ﬁ lm types originate from surface energy differences , but instead from the variable presentation of absorbed PLL that in fact renders the pHH ﬁ lms biocompliant . 2 . 7 . Quantitative Analyses of PLL Absorption Dynamics in pHH Gels As noted above , qualitative observations establish a temporal sensitivity for the uptake of PLL by the various pHH gels . We carried out detailed measurements using thin - ﬁ lm substrates and FPLL to better quantify the dynamics involved . The sub - strates used in these experiments are sufﬁ ciently thin to allow rapid removal of non - bound FPLL upon rinsing the ﬁ lms prior to imaging , allowing a direct measurement of the total quan - tity of strongly absorbed FPLL . The data do not fully resolve the axial distribution of the ﬂ uorescence intensity present in the pHH thin - ﬁ lm materials . For this reason , the spatial gradi - ents inherent to FPLL diffusion into and absorption within the hydrogel matrix were not characterized directly with this experi - ment , but their possible contributions to overall ﬂ uorescence measurements were carefully considered and excluded ( S18 , Supporting Information ) . An apparent diffusion coefﬁ cient for the temporal evolution of a PLL gradient can be calculated , however , based on measurements of intensity in accordance with a model with several simplifying assumptions . First , we assume that the absorption of the PLL by the pHH involves multi - segmental interactions and is essentially irreversible in nature . Second , the absorption of the PLL in speciﬁ c regions inhibits / precludes additional adsorption of the protein in those same regions . Third , the effective sticking probability for this massive molecule in an open region is likely to be very large ( here we assume unity ) . Finally , as the sample is incubated , uptake is assumed to be fastest at the ambient solution inter - face of the gel and increments as the PLL penetrates deeper into the pHH matrix . Since time - dependent uptake of FPLL corresponds to the equilibrated absorption of FPLL throughout the entire ﬁ lm , the temporal absorption gradient so engendered will only be seen ( and best quantiﬁ ed ) by integration through the entire z - depth proﬁ le ( more information regarding the development of metrics for CFM optical stack analyses is given in S19 ( Supporting Information ) . We therefore used the mean maximum ﬂ uorescence intensity ( MMFI ) to quantify the FPLL - exposure time - dependent changes in protein uptake by the gel . By extracting only the maximum voxel intensity from an entire axial stack , the MMFI emphasizes trends tracking the rela - tive increase in average PLL composition as effected over the course of a single kinetic experiment . Exemplary data for tem - poral distributions of voxel intensities measured from confocal Adv . Healthcare Mater . 2016 , 5 , 1025 – 1039 www . advhealthmat . de www . MaterialsViews . com F U LL P A P E R 1035 wileyonlinelibrary . com © 2016 WILEY - VCH Verlag GmbH & Co . KGaA , Weinheim images within a single pHH - 1 kinetic experiment are given in Figure 6 e ( left ) . The general trends show a marked broad - ening of the ﬂ uorescence intensity distributions occurs with increasing FPLL exposure time . The data in Figure 6 e ( right ) plots the corresponding average maximum intensities for this experiment as are calculated from the ﬂ uorescence intensi - ties of the peak voxel population for each voxel intensity dis - tribution curve . These data are part of a broad set of replicate experiments that show that the integrated intensities increase markedly with time . A more detailed discussion of mass trans - port in relation to this measurement and data for other ﬁ lm types is given in S20 ( Supporting Information ) . [ 27 ] 2 . 8 . Modeling FPLL Absorption Kinetics The suitability of several physical and semi - empirical models to ﬁ t the experimental data described above was tested . These include integrated kinetic functions reported in the litera - ture following pseudo - ﬁ rst order ( PFO ) , pseudo - second order ( PSO ) , and biphasic models . Aspects of the underlying physical assumptions of these models ( given in S21 , Supporting Infor - mation ) mitigate against their consideration . [ 28 ] As embedded in the dynamical assumptions discussed above , we found that Fickian models of diffusion kinetics present both superior mathematical ﬁ ts and more plausible physical interpretations for this materials system . Modeling diffusion in polymeric ﬁ lm systems has been studied extensively in the literature , with a number of different models used to describe instances of devia - tion from classical Fickian behaviors . [ 29 ] According to Fick’s second law , a simple power law equation described for general - ized diffusional solute uptake behavior in polymeric systems is given by Equation ( 5 ) : M M kt t n = ∞ ( 5 ) where / M M t ∞ is the fractional value of mass uptake at time t over mass uptake at times approaching inﬁ nity , k is a constant incorporating characteristics of the macromolecular network , and n is a diffusional exponent coefﬁ cient indicative of the transport mechanism . [ 30 ] For ideal Fickian diffusion , n values of 0 . 5 for a slab geometry ( and lower values down to 0 . 43 for geometries presenting with varying aspect ratios ) are expected . When heterogeneity in the polymer ﬁ lm is present , more com - plex scalings are expected and generally found . [ 31 ] For the present data , we considered a modiﬁ ed version of the generalized diffusion equation as the basis for the analysis of CFM data , one that assumed a linear correlation between a mass transfer - limited change in composition and ﬂ uorescence intensity such as is given in Equation ( 6 ) : M bF t t = ( 6 ) where b is a coefﬁ cient relating ﬂ uorescence intensity per voxel to ﬂ uorescently labeled protein mass , and F t is the ﬂ uorescence intensity measured at exposure time t . Use of a diffusional change in mass fraction in the generalized diffusion equation permitted direct application of Equation ( 5 ) in modiﬁ ed form as given in Equation ( 7 ) : F F kt t n = ∞ ( 7 ) where / F F t ∞ is the fractional value of mean total ﬂ uorescence intensity ( MTFI ) imaged for a given ﬁ lm volume over the MTFI at the maximum value calculated for a near - equilibrium time point . As discussed in the Supporting Information , the MTFI values represent one of several methods of assessing the composite data such as those presented in Figure 6 e . Cor - relation coefﬁ cients of 0 . 950 < RSQ < 0 . 968 for curve ﬁ ts using Equation ( 8 ) across the ﬁ lm series were calculated for the entire kinetic curve for each pHH ﬁ lm type . The quality of these ﬁ ts , which exceed all other forms considered ( see above ) , strongly suggests , that the functional form of the model is one that is most physically relevant for describing the dynamical attrib - utes of the FPLL interaction with the pHH thin ﬁ lms . Diffu - sional exponent coefﬁ cients were calculated from these data , restricting its range to the ﬁ rst 60 % of the kinetic data in accord - ance with the standard ﬁ tting protocols . These calculations gave values of n lying between 0 . 081 and 0 . 211 , with an average dif - fusional coefﬁ cient for the ﬁ lm series of 0 . 167 ± 0 . 065 . These values are listed in Table 2 along with the parameters and standard errors for the modiﬁ ed generalized diffusion equa - tion . The latter ﬁ ts are shown graphically along with the aver - aged replicate experimental kinetic data for each pHH ﬁ lm type in Figure 7 a , with the gray points specifying data spanning the ﬁ rst 60 % of the rate proﬁ le . On inspection of the latter data , it is evident that the rate proﬁ le ( and ﬁ ts ) for ﬁ lm type 4 are in fact quite poor , with considerable divergences being noted in the trend line developed using the array - based sampling tech - nique . This suggests that some heterogeneity exists in samples of this class , a feature absent in the data for ﬁ lm types 1 – 3 . There we note a more generalized set of trends and ﬁ ts that in fact well predict the entire range of the experimental data ( seen in the Figure via the extension of the ﬁ t developed using the ﬁ rst 60 % of the data range to its full span ) . These same ﬁ ts give values of n ( ≈ 0 . 2 ) that are smaller than would be expected for an ideal case of absorption mediated solely by the dynamics of Fickian diffusion . In point of fact , it is evident that broader compositionally dependent trends are evidenced in these data . This is most clearly evidenced in the data shown in Figure 7 b . These data illustrate two important points . First , the quantity of FPLL taken up by each pHH gel is not the same ; the largest uptake is seen in ﬁ lms prepared from composition type 1 inks and falls markedly ( threefold ) across the series . This trend is clearly seen in Figure 7 b ( top ) , which shows the reduction in equilibrium ﬂ uorescence intensity seen as the M r value for a particular ﬁ lm Adv . Healthcare Mater . 2016 , 5 , 1025 – 1039 www . advhealthmat . de www . MaterialsViews . com Table 2 . Characteristic kinetic ﬁ tting parameters for pHH ﬁ lms . Fitting parameters Film type k n RSQ pHH - 1 0 . 2517 ± 0 . 0329 0 . 1973 ± 0 . 0334 0 . 951 pHH - 2 0 . 1723 ± 0 . 0184 0 . 2113 ± 0 . 0228 0 . 978 pHH - 3 0 . 1932 ± 0 . 0490 0 . 1903 ± 0 . 0526 0 . 903 pHH - 4 0 . 3450 ± 0 . 0344 0 . 0694 ± 0 . 0243 0 . 949 F U LL P A P E R 1036 wileyonlinelibrary . com © 2016 WILEY - VCH Verlag GmbH & Co . KGaA , Weinheim Adv . Healthcare Mater . 2016 , 5 , 1025 – 1039 www . advhealthmat . de www . MaterialsViews . com type increases . High homopolymer composition inks thus yield more poorly sorptive ﬁ lms post - curing . The most striking effect noted is the counter trend evidenced in the rate of uptake of the FPLL by each ﬁ lm . To fully assess the latter aspect , we consider the quantitative attributes of the kinetics data shown , recasting it in the form of an empirical diffusion coefﬁ cient , D F , as is dis - cussed in the section below . 2 . 9 . Evaluation of Empirical Diffusion Coefﬁ cients , D F We adopt as a starting point for an analysis of the composi - tional origin of the variation in FPLL uptake kinetics seen for the series of pHH hydrogel ﬁ lms , the calculation of an empirical diffusion coefﬁ cient equivalent , D F , to establish the relative proﬁ ciencies of diffusing FPLL protein molecules to move throughout the gel volume . This is done using Equation ( 8 ) : 4 F 2 D h F π θ = ⎛ ⎝⎜ ⎞ ⎠⎟ ∞ ( 8 ) where h corresponds to average ﬁ lm thickness ( cm ) , and θ cor - responds to the slope of the linear best ﬁ t equation for / F F t ∞ vs . t n . These results are shown plotted against the M r values for each of the pHH thin ﬁ lms in Figure 7 b ( bottom ) . The linear scaling evidenced ( strong positive correlation coefﬁ cient of 0 . 996 ) is particularly striking . We believe this trend is best explained as arriving from a simple structural trend that follows as a result of the compositions used to prepare the inks , namely that the mesh architecture of the gel is directly impacted as a consequence of the changing densities of physical crosslinks ( chain entanglements ) that can be developed between the homopolymer components of the ink and the new chain formed by a propagating polymerization of the monomer constituents . An alternative model , which invokes a scaling related to relaxa - tion dynamics of the gel appears to be strongly contradicted by the experimental values of n being signiﬁ cantly smaller than 1 — the latter value being of the order required for relaxation coup led transport dynamics as given in S22 ( Supporting Infor - mation ) . [ 32 ] We conclude as a result that the distinctive mole - cular network mesh characteristics that result from differences in the M r values affect not only the equilibrium mass uptake Figure 7 . a ) Normalized characteristic kinetic curves and Fickian ﬁ ts for pHH ﬁ lm compositions 1 – 4 . Gray markers correspond to data points in the ﬁ rst 60 % of equilibration with ﬁ ts shown for all pictured data points . b ) Equilibrium ﬂ uorescence intensities for pHH ﬁ lm types 1 – 4 logarithmically decrease as homopolymer pHEMA content increases ( top ) . Empirical diffusion coefﬁ cients for pHH ﬁ lm types 1 – 4 linearly correlate FPLL uptake rates with increased homopolymer content ( bottom ) . c ) Hydrogel mesh differences affect the rate of FPLL absorption kinetics , with more open mesh exhibiting faster kinetics . F U LL P A P E R 1037 wileyonlinelibrary . com © 2016 WILEY - VCH Verlag GmbH & Co . KGaA , Weinheim Adv . Healthcare Mater . 2016 , 5 , 1025 – 1039 www . advhealthmat . de www . MaterialsViews . com of FPLL into the gel , but also the relative mobilities of the pro - tein molecules throughout the polymeric mesh network as well , which is represented schematically in Figure 7 c . A useful set of structure – property correlations follows from this analysis , ones based on the inference that increasing M r values in a pHH prepolymer solution must decrease the rela - tive frequency with which initiation centers physically cross - link / entangle the preexisting polymer chains . These are : 1 ) the ﬂ exural lability of the pHEMA chains likely increases due to longer distances between points of physical cross - linking ; 2 ) the hydrogel network mesh density is lowered by the reduced density of physical entanglements developed with the linear pHEMA chains ; and 3 ) that the FPLL protein sorption into the gel occurs more rapidly due to the more open network mesh density that results . We believe that an entropically driven effect in the absorption of the FPLL must be operative as well . In effect the data seem to imply that the internal surface area for binding the FPLL must be reduced as a consequence of a lower density gel mesh . An important question then is why the quan - tity of FPLL taken up by the gel decreases more than threefold as the M r values increase over the range explored . We believe a better physical description would be one positing enhanced osmotic repulsions leading to lower degrees of FPLL uptake within more open - mesh gels . An important conclusion can be taken from this work , namely that ﬁ ne - tuning the physicochemical properties of print - able gels can be realized using simple modiﬁ cations of compo - sition without changing the underlying segmental attributes of the hydrogel chemistry , its monomer to cross - linker ratio , and without introducing gross structural perturbations ( such as macroporosity ) during polymerization . The results further sug - gest routes through which ink systems for printing scaffolds can be modiﬁ ed to effect speciﬁ c cellular responses to bioactive molecules . For instance in the case of device implantation it may be beneﬁ cial to incorporate nonadhesive regions at certain locations to prevent ﬁ brosis or calciﬁ cation , but to induce high cellular compatibility in other regions to enable incorporation of the implant into host tissue . The current work suggests new opportunities for functional materials’ design that may eventu - ally expand to include new forms of gradient compositional / structural proﬁ les and perhaps most importantly motifs that might be developed to carry preprogrammed temporal activity . 3 . Conclusion Model studies of the biocompatibility of PLL - treated pHH thin ﬁ lms and 3D scaffolds performed by culturing NIH / 3T3 ﬁ bro - blasts and MC - 3T3 - E1 preosteoblasts on these constructs show the protein treatments are essential to effect cell attachment , growth , and proliferation on these materials . Compositional dif - ferences in the inks used to print such structures in both 2D and 3D forms signiﬁ cantly affect cell proliferation . The modiﬁ cation of the pHEMA platforms , here carried out by absorption of poly - L - lysine ( PLL ) , is essential to initiate and sustain robust forms of cell growth . This promotive effect is one that is compositionally sensitive to attributes of the ink formulation that in turn serve to impact physicochemical properties of the gel . Fibroblasts and preosteoblasts , as characterized with ﬂ uorescence microscopy and SLIM imaging , exhibit cell - speciﬁ c morphologies , cytoskel - etal structures , and dynamic motilities that are innate to each cell line and dictate certain attributes of their adhesion to pHH ﬁ lm systems . To initiate their attachment to a substrate , both cell lines rely on a high concentration of PLL absorbed into the pHH gel matrix . Most importantly , the relative quantities of attached cells appear to ultimately dictate the success of the cul - ture . Following cellular attachment , numerous factors interact to further affect growth outcomes , including the networking dynamics on which the cells depend , the possible excess of PLL ( which could over - adhere cells and reduce their networking ) , the modest differences in elastic modulus across the ﬁ lm series , and the microstructural composition of the hydrogel matrix itself . AFM mechanics characterization showed a com - plex spectrum of properties can be developed that are also cor - related with the compositional attributes of the hydrogel inks used to prepare the HEMA substrates . In each case , attributes of physical crosslinking / entanglement ( a tunable property ) dominate the structure / property correlations evidenced . Several kinetic models were considered to describe the absorption of FPLL into pHH thin ﬁ lms that were prepared with varying M r ratios . It was determined that a Fickian diffu - sion model best described the physical system , with an average diffusional coefﬁ cient falling below the value expected for a classical case . This result arises as a consequence of the hetero - geneity of the hydrogel network and its attendant mesh density . Detailed kinetics models conﬁ rm that a strong positive correla - tion exists between homopolymer content present in a HEMA pre - polymer ink and the resultant mobility of diffusive PLL molecules within the ﬁ nal ( post - cure ) pHH hydrogel networks . We ﬁ nd that , for pHH hydrogel systems , the fastest protein absorption kinetics occur in low mesh density gels , but with the consequence that this also leads to lower equilibrium pro - tein absorption uptakes as well . The latter scaling likely reﬂ ects osmotic repulsions as mediating inﬂ uences in the absorption of the PLL . From the data taken as a whole , a molecular descrip - tion of the ink chemistries emerges that will be useful for the development of hydrogel ink materials for use in the construc - tion of complex 3D printed bioscaffolds . Such materials remain areas of active study and will be reported in future publications . 4 . Experimental Section Commercially available chemical reagents were purchased from Sigma Aldrich , ATCC , Life Technologies , Polysciences Inc , and EMS Acquisition Corp . A complete reagent list is given S23 ( Supporting Information ) . pHH solutions were prepared from pHEMA - 1000 , pHEMA - 300 , hydroxyethyl methacrylate , ethylene glycol dimethacrylate , dimethoxy - 2 - phenylacetophenone , ethylene glycol , ethanol , and MilliQ water then spin - cast on to clean 1 . 5H glass coverslips . pHH - 0 and pHH - 2 inks ( viscous gels ) were prepared by excluding ethylene glycol and ethanol from pHH - 0 and pHH - 2 solution compositions , and printed into 3D scaffolds with an Aerotech AGS - 1000 precision custom gantry . Compositional parameters of pHH solutions , spin - casting protocols , and a detailed description of the 3D printing platform are given in S24 ( Supporting Information ) . AFM measurements were performed with PNP - TR SiN cantilevers purchased from NanoAndMore USA Inc . on an Asylum AFM and analyses were performed with Asylum Research Software MFP3D . Details regarding intensive replicate mechanics measurements that F U LL P A P E R 1038 wileyonlinelibrary . com © 2016 WILEY - VCH Verlag GmbH & Co . KGaA , Weinheim Adv . Healthcare Mater . 2016 , 5 , 1025 – 1039 www . advhealthmat . de www . MaterialsViews . com yielded near - quantitative modulus data are given in S25 ( Supporting Information ) . NIH / 3T3 embryonic murine ﬁ broblasts and MC - 3T3 - E1 preosteoblasts were cultured and passaged according to the recommended protocols for each cell line . Films and scaffolds seeded with these cell cultures were ﬁ xed and stained with a standard immunoﬂ uorescent protocol or stained live with a LIVE / DEAD ﬂ uorescent assay and then imaged with a Zeiss 7 Live Confocal Fluorescence microscope or a Zeiss Axiovert 25 Fluorescence microscope for each preparation , respectively . Details regarding culture and imaging protocols are given in S26 ( Supporting Information ) . The MTrackJ plug - in was used for the cell tracking analysis . Addition details regarding SLIM imaging methods and protocols are given in S27 ( Supporting Information ) . [ 33 ] The microreaction chamber used for kinetics studies was fabricated by integrating a custom - printed plate with a spin - cast pHH ﬁ lm coverslip on which an array of pHH ﬁ lm grids had been selectively patterned . The protocol for kinetics studies used rigorous replicate controls in which an aqueous solution of FPLL ( 0 . 5 mg mL − 1 ) was divided into aliquots ( 100 µL ) and stored at − 20 ° C in the dark until immediately prior to use , then selectively deposited on a pHH ﬁ lm grid of interest . A stopwatch was used for accurate timing of FPLL incubation , which was followed by replicate rinses . A Zeiss 7 Live CFM was used for all measurements , with all settings identical for all kinetics experiments . Detailed kinetics experiment protocols as microscope settings are given in S28 ( Supporting Information ) . Supporting Information Supporting Information is available from the Wiley Online Library or from the author . Acknowledgements The authors thank Professor Jonathan V . Sweedler , Stanislav S . Rubakhin , and Emily G . Tillmaand for their instruction and for use of their microscopy facilities . The authors also thank Julio Soares and Matthew Curtis for their helpful advice regarding confocal ﬂ uorescence microscopy . Additionally , the authors thank Scott Maclaren and Ted Limpoco for their thoughtful recommendations regarding AFM mechanics measurements as well as Lucas Osterbur for his rheological measurements . This material is based upon work supported by the Army Research Ofﬁ ce Award No . W911NF - 13 - 0489 through the Frederick Seitz Materials Research Laboratory at the University of Illinois at Urbana - Champaign and the Wyss Institute in the School of Engineering and Applied Sciences at Harvard University . Received : November 3 , 2015 Revised : January 28 , 2016 Published online : February 29 , 2016 [ 1 ] a ) B . V . Slaughter , S . S . Khurshid , O . Z . Fisher , A . Khademhosseini , N . A . Peppas , Adv . Mater . 2009 , 21 , 3307 ; b ) C . M . Kirschner , K . S . Anseth , Acta Mater . 2013 , 61 , 931 ; c ) S . Hong , S - J . Song , J . Y . Lee , H . Jang , J . Choi , K . Sun , Y . Park , J . Biosci . Bioeng . 2013 , 116 , 2 . [ 2 ] a ) I . C . Um , D . Fang , B . S . Hsiao , A . Okamoto , B . Chu , Biomacro - molecules 2004 , 5 , 1428 ; b ) A . P . Napolitano , D . M . Dean , A . J . Man , J . Youssef , D . N . Ho , A . P . Rago , M . P . Lech , J . R . Morgan , Biotech - niques 2007 , 43 , 494 ; c ) E . Sutanto , K . Shigeta , Y . K . Kim , P . G . Graf , D . J . Hoelzle , K . L . Barton , A . G . Alleyne , P . M . Ferreira , J . A . Rogers , J . Micromech . Microeng . 2012 , 22 , 045008 ; d ) P . Zorlutuna , N . Annabi , G . Camci - Unal , M . Nikkhah , J . M . Cha , J . W . Nichol , A . Manbachi , H . Bae , S . Chen , A . Khademhosseini , Adv . Mater . 2012 , 24 , 1782 . [ 3 ] a ) T . V . Chirila , I . J . Constable , G . J . Crawford , S . Vijavasekaran , D . E . Thompson , Y - C . Chen , W . A . Fletcher , B . J . Grifﬁ n , Biomate - rials 1993 , 14 , 26 ; b ) L . Shapiro , S . Cohen , Biomaterials 1997 , 18 , 583 ; c ) U . J . Kim , J . Park , H . J . Kim , M . Wada , D . L . Kaplan , Biomate - rials 2005 , 26 , 2775 ; d ) Y . Gong , L . He , J . Li , Q . Zhou , Z . Ma , C . Gao , J . Shen , J . Biomed . Mater . Res . Part B : Appl . Biomater . 2006 , 82 , 192 ; e ) J . Webber , L . Bergstrom , Macromolecules 2009 , 42 , 8234 ; f ) W - C . Lai , S - C . Tseng , Nanotechnology 2009 , 20 , 475606 ; g ) A . Dhanasingh , J . Salber , M . Moeller , J . Groll , Soft Matter 2010 , 6 , 618 . [ 4 ] a ) P . Bajaj , X . Tang , T . A . Saif , R . Bashir , J . Biomed . Mater . Res . A . 2010 , 95A , 1261 ; b ) J . Lee , A . A . Abdeen , D . Zhang , K . A . Kilian , Biomaterials 2013 , 34 , 8140 ; c ) A . Higuchi , Q - D . Ling , Y . Chang , S - T . Hsu , A . Umezawa , Chem . Rev . 2013 , 113 , 3297 . [ 5 ] a ) W . Wu , C . J . Hansen , A . M . Aragón , P . H . Geubelle , S . R . White , J . A . Lewis , Soft Matter 2010 , 6 , 739 ; b ) C . J . Hansen , S . R . White , N . R . Sottos , J . A . Lewis , Adv . Funct . Mater . 2011 , 21 , 4320 ; c ) L . Sun , S . T . Parker , D . Syoji , X . Wang , J . A . Lewis , D . L . Kaplan , Adv . Healthcare Mater . 2012 , 1 , 729 ; d ) D . B . Kolesky , R . L . Truby , A . S . Gladman , T . A . Busbee , K . A . Homan , J . A . Lewis , Adv . Mater . 2014 , 26 , 3124 . [ 6 ] a ) B . Y . Ahn , S . B . Walker , S . C . Slimmer , A . Russo , A . Gupta , S . Kranz , E . B . Duoss , T . F . Malkowski , J . A . Lewis , J . Vis . Exp . 2011 , 58 , 3189 ; b ) L . Sun , S . T . Parker , D . Syoji , X . Wang , J . A . Lewis , D . L . Kaplan , Adv . Healthcare Mater . 2012 , 1 , 729 ; c ) C . J . Hansen , R . Saksena , D . B . Kolesky , J . J . Vericella , S . J . Kranz , G . P . Muldowney , K . T . Christensen , J . A . Lewis , Adv . Mater . 2012 , 25 , 96 . [ 7 ] J . N . Hanson Shepherd , S . T . Parker , R . F . Shepherd , M . U . Gillette , J . A . Lewis , R . G . Nuzzo , Adv . Funct . Mater . 2011 , 21 , 47 . [ 8 ] a ) B . K . Denizli , H . K . Can , Z . M . O . Rzaev , A . Guner , Polymer 2004 , 45 , 6431 ; b ) H . V . Chavda , C . N . Patel , Indian J . Pharm . Sci . 2011 , 73 , 30 ; c ) J . J . Schmidt , J . H . Jeong , V . Chan , C . Cha , K . Baek , M - H . Lai , R . Bashir , H . Kong , Biomacromolecules 2013 , 14 , 1361 ; d ) C . Cha , P . Soman , W . Zhu , M . Nikkhah , G . Camci - Unal , S . Chen , A . Khademhosseini , Biomater . Sci . 2014 , 2 , 703 . [ 9 ] R . A . Barry III , R . F . Shepherd , J . N . Hanson , R . G . Nuzzo , P . Wiltzius , J . A . Lewis , Adv . Mater . 2009 , 21 , 2407 . [ 10 ] a ) S . H . Kim , A . Opdahl , C . Marmo , G . A . Somorjai , Biomate - rials 2002 , 23 , 1657 ; b ) X . M . Chen , A . C . Dunn , W . G . Sawyer , M . Sarntinoranont , J . Biomech . Eng . - Trans . Asme 2007 , 129 , 156 ; c ) J . M . González - Méijome , A . López - Alemany , J . B . Almeida , M . A . Paraﬁ ta , J . Biomed . Mater . Res . Part B : Appl . Biomater . 2008 , 88B , 75 ; d ) D . Passeri , M . Rossi , E . Tamburri , M . L . Terranova , Anal . Bioanal . Chem . 2013 , 405 , 1463 . [ 11 ] a ) Z . Wang , L . Millet , M . Mir , H . Ding , S . Unarunotai , J . A . Rogers , M . U . Gillette , G . Popescu , Opt . Express 2011 , 19 , 1016 ; b ) Z . Wang , L . Millet , V . Chan , H . Ding , M . U . Gillete , R . Bashir , G . Popescu , J . Biomed . Opt . 2011 , 16 , 026019 ; c ) B . Bhaduri , D . Wickland , R Wang , V . Chan , R . Bashir , G . Popescu , PLoS One 2013 , 8 , e56930 ; d ) M . Mir , T . Kim , A . Majumder , M . Xiang , R . Wang , S . C . Liu , M . U . Gillette , S . Stice , G . Popescu , Sci . Rep . 2014 , 4 , 4434 . [ 12 ] L . Wang , B . Sun , K . S . Ziemer , G . A . Barabino , R . L . Carrier , J . Biomed . Mater . Res . Part A 2009 , 93A , 1260 . [ 13 ] a ) C . Shan , H . Yang , D . Han , Q . Zhang , A . Ivaska , L . Niu , Lang - muir 2009 , 25 , 12030 ; b ) A . Grotzky , Y . Manaka , S . Fornera , M . Willeke , P . Walde , Anal . Methods 2010 , 2 , 1448 ; c ) Y . Chen , W . Cao , J . Zhou , B . Pidhatika , B . Xiong , L . Huang , Q . Tian , Y . Shu , W . Wen , I . - M . Hsing , H . Wu , ACS Appl . Mater . Interfaces 2015 , 7 , 2919 . [ 14 ] a ) K . Jo , M . L . Heien , L . B . Thompson , M . Zhong , R . G . Nuzzo , J . V . Sweedler , Lab Chip 2007 , 7 , 1454 ; b ) L . J . Millet , M . E . Stewart , J . V . Sweedler , R . G . Nuzzo , M . U . Gillette , Lab Chip 2007 , 7 , 987 ; c ) L . J . Millet , M . E . Stewart , R . G . Nuzzo , M . U . Gillette , Lab Chip 2010 , 10 , 1525 . F U LL P A P E R 1039 wileyonlinelibrary . com © 2016 WILEY - VCH Verlag GmbH & Co . KGaA , Weinheim Adv . Healthcare Mater . 2016 , 5 , 1025 – 1039 www . advhealthmat . de www . MaterialsViews . com [ 15 ] a ) R . Muller , A . Eidt , K - A . Hiller , V . Katzur , M . l . Subat , H . Schweikl , S . Imazato , S . Ruhl , G . Schmalz , Biomaterials 2009 , 30 , 4921 ; b ) H . Zhang , J . N . Hanson , R . G . Nuzzo , Soft Matter 2010 , 6 , 2238 ; c ) A . Guan , Z . Li , K . S . Phillips , J . Fluoresc . 2014 , 24 , 1639 . [ 16 ] J . N . Shepherd , Manipulating soft materials to direct cell growth in multiple dimensions ( Doctoral dissertation ) , Retrieved from IDEALS database , http : / / hdl . handle . net / 2142 / 15524 , 2010 . [ 17 ] C . J . Hansen , S . R . White , N . R . Sottos , J . A . Lewis , Adv . Funct . Mater . 2011 , 21 , 4320 . [ 18 ] S . Sridharan , M . Mir , G . Popescu , Opt . Express 2011 , 2 , 2815 . [ 19 ] a ) V . Torres - Costa , G . Martinez - Munõz , V . Sánchez - Vaquero , Á . Muñoz - Noval , L . González - Méndez , E . Punzón - Quijorna , D . Gallach - Pérez , M . Manso - Silván , A . Climent - Font , J . P . García - Ruiz , R . J . Martín - Palma , Int . J . Nanomed . 2012 , 7 , 623 ; b ) J . Wu , Z . Mao , L . Han , J . Xi , Y . Zhao , C . Gao , J . Bioact . Compat . Polym . 2013 , 28 , 605 ; c ) V . Dinca , P . Alloncle , P . Delaporte , V . Ion , L . Rusen , M . Filipescu , C . Mustaciosu , C . Luculescu , M . Dinescu , Appl . Surf . Sci . 2015 , 352 , 82 . [ 20 ] a ) J . L . Drury , D . J . Mooney , Biomaterials 2003 , 24 , 4337 ; b ) W . Kim , D . C . Tretheway , S . S . Kohles , J . Biomech . 2009 , 42 , 395 ; c ) N . D . Evans , C . Minelli , E . Gentleman , V . LaPointe , S . N . Patankar , M . Kallivretaki , X . Chen , C . J . Roberts , M . M . Stevens , Eur . Cells . Mater . 2009 , 18 , 1 ; d ) T . A . Ulrich , A . Jain , K . Tanner , J . L . MacKay , S . Kumar , Biomaterials 2010 , 31 , 1875 ; e ) J . H . Wen , L . G . Vincent , A . Fuhrmann , Y . S . Choi , K . C . Hribar , H . Taylor - Weiner , S . C . Chen , A . J . Engler , Nat . Mater . 2014 , 13 , 979 ; f ) M . Goktas , G . Cinar , J . Orujalipoor , S . Ide , A . B . Tekinay , M . O . Guler , Biomacromole - cules 2015 , 16 , 1247 ; g ) J . Lee , A . A . Abdeen , X . Tang , T . A . Saif , K . A . Kilian , Biomaterials 2015 , 69 , 174 . [ 21 ] a ) K . L . Johnson , Contact Mechanics , Cambridge University Press , Cambridge , UK 1987 , 1 ; b ) D . C . Lin , E . K . Dimitriadis , F . Horkay , J . Biomech . Eng . 2007 , 129 , 430 ; c ) P . J . Nowatzki , C . Franck , S . A . Maskarinec , G . Ravichandran , D . A . Tirrell , Macromolecules 2008 , 41 , 1839 . [ 22 ] a ) D . Xu , K . M . Liechti , K . Ravi - Chandar , J . Colloid Interface Sci . 2007 , 315 , 772 ; b ) J . F . Waters , S . Lee , P . R . Guduru , Int . J . Solids Struct . 2009 , 46 , 1033 ; c ) D . S . Grierson , E . E . Flater , R . W . Carpick , J . Adhes . Sci . Technol . 2005 , 19 , 291 . [ 23 ] D . C . Lin , F . Horkay , Soft Matter 2008 , 4 , 669 . [ 24 ] D . Xu , K . M . Liechti , K . Ravi - Chandar , J . Colloid Interface Sci . 2007 , 315 , 772 . [ 25 ] a ) C . S . Chen , M . Mrksich , S . Huang , G . M . Whitesides , D . E . Ingber , Science 1997 , 276 , 1425 ; b ) Hadjipanavi , V . Mudera , R . A . Brown , J . Tiss . Eng . Regen . Med . 2009 , 3 , 77 . [ 26 ] J . F . Waters , S . Lee , P . R . Guduru , Intl . J . Solids Struct . 2009 , 46 , 1033 . [ 27 ] R . W . Glaser , Anal . Biochem . 1983 , 213 , 152 . [ 28 ] a ) P . R . Edwards , A . Gill , D . V . Pollardknight , M . Hoare , P . E . Buckle , P . A . Lowe , R . J . Leatherbarrow , Anal . Biochem . 1995 , 231 , 210 ; b ) A . W . Marczewski , Langmuir 2010 , 26 , 15229 ; c ) Z . Wang , T . Yue , Y . Yuan , R . Cai , C . Niu , C . Guo , Int . J . Biol . Macromol . 2013 , 58 , 57 . [ 29 ] a ) D . J . T . Hill , A . K . Whittaker , Radiat . Phys . Chem . 2011 , 80 , 213 ; b ) P . Y . Ghi , D . J . T . Hill , D . Maillet , A . K . Whittaker , Polym . Commun . 1997 , 38 , 3985 . [ 30 ] N . A . Peppas , L . Brannon - Peppas , J . Food Eng . 1994 , 22 , 189 . [ 31 ] P . L . Ritger , N . A . Peppas , J . Controlled Release 1987 , 5 , 23 . [ 32 ] J . S . Vrentas , C . M . Jarzebski , J . L . Duda , AIChE J . 1975 , 21 , 894 . [ 33 ] E . Meijering , O . Dzyubachyk , I . Small , Methods Enzymol . 2012 , 504 , 183 .