Factors influencing the stability of the motor - clutch model on compliant substrates under external load Beibei Shen and Yunxin Zhang ∗ Shanghai Key Laboratory for Contemporary Applied Mathematics , School of Mathematical Sciences , Fudan University , Shanghai 200433 , China . ( Dated : February 29 , 2024 ) Cellular migration is crucial for biological processes including embryonic development , immune response , and wound healing . The myosin - clutch model is a framework that describes how cells control migration through the interactions between myosin , the clutch mechanism , and the sub - strate . This model is related to how cells regulate adhesion , generate traction forces , and move on compliant substrates . In this study , we present a five - dimensional nonlinear autonomous system to investigate the influences of myosin , clutches , substrate , and external load on the system’s stability . Moreover , we analyze the effects of various parameters on fixed points and explore the frequency and amplitude of the limit cycle associated with oscillations . We discovered that the system demon - strates oscillatory behavior when the velocity of the myosin motor is relatively low , or when the ratio of the motor attachment rate to motor detachment rate is relatively high . The external load shares a fraction of the force exerted by myosin motors , thereby diminishing the force endured by the clutches . Within a specific range , an increase in external load not only diminishes and eventually eliminates the region lacking fixed points but also decelerates clutch detachment , enhancing clutch protein adherence . Keywords : myosin contractility , motor - clutch model , compliant substrates , dynamical system stability . I . INTRODUCTION Cellular migration plays a pivotal role in a wide array of biological processes , including embryonic development , the immune response , and wound healing [ 1 – 6 ] . This process is intricately regulated by the cell’s ability to sense and respond to the mechanical stiffness of its surroundings . Through the use of their contractile and adhesive molecular machinery , cells apply and transmit forces across the extracellular ma - trix , converting these mechanical interactions into biochem - ical signals that influence cell behavior and fate [ 7 – 10 ] . Key to this regulatory mechanism is the actomyosin complex , comprised of actin filaments , myosin motors , and adaptor proteins . These adaptor proteins form crucial links to trans - membrane proteins , thereby establishing connections with the cell’s microenvironment and facilitating migration [ 11 – 13 ] . The nuanced interplay between mechanical sensing and the molecular components driving cell migration underscores the complexity of cellular responses in various physiological contexts , with the mechanical stiffness of the environment playing a significant , albeit variable , role in dictating cell behavior and destiny [ 14 , 15 ] . The molecular assembly facilitating cell migration , termed the adhesion complex , exhibits significant dynamism , pri - marily through the kinetics of attachment and detachment among components linking the cytoskeleton to the extracel - lular matrix . This dynamic behavior is crucial for the orches - trated movement of cells . The combined actions of myosin motors generating contractile forces and the polymerization of actin filaments against the cell membrane induce a ‘retro - grade flow’ of actin towards the cell’s center . Central to this process is the ‘molecular clutch’ hypothesis , which suggests that focal adhesions ( FAs ) act as mechanical clutches . These clutches serve as dynamic linkages , facilitating the transmis - sion of forces from the actin filaments to the transmembrane proteins and effectively converting the retrograde actin flow ∗ Email : xyz @ fudan . edu . cn into forward cellular motion [ 16 ] . Furthermore , cells use this molecular clutch mechanism to sense and respond to envi - ronmental stiffness by transmitting forces to the extracellular matrix [ 9 , 17 – 19 ] and transforming these mechanical inter - actions into biochemical signals [ 20 ] . Recent experiments using time - lapse traction force mi - croscopy have revealed that the local forces applied by indi - vidual focal adhesions ( FAs ) vary over time and space , sug - gesting that they periodically tug on the extracellular ma - trix / substrate [ 6 , 17 ] . Mature focal adhesions exhibit both stable and dynamic states , with the stable state character - ized by invariant traction across both space and time , and the dynamic state involving fluctuating traction forces that suggest a tugging mechanism on the extracellular membrane . Such force fluctuations might serve as a molecular mecha - nism through which cells can precisely regulate their move - ment in reaction to environmental signals [ 21 , 22 ] . However , integrating these fluctuations into a comprehensive model of cell migration remains a challenge , as the underlying mech - anisms are not fully understood . Myosin contractility plays a crucial role in generating these fluctuations , with exist - ing models suggesting that the combined activity of myosin motors and elastic substrates can lead to spontaneous oscil - latory behaviors in local contractile units [ 23 ] . Previous theoretical models predicted the spontaneous , di - rected movements of actin motor proteins [ 24 ] and subse - quently a stick - slip type of dynamics within the motor - clutch paradigm [ 8 , 25 ] . A stochastic model of cell force trans - mission based on the motor - clutch hypothesis , presented by Chan and Odde [ 8 ] , considers the force - velocity relationship of the myosin motors and incorporates the load - and - fail dy - namics of cellular adhesions . However , these models either assumed that the forces exerted by the stress fibers on FAs are constant [ 8 , 26 ] , or they did not take into account the role of myosin contractility and the attachment - detachment dynamics [ 27 ] . Despite the fact that the various components of cell migration process are well - known , the measurement of mechanical forces exhibits substantial variability at the cellular level [ 17 , 28 – 30 ] , making it imperative to decipher the crucial parameters that govern these dynamics . a r X i v : 2 4 02 . 18363v1 [ phy s i c s . b i o - ph ] 2 8 F e b 2024 2 Our model , by considering a range of biologically relevant parameters , exhibits a rich array of dynamic states . The structural framework for describing our model was derived from the work of D . Ghosh et al . [ 31 ] . In contrast to the work of D . Ghosh et al . , which treats the motor - clutch and substrate sectors as separate blocks , we argue that these sec - tors form an integral block . Their dynamics , we believe , should be analyzed in conjunction . Additionally , research has demonstrated that the motor - clutch system inherently senses and responds to the mechanical stiffness of its local environment [ 8 , 32 , 33 ] . For a deeper understanding of stiff - ness sensing , it is crucial to explore how substrate stiffness impacts the system within the ‘motor - clutch’ force transmis - sion mechanism . In this study , we introduce a set of coupled ordinary differ - ential equations that serve as a system model for describing and simulating the dynamics of intracellular actomyosin ac - tivity and the complex biomechanical interactions between the cell and its external environment . We investigate the system’s dynamical stability by considering various factors , including myosin motors , molecular clutches , compliant sub - strates , and external loads . A variation of the relevant pa - rameters of each factor gives rise to a multitude of dynamical states . Specifically , from the perspective of myosin motors , we pay particular attention to how myosin II activity affects dynamical stability . The myosin II activity is characterized by the velocity of the attached myosin motors , as well as by its dynamics of attachment and detachment with the actin filament . Through the proposed system , we validate the sig - nificant influence of myosin activity on oscillatory behaviors . Furthermore , we investigate the impact of parameter varia - tions on fixed points , and we delve into local fluctuations induced by spontaneous oscillations through a calculation of the frequency and amplitude of the limit cycle . Through in - depth analysis , our model not only complements the existing theoretical framework but also provides a new perspective for understanding cellular mechanical behavior . FIG . 1 : A model for motor - clutch motility on compliant sub - strates under external load F . Myosin motors exert forces on inextensible actin filament bundles , inducing their movement in the retrograde direction . Molecular clutches reversibly engage the actin filament bundles to resist retrograde flow and transmit forces to a compliant substrate in the extracellular environment . Myosin motors , molecular clutches , and compliant substrates are modeled as linear elastic springs , each characterized by its me - chanical stiffness : κ m for the motors , κ c for the clutches , and κ s for the substrate . The symbols + and − are used to indicate the anterograde and retrograde directions , respectively . II . METHODS A . Model Description In this paper , we explore a model of myosin - clutch motility on compliant substrates under external load F , treating the motor - clutch mechanism and the substrate as a unified entity for our investigation . Considering an average availability of N m myosin motors , with n m of these motors being attached to the actin bundle . They are modeled as stretchable linear springs , and the extension of the i - th myosin motor , denoted as y i , is directly proportional to the load force exerted , rep - resented as f il = κ m y i . Here , κ m is referred to as the spring stiffness . Consequently , the average load force exerted by the myosin motors can be expressed as f l = κ m y , where y represents the mean extension of these attached motors , as y = 1 n m (cid:80) n m i = 1 y i . Myosin motors undergo attachment - detachment dynamics to and from the actin filament bundles , a process driven by the energy released during ATP hydrolysis . The contractil - ity and the resultant force generation of myosin motors are dependent on the dynamics of attachment and detachment to actin filaments [ 34 , 35 ] . One end of the spring is anchored , whereas the other end attaches to and detaches from the F - actin bundle with rates ω a and ω d , respectively . Similar to [ 36 , 37 ] , the detachment rate ω d of motors from the actin filament is assumed to be of the form ω d = ω 0 d exp ( | f l | / f d ) where parameter f d represents the detachment force , | f l | is the load force , and ω 0 d is the bare detachment rate . Then , the kinetic behavior of the attached myosin motors can be given as dn m dt = ω a ( N m − n m ) − ω 0 d n m exp (cid:18) | f l | f d (cid:19) . ( 1 ) In their state of attachment , myosin motors exhibit directed movement along the filament bundle , primarily orienting to - wards the plus end of the filament with a velocity v m ( f l ) , which is dependent on the load force that it experiences . This behavior is quantitatively captured through a piecewise linear force - velocity relationship [ 8 , 31 ] , formulated as v m ( f l ) =   v u , for f l ≤ 0 , v u (cid:16) 1 − f l f s (cid:17) , for 0 < f l ≤ f s , v b , for f l > f s . Here , f s is the stall force , a critical threshold beyond which the myosin motor ceases to move . v u represents the intrinsic velocity of the motor in the free load , while v b corresponds to a reverse velocity . Molecular clutches are modeled as extensible springs with a spring stiffness κ c , one end attached to the actin bun - dle and the other to a compliant substrate with stiffness κ s through substrate linkage , see Fig . 1 . The motion of the myosin motors on the actin bundle induces the retrograde motion of the actin . Driven by the contractility of myosin motors , the retrograde motion of the actin bundle with a distance of x o , results in an extension x ic in the i - th clutch among the n c attached clutches , as well as the substrate extension x s . Let x c = 1 n c (cid:80) n c i = 1 x ic represent the average extension of connected clutches . There exists a relationship x o = x c + x s . Analogous to the mechanism in myosin motors , clutches experience attachment and detachment dynamics at rates 3 k on and k off , respectively . The average tension exerted by attached clutches is f cl = κ c x c . Correspondingly , the tension along engaged clutches increases the detachment rate , k off , exponentially according to Bell model [ 38 ] , k off = k 0off exp ( | f cl | / F b ) , where k 0off is the unloaded dissociation rate of the molecular clutch from the actin bundle , F b is the characteristic bond rupture force . Defining N c as the total number of available clutches , we describe the attachment - detachment dynamics of these clutches with the following rate equation dn c dt = k on ( N c − n c ) − k 0off n c exp (cid:18) | f cl | F b (cid:19) . ( 2 ) The dynamics governing the motion distance x o of the actin bundle is elucidated by considering a mechanical bal - ance of forces within the over - damped regime , as represented by the following equation : Γ dx o dt = n m κ m y − n c κ c x c − F , ( 3 ) where the viscous force due to the motion of the actin bundle , characterized by the viscous friction coefficient Γ , is balanced by the collective forces exerted by the motors and clutches , in addition to the external load F . The rate of mean extension of an attached myosin motor is determined by two primary factors : the active velocity of the motor v m on the actin filament and the velocity of the actin bundle’s movement , represented by dx o dt , dy dt = v m ( f l ) − dx o dt . ( 4 ) Since the actin bundle flows in the retrograde direction , there is a negative sign before dx o dt . Clutches interact with actin filaments to resist retrograde flow and transmit forces to compliant substrate in the ex - tracellular environment . In this model , substrate linkage is typically considered dynamic , capable of moving to accom - modate changes in internal cellular forces . The dynamics of the substrate extension x s are determined by a balance of forces exerted by attached clutches and the substrate , as described by the equation : γ dx s dt = n c κ c x c − k s x s , ( 5 ) where γ dx s dt represents the substrate frictional damping force due to the motion of the substrate linkage . Such a force is akin to that produced by actin filament bundles and is typ - ically quantified by a substrate friction coefficient , γ . This relationship signifies that the motion of the substrate link - age engenders resistance proportional to its velocity , mirror - ing the resistance experienced by objects traversing a vis - cous fluid . Therefore , the substrate friction coefficient , γ , constitutes a consideration when analyzing the interactions between the motor - clutch model and the substrate . The extensions of springs x c , x s , and y are all considered positive when the springs are elongated , and negative during compression , without including the direction sign . B . Dimensionless Transformation These five equations Eqs . ( 1 ) – ( 5 ) constitute a five - dimensional nonlinear autonomous system . By selecting specific characteristic scales for length , time , velocity , and force as l 0 = (cid:0) k B T / ω 0 d Γ (cid:1) 1 / 2 , τ = 1 / ω 0 d , v 0 = l 0 ω 0 d , and f = (cid:0) ω 0 d Γ k B T (cid:1) 1 / 2 , respectively , we facilitate the trans - formation of Eqs . ( 1 ) – ( 5 ) into their dimensionless forms . This is accomplished through the introduction of dimen - sionless parameters : ˜ τ = t / τ , ˜ ω = ω a / ω 0 d , ˜ v u = v u / v 0 , ˜ k on = k on / ω 0 d , ˜ k 0off = k 0off / ω 0 d , ˜ x o = x o / l 0 , ˜ x s = x s / l 0 , ˜ y = y / l 0 , ˜ κ c = κ c l 0 / f , ˜ κ m = κ m l 0 / f , ˜ κ s = κ s l 0 / f , ˜ F = F / f and ˜ f s = f s / f . These dimensionless variables provide a more streamlined and universal framework for analyzing the equations , enhancing the comprehension and applicability of the model under varying physical conditions . The physical parameters employed in our model are delineated in Tab . I . TABLE I : Physical parameters present in the system Parameter Symbol Values Motor attachment rate ω a 40 s − 1 [ 39 ] Motor detachment rate ω 0 d 350 s − 1 [ 39 ] Total number of motors N m 100 Clutch attachment rate k on 1 s − 1 [ 8 ] Clutch detachment rate k 0off 0 . 1 s − 1 [ 8 ] Back velocity v b 0 . 2256 µ m / s [ 39 ] Stall force f s 4 . 96 pN [ 39 ] Detachment force f d 2 . 4 pN [ 40 ] Clutch bond rupture force F b 6 . 25 pN [ 27 ] Motor spring stiffness k m 0 . 3 pN / nm [ 39 ] Clutch spring stiffness k c 0 . 03144 pN / nm [ 41 ] Substrate spring stiffness k s ( 10 − 2 ∼ 10 2 ) f / l 0 Viscous friction coefficient Γ 893 × 10 − 6 k B Ts / nm 2 [ 42 ] Substrate friction coefficient γ ( 10 − 5 ∼ 10 − 2 ) k B Ts / nm 2 Characteristic length l 0 1 . 7887 nm Characteristic time τ 0 . 0029 s Characteristic velocity v 0 626 . 0490 nm / s Characteristic force f 2 . 3033 k B T / nm We now proceed to render our dynamical equations into a dimensionless form : dn m d ˜ τ = ˜ ω ( N m − n m ) − n m exp (cid:18) ˜ κ m ˜ y ˜ f d (cid:19) , dn c d ˜ τ = ˜ k on ( N c − n c ) − ˜ k 0off n c exp (cid:18) ˜ κ c ( ˜ x o − ˜ x s ) ˜ F b (cid:19) , d ˜ x o d ˜ τ = n m ˜ κ m ˜ y − n c ˜ κ c ( ˜ x o − ˜ x s ) − ˜ F , d ˜ y d ˜ τ = ˜ v u (cid:18) 1 − ˜ κ m ˜ y ˜ f s (cid:19) − d ˜ x o d ˜ τ , γ Γ d ˜ x s d ˜ τ = n c ˜ κ c ( ˜ x o − ˜ x s ) − k s ˜ x s . ( 6 ) Moreover , we can derive the equation for the average exten - sion of the attached clutches : d ˜ x c d ˜ τ = n m ˜ κ m ˜ y − (cid:18) 1 + Γ γ (cid:19) n c ˜ κ c ˜ x c + k s ˜ x s − ˜ F . ( 7 ) 4 C . Calculation of Fixed Points We determine the steady - state solutions , i . e . , fixed points of Eqs . ( 6 ) at steady state , which are represented as follows : 0 = ˜ ω ( N m − n m ) − n m exp (cid:18) ˜ κ m ˜ y ˜ f d (cid:19) , 0 = ˜ k on ( N c − n c ) − ˜ k 0off n c exp (cid:18) ˜ κ c ˜ x c ˜ F b (cid:19) , 0 = n m ˜ κ m ˜ y − n c ˜ κ c ˜ x c − ˜ F , 0 = ˜ v u (cid:18) 1 − ˜ κ m ˜ y ˜ f s (cid:19) − 0 , 0 = n c ˜ κ c ˜ x c − k s ˜ x s , ( 8 ) where ˜ x c = ˜ x o − ˜ x s . The the fixed points ˜ y 0 , n 0 m , ˜ x 0 s , ˜ x 0 o , and n 0 c of the dimen - sionless dynamical equations are given by : ˜ y 0 = ˜ f s / ˜ κ m , ( 9 ) n 0 m = ˜ ωN m ˜ ω + exp (cid:16) ˜ f s / ˜ f d (cid:17) , ( 10 ) ˜ x 0 s = n 0 m ˜ f s − ˜ F ˜ κ s , ( 11 ) ˜ x 0 o = (cid:18) ˜ κ s n 0 c ˜ κ c + 1 (cid:19) n 0 m ˜ f s − ˜ F ˜ κ s . ( 12 ) Subsequently , by the relational expression ˜ x c = ˜ x o − ˜ x s , the average extension of the attached clutches in steady state is ˜ x 0 c = n 0 m ˜ f s − ˜ F n 0 c ˜ κ c . ( 13 ) We substitute ˜ x 0 c into the second equation concerning n 0 c in the system of equations Eqs . ( 8 ) to obtain ˜ k on (cid:0) N c − n 0 c (cid:1) = ˜ k 0off n 0 c exp (cid:32) n 0 m ˜ f s − ˜ F n 0 c ˜ F b (cid:33) , ( 14 ) this is a transcendental equation . We rearrange Eq . ( 14 ) to obtain N c = n 0 c + ˜ k 0off ˜ k on n 0 c exp (cid:32) n 0 m ˜ f s − ˜ F n 0 c ˜ F b (cid:33) , ( 15 ) we observe that N c influences the number of solutions for n 0 c . Subsequently , we will investigate the number of solutions for Eq . ( 15 ) . Consider the right - hand side of Eq . ( 15 ) , which we denote as g ( n 0 c ) , g ( n 0 c ) = n 0 c + ˜ k 0off ˜ k on n 0 c exp (cid:32) n 0 m ˜ f s − ˜ F n 0 c ˜ F b (cid:33) , ( 16 ) correspondingly , the derivative function g ′ ( n 0 c ) is g ′ ( n 0 c ) = 1 + ˜ k 0off ˜ k on exp (cid:32) n 0 m ˜ f s − ˜ F n 0 c ˜ F b (cid:33) (cid:32) 1 − n 0 m ˜ f s − ˜ F n 0 c ˜ F b (cid:33) . ( 17 ) It is noted that the sign of n m ˜ f s − ˜ F significantly influences the positivity or negativity of the derivative function g ′ ( n 0 c ) . In light of this , we conduct a case - by - case analysis . Case 1 : When n 0 m ˜ f s − ˜ F > 0 , that is ˜ F < n 0 m ˜ f s , the derivative function g ′ ( n 0 c ) is monotonically increasing with respect to n 0 c . As n 0 c → 0 , g ′ ( n 0 c ) → −∞ , and as n 0 c → ∞ , g ′ ( n 0 c ) → 1 + ˜ k off ˜ k on . Therefore , the derivative function g ′ ( n 0 c ) undergoes a transition from negative to positive , indicat - ing that the original function g ( n 0 c ) initially decreases and subsequently increases . The minimum value of N c , de - noted as N c , min , corresponds to when g ′ ( n 0 c ) = 0 . Further - more , Eq . ( 15 ) indicates that the number of solutions for n 0 c , can be zero , one , or two , corresponding to the conditions N c < N c , min , N c = N c , min , and N c > N c , min , respectively . This value of N c , min is related to the external load F . Within the interval 0 ≤ ˜ F < n 0 m ˜ f s , N c , min monotonically decreases to 0 as F increases . This point will be further elaborated upon in the subsequent section , as demonstrated in Fig . 10 . Furthermore , we observe that , according to Eq . ( 16 ) , g ( n 0 c ) increases as n 0 m increases . As ˜ ω increases , it leads to an in - crease in n 0 m . When N c and ˜ F are held constants , there exists a maximum allowable value for ˜ ω , denoted as ˜ ω max ( N c , ˜ F ) , such that when ˜ ω > ˜ ω max ( N c , ˜ F ) , the minimum value of g ( n 0 c ) exceeds the N c , i . e . , g ( n 0 c ) min > N c . As a result , no solutions exist for Eq . ( 15 ) . It is easy to observe that ˜ ω max ( N c , ˜ F ) is dependent on N c and increases as N c in - creases . Case 2 : When n 0 m ˜ f s − ˜ F ≤ 0 , that is ˜ F ≥ n 0 m ˜ f s , the derivative function g ′ ( n 0 c ) is strictly positive . This results in the original function g ( n 0 c ) being monotonically increasing with respect to n 0 c . Notably , when n 0 c → 0 , g ( n 0 c ) → 0 + . Therefore , Eq . ( 15 ) has only the trivial solution where N c = n 0 c = 0 . This means that the external force F balances the force generated by the myosin motors , rendering the clutches unnecessary . D . Linear Approximation of Nonlinear Systems We rewrite five - dimensional nonlinear system Eqs . ( 6 ) in vector form , d d ˜ τ   n m n c ˜ x o ˜ y ˜ x s   =   ˜ ω ( N m − n m ) − n m exp (cid:16) ˜ κ m ˜ y ˜ f d (cid:17) ˜ k on ( N c − n c ) − ˜ k off n c exp (cid:16) ˜ κ c ˜ x c ˜ F b (cid:17) n m ˜ κ m ˜ y − n c ˜ κ c ˜ x c − ˜ F ˜ v u (cid:16) 1 − ˜ κ m ˜ y ˜ f s (cid:17) − (cid:16) n m ˜ κ m ˜ y − n c ˜ κ c ˜ x c − ˜ F (cid:17) Γ γ ( n c ˜ κ c ˜ x c − k s ˜ x s )   , ( 18 ) where ˜ x c = ˜ x o − ˜ x s . To analyze the stability near fixed points , we perform a linear approximation of this five - dimensional nonlinear au - tonomous system . Below is the linear system we introduce . To distinguish it from the preceding nonlinear system , we 5 rename the variables as δn m , δn c , δ ˜ x o , δ ˜ y , δ ˜ x s , d d ˜ τ   δn m δn c δ ˜ x o δ ˜ y δ ˜ x s   = J   δn m δn c δ ˜ x o δ ˜ y δ ˜ x s   , ( 19 ) where J is the 5 × 5 Jacobian matrix of the fixed points , as detailed in Appendix . The eigenvalues of this Jacobian matrix J determine the linear stability of the dynamical system . The determinant of the Jacobian matrix J has been computed as follows : | J | = − ˜ v u ˜ κ c ˜ κ m ˜ κ s ˜ F b ˜ f s exp (cid:32) − ˜ F n 0 c ˜ F b (cid:33) (cid:32) exp (cid:32) ˜ f s ˜ f d (cid:33) + ˜ ω (cid:33) × (cid:34) ˜ k off exp (cid:32) n 0 m ˜ f s n 0 c ˜ F b (cid:33) (cid:16) ˜ F + n 0 c ˜ F b − n 0 m ˜ f s (cid:17) + ( 20 ) exp (cid:32) ˜ F n 0 c ˜ F b (cid:33) n 0 c ˜ F b ˜ k on (cid:35) . The characteristic polynomial of the Jacobian matrix is ex - pressed as P ( λ ) = ( λ − λ 1 ) ( λ − λ 2 ) ( λ − λ 3 ) ( λ − λ 4 ) ( λ − λ 5 ) , ( 21 ) which forms a fifth - order polynomial equation , with λ 1 , · · · , λ 5 as its eigenvalues . III . RESULTS A . Saddle - Node Bifurcation : Stable and Unstable Branches As previously mentioned , when N c < N c , min , fixed points do not exist in the dynamical system . However , as N c in - creases and reaches N c , min , the system undergoes bifurca - tion : a saddle - node bifurcation transforms a single saddle - node into two fixed points with differing stabilities . One of these is a stable fixed point , forming a stable branch , while the other is an unstable fixed point , giving rise to an unsta - ble branch . By analyzing the determinant of the Jacobian matrix , we can readily identify certain unstable fixed points . This is due to the fact that the determinant of the Jacobian matrix is equivalent to the product of all its eigenvalues , represented as | J | = λ 1 λ 2 λ 3 λ 4 λ 5 . If | J | > 0 , it implies the existence of at least one positive eigenvalue , indicating that the system is unstable . Upon computation , it has been confirmed that for the smaller fixed point , substituting n 0 c into the Jacobian ma - trix yields | J | > 0 , implying the existence of at least one positive eigenvalue and indicating that the system is unsta - ble . Consequently , our research focus is redirected towards the stable branch , where | J | < 0 . The bifurcation point can be obtained through the condi - tion where the derivative in Eq . ( 17 ) equals zero , g ′ ( n 0 c ) = 0 , in conjunction with Eq . ( 14 ) . We ascertain the bifurcation point and mark it in Fig . 2 as a highlighted point . In the region where N c < N c , min is lower than its value at the bifurcation point , due to the absence of fixed points for n 0 c , the system loses stability and remains unstable re - gardless of ˜ v u . Consequently , this region is labeled as the Non - existence ( N ) zone in the stability diagram shown in Fig . 3 . 0 . 8 1 1 . 2 1 . 4 1 . 6 1 . 8 2 0 0 . 5 1 1 . 5 2 Stable Branch Unstable Branch FIG . 2 : A saddle - node bifurcation emerges from the tran - scendental properties of the n 0 c equation . The solid curve rep - resents the stable branch , while the dashed line indicates the unstable branch . The highlighted point marks the bifurcation point where the system’s behavior changes . It is noteworthy that N c , min = 0 . 978 represents the critical threshold for the existence of solutions . In this figure , the external load ˜ F = 0 . B . Different Dynamical Behavior of the System When | J | < 0 , the dynamical behavior of the system , which has four different states characterized by the different combinations of the five eigenvalues : ( 1 ) Five real negative eigenvalues are indicative of a stable ( S ) state , wherein perturbations exhibit exponential decay over time . ( 2 ) There are three real negative and two real positive eigenvalues ; alternatively , there is one real negative and four real positive eigenvalues . Both configurations give rise to an unstable ( U ) state characterized by exponentially intensify - ing perturbations . ( 3 ) There are three real negative eigenvalues and two com - plex conjugate eigenvalues with a negative real part , denoted as λ 4 , 5 = − α ± iβ . This configuration characterizes a stable spiral ( SS ) state with decaying oscillations . ( 4 ) There are three real negative eigenvalues and two com - plex conjugate eigenvalues with a positive real part , ex - pressed as λ 4 , 5 = α ± iβ . This represents an unstable spiral ( US ) state with oscillations of growing amplitude . TABLE II : Different dynamical states are associated with combi - nations of eigenvalues . In this table , α is a positive real number . The numbers in this table correspond to the quantities of the re - spective types of eigenvalues . α − α − α ± iβ α ± iβ S ( Stable ) 0 5 0 0 SS ( Stable Spirals ) 0 3 2 0 US ( Unstable Spirals ) 0 3 0 2 U ( Unstable ) 2 3 0 0 1 4 0 0 6 In the system under consideration , as the parameter val - ues change , there emerges an increasing oscillation over time transitioning from a decaying oscillation . This phenomenon represents a dynamical transition from a stable spiral ( SS ) to an unstable spiral ( US ) , attributed to a change in the complex conjugate eigenvalues from ( − α ± iβ ) to ( α ± iβ ) . The sign of the real part of the complex conjugate roots α is opposite on either side of the boundary ; consequently , α = 0 is the condition of the associated phase boundary . This tran - sition from SS to US is the route through which stable limit cycle oscillation sets in the system via non - linear effects lead - ing to Hopf bifurcation . For theoretical methods related to the stability of limit cycles and the assessment of Hopf bi - furcations , see reference [ 43 ] . In Fig . A1 , we provide visual representations of the four dynamical behaviors exhibited by the system . In the S state , the system rapidly stabilizes , reaching steady - state solutions . Conversely , in the SS state , the system undergoes a trajec - tory of decaying oscillations . Notably , within the US state , the system exhibits self - sustaining limit cycle oscillations , a phenomenon observed subsequent to crossing the supercriti - cal Hopf bifurcation boundary . In the U state , the variables ˜ x o , ˜ y , and ˜ x s diverge , failing to converge to a fixed point . Furthermore , we present trajectory diagrams within the n m − ˜ x 0 and ˜ y − ˜ x 0 planes under SS and US states , as shown in Fig . A2 . In the SS state , the trajectories eventually con - verge towards a fixed point , whereas in the US state , the trajectories ultimately evolve towards and settle on a limit cycle , indicating a persistent oscillatory behavior . C . Linear Stability Analysis of the System In this section , we explore the stability of the system when it is unloaded , namely when the external load ˜ F = 0 . We analyze the impact of relevant parameters on the stability of this dynamic system from several perspectives : myosin mo - tors , molecular clutches , and the compliant substrate . The parameters characterizing myosin Il activity include the ve - locity of attached myosin motors and their attachment and detachment rates with the actin filament . Given that N c controls the saddle - node bifurcation and ˜ v u regulates the activity of the myosin motors , we present a stability diagram in the N c − ˜ v u plane , which delineates the various dynamical behaviors exhibited by our system . Additionally , we use the model to reproduce the results of the N c − ˜ v u plane stability diagram for the dynamic sys - tem observed under various experimental conditions , namely different substrate stiffnesses and different substrate viscous friction coefficients , as shown in Fig . 3 . From Fig . 2 , within the stable branch , a smaller N c cor - responds to a smaller n 0 c , which leads to a larger equi - librium position ˜ x 0 c ( as deduced from Eq . ( 13 ) ) . Conse - quently , the detachment rate ˜ k off increases , as this is due to ˜ k off = ˜ k 0off exp (cid:16) ˜ κ c ˜ x c ˜ F b (cid:17) . When N c < N c , min and N c con - tinues to decrease , ˜ k off further increases , causing dn c d ˜ τ < 0 to always hold true , corresponding to no solution for Eq . ( 14 ) . This results in n c → 0 , and to balance the forces of myosin motors and the clutches , ˜ x c → ∞ , which is equivalent to the clutch mechanism being inoperative and unable to resist the retrograde motion of the actin . This region is marked as ‘N’ in Fig . 3 . FIG . 3 : Stability diagram of the N c − ˜ v u plane for the system . Regions marked with different letters represent distinct dynami - cal behaviors : ‘S’ represents stable , ‘SS’ indicates stable spirals , ‘US’ designates unstable spirals , and ‘U’ corresponds to unstable . The region marked ‘N’ signifies the non - existence of fixed points . Each dynamical stability region corresponds to a combination of eigenvalues . The stability at each point is determined by calculat - ing the eigenvalues of the Jacobian matrix for a linearly approxi - mated system , varying with changes in N c and ˜ v u . In this study , we utilized an extensive range for ˜ v u , spanning from 0 to 15 . The scope of our research on N c encompasses the range 0 − 20 . The phase boundaries lack specific analytical forms and are derived through numerical computations . The theoretical predictions are rigorously assessed through numerical solutions of the differential equations across the full spectrum of the parameter plane . Earlier experimental investigations [ 44 – 46 ] have estab - lished the force - velocity relationships of myosin and per - formed ensemble measurements of motor velocities under unloaded conditions . As ATP concentration increases , mo - tor velocities ˜ v u increase correspondingly , the system more likely to enter a stable state . This phenomenon elucidates the system’s propensity to attain a stable state at high ATP concentrations . At high motor velocities , the system maintains a stable state . However , with a decrease in motor velocity , the sys - tem transitions into a stable spiral state . In the SS region , the oscillations gradually decay with the increase in time . As ˜ v u progressively decreases , the system crosses into US re - gion of periodic oscillations . In the US region , the system exhibits a limit cycle around an unstable fixed point . As ˜ v u decreases , the transition from a stable fixed point to oscilla - tory behavior ( represented by the emergence of a stable limit cycle from an unstable fixed point ) is a hallmark of a super - critical Hopf bifurcation . Additionally , when motor velocity ˜ v u is very low , the system transitions from U region to US region upon an increase in N c . Considering that cells utilize the motor - clutch mechanism to probe their mechanical environment , we wonder how this 7 system would be influenced by substrate stiffness . When we simulate the motor - clutch system on compliant substrates , we classify the substrate stiffness into three distinct cate - gories based on its relationship with the ensemble clutch stiffness . Firstly , when the substrate stiffness k s = k c and is found to be less than the ensemble clutch stiffness , the condition is defined as a ‘soft substrate’ . Secondly , a ‘stiff substrate’ condition occurs when k s = 1 pN / nm , with the substrate stiffness exceeding that of the ensemble clutch stiff - ness . The maximum value of the ensemble clutch stiffness , n c k c , remains below 1 pN / nm , even as n c increases in re - sponse to variations in N c . Finally , the substrate stiffness k s is equivalent to the number of engaged clutches multi - plied by the individual clutch stiffness , namely k s = n c k c , which we define as a ‘matched substrate’ . In this context , the ensemble clutch stiffness precisely matches the substrate stiffness , indicating that the ensemble clutch and substrate , both having equal stiffness , are in series . Consequently , the overall stiffness becomes 12 n c k c . If the substrate is too soft , cells may not be able to effec - tively transmit forces , leading to compromised cell motility and signal transduction . On the other hand , if the sub - strate is too hard , while force transmission can be effective , it might negatively affect the cell’s flexibility and adaptabil - ity . A majority of theoretical studies [ 16 ] focusing on force transmission within clutch models , wherein substrate stiff - ness is adjusted , reveal a biphasic relationship between the stiffness of the substrate and the clutches . This biphasic correlation between the stiffness of the substrate and that of the clutches implies the existence of an optimal range of stiffness , within which cellular forces are transmitted most efficiently . Both excessively rigid or overly soft substrates may reduce the efficiency of force transmission . From Fig . 3 ( a ) , ( c ) , and ( e ) , we explore the influence of varying substrate stiffness on system stability . Our findings indicate that , for a soft substrate as shown in Fig . 3 ( a ) , it is notably difficult to achieve a transition from U to US by in - creasing N c at lower velocities 0 < ˜ v u < 1 . Conversely , with an increase in substrate stiffness , as shown in Fig . 3 ( c ) and ( e ) , we observe that at similar lower velocities ˜ v u , the system can transition from U to US , provided a sufficient number of clutches are available , by increasing N c . With the increase in substrate stiffness ˜ k s , the upper boundary of US becomes progressively steeper and more inclined . Concurrently , the area of US region expands , while U region diminishes . This elucidates that an increase in substrate stiffness leads to an expansion in the total area of the S and SS regions , thereby exerting a stabilizing effect on the system . In terms of effects , increasing the substrate friction coef - ficient and the enhancement of substrate stiffness both act to inhibit the movement of the substrate linkage . Compar - ing Fig . 3 ( a ) and ( b ) , ( c ) and ( d ) , as well as ( e ) and ( f ) , it can be observed that increasing substrate friction coefficient also exerts a stabilizing influence on the system . Particu - larly , Fig . 3 ( b ) employs a considerably large substrate vis - cous friction coefficient to simulate a condition wherein the substrate linkage is virtually immobilized . This is akin to the assumptions of the model in [ 31 ] , resulting in a similar stability distribution diagram . Next , we elucidate the impact of the ratio ˜ ω on system stability by investigating the N c − ˜ ω plane stability diagram . In Fig . 4 , with the constant N c , according to Eq . ( 10 ) , we observe that an increase in ˜ ω leads to an increase in n 0 m , the FIG . 4 : Stability diagram of the N c − ˜ ω plane . The distinction between ( a ) and ( b ) is the activity of the myosin motors ; specif - ically , the motors exhibit a higher velocity in ( a ) , with ˜ v u = 15 , while in ( b ) , the motor speed is lower , ˜ v u = 5 . force exerted by myosin n m ˜ k m ˜ y increases , causing d ˜ x c d ˜ τ > 0 in Eq . ( 7 ) and resulting in an increase in ˜ x c . This change is a response by the clutch mechanism to achieve equilibrium , implying that the force applied by the clutch should also increase . Moreover , the detachment rate ˜ k off increases accordingly . As ˜ ω exceeds ˜ ω max ( N c , ˜ F ) , dn c d ˜ τ < 0 consistently holds , corre - sponding to the absence of solutions for Eq . ( 14 ) . This leads to n c → 0 and ˜ x c → ∞ . The fixed point vanishes , and the system enters the N region . Except for the N region , when N c is fixed , an increase in ˜ ω leads to the system becoming more unstable . This indicates that an increase in ˜ ω results in a destabilizing effect on the system . In Fig . 4 ( a ) ( b ) , as ˜ ω increases , a Hopf bifurcation is ob - served during the transition from the SS state to the US state . FIG . 5 : Stability diagram of the ˜ k s − ˜ k c plane . In ( a ) , both N c and ˜ v u are significantly large . Conversely , in ( b ) , N c is set at 10 and ˜ v u at 1 . 7 , positioning this point close to the upper boundary of the US region in Fig . 3 ( a ) , where ˜ v u is comparatively lower . As shown in Fig . 5 , we investigate the impact of the clutch spring stiffness k c on the system’s stability through the sta - bility diagram in the ˜ k s − ˜ k c plane . Within the research scope depicted in Fig . 5 ( a ) , when both N c and ˜ v u are sufficiently large , the system remains stable regardless of variations in ˜ k s and ˜ k c ; it simply transitions back and forth between the S and SS regions . In Fig . 5 ( b ) , N c = 10 and ˜ v u = 1 . 7 , corresponding to a point near the SS and US boundary in Fig . 3 ( a ) , where ˜ v u is relatively low . We find that the clutch spring stiffness , ˜ k c , should not be too low . When the clutch stiffness is extremely low , the system remains unstable or enters a state of unstable spirals , regardless of variations in ˜ k s . In Fig . 5 ( b ) , when ˜ k s is fixed , an increase in ˜ k c enhances the propensity of the system towards stabilization . Conse - quently , ˜ k c plays a pivotal role in the stability of the system . In Fig . 6 , we investigate the impact of two viscous friction coefficients , Γ and γ , on the stability of the system . Upon comparing Fig . 6 ( a ) and Fig . 6 ( b ) , it is evident that an in - 8 FIG . 6 : Stability diagram of the Γ − γ plane . The difference between the two pictures ( a ) and ( b ) , is the stiffness of the sub - strate ; Fig . 6 ( a ) features a soft substrate , while Fig . 6 ( b ) features a stiff substrate . crease in substrate stiffness ˜ k s leads to a reduction in the U region . As the viscous friction coefficient Γ and the substrate friction coefficient γ decrease , the system becomes unstable or oscillatory , corresponding to the lower left region in the Fig . 6 . Particularly , when Γ is significantly low , that is , less than 10 − 4 k B Ts / nm 2 , the system becomes unstable or ex - hibits unstable spirals , regardless of the variations in γ . D . The Impact of Parameters on Fixed Points Due to the complexity of regulating force generation and the subsequent transmission process , understanding the role of each parameter in this process , as well as how they in - teract with one another , is crucial for a deep understanding of cellular mechanical behavior . Additionally , mechanical force measurements vary significantly at the cellular level [ 17 , 28 – 30 ] . Therefore , there is a need to discern the role of individual parameters on fixed points . Based on the ex - pressions of the fixed points Eq . ( 9 ) - ( 13 ) , we can analyze the influence of certain parameters on the fixed points . However , since the influence of some parameters cannot be intuitively analyzed through the analytical expressions , we also plot - ted the corresponding numerical trend graphs , as shown in Figs . 7 , 8 , and A3 . Combining the above two methods , we ultimately summarize the influence of each parameter on the fixed points in Tab . III . Specifically , the direct impact of various parameters on n 0 c , as suggested by Eq . ( 14 ) , presents a challenge for intuitive analysis through analytical means alone . To address this , we offer detailed trend graphs in Fig . 7 , providing a visual representation of these parameter influences . As depicted in Fig . 7 ( a ) , we observe that n 0 c increases with N c . When N c < 11 . 92 , the system is in state S ; when N c exceeds 11 . 92 , it enters the SS state . With a sufficient number of clutches available , the system transitions from state S to SS . In Fig . 7 ( b ) , n 0 c decreases slowly as N m increases . For N c = 10 , the system is in the S state when N m is below 123 ; it shifts to the SS state as N m falls between 123 and 150 . When N c = 20 , N m is consistently in state SS within the range [ 50 , 150 ] . Furthermore , in Fig . 7 ( c ) , n 0 c monotonically decreases with an increase in ˜ ω . For N c = 10 , the system is in state S when ˜ ω < 0 . 14 , transitioning to state SS beyond that threshold . Similarly , for N c = 20 , the S state is observed when ˜ ω is un - der 0 . 05 , with the SS state emerging thereafter . In Fig . 7 ( d ) , n 0 c monotonically decreases with an increase in k off / k on . For N c = 10 , the system remains in the S state across the en - tire range of [ 0 , 1 ] for ˜ k off / ˜ k on . At N c = 20 , it is in the SS state when ˜ k off / ˜ k on is below 0 . 78 , and transitions to the S state for values between 0 . 78 and 1 . Continuing to Fig . 7 ( e ) , n 0 c increases with an increase in ˜ F b . Lastly , in Fig . 7 ( f ) , n 0 c gradually decreases as ˜ f d increases . FIG . 7 : The impact of parameters variations on n 0 c within the S and SS regions . Light - colored lines represent the scenario at N c = 10 , while dark - colored lines are used for N c = 20 . Solid and dashed lines denote their nature as stable ( S ) and stable spirals ( SS ) , respectively . The expression for ˜ x 0 o includes n 0 c and n 0 m , which in turn are related to multiple parameters , making it difficult to dis - TABLE III : The influence of parameters on fixed points is de - picted in the table . An upward arrow ( ↑ ) indicates a monotonic increase , a downward arrow ( ↓ ) signifies a monotonic decrease , and a combination of an upward followed by a downward ar - row ( ↑↓ ) represents an influence that initially increases and then decreases . Conversely , a downward followed by an upward ar - row ( ↓↑ ) would represent an influence that initially decreases and then increases . A dash ( – ) indicates no influence . In this table , monotonicities derived directly from analytical expressions are represented by single arrows , whereas those determined through numerical plotting are denoted by double arrows to distinguish between the two methodologies . n 0 m n 0 c ˜ x 0 o ˜ y 0 ˜ x 0 s ˜ x 0 c ˜ ω ↑ ⇓ ⇑ – ↑ ⇑ N m ↓ ⇓ ⇑ – ↑ ⇑ N c – ⇑ ⇓ – – ⇓ ˜ k off / ˜ k on – ⇓ ⇑ – – ⇑ ˜ f s ↓ ⇓⇑ ⇑⇓ ↑ ↑↓ ⇑⇓ ˜ f d ↑ ⇓ ⇑ – ↑ ⇑ ˜ F b – ⇑ ⇓ – – ⇓ ˜ κ m – – – ↓ – – ˜ κ c – – ↓ – – ↓ ˜ κ s – – ↓ – ↓ – ˜ F – ↑ ↓ – ↓ ↓ 9 cern the individual effects of each parameter on ˜ x 0 o . To clarify these relationships , Fig . 8 presents trend graphs illustrating the influence of parameters . In Fig . 8 ( a ) , we can see that ˜ x 0 o monotonically decreases with an increase in N c . The system resides in the S state at lower N c values but transitions to the SS state upon exceeding a threshold of 11 . 92 . In Fig . 8 ( b ) , ˜ x 0 o monotonically increases with N m . Fig . 8 ( c ) shows that ˜ x 0 o monotonically increases with ˜ ω . Notably , as ˜ ω approaches 0 . 8 ( ˜ ω > 0 . 76 ) , we observe that the lighter line is shorter than the darker line , indicating that the system enters the unstable US state earlier . This implies that an increase in N c shortens the region of state S and lengthens that of SS , and as ˜ ω increases , systems with a smaller N c more readily enter the unstable US state . Fig . 8 ( d ) illustrates that ˜ x 0 o increases monotonically with ˜ k off / ˜ k on . Specifically , for N c = 10 , the system remains in the S state across the [ 0 , 1 ] range of ˜ k off / ˜ k on . For N c = 20 , the S state is observed for 0 . 78 < ˜ k off / ˜ k on < 1 , whereas the SS state is noted for 0 < ˜ k off / ˜ k on < 0 . 78 . In Fig . 8 ( e ) , ˜ x 0 o monotonically decreases as ˜ F b increases . With N c = 10 , the fixed point does not exist for ˜ F b < 0 . 27 . In the range of ˜ F b from 0 . 27 to 4 . 34 , the system consistently remains in the S state . For N c = 20 , the fixed point disappears when ˜ F b < 0 . 13 , and the system enters the SS state within the range [ 0 . 13 , 4 . 34 ] . Lastly , in Fig . 8 ( f ) , ˜ x 0 o monotonically increases with ˜ f d . FIG . 8 : The impact of variations in parameters on ˜ x 0 o within the S and SS regions . Light - colored lines denote the case at N c = 10 , whereas dark - colored lines correspond to N c = 20 . Solid lines indicate a stable ( S ) nature , while dashed lines represent stable spirals ( SS ) . Since the situation for ˜ x 0 c is analogous to that of ˜ x 0 o , the graphs for ˜ x 0 c are omitted here . Unlike the monotonic in - fluence observed with other parameters , ˜ f s exhibits a non - monotonic effect on the fixed points . Consequently , we specifically illustrate this unique impact through a graph , as demonstrated in Fig . A3 . E . The Analysis of the Unstable Spirals Region As previously mentioned , within the unstable spiral re - gion , there exists a stable limit cycle around an unstable fixed point , corresponding to the system’s periodic oscilla - tions . Here , we investigate how the frequency and ampli - tude of the limit cycle vary with the parameter ˜ v u within the unstable spiral region in Fig . 3 ( a ) . As shown in Fig . 9 , the frequency and amplitude of the limit cycles within the unstable spirals region are determined through numerical calculations . As depicted in Fig . 9 ( a ) and ( c ) , the oscillation frequency f increases with an increase in velocity ˜ v u , while it decreases as N c increases . In Fig . 3 ( a ) , on the upper boundary of the US region , where the real part of the complex conjugate roots α = 0 , the corresponding ˜ v u is a function of N c . This critical value of ˜ v u is denoted as ˜ v 0 u ( N c ) . When N c is fixed , if ˜ v u < ˜ v 0 u ( N c ) , then as ˜ v u decreases , the amplitude of ˜ y is proportional to (cid:112) ˜ v 0 u ( N c ) − ˜ v u , as shown in Fig . 9 ( d ) . As ˜ v u decreases , the amplitude of ˜ y increases , engendering increasingly pro - nounced oscillations and augmented system instability , ul - timately causing the system to enter the unstable region , as shown in Fig . 9 ( b ) . Simultaneously , the decrease in fre - quency f accompanies the decrease in ˜ v u , extending the os - cillatory periods . FIG . 9 : Frequency and amplitude of the limit cycle in the unsta - ble spirals region . We focus on the unstable spirals region ( US ) from Fig . 3 ( a ) . To enhance visibility , we narrow the range of the ˜ v u axis from 0 - 15 to 0 - 5 . ( a ) Heat map showing the variation of frequency f with changes in ˜ v u and N c , with the color gradient representing the frequency in hertz ( Hz ) . ( b ) Heat map depicting the variation of amplitude of ˜ y with ˜ v u and N c , with the color gradient representing the magnitude of amplitude . ( c ) Variation of frequency f with ˜ v u at fixed values of N c = 5 , 10 , and 15 . ( d ) Variation of amplitude of ˜ y with ˜ v u at fixed values of N c = 5 , 10 , and 15 . ( c ) and ( d ) provide detailed line profiles extracted from the heat maps in ( a ) and ( b ) , offering a more intuitive analysis at specific . To see this figure in color , go online . F . The Effect of External Load on Dynamical Systems Based on Fig . 10 , it is observed that the critical value N c , min is dependent on the external load ˜ F . Within the in - 10 terval 0 ≤ ˜ F < n 0 m ˜ f s , we note that N c , min monotonically de - creases to 0 as ˜ F increases . This figure incorporates ten dis - tinct lines which , following the direction of the arrows , cor - respond to gradually increasing external loads ˜ F = j 10 n 0 m ˜ f s , where j ranges from 0 to 9 . The starting point of this arrow corresponds to the external load of ˜ F = 0 , which is equiv - alent to the line in Fig . 2 . This facilitates a comprehensive visual representation of how N c , min is influenced by varying degrees of external load . 0 0 . 5 1 1 . 5 2 0 0 . 5 1 1 . 5 2 FIG . 10 : The influence of external load ˜ F on saddle - node Bifur - cation . The direction of the arrow in the figure represents the increasing direction of the external load ˜ F , where the starting point of this arrow corresponds to an external load ˜ F = 0 . Fol - lowing the direction of the arrow , each point corresponds to an external load ˜ F = j 10 n 0 m ˜ f s , where j ranges from 0 to 9 . According to Figs . 11 ( a ) and ( b ) , we observe that as the external load ˜ F increases , the region N , where the fixed point does not exist , gradually diminishes until it disap - pears . This is equivalent to the original image being trans - lated to the left . This phenomenon can be elucidated by referencing the balance equation n m ˜ k m ˜ y = n c ˜ k c ˜ x c + ˜ F . As ˜ F increases , it takes over a part of the force generated by myosin , leading to a reduction in the force borne by the clutch ; that is , ˜ x c becomes smaller . Consequently , the de - tachment rate ˜ k off decreases . According to the equation 0 = ˜ k on ( N c − n c ) − ˜ k 0off n c exp (cid:16) ˜ κ c ˜ x c ˜ F b (cid:17) , the corresponding critical value N c , min also decreases , hence the region N be - comes smaller . The diminution of the N region as ˜ F increases reflects the system’s adaptive response to external mechani - cal stimuli . Given that n 0 m varies with changes in ˜ ω , resulting in a vari - able ˜ F = n 0 m ˜ f s , a constant external load force is considered by setting ˜ ω = 1 . At this condition , the corresponding ˜ F ˜ w = 1 = N m 1 + exp (cid:16) ˜ f s / ˜ f d (cid:17) ˜ f s , thus facilitating a standardized analysis with external loads set at ˜ F = 12 ˜ F ˜ w = 1 and ˜ F = ˜ F ˜ w = 1 respectively . Figs . 10 ( c ) , ( d ) , and ( e ) , ( f ) correspond to the scenarios of Fig . 4 under external loads ˜ F = 12 ˜ F ˜ w = 1 and ˜ F = ˜ F ˜ w = 1 , re - spectively . Similarly , we observe the region N contracts and ultimately vanishes as the external load ˜ F increases , due to the critical value ˜ ω max ( N c , ˜ F ) increasing with ˜ F . As pre - viously mentioned , according to the balance equation , the increase in ˜ F leads to a diminution of the force endured by the clutch , resulting in a decrease in ˜ x c . Consequently , the detachment rate ˜ k off decreases , and n c increases . This in - dicates that an increase in ˜ F exerts a facilitative influence on clutch attachment , promoting the adhesion of a greater number of clutches . Now , with ˜ F offsetting a portion of this force , it implies that a greater force generated by myosin ( i . e . , an increase in n m ) is needed to equate the force experienced by the clutches to it original level , thereby achieving the crit - ical state value , corresponding to an increase in ˜ ω max ( N c , ˜ F ) . This phenomenon is manifested as the diminution of the N region . An increase in the external load ˜ F effectively substitutes for the clutches by sharing a portion of the force produced by myosin motors , resulting in a stabilizing effect and lead - ing to an expansion of the system’s region of stability . This occurs because the increase in force from myosin induces an increase in ˜ x c and consequently elevates ˜ k off , leading to an expedited detachment of the clutches . This is identified as the underlying cause for the disappearance of fixed points . The increase in ˜ F serves to mitigate this destabilizing influ - ence . FIG . 11 : The influence of external load ˜ F on system stability . ( a ) and ( b ) represent the stability diagrams at ˜ F = 12 n 0 m ˜ f s and ˜ F = n 0 m ˜ f s , respectively , for Fig . 3 ( a ) . ( c ) and ( d ) illustrate the stability diagrams for Fig . 4 under an external load ˜ F = 12 ˜ F ˜ w = 1 . ( e ) and ( f ) depict the stability diagrams for Fig . 4 with an external load ˜ F = ˜ F ˜ w = 1 . Furthermore , according to the fixed - point expressions Eq . ( 9 ) - ( 13 ) , we know that an increase in ˜ F affects the po - sition of the fixed points . To summarize , we find that an increase in the external load ˜ F primarily results in the re - duction of the N region , which is equivalent to a translation of the original image . 11 IV . CONCLUSION In this work , we introduce a five - dimensional nonlinear au - tonomous system for describing and simulating the dynamics of intracellular actomyosin activity , as well as the complex biomechanical interactions between the cell and its external environment . This system model is designed to investigate the influences of myosin , clutches , substrate , and external load on the system’s stability . Moreover , we explore the os - cillatory behavior within the unstable spiral region and ana - lyze the effects of various parameters on fixed points within both the stable and stable spiral regions . As predicted by previous models , myosin contractility is a key candidate for causing fluctuations due to its ability to induce spontaneous oscillations [ 23 ] . Moreover , there is experimental evidence of myosin’s role in the specific con - text of force fluctuations within individual focal adhesions ( FAs ) and in the regulation of migration and mechanosens - ing [ 21 , 47 , 48 ] . Through the proposed system , which is applicable across a wide range of experimentally relevant parameters , we validate the significant influence of myosin activity on oscillatory behaviors . We recognize that the prin - cipal factors which considerably influence the force fluctua - tions in FAs are myosin active velocity ˜ v u and the ratio ˜ w of motor attachment rate to motor detachment rate . Our model reproduces stick - slip type behavior at lower active velocities ˜ v u or when the ratio ˜ w is relatively high , and it successfully demonstrates self - sustaining oscillations known to occur within ( FAs ) [ 17 , 21 ] . In this study , we direct our attention to the unstable spirals region within the N c − ˜ v u plane , exploring the oscillation frequency and amplitude of the limit cycle . When ˜ v u falls below ˜ v 0 u ( N c ) , a reduction in ˜ v u results in an increase in the amplitude of ˜ y , which is directly proportional to (cid:112) ˜ v 0 u ( N c ) − ˜ v u , thus giving rise to more pronounced oscillatory behaviors . Concurrently , a de - crease in the oscillation frequency f is observed , leading to prolonged oscillatory periods . Within our study , the N region emerges under two dis - tinct conditions . The first condition arises when N c falls below a minimal threshold , specifically N c < N c , min . The second condition arises when ˜ ω exceeds its maximum allow - able value , satisfying ˜ ω > ˜ ω max ( N c , ˜ F ) . We discuss the stability of the dynamic system from four aspects : myosin motors , molecular clutches , compliant sub - strate , and external load . When solution exist , our findings indicate that an increase in the velocity of ˜ v u tends to en - hance the system’s stability . A higher ratio of ˜ ω leads to an increased number of attached motors n m , thereby augment - ing the force exerted by myosin and rendering the system more unstable . Furthermore , the lower the stiffness of the clutch , the more unstable the system becomes . Both substrate stiffness and substrate friction coefficient influence the system similarly by hindering the movement of substrate linkages . The smaller the substrate stiffness and substrate friction coefficient , the lesser the hindrance , mak - ing the system more unstable ; conversely , the greater the hindrance , the more easily the system stabilizes . Thus , aug - menting substrate stiffness and substrate friction coefficient plays a stabilizing role in the system’s dynamics . The external load influences the position of fixed points . The increase in ˜ F alleviates a fraction of the force exerted by myosin motors , thereby diminishing the force endured by the clutches . Within a certain range , an increase in ˜ F results in a diminishment and eventual disappearance of the N region , consequently expanding the area of regions where solutions exist . The presence of an external load or a substrate could change the timescales of attachment / detachment of myosin motors and clutch proteins [ 31 ] . This means that the exis - tence of a substrate or the application of an external load could accelerate or decelerate the dynamic interactions be - tween proteins , thereby influencing the cellular mechanisms of sensing and responding to the external environment . An external load applied to actin filaments affects the interac - tion between myosin and clutch proteins . The application of the external load slows down the detachment process of the clutch , thereby facilitating an increased adherence of clutch proteins . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This research is supported by the Science and Technology Commission of Shanghai Municipality ( 23JC1400501 ) and the Natural Science Foundation of China ( 12241103 ) . APPENDIX : COMPUTING THE JACOBIAN MATRIX ABOUT THE FIXED POINTS OF THE SYSTEM In this Appendix , we rewrite five - dimensional nonlinear system Eqs . ( 6 ) in vector form , d dτ    n m n c ˜ x o ˜ y ˜ x s    =    ˜ ω ( N m − n m ) − n m exp (cid:16) ˜ κ m ˜ y ˜ f d (cid:17) ˜ k on ( N c − n c ) − ˜ k off n c exp (cid:16) ˜ κ c ( ˜ x o − ˜ x s ) ˜ F b (cid:17) n m ˜ κ m ˜ y − n c ˜ κ c ˜ x c − ˜ F ˜ v u (cid:16) 1 − ˜ κ m ˜ y ˜ f s (cid:17) − (cid:16) n m ˜ κ m ˜ y − n c ˜ κ c ˜ x c − ˜ F (cid:17) Γ γ [ n c ˜ κ c ( ˜ x o − ˜ x s ) − k s ˜ x s ]    , ( A1 ) we denote the vector on the right - hand side of Eqs . ( A1 ) as the vector f , where its components are f 1 , f 2 , · · · , f 5 . To analyze the stability near fixed points , we perform a linear approximation of this five - dimensional nonlinear system . Below is the linear system we introduce . To distinguish it from the preceding nonlinear system , we rename the variables as 12 δn m , δn c , δ ˜ x o , δ ˜ y , δ ˜ x s , d dτ   δn m δn c δ ˜ x o δ ˜ y δ ˜ x s   = J   δn m δn c δ ˜ x o δ ˜ y δ ˜ x s   =   ∂f 1 ∂n m ∂f 1 ∂n c ∂f 1 ∂ ˜ x o ∂f 1 ∂ ˜ y ∂f 1 ∂ ˜ x s ∂f 2 ∂n m ∂f 2 ∂n c ∂f 2 ∂ ˜ x o ∂f 2 ∂ ˜ y ∂f 2 ∂ ˜ x s ∂f 3 ∂n m ∂f 3 ∂n c ∂f 3 ∂ ˜ x o ∂f 3 ∂ ˜ y ∂f 3 ∂ ˜ x s ∂f 4 ∂n m ∂f 4 ∂n c ∂f 4 ∂ ˜ x o ∂f 4 ∂ ˜ y ∂f 4 ∂ ˜ x s ∂f 5 ∂n m ∂f 5 ∂n c ∂f 5 ∂ ˜ x o ∂f 5 ∂ ˜ y ∂f 5 ∂ ˜ x s     δn m δn c δ ˜ x o δ ˜ y δ ˜ x s   . ( A2 ) We compute the Jacobian matrix about the fixed points of the system , J =   − ˜ ω − exp (cid:16) ˜ f s ˜ f d (cid:17) 0 0 − n 0 m ˜ κ m ˜ f d exp (cid:16) ˜ f s ˜ f d (cid:17) 0 0 − ˜ k on − ˜ k off exp (cid:16) n 0 m ˜ f s − ˜ F n 0 c ˜ F b (cid:17) − ˜ k off n 0 c ˜ κ c ˜ F b exp (cid:16) n 0 m ˜ f s − ˜ F n 0 c ˜ F b (cid:17) 0 ˜ k off n 0 c ˜ κ c ˜ F b exp (cid:16) n 0 m ˜ f s − ˜ F n 0 c ˜ F b (cid:17) ˜ f s − n 0 m ˜ f s − ˜ F n 0 c − n 0 c ˜ κ c n 0 m ˜ κ m n 0 c ˜ κ c − ˜ f s n 0 m ˜ f s − ˜ F n 0 c n 0 c ˜ κ c − ˜ v u ˜ κ m ˜ f s − n 0 m ˜ κ m − n 0 c ˜ κ c 0 Γ γ n 0 m ˜ f s − ˜ F n 0 c Γ γ n 0 c ˜ κ c 0 − Γ γ n 0 c ˜ κ c − ˜ κ s   . ( A3 ) 13 0 500 1000 1500 2000 0 2 4 Unstable Spirals ( US ) 0 500 1000 1500 2000 3 . 51 3 . 52 3 . 53 0 500 1000 1500 2000 140 160 180 0 500 1000 1500 2000 5 10 15 0 500 1000 1500 2000 120125130 0 500 1000 1500 2000 0 5 10 Unstable ( U ) 0 500 1000 1500 2000 1 2 3 0 500 1000 1500 2000 0 100 200 0 500 1000 1500 2000 0 1 2 0 500 1000 1500 2000 0 50 100 FIG . A1 : Four dynamical behaviors of the system as identified in Tab . II . In the different stability regions of the stability diagram on the N c − ˜ v u plane ( Fig . 3 ( a ) ) , we selected a point from each region and plotted the numerical solutions of the dynamical equations at these points to validate our predictions made by linear stability analysis . 14 FIG . A2 : Trajectory diagrams in the n m − ˜ x o plane and ˜ y − ˜ x o plane under SS and US states . FIG . A3 : The effect of variations in the parameter ˜ f s on the system’s fixed point within the stable region at N c = 20 . 15 [ 1 ] R . J . Petrie , A . D . Doyle , and K . M . Yamada . Random versus directionally persistent cell migration . Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology , 10 ( 8 ) : 538 – 549 , 2009 . [ 2 ] J . De Rooij , A . Kerstens , G . Danuser , M . A . Schwartz , and C . M . Waterman - Storer . Integrin - dependent actomyosin con - traction regulates epithelial cell scattering . The Journal of Cell Biology , 171 ( 1 ) : 153 – 164 , 2005 . [ 3 ] M . J . Paszek , N . Zahir , K . R . Johnson , J . N . Lakins , G . I . Rozenberg , A . Gefen , C . A . Reinhart - King , S . S . Margulies , M . Dembo , D . Boettiger , et al . Tensional homeostasis and the malignant phenotype . Cancer Cell , 8 ( 3 ) : 241 – 254 , 2005 . [ 4 ] H . Yamaguchi , J . Wyckoff , and J . Condeelis . Cell migration in tumors . Current Opinion in Cell Biology , 17 ( 5 ) : 559 – 564 , 2005 . [ 5 ] E . K . Paluch , I . M . Aspalter , and M . Sixt . Focal adhesion – independent cell migration . Annual Review of Cell and De - velopmental Biology , 32 : 469 – 490 , 2016 . [ 6 ] S . V . Plotnikov and C . M . Waterman . Guiding cell migration by tugging . Current Opinion in Cell Biology , 25 ( 5 ) : 619 – 626 , 2013 . [ 7 ] S . W . Moore , P . Roca - Cusachs , and M . P . Sheetz . Stretchy proteins on stretchy substrates : the important elements of integrin - mediated rigidity sensing . Developmental Cell , 19 ( 2 ) : 194 – 206 , 2010 . [ 8 ] C . E . Chan and D . J . Odde . Traction dynamics of filopodia on compliant substrates . Science , 322 ( 5908 ) : 1687 – 1691 , 2008 . [ 9 ] A . Elosegui - Artola , E . Bazelli ` eres , M . D . Allen , I . Andreu , R . Oria , R . Sunyer , J . J . Gomm , J . F . Marshall , J . L . Jones , X . Trepat , et al . Rigidity sensing and adaptation through regulation of integrin types . Nature Materials , 13 ( 6 ) : 631 – 637 , 2014 . [ 10 ] L . B . Case and C . M . Waterman . Integration of actin dynam - ics and cell adhesion by a three - dimensional , mechanosensi - tive molecular clutch . Nature Cell Biology , 17 ( 8 ) : 955 – 963 , 2015 . [ 11 ] A . Elosegui - Artola , X . Trepat , and P . Roca - Cusachs . Con - trol of mechanotransduction by molecular clutch dynamics . Trends in Cell Biology , 28 ( 5 ) : 356 – 367 , 2018 . [ 12 ] L . Blanchoin , R . Boujemaa - Paterski , C . Sykes , and J . Plas - tino . Actin dynamics , architecture , and mechanics in cell motility . Physiological Reviews , 94 ( 1 ) : 235 – 263 , 2014 . [ 13 ] G . Charras and E . Sahai . Physical influences of the extracel - lular environment on cell migration . Nature Reviews Molec - ular Cell Biology , 15 ( 12 ) : 813 – 824 , 2014 . [ 14 ] C . M . Lo , H . B . Wang , M . Dembo , and Y . L . Wang . Cell movement is guided by the rigidity of the substrate . Bio - physical Journal , 79 ( 1 ) : 144 – 152 , 2000 . [ 15 ] J . P . Califano and C . A . Reinhart - King . Substrate stiffness and cell area predict cellular traction stresses in single cells and cells in contact . Cellular and Molecular Bioengineering , 3 : 68 – 75 , 2010 . [ 16 ] A . Elosegui - Artola , R . Oria , Y . Chen , A . Kosmalska , C . P´erez - Gonz´alez , N . Castro , C . Zhu , X . Trepat , and P . Roca - Cusachs . Mechanical regulation of a molecular clutch defines force transmission and transduction in re - sponse to matrix rigidity . Nature Cell Biology , 18 ( 5 ) : 540 – 548 , 2016 . [ 17 ] S . V . Plotnikov , A . M . Pasapera , B . Sabass , and C . M . Wa - terman . Force fluctuations within focal adhesions mediate ecm - rigidity sensing to guide directed cell migration . Cell , 151 ( 7 ) : 1513 – 1527 , 2012 . [ 18 ] M . Gupta , B . R . Sarangi , J . Deschamps , Y . Nematbakhsh , A . Callan - Jones , F . Margadant , R . M . M ` ege , C . T . Lim , R . Voituriez , and B . Ladoux . Adaptive rheology and ordering of cell cytoskeleton govern matrix rigidity sensing . Nature Communications , 6 ( 1 ) : 7525 , 2015 . [ 19 ] P . W . Oakes , S . Banerjee , M . C . Marchetti , and M . L . Gardel . Geometry regulates traction stresses in adherent cells . Bio - physical Journal , 107 ( 4 ) : 825 – 833 , 2014 . [ 20 ] S . Dupont , L . Morsut , M . Aragona , E . Enzo , S . Giulitti , M . Cordenonsi , F . Zanconato , J . Le Digabel , M . Forcato , S . Bicciato , et al . Role of yap / taz in mechanotransduction . Nature , 474 ( 7350 ) : 179 – 183 , 2011 . [ 21 ] Z . Wu , S . V . Plotnikov , A . Y . Moalim , C . M . Waterman , and J . Liu . Two distinct actin networks mediate traction oscil - lations to confer focal adhesion mechanosensing . Biophysical Journal , 112 ( 4 ) : 780 – 794 , 2017 . [ 22 ] M . L . Gardel , I . C . Schneider , Y . Aratyn - Schaus , and C . M . Waterman . Mechanical integration of actin and adhesion dynamics in cell migration . Annual Review of Cell and De - velopmental Biology , 26 : 315 – 333 , 2010 . [ 23 ] S . W . Grill , K . Kruse , and F . J¨ulicher . Theory of mitotic spindle oscillations . Physical Review Letters , 94 ( 10 ) : 108104 , 2005 . [ 24 ] F . J¨ulicher and J . Prost . Cooperative molecular motors . Physical Review Letters , 75 ( 13 ) : 2618 , 1995 . [ 25 ] B . L . Bangasser and D . J . Odde . Master equation - based anal - ysis of a motor - clutch model for cell traction force . Cellular and Molecular Bioengineering , 6 : 449 – 459 , 2013 . [ 26 ] B . Sabass and U . S . Schwarz . Modeling cytoskeletal flow over adhesion sites : competition between stochastic bond dynamics and intracellular relaxation . Journal of Physics : Condensed Matter , 22 ( 19 ) : 194112 , 2010 . [ 27 ] B . L . Bangasser , S . S . Rosenfeld , and D . J . Odde . Determi - nants of maximal force transmission in a motor - clutch model of cell traction in a compliant microenvironment . Biophysical Journal , 105 ( 3 ) : 581 – 592 , 2013 . [ 28 ] L . Kurzawa , B . Vianay , F . Senger , T . Vignaud , L . Blanchoin , and M . Th´ery . Dissipation of contractile forces : the miss - ing piece in cell mechanics . Molecular Biology of the Cell , 28 ( 14 ) : 1825 – 1832 , 2017 . [ 29 ] R . Meili , B . Alonso - Latorre , J . C . Del Alamo , R . A . Firtel , and J . C . Lasheras . Myosin II is essential for the spatiotempo - ral organization of traction forces during cell motility . Molec - ular Biology of the Cell , 21 ( 3 ) : 405 – 417 , 2010 . [ 30 ] A . D . Rape , W . Guo , and Y . Wang . The regulation of trac - tion force in relation to cell shape and focal adhesions . Bio - materials , 32 ( 8 ) : 2043 – 2051 , 2011 . [ 31 ] D . Ghosh , S . Ghosh , and A . Chaudhuri . Deconstructing the role of myosin contractility in force fluctuations within focal adhesions . Biophysical Journal , 121 ( 9 ) : 1753 – 1764 , 2022 . [ 32 ] T . Yeung , P . C . Georges , L . A . Flanagan , B . Marg , M . Ortiz , M . Funaki , N . Zahir , W . Ming , V . Weaver , and P . A . Janmey . Effects of substrate stiffness on cell morphology , cytoskeletal structure , and adhesion . Cell Motility and the Cytoskeleton , 60 ( 1 ) : 24 – 34 , 2005 . [ 33 ] A . J . Engler , S . Sen , H . L . Sweeney , and D . E . Discher . Ma - trix elasticity directs stem cell lineage specification . Cell , 126 ( 4 ) : 677 – 689 , 2006 . [ 34 ] S . Stam , J . Alberts , M . L . Gardel , and E . Munro . Isoforms confer characteristic force generation and mechanosensation by myosin II filaments . Biophysical Journal , 108 ( 8 ) : 1997 – 2006 , 2015 . [ 35 ] G . H . Koenderink and E . K . Paluch . Architecture shapes contractility in actomyosin networks . Current Opinion in Cell Biology , 50 : 79 – 85 , 2018 . [ 36 ] M . J . I . M¨uller , S . Klumpp , and R . Lipowsky . Tug - of - war as a cooperative mechanism for bidirectional cargo transport by molecular motors . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 105 : 4609 – 4614 , 2008 . [ 37 ] Y . Zhang and M . E . Fisher . Dynamics of the tug - of - war model for cellular transport . Physical Review E , 82 : 011923 , 16 2010 . [ 38 ] G . I . Bell . Models for the specific adhesion of cells to cells : a theoretical framework for adhesion mediated by reversible bonds between cell surface molecules . Science , 200 ( 4342 ) : 618 – 627 , 1978 . [ 39 ] S . Walcott , D . M . Warshaw , and E . P . Debold . Mechani - cal coupling between myosin molecules causes differences be - tween ensemble and single - molecule measurements . Biophys - ical Journal , 103 ( 3 ) : 501 – 510 , 2012 . [ 40 ] M . J . Schnitzer , K . Visscher , and S . M . Block . Force produc - tion by single kinesin motors . Nature Cell Biology , 2 ( 10 ) : 718 – 723 , 2000 . [ 41 ] M . Dembo , D . C . Torney , K . Saxman , and D . Hammer . The reaction - limited kinetics of membrane - to - surface adhesion and detachment . Proceedings of the Royal Society of Lon - don . Series B . Biological Sciences , 234 ( 1274 ) : 55 – 83 , 1988 . [ 42 ] Z . Lansky , M . Braun , A . L¨udecke , M . Schlierf , P . R . Ten Wolde , M . E . Janson , and S . Diez . Diffusible crosslink - ers generate directed forces in microtubule networks . Cell , 160 ( 6 ) : 1159 – 1168 , 2015 . [ 43 ] G . F . Verduzco . The first lyapunov coefficient for a class of systems . IFAC Proceedings Volumes , 38 ( 1 ) : 1205 – 1209 , 2005 . [ 44 ] D . E . Harris and D . M . Warshaw . Smooth and skeletal muscle myosin both exhibit low duty cycles at zero load in vitro . Journal of Biological Chemistry , 268 ( 20 ) : 14764 – 14768 , 1993 . [ 45 ] E . P . Debold , J . B . Patlak , and D . M . Warshaw . Slip sliding away : load - dependence of velocity generated by skeletal mus - cle myosin molecules in the laser trap . Biophysical Journal , 89 ( 5 ) : L34 – L36 , 2005 . [ 46 ] E . P . Debold , M . A . Turner , J . C . Stout , and S . Walcott . Phosphate enhances myosin - powered actin filament velocity under acidic conditions in a motility assay . American Journal of Physiology - Regulatory , Integrative and Comparative Phys - iology , 300 ( 6 ) : R1401 – R1408 , 2011 . [ 47 ] M . J . Greenberg , G . Arpa˘g , E . T¨uzel , and E . M . Ostap . A perspective on the role of myosins as mechanosensors . Bio - physical Journal , 110 ( 12 ) : 2568 – 2576 , 2016 . [ 48 ] A . M . Pasapera , S . V . Plotnikov , R . S . Fischer , L . B . Case , T . T . Egelhoff , and C . M . Waterman . Rac1 - dependent phos - phorylation and focal adhesion recruitment of myosin IIA regulates migration and mechanosensing . Current Biology , 25 ( 2 ) : 175 – 186 , 2015 .