ª The Rockefeller University Press , 0021 - 9525 / 99 / 05 / 1009 / 18 $ 2 . 00 The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 145 , Number 5 , May 31 , 1999 1009—1026 http : / / www . jcb . org 1009 Arp2 / 3 Complex and Actin Depolymerizing Factor / Cofilin in Dendritic Organization and Treadmilling of Actin Filament Array in Lamellipodia Tatyana M . Svitkina and Gary G . Borisy Laboratory of Molecular Biology , University of Wisconsin , Madison , Wisconsin 53706 Abstract . The leading edge ( (cid:122) 1 (cid:109) m ) of lamellipodia in Xenopus laevis keratocytes and ﬁbroblasts was shown to have an extensively branched organization of actin ﬁlaments , which we term the dendritic brush . Pointed ends of individual ﬁlaments were located at Y - junctions , where the Arp2 / 3 complex was also localized , suggest - ing a role of the Arp2 / 3 complex in branch formation . Differential depolymerization experiments suggested that the Arp2 / 3 complex also provided protection of pointed ends from depolymerization . Actin depolymer - izing factor ( ADF ) / coﬁlin was excluded from the distal 0 . 4 (cid:109) m of the lamellipodial network of keratocytes and in ﬁbroblasts it was located within the depolymeriza - tion - resistant zone . These results suggest that ADF / coﬁ - lin , per se , is not sufﬁcient for actin brush depolymer - ization and a regulatory step is required . Our evidence supports a dendritic nucleation model ( Mullins , R . D . , J . A . Heuser , and T . D . Pollard . 1998 . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 95 : 6181 – 6186 ) for lamellipodial protrusion , which involves treadmilling of a branched actin array instead of treadmilling of individual ﬁlaments . In this model , Arp2 / 3 complex and ADF / coﬁlin have antago - nistic activities . Arp2 / 3 complex is responsible for inte - gration of nascent actin ﬁlaments into the actin network at the cell front and stabilizing pointed ends from depo - lymerization , while ADF / coﬁlin promotes ﬁlament dis - assembly at the rear of the brush , presumably by pointed end depolymerization after dissociation of the Arp2 / 3 complex . Key words : actin • Arp2 / 3 complex • actin depoly - merizing factor / coﬁlin • locomotion • treadmilling A CTIN dynamics play a central role in certain types of cell motility , primarily in protrusion of the leading edge of crawling cells ( for review see Welch et al . , 1997b ; Carlier , 1998 ) , but also in the rocketing motion of intracellular parasites ( for review see Higley and Way , 1997 ) . Polymerization at barbed ends of actin filaments has been proposed to provide the driving force for forward movement , while dissociation of actin subunits from free pointed ends allows for filament actin turnover . Interpretation of polymerization - driven protrusion in terms of a molecular mechanism depends upon knowledge of the length distribution and organization of the actin fila - ments . Structural evidence pointing to the existence of long actin filaments in lamellipodia ( Small , 1988 ) suggests a filament treadmilling model ( Small , 1994 , 1995 ) . In this model , based on behavior of actin filaments demonstrated initially in vitro ( Wegner , 1976 ; Pollard , 1986 ; Carlier and Pantaloni , 1997 ) , subunits are continuously added to the forward - facing barbed ends and are lost from the rear - fac - ing pointed ends . In contrast to actin polymerization , which occurs prefer - entially at the leading edge , actin depolymerization occurs uniformly throughout the entire actin filament array ( The - riot and Mitchison , 1991 , 1992 ) . According to the filament treadmilling model , depolymerization occurs only at free pointed ends . Therefore , actin filaments are proposed to have a graded length distribution , with their barbed ends concentrated at the leading edge and pointed ends distrib - uted throughout the cytoplasm ( Small , 1994 , 1995 ) . We recently studied the supramolecular organization of actin filaments in a model motility system , namely , lamellipodia of fish keratocytes ( Svitkina et al . , 1997 ) , and found a structural pattern differing significantly from the premise of the individual filament treadmilling model . Barbed ends were numerous near the leading edge , but we were unable to identify free pointed ends within the lamel - lipodium . Pointed ends , where they could be detected , were involved in structural association with the sides of other filaments , resulting in Y - junctions . We suggested that the Y - junctions arose as a result of tightly coupled nu - cleation and cross - linking of actin filaments at the leading edge ( Svitkina et al . , 1997 ) . Such coupling would allow na - scent filaments to push against the membrane immediately after formation and provide the structural basis for poly - merization - driven protrusion . In general , our findings on Address correspondence to Tatyana M . Svitkina , Laboratory of Molecu - lar Biology , Bock Laboratories , University of Wisconsin , 1525 Linden Drive , Madison , WI 53706 . Tel . : ( 608 ) 262 - 4581 . Fax : ( 608 ) 262 - 4570 . E - mail : tsvitkin @ facstaff . wisc . edu The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 145 , 1999 1010 the structural organization of the lamellipodial network sug - gest that actin dynamics at the leading edge should be dis - cussed in terms of the behavior of an integrated actin filament array , rather than of a collection of individual filaments . One recently characterized component , the Arp2 / 3 com - plex ( for review see Machesky , 1997 ; Machesky and Way , 1998 ; Zigmond , 1998 ; Machesky and Gould , 1999 ) , seemed to be a particularly good candidate for the role of Y - junc - tion linker in the formation of an integrated actin filament array . The Arp2 / 3 complex , originally identified in Acan - thamoeba castellanii ( Machesky et al . , 1994 ) , consists of ac - tin - related proteins 2 and 3 , and five other proteins ( Ma - chesky et al . , 1997 ; Mullins et al . , 1997 ; Welch et al . , 1997c ) . It localizes to the leading edge of crawling cells ( Kelleher et al . , 1995 ; Machesky et al . , 1997 ; Mullins et al . , 1997 ; Welch et al . , 1997c ) and is sufficient to induce actin polymerization at the surface of Listeria monocytogenes cells ( Welch et al . , 1997a ) . Biochemically , the Arp2 / 3 com - plex nucleates actin filaments ( Mullins et al . , 1998 ) and the nucleating activity is regulated by other proteins ( Welch et al . , 1998 ; Machesky et al . , 1999 ; Rohatgi et al . , 1999 ) . The complex also binds to the sides of actin filaments ( Mullins et al . , 1997 ) , caps pointed ends , and forms branched structures when mixed with actin filaments ( Mullins et al . , 1998 ) . Based on biochemical properties of the Arp2 / 3 complex , together with our previous structural data on the organiza - tion of the keratocyte lamellipodium ( Svitkina et al . , 1997 ) , Mullins et al . ( 1998 ) proposed a dendritic nucle - ation model for the mechanism of actin assembly in cell protrusions ( see also Machesky and Way , 1998 ) . The model proposes that the Arp2 / 3 complex nucleates new actin filaments , caps their pointed ends , and anchors them to the sides of pre - existing filaments , which results in as - sembly of a branched actin network . In contrast to the fila - ment treadmilling model , in which new growth occurs as elongation of pre - existing filaments ( Small , 1994 , 1995 ) , the dendritic model proposes formation of new actin fila - ments by nucleation on pre - existing filaments . Previously , even in situations where massive formation of new sites of polymerization was expected , e . g . , during chemotactic re - sponse , de novo nucleation was given less attention , as compared with two other mechanisms , uncapping or sev - ering of pre - existing filaments . Capping of pointed ends is an additional feature of the dendritic model . The amount of Arp2 / 3 complex in Acanthamoeba has been estimated to be sufficient to cap all pointed ends in the lamellipo - dium ( Mullins et al . , 1998 ) . Further , our structural investi - gation failed to reveal free pointed ends in the keratocyte lamellipodium ( Svitkina et al . , 1997 ) . These findings chal - lenge a critical assumption of the treadmilling model , namely , that pointed ends should be constitutively free to release actin subunits , thus allowing for actin turnover . Nevertheless , in any steady state mechanism , polymeriza - tion - driven protrusion at the leading edge must be bal - anced by depolymerization of actin filaments elsewhere . Consequently , a question directed to the dendritic model is how it may be adapted to explain the necessary depoly - merization . Actin depolymerizing factor ( ADF ) 1 / cofilin has been shown to play an important role in the depolymerization of actin filaments during actin - based motility ( for recent reviews see Theriot , 1997 ; Maciver , 1998 ; Rosenblatt and Mitchison , 1998 ) . Proteins of the ADF / cofilin family bind both G - and F - actin , but prefer ADP - bound forms ( Ma - civer and Weeds , 1994 ) . They enhance depolymerization by increasing the rate constant for actin dissociation from pointed ends ( Carlier et al . , 1997 ) and by severing actin fil - aments ( Maciver et al . , 1991 , 1998 ; Maciver , 1998 ) . The relative impact of these two pathways in vivo has not been established . In vivo , ADF / cofilin localizes to sites of inten - sive actin turnover ( Theriot , 1997 ; Rosenblatt and Mitchi - son , 1998 ) , including lamellipodia of crawling cells ( Bam - burg and Bray , 1987 ; Yonezawa et al . , 1987 ; Meberg et al . , 1998 ) , and facilitates actin turnover in Listeria tails in cyto - plasmic extracts ( Carlier et al . , 1997 ; Rosenblatt et al . , 1997 ) . ADF / cofilin may be regulated by multiple path - ways , such as phosphorylation , phosphoinositides , and pH ( for review see Moon and Drubin , 1995 ) . A role for ADF / cofilin is compatible with either the filament treadmilling model or the dendritic model , although the details of its structural organization and regulation are likely to differ . The available evidence points to the idea that the mech - anism of cell protrusion is driven by the polymerization of actin filaments organized in some sort of motile machin - ery . This study attempts to place likely key molecular reg - ulators into the emerging picture of actin filament organi - zation and to distinguish between the individual actin filament treadmilling model and the dendritic model . Spe - cifically , we investigate the supramolecular organization and dynamics of the actin filament network in lamellipo - dia of two different cell types , keratocytes and fibroblasts , which use similar mechanisms for protrusion , but express remarkable differences in motile behavior . The smooth , persistent locomotion of stably shaped keratocytes con - trasts with the jerky motion of ever changing fibroblasts . Comparison of these two cell types has the potential to re - veal common functional elements , as well as variables in the mechanisms of actin - based motility . A key finding is that the Arp2 / 3 complex is located at Y - junctions of actin filaments at the leading edge and that this complex pro - vides protection of pointed ends against depolymerization . Materials and Methods Cell Culture Xenopus laevis keratocytes were isolated and cultured basically as de - scribed by Bereiter - Hahn and Vöth ( 1988 ) . In brief , tails were amputated from anesthetized tadpoles at stages 48 – 55 ( Nieuwkoop and Faber , 1956 ) , cut into pieces with a razor blade , incubated in digestion solution ( 0 . 2 % trypsin and 0 . 2 % EDTA in PBS ) for 5 min , and rigorously pipetted . Large tissue pieces were allowed to settle and the supernatant cell suspension was collected . Cells were centrifuged to remove digestion solution , resus - pended in L - 15 medium ( Sigma Chemical Co . ) , diluted to 70 % with dis - tilled water , and supplemented with 20 % FBS ( HyClone Labs ) , 0 . 29 g / li - ter glutamine , and antibiotics plated onto glass coverslips and cultured at 27 (cid:56) C . After (cid:122) 1 h , cultures were washed free from unattached cells and de - bris , and used for experiments . A spontaneously immortalized cell line of Xenopus embryo fibroblasts obtained as in Daniolos et al . ( 1990 ) was provided by Dr . V . I . Rodionov ( University of Wisconsin , Madison , WI ) and cultured using the same me - dium and temperature as for Xenopus keratocytes . Human 356 fibro - blasts , rat REF - 52 , mouse MFT - 6 , and Swiss 3T3 cell lines were cultured as described in Verkhovsky et al . ( 1995 ) and Svitkina et al . ( 1996 ) . 1 . Abbreviations used in this paper : ADF , actin depolymerizing factor ; CD , cytochalasin D ; LA , latrunculin A ; PEG , polyethylene glycol ; XAC , Xenopus ADF / cofilin . Svitkina and Borisy Arp2 / 3 Complex and Cofilin in Lamellipodia 1011 Cytochalasin D ( CD ; Sigma Chemical Co . ) , latrunculin A ( LA ; Molec - ular Probes ) , or staurosporine ( Sigma Chemical Co . ) were added to cul - ture medium from concentrated stock solutions in DMSO . For recovery from serum starvation experiments , cells were kept in serum - free medium overnight and then returned to serum - containing medium . For energy starvation , cells were incubated for 30 min at 37 (cid:56) C in PBS supplemented with 1 mM MgCl 2 , 0 . 5 mM CaCl 2 , 10 mM NaN 3 , and 50 mM deoxyglucose ( Sigma Chemical Co . ) . Antibody Reagents The following antibodies were used for immunofluorescence and im - muno - EM . Arp2 / 3 complex : affinity - purified rabbit polyclonal antibodies prepared against mammalian Arp3 , p34 - Arc , and p21 - Arc ( Welch et al . , 1997c ) were kindly provided by Dr . M . D . Welch ( University of California , Berkeley , CA ) ; antibodies against mammalian p33 - Arc ( Machesky et al . , 1997 ) were provided by Dr . L . M . Machesky ( University of Birming - ham , Edgbaston , UK ) . Each of these antibodies was tested against lysates of Xenopus fibroblasts by immunoblot analysis and gave a single band of the predicted mobility ( results not shown ) . ADF / cofilin : affinity - purified rabbit polyclonal antibodies to Xenopus ADF / cofilin ( XAC ; Abe et al . , 1996 ; Rosenblatt et al . , 1997 ) were kindly provided by Dr . J . Rosenblatt ( University of California , San Francisco , CA ) and by Dr . J . R . Bamburg ( Colorado State University , Fort Collins , CO ) . We confirmed that these antibodies gave a single band by immunoblot analysis . ABP 280 : mouse mAbs to human ABP - 280 ( Gorlin et al . , 1990 ) were generously provided by Dr . J . Hartwig and Dr . T . Stossel ( Harvard Medical School , Boston , MA ) . This antibody did not cross - react with Xenopus and was used only with human fibroblasts . (cid:97) - Actinin : mouse mAb to (cid:97) - actinin was pur - chased from Sigma Chemical Co . Immunoblot analysis gave a single band with Xenopus lysates . Secondary antibodies : secondary TRITC - , FITC - , and 10 - nm gold - conjugated antibodies were purchased from Sigma Chem - ical Co . 18 - nm gold - conjugated anti – mouse IgM antibody was obtained from Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratories . Microscopy Procedures for detergent extraction , immunostaining , S1 decoration , light , and EM were described previously ( Svitkina et al . , 1995 , 1996 , 1997 ; Verkhovsky et al . , 1995 ; Svitkina and Borisy , 1998 ) . In brief , cells were washed in PBS and extracted for 3 min at room temperature with 1 % Tri - ton X - 100 in PEM buffer ( 100 mM Pipes , pH 6 . 9 , 1 mM MgCl 2 , and 1 mM EGTA ) containing 4 % polyethylene glycol ( PEG ) , mol wt 40 , 000 ( Serva ) , and either 0 . 5 (cid:109) M TRITC - phalloidin ( for light microscopy ) or 2 (cid:109) M phal - loidin ( for EM ; Sigma Chemical Co . ) . Extracted cells were briefly washed with the phalloidin - containing PEM buffer and fixed with 2 % glutaralde - hyde . For some experiments , PEG and / or phalloidin were omitted from the extraction procedure . PEG without phalloidin preserved lamellipodial network similar to the regular extraction . Decrease in PEG concentration from 4 to 1 % or less in the absence of phalloidin , produced gradual loss of actin filaments from lamellipodial rear ( see Results ) . Omitting PEG in the presence of phalloidin resulted in loss of granular material from lamellipo - dia , which is usually present in minor amounts , yet actin filaments seemed to be completely preserved . This granular material became abundant after LA treatment , and to a lesser extent , after CD treatment . Presumably , it represented insoluble forms of G - actin and might be similar to G - actin structures revealed after introducing fluorescently labeled actin into living cells ( Cao et al . , 1993 ; Ballestrem et al . , 1998 ) . To remove granular mate - rial obscuring F - actin distribution , we omitted PEG from the extraction solution for LA - and CD - treated cells . For some antibodies , we used modifications of the regular immu - nostaining procedure . The ABP - 280 antibody , which only worked with unfixed antigen , was applied in the PEM buffer containing phalloidin to extracted cells before glutaraldehyde fixation . For immunolocalization of XAC , we excluded phalloidin from the extraction solution to prevent competitive displacement of XAC from actin filaments . The presence of PEG , as we mentioned earlier , provided as good a quality of cytoskeleton preservation as phalloidin . For immunofluorescence microscopy with anti - bodies to Arp2 / 3 complex components , which worked only with dena - tured proteins , glutaraldehyde - fixed cytoskeletons were treated with 100 % methanol for 20 min at 37 (cid:56) C and rinsed with PBS before application of antibodies . This procedure provided the brightest staining , compared with lower concentrations of methanol , but at the electron microscopic level , it completely ruined filament structure . Therefore , for immuno - EM we used aqueous 33 % methanol instead of pure methanol , which pro - vided acceptable morphology and detectable immunoreactivity of sam - ples . Comparable results were obtained when glutaraldehyde - fixed cells were treated with 0 . 5 % SDS in Tris - buffered saline for 20 min at 37 (cid:56) C and rinsed with Tris - buffered saline before application of antibodies . All of the four Arp2 / 3 complex antibodies tested gave essentially identical im - munofluorescence patterns of staining . The immuno - EM reaction was of varying intensity , with the p21 - Arc antibody giving the strongest signal . In all cases , at both the light and electron microscopic levels , staining by sec - ondary antibody reagents alone was negligible ( not shown ) . Results Y - Junctions in the Actin Lamellipodial Network Results of our previous study on fish keratocytes ( Svitkina et al . , 1997 ) suggested that actin filaments were organized into a branched network similar to that proposed by the dendritic model ( Mullins et al . , 1998 ) . However , few anti - bodies are available which cross - react with components in fish cells . Consequently , to test the presence and deter - mine the distribution of predicted molecular constituents , we focused on the lamellipodial network in Xenopus kera - tocytes and fibroblasts , systems better suited for immu - nolocalization studies . Xenopus keratocytes had similar cytoskeletal organiza - tion to fish keratocytes . Actin filaments in lamellipodia ( Fig . 1 a ) formed an extensive network , with the highest filament density at the leading edge which gradually de - creased with distance from the edge . Assaying for actin fil - ament polarity using myosin S1 decoration demonstrated that barbed ends faced forward ( not shown ) as in fish keratocytes ( Svitkina et al . , 1997 ) . Although ultrastruc - tural observation , per se , does not permit one to say that actin filaments do not terminate in capping protein , for our operational purposes , their ends are designated as free if the filament did not terminate at another filament or any other visible structure . With this criterion , the most pe - ripheral zone ( up to (cid:122) 1 (cid:109) m from the leading edge ) was highly enriched in apparently free barbed ends , but some barbed ends were also found deeper in the lamellipodium . Many Y - junctions between filaments ( Fig . 1 , b – g ) , but no free pointed ends , were visualized within the lamellipo - dial network . As determined by quantification of visible Y - junctions per unit area on electron micrographs , Y - junc - tions were (cid:122) 2 – 3 times more abundant in the peripheral (cid:122) 1 (cid:109) m zone , as compared with the zone immediately be - hind this region , namely , 1 – 2 (cid:109) m from the leading edge . The real difference in Y - junction frequency between these zones may be even greater , since the number of Y - junc - tions near the edge was likely underestimated because of very high filament density in this region . Fibroblast lamel - lipodia ( Fig . 1 , h – o ) had the same basic features of actin network organization , but had qualitatively lower network density and fewer free barbed ends at the leading edge , as compared with keratocytes . Thus , both Xenopus kerato - cytes and vertebrate fibroblasts confirmed the existence of abundant Y - junctions near the leading edge of motile cells . The high filament density in lamellipodia hindered ob - servation of individual filaments for a significant distance and determination of the frequency of Y - junctions per unit length of filament . Occasionally , we could see several Y - junctions belonging to the same tree of actin filaments The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 145 , 1999 1012 and they were usually closely spaced , suggesting frequent branching of individual filaments ( Fig . 1 ) . To facilitate the visibility of branched filaments , we attempted to generate a sparser lamellipodial network by treatment with CD , which acts preferentially to cap barbed ends ( Brown and Spudich , 1981 ; Goddette and Frieden , 1986 ; Sampath and Pollard , 1991 ) . At low concentrations ( 0 . 2 – 0 . 5 (cid:109) M ) , CD gradually suppressed lamellipodial protrusion in kerato - cyte . TRITC - phalloidin staining of lamellipodia of CD - treated keratocytes revealed low and uniform actin den - sity from front to rear ( not shown ) in contrast to control cells displaying a pronounced gradient of actin staining ( Small et al . , 1995 ; Svitkina et al . , 1997 ; see also Figs . 3 and 8 ) . EM demonstrated a significantly sparser actin network in lamellipodia of CD - treated cells , permitting observation of individual filaments for a significant length and im - proved visualization of Y - junctions . Depending upon the concentration of CD and time of treatment , as well as on the response of individual cells , it was possible to find the entire range of variation from an almost normal lamellipo - dial network to a sparse collection of branched filaments ( Fig . 2 , a and b ) . The average angle subtended by a Y - junc - tion was 67 (cid:54) 12 (cid:56) ( n (cid:53) 212 ) , similar to that reported for Arp2 / 3 - nucleated branches in vitro ( 70 (cid:54) 7 (cid:56) ; Mullins et al . , 1998 ) . The spacing between adjacent Y - junctions was variable . However , many Y - junctions occurred within 20 – 50 nm of each other , indicating a high probability for branching near the leading edge . Some filaments appeared to have axial functions : they held numerous secondary fila - ments alongside . Assay for filament polarity ( not shown ) demonstrated that free ends were barbed , and pointed ends were involved in junction formation , as in untreated cells ( Svitkina et al . , 1997 ) . As in control preparations , no free pointed ends were identified in CD - treated lamellipo - dia . Since the actin network in CD - treated cells was suffi - ciently sparse to visualize free pointed ends if they were abundant , this observation suggests that free pointed ends were virtually absent or very transient . The high frequency of branching seemed remarkable . To test the possibility that frequent branching was artifac - tually induced by CD , we examined lamellipodia in other situations , which also allowed for better visualization of branched filaments . They included : short term release Figure 1 . Multiple branching of actin filaments in lamellipodia . EM of lamellipodia of Xenopus keratocytes ( a – g ) and fibroblasts ( h – o ) showing overviews of the leading edge ( a and h ) and enlargements of the boxed regions ( b – g and i – o ) . Many examples of filaments with tightly spaced multiple branches ( cyan ) can be visualized in lamellipodia despite the high overall density of the actin network . Bar , 0 . 5 (cid:109) m . Svitkina and Borisy Arp2 / 3 Complex and Cofilin in Lamellipodia 1013 from serum or energy starvation , which led to formation of nascent comparatively loose lamellipodia ; treatment with the actin monomer sequestering agent , LA ( for review see Ayscough , 1998 ) , which caused depolymerization of actin filaments in cells ; and cell lysis under conditions allowing for actin filament depolymerization . In all three experi - mental conditions , we were able to visualize filaments with multiple branches ( Fig . 2 , c and d ) and the spacing be - tween branches was similar to that observed in CD - treated cells . Again , free pointed ends were not observed . Thus , actin filaments in lamellipodia displayed frequent branches , which engaged virtually all detectable pointed ends into Y - junctions and left numerous barbed ends ap - parently free . Extensive filament branching was a general feature of lamellipodia in different situations , including expanding lamellipodia in starvation - release experiments , steady state conditions in untreated keratocyte lamellipo - dia , or declining protrusions after drug treatment . Identification of Y - Junction Linker Our next goal was to identify a molecule that localized to Figure 2 . Improved visualization of actin filament branching in lamellipodia . EM of keratocyte or fibroblast lamellipodial actin network after CD treatment ( a and b , 0 . 2 (cid:109) M for 30 min or 0 . 5 (cid:109) M for 10 min ) , 1 min recovery from serum starvation of a mouse fibroblast ( c ) , LA treatment ( 0 . 2 (cid:109) M for 10 min ) , or unprotected extraction ( d ) . All examples demonstrate frequent branching of actin filaments . Bars , 0 . 1 (cid:109) m ; b and d are shown at the same magnification as c . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 145 , 1999 1014 actin filament branch points . Arp2 / 3 complex seemed to be a primary candidate , but other cross - linking proteins which localize to lamellipodia , such as (cid:97) - actinin or ABP - 280 / filamin , were also possibilities . We performed immu - nolocalization of these proteins in keratocytes and fibro - blasts . Antibodies to various components of the mammalian Arp2 / 3 complex have been shown to stain lamellipodia in cultured cells of mammalian origin ( Machesky et al . , 1997 ; Welch et al . , 1997c ) . We found that they also stained lamellipodia in Xenopus cells ( Fig . 3 ) , but in fibroblasts , Arp2 / 3 complex was excluded from most filopodia ( Fig . 3 g , insets ) . The overall pattern of Arp2 / 3 staining at the electron microscopic level in keratocytes and fibroblasts ( Fig . 3 , d and h ) correlated with the results obtained by light micros - copy . The gold label was distributed all over the dense lamellipodial network and gradually declined toward the lamellipodial rear . The high density of the actin network , however , did not allow us to routinely attribute gold parti - cles to any specific filaments or branches . As before , we used CD treatment to visualize individual Y - junctions and Figure 3 . Localization of Arp2 / 3 complex in lamellipodia . ( a – c and e – g ) Fluorescence micros - copy of Xenopus keratocyte ( a – c ) or fibroblast ( e – g ) . Stain - ing with p21 antibody ( green ) and TRITC - phalloidin ( red ) shows ARP2 / 3 complex highly enriched in lamellipodia . Boxed region in g is enlarged in insets ; it shows several filopodia lack - ing and only one filopodium containing Arp2 / 3 complex . ( d and h ) Immuno - EM of lamelli - podia of Xenopus keratocyte ( d ) or fibroblast ( h ) stained with p21 primary antibody and 10 - nm gold - conjugated secondary anti - body after glutaraldehyde fixa - tion and SDS treatment of de - tergent - extracted cells . Gold particles are highlighted in yellow . Bars : ( a and e ) 10 (cid:109) m ; ( d and h ) 0 . 1 (cid:109) m . Svitkina and Borisy Arp2 / 3 Complex and Cofilin in Lamellipodia 1015 were able to stain branch points with antibody to p21 - Arc as a result ( Fig . 4 ) . Distinctly labeled branches were seen clearly in regions with very sparse filament distribution . More commonly , clusters of gold particles with short fila - ments sticking out were observed ( not shown ) . Such distri - bution of label would be predicted for multiple branches in close proximity to each other , as was observed ( see above ) . Not all visible branches in the specimen were la - beled , but incomplete labeling could be the result of a vari - ety of factors , including suboptimal immunoreactivity be - cause of the procedure used for structural preservation ( Materials and Methods ) . To test whether a fraction of branches was mediated by other proteins , we performed immunolocalization of (cid:97) - actinin and ABP - 280 , proteins which make side - to - side cross - links ( for review see Matsudaira , 1994 ) . Immuno - fluorescence of Xenopus fibroblasts and keratocytes with antibody to (cid:97) - actinin , and of human fibroblasts with anti - body to ABP - 280 ( Fig . 5 , a – c ) , revealed some lamel - lipodial staining , but it was not as prominent as staining of internally located actin structures . Compared with Arp2 / 3 complex , (cid:97) - actinin and ABP - 280 in lamellipodia were much less abundant with respect to actin content ( Fig . 5 , a (cid:57) – c (cid:57) ) . A similar relationship between (cid:97) - actinin and Arp2 / 3 complex distribution was found in Acanthamoeba ( Mullins et al . , 1998 ) . Immuno - EM of CD - treated cells with anti - body to (cid:97) - actinin and ABP - 280 demonstrated negligible staining of branched filaments near the leading edge ( Fig . 5 , e and f ) , but significant staining of internal actin net - works , predominantly at points of filament crossovers or Figure 4 . Localization of Arp2 / 3 complex at actin filament branching points . Xenopus keratocytes and fibroblasts were treated with CD ( 0 . 2 (cid:109) M for 30 min or 0 . 5 (cid:109) M for 10 min ) , extracted in the presence of phalloidin , fixed with glutaraldehyde , treated with 33 % metha - nol , and immunostained with p21 antibody followed by 10 - nm gold - conjugated secondary antibody . Gold particles are highlighted in yellow . Bar , 50 nm . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 145 , 1999 1016 juxtapositions ( Fig . 5 , h and i ) , which contrasted with the opposite pattern of Arp2 / 3 staining ( Fig . 5 , d and g ) . Thus , our data demonstrate that Arp2 / 3 complex is lo - cated at Y - junctions , implying that it plays a role in their formation or maintenance . The structural evidence for ABP - 280 and (cid:97) - actinin suggests that they are unlikely to play a significant role in branching near the leading edge . Their impact on filament cross - linking is likely to be ex - pressed more deeply in the cytoplasm . Protection of Pointed Ends from Depolymerization Involvement of pointed ends in Y - junction formation and localization of Arp2 / 3 complex at the same positions sug - gested that pointed end depolymerization in lamellipodia may be significantly blocked due to pointed end capping by the Arp2 / 3 complex ( Mullins et al . , 1998 ) . We tested depolymerization properties of the lamellipodial network using two approaches , cytoskeletal preparations and living cells . To allow for actin depolymerization in cytoskeletons , we omitted certain precautions in the process of detergent ex - traction , which are usually necessary to preserve the actin network in the lamellipodium . Our regular extracting solu - tion ( Svitkina et al . , 1995 ; Svitkina and Borisy , 1998 ) con - tains two protective agents to stabilize the actin network : a Figure 5 . Localization of cross - linking proteins in fibroblast cytoskeleton . ( a – c ) Fluorescence microscopy and corresponding intensity profiles ( a (cid:57) – c (cid:57) ) of Xenopus ( a and c ) or human 356 ( b ) fibroblast lamellipodia double stained with TRITC - phalloidin ( red ) and either p21 ( a and a (cid:57) ) , ABP - 280 ( b and b (cid:57) ) , or (cid:97) - actinin ( c and c (cid:57) ) antibodies ( green ) . The protein / actin ratio at the leading edge of the lamelli - podium is high for Arp2 / 3 complex ( a and a (cid:57) ) , medium for ABP - 280 ( b and b (cid:57) ) , and low for (cid:97) - actinin ( c and c (cid:57) ) compared with internal actin structures . ( d – i ) Immuno - EM of the cell edge ( d – f ) or interior ( g – i ) of CD - treated Xenopus ( d , f , g , and i ) or human 356 ( e and h ) fibroblasts stained with p21 ( d and g ) , ABP - 280 ( e and h ) , or (cid:97) - actinin ( f and i ) primary antibody and 10 - nm ( d , e , g , and h ) or 18 - nm ( f and i ) gold - conjugated secondary antibody . Gold particles ( yellow ) reveal Arp2 / 3 complex at Y - junctions at cell edge and ABP - 280 and (cid:97) - actinin at filament crossovers in the cell interior . Bars : ( a – c ) 1 (cid:109) m ; ( d – i ) 0 . 1 (cid:109) m . Svitkina and Borisy Arp2 / 3 Complex and Cofilin in Lamellipodia 1017 nonspecific stabilizer , PEG ; and a specific F - actin stabiliz - ing drug , phalloidin . In the absence of these chemicals , sig - nificant loss of actin filaments was observed in the rear of lamellipodia , whereas the peripheral zone ( (cid:122) 1 (cid:109) m ) at the leading edge remained almost as dense as in control cy - toskeletons ( Fig . 6 ) . This zone frequently looked barely connected to the rest of the cytoskeleton and usually con - tained numerous free barbed ends rendering it a brush - like appearance . Only a minor proportion of actin fila - ments seemed to be lost from this actin brush . CD ( 1 (cid:109) M ) , when added to the extraction solution to suppress depoly - merization from the barbed ends , did not prevent loss of actin filaments in the rear network ( not shown ) , although the density of the actin brush at the front was similar to Figure 6 . Structural differentiation of actin network in lamellipodium . EM of Xenopus keratocytes ( a – c ) or Xenopus fibroblasts ( d – f ) after regular extraction in the presence of PEG and phalloidin ( a and d ) or after unprotected extraction without PEG and phalloidin ( b , c , e , and f ) . Boxed areas from b and e are enlarged in c and f , respectively . Actin network at lamellipodial rear disassembled in the course of unprotected extraction , whereas front zone remained as dense as in control cells . Bar , 1 (cid:109) m . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 145 , 1999 1018 that of untreated cells . These results demonstrated that loss of actin filaments at the lamellipodial rear occurred mostly via pointed end depolymerization , whereas loss from barbed ends had only minor impact . In living cells , we used LA under conditions which shifted the actin steady state toward depolymerization , but did not completely block motility . Observations on living keratocytes by phase - contrast microscopy demonstrated that at concentrations of 0 . 3 (cid:109) M or higher , LA induced fast cessation of motility and collapse of lamellipodia ( not shown ) . At lower concentrations ( 0 . 1 – 0 . 2 (cid:109) M ) , protrusion of the keratocyte leading edge continued with a progres - sively slower rate ( Fig . 7 , A and B ) and eventually ceased , after which the cell body continued to migrate forward for a short time approaching the leading edge , similar to what has been reported for CD - treated keratocytes ( Anderson et al . , 1996 ) . Pseudopodial activity at cell edges persisted for up to 40 min , but became progressively irregular and frequently ended up with the formation of phase dense beads along the cell periphery . Thus , low level LA treat - ment permitted analysis of the pathway whereby seques - tration of actin subunits leads to cessation of leading edge protrusion . We studied actin filament organization in LA - treated keratocytes by TRITC - phalloidin staining and by EM . At the light microscopic level in most cells , which were still motile after LA treatment , the lamellipodium looked like a narrow band of phalloidin - stained actin at the cell edge , which was separated by a wide dark zone from internally located actin bundles , as if the lamellipodium ran away from the cell body ( Fig . 7 C ) . As the motility of the lamel - lipodium decreased and the cell body caught up , the dis - tance between the lamellipodium and the rest of the cy - toskeleton decreased . At late stages of LA treatment , actin was found only in bright spots along the cell periph - ery ( not shown ) . Figure 7 . Differential response of lamellipodial actin network to LA . ( A ) Phase - contrast sequence of a locomoting Xenopus keratocyte . After addition of 0 . 1 (cid:109) m LA at 9 min time point , the cell continued to translocate , retaining the crescent - like shape . ( B ) Plot showing rate of front edge protrusion versus time of the cell shown in A . LA addition ( arrow ) decreased rate of protrusion from (cid:122) 4 (cid:109) m / min be - fore LA application to 1 (cid:109) m / min at the end of the sequence . ( C ) Fluorescence microscopy of the boxed region of the cell shown in A , which was lysed at 34 min time point , fixed , and stained with TRITC - phalloidin . Actin - staining reveals narrow bright lamellipodium at the leading edge , separated by the wide actin - depleted zone from the internal actin structures . ( D and E ) EM of a Xenopus keratocyte ( D ) or Xenopus fibroblast ( E ) lamellipodium treated with LA ( D , 0 . 1 (cid:109) M for 30 min ; E , 0 . 25 (cid:109) M for 10 min ) reveals actin depletion from the lamellipodial rear . Bars : ( A ) 10 (cid:109) m ; ( D and E ) 1 (cid:109) m . Svitkina and Borisy Arp2 / 3 Complex and Cofilin in Lamellipodia 1019 At the electron microscopic level , the runaway lamelli - podium of an LA - treated keratocyte was very similar to the actin brush revealed by unprotected extraction . It was a dense , narrow ( 0 . 5 – 1 (cid:109) m ) band of actin network contain - ing numerous Y - junctions and free ends ( Fig . 7 D ) . In cells treated for a longer time and / or with higher concentra - tions of LA , discontinuous foci of the actin brush were found instead of a continuous brush . In fibroblasts , LA treatment gave basically the same results as in keratocytes . After (cid:122) 10 min in 0 . 1 (cid:109) M LA , numerous runaway lamelli - podia composed of dense actin network were formed ( Fig . 7 E ) . A possible mechanism for the formation of runaway lamellipodia is continued protrusion under nonsteady state conditions . Although the rate of actin polymerization is predicted to be decreased by LA , the rate of depolymer - ization would be unaffected , leading to an erosion of the brush from the rear . If actin filaments were free to depoly - merize throughout the lamellipodium , such imbalance would result in fast and complete disassembly of the entire lamellipodial network . Thus , our results on actin depolymerization in cytoskel - etons and in live cells demonstrated that actin filaments are protected from depolymerization within a narrow zone at the leading edge , but were susceptible to depolymeriza - tion farther away from the edge . The most likely mecha - nism of protection is capping of filament pointed ends by the Arp2 / 3 complex . In addition , our results with LA treatment revealed a possible minimal system for actin turnover . Under conditions of G - actin deficiency , cells progressively depolymerized actin from the rear of the lamellipodium retaining just a narrow , runaway actin brush . Progressive locomotion of such cells suggested that actin turnover can occur within this narrow zone . Localization of ADF / Cofilin in Lamellipodia Differential depolymerization of the lamellipodial actin network suggested a spatially regulated mechanism for ex - posing the pointed ends , which would allow for actin depo - lymerization at the lamellipodial rear . Exposure of the pointed ends may occur by dissociation of the Arp2 / 3 com - plex or by filament severing . The mechanism of actin fila - ment depolymerization in lamellipodia is likely to involve activity of ADF / cofilin . The exact mode of action of ADF / cofilin in cells ( pointed end depolymerization , severing , or both ) is not clear . If we assume that ADF / cofilin severs ac - tin filaments to expose pointed ends , then to explain local protection of the front actin brush from depolymeriza - tion we should expect ADF / cofilin to be excluded from the protected zone . Alternatively , if ADF / cofilin depoly - merizes actin filaments only from pointed ends , then bind - ing of ADF / cofilin to actin filaments within the protected area would not result in actin depolymerization until pointed ends were released . In this case , spatially regu - lated pointed end uncapping could be the rate - limiting mechanism for actin network disassembly . We performed immunolocalization of ADF / cofilin in keratocytes and fi - broblasts to get insight into this problem . Since we found differences between the two cell types , we present results for keratocytes and fibroblasts separately . Keratocytes . Immunofluorescence staining of kerato - cytes with antibody to XAC revealed XAC in lamellipodia ( Fig . 8 a ) , similar to what has been shown for other cells ( Bamburg and Bray , 1987 ; Yonezawa et al . , 1987 ; Meberg et al . , 1998 ) . However , upon double - staining with TRITC - phalloidin , we found a new feature of XAC distribution in keratocyte lamellipodia : exclusion of XAC from a narrow marginal zone . Immuno - EM demonstrated that XAC was absent from the most peripheral 0 . 3 – 0 . 7 (cid:109) m of the lamelli - podial actin network ( Fig . 8 , f – i ) . The intensity of XAC staining gradually declined toward the cell center and was at a minimum at the rear of the lamellipodium . The absence of XAC from actin filaments at the leading edge is consistent with in vitro data which indicate that ADF / cofilin does not bind to actin filaments with bound ATP or ADP and Pi ( Maciver et al . , 1991 ; Carlier et al . , 1997 ) . If this were the explanation , the length of the XAC - free zone would be a measure of the polymerization veloc - ity of actin filaments and hence , of the protrusive speed of the cell . To test for a possible relationship between the width of the XAC - free zone and the rate of keratocyte locomotion , we performed correlative light and immuno - EM of individual cells crawling at naturally varying speeds . To broaden the range of speed variations , we slowed cell lo - comotion by a protein kinase inhibitor , staurosporine ( 50 nM ) , or by decreasing serum concentration in the me - dium , and carried out a statistical analysis of the covaria - tion of cell speed and width of XAC - free zone . Surpris - ingly , no correlation between these two parameters was evident ( data not shown ) . All keratocytes in culture had XAC - free front zones , including cells locomoting at nor - mal rate ( Fig . 8 , f – i ) and round stationary cells , which were occasionally found in the culture ( not shown ) . The lack of correlation of the XAC - free zone with cell speed suggests that additional or alternative factors influence the binding of XAC to actin filaments . Unprotected extraction and LA treatment had the ef - fect of depolymerizing the bulk of cellular actin , although a lamellipodial brush survived . If ADF / cofilin binding was sufficient for actin depolymerization , surviving filaments would be predicted to be devoid of XAC . However , im - munostaining with XAC antibody showed that the depoly - merization - resistant brush obtained during unprotected extraction contained XAC at its rear ( Fig . 9 a ) . In LA - treated cells , XAC also localized to the posterior portion of the runaway lamellipodium leaving a narrow XAC - free zone at the front ( Fig . 9 , b and c ) . Since in LA - treated cells , the brush continued to move , these data suggest that the brush effectively treadmills with assembly of XAC - free actin filaments at the front and disassembly of XAC - containing filaments at the rear . Fibroblasts . Immunofluorescence also revealed XAC lo - calizing to lamellipodia of Xenopus fibroblasts ( Fig . 10 a ) . In contrast to keratocytes , no distinct XAC - free zone at fi - broblast leading edges was revealed in double staining with TRITC - phalloidin : both proteins were found all the way to the cell edge ( Fig . 10 , a – e ) . Only in rare cases was actin staining slightly extended beyond the XAC staining . Most filopodia were not stained with XAC antibody , but some of them were stained . Immuno - EM confirmed that XAC in fibroblast lamellipodia was distributed all the way to the periphery ( Fig . 10 i ) . The concentration of XAC was highest at the extreme outer margins of lamellipodia and gradually disappeared toward the rear . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 145 , 1999 1020 Since protrusion of lamellipodia in fibroblasts is not as persistent as in keratocytes and may frequently alternate with withdrawals , we performed correlative analysis of lo - comotory behavior and XAC staining of fibroblast lamelli - podia . In 13 examined cells , the vast majority of protrud - ing ( Fig . 10 , f – i ) or stationary lamellipodia , as well as ruffling lamellipodia , had XAC distributed all the way to the edge or very close ( within 0 . 1 (cid:109) m of the edge ) . Thus , Figure 8 . Localization of XAC in Xenopus keratocytes . ( a – e ) Fluorescence microscopy of a whole cell ( a – c ) and the intensity profile ( d ) of the enlarged lamellipodium ( e ) from the boxed region in c , double stained with XAC antibody ( green ) and TRITC - phalloidin ( red ) . XAC in lamellipodium is excluded from the narrow zone at the extreme leading edge . ( f ) Phase - contrast sequence of a locomoting cell ; time is shown in min . ( g – i ) Immuno - EM with XAC antibody of the cell shown in f , which was lysed and processed at 8 min time point . ( g ) Cell overview . ( h ) Intermediate magnification of the boxed region from g showing distribution of gold particles ( yellow ) in lamelli - podia . ( i ) High magnification of the boxed region from d showing leading edge . XAC is excluded from the extreme front of the lamelli - podium ( h and i ) . Bars : ( a and f ) 10 (cid:109) m ; ( h ) 10 (cid:109) m . Svitkina and Borisy Arp2 / 3 Complex and Cofilin in Lamellipodia 1021 XAC in fibroblast lamellipodia was found essentially throughout the depolymerization - resistant actin brush , as well as in the more labile rear parts of the lamellipodium . The difference between keratocytes and fibroblasts cannot be attributed simply to speed of protrusion . Although the net speed of a fibroblast cell is slow compared with that of a keratocyte , the speed of many fibroblast protrusions is comparable , (cid:122) 5 – 6 (cid:109) m / min . Again , the lack of evident cor - relation between protrusive speed and distribution of XAC suggests that factors in addition to ATP or ADP - Pi regulate the binding of ADF / cofilin to actin filaments . Discussion Properties of the Dendritic Actin Brush Our results indicate that the actin network at the leading edge of crawling cells , the dendritic brush , is distinctive in its structural organization , dynamics , and biochemical composition . Structurally , the brush is characterized by an extensively branched organization of actin filaments , with barbed ends facing approximately forward and pointed ends essentially all involved in Y - junctions . That barbed ends are enriched in the brush as compared with the rest of the lamellipodium is consistent with the idea that actin assembly occurs primarily within the dendritic brush . Fur - ther , the depth of the actin brush matches well with the depth of the zone , which has been demonstrated to incor - porate actin ( Symons and Mitchison , 1991 ; Chan et al . , 1998 ) . Pointed ends are more evenly distributed through - out the lamellipodium as compared with barbed ends , but they are more abundant in the actin brush . Remarkably , individual Y - junctions in the brush are frequently spaced by as little as several tens of nanometers . As a result , the dendritic brush contains numerous short filaments incor - porated into the actin array by Y - junctions , as well as a proportion of longer filaments which continue into the more internal lamellipodial regions . Dynamically , differential depolymerization experiments indicate that the dendritic brush is highly protected from disassembly . The fact that capping of barbed ends by CD during extraction did not significantly affect the differen - tial depolymerization of the lamellipodial network implies that depolymerization indeed occurs from pointed ends and that the status of pointed ends ( capped or uncapped ) is responsible for the differential behavior of the actin brush and the internal actin network . Remarkably , protec - tion of the actin brush from depolymerization does not in - terfere with its dynamic behavior . Indeed , cells which re - tained just the actin brush ( runaway lamellipodium ) and lost almost all the internal actin network were still able to locomote and therefore , to maintain continuous actin turnover within the actin brush . Thus , pointed end capping as a putative mechanism for protection of the actin brush from depolymerization is dynamic and probably regulated . Protection of newly formed barbed ends from capping , re - cently demonstrated in neutrophil extracts stimulated by Cdc42 ( Zigmond et al . , 1998 ) , may also have an impact for dynamic persistence of the actin brush in addition to pro - tection of pointed ends from depolymerization . Biochemically , the dendritic actin brush contains signifi - cant amounts of the Arp2 / 3 complex , which localizes specifically to Y - junctions , whereas other possible cross - linking proteins , (cid:97) - actinin and ABP - 280 , have their pre - dominant association with X - junctions deeper in the cyto - plasm . These results support the idea that the Arp2 / 3 complex is the major cross - linker in the actin brush and that it plays a role in stabilization of the actin brush by capping pointed ends ( Mullins et al . , 1998 ) . Another lamellipodium - specific protein , ADF / cofilin , which plays a Figure 9 . Localization of XAC to posterior regions of depolymerization - resistant actin brush . Electron ( a and c ) and fluorescence ( b ) microscopy of lamellipodia of Xenopus keratocytes after unprotected extraction ( a ) or LA treatment ( b , 0 . 15 (cid:109) M for 30 min ; c , 0 . 25 (cid:109) M for 10 min ) and subsequent staining with XAC antibody ( a and c ) or double staining with TRITC - phalloidin and XAC antibody ( b ) . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 145 , 1999 1022 role in actin depolymerization and thus has an antagonistic activity to the Arp2 / 3 complex , is not a uniform compo - nent of the actin brush . Depending on cell type , it may as - sociate with actin filaments throughout the brush , but it may also localize just to the brush’s posterior portion . We propose that ADF / cofilin is functionally regulated in the actin brush and performs actin depolymerization after dis - sociation of the Arp2 / 3 complex , predominantly in the lamellipodial network behind the brush region . Formation of the Dendritic Actin Brush The central problem of dendritic brush formation is the origin of side branches : actin filaments which have pointed ends associated with Arp2 / 3 molecules at sides of other fil - aments . Two different , although nonexclusive , possibilities may be considered for the location of the Arp2 / 3 complex at Y - junctions : Arp2 / 3 complex nucleates filaments de novo or Arp2 / 3 complex captures pointed ends of pre - existing filaments nucleated elsewhere . Filament nucle - Figure 10 . Localization of XAC in Xenopus fibroblasts . ( a – e ) Fluorescence microscopy of a cell fragment ( a – c ) and the intensity profile ( d ) of the enlarged lamellipodium ( e ) from the boxed region in c , double stained with XAC antibody ( green ) and TRITC - phalloidin ( red ) . XAC is distributed throughout the entire lamellipodium . ( f and g ) Phase - contrast sequence showing protruding lamellipodium of a motile cell ( f ) and the overview of the same cell ( g ) at 80 s time point . ( h and i ) Immuno - EM with XAC antibody of the cell shown in g . ( h ) Cell overview . Nucleus and surrounding regions look bright because of high content of cellular proteins , which creates high elec - tron density ( brightness in inverted contrast ) . Immunogold - labeling in these central regions is very low . ( i ) High magnification of the protruding region pointed to by arrow in h . Gold particles ( yellow ) revealing XAC localization are found at the extreme leading edge , as well as throughout the lamellipodia . Svitkina and Borisy Arp2 / 3 Complex and Cofilin in Lamellipodia 1023 ation mediated by the Arp2 / 3 complex residing on pre - existing filaments is proposed by the dendritic nucleation model ( Mullins et al . , 1998 ) and is supported by biochemi - cal data indicating that binding of the Arp2 / 3 complex to preformed filaments significantly increases its nucleating activity ( Machesky et al . , 1999 ) . However , filament nucle - ation by the Arp2 / 3 complex near the leading edge , fol - lowed by docking via the Arp2 / 3 complex onto pre - exist - ing filaments have not been formally excluded . In the second mechanism , the Arp2 / 3 complex residing on pre - existing filaments captures the pointed ends of filaments formed elsewhere , either new filaments nucleated near the leading edge by an Arp2 / 3 - independent mechanism or older fila - ments in the process of depolymerization . Constitutive locomotion similar to that expressed by keratocytes or Listeria theoretically could be maintained primarily by continuous elongation of pre - existing fila - ments . However , in many other systems actin - based motil - ity is characterized by frequent protrusion – withdrawal cy - cles , like in locomoting fibroblasts , or by explosive actin polymerization in response to external stimuli , e . g . , during chemotaxis . In such cases , generation of new sites for actin polymerization is unavoidable . In addition to nucleation , barbed end uncapping and filament severing ( Condeelis , 1993 ; Zigmond , 1996 ) have been proposed as mechanisms . Our data , together with a growing mass of evidence indi - cating a role for the Arp2 / 3 complex in filament nucleation ( Mullins et al . , 1998 ; Machesky et al . , 1999 ) , are most con - sistent with the de novo nucleation mechanism mediated by Arp2 / 3 complex resulting in the formation of the den - dritic brush . However , uncapping and severing mecha - nisms may also work in other systems or along with de novo nucleation ( Hartwig , 1992 ; Hartwig et al . , 1995 ; Scha - fer et al . , 1996 ; Eddy et al . , 1997 ) . Dendritic nucleation of actin filaments may require a mechanism to ensure that most face forward . Preferential growth of barbed ends , perhaps by involvement of plasma membrane - associated factors , is one possibility . Recent data showing a role for the Ena / VASP protein family in directional motility of Listeria , supposedly by keeping growing barbed ends in a correct position ( Laurent et al . , 1999 ) , is an example of such function . Additional possibilities include membrane - dependent regulation of nucleation or capping . The high frequency of branches in the dendritic brush carries implications for its dynamics and regulation . If each Y - junction in the brush indeed represents an individ - ual nucleation event , frequent branching is predicted to result in rapid , exponential growth of filament number , which may occur in expanding protrusions . However , ex - tensively branched filaments also were observed in appar - ently steady state protrusions , such as keratocyte lamelli - podia , suggesting that continuous de novo nucleation may be a constitutive mechanism for generating protrusions . One way to maintain steady state would be for most of the nucleated filaments to be capped soon after nucleation and only a small proportion of them continue to elongate and branch . This assumption is consistent with data show - ing that capping protein is localized at the leading edge ( Schafer at al . , 1998 ) , the vast majority of free barbed ends are capped ( Eddy et al . , 1997 ) , and stimulation of actin po - lymerization leads to association of capping protein with the cytoskeleton ( Barkalow et al . , 1996 ; Eddy et al . , 1997 ) . Although we have referred to free barbed ends in the den - dritic brush , our structural observations do not distinguish between ends free to grow and ends terminated by cap - ping protein . Frequent nucleation followed by capping should generate a significant number of short filaments , which is indeed what we observed in the actin brush . In - crease in filament number , but not in their length during stimulated actin polymerization ( Eddy et al . , 1997 ; Zig - mond et al . , 1998 ) , is also consistent with frequent nucle - ation as a pathway for actin polymerization . Estimates of a low average length of filaments in vivo ( (cid:44) 1 (cid:109) m ; Podolski and Steck , 1990 ; Cano et al . , 1991 ) are hard to explain oth - erwise . A nucleation - capping mechanism is attractive be - cause it offers considerable flexibility in terms of organiza - tion and level of actin polymerization , which could be controlled via activity of the Arp2 / 3 complex and / or cap - ping protein . Disassembly of the Dendritic Actin Brush Our working hypothesis is that the Arp2 / 3 complex pro - tects actin filaments in the dendritic brush from depoly - merization , whereas ADF / cofilin acts to promote disas - sembly of the actin network . Two mechanisms of ADF / cofilin action in actin disassembly have been described in vitro , facilitated release of actin subunits from the pointed end and severing ( Carlier et al . , 1997 ; Maciver , 1998 ; Ma - civer et al . , 1998 ) . Which mechanism ADF / cofilin uses in vivo and how antagonistic activities of ADF / cofilin and Arp2 / 3 complex are coordinated in cells are important questions for understanding actin turnover in lamellipodia . The extreme distal zone of keratocyte lamellipodia re - mains free of XAC , whereas the actin network toward the rear of lamellipodia is intensively stained by XAC anti - body . The mechanism for XAC exclusion from the kerato - cyte leading edge is not clear . One possibility is preferen - tial association of ADF / cofilin to ADP - bound forms of actin ( Maciver and Weeds , 1994 ; Carlier et al . , 1997 ) . Be - cause of the lag of ATP hydrolysis and Pi release following actin filament elongation , ADP - actin filament domains would not be present or would be less frequent at the ex - treme front . Such a mechanism implies almost synchro - nous growth of actin filaments at the keratocyte leading edge to account for the observed pattern of XAC staining . A different possibility suggests that some regulatory fac - tors affecting XAC may inhibit its binding to actin fila - ments at the cell front . Spatially confined phosphorylation of XAC , production of inhibitory phosphoinositides at the leading edge , and / or a pH gradient may restrain XAC from binding to actin filaments . Finally , we cannot exclude the possibility that XAC was lost from the leading edge of keratocytes during permeabilization . In contrast to kerato - cytes , XAC in fibroblast lamellipodia was found even at the extreme leading edge . The different pattern of XAC distribution in keratocytes and fibroblasts seems not to be related to the difference in the instantaneous rate of pro - trusion , as we showed by correlating rate of protrusion and localization of XAC for individual lamellipodia . Asyn - chronous growth of actin filaments at the fibroblast lead - ing edge or a different mode of regulation may permit XAC binding at the fibroblast leading edge . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 145 , 1999 1024 Despite apparently different mechanisms for determin - ing localization of XAC in two cell types , the presence of XAC within the actin brush in fibroblasts suggests that XAC binding to actin filaments is not sufficient for fila - ment disassembly . The same conclusion can be drawn from XAC staining of actin brush in keratocytes after un - protected extraction or after LA treatment . In these prep - arations , XAC binding to posterior parts of the depoly - merization - resistant actin brush demonstrates that the XAC - containing network and the network susceptible to depolymerization do not completely coincide . An XAC - independent step is consistent with the results of Rosen - blatt et al . ( 1997 ) who showed that excess of XAC in cyto - plasmic extracts was unable to shorten Listeria tails below a certain limit . These findings are hard to reconcile with a pure severing activity of XAC because rapid depolymer - ization would be expected to follow severing . The results more readily fit with the idea that severing activity of XAC is not significantly expressed in the actin brush in vivo . We suggest that XAC binds actin filaments within the actin brush and waits for the release of Arp2 / 3 com - plex to get a chance to facilitate subunit dissociation from pointed ends . In this framework , the XAC - independent step would be Arp2 / 3 dissociation from pointed ends , the signals for which remain to be determined . Actin Array Treadmilling Model Our data on the structural organization of the actin net - work at the leading edge and localization of the Arp2 / 3 complex at Y - junctions in vivo are fully consistent with the dendritic nucleation model ( Mullins et al . , 1998 ; Machesky et al . , 1999 ) concerning cross - linking and pointed end cap - ping activity of the Arp2 / 3 complex in vitro . Consequences of the dendritic model suggest a novel concept of actin turnover in lamellipodia in which the actin array as a whole treadmills , but not individual actin filaments , per se ( Fig . 11 ) . All polymer turnover mechanisms require a balance in the steady state of formation and disassembly . In the treadmilling filament model , each actin filament in the ac - tin network simultaneously adds subunits at its barbed end and releases subunits from its pointed end , thus continu - ously reproducing itself by balanced growth and disassem - bly . Treadmilling of individual filaments collectively re - sults in the treadmilling of the lamellipodial network . In contrast , in the array treadmilling model , an individual fil - ament does not treadmill , but rather first grows at the barbed end and later shrinks at the pointed end . However , the actin filament array as a whole treadmills , reproducing itself at the cell front and dismantling itself at the lamelli - podial rear . Formation of new filaments occurs by Arp2 / 3 - mediated nucleation , within a narrow zone at the leading edge , the dendritic actin brush . Newborn filaments be - come incorporated immediately into the actin array as branches of pre - existing filaments . Some of these nascent filaments continue to grow and branch , whereas others are predicted to be capped after a short period of elongation Figure 11 . Two treadmilling models for actin turnover in lamellipodia . Left , treadmilling of individual filaments suggests that each actin filament in the actin network simultaneously assembles subunits at its barbed end and releases subunits from the pointed end , thus continu - ously reproducing itself by treadmilling mechanism . Tread - milling of individual filaments collectively results in the tread - milling of the lamellipodial net - work . Right , treadmilling of the dendritic array suggests fre - quent formation of new fila - ments by de novo nucleation , which occurs within the narrow zone at the leading edge , the ac - tin brush . Newborn filaments become immediately incorpo - rated into the actin array as branches of pre - existing fila - ments . Within the actin brush , filaments are protected from de - polymerization at pointed ends . Nucleation , cross - linking , and pointed end capping are proposed to be mediated by the Arp2 / 3 complex . Many barbed ends are pre - dicted to be capped to prevent exponential increase in filament mass . Release of the Arp2 / 3 complex from Y - junctions behind the actin brush , followed by ADF / cofilin - mediated dissociation of actin subunits from pointed ends , may be a major pathway for actin array dis - assembly . By this model , an individual filament in the dendritic array does not treadmill , but rather first grows at the barbed end and later shrinks at the pointed end . However , the actin filament array as a whole treadmills , reproducing itself at the cell front and disman - tling itself at the lamellipodial rear . Growing barbed ends are shaded in gray . Svitkina and Borisy Arp2 / 3 Complex and Cofilin in Lamellipodia 1025 to prevent exponential increase in filament mass . Thus , in contrast to the individual filament treadmilling model which is characterized by low nucleation frequency and extensive filament growth , the array treadmilling model is characterized by high frequency of nucleation and limited filament growth . In the array treadmilling model , a de - branching reaction must exist to balance the branching re - action . The dendritic brush assembled at the leading edge is protected from depolymerization due to pointed - end capping activity of the Arp2 / 3 complex . Disassembly of ac - tin filaments is favored farther away from the leading edge through abrogation of the protection mechanism . De - branching of filaments would result from release of Arp2 / 3 complex from Y - junctions . Subsequently , depolymeriza - tion would result from ADF / cofilin - mediated dissociation of actin subunits from their pointed ends . Thus , the life cy - cle of an actin filament would consist of steps of nucleation with pointed - end capping , elongation , barbed - end cap - ping , pointed - end uncapping , and disassembly . Depending on the rate constants and probabilities of the individual steps , an actin filament could undergo repeated reactions of capping and uncapping , growth and shortening , branch - ing and debranching . Alternatively , it could arise as a new branch and undergo a single episode of growth balanced by a single episode of shortening at a later time . In con - trast to the stochastic life cycle of an individual filament , the array , consisting of a large number of filaments , on av - erage would add polymer continuously at its leading edge and disassemble polymer continuously toward the rear , re - sulting in a uniform treadmilling of the array as a whole . From the functional point of view , a dendritic brush of actin filaments at the leading edge of locomoting cells seems well designed for lamellipodial protrusion . First , the brush naturally can support massive actin polymerization because of the presence of numerous nucleating sites and the level of polymerization , in principle , can be readily controlled by regulation of the activity of the Arp2 / 3 com - plex and / or capping protein . Second , the brush is mechani - cally organized for efficient polymerization - driven force generation because of its high filament density , extensive cross - linking of actin filaments , and the angular orienta - tion of actin filaments ( Mogilner and Oster , 1996 ) . Finally , the brush is dynamically regulated so as to generate poly - merization - driven protrusion by an array treadmilling mechanism which may play a role in the persistence of lamellipodial protrusion and in the ability to adapt to change in direction . We thank Dr . Vladimir Rodionov for providing the Xenopus fibroblast cell line , Drs . Matt Welch , Laura Machesky , Jody Rosenblatt , James Bam - burg , John Hartwig , and Tom Stossel for generous gifts of antibodies , John Peloquin for help with immunoblot analysis , Dr . Alexander Verkhovsky for constructive discussions and critical reading of this manu - script , Steve Limbach for excellent light and electron microscope support , and Zoya Svitkina for assistance in analyzing live sequences . This work was supported by the American Cancer Society grant CB - 95 and the National Institutes of Health grant GM 25062 . Received for publication 17 March 1999 and in revised form 22 April 1999 . References Abe , H . , T . Obinata , L . S . Minamide , and J . R . Bamburg . 1996 . Xenopus laevis actin - depolymerizing factor / cofilin : a phosphorylation - regulated protein es - sential for development . J . Cell Biol . 132 : 871 – 885 . Anderson , K . I . , Y . - L . Wang , and J . V . Small . 1996 . Coordination of protrusion and translocation of the keratocyte involves rolling of the cell body . J . Cell Biol . 134 : 1209 – 1218 . Ayscough , K . 1998 . Use of latrunculin - A , an actin monomer - binding drug . Methods Enzymol . 298 : 18 – 25 . Ballestrem , C . , B . Wehrle - Haller , and B . A . Imhof . 1998 . Actin dynamics in liv - ing mammalian cells . J . Cell Sci . 111 : 1649 – 1658 . Bamburg , J . R . , and D . Bray . 1987 . Distribution and cellular localization of actin depolymerizing factor . J . Cell Biol . 105 : 2817 – 2825 . Barkalow , K . , W . Witke , D . J . Kwiatkowski , and J . H . Hartwig . 1996 . Coordi - nated regulation of platelet actin filament barbed ends by gelsolin and cap - ping protein . J . Cell Biol . 134 : 389 – 399 . Bereiter - Hahn , J . , and M . Vöth . 1988 . Ionic control of locomotion and shape of epithelial cells . II . Role of monovalent cations . Cell Motil . Cytoskel . 10 : 528 – 536 . Brown , S . S . , and J . A . Spudich . 1981 . Mechanism of action of cytochalasin : evi - dence that it binds to actin filament ends . J . Cell Biol . 88 : 487 – 491 . Cano , M . L . , D . A . Lauffenburger , and S . H . Zigmond . 1991 . Kinetic analysis of F - actin depolymerization in polymorphonuclear leukocyte lysates indicates that chemoattractant stimulation increases actin filament number without altering the filament length distribution . J . Cell Biol . 115 : 677 – 687 . Cao , L . G . , D . J . Fishkind , and Y . L . Wang . 1993 . Localization and dynamics of nonfilamentous actin in cultured cells . J . Cell Biol . 123 : 173 – 181 . Carlier , M . - F . 1998 . Control of actin dynamics . Curr . Opin . Cell . Biol . 10 : 45 – 51 . Carlier , M . - F . , and Pantaloni , D . 1997 . Control of actin dynamics in cell motil - ity . J . Mol . Biol . 269 : 459 – 467 . Carlier , M . - F . , V . Laurent , J . Santolini , R . Melki , D . Didry , G . X . Xia , Y . Hong , N . H . Chua , and D . Pantaloni . 1997 . Actin depolymerizing factor ( ADF / cofi - lin ) enhances the rate of filament turnover : implication in actin - based motil - ity . J . Cell Biol . 136 : 1307 – 1322 . Chan , A . Y . , S . Raft , M . Bailly , J . B . Wyckoff , J . E . Segall , and J . S . Condeelis . 1998 . EGF stimulates an increase in actin nucleation and filament number at the leading edge of the lamellipod in mammary adenocarcinoma cells . J . Cell Sci . 111 : 199 – 211 . Condeelis , J . 1993 . Life at the leading edge : the formation of cell protrusions . Annu . Rev . Cell Biol . 9 : 411 – 444 . Daniolos , A . , A . B . Lerner , and M . R . Lerner . 1990 . Action of light on frog pig - ment cells in culture . Pigm . Cell Res . 3 : 38 – 43 . Eddy , R . J . , J . Han , and J . S . Condeelis . 1997 . Capping protein terminates but does not initiate chemoattractant - induced actin assembly in Dictyostelium . J . Cell Biol . 139 : 1243 – 1253 . Goddette , D . W . , and C . Frieden . 1986 . Actin polymerization . The mechanism of action of cytochalasin D . J . Biol . Chem . 261 : 15974 – 15980 . Gorlin , J . B . , R . Yamin , S . Egan , M . Stewart , T . P . Stossel , D . J . Kwiatkowski , and J . H . Hartwig . 1990 . Human endothelial actin - binding protein ( ABP - 280 , nonmuscle filamin ) : a molecular leaf spring . J . Cell Biol . 111 : 1089 – 1105 . Hartwig , J . H . 1992 . Mechanisms of actin rearrangements mediating platelet ac - tivation . J . Cell Biol . 118 : 1421 – 1442 . Hartwig , J . H . , G . M . Bokoch , C . L . Carpenter , P . A . Janmey , L . A . Taylor , A . Toker , and T . P . Stossel . 1995 . Thrombin receptor ligation and activated Rac uncap actin filament barbed ends through phosphoinositide synthesis in per - meabilized human platelets . Cell . 82 : 643 – 653 . Higley , S . , and M . Way . 1997 . Actin and cell pathogenesis . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 9 : 62 – 69 . Kelleher , J . F . , S . J . Atkinson , and T . D . Pollard . 1995 . Sequences , structural models , and cellular localization of the actin - related proteins Arp2 and Arp3 from Acanthamoeba . J . Cell Biol . 131 : 385 – 397 . Laurent , V . , T . P . Loisel , B . Harbeck , A . Wehman , L . Grobe , B . M . Jockusch , J . Wehland , F . B . Gertler , and M . - F . Carlier . 1999 . Role of proteins of the Ena / VASP family in actin - based motility of Listeria monocytogenes . J . Cell Biol . 144 : 1245 – 1258 . Machesky , L . M . 1997 . Cell motility : complex dynamics at the leading edge . Curr . Biol . 7 : R164 – R167 . Machesky , L . M . , and M . Way . 1998 . Actin branches out . Nature . 394 : 125 – 126 . Machesky , L . M . , and K . L . Gould . 1999 . The Arp2 / 3 complex : a multifunctional actin organizer . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 11 : 117 – 121 . Machesky , L . M . , S . J . Atkinson , C . Ampe , J . Vandekerckhove , and T . D . Pol - lard . 1994 . Purification of a cortical complex containing two unconventional actins from Acanthamoeba by affinity chromatography on profilin - agarose . J . Cell Biol . 127 : 107 – 115 . Machesky , L . M . , E . Reeves , F . Wientjes , F . J . Mattheyse , A . Grogan , N . F . Totty , A . L . Burlingame , J . J . Hsuan , and A . W . Segal . 1997 . Mammalian ac - tin - related protein 2 / 3 complex localizes to regions of lamellipodial protru - sion and is composed of evolutionarily conserved proteins . Biochem . J . 328 : 105 – 112 . Machesky , L . M . , R . D . Mullins , H . N . Higgs , D . A . Kaiser , L . Blanchoin , R . C . May , M . E . Hall , and T . D . Pollard . 1999 . Scar , a WASP - related protein , acti - vates dendritic nucleation of actin filaments by the Arp2 / 3 complex . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 96 : 3739 – 3744 . Maciver , S . K . 1998 . How ADF / cofilin depolymerizes actin filaments . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 10 : 140 – 144 . Maciver , S . K . , and A . G . Weeds . 1994 . Actophorin preferentially binds mono - meric ADP - actin over ATP - bound actin : consequences for cell locomotion . FEBS Lett . 347 : 251 – 256 . Maciver , S . K . , H . G . Zot , and T . D . Pollard . 1991 . Characterization of actin fila - The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 145 , 1999 1026 ment severing by actophorin from Acanthamoeba castellanii . J . Cell Biol . 115 : 1611 – 1620 . Maciver , S . K . , B . J . Pope , S . Whytock , and A . G . Weeds . 1998 . The effect of two actin depolymerizing factors ( ADF / cofilins ) on actin filament turnover : pH sensitivity of F - actin binding by human ADF , but not of Acanthamoeba ac - tophorin . Eur . J . Biochem . 256 : 388 – 397 . Matsudaira , P . 1994 . Actin cross - linking proteins at the leading edge . Semin . Cell Biol . 5 : 165 – 174 . Meberg , P . J . , S . Ono , L . S . Minamide , M . Takahashi , and J . R . Bamburg . 1998 . Actin depolymerizing factor and cofilin phosphorylation dynamics : response to signals that regulate neurite extension . Cell Motil . Cytoskel . 39 : 172 – 190 . Mogilner , A . , and G . Oster . 1996 . Cell motility driven by actin polymerization . Biophys . J . 71 : 3030 – 3045 . Moon , A . , and D . G . Drubin . 1995 . The ADF / cofilin proteins : stimulus - respon - sive modulators of actin dynamics . Mol . Biol . Cell . 6 : 1423 – 1431 . Mullins , R . D . , W . F . Stafford , and T . D . Pollard . 1997 . Structure , subunit topol - ogy , and actin - binding activity of the Arp2 / 3 complex from Acanthamoeba . J . Cell Biol . 136 : 331 – 343 . Mullins , R . D . , J . A . Heuser , and T . D . Pollard . 1998 . The interaction of Arp2 / 3 complex with actin : nucleation , high affinity pointed end capping , and for - mation of branching networks of filaments . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 95 : 6181 – 6186 . Nieuwkoop , P . D . , and J . Faber . 1956 . Normal Tables of Xenopus laevis ( Dau - din ) . A Systematical and Chronological Survey of the Development from Fertilized Egg Till the End of Metamorphosis . North Holland Publishing Co . , Amsterdam . Podolski , J . L . , and T . L . Steck . 1990 . Length distribution of F - actin in Dictyoste - lium discoideum . J . Biol . Chem . 265 : 1312 – 1318 . Pollard , T . D . 1986 . Rate constants for the reactions of ATP - and ADP - actin with the ends of actin filaments . J . Cell Biol . 103 : 2747 – 2754 . Rohatgi , R . , L . Ma , H . Miki , M . Lopez , T . Kirchhausen , T . Takenawa , M . W . Kirschner . 1999 . The interaction between N - WASP and the Arp2 / 3 complex links Cdc42 - dependent signals to actin assembly . Cell . 97 : 221 – 231 . Rosenblatt , J . , and T . J . Mitchison . 1998 . Actin , cofilin and cognition . Nature . 393 : 739 – 740 . Rosenblatt , J . , B . J . Agnew , H . Abe , J . R . Bamburg , and T . J . Mitchison . 1997 . Xenopus actin depolymerizing factor / cofilin ( XAC ) is responsible for the turnover of actin filaments in Listeria monocytogenes tails . J . Cell Biol . 136 : 1323 – 1332 . Sampath , P . , and T . D . Pollard . 1991 . Effects of cytochalasin , phalloidin , and pH on the elongation of actin filaments . Biochemistry . 30 : 1973 – 1980 . Schafer , D . A . , P . B . Jennings , and J . A . Cooper . 1996 . Dynamics of capping pro - tein and actin assembly in vitro : uncapping barbed ends by polyphospho - inositides . J . Cell Biol . 135 : 169 – 179 . Schafer , D . A . , M . D . Welch , L . M . Machesky , P . C . Bridgman , S . M . Meyer , and J . A . Cooper . 1998 . Visualization and molecular analysis of actin assembly in living cells . J . Cell Biol . 143 : 1919 – 1930 . Small , J . V . 1988 . The actin cytoskeleton . Electron Microsc . Rev . 1 : 155 – 174 . Small , J . V . 1994 . Lamellipodia architecture : actin filament turnover and the lat - eral flow of actin filaments during motility . Semin . Cell . Biol . 5 : 157 – 163 . Small , J . V . 1995 . Getting the actin filaments straight : nucleation - release or treadmilling ? Trends Cell Biol . 5 : 52 – 55 . Small , J . V . , M . Herzog , and K . Anderson . 1995 . Actin filament organization in the fish keratocyte lamellipodium . J . Cell Biol . 129 : 1275 – 1286 . Svitkina , T . M . , and G . G . Borisy . 1998 . Correlative light and electron micros - copy of the cytoskeleton of cultured cells . Methods Enzymol . 298 : 570 – 592 . Svitkina , T . M . , A . B . Verkhovsky , and G . G . Borisy . 1995 . Improved procedures for electron microscopic visualization of the cytoskeleton of cultured cells . J . Struct . Biol . 115 : 290 – 303 . Svitkina , T . M . , A . B . Verkhovsky , G . G . Borisy . 1996 . Plectin sidearms mediate interaction of intermediate filaments with microtubules and other compo - nents of the cytoskeleton . J . Cell Biol . 135 : 991 – 1007 . Svitkina , T . M . , A . B . Verkhovsky , K . M . McQuade , and G . G . Borisy . 1997 . Analysis of the actin - myosin II system in fish epidermal keratocytes : mecha - nism of cell body translocation . J . Cell Biol . 139 : 397 – 415 . Symons , M . H . , and T . J . Mitchison . 1991 . Control of actin polymerization in live and permeabilized fibroblasts . J . Cell Biol . 114 : 503 – 513 . Theriot , J . A . 1997 . Accelerating on a treadmill : ADF / cofilin promotes rapid ac - tin filament turnover in the dynamic cytoskeleton . J . Cell Biol . 136 : 1165 – 1168 . Theriot , J . A . , and T . J . Mitchison . 1991 . Actin microfilament dynamics in loco - moting cells . Nature . 352 : 126 – 131 . Theriot , J . A . , and T . J . Mitchison . 1992 . Comparison of actin and cell surface dy - namics in motile fibroblasts . J . Cell Biol . 119 : 367 – 377 . Verkhovsky , A . B . , T . M . Svitkina , and G . G . Borisy . 1995 . Myosin II filament as - semblies in the active lamella of fibroblasts : their morphogenesis and role in the formation of actin filament bundles . J . Cell Biol . 131 : 989 – 1002 . Wegner , A . 1976 . A head to tail polymerization of actin . J . Mol . Biol . 108 : 139 – 150 . Welch , M . D . , A . Iwamatsu , and T . J . Mitchison . 1997a . Actin polymerization is induced by Arp2 / 3 protein complex at the surface of Listeria monocytoge - nes . Nature . 385 : 265 – 269 . Welch , M . D . , A . Mallavarapu , J . Rosenblatt , and T . J . Mitchison . 1997b . Actin dynamics in vivo . Curr . Opin . Cell . Biol . 9 : 54 – 61 . Welch , M . D . , A . H . DePace , S . Verma , A . Iwamatsu , and T . J . Mitchison . 1997c . The human Arp2 / 3 complex is composed of evolutionarily conserved sub - units and is localized to cellular regions of dynamic actin filament assembly . J . Cell Biol . 138 : 375 – 384 . Welch , M . D . , J . Rosenblatt , J . Skoble , D . A . Portnoy , and T . J . Mitchison . 1998 . Interaction of human Arp2 / 3 complex and the Listeria monocytogenes ActA protein in actin filament nucleation . Science . 281 : 105 – 108 . Yonezawa , N . , E . Nishida , S . Koyasu , S . Maekawa , Y . Ohta , I . Yahara , and H . Sakai . 1987 . Distribution among tissues and intracellular localization of cofi - lin , a 21 kDa actin - binding protein . Cell Struct . Funct . 12 : 443 – 452 . Zigmond , S . H . 1996 . Signal transduction and actin filament organization . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 8 : 66 – 73 . Zigmond , S . H . 1998 . Actin cytoskeleton : the Arp2 / 3 complex gets to the point . Curr . Biol . 8 : R654 – R657 . Zigmond , S . H . , M . Joyce , C . Yang , K . Brown , M . Huang , and M . Pring . 1998 . Mechanism of Cdc42 - induced actin polymerization in neutrophil extracts . J . Cell Biol . 142 : 1001 – 1012 .