Clathrin - mediated hemoglobin endocytosis is essential for survival of Leishmania Shruti Agarwal a , 1 , Ruchir Rastogi a , 1 , Deepika Gupta a , 1 , Nitin Patel a , Manoj Raje b , Amitabha Mukhopadhyay a , ⁎ a National Institute of Immunology , Aruna Asaf Ali Marg , New Delhi 110067 , India b Institute of Microbial Technology , Chandigarh 160036 , India a b s t r a c t a r t i c l e i n f o Article history : Received 20 October 2012 Received in revised form 21 December 2012 Accepted 8 January 2013 Available online 14 January 2013 Keywords : Leishmania Hemoglobin Traf ﬁ cking Clathrin Survival Chlorpromazine Leishmania is auxotroph for heme . Previously , we have shown that Leishmania acquire heme from the degra - dation of endocytosed hemoglobin via a speci ﬁ c receptor located in the ﬂ agellar pocket . Here , we report the cloning and expression of clathrin heavy chain from Leishmania ( Ld - CHC ) and provide evidences that Ld - CHC is localized in ﬂ agellar pocket and regulates Hb - endocytosis in Leishmania . Kinetic analysis of Hb traf ﬁ cking in GFP - Ld - CHC overexpressed Leishmania reveals that Hb is internalized through Ld - CHC coated region and re - mains associated with Ld - CHC containing vesicles at early time points of internalization and subsequently starts dissociating from Hb - containing vesicles at later time points indicating that clathrin - coating and uncoating regulate Hb traf ﬁ cking in Leishmania . Interestingly , overexpression of dominant negative mutant of clathrin heavy chain of Leishmania ( GFP - Ld - CHC - Hub ) blocks the Hb internalization and causes severe growth defect in parasite . Moreover , we have shown that chlorpromazine , a pharmacological agent , blocks Hb internalization in Leishmania by depolymerizing Ld - CHC and thereby inhibits the growth of the parasites . Taken together , our results have shown that Hb endocytosis in Leishmania is a clathrin dependent process and is essential for the survival of the parasites . © 2013 Elsevier B . V . All rights reserved . 1 . Introduction Endocytosis is a fundamental process by which cell acquires essen - tial nutrients and other molecules from the extra - cellular milieu [ 1 , 2 ] . This process is initiated by the binding of cargo with a speci ﬁ c cell sur - face receptor which is followed by their internalization and subsequent degradation inside the cells [ 3 ] . Previously , we have shown that hemo - globin ( Hb ) endocytosisin Leishmania ismediatedthrough aspeci ﬁ cre - ceptor locatedinthe ﬂ agellarpocket [ 4 , 5 ] . Our resultsindicate that after initial binding with the cell surface receptor , Hb is internalized into dis - crete intracellular compartment and subsequently targeted to the lyso - somal compartment for degradation . We have also shown that early step of Hb endocytosis in Leishmania is regulated by a Rab5 homologue whereas transport of Hb to the lysosomal compartment is controlled by Rab7 [ 6 , 7 ] . In addition , this receptor system appears to play a very signi ﬁ cant role in the biology of Leishmania as this parasite is unable to synthesize heme [ 8 ] and must acquire heme from external sources to sustain their growth [ 9 ] . Thus , the degradation of internalized Hb could be a source of heme for this parasite . However , it is not known whether Hb endocytosis in Leishmania is clathrin - dependent or clathrin - independent process . Among the different modes of endocytosis , the most well studied process is the clathrin - mediated endocytosis pathway [ 10 , 11 ] . Previous studies in mammalian cells have shown that during endocytosis the cy - toplasmic domain of the receptor is generally activated upon ligand binding and then interacts with endocytic adaptors which in turn , directly or indirectly bind to clathrin [ 12 – 15 ] . Cytosolic clathrin is com - posed of three heavy chains of 190 kDa radiatingfrom a central hub and each of them is associated with 25 - kDa light chain . These proteins to - gether form a three - legged protein complex called a triskelion which can self - assemble into a planar lattice of hexagons with the membrane [ 16 ] . Finally , appropriatesignalsgeneratedfromthecytoplasmicdomain of the receptor induce conversion of hexagons to pentagons and pro - vides the driving force for the invagination of the membrane to form clathrin coated pits [ 17 , 18 ] . However , previous studies have shown that clathrin hub fragment consisting of the carboxyterminal end of the clathrin heavy chain can trimerize and interact with clathrin light chains ; but fails to form into functional structures and thereby , clathrin hub fragment acts as a dominant negative mutant of clathrin [ 19 ] . Con - sequently , it has been shown that transfection of clathrin hub fragment speci ﬁ cally inhibits clathrin - dependent receptor - mediated endocytosis in mammalian cells [ 20 ] . However among various parasites , the role of clathrin in receptor - mediated endocytosis is partially characterized in Trypansoma using depletion of clathrin by RNA interference , though Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1833 ( 2013 ) 1065 – 1077 Abbreviations : Hb , hemoglobin ; HbR , hemoglobin receptor ; CHC , clathrin heavy chain ; CPZ , chlorpromazine ; Ld , Leishmania donovani ⁎ Corresponding author at : Cell Biology Lab , National Institute of Immunology , New Delhi 110067 , India . Tel . : + 91 11 26715012 , + 91 11 26703596 ; fax : + 91 11 26717104 . E - mail address : amitabha @ nii . res . in ( A . Mukhopadhyay ) . 1 Authors contributed equally to this work . 0167 - 4889 / $ – see front matter © 2013 Elsevier B . V . All rights reserved . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bbamcr . 2013 . 01 . 006 Contents lists available at SciVerse ScienceDirect Biochimica et Biophysica Acta journal homepage : www . elsevier . com / locate / bbamcr genome analysis reveals the presence of clathrin in Trypanosoma , Leishmania , Giardia and Dicstyostelium [ 21 – 24 ] . As hemoglobin endocytosis is physiologically very important for Leishmania , it will be interesting to determine the role of clathrin heavy chain in the endocytosis of hemoglobin in this parasite . Here , we report the cloning and expression of clathrin heavy chain in Leishmania and its role in hemoglobin endocytosis . Our results have also shown that de - polymerization of Leishmania clathrin by chlorpromazine , a drug , blocks hemoglobin endocytosis in Leishmania and inhibits the growth of the parasites demonstrating that clathrin - dependent hemoglobin endocyto - sis is essential for the survival of Leishmania . 2 . Materials and methods 2 . 1 . Reagents Unless otherwise stated , all reagents were obtained from Sigma Chemical Co . ( St . Louis , MO ) . Alexa Fluor 594 succimidyl ester , Alexa Fluor labeled goat anti - mouse IgG , FM4 - 64FX , Dextran - Texas Red ( 10 , 000 Da ) , Prolong antifade kit and other ﬂ uorescent dyes were pur - chased from Molecular Probes ( Eugene , OR ) . All HRP - labeled secondary antibodies were obtained from Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratories ( West Grove , PA ) . Tissue culture supplies were obtained from BD Biosciences ( Canaan , CT ) . pXG - GFP + 2 vector used for overexpression of Ld - CHC or its dominant negative mutant in Leishmania was received as a gift from Dr . S . M . Beverley ( Washington University , St . Louis , USA ) . Enhanced chemiluminescence ( ECL ) reagents were purchased from Amersham Biosciences ( Amersham , UK ) . Platinum Taq polymerase Hi - Fi and restriction enzymes were procured from Invitrogen and Promega ( USA ) , respectively . 2 . 2 . Leishmania Promastigotes of Leishmaniadonovani wereobtainedfromtheIndian Institute of Chemical Biology , Kolkata , India . The cells were maintained routinely on blood agar slants containing brain heart infusion agar , glu - cose , peptone , sodium chloride blood and gentamycin [ 25 ] . For experi - mental purposes , cells were grown in liquid medium M199 ( pH 7 . 4 ) supplemented with 10 % FCS and gentamycin ( 50 μ g / ml ) at 23 °C and log phase cells were harvested in 10 mM phosphate buffer saline , pH 7 . 2 ( PBS ) . 2 . 3 . Cloning and expression of clathrin heavy chain from Leishmania To clone the clathrin heavy chain ( CHC ) from L . donovani , the clathrin heavy chain sequence was identi ﬁ ed from L . major ( accession number LmjF36 . 1630 ) genome sequence . Appropriate forward ( 5 ′ - GC CAATTGTATGGACTCTCCTTCGATTTCTACG - 3 ′ ) and reverse ( 5 ′ - ATCAAT TGCTA GAAAGGCCGGCCAGA - 3 ′ ) primers were designed based on L . major CHCsequencetoamplifytheputativefulllengthclathrincoding sequence by RT - PCR using L . donovani cDNA . Brie ﬂ y , total RNA was iso - lated from Leishmania promastigotes using Trizol reagent ( Invitrogen ) and was used for cDNA synthesis using thermoscript Reverse Transcrip - tase ( Invitrogen ) accordingtomanufacturer ' sinstructions . Subsequently , PCR was performed using the above primers and Platinum HiFidelity Taq polymerase ( Invitrogen ) in a Perkin - Elmer thermocycler for 30 cy - cles ( denaturation at 94 °C for 30 s ; annealing at 65 °C for 30 s ; and ex - tension at 68 °C for 5 . 5 min ) . The ampli ﬁ ed product was cloned into pGEMT - Easy vector ( Promega ) , sequenced and determined the homol - ogy of the recombinant Ld - CHC with reported clathrin heavy chain sequences from the data base . Finally , the full length Ld - CHC was sub - cloned into pXG - GFP + 2 vector [ 26 ] at MunI restriction enzyme site for expression of Ld - CHC as N - terminus GFP tagged fusion protein in L . donovani . 2 . 4 . Generation of antibodies against Ld - CHC Speci ﬁ c antibody against Ld - CHC was raised against the C - terminal hub fragment spanning from 1261 to 1680 amino acids of Ld - CHC cod - ing region of Leishmania . First , C - terminal hub fragment was ampli ﬁ ed from L . donovani cDNA by RT - PCR using appropriate forward ( 5 ′ - GCGA ATTCGTATGAAGAAGGC CAAGTCGATCCACGCG - 3 ′ ) and reverse ( 5 ′ - GC GCGGCCGCCTAGAAAGGCCGGCCAGATCCG - 3 ′ ) primers . Finally , the PCR product was cloned into Eco RI / Not I sites of pGEX - 4T - 2 vector and transformed into Escherichia coli ( BL21 strain ) . Cells were induced with 0 . 5 mM isopropyl 1 - thio - β - D - galactopyrannoside for 3 h at 37 °C , and Ld - CHC as GST fusion protein was af ﬁ nity puri ﬁ ed as the manu - facturer ' s instruction ( Amersham Biosciences ) . After ensuring purity of Ld - CHC hub fragment by SDS - PAGE , mice were immunized with this protein to raise antibody using the procedure described previously [ 6 ] . Speci ﬁ city of the antibody against Ld - CHC was determined by Western blot analysis using Leishmania cell lysate . 2 . 5 . Overexpression of Ld - CHC in Leishmania promastigotes To overexpress Ld - CHC or its dominant negative mutant ( hub fragment of Ld - CHC ) in Leishmania as GFP fusion protein , Leishmania promastigotes were transfected with pXG - GFP + 2 containing appro - priate Ld - CHC construct using standard protocol [ 27 ] . Brie ﬂ y , Leishmania cells were grown to the late log phase and were resuspended at a density of 2×10 8 / ml in Cytomix buffer ( 120 mM KCl ; 0 . 15 mM CaCl 2 ; 10 mM K 2 HPO 4 ; 25 mM HEPES ; 2 mM EDTA and 5 mM MgCl 2 , pH 7 . 6 ) . Cells ( 0 . 5 ml ) were transferred to a pre - cooled electroporation cuvette along with chilled DNA construct ( 40 μ g ) , and electroporation was carried out at 25 μ F capacitance and 1500 V using a GenePulser ( Bio - Rad ) . Cells were then incubated on ice for 10 min and transferred into drug free M199 medium for 24 h at 23 °C . Subsequently , stable clones were selected in the pres - ence of G418 antibiotic ( 50 μ g / ml ) . Overexpression of the respective protein was con ﬁ rmed by Western blotting using antibody against GFP as well as by confocal microscopy . 2 . 6 . Localization of clathrin heavy chain in Leishmania promastigotes To determine the localization of endogenous clathrin in Leishmania , cells were harvested from liquid culture , washed , and ﬁ xed with 4 % paraformaldehyde . Subsequently , cells were permeabilized with 0 . 4 % saponin for 20 min and blocked with 2 % BSA in PBS for 30 min . Finally , cells were probed with anti - Ld - CHC antibody ( 1 : 200 ) in PBS containing 0 . 1 % saponin and 2 % BSA for 1 h at 23 °C . Cells were washed thrice with PBS and incubated with Alexa Fluor 488 - labeled goat anti - mouse sec - ondary antibody in the same buffer for 1 h at 23 °C . Cells were washed and viewed in an LSM 510 Meta confocal microscope using oil immer - sion objective . Similarly , Leishmania overexpressing GFP - Ld - CHC was also observed under a confocal microscope to ascertain the localization of clathrin as a GFP fusion protein . 2 . 7 . Intracellular traf ﬁ cking of hemoglobin in Leishmania To determine the kinetics of intracellular traf ﬁ cking of Hb in GFP - Ld - CHC overexpressed Leishmania , Hb was labeled with Alexa Fluor 594 ( Alexa - Hb ) as described previously [ 7 ] . Cells ( 1×10 7 cells / ml ) ex - pressing GFP - Ld - CHC were harvested , washed twice with ice - cold vPBS ( 136 . 9 mM NaCl , 3 mM KCl , 16 mM Na 2 HPO 4 , 3 mM KH 2 PO 4 , 45 . 9 mM sucrose and 10 mM glucose , pH 7 . 5 ) and incubated in vPBS containing Alexa - Hb ( 120 μ g / ml ) for 1 h at 4 °C to allow the cell surface binding . CellswerewashedtoremoveunboundAlexa - Hbandincubated for indicated periods of time at 23 °C in the same buffer . At respective times , cells were transferred onto ice and washed twice with chilled vPBS . Finally , cells were ﬁ xed with 2 % paraformaldehyde on ice for 20 min , washed with vPBS and visualized under confocal microscope 1066 S . Agarwal et al . / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1833 ( 2013 ) 1065 – 1077 ( Zeiss LSM 510 META ) . Similar experiments were also carried out using Leishmania overexpressing dominant negative mutant of clathrin heavy chain ( GFP - Ld - CHC - Hub ) or cells treated with chlorpromazine ( 1 μ M ) for 30 min at 23 °C . 2 . 8 . Endocytosis of FM4 - 64 and dextran by Leishmania To determine the role of clathrin in bulk endocytosis in Leishmania , we compared the traf ﬁ cking of FM4 - 64 in GFP - Ld - CHC and GFP - Ld - CHC - Hub overexpressed cells using previously described procedure [ 28 ] . Brie ﬂ y , cells ( 2×10 7 / ml ) were incubated in culture medium with 10 % FCS containing 2 μ g / ml FM4 - 64FX for 15 min at 23 °C . Cells were washed four times with cold PBS and further incubated in PBS for 60 min at 23 °C . Similarly , role of clathrin in ﬂ uid phase endocytosis in Leishmania was determined using dextran - Texas Red ( 10 , 000 Da ) . Brie ﬂ y , respec - tive cells ( 2×10 7 / ml ) were incubated in PBS containing dextran - Texas Red ( 1 mg / ml ) for 15 min at 23 °C . Cells were washed four times with cold PBS and further incubated in PBS for 60 min at 23 °C . Finally , cells were ﬁ xed and visualized under confocal microscope as described previously . 2 . 9 . Uptake and degradation of 125 I - Hb in Leishmania To determine the role of clathrin in Hb endocytosis in Leishmania , uptake and degradation of 125 I - Hb was measured in GFP - Ld - CHC overexpressed Leishmania along with untransfected control cells [ 4 ] . Brie ﬂ y , indicated numbers of cells were incubated with 6 μ g of 125 I - Hb in 1 ml of RPMI 1640 medium containing 1 mg / ml BSA for different periods of times at 23 °C . At respective times , cells were washed to re - move the unbound radioactivity and pellet was used to determine the cell - associated radioactivity . Trichloroaceticacid - soluble non - iodide ra - dioactivitypresentintherespectivemediumwasmeasured asdegrada - tion . Binding was determined by incubating the cells in the presence of 6 μ g / ml of 125 I - Hb at 4 °C for 2 h using similar procedure . Results were expressed as ng Hb per mg of cell protein . 2 . 10 . Determination of the growth of Leishmania To determine the effect of chlorpromazine on the growth of Leishmania , cells were treated with indicated concentrations of chlor - promazine and incubated for 24 h in the presence of [ 3 H ] - thymidine [ 7 ] . Brie ﬂ y , promastigotes from overnight grown culture were harvested , washed and resuspended in M199 medium containing 10 % FCS . Cells ( 10 6 cells in 200 μ l ) were allowed to grow in the presence or absence of indicated concentrations of chlorpromazine along with [ 3 H ] - thymidine ( 0 . 6 μ Ci / well ) for 24 h at 23 °C . Subsequently , cells were washed and harvested on ﬁ lter papers using a multi - well cell har - vester ( Wallac , Finland ) . Finally , the growth of the treated and untreated parasites was measured by determining the radioactivity in - corporated by respective cells using a beta plate liquid scintillation counter . Results are expressed as a percentage of growth of Leishmania . Similarly , growth of dominant negative mutant of clathrin ( GFP - Ld - CHC - Hub ) overexpressed Leishmania was compared with that of control cells . It is pertinent to mention that cells overexpressing GFP - Ld - CHC - Hub failed to grow in M199 medium containing 10 % FCS and cells were rescued by supplementing the medium with hemin ( Medium 199 containing 10 μ g / ml of hemin supplemented with 10 % FCS ) . Therefore , growth of Leishmania overexpressing dominant nega - tive mutant of clathrin heavy chain ( hub fragment ) was compared with that of control cells in modi ﬁ ed medium . 2 . 11 . Electron microscopy To determine the effect of overexpression of GFP - Ld - CHC and its dominant negative mutant on the morphology of ﬂ agellar pocket in Leishmania , cells ( 5×10 6 ) overexpressing respective protein were harvested from freshly grown culture , washed thrice with cold PBS and ﬁ xed in modi ﬁ ed Karnovsky ' s ﬁ xative , pH 7 . 3 . Fixed cells were washed twice with cacodylate buffer and treated with 1 % OsO 4 in cacodylate buffer for 2 h at 4 °C . Subsequently , the cells were rinsed and dehydrated in acetone and embedded in epoxy resin . Ultra - thin sections were double stained with uranyl acetate and lead citrate and examined on a Philips CM10 transmission electron microscope . To determine the morphology of Leishmania overexpressing GFP - Ld - CHC and its dominant negative mutant , cells were washed with PBS and immobilized on poly - L - Lysine coated coverslips before ﬁ xation in modi ﬁ ed Karnovsky ' s ﬁ xative . Subsequently , cells were dehydrated through graded series of alcohol ; transferred to tertiary - butyl alcohol , freeze dried and observed in a Carl Zeiss EVO 40 scanning electron microscope . 3 . Results 3 . 1 . Cloning and expression of clathrin heavy chain homologue from Leishmania To understand the role of clathrin in Hb endocytosis in Leishmania , we need to clone the clathrin heavy chain homologue from L . donovani . To clone clathrin heavy chain from L . donovani , a BLAST search was performed using Trypanosoma brucei sequence as a query , which iden - ti ﬁ ed a putative clathrin heavy chain - like sequence from L . major ge - nome showing 62 % homology to T . brucei sequence . Using appropriate forward and reverse primers , we ampli ﬁ ed a fragment ( 5082 bp ) from L . donovani cDNA by PCR ( Fig . 1A ) . The PCR product was cloned , sequenced and hypothetically translated into 1693 amino acid se - quence . Comparison of Ld - CHC sequence by CLUSTAL W multiple se - quence alignment demonstrated that the cloned protein has about 95 % similarity with L . major , 61 % with T . brucei , and 37 % with mamma - lian clathrin heavy chain sequences . The sequenceanalysis of the Ld - CHC revealed that thecloned protein hashighlyconservedclathrinheavychainrepeat ( CHCR ) motifs [ 16 ] and is subdivided into proximal , distal and terminal clathrin heavy chain do - mains ( Fig . 1B ) . C - terminal end of the Ld - CHC showed high homology with proximal domain of the clathrin heavy chain and the trimerization region was found between residues 1567 and 1631 . Clathrin hub frag - ment which acts as a dominant negative mutant of clathrin was found between residues 1261 and 1680 . Clathrin light chain binding site and trimerization domain of Ld - CHC also showed high homology with Lm - CHC , Tb - CHC and Hs - CHC sequences . Binding of Hs - CHC with clathrin light chain was shown to be mediated through the leucine ( L ) residues present at 1554 , 1570 and 1576 positions in the trimerization domainwhich were found tobe conserved inLd - CHC . Similarly , cysteine ( C1573 ) , phenylalanine ( F1566 ) and glutamate ( E1584 ) residues in Hs - CHC were shown to be critical for trimerization [ 29 , 30 ] . The results presented in the Fig . 1C showed that these residues are also present in Ld - CHC . N - terminal of Ld - CHC showed high homology with globular terminal domain of Hs - clathrin followed by ﬂ exible linker region . β - Arrestin binding site was found to be present between residues 51 and 101 in the terminal domain of Ld - CHC and showed 89 % and 72 % similarities with Tb - CHC and Hs - CHC sequences , respectively . Critical residues like Q89 , F91 and K100 involved in the β - arrestin binding site of Hs - CHC were also found to be conserved in Leishmania clathrin heavy chain ( Fig . 1D ) . Thus , sequence analysis revealed that the cloned protein is clathrin heavy chain homologue , from Leishmania . Additionally , a unique insertion sequence of 10 residues ( MAQKQDTDLN ) was ob - servedinthekneeregionofthedistaldomainofLd - CHClikeTb - CHC [ 31 ] . 3 . 2 . Intracellular localization of clathrin heavy chain in Leishmania To determine the intracellular localization of Ld - CHC , speci ﬁ c anti - body against Ld - CHC was raised using hub fragment of Leishmania 1067 S . Agarwal et al . / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1833 ( 2013 ) 1065 – 1077 clathrin heavy chain ( residues 1261 to 1680 ) . Western blot analysis showed that antibody against Ld - CHC speci ﬁ cally recognized a ~ 190 kDa protein from Leishmania lysate ( Fig . 2A ) . This antibody wasusedto detectthe localizationof endogenous clathrinin Leishmania promastigotes . The results presented in Fig . 2B ( upper panel ) showed thatendogenousclathrinis localized nearkinetoplast inthe anteriorre - gion of the cells , very close to the base of ﬂ agella . Hemoglobin receptor in Leishmania was shown to be localized in the ﬂ agellar pocket [ 4 ] , therefore , binding of Alexa - Hb at 4 °C was used to label the ﬂ agellar pocket . Signi ﬁ cant colocalization was observed between bound Hb and endogenous clathrin indicating that Ld - CHC is localized in the ﬂ a - gellar pocket of Leishmania promastigotes ( Fig . 2B , lower panel ) . 3 . 3 . Role of clathrin in intracellular traf ﬁ cking of Hb in Leishmania To determine the role of Ld - CHC in Hb traf ﬁ cking in Leishmania , Ld - CHC was overexpressed as GFP fusion protein in Leishmania using pXG - GFP + 2 vector and stable clones were selected in the presence of 5kb 3kb 1kb 1 2 C D Ld - CHC 51 LVIVDLEK - RESIRNNVKDAESCIMNPKSKTLALRSGRNL Q V F DVDASRRP K 101 Lm - CHC 51 LVIVDLEK - RESIRNNVKDAESCIMNPKSKILALRSGRNL Q V F DVDASRRL K 101 Tb - CHC 51 LVIVDLGK - RESMRNSIRDAESAIMNPMAKILALRSGRNL Q I F DVDAANRL K 101 Hs - CHC 50 VVIIDMNDPSNPIRRPIS - ADSAIMNPASKVIALKAGKTL Q I F NIEMKSKM K 100 : * * : * : . : . : * . : * : * . * * * * : * : * * : : * : . * * : * : : : : * A B Fig . 1 . Cloningandexpressionofclathrinheavychainfrom Leishmania . A . A5082 bpfragment ( lane2 ) wasampli ﬁ edfrom L . donovani cDNAbyPCRusingappropriateforwardandreverse primers as described in Materials and methods . Lane 1 represents 1 kb DNA ladder . The sequence of Ld - CHC is submitted to GenBank database under accession no . JQ400149 . B . Hypo - thetical translation of the obtained sequence into protein revealed that Ld - CHC shows signi ﬁ cant similarity with different structural domains of human ( accession no . Q00610 ) and Trypanosoma ( accessionno . AJ278858 ) clathrinheavychains . Therelativelocationsofterminaldomain , distaldomain , proximaldomain , trimerizationregion , lightchainbindingregion , clathrinhubfragmentand β - arrestinbindingsiteinLd - CHCareindicated . Percentagesimilarity / identityofdifferentdomainsofLd - CHCwith L . major ( Lm ) , T . brucei ( Tb ) andhuman ( Hs ) areshownbeloweachdomain . C . SequencealignmentofclathrintrimerizationdomainofLd - CHCwithLm - CHC , Tb - CHCandHs - CHC . Arrowsindicateaminoacidresiduespreferentially implicated in light chain binding and arrow heads indicate amino acid residues involved in trimerization and light chain binding . D . Sequence homology of β - arrestin binding sites ( 51 – 101 ) of Ld - CHC with Lm - CHC , Tb - CHC and Hs - CHC . Critical residues involved in the β - arrestin binding are indicated in bold . 1068 S . Agarwal et al . / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1833 ( 2013 ) 1065 – 1077 G418 antibiotic . Confocal analysis of GFP - Ld - CHC overexpressing Leishmania revealed that like endogenous protein , GFP - Ld - CHC is also predominantly colocalized with bound Hb ( Fig . 3A ) . In addition , our results also showed that GFP - Ld - CHC partially colocalizes with LPG2 , a Golgi marker in Leishmania ( Supplementary Fig . 1 ) . The overexpression of GFP - Ld - CHC in Leishmania was also con ﬁ rmed by Western blot analysis of the cell lysates using anti - GFP antibody ( Fig . 3B ) . Subsequently , we analyzed the traf ﬁ cking of Alexa - Hb in GFP - Ld - CHC overexpressing Leishmania by confocal microscopy . The re - sults presented in Fig . 3C ( upper panel ) showed that 5 min after in - ternalization , Hb is predominantly colocalized with GFP - Ld - CHC and remains partially associated with GFP - Ld - CHC labeled structure till 15 min ( middle panel ) of Hb internalization in the parasites . Interest - ingly , Hb was found to be dissociating from GFP - Ld - CHC after about 30 min of internalization and complete dissociation was observed after 45 min ( lower panel ) of internalization of Hb into Leishmania . We also measured the kinetics of uptake and degradation of 125 I - Hb at 23 °C in GFP - Ld - CHC overexpressed cells . Our results demonstrated that clathrin overexpression stimulated about 2 . 5 folds higher uptake of Hb in the cells overexpressing GFP - Ld - CHC in comparison to the con - trol cells . Similarly , degradation of internalized Hb in GFP - Ld - CHC overexpressing cells was alsofound tobe about4 foldshigher thancon - trol cells ( Fig . 3D ) . These results demonstrated that overexpression of clathrin triggers the overall endocytosis of Hb in Leishmania . 3 . 4 . Overexpression of dominant negative mutant of Ld - CHC alters the morphology of the ﬂ agellar pocket of Leishmania As endocytosis in Leishmania is mediated through ﬂ agellar pocket , we overexpressed the dominant negative mutant of Ld - CHC ( GFP - Ld - CHC - Hub ) in Leishmania using pXG - GFP + 2 vector and compared the morphology of ﬂ agellar pocket of Leishmania overexpressing GFP - Ld - CHC - Hub with control cells . Overexpression of GFP - Ld - CHC - Hub was found to be lethal to parasites . We assumed that this growth defect could be due to the unavailability of heme from Hb degradation ; there - fore , we supplemented the growth medium with hemin . Addition of hemin in the growth medium allowed the growth of GFP - Ld - CHC - Hub expressed cells at slower rate . Finally , stable clones were selected in the presence of G418 antibiotic in the modi ﬁ ed medium . In contrast A 220kDa 97kDa 66kDa 45kDa B Fig . 2 . Localization of Ld - CHC in Leishmania . A . Speci ﬁ c antibody against Ld - CHC was raised as described in Materials and methods . Western blot analysis showed that antibodies against Ld - CHC speci ﬁ cally recognized a ~ 190 kDa protein from Leishmania lysate ( 80 μ g ) . Results of Western blots are representative of three independent preparations . B . To de - termine the localization of endogenous clathrin in Leishmania , cells were ﬁ xed and permeabilized with saponin as described in Materials and methods . Ld - CHC was labeled with anti - Ld - CHC antibody and visualized using Alexa Fluor 488 - labeled goat anti - mouse secondary antibody . Green shows the localization of Ld - CHC . In the upper panel , nucleus ( Nu ) andkinetoplast ( K ) of Leishmania werelabeledwithpropidiumiodide andappearinred . Inthelowerpanel , cellswereincubatedwithAlexa - Hbat4 °Cfor1 htolabel ﬂ agellar pocket of Leishmania and subsequently endogenous CHC were labeled with anti - Ld - CHC antibody as described previously . Cells were analyzed by confocal microscopy and the images represent an x / y plane after Z - stack analysis where Hb appears in red , green shows Ld - CHC and yellow indicates the colocalization of Hb with Ld - CHC . Results are repre - sentative of three independent preparations . 1069 S . Agarwal et al . / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1833 ( 2013 ) 1065 – 1077 to localization of GFP - Ld - CHC , dominant negative mutant GFP - Ld - CHC - Hub was found to be dispersed throughout cytosol in Leishmania ( Fig . 4A ) . As endocytosis in Leishmania is mediated through ﬂ agellar pocket , we labeled the ﬂ agellar pocket of GFP - Ld - CHC or its mutant expressing cells by incubating respective cells in the presence of ﬂ uorophore N - ( 3 - triethylammoniumpropyl ) - 4 - { 6 - [ 4 - ( diethylamino ) phenyl ] - hexatrienyl } pyridinium dibromide ( FM4 - 64 ) at 4 °C for 5 min . Our results showed that ﬂ agellar pocket in GFP - Ld - CHC - Hub expressed Leishmania is signi ﬁ cantly enlarged in comparison to control and GFP - Ld - CHC overexpressed parasites ( Fig . 4A ) . Enlargement of ﬂ agellar pocket in GFP - Ld - CHC - Hub expressed Leishmania was further con ﬁ rmed byelectronmicroscopy ( Fig . 4B ) . Flagellarpocketappearedtobe asmall ﬂ ask shaped structure ( 0 . 4±0 . 2 μ m ) in control and GFP - Ld - CHC over - expressed cells whereas pocket was found to be about 3 folds enlarged in GFP - Ld - CHC - Hub overexpressed cells ( 1 . 2±0 . 3 μ m ) . We also found that GFP - Ld - CHC - Hub overexpressed cells are signi ﬁ cantly smaller in size than control or GFP - Ld - CHC overexpressed cells ( Fig . 4C ) . Further quantitation revealed that average length of control and GFP - Ld - CHC overexpressed cells are 9 . 1±1 . 1 μ m and 9 . 4±1 . 2 μ m , respectively and more than 90 % cells in these two groups are larger than 9 μ m . Fig . 3 . Role of clathrin in intracellular traf ﬁ cking of Hb in Leishmania . A . To determine the role of Ld - CHC in Hb traf ﬁ cking in Leishmania , Ld - CHC was overexpressed as GFP fusion protein as described in Materials and methods . Confocal images in the upper panel represent an x / y plane after Z - stack analysis where green shows GFP - Ld - CHC and nucleus ( Nu ) and kinetoplast ( K ) of Leishmania were labeled with Hoechst ( blue ) . Confocal image in lower panel shows the colocalization of GFP - Ld - CHC with bound Alexa - Hb at 4 °C ( red ) which appears in yellow . Results are representative of three independent preparations . B . To determine the overexpression of Ld - CHC as GFP fusion protein in Leishmania , cells transfected with pXG - GFP + 2 or pXG - GFP + 2 containing Ld - CHC construct were lysed and respective proteins were determined by western blot analysis using anti - GFP antibody . Results are representative of three independent preparations . C . To determine the kinetics of Hb traf ﬁ cking in GFP - Ld - CHC overexpressed Leishmania , cells were allowed to bind Alexa - Hb at 4 °C and subsequently chased for indicated times at 23 °C as described in Materials and methods . Finally , cells were ﬁ xed with paraformaldehyde and visualized under confocal microscope . Images represent an x / y plane after Z - stack analysis where Hb appears in red , green shows GFP - Ld - CHC and yellow indicates the colocalization of Hb with GFP - Ld - CHC . Results are representative of three independent preparations . D . Uptake ( left panel ) and degradation ( right panel ) of 6 μ g / ml of 125 I - Hb at 23 °C in GFP - Ld - CHC overexpressed Leishmania along with untransfected control cells ( 2×10 7 ) were determined as described in Materials and methods . At respective times , cell - associated radioactivity ( left panel ) and trichloroacetic acid - soluble non - iodide radioactive product released in the medium ( right panel ) were determined . Results are expressed as ng of Hb per mg of cell protein from three independent determinations±SD . 1070 S . Agarwal et al . / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1833 ( 2013 ) 1065 – 1077 In contrast , GFP - Ld - CHC - Hub overexpressed cells were found to be relatively smaller ( 6 . 7±0 . 9 μ m ) and more than 85 % cells in this group were below 7 μ m . 3 . 5 . Role of Ld - CHC in various modes of endocytosis in Leishmania To unequivocally prove the role of Ld - CHC in hemoglobin traf ﬁ cking in Leishmania , we compared the internalization of Alexa - Hb between GFP - Ld - CHC and GFP - Ld - CHC - Hub overexpressing Leishmania by confocal microscopy . Accordingly , respective cells were incubated in the presence of Alexa - Hb for 45 min at 23 °C , washed and viewed in confocal microscope . The results presented in the Fig . 5A showed that Hb is present both in ﬂ agellar pocket as well as in the late endosomal / lysosomal compartment in control and GFP - Ld - CHC overexpressed Leishmania . In contrast , most of the Hb was retained in the ﬂ agellar pocket even after 45 min of uptake in GFP - Ld - CHC - Hub overexpressing Fig . 3 ( continued ) . 1071 S . Agarwal et al . / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1833 ( 2013 ) 1065 – 1077 cells indicating that dominant negative mutant of Ld - CHC blocks Hb internalization . Whereas , traf ﬁ cking of FM4 - 64 ( Fig . 5B ) and dextran - TexasRed ( Fig . 5C ) werenotalteredinGFP - Ld - CHC - Hubcellscompared to GFP - Ld - CHC and vector transfected cells demonstrating that bulk endocytosis of FM4 - 64 and ﬂ uid phase endocytosis of dextran - Texas Red are clathrin independent process in Leishmania . Our previous studies showedthat Leishmania acquireshemethroughthedegradation of endocytosed Hb and this endocytic process is required for their growth and survival of the parasite [ 7 ] . Therefore , we compared the growth of GFP - Ld - CHC and GFP - Ld - CHC - Hub overexpressing cells in modi ﬁ ed medium containing hemin ( 10 μ g / ml ) . Our results demon - strated that GFP - Ld - CHC - Hub expressed cells show signi ﬁ cant growth defecteveninthe continuouspresence of hemin inthe growth medium in comparison to respective control cells ( Fig . 5D ) . To determine the requirement of hemin in the growth medium in rescue of severe growth defect observed in GFP - Ld - CHC - Hub expressed cells , cells were grown in the presence or absence of hemin for 12 h at 23 °C . Our results demonstrated that growth of GFP - Ld - CHC - Hub cells was signi ﬁ cantly compromised in the absence of hemin in the medium ( Fig . 5D inset ) . A B C Fig . 4 . Overexpression of dominant negative mutant of Ld - CHC alters the morphology of ﬂ agellar pocket in Leishmania . A . Determination of the morphology of ﬂ agellar pocket in GFP - Ld - CHC - Hub overexpressed Leishmania . Flagellar pockets of GFP - Ld - CHC - Hub , GFP - Ld - CHC and control cells were labeled with FM4 - 64 as described in Materials and methods . Confocal images represent an x / y plane after Z - stack analysis where green shows GFP - Ld - CHC and red indicates the ﬂ agellar pocket of the cells stained with FM4 - 64 . Arrows indi - cate size of ﬂ agellar pocket in respective cells . Results are representative of three independent preparations . B . Transmission electron micrographs showing the morphology of the ﬂ agellar pocket in GFP - Ld - CHC and its mutant overexpressed cells . Bars , 0 . 5 μ m . C . Scanning electron micrographs showing shape and size of GFP - Ld - CHC and its mutant overexpressed Leishmania . Bars , 2 μ m . 1072 S . Agarwal et al . / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1833 ( 2013 ) 1065 – 1077 3 . 6 . Effect of chlorpromazine in Hb endocytosis in Leishmania In order to further elucidate the role of clathrin in Hb endocytosis in Leishmania , cells were treated with 1 μ M chlorpromazine ( CPZ ) , an amphiphilic cationic drug known to disrupt clathrin mediated endocy - tosis [ 32 ] . The results presented in the Fig . 6A ( upper panel ) showed that pretreatment of Leishmania promastigotes by 1 μ M of CPZ for 15 min at 23 °C resulted in the complete dissociation of clathrin at the A B C Time ( hr ) 0 5 10 15 20 25 3 H - T h y m i d i n e i n c o r p o r a t i o n ( C . P . M . ) 0 10000 20000 30000 40000 50000 Control GFP - Ld - CHC GFP - Ld - CHC - Hub 3 H - T h y m i d i n e i n c o r p o r a t i o n ( C . P . M . ) 0 2000 4000 6000 8000 10000 12000 Medium Medium + Hemin GFP - Ld - CHC - Hub D Fig . 5 . OverexpressionofdominantnegativemutantofLd - CHCspeci ﬁ callyinhibitsHbinternalizationin Leishmania . A . TodeterminetheroleofclathrinheavychaininHbendocytosisin Leishmania , GFP - Ld - CHCanditsmutantoverexpressed Leishmania were incubatedwithAlexa - Hbat23 °Cfor45 min . Finally , cellswerewashed , ﬁ xedwithparaformaldehydeandvisu - alizedunder confocalmicroscope . Imagesrepresent anx / y plane after Z - stackanalysiswhere Hb appears inred , green shows GFP - Ld - CHC and yellow indicates the colocalization of Hb with GFP - Ld - CHC . Results are representative of three independent preparations . B . Uptake of FM4 - 64 in GFP - Ld - CHC and its mutant overexpressed Leishmania were determined as de - scribedinMaterialsandmethods . Finally , cellswerewashed , ﬁ xedwithparaformaldehydeandvisualizedunderconfocalmicroscope . Imagesrepresentanx / yplaneafterZ - stackanalysis whereFM4 - 64appearsinred , greenshowsGFP - Ld - CHCandyellowindicatesthecolocalizationofFM4 - 64withGFP - Ld - CHC . Resultsarerepresentativeofthreeindependentpreparations . C . Fluid phase endocytosis of dextran - Texas Red in GFP - Ld - CHC and GFP - Ld - CHC - Hub overexpressed Leishmania were determined as described in Materials and methods . Finally , cells were washed , ﬁ xed with paraformaldehyde and visualized under confocal microscope . Images represent an x / y plane after Z - stack analysis where dextran appears in red , green shows GFP - Ld - CHC and yellow indicates the colocalization of dextran with GFP - Ld - CHC . Results are representative of three independent preparations . D . Comparison of growth of GFP - Ld - CHC and its mutant overexpressed Leishmania were determined by [ 3 H ] - thymidine incorporation as described in Materials and methods . Cells were grown in medium 199 supplemented with hemin in the presence of [ 3 H ] - thymidine for indicated periods of times , washed and radioactivity incorporated by respective cells was measured . Inset shows the [ 3 H ] - thymidine incorporation in GFP - Ld - CHC - Hub overexpressed Leishmania in the absence or presence of hemin after 12 h incubation at 23 °C . Results are expressed as radioactivity incorporated by respective cells from three independent experiments±SD . 1073 S . Agarwal et al . / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1833 ( 2013 ) 1065 – 1077 ﬂ agellar pocket and clathrin is found to be dispersed into cytosol in the treated cells . Interestingly , our results demonstrated that both CPZ treated and untreated cells bind Hb when cells were incubated with Alexa - 594 conjugated Hb for 1 h at 4 °C ( Fig . 6A lower panel ) . In con - trast , pretreatment of RAW 264 . 7 macrophages by 1 μ M of CPZ for 15 min at 37 °C did not show any effect on clathrin assembly ( Supple - mentary Fig . 2 ) . Subsequently , attempts were made to determine the internalization of bound Hb in CPZ treated cells . Therefore , CPZ treated or untreated cells were allowed to bind Alexa - 594 conjugated Hb at 4 °C for 1 h , thenwashedandchasedforindicatedperiodoftimesat23 °C . Theresults presented in Fig . 6B showed that bound Hb is internalized into early endosomal compartment by 10 min and subsequently targeted to the perinuclear late / lysosomal compartment in untreated control cells as observed previously [ 7 ] . In contrast , most of the bound Hb was retained near the ﬂ agellar pocket even after 30 min of incubation at 23 °C in CPZ treated cells indicating that Hb internalization in Leishmania is mediated through CPZ - sensitive pathways . These results were further supported by the fact that uptake of 125 I - Hb at 23 °C in CPZ treated cells is signi ﬁ - cantly inhibited in comparison to untreated control cells ( Fig . 6C ) . A C Untreated CPZ - treated Hb Hb Hb Hb Hb Hb Nu Nu K K K K K K Nu Nu 10 min 20 min 30 min B Time ( Hr ) 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 H b U p t a k e ( n g / m g ) 0 200 400 600 800 Control CPZ Control CPZ H b B i nd i n g ( n g / m g ) 0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 Fig . 6 . Depolymerization of clathrin by chlorpromazine inhibits internalization of hemoglobin in Leishmania . A . To elucidate the role of endogenous clathrin in Hb endocytosis in Leishmania , cells were treated with 1 μ M chlorpromazine ( CPZ ) and clathrin was visualized with anti - Ld - CHC antibody ( upper panel ) as described in Materials and methods . Nu - cleus ( Nu ) and kinetoplast ( K ) of Leishmania were labeled with propidium iodide ( red ) and green shows Ld - CHC . Lower panel shows the binding of Alexa - Hb ( red ) in chlorprom - azine ( CPZ ) treated and untreated cells . Cells were analyzed by confocal microscopy and the images represent an x / y plane after Z - stack analysis . Results are representative of three independent preparations . B . To compare the kinetics of Hb traf ﬁ cking in chlorpromazine treated and untreated Leishmania , respective cells were allowed to bind Alexa - Hb at 4 °C and subsequently chased for indicated times at 23 °C as described in Materials and methods . Finally , cells were ﬁ xed with paraformaldehyde and visualized under confocal micro - scope . Imagesrepresent anx / yplaneafterZ - stackanalysiswhereHbappearsinred , greenshowsLd - CHC . Resultsarerepresentativeofthreeindependentpreparations . C . Uptakeof 6 μ g / ml of 125 I - Hb at 23 °C in chlorpromazine treated and untreated Leishmania ( 5×10 7 ) were determined as described in Materials and methods . At respective times , cells were washed and cell - associated radioactivity was determined as uptake in chlorpromazine treated and untreated Leishmania . Inset shows the binding of 125 I - Hb at 4 °C in chlorprom - azine treated and untreated cells . Results are expressed as ng of Hb per mg of cell protein from three independent determinations±SD . 1074 S . Agarwal et al . / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1833 ( 2013 ) 1065 – 1077 3 . 7 . Effect of chlorpromazine on the survival of Leishmania CPZ was found to inhibit the Hb uptake in Leishmania , therefore , it is tempting to speculate that CPZ might inhibit the growth of the parasite if heme generated from Hb degradation is essential for the parasites . TocomparethegrowthofCPZ treated and untreatedcells , cells were in - cubated in medium 199 supplemented with 10 % FCS containing [ 3 H ] - thymidine in the absence or presence of indicated concentration CPZ for 24 h and the amount of radioactivity incorporated by cells was mea - sured to determine the cell proliferation . The results presented in Fig . 7 showed that CPZ inhibits the proliferation of Leishmania in a concentra - tion dependent way and about 50 % inhibition of the growth of the par - asite is observed at 8 μ M of CPZ whereas 15 μ M of CPZ inhibits about 80 % parasite growth . Interestingly , leishmanicidal effect of CPZ ( 8 μ M ) is signi ﬁ cantly reversed by the addition of hemin ( 10 μ g / ml ) in the me - dium ( Fig . 7 inset ) . However , only 30 % of the inhibition of proliferation of RAW264 . 7 macrophages wasobserved at15 μ MofCPZunder similar conditions ( Supplementary Fig . 3 ) . 4 . Discussion In the present investigation , we have cloned and expressed clathrin heavychainhomologuefrom L . donovani todeterminetheroleofclathrin in Hb endocytosis in the parasite . Using appropriate forward and reverse primers , weampli ﬁ eda5082 bpfragment from L . donovani cDNAbyPCR which codes for ~ 190 kDa protein . Sequence comparison of the cloned protein along with clathrin heavy chain sequences reported from differ - ent organisms reveals that Ld - CHC contains highly conserved clathrin heavy chain repeat ( CHCR ) motifs , trimerization domain , clathrin light chain and β - arrestin binding sites . The high degree of homology of Ld - CHCwithhumanclathrindemonstratesthatclonedproteinisclathrin heavy chain homologue from Leishmania . Moreover , Ld - CHC also con - tains an insertion of 10 amino acid residues ( MAQKQDTDLN ) in the knee of the distal domain of Ld - CHC , which are also present in the clathrin sequence of T . brucei [ 31 ] . However , functional relevance of this insertion sequence in clathrin - mediated endocytosis in this group of parasite needs to be evaluated . Several ultrastructural and biochemical evidences have indicated the presence of clathrin like molecule in trypanosomatid parasites . Though , receptor - mediated endocytic process is known in Leishmania [ 33 – 35 ] , however , the role of clathrin in endocytosis in Leishmania is not well elucidated . Nevertheless , RNA interference ( RNAi ) mediated depletion of clathrin in Trypanosoma was shown to be lethal indicating essentialrole of clathrin in trypanosomatid parasites [ 22 ] . We have pre - viously shown that Leishmania endocytosed hemoglobin through a spe - ci ﬁ creceptorlocatedinthe ﬂ agellarpocket [ 4 , 5 ] andboundhemoglobin is rapidly internalized into discrete Rab5 positive early endosomal com - partmentandsubsequentlytargetedtothelysosomalcompartmentina Rab7 dependent way [ 6 , 7 ] . These results indicate that several compo - nents of endocytic and intracellular traf ﬁ cking machinery are well preserved in Leishmania , thereby ; this parasite provides a unique op - portunity to determine the intricacies of membrane traf ﬁ cking and sorting phenomena in a whole organism . With clathrin heavy chain being an ~ 190 kDa protein , most of the studies have used either trun - cated protein , immunostaining with clathrin speci ﬁ c antibody or deple - tion of clathrin using RNA interference ( RNAi ) to determine the role of clathrin in endocytosis [ 10 , 11 , 22 , 36 , 37 ] . As cellular machinery for RNA interference is not conserved in L . donovani [ 38 ] , therefore , we have overexpressed Ld - CHC or its dominant negative mutant as GFP fusion protein to determine the role of Ld - CHC in hemoglobin endocytosis in this parasite . Leishmania promastigotes are highly polarized cells and have a ﬂ ask - shaped invagination of the plasma membrane in the apical region of the cells from where ﬂ agellum originates known as ﬂ agellar pocket [ 39 ] . Both exocytosis and endocytosis exclusively occur in Leishmania through this specialized invagination of the plasma membrane [ 40 ] . To determine the intracellular localization of clathrin in Leishmania , speci ﬁ c antibody was made against hub fragmentof Ld - CHC whichspe - ci ﬁ callyrecognized an ~ 190 kDa protein from Leishmania lysate . Immu - no ﬂ uorescence studies using this antibody reveal that endogenous clathrin heavy chain is localized near kinetoplast in the anterior region of the cells where hemoglobin binds . We have also observed similar localization of clathrin in GFP - Ld - CHC overexpressed Leishmania . Previ - ously , we have shown that Hb binds with speci ﬁ c receptor localized in the ﬂ agellar pocket , therefore , our results have clearly demonstrated that clathrin heavy chain primarily localizes in the ﬂ agellar pocket of Leishmania . We have also found that GFP - Ld - CHC partially colocalizes with LPG2 , a Golgi marker in Leishmania . These results are consistent with the facts that clathrin - coated vesicles mediate the transport from both plasma membranes as well as from trans - Golgi network ( TGN ) depending on secretory or endocytic pathways in higher eukaryotic cells . Based on these facts and our results , clathrin is also found to be lo - calized both in the ﬂ agellarpocket aswell asin other intracellularvesic - ular structures in T . brucei [ 22 ] and Leishmania major [ 23 ] . However , it is pertinent to mention that some of the intracellular organelles like mitochondria , Golgi , endosomes , etc . are juxtaposed near ﬂ agellar pocket of Leishmania and therefore , it is hard to distinguish them with GFP - Ld - CHC expression . Our results have also shown that hemoglobin is predominantly associated with GFP - Ld - CHC labeled compartment till 5 min of inter - nalization after their initial binding with cell surface receptor in the ﬂ agellar pocket of Leishmania . Subsequently , GFP - Ld - CHC starts disso - ciating from Hb - containing vesicles as it moves towards late compart - ment by about 15 to 30 min . Complete absence of GFP - Ld - CHC on Hb - containing vesicles after 45 min of internalization demonstrates that transport of Hb to lysosomal compartment does not require clathrin . Taken together , our results have clearly demonstrated that clathrin assembly is required for the formation of coated pits and coated vesicles during Hb endocytosis in Leishmania which is subse - quently dissociated from Hb - containing vesicles to form uncoated vesicles which presumably fuse with early endosomes [ 6 ] and ulti - mately Hb is delivered to lysosomes [ 7 ] . In addition , we have found that GFP - Ld - CHC overexpressed Leishmaina enhances both uptake Fig . 7 . Effect of chlorpromazine on the growth of Leishmania . Growth of chlorpromazine treated Leishmania were determined by [ 3 H ] - thymidine incorporation as described in Materialsandmethods . Cellswereharvestedafter24 hofdrugtreatmentandradioactivity incorporated by respective cells was measured . Inset shows the rescue of CPZ - mediated ( 8 μ M ) growth inhibition of Leishmania by 10 μ g / ml of hemin . Radioactivity incorporated bytheuntreatedcellsischosenas100 % andresultsareexpressedasapercentageofradio - activityincorporatedbythetreatedcellsincomparisontountreatedcellsfromthreeinde - pendentexperiments±SD . 1075 S . Agarwal et al . / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1833 ( 2013 ) 1065 – 1077 and degradation of hemoglobin . However , we do not know the pre - cise mechanism of this enhanced endocytosis of Hb in these cells . In order to prove unequivocally that hemoglobin endocytosis in Leishmania is a clathrin dependent process , we have transfected the cells with clathrin hub fragment . Previous studies have shown that transfection of HeLacells withclathrin hub fragment ( carboxy - terminal third of the clathrin heavy chain ) speci ﬁ cally inhibits clathrin - dependent receptor - mediated endocytosis of transferrin but does not impairs clathrin - independent ﬂ uid - phase uptake of dextran [ 20 ] . We have found that expression of clathrin hub fragment is lethal to Leishmania indicating that clathrin function is essential for this parasite . However , we could rescue GFP - Ld - CHC - Hub overexpressed Leishmania by growing the cells in the medium supplemented with hemin . This is consistent with our previous ﬁ nding that hemin can compensate the need of heme generated from the degradation of endocytosed Hb by the cells [ 7 ] and subsequently , it has been shown that heme can be taken in by Leishmania through speci ﬁ c transporter independent of Hb receptor [ 41 ] . Most importantly , overexpression of dominant negative mutant of clathrin ( GFP - Ld - CHC - Hub ) completely inhibits the receptor - mediated internalization of Hb by these cells ; however , internalization of bulk phase endocytic probes like FM4 - 64 and dextran are not blocked in GFP - Ld - CHC - Hub overexpressed Leishmania . These results unequivo - cally demonstrate the role of clathrin heavy chain in Hb endocytosis in Leishmania . Interestingly , overexpression of GFP - Ld - CHC - Hub induces the formation signi ﬁ cantly larger ﬂ agellar pocket in comparison to con - trolcells . Thiscouldbepossiblyduetoimbalanceofmembranetraf ﬁ cbe - tween endocytic and secretory pathways in GFP - Ld - CHC - Hub expressed cells where endocytic pathway is repressed . In addition , GFP - Ld - CHC - Hub expressed cells are relatively small and grow slowly even in the continuous presence of hemin in the medium . This is consistent with previous results that depletion of clathrin in blood stream form of Trypanosoma brucei by RNAi induce the formation of enlarge ﬂ agellar pocket and parasites are unable to grow [ 22 ] . However , enlargement of ﬂ agellar pocket in GFP - Ld - CHC - Hub expressed Leishmania is less dra - matic than RNAi mediated depletion of clathrin in blood stream form of Trypanosoma brucei . This may be either due to the presence of endoge - nousclathrininGFP - Ld - CHC - HuboverexpressedcellsthanRNAimediat - ed depletion of clathrin in Trypanosoma or could be due to differential endocytic activities between these two parasites . In contrast , knocking out clathrin heavy chain in yeast and Dictyostelium do not affect the via - bility of cells and deletion of clathrin gene in mammalian cell is well tol - erated [ 42 – 44 ] . Our results demonstrate that overexpression of clathrin dominant negative mutant in Leishmania arrests the growth of cells by blocking Hb endocytosis and this growth defect can be signi ﬁ cantly rescued by hemin . These results indicate that clathrin mediated internal - ization of Hb is essential for the survival of Leishmania possibly by gener - ating heme from the intracellular degradation of endocytosed Hb . However , wearenotrulingoutthepossibleroleofclathrin - mediateden - docytosis of other nutrients in the survival Leishmania . We have also explored the effect of pharmacological inhibitors of clathrin - mediated endocytic pathway . Previous studies have indicated that clathrin - mediated endocytosis is speci ﬁ cally blocked by chlor - promazine ( CPZ ) , a cationic amphiphilic molecule [ 32 , 45 ] . However , how CPZ disrupts clathrin - mediated endocytosis is not clearly known . Indirect immuno ﬂ uorescence studies have shown that treatment of mammalian cells with 100 μ m of CPZ trapped LDL receptor inside cells and change the localization of clathrin and adaptor protein com - plex 2 ( AP2 ) from plasma membrane to intracellular compartment [ 32 ] . However , our results have shown that CPZ treatment resulted in redistribution of clathrin heavy chain throughout the cell body from its usual localization in the ﬂ agellar pocket in Leishmania . This result suggests that CPZ at a low concentration speci ﬁ cally depolymerizes the clathrin in Leishmania . Subsequently , we have compared the Hb traf ﬁ cking in CPZ treated and untreated cells . Kinetics of the Hb traf - ﬁ cking in Leishmania reveal that Hb ﬁ rst enter into early endosomal compartment and subsequently move to perinuclear late endosomal compartment by about 30 min of internalization in untreated control cells . In contrast , CPZ treated Leishmania inhibits the internalization of bound Hb and most of the Hb is trapped in the ﬂ agellar pocket even 30 min after internalization . Binding of Hb with cell surface recep - torremainsunaffectedbyCPZtreatmentindicatingthat CPZblocksonly internalization by dissociating clathrin possibly from the coated vesi - cles . CPZ treatment blocks the Hb endocytosis in Leishmania that prompted us to determine the effect of CPZ on the growth of the para - sites . Thus , we have measured the proliferation of CPZ treated and untreated Leishmania by [ 3 H ] - thymidine incorporation . Interestingly , we have found that CPZ treatment for 24 h ( 15 μ M ) arrests about 80 % growth of Leishmania in comparison to untreated control cells . These results are in broad agreement with previous ﬁ nding that CPZ treatment for 18 h at 13 . 6 μ g / ml ( 38 μ M ) kills about 90 % of the promastigotes as determined by the ﬂ agellar motility in the treated cells [ 46 ] . However , apparent discrepancies between these two results could be due to the sensitivity of the assay systems used for determina - tion of antileishmanial effect of CPZ . Subsequent study has shown that CPZ at 50 μ g / ml ( 140 μ M ) kills the parasites by reducing the oxygen consumption in the cells [ 47 ] . Our results have shown that CPZ depoly - merizes clathrin and blocks clathrin - dependent endocytosis of Hb and therefore , parasiteisunabletoacquirehemefromthedegradationofin - ternalized Hb required for their growth . These observation is further strengthened by the fact that hemin can signi ﬁ cantly reverse the leishmanicidal effect of CPZ . In contrast , only 30 % inhibition of macro - phage proliferation is observed at 15 μ M of CPZ . This might be due to lesser ef ﬁ cacy of CPZ in depolymerizing macrophage clathrin in comparison to clathrin in Leishmania . Moreover , CPZ at lower concen - tration ( 12 . 5 μ g / ml ) does not alter macrophage morphology [ 46 ] . It is pertinent to mention that macrophages are terminally differentiated cells and dead cells are replaced from cells of monocyte - macrophage lineage . Thus , we have identi ﬁ ed a new mechanism of leishmanicidal activity of CPZ which blocks clathrin - mediated endocytosis of Hb by depolymerizing clathrin in Leishmania at low concentration . Therefore , our results suggest that it is worth to design less toxic derivatives of CPZ which could be explored as a new chemotherapeutic agent against visceral leishmaniasis . 5 . Conclusion This result is the ﬁ rst demonstration that Hb endocytosis in Leishmania is a clathrin - dependent process and this process is essen - tial for parasite survival . In addition , CPZ mediated depolymerization of clathrin suggests that how this drug inhibits clathrin mediated endocytic pathway in general . As hemoglobin endocytosis is im - portant for both promastigote and amastigote stages of Leishmania [ 7 , 48 ] , therefore , CPZ mediated inhibition of parasite growth by blocking hemoglobin endocytosis in parasite could be useful for development of new anti - leishmanial agent which we are currently exploring . Acknowledgement These studies are supported by grant from National Institute of Immunology , Government of India , New Delhi and J . C . Bose Fellow - ship from Department of Science & Technology , Govt . of India to AM . S . A . , R . R . , D . G . and N . P . were supported by the fellowship from Council of Scienti ﬁ c and Industrial Research , Government of India . Authors have no con ﬂ ict of interest . Appendix A . Supplementary data Supplementary data to this article can be found online at http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bbamcr . 2013 . 01 . 006 . 1076 S . Agarwal et al . / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1833 ( 2013 ) 1065 – 1077 References [ 1 ] G . J . Doherty , H . T . McMahon , Mechanisms of endocytosis , Annu . Rev . Biochem . 78 ( 2009 ) 857 – 902 . [ 2 ] F . R . Max ﬁ eld , T . E . McGraw , Endocytic recycling , Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 5 ( 2004 ) 121 – 132 . [ 3 ] L . M . Traub , Tickets to ride : selecting cargo for clathrin - regulated internalization , Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 10 ( 2009 ) 583 – 596 . [ 4 ] S . Sengupta , J . Tripathi , R . Tandon , M . Raje , R . P . Roy , S . K . Basu , A . Mukhopadhyay , Hemoglobin endocytosis in Leishmania is mediated through a 46 - kDa protein located in the ﬂ agellar pocket , J . Biol . Chem . 274 ( 1999 ) 2758 – 2765 . [ 5 ] G . Krishnamurthy , R . Vikram , S . B . Singh , N . Patel , S . Agarwal , G . Mukhopadhyay , S . K . Basu , A . Mukhopadhyay , Hemoglobin receptor in Leishmania is a hexokinase located in the ﬂ agellar pocket , J . Biol . Chem . 280 ( 2005 ) 5884 – 5891 . [ 6 ] S . B . Singh , R . Tandon , G . Krishnamurthy , R . Vikram , N . Sharma , S . K . Basu , A . Mukhopadhyay , Rab5 - mediated endosome - endosome fusion regulates hemoglo - bin endocytosis in Leishmania donovani , EMBO J . 22 ( 2003 ) 5712 – 5722 . [ 7 ] N . Patel , S . B . Singh , S . K . Basu , A . Mukhopadhyay , LeishmaniarequiresRab7 - mediated degradation of endocytosed hemoglobinfor their growth , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 105 ( 2008 ) 3980 – 3985 . [ 8 ] J . F . Sah , H . Ito , B . K . Kolli , D . A . Peterson , S . Sassa , K . P . Chang , Genetic rescue of Leishmania de ﬁ ciency in porphyrin biosynthesis creates mutants suitable for analysis of cellular events in uroporphyria and for photodynamic therapy , J . Biol . Chem . 277 ( 2002 ) 14902 – 14909 . [ 9 ] J . X . Kelly , M . V . Ignatushchenko , H . G . Bouwer , D . H . Peyton , D . J . Hinrichs , R . W . Winter , M . Riscoe , Antileishmanial drug development : exploitation of parasite heme dependency , Mol . Biochem . Parasitol . 126 ( 2003 ) 43 – 49 . [ 10 ] M . G . Roth , Clathrin - mediated endocytosis before ﬂ uorescent proteins , Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 7 ( 2006 ) 63 – 68 . [ 11 ] H . T . McMahon , E . Boucrot , Molecular mechanism and physiological functions of clathrin - mediated endocytosis , Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 12 ( 2011 ) 517 – 533 . [ 12 ] A . Motley , N . A . Bright , M . N . Seaman , M . S . Robinson , Clathrin - mediated endocytosis in AP - 2 - depleted cells , J . Cell Biol . 162 ( 2003 ) 909 – 918 . [ 13 ] D . J . Owen , B . M . Collins , P . R . Evans , Adaptors forclathrin coats : structureand func - tion , Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 20 ( 2004 ) 153 – 191 . [ 14 ] B . Doray , I . Lee , J . Knisely , G . Bu , S . Kornfeld , Thegamma / sigma1andalpha / sigma2 hemicomplexes of clathrin adaptors AP - 1 and AP - 2 harbor the dileucine recogni - tion site , Mol . Biol . Cell 18 ( 2007 ) 1887 – 1896 . [ 15 ] A . Reider , B . Wendland , Endocytic adaptors — social networking at the plasma membrane , J . Cell Sci . 124 ( 2011 ) 1613 – 1622 . [ 16 ] A . Young , Structural insights into the clathrin coat , Semin . Cell Dev . Biol . 18 ( 2007 ) 448 – 458 . [ 17 ] L . Hinrichsen , A . Meyerholz , S . Groos , E . J . Ungewickell , Bending amembrane : how clathrin affects budding , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 103 ( 2006 ) 8715 – 8720 . [ 18 ] H . T . McMahon , J . L . Gallop , Membrane curvature and mechanisms of dynamic cell membrane remodelling , Nature 438 ( 2005 ) 590 – 596 . [ 19 ] S . H . Liu , M . L . Wong , C . S . Craik , F . M . Brodsky , Regulation of clathrin assembly and trimerization de ﬁ ned using recombinant triskelion hubs , Cell83 ( 1995 ) 257 – 267 . [ 20 ] S . H . Liu , M . S . Marks , F . M . Brodsky , Adominant - negativeclathrinmutantdifferentially affectstraf ﬁ ckingofmoleculeswithdistinctsortingmotifsintheclassIImajorhisto - compatibility complex ( MHC ) pathway , J . Cell Biol . 140 ( 1998 ) 1023 – 1037 . [ 21 ] T . Ruscetti , J . A . Cardelli , M . L . Niswonger , T . J . O ' Halloran , Clathrin heavy chain func - tions in sorting and secretion of lysosomal enzymes in Dictyostelium discoideum , J . Cell Biol . 126 ( 1994 ) 343 – 352 . [ 22 ] C . L . Allen , D . Goulding , M . C . Field , Clathrin - mediated endocytosis is essential in Trypanosoma brucei , EMBO J . 22 ( 2003 ) 4991 – 5002 . [ 23 ] P . W . Denny , G . W . Morgan , M . C . Field , D . F . Smith , Leishmania major : clathrin and adaptin complexes of an intra - cellular parasite , Exp . Parasitol . 109 ( 2005 ) 33 – 37 . [ 24 ] Y . Hernandez , C . Castillo , S . Roychowdhury , A . Hehl , S . B . Aley , S . Das , Clathrin - dependent pathways and the cytoskeleton network are involved in ceramide endocytosisbyaparasiticprotozoan , Giardialamblia , Int . J . Parasitol . 37 ( 2007 ) 21 – 32 . [ 25 ] J . C . Roy , Cultivation of various Leishmania parasites in solid medium , Ind . J . Med . Res . 20 ( 1932 ) 355 – 367 . [ 26 ] D . S . Ha , J . K . Schwarz , S . J . Turco , S . M . Beverley , Useof thegreen ﬂ uorescent protein as a marker in transfected Leishmania , Mol . Biochem . Parasitol . 77 ( 1996 ) 57 – 64 . [ 27 ] K . A . Robinson , S . M . Beverley , Improvements in transfection ef ﬁ ciency and tests of RNA interference ( RNAi ) approaches in the protozoan parasite Leishmania , Mol . Biochem . Parasitol . 128 ( 2003 ) 217 – 228 . [ 28 ] A . Sahin , B . Espiau , E . Tetaud , A . Cuvillier , L . Lartigue , A . Ambit , D . R . Robinson , G . Merlin , Theleishmania ARL - 1 and Golgitraf ﬁ c , PLoS One3 ( 2008 ) e1620 . [ 29 ] B . Pishvaee , A . Munn , G . S . Payne , A novel structural model for regulation of clathrin function , EMBO J . 16 ( 1997 ) 2227 – 2239 . [ 30 ] J . A . Ybe , N . Ruppel , S . Mishra , E . VanHaaften , Contribution of cysteines to clathrin trimerization domain stability and mapping of light chain binding , Traf ﬁ c 4 ( 2003 ) 850 – 856 . [ 31 ] G . W . Morgan , C . L . Allen , T . R . Jeffries , M . Hollinshead , M . C . Field , Developmental and morphological regulation of clathrin - mediated endocytosis in Trypanosoma brucei , J . Cell Sci . 114 ( 2001 ) 2605 – 2615 . [ 32 ] L . H . Wang , K . G . Rothberg , R . G . Anderson , Mis - assembly of clathrin lattices on endosomes reveals a regulatory switch for coated pit formation , J . Cell Biol . 123 ( 1993 ) 1107 – 1117 . [ 33 ] C . S . Voyiatzaki , K . P . Soteriadou , Identi ﬁ cation and isolation of the Leishmania transferrin receptor , J . Biol . Chem . 267 ( 1992 ) 9112 – 9117 . [ 34 ] P . Bastin , A . Stephan , J . Raper , J . M . Saint - Remy , F . R . Opperdoes , P . J . Courtoy , AnM ( r ) 145 , 000low - densitylipoprotein ( LDL ) - bindingproteinisconservedthroughoutthe Kinetoplastida order , Mol . Biochem . Parasitol . 76 ( 1996 ) 43 – 56 . [ 35 ] J . Liu , X . Qiao , D . Du , M . G . Lee , Receptor - mediated endocytosis in the procyclic form of Trypanosoma brucei , J . Biol . Chem . 275 ( 2000 ) 12032 – 12040 . [ 36 ] F . Huang , A . Khvorova , W . Marshall , A . Sorkin , Analysis of clathrin - mediated endocytosis of epidermal growth factor receptor by RNA interference , J . Biol . Chem . 279 ( 2004 ) 16657 – 16661 . [ 37 ] M . A . McNiven , Big gulps : specialized membrane domains for rapid receptor - mediated endocytosis , Trends Cell Biol . 16 ( 2006 ) 487 – 492 . [ 38 ] L . F . Lye , K . Owens , H . Shi , S . M . Murta , A . C . Vieira , S . J . Turco , C . Tschudi , E . Ullu , S . M . Beverley , Retention and loss of RNA interference pathways in trypanosomatid protozoans , PLoS Pathog . 6 ( 2010 ) e1001161 . [ 39 ] M . C . Field , M . Carrington , The trypanosome ﬂ agellar pocket , Nat . Rev . Microbiol . 7 ( 2009 ) 775 – 786 . [ 40 ] P . Overath , Y . D . Stierhof , M . Wiese , Endocytosis and secretion in trypanosomatid parasites — tumultuous traf ﬁ c in a pocket , Trends Cell Biol . 7 ( 1997 ) 27 – 33 . [ 41 ] J . Campos - Salinas , M . Cabello - Donayre , R . Garcia - Hernandez , I . Perez - Victoria , S . Castanys , F . Gamarro , J . M . Perez - Victoria , A new ATP - binding cassette protein is involved in intracellular haem traf ﬁ cking in Leishmania , Mol . Microbiol . 79 ( 2011 ) 1430 – 1444 . [ 42 ] T . J . O ' Halloran , R . G . Anderson , Clathrin heavy chain is required for pinocytosis , the presence of large vacuoles , and development in Dictyostelium , J . Cell Biol . 118 ( 1992 ) 1371 – 1377 . [ 43 ] M . Seeger , G . S . Payne , A role for clathrin in the sorting of vacuolar proteins in the Golgi complex of yeast , EMBO J . 11 ( 1992 ) 2811 – 2818 . [ 44 ] F . R . Wettey , S . F . Hawkins , A . Stewart , J . P . Luzio , J . C . Howard , A . P . Jackson , Controlled elimination of clathrin heavy - chain expression in DT40 lymphocytes , Science 297 ( 2002 ) 1521 – 1525 . [ 45 ] H . Liu , Y . Liu , S . Liu , D . W . Pang , G . Xiao , Clathrin - mediated endocytosis in living host cells visualized through quantum dot labeling of infectious hematopoietic necrosis virus , J . Virol . 85 ( 2011 ) 6252 – 6262 . [ 46 ] R . D . Pearson , A . A . Manian , J . L . Harcus , D . Hall , E . L . Hewlett , Lethal effect of pheno - thiazine neuroleptics on the pathogenic protozoan Leishmania donovani , Science 217 ( 1982 ) 369 – 371 . [ 47 ] R . D . Pearson , A . A . Manian , D . Hall , J . L . Harcus , E . L . Hewlett , Antileishmanialactivityof chlorpromazine , Antimicrob . Agents Chemother . 25 ( 1984 ) 571 – 574 . [ 48 ] S . Carvalho , T . Cruz , N . Santarem , H . Castro , V . Costa , A . M . Tomas , Hemeasasourceof iron to Leishmania infantum amastigotes , Acta Trop . 109 ( 2009 ) 131 – 135 . 1077 S . Agarwal et al . / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1833 ( 2013 ) 1065 – 1077