Creativity in dynamic networks : How divergent thinking is impacted by one’s choice of peers Raiyan Abdul Baten 1 , Daryl Bagley 2 , Ashely Tenesaca 2 , Famous Clark 2 , James P . Bagrow 3 , Gourab Ghoshal 4 , Mohammed Ehsan Hoque 2 , * 1 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering , University of Rochester , NY , USA 2 Department of Computer Science , University of Rochester , NY , USA 3 Department of Mathematics & Statistics , University of Vermont , VT , USA 4 Department of Physics and Astronomy , University of Rochester , NY , USA * mehoque @ cs . rochester . edu Abstract Creativity is viewed as one of the most important skills in the context of future - of - work . In this paper , we explore how the dynamic ( self - organizing ) nature of real social networks impacts the fostering of creative ideas . We run 6 trials ( N = 288 ) of a web - based experiment involving divergent ideation tasks . We ﬁnd that network connections gradually adapt to individual creative performances , as the participants predominantly seek to follow high - performing peers for creative inspirations . We unearth both opportunities and bottlenecks afforded by such self - organization . While exposure to high - performing peers is associated with better creative performances of the followers , we see a counter - effect that choosing to follow the same peers introduces semantic redundancies in the followers’ ideas . We formulate an agent - based simulation model that highlights the implications of these processes . Our ﬁndings may help design large - scale interventions to im - prove the creative aptitude of people interacting in a social network . Keywords— Network science , computational social science , creativity , dynamic social networks Recent advances in robotics , AI and machine learning are increasingly focused on mimicking or even surpassing human capabilities . This particular innovation , however , has serious implications on our future workforce [ 1 , 2 , 3 ] . Approximately 51 % of the tasks done in the US economy can be automated [ 4 ] , and for each robot on the factory ﬂoor , some six jobs are lost [ 5 ] . The need for manual labor in predictable and repetitive work is declining [ 6 ] , while the demand is soaring for ex - pertise in creative tasks , problem - solving , and other social - cognitive avenues of soft - skills [ 4 , 7 , 8 ] . Many of the critical and challenging tasks of the human civilization requires humans to collaborate with others [ 9 , 10 ] , and perform creatively at both individual and collective levels . Thus , enhancing the creative abilities of collaborating humans has become one of the aspirational challenges today . This motivation for creativity - at - scale leads to the exploration of social networks of creative collab - orators . For instance , the development of an innovative product such as an aircraft or a computer operating system is only made possible by an interacting network of creative problem solvers , who beneﬁt from each other’s expertise [ 11 ] . Discussions in an academic network of researchers , fac - ulties and students can stimulate ideas for novel explorations in the members of the network . A graphic designer can beneﬁt from inspirations found in online networks like Reddit , Behance or Twitter , among other instances of social network driven creative accomplishments . Adopting a so - cial network lens helps understand the mechanisms , bottlenecks and opportunities for maximizing creative outcomes in a larger scale . 1 a r X i v : 1911 . 11395v1 [ c s . S I ] 26 N o v 2019 Researchers have examined the effects of various network attributes on creativity [ 12 , 13 ] . For instance , it has been reported that relationship strength , position and external ties are some of the factors that inﬂuence creative performance [ 14 ] . However , a key element missing from most prior literature is the dynamic characteristic of real social networks . Human interactions are structured in social networks , where people have control over who they interact with . Given an objective , they can choose to make or break ties to update the connectivity patterns around them , often in response to behavior , performance , prestige , age , gender , popularity , self - similarity and other cues of the social partners [ 15 , 16 , 17 , 18 , 19 , 20 ] . This dynamic characteristic affords opportunities in human populations that static networks cannot : for example , dynamic networks promote cooperation among humans [ 21 ] , improve their collective intelligence [ 22 , 23 ] , and even help build up people’s speaking skills [ 24 ] . When it comes to creative performance , the dynamic nature of social networks has received rather little research attention . Perry - Smith et al . proposed a spiraling model , capturing the cyclical rela - tionship between creativity and network position , where one fosters the other [ 12 ] . The argument being , if someone is creative at something , it might draw more attention to the creative person , re - sulting in an increased centrality and visibility . Conversely , a central person is able to inspire creative thoughts in others and can also get inspired by others more readily than a peripheral person , thus helping in further creative ideation . However , this chain of argument has not been directly tested . Despite some efforts in examining other temporal effects [ 25 , 26 , 27 ] , it remains largely unclear how dynamic creative networks evolve with time , what laws they follow , and what implications such evolving has on the creative ideation process and outcomes . This motivates the desire to understand how creative performances are exhibited and impacted in dynamic social networks . Consequently , in this paper , we ﬁrst explore how connectivity patterns adapt to individual performance cues in a creativity - centric dynamic network ( RQ1 ) . Second , we test how such adaptations impact individual and collective ideation performances in a dynamic network , against the controls of static ( ﬁxed connections ) and solo ( unconnected ) network conditions ( RQ2 ) . We run six trials of a web - based experiment , where participants in a dynamic social network per - formed creative idea generation tasks in 5 consecutive rounds . The participants chose after each round which of the peers’ ideas they wanted to be shown as stimuli ( see Experimental setup for de - tails ) . Following Perry - Smith et al . ’s argumentation [ 12 ] , we anticipated in RQ1 that people looking for creative inspiration from others will use some form of success cues to determine who among the peers are more creative and , therefore , more promising to be advantageous to form ties with ( “fol - low” ) . Our results show that in the dynamic networks , the participants were indeed drawn towards following the most creative ideators . In particular , we ﬁnd that the statistical rarity and novelty ratings of one’s ideas to be robust predictors of his / her popularity in the dynamic networks . If more people choose to form ties with the highly creative ideators in the network , what implications will it have on the individual and collective creative performances ? The associative theory of creative cognition suggests that when people are primed properly , e . g . , by exposure to ideas from others [ 28 , 29 ] , their long - term memory circuitry can be stimulated . This can enable retrieving concepts that are remotely stored in the memory [ 30 , 31 , 32 , 33 , 34 , 35 ] . Combining various aspects of such remote concepts can help in synthesizing novel ideas [ 36 , 37 , 38 ] . Based on this , we anticipated that following highly creative peers in a dynamic social network can allow for positive stimulation of novel ideas in people . For instance , following a person who generates rare or unique ideas will increase the chances that the follower comes across ideas that have little overlap with his / her own . This can allow for the stimulation of further ideas through novel association of concepts , resulting in ideas that would not have occurred to the follower otherwise [ 39 , 40 , 41 , 42 ] . However , we also anticipated a counter - effect that if many people follow the same highly creative ideators in a dynamic network , the followers’ inspiration sets will become overlapping , which might introduce redundancy in the stimulated ideas [ 43 , 44 ] . Our results show that following highly creative ideators is indeed associated with one’s better creative performance . However , different participants who chose to follow the same alters ( same stimuli ) show an increasing semantic similarity in their independently stimulated ideas with time . These results suggest that self - organizing in a dynamic network ( i . e . , preferentially forming ties with the most creative peers ) might lead to conﬂicting opportunities and constraints . In the end , we do not ﬁnd any signiﬁcant difference in the individual and collective creative performances between the dynamic and static conditions . We formulate a simulation model that captures these empirically - derived intuitions , and helps us assess the generality of the reported processes and insights . 2 Rewiring Turn 2 Social Exposure and Second Attempt Turn 1 First Attempt Dynamic , static and solo Dynamic only Dynamic and static ( A ) Alters Egos ( B ) Figure 1 : ( A ) The bipartite network structure used in the static condition , and as the initial condition in the dynamic condition . The ideas of the 6 alters were pre - recorded and later shown to 18 egos each in static and dynamic conditions . Each ego was connected to 2 alters . ( B ) The study protocol for each of the 5 rounds . In turn 1 , the participants generated alternate use ideas on their own on a given prompt object . In turn 2 , egos in the dynamic and static conditions received social exposure from their alters and could add further ideas to their lists . The solo condition did not have any stimuli . Egos in the dynamic condition could update their set of 2 alters at the end of each round , which the participants in other conditions could not . Experimental setup . It is challenging to identify or generate a dataset in the wild that allows for traceable links between ideas and their stimuli , and also provides temporal evolution information of a dynamic network . We therefore resort to an artiﬁcial social network created in the virtual laboratory . In this experiment , we are interested in divergent creativity , which deals with a person’s ability to come up with or explore many possible solutions to a given problem [ 45 ] . We use a customized version of Guilford’s Alternate Uses Test [ 46 ] , which is a widely - adopted approach for quantifying divergent creative performances . The study had 5 rounds . In each round , the participants were instructed to consider an everyday object ( e . g . , a brick ) , whose common use was stated ( e . g . , a brick is used for building ) . The participants needed to come up with alternative uses for the object : uses that are different than the given use , yet are appropriate and feasible . We choose 5 common objects from Form B of Guilford’s test as the ideation objects in the 5 rounds . We recruited 288 participants from Amazon Mechanical Turk , who are diverse in their age , racial , ethnic and gender distributions , and live in the United States ( see SI for details ) . We placed them randomly in one of three network conditions : ( 1 ) Dynamic , ( 2 ) Static , and ( 3 ) Solo . The static and solo conditions act as controls against which we assess the performances in the dynamic condition . For the dynamic and static conditions , we adopted a bipartite network structure [ 47 ] , as shown in Figure 1A . There are two types of nodes in the network , alters and egos . First , we pre - recorded the ideas of 6 alters , who generated ideas on their own . Then , we used these ideas as the stimuli for 36 egos — 18 of them placed in a dynamic network condition , and the other 18 in static . This bipartite design helped us ensure a uniform stimuli - set for all the egos in the static and dynamic conditions . We repeated the process for 6 independent trials , each with its unique set of alters . Under the solo condition , 36 additional participants generated ideas in isolation . Initially , the egos in the dynamic and static conditions were connected to 2 alters each using the network structure shown in Figure 1A . In each round , the egos in both of these conditions ﬁrst generated ideas on their own for 3 minutes ( ‘turn 1’ ) . They were then shown the ideas of the 2 alters they were connected to , and given an additional 3 minutes to list further ideas ( ‘turn 2’ ) . The egos were told not to resubmit any of the alters’ exact ideas , and that only non - redundant ideas would contribute to their performance . They were also told that there will be a short test at the end of the study , where they will need to recall the ideas shown to them . This was to ensure that the participants paid attention to the stimuli ideas , which has been shown to positively impact ideation performances [ 37 , 33 , 41 , 48 ] . Then , the egos rated the ideas of all of the 6 alters on novelty ( 5 - point ratings , 1 : not novel , 5 : highly novel ) [ 49 , 50 ] . Finally , in the dynamic condition , the egos were allowed to update their links at the end of the round , by optionally following / unfollowing alters to have an updated list of 2 alters each . Except for the alters’ username and ideas , no other information about the alters was shown to the egos . The egos were required to submit the rationale behind their choices of updating / not updating links in each round . This was in place to make the dynamic egos accountable for their choices , which has been shown to raise epistemic motivation and improve 3 Trial 1 Trial 2 Trial 3 Trial 4 Trial 5 Trial 6 Popular alter Unpopular alter Ego Figure 2 : Final ( evolved ) dynamic networks in the 6 trials . The diameters of the circles in the upper - rows ( alters ) are proportional to the alters’ number of followers at the end of the 5 th round . Some of the alters ﬁnished with more than the initial number of 6 ego - followers ( ‘popular alters’ , marked in cyan ) , while some ﬁnished with ≤ 6 ego - followers ( ‘unpopular alters’ , marked in maroon ) . systematic information processing [ 50 , 51 ] . The egos in the static condition could not update their links , marking the only difference between the two study conditions of static and dynamic . The participants in the solo condition were given 6 minutes to list their ideas without any external stimuli . Detailed descriptions and examples guided the participants throughout the study . Every - one was paid $ 10 after completing the requirements , and the top 5 egos / solo participants ( in each group of 18 ) with the most number of non - redundant ideas were awarded $ 5 bonuses . Figure 1B summarizes the protocol . Measures . We operationalize creative performance using three metrics : ( 1 ) Number of non - redundant ideas , ( 2 ) Average novelty ratings and ( 3 ) Creativity quotient . We brieﬂy introduce the metrics below , and refer to the Methods section for details . The non - redundant idea count is a mea - sure of statistical rarity of the ideas . If an idea is given by at most a threshold number of participants in a given participant pool , it is considered non - redundant . The non - redundant idea count is then incremented for all of the participants who submitted that idea [ 52 , 53 ] . Each idea of the alters was rated on novelty by 36 egos in the static and dynamic conditions in the corresponding trial . Additionally , each idea of the egos and solo participants was rated by at least 4 raters , who were hired separately from Amazon Mechanical Turk . We take the mean of the ratings received by each idea as that idea’s novelty indicator , and consider the average novelty rating received by an individual as his / her creativity metric . Our third metric is the creativity quotient , Q . This metric combines ﬂuency ( quantity of ideas ) and ﬂexibility ( the ability to generate a wide variety of ideas ) of the submitted ideas using informa - tion theoretic measures [ 54 , 55 , 56 ] . In all three metrics , a higher value indicates a better creative performance . Results Link update patterns in the network evolution . In response to RQ1 , we ﬁrst explore the evolution of network connectivity patterns and the associated cues . The dynamic networks evolved as the egos updated their lists of 2 alters across the rounds . The ﬁnal evolved networks of the 6 trials are shown in Figure 2 , where the diameters of the upper - row circles ( alters ) are drawn in proportion to the alters’ number of followers at the end of the 5 th round . All of the alters started with 6 ego - followers , but after the network evolution , some of the alters lost followers , and some of them gained . Figure 3 shows the number of connection updates per ego at the end of each round . As can be seen , the number of connection changes had a downward trend across rounds ( p < 0 . 001 for the negative slope ) , often showing a sharp drop at the end of the second round . Out of a maximum of 2 possible updates , an average of 0 . 97 connections were updated per ego after the ﬁrst rounds of the trials , 4 C o nn e c t i o n u p d a t e s p e r e g o Mean95 % CI 0 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 2 . 0 0 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 2 . 0 2 1 3 4 5 Round 2 1 3 4 5 2 1 3 4 5 Trial 1 Trial 2 Trial 3 Trial 4 Trial 5 Trial 6 Figure 3 : Number of connections updated per ego at the end of each round . Across rounds , the number of connection updates per ego has a downward trend ( p < 0 . 001 for the negative slope ) . Round C u m u l . n o n - r e d u n . i d e a c o u n t C u m u l a t i v e Q 5 10 10 20 30 40 50 60 15 20 25 Round 2 1 3 4 5 2 1 3 4 5 ( A ) ( C ) Popular mean Unpopular mean Popular 95 % CI Unpopular 95 % CI Popular mean Unpopular mean Popular 95 % CI Unpopular 95 % CI Popularalters Unpopularalters A v e r a g e n o v e l t y r a t i n g s 1 . 5 2 . 0 2 . 5 3 . 0 ( B ) 95 % CI * * * * * * * * * Figure 4 : ( A ) Cumulative non - redundant idea count comparisons between popular and unpopular alters across rounds . The total number of non - redundant ideas in all 5 rounds is signiﬁcantly higher for the popular alters than unpopular alters ( p < 0 . 001 , see footnote 1 ) . ( B ) The popular alters have signiﬁcantly higher average novelty ratings than the unpopular alters across all 5 rounds ( p < 0 . 001 , footnote 2 ) . ( C ) The total creativity quotient in all 5 rounds is signiﬁcantly higher for the popular alters than the unpopular alters ( p < 0 . 001 , footnote 3 ) . * * * p < 0 . 001 . while 0 . 3 connections were updated per ego after the ﬁnal rounds . This suggests that as the egos received information about the alters’ performances through the rounds , they made up their minds on whom to follow , and readjusted later if necessary . We denote alters who ﬁnished with > 6 and ≤ 6 followers as ‘popular’ and ‘unpopular’ alters respectively , for ease of reference . The rationale being , if the egos don’t update their links at all , the alters will still have the initially assigned 6 followers , so we take > 6 followers as the threshold for deﬁning popularity . The total non - redundant idea counts of the popular alters in all 5 rounds were signiﬁcantly higher than the counts of the unpopular alters ( p < 0 . 001 in the aggregated data over all trials 1 , Figure 4A ; p < 0 . 05 in each of the 6 trials , SI Figure S1 ) . Similarly , the average novelty ratings of the ideas of the popular alters were signiﬁcantly higher than those of the unpopular alters ( p < 0 . 001 in the aggregated data 2 , Figure 4B ; p < 0 . 05 in 5 out of 6 trials , SI Figure S2 ) . When it comes to the creativity quotient , the total Q scores of the popular alters in all 5 rounds were again signiﬁcantly higher than the unpopular ones ( p < 0 . 001 in the aggregated data 3 , Figure 4C ) . However , in this case , the differences were signiﬁcant in 3 of the trials ( p < 0 . 05 ) and insigniﬁcant in the other 3 ( SI Figure S3 ) . 1 Popular ( p ) vs unpopular ( u ) alters : 2 - tailed test , m p = 23 . 8 , m u = 14 . 4 , t ( 34 ) = 7 . 291 , p < 0 . 001 , 95 % C . I . for m p − m u = [ 6 . 9 , 12 ] 2 2 - tailed test , m p = 3 . 1 , m u = 2 . 6 , t ( 34 ) = 5 . 7 , p < 0 . 001 , 95 % C . I . for m p − m u = [ 0 . 3 , 0 . 6 ] 3 2 - tailed test , m p = 57 . 8 , m u = 36 . 7 , t ( 34 ) = 5 . 81 , p < 0 . 001 , 95 % C . I . for m p − m u = [ 13 . 9 , 28 . 2 ] 5 Table 1 : Regression results of predicting the alters’ relative popularity from their relative creativity markers . β = standardized regression coefﬁcient . * * p < 0 . 01 . * * * p < 0 . 001 . Predictor Model 1 : ¯ r (cid:48) only Model 2 : ¯ r (cid:48) , u (cid:48) Model 3 : all predictors β t β t β t ¯ r (cid:48) 0 . 1851 * * * 9 . 762 0 . 1278 * * * 4 . 972 0 . 1026 * * 3 . 435 u (cid:48) — — 0 . 0767 * * 2 . 983 0 . 0704 * * 2 . 763 Q (cid:48) — — — — 0 . 0399 1 . 562 R 2 0 . 737 0 . 793 0 . 808 Adjusted R 2 0 . 729 0 . 780 0 . 790 Using multivariate linear regression analysis , we explore how the creative performances of the alters correspond to their ﬁnal number of followers . As the dependent variable y i , we take the fraction of egos connected to an alter i at the end of the 5 th round . The three independent variables are : ( 1 ) the relative number of non - redundant ideas , u (cid:48) i = u i (cid:80) i u i , ( 2 ) relative average novelty ratings , ¯ r (cid:48) i = ¯ r i (cid:80) i ¯ r i , and ( 3 ) relative creativity quotient , Q (cid:48) i = Q i (cid:80) i Q i . Here , u i , ¯ r i and Q i are the total number of non - redundant ideas , average novelty ratings and total creativity quotients of alter i in all 5 rounds together . We take the relative performance of the alters with respect to other alters in a given trial , since the egos could only choose from a ﬁxed pool of alters . While all of the three independent variables correlate strongly with the dependent variable ( Pearson’s ρ = 0 . 80 , 0 . 86 , 0 . 75 respectively , p < 0 . 001 in each ) , multivariate regression takes care of information overlap therein and allows us to explore the relative contributions of the three independent variables . Mathematically , y i = β 0 + β 1 u (cid:48) i + β 2 ¯ r (cid:48) i + β 3 Q (cid:48) i ( 1 ) The results are shown in Table 1 . We ﬁrst test the three independent variables separately using uni - variate regression , and ﬁnd ¯ r (cid:48) to lead to the best adjusted R 2¯ r (cid:48) = 0 . 729 ( shown as Model 1 in the table ) . Adding u (cid:48) makes adjusted R 2¯ r (cid:48) , u (cid:48) = 0 . 780 ( Model 2 ) , while all the features together give adjusted R 2¯ r (cid:48) , u (cid:48) , Q (cid:48) = 0 . 790 ( Model 3 ) . In Model 3 , it can be seen that the β values are signiﬁcant for ¯ r (cid:48) and u (cid:48) , but not for Q (cid:48) . These p - values are computed against a null hypothesis of no asso - ciation between the dependent and independent variables , showing that the associations reported here are systematic for the ﬁrst two predictors ( ¯ r (cid:48) and u (cid:48) ) . Thus , the three independent variables together explain 79 % of the variation in the dependent variable , where the ﬁrst two independent variables contribute the most . This indicates that the egos’ decisions of following alters were more strongly captured by the novelty of the alters’ ideas ( ¯ r (cid:48) ) and moderately by the statistical rarity of the ideas ( u (cid:48) ) . The relative creativity quotient metric , which combines ﬂuency ( quantity of ideas ) and ﬂexibility ( quantity of different categories represented by the ideas ) , had much of its information overlapped with the other two metrics . The key take - away here is that the egos in a dynamic network are drawn to form ties with the consistently high - performing alters , as we anticipated . In typical creativity studies , participants are shown inspiration stimuli randomly or based on intrinsic qualities of the stimuli [ 29 , 28 ] . In our experiment , a key contrast is that the networks are allowed to dynamically self organize—in other words , one can choose for oneself who to take inspirations from . Thus , the implications of such adaptations on the ideation process , as we explore below ( RQ2 ) , become direct manifestations of the dynamic nature of the social networks . Exposure to high - performing alters is associated with better creative performance of the egos . We argued previously that forming ties with high - performing alters should increase the chances that an ego comes across ideas that have little overlap with his / her own . This lack of overlap , in turn , can increase the chances of stimulating new ideas in the ego by facilitating novel associations between remote concepts . To test this , we take advantage of the fact that in turn 1 , the egos generated ideas on their own prior to any social exposure , which allows us to test the overlap their ideas have with their alters’ ideas ( measured by idea - set overlap , Jaccard index , see Methods ) . In turn 2 , the egos could see the alters’ ideas , which allows us to explore whether the creativity measures of stimulated ideas have any association with how good the respective alters were . 6 ( i ) Both alters are popular ( ii ) One alter is popular ( iii ) No alter is popular 0 . 6 1 . 0 1 . 4 1 . 8 2 . 2 N o n - r e d u n d a n t i d e a c o u n t * * * * ( i ) Both alters are popular ( ii ) One alter is popular ( iii ) No alter is popular 0 . 00 0 . 04 0 . 08 0 . 12 * * * * * * J a cc a r d I n d e x 95 % CI * * * ( i ) Both alters are popular ( ii ) One alter is popular ( iii ) No alter is popular 2 . 2 2 . 4 2 . 6 2 . 8 3 . 0 3 . 2 A v e r a g e n o v e l t y r a t i n g s * * * * * ( i ) Both alters are popular 2 3 4 5 6 7 Q ( ii ) One alter is popular ( iii ) No alter is popular * * * * * * ( A ) ( B ) ( C ) ( D ) Figure 5 : ( A ) Average overlap ( measured with Jaccard Index ) between the egos’ turn - 1 ideas and their alters’ ideas , aggregated over all rounds and all trials . Comparisons are made among three cases of egos : those with ( i ) both , ( ii ) only one and ( iii ) no alter ( s ) who are round - wise popular . The overlaps are signiﬁcantly higher from ( i ) to ( ii ) , and from ( ii ) to ( iii ) ( p < 0 . 001 in both cases , see footnotes 4 , 5 ) . This shows that following more high - performing alters increases the ego’s exposure to ideas that are different from his / her own . Panels ( B ) , ( C ) and ( D ) show the creative performances of these egos in turn - 2 . In all three metrics , we ﬁnd that egos in condition ( iii ) perform signiﬁcantly worse than both ( i ) and ( ii ) , but there is no signiﬁcant difference between ( i ) and ( ii ) ( footnote 6 ) . * p < 0 . 05 , * * p < 0 . 01 , * * * p < 0 . 001 , all p - values Bonferroni - corrected . We ﬁrst ﬁnd out the round - wise popular alters . If an alter has > 6 followers at the end of a round , we take that as a marker that his / her performance was superior in that round , and label the alter as a popular alter for that round . Then , for each round , we split the egos ( dynamic and static conditions together ) into three groups , where ( i ) both , ( ii ) only one , and ( iii ) none of the followees of an ego are round - wise popular alters . For each ego , we take the average overlap between the ego’s turn - 1 ideas and his / her two alters’ ideas . Figure 5A shows that group ( i ) had signiﬁcantly less idea - overlap than group ( ii ) ( p < 0 . 001 4 ) , and group ( ii ) had signiﬁcantly less overlap than group ( iii ) ( p < 0 . 001 5 ) . This shows that following more high - performing alters systematically decreased the overlap between an ego’s turn - 1 ideas and the alters’ ideas , as was anticipated . SI Figure S4 shows that group ( i ) consistently had less overlap than groups ( ii ) and ( iii ) in each of the 5 rounds . We then compare the creativity metrics of the turn - 2 ideas among the same three groups . As shown in Figures 5B , 5C and 5D , both groups ( i ) and ( ii ) signiﬁcantly outperformed the turn - 2 ideas 4 Group ( i ) vs ( ii ) : 2 - tailed test , m 1 = 0 . 04 , m 2 = 0 . 08 , t ( 747 ) = − 6 . 493 , Bonferroni - corrected p < 0 . 001 , 95 % C . I . for m 1 − m 2 = [ − 0 . 043 , − 0 . 023 ] 5 Group ( ii ) vs ( iii ) : 2 - tailed test , m 2 = 0 . 08 , m 3 = 0 . 11 , t ( 805 ) = − 5 . 194 , Bonferroni - corrected p < 0 . 001 , 95 % C . I . for m 2 − m 3 = [ − 0 . 042 , − 0 . 019 ] 7 Round 2 1 3 4 5 ( B ) Static Round 2 1 3 4 5 ( A ) Dynamic S e m a n t i c D i ss i m i l a r i t y ( W M D ) 0 common alter 1 common alter 2 common alters 0 common alter 1 common alter 2 common alters Round 2 1 3 4 5 ( C ) Solo 2 . 8 3 . 0 3 . 2 3 . 4 3 . 6 2 . 8 3 . 0 3 . 2 3 . 4 3 . 6 2 . 8 3 . 0 3 . 2 3 . 4 3 . 6 0 common alter Initial condition After round 2 After round 5 1 common alter 2 common alters * * * Figure 6 : ( Top row ) One - mode projections of the bipartite networks on the ego - nodes . Three such projections from the dynamic condition of trial 4 are shown : the initial projected network , and the projections after rounds 2 and 5 . In the static condition , the initial condition remained ﬁxed . ( Bottom row ) Semantic dissimilarity ( measured by Word Mover’s Distance , WMD ) between the idea - sets of node - pairs are shown for ( A ) dynamic , ( B ) static and ( C ) solo conditions . Node - pairs that share two common alters in the dynamic condition show signiﬁcantly less dissimilarity by the ﬁfth round than the 0 and 1 common alter cases ( footnote 7 ) . The whiskers denote 95 % C . I . * p < 0 . 05 , * * p < 0 . 01 , all p - values Bonferroni - corrected . of group ( iii ) in all of the three metrics 6 . However , there was no signiﬁcant difference in any of the performance metrics between groups ( i ) and ( ii ) ( 2 - tailed test , p > 0 . 05 ) . This implies that following at least one high - performing alter is associated with better creative performance of the egos . To summarize , these results suggest evidence for better stimulation of ideas when egos are exposed to high - performing alters’ ideas . Following the same alters introduces semantic similarities in the egos’ ideas . We further mo - tivated a counter - argument that if many egos follow the same high - performing alters , their stimuli set will become overlapping . This might make the egos’ turn - 2 ideas similar , despite them ideating independently . To test this , we explore whether the semantic ( dis ) similarities of pairs of egos have any association with the number of common alters they have . We estimate the semantic nature of submitted ideas using neural word embeddings ( Word2Vec [ 57 ] ) and compare the dissimilarity of the embeddings using Word Mover’s Distance [ 58 ] ( see Methods ) . We ﬁrst take one - mode projections [ 47 ] of the round - wise bipartite networks on the ego nodes . In the projected graphs , two ego - nodes are connected with an edge if they have common alters ( top row of Figure 6 ) . For each node - pair , we compute the semantic dissimilarity between the two nodes’ turn - 2 idea - sets . We then compare the average dissimilarities among node - pairs with 2 , 1 and 0 6 2 - tailed t - tests ; Non redundant idea count : for groups ( i ) vs ( iii ) : m 1 = 1 . 96 , m 3 = 1 . 72 , t ( 602 ) = 2 . 403 , Bonferroni - corrected p < 0 . 05 , 95 % C . I . for m 1 − m 3 = [ 0 . 04 , 0 . 44 ] ; for ( ii ) vs ( iii ) : m 2 = 2 . 06 , m 3 = 1 . 72 , t ( 805 ) = 3 . 751 , Bonferroni - corrected p < 0 . 001 , 95 % C . I . for m 2 − m 3 = [ 0 . 17 , 0 . 53 ] . Average ratings : for ( i ) vs ( iii ) : m 1 = 3 . 22 , m 3 = 3 . 03 , t ( 601 ) = 4 . 98 , Bonferroni - corrected p < 0 . 001 , 95 % C . I . for m 1 − m 3 = [ 0 . 11 , 0 . 26 ] ; for ( ii ) vs ( iii ) : m 2 = 3 . 15 , m 3 = 3 . 03 , t ( 805 ) = 3 . 345 , Bonferroni - corrected p < 0 . 003 , 95 % C . I . for m 2 − m 3 = [ 0 . 05 , 0 . 18 ] . Creativity quotient : for ( i ) vs ( iii ) : m 1 = 6 . 95 , m 3 = 5 . 7 , t ( 602 ) = 6 . 12 , Bonferroni - corrected p < 0 . 001 , 95 % C . I . for m 1 − m 3 = [ 0 . 86 , 1 . 66 ] ; for ( ii ) vs ( iii ) : m 2 = 6 . 61 , m 3 = 5 . 7 , t ( 805 ) = 4 . 984 , Bonferroni - corrected p < 0 . 001 , 95 % C . I . for m 2 − m 3 = [ 0 . 56 , 1 . 28 ] 8 Static Dynamic Solo 2 . 6 2 . 8 3 . 0 3 . 2 ( B ) A v e r a g e n o v e l t y r a t i n g s 95 % CI 10 20 30 40 50 60 C u m u l a t i v e Q ( C ) Round 2 1 3 4 5 1 3 5 7 Round 2 1 3 4 5 ( A ) C u m u l . n o n - r e d u n . i d e a c o u n t StaticDynamicSolo StaticDynamicSolo * * Figure 7 : Individual - level comparisons of ( A ) cumulative non - redundant idea counts , ( B ) average novelty ratings and ( C ) cumulative creativity quotients among all the participants of the three study conditions . The static and dynamic conditions signiﬁcantly outperformed the solo case in the total number of non - redundant ideas ( see footnote 8 ) . All other pairwise comparisons show insigniﬁcant results . The whiskers in ( A ) and ( C ) denote 95 % CI . * Bonferroni - corrected p < 0 . 05 . common alters ( corresponding to the purple , gray and missing edges respectively in the projected graphs ) . We ﬁnd that as the rounds progressed and the dynamic - egos rewired their connections , the turn - 2 ideas of node - pairs with 2 common alters gradually became less dissimilar in the dynamic condition ( p < 0 . 05 for the negative slope , panel A in the bottom row of Figure 6 ) . Node - pairs with 0 and 1 common alters did not show any such decreasing trend . At the end of the 5 th round , the node - pairs with 2 common alters were signiﬁcantly less dissimilar than 0 and 1 shared alter cases 7 . In the static condition , the alters were the same as the dynamic condition , but the network ties remained ﬁxed . All of the three comparison cases of 0 , 1 and 2 common alter node - pairs showed a steadily decreasing dissimilarity ( p < 0 . 001 for the negative slope in all three cases ) , but there was no difference among the three comparison cases ( 2 - tailed test , p > 0 . 05 , panel B in the bottom row of Figure 6 ) . For the solo case , there was no stimuli at all , and the semantic dissimilarity did not have any systematic trend ( p = 0 . 68 for the slope , panel C in Figure 6 ) . This shows that as the rounds progressed and the dynamic networks evolved , the ideas of egos who followed the exact same alters increasingly grew similar . It is important to note that this effect is different from groupthink [ 59 ] , where the desire for harmony or conformity results in consensus among group members . In our case , the egos acted independently without the knowledge of other egos’ responses , yet became increasingly similar in association with their choices of the same alters . Individual creative performance comparisons among various study conditions . We proceed to analyze the individual creative performances in various study conditions . Figure 7A compares the number of non - redundant ideas of the egos and solo participants , aggregated over all the trials . The participants in both the dynamic and static conditions signiﬁcantly outperformed the solo partici - pants in the total number of non - redundant ideas generated ( p < 0 . 03 in both cases 8 ) . However , there was no signiﬁcant difference between the participants in the dynamic and static conditions ( 2 - tailed test , p > 0 . 05 ) . Looking at the trials individually , we ﬁnd that only in trial 3 the static condition signiﬁcantly outperformed the dynamic condition in the total number of non - redundant ideas generated ( 2 - tailed t - test , p < 0 . 05 , SI Figure S5 ) . However , this result was not replicated in any of the other trials ( p > 0 . 05 , SI Figure S5 ) . In the case of average novelty ratings , the egos in the dynamic condition showed signiﬁcantly higher average ratings than the ones in the static condition ( p < 0 . 05 ) , but after Bonferroni correction , the difference was no longer signiﬁcant 9 ( Figure 7B ) . The other condition - pair comparisons ( solo vs dynamic and solo vs static ) did not show any signiﬁcant difference ( 2 - tailed test , p > 0 . 05 , same 7 2 - tailed test , 2 vs 0 common alter ( s ) : m 2 = 3 . 01 , m 0 = 3 . 22 , t ( 452 ) = − 2 . 962 , Bonferroni - corrected p < 0 . 01 , 95 % C . I . for m 2 − m 0 = [ − 0 . 36 , − 0 . 07 ] ; 2 vs 1 common alter ( s ) : m 2 = 3 . 01 , m 1 = 3 . 19 , t ( 632 ) = − 2 . 788 , Bonferroni - corrected p < 0 . 02 , 95 % C . I . for m 2 − m 1 = [ − 0 . 31 , − 0 . 05 ] 8 Aggregated over all trials , 2 - tailed test ; dynamic ( d ) vs solo ( c ) : m d = 6 . 33 , m c = 4 . 44 , t ( 142 ) = 2 . 7 , Bonferroni - corrected p < 0 . 03 , 95 % C . I . for m d − m c = [ 0 . 52 , 3 . 26 ] ; static ( s ) vs solo ( c ) : m s = 6 . 77 , m c = 4 . 44 , t ( 142 ) = 2 . 898 , Bonferroni - corrected p < 0 . 02 , 95 % C . I . for m s − m c = [ 0 . 75 , 3 . 9 ] 9 Aggregated over all trials , 2 - tailed test ; dynamic ( d ) vs static ( s ) : m d = 3 . 09 , m s = 3 . 03 , t ( 214 ) = 2 . 042 , p < 0 . 04 , Bonferroni - corrected p > 0 . 05 , 95 % C . I . for m d − m s = [ 0 . 004 , 0 . 109 ] 9 ﬁgure ) . In the individual trials , the egos in the dynamic group signiﬁcantly outperformed the static egos in trials 4 and 6 ( p < 0 . 05 in 2 - tailed tests ) , but there was no signiﬁcant difference in the other four trials ( 2 - tailed test , p > 0 . 05 , SI Figure S6 ) . The creativity quotient metric did not show any signiﬁcant difference between any of the condition - pairs in any of the individual trials and in the aggregated data ( 2 - tailed tests , p > 0 . 05 for each condition pair , see Figure 7C for aggregated data , SI Figure S7 for individual trial data ) . Collective creative performance comparisons among various study conditions . Next , we com - pare the creative outcomes at a collective level . We refer to the sets of 18 egos in the static and dynamic conditions in each trial as the ‘collective’ or ‘group’ entity . For the solo condition , the 36 participants are randomly split into 2 similar groups of 18 participants . Thus , we compare among 6 dynamic - groups ( from the 6 trials ) , 6 static - groups and 2 solo - groups . The Methods section provides details on the group - level creativity metric computations . As detailed in SI Figures S8 , S9 and S10 , there was no signiﬁcant difference between any condition - pair in any of the three metrics ( 2 - tailed tests with Bonferroni correction , p > 0 . 05 in each case ) . Thus , at individual and collective levels , we observe no signiﬁcant beneﬁt in dynamic networks compared to their static counterparts . This is in contrast to another important human performance avenue—collective intelligence—where dynamic link adaptations have been shown to have individ - ual and collective performance beneﬁts over the static condition [ 22 ] . However , in typical collective intelligence tasks , people can imitate their peers’ answers to get closer to the known ‘correct’ re - sponse . In our study , the task was fundamentally different as it encouraged open ended ideation , and none of the three creativity metrics we used showed any systematic beneﬁt of the dynamic condition . Simulation model for the observed processes . We present a simulation model for the observed processes , as elaborated in the SI Index . We begin by generating idea - sets for alters such that some of the alters have more non - redundant ideas than others ( capturing popular and unpopular alters , respectively ) . Starting from the same initial network structure as the empirical setup , the egos gradually rewire their connectivity patterns to increasingly follow the popular alters . We model the consequent network - driven and cognitive effects on the ideation process as follows . ( A ) As rewiring takes place , more egos connect to the popular alters . This is a network - driven process , which makes the stimuli sets overlapping for egos who have either or both alters in common . ( B ) Given the stimuli set , the egos can generate stimulated ideas , which is a cognitive process . We model the cognitive process to capture the intuition that rare stimuli ideas are associated with better stimulation of new ideas . ( C ) There can be redundancies in the stimulated ideas of independently ideating egos , if they share the same alters . This is again a network - driven process , as the redundancy is initiated / facilitated by the egos’ similar choices of peers . The simulation results show that as the egos increasingly follow popular alters ( process A ) , they independently get exposed to more rare ideas , which is associated with their generation of new stimulated ideas ( process B ) . However , as the inter - ego redundancy increases ( process C ) , those stimulated ideas lose statistical rarity . Our simulated model captures these processes and insights that we observed in the empirical data . The results highlight the implications of the two extreme cases of inter - ego redundancy : if there is no inter - ego redundancy whatsoever , then all the stimulated ideas from a given stimulus are different from each other . In that case , process C becomes irrelevant , and the cognitive processes become key to the creative outcomes of the agents in the network . On the other hand , at full inter - ego redundancy , all the stimulated ideas from a single stimulus become exactly the same , in which case none of the stimulated ideas remain statistically rare anymore . These insights are robust to various cognitive stimulation functions that we used to test the generality of the obtained results . Discussion Social cues and heuristics are used by humans from their early childhood , lasts throughout the lifespan as they navigate through societal interactions , and contributes to their immense success as a species . In this study , we ﬁrst explored how the connectivity patterns in a creativity - centric dynamic network adapted to people’s performance cues . From 6 independent trials , we found evidence that the egos’ following / unfollowing patterns are governed signiﬁcantly by the novelty ( measured by average novelty ratings ) and statistical rarity ( measured by non - redundant idea counts ) of the alters’ 10 ideas . The three performance metrics used in the study lead to adjusted R 2 = 0 . 79 in predicting the relative popularity of the alters , suggesting that the cues reported here explain a reasonably high 79 % of the variation in the independent variable . Perry - Smith et al . ’s spiral model suggests that highly creative people will enjoy increased visibility in a dynamic network [ 12 ] . Our results validate that idea and explain the relevant cues governing such tie updates . These tie formations are different from preferential attachment [ 47 ] , since the egos were blind to the number of followers of the alters , and therefore , made their choices without the knowledge of which alters were already popular . The use of a bipartite network structure helped us keep the egos’ stimuli set uniform and thus understand the dynamic link update patterns in a cleaner manner . However , this setting comes with the trade off of having only unidirectional edges between alters and egos , as the alters’ ideas were pre - recorded . This asymmetry prohibited us from testing the full spiral model , where a back - and - forth inﬂuence mechanism is proposed among the interacting nodes . While the alters were passive actors in the study , our results have implications for them as well . As an example , one can consider the social media inﬂuencers , who act as third - party endorsers and shape audience perceptions through blogs , tweets , and other social media channels [ 60 ] . The rise of such micro - celebrity has triggered a lot of research interest ( e . g . , see [ 61 ] ) . In particular , corporate brands are interested in understanding how such inﬂuence works , towards leveraging the marketing capital therein [ 62 ] . We see in our results that the alters need to generate not only statistically rare ideas , but also ideas that are of high quality and novelty to win more attention over other alters ( i . e . , competitors ) . This has implications for the inﬂuencers regarding how to stay relevant and ahead of others , in parallel to the Red Queen hypothesis [ 63 ] . We conﬁrmed that following high - performing alters is associated with better creative performance of the egos . Indeed , as the egos followed more high - performing alters , the overlap reduced be - tween the ego’s own ideas and the alters’ ideas—which can partly explain the positive stimulation of ideas that we observed . In the dynamic networks , the egos showed a pattern of ﬂocking behind the high - performing alters , thereby improving their own chances of positive stimulation of novel ideas . However , there was a catch . We saw that ego - pairs who followed the same alters ( i . e . , exposed them - selves to the same stimuli set ) in the dynamic condition had an increasing semantic similarity with time , and at the end of the ﬁfth round , had signiﬁcantly higher semantic similarity than ego - pairs who did not have both of their alters in common . This shows one way dynamic networks can hurt original idea generation from its members : choosing to follow the same stimuli might inadvertently and increasingly make people’s ideas similar to each other , despite everyone ideating independently . It is important to note how these processes are driven by the egos’ own choices of alters , which captures the dynamic nature of real social networks . In the end , we found no systematic difference in creative outcomes between the dynamic and static conditions , in any of the three metrics . Our simulation model captures the interplay between the network - driven and cognitive processes , and corroborates the generality of the ﬁndings . These insights can lead to research directions that aim to make social networks more creatively competent , both individually and as a whole . As an example , consider a case where many aca - demicians follow the same popular domain experts on social media , seeking inspirations for novel research . Indeed , high quality stimuli can be expected to help the followers generate high quality ideas themselves . But at the same time , there can be redundancies in the stimulated ideas of dif - ferent followers , hurting the chances of out - of - the - box ideas to be generated . Research on social network intervention strategies will then need to strike a sweet spot to help the followers get the best out of their networks . One way to achieve this could be to recommend people new followers who are diverse and different from one’s current set of followers . This might decrease the chances for redundancy that stems from everyone dynamically choosing to follow the same popular stars . The same arguments can apply for ofﬂine social networks , such as in large - scale creative projects , where explorations on intelligent intervention can protect against network - driven redundancy being intro - duced among independent problem - solvers . As for an ego , one can further take away implications that seeking out high - quality creative inspirations can be worthwhile , but ﬂocking behind popular people might not always be optimal for one to stand out . Drawing from relevant literature , our study settings were designed to reduce performance bottle - necks and increase cognitive stimulation of the egos . The key bottlenecks known to affect creative performance in brainstorming sessions [ 64 , 41 , 42 ] were not present here : there was no evalu - ation apprehension from peers as the egos were asynchronously exposed to the alters’ ideas , no social loaﬁng as the individuals were responsible for their own performance , and no production 11 blocking as the egos could think on their own in turn 1 of each round . Furthermore , the quiz at the end and the justiﬁcations for connection update decisions recorded each round were in place to increase cognitive stimulation and and epistemic motivation , as per recommendations in litera - ture [ 37 , 33 , 41 , 48 , 50 , 51 ] . As expected , the dynamic and static conditions , which had access to stimuli from alters , enjoyed a signiﬁcantly higher count of non - redundant ideas compared to the solo condition , which did not have any stimuli . Our study is not without limitations . The participants generated alternative uses of common ob - jects in our study—which , despite being widely adopted in the creativity research domain , hardly resembles real - life creative challenges . The study settings prohibited us from exploring the effects of bidirectional creative inﬂuence . Also , the study lasted for 5 rounds , which can be prohibitively short to demonstrate the full effects of dynamicity in creative networks . Longitudinal studies with practical creative challenges might generate further insights on the research questions . Methods Metrics The idea of ‘divergent thinking’ leads an individual to come up with numerous and varied responses to a given prompt / situation . Individual differences can then be assessed through measures of ﬂu - ency ( quantity of ideas generated ) , originality ( quantity of unusual ideas ) , ﬂexibility ( the number of different categories implied by the ideas / the ability to generate a wide variety of ideas ) , elaboration ( development of ideas ) , and other parameters [ 41 , 31 , 65 ] . We choose the three metrics described below , based on previous literature . Non - redundant idea counts We operationalized creative performance as the number of non - redundant ideas generated , both at individual and group - levels [ 52 , 53 ] . First , we ﬁltered out inappropriate answers that did not meet the requirements of being feasible and different from the given use . Then , all the ideas in a given round were organized so that the same ideas are binned or collected together . We followed the coding rules described by Bouchard and Hare [ 66 ] and the rules speciﬁed in the scoring key of Guilford’s Alternate Uses test , Form B 10 . Once all the ideas were binned , we computed the non - redundant idea counts by looking at the statistical rarity of the ideas submitted by the participants . Namely , an idea was determined to be non - redundant if it was given by at most a threshold number of participants in a given pool of ideas . For the alters , the threshold was set to 1 , and the pool was set to be the round - wise idea - set of the 6 alters in the given trial . When comparing trial - wise dynamic and static egos , the threshold was heuristically set to 2 , with the pool being the round - wise idea - set of the 36 egos in the trial . In other words , if 3 or more egos in a trial submitted the same idea , it was no longer considered non - redundant . When comparing the data of the solo , static and dynamic conditions aggregated over all trials , the threshold was once again heuristically set to 2 , and the pool was set to all the ideas generated by all these participants . Finally , the total number of non - redundant ideas generated by an individual was taken as his / her creativity marker . 2 research assistants independently binned similar ideas together from the ﬁrst 3 trials of the study . They were shown the anonymized ideas in a random order . Based on their coding , the non - redundant idea counts of the participants were computed , which had a high agreement ( Krippendorff’s α = 0 . 85 ; Spearman’s ρ = 0 . 92 , p < 0 . 001 , 95 % C . I . = [ 0 . 885 , 0 . 941 ] ) . Then , the ﬁrst research assistant carried out the coding procedure for the rest of the dataset , which were used in the analyses . We also computed non - redundant ideas at a group ( collective ) level of the 18 egos in the static and dynamic conditions in each trial . The cardinality of the set of non - redundant ideas was taken as the performance marker at the group level , computed using the same thresholds and idea pools described above . In other words , if an idea is given by 2 egos in the same group , it is considered a non - redundant idea and the count is increased for both the egos . However , at the group level , that non - redundant idea is counted only once . 10 Guilford’s Alternate Uses Test is Copyright @ 1960 by Sheridan Supply Co . , all rights reserved in all media , and is published by Mind Garden , Inc , www . mindgarden . com . 12 Creativity Quotient For illustrative purposes , consider two imaginary participant’s alternate use ideas for a tire of a truck . Person A submits “boat dock bumper” , “cushion around a mailbox” and “go - kart track boundaries” , all of which are variants of shock absorption . On the other hand , person B submits “As the Os in an autOmOtive repair shOp sign” , “Donate a bunch to Donald Trump to create a wall out of them” and “Use it as a goal hoop in Quidditch” , which are much more spread out and dissimilar in terms of the categories they belong to . Intuitively , person B should be rewarded more . However , it is a matter of subjective judgment to determine the acceptable degree of overlap among different ideas and evaluate them accordingly . One way to resolve this is to analyze the ideas computationally . The Creativity Quotient metric accounts for both the quantity of ideas generated and the quantity of distinct categories those ideas fall into [ 55 ] . Bossomaier et al . proposed a semantic network approach for determining the creativity quotient [ 54 ] . The idea being , if the ideas of a participant ( in a single round , in our case ) are very ‘similar’ , perhaps they are mostly subtle variations of a small number of categories . Conversely , if they are very dissimilar , perhaps the participant touched many categories—which marks a better creative performance . The computation of the creativity quotient , Q , relies on an information theoretic measure of semantic similarity derived from WordNet [ 67 ] . Concepts appear as syn - sets ( set of synonyms ) in WordNet , and the nouns come with an ‘is a’ relationship . We begin by mapping the ideas in the dataset to their corresponding concepts or syn - sets . First , we pre - process the ideas by removing stopwords and punctuations , and running a spell - checker algorithm to ﬁx misspelled words . We then split each idea into the set of concepts it is made up of , preferably by replacing verbs and adjectives with re - lated nouns , whenever possible . Then , we ﬁnd the information content of each of those concepts . Seco et al . argued that since the taxonomic structure of WordNet is organized in a meaningful way , concepts with many hyponyms should convey less information than the ones with a small number of hyponyms [ 56 ] . In other words , infrequent concepts ( such as leaf nodes ) should hold more infor - mation than the nodes abstracting them . We can therefore quantify the Information Content , I , of a concept c as , I ( c ) = log (cid:0) h ( c ) + 1 w (cid:1) log (cid:0) 1 w (cid:1) = 1 − log ( h ( c ) + 1 ) log ( w ) ( 2 ) where h ( c ) is the number of hyponyms of concept c and w is the total number of concepts in the taxonomy . The denominator , in essence , normalizes the metric with respect to the most informative concept , to have an I value between [ 0 , 1 ] . Using the information contents of the concepts , we then proceed to determine how similar a given pool of ideas are in a certain round . The pool can be the ideas of an individual participant or the idea - set of an entire group . We compute the semantic similarity between every pair of concepts in the pool , c 1 and c 2 , using the following formulation [ 68 ] : sim ( c 1 , c 2 ) = 1 − (cid:16) I ( c 1 ) + I ( c 2 ) − 2 × sim MSCA ( c 1 , c 2 ) 2 (cid:17) ( 3 ) Here , the semantic similarity , sim ( c 1 , c 2 ) , is a function of the amount of information two concepts have in common , sim MSCA ( c 1 , c 2 ) . This , in turn , is given by the information content of the Most Speciﬁc Common Abstraction ( MSCA ) that subsumes both the concepts in question . Namely , sim MSCA ( c 1 , c 2 ) = max c (cid:48) ∈ S ( c 1 , c 2 ) I ( c (cid:48) ) ( 4 ) where S ( c 1 , c 2 ) is the set of concepts subsuming c 1 and c 2 . Given the pairwise mutualities of an idea pool , we compute the multi - information , I m , as the shared information across that response - set . This is computed by ﬁrst obtaining the maximum spanning tree from the network of concept similarity values between concept pairs , and then summing over the edge weights in the max spanning tree . Finally , the creativity quotient , Q , is obtained by Q = N − I m ( 5 ) where N is the total number of concepts in the idea pool . We compute the Q ( p ) i values for each participant i in each round p . The overall creativity quotient for the participant is then computed by 13 taking the sum over the 5 rounds , Q i = 5 (cid:88) p = 1 Q ( p ) i ( 6 ) Similarly , the overall creativity quotient for a group , Q g , is computed by , Q g = 5 (cid:88) p = 1 Q ( p ) g . ( 7 ) Ratings Each of the 36 participants in the static and dynamic groups rated their respective alters’ ideas in each round . This lead to a total of 38 , 880 ego - generated novelty ratings that we use in our analyses . We take the mean rating received by each alter from each ego , and compute the consequent intra - class correlation coefﬁcient among the ego - raters in that trial . The mean intra - class correlation coefﬁcient from all 6 trials was ICC ( 3 , 36 ) = 0 . 945 . For the egos’ ideas , we collected ratings from Amazon Mechanical Turk workers ( ‘raters’ ) , who were different individuals from the study participants . To make the rating comparisons fair , each rater focused on only one round , and rated all the 36 participants’ ideas on that round in a given trial ( static and dynamic conditions ) . They were ﬁrst given 3 minutes to generate ideas on that round’s prompt themselves , so that they could appreciate the difﬁculty - levels associated with the tasks . Then the ideas were shown to them in a random order , which they rated on novelty ( 5 - point scale , 1 : not novel , 5 : highly novel ) . The raters were guided with detailed instructions and examples . Each idea was rated by at least 4 raters . The ideas of the 36 participants in the solo condition were similarly rated . 141 raters were hired , who generated a total of 40 , 320 ratings in the dataset . Computed the same way as the ego - raters above , we ﬁnd a positive mean intra - class correlation coefﬁcient among the raters , ICC ( 3 , 4 ) = 0 . 317 . For an idea j , the mean of all its ratings is taken as the idea - rating r j . For a participant i , the average novelty rating is computed as ¯ r i = mean ( r j ) , for all ideas j submitted by i . This average novelty rating is used as the quality indicator of the participant in our analyses . For the collective level , the mean rating of all the participants is taken as the creative performance marker . Measure of idea overlap To measure the overlap between idea - sets A and B , we use the Jaccard Index : J ( A , B ) = | A ∩ B | | A ∪ B | . ( 8 ) If A = B = ∅ , we take J ( A , B ) = 1 . We resort to the manual annotations done in non - redundant idea count computations to decide which ideas should be considered the same entry in the idea - sets . Measure of semantic dissimilarity To measure how semantically dissimilar two sets of ideas are , we use the Word Mover’s Distance metric [ 58 ] . First , we remove all of the stop - words and punctuation from the ideas , and ﬁnd their Word2Vec [ 57 ] embeddings . The dissimilarity or distance between two idea - sets is then computed by taking the minimum Euclidean distance that the embedded words of one idea - set need to travel to reach the embedded words of another idea - set . Code and Data Availability The data analysis and simulation code is available at http : / / bit . ly / dynamic _ creativity19 ( temporary link for review ) . The full data is not publicly released to ensure com - pliance with the copyright requirements of some of the study materials . 14 References [ 1 ] Frank , M . R . et al . Toward understanding the impact of artiﬁcial intelligence on labor . Pro - ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 116 , 6531 – 6539 ( 2019 ) . [ 2 ] Mitchell , T . & Brynjolfsson , E . Track how technology is transforming work . Nature 544 , 290 – 292 ( 2017 ) . [ 3 ] Brynjolfsson , E . & Mitchell , T . What can machine learning do ? Workforce implications . Science 358 , 1530 – 1534 ( 2017 ) . [ 4 ] Manyika , J . et al . A future that works : Automation , employment , and productivity . McKinsey Global Institute ( 2017 ) . [ 5 ] Acemoglu , D . & Restrepo , P . Robots and jobs : Evidence from US labor markets . Journal of Political Economy ( 2019 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1086 / 705716 . [ 6 ] Rotman , D . Making AI into jobs . MIT Technology Review 121 , 10 – 17 ( 2018 ) . [ 7 ] Alabdulkareem , A . et al . Unpacking the polarization of workplace skills . Science Advances 4 ( 2018 ) . [ 8 ] Baten , R . A . , Clark , F . & Hoque , M . E . Upskilling together : How peer - interaction inﬂuences speaking - skills development online . In 8th International Conference on Affective Computing & Intelligent Interaction ( ACII ) ( 2019 ) . [ 9 ] Wu , L . , Wang , D . & Evans , J . A . Large teams develop and small teams disrupt science and technology . Nature 566 , 378 ( 2019 ) . [ 10 ] Milojevi´c , S . Principles of scientiﬁc research team formation and evolution . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 111 , 3984 – 3989 ( 2014 ) . [ 11 ] Kazanjian , R . K . , Drazin , R . & Glynn , M . A . Creativity and technological learning : The roles of organization architecture and crisis in large - scale projects . Journal of Engineering and Technology Management 17 , 273 – 298 ( 2000 ) . [ 12 ] Perry - Smith , J . E . & Shalley , C . E . The social side of creativity : A static and dynamic social network perspective . Academy of Management Review 28 , 89 – 106 ( 2003 ) . [ 13 ] Kijkuit , B . & Van Den Ende , J . The organizational life of an idea : Integrating social network , creativity and decision - making perspectives . Journal of Management Studies 44 , 863 – 882 ( 2007 ) . [ 14 ] Perry - Smith , J . E . Social yet creative : The role of social relationships in facilitating individual creativity . Academy of Management Journal 49 , 85 – 101 ( 2006 ) . [ 15 ] Henrich , J . The Secret of Our Success : How Culture is Driving Human Evolution , Domesti - cating Our Species , and Making Us Smarter ( Princeton University Press , 2015 ) . [ 16 ] Henrich , J . , Chudek , M . & Boyd , R . The big man mechanism : How prestige fosters coopera - tion and creates prosocial leaders . Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London B : Biological Sciences 370 ( 2015 ) . [ 17 ] Welles , B . F . & Contractor , N . Individual motivations and network effects : A multilevel anal - ysis of the structure of online social relationships . The ANNALS of the American Academy of Political and Social Science 659 , 180 – 190 ( 2015 ) . [ 18 ] Bollen , J . & Gonçalves , B . Network happiness : How online social interactions relate to our well being . In Complex Spreading Phenomena in Social Systems , 257 – 268 ( Springer , 2018 ) . [ 19 ] Herrmann , E . , Call , J . , Hernández - Lloreda , M . V . , Hare , B . & Tomasello , M . Humans have evolved specialized skills of social cognition : The cultural intelligence hypothesis . Science 317 , 1360 – 1366 ( 2007 ) . [ 20 ] Boyd , R . , Richerson , P . J . & Henrich , J . The cultural niche : Why social learning is essential for human adaptation . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 108 , 10918 – 10925 ( 2011 ) . [ 21 ] Rand , D . G . , Arbesman , S . & Christakis , N . A . Dynamic social networks promote cooperation in experiments with humans . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 108 , 19193 – 19198 ( 2011 ) . 15 [ 22 ] Almaatouq , A . et al . The wisdom of the network : How adaptive networks promote collective intelligence ( 2018 ) . arxiv . org / abs / 1805 . 04766 . [ 23 ] Bernstein , E . , Shore , J . & Lazer , D . How intermittent breaks in interaction improve collective intelligence . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 115 , 8734 – 8739 ( 2018 ) . [ 24 ] Shaﬁpour , R . et al . Buildup of speaking skills in an online learning community : A network - analytic exploration . Palgrave Communications 4 , 63 ( 2018 ) . [ 25 ] Jiang , H . , Zhang , Q . - P . & Zhou , Y . Dynamic creative interaction networks and team creativity evolution : A longitudinal study . The Journal of Creative Behavior 52 , 168 – 196 ( 2018 ) . [ 26 ] Chen , M . - H . , Chang , Y . - C . & Hung , S . - C . Social capital and creativity in R & D project teams . R & D Management 38 , 21 – 34 ( 2008 ) . [ 27 ] Leenders , R . T . A . , Van Engelen , J . M . & Kratzer , J . Virtuality , communication , and new product team creativity : A social network perspective . Journal of Engineering and Technology Management 20 , 69 – 92 ( 2003 ) . [ 28 ] Siangliulue , P . , Arnold , K . C . , Gajos , K . Z . & Dow , S . P . Toward collaborative ideation at scale : Leveraging ideas from others to generate more creative and diverse ideas . In Proceedings of the 18th ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing , 937 – 945 ( ACM , 2015 ) . [ 29 ] Chan , J . , Dang , S . & Dow , S . P . Comparing different sensemaking approaches for large - scale ideation . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 2717 – 2728 ( ACM , 2016 ) . [ 30 ] Nijstad , B . A . , Diehl , M . & Stroebe , W . Cognitive stimulation and interference in idea gener - ating groups . Group Creativity : Innovation through Collaboration 137 – 159 ( 2003 ) . [ 31 ] Runco , M . A . Creativity : Theories and Themes : Research , Development , and Practice ( Else - vier , 2014 ) . [ 32 ] Carson , S . Your Creative Brain : Seven Steps to Maximize Imagination , Productivity , and Innovation in Your Life ( John Wiley & Sons , 2010 ) . [ 33 ] Dugosh , K . L . & Paulus , P . B . Cognitive and social comparison processes in brainstorming . Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 41 , 313 – 320 ( 2005 ) . [ 34 ] Mednick , S . The associative basis of the creative process . Psychological Review 69 , 220 ( 1962 ) . [ 35 ] Collins , A . M . & Loftus , E . F . A spreading - activation theory of semantic processing . Psycho - logical Review 82 , 407 ( 1975 ) . [ 36 ] Paulus , P . B . & Brown , V . R . Toward more creative and innovative group idea generation : A cognitive - social - motivational perspective of brainstorming . Social and Personality Psychology Compass 1 , 248 – 265 ( 2007 ) . [ 37 ] Nijstad , B . A . & Stroebe , W . How the group affects the mind : A cognitive model of idea generation in groups . Personality and Social Psychology Review 10 , 186 – 213 ( 2006 ) . [ 38 ] Brown , V . R . & Paulus , P . B . Making group brainstorming more effective : Recommendations from an associative memory perspective . Current Directions in Psychological Science 11 , 208 – 212 ( 2002 ) . [ 39 ] Dahl , D . W . & Moreau , P . The inﬂuence and value of analogical thinking during new product ideation . Journal of Marketing Research 39 , 47 – 60 ( 2002 ) . [ 40 ] Doboli , A . , Umbarkar , A . , Subramanian , V . & Doboli , S . Two experimental studies on creative concept combinations in modular design of electronic embedded systems . Design Studies 35 , 80 – 109 ( 2014 ) . [ 41 ] Paulus , P . Groups , teams , and creativity : The creative potential of idea - generating groups . Applied Psychology 49 , 237 – 262 ( 2000 ) . [ 42 ] Dennis , A . & Williams , M . Electronic brainstorming . Group Creativity : Innovation through Collaboration 160 – 178 ( 2003 ) . [ 43 ] Burt , R . S . Structural holes and good ideas . American Journal of Sociology 110 , 349 – 399 ( 2004 ) . 16 [ 44 ] Zhou , J . , Shin , S . J . , Brass , D . J . , Choi , J . & Zhang , Z . - X . Social networks , personal values , and creativity : Evidence for curvilinear and interaction effects . Journal of Applied Psychology 94 , 1544 ( 2009 ) . [ 45 ] Kozbelt , A . , Beghetto , R . A . & Runco , M . A . Theories of creativity . The Cambridge Handbook of Creativity 2 , 20 – 47 ( 2010 ) . [ 46 ] Guildford , J . , Christensen , P . , Merriﬁeld , P . & Wilson , R . Alternate uses : Manual of instruc - tions and interpretation . Orange , CA : Sheridan Psychological Services ( 1978 ) . [ 47 ] Newman , M . Networks ( Oxford University Press , 2018 ) . [ 48 ] Brown , V . , Tumeo , M . , Larey , T . S . & Paulus , P . B . Modeling cognitive interactions during group brainstorming . Small Group Research 29 , 495 – 526 ( 1998 ) . [ 49 ] Coursey , L . E . , Williams , B . C . , Kenworthy , J . B . , Paulus , P . B . & Doboli , S . Divergent and convergent group creativity in an asynchronous online environment . The Journal of Creative Behavior ( 2018 ) . [ 50 ] Bechtoldt , M . N . , De Dreu , C . K . , Nijstad , B . A . & Choi , H . - S . Motivated information pro - cessing , social tuning , and group creativity . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 99 , 622 ( 2010 ) . [ 51 ] Scholten , L . , Van Knippenberg , D . , Nijstad , B . A . & De Dreu , C . K . Motivated information processing and group decision - making : Effects of process accountability on information pro - cessing and decision quality . Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 43 , 539 – 552 ( 2007 ) . [ 52 ] Oppezzo , M . & Schwartz , D . L . Give your ideas some legs : The positive effect of walking on creative thinking . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition 40 , 1142 ( 2014 ) . [ 53 ] Abdullah , S . , Czerwinski , M . , Mark , G . & Johns , P . Shining ( blue ) light on creative ability . In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM International Joint Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing , 793 – 804 ( ACM , 2016 ) . [ 54 ] Bossomaier , T . , Harré , M . , Knittel , A . & Snyder , A . A semantic network approach to the Creativity Quotient ( CQ ) . Creativity Research Journal 21 , 64 – 71 ( 2009 ) . [ 55 ] Snyder , A . , Mitchell , J . , Bossomaier , T . & Pallier , G . The Creativity Quotient : An objective scoring of ideational ﬂuency . Creativity Research Journal 16 , 415 – 419 ( 2004 ) . [ 56 ] Seco , N . , Veale , T . & Hayes , J . An intrinsic information content metric for semantic similarity in WordNet . In Proceedings of the 16th Eureopean Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence , ECAI , vol . 16 , 1089 ( 2004 ) . [ 57 ] Mikolov , T . , Chen , K . , Corrado , G . & Dean , J . Efﬁcient estimation of word representations in vector space . arXiv preprint arXiv : 1301 . 3781 ( 2013 ) . [ 58 ] Kusner , M . , Sun , Y . , Kolkin , N . & Weinberger , K . From word embeddings to document dis - tances . In International Conference on Machine Learning , 957 – 966 ( 2015 ) . [ 59 ] Nemeth , C . & Nemeth - Brown , B . Better than individuals . Group Creativity : Innovation through Collaboration 4 , 63 – 84 ( 2003 ) . [ 60 ] Freberg , K . , Graham , K . , McGaughey , K . & Freberg , L . A . Who are the social media in - ﬂuencers ? A study of public perceptions of personality . Public Relations Review 37 , 90 – 92 ( 2011 ) . [ 61 ] Khamis , S . , Ang , L . & Welling , R . Self - branding , ‘micro - celebrity’ and the rise of social media inﬂuencers . Celebrity Studies 8 , 191 – 208 ( 2017 ) . [ 62 ] Booth , N . & Matic , J . A . Mapping and leveraging inﬂuencers in social media to shape corporate brand perceptions . Corporate Communications : An International Journal 16 , 184 – 191 ( 2011 ) . [ 63 ] Derfus , P . J . , Maggitti , P . G . , Grimm , C . M . & Smith , K . G . The red queen effect : Competitive actions and ﬁrm performance . Academy of Management Journal 51 , 61 – 80 ( 2008 ) . [ 64 ] Paulus , P . B . , Putman , V . L . , Dugosh , K . L . , Dzindolet , M . T . & Coskun , H . Social and cognitive inﬂuences in group brainstorming : Predicting production gains and losses . European Review of Social Psychology 12 , 299 – 325 ( 2002 ) . [ 65 ] Sawyer , R . K . Explaining Creativity : The Science of Human Innovation ( Oxford University Press , 2011 ) . 17 [ 66 ] Bouchard Jr , T . J . & Hare , M . Size , performance , and potential in brainstorming groups . Journal of Applied Psychology 54 , 51 ( 1970 ) . [ 67 ] Miller , G . A . Wordnet : A lexical database for English . Communications of the ACM 38 , 39 – 41 ( 1995 ) . [ 68 ] Jiang , J . J . & Conrath , D . W . Semantic similarity based on corpus statistics and lexical taxon - omy . In Proceedings of the International Conference on Research in Computational Linguistics ( 1998 ) . 18 Supplementary Materials 1 Demographic information Among the 288 participants we recruited from Amazon Mechanical Turk , 167 were male and 121 were female . Their ages ranged from 18 to 55 + ( 18y - 24y : 30 , 25y - 34y : 129 , 35y - 44y : 81 , 45y - 54y : 23 , 55y + : 25 ) . The racial distribution was : White : 224 , Asian : 15 , Black or African American : 22 , American Indian or Alaska Native : 15 , other : 12 . Among them , 15 participants belonged to Hispanic or Latino ethnicity . 2 Supplementary ﬁgures Figures S1 through S10 present additional results from the analysis , as referred to from the main manuscript . Figure S1 : Trial - wise comparisons of cumulative non - redundant idea counts between popular and unpopular alters . 2 - tailed tests show the popular alters ( p ) to have signiﬁcantly higher cumulative counts over all rounds than unpopular alters ( u ) in all 6 trials , detailed as follows . Trial 1 : m p = 17 . 0 , m u = 9 . 5 , t ( 4 ) = 5 . 222 , p = 0 . 0064 , 95 % C . I . for m p − m u = [ 4 . 0 , 11 . 0 ] ; Trial 2 : m p = 21 . 5 , m u = 12 . 8 , t ( 4 ) = 2 . 879 , p = 0 . 045 , 95 % C . I . for m p − m u = [ 2 . 1 , 15 . 4 ] ; Trial 3 : m p = 25 . 0 , m u = 14 . 0 , t ( 4 ) = 6 . 351 , p = 0 . 0031 , 95 % C . I . for m p − m u = [ 6 . 9 , 15 . 1 ] ; Trial 4 : m p = 26 . 0 , m u = 15 . 8 , t ( 4 ) = 6 . 629 , p = 0 . 0027 , 95 % C . I . for m p − m u = [ 6 . 5 , 14 . 0 ] ; Trial 5 : m p = 25 . 3 , m u = 15 . 0 , t ( 4 ) = 6 . 609 , p = 0 . 0027 , 95 % C . I . for m p − m u = [ 6 . 8 , 13 . 9 ] ; Trial 6 : m p = 27 . 0 , m u = 19 . 3 , t ( 4 ) = 4 . 66 , p = 0 . 0096 , 95 % C . I . for m p − m u = [ 3 . 8 , 11 . 7 ] . 19 95 % CI Figure S2 : Trial - wise comparison of average novelty ratings between popular and unpopular alters . 2 - tailed tests show the popular alters ( p ) to have signiﬁcantly higher average novelty ratings over all rounds than unpopular alters ( u ) in 5 out of 6 trials , detailed as follows . Trial 1 : m p = 3 . 2 , m u = 3 . 0 , t ( 4 ) = 3 . 675 , p = 0 . 021 , 95 % C . I . for m p − m u = [ 0 . 1 , 0 . 4 ] ; Trial 2 : m p = 3 . 1 , m u = 2 . 8 , t ( 4 ) = 2 . 67 , p = 0 . 0558 , 95 % C . I . for m p − m u = [ 0 . 04 , 0 . 7 ] ; Trial 3 : m p = 3 . 2 , m u = 2 . 5 , t ( 4 ) = 4 . 264 , p = 0 . 013 , 95 % C . I . for m p − m u = [ 0 . 3 , 1 . 0 ] ; Trial 4 : m p = 3 . 0 , m u = 2 . 6 , t ( 4 ) = 4 . 207 , p = 0 . 0136 , 95 % C . I . for m p − m u = [ 0 . 2 , 0 . 6 ] ; Trial 5 : m p = 2 . 9 , m u = 2 . 4 , t ( 4 ) = 5 . 98 , p = 0 . 0039 , 95 % C . I . for m p − m u = [ 0 . 3 , 0 . 7 ] , Trial 6 : m p = 3 . 0 , m u = 2 . 5 , t ( 4 ) = 3 . 63 , p = 0 . 022 , 95 % C . I . for m p − m u = [ 0 . 2 , 0 . 8 ] 20 Figure S3 : Trial - wise comparison of cumulative Q between popular and unpopular alters . 2 - tailed tests show the popular alters ( p ) to have signiﬁcantly higher total Q scores over all rounds than unpopular alters ( u ) in 3 of the trials , detailed as follows . Trial 1 : m p = 72 . 6 , m u = 38 , t ( 4 ) = 4 . 102 , p = 0 . 015 , 95 % C . I . for m p − m u = [ 14 . 7 , 54 . 6 ] ; Trial 2 : m p = 57 . 9 , m u = 36 . 1 , t ( 4 ) = 2 . 41 , p = 0 . 073 , 95 % C . I . for m p − m u = [ 1 . 7 , 41 . 8 ] ; Trial 3 : m p = 45 . 5 , m u = 35 . 9 , t ( 4 ) = 1 . 572 , p = 0 . 19 , 95 % C . I . for m p − m u = [ − 4 . 9 , 24 . 2 ] ; Trial 4 : m p = 57 . 4 , m u = 46 . 2 , t ( 4 ) = 1 . 44 , p = 0 . 223 , 95 % C . I . for m p − m u = [ − 6 . 2 , 28 . 6 ] ; Trial 5 : m p = 58 . 7 , m u = 26 . 9 , t ( 4 ) = 2 . 962 , p = 0 . 041 , 95 % C . I . for m p − m u = [ 7 . 5 , 56 . 2 ] ; Trial 6 : m p = 54 . 1 , m u = 35 , t ( 4 ) = 2 . 872 , p = 0 . 045 , 95 % C . I . for m p − m u = [ 4 . 3 , 34 . 0 ] 21 Figure S4 : Average overlap ( measured with Jaccard Index ) between idea - sets of egos’ turn - 1 ideas and their alters in various rounds . Comparisons are made among three cases of egos : those with ( i ) both , ( ii ) only one and ( iii ) no alter ( s ) who are round - wise popular . As can be seen , egos who follow 2 popular alters consistently show a lower overlap compared to the other two cases . 2 - tailed test results on the ﬁfth round is given below . ( i ) vs ( ii ) : m 1 = 0 . 03 , m 2 = 0 . 1 , t ( 145 ) = − 7 . 03 , Bonferroni - corrected p < 0 . 001 , 95 % C . I . for m 1 − m 2 = [ − 0 . 088 , − 0 . 05 ] ; ( i ) vs ( iii ) : m 1 = 0 . 03 , m 3 = 0 . 13 , t ( 131 ) = − 8 . 223 , Bonferroni - corrected p < 0 . 001 , 95 % C . I . for m 1 − m 3 = [ − 0 . 121 , − 0 . 074 ] 22 Figure S5 : Trial - wise comparison of non - redundant idea counts between static and dynamic egos . 2 - tailed tests are performed between the cumulative counts of static ( s ) and dynamic ( d ) conditions at the end of all 5 rounds , as detailed in the following : Trial 1 : m s = 10 . 89 , m d = 12 . 28 , t ( 34 ) = − 0 . 968 , p = 0 . 3397 , 95 % C . I . for m s − m d = [ − 4 . 221 , 1 . 444 ] ; Trial 2 : m s = 17 . 78 , m d = 17 . 33 , t ( 34 ) = 0 . 261 , p = 0 . 7954 , 95 % C . I . for m s − m d = [ − 2 . 914 , 3 . 803 ] ; Trial 3 : m s = 19 . 5 , m d = 15 . 94 , t ( 34 ) = 2 . 036 , p = 0 . 0496 , 95 % C . I . for m s − m d = [ 0 . 106 , 7 . 005 ] ; Trial 4 : m s = 20 . 67 , m d = 21 . 28 , t ( 34 ) = − 0 . 272 , p = 0 . 7873 , 95 % C . I . for m s − m d = [ − 5 . 050 , 3 . 828 ] ; Trial 5 : m s = 21 . 11 , m d = 18 . 28 , t ( 34 ) = 1 . 415 , p = 0 . 1662 , 95 % C . I . for m s − m d = [ − 1 . 122 , 6 . 789 ] ; Trial 6 : m s = 19 . 67 , m d = 19 . 67 , t ( 34 ) = 0 . 0 , p = 1 . 0 , 95 % C . I . for m s − m d = [ − 3 . 280 , 3 . 280 ] . Whiskers represent 95 % CI . 23 95 % CI Figure S6 : Trial - wise comparison of average novelty ratings between dynamic and static egos . 2 - tailed tests are performed between the average novelty ratings of dynamic ( d ) and static ( s ) condi - tions over all 5 rounds , as detailed in the following : Trial 1 : m d = 2 . 93 , m s = 2 . 98 , t ( 34 ) = − 1 . 091 , p = 0 . 283 , 95 % C . I . for m d − m S = [ − 0 . 137 , 0 . 04 ] ; Trial 2 : m d = 3 . 05 , m s = 3 . 01 , t ( 34 ) = 0 . 641 , p = 0 . 526 , 95 % C . I . for m d − m s = [ − 0 . 069 , 0 . 136 ] ; Trial 3 : m d = 2 . 88 , m s = 2 . 9 , t ( 34 ) = − 0 . 358 , p = 0 . 723 , 95 % C . I . for m d − m s = [ − 0 . 097 , 0 . 067 ] ; Trial 4 : m d = 3 . 18 , m s = 3 . 04 , t ( 34 ) = 3 . 107 , p = 0 . 0038 , 95 % C . I . for m d − m s = [ 0 . 054 , 0 . 241 ] ; Trial 5 : m d = 3 . 1 , m s = 3 . 07 , t ( 34 ) = 0 . 495 , p = 0 . 624 , 95 % C . I . for m d − m s = [ − 0 . 084 , 0 . 14 ] ; Trial 6 : m d = 3 . 38 , m s = 3 . 19 , t ( 34 ) = 3 . 801 , p = 0 . 00057 , 95 % C . I . for m d − m s = [ 0 . 092 , 0 . 292 ] . 24 Figure S7 : Trial - wise comparison of creativity quotients between static and dynamic egos . 2 - tailed tests results between the cumulative Q counts of the static ( s ) and dynamic ( d ) conditions at the end of all 5 rounds is given in the following : Trial 1 : m s = 55 . 71 , m d = 51 . 47 , t ( 34 ) = 0 . 848 , p = 0 . 402 , 95 % C . I . for m s − m d = [ − 5 . 628 , 14 . 104 ] ; Trial 2 : m s = 56 . 28 , m d = 60 . 03 , t ( 34 ) = − 0 . 9 , p = 0 . 375 , 95 % C . I . for m s − m d = [ − 11 . 976 , 4 . 481 ] ; Trial 3 : m s = 61 . 52 , m d = 64 . 08 , t ( 34 ) = − 0 . 548 , p = 0 . 588 , 95 % C . I . for m s − m d = [ − 11 . 833 , 6 . 695 ] ; Trial 4 : m s = 64 . 17 , m d = 67 . 8 , t ( 34 ) = − 0 . 69 , p = 0 . 495 , 95 % C . I . for m s − m d = [ − 14 . 01 , 6 . 752 ] ; Trial 5 : m s = 58 . 65 , m d = 64 . 76 , t ( 34 ) = − 1 . 232 , p = 0 . 227 , 95 % C . I . for m s − m d = [ − 15 . 912 , 3 . 689 ] ; Trial 6 : m s = 55 . 64 , m d = 58 . 53 , t ( 34 ) = − 0 . 624 , p = 0 . 537 , 95 % C . I . for m s − m d = [ − 12 . 033 , 6 . 254 ] . Whiskers denote 95 % CI . 25 95 % CI Figure S8 : Collective - level comparison of non - redundant idea counts between solo , static and dy - namic groups . 2 - tailed tests show that the differences are insigniﬁcant between each condition - pair : Dynamic ( d ) vs solo ( c ) : m d = 68 . 33 , m c = 39 . 5 , t ( 6 ) = 1 . 928 , Bonferroni - corrected p > 0 . 05 , 95 % C . I . for m d − m c = [ − 4 . 538 , 62 . 205 ] ; Dynamic ( d ) vs static ( s ) : m d = 68 . 33 , m s = 74 . 33 , t ( 10 ) = − 0 . 391 , Bonferroni - corrected p > 0 . 05 , 95 % C . I . for m d − m s = [ − 37 . 235 , 25 . 235 ] ; Static ( s ) vs solo ( c ) : m s = 74 . 33 , m c = 39 . 5 , t ( 6 ) = 1 . 465 , Bonferroni - corrected p > 0 . 05 , 95 % C . I . for m s − m c = [ − 18 . 240 , 87 . 906 ] . 95 % CI Figure S9 : Collective - level comparison of average ratings between solo , static and dynamic groups . 2 - tailed tests show that the differences are insigniﬁcant between each condition - pair : Dynamic ( d ) vs solo ( c ) : m d = 3 . 09 , m c = 3 . 06 , t ( 6 ) = 0 . 206 , Bonferroni - corrected p > 0 . 05 , 95 % C . I . for m d − m c = [ − 0 . 276 , 0 . 332 ] ; Dynamic ( d ) vs static ( s ) : m d = 3 . 09 , m s = 3 . 03 , t ( 10 ) = 0 . 665 , Bonferroni - corrected p > 0 . 05 , 95 % C . I . for m d − m s = [ − 0 . 116 , 0 . 228 ] ; Static ( s ) vs solo ( c ) : m s = 3 . 03 , m c = 3 . 06 , t ( 6 ) = − 0 . 372 , Bonferroni - corrected p > 0 . 05 , 95 % C . I . for m s − m c = [ − 0 . 195 , 0 . 139 ] . 26 95 % CI Figure S10 : Collective - level comparison of creativity quotients between solo , static and dynamic groups . 2 - tailed tests show that the differences are insigniﬁcant between each condition - pair : Dy - namic ( d ) vs solo ( c ) : m d = 431 . 84 , m c = 401 . 22 , t ( 6 ) = 1 . 205 , Bonferroni - corrected p > 0 . 05 , 95 % C . I . for m d − m c = [ − 26 . 107 , 87 . 348 ] ; Dynamic ( d ) vs static ( s ) : m d = 431 . 84 , m s = 424 . 97 , t ( 10 ) = 0 . 365 , Bonferroni - corrected p > 0 . 05 , 95 % C . I . for m d − m s = [ − 31 . 49 , 45 . 243 ] ; Static ( s ) vs solo ( c ) : m s = 424 . 97 , m c = 401 . 22 , t ( 6 ) = 1 . 018 , Bonferroni - corrected p > 0 . 05 , 95 % C . I . for m s − m c = [ − 28 . 317 , 75 . 805 ] . 27 Figure S11 : ( Top row ) Simulation of the initial condition of the bipartite network ( rewiring prob - ability P r = 0 ) . One realization of the stimuli idea set is shown here , where alters A1 and A6 generated non - redundant ideas ( p , q and r , s respectively ) . Alters A2 through A5 generated ideas a , b and c , which are not unique and were submitted by multiple alters . Thus , A1 and A6 are the top - performing alters here . The egos are connected to the alters in the same pattern as used in the original experiment . 6 egos are shown for demonstration purposes , although we simulate for 18 egos using by repeating this same connectivity pattern thrice . The table to the left shows the computation of the exposure sets of the egos . ( Bottom row ) The evolved network for P r = 1 , where all the egos follow the same top - performing alters . This results in making all of the egos’ exposure sets the same , as shown in the table on the left . 3 Simulation 3 . 1 Network initialization We simulate the study outcomes using the same bipartite network setting as adopted in the empirical explorations . Namely , we take m = 6 alters and n = 18 egos , and initialize their connections in the same initial pattern as the original experiment . Each of the alters i have an idea set A i , that is used as the exposure to the ego . 3 . 2 Stimuli set generation Following empirical observations in our study , we generate the idea - sets A i for alters i such that some of the alters have larger unique idea counts than others ( popular and unpopular alters , respec - tively ) . To simulate this , we start with two pools ( sets ) of symbols representing unique ideas : U 1 and U 2 . By having | U 1 | < < | U 2 | , we ensure that ideas sampled with replacement from U 1 will be more common than those from U 2 . In other words , we simulate U 1 to include ideas that occur to people with a high probability , and U 2 to consist of rare ideas . We assume that each alter i generates a ﬁxed number of | A | ideas . Each idea in A i comes from pool U 1 with probability α i , or from U 2 with probability 1 − α i . For a random one - third of the alters , we take 0 ≤ α i ≤ 0 . 5 ( high - performing alters ) , and for others 0 . 5 < α ≤ 1 ( low - performing alters ) . This makes the idea sets A i non - uniform , with the high - performing alters having a higher unique idea count than the low - performing alters , as shown in the top row of Figure S11 . 28 3 . 3 Exposure set calculation For each ego j , we take the set of ideas they are exposed to as the exposure set E j = A i 1 ∪ A i 2 , where alters i 1 and i 2 are ego j ’s peers . 3 . 4 Evolution of exposure set With time ( e . g . , with rounds in our study ) , the egos in the dynamic condition can rewire their connec - tions to the alters , which the static egos cannot . In the empirical results , we saw that the connection changes per ego dropped with time ( p < 1 e − 4 for the negative slope ) as more egos followed the high - performing popular alters . We deﬁne a rewiring probability P r that captures how much the net - work deviates from its initial conﬁguration ( P r = 0 ) to the extreme case where two popular alters win the attention of all the egos ( P r = 1 ) . Therefore , instead of simulating the dynamic network through time to explore its temporal effects , we can equivalently sweep over the rewiring probability P r and explore its effects on the exposure sets of the egos . Figure S11 shows the idea . With time , the exposure sets become more uniform , as even the rare ideas from pool U 2 become common due to increased exposure . 3 . 5 Generation of stimulated ideas set Given the exposure set E j , an ego j can generate the following : with probability p 1 , s / he can gener - ate ideas that are substantially inspired / stimulated by ideas from the exposure set , with probability p 2 s / he can generate ideas with negligible or no stimulation from the exposure set ideas , and with probability p 3 s / he can generate ideas that are inspired by the exposure set but do not fulﬁll the study requirements of being substantially different than the stimuli and also feasible . For our purposes of exploring the effects of the network dynamics , we can set p 2 = p 3 = 0 , which makes p 1 = 1 . In other words , we are assuming that an ego only generates ideas that are inspired by the exposure set . Any effect from p 2 and p 3 should occur similarly in both static and dynamic conditions as the participants are randomly placed , and therefore act as mere random noise that we set to 0 . This leads to the set of stimulated ideas for ego j , S j = { e (cid:48) 1 } ∪ { e (cid:48) 2 } ∪ . . . ∪ { e (cid:48) k } where each idea in the exposure set e k ∈ E j leads to a set of ideas S ( e k ) = { e (cid:48) k } , and the union of all such idea sets from all e k ∈ E j are contained in S j . The empirical results show a positive stimulation of ideas in the dynamic and static conditions compared to the solo condition ( no stimuli ) . Therefore we can reasonably ignore the possibility that a stimulus can hurt the ideation process ( negative association between | E | and | S | ) . Also , our choice of having p 1 = 1 in the previous paragraph gets rid of the possibility of no association between | E | and | S | . This leaves a positive stimulation effect , captured by a positive association between | E | and | S | . As argued in the main manuscript , less overlap between an ego’s own ideas and his / her al - ters’ ideas can help in stimulating further novel ideas in the ego . Again , the rare a stimulus idea e is , the less overlap can be expected to exist between e and the ego’s own ideas , which can lead to a higher chance of stimulation . We measure the rarity of each stimulus idea as R e = 1 − Number of times the idea was submitted by the alters total number of alters’ ideas . Therefore , we have the number of ideas stimulated by e , | S ( e ) | ∝ f ( R e ) , where f is a stimulation function . We consider three cases of this stimulation relation : ( 1 ) linear : | S ( e ) | = kR e , ( 2 ) sub - linear : | S ( e ) | = k √ R e , ( 3 ) super - linear : | S ( e ) | = kR 2 e , where k is a proportionality constant . 3 . 6 Redundancy among egos’ ideas and ﬁnal outcomes Every ego j generates stimulated ideas S j independently of other egos . However , when the network evolves such that the high - performing alters become highly popular ( high rewiring probability P r ) , the exposure sets of the egos can become similar . We consider two extreme cases in this regard : ( 1 ) No redundancy : every ego j with the same stimulus idea e generates completely different stimulated ideas in S ( e ) , and ( 2 ) Full redundancy : every ego j with the same stimulus idea e generates exactly the same stimulated ideas in S ( e ) . 29 1 2 3 4 5 6 1 2 3 4 5 6 Figure S12 : ( Top row ) An illustration of one stimulus e being shown to 6 independent egos , where the egos generate one stimulated idea each . ( Bottom row ) Two extreme cases : ( 1 ) No redundancy , where each stimulated idea is unique from each other , and ( 2 ) Full redundancy , where all the stimu - lated ideas turn out to be the same . The dynamic network suffers in case of increased redundancy , since the rewiring process exposes an increased number of people to the same stimulus e . The ﬁrst case will have the least network effect due to the complete uniqueness of every stimulated idea . But in the second case , the dynamic network will suffer from generating more redundant ideas among the participants . An example is shown in Figure S12 . 3 . 7 Results The results are shown in Figure S13 . When there is no redundancy among the egos’ ideas generated in response to the same stimuli , the dynamic condition enjoys an advantage over the static condition as the rewiring probability P r increases . But when there is full redundancy , none of the ideas in the dynamic condition remains unique anymore as P r approaches 1 , thereby hurting the creative outcomes . This result is robust to various stimulation functions we chose in Section S3 . 5 . 3 . 8 Discussion The simulation highlights the roles played by the network dynamics and the cognitive stimulation mechanism in the creative ideation process . First , the rewiring process makes the stimuli set similar with time for the egos in the dynamic condition , which is a purely network - driven process . Second , the redundancy among the egos’ ideas in response to the same stimulus also becomes a manifesta - tion of the network dynamics , as the redundancy is initiated / facilitated by the egos’ similar choices of peers . These two factors , taken together , negatively impact the creative outcomes in the dynamic condition . On the other hand , the stimulation process of the egos’ ideas is driven by cognitive mech - anisms . The various stimulation functions we experimented with ( f ) beneﬁt the creative outcomes in varying degrees . However , as the simulation demonstrates , sufﬁcient redundancy in the egos’ ideas has the ability to overpower the cognitive stimulation beneﬁts . In our empirical data , we ﬁnd evidence of both of the network and cognitive factors to be present concurrently , which are captured by this simulation model . 30 ( A ) No redundancy , Sub - linear stimulation function f ( B ) Full redundancy , Sub - linear stimulation function f ( C ) No redundancy , Linear stimulation function f ( D ) Full redundancy , Linear stimulation function f ( E ) No redundancy , Super - linear f Rewiring probability , P r 0 . 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 Rewiring probability , P r 0 . 0 0 45 50 50 55 55 56 60 64 68 72 60 65 0 0 10 10 10 20 20 20 30 30 30 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 Rewiring probability , P r 0 . 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 Rewiring probability , P r 0 . 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 Rewiring probability , P r N on - r edundan t i dea c oun t N on - r edundan t i dea c oun t N on - r edundan t i dea c oun t N on - r edundan t i dea c oun t N on - r edundan t i dea c oun t N on - r edundan t i dea c oun t 0 . 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 Rewiring probability , P r 0 . 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 ( F ) Full redundancy , Super - linear f Figure S13 : Simulation results aggregated over 10 , 000 runs of the model ( 200 runs each for 50 different instances of alters’ idea sets ) for each of the three stimulation functions . The x - axis denotes rewiring probability P r , where P r = 0 denotes the initial network structure and P r = 1 denotes the extreme case where all the egos follow the same two popular alters . The left column panels ( A , C and E ) show the simulation results for the case of no redundancy among the ideas generated by different egos in response to the same stimulus . The right column panels ( B , D and F ) show results for full redundancy cases . The top row , middle row and bottom row are the simulation results for the sub - linear , linear and super - linear stimulation functions , respectively . As can be seen , when there is no redundancy , the dynamic networks outperform the static ones as P r increases . However , when there is redundancy , the dynamic network suffers as more egos follow the same alters at higher P r , eventually making all the stimulated ideas redundant and therefore not creative . Slope parameter k = 20 has been used in the stimulation functions . An idea is taken to be non - redundant if it is given by ≤ 7 egos , although any threshold in the range m ≤ th < n gives the same insights . 31 4 Study interface The study was conducted with approval from the University IRB . No personally identiﬁable infor - mation was collected from the participants . The web interfaces used in the experiment are shown below , using pseudo usernames . Some of the materials are redacted to ensure copyright compliance of using materials from Guilford’s Alternate Uses test . Figure S14 : Instruction page for the egos of the static condition . Here , the ﬁrst point is redacted to ensure copyright compliance of using the Guilford’s test . This ﬁrst point provides instructions for idea generation with examples . For the alters and solo participants , only the ﬁrst point was shown . 32 Figure S15 : Instruction page for the egos of the dynamic condition . 33 Figure S16 : Initial idea submission interface . This was used in turn - 1 for the egos of static and dynamic conditions , as well as for the alters and solo participants . Figure S17 : Turn - 2 interface for the egos of static and dynamic conditions . The alters’ ideas are shown on the left - side cards . 34 Figure S18 : Rating interface for the egos in the static condition . The egos rated the ideas of all 6 alters in the respective trial . 35 Figure S19 : Rating and following / unfollowing interface for the egos in the dynamic condition . 36