Article The molecular basis for sarcomere organization in vertebrate skeletal muscle Graphical abstract Highlights d Three - dimensional sarcomere organization and plasticity at the molecular level d Myosin double heads can adopt two different interactions with actin ﬁlaments d Transition between tropomyosin states happens within one tropomyosin unit d An irregular mesh of a - actinin doublets cross - links antiparallel actin ﬁlaments Authors Zhexin Wang , Michael Grange , Thorsten Wagner , Ay Lin Kho , Mathias Gautel , Stefan Raunser Correspondence stefan . raunser @ mpi - dortmund . mpg . de In brief Visualizing the mouse sarcomere in the rigor state using electron cryo - tomography reveals architectural details of the different zones and provides insight into how key factors are arranged within them to support function during muscle contraction . Wang et al . , 2021 , Cell 184 , 2135 – 2150 April 15 , 2021 ª 2021 The Author ( s ) . Published by Elsevier Inc . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2021 . 02 . 047 ll Article The molecular basis for sarcomere organization in vertebrate skeletal muscle Zhexin Wang , 1 , 3 Michael Grange , 1 , 3 Thorsten Wagner , 1 Ay Lin Kho , 2 Mathias Gautel , 2 and Stefan Raunser 1 , 4 , * 1 Department of Structural Biochemistry , Max Planck Institute of Molecular Physiology , Otto - Hahn - Strasse 11 , 44227 Dortmund , Germany 2 The Randall Centre for Cell and Molecular Biophysics , School of Basic and Medical Biosciences , Kings College London BHF Excellence Centre , New Hunt’s House , Guy’s Campus , London SE1 1UL , UK 3 These authors contributed equally 4 Lead contact * Correspondence : stefan . raunser @ mpi - dortmund . mpg . de https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2021 . 02 . 047 SUMMARY Sarcomeres are force - generating and load - bearing devices of muscles . A precise molecular picture of how sarcomeres are built underpins understanding their role in health and disease . Here , we determine the mo - lecular architecture of native vertebrate skeletal sarcomeres by electron cryo - tomography . Our reconstruc - tion reveals molecular details of the three - dimensional organization and interaction of actin and myosin in the A - band , I - band , and Z - disc and demonstrates that a - actinin cross - links antiparallel actin ﬁlaments by form - ing doublets with 6 - nm spacing . Structures of myosin , tropomyosin , and actin at ~ 10 A˚ further reveal two con - formations of the ‘‘double - head’’ myosin , where the ﬂexible orientation of the lever arm and light chains enable myosin not only to interact with the same actin ﬁlament , but also to split between two actin ﬁlaments . Our results provide unexpected insights into the fundamental organization of vertebrate skeletal muscle and serve as a strong foundation for future investigations of muscle diseases . INTRODUCTION Skeletal muscle is an essential tissue required for efﬁcient move - ment in vertebrates . In humans , dysfunctional muscle function leads to a broad variety of physiological disorders , ranging from common muscle cramps to severe myopathies ( Bo¨nne - mann and Laing , 2004 ; Savarese et al . , 2020 ) . In muscle , special - ized cells align and assemble during development into a funda - mental unit known as the muscle ﬁber . Individual muscle ﬁbers can be very large syncytia of up to several centimeters in length and are comprised of the force - generating and load - bearing de - vices of muscles called sarcomeres . Each sarcomere can be axially divided into different zones based on its ultrastructure : the I ( isotropic ) - band where only actin ( thin ) ﬁlaments are present , the A ( anisotropic ) - band that con - tains overlapping actin and myosin ( thick ) ﬁlaments , the Z - disc that borders the sarcomere at its ends , anchoring the barbed ( + ) ends of actin ﬁlaments , and the M - band in the center , where only myosin ﬁlaments are present and cross - linked . The Z - disc is formed by the ends of antiparallel thin ﬁlaments from adjacent sarcomeres . These ﬁlaments are laterally cross - linked by a - acti - nin ( Ribeiro et al . , 2014 ; Takahashi and Hattori , 1989 ) , forming an intricate network with other proteins such as titin , nebulin , and myotilin ( Gontier et al . , 2005 ; Gregorio et al . , 1998 ; Lange et al . , 2006 ) . In the M - band , myosin ﬁlaments are anchored in a hexagonal array by a complex of the proteins myomesin , titin , and obscurin / obsl1 . The network formed by these proteins and myosin ﬁlaments provide mechanical stability for the sarcomere by absorbing misbalanced longitudinal force produced by myosin heads . Deformation of the M - band by shear forces could allow it to act as a strain sensor and thus play an important role in signaling ( Gautel , 2011 ; Gautel and Djinovi (cid:1) c - Carugo , 2016 ; Lange et al . , 2020 ) . The myosin ﬁlaments are stably linked to actin ﬁlaments by a third ‘‘connecting’’ ﬁlament , consisting of the gigantic titin pro - tein . Titin’s N terminus is bound to a - actinin , telethonin , and possibly CapZ at the Z - disc ( Gautel and Djinovi (cid:1) c - Carugo , 2016 ; Ribeiro et al . , 2014 ) . Its C terminus interacts with myome - sin and obscurin at the M - band ( Gautel , 2011 ; Gautel and Djinovi (cid:1) c - Carugo , 2016 ) . The basis of the mechanism of skeletal muscle action is the cyclical interaction of actin and myosin , converting chemical into kinetic energy , which leads to relative movement between thin and thick ﬁlaments and is the primary driver of force gener - ation within the sarcomere ( Huxley and Hanson , 1954 ; Huxley and Niedergerke , 1954 ) . Images of ﬁxed , stained , and sectioned sarcomeres acquired using electron microscopy revealed a hexagonal arrangement of thick and thin ﬁlaments and cross - bridges between them formed by myosin head domains in the A - band ( Hirose and Wakabaya - shi , 1993 ; Huxley , 1957 ; Tsukita and Yano , 1985 ) . The composi - tion , regulation , and function of arthropod and vertebrate ll OPEN ACCESS Cell 184 , 2135 – 2150 , April 15 , 2021 ª 2021 The Author ( s ) . Published by Elsevier Inc . 2135 This is an open access article under the CC BY license ( http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by / 4 . 0 / ) . muscles differ in key aspects ( Bullard and Pastore , 2011 ; Taylor et al . , 2007 ) . In vertebrate skeletal muscle , one thin ﬁlament inter - acts with three neighboring thick ﬁlaments instead of two , lead - ing to a more complicated model of cross - bridge formation ( Hooper et al . , 2008 ; Luther and Squire , 2014 ) . In insect ﬂight muscle sarcomeres , the three - dimensional structure of the cross - bridges were further analyzed using electron tomography of plastic - embedded samples ( Schmitz et al . , 1996 , 1997 ; Taylor et al . , 1984 ) and freeze - substituted samples ( Liu et al . , 2004 ; Wu et al . , 2010 ) , showing the distribution and overall shapes of cross - bridges in different states . However , these studies were limited in resolution and did not allow an understanding of the molecular detail of cross - bridges in the A - band . Similarly , a three - dimensional tomographic study of the vertebrate sarco - mere showing the variable lengths of thin ﬁlaments in different vertebrate muscle types ( Burgoyne et al . , 2008 ) was also limited due to the applied method . Therefore , the molecular details un - derpinning the organization of the vertebrate skeletal muscle sarcomere remain elusive . Z - discs are complex structures despite their fundamentally ‘‘simple’’ function as stable yet ﬂexible crosslinkers of antipar - allel actin ﬁlaments ( Ribeiro et al . , 2014 ) . The core unit is the actin - a - actinin link , crosslinking actin ﬁlaments at roughly 90 (cid:1) turns in variable layers of between 2 to 7 ( Luther , 2009 ) . Images of the transverse section of Z - discs of chemically ﬁxed mouse soleus and cardiac muscle showed two types of appearance in response to , and absence of , stimulation : a relaxed ‘‘small square’’ form and an active ‘‘basket - weave’’ form ( Goldstein et al . , 1990 ) . Both states exhibit a square arrangement of thin ﬁl - aments . Due to the lack of a 3D visualization of the I - band thin ﬁlaments , it remains obscure as to how the thin ﬁlaments prog - ress from a hexagonal pattern in the A - band to a square pattern in the Z - disc . The actin - a - actinin crosslinks are known to be conformation - ally ﬂexible and can be affected by the activation state of the thick ﬁlament as well as temperature and ionic strength ( Perz - Edwards and Reedy , 2011 ) . The conformational plasticity of the Z - disc is believed not only to provide resistance to mechan - ical forces during contraction and relaxation but also to translate mechanical stress into biochemical signals via a number of signaling pathways ( Pyle and Solaro , 2004 ) involving transiently associated Z - disc proteins . The recently presented structure from resin - embedded sec - tions of the highly atypical Z - disc of the midshipman sonic muscle , structures that are at least 10 times thicker than the Z - discs of representative vertebrate skeletal muscles , revealed a fundamental arrangement of transverse crosslinks with an axial displacement of 19 . 2 nm , in line with previous work at lower resolution ( Burgoyne et al . , 2015 , 2019 ; Perz - Edwards and Reedy , 2011 ) . A further study of the Z - disc from isolated branches of cardiac myoﬁbrils using electron cryo - tomography ( cryo - ET ) determined averaged structures of actin - a - actinin complexes in two states ( putatively , the relaxed and activated states ) at ~ 23 A ˚ resolution ( Oda and Yanagisawa , 2020 ) . These two structures highlight changes within the Z - disc in response to torque applied by the myosin heads on thin ﬁlaments , whereby a - actinin can pivot via linker domains between the central ‘‘rod’’ domain and the N - terminal actin binding domain . Nevertheless , any inherent strain within a given sarcomere was not ascertained within these data and , as the structures are averaged from many individual sub - volumes , any heterogene - ity of a - actinin arrangement within the same Z - disc or across different Z - discs remains undiscovered . The current molecular understanding of actin - myosin interactions and the function and mechanism of other essential sarcomeric proteins , such as troponin , titin , and a - actinin has been derived from atomic structures of in vitro reconstituted components by X - ray crys - tallography , single particle cryo - EM ( Behrmann et al . , 2012 ; von Castelmur et al . , 2008 ; von der Ecken et al . , 2016 ; Mentes et al . , 2018 ; Ribeiro et al . , 2014 ; Yamada et al . , 2020 ) or ensemble information , obtained from X - ray diffraction of mus - cle ﬁbers ( Al - Khayat and Squire , 2006 ; Al - Khayat et al . , 2003 ; Huxley and Brown , 1967 ; Lombardi et al . , 2004 ; Squire et al . , 2004 ) . Although these structures serve as a foundation for determining interactions among different sarcomeric components , high - resolution information on their biological arrangement in the context of a sarcomere is lacking . As such , an in situ approach that allows a molecular and struc - tural analysis of a functional sarcomere is necessary for under - standing the native interactions and localization of sarcomeric proteins . The major obstacles in obtaining molecular structural details of the sarcomere using conventional tomographic methods lie in the artifacts arising from ﬁxation and staining methods , dehydra - tion of the sample , the diamond blade during sectioning , or from the shrinkage and deformation of plastic sections during imaging ( Bennett , 1974 ) . All these factors impede the determination of high - resolution features of macromolecules within the sample . In the past 15 years , investigations of the structure of muscle ﬁ - bers with conventional electron tomography have provided important insights into the sarcomeric actomyosin cross - bridge architecture ( Liu et al . , 2004 ; Wu et al . , 2010 ) . However , chemical ﬁxation , freeze - substitution and EM hardware limited the obtain - able resolution . To circumvent these artifacts , cryo - focused ion beam - milling ( cryo - FIB ) ( Marko et al . , 2007 ; Rigort et al . , 2012 ; Schaffer et al . , 2017 ) of vitriﬁed samples has been introduced , facilitating direct imaging via cryo - ET of cellular sections with minimal arti - facts and in a frozen - hydrated state ( e . g . , Hagen et al . , 2015 ; Ma - hamid et al . , 2016 ; Weiss et al . , 2019 ) . As these techniques pre - serve the hydrogen bond network and ﬁne ultrastructure of samples , they allow the subsequent structure determination us - ing sub - volume averaging after cryo - ET . Recent developments in the ﬁeld have led to a number of structures at resolutions ap - proaching the atomic scale derived from in situ environments and have demonstrated the ability to inform on the molecular and structural details of proteins in their native state and context ( Schur et al . , 2016 ; Tegunov et al . , 2020 ) . Cryo - FIB and cryo - ET were recently employed to investigate neonatal rat cardiomyo - cytes and provided an initial insight into the organization of muscular ﬁlaments inside immature sarcomeres , in which the thick ﬁlaments and thin ﬁlaments could be observed in a semi - striated arrangement ( Burbaum et al . , 2020 ) . However , the de - tails of a mature sarcomere from a fully developed vertebrate myoﬁbril , wherein different zones and structures can be distin - guished , remain elusive . ll OPEN ACCESS 2136 Cell 184 , 2135 – 2150 , April 15 , 2021 Article Figure 1 . Isolated mouse skeletal myoﬁbrils imaged using electron cryotomography ( A ) Projectionimageofmouseskeletalmuscle , withZ - disc , I - , M - , andA - bandsvisible ( green , lightblue , darkblue , andpurple , respectively ) . Aschematicdiagram is shown below , highlighting the lateral organization and cross - links in different zones . Mitochondria ( Mito ) and sarcoplasmic reticulum ( SR ) can be identiﬁed between sarcomeres . Scale bar , 1 m m . ( legend continued on next page ) ll OPEN ACCESS Cell 184 , 2135 – 2150 , April 15 , 2021 2137 Article Combining cryo - FIB , cryo - ET , and sub - volume averaging , we present the three - dimensional structure of a mouse psoas sarcomere in the rigor state with a comprehensive description of the organization and interaction of key sarcomeric proteins in molecular detail . RESULTS AND DISCUSSION Vitriﬁed myoﬁbrils exhibit undisturbed sarcomere ultrastructure in molecular detail In order to investigate the native organization of an intact sarco - mere , we vitriﬁed mouse psoas myoﬁbrils in the rigor state ( i . e . , without ATP ) by plunge - freezing in liquid ethane and subse - quently prepared thin lamellae using cryo - FIB ( Tacke et al . , 2020 ; STAR Methods ) . The lamellae were 30 – 150 nm thin and ideally suited for cryo - ET ( Figure S1 ) . Vitriﬁed myoﬁbrils show an intact sarcomere ultrastructure , including apparent Z - discs , I - bands , A - bands , M - bands , and or - ganelles such as mitochondria and sarcoplasmic reticulum localized between laterally adjacent sarcomeres ( Figures 1A and S1 ) . Importantly , the tomograms include structures that could not previously be visualized in situ . Of particular note are myosin double heads forming regular cross - bridges that resemble an ‘‘arrow - head , ’’ thin myosin tails mainly composed of coiled - coil structures ( Chew and Squire , 1995 ) protruding from the thick ﬁlament , and details of the Z - disc and troponin complexes ( Figures 1B – 1D ) . The M - band consists of numerous structural proteins other than myosin , such as myomesin , titin , and obscurin as well as accessory proteins with transient local - ization , such as FHL - 2 , Nbr1 , MURFs , or calpain - 3 ( Lange et al . , 2006 , 2020 ) . Together , they form pleomorphic densities deco - rating and cross - linking the thick ﬁlaments ( Figures 1B and 1D ) . This heterogeneity hampers identiﬁcation of individual pro - teins in this crowded region . Therefore , we focused on the details of the A - band , I - band , and Z - disc in the following sections . It is well - known from cross - sectional views of myoﬁbrils that thin and thick ﬁlaments are hexagonally arranged in the A - band ( Huxley , 1957 ) . Interestingly , in immature sarcomeres found within neonatal cardiomyocytes , the hexameric pattern is limited to thick ﬁlaments , suggesting that thin ﬁlament organi - zation is a later process of sarcomeric maturation in vivo ( Bur - baum et al . , 2020 ) . In orthogonal views of our tomograms , we can clearly discern this hexagonal pattern in the A - band , demon - strating that our preparations are consistent with previous studies ( Figures S1D – S1F ) . One thin ﬁlament is surrounded by three thick ﬁlaments and three other thin ﬁlaments at a distance of around 26 nm ( Figures S1D – S1F ) . Thick ﬁlaments form trian - gular patterns with an average inter - thick - ﬁlament distance of 45 nm ( Figures S1G – S1I ) . This arrangement of thick ﬁlaments is maintained from the A - band to the M - band where thin ﬁla - ments are missing . In situ actomyosin structure reveals a myosin double - head with different lever arm conformations Segmentation of the tomograms enabled us to unequivocally characterize the 3D arrangement of thin and thick ﬁlaments and the cross - bridges within a sarcomere ( Video S1 ) . To in - crease the level of observable detail that we could resolve with our data , we employed sub - volume averaging to determine the structure of the thin and thick ﬁlament and cross - bridges . The reconstruction of the thick ﬁlament was proved to be difﬁcult due to its heterogeneity , ﬂexibility , and an absence of obvious symmetry . Nevertheless , we obtained a low - resolution recon - struction showing the architecture of the core of thick ﬁlaments that we could use for the subsequent analyses ( Figure S2 ) . The three - dimensional reconstruction of the thin ﬁlament and cross - bridges could be resolved to a higher resolution . Segmen - tation of the tomograms and 3D classiﬁcation of all sub - volumes of the cross - bridges indicated that the two heads from the same myosin molecule , known as double - heads , mostly bind to two neighboring actin subunits ( Figure S3D ) . Hence , we merged mul - tiple classes after modifying alignment parameters to obtain a structure of a native thin ﬁlament with the myosin double - head bound ( Figure 2A ; STAR Methods ) . The reconstruction has a res - olution of 10 . 2 A˚ and we could clearly assign tropomyosin and the domains of actin and of the myosin heads and necks , including the essential chains ( ELC ) and part of the regulatory light chains ( RLC ) ( Figures 2A and S3 ; STAR Methods ) . We calculated a homology model using the rigor cytoplasmic actomyosin cryo - EM structure ( PDB : 5JLH ) ( von der Ecken et al . , 2016 ) and the crystal structure of the S1 fragment from squid muscle ( PDB : 3I5G ) ( Yang et al . , 2007 ) as a template and ﬁtted it into the density map using rigid body ﬁtting ( Figures 2B and 2C ) . We chose this myosin structure because there are no crystal structures of a complete vertebrate myosin S1 fragment in the rigor state available . The model ﬁts well into the density , demon - strating that the in vitro structures resemble well the structures determined in situ . At this resolution , both myosin heads bind to the actin ﬁlament in a structurally identical manner with close interactions formed between actin subunits and myosin as well as tropomyosin ( Figures 2B and 2C ) . Both ELCs bind to the up - per parts of the lever arms ( residues L788 – L800 ) as is seen in the crystal structure . The density threshold corresponding to the RLCs and RLC binding domains after averaging is considerably lower than the rest of the structure , indicating a higher ﬂexibility or variability in this region . ( B ) Slice through an electron cryo - tomogram spanning A - to M - band . Its representative position on a sarcomere is marked as the black box in ( A ) ( not same sarcomere ) . Inthisregion , myosinheadsboundtothethinﬁlament , myosintailsemanatingfromthethickﬁlament ( darkblueinsets ) andobscureproteindensities at the M - band ( purple inset ) can be discerned . Scale bar , 100 nm . ( C ) Slice through an electron cryo - tomogram spanning I - band and Z - disc . Its representative position on a sarcomere is marked as the white box in ( A ) ( not same sarcomere ) . Thetail - feather - like arrangementof a - actininmolecules cross - linking thinﬁlamentsinazig - zag mannerisvisible ( greeninset ) . ThinﬁlamentsintheI - bandhaveregularly - spacednodescorrespondingtotroponincomplexes ( pinkarrowheads , blueinset ) . Asliceofthesamelocationbut7nmabovefromtherest of the slice is shown inset . Scale bar , 100 nm . ( D ) Larger view of insets described in ( A ) – ( C ) , with cartoon depictions of densities . Scale bar , 20 nm . See also Figure S1 . ll OPEN ACCESS 2138 Cell 184 , 2135 – 2150 , April 15 , 2021 Article To improve the quality of the reconstruction in the region of the RLC , we shifted the center of sub - volume averaging from the thin ﬁlament to the myosin head . Through further classiﬁcation , we determined a structure of the complete double - head myosin S1 fragment , including the two heavy chains that are bound to actin , two ELCs and two RLCs ( Figure 2D ) . The S2 fragment that tethers myosin heads to the thick ﬁlament was not resolved in this structure , likely due to the different positions and angles it takes in the sarcomere . Although a homology model of the myosin motor domain and ELC of the squid myosin crystal structure ( PDB : 3I5G ) ﬁts well into our density , the RLCs and the lower part of the lever arm ( residues R811 – L844 ) had to be ﬁtted separately ( Figure 2D ) . Compared with its conformation in the crystal structure , the lever arm is strongly kinked between the ELC and RLC binding regions ( residues M801 – E810 ) , resulting in a bent conformation ( Fig - ure 2E ) . Interestingly , the kink in the upper head is in the opposite direction compared to the one in the lower head , bringing the RLCs of the two heads in close proximity ( Figure 2F ) . This crucial Figure 2 . Sub - volume averaging of thin ﬁlaments reveals the interaction of a double - head myosin with the thin ﬁlament and two confor - mations of light chain domains within a double - head ( A ) Surface view of the in situ actomyosin structure , showing actin ﬁlament ( green ) , tropomyosin ( blue ) , and myosin double heads , with motor domains ( yellow ) , essential light chains ( orange ) , and regulatory light chains ( red ) . Scale bar , 5 nm . ( B ) Close - up view of the lower myosin head and homology models based on PDB : 3I5G , 5JLH , and 6KN8 . The upper 50 kDa ( U50 ) , lower 50 kDa ( L50 ) , SH3 , and essential light chains ( ELC ) can be allocated in the map , along with part of the regulatory domain ( RLC ) . Arrow heads indicate the interaction interfaces between actin and myosin at loop 4 , helix - loop - helix motif , loop 3 of myosin ( top to bottom ) . Arrow heads in the inset depict interaction interfaces at the cardiomyopathy loop and loop 2 ( left to right ) . ( C ) Close - up of an actin subunit and structural model ﬁtted into the EM map showing the four subdomains of an actin subunit ( SD1 – SD4 ) . ( D ) Surface view of the structure of a complete myosin double - head including RLCs determined from averaging shifted sub - volumes ( see Figure S4 ) . Their interface is indicated by a dotted line . ( E ) Comparison between the lower and upper heads within one double head , showing two different conformations in the lever arm that interacts with RLC and ELC . Lengths of the lever arms were measured between G772 and L844 . ( F ) Alignment of the lower ( purple ) and upper ( blue ) heads heavy chain , showing two different kinks between the ELC - binding region and the RLC - binding region . See also Figures S2 and S3 . ll OPEN ACCESS Cell 184 , 2135 – 2150 , April 15 , 2021 2139 Article observation reveals the ability of the myosin double head to accommodate force production , and has not been validated structurally in any previous study in any system . It is also consis - tent with previous cross - linking and FRET experiments , which suggested a small distance between the two RLCs in a double head ( Bower et al . , 1992 ; Chakrabarty et al . , 2002 ; Chantler et al . , 1991 ) . This arrangement , which is probably stabilized by interactions between the ELCs and RLCs , allows for the simultaneous bind - ing of the two heads to actin and at the same time brings their necks close enough together to continue with the coiled - coil structure of the joint S2 fragment . In addition , the opposite direc - tion of the kinks on the two lever arms leads to a similar length of the two arms . This is important because the length of the lever arm determines the step size of myosin heads on actin ( Ruff et al . , 2001 ) . In this context , it is interesting that the hinge in the lever arm together with ahook ( residues W824 – W826 inmolluscan myosin ) have previously been shown to be important for regulated myo - sins ( Brownetal . , 2011 ; Himmeletal . , 2009 ) . Inthiscase , thelight chains control myosin activity even in the absence of actin ( Wells and Bagshaw , 1985 ) and the presence of Ca 2 + determines the stability of the ELC / RLC interface . Different ELC / RLC interfaces were also suggested from the latest model of myosin in the relaxed state , where the heads fold back to the thick ﬁlament ( Hu et al . , 2016 ; Knupp et al . , 2019 ) . Notably , the arrangement of the ELC / RLC of the lower head in our model resembles that in the ‘‘blocked’’ head of the off - state myosin while the upper head ELC / RLC is similar to the ‘‘free’’ head ( Figures S3I and S3J ) . This suggests that there are only two possible angles for the kink in the lever arm , which are likely to be determined by the interaction of the ELCs and RLCs . This interaction probably stabilizes the two conformations to rigidify the lever arm , which is needed for the proper transmission of the force of the power stroke ( Holmes , 1997 ) . It will be interesting to visualize how the phosphorylation state of the RLC can modulate the interaction of the ELCs and RLCs and thus modulate muscle contractility . Various structures for the single isolated myosin head have been determined in different states of the ATP hydrolysis cycle ( e . g . , Behrmann et al . , 2012 ; von der Ecken et al . , 2016 ; Hou - dusse et al . , 2000 ; Mentes et al . , 2018 ; Risal et al . , 2004 ; Yang et al . , 2007 ) . Furthermore , whereas the myosin double - head has also been determined in structures of isolated thick ﬁlaments and in 2D crystals of heavy meromyosin ( Alamo et al . , 2008 ; Bau - mann et al . , 2012 ; Knupp et al . , 2019 ; Wendt et al . , 2001 ) , our in situ actomyosin complex is a structure of the myosin double - head interacting with the thin ﬁlament determined directly within fully organized myoﬁbrils . Our analysis of this structure can be used to further inform other states of the myosin double - head , such as the pre - power stroke state and the relaxed state , to further understand the cross - bridge cycle ( Spudich , 2001 ) within a sarcomere in a native context . Cross - bridges in the A - band depict a pseudo - regular distribution of myosin heads and reveal a split - head conformation In order to identify the proportion of myosin heads that bind to thin ﬁlaments in a rigor state sarcomere , we annotated and iso - lated the densities corresponding to the cross - bridges as well as thick and thin ﬁlaments in the A - band ( Figures 3A and S4 ) . Combining annotated ﬁlaments with structures determined via sub - volume averaging allowed us to produce a molecular map of the thin and thick ﬁlaments and attached myosin heads ( Fig - ures 3B and S4 ) . Of the 30 thin ﬁlaments annotated containing 5 , 664 actin sub - units , 2 , 734 myosin heads were ﬁtted into the cross - bridge den - sities , corresponding to 82 . 5 % of the total number of myosin heads in this region calculated from the theoretical number of myosin heads per given length of the thick ﬁlament ( 6 heads per 14 . 3 nm , 294 heads per thick ﬁlament [ Bennett et al . , 2020 ] , total heads in our analysis = 3 , 315 ) . This suggests that not all myosin heads are attached to thin ﬁlaments , even in the rigor state . Similar to sarcomeres from insect muscle , all thin ﬁlaments are in helical register ( Figure 3B ) and cross - bridges appear at regular target regions every ~ 37 nm on a thin ﬁlament between each pair of thick and thin ﬁlaments ( Figures 3A and 3B ; Reedy , 1968 ) . However , in contrast to the ‘‘double - chevron’’ arrangement of cross - bridges in an insect sarcomere , the cross - bridges in a vertebrate sarcomere show a higher variability regarding the dis - tance between each other and tend to appear in clusters ( Figures 3A , 3B , and 5 ) . Although the most common composition of a cross - bridge is only one myosin double - head ( Figure 3C ) , two consecutive myosin double - heads also appear at many target regions . Occasionally , there are also single heads bound to the thin ﬁlament ( 8 . 3 % of all myosin heads ) with their partners not identiﬁed within the tomogram . In addition , a rare ‘‘split - head’’ conformation also occurs when the two heads from one myosin binds to two different adjacent thin ﬁlaments ( 10 pairs observed ; 0 . 6 % of all heads ) ( Figures 3D and S4 ) . This conformation has been previously suggested ( Offer and Elliott , 1978 ) and vaguely indicated by 2D projection images ( Hirose and Wakabayashi , 1993 ) . Our observation provides direct proof of this conformation in three - dimensions in the rigor state vertebrate sarcomere . The ability of myosin to split its two heads and bind to different thin ﬁlaments enhances the plasticity of the sarcomere and allows proper contraction under slight structural deformation due to external forces . Notably , although we annotated mostly the C - zone of the A - band , where myosin binding protein C ( MyBP - C ) is present , we did not identify any corresponding densities along the thick ﬁla - ments with a regularity of 43 nm as seen in previous studies ( Craig and Offer , 1976 ; Luther et al . , 2011 ) . In the rigor state sarcomere , the density corresponding to MyBP - C is likely to be overwhelmed by the large number of myosin heads bridging between the thick and thin ﬁlaments . Further structural investiga - tion on relaxed myoﬁbrils will shed light on the MyBP - C organi - zation as retracted myosin heads abolish the cross - bridges , leaving only cross - links formed by MyBP - C between the thick and thin ﬁlaments . To further investigate the variability in myosin binding , we focused on the inﬂuence of actin orientation and the distance be - tween thin and thick ﬁlaments ( Figure 4 ) . We plotted the orienta - tion of the actin subunits bound by myosin heads in terms of their relative angles with respect to a ﬁxed orientation perpendicular to the ﬁlament axis . The distribution showed three distinctive ll OPEN ACCESS 2140 Cell 184 , 2135 – 2150 , April 15 , 2021 Article groups with a Gaussian distribution corresponding to the three thick ﬁlaments from which the myosin heads originate . For a spe - ciﬁc thick ﬁlament , the orientations of myosin - bound actin sub - units are mostly conﬁned within a range of ~ 120 (cid:1) ( Figure 4A ) . This indicates that myosin heads tend to bind to actin subunits oriented toward the direction of the thick ﬁlament from which it originates . This is also demonstrated by the combined myosin binding proﬁle of all 30 thin ﬁlaments ( Figures 4B and S5 ) . In addition , this footprint map of myosin binding on a thin ﬁlament also exhibits the 37 - nm hotspot ( ~ 13 actin subunits ) of cross - bridge clusters as a consequence of this preferred binding orien - tation of actin subunits . Furthermore , the distances between the thin and thick ﬁla - ments at both myosin - bound and myosin - free actin subunits show a Gaussian distribution with no obvious skewness ( Fig - ure 4C ) . The myosin - bound actin subunits are on average 0 . 4 nm closer to the thick ﬁlaments ( 95 % conﬁdence interval 0 . 2 – 0 . 5 nm ) compared to myosin - free actin subunits . This small difference implies only a minor preference for myosin - binding when there is a shorter distance between the thin and thick ﬁlaments . Our molecular map of myosin head distribution enabled us to determine the arrangement of myosin heads emanating from thick ﬁlaments within the rigor state sarcomere ( Figure 5A ) . In the OFF state , when myosin heads are retracted to the thick ﬁla - ment , they are arranged in a 3 - start helical pattern with 14 . 3 nm between layers of crowns as illustrated by cryo - EM and X - ray diffraction studies ( Al - Khayat et al . , 2013 ; Squire , 2009 ) . This reg - ular organization is not maintained in sarcomeres in the rigor state , when thick ﬁlaments are in the ON state . We could observe that the distance between axially adjacent myosin heads varies ( Figure 5B ) and found a different binding of myosin heads in different sections of a thick ﬁlament ( Figures 5D – 5G ) . The S2 fragment , which forms a convex surface with the S1 fragment ( Cantino et al . , 2000 ) , provides enough ﬂexibility for a myosin head to bind to a random actin subunit within the range of al - lowed distance and orientation ( Figure 5C ) . This ﬂexibility makes allowance for the mismatch of the 37 - nm actin repeat in thin Figure 3 . Organization of the A - band in natively isolated myoﬁbrils shows that myosin heads can adopt two interactions with thin ﬁlaments ( A ) XY - slices through a tomogram at three different Z positions ( illustrated by the cartoon below ) , highlighting the myosin head densities ( orange , yellow , and magenta ) andthethinﬁlament ( green ) apparentwithinthevolume . Annotationofdensitiesproducesavolumeinwhichﬁlteredactomyosincanbeﬁtted , shownon the right and in ( B ) . The three myosin colors represent the contribution of the myosin head from a respective neighboring thick ﬁlament . Scale bars , 20 nm . ( B ) Fitted model of all thin ﬁlaments and myosin heads in a tomogram , with the black inset depicting the ﬁlament shown in ( A ) In the XZ view , reconstructions of corresponding thick ﬁlaments are also shown . ( C ) A typical cross - bridge with a myosin double - head . ( D ) A rare myosin split - head with two heads from the same myosin molecule binding to two different actin ﬁlaments . See also Figures S2 and S4 and Video S1 . ll OPEN ACCESS Cell 184 , 2135 – 2150 , April 15 , 2021 2141 Article ﬁlaments and the 14 . 3 - nm myosin repeat in thick ﬁlaments ( Squire , 2009 ) and results in the pseudo - regular arrangement of cross - bridges . Overall , the analysis of myosin heads in the A - band suggests that myosin binding is a stochastic process regulated by phys - ical limitations such as the orientation of actin subunits . Myosin prefers to bind to regions on thin ﬁlaments that orient toward the thick ﬁlament , creating ~ 37 nm regular periodic cross - bridge clusters , consistent with previous observations in insect muscle ( Reedy , 1968 ) and single - molecule experiments ( Steffen et al . , 2001 ) . In insect ﬂight muscle , cross - bridges are formed in distinct lead and rear bridges ( Liu et al . , 2004 ; Schmitz et al . , 1996 ; Taylor et al . , 1984 ) . However , cross - bridges in vertebrate sarcomere are composed of various myosin double - heads in an irregular pattern . This pseudo - regular organization indicates a certain plasticity within a vertebrate sarcomere , whereby a strictly ordered myosin binding network is unnecessary . Thin ﬁlaments in the I - band are disorganized and bear a different tropomyosin state to those in the A - band One advantage of our approach is that we can trace single ﬁla - ments through the sarcomere in 3D , allowing us to follow thin ﬁl - aments from the A - band through the I - band into the Z - disc . The ordered hexagonal pattern of ﬁlaments in the A - band breaks down in the I - band , where the thick ﬁlaments end ( Figure 6D ) . Consistent with previous studies presenting cross - section im - ages of the I - band ( Pepe , 1975 ) and contrary to a previous model stating an equally distanced arrangement of thin ﬁlaments along the A - band to Z - disc transition ( Knupp et al . , 2002 ) , thin ﬁlaments show a transition in the I - band from a hexagonal pattern to an Figure 4 . Myosin binding preference is dependent on actin orientation and distance between thin and thick ﬁlaments ( A ) Angular distribution of myosin heads shown by a circular histogram of the orientation of the actin subunits bound by myosin heads . The colors indi - cate three different thickﬁlaments where themyosin heads originate . ( B ) Hotspots of myosin binding from three thick ﬁl - amentsshownonactinﬁlaments . Actinﬁlamentsare colored with the footprint of the myosin heads ac - cording to multiple sequence alignment of the myosin binding proﬁle sequences determined from the annotated volume and the ﬁtted model in Fig - ure 3B . See also Figure S5 . The preferred side on a thin ﬁlament for binding of a certain myosin group is shown in the schematic diagram below . ( C ) Histograms of distances between thin and thick ﬁlaments at actin subunits with ( orange ) or without ( green ) a myosin head bound . Mean distances are 25 . 9 nm ( SD 2 . 7 nm ) and 26 . 3 nm ( SD 2 . 7 nm ) , respectively . No skewness was measured in either population , meaning both distributions can be considered Gaussian . irregular pattern caused by the lack of cross - bridges in this region . The extent of displacement from the hexagonal arrange - ment varies among ﬁlaments ( Figure 6D ) . Due to the absence of myosin in the I - band , troponin com - plexes are clearly visible with a periodicity of ~ 37 nm on the thin ﬁlament ( Figures 1C , 6D , and S6 ) . We applied sub - volume averaging to determine the structures of the actin - tropomy - osin - troponin complex and the actin - tropomyosin complex in the I - band at resolutions of 19 . 8 A˚ and 10 . 6 A˚ ( Figures 6A , 6B , and S6 ) , respectively . We then calculated a homology model using an in vitro cardiac muscle thin ﬁlament cryo - EM structure of the Ca 2 + - bound state as a template ( PDB : 6KN8 ) ( Yamada et al . , 2020 ) and ﬁtted it into the density maps using rigid body ﬁtting . The model ﬁts well into the reconstruction of both structures , demonstrating that the thin ﬁlament is in the on - state with tropomyosin in the C ( Ca 2 + induced ) state position ( Figures S6I and S6J ) . This sug - gests that there is structural similarity between skeletal and cardiac troponin complexes when bound to actin ﬁlaments at this resolution , despite differences in respective crystal structures ( Takeda et al . , 2003 ; Vinogradova et al . , 2005 ) . Interestingly , the position of tropomyosin differs from that in the A - band , where tropomyosin is in the M ( myosin - bound ) state ( Figures 6C , S6A , and S6B ; von der Ecken et al . , 2016 ; McKillop and Geeves , 1993 ) . Thus , the binding of myosin to the thin ﬁlament shifts tropomyosin from the C - state to the M - state position in the A - band , whereas tropomyosin remains in the C - state in the I - band . Although different tropomyosin states have been observed separately in vitro ( von der Ecken et al . , 2015 , 2016 ; Poole et al . , 2006 ; Yamada et al . , 2020 ) , our in situ structures of thin ﬁlaments suggest that the tropomy - osin position can vary on a local scale within the same sarco - mere and even the same thin ﬁlament . ll OPEN ACCESS 2142 Cell 184 , 2135 – 2150 , April 15 , 2021 Article To determine the location of this transition , we subdivided the tomograms in 37 - nm sections around the A - band / I - band transi - tion and averaged the thin ﬁlaments separately ( Figure S6D ) . The averages revealed that tropomyosin is in the M - state in A - band sections . In the ﬁrst I - band section , tropomyosin is in an interme - diate state between the M - state and C - state and from the sec - ond I - band section , it occupies the C - state position ( Figure S6F ) . This suggests that , contrary to previous predictions , the M - to C - state transition happens mostly within one tropomyosin unit and occurs at the section immediately after the A - band / I - band transition . Different forms of the Z - disc and the organization of a - actinin network The irregular pattern of thin ﬁlaments resumes an ordered state when the ﬁlaments approach the Z - disc ( Figure 6G ) . In contrast to the exact square patterns observed in Z - discs from midshipman ﬁsh sonic muscle ( Burgoyne et al . , 2019 ) and rat so - Figure 5 . Arrangement of myosin heads around a thick ﬁlament ( A ) Model of a thick ﬁlament with surrounding thin ﬁlament - bound myosin heads obtained from ﬁtting into the annotated tomogram . The six different colors represent myosin heads bound to the six adjacent thin ﬁlaments . ( B ) Close - up view of the black inset in ( A ) showing varying spacings between the tips of adjacent myosin heads . ( C ) Different conformations of S2 fragments taken from clearly discernible annotations . ( D – G ) Top view of four segments of the thick ﬁla - ment in ( A ) together withthethinﬁlaments itbinds , highlighting heterogeneity of myosin head orga - nization . Each image depicts a segment with a depth of ~ 40 nm . See also Figures S2 and S4 and Video S1 . leus and cardiac muscle ( Goldstein et al . , 1990 ) , the Z - discs in our reconstructions are slightly less well ordered and form squared to more rhomboid patterns ( Fig - ures 6G , 6H , and 7 ) . This is likely due to the fact that we used single myoﬁbrils instead of complete muscles , where Z - discs are laterally anchored and stabi - lized . Antiparallel thin ﬁlaments in the Z - disc with opposing polarities are con - nected by 33 - nm long cross - links , which we attribute to a - actinin ( Ribeiro et al . , 2014 ; Takahashi and Hattori , 1989 ; Fig - ures 7G – 7I and S7D ) . By comparing Z - discs from different reconstructions , we found different Z - discs varied in thickness , ranging from ~ 80 nm to ~ 100 nm ( Figures 7A – 7F , S7A , and S7B ; STAR Methods ) . Thicker Z - discs are more compact than thinner ones ( thin ﬁlaments are closer laterally ) ( Figures 7A – 7F and S7B ) . Interestingly , although the mean length of a - actinin is similar in all Z - discs ( Figure S7D ) , the average angle between a - actinin and actin ﬁlaments in direc - tion to the pointed end differs considerably , ranging from ~ 158 (cid:1) in the thickest and ~ 128 (cid:1) in the thinnest form ( Figure S7A ) . We propose that the different forms of Z - discs represent conformational states of the sarcomeric unit . We hypothesize that post - isolation mechanical factors , such as different on - grid blotting forces before freezing , increase the stress / strain in some myoﬁbrils . The angle between actin and a - actinin be - comes more acute and the Z - discs fold together like a parallel hinge , resulting in the thicker appearance of the Z - disc ( Figures 7D – 7F , S7A , and S7B ) . This situation is likely similar to activated myoﬁbrils under tension ( Pavlov et al . , 2009 ) . Thinner forms possibly represent the Z - disc under low strain / stress , where the angle between actin and a - actinin is more obtuse ( Figures 7A – 7C , S7A , and S7B ) . Considering a stable interaction interface between the actin - binding domain of a - actinin and actin ll OPEN ACCESS Cell 184 , 2135 – 2150 , April 15 , 2021 2143 Article Figure 6 . Structure and organization of thin ﬁlaments in the I - band ( A ) Sub - volumeaverageofthethinﬁlament intheI - bandﬁttedwithahomologymodelofthecompletethinﬁlamentincluding troponin . Homologymodelisbased on PDB : 6KN8 . ( B ) 3D reconstruction of the thin ﬁlament in the I - band excluding troponin . The actin ﬁlament is depicted in green and tropomyosin in blue . At this resolution , the four subdomains of actin form a clear ‘‘U’’ shape ( marked by the arrow head ) and indicates actin barbed end faces toward the Z - disc . ( C ) Tropomyosin along thin ﬁlaments takes the C - state in the I - band ( blue ) and the M - state in the A - band ( yellow ) . ( D ) XZ views of sarcomeres at the A - band and I - band highlighting the disappearance of the hexagonal pattern of thin ﬁlaments . Two hexagonal units of thin ﬁlaments and their corresponding positions in the I - band are indicated by green and orange triangles . Displacement of the ﬁlaments from A - band to I - band are shown as arrows . Asterisk denotes a ﬁlament that moved out of the ﬁeld of view during the A – I transition . ( E ) Slice through a tomogram depicting the Z - disc and two I - bands from two adjacent sarcomeres . ( F ) 3D model of thin ﬁlaments showing the same region as in ( E ) . ( legend continued on next page ) ll OPEN ACCESS 2144 Cell 184 , 2135 – 2150 , April 15 , 2021 Article ﬁlaments ( Iwamoto et al . , 2018 ) and the rigidity of the rod region of a - actinin ( Ribeiro et al . , 2014 ) , the ﬂexibility in the neck be - tween the rod and the actin - binding domain ( ABD ) of an a - actinin probably serves as the central hinge of this pivot - and - rod struc - ture ( Gautel and Djinovi (cid:1) c - Carugo , 2016 ) . In order to experimen - tally validate that stress / strain induces different conformations of the Z - disc , activated myoﬁbers will have to be vitriﬁed under deﬁned strain / stress conditions prior to cryo - ET analysis in the future . We annotated all clearly visible densities in the thinner Z - disc where single a - actinin densities were more apparent to under - stand the a - actinin organization between antiparallel thin ﬁla - ments ( Figure 7G ; Video S2 ) . Top and side views of the resulting three - dimensional model reveal that a - actinin forms a mesh by cross - linking the actin ﬁlaments , which is less well ordered than anticipated from the projection ( Figures 7G – 7I ) or from idealized helical models in previous work ( Luther , 2009 ) . A prominent and unexpected feature is a doublet of a - actinin cross - links with 6 nm spacing , which is only possible when two a - actinins bind to longitudinally adjacent actin subunits along the actin ﬁlament ( Figures 7J , 7K , and S7F ) . We observe up to three of these a - ac - tinin pairs connecting two antiparallel thin ﬁlaments over ~ 37 nm , at ~ 18 . 5 - nm intervals . Thus , although the spacing of these dou - blets follows the 37 - nm actin helical repeat , it places individual a - actinin molecules closer together ( maximally 12 nm rather than 18 . 5 nm ) than previously presumed . Doublets have also been observed in an in vitro reconstituted a - actinin - F - actin raft ( Hampton et al . , 2007 ) . Our analysis shows that this arrangement wasnotan invitro artifactbutafeatureofnativesarcomeres . Inter - estingly , these doublets were not apparent in the recent recon - struction of the F - actin - a - actinin complex from branched cardiac myoﬁbrils obtained through sub - volume averaging , in which the angles between a - actinin and actin resemble the thick - form Z - disc ( Oda and Yanagisawa , 2020 ) . Importantly , as single a - acti - nins were not distinguishable in these tomograms , this study relied strongly on subtomogram averaging at certain positions , assuming a highly symmetric Z - disc . However , our visualization of the Z - disc illustrates that it is a heterogeneous , non - symmetri - cal structure . The doublets , which are not present at regular inter - vals , were therefore probably lost during sub - volume averaging of the Z - disc or are not present in cardiac myoﬁbrils . Consistent with previous studies ( Burgoyne et al . , 2019 ; Luther and Squire , 2002 ) , we observed several ~ 37 nm spaced a - actinin cross - links ( Figures S7E and S7G ) , which corresponds roughly to the half - helical pitch of actin ﬁlaments . However , we also observed a - actinins that do not follow this pattern ( Figures 7J , 7K , and S7E ) suggesting a less ordered organization of the Z - disc than previously assumed or inferred from atypical actin - a - actinin arrays in nemaline rods or midshipman muscle ( Bur - goyne et al . , 2019 ; Morris et al . , 1990 ) . By performing sub - vol - ume averaging of the a - actinin positions , we could show that it connects opposite sides of antiparallel actin ﬁlaments , forming a slight ‘‘S’’ shape ( Figure S7H ) . The actin binding domains and the central rod region of an a - actinin from the crystal struc - ture ( Ribeiro et al . , 2014 ) ﬁt well into the density ( Figure S7H ) , and the four spectrin - like repeats can be clearly distinguished in a projection of the reconstruction ( Figure 7L ) . This ‘‘S’’ shape ﬁts well to the a - actinin crystal structure ( Ribeiro et al . , 2014 ) , considering the ﬂexibility in the neck region , but differs from the conventional ‘‘basket - weave’’ model that is derived from ob - servations of transverse sections of Z - discs ( Ullrick et al . , 1977 ) . In order to form the S shape , the two ends of an a - actinin , where it interacts with actin ﬁlaments , need to have different conforma - tions ; one end resembling that of the basket - weave model with the other end in an alternate conformation that interacts with actin differently at the ﬂexible neck region ( Figure S7I ) . Future studies at a higher resolution will elucidate the molecular basis of this interaction and shed light on the organization of other pro - teins in the Z - disc , such as accessory smaller proteins like ZASP , myotilin or FATZ that may play a role in a - actinin dimerization , or to visualize the position of the a - actinin - binding Z - repeats of titin or the actin - binding repeats of nebulin . The potential contribution of these proteins to the arrangement of a - actinin doublets would also be of fundamental interest for understanding diseases of the Z - disc with aberrant arrangement of alpha - actinin like actinino - pathies ( Savarese et al . , 2019 ) , zaspopathies ( Griggs et al . , 2007 ) , nemaline myopathies ( Wallgren - Pettersson et al . , 2011 ) , or myoﬁbrillar myopathies ( Selcen and Engel , 2011 ) . CONCLUSIONS Cryo - FIB milling combined with cryo - ET enabled us to visualize native vertebrate sarcomeres in three - dimensions with minimal artifacts or damage . Our structure of the actomyosin complex shows the complete myosin double head in the rigor state in molecular detail and pinpoints the ELC / RLC interface as the position within myosin crucial for the structural rearrangement of the double head when bound to the thin ﬁlament . In addition , our model of the sarcomere shows a pseudo - regular distribu - tion of myosin cross - bridges in the A - band . An irregular pattern of the I - band thin ﬁlaments illustrates the importance of the cross - bridge and the Z - disc in maintaining the regularity of thin ﬁlaments within the sarcomere . Our observation that the thin ﬁlaments and cross - links of a - actinin within the Z - disc can accommodate different arrangements demonstrates the need for the sarcomere to respond to and accommodate the collective forces exerted on it during muscle contraction . Collectively , our high - resolution structure of the sarcomere , although not yet a complete atomic model of the entire struc - ture , identiﬁes previously unresolved details of the molecular architecture of A - bands , I - bands , and Z - discs and highlights the molecular plasticity of its components . It allows improved ( G ) Cross - section views of the positions indicated by dotted lines in ( F ) , showing the pattern of thin ﬁlaments during the I - Z - I transition . Filaments are traced in green triangles from the I - band to Z - disc of the top sarcomere and in magenta triangles from the Z - disc to the I - band of the bottom sarcomere . In the Z - disc image , antiparallel ﬁlaments in the center are labeled with green and magenta dots . ( H ) A schematic diagram shows the hexagonal pattern in the A - band , the irregular pattern in the I - band and the rhomboid pattern in the Z - disc . Scale bars , 2 nm ( A ) , 50 nm ( D – G ) . See also Figure S6 . ll OPEN ACCESS Cell 184 , 2135 – 2150 , April 15 , 2021 2145 Article Figure 7 . Different types of Z - discs from fast mouse psoas myoﬁbril and a - actinin organization in the thinner form ( A – C ) XYsliceview ( A ) , equator - ﬁlteredcross - sectionview ( B ) , andaschematicdiagramshowingthepattern ( C ) ofaZ - discinthethinnerformwithinatomogram . The thickness of the Z - disc was measured between where a - actinins bind to the antiparallel thin ﬁlaments . The length of a single thin ﬁlament within the Z - disc was also measured . The organization of the ﬁlaments in this Z - disc is rhomboidal , likely resulting from a tilted orientation of the Z - disc on the grid and a slight stretching of the myoﬁbril . We used this Z - disc for our analysis because most of the a - actinin densities could be unambiguously assigned . Scale bar , 50 nm . ( D – F ) XY slice view ( D ) , cross - section view ( E ) , and a schematic diagram of a tomogram showing a Z - disc in the thick form with a square pattern ( F ) . This is the predicted organization of a Z - disc from skeletal muscle . However , it is difﬁcult to assign individual a - actinin densities in these tomograms hampering a non - biased annotation . Scale bar , 50 nm . ( G ) Slice through the same tomogram as ( A ) depicting the thin - form Z - disc and two I - bands . Scale bar , 100 nm . ( H ) Cryo - ET based 3Dmodel oftheZ - discshowing antiparallel thinﬁlamentsfrom two adjacent sarcomeres ( green and magenta ) and the a - actinins ( blue ) cross - linking the ﬁlaments . ( I ) Tilted view of the model shown in ( H ) . ( J ) SliceofanexampleunitintheZ - discdepictingonethinﬁlamentwithitsneighboringantiparallelthinﬁlamentsandthe a - actininsconnectingthem . Adoubletof a - actinins is highlighted by a red arrow head . Scale bar , 20 nm . ( K ) Cryo - ET - based 3D model of the same region in ( J ) . Actin ﬁlament model is derived from the thin ﬁlament reconstruction in Figure 6A , excluding tropomyosin . The a - actinin model is derived from the crystal structure of an a - actinin dimer ( PDB : 4D1E ) . ( L ) Projection image ( 7 - nm thickness ) of the 3D reconstruction of a - actinin obtained from averaging the sub - volumes as picked in ( H ) and ( I ) , depicting four domains ( marked by red arrow heads ) which correspond to the four spectrin - like repeats ( SRs ) in the rod region . Scale bar , 20 nm . See also Figure S7 and Video S2 . ll OPEN ACCESS 2146 Cell 184 , 2135 – 2150 , April 15 , 2021 Article dynamic modeling of muscle contraction and will serve to test new concepts on the molecular , cellular , and physiological level , not least for the development of new approaches for investigating muscle diseases . Limitations of the study Although this study provided an overall picture of the skeletal sarcomere , subsequent work needs to be performed to address a number of missing pieces arising from this research . In this study , we focused on sarcomeres from skeletal muscle in rigor , where the myosin cross - bridges are locked in a strong - binding state . Other states of the cross - bridge cycle need to be investi - gated in order to provide a dynamic understanding of muscle contraction . This study could not include an analysis of M - band proteins , MyBP - C , or other less regularly arranged proteins that also play an essential role in sarcomere regulation , function , and plasticity . Additional in situ labeling methods in future studies will help to elucidate the organization of these less common and less organized proteins . In the analysis of Z - discs of different thicknesses , our hypothesis that the different Z - disc conforma - tions may correspond to the different stain / stress states of the sarcomere should be validated experimentally using custom ap - proaches where muscle can be examined under deﬁned load . Future studies using greater numbers of tomograms acquired on myoﬁbrils should help to improve the resolution of structures obtained in this study to achieve insights on the atomic level . STAR + METHODS Detailed methods are provided in the online version of this paper and include the following : d KEY RESOURCES TABLE d RESOURCE AVAILABILITY B Lead contact B Materials availability B Data and code availability d EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT DETAILS d METHOD DETAILS B Myoﬁbril preparation and vitriﬁcation B Cryo - focused ion beam milling B Electron cryo - tomography and tomogram reconstruction B Sub - volume averaging of the thick ﬁlament B Sub - volume averaging of the actomyosin complex and ﬁtting of atomic model B Annotation of the A - band and ﬁtting of the molecular model of actomyosin B Analysis of the preferred binding positions of myosin heads on a thin ﬁlament B Sub - volume averaging of the I - band thin ﬁlaments B Analysis of I - band and Z - disc organization d QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION Supplementalinformationcanbefoundonlineathttps : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2021 . 02 . 047 . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank M . Saur for preliminary work and J . Mahamid and J . Plitzko for advice on cryo - FIB milling . We are thankful to S . Tacke for hardware optimiza - tion for cryo - FIB and R . S . Goody for critical reading of the manuscript . We are grateful to O . Hofnagel and D . Prumbaum for EM support and B . Brandmeier for technical assistance . This work was supported by funds from the Max Planck Society ( to S . R . ) , the Wellcome Trust ( Collaborative Award in Sciences 201543 / Z / 16 / Z to S . R . and M . Gautel ) , the European Research Council under the European Union’s Horizon 2020 Programme ( ERC - 2019 - SyG 856118 to S . R . and M . Gautel ) , and the Medical Research Council ( MR / R003106 / 1 to M . Gautel and A . L . K . ) . M . Grange was supported by an European Molecular Biology Organization Long - Term Fellowship . M . Gautel holds the BHF Chair of Molecular Cardiology . AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS S . R . designed and supervised the project . A . L . K . and M . Gautel isolated mouse psoas myoﬁbrils . Z . W . prepared cryo - lamellae , collected cryo - ET data , and performed sub - volume averaging . M . Grange optimized cryo - ET data acquisition . Z . W . and M . Grange annotated and analyzed the A - band and I - banddata . Z . W . , M . Grange , and T . W . analyzedZ - discdata . T . W . imple - mented tools for data analysis and automatic ﬁlament picking . Z . W . and M . Grange prepared ﬁgures and videos . Z . W . , M . Grange , M . Gautel , and S . R . wrote the manuscript . All authors reviewed the results and commented on the manuscript . DECLARATION OF INTERESTS The authors declare no competing interests . Received : October 12 , 2020 Revised : January 27 , 2021 Accepted : February 22 , 2021 Published : March 24 , 2021 REFERENCES Al - Khayat , H . A . , and Squire , J . M . ( 2006 ) . Reﬁned structureofbonyﬁshmuscle myosin ﬁlaments from low - angle X - ray diffraction data . J . Struct . Biol . 155 , 218 – 229 . AL - Khayat , H . A . , Hudson , L . , Reedy , M . K . , Irving , T . C . , and Squire , J . M . ( 2003 ) . Myosin head conﬁguration in relaxed insect ﬂight muscle : x - ray modeled resting cross - bridges in a pre - powerstroke state are poised for actin binding . Biophys . J . 85 , 1063 – 1079 . Al - Khayat , H . A . , Kensler , R . W . , Squire , J . M . , Marston , S . B . , and Morris , E . P . ( 2013 ) . Atomic model of the human cardiac muscle myosin ﬁlament . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 110 , 318 – 323 . Alamo , L . , Wriggers , W . , Pinto , A . , Ba´rtoli , F . , Salazar , L . , Zhao , F . Q . , Craig , R . , and Padro´n , R . ( 2008 ) . Three - dimensional reconstruction of tarantula myosin ﬁlaments suggests how phosphorylation may regulate myosin activity . J . Mol . Biol . 384 , 780 – 797 . Baumann , B . A . J . , Taylor , D . W . , Huang , Z . , Tama , F . , Fagnant , P . M . , Trybus , K . M . , and Taylor , K . A . ( 2012 ) . Phosphorylated smooth muscle heavy meromy - osin shows an open conformation linked to activation . J . Mol . Biol . 415 , 274 – 287 . Behrmann , E . , Mu¨ller , M . , Penczek , P . A . , Mannherz , H . G . , Manstein , D . J . , and Raunser , S . ( 2012 ) . Structure of the rigor actin - tropomyosin - myosin complex . Cell 150 , 327 – 338 . Bennett , P . M . ( 1974 ) . Decrease in section thickness on exposure to the elec - tron beam ; the use of tilted sections in estimating the amount of shrinkage . J . Cell Sci . 15 , 693 – 701 . Bennett , P . , Rees , M . , andGautel , M . ( 2020 ) . TheAxialAlignmentofTitinonthe Muscle Thick Filament Supports Its Role as a Molecular Ruler . J . Mol . Biol . 432 , 4815 – 4829 . ll OPEN ACCESS Cell 184 , 2135 – 2150 , April 15 , 2021 2147 Article Bertoni , M . , Kiefer , F . , Biasini , M . , Bordoli , L . , and Schwede , T . ( 2017 ) . Modeling protein quaternary structure of homo - and hetero - oligomers beyond binary interactions by homology . Sci . Rep . 7 , 10480 . Bharat , T . A . M . , and Scheres , S . H . W . ( 2016 ) . Resolving macromolecular struc - tures from electron cryo - tomography data using subtomogram averaging in RELION . Nat . Protoc . 11 , 2054 – 2065 . Bienert , S . , Waterhouse , A . , de Beer , T . A . P . , Tauriello , G . , Studer , G . , Bordoli , L . , and Schwede , T . ( 2017 ) . The SWISS - MODEL Repository - new features and functionality . Nucleic Acids Res . 45 ( D1 ) , D313 – D319 . Blankenfeldt , W . , Thoma¨ , N . H . , Wray , J . S . , Gautel , M . , and Schlichting , I . ( 2006 ) . Crystal structures of human cardiac b - myosin II S2 - D provide insight into the functional role of the S2 subfragment . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 103 , 17713 – 17717 . Bo¨nnemann , C . G . , and Laing , N . G . ( 2004 ) . Myopathies resulting from muta - tions in sarcomeric proteins . Curr . Opin . Neurol . 17 , 529 – 537 . Bower , S . M . , Wang , Y . , and Chantler , P . D . ( 1992 ) . Regulatory light - chain Cys - 55 sites on the two heads of myosin can come within 2A of each other . FEBS Lett . 310 , 132 – 134 . Brown , J . H . , Kumar , V . S . S . , O’Neall - Hennessey , E . , Reshetnikova , L . , Robin - son , H . , Nguyen - McCarty , M . , Szent - Gyo¨rgyi , A . G . , and Cohen , C . ( 2011 ) . Visualizing key hinges and a potential major source of compliance in the lever arm of myosin . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 108 , 114 – 119 . Bullard , B . , and Pastore , A . ( 2011 ) . Regulating the contraction of insect ﬂight muscle . J . Muscle Res . Cell Motil . 32 , 303 – 313 . Burbaum , L . , Schneider , J . , Scholze , S . , Boettcher , R . B . , Baumeister , W . , Schwille , P . , Plitzko , J . M . , and Jasnin , M . ( 2020 ) . Molecular - scale visualization of sarcomere contraction within native cardiomyocytes . bioRxiv . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1101 / 2020 . 09 . 09 . 288977 . Burgoyne , T . , Muhamad , F . , and Luther , P . K . ( 2008 ) . Visualization of cardiac muscle thin ﬁlaments and measurement of their lengths by electron tomogra - phy . Cardiovasc . Res . 77 , 707 – 712 . Burgoyne , T . , Morris , E . P . , and Luther , P . K . ( 2015 ) . Three - Dimensional Struc - ture of Vertebrate Muscle Z - Band : The Small - Square Lattice Z - Band in Rat Cardiac Muscle . J . Mol . Biol . 427 , 3527 – 3537 . Burgoyne , T . , Heumann , J . M . , Morris , E . P . , Knupp , C . , Liu , J . , Reedy , M . K . , Taylor , K . A . , Wang , K . , and Luther , P . K . ( 2019 ) . Three - dimensional structure of the basketweave Z - band in midshipman ﬁsh sonic muscle . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 116 , 15534 – 15539 . Cantino , M . E . , Brown , L . D . , Chew , M . , Luther , P . K . , andSquire , J . M . ( 2000 ) . A - band architecture in vertebrate skeletal muscle : polarity of the myosin head array . J . Muscle Res . Cell Motil . 21 , 681 – 690 . Chakrabarty , T . , Xiao , M . , Cooke , R . , and Selvin , P . R . ( 2002 ) . Holding two heads together : stability of the myosin II rod measured by resonance energy transfer between the heads . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 99 , 6011 – 6016 . Chantler , P . D . , Tao , T . , and Stafford , W . F . , 3rd . ( 1991 ) . On the relationship be - tweendistanceinformationderivedfromcross - linkingandfromresonanceen - ergy transfer , with speciﬁc reference to sites located on myosin heads . Bio - phys . J . 59 , 1242 – 1250 . Chew , M . W . K . , andSquire , J . M . ( 1995 ) . Packingof a - helicalcoiled - coilmyosin rods in vertebrate muscle thick ﬁlaments . J . Struct . Biol . 115 , 233 – 249 . Craig , R . , and Offer , G . ( 1976 ) . The location of C protein in rabbit skeletal mus - cle . Proc . R . Soc . Lond . B Biol . Sci . 192 , 451 – 461 . Edgar , R . C . ( 2004 ) . MUSCLE : multiple sequence alignment withhighaccuracy and high throughput . Nucleic Acids Res . 32 , 1792 – 1797 . Farabella , I . , Vasishtan , D . , Joseph , A . P . , Pandurangan , A . P . , Sahota , H . , and Topf , M . ( 2015 ) . TEMPy : a Python library for assessment of three - dimensional electron microscopy density ﬁts . J . Appl . Cryst . 48 , 1314 – 1323 . Gautel , M . ( 2011 ) . Thesarcomericcytoskeleton : whopicksupthestrain ? Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 23 , 39 – 46 . Gautel , M . , andDjinovi (cid:1) c - Carugo , K . ( 2016 ) . Thesarcomericcytoskeleton : from molecules to motion . J . Exp . Biol . 219 , 135 – 145 . Goldstein , M . A . , Schroeter , J . P . , andSass , R . L . ( 1990 ) . Twostructuralstatesof the vertebrate Z band . Electron Microsc . Rev . 3 , 227 – 248 . Gontier , Y . , Taivainen , A . , Fontao , L . , Sonnenberg , A . , vanderFlier , A . , Carpen , O . , Faulkner , G . , and Borradori , L . ( 2005 ) . The Z - disc proteins myotilin and FATZ - 1 interact with each other and are connected to the sarcolemma via muscle - speciﬁc ﬁlamins . J . Cell Sci . 118 , 3739 – 3749 . Gregorio , C . C . , Trombita´s , K . , Centner , T . , Kolmerer , B . , Stier , G . , Kunke , K . , Suzuki , K . , Obermayr , F . , Herrmann , B . , Granzier , H . , etal . ( 1998 ) . TheNH2ter - minus of titin spans the Z - disc : its interactionwithanovel 19 - kD ligand ( T - cap ) is required for sarcomeric integrity . J . Cell Biol . 143 , 1013 – 1027 . Griggs , R . , Vihola , A . , Hackman , P . , Talvinen , K . , Haravuori , H . , Faulkner , G . , Eymard , B . , Richard , I . , Selcen , D . , Engel , A . , et al . ( 2007 ) . Zaspopathy in a large classic late - onset distal myopathy family . Brain 130 , 1477 – 1484 . Guex , N . , Peitsch , M . C . , andSchwede , T . ( 2009 ) . Automatedcomparativepro - tein structure modeling with SWISS - MODEL and Swiss - PdbViewer : a histori - cal perspective . Electrophoresis 30 ( Suppl 1 ) , S162 – S173 . Hagen , C . , Dent , K . C . , Zeev - Ben - Mordehai , T . , Grange , M . , Bosse , J . B . , Whittle , C . , Klupp , B . G . , Siebert , C . A . , Vasishtan , D . , Ba¨uerlein , F . J . B . , et al . ( 2015 ) . Structural Basis of Vesicle Formation at the Inner Nuclear Membrane . Cell 163 , 1692 – 1701 . Hagen , W . J . H . , Wan , W . , and Briggs , J . A . G . ( 2017 ) . Implementation of a cryo - electron tomography tilt - scheme optimized for high resolution subtomogram averaging . J . Struct . Biol . 197 , 191 – 198 . Hampton , C . M . , Taylor , D . W . , and Taylor , K . A . ( 2007 ) . Novel structures for a - actinin : F - actin interactions and their implications for actin - membrane attachment and tension sensing in the cytoskeleton . J . Mol . Biol . 368 , 92 – 104 . Heumann , J . M . , Hoenger , A . , and Mastronarde , D . N . ( 2011 ) . Clustering and variance maps for cryo - electron tomography using wedge - masked differ - ences . J . Struct . Biol . 175 , 288 – 299 . Himmel , D . M . , Mui , S . , O’Neall - Hennessey , E . , Szent - Gyo¨rgyi , A . G . , and Co - hen , C . ( 2009 ) . The on - off switch in regulated myosins : different triggers but related mechanisms . J . Mol . Biol . 394 , 496 – 505 . Hirose , K . , and Wakabayashi , T . ( 1993 ) . Structural change of crossbridges of rabbit skeletal muscle during isometric contraction . J . Muscle Res . Cell Motil . 14 , 432 – 445 . Holmes , K . C . ( 1997 ) . The swinging lever - arm hypothesis of muscle contrac - tion . Curr . Biol . 7 , R112 – R118 . Hooper , S . L . , Hobbs , K . H . , and Thuma , J . B . ( 2008 ) . Invertebrate muscles : thin and thick ﬁlament structure ; molecular basis of contraction and its regulation , catch and asynchronous muscle . Prog . Neurobiol . 86 , 72 – 127 . Houdusse , A . , Szent - Gyo¨rgyi , A . G . , and Cohen , C . ( 2000 ) . Three conforma - tional states of scallop myosin S1 . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 97 , 11238 – 11243 . Hu , Z . , Taylor , D . W . , Reedy , M . K . , Edwards , R . J . , and Taylor , K . A . ( 2016 ) . Structure of myosin ﬁlaments from relaxed Lethocerus ﬂight muscle by cryo - EM at 6 A˚ resolution . Sci . Adv . 2 , e1600058 . Huxley , H . E . ( 1957 ) . The double array of ﬁlaments in cross - striated muscle . J . Biophys . Biochem . Cytol . 3 , 631 – 648 . Huxley , H . E . , andBrown , W . ( 1967 ) . Thelow - anglex - raydiagram ofvertebrate striated muscle and itsbehaviour duringcontraction and rigor . J . Mol . Biol . 30 , 383 – 434 . Huxley , H . , and Hanson , J . ( 1954 ) . Changes in the cross - striations of muscle during contraction and stretch and their structural interpretation . Nature 173 , 973 – 976 . Huxley , A . F . , and Niedergerke , R . ( 1954 ) . Structural changes in muscle during contraction ; interference microscopy of living muscle ﬁbres . Nature 173 , 971 – 973 . Iwamoto , D . V . , Huehn , A . , Simon , B . , Huet - Calderwood , C . , Baldassarre , M . , Sindelar , C . V . , and Calderwood , D . A . ( 2018 ) . Structural basis of the ﬁlamin A actin - binding domain interaction with F - actin . Nat . Struct . Mol . Biol . 25 , 918 – 927 . ll OPEN ACCESS 2148 Cell 184 , 2135 – 2150 , April 15 , 2021 Article Knight , P . J . , and Trinick , J . A . ( 1982 ) . Preparation of myoﬁbrils . Methods Enzy - mol . 85 ( Pt B ) , 9 – 12 . Knupp , C . , Luther , P . K . , and Squire , J . M . ( 2002 ) . Titin organisation and the 3D architecture of the vertebrate - striated muscle I - band . J . Mol . Biol . 322 , 731 – 739 . Knupp , C . , Morris , E . , and Squire , J . M . ( 2019 ) . The Interacting Head Motif Structure Does Not Explain the X - Ray Diffraction Patterns in Relaxed Verte - brate ( Bony Fish ) Skeletal Muscle and Insect ( Lethocerus ) Flight Muscle . Biology ( Basel ) 8 , 67 . Kremer , J . R . , Mastronarde , D . N . , and McIntosh , J . R . ( 1996 ) . Computer visual - ization of three - dimensional image data using IMOD . J . Struct . Biol . 116 , 71 – 76 . Lange , S . , Ehler , E . , and Gautel , M . ( 2006 ) . From A to Z and back ? Multicom - partment proteins in the sarcomere . Trends Cell Biol . 16 , 11 – 18 . Lange , S . , Pinotsis , N . , Agarkova , I . , and Ehler , E . ( 2020 ) . The M - band : The underestimated part of the sarcomere . Biochim . Biophys . Acta Mol . Cell Res . 1867 , 118440 . Liu , J . , Reedy , M . C . , Goldman , Y . E . , Franzini - Armstrong , C . , Sasaki , H . , Tre - gear , R . T . , Lucaveche , C . , Winkler , H . , Baumann , B . A . J . , Squire , J . M . , et al . ( 2004 ) . Electron tomography of fast frozen , stretched rigor ﬁbers reveals elastic distortions in the myosin crossbridges . J . Struct . Biol . 147 , 268 – 282 . Lombardi , V . , Piazzesi , G . , Reconditi , M . , Linari , M . , Lucii , L . , Stewart , A . , Sun , Y . B . , Boesecke , P . , Narayanan , T . , Irving , T . , and Irving , M . ( 2004 ) . X - ray diffraction studiesofthecontractilemechanism insingle muscle ﬁbres . Philos . Trans . R . Soc . Lond . B Biol . Sci . 359 , 1883 – 1893 . Luther , P . K . ( 2009 ) . ThevertebratemuscleZ - disc : sarcomereanchorforstruc - ture and signalling . J . Muscle Res . Cell Motil . 30 , 171 – 185 . Luther , P . K . , and Squire , J . M . ( 2002 ) . Muscle Z - band ultrastructure : titin Z - re - peats and Z - band periodicities do not match . J . Mol . Biol . 319 , 1157 – 1164 . Luther , P . K . , and Squire , J . M . ( 2014 ) . The intriguing dual lattices of the Myosin ﬁlaments in vertebrate striated muscles : evolution and advantage . Biology ( Basel ) 3 , 846 – 865 . Luther , P . K . , Winkler , H . , Taylor , K . , Zoghbi , M . E . , Craig , R . , Padro´n , R . , Squire , J . M . , and Liu , J . ( 2011 ) . Direct visualization of myosin - binding protein C bridging myosin and actin ﬁlaments in intact muscle . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 108 , 11423 – 11428 . Mahamid , J . , Pfeffer , S . , Schaffer , M . , Villa , E . , Danev , R . , Cuellar , L . K . , Fo¨rster , F . , Hyman , A . A . , Plitzko , J . M . , and Baumeister , W . ( 2016 ) . Visualizing the mo - lecular sociology at the HeLa cell nuclear periphery . Science 351 , 969 – 972 . Marko , M . , Hsieh , C . , Schalek , R . , Frank , J . , andMannella , C . ( 2007 ) . Focused - ion - beam thinning of frozen - hydrated biological specimens for cryo - electron microscopy . Nat . Methods 4 , 215 – 217 . Mastronarde , D . N . ( 2005 ) . Automated electron microscope tomography using robust prediction of specimen movements . J . Struct . Biol . 152 , 36 – 51 . McKillop , D . F . , andGeeves , M . A . ( 1993 ) . Regulationoftheinteractionbetween actin and myosin subfragment 1 : evidence for three states of the thin ﬁlament . Biophys . J . 65 , 693 – 701 . Mentes , A . , Huehn , A . , Liu , X . , Zwolak , A . , Dominguez , R . , Shuman , H . , Ostap , E . M . , and Sindelar , C . V . ( 2018 ) . High - resolution cryo - EM structures of actin - bound myosin states reveal the mechanism of myosin force sensing . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 115 , 1292 – 1297 . Moriya , T . , Saur , M . , Stabrin , M . , Merino , F . , Voicu , H . , Huang , Z . , Penczek , P . A . , Raunser , S . , and Gatsogiannis , C . ( 2017 ) . High - resolution single particle analysis from electron cryo - microscopy images using SPHIRE . J . Vis . Exp . 2017 , 1 – 11 . Morris , E . P . , Nneji , G . , and Squire , J . M . ( 1990 ) . The three - dimensional struc - ture of the nemaline rod Z - band . J . Cell Biol . 111 , 2961 – 2978 . Nicastro , D . , Schwartz , C . , Pierson , J . , Gaudette , R . , Porter , M . E . , and Mcin - tosh , J . R . ( 2006 ) . TheMolecularArchitectureofAxonemesRevealedbyCryoe - lectron tomography . Science 313 , 944 – 948 . Oda , T . , and Yanagisawa , H . ( 2020 ) . Cryo - electron tomography of cardiac myoﬁbrils reveals a 3D lattice spring within the Z - discs . Commun . Biol . 3 , 585 . Offer , G . , and Elliott , A . ( 1978 ) . Can a myosin molecule bind to two actin ﬁla - ments ? Nature 271 , 325 – 329 . Pavlov , I . , Novinger , R . , and Rassier , D . E . ( 2009 ) . The mechanical behavior of individual sarcomeres of myoﬁbrils isolated from rabbit psoas muscle . Am . J . Physiol . Cell Physiol . 297 , C1211 – C1219 . Pepe , F . A . ( 1975 ) . Structure of muscle ﬁlaments from immunohistochemical and ultrastructural studies . J . Histochem . Cytochem . 23 , 543 – 562 . Perz - Edwards , R . J . , and Reedy , M . K . ( 2011 ) . Electron microscopy and x - ray diffraction evidence for two Z - band structural states . Biophys . J . 101 , 709 – 717 . Pettersen , E . F . , Goddard , T . D . , Huang , C . C . , Couch , G . S . , Greenblatt , D . M . , Meng , E . C . , and Ferrin , T . E . ( 2004 ) . UCSF Chimera – a visualization system for exploratory research and analysis . J . Comput . Chem . 25 , 1605 – 1612 . Poole , K . J . V . , Lorenz , M . , Evans , G . , Rosenbaum , G . , Pirani , A . , Craig , R . , To - bacman , L . S . , Lehman , W . , and Holmes , K . C . ( 2006 ) . A comparison of muscle thin ﬁlament models obtained from electron microscopy reconstructions and low - angle X - ray ﬁbre diagrams from non - overlap muscle . J . Struct . Biol . 155 , 273 – 284 . Pyle , W . G . , and Solaro , R . J . ( 2004 ) . At the crossroads of myocardial signaling : the role of Z - discs in intracellular signaling and cardiac function . Circ . Res . 94 , 296 – 305 . Reedy , M . K . ( 1968 ) . Ultrastructure of insect ﬂight muscle . I . Screw sense and structural grouping in the rigor cross - bridge lattice . J . Mol . Biol . 31 , 155 – 176 . Ribeiro , Ede . A . , Jr . , Pinotsis , N . , Ghisleni , A . , Salmazo , A . , Konarev , P . V . , Ko - stan , J . , Sjo¨blom , B . , Schreiner , C . , Polyansky , A . A . , Gkougkoulia , E . A . , et al . ( 2014 ) . The structure and regulation of human muscle a - actinin . Cell 159 , 1447 – 1460 . Rigort , A . , Ba¨uerlein , F . J . B . , Villa , E . , Eibauer , M . , Laugks , T . , Baumeister , W . , andPlitzko , J . M . ( 2012 ) . Focusedionbeammicromachiningofeukaryoticcells for cryoelectron tomography . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 109 , 4449 – 4454 . Risal , D . , Gourinath , S . , Himmel , D . M . , Szent - Gyo¨rgyi , A . G . , and Cohen , C . ( 2004 ) . Myosin subfragment 1 structures reveal a partially bound nucleotide and a complex salt bridge that helps couple nucleotide and actin binding . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 101 , 8930 – 8935 . Ruff , C . , Furch , M . , Brenner , B . , Manstein , D . J . , and Meyho¨fer , E . ( 2001 ) . Sin - gle - molecule tracking of myosins with genetically engineered ampliﬁer do - mains . Nat . Struct . Biol . 8 , 226 – 229 . Savarese , M . , Palmio , J . , Poza , J . J . , Weinberg , J . , Olive , M . , Cobo , A . M . , Vi - hola , A . , Jonson , P . H . , Sarparanta , J . , Garcı´a - Bragado , F . , et al . ( 2019 ) . Acti - ninopathy : A new muscular dystrophy caused by ACTN2 dominant mutations . Ann . Neurol . 85 , 899 – 906 . Savarese , M . , Sarparanta , J . , Vihola , A . , Jonson , P . H . , Johari , M . , Rusanen , S . , Hackman , P . , and Udd , B . ( 2020 ) . Panorama of the distal myopathies . Acta Myol . 39 , 245 – 265 . Schaffer , M . , Mahamid , J . , Engel , B . D . , Laugks , T . , Baumeister , W . , and Plitzko , J . M . ( 2017 ) . Optimized cryo - focused ion beam sample preparation aimed at in situ structural studies of membrane proteins . J . Struct . Biol . 197 , 73 – 82 . Schindelin , J . , Arganda - Carreras , I . , Frise , E . , Kaynig , V . , Longair , M . , Pietzsch , T . , Preibisch , S . , Rueden , C . , Saalfeld , S . , Schmid , B . , et al . ( 2012 ) . Fiji : an open - sourceplatformforbiological - image analysis . Nat . Methods 9 , 676 – 682 . Schmitz , H . , Reedy , M . C . , Reedy , M . K . , Tregear , R . T . , Winkler , H . , and Taylor , K . A . ( 1996 ) . Electron tomography of insect ﬂight muscle in rigor and AMPPNP at 23 (cid:1) C . J . Mol . Biol . 264 , 279 – 301 . Schmitz , H . , Reedy , M . C . , Reedy , M . K . , Tregear , R . T . , and Taylor , K . A . ( 1997 ) . Tomographicthree - dimensionalreconstructionofinsectﬂightmusclepartially relaxed by AMPPNP and ethylene glycol . J . Cell Biol . 139 , 695 – 707 . Schneider , C . A . , Rasband , W . S . , and Eliceiri , K . W . ( 2012 ) . NIH Image to Im - ageJ : 25 years of image analysis . Nat . Methods 9 , 671 – 675 . Schur , F . K . M . , Obr , M . , Hagen , W . J . H . , Wan , W . , Jakobi , A . J . , Kirkpatrick , J . M . , Sachse , C . , Kra¨usslich , H . - G . , and Briggs , J . A . G . ( 2016 ) . An atomic model of HIV - 1 capsid - SP1 reveals structures regulating assembly and matu - ration . Science 353 , 506 – 508 . ll OPEN ACCESS Cell 184 , 2135 – 2150 , April 15 , 2021 2149 Article Selcen , D . , and Engel , A . G . ( 2011 ) . Myoﬁbrillar Myopathies ( Elseview B . V . ) . Shalabi , N . , Persson , M . , Ma˚nsson , A . , Vengallatore , S . , and Rassier , D . E . ( 2017 ) . SarcomereStiffnessduringStretchingandShorteningofRigorSkeletal Myoﬁbrils . Biophys . J . 113 , 2768 – 2776 . Spudich , J . A . ( 2001 ) . Themyosin swinging cross - bridgemodel . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 2 , 387 – 392 . Squire , J . M . ( 2009 ) . Muscle myosin ﬁlaments : cores , crowns and couplings . Biophys . Rev . 1 , 149 – 160 . Squire , J . M . , Roessle , M . , and Knupp , C . ( 2004 ) . New X - ray diffraction obser - vations on vertebrate muscle : organisation of C - protein ( MyBP - C ) and troponin and evidence for unknown structures in the vertebrate A - band . J . Mol . Biol . 343 , 1345 – 1363 . Steffen , W . , Smith , D . , Simmons , R . , and Sleep , J . ( 2001 ) . Mapping the actin ﬁlament with myosin . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 98 , 14949 – 14954 . Studer , G . , Rempfer , C . , Waterhouse , A . M . , Gumienny , R . , Haas , J . , and Schwede , T . ( 2020 ) . QMEANDisCo - distance constraints applied on model quality estimation . Bioinformatics 36 , 1765 – 1771 . Tacke , S . , Erdmann , P . , Wang , Z . , Klumpe , S . , Grange , M . , K (cid:3) rı´ (cid:3) z , R . , Dolnı´k , M . , Mitchels , J . , Plitzko , J . , and Raunser , S . ( 2020 ) . A streamlined workﬂow for automated cryo focused ion beam milling . bioRxiv . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1101 / 2020 . 02 . 24 . 963033 . Takahashi , K . , and Hattori , A . ( 1989 ) . a - actinin is a component of the Z - ﬁla - ment , a structural backbone of skeletal muscle Z - disks . J . Biochem . 105 , 529 – 536 . Takeda , S . , Yamashita , A . , Maeda , K . , and Mae´da , Y . ( 2003 ) . Structure of the core domain of human cardiac troponin in the Ca ( 2 + ) - saturated form . Nature 424 , 35 – 41 . Tang , G . , Peng , L . , Baldwin , P . R . , Mann , D . S . , Jiang , W . , Rees , I . , and Ludtke , S . J . ( 2007 ) . EMAN2 : an extensible image processing suite for electron micro - scopy . J . Struct . Biol . 157 , 38 – 46 . Taylor , K . A . , Reedy , M . C . , Co´rdova , L . , and Reedy , M . K . ( 1984 ) . Three - dimen - sional reconstruction of rigor insect ﬂight muscle from tilted thin sections . Na - ture 310 , 285 – 291 . Taylor , K . A . , Wu , S . , Reedy , M . C . , and Reedy , M . K . ( 2007 ) . Imaging actomy - osin in situ . Methods Cell Biol . 79 , 321 – 368 . Tegunov , D . , Xue , L . , Dienemann , C . , Cramer , P . , and Mahamid , J . ( 2020 ) . Multi - particle cryo - EM reﬁnement with M visualizes ribosome - antibiotic com - plex at3 . 7 A˚ inside cells . bioRxiv . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1101 / 2020 . 06 . 05 . 136341 . Tinevez , J . Y . , Perry , N . , Schindelin , J . , Hoopes , G . M . , Reynolds , G . D . , Laplan - tine , E . , Bednarek , S . Y . , Shorte , S . L . , and Eliceiri , K . W . ( 2017 ) . TrackMate : An openandextensibleplatformforsingle - particletracking . Methods 115 , 80 – 90 . Tsukita , S . , and Yano , M . ( 1985 ) . Actomyosin structure in contracting muscle detected by rapid freezing . Nature 317 , 182 – 184 . Ullrick , W . C . , Toselli , P . A . , Saide , J . D . , and Phear , W . P . C . ( 1977 ) . Fine struc - ture of the vertebrate Z - disc . J . Mol . Biol . 115 , 61 – 74 . Vinogradova , M . V . , Stone , D . B . , Malanina , G . G . , Karatzaferi , C . , Cooke , R . , Mendelson , R . A . , and Fletterick , R . J . ( 2005 ) . Ca ( 2 + ) - regulated structural changes in troponin . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 102 , 5038 – 5043 . von Castelmur , E . , Marino , M . , Svergun , D . I . , Kreplak , L . , Ucurum - Fotiadis , Z . , Konarev , P . V . , Urzhumtsev , A . , Labeit , D . , Labeit , S . , and Mayans , O . ( 2008 ) . A regular pattern of Ig super - motifs deﬁnes segmental ﬂexibility as the elastic mechanism of the titin chain . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 105 , 1186 – 1191 . von der Ecken , J . , Mu¨ller , M . , Lehman , W . , Manstein , D . J . , Penczek , P . A . , and Raunser , S . ( 2015 ) . StructureoftheF - actin - tropomyosincomplex . Nature 519 , 114 – 117 . von der Ecken , J . , Heissler , S . M . , Pathan - Chhatbar , S . , Manstein , D . J . , and Raunser , S . ( 2016 ) . Cryo - EM structure of a human cytoplasmic actomyosin complex at near - atomic resolution . Nature 534 , 724 – 728 . Wagner , T . , Merino , F . , Stabrin , M . , Moriya , T . , Antoni , C . , Apelbaum , A . , Ha - gel , P . , Sitsel , O . , Raisch , T . , Prumbaum , D . , et al . ( 2019 ) . SPHIRE - crYOLO is a fast and accurate fully automated particle picker for cryo - EM . Commun . Biol . 2 , 218 . Wallgren - Pettersson , C . , Sewry , C . A . , Nowak , K . J . , and Laing , N . G . ( 2011 ) . Nemaline myopathies . Semin . Pediatr . Neurol . 18 , 230 – 238 . Waterhouse , A . , Bertoni , M . , Bienert , S . , Studer , G . , Tauriello , G . , Gumienny , R . , Heer , F . T . , de Beer , T . A . P . , Rempfer , C . , Bordoli , L . , et al . ( 2018 ) . SWISS - MODEL : homology modelling of protein structures and complexes . Nucleic Acids Res . 46 ( W1 ) , W296 – W303 . Weiss , G . L . , Kieninger , A . K . , Maldener , I . , Forchhammer , K . , and Pilhofer , M . ( 2019 ) . Structure and Function of a Bacterial Gap Junction Analog . Cell 178 , 374 – 384 . e15 . Wells , C . , and Bagshaw , C . R . ( 1985 ) . Calcium regulation of molluscan myosin ATPase in the absence of actin . Nature 313 , 696 – 697 . Wendt , T . , Taylor , D . , Trybus , K . M . , and Taylor , K . ( 2001 ) . Three - dimensional imagereconstructionofdephosphorylatedsmoothmuscleheavymeromyosin reveals asymmetry in the interaction between myosin heads and placement of subfragment 2 . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 98 , 4361 – 4366 . Wu , S . , Liu , J . , Reedy , M . C . , Tregear , R . T . , Winkler , H . , Franzini - Armstrong , C . , Sasaki , H . , Lucaveche , C . , Goldman , Y . E . , Reedy , M . K . , and Taylor , K . A . ( 2010 ) . Electron tomography of cryoﬁxed , isometrically contracting insect ﬂight muscle reveals novel actin - myosin interactions . PLoS ONE 5 , 1 – 21 . Yamada , Y . , Namba , K . , and Fujii , T . ( 2020 ) . Cardiac muscle thin ﬁlament structures reveal calcium regulatory mechanism . Nat . Commun . 11 , 153 . Yang , Y . , Gourinath , S . , Kova´cs , M . , Nyitray , L . , Reutzel , R . , Himmel , D . M . , O’Neall - Hennessey , E . , Reshetnikova , L . , Szent - Gyo¨rgyi , A . G . , Brown , J . H . , and Cohen , C . ( 2007 ) . Rigor - like structures from muscle myosins reveal key mechanical elements in the transduction pathways of this allosteric motor . Structure 15 , 553 – 564 . Yang , Z . , Fang , J . , Chittuluru , J . , Asturias , F . J . , and Penczek , P . A . ( 2012 ) . Iter - ative stable alignment and clustering of 2D transmission electron microscope images . Structure 20 , 237 – 247 . Zheng , S . Q . , Palovcak , E . , Armache , J . P . , Verba , K . A . , Cheng , Y . , and Agard , D . A . ( 2017 ) . MotionCor2 : anisotropic correction of beam - induced motion for improved cryo - electron microscopy . Nat . Methods 14 , 331 – 332 . ll OPEN ACCESS 2150 Cell 184 , 2135 – 2150 , April 15 , 2021 Article STAR + METHODS KEY RESOURCES TABLE REAGENT or RESOURCE SOURCE IDENTIFIER Biological samples Mouse fast psoas myoﬁbrils from a 3 - month female BALB / c mouse King’s College London N / A Deposited data Sub - volume average of in situ actomyosin complex This paper EMD : 12289 Sub - volume average of re - centered myosin double - head This paper EMD : 12291 Sub - volume average of I - band thin ﬁlaments without troponin This paper EMD : 12292 Sub - volume average of I - band thin ﬁlaments including troponin This paper EMD : 12293 Homology model of in situ actomyosin complex This paper PDB : 7NEP Cryo - EM structure of in vitro cytoplasmic actomyosin complex von der Ecken et al . , 2016 PDB : 5JLH Crystal structure of rigor - like squid myosin S1 fragment Yang et al . , 2007 PDB : 3I5G Cryo - EM structure of human cardiac thin ﬁlament in calcium - bound state Yamada et al . , 2020 PDB : 6KN8 Cryo - EM structure of human cardiac thin ﬁlament in calcium - free state Yamada et al . , 2020 PDB : 6KN7 Cryo - EM structure of relaxed myosin heads in insect ﬂight muscle Hu et al . , 2016 ; Knupp et al . , 2019 PDB : 6SO3 Crystal structure of human myosin S2 fragment Blankenfeldt et al . , 2006 PDB : 2FXM Crystal structure of human a - actinin 2 Ribeiro et al . , 2014 PDB : 4D1E Cryo - EM structure of actin ﬁlament decorated by ﬁlamin A CH1 domain Iwamoto et al . , 2018 PDB : 6D8C Software and algorithms SerialEM Mastronarde , 2005 https : / / bio3d . colorado . edu / SerialEM / MotionCorr2 Zheng et al . , 2017 https : / / emcore . ucsf . edu / ucsf - software EMAN2 Tang et al . , 2007 https : / / blake . bcm . edu / emanwiki / EMAN2 IMOD Kremer et al . , 1996 https : / / bio3d . colorado . edu / imod / crYOLO Wagner et al . , 2019 https : / / cryolo . readthedocs . io RELION3 Bharat and Scheres , 2016 https : / / www3 . mrc - lmb . cam . ac . uk / relion / index . php ? title = Main _ Page PEET Heumann et al . , 2011 ; Nicastro et al . , 2006 https : / / bio3d . colorado . edu / PEET / ISAC Yang et al . , 2012 http : / / sphire . mpg . de / wiki / doku . php ? id = gpu _ isac SPHIRE Moriya et al . , 2017 https : / / sphire . mpg . de / TrackMate plug - in in Fiji Tinevez et al . , 2017 https : / / imagej . net / TrackMate Fiji ( ImageJ ) Schindelin et al . , 2012 ; Schneider et al . , 2012 https : / / imagej . net / Fiji TEMPy Farabella et al . , 2015 http : / / tempy . ismb . lon . ac . uk / ( Continued on next page ) ll OPEN ACCESS Cell 184 , 2135 – 2150 . e1 – e5 , April 15 , 2021 e1 Article RESOURCE AVAILABILITY Lead contact Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be fulﬁlled by the Lead Contact , Stefan Raunser ( stefan . raunser @ mpi - dortmund . mpg . de ) . Materials availability This study did not generate new unique reagents . Data and code availability The EM structures generated through this study have been deposited in the Electron Microscopy Data Bank ( https : / / www . ebi . ac . uk / pdbe / emdb ) under accession numbers 12289 , 12291 , 12292 , 12293 . The in situ actomyosin model is deposited in the Protein Data Bank ( https : / / www . rcsb . org ) under accession number 7NEP . EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT DETAILS This study used muscle isolated from the psoas of 3 - month female BALB / c mice . Animals were euthanised in a schedule - 1 procedure by cervical dislocation following licensed procedures approved by King’s College London ethics committee and the Home Ofﬁce UK . The isolation of muscle is described below in the Method details . METHOD DETAILS Myoﬁbril preparation and vitriﬁcation Myoﬁbrils were isolated from BALB / c mouse psoas muscle essentially as previously described ( Knight and Trinick , 1982 ; Shalabi et al . , 2017 ) . Brieﬂy , bundles of the freshly excised psoas major muscle were tied to plastic supports and their sarcomere length adjusted as judged by laser diffraction to 2 . 2 - 2 . 4 m m . They were allowed to equilibrate in rigor buffer ( 20 mM HEPES pH 7 , 140 mM KCl , 2 mM MgCl 2 , 1 mM EGTA , 1 mM DTT , Roche complete protease inhibitor ) over night at 4 (cid:1) C . The following day , the central section of the bundles was dissected into ~ 2 mm pieces and homogenized 3 to 4 times at 7 , 700 rpm for 15 s , and 3 times at 10 , 000 rpm for 5 s ( IKA TC10 basic ULTRA - TURRAX (cid:2) homogenizer with S10N - 5G dispersing element , IKA England ) with inter - mittent washes in rigor buffer , with myoﬁbril separation monitored by light microscopy of small samples at each step . Myoﬁbril sus - pensions were stored in complete rigor buffer at 0 (cid:1) C for 1 - 3 days until vitriﬁcation . Grids with myoﬁbrils were vitriﬁed using a Vitrobot Mark IV plunger ( Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc , USA ) . 2 m l of myoﬁbril - containing solution was applied to glow - discharged Quantifoil R1 . 2 / 1 . 3 Cu 200 grids . After incubation on the grid for 60 s at 13 (cid:1) C , excess solution was blotted for 15 s from the opposite side from the sample with a Teﬂon sheet attached to the front pad of the apparatus . The grids were then vitriﬁed by plunge - freezing into liquid ethane and afterward clipped into cryo - FIB - speciﬁc autogrid rings ( Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc ) with marks for orientation alignment and a cut - out for subsequent milling at a shallow angle . Cryo - focused ion beam milling Clipped autogrids were loaded into a shuttle and transferred into an Aquilos cryo - FIB / SEM dual - beam microscope ( Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc ) . Overview tile sets for the grids were acquired at 256 x magniﬁcation with the scanning electron beam using MAPS soft - ware ( Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc ) . The grids were then sputter coated with platinum for 15 s to minimize charging effects arising from Continued REAGENT or RESOURCE SOURCE IDENTIFIER SWISS - MODEL Bertoni et al . , 2017 ; Bienert et al . , 2017 ; Guex et al . , 2009 ; Studer et al . , 2020 ; Waterhouse et al . , 2018 https : / / swissmodel . expasy . org / Chimera Pettersen et al . , 2004 https : / / www . cgl . ucsf . edu / chimera / Amira2019 . 3 Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc https : / / www . thermoﬁsher . com / us / en / home / industrial / electron - microscopy / electron - microscopy - instruments - workﬂow - solutions / 3d - visualization - analysis - software / amira - life - sciences - biomedical . html MUSCLE algorithm in msa R package Edgar , 2004 https : / / www . rdocumentation . org / packages / msa ll OPEN ACCESS e2 Cell 184 , 2135 – 2150 . e1 – e5 , April 15 , 2021 Article the electron beam , allowing better recognition of myoﬁbrils ( Figure 1 ) . Vitriﬁed myoﬁbrils were localized and labeled as lamella sites . Prior to FIB - milling , organometallic platinum was deposited onto the grids through a gas - injection - system to prevent damage to the sample at the leading edge from the gallium ion beam . For each lamella site , the coincident point between electron beam and ion beam was determined by adjusting stage Z height . The stage was tilted to allow a 6 - 10 (cid:1) incidence angle of ion beam . FIB - milling using gallium ions was then performed in four steps as described in Table S1 . During each step , all lamellae were milled before pro - ceeding to the next step . All lamellae were polished within one hour to minimize water deposition onto the surface of lamellae . During polishing , the lamella was monitored with the electron beam at 5 kV , 25 pA to help estimate its actual thickness via charging propensity . Electron cryo - tomography and tomogram reconstruction Autogrids were rotated by 90 (cid:1) after milling before being inserted into an autogrid cassette so as to align the longitudinal axis of lamellae perpendicular to the tilt axis of the transmission electron microscope ( TEM ) stage later . This ensures autofocus and record positions are aligned along the tilt axis on a lamella and have close to the same eucentric height . Grids were then loaded into a Titan Krios ( Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc ) equipped with a zero - loss energy ﬁlter and a K2 Summit direct electron detector ( Gatan Inc . , USA ) . SerialEM software ( Mastronarde , 2005 ) was used to acquire images . Lamellae overview images were acquired at 6 , 300x or 8 , 400x magniﬁcation . High magniﬁcation tilt series were acquired at a calibrated post - energy - ﬁlter TEM magniﬁcation of 28409x ( nominal magniﬁcation of 81 , 000x , pixel size 1 . 76 A˚ ) with a dose - symmetric tilt scheme ( Hagen et al . , 2017 ) and a total dose ranging from approximately 130 to 155 e - / A˚ 2 . The stage was tilted from (cid:3) 60 (cid:1) to + 60 (cid:1) relative to the lamella tilt angle ( 6 - 10 (cid:1) ) with an increment of 3 (cid:1) during data acquisition . The defocus at which acquisition was performed ranged from 2 . 4 m m to 4 m m ( Table S2 ) . Collected tilt movies were subsequently motion - corrected and stacked in batch using a custom python script with MotionCorr2 ( Zheng et al . , 2017 ) and EMAN2 ( Tang et al . , 2007 ) . Subsequent tomogram reconstruction steps including tilt series alignment , CTF estima - tion and correction , and weighted back projection were performed using the IMOD software package ( Kremer et al . , 1996 ) . Platinum particles deposited onto the surface of lamellae were used as ﬁducial markers for alignment of tilt series where possible whereas in their absence patch tracking was used to align the tilt series . Sub - volume averaging of the thick ﬁlament Tomograms were initially 4x binned and lowpass - ﬁltered to 60 A˚ using EMAN2 for visualization . To pick ﬁlaments accurately without the interference from signals from cross - bridges , an equatorial mask in the Fourier transform of XY slices of tomograms was applied . CrYOLO ( Wagner et al . , 2019 ) was afterward employed to detect the shape of thick ﬁlaments in the XZ planes of the ﬁltered tomo - gram . The detected points were then traced by a python script , which generated the coordinates for the thick ﬁlaments . In total , 13 , 700 segments of thick ﬁlaments ( sub - volumes ) were picked from 8 tomograms from multiple myoﬁbrils with an inter - segment dis - tance of 105 A˚ . These segments were extracted from unbinned and 2x binned tomograms with a box size of 128 pixels ( 450 A˚ ) using RELION ( Bharat and Scheres , 2016 ) . Prior information of the orientations of the thick ﬁlaments in a tomogram was used to generate a featureless cylinder - like reference using PEET ( Heumann et al . , 2011 ; Nicastro et al . , 2006 ) . The sub - volumes were then aligned and averaged using RELION . Three different strategies were used during alignment . First , the sub - volumes were aligned without any sym - metry imposed and a global reﬁnement was enabled . This resulted in aligning the missing wedge and a map with anisotropic reso - lution was generated ( Figure S2B ) . Then , a C3 symmetry was imposed during reﬁnement according to a previous structural study of the relaxed human cardiac myosin ﬁlament ( Al - Khayat et al . , 2013 ) . Although the averaged map had an isotropic resolution , the qual - ity of the map did not improve ( Figure S2C ) . In the end , without any symmetry imposed , only local reﬁnement was enabled to prevent aligning the missing wedges ( Figure S2D ) . This averaged structure has an estimated resolution of 30 . 4 A˚ based on the ‘‘gold - stan - dard’’ FSC with 0 . 143 criterion . The map was used as a model for the thick ﬁlament in Figures 3 and 5 . Sub - volume averaging of the actomyosin complex and ﬁtting of atomic model Thin ﬁlaments were picked automatically in a similar method as described above . Instead of using crYOLO , thin ﬁlaments , which ap - peared as dense dots from the XZ view ( Figure S1E ) , were recognized and traced by the TrackMate plug - in ( Tinevez et al . , 2017 ) in Fiji ( Schindelin et al . , 2012 ; Schneider et al . , 2012 ) . In total , 32 , 421 segments ( sub - volumes ) were picked from 8 tomograms from multiple myoﬁbrils with an inter - segment distance of 63 A˚ . These segments were extracted from unbinned and unﬁltered tomograms with a box size of 200 pixels ( 351 A˚ ) using RELION ( Bharat and Scheres , 2016 ) . In order to exclude low - quality sub - volumes using 2D clas - siﬁcation , the extracted sub - volumes were ﬁrst rotated to orient thin ﬁlaments parallel the XY plane based on ﬁlament orientations calculated from particle positions . Projection images along Z axis were then generated from the central 100 slices ( 175 A˚ ) of each particle and subsequently classiﬁed using 2D classiﬁcation in the ISAC software ( Yang et al . , 2012 ) from the SPHIRE package ( Moriya et al . , 2017 ) . This approach , compared to using the entire sub - volume for projection , excluded signals from other ﬁlaments at the corner of the sub - volume and thus enabled a more reliable assessment of particle quality ( Figure S3B ) . 21 , 130 selected good sub - volumes were aligned , averaged , and classiﬁed in 3D using RELION , based on a cylinder - like reference generated from aver - aging all sub - volumes after aligning the longitudinal axis of segments using PEET ( Figure S3C ) . In each 3D class , translation and rota - tion parameters were modiﬁed to align the most prominent double - head of myosin ( Figure S3D ) . After combining the modiﬁed good classes and removing duplicate particles , 18 , 090 sub - volumes were reﬁned locally with a mask including the thin ﬁlament and one pair of myosin double - head . The ﬁnal average has an estimated resolution of 10 . 2 A ˚ based on the ‘‘gold - standard’’ FSC with 0 . 143 ll OPEN ACCESS Cell 184 , 2135 – 2150 . e1 – e5 , April 15 , 2021 e3 Article criterion . Local resolution was estimated in SPHIRE using the two half - maps and the mask used during averaging . The ﬁnal map was sharpened with a B - factor of (cid:3) 250 and ﬁltered to the nominal resolution ( Figure S3F ) . In order to resolve the light chain domains of myosin heads , sub - volumes centered on myosin the double - heads ( shifted 90 pixels along x axis compared to original sub - volumes ) were extracted . The positions of these new sub - volumes in tomograms were calcu - lated by a python script using the original sub - volume coordinates and their alignment parameters . The new sub - volumes were sorted through 3D classiﬁcation in RELION . 4 , 519 particles from the two good classes were reﬁned locally with masking out the thin ﬁlament and myosin double - head ( Figures S3E and S3G ) . An initial atomic model of the in situ actomyosin complex was ﬁrst built by rigid - body ﬁtting of actin subunits and myosin motor domains from the atomic model of the in vitro actomyosin complex ( von der Ecken et al . , 2016 ) ( PDB : 5JLH ) , tropomyosin from the atomic model of isolated cardiac thin ﬁlament ( Yamada et al . , 2020 ) ( PDB : 6KN8 ) and myosin lever arms from the crystal structure of rigor - like squid myosin S1 ( Yang et al . , 2007 ) ( PDB : 3I5G ) using ‘Fit in Map’ in Chimera ( Pettersen et al . , 2004 ) . Essential light chains ( ELCs ) and the regulatory light chain ( RLCs ) were ﬁtted separately into the averaged map after removing 5 amino acids ( M796 - Y800 ) at the hinge on the a - helix between ELC and RLC . The model of RLC together with part of the heavy chain lever arm ( K801 - L839 ) was rigid - body ﬁtted into a segmented map generated by ‘‘Color Zone’’ in Chimera . Based on this initial atomic model and the sequences of actin , myosin and tropomyosin in mouse fast skeletal muscle , a homology model was calculated using SWISS - MODEL ( Bertoni et al . , 2017 ; Bienert et al . , 2017 ; Guex et al . , 2009 ; Studer et al . , 2020 ; Waterhouse et al . , 2018 ) ( Figure 2 ) . Comparison of lever arms in the in situ rigor upper head , lower head , squid myosin S1 fragment , and the blocked and free heads from relaxed insect ﬂight muscle ( PDB : 6SO3 ) ( Knupp et al . , 2019 ) ( Figures S3I and S3J ) was performed by aligning the RLC of the heads using the ‘‘MatchMaker’’ function in Chimera . Annotation of the A - band and ﬁtting of the molecular model of actomyosin In order to visualize the organization of cross - bridges between thin and thick ﬁlaments , the densities of a complete A - band were an - notated manually using Amira ( Thermo Fischer Scientiﬁc ) on a slice - by - slice basis . A user - deﬁned mask based on gray values was used during manual annotation to prevent the picking of weaker densities . The 2D annotation stacked to form a 3D segmented vol - ume depicting the arrangement of thin and thick ﬁlaments as well as the cross - bridges formed by myosin heads ( Figure 3A ) . During sub - volume averaging , a structure of the thin ﬁlament fully decorated with myosin heads ( Figure S3C ) was obtained prior to 3D clas - siﬁcation . This was low - pass ﬁltered to 17 A˚ and extended to a length of 1 , 755 A˚ ( ~ 63 actin subunits ) based on the helical symmetry detected in the structure ( (cid:3) 166 . 6 (cid:1) turn and 27 . 9 A˚ rise ) using RELION helix toolbox . This long fully - decorated thin ﬁlament model was then ﬁtted into each segmented volume corresponding to a thin ﬁlament with bound myosin heads using ‘‘Fit in Map’’ in Chimera . The myosin heads that matched segmented volume were kept and colored depending on which thick ﬁlament they originated from while the other myosin heads were removed . This generated a complete map of myosin heads bound to thin ﬁlaments in the A - band ( Fig - ures 3B and 5 ; Video S1 ) . The models of double - head and split - head conformations were made from initially ﬁtting our actomyosin structure into the segmented volume ( Figures 3C , 3D , and S4 ) . For the split - head conformation , the upper head from the double - head conformation was ﬁtted into densities for both heads . The S2 domain from segments of a crystal structure ( Blankenfeldt et al . , 2006 ) ( PDB : 2FXM ) was manually placed at the interface between the two regulatory light chains for its speculated position and orientation . Surface models were generated with the ‘‘molmap’’ command in Chimera at a resolution of 15 A˚ . Analysis of the preferred binding positions of myosin heads on a thin ﬁlament In order to investigate the relation between myosin binding and the orientation of their bound actin subunit relative to the neighboring thick ﬁlament , the corresponding angle of each actin position relative to the ﬁrst actin subunit in the thin ﬁlament was calculated based on actin helical parameters determined from the averaged structure . The angles where there was a myosin bound were divided into three groups depending the original thick ﬁlaments and plotted as a circular histogram . Values of angles from different ﬁlaments were combined by aligning the average of one myosin group ( represented as red color in Figure 4 ) , resulting a ﬁnal histogram rep - resenting all myosin - bound actin positions ( Figure 4 ) . In addition , the molecular model of each thin ﬁlament was converted to a myosin - binding proﬁle sequence consisting of R , G , B , and E representing actin bound by myosin from three different thick ﬁlaments and non - bound actin , respectively . The sequences of all 30 annotated ﬁlaments were aligned by multiple sequence alignment using the ‘‘msa’’ package in R with the MUSCLE algorithm ( Edgar , 2004 ) utilizing a customized weighting matrix ( Figure S5 ; Table S3 ) . When a thin ﬁlament was treated as a single strand , adja - cent actin subunits had a huge change in orientation ( 166 . 6 (cid:1) ) and thus very different preference for myosin binding , resulting in nonoptimal multiple sequence alignment . Therefore , each thin ﬁlament was considered as two actin strands and only one strand was used for multiple sequence alignment . The other strands were aligned using the same alignment as the ﬁrst strands . The occur - rence of myosin binding at each actin position was summed up for myosin from each thick ﬁlament and then used to color actin ﬁla - ment models in Chimera , showing averaged hotspots for myosin binding on a thin ﬁlament ( Figure S5B ) . To further investigate whether myosin prefers to bind at shorter distances between thin and thick ﬁlaments , the distances between thin and thick ﬁlaments at the positions where there is a myosin head bound and where myosin is absent were calculated using a python script . For each actin subunit not bound by a myosin head , three measurements were taken between the actin and three different neighboring thick ﬁlaments . For an actin subunit that is bound by a myosin head , the distance between the actin subunit ll OPEN ACCESS e4 Cell 184 , 2135 – 2150 . e1 – e5 , April 15 , 2021 Article and the corresponding thick ﬁlament is considered as the myosin - bound measurement while the distances between this actin sub - unit and the other two neighboring thick ﬁlaments are considered as the myosin - free measurements . All measurements were plotted in a histogram ( Figure 4C ) . Sub - volume averaging of the I - band thin ﬁlaments Thin ﬁlaments in the I - band were picked automatically as described in the previous sections with crYOLO . 15 , 153 sub - volumes from 4 tomograms from multiple myoﬁbrils showing I - band in the ﬁeld of view were aligned with calculated priors ( phi and theta angles ) and reﬁned in 3D using RELION . Helical processing was used to minimize missing wedge artifacts using the helical parameters deter - mined in the A - band thin ﬁlament structure . This resulted to a ﬁnal structure of I - band thin ﬁlament without troponin with an estimated resolution of 10 . 6 A˚ using the 0 . 143 criterion . The map was sharpened with a B - factor of (cid:3) 600 and ﬁltered to the nominal resolution . Thin ﬁlament segments decorated by troponin densities were picked manually in IMOD . In total , 704 sub - volumes were aligned to an initial reference generated by averaging all sub - volumes without alignment in PEET . The averaged structure of the I - band thin ﬁlament including troponin has an estimated resolution of 19 . 8 A˚ after masking . A homology atomic model of the I - band thin ﬁlament was calculated using SWISS - MODEL based on the atomic model of isolated cardiac thin ﬁlament ( Yamada et al . , 2020 ) and rigid - body ﬁtted into the averaged maps ( Figures 6 and S6 ) . To investigate the location where the transition of tropomyosin from the M - state to C - state occurs , three tomograms containing both A - band and I - band were analyzed . Particles around the A / I junction in these tomograms were divided into 37 - nm sections . Four sections ( one in A - band and three in I - band ) were selected using a customized script . Sections 1 - 4 contains 1206 , 1126 , 988 and 947 particles , respectively . The particles from the four sections were averaged separately using the same strategy as described above ( Figures S6D and S6F ) . The averages were aligned to an undecorated actin ﬁlament structure for the comparison of tropomyosin positions . The particles colored by their tropomyosin states were visualized in the 3D view in IMOD to depict their distribution ( Figure S6E ) . Analysis of I - band and Z - disc organization Different Z - disc thicknesses were observed in different sarcomeres from multiple myoﬁbrils . The thickness was measured between the sites where a - actinins start to bind to the antiparallel thin ﬁlaments using IMOD ( Figures 7A , 7D , and S7A ) . The relative angle be - tween a - actinin and actin was measured as the obtuse angle between the pointed end of actin ﬁlament and a - actinin using Fiji ( Fig - ure S7A ) . From our observations , the Z - discs from the same myoﬁbril have a similar thickness . A tomogram showing both I - band and Z - disc was 4x binned and ﬁltered initially with a SIRT - like ﬁlter using IMOD , followed by a low - pass ﬁlter at 60 A˚ . Thin ﬁlaments in the tomogram were ﬁrst picked automatically as described in the previous section . The seg - ments in the Z - disc were further curated manually and merged into the originally picked ﬁlaments . The polarities of the ﬁlaments were determined based on the location of the ends of the ﬁlaments . 3D organization of these ﬁlaments was generated in Fiji and shown in Chimera ( Figure 6F ) . To analyze the organization of a - actinin in the thin - form Z - disc , potential positions of a - actinin were sampled between ends of ﬁlaments with opposite polarities . The exact location of a - actinin was searched for by aligning sub - volumes ex - tracted at these positions to a cylinder using a limited search range with PEET . The new positions and the corresponding orientation of sub - volumes representing the location of a - actinin were clustered based on the determined new position . Obvious false - positive and false - negative positions were then curated manually . In the thick - form and intermediate Z - discs , 12 a - actinins were picked in each tomogram manually in IMOD . The angles between the pointed end of actin and the long axis a - actinin and the lengths of a - ac - tinins in both types of Z - discs were calculated and plotted as histograms using python scripts . The 3D organization of the thin - form Z - disc was generated in Fiji and shown in Chimera ( Figures 7H and 7I ) . A local 3D model of one thin ﬁlament with its neighboring thin ﬁlaments and a - actinins was generated by ﬁtting models of actin ﬁlament and plotting back a map from the crystal structure of a - ac - tinin ( Ribeiro et al . , 2014 ) ( PDB : 4D1E ) according to their 3 - dimensional positions and orientations using tools developed as part of the TEMPy software package ( Farabella et al . , 2015 ) ( Figure 7K ) . Sub - volumes at the position of a - actinin were extracted from the 4x binned tomogram with a box size of 80 pixels ( 560 A˚ ) . An initial reference was obtained by averaging all 384 sub - volumes without reﬁnement using PEET based on their orientation calculated from the coordinates of the a - actinin and the connected thin ﬁlaments . These sub - volumes were aligned to this reference during 3D reﬁne - ment using RELION to generate a ﬁnal average . The central rod domain from the crystal structure of a - actinin ( PDB : 4D1E ) was ﬁtted into the averaged density manually . The actin binding domain , together with actin ﬁlaments was ﬁtted into the density based on the atomic model of actin ﬁlament decorated by the ﬁrst calponin homology ( CH1 ) domain of ﬁlamin A ( PDB : 6D8C ) , which shares a similar structure to the CH1 domain of a - actinin ( Figures 5L and S7F ) . QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS Statistical parameters are reported in ﬁgures and ﬁgure legends . ll OPEN ACCESS Cell 184 , 2135 – 2150 . e1 – e5 , April 15 , 2021 e5 Article Supplemental ﬁgures Figure S1 . Cryo - FIB - ET ofisolatedmouse myoﬁbrils reveals sarcomere ultrastructure and hexagonal arrangement ofﬁlamentsin the cross - section view , related to Figure 1 ( A ) Cartoon showing the arrangement of the SEM and FIB ion source with respect to the grid . Myoﬁbrils are depicted in red . ( B ) Left : SEMimagetaken45 (cid:1) totheplaneofagridonwhichmyoﬁbrilswerevitriﬁed , withredarrowheadspointingtowardthemyoﬁbrils . Theorangearrowhead indicatesthemillingdirection . Scalebar , 50 m m . Right : Top ( takenwithelectronbeam ) andside ( takenwithionbeam ) viewsofthelamellatakenaftermillinginthe FIB - SEM . The top view was taken 60 (cid:1) angle to the plane of the grid . The side view was taken 8 (cid:1) to the plane of the grid , which was also the milling angle . Scale bar , 5 m m . ( C ) Projection image of a lamella after FIB - milling recorded at a TEM at stage 0 (cid:1) . Purple arrow heads indicate M - bands of sarcomeres , while green arrow heads indicate Z - discs . Scale bar , 3 m m . ( D and G ) Schematic diagrams of the triangular arrangement of thick ﬁlaments in the A - band ( D ) and the hexagonal arrangement of thin ﬁlaments in the M - band ( G ) . Thin and thick ﬁlaments are represented by green and orange circles , respectively . ( EandH ) Slicesofthecross - sectionviewoftomogramsintheA - band ( E ) andtheM - band ( H ) . ThetomogramswerepreviouslyﬁlteredwithanequatorﬁlteronXY slices in Fourier space to remove signals from cross - bridges . The thicknesses of lamellae were measured in this view . Scale bar , 50 nm . ( F and I ) Distances between ﬁlaments were measured using the line proﬁles of the white dotted lines in ( E ) and ( H ) , respectively . ll OPEN ACCESS Article Figure S2 . Sub - volume averaging of thick ﬁlaments , related to Figures 3 and 5 ( A ) Slice through a tomogram depicting three adjacent thick ﬁlaments . Scale bar , 50 nm . ( B ) Averaged structure from a global reﬁnement . The map suffers from missing wedge artifacts , indicating alignment focused on the missing wedge instead of actual structural features . ( C ) The distribution of myosin heads when retracted to the thick ﬁlaments in the relaxed state has a C3 symmetry . We therefore performed a reﬁnement and reconstruction applying C3 symmetry . However , this did not improve the quality of the map , indicating that the core of vertebrate thick ﬁlaments is not C3 symmetric . ( D ) A local reﬁnement with restricted possible rotation angles reduced alignment errors and thereby missing wedge artifacts . This reconstruction was used as a model for thick ﬁlament in Figures 3 and 5 . ( E ) The estimated resolution of the reconstruction in ( D ) is 30 . 4 A˚ using the 0 . 143 criterion . ll OPEN ACCESS Article ( legend on next page ) ll OPEN ACCESS Article Figure S3 . Strategies ofsub - volume averagingofthe insitu actomyosin complexand different ‘‘kink’’conformationsinthelever arm , related to Figure 2 and STAR Methods ( A ) Workﬂow of sub - volume averaging leading to the ﬁnal structures of the in situ actomyosin complex and double - head myosin . Details of the colored steps are shown in ( B - G ) . ( B ) Examples of selected and discarded 2D class averages . After cleaning by 2D sorting , 21 , 130 out of 32 , 421 sub - volumes were selected for subsequent processing . ( C ) Initial reference and the average after the ﬁrst 3D reﬁnement with only a spherical mask with a diameter of 340 A˚ applied . ( D ) Classes of the actomyosin complex after 3D classiﬁcation . Prominent myosin double head pairs in each class are indicated by red arrow heads . These pairs were later aligned to each other during merging the classes by modifying the alignment parameters . The classes in the black box were selected and used for subsequent processing . ( E ) Classes of the myosin double - heads after the 3D classiﬁcation applied on the sub - volumes re - centered on myosin heads . The two classes in the black boxes showing clear densities for the double - head were selected for the ﬁnal averaging . ( F ) Left : ﬁnalreconstructionof theactomyosincomplexgenerated from thelocal reﬁnement withamask aroundthethin ﬁlament and apair ofmyosin heads after mergingtheclassesin ( D ) . Themapiscoloredbasedonlocalresolution . Thepurpleinsetshowstheareaofthere - centeredsub - volumesfordouble - headanalysis in ( E ) and ( G ) . Right : The estimated resolution of the reconstruction is 10 . 2 A˚ using the 0 . 143 criterion . ( G ) Left : ﬁnalaverageofthecompletemyosindouble - headincludingRLC . Right : Theestimatedresolutionofthereconstructionis15 . 1A˚usingthe0 . 143criterion . ( H ) ExampledetailsshowingsecondarystructuresthatarevisibleintheaveragedstructureinF . Theredarrowheadsindicate theD - loopofactin , helix - loop - helix motif and loop 3 of myosin from left to right at the interface between actin and myosin . ( I ) Alignment of ELCs , together with the ELC - binding region , from different atomic models of myosin heads . Only the RLC - binding helix of the lever arm in each modelisshowninsteadofthecomplete RLCforclearvisualization . Twodifferentgroupsofconformationsareshown . Theconformationofthelowerhead ( red ) is similar to the relaxed blocked state ( orange ) . The upper head ( blue ) exhibits a similar conformation to the relaxed free head ( purple ) and the crystal structure of squid myosin S1 ( green ) . ( J ) Side - by - side comparison of the complete myosin atomic models in ( I ) showing the heavy chain and both light chains . ll OPEN ACCESS Article Figure S4 . Annotation and ﬁtting of split and double heads of myosin between thin and thick ﬁlaments from A - band tomograms , related to Figures 3 and 5 ( A ) Annotated density of a thin ﬁlament including the myosin heads ( green ) , with the annotated density for a myosin double - head highlighted in orange . ( B ) Oblique and zoomed - in view of the double - head density and its associated thick ﬁlament segmentation ( pink ) . ( C ) Same view as in ( B ) including the ﬁtted thin ﬁlament and myosin double - head models from sub - volume averaging . ( D ) Annotated density of two thin ﬁlaments including the myosin heads ( green and light blue ) , highlighting annotated density corresponding split - head in orange . ( E ) Oblique and zoomed - in view of the split - head density and its associated thick ﬁlament segmentation . ( F ) Sameviewasin ( E ) includingtheﬁttedthinﬁlamentandmyosinsplit - headmodels . Thesplit - headiscomposedoftwoheadsintheupperheadconformationin order to be ﬁtted into the density . ll OPEN ACCESS Article FigureS5 . Overall myosinbindingproﬁlegenerated frommultiplesequencealignmentofmyosinbindingproﬁlesof30thinﬁlaments , related to Figure 4 and STAR Methods ( A ) TheﬁttedmyosinheadmodelinFigure3Bwasconvertedtomyosinbindingproﬁlesequencesonthinﬁlaments , with‘‘R , ’’‘‘G , ’’‘‘B’’representingactinsubunits bound by three groups of myosin heads originating from three neighboring thick ﬁlaments and ‘‘E’’ representing myosin - free actin subunits . These sequences were aligned using multiple sequence alignment with a customized weight matrix . Only the sequence of one actin strand for each thin ﬁlament was used for alignment . The sum of occurrence of each myosin group at each actin subunit position is shown at the bottom and colored accordingly . Darker color indicates higher occurrence . ( B ) Thecolored overallmyosinbindingproﬁleonbothactinstrandsforeachmyosingroup . Sequencesofstrand2werecombinedusingthealignmentofstrand1 shown in ( A ) . The overall myosin binding proﬁles depict hotspots for myosin binding on a thin ﬁlament and the region highlighted in the black box is used to color the models shown in Figure 4B . ll OPEN ACCESS Article Figure S6 . Sub - volume averaging of the thin ﬁlaments in the I - band , related to Figure 6 ( A and B ) Comparison of tropomyosin positions in different regions of the sarcomere . Side ( A ) and top ( B ) views of a thin ﬁlament with tropomyosin in the A - band ( yellow ) and I - band ( blue ) . Tropomyosin is in the M state in the A - band and resides in the C - state in the I - band . The two states differ by an azimuthal rotation of ~ 21 (cid:1) . The B - state tropomyosin from a model of Ca 2 + - free thin ﬁlament ( PDB : 6KN7 ) ( orange ) is also shown for comparison . ( C ) The estimated resolution of the reconstruction of a thin ﬁlament excluding troponin in the I - band is 10 . 6 A˚ using the 0 . 143 criterion . ( D ) Slicefrom atomogram showingboth A - band and I - band . Thesolid red line represents the border between theA - band and I - band . 37 - nm sections separated by the red dotted lines were selected for separate sub - volume averaging . ( E ) 3D view of particles of thethin ﬁlaments inthe same region as ( D ) , colored basedon thestate of their tropomyosinposition . All A - band particles exhibit theM - statetropomyosinposition ( yellow ) . MostI - bandparticlesexhibittheC - statetropomyosin ( blue ) . Theparticlesintheclosest37 - nmsectionintheI - bandtotheA - band ( section 2 in ( D ) ) exhibit an intermediate position of tropomyosin , and hence deﬁne a transition zone . ( F ) Averagedstructurescorrespondingtosections1 - 4asindicatedin ( D ) . Thestructureswerealignedtoanon - decoratedF - actinstructure . Tropomyosinmodelsﬁtted intothestructuresareshownontheright . Section1hasthesametropomyosinpositionastheM - statestructure . Section3and4hasthesametropomyosinpositionas the C - state structure . Section 2 has an intermediate tropomyosin position between the M - and C - state , implying that this is the section where the transition occurs . ( G ) Slice of a tomogram depicting thin ﬁlaments in the I - band . Bulges along the ﬁlaments appear with a periodicity of ~ 37 nm ( highlighted by pink arrow heads ) , corresponding to troponin complexes . An enlarged version of a pair of troponin complexes in the black inset is shown at the bottom - right corner , depicting clear extra densities . Scale bar , 10 nm . ( H ) 3D reconstruction of a thin ﬁlament decorated by a pair of troponin complexes obtained from sub - volume averaging . ( I ) A homology model based on the structure of the Ca 2 + - bound cardiac muscle thin ﬁlament ( PDB : 6KN8 ) was ﬁtted into the map . Actin , tropomyosin , troponin I , troponin T and troponin C are shown in green , blue , yellow , red , and orange , respectively . ( J ) The structure of troponin in the Ca 2 + - bound state ( PDB : 6KN8 ) ﬁts much better into the map than the structure of troponin in the Ca 2 + - free state ( PDB : 6KN7 ) . Together with the C - state position of tropomyosin ( A and B ) , this indicates that the I - band thin ﬁlament is in the Ca 2 + - bound state . ( K ) The estimated resolution of the reconstruction of the thin ﬁlament including troponin in the I - band is 19 . 8 A˚ using the 0 . 143 criterion . ll OPEN ACCESS Article Figure S7 . a - Actinin structure and organization in the Z - disc , related to Figure 7 ( A ) PlotrelatingthethicknessofZ - discsandtheanglebetween a - actininsandthepointedendofactinﬁlamentfromdifferenttomograms . Thepositivecorrelation implies a parallel hinge mechanism of the Z - disc . ( B ) Slices through tomograms depicting a thin Z - disc ( left , red arrow in ( A ) ) , a thick Z - disc ( right , blue arrow in ( A ) ) and a Z - disc of intermediate thickness ( middle , green arrow in ( A ) ) . Scale bar , 50 nm . ( C ) Distribution of the calculated angles between annotated a - actinins and actin ﬁlaments in direction to the pointed end in the thin ( red ) , thick ( blue ) and in - termediate - thickness ( green ) Z - discs . TheyaxisforboththethickandintermediateZ - discisshownontherightinblack . TherearemoredatapointsforthethinZ - disc as it was completely annotated , while a few examples of a - actinin were selected for the intermediate and thick Z - discs . ( D ) Distributionofthelengthofannotated a - actininsinthethin ( red ) , thick ( blue ) andintermediate - thickness ( green ) Z - discs . Thedistancealong a - actininbetween thecentersoftheconnectingactinﬁlamentswasmeasuredandthelengthof a - actininwascalculatedbysubtractingthediameterofanactinﬁlament ( 6nm ) . The relativelylarge standarddeviation inthethinform Z - discislikely caused by a - actininsbindingtoactinﬁlaments atdifferentazimuthalorientationsandtheerrorin the precise determination of the central axis of actin ﬁlaments . ( E ) Distribution of the calculated spacing between adjacent a - actinins in the thin Z - disc . The red , yellow , and blue arrow heads highlight peaks at 6 - 9 nm , 24 - 27 nm and 36 - 39 nm , respectively . The 24 - 27 nm peak appears as a result of the two other types of spacing ( 36 - 2x6 ) . ( F and G ) Example images showing a - actinins with the 6 - 9 nm spacing ( D ) and the 36 - 39 nm spacing ( E ) . Arrow heads highlight the positions and orientations of a - actinins . Scale bar , 20 nm . ( H ) 3Dreconstructionof a - actininobtainedfromsub - volumeaveraging . Althoughthereisastrongmissingwedgeeffectresultinginanelongationofthereconstruction in one direction , wewere able to manually ﬁt atomic models derived from the crystal structure of a - actinin ( PDB : 4D1E ) and the cryo - EM structure of actin ﬁlaments bound by the ﬁrst calponin homology domain of the actin binding domain ( PDB : 6D8C ) into the density . Actin ﬁlaments are shown in magenta and green ; the actin bindingdomainandtherodregionaredepictedinpurpleandblue , respectively . TheﬂexibleneckregionsandtheC - terminalcalmodulin - likedomainsarenotshown . ( I ) Left : Schematic diagram showing the difference between averaged a - actinin structure and the conventional basket - weave model . Right : The two different interactions ( marked by the red and black asterisks ) between the end of a - actininand actin ﬁlaments ( magenta and green ) are demonstratedon the right , formed by the ﬂexible neck region between the rod ( blue ) and actin binding domain ( purple ) . ll OPEN ACCESS Article