D RAFT The author is indebted to Harvard University’s Office of Technology and Trademark Licensing and Harvard Medical School’s Office of Technology Licensing and Industry Sponsored Research for providing access to the data . The author would also like to thank Kenneth Levin for many hours of discussion and helpful comments . In addition , the author is grateful to Josh Lerner , Richard Caves , Jasjit Singh , Rob Lowe , John de Figureido and participants at Harvard Business School’s doctoral research seminar , the Harvard IO research seminar , the NBER Productivity Lunch , and the Berkeley Innovation Seminar for their helpful comments . Contract Structure and Performance of Technology Transfer Agreements : Evidence from University Licenses Dan Elfenbein * January 12 , 2004 I examine the relationship between the payment structure of contracts and the likelihood of termination using a sample of patented technologies licensed by Harvard University to outside parties . Two features of this setting make it appropriate for establishing the link between payment structure and performance . First , university technologies are licensed at a very early stage ; bringing these technologies to market typically requires significant ( and sometimes non - contractible ) investment both by licensors and by inventors . Second , performance measures such as product sales and the achievement of development milestones are observable and verifiable . Terms that stipulate payments based on these performance measures , then , provide important incentives to both licensees and inventors . Theory suggests two main incentive effects . On the one hand , royalties and other performance - based payments reduce the share of ex post surplus captured by the licensee and increase the likelihood that the licensee will abandon the project . On the other hand these contract terms should induce non - contractible effort on the part of inventors , which may raise the likelihood that the project will be a technical success . I account for potential endogeneity problems by instrumenting for contract structure . The analysis shows that for large licensees , the use of contingent payment terms is associated with lower hazard rates of termination , whereas for small licensees the two types of incentives provided by contingent payment cancel each other out . The difference in the impact of incentives between small and large firms is consistent with the literature that suggests that agency problems may be less severe in small firms . Keywords : Technology Licensing , Contract Structure , Innovation , Incentives JEL Classification : L14 , L33 , O31 * Harvard University dan @ elfenbein . net D RAFT - 1 - 1 . Introduction Formal— i . e . , written—contracts form the basis for many economic relationships . Contracts frequently define the quality , quantity , and timing of a good or service to be exchanged between two parties , specific investments to be made to support the delivery of these goods and services , and the distribution of gains from the transaction . Furthermore , contracts frequently specify penalties to be levied when certain commitments are breached . Economists have developed two major theoretical lenses through which to analyze contracts between economic actors , one in which performance following the signing of the contract is verifiable by a court ( i . e . , complete contracts ) and one in which performance is not verifiable ( incomplete contracts ) . Although these theories differ in the mechanisms that they propose , both offer solutions to the problem of how to maximize the surplus of one or both parties ( depending on the relative bargaining positions of the players ) subject to constraints imposed by a number of different types of information problems through the provision of incentives . The large majority of theoretical and empirical work in this area has focused on how the structure of contracts that parties enter into corresponds to particular constraints imposed by the information setting and how contract structure relates to other issues such as the opportunities for repeated interactions . While this focus on contract structure has yielded great insight , it has been contemporaneous with a neglect of two important empirical questions . First , is there a meaningful economic difference between the performance of contracts that theoreticians identify as optimal and those that are not ( assuming that non - optimal contracts are , in some cases , written and that they can be identified ) ? Second , do the incentives provided by the contract actually function in the way that is predicted by theory ? To my knowledge , Lerner , Shane , and Tsai ( 2003 ) have provided the only empirical analysis of the first question . Although this paper addresses the first question to a certain extent , its main contribution is to address the second question , where previous research has mainly focused on how incentives affect individual performance ( e . g . , Lazear , 1999 ) or team performance ( e . g . , Ichniowski , Shaw , and Prennushi D RAFT - 2 - 1997 ) . Unlike prior work , this paper investigates how the incentives generated by contracts affect performance in an inter - firm setting . A major challenge to investigating the impact of contract structure on performance—and a possible reason why this issue has been neglected empirically—is the potentially endogenenous relationship between contract structure and performance . It seems highly plausible that unobservable characteristics of the target of the contract might be correlated systematically with the presence of specific contract terms and with the contract’s performance . Additionally , the use of certain contract terms may not be independent from unobserved characteristics of the contracting parties , which also may be systematically related to performance . In either case , estimates of the impact of contract structure on performance will produce biased results , unless appropriate instruments can be found . The setting chosen for this paper allows me to minimize potential endogeneity problems , and my unique access to data provides me with some promising instruments with which to address these problems . To be specific , this paper investigates the relationship between the structure of technology licensing agreements between universities and private firms and one measure of performance , i . e . early termination , of these licenses . In this setting , the most meaningful measures of ex post performance , such as sales and development milestones , are arguably observable and verifiable . As a result , a contract can be written that elicits the desired behavior through contracting on the division of ex post surplus . In the standard investigation of technology licenses , the contract itself is an equilibrium outcome that maximizes returns for one or both parties , and performance ex post can be thought of as resulting from idiosyncratic shocks . 1 More recent theoretical work examining licenses of early - stage technologies is highly suggestive that contract structure can influence performance ex post . In particular , Jensen and Thursby ( 2001 ) propose an important role for non - contractible inventor effort in bringing university - generated technologies to the marketplace . In their view , downstream payments that are contingent on verifiable 1 Or alternatively as the explanation goes , if regularities exist between certain contract types and performance , these must result from the fact that these contract types are generated from setups with similar types of information problems . D RAFT - 3 - outcomes generate important incentives that induce this inventor effort . An alternative view is held by Dechenaux , Goldfarb , Shane , and Thursby ( 2002 ) , which models licensees’ decisions to continue investing in the risky venture of bringing a new technology to market . In their view , future payments that the licensee must make to the licensor reduce incentives for investment and increase the likelihood that licenses will be terminated . In this paper , I run an empirical horse race between these two models . To run this horse race , I use data from licenses of faculty inventions made by Harvard University and affiliated institutions . Since the Bayh - Dole Act of 1980 made it easier for universities to obtain property rights over faculty innovations made in whole or in part with the support of public funds , the rate at which universities patent inventions and license them has dramatically increased . More than 200 U . S . universities are now actively engaged in technology transfer , and in 1999 , these technology transfers contributed roughly $ 40 billion and 260 , 000 jobs to the U . S . economy ( Association of University Technology Managers , 2000 ) . 2 Using university licenses to study the connection between contract structure and performance has a number of advantages . First , unlike private firms , universities do not have incentives to keep information about the licenses private . Private firms are typically reluctant to disclose the exact nature of the technologies that they in - license and are even more reluctant to discuss the payment terms upon which these licenses are executed . Even the SEC regulations that force firms to disclose license agreements that have a material impact on a firm’s performance allow firms to redact payment terms that might provide critical information to competitors . University license contracts , by contrast , allow the investigator to parameterize the full set of contract terms , including the levels of the payments and royalty rates . Second , university licensing offices typically operate with a dual set of objectives that distinguish them further from profit - maximizing firms . Harvard University’s Office of Technology and Trademark Licensing , for example , states that its objectives are to “to bring University - generated intellectual property into public use as rapidly as possible while protecting academic freedoms and generating a 2 This estimate includes technology transfer from “U . S . universities , teaching hospitals , research institutes , and patent management firms . ” D RAFT - 4 - financial return to the University , inventors and their departments . ” 3 These two objectives of university licensing offices—promoting the transfer of university - generated technology into the economy and generating revenue for the university—are not necessarily at odds with one another . They do suggest , however , that the university may trade off profits ( or other terms of the license contract ) to ensure that the technology gets into the marketplace . The fact that universities are not purely profit - maximizers creates an additional source of variation in the structure of intellectual property licenses that is useful to the investigator in assessing the impact of these provisions on licensee decision - making . Off - equilibrium observations of contract structure , one might argue , lessen the possibility that the observed differences in performance are merely the result of ex post realizations of some particular state of nature . Third , recent empirical and theoretical work has suggested that relationships may be conducive to technology transfer activity and may affect its structure ( Anand and Khanna , 2000 ; Banerjee , and Duflo , 2000 ; Baker , Gibbons and Murphy , 2001 ) . In the context of university licensing , relationships are unlikely to be of principle importance . University licensing officers act as agents for a broad and diverse set of faculty members , and anecdotal evidence suggests that turnover among licensing officers is relatively high . While there are opportunities for firms to develop relationships with individual scientists , perhaps trading preferential access to new research in exchange for lucrative consulting contracts , ethical restrictions make it difficult to do so with university licensing officers . 4 The ability to discard the potential importance of relationships for contract design and performance further simplifies the analysis . Additionally , since the university is the licensor for each of technologies examined , the data collection is simplified since the analyst does not have to control for different licensor characteristics . Finally , the richness of this particular data set provides a number of control variables for the licensed technologies , limiting the problem of unobserved heterogeneity , as well as a number of promising instruments for contract structure , which can be used to address the bias that remains . In 3 The source of this quotation is the following URL : http : / / www . techtransfer . harvard . edu / MissionStatement . html [ accessed 10 / 06 / 2002 ] . D RAFT - 5 - addition to detailed information about the technology itself and its target applications , I employ the identity of the case manager who negotiated the contract , the identity and publication record of the inventor , and the timing of the signed contract with respect to the first patent application and the first patent grant as instruments . Particularly with regards to the identity of the individual who negotiated the contract , a strong case can be made for the independence of this instrument from the license’s performance . In the analysis , I divide contractual payment provisions into five categories based on their timing and whether they are contingent on observable performance measures . I use two methods of parameterizing contract structure : ( 1 ) the presence of each of the five categories of payment provisions and ( 2 ) the levels of these payments ( or royalty rates as expressed as a percentage of net sales ) . Whether contract terms are treated as exogenous or endogenous , the analysis is consistent with the hypothesis that the incentives described by both Jensen and Thursby ( 2001 ) and Dechenaux , et al . ( 2002 ) are important and that the relative importance of these incentives varies depending on the characteristics of the licensee . In particular , the analysis suggests that larger downstream , contingent payments—such as milestones and royalties—are consistent with lower rates of termination of licenses when licensees are large firms . When licensees are small firms , there is an offsetting effect . Relative to large firms , small firms are more likely to terminate technology licenses when contracts commit them to high contingent downstream payments . This result is consistent with small firms having tighter R & D budget constraints , less severe principle - agent problems or both . The analysis additionally shows that sunk costs seem to be unrelated to performance and that equity seems to be employed more frequently for riskier technologies , but does not have an impact on performance when the presence of equity is instrumented for . The research presented in this paper lies at the intersection of three streams of literature . The first is the literature described above addressing the relationship between particular types of contractual incentives and performance , of which Ichniowski , et al . ( 1997 ) , Lazear ( 1999 ) , and Lerner , et al . ( 2003 ) 4 In some instances university licensing officers have been hired away by firms with whom they have negotiated contracts . D RAFT - 6 - are the most relevant examples . The second is the literature on the structure of technology transfer agreements . A significant body of theoretical work addresses how technology licenses should be structured in order to maximize the inventor’s license revenue . This literature investigates the impact of a number of constraints on this revenue maximization program , including asymmetric information , incomplete property rights , single - or double - sided moral hazard , and the presence of important but non - contractible transfers of tacit information about inventions . The third stream is the literature on the commercialization of university technologies . A number of recent studies have looked at the commercialization of university technologies ( Agrawal and Henderson , 2002 ; Lowe , 2002 ; Thursby and Thursby , 2002 ) . The remainder of the paper is organized as follows . Section 2 provides a brief review of the technology licensing literature as whole and the literature on university technology licenses in particular . Section 3 describes the data set and the process through which it was collected . Section 4 builds on the literature review and the discussion of the data set to develop hypotheses for testing . In Section 5 , I review the empirical analysis conducted to date . Section 6 concludes . 2 . Literature Technology licensing A long - standing theoretical literature investigates the terms under which inventors should license their technologies . In these highly stylized models , inventors are typically assumed to be unable to market technologies themselves and must choose three strategic variables to maximize the rents from their innovations : ( 1 ) the number of licenses to offer , ( 2 ) the amount of the fixed license fee , and ( 3 ) a D RAFT - 7 - royalty function that specifies payments due to the inventor as a function of product sales . 5 Depending on the setting , the inventor will offer a single contract or a menu of contracts . At least one potential licensee will find it profitable to accept one of these contracts . Under conditions of perfect information and completely enforceable contracts , Arrow ( 1962 ) and Kamien and Tauman ( 1986 ) find that the optimal contract structure depends on the importance of the innovation ( e . g . , whether it is drastic or incremental ) and the form of competition in the downstream market ( e . g . , Bertrand or Cournot ) . Gallini and Wright ( 1990 ) and Anton and Yao ( 1994 ) relax the assumption of perfect information and investigate how firms write contracts when property rights on the innovation are limited or non - existent . 6 These conditions tend to favor royalty - based contracts . Arora ( 1995 ) examines a setting of double - sided moral hazard in which the value of the technology depends on the inventor providing additional , non - contractible tacit information about how to use the technology and there is also the threat that the technology will be appropriated by the licensee . Hall ( 1991 ) investigates a setting in which the moral hazard is on the side of the inventor , who can license a similar invention to someone else , and finds that royalties can be used as a bond to reduce the likelihood that the inventor will cheat the licensee in this way . A series of empirical studies , dating back to Taylor and Silbertson ( 1973 ) , Contractor ( 1981 ) , and Caves , Crookell and Killing ( 1983 ) have examined the structure of technology licenses . These studies highlighted two issues : ( 1 ) the variation in fixed fees and royalty rates across industries is difficult to explain , and ( 2 ) that provisions of licensing agreements other than payment terms are important to the contracting parties . Caves et al . ( 1983 ) , for example , describe the importance of marketing restrictions , technology grantbacks , and other provisions that limit the ability of the downstream party to use the invention . Anand and Khanna ( 2000 ) examine the structure of licensing contracts in the three broad industry categories where most licensing occurs , focusing on contractual features relating to exclusivity , 5 These models generally abstract away from the issues of uncertainty and how much the licensees will need to invest in the invention in order to commercialize it . They also assume that the licensee does not need to aggregate a series of licenses to commercialize the new product ( or implement the new process ) . 6 This enables a prospective licensor to imitate or steal the invention after inspecting the technology . D RAFT - 8 - restrictions on the use of technology , cross - licensing , and multiple contracts . They find significant evidence of cross - industry differences in the presence of these features and explain them based on systematic differences in the strength of intellectual property rights . University licensing The increasing economic importance of university licensing has coincided with a growing body of empirical work . Topics that have been investigated include the determinants of productivity of university licensing offices ( Siegel , Waldman and Link , 1999 ) , the sources of growth in university licensing ( Thursby and Thursby , 2002 ) , and geographic aspects of university licensing ( Mowery and Ziedonis , 2001 ) . Jensen and Thursby ( 2001 ) discuss data from a recent survey of university technology managers and report that the majority of university inventions are licensed at a very early stage . These inventions require significant ongoing investments from their licensors to discover the technology’s commercial value and to convert the technology into a market - ready product . Furthermore , the authors contend that , much like in the setting that Arora ( 1995 ) investigated , ongoing effort from the faculty inventor is critical to the ultimate success of the invention . Thus , Jensen and Thursby propose , there is a moral hazard problem in which the inventor is likely to provide too little effort for the development of the product . This moral hazard problem can be partially solved by offering the university royalties on sales resulting from the invention or equity in the licensing firm . 7 Dechenaux , et al . ( 2003 ) also investigate the licensing of early - stage innovations that require significant additional investment for the licensee to commercialize . They focus on exclusive licenses and model the decision by the licensee to continue to invest in the technology as an optimal stopping problem . If the technology has not already been commercialized , the firm will continue to invest in it if the value of continuing to do so—which is a non - decreasing function of a stationary random variable that takes on a 7 Typical employment contracts with universities provide researchers with one - fourth to one - third of the payments to the university that stem from the researcher’s innovation . D RAFT - 9 - new value in each period—less the ongoing investment costs exceeds zero . In each period , there is a cutoff level of the random variable above which it is profitable to continue to invest and below which the licensee will terminate the contract . This enables the authors to describe the hazard rates for termination and the probability of commercialization over the lifetime of the license . Although the specific empirical predictions generated by this model about hazard rates are dependent on a few extreme assumptions— such as the assumption that the period of exclusivity is the same for all types of technologies and is not eroded by imitation or competition—the essential intuition of the model is plain : ceteris paribus , raising the costs of investment by the licensee , or reducing his expected benefit if the project becomes a technological success , unambiguously increases the probability that the licensee will terminate the contract prior to commercialization . 3 . Data Harvard University’s Office of Technology and Trademark Licensing and the Office of Technology Licensing and Industry Sponsored Research at Harvard Medical School provided data about 792 license agreements for faculty inventions between 1978 and May 2002 . The data included the following : contractual provisions relating to the payment obligations of the licensee ; the exclusivity of the license ; the identity of the licensee and the inventor ; the type of intellectual property covered by the license ; the patent application number when sought and patent number where granted ; the total payments received from the license ; and the date of license termination where applicable . In this paper , I focus on licensing agreements that involved exclusively licensed patents . 8 In addition , I eliminate all contracts with non - profit institutions . This narrows the sample to 154 distinct contracts . 8 In contrast to exclusively licensed technologies , the utility of non - exclusive licenses ( and hence the decision about whether to terminate them ) may be more responsive to competitive dynamics in downstream markets than are exclusive licenses . Furthermore , as discussed above , the technology licensing literature has long argued that the decision to license exclusively versus non - exclusively may D RAFT - 10 - Table 1 provides summary statistics for the licensing agreements used in the analysis . Panel A presents a number of agreement characteristics such as the year of the agreement , whether the agreement has been terminated , the number of different technologies ( “cases” in the licensing office’s parlance ) included in the agreement , and the number of patents issued and patents pending for the agreement’s primary technology . As Panel A shows , 28 percent of all exclusive patent licenses entered into between 1979 and 2002 have been terminated . This fraction would doubtlessly be higher if more of the agreements had been signed earlier . Fifty percent of the agreements were signed in or after 1996 , and 25 percent of the agreements were signed in or after 1998 . Panel B presents data on the structure of these licensing agreements . The payment provisions of the contract were divided into five categories that are common features of university technology licensing agreements : license fees , royalties , milestones , maintenance fees and minimums , and equity . License fees represented obligations that were not contingent on future performance and which were typically due upon the signing of the license agreement or shortly thereafter . Royalties were any payments that were contingent on product sales . Typically royalties were a fraction of the value of end - product sales , but royalties could also be a fixed amount per unit sold . Milestones were payments that were contingent on some non - recurring event , such as passing a certain stage of product development , receiving a specific type of financing , or selling the first unit of a product . Maintenance fees were periodic payments required for the licensee to keep the license , and were required each year for many licensees . Minimums were yearly minimum payments that became due after the resulting product came on the market . Typically , licensors and licensees referred to these payments as minimum royalties . Because they had essentially the same character as minimum royalties , these payments were classified as maintenance fees in the analysis . Part 1 of Panel B summarizes the presence of each of these terms in the license contracts entered into by Harvard and the licensing partners . The large majority of licensing agreements contained up - front depend on the characteristics of the technology . To the extent that these characteristics are unobservable in the data , eliminating non - exclusive licenses from the sample eliminates on potential source of unobserved heterogeneity . D RAFT - 11 - licensing fees and royalties . Maintenance fees and milestones were used more than half of the time . Equity was used in a small fraction of the contracts . Part 2 of Panel B summarizes the levels of each of these terms in the license contracts . As this panel demonstrates , there is a high level of dispersion in up - front license fees , milestones , and royalty rates . The exact amount of equity granted by the licensee to the university was not available , thus it was impossible to determine the ex ante value of equity grants . The characteristics of licensing organizations were drawn from Compustat and Hoover’s business directory . This information was used to categorize firms into two groups based on firm size and two groups based on the location of the licensing organization . Firms that were private or that had zero sales at the time of license were classified as small firms . The remainder , i . e . , publicly traded firms with non - zero sales in the year of license were classified as large firms . If the licensee organization was not based in the United States , the organization was classified as non - US . If a foreign firm licensed a technology through a US – based subsidiary with US operations , the organization was classified as US . Panel C provides a breakdown of licensee characteristics . Data about patent attributes came from two sources . The first is the NBER Patent Citation file . This file contains data on patents granted between 1963 and 1999—including the patent class and NBER defined category and subcategory ; the number of citations by and to the patent ; the number of claims granted for the patent ; and measures of originality and generality ( Hall , Jaffe and Trajtenberg , 2001 ) . Data on patents granted after 1999 was pulled directly from the website of the U . S . Patent and Trademark Office ( USPTO ) . 9 On the USPTO’s forms , several patent classes were typically listed . For each granted patent , I selected the first patent class , which was also identified in bold type , and used this data in subsequent analysis . Likewise , I counted the number of citations to US patents and claims made on the patent form , attempting to use the same methodology as Hall et al . Panel A of Table 3 summarizes the characteristics of the patents involved in these licenses . Measures of generality and originally are 9 http : / / patft . uspto . gov / netahtml / srchnum . htm D RAFT - 12 - available only for pre - 2000 ; they were not updated with post - 2000 citation information . Panel B presents the breakdown of the licensed patents in the groups defined by Hall et al . Each technology was also classified based on the field of the primary investigator . Where possible , the PI’s name was matched with an identical name in ISI Web of Sciences’ Science Citation Index . Each inventor for which a clear match was made was classified as being in the field of Chemistry , Medical / Biological , or Other based upon the inventor’s publications . As Panel C of Table 3 shows , over three - quarters of all licensed inventions were made by faculty publishing in the Medical / Biological category . In addition to information about inventors’ publication records , I used summary information about each agreement to classify the technology based on the type of product that was likely to result from the license . Panel D displays the breakdown of technologies by product type . The majority of all applications were medical or biological in nature ( 82 % ) . Within the medical / biological category technologies could be used to develop diagnostic tests ( 7 % of category ) , medical instruments ( 4 % ) , disease therapies ( 48 % ) , or they could be used as research tools for the development of these end products ( 26 % ) . In some cases , the summary information clearly indicated that the contracting parties envisioned multiple types of applications . Typically , this subset of contracts made provisions for the development of therapeutic applications and either diagnostic applications or research products based upon the licensed technology ( or bundle of licensed technologies ) . Non - medical technologies were classified as either process or product technologies . One agreement could not be classified . 4 . Hypothesis development Given the wide heterogeneity of theoretical treatments , the empirical analysis of contracts depends critically on choosing the most applicable theoretical lens . Although technology licensing agreements have been viewed as incomplete contracts by some investigators ( e . g . , Lerner and Merges , D RAFT - 13 - 1998 ; Elfenbein and Lerner , 2003 ) , the hallmarks of problems that invoke incomplete contracts are not present in this setting . By contrast , a number of observable and , arguably , verifiable performance measures such as elapsed time , product sales , development milestones are available and are the focus of the majority of license negotiations . Moreover , in practice licenses transfer property rights on the patent completely ( subject to complying with the payment terms of the contract ) , and there are no known cases in present sample in which the university retains any control rights over how the technology is used or developed . 10 Thus , it seems highly likely that payment terms generate the most important incentives in this setting . The hypotheses tested in this paper follow directly from Dechenaux , Goldfarb , Shane , and Thursby ( 2003 ) ( hereafter DGST ) and from Jensen and Thursby ( 2001 ) ( hereafter J & T ) . According to DGST ( and most other models of economic decision making ) sunk costs such as up - front license fees should have no impact on the likelihood of termination of the license . However , anything that reduces the value of the rents flowing from an innovation ( e . g . , royalties ) or that increases the costs of continuing the license ( e . g . milestone payments or maintenance fees ) increases the cutoff level of the random variable , thereby increasing the hazard rate of termination . The role of equity grants to the university affects the global incentives of the licensee , 11 but as long as equity is not returned to the licensee upon termination of the license , it does not enter into the licensee’s decision - making process about whether to continue to develop the specific licensed technology . DGST offers no prediction about the impact of equity provisions on termination . The J & T model emphasizes different concerns . According to J & T , royalties and / or equity grants are necessary to elicit critical , non - contractible effort from the researcher - inventors . If inventor effort 10 One might argue that in cases where equity is part of the payment structure , the university may exert some control over the project or over the licensee . To the best of my knowledge , the university attempts to avoid exerting authority over licensees and has , moreover , a policy of selling its equity position at the earliest date allowed by the firm’s financing choices and associated regulation . 11 For example , if the contract grants fraction α of the licensee’s equity to the university , the licensee owners are entitled to ( 1 - α ) of the value that it generates . D RAFT - 14 - increases the probability of success , the presence of these profit - sharing provisions should decrease the likelihood of termination . Milestone payments , too , are contingent payments , and should elicit inventor effort to achieve the milestones . If the specific milestones outlined in the contract reflect important steps in the commercialization of the product ( as opposed to a milestone that is just for “show” ) , then milestone payments should improve the likelihood of success of the project and should decrease the likelihood of termination . Table 2 provides a summary of the predictions of the two models with respect to the five types of payment provisions . In addition to the predictions drawn from these two models , the agency theory literature and the literature on R & D budget - setting yield some additional predictions about the interaction of firm characteristics and payment provisions on the likelihood of termination of technology licenses . An empirical literature suggests that R & D budgets as a whole are frequently responsive to concerns other than firms’ technological opportunities or profit maximization . These concerns include cash windfalls and liquidity constraints ( Mairesse , Hall and Mulkay , 1999 ; Gugler , 2003 ) , CEO characteristics ( Lundstrum , 2002 ) , and earnings management ( Bange and De Bondt , 1998 ) . These findings are generally consistent with principal - agent models which suggest that managers are not fully responsive to economic forces that buffet the firm , and therefore may make decisions that deviate from those that the firm’s owners may make . Furthermore , theory suggests and empirical studies have shown that agency problems become more severe when ownership is more dispersed ( Jensen and Meckling , 1976 ; Jensen , 1986 ) . When translated into the context of decision - making about individual projects within a firm , this literature suggests that privately owned firms may be more responsive to the strict economic consequences of their decisions ( such as the decision to continue to invest in licensed technology as described in DGST . ) . This yields the prediction that maintenance fees , milestones , and royalties may have a more pronounced effect on project termination in small ( or private ) firms than in large ( or public ) firms . D RAFT - 15 - 5 . Analysis This section analyzes the determinants of license termination and tests the hypotheses developed in section 4 . The analysis proceeds in three parts . In part A , I examine differences in the characteristics of terminated and non - terminated contracts as well as the correlation between contract structure and a termination dummy . In part B , I assume that contract structure is exogenous and examine the relationship between contract structure and termination using survival analysis . In part C , I discuss some reasons that contract structure may not be exogenous , examine the direction of the resulting bias , and I attempt to address this problem using an instrumental variables approach . A . Patterns of contract structure and termination Table 4 splits the sample into two groups—licenses that were terminated before March 15 , 2003 and all other licenses—and provides summary statistics for the two groups . The differences in the characteristics of the licensed technology are minimal between the two groups ( see Panels A , C , and D ) , with the exception that licenses to non - US firms seem to be terminated at a higher rate . Likewise , there is little difference between the structure of contracts that were terminated and those that were not ( see Panel B ) , although license fees and milestone payments are modestly higher in the non - terminated sample . Table 5 examines the correlation between the presence of individual payment terms in the contract , several control variables , and a dummy variable that equals 1 if the contract has been terminated and zero otherwise . The first column in the table presents the correlation between this dummy variable and the other variables . As expected , the likelihood that a license has been terminated is significantly related to the year in which the license was signed . None of the other structural features of the contract , however , are significantly related to the likelihood that the contract was terminated . The correlation matrix itself reveals some interesting patterns . First , there seems to have been a systematic change in the structure of the license contracts over time . Both the use of license fees and the use of milestone payments are positively ( and significantly ) correlated with the year in which the license D RAFT - 16 - was signed . The presence of each of these fees is , not surprisingly , correlated with the presence of the other . License fees , maintenance fees , and milestones are also more likely to be present the more pending patents are included in the license . This relationship , however , may purely reflect the fact that pending patents are more likely to be found in recently signed alliances . Second , it seems that the technology licensed may vary systematically with the licensing organization . Small firms’ licenses contain fewer granted and pending patents than large firms’ licenses . B . Survival analysis assuming contract terms are exogenous Together , Table 4 and Table 5 provide little support for hypothesis that contract structure affects the likelihood of license termination . However , summary statistics and correlations do not take into account the fact that some licenses are under observation for longer than others and that many observations are right - censored . That is , they exit from observation while still at risk termination at some point in the future . Survival analysis has the benefit of making efficient use of the information contained in right - censored observations . Panel A of Table 6 presents two sets of non - parametric analyses of the impact of individual contract provisions on survivor functions and hazard rates , the log - rank test of equality of survivor functions and the Wilcoxon test . Both tests generate similar results . Analyzed individually , the presence or absence of the single payment terms is not related to any statistical differences in survivor functions of the licenses . Panel B compares the survivor functions based on the characteristics of the licensee . Small firms terminate contracts at a higher rate than larger firms , however the differences are not statistically significant . Non - US licensees terminate licenses at a statistically higher rate than US licensees , although the relatively small number of - non - US licensees in the sample may drive this result . Panel C explores the interaction of the firm size dummy variables and the presence or absence of specific contract terms . Licenses with small firms that use maintenance fees do not terminate at a rate that is statistically higher than other licenses . Technologies licensed to small firms that use milestones or royalties , however , do have statistically higher rates of termination than other technologies . D RAFT - 17 - Estimates of the Kaplan - Meier survival functions for different classes of licenses are provided in Figures 1 - 3 . These figures corroborate the non - parametric analyses presented in Table 6 . Where two groups of licenses have non - intersecting survivor functions , the survivor functions are statistically different . The non - parametric tests of survivor function equality are suggestive that contract structure may be systematically related to performance differences in the licenses , at least among some subset of licensees . However , these tests are limited ; they do not control for multiple features of the contract and the licensee simultaneously , nor do they allow payment levels rather than payment dummies to enter into the analysis . To address these limitations , I perform a semi - parametric analysis to examine the impact of contract structure on termination while controlling for a number of other factors . In particular , I estimate a Cox proportional hazards model . The proportional hazard rate model makes no specific assumption about the distribution of survival times in the sample . Rather , it models the conditional hazard rate as a function of independent variables that remain constant over the time at which the observation is at risk . Equation ( 1 ) is a standard representation of the Cox model , where x is a vector of covariates , β is a vector of coefficients , and h 0 ( t ) is the baseline hazard rate in each period : h ( t , x ) = h 0 ( t ) exp ( β x ) ( 1 ) For fixed covariates , the model can be estimated by maximizing the conditional likelihood function : [ ] ∏ ∑ = ∈ = d i i n i d t R l l i x s L 1 ) ( ) ( ) exp ( ) exp ( β β ( 2 ) where n d is the number of distinct failure times , s i is the sum of the covariates of the d i observations that fail at t ( i ) and R ( t ( i ) ) is the set of observations that have not failed prior to t ( i ) ( Cox , 1972 ) . I estimate the Cox model with a vector of covariates , x = [ z 1 z 2 z 3 z 1 ´ z 3 ] ´ , where z 1 is a vector of variables representing the structure of the license contract , z 2 is a set of observable characteristics of the technology that is D RAFT - 18 - licensed , z 3 is a vector of variables representing observable characteristics of the licensee , and z 1 ´ z 3 are a set of interactions between the license structure and licensee characteristics . The set of coefficients β were estimated by maximizing the likelihood function given in equation ( 2 ) . Table 7 reports the results of the estimation using dummy variables to parameterize contract structure . Positive coefficients indicate that the variable in question increases the hazard rate of termination . Column 1 reports the effects of contract structure and the number of technologies bundled in license on the hazard rate of termination . Column 2 adds two licensee characteristics , a dummy variable representing whether the licensee is a small firm and a dummy variable representing whether the licensee is a US firm or a US - based subsidiary of an international firm . Column 3 adds interaction terms ( small firm dummy x maintenance fee dummy , small firm dummy x milestone dummy , small firm dummy x royalty dummy ) but drops the small firm dummy to avoid co - linearity among a subset of the covariates . Columns 4 though 6 introduce additional controls for technology type . Column 4 uses a control for the patent type based upon the NBER’s patent sub - category classification ( Hall , Jaffe , and Trajtenberg , 2001 ) ; Column 5 includes a categorical variable for the field of research of the primary inventor ( corresponding to Table3 , Panel C ; and Column 6 controls for the anticipated product type of the licensed technology ( corresponding to Table 3D ) . Table 8 repeats the analysis of Table 7 parameterizing contract structure with payment ( or royalty ) levels , rather than dummy variables . In these regressions the co - linearity problem is solved , and small firm dummies are included in columns 2 through 6 . Because precise measures of equity grants are not available , the use of equity in the licenses continues to be parameterized as a dummy variable . The estimates reported in Tables 7 and 8 are broadly consistent with each other and with the non - parametric tests reported in Table 6 . Recall , these estimates assume that contract terms are exogenous . Under the assumption of exogeneity , the estimates offer some limited support for each of the models : • Up - front fees have no statistically significant relationship to the likelihood of termination of the licenses . D RAFT - 19 - • In most of the specifications , the coefficients on maintenance fees and the interactions with small firm dummies do not have the predicted sign . While the coefficients on maintenance fees do have the predicted ( positive ) sign in columns 3 - 6 of Table 8 , the interaction effects do not . They are negative and significant . This is not consistent with the hypothesis that R & D budget constraints bind more frequently in small firms or that corporate governance is better in these firms . While it may be the case these hypotheses are incorrect , these results may also obtain from a handful of modeling problems . In addition to the possibility of a selection bias , maintenance fees are modeled as if they are constant over the lifetime of the contract . In some cases , maintenance fees are only due in the first few years of the contract . In this case , they may be sunk when actual termination decisions are made , with a resulting errors - in - variables problem for these cases . • For the entire sample , milestones are related to a statistically lower rate of termination ; however , for the sub - sample of small firms , milestones are associated with a significant increase in the hazard rate . 12 These results are significant at the p < 0 . 1 level when contract structure is parameterized as dummy variables ant at the p < 0 . 05 level when payment levels are used . The results are economically significant as well . Increasing the total milestone payments by $ 100 in real 1996 dollars decreases the relative hazard rate of termination by roughly 35 % for all firms , and corresponding increases the hazard rate for small firms by over 50 % . 13 These results suggest partial support for both J & T and for DGST . They are also consistent with the view that agency problems may be less severe in small firms . • Although the theoretical predictions about the impact of royalty rates are identical to the predictions about milestone payments , the empirical results are not . In some regard , this is not surprising . Where royalties enter the regression equations as dummy variables—i . e . , in Table 7—there is little variation in the right - hand - side royalty measures since 94 % of all licenses include some form of output - based 12 The net effect of adding an additional dollar of milestones is not significantly different from zero for small firms . 13 Again , the net effect for small firms is not significantly different from zero . D RAFT - 20 - payment . In Table 8 , when royalty rates are used , the signs of the coefficients are identical to those of milestone payments—negative for the entire sample and positive for small firms ; however , these coefficients do not meet standard levels of significance in any of the specifications . • Contrary to the prediction of J & T , equity does not improve license performance . Rather , license contracts that use equity in the payment terms terminate more frequently . These differences are statistically significant in several , but not all specifications . One possible explanation for this result is that equity is used as a method of compensation for riskier technologies . In this case , the positive coefficients on the equity dummy variables are a result of selection rather than effects of behavior that equity induces . This result also suggests that the assumption that contract terms are completely exogenous may not be completely correct . This consideration is addressed in the following section . C . Endogeneity and Omitted Variables A critical potential problem for analyzing the impact of contract structure on performance is the possibility that unobservable technology characteristics are correlated both with the structure of the contract , z 1 , and with decisions to terminate . If this is the case , the model estimates will be biased . In certain situations , the direction of the bias can be determined by a careful analysis of the problem in question . For technology license contracts , however , the structure of contracts may be related to unobservable characteristics that are correlated either with higher or lower rates of termination , so the direction of the bias cannot be determined ex ante . 14 14 Suppose , for example , the omitted characteristic is the prior of the parties about the expected value of the technology at the time of license . If the parties believe that the expected value is higher , all payment terms are likely to be larger ; and if the licensee holds a strong prior that the technology is very valuable , they will continue to pursue its development even in the face of news that would cause them to terminate the contract for other technologies . In this case , the bias in the estimated hazard rate coefficients , particularly for milestones , royalties , and equity would be downward . On the other hand , suppose the omitted characteristic is the variance of the technology’s value . A plausible case could be made that these licenses would be more likely to employ contingent payments such as royalties and milestones . At a given mean value , the greater the variance of the technology’s value the more likely the technology will ultimately prove less valuable than the cutoff value required to continue development of the technology to D RAFT - 21 - A second potential empirical problem is the issue of endogenous matching . The problem of endogenous matching has typically been explored in the context of contract choice ( e . g . , Ackerberg and Botticini , 2002 ) , wherein unobserved characteristics of principals agents have been demonstrated to bias estimated coefficients of observed characteristics on the form of the equilibrium contract . This problem has a clear extension in the study of contract structure on performance . If unobserved measures of quality lead firms to chose certain contract terms and not others , then the estimated coefficients of the effects of these terms on performance will be biased . 15 A typical approach to addressing estimation biases due to endogeneity and omitted characteristics is to instrument for the independent variables in the model that are thought to be endogenous . In linear specifications , this approach produces consistent estimates ; however , in non - linear specifications , such as hazard rate models , instrumenting for the endogenous right - hand - side variables does not produce consistent estimates ( Hausman , 2001 ) . Newey ( 1987 ) provides a procedure for generating consistent estimates for non - linear models such as probit , logit , and tobit regressions via Amemiya Generalized Least Squares . To my knowledge , there is no similar method to produce consistent estimates of hazard rate models with endogenous right hand side variables . Therefore , I use Newey’s method as implemented in STATA by Harkness ( 2003 ) . To do this , I use a probit analysis in which the dependent variable is a dummy variable equal to one if the contract has been terminated and zero otherwise . The contract structure variables are considered endogenous and are estimated in a first stage using a set of instruments that include dummy variables representing the potential applications for the technology in question , the publication record of and commercialization experience of the inventor , the identity of the case manager who negotiated the contract , the timing of the deal relative to the first completion . If this were the case , the estimated coefficients on milestones and royalties would be biased upwards . 15 For example , if low quality licensees are forced to agree to more milestone payments , then the estimated contribution of milestone payments to the hazard rate of termination will be biased upwards . D RAFT - 22 - patent application and first patent grant , and the size of the firm . 16 The validity of these instruments is discussed below . Table 9 presents the results of the instrumental variables analysis . Columns 1 and 2 present the baseline ( non - instrumented ) analysis using a probit model parameterizing contract structure via dummy variables and payment / royalty levels , respectively . The estimates in this baseline model are similar in sign and significance to the estimates in the non - instrumented hazard rate models . Column 3 and 4 present the analysis , using instruments for the contract structure . When the dummy variables representing contract structure are instrumented , the coefficients in the resulting probit model are imprecisely estimated , although the interaction of the milestone and royalty dummies with small firm dummies are both significantly different from zero ( see column 3 ) . When instruments are used for payment levels and royalty rates , however , the estimated coefficients are of greater interest . The coefficients on milestones and royalty rates both fall for large firms , and rise when interacted with the small firm dummy variables . As expected from instrumental variable regressions , the precision of the estimates falls . The coefficient of the milestone payment becomes more negative and is significantly different from zero at the p < . 05 level ( two - sided test ) . The coefficient on royalty rates also becomes more negative and is significant at the p < . 1 level ( two - sided test ) . Coefficients on the interaction terms with milestones and royalties increase in magnitude , but only 16 Ideally instruments have the property of being correlated with the independent variable ( s ) considered to be endogenous but being uncorrelated with the dependent variable . With the exception of firm size , a plausible story can be made that each of the variables listed above may make a good instrument . For example , certain case managers may be better than others at negotiating or may have specific preferences about contract structure that are unrelated to the unobservable quality characteristics of the technology . Whether the license is signed before or after a patent is granted ( or applied for ) may affect the structure of the contract without having a major impact on the technical or commercial viability of the licensed technology ( especially since the sample is heavily biased in favor of those technologies that received patents eventually ) . Inventors’ status may impact the university’s ability to negotiate a license independent of the quality of the underlying technology ; this claim is supported at least partially by the research of Sine , Wesley David , Scott A Shane , and Dante DiGregorio . 2003 . " The Halo Effect and Technology Licensing : The Influence of Institutional Prestige on the Licensing of University Inventions . " Management Science , 49 : 4 , pp . 478 - 96 . In no case , however , would I contend that the arguments about an instrument’s validity advanced above are unimpeachable . Whether the instruments are indeed uncorrelated with outcomes is an empirical matter . D RAFT - 23 - the coefficient on the interaction with royalties is statistically different from zero . The magnitudes of each of these four coefficients increases , and the marginal effects thus become more economically significant : for example , at the mean of the independent variables , increasing the milestone payments by $ 100 , 000 decreases the probability of early termination for large firms by 13 % . 17 After instrumenting for equity , it is no longer significantly different from zero . Maintenance fees continue to display the same signs as in the non - instrumented analysis , and are now significant . A puzzling feature of the IV analysis is that the coefficient on up - front license fees is now positive and significant . 18 This evidence is again consistent with some of the predictions of both J & T and DGST . Columns 5 and 6 display the results of a two - stage procedure in which contact structure only is estimated in the first stage and a hazard rate model is estimated in the second stage . Although this procedure is known not to produce consistent estimates , I include it for the purpose of comparison and also to relax some of the computational limitations imposed by Harkness’s program . 19 Again , when dummy variables are used to parameterize contract structure , the two - stage procedure produces estimates which are not statistically significant . When levels are used to parameterize contract structure , the estimates have a similar pattern to that observed in the IV - logit estimation : royalties and milestones are associated with lower hazard rates for large firms and have a positive differential correlation with hazard rates for small firm licenses . 17 Note that this figure has different interpretation from the economic effects reported in the section above . 18 As Table 10 indicates , the instruments for up - front fees do not explain much of the variation in this variable . 19 Specifically , I can use a larger set of instruments , and I can obtain first - stage estimates and regression - level statistics that are not provided by Harkness’s program . Additionally , I can instrument for contract structure alone and interact it with actual dummy variables for licensee size rather than being forced to instrument for the interaction of the two . D RAFT - 24 - Validity of Instruments A Hausman specification test comparing the IV probit estimates with the simple probit estimates of a reduced model testing only the coefficients of theoretical interest in the levels regressions yielded a test statistic of 31 . 81 ( p < . 0001 ) . Hausman tests using the full model rejected the null hypothesis at standard levels of significance when nominal dollars were employed buy not when real dollars were used to parameterize contract structure . The result for the levels regression suggests that the assumption that contract terms are exogenous is unlikely to be correct . First - stage estimates were not available for these regressions ; however , Table 10 provides the results of the first stage estimates for the “IV Cox” regressions using the same instruments . As Table 10 shows , the first stage OLS regressions are highly significant for all of the contract terms with the exception of the royalty dummy variable and the level of up - front license fees . Additional concerns include the possibility that some of the instruments , e . g . , inventor experience or the type of product anticipated from the technology , might be related systematically to the hazard rate of termination , and therefore would be poor instruments . In individual tests , however , there is no statistical correlation between any of the instrumental variables and the hazard rate of termination . A second potential problem is the estimates suffer from problems commonly associated with weak instruments ( Staiger and Stock , 1997 ) . This problem will be addressed in future work . A final concern with the empirical results is the possibility of endogenous matching . This possibility was not addressed explicitly in the IV procedure described above . One indication that endogenous matching might be a problem in the data would be if the structure of contracts varied systematically by the type of licensee . Table 11 provides a breakdown of contract structure by small and large licensees . There is some difference in the frequencies with which maintenance fees are used and a large difference in the levels of up - front license fees . The remaining contract terms are remarkably similar across these two categories . Future work will attempt to address the possibility of endogenous matching in greater detail . D RAFT - 25 - D . Incentives and Career Concerns The analysis performed above seeks to examine whether the incentives provided to firms and research scientists affect the likelihood of early contract termination . The results provide some support for the hypothesis that contingent payments may illicit some non - contractual effort from inventors . Pecuniary incentives , however , may induce differing levels of effort depending on the particular circumstances of the inventor . Goldfarb and Colyvas ( 2003 ) have hypothesized , for example , that the opportunity cost of a researcher’s time is particularly high when he or she is attempting to secure tenure , and that leisure and legacy - building activities also raise the opportunity cost of time for faculty in the late stages of their careers . Based upon this , they argue , financial rewards will have the greatest impact on the behavior of mid - career faculty . To test whether the strength of incentives differs according to the career stage of the inventor , I develop a proxy for the inventor’s experience in his or her field by examining the inventor’s first publication . I classify inventors as being in the early stage of their careers ( at the time of license ) if their first publication appears less than 12 years before the effective date of the license ; in the middle stage of their careers if their first publication appears more than 12 but fewer than 24 years before the license ; and in the late stage of their careers if their first publication is more than 24 years before the license . Panel A of Table 12 displays the breakdown of inventors along these lines . Using this proxy , I test whether there are systematic differences in the way that incentives affect performance among these groups . Panel B compares the performance of inventions licensed by these three groups using non - parametric analysis , and Panel C compares the performance of each group under the presence of contingent - payment incentives . These analyses reveal little difference in performance across groups whether the inventors are faced with contingent - payment incentives or not . In unreported regression analyses , the impact of royalties and milestones are allowed to vary across the three inventor career categories . Doing so improves the fit of the overall model , and increases the significance of the coefficients of interest ; however , these tests fail to support the hypothesis that the incentive impact is weaker for researchers in D RAFT - 26 - early stages of their careers . It is worth noting , however , the proxy for career stage may be a noisy one . Future work will attempt to incorporate more precise measures of inventor attributes which may impact how incentives operate . 6 . Conclusion This paper suggests that in certain settings the incentives generated by contracts can impact the performance of the relationship the contract governs . Although establishing this connection empirically is difficult , and requires selecting the appropriate theoretical model to test , doing so seems to be a worthwhile pursuit . The incentives generated by the contracts have meaningful economic consequences for one party or for both . A better understanding of how these incentives work empirically should be used to feed back into further developments in the theory . Moreover , this paper touches upon , but does not answer the question about whether the difference in performance between optimal contracts and contracts that are not ( whether they are generated by mistakes or are shaped by the bargaining power of one party ) is economically meaningful . Future research on this topic would add greatly to our empirical and theoretical understanding of contracts . More specifically , this paper examines the relationship between the form of university technology licenses and the likelihood that these licenses will be terminated prior to commercialization . Because university technologies are licensed at an early stage , the effort of the inventor as well as investment by the licensee is required to bring a product based upon the licensed technology to market . License contracts , by their nature , generate incentives for both licensors and inventors . J & T and DGST focus on how contingent payments may influence the development of a new technology through these incentives . In addition to the fact that university technologies are typically licensed at an early stage ( which highlight the relevance of the J & T and DGST models ) , there are some additional advantages to studying the effects of contract structure on the performance in the university setting . The first advantage is the D RAFT - 27 - fact that because universities rarely engage in commercialization themselves , the adverse selection problem , which exerts significant influence over the structure of markets between private parties for technologies , is greatly reduced . The second advantage is that university technology licensing offices have a commercialization objective in addition to a revenue objective . This commercialization motive can be seen as providing an extra source of variation in contract structure . Taking prior work on the structure of technology licenses literally , this means that empirically there will be “off - equilibrium” observations of contract structure ( from the point of revenue maximization ) , which will help with the identification of effects , if they exist . The results of the analysis are consistent with the notion that contract structure does indeed affect license performance in this setting . Rather than crowning a winner in the horserace between J & T and DGST , the empirical results suggest some support for both models . In particular , for large firms the use of contingent payments such as royalties and milestones ( and higher levels of these ) seem to be associated with lower termination rates of licenses , supporting J & T’s claim that these contract provisions may be important in inducing non - contractible inventor effort . By contrast for small firms , where R & D budget constraints are more likely to bind and where governance may be better , the use of milestones and royalties are associated with an offsetting effect , predicted by DGST , of increasing the hazard rates of termination . Equity , which according to J & T should induce non - contractible inventor effort does not seem to have the predicted result . For milestones , which should increase hazard rates , and up - front fees which should not affect hazard rates at all , the empirical evidence is mixed , perhaps owing to errors - in - variables problems and the weakness of instruments used . This paper highlights a number of issues that can be of importance in the design of future technology transfer agreements . First , the role of equity in supporting technology transfer deserves further investigation , a question for which Feldman , et al . ( 2002 ) offer a useful framework . Second the sharing rule for university license revenues deserves scrutiny . If as the results of this paper suggest , contingent payments do increase the likelihood of success by inducing inventor effort ( while also having a negative impact which may be more important in small firms ) , then the sharing schedule between D RAFT - 28 - university and inventor may have significant leverage over the success of commercialization activity . For example , at a given royalty level , raising inventors’ marginal incentives could improve the likelihood of project success , even while providing the same expected revenue to the university . The results of this paper , together with those of Lach and Shankerman ( 2003 ) , suggest that university administrators think carefully about the incentives that they generate for faculty through the technology transfer process . This paper focuses on termination as the sole indicator of technology transfer performance . Termination , however , is not necessarily an inefficient or bad outcome . Many licenses will naturally terminate when a licensee discovers that its licensed technology does not work or to has very little value in the marketplace . It is not clear , from the licensee’s point of view , that the timing of this discovery matters much . It might be preferable to discover that the technology has no value sooner , rather than later , but ultimately the licensee’s preference will depend on the path of research and development expenditures and the impact that supporting the licensed technology has on the remainder of the R & D portfolio . From the university licensing office’s perspective , early termination may also be a good thing . University licensing offices are highly sensitive to the criticism that they allow firms to obtain and then park ( or not develop ) exclusively licensed technologies . So the university licensing office would prefer that a licensee research a licensed technology actively , even if that leads to earlier termination . Termination is not the only aspect of performance that might be linked to contract structure . Of clear interest to university licensing offices is the relationship between contract structure and the ultimate returns to the university . From a theoretical standpoint , this may be a more difficult relationship to test . First , it is clear that given a fixed amount of effort on the part of a licensee ( and a signed agreement ) , more is better , i . e . higher royalty rates and higher milestones lead to more revenue for the university . Yet , as discussed above demands for larger royalties and contingent fees may affect firm behavior . Furthermore , these demands may reduce the likelihood that a licensing agreement can be reached in the first place and are , as the literature suggests , clearly constrained by a number of information problems . Thus , a simple test relating the returns of a given license to the structure of the license contract is likely to provide results that are not easily interpretable . In further work , I hope to develop a more structured D RAFT - 29 - approach to these problems . Table 13 highlights some of the potential promise of this type of investigation along with some of its difficulties . As this table shows , licenses that are eventually terminated pay , on average , less than licenses that have not been terminated . The table also suggests that there may some systematic differences in the university returns of contracts that use milestones , as opposed to those that do not . These issues , while complex , deserve additional empirical attention . D RAFT - 30 - References : Ackerberg , Daniel A and Botticini Maristella . 2002 . " Endogenous Matching and the Empirical Determinants of Contract Form . " Journal of Political Economy , 110 : 3 , pp . 564 - 91 . Agrawal , Ajay and Rebecca M . Henderson . 2002 . " Putting patents in context : Exploring knowledge transfer from MIT . " Management Science , 48 : 1 , pp . 44 - 60 . Anand , Bharat N . and Tarun Khanna . 2000 . " The Structure of Licensing Contracts . " Journal of Industrial Economics , 48 : 1 , pp . 103 - 35 . Anton , James J . and Dennis A . Yao . 1994 . " Expropriation and inventions : Appropriable rents in the absence of property rights . " American Economic Review , 84 : 1 , pp . 190 - 209 . Arora , Ashish . 1995 . " Licensing Tacit Knowledge : Intellectual Property Rights and the Market for Know - How . " Economics of Innovation and New Technology , 4 : 1 , pp . 41 - 59 . Arrow , Kenneth J . 1962 . " Economic Welfare and the Allocation of Resources for Invention , " in The Rate and Direction of Inventive Activity : Economic and Social Factors . Richard R . Nelson ed . Princeton , NJ : Princeton University Press , pp . 609 - 26 . Association of University Technology Managers . 2000 . " Common Questions & Answers About Technology Transfer . " , Vol . 2002 . Baker , George P . , Robert Gibbons , and Kevin J . Murphy . 2001 . " Relational Contracts in Strategic Alliances . " : Working Paper Harvard University , Massachusetts Institute of Technology , and University of Southern California . Banerjee , Abhijit V . and Esther Duflo . 2000 . " Reputation Effects and the Limits of Contracting : A Study of the Indian Software Industry . " Quarterly Journal of Economics , 115 : 3 , pp . 989 - 1017 . Bange , Mary M and Werner F M De Bondt . 1998 . " R & D Budgets and Corporate Earnings Targets . " Journal of Corporate Finance : Contracting , Governance , and Organization , 4 : 2 , pp . 153 - 84 . Caves , Richard E . , Harold Crookell , and J . Peter Killing . 1983 . " The Imperfect Market for Technology Licences . " Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics , 45 : 3 , pp . 249 - 67 . Contractor , Farok J . 1981 . International Technology Transfer : Compensation , Costs , and Negotiation . Lexington , MA : Lexington Books . Cox , D R . 1972 . " Regression Models and Life - Tables . " Journal of the Royal Statistical Society , Series B ( Methodological ) , 34 : 2 , pp . 187 - 220 . Dechenaux , Emmanuel , Brent Goldfarb , Scott A Shane , and Marie C . Thursby . 2003 . " Appropriability and the timing of innovation : Evidence from MIT inventions . " : NBER Working Paper 9735 . Elfenbein , Daniel W and Josh Lerner . 2003 . " Ownership and control rights in Internet portal alliances , 1995 - 1999 . " RAND Journal of Economics , 32 : 2 , pp . 356 - 69 . Feldman , Maryann , Irwin Feller , Janet Bercovitz , and Richard Burton . 2002 . " Equity and the Technology Transfer Strategies of American Research Universities . " Management Science , 48 : 1 , pp . 105 - 21 . Gallini , Nancy T . and Brian D . Wright . 1990 . " Technology Transfer under Asymmetric Information . " RAND Journal of Economics , 21 : 1 , pp . 147 - 60 . Goldfarb , Brent and Jeannette Colyvas . 2003 . " Do Stronger Property Rights Inspire Academic Entrepreneurship . " : Working Paper , University of Maryland . D RAFT - 31 - Gugler , Klaus . 2003 . " Corporate Governance , Dividend Payout Policy , and the Interrelation between Dividends , R & D , and Capital Investment . " Journal of Banking & Finance , 27 : 7 , pp . 1297 - 321 . Hall , Bronwyn H , Adam B . Jaffe , and Manuel Trajtenberg . 2001 . " The NBER Patent Citations Data File : Lessons , Insights and Methodological Tools . " : NBER Working Paper 8498 . Hall , Christopher D . 1991 . " Renting Ideas . " Journal of Business , 64 : 1 , pp . 21 - 48 . Harkness , Joe . 2003 ? " Instrumental variables probit and tobit using Amemiya Generalized Least Squares . " . Stata Corp : Baltimore , MD . Hausman , Jerry A . 2001 . " Mismeasured Variables in Econometric Analysis : Problems from the right and Problems from the Left . " Journal of Economic Perspectives , 15 : 4 , pp . 57 - 67 . Ichniowski , Casey , Kathryn Shaw , and Giovanna Prennushi . 1997 . " The Effects of Human Resource Management Practices on Productivity . " American Economic Review , 87 : 3 , pp . 291 - 313 . Jensen , Michael C . 1986 . " Agency Costs of Free Cash Flow , Corporate Finance , and Takeovers . " American Economic Review , 76 : 2 , pp . 323 - 29 . Jensen , Michael C . and William H . Meckling . 1976 . " Theory of the Firm : Managerial Behavior , Agency Costs , and Ownership Structure . " Journal of Financial Economics , 3 : 4 , pp . 305 - 60 . Jensen , Richard and Marie C . Thursby . 2001 . " Proofs and prototypes for sale : The licensing of university inventions . " American Economic Review , 91 : 1 , pp . 240 - 59 . Kamien , Morton I and Yair Tauman . 1986 . " Fees versus Royalties and the Private Value of a Patent . " Quarterly Journal of Economics , 101 : 3 , pp . 471 - 91 . Lach , Saul and Mark Shankerman . 2003 . " Incentives and Invention in Universities . " NBER Working Paper No . 9727 . Lazear , Edward P . 1999 . " Output Based Pay : Incentives or Sorting ? " : NBER Working Paper 7419 . Lerner , Josh and Robert P . Merges . 1998 . " The Control of Technology Alliances : An Empirical Analysis of the Biotechnology Industry . " Journal of Industrial Economics , 46 : 2 , pp . 125 - 56 . Lerner , Josh , Hilary Shane , and Alexander Tsai . 2003 . " Do Equity Financing Cycles Matter ? Evidence from Biotechnology Alliances . " Journal of Financial Economics , 67 , pp . forthcoming . Lowe , Robert . 2002 . " Entrepreneurship , Invention , and Innovation : The Commercialization of University Research by Inventor - Founded Firms . " Haas School of Business . University of California at Berkeley : Berkeley . Lundstrum , Leonard L . 2002 . " Corporate Investment Myopia : A Horserace of the Theories . " Journal of Corporate Finance : Contracting , Governance , and Organization , 8 : 4 , pp . 353 - 71 . Mairesse , Jacques , Bronwyn H Hall , and Benoit Mulkay . 1999 . " Firm - Level Investment in France and the United States : An Exploration of What We Have Learned in Twenty Years . " Annales D ' Economie et de Statistique , 0 : 55 - 56 , pp . 27 - 67 . Mowery , David C . and Arvids A . Ziedonis . 2001 . " The Geographic Reach of Market and Non - Market Channels of Technology Transfer : Comparing Citations and Licenses of University Patents . " : NBER Working Paper 8568 . Newey , Whitney . 1987 . " Efficient Estimation of Limited Dependent Variable Models with Endogenous Explanatory Variables . " Journal of Econometrics , 36 : 3 , pp . 231 - 50 . D RAFT - 32 - Siegel , Donald , David Waldman , and Albert Link . 1999 . " Assessing the Impact of Organizational Practices on the Productivity of University Technology Transfer Licenses : An Exploratory Study . " : NBER Working Paper 7256 . Sine , Wesley David , Scott A Shane , and Dante DiGregorio . 2003 . " The Halo Effect and Technology Licensing : The Influence of Institutional Prestige on the Licensing of University Inventions . " Management Science , 49 : 4 , pp . 478 - 96 . Staiger , Douglas and James H Stock . 1997 . " Instrumental Variables Regression with Weak Instruments . " Econometrica , 65 : 3 , pp . 557 - 86 . Taylor , C . T . and Z . A . Silbertson . 1973 . The Economic Impact of the Patent System : A Study of the British System . New York : Cambridge University Press . Thursby , Jerry G . and Marie C . Thursby . 2002 . " Who is selling the ivory tower ? Sources of growth in university licensing . " Management Science , 48 : 1 , pp . 90 - 104 . D RAFT - 33 - Figure 1 . Kaplan Meier Survival Estimates Stratified by Individual Contract Provisions 0 . 00 0 . 25 0 . 50 0 . 75 1 . 00 0 5 10 15 20 analysis time No Yes Kaplan - Meier survival estimates , by license _ fee 0 . 00 0 . 25 0 . 50 0 . 75 1 . 00 0 5 10 15 20 analysis time No Yes Kaplan - Meier survival estimates , by maintenance _ fees 0 . 00 0 . 25 0 . 50 0 . 75 1 . 00 0 5 10 15 20 analysis time No Yes Kaplan - Meier survival estimates , by milestones 0 . 00 0 . 25 0 . 50 0 . 75 1 . 00 0 5 10 15 20 analysis time No Yes Kaplan - Meier survival estimates , by royalties 0 . 00 0 . 25 0 . 50 0 . 75 1 . 00 0 5 10 15 20 analysis time No Yes Kaplan - Meier survival estimates , by equity D RAFT - 34 - Figure 2 . Kaplan Meier Survival Estimates Stratified by Individual Contract Provisions Interacted with Firm Size Dummies 0 . 00 0 . 25 0 . 50 0 . 75 1 . 00 0 5 10 15 20 analysis time No Yes Kaplan - Meier survival estimates , by small _ X _ maintenance _ fee 0 . 00 0 . 25 0 . 50 0 . 75 1 . 00 0 5 10 15 20 analysis time No Yes Kaplan - Meier survival estimates , by small _ X _ milestone 0 . 00 0 . 25 0 . 50 0 . 75 1 . 00 0 5 10 15 20 analysis time No Yes Kaplan - Meier survival estimates , by small _ X _ royalty D RAFT - 35 - Table 1 . Predicted impact on hazard rate of termination of common provisions in university licenses Predicted Impact on Hazard Rate : Provision Amount Timing Dechenaux , Goldfarb , Shane , and Thursby ( 2003 ) Jensen & Thursby ( 2001 ) LicenseFee Fixed Up front no effect No prediction MaintenanceFee Fixed Yearly Increase No prediction Milestone Payment Fixed Contingent on achieving some verifiable outcome Increase decrease a Royalties Variable , based on sales Postcommercialization Increase decrease Equity Variable , based on performance If granted by a private firm , generally requires a liquidity event no effect b decrease a Assumes the milestones are value - generating activities b Assumes the equity is not returned to the licensee in the case of termination D RAFT - 36 - Table 2 . Summary statistics for sample licenses . The sample consists of 154 exclusive license agreements for patented ( or patent - pending ) technologies entered into by Harvard University and commercial licensees between 1979 and 2002 . Dummy variable indicating the status of the license as of March 15 , 2003 is coded as 1 if the license has been terminated and 0 otherwise . Contractually - stipulated payments are divided into five categories : royalty dummy variable is coded as 1 if there is an output - dependent payment and 0 otherwise ; royalty level is the percentage of net sales of the first unit of product to be sold ; license fee dummy variable is coded as 1 if there is a non - contingent payment excluding patent expenses in the first year of the license ; license fee level is the total value of non - contingent payments ; maintenance fee dummy variables are coded as 1 if there are non - contingent fees due in subsequent years to keep the license in force ; maintenance fee levels are the value of the first yearly payment due ; milestone dummy variable is coded as 1 if a contingent payment not dependent on sales is present in the contract ; milestone levels are the total value of all milestone payments ; equity dummy variable is coded as 1 if the license transfers any firm equity to the licensor and 0 otherwise . Licensees coded as small firms if firms were private at the time of license or if firm did not report positive net sales during the year of license and as large firms otherwise . Panel A . Agreement Characteristics Obs . Mean Std . Dev . Min Max Year of License Agreement 154 1994 . 9 4 . 6 1979 2002 License has been terminated 154 . 28 . 45 0 1 Number of Technologies 154 1 . 6 1 . 4 1 11 Number of Patents Issued 151 1 . 5 1 . 8 0 13 Number of Patents Pending 151 . 6 1 . 0 0 6 Panel B . Contract Structure Obs . Mean Std . Dev . Min Max Part 1 ( Dummies ) : Royalties 154 . 94 . 24 0 1 License Fees 154 . 81 . 40 0 1 Maintenance Fees 154 . 66 . 47 0 1 Milestones 154 . 51 . 50 0 1 Equity 154 . 12 . 33 0 1 Part 2 ( Levels ) : Royalties 154 3 . 3 % 2 . 6 % 0 10 % Nominal dollars License Fees 154 84 , 202 567 , 097 0 7 , 000 , 000 Maintenance Fees 154 4 , 243 8 , 354 0 40 , 000 Milestones 154 171 , 564 425 , 944 0 3 , 000 , 000 Constant ( 1996 ) dollars License Fees 154 84 , 428 532 , 162 0 6 , 548 , 789 Maintenance Fees 154 4 , 278 8 , 528 0 41 , 824 Milestones 154 172 , 292 431 , 682 0 3 , 266 , 551 Panel C . Licensee Characteristics Obs . Mean Std . Dev . Min Max Large Firm 154 . 38 . 49 0 1 Small Firm 154 . 62 . 49 0 1 US Domicile 154 . 90 . 30 0 1 Non - US 154 . 10 . 30 0 1 D RAFT - 37 - Table 3 . Attributes of licensed technologies . The sample consists of 154 exclusive license agreements for patented ( or patent - pending ) technologies entered into by Harvard University and commercial licensees between 1979 and 2002 . Patent characteristics are provided for licensed technologies that have received patents as of May 2003 ; maximum values for individual patents are used for licenses bundling multiple patents . Categories and subcategories are those defined by Hall , et al . ( 2001 ) . Panel A . Patent Characteristics Obs . Mean Std . Dev . Min Max Claims 91 24 . 3 28 . 5 1 235 Citations Made 100 5 . 5 7 . 7 0 34 Citations Received 100 10 . 0 18 . 6 0 110 Original 78 . 39 . 30 0 . 88 General 69 . 38 . 31 0 . 83 Panel B : Categories and subcategories for issued patents Patent Category Frequency Patent Sub - Category Frequency 1 Chemical 39 12 Coating 2 13 Gas 2 14 Organic Compounds 14 15 Resins 9 19 Miscellaneous 12 2 Computers & Communications 3 22 Computer Hardware & Software 3 3 Drugs & Medical 67 31 Drugs 25 32 Surgery & Medical Instruments 2 33 Biotechnology 40 4 Electrical & Electronic 4 43 Measuring & Testing 2 44 Nuclear & X - Rays 2 5 Mechanical 1 51 Materials Processing & Handling 1 Total 114 114 Panel C : Inventor Field Count Fraction of Total Chemistry 24 17 % Medical / Biological 111 78 % Other 6 5 % Total 141 100 % Panel D : Product Type Count Fraction of Total Medical / Biological Diagnostic 9 6 % Instrument 5 3 % Research Product 33 21 % Therapeutic 60 39 % Multiple 19 12 % Non - medical Process Technology 12 8 % Product Technology 15 10 % Uncategorized 1 1 % Total 154 100 % D RAFT - 38 - Table 4 . Summary statistics for sample licenses divided into terminated and non - terminated groups . The sample consists of 154 exclusive license agreements for patented ( or patent - pending ) technologies entered into by Harvard University and commercial licensees between 1979 and 2002 . Dummy variable indicating the status of the license as of March 15 , 2003 is coded as 1 if the license has been terminated and 0 otherwise . Contractually - stipulated payments are divided into five categories : royalty dummy variable is coded as 1 if there is an output - dependent payment and 0 otherwise ; royalty level is the percentage of net sales of the first unit of product to be sold ; license fee dummy variable is coded as 1 if there is a non - contingent payment excluding patent expenses in the first year of the license ; license fee level is the total value of non - contingent payments ; maintenance fee dummy variables are coded as 1 if there are non - contingent fees due in subsequent years to keep the license in force ; maintenance fee levels are the value of the first yearly payment due ; milestone dummy variable is coded as 1 if a contingent payment not dependent on sales is present in the contract ; milestone levels are the total value of all milestone payments ; equity dummy variable is coded as 1 if the license transfers any firm equity to the licensor and 0 otherwise . Licensees coded as small firms if firms were private at the time of license or if firm did not report positive net sales during the year of license and as large firms otherwise . Panel A . Agreement Characteristics Non - Terminated Terminated Obs . Mean Std Dev Obs . Mean Std Dev Year of License Agreement 111 1995 . 8 4 . 5 43 1992 . 6 4 . 2 License has been terminated 111 0 . 0 0 . 0 43 1 . 0 0 . 0 Number of Technologies 111 1 . 7 1 . 6 43 1 . 3 0 . 5 Number of Patents Issued 108 1 . 3 1 . 7 43 1 . 8 2 . 0 Number of Patents Pending 108 0 . 8 1 . 1 43 0 . 3 0 . 7 Panel B . Contract Structure Non - Terminated Terminated Obs . Mean Std Dev Obs . Mean Std Dev Part 1 ( Dummies ) : License Fees 111 . 81 . 39 43 . 79 . 41 Maintenance Fees 111 . 66 . 47 43 . 67 . 47 Milestones 111 . 53 . 50 43 . 46 . 50 Royalties 111 . 93 . 15 43 . 98 . 15 Equity 111 . 12 . 35 43 . 14 . 35 Part 2 ( Levels , 1996 dollars ) : License Fees 111 92 , 332 623 , 131 43 60 , 442 118 , 062 Maintenance Fees 111 4 , 693 8 , 781 43 3 , 206 7 , 832 Milestones 111 191 , 045 477 , 969 43 123 , 882 277 , 819 Royalties 111 3 . 3 % 2 . 6 % 43 3 . 5 % 2 . 7 % Panel C . Licensee Characteristics Non - Terminated Terminated Obs . Mean Std Dev Obs . Mean Std Dev Large Firm 111 . 41 . 49 43 . 30 . 46 Small Firm 111 . 59 . 49 43 . 70 . 46 US Domicile 111 . 92 . 27 43 . 84 . 37 Non - US 111 . 08 . 27 43 . 16 . 37 Panel D . Patent Characteristics Non - Terminated Terminated Obs . Mean Std Dev Obs . Mean Std Dev Claims 59 23 . 7 31 . 7 32 25 . 4 21 . 6 Citations Made 68 4 . 9 6 . 2 32 6 . 7 10 . 2 Citations Received 68 11 . 1 21 . 5 32 7 . 8 9 . 9 Original 54 . 41 . 28 24 . 34 . 33 General 46 . 38 . 31 23 . 38 . 31 D RAFT - 39 - Table 5 . Correlation between explanatory variables and termination . The sample consists of 154 exclusive license agreements for patented ( or patent - pending ) technologies entered into by Harvard University and commercial licensees between 1979 and 2002 . Dummy variable indicating the status of the license as of March 15 , 2003 is coded as 1 if the license has been terminated and 0 otherwise . Contractually - stipulated payments are divided into five categories : royalty dummy variable is coded as 1 if there is an output - dependent payment ( and 0 otherwise as in all remaining cases ) ; license fee dummy variable is coded as 1 if there is a non - contingent payment excluding patent expenses in the first year of the license ; maintenance fee dummy variables are coded as 1 if there are non - contingent fees due in subsequent years to keep the license in force ; milestone dummy variable is coded as 1 if a contingent payment not dependent on sales is present in the contract ; equity dummy variable is coded as 1 if the license transfers any firm equity to the licensor . Licensees coded as small firms if firms were private at the time of license or if firm did not report positive net sales during the year of license and as large firms otherwise . Term - inated ? Year # Techs PatentsIssued PatentsPending LicenseFee Mainten - ance Fee Mile - stones Royalty Equity SmallFirm Year * * * – . 314 ( . 000 ) 1 . 000 # Techs – . 111 ( . 171 ) – . 073 ( . 370 ) 1 . 000 Patents Issued . 122 ( . 135 ) * – . 139 ( . 086 ) . 109 ( . 183 ) 1 . 000 Patents Pending * * – . 182 ( . 023 ) * * * . 377 ( . 000 ) * * – . 153 ( . 061 ) . 070 ( . 397 ) 1 . 000 License Fee – . 023 ( . 779 ) * * . 200 ( . 008 ) * – . 135 ( . 095 ) – . 023 ( . 782 ) * . 154 ( . 060 ) 1 . 000 Maintenance Fee . 016 ( . 845 ) . 059 ( . 471 ) – . 038 ( . 638 ) – . 095 ( . 248 ) * . 134 ( . 091 ) * * . 204 ( . 011 ) 1 . 000 Milestones – . 060 ( . 463 ) * * * . 220 ( . 006 ) . 086 ( . 291 ) . 006 ( . 943 ) * * * . 230 ( . 004 ) * * * . 341 ( . 000 ) – . 064 ( . 431 ) 1 . 000 Royalty . 093 ( . 250 ) . 054 ( . 510 ) . 063 ( . 441 ) . 030 ( . 713 ) . 030 ( . 712 ) – . 053 ( . 517 ) . 056 ( . 488 ) * . 145 ( . 08 ) 1 . 000 Equity . 031 ( . 707 ) . 113 ( . 163 ) . 098 ( . 228 ) . 118 ( . 148 ) . 091 ( . 266 ) . 085 ( . 296 ) . 101 ( . 213 ) . 050 ( . 542 ) . 009 ( . 909 ) 1 . 000 Small Firm . 104 ( . 202 ) – . 056 ( . 491 ) . 038 ( . 634 ) * * * – . 231 ( . 002 ) * * – . 284 ( . 000 ) – . 016 ( . 838 ) * * . 172 ( . 033 ) – . 100 ( . 218 ) . 031 ( . 698 ) . 052 ( . 522 ) * * * – . 961 ( . 000 ) USA – . 120 ( . 138 ) – . 028 ( . 734 ) * – . 146 ( . 070 ) – . 027 ( . 745 ) . 092 ( . 261 ) – . 060 ( . 460 ) – . 018 ( . 824 ) – . 119 ( . 142 ) . 097 ( . 233 ) . 128 ( . 114 ) – . 050 ( . 542 ) * * * = significant at 1 % , * * = significant at 5 % , * = significant at 10 % ; p - values in parentheses D RAFT - 40 - Table 6 . Non - parametric tests of survivor function equality using dummy variables to parameterize license contracts . The sample consists of 154 exclusive license agreements for patented ( or patent - pending ) technologies entered into by Harvard University and commercial licensees between 1979 and 2002 . Contractually - stipulated payments are divided into five categories : royalty dummy variable is coded as 1 if there is an output - dependent payment ( and 0 otherwise as in all remaining cases ) ; royalty level is the percentage of net sales of the first unit of product to be sold ; license fee dummy variable is coded as 1 if there is a non - contingent payment excluding patent expenses in the first year of the license ; license fee level is the total value of non - contingent payments ; maintenance fee dummy variables are coded as 1 if there are non - contingent fees due in subsequent years to keep the license in force ; maintenance fee levels are the value of the first yearly payment due ; milestone dummy variable is coded as 1 if a contingent payment not dependent on sales is present in the contract ; milestone levels are the total value of all milestone payments ; equity dummy variable is coded as 1 if the license transfers any firm equity to the licensor and 0 otherwise . Licensees coded as small firms if firms were private at the time of license or if firm did not report positive net sales during the year of license and as large firms otherwise . Panel A : Individual Payment Provisions Log - Rank Test Wilcoxon Provision ( Dummies ) EventsObserved EventsExpected χ 2 ( 1 ) p - value Sum of Ranks χ 2 ( 1 ) p - value License Fee 34 33 . 43 . 04 . 833 – 179 . 54 . 462 Maintenance Fees 29 29 . 22 . 01 . 941 – 26 . 01 . 929 Milestone Payments 20 18 . 81 . 14 . 704 89 . 08 . 776 Royalty 42 39 . 82 1 . 62 . 203 101 . 47 . 494 Equity 6 3 . 90 1 . 27 . 260 172 . 82 . 366 Panel B : Licensee Characteristics Log - Rank Test Wilcoxon Provision ( Dummies ) EventsObserved EventsExpected χ 2 ( 1 ) p - value Sum of Ranks χ 2 ( 1 ) p - value Small Firm 30 26 . 23 1 . 40 . 236 464 2 . 37 . 124 US Organization 36 39 . 53 3 . 91 * * . 048 – 522 8 . 81 * * * . 003 Panel C : Interactions Log - Rank Test Wilcoxon Provision ( Dummies ) EventsObserved EventsExpected χ 2 ( 1 ) p - value Sum of Ranks χ 2 ( 1 ) p - value Small Firm x Maintenance Fees 9 8 . 08 . 13 . 717 36 . 02 . 887 Small Firm x Milestones 15 8 . 34 6 . 87 * * * . 009 677 6 . 71 * * * . 001 Small Firm x Royalties 30 23 . 57 3 . 89 * * . 049 646 4 . 47 * * . 034 * * * = less than 1 % , * * = less than 5 % , * = less than 10 % D RAFT - 41 - Table 7 . Hazard rate model for license termination using dummy variables to parameterize contract structure . The sample consists of 154 exclusive license agreements for patented ( or patent - pending ) technologies entered into by Harvard University and commercial licensees between 1979 and 2002 . Contractually - stipulated payments are divided into five categories : royalty dummy variable is coded as 1 if there is an output - dependent payment ( and 0 otherwise as in all remaining cases ) ; license fee dummy variable is coded as 1 if there is a non - contingent payment excluding patent expenses in the first year of the license ; maintenance fee dummy variables are coded as 1 if there are non - contingent fees due in subsequent years to keep the license in force ; milestone dummy variable is coded as 1 if a contingent payment not dependent on sales is present in the contract ; equity dummy variable is coded as 1 if the license transfers any firm equity to the licensor and 0 otherwise . Licensees coded as small firms if firms were private at the time of license or if firm did not report positive net sales during the year of license and as large firms otherwise . Technology characteristic controls in column 5 are based on NBER patent subcategories , and hand - coded subcategories where patents have not yet been issued . The reported coefficients are the natural logarithms of the relative hazard rates estimated by the model . The null hypothesis is that each of these coefficients equals zero . Robust standard errors are in brackets . Specification : Cox Cox Cox Cox Cox Cox ( 1 ) ( 2 ) ( 3 ) ( 4 ) ( 5 ) ( 6 ) Contract Structure : License Fees . 071 [ . 493 ] . 013 [ . 511 ] . 100 [ . 488 ] . 073 [ . 509 ] . 262 [ . 542 ] 0 . 003 [ 0 . 536 ] Maintenance Fees – . 034 [ . 348 ] – . 204 [ . 362 ] – . 106 [ . 377 ] – . 151 [ . 369 ] – . 395 [ . 417 ] – 0 . 337 [ 0 . 425 ] Milestones . 078 [ . 337 ] – . 149 [ . 360 ] – . 815 [ . 502 ] – . 772 [ . 534 ] – . 929 [ 0 . 595 ] – 1 . 026 [ 0 . 693 ] Royalties 1 . 186 [ 1 . 13 ] 1 . 752 [ 1 . 23 ] 1 . 399 [ 1 . 31 ] 1 . 314 [ 1 . 32 ] . 036 [ 1 . 338 ] 1 . 752 [ 1 . 250 ] Equity . 571 [ . 495 ] * . 906 [ . 488 ] * . 806 [ . 482 ] . 862 [ . 496 ] . 891 [ 0 . 585 ] 0 . 766 [ 0 . 487 ] Technology Characteristics : Number of Technologies * * – . 285 [ . 120 ] * – . 377 [ . 148 ] * * – . 317 [ 0 . 121 ] * * – . 307 [ . 122 ] * * * – . 341 [ . 129 ] – 0 . 315 [ 0 . 126 ] Control for Patent Subcategory ? N N N Y a N N Control for Inventor Field ? N N N N Y N Control for Product Category ? N N N N N Y Licensee Characteristics : Small Firm Dummy b . 455 [ . 338 ] US * * * – 1 . 489 [ . 495 ] * * – 1 . 395 [ . 542 ] * * * – 1 . 426 [ . 524 ] * * – 1 . 474 [ 0 . 635 ] * * * – 1 . 482 [ . 493 ] Interactions ( Licensee Characteristics and Contract Structure ) : Small Firm x Maintenance Fees – . 405 [ . 447 ] – . 390 [ . 465 ] – . 526 [ 0 . 523 ] – 0 . 220 [ 0 . 443 ] Small Firm x Milestones * 1 . 105 [ . 586 ] * 1 . 232 [ . 657 ] * 1 . 051 [ 0 . 621 ] * * 1 . 496 [ 0 . 734 ] Small Firm x Royalties . 255 [ . 414 ] . 157 [ . 429 ] . 405 [ 0 . 469 ] 0 . 130 [ 0 . 543 ] Observations 154 154 154 150 141 154 Log Likelihood – 178 . 8 – 173 . 9 – 171 . 5 – 170 . 0 – 154 . 3 – 169 . 2 Wald Statistic 9 . 19 * * 15 . 84 * * 20 . 49 * * 25 . 98 * * 22 . 82 * * 30 . 53 * * * = significant at p ≤ 0 . 01 ; * * = significant at p ≤ 0 . 05 ; * = significant at p ≤ 0 . 1 ( two sided test , with the exception of the Wald Statistic , which is a for a one - sided test ) D RAFT - 42 - Table 8 . Hazard rate model for license termination using levels to parameterize contract structure . The sample consists of 154 exclusive license agreements for patented ( or patent - pending ) technologies entered into by Harvard University and commercial licensees between 1979 and 2002 . Contractually - stipulated payments are divided into five categories : royalty level is the percentage of net sales of the first unit of product to be sold ; license fee level is the total value of non - contingent payments in constant ( 1996 ) dollars ; maintenance fee levels are the value of the first yearly payment due in constant dollars ; milestone dummy ; milestone levels are the total value of all contingent payments that do not depend on net sales ; equity dummy variable is coded as 1 if the license transfers any firm equity to the licensor and 0 otherwise . Technology characteristic controls in column 5 are based on NBER patent subcategories , and hand - coded subcategories where patents have not yet been issued . Licensees coded as small firms if firms were private at the time of license or if firm did not report positive net sales during the year of license and as large firms otherwise . The reported coefficients are the natural logarithms of the relative hazard rates estimated by the model . The null hypothesis is that each of these coefficients equals zero . Coefficients and standard errors on license fees , maintenance fees , and milestones ( and their interaction terms ) have been multiplied by 10 6 , 10 3 , and 10 5 , respectively . Robust standard errors are in brackets . Specification : Cox Cox Cox Cox Cox Cox ( 1 ) ( 2 ) ( 3 ) ( 4 ) ( 5 ) ( 6 ) Contract Structure : License Fees . 081 [ . 201 ] – . 055 [ . 536 ] – . 348 [ 1 . 13 ] – . 235 [ . 753 ] – 2 . 334 [ 2 . 22 ] – . 120 [ . 517 ] Maintenance Fees – . 017 [ . 021 ] – . 018 [ . 022 ] * . 036 [ . 022 ] . 032 [ . 022 ] . 011 [ . 024 ] . 037 [ . 023 ] Milestones . 132 [ . 429 ] – . 023 [ . 522 ] * * – . 479 [ . 223 ] * * – . 512 [ . 234 ] * * – . 488 [ . 225 ] * * – . 452 [ . 215 ] Royalties . 001 [ . 054 ] . 036 [ . 059 ] – . 066 [ . 103 ] – . 056 [ . 116 ] – . 147 [ . 152 ] – . 062 [ . 104 ] Equity * . 759 [ . 459 ] * * . 974 [ . 464 ] * * * 1 . 081 [ . 416 ] * * * 1 . 131 [ . 435 ] * * * 1 . 540 [ . 478 ] * * 1 . 044 [ . 418 ] Technology Characteristics : Number of Technologies * * – . 291 [ . 123 ] * * – . 352 [ . 148 ] * * * – . 395 [ . 149 ] * * * – . 407 [ . 154 ] * * * – . 616 [ . 233 ] * * * – . 426 [ . 167 ] Control for Patent Subcategory ? N N N Y N N Control for Inventor Field ? N N N N Y N Control for Product Category ? N N N N N Y Licensee Characteristics : Small Firm Dummy . 369 [ . 335 ] – . 411 [ . 592 ] – . 309 [ . 624 ] – . 077 [ . 661 ] – . 476 [ . 707 ] US * * – 1 . 204 [ . 547 ] * * – 1 . 287 [ . 590 ] * * – 1 . 306 [ . 536 ] * * * – 2 . 155 [ . 688 ] * * – 1 . 289 [ . 638 ] Interactions ( Licensee Characteristics and Contract Structure ) : Small Firm x Maintenance Fees * * – . 068 [ . 032 ] * – . 066 [ . 035 ] * * * – . 137 [ . 049 ] * * – . 068 [ . 034 ] Small Firm x Milestones * * . 542 [ . 226 ] * * . 574 [ . 237 ] * * . 562 [ . 233 ] * * . 531 [ . 218 ] Small Firm x Royalties . 162 [ . 124 ] . 124 [ . 143 ] . 163 [ . 164 ] . 168 [ . 136 ] Observations 154 154 154 150 141 154 Log Likelihood – 179 . 5 – 175 . 8 – 171 . 6 – 170 . 3 – 150 . 2 – 171 . 0 Wald Statistic 6 . 84 10 . 95 * * 20 . 34 * * 28 . 01 * * 22 . 99 25 . 03 * * * = significant at p ≤ 0 . 01 ; * * = significant at p ≤ 0 . 05 ; * = significant at p ≤ 0 . 1 ( two sided test , with the exception of the Wald Statistic , which is a for a one - sided test ) D RAFT - 43 - Table 9 . Analysis of termination likelihood using instrumental variables for contract structure . The sample consists of 154 exclusive license agreements for patented ( or patent - pending ) technologies entered into by Harvard University and commercial licensees between 1979 and 2002 . Contractually - stipulated payments are divided into five categories : royalty dummy variable is coded as 1 if there is an output - dependent payment and 0 otherwise ; royalty level is the percentage of net sales of the first unit of product to be sold ; license fee dummy variable is coded as 1 if there is a non - contingent payment excluding patent expenses in the first year of the license ; license fee level is the total value of non - contingent payments ; maintenance fee dummy variables are coded as 1 if there are non - contingent fees due in subsequent years to keep the license in force ; maintenance fee levels are the value of the first yearly payment due ; milestone dummy variable is coded as 1 if a contingent payment not dependent on sales is present in the contract ; milestone levels are the total value of all milestone payments ; equity dummy variable is coded as 1 if the license transfers any firm equity to the licensor and 0 otherwise . Technology characteristic controls in columns 1 - 4 are based on NBER patent subcategories , and hand - coded subcategories where patents have not yet been issued . Licensees coded as small firms if firms were private at the time of license or if firm did not report positive net sales during the year of license and as large firms otherwise . In columns 5 and 6 , the reported coefficients are the natural logarithms of the relative hazard rates estimated by the model . The null hypothesis is that each of these coefficients equals zero . Coefficients and standard errors on license fees , maintenance fees , and milestones ( and their interaction terms ) have been scaled by different factors of 10 to facilitate reporting . Robust standard errors are in brackets . Specification : Probit Probit IV Probit IV Probit “IV” Cox a “IV” Cox a Dummies Levels Dummies Levels Dummies Levels ( 1 ) ( 2 ) ( 3 ) ( 4 ) ( 5 ) ( 6 ) Year of Deal * * * – . 115 [ . 026 ] * * * – . 110 [ . 027 ] * * – . 130 [ . 061 ] * * – . 107 [ . 049 ] Contract Structure : License Fees . 253 [ . 350 ] – . 018 [ . 145 ] 1 . 624 [ 1 . 29 ] 1 . 05 [ 1 . 14 ] . 725 [ 1 . 06 ] – . 570 [ . 677 ] Maintenance Fees . 039 [ . 291 ] . 014 [ . 019 ] . 537 [ 1 . 13 ] * * . 205 [ . 093 ] – . 355 [ . 470 ] – . 127 [ . 198 ] Milestones – . 545 [ . 385 ] * * – . 278 [ . 146 ] . 928 [ 1 . 05 ] * * – . 785 [ . 349 ] – . 664 [ . 646 ] – . 008 [ . 226 ] Royalties . 988 [ . 673 ] . 015 [ . 061 ] – . 199 [ 2 . 65 ] * – . 308 [ . 179 ] * * – 7 . 193 [ 3 . 25 ] * – . 490 [ . 265 ] Equity . 623 [ . 344 ] * * . 768 [ . 348 ] – . 500 [ 1 . 77 ] . 636 [ 1 . 30 ] – 1 . 314 [ 1 . 68 ] – . 020 [ 1 . 54 ] Technology Characteristics : Number of Technologies * * * – . 223 [ . 086 ] * * * – . 282 [ . 105 ] – . 221 [ . 185 ] – . 084 [ . 217 ] * – . 285 [ . 156 ] * * – . 338 [ . 171 ] Control for Patent Cat . & Subcat . ? Y Y Y Y N N Control for Inventor Field ? N N N N Y Y Licensee Characteristics : Small Firm * * – 6 . 659 [ 3 . 58 ] – 1 . 706 [ 1 . 14 ] US * * * – . 881 [ . 378 ] * * – . 800 [ . 371 ] – 1 . 546 [ . 784 ] * * – 1 . 802 [ . 767 ] * * – 1 . 207 [ . 528 ] * * – 1 . 308 [ . 639 ] Interactions ( Licensee Characteristics and Contract Structure ) : Small Firm x Maintenance Fees – . 442 [ . 345 ] – . 042 [ . 026 ] – . 590 [ 1 . 56 ] * * * – . 343 [ . 124 ] . 205 [ . 991 ] . 090 [ . 180 ] Small Firm x Milestones * * . 930 [ . 458 ] * * . 325 [ . 146 ] * * – 3 . 662 [ 1 . 70 ] . 564 [ . 378 ] . 476 [ . 987 ] . 059 [ . 258 ] Small Firm x Royalties . 002 [ . 341 ] . 050 [ . 060 ] * 2 . 141 [ 1 . 10 ] * . 328 [ . 197 ] * * 7 . 086 [ 3 . 61 ] * * . 590 [ . 281 ] Observations 154 154 154 154 138 138 Log Likelihood – 71 . 4 – 71 . 7 Not provided Not provided – 154 . 7 – 154 . 1 Wald Statistic * * * 38 . 64 * * * 32 . 33 Not provided Not provided * * 23 . 30 * * 25 . 14 * * * = significant at p ≤ 0 . 01 ; * * = significant at p ≤ 0 . 05 ; * = significant at p ≤ 0 . 1 ( two sided test , with the exception of the Wald Statistic ) D RAFT - 44 - Table 10 . First - stage R 2 and F - statistics for instrumental variables analysis . The sample consists of 154 exclusive license agreements for patented ( or patent - pending ) technologies entered into by Harvard University and commercial licensees between 1979 and 2002 . Contractually - stipulated payments are divided into five categories : royalty level is the percentage of net sales of the first unit of product to be sold ; license fee level is the total value of non - contingent payments in constant ( 1996 ) dollars ; maintenance fee levels are the value of the first yearly payment due in constant dollars ; milestone dummy ; milestone levels are the total value of all contingent payments that do not depend on net sales ; equity dummy variable is coded as 1 if the license transfers any firm equity to the licensor and 0 otherwise Corresponding Regression : “IV” Cox “IV” Cox Dummies Levels Table 9 Column ( 5 ) Table 9 Column ( 6 ) R 2 License Fees . 3743 . 2157 Maintenance Fees . 3242 . 3152 Milestones . 4219 . 2989 Royalties . 2441 . 3544 Equity . 2614 . 2605 F - Statistic License Fees * * * 2 . 612 1 . 272 Maintenance Fees * * * 2 . 227 * * * 2 . 167 Milestones * * * 3 . 497 * * * 2 . 008 Royalties * 1 . 547 * * * 2 . 584 Equity * * 1 . 696 * * 1 . 658 * * * = significant at p ≤ 0 . 01 ; * * = significant at p ≤ 0 . 05 ; * = significant at p ≤ 0 . 1 D RAFT - 45 - Table 11 . Contract terms broken down by licensee type . The sample consists of 154 exclusive license agreements for patented ( or patent - pending ) technologies entered into by Harvard University and commercial licensees between 1979 and 2002 . Dummy variable indicating the status of the license as of March 15 , 2003 is coded as 1 if the license has been terminated and 0 otherwise . Contractually - stipulated payments are divided into five categories : royalty dummy variable is coded as 1 if there is an output - dependent payment and 0 otherwise ; royalty level is the percentage of net sales of the first unit of product to be sold ; license fee dummy variable is coded as 1 if there is a non - contingent payment excluding patent expenses in the first year of the license ; license fee level is the total value of non - contingent payments ; maintenance fee dummy variables are coded as 1 if there are non - contingent fees due in subsequent years to keep the license in force ; maintenance fee levels are the value of the first yearly payment due ; milestone dummy variable is coded as 1 if a contingent payment not dependent on sales is present in the contract ; milestone levels are the total value of all milestone payments ; equity dummy variable is coded as 1 if the license transfers any firm equity to the licensor and 0 otherwise . Licensees coded as small firms if firms were private at the time of license or if firm did not report positive net sales during the year of license and as large firms otherwise . Large Licensees : Small Licensees Contract Provision Mean StandardDeviation Mean StandardDeviation Dummies : License Fee 81 . 3 % 80 . 3 % Maintenance Fees 55 . 9 72 . 6 Milestones 57 . 6 47 . 3 Royalties 93 . 2 94 . 7 Equity Included 10 . 2 13 . 7 Levels ( thousands of 1996 dollars ) a : License Fee 158 . 5 851 . 0 36 . 7 91 . 2 Maintenance Fees 4 . 2 9 . 5 4 . 3 7 . 9 Milestones 204 . 1 437 . 2 152 . 5 429 . 4 Royalties 3 . 46 % 2 . 60 3 . 27 2 . 65 59 observations 95 observations a Levels include the contracts for which these parameters are zero D RAFT - 46 - Table 12 . Analysis of impact of inventor career - stage variables and contingent payments on termination . The sample consists of 154 exclusive license agreements for patented ( or patent - pending ) technologies entered into by Harvard University and commercial licensees between 1979 and 2002 . Inventors are characterized as early - career if , at the time of license , their first publication dates back less than 12 years ; they are characterized as mid - career if , at the time of license , their first publication dates between 12 and 24 years ; otherwise inventors are characterized as late - career . Panel A . Career Stage of Inventor at Time of License Obs . Mean Std . Dev . Min Max Year of First Publication 141 1977 . 2 9 . 21 1960 2003 Academic Experience at Time of License 141 17 . 7 8 . 3 - 6 38 Early Career 141 . 26 . 44 0 1 Mid Career 141 . 55 . 50 0 1 Late Career 141 . 19 . 39 0 1 Panel B . Career Stage of Inventor and License Termination Log - Rank Test Wilcoxon Test Provision ( Dummies ) Events Observed Events Expected χ 2 ( 1 ) p - value Sum of Ranks χ 2 ( 1 ) p - value Early career 10 13 . 06 1 . 08 . 299 - 359 2 . 25 . 13 Mid - career 22 19 . 22 0 . 78 . 376 258 . 96 . 32 Late - Career 8 7 . 72 . 0 . 911 101 . 23 . 62 Panel C . Interaction between Career Stage of Inventor and Contingent Payment Terms Log - Rank Test Wilcoxon Test Provision ( Dummies ) EventsObserved EventsExpected χ 2 ( 1 ) p - value Sum of Ranks χ 2 ( 1 ) p - value Early - Career x Milestone 4 5 . 77 . 65 . 419 - 201 1 . 09 . 29 Mid - Career x Milestone 10 9 . 89 . 00 . 999 - 41 . 03 . 86 Late - Career x Milestone 5 2 . 59 2 . 43 . 119 280 3 . 97 * * . 04 Early - Career x Royalty 10 11 . 89 . 42 . 511 - 289 1 . 53 . 2 Mid - Career x Royalty 21 18 . 72 . 53 . 468 179 . 46 . 49 Late - Career x Royalty 8 7 . 72 . 0 . 911 101 . 23 . 62 D RAFT - 47 - Table 13 . Realized Revenues from Licensed Technologies , 1988 - 2002 . The sample consists of 139 exclusive license agreements for patented ( or patent - pending ) technologies entered into by Harvard University and commercial licensees between 1988 and 2002 . Remuneration for patent expenses incurred by Harvard is not included . All figures are in nominal dollars . Years after signing 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 7 + Total Revenues All Licenses Obs 139 135 130 110 103 89 78 60 139 Non - Zero 100 83 80 65 57 42 40 30 134 Mean $ 90 , 233 $ 50 , 699 $ 47 , 310 $ 64 , 897 $ 23 , 275 $ 13 , 572 $ 29 , 173 $ 64 , 002 $ 302 , 929 Median 15 , 000 4 , 375 1 , 952 1 , 006 1 , 660 0 0 0 40 , 821 75 th Percentile 29 , 125 20 , 000 10 , 000 15 , 151 15 , 000 10 , 500 16 , 250 26 , 161 149 , 926 Terminated Obs 37 37 37 35 35 33 30 26 37 Non - Zero 29 19 20 21 20 11 13 9 36 Mean 45 , 725 20 , 575 10 , 207 31 , 220 37 , 432 6 , 870 8 , 668 53 , 703 192 , 924 Median 15 , 000 1 1 , 425 3 , 951 5 , 000 0 0 0 51 , 639 75 th Percentile 30 , 000 15 , 000 10 , 000 18 , 826 16 , 644 4 , 985 16 , 250 8 , 753 230 , 000 Surviving Licenses Obs 102 98 93 75 68 56 48 34 102 Non - Zero 68 63 57 41 35 28 25 19 95 Mean 102 , 332 61 , 862 61 , 988 80 , 396 15 , 659 17 , 668 42 , 120 73 , 975 342 , 829 Median 12 , 500 5 , 000 2 , 000 976 1050 413 1248 5 , 000 36 , 799 75 th Percentile 27 , 500 20 , 000 11 , 000 15 , 000 13 , 500 15 , 000 17 , 488 51 , 434 137 , 500 Licenses with Royalties Obs 132 128 124 105 98 84 73 56 132 Non - Zero 91 79 75 61 53 38 38 28 124 Mean 83 , 787 52 , 843 49 , 519 62 , 621 24 , 361 14 , 321 31 , 171 68 , 574 304 , 227 Median 15 , 000 4 , 695 2 , 000 1 , 706 1 , 805 0 1 , 500 500 40 , 822 75 th Percentile 29 , 125 17 , 730 11 , 521 15 , 151 16 , 903 10 , 000 16 , 500 37 , 341 149 , 926 Licenses with Milestones Obs 76 76 74 63 59 51 43 33 77 Non - Zero 60 46 41 30 28 18 17 14 76 Mean 45 , 155 22 , 803 15 , 041 13 , 307 10 , 718 9 , 141 33 , 372 56 , 026 149 , 382 Median 21 , 211 5 , 000 999 0 0 0 0 0 50 , 000 75 th Percentile 47 , 500 25 , 000 12 , 042 15 , 000 15 , 000 10 , 000 15 , 000 45 , 000 169 , 017 Note : Table includes data only from exclusive patent licenses licensed in 1988 or afterwards . Realized revenues do not include patent expenses .