Child Computer Interaction Abstract The study of Child Computer Interaction is a growing subfield of HCI . Child Computer Interaction encompasses traditional HCI but also specifically reaches out into the areas of child psychology , learning and play . The aim of this SIG is to bring together researchers and practitioners working in this area , to discover current themes , to explore the creation of a more formal working group , to locate publishing opportunities and to foster international co - operation . Keywords Children , HCI , learning , play ACM Classification Keywords H5 . m . Information interfaces and presentation ( e . g . , HCI ) : Miscellaneous . K . 3 . m Computers and education : Miscellaneous Introduction Since the earliest days when Seymour Papert [ 1 ] brought together the two words children and computers , through the work of Yasmin Kafai [ 2 ] , and Allison Druin [ 3 ] to more recent global engagement with children and interactive technology evidenced by the continued success of the IDC conference and an increased showing of child centered HCI work at major HCI conferences like CHI [ 4 ] , [ 5 ] , [ 6 ] , HCI [ 7 ] , Copyright is held by the author / owner ( s ) . CHI 2008 , April 5 – April 10 , 2008 , Florence , Italy ACM 978 - 1 - 60558 - 012 - 8 / 08 / 04 . Janet C Read ChiCI group University of Central Lancashire Preston , UK , PR1 2HE jcread @ uclan . ac . uk Panos Markopoulos Eindhoven University of Technology HG 2 . 38 , P . O . Box 513 Den Dolech 2 5600 MB Eindhoven p . markopoulos @ tue . nl Narcís Parés Universitat Pompeu Fabra Pg . Circumval·lació , 8 . 08003 Barcelona , Spain npares @ iua . upf . edu Juan Pablo Hourcade Department of Computer Science University of Iowa 14 MacLean Hall Iowa City , IA 52242 USA hourcade @ cs . uiowa . edu Alissa N Antle School of Interactive Arts and Technology Simon Fraser University 2400 Central City , Surrey , B . C . , Canada V3T 2W1 aantle @ sfu . ca NordiCHi [ 8 ] , [ 9 ] and so on , the research community concerned with understanding child computer interaction has grown both in size and strength . Theoretical papers that demonstrate the increasing maturity of the field are now found in many conferences , journals and books . Examples include frameworks [ 10 ] , case studies [ 11 ] , reflective works [ 12 ] , literature reviews [ 13 ] , and summary works [ 14 ] . Now very much an international community , and spreading into areas beyond the traditional HCI domain [ 15 ] , [ 16 ] this community is currently not represented as an international group , despite the existence of a lively international conference . The community is ripe for some formalization , creating a formal group would improve the organization and continuity of the IDC conference , provide a lobbying group for improved publication opportunities , and allow better collaboration across international boundaries . The need for a separate agenda is also indicated as Child Computer Interaction has been identified as being fundamentally different from HCI [ 17 ] , with different priorities and different methods . Research questions currently posed by the CCI community fall broadly into three areas of interest : • How to do good research in this area ? • How to design interactive products for children ? • How to evaluate children’s products ? In this SIG we hope to attract specialists from these three themes . Aims and Objectives As well as bringing together practitioners and researchers from around the globe , the SIG has three very specific aims and four smaller objectives . • Aim1 : To formalize the CCI community • Aim2 : To create an interactive ‘home’ for CCI research and development • Aim3 : To identify themes for future CCI events In addition , the SIG hopes to answer the following questions : • Q1 : Fields of inquiry that need to be ( more ) represented in the CCI community • Q2 : Publishing in CCI . Are the opportunities there ? Inventorizing conferences and journals with overlapping interests . • Q3 : Reflection : Which methods are well understood ? Which need more research ? How far have we come in the last ten years ? Are reporting standards sufficient ? • Q4 : Challenges and Opportunities for the growth of the CCI community . Things we want to keep and things we want to change about how this community is developing . Outputs from the SIG are expected to include an international website ( hosting already agreed ) , and an agenda paper setting actions for the future . Related Events There have been several related events in this area including the IDC conference , tutorials and workshops at major conferences like CHI , Interact and HCI , and special edition journals ( Interacting with Computers , Cognition Technology and Work ) . Audience With CHI2008 being in Europe , one of the major goals for this SIG is to ( rather uniquely ) bring together both US and European personnel working in this area . We hope to attract practitioners and researchers as well as people who are first time at CHI and may not identify themselves as HCI practitioners but rather might come from one of the related areas . SIG Session Plan The plan for the 90 minute SIG is as follows : Introduction of the SIG goals and the organizers . In this event , the organizers will each give a five minute overview of their own area of Child Computer Interaction and the goals for the event will be outlined ( 25 minutes ) Introduce the “Interaction Design and Children” ( IDC ) conference as a reference ( 5 mins ) Introduction to the main areas for discussion . ( 10 mins ) Group work on the main areas for discussion . Participants to break into groups , each to identify a note taker and faciliator . Groups shall discuss some of the questions noted and how the aims of the SIG should be addressed . Their objective will be to propose two Action Points in the first half of the discussion ( 15’ ) . After 15’ minutes half of each group rotates to another group : the new mixed group will discuss and refine one of the points made by each consituent half ( 30 mins ) Summary Session : A member of each group presents group findings ( 10 mins ) Discussion for taking action points further ( 10 mins ) How will the SIG be conducted ? Working groups will be asked to appoint a note - taker to record on a small slide presentation some points to share with the rest of the participants and a faciliatator whose task is to encourage a participation by all group members . Why is this SIG timely ? The SIG as proposed here is an ideal opportunity to bring together the different communities engaged in Child Computer Interaction . The authors hope to attract into the discussion researchers who are unfamiliar with the IDC series , who may have previously not realized that there is a community that might meet their needs as well as some of the more experienced individuals who , it is believed , will gain great benefit from engaging with this SIG . References [ 1 ] Papert , S . , Mindstorms , Children , Computers and Powerful Ideas . 1980 , Great Britain : Basic Books . [ 2 ] Kafai , Y . B . , ed . From Barbie to Mortal Kombat , Gender and Computer Games . 1990 , MIT Press . 90 - 110 . [ 3 ] Druin , A . , ed . The Design of Children ' s technology . 1999 , Morgan Kaufmann Publishers , Inc : San Francisco , CA . [ 4 ] Strommen , E . Children ' s use of mouse - based interfaces to control virtual travel . in CHI ' 94 . 1994 . Boston , MA : ACM Press . [ 5 ] Druin , A . Cooperative inquiry : Developing new technologies for children with children . in CHI99 . 1999 : ACM Press . [ 6 ] Berg , S . , A . S . Taylor , and R . Harper . Mobile Phones for the Next Generation : Device Designs for Teenagers . in CHI 2003 . 2003 . Ft Lauderdale , Florida : ACM Press . [ 7 ] Read , J . C . and S . J . MacFarlane . Measuring Fun - Usability Testing for Children . in Computers and Fun 3 . 2000 . York , England : BCS HCI Group . [ 8 ] Read , J . C . , S . J . MacFarlane , and C . Casey . Oops ! Silly me ! Errors in a Handwriting Recognition - based Text entry Interface for Children . in NordiChi 2002 . 2002 . Aarhus , Denmark : ACM Press . [ 9 ] Kelly , S . R . , et al . Bluebells : A Design Method for Child - Centred Product Development . in NordiChi 2006 . 2006 . Oslo : ACM Press . [ 10 ] Rogers , Y . , et al . , Conceptual Framework for Mixed Reality Environments : Designing Novel Learning Activities for Young Children . . Presence Teleoperators and Virtual Environments , 2002 . 11 ( 6 ) . [ 11 ] Antle , A . Case Study : The Design of CBC4Kids ' StoryBuilder . in IDC2003 . 2003 . Preston , UK : ACM Press . [ 12 ] Resnick , M . All I Really Need to Know ( About Creative Thinking ) I Learned ( By Studying How Children Learn ) in Kindergarten . . in Creativity & Cognition , . 2007 . Washington , DC : ACM . [ 13 ] Jensen , J . J . and M . B . Skov . A review of research methods in Children ' s technology design . in IDC 2005 . 2005 . Boulder , Colorado : ACM Press . [ 14 ] Hourcade , J . P . , Design for Children , in Handbook of Human Factors and Ergonomics , G . Salvendy , Editor . 2006 , John Wiley : Hoboken , NJ . p . 1446 - 1459 . [ 15 ] Zuckerman , O . , et al . Designing interactive environments for outdoors gaming and play . in CHI . 2008 : ACM . [ 16 ] Antle , A . N . Antle , A . N . The CTI Framework : Informing the design of tangible and spatial interactive systems for children , . in First International Conference on Tangible and Embedded Interaction . 2007 . Baton Rouge : ACM . [ 17 ] Read , J . C . , The ABC of CCI . Interfaces , 2005 . 62 : p . 8 - 9 . [ 18 ] Markopoulos , P . and M . M . Bekker , Interaction design and children . Interacting with Computers 2003 . 15 ( 2 ) : p . 141 - 149 .