Crazy Like Us : Design for Vulnerable Populations Abstract Most ethics boards classify children as a vulnerable population – all children . The reason given for this is that children lack the necessary cognitive capacity to decide whether or not to participate in most research . It may be difficult for them to foresee the risks and potential benefits to their own well - being or to understand how the conditions of research may or may not be in their own best interests . Children who have special challenges , such as those with dyslexia , ADHD , developmental delays , or mental health issues , or children living in poverty , who may be illiterate or repressed , may have even less capacity to understand and give assent to participate in research . Working with and for children , which is the cornerstone of the child - computer interaction community , raises a number of ethical challenges . First , we must present our research to children in ways they can understand . Because if we don’t do this then we exclude the children who could benefit the most from the work we do , because they cannot easily give assent or because they may be difficult to access or work with . This raises an even more important issue . We may think that children can benefit from participating in our research or from using the computational systems that result from our research . But is this true ? How do we know if the children we study are benefiting from our research ? Third , what happens after our research is over ? What legacy do we leave behind when our research is complete ? And lastly , Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for third - party components of this work must be honored . For all other uses , contact the Owner / Author . IDC ' 17 , June 27 - 30 , 2017 , Stanford , CA , USA © 2017 Copyright is held by the owner / author ( s ) . ACM ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 4921 - 5 / 17 / 06 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3078072 . 3078074 Alissa Antle Simon Fraser University Burnaby , BC V5A 1S6 Canada aantle @ sfu . ca Keynote Address IDC 2017 , June 27 – 30 , 2017 , Stanford , CA , USA 3 whether we are aware of it or not , we all make assumptions about what children’s development , education and even their lives should look like . Author Ethan Watters wrote a book called , Crazy Like Us , The Globalization of the American Psyche . In this book , Watters suggests that mental health professionals from industrialized countries have generated modern theories of the human psyche , created treatments based on these models and then exported them to many of the world’s cultures – sometimes with devastating consequences . Can we really take what we know about mental health and well - being and transfer it to other cultures ? Does it really apply ? The assumption behind this commodification is that everyone is crazy like us ! But is this true ? Based on my own experience working with vulnerable children , in both industrialized and non - industrialized countries , I will discuss ethical challenges that deserve our consideration when we conduct research in child - computer interaction . By examining these issues as we plan and conduct our research we can – as a community – take the necessary care to ensure that our work has a positive impact and that we are contributing in ways that are important not just in our own minds , but in the lives of the children our work is intending to serve . Biography Dr . Antle is an innovator and scholar . Her research in design and human - computer interaction pushes the boundaries of computation to augment the ways we think and learn . As a designer and builder of interactive technologies , her goal is to explore the ways in which these innovations can improve , augment , and support children’s cognitive and emotional development . Her interactive technologies have been deployed to facilitate collaborative learning about aboriginal heritage , sustainability and social justice ; improve learning outcomes for dyslexic children ; and teach self - regulation to disadvantaged children . In 2015 , Dr . Antle was inducted into the Royal Society of Canada’s College of New Scholars , Artists and Scientists . This is the highest honour for a scholar in Canada , acknowledging her as one of Canada’s intellectual leaders . Dr . Antle began her career receiving dual Bachelor degrees in Systems Design Engineering and Liberal Arts from the University of Waterloo and a Ph . D . from the University of British Columbia . After her graduate studies , Dr . Antle worked in the new media industry as a senior designer and executive producer for companies including CBC Children’s Television . Currently , Dr . Antle is a Professor in the School of Interactive Arts + Technology at Simon Fraser University . Keynote Address IDC 2017 , June 27 – 30 , 2017 , Stanford , CA , USA 4