Source URL : https : / / www . cirm . ca . gov / about - cirm / publications / machine - learning - based - analysis - genome - edited - cells - reveals - efficiency California Institute for Regenerative Medicine Machine - Learning - Based Analysis in Genome - Edited Cells Reveals the Efficiency of Clathrin - Mediated Endocytosis . Journal : Cell Rep Publication Year : 2015 Authors : Sun Hae Hong , Christa L Cortesio , David G Drubin PubMed link : 26387943 Funding Grants : Interdisciplinary Training in Stem Cell Biology , Engineering and Medicine Public Summary : A fundamental property of cell biology is the ability to internalize lipids , signaling molecules such as growth factors and nutrients ( " cargo " ) through clathrin - mediated endocytosis ( CME ) . During CME , cellular proteins and cargo molecules assemble at a region of the plasma membrane and form a coated pit which is subsequently pinched off to deliver the cargo molecules to the inside of the cell . Previous studies have reported that this process is highly inefficient , with a large fraction of potential CME sites failing to form vesicles , Here , we developed a robust tool to distinguish authentic CME sites from false CME sites . . When we excluded the false CME sites from our analyses , we found that the vast majority ( ∼ 90 % ) of the authentic CME sites form vesicles , in contrast to previous conclusions . Scientific Abstract : Cells internalize various molecules through clathrin - mediated endocytosis ( CME ) . Previous live - cell imaging studies suggested that CME is inefficient , with about half of the events terminated . These CME efficiency estimates may have been confounded by overexpression of fluorescently tagged proteins and inability to filter out false CME sites . Here , we employed genome editing and machine learning to identify and analyze authentic CME sites . We examined CME dynamics in cells that express fluorescent fusions of two defining CME proteins , AP2 and clathrin . Support vector machine classifiers were built to identify and analyze authentic CME sites . From inception until disappearance , authentic CME sites contain both AP2 and clathrin , have the same degree of limited mobility , continue to accumulate AP2 and clathrin over lifetimes > approximately 20 s , and almost always form vesicles as assessed by dynamin2 recruitment . Sites that contain only clathrin or AP2 show distinct dynamics , suggesting they are not part of the CME pathway . 1