Petersen and Penner EPJDataScience 2014 , 3 : 24 http : / / www . epjdatascience . com / content / 3 / 1 / 24 R E G U L A R A R T I C L E Open Access Inequality and cumulative advantage in science careers : a case study of high - impact journals Alexander M . Petersen 1 * and Orion Penner 2 * Correspondence : petersen . xander @ gmail . com 1 Laboratory for the Analysis of Complex Economic Systems , IMT Lucca Institute for Advanced Studies , Piazza San Francesco 19 , Lucca , IT - 55100 , Italy Full list of author information is available at the end of the article Abstract Analyzing a large data set of publications drawn from the most competitive journals in the natural and social sciences we show that research careers exhibit the broad distributions of individual achievement characteristic of systems in which cumulative advantage plays a key role . While most researchers are personally aware of the competition implicit in the publication process , little is known about the levels of inequality at the level of individual researchers . Here we analyzed both productivity and impact measures for a large set of researchers publishing in high - impact journals , accounting for censoring biases in the publication data by using distinct researcher cohorts deﬁned over non - overlapping time periods . For each researcher cohort we calculated Gini inequality coeﬃcients , with average Gini values around 0 . 48 for total publications and 0 . 73 for total citations . For perspective , these observed values are well in excess of the inequality levels observed for personal income in developing countries . Investigating possible sources of this inequality , we identify two potential mechanisms that act at the level of the individual that may play deﬁning roles in the emergence of the broad productivity and impact distributions found in science . First , we show that the average time interval between a researcher’s successive publications in top journals decreases with each subsequent publication . Second , after controlling for the time dependent features of citation distributions , we compare the citation impact of subsequent publications within a researcher’s publication record . We ﬁnd that as researchers continue to publish in top journals , there is more likely to be a decreasing trend in the relative citation impact with each subsequent publication . This pattern highlights the diﬃculty of repeatedly producing research ﬁndings in the highest citation - impact echelon , as well as the role played by ﬁnite career and knowledge life - cycles , and the intriguing possibility that conﬁrmation bias plays a role in the evaluation of scientiﬁc careers . Keywords : science of science ; computational sociology ; Matthew eﬀect ; career growth ; citation analysis ; reputation ; success premium 1 Introduction The business of science is constantly evolving , on multiple levels and time scales , and this evolution has a profound impact on the institutions and individuals engaged in the pro - duction of scientiﬁc research . Competition plays a central role in pushing science forward , from the winner - takes - all race for the priority of discovery , to the awarding of research funds , and the challenge in obtaining a tenure - track faculty position [  –  ] . However , high © 2014PetersenandPenner ; licenseeSpringer . ThisisanOpenAccessarticledistributedunderthetermsoftheCreativeCommons Attribution License ( http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by / 4 . 0 ) , which permits unrestricted use , distribution , and reproduction in any medium , provided the original work is properly credited . Petersen and Penner EPJDataScience 2014 , 3 : 24 Page 2 of 25 http : / / www . epjdatascience . com / content / 3 / 1 / 24 levels of competition and inequality can be detrimental to the overall functioning of the science system [  –  ] , for example by aﬀecting scientists’ decision processes and senti - ments of ethical responsibility [  ,  –  ] , and by altering the entry rate , the exit rate , and the overall appeal of careers in science [  ,  –  ] . Ideally , academia should provide a science career path that is sustainable yet competitive and eﬃcient [  ,  –  ] . However , the improvement of the current career system in science requires a better understanding of how various complex social ingredients - reputation , cooperation , competition , risk - taking , and creativity - ﬁt together . To begin with , two hall - marks of complex systems stand out as fundamental to improving our understanding of the complex science system : ( i ) correlated behavior between individuals , due to the competition for ﬁnite resources , the increasing role of collaborative teams in science [  ,  ] , and ideation process arising from the combination of novel versus grounded ideas [  ] , ( ii ) systemic memory , whereby cumulative advantage and reputation are known to play a strong role when integrated across the career [  ,  –  ] . Here we investigate the high levels of inequality across researcher careers , and then quantify the role of cumulative advantage by analyzing longitudinal patterns of productiv - ity and impact . Our focal unit throughout the analysis is the scientiﬁc career , even though we use publication and citation counts as the central quantitative measure . Our data com - prises  ,  publications drawn from  individual high - impact journals indexed by Thompson Reuters Web of Knowledge ( TRWOK ) . From these data we extracted the pub - lication proﬁle of  ,  individual scientists , where each trajectory is deﬁned within a set of journals . By analyzing researcher proﬁles within prestigious journals , we gather insights into the ascent of top scientists and the operational value of these highly - selective ‘competitive arenas’ . We focus most of the analysis on a case study of two journal sets in parallel , one representing the natural sciences and the other the economic sciences , each com - prised of the highest impact journals in each domain . For the natural sciences we aggre - gated Nature , the Proceedings of the National Academy of Science ( PNAS ) , and Science . For the economic sciences we aggregated  highly cited journals ( e . g . American Eco - nomic Review , Quarterly Journal of Economics , etc . ) , selected based on a page - ranking algorithm applied to journal citation data performed by SCImago Journal & Country Rank ( http : / / www . scimagojr . com / index . php ) . Table  lists the journals comprising each journal set j . In what follows , we explore at length and depth the statistical patterns that reﬂect the complex social processes underlying cumulative advantage in science . Our data are lim - Table 1 Summary of journal set datasets Journal set j Years Articles Authors , R j Cell 1974 - 2012 12 , 349 20 , 521 ( 1 , 006 ) Economics ( top 14 journals ) 1899 - 2012 44 , 571 11 , 882 ( 1 , 791 ) Management Sci . ( top 3 journals ) 1954 - 2012 18 , 836 6 , 801 ( 479 ) Nat . / PNAS / Sci . 1958 - 2012 219 , 656 123 , 165 ( 10 , 317 ) New England J . Med . ( NEJM ) 1958 - 2012 18 , 347 34 , 828 ( 916 ) Phys . Rev . Lett . ( PRL ) 1958 - 2012 98 , 739 61 , 429 ( 13 , 085 ) Rj isthenumberof‘sufﬁciently rare’surnames ( seetheData & Methodssection ) wewereabletoidentifyineachjournalset j overthedenotedperiod . The Rj value inparentheses denotesthenumberofresearcherproﬁleswith Li ≥ 5 , Np ≥ 5 , and y j i , 0 ≥ 1960 ( Econ . ) and y j i , 0 ≥ 1970 ( other ) . Petersen and Penner EPJDataScience 2014 , 3 : 24 Page 3 of 25 http : / / www . epjdatascience . com / content / 3 / 1 / 24 ited in the sense that we are not able to pinpoint the speciﬁc covariates associated with cumulative advantage at the individual level ( e . g . the emergence of individual reputation [  ,  ] , access to ﬁnancial and human capital resources [  ] , reﬁnement of talent and eﬃciency , collaboration spillovers [  ,  ,  ] , etc . ) . For an in - depth study using a control versus treated regression analysis approach , which astutely pinpoints speciﬁc covariates underlying the Matthew eﬀect in science , see [  ] . Here we take an alternative data - science approach , using longitudinal trends at the individual career level to provide novel insight into the emergence of cumulative advantage in the context of large number of scientists competing for limited publication space in prestigious journals . To this end , we begin in Section  .  with a visualization of the historical publication patterns of highly - cited scientists in the natural and economic sciences . Following that , we present our analysis of the aggregate citation distribution of individual researchers and observe remarkable statistical regularities in the broad distribution of total citations within each publication ‘arena’ . We then compare these results with the distribution of longevity and productivity , ﬁnding that the skewed productivity distributions persist even among the scientists with the greatest longevity in each journal set . We also calculate the Gini inequality indices for both publications and cumulative citations . These initial descriptive analyses beg the question : How might these skewed distributions , representing relatively high levels of inequality in science , emerge at the micro level of individual careers ? To address this basic question , we used the longitudinal data for individual researchers in two complementary analyses to provide evidence for the manifestation of cumulative advantage . First , in Section  .  we analyze the waiting times between successive publica - tions in these highly competitive journals . By analyzing the research proﬁles of proliﬁc scientists within elite journals , our quantitative method shows how cumulative advantage manifests as an increasing publication rate . In Section  .  we present our second main result , showing that the relative citation impact of these researchers tends , on average , to decrease with each subsequent publication . 2 Results 2 . 1 General evidence of cumulative advantage in scientiﬁc careers Given the complex institutional , economic , and behavioral factors at play in the academic career system it is no surprise that careers in science demonstrate two of the hallmark features of complex systems : strong correlations and long - term memory . For evidence of strong correlations one needs not look further than the collaboration and citation net - works , which together serve as a backbone for the ﬂow of reputation [  ,  ] . Long - term systemic memory plays a role in the emergence of researcher reputation , and likely plays a strong role in social stratiﬁcation [  –  ] . Consequently , non - linear feedback can am - plify small , early career , diﬀerences into large diﬀerences in successful outcomes over the course of scientiﬁc careers , a divergence which follows from integrating the ‘Matthew ef - fect’ across time [  ,  ,  ] . In this section we provide a descriptive analysis of research careers deﬁned within two distinct sets of high - impact journals . The ﬁrst set of economic researcher proﬁles are drawn from  highly - cited journals in political , ﬁnancial , theoretical , and empirical eco - nomics . The second set of natural science researchers are drawn from the multidisci - plinary journals Nature , PNAS , and Science . While we also analyzed other high - impact journal sets in the management science , cell biology , medicine , and physics domains , in Petersen and Penner EPJDataScience 2014 , 3 : 24 Page 4 of 25 http : / / www . epjdatascience . com / content / 3 / 1 / 24 the interest of doing a side - by - side comparison , we focus mainly on the economics and multidisciplinary natural science journals sets . Within each journal set dataset we per - formed a name disambiguation estimation by analyzing only the research proﬁles of the suﬃciently ‘rare’ surname + given - name combinations that we aggregated from the au - thor lists . This disambiguation strategy was recently benchmarked on datasets of similar size to ours , demonstrating a remarkably high precision given its basic approach [  ] . We defer our in - depth description of our disambiguation approach to the Appendix . We start with two motivational questions to help guide our intuition on the path re - searchers take to success : Are the citation trajectories of top - cited scientists similar ? Are the growth patterns smooth or marked by singular events ? To answer these questions we ﬁrst calculate the cumulative citation impact achieved by a given researcher , i , via his or her publications in a given journal set , j . It is important to note that citation counts are time and discipline dependent , and so we standardized our citation measures by normalizing each publication’s net citation count by the average total citation count of all publications published in the same year y in j . This method eﬀectively suppresses the time and disci - pline dependence [  ,  ] . Hence , the normalized citations of a paper , p , published in a journal belonging to the journal set j in year y is given by ˜ c ji , p ( y ) = c ji , p , Y ( y ) / (cid:2) c jY ( y ) (cid:3) , (  ) where c ji , p , Y ( y ) is the total number of citations in census year Y to publication p published in j in year y , and (cid:3) c jY ( y ) (cid:4) is the average citations calculated over all publications in j from the same year . Y is the year when the citation data was collected from TRWOK ( corresponding to  for Nat . / PNAS / Sci . and  for the economics journals , see the Appendix for further explanation ) . It is worth mentioning that , despite the fact that Nature , PNAS , and Science are multidisciplinary journals , for the sake of our analysis , controlling for the base citation rate is the most important reason for the normalization in Eq . (  ) . Hence , in this regard , PNAS , Science and Nature are comparable since they each have roughly the same order of magnitude in their base citations rates ( i . e . the total number of times their articles are cited per year ) . Using the normalized citation count ˜ c , we deﬁne a scientist’s net citation count ˜ C j i ( y ) as the sum , ˜ C ji ( y ) = N jp ( y ) (cid:4) p =  ˜ c ji , p ( y ) . (  ) Here N jp ( y ) represents the scientist’s total publications up to year y . The measure is the scientist’s cumulative citations measured in units of the mean citation baseline (cid:3) c jY ( y ) (cid:4) . For a given researcher , i , the time variable y runs from the ﬁrst year y j i ,  he / she published in j to the arbitrary census year Y . Due to the ﬁnite citation life cycle of most publications [  ] , as long as the diﬀerence between Y and y is suﬃciently long , then the publication p should have a relative stable ranking amongst the publications from its journal - year co - hort . In our citation analyses we require the diﬀerence Y – y to be at least  years . As such , ˜ C j i ( y ) is a robust measure of cumulative citation impact . Additional methods have Petersen and Penner EPJDataScience 2014 , 3 : 24 Page 5 of 25 http : / / www . epjdatascience . com / content / 3 / 1 / 24 Figure 1 Top - cited scientists within the economists and natural sciences journal sets . Top - 20 researchers , ranked by ˜ C , who had their ﬁrst publication in the time - period cohort 1970 - 1980 . A trajectory terminates in the last observed year in which there was a publication within the journal set , and so a single dot represents a researcher proﬁle with only a single publication . The citation census year Y was 2012 ( economics ) and 2009 ( Nat . / PNAS / Sci . ) . Hence using a 7 year window to allow the citations to properly accrue , only publications published prior to 2005 for economics and 2002 for Nat . / PNAS / Sci . are shown . also been developed to account for variable team size by further normalizing by coau - thor number , thus providing a way to aggregate scientists from varying time , discipline , and even sub - disciplines [  ,  ] . In a very general sense , this detrending approach can be easily applied to other competitive arenas , such as professional sports , where success rates can be explicitly era dependent [  ] . Figure  shows ˜ C ji ( y ) trajectories for top - ranked researchers entering the journal sets over the decade  -  ( see Figures S and S in Additional ﬁle  for researcher rank - ings using more recent time windows ) . In the case of economics there appears to be a greater level of separation ( divergence ) among the top ranked researches as qualitatively indicated by the gap between the highest - cited scientists ( red curves ) and the others . Each citation trajectory terminates at the year of the ﬁnal publication within the journal set . In this way , a single dot corresponds to a scientist with a single publication . Figure  begins to Petersen and Penner EPJDataScience 2014 , 3 : 24 Page 6 of 25 http : / / www . epjdatascience . com / content / 3 / 1 / 24 Figure 2 Skewed citation impact distributions . The right - skewed P ( ˜ C ) , which range across more than 4 orders of magnitude , illustrate the wide range of outcomes in scientiﬁc winner - takes - all prestige competitions [ 1 , 41 ] . To account for censoring bias we show the P ( ˜ C ) for the economics arena ( A ) and for the Nat . / PNAS / Sci . arena ( B ) by considering non - overlapping scientist cohorts according to when each scientist entered a given arena by conditioning on his / her ﬁrst publication being in the indicated time window . In ( C ) we show the P ( ˜ C ) conditional on the career length within the arena . The dashed grey best - ﬁt curves are calculated using the log - normal distribution maximum likelihood estimator . provide an answer to our preliminary questions , showing that the group of highest - cited scientists are a mixture of individuals whose accomplishments range from a single , mon - umental , contribution to persistent stream of high - impact publications , and everything between . However , as we will see below , despite this variability in the paths of ascent , there are remarkable statistical regularities in the distribution of ˜ C ji across all researchers in each j . To better understand the relative frequency of ‘superstars’ we calculated the distribution of normalized career citation counts P ( ˜ C ) using logarithmically sized bins to account for the broad distribution of ˜ C ji values . Because ˜ C ji controls for the average citation count of papers published within a speciﬁc year cohort , it is particularly well - suited for comparing achievements which occurred across a broad time range . Figures  ( A , B ) each show three P ( ˜ C ) distributions , one for each of the cohorts indicated in the legend . Figure  ( C ) shows conditional distributions P ( ˜ C | L ) , where L is the length of time between the ﬁrst and last publication of author i in the journal set j , L j i ≡ y j i , f – y j i ,  +  . (  ) Interestingly , in each panel the aggregate success distribution is well - described by a log - normal distribution , P ( ˜ C ) ∝ ˜ C –  exp (cid:5) – ( ln ˜ C – μ )  /  σ  LN (cid:6) , (  ) Petersen and Penner EPJDataScience 2014 , 3 : 24 Page 7 of 25 http : / / www . epjdatascience . com / content / 3 / 1 / 24 Table 2 Summary of the Gini index ( G ) and top - 1 % share ( f 1 % ) Journal set j Cohort entry years G ( ˜ C ) f 1 % ( ˜ C ) G ( N p ) f 1 % ( N p ) Economics 1970 - 1995 0 . 80 0 . 23 0 . 54 0 . 09 1970 - 1980 0 . 83 0 . 26 0 . 56 0 . 10 1980 - 1990 0 . 79 0 . 21 0 . 55 0 . 09 1990 - 1995 0 . 74 0 . 19 0 . 47 0 . 07 Nat . / PNAS / Sci . 1970 - 1995 0 . 69 0 . 18 0 . 46 0 . 10 1970 - 1980 0 . 74 0 . 22 0 . 53 0 . 12 1980 - 1990 0 . 67 0 . 15 0 . 45 0 . 08 1990 - 1995 0 . 63 0 . 12 0 . 35 0 . 06 Inequalitymeasures arecalculatedfromthedistributionofcitationimpact , P ( ˜ C ) , andfromthedistributionofproductivity , P ( Np ) , forthecohortsofscientists whoseﬁrstpublicationoccurredintheindicatedtimeintervals . with varying location parameter μ and shape parameter σ , estimated using the log - normal distribution maximum likelihood estimator method . For small ˜ C the log - normal ﬁt has larger deviations from the empirical data due to ﬂuctuations in the lower bound of ˜ C arising from variability in the value of (cid:3) c jY ( y ) (cid:4) . Moreover , the poor ﬁt for small ˜ C further indicates that the aggregate empirical distributions are likely mixtures of underlying log - normal distributions with slightly varying shape and location parameters . For example , in the  -  Economics cohort in Figure  ( A ) we calculate μ =  .  and σ LN =  .  and for the  -  Nat . / PNAS / Sci . cohort in Figure  ( B ) we calcu - late μ =  .  and σ LN =  .  . For contrast , the subset of Nat . / PNAS / Sci . scientists in Fig - ure  ( C ) with L ≥  ( with (cid:3) L (cid:4) =  , (cid:3) N p (cid:4) =  .  and (cid:3) ˜ C (cid:4) =  .  ) have parameters μ =  .  and σ LN =  .  . These values can be used to model the growth of ˜ C using Gibrat’s stochastic ( proportional ) growth model , (cid:3) ˜ C t = ˜ C t –  (  + η ) , where η is white noise with mean and standard deviation depending on the log - normal counterparts , μ and σ LN . The limiting distribution of this multiplicative process is the log normal distribution ( see [  ] for re - cent empirical and theoretical results on ﬁrm growth that provides an appropriate starting point for the modeling of researchers’ publication portfolios as companies in the small size limit ) . To provide additional intuition regarding the level of ‘inequality’ within these citation distributions , we calculated the Gini index G as well as the citation share f  % of the top  % of researchers in each P ( ˜ C ) . For example , for the  -  cohort we observe G =  .  ( economics ) and G =  .  ( Nat . / PNAS / Sci . ) and found that the top  % of researchers ( comprised of  and  researchers , respectively ) held a signiﬁcantly disproportionate share of  % and  % of the total ˜ C aggregated across all researchers in each distribution . Table  shows the G ( ˜ C ) and f  % ( ˜ C ) for each cohort group , which indicate for both journal sets a decreasing trend in the citation inequality over time . We note that our calculations do not control for the increasing prevalence of large collaborations in science [  ] . There - fore , because there are correlations between the number of coauthors and the average citations a publication receives [  ] , and because we did not control for multiple counting of single publications in the calculation of the total ˜ C , it is diﬃcult to assess whether the diﬀerence between the inequality values calculated for economics ( where coauthorship eﬀect is weak because the number of coauthors is typically small ) and for natural sciences is attributable to this feature of the data . For comparison , a recent analysis of US research funding at the institutional level pro - vides a diﬀerent picture , indicating a slow but steady increase in the Gini index across U . S . universities over the last  years , with current estimates of the Gini inequality index for Petersen and Penner EPJDataScience 2014 , 3 : 24 Page 8 of 25 http : / / www . epjdatascience . com / content / 3 / 1 / 24 Figure 3 Competitive arenas in science . The right - skewed distributions of scientist longevity L and productivity N p are the starting point for understanding the skewed success distributions in science . Panels A ( Economics ) and B ( Nat . / PNAS / Sci . ) address censoring bias in the longevity distributions by considering separately the cohorts of scientists who entered the Nat . / PNAS / Sci . arena in the indicated time window . Panel C ( Nat . / PNAS / Sci . ) shows the unconditional aggregate longevity distribution . Panels D / E / F show P ( ≥ N p ) , the complementary cumulative distribution function ( CCDF ) of total publications N p . Panels D / E are analogs of panels A / B , showing the ﬁxed cohorts of researchers who entered the respective journal arena with their ﬁrst publication in the indicated time window . Panel F shows the P ( ≥ N p | L ) distributions conditioned on L , which indicate that even within the set of ‘iron horse’ researchers with longevity L i ≥ 11 the distribution is still extremely broad . To guide the eye and emphasize the curvature in P ( ≥ N p ) , which is not consistent with a power - law distribution , we plotted a curve proportional to N – 2 p . university expenditure around G ≈  .  [  ] . This increasing trend has also been noted in data measuring the share of the top  % individuals in terms of U . S . income , which has increased from roughly  % to  % over the last half century ; nevertheless , the  U . S . income Gini coeﬃcient reported was G =  .  [  ] , signiﬁcantly less than what we observed for these citation distributions . Success is typically assumed to be strongly correlated with career longevity , but to what degree does this assumption hold ? In Figure  , we conditioned the distributions on L i and ﬁnd that P ( ˜ C | L ) is still well - described by a log - normal distribution , even after controlling for censoring and survivor bias . Hence , the correlation is somewhat weak , because even among researchers publishing in Nat . / PNAS / Sci . for L ≥  years , the citation distribu - tions still span a huge range , from ˜ C ∼  –  to ˜ C ∼   , with the maximum value being roughly  times larger than the characteristic mean value (cid:3) ˜ C (cid:4) ∼   . Figures  ( A , B ) show the longevity distributions P ( L ) conditioned on the ﬁrst publica - tion being within a speciﬁed time window . Remarkably , roughly half the scientists enter Petersen and Penner EPJDataScience 2014 , 3 : 24 Page 9 of 25 http : / / www . epjdatascience . com / content / 3 / 1 / 24 and exit the arena in a single year ( L ji =  ) , likely with a single publication . At the other end of the distribution , as indicated by the systemic shift in the tail across cohorts , a rel - atively small set of proliﬁc scientists steadily publish within the arena throughout their scientiﬁc careers . The tail of the distribution , beginning around the peak in the far right of the distribution , consists of scientists sustained activity in j for longer than a decade , representing roughly  -  % of the researchers analyzed . Aggregating across cohorts , Fig - ure  ( C ) shows that roughly  % of authors enter this arena for the minimum time span of  year , with only  % of the entrants publishing over a period L i ≥  years . While Figures  ( A - C ) illustrate how long scientists stay active these high - impact arenas , Figures  ( D - F ) show the productivity distributions P ( ≥ N p ) for the same datasets shown in ( A - C ) . The top  % of the distribution corresponds to individuals publishing roughly ﬁve publications or more , signifying a rather broad productivity distribution even amongst the researchers with L ≥  . Indeed , comparing P ( ≥ N p | L ) conditioned on career length in Figure  ( F ) , there is a rather large range in N p , e . g . from  to more than  publications for the subset with L ≥  . We also note that none of the productivity distributions are consistent with Lotka’s productivity law , P ( ≥ N p ) ∼ N – λ p , for any value λ . In order to compare the inequality levels for citation impact to productivity , we also calculated G and f  % for each productivity distribution P ( ˜ N p ) . For example , for the  -  cohort we calculated G =  .  ( economics ) and G =  .  ( Nat . / PNAS / Sci . ) , ﬁnding that the top  % of researchers ( comprised of  and  researchers , respectively ) had a share of  % and  % of the total publications . Table  shows the G ( N p ) and f  % ( N p ) for each cohort group , which like the citation inequality counterparts G ( ˜ C ) and f  % ( ˜ C ) , suggests that productivity inequality is also becoming more equitable over time . However , it is worth noting that citation inequality is substantially larger than publication inequality for each cohort group , arising from the fact that all publications are measured equally and their value does not increase over time , in contrast to citations which accrue over time . We conclude this section by noting the similarity and diﬀerences between the analysis performed in ref . [  ] . First , the career citation share and paper share measures deﬁned in [  ] normalizes by the number of coauthors ( dividing the credit among them equally ) . Also , a statistical method to eliminate ‘unﬁnished’ careers was implemented in [  ] but was not used here . Hence , the results in this section , which represent ﬁnished and unﬁn - ished careers pooled together , neglect the censoring bias arising from including unﬁnished careers . 2 . 2 Decreasing waiting times as quantitative evidence of cumulative advantage In the previous section we showed that the distributions of impact , productivity , and longevity are consistent with a highly competitive ‘winner takes all’ system . In this sec - tion we shift to the longitudinal perspective of researcher trajectories . The schematic in Figure  ( A ) emphasizes the sequence of accomplishments as they might occur across a scientist’s complex backdrop of career phases ( grad student / postdoctoral fellow → as - sistant professor → tenured faculty ) . These career phases are characterized by varying roles in the research process , shifts in research interests , and the accumulation of various institutional responsibilities . Our approach is to measure the longitudinal patterns in the sequence of inter - publication waiting times of individual researchers . It is important to note that we are not analyzing the complete publication proﬁle of each researcher , but rather , just the set Petersen and Penner EPJDataScience 2014 , 3 : 24 Page 10 of 25 http : / / www . epjdatascience . com / content / 3 / 1 / 24 Figure 4 Decreasing inter - publication waiting time τ ( n ) is quantitative evidence for cumulative advantage in science . ( A ) Schematic of a science career , where major accomplishments sustain career growth . Speciﬁcally , publications in high - impact journals serve as a record of scientists capitalizing on opportunities for success , and the duration τ ji ( n ) between a scientist’s success n and success n + 1 provide a quantitative method for analyzing cumulative advantage . We search for quantitative evidence of self - reinforcing social mechanisms by analyzing productivity patterns in speciﬁc journal sets that are highly competitive and widely targeted . ( B ) The average waiting time (cid:3) τ j ( n ) (cid:4) between publication n and publication n + 1 shows a signiﬁcant decreasing trend as an author continues to publish in a given journal set . A decreasing τ j ( n ) between publications suggests that an advanced publication career ( larger n ) facilitates future publications by leveraging reputation , expertise , seniority , and other cumulative resources . The values of (cid:3) τ j ( 1 ) (cid:4) are 2 . 9 yrs . ( Cell ) , 2 . 4 yrs . ( Econ . ) , 2 . 8 yrs . ( Mgmt . Sci . ) , 3 . 6 yrs . ( Nat . / PNAS / Sci . ) , 4 . 3 yrs . ( NEJM ) and 3 . 1 yrs . ( PRL ) . The journal PRL exhibits a more rapid decline in τ ( n ) because of possible rapidity in successive publications ( often by large high - energy experiment collaborations that publish many publications together in a single issue ) . Only research proﬁles with L ≥ 5 years and N p ≥ 5 are included in the calculation of these inter - event waiting - time curves . In order to reduce censoring bias arising form careers that started before the beginning of each data sample , we only included trajectories with the ﬁrst publication year y ji , 0 ≥ 1970 for the natural and management sciences and y ji , 0 ≥ 1960 for the economic sciences . ( C , D ) Complementary cumulative probability distribution , P ( ≥ τ ( n ) ) , for publications n = 1 , . . . , 15 in ( C ) the Economics and ( D ) Nat . / PNAS / Sci . journal sets . The distributions are right - skewed , indicating the possibility of a relatively long waiting time τ ( n ) for all n . However , by n = 10 the observed likelihood of waiting 3 or more years , P ( ≥ 3 | n = 10 ) , falls to roughly 0 . 2 for both Econ . and Nat . / PNAS / Sci . Petersen and Penner EPJDataScience 2014 , 3 : 24 Page 11 of 25 http : / / www . epjdatascience . com / content / 3 / 1 / 24 of publications within each journal set j . Given the signiﬁcant incentives for publishing in top journals , both in terms of prestige [  ,  ] and ﬁnancial beneﬁts [  ] , we assume that ‘if a researcher could publish in one of these journals , he / she would . ’ In this regard , the information contained in the waiting times between successive publications can provide quantitative insight into the workings of cumulative advantage . For each i in j we deﬁne a sequence of waiting times , τ ji ( n ) , for which the n th entry is the number of years between his / her publication n and publication n +  in a given journal set j . For example , the average time (cid:3) τ j (  ) (cid:4) between an author’s ﬁrst and second publication in both NEJM and Nat . / PNAS / Sci . is roughly four years , whereas in the biology journal Cell and the physics journal PRL , the initial mean waiting time is closer to three years . Figure  ( B ) shows that the average (cid:3) τ j ( n ) (cid:4) decreases signiﬁcantly with increasing n for each journal arena analyzed . Indeed , by the around the th publication the waiting time τ j (  ) has decreased to roughly  /  of the initial waiting time τ j (  ) . Moreover the rate of publications becomes roughly one per year after the th publication in the economics journal set , and one per year after the th publication in the non - physics journal set , and on average one per year after the th publication in PRL . In order to provide new insights beyond what was already shown in [  ] , we have ex - tended the waiting - time analysis to the research domains of economics and management science , and have also analyzed the distribution of waiting times P ( ≥ τ j ( n ) ) which are shown in Figures  ( C , D ) for n =  , . . . ,  . Notably , the systematic shift towards smaller τ j ( n ) is not only reﬂected by the median and the mean τ j ( n ) value , but is also visible across the entire distribution . Indeed , by n =  the observed likelihood P ( ≥  | n =  ) of waiting  or more years until the next publication (  years being a characteristic time scale asso - ciated with both a scientiﬁc project and a scientiﬁc collaboration ) , falls to roughly  .  for both Econ . and Nat . / PNAS / Sci . A factor likely contributing to this systemic trend is the steady exponential growth in the total number of publications per year ( recently measured for physics and cell biology to be around  % growth per year [  ] ) , as well as a slow but substantial  % to  % exponential growth in coauthorship size over time depending on the discipline [  ] , both of which could account for an overall decrease in publication waiting times . The signiﬁcant smaller values for the journal PRL largely reﬂects the large variations in team size as well as the type of research design - experimental and theoretical - occur - ring in physics . To elaborate , we ponder three basic pathways to publishing more than one publication in this high - impact journal per year . The ﬁrst pathway involves a theoretical physicist with a very inspiring year - e . g . Albert Einstein’s  ‘Annus Mirabilis’ - who is able to rapidly publish more than one ( relatively short , ≤  pages ) letters in succession . This pathway , however , is likely unsustainable over the long run . The second pathway in - volves an experimental physicist working at a large particle collider or national laboratory , working in large teams that publish results with  or more coauthors . In this situation , a scientist in a top management position or involved with a critical experimental process may even be able to consistently publish multiple PRL articles per year ; For a peculiar example consider L . Nodulman who has  PRL publications , but with on average  coauthors per publication ! The third pathway , present to all scientists independent of dis - cipline , reﬂects a mixture of the ﬁrst two pathways , whereby a scientist is embedded in an eﬃcient medium - sized team environment and capitalizes on collaboration spillovers , thereby consistently producing highly - cited publications . We should also mention that Petersen and Penner EPJDataScience 2014 , 3 : 24 Page 12 of 25 http : / / www . epjdatascience . com / content / 3 / 1 / 24 PNAS oﬀers a streamlined publication track ( ‘contributed paper’ ) for select US National Academy of Sciences members , an additional idiosyncratic and rare pathway , which nev - ertheless contributes to the surprisingly large number of scientists that have numerous publications in the Nat . / PNAS / Sci . journal set . Overall , Figure  provides evidence that cumulative advantage plays a strong role when it comes to publishing in elite journals . In fact , the mean waiting time , which can be em - pirically measured using publication data , also has a simple analytic relation to a position - dependent progress rate g ( n ) =  / (cid:3) τ ( n ) (cid:4) within a Poisson process framework , where g ( n ) is the probability of moving from position n to n +  in a unit time interval . This theoretical model has been tested on both scientiﬁc and sports career data , with the interesting fea - ture that small modiﬁcations to the progress rate g ( n ) for small n ( early career transition rates ) can lead to either a bimodal or a truncated power - law career longevity distributions [  ] , oﬀering insight into the potential impact of career sustainability policies aimed at early - career researchers . 2 . 3 A decreasing longitudinal citation trend In this section we investigate the longitudinal citation impact trends for the publications in each researcher proﬁle . This analysis is related to the delicate topic of ‘career predictabil - ity’ [  –  ] , but is distinct in the sense that we focus exclusively on the citation impact within the most prestigious journals and relative to his / her own citation baseline . Hence , as a signiﬁcant number of publications within each scientist’s rank - citation proﬁle [  ,  ] are missing from our analysis , it is important to note that we do not contend that the ci - tation trends within the high - impact journal set are representative of the trend within the scientist’s entire publication portfolio . We focus on the publication trajectory of individuals within select high - impact jour - nals , acknowledging that it is likely to reﬂect factors beyond just the inherent citation impact of his / her average research output . One possibility is that there is no signiﬁcant change in the citation impact of a researcher’s publications over time . A second possi - bility is that there is an increase in the citation impact with each subsequent publication . This increasing trend is consistent with a researcher being able to leverage prior success to improve their research resources [  ] and to leverage reputation within the community to increase their base citation rate [  ] . A third scenario is a decrease in the citation impact over time . This negative trend is consistent with an opportunity premium that is provided to accomplished scientists via cumulative advantage , such that new opportunities arrive at eﬀectively a ‘lower cost’ than the base ‘entry cost’ . In order to investigate the longitudinal variation in the citation impact , we map the ci - tation count c ji , p , y ( n ) of the n th publication p of researcher i to a z - score , z i ( n ) ≡ ln c ji , p , y ( n ) – (cid:3) ln c jy (cid:4) σ [ ln c jy ] , (  ) which allows for a comparison of citation counts across time . The z - score of the log - citation count in Eq . (  ) is measured relative to the mean ( (cid:3)···(cid:4) ) and standard deviation ( σ [ ··· ] ) of the logarithm of the citations for a given journal set , j , in a given year , y . This follows naturally since the logarithm of a log - normally distributed variable is a normally distributed variable ( z ∼ N (  ,  ) ) , making the z - score an appropriate statistical measure . Petersen and Penner EPJDataScience 2014 , 3 : 24 Page 13 of 25 http : / / www . epjdatascience . com / content / 3 / 1 / 24 Figure 5 Empirical distribution of citation impact values conditioned on publication number n . We aggregate the normalized citation z values of researcher proﬁles with ﬁrst publication year y ji , 0 ≥ 1970 for Nat . / PNAS / Sci . and y ji , 0 ≥ 1960 for the economic sciences , and with L i ≥ 5 and 5 ≤ N p ≤ 20 . Each panel shows the probability distribution P ( z ( n ) ) conditioned on publication number n = 1 , . . . , 10 . The z - scores represented by each P ( z ( n ) ) represent a subset of the aggregate set of z values , independent of L i and N p . Because the unconditional distribution of z values is approximately normal with mean 0 and with units of the standard deviation ( σ z = 1 ) , we also plot a normal distribution Normal ( 0 , 1 ) in each panel for reference ( red curve ) . We use the convention of replacing c p by  for publications with zero citations ; similarly , the mean (cid:3) ln c jy (cid:4) and standard deviation σ [ ln c jy ] within each journal set are also calculated excluding publications with no citations . This method of dealing with the logarithm of zero has a negligible overall eﬀect , since only  .  % of publications over the time period  -  had  citations in the census year  for the Nat . / PNAS / Sci . journal set , and publications in the economics dataset had only twice this frequency . Figure  shows the distributions of z i ( n ) conditioned on the publication number n =  , . . . ,  and restricting to researchers with L i ≥  and  ≤ N p ≤  . For example , P ( z (  ) ) is the distribution of z - scores for the set of ﬁrst publications , P ( z (  ) ) is the distribution for the set of second publications , and so on . Each P ( z ( n ) ) is approximately normal , with a mean and standard deviation that deviates only slightly from the baseline Normal (  ,  ) distribution ( red curve ) shown for visual comparison . Next , in order to account for author - speciﬁc heterogeneity before we aggregate cita - tion trajectories across scientists , we centered the z - score around the mean value (cid:3) z i (cid:4) ≡ N –  p (cid:7) n =  z i ( n ) calculated for the N p publications of a given scientist i . As a result , we ob - tain the relative citation impact trajectory , ˜ z i ( n ) ≡ z i ( n ) – (cid:3) z i (cid:4) . (  ) Petersen and Penner EPJDataScience 2014 , 3 : 24 Page 14 of 25 http : / / www . epjdatascience . com / content / 3 / 1 / 24 Table 3 Summary statistics for two aggregate regression models Journal set N p A B S p - val . N ﬁt R 2 Economics 4 - 9 1 , 090 0 . 17 ( 3 ) – 0 . 046 ( 4 )  ×  –  9 0 . 93 Shuﬄed 4 - 9 21 , 800 – 0 . 003 ( 6 ) 0 . 0001 ( 1 ) 0 . 68 9 0 . 03 Economics 10 - 20 373 0 . 17 ( 2 ) – 0 . 021 ( 4 )  ×  –  10 0 . 87 Shuﬄed 10 - 20 7 , 460 0 . 01 ( 1 ) – 0 . 002 ( 2 ) 0 . 23 10 0 . 17 Mgmt . Sci . 5 - 10 262 0 . 22 ( 9 ) – 0 . 05 ( 1 )  ×  –  10 0 . 63 Shuﬄed 5 - 10 5 , 240 – 0 . 01 ( 3 ) 0 . 004 ( 4 ) 0 . 40 10 0 . 09 Mgmt . Sci . 11 - 20 62 0 . 5 ( 1 ) – 0 . 07 ( 2 )  ×  –  10 0 . 68 Shuﬄed 11 - 20 1 , 240 0 . 03 ( 2 ) 0 . 005 ( 4 ) 0 . 20 10 0 . 19 Nat . / PNAS / Sci . 5 - 10 3 , 953 0 . 15 ( 2 ) – 0 . 035 ( 4 )  ×  –  10 0 . 93 Shuﬄed 5 - 10 79 , 060 – 0 . 006 ( 8 ) 0 . 002 ( 1 ) 0 . 28 10 0 . 16 Nat . / PNAS / Sci . 11 - 20 847 0 . 23 ( 3 ) – 0 . 032 ( 4 )  –  10 0 . 88 Shuﬄed 11 - 20 16 , 940 0 . 02 ( 1 ) – 0 . 003 ( 1 ) 0 . 05 10 0 . 36 Journal set N p N d b s p - val . A R 2 Economics 4 - 9 6 , 183 0 . 19 ( 3 ) – 0 . 053 ( 7 )  1 , 090 0 . 012 Economics 10 - 20 3 , 730 0 . 17 ( 3 ) – 0 . 022 ( 6 )  ×  –  373 0 . 005 Mgmt . Sci . 5 - 10 1 , 710 0 . 26 ( 4 ) – 0 . 07 ( 1 )  262 0 . 020 Mgmt . Sci . 11 - 20 620 0 . 48 ( 9 ) – 0 . 07 ( 2 )  –  62 0 . 042 Nat . / PNAS / Sci . 5 - 10 26 , 010 0 . 19 ( 1 ) – 0 . 048 ( 3 )  3 , 953 0 . 013 Nat . / PNAS / Sci . 11 - 20 8 , 470 0 . 23 ( 2 ) – 0 . 032 ( 4 )  847 0 . 013 ( Top ) Theregressionmodel ( ii ) givenbyEq . ( 8 ) : A denotesthenumberofindividualcareersthatwereaggregatedforeach meanimpacttrajectory (cid:3)˜ z ( n ) (cid:4) . B and S areestimatedusing ordinaryleastsquares , alongwiththe F - test p - value , thenumber Nﬁt ofdatapoints , andthe R 2 correlationvalue . Thenumberinparentheses represents thestandarderrorinthelastdigit shown . The‘shufﬂed’ values correspondtotheparameterestimationsusingourcitationshufﬂingscheme ( conservingthe empiricalcitationdistribution ) thatalsoallowsforanincreaseinthesamplesizebyafactorof20 ) . Wealsoincludethe managementsciencecareersforcomparisonsincethedatasetcontainedasufﬁcientnumber ofresearcherproﬁlesto analyze . Bold - faced p - values indicatetheregressionswith p ≤ 0 . 01 . ( Bottom ) Theﬁxed - effectslinearregressionmodel ( iii ) ( implemented by thefunction‘xtreg , vce ( robust ) fe’inSTATA11 ) givenby Eq . ( 9 ) . Weusedthe‘vce ( robust ) ’Huber - White varianceestimatortoaccountforpossible heteroscedasticityinthemodelerrors . Nd denotesthenumberofobservations , b and s arethecoefﬁcientestimatesoftheﬁxed - effectsmodel ( valueinparenthesis istherobust standarderrorinthelast signiﬁcantdigit ) , and p - val . correspondstothemodelF - statistic F ( 1 , A – 1 ) . This normalization also helps in controlling for latent eﬀects arising from disciplinary variation within each j that can aﬀect the citation potential of a paper over time . Using these standardized ˜ z i ( n ) trajectories , we pooled the data across scientists , noting that ˜ z i ( n ) is still measured in normalized units of the standard deviation σ ln c . We also separated the researcher data into two sets of proﬁles , one with medium N p and the other with relatively large N p , requiring in both cases that L i ≥  so that increasing n is more likely to correlate with increasing time . In order to reduce censoring bias arising from careers that started before the beginning of each data sample , we only analyzed tra - jectories with the ﬁrst publication year y ji ,  ≥  for Nat . / PNAS / Sci . and y ji ,  ≥  for the economic sciences . For both disciplines and for each N p subset we observed on average a negative trend in ˜ z i ( n ) . We show this negative trend at two levels of aggregation outlined below , ﬁrst at the individual level in method ( i ) , and then at the systemic level in methods ( ii ) and ( iii ) . Table  shows the summary statistics and parameter estimates for models ( ii ) and ( iii ) . ( i ) In order to analyze trends at the researcher level , we ﬁrst analyzed each individual ˜ z i ( n ) separately by performing an ordinary least squares parameter estimation of the pa - rameters of the basic linear model ˜ z i ( n ) = b i + s i n + (cid:7) . (  ) Petersen and Penner EPJDataScience 2014 , 3 : 24 Page 15 of 25 http : / / www . epjdatascience . com / content / 3 / 1 / 24 Figure  shows the cumulative distribution P ( ≤ s i ) for four scientist subsets ( see Fig . S in Additional ﬁle  for the analogous plots for the management science researcher proﬁles ) . In each case , the average value (cid:3) s i (cid:4) , indicated by the vertical blue line , is negative at the indicated p - value shown within each sub - panel ( using the  - sided z - statistic with the null hypothesis that s =  ) . The P ( ≤  ) value , ranging between  % to  % across the four panels , indicates the excess proportion of the population with negative s i . The asymmetry towards statistically signiﬁcant negative s i values is even more pronounced . For example , consider the asymmetry in the large N p subsets : of the  economics proﬁles we analyzed , only  (  .  % ) had p - val . <  .  and s i >  whereas  (  % ) had p - val . <  .  and s i <  ; of the  Nat . / PNAS / Sci . proﬁles we analyzed , only  (  % ) had p - val . <  .  and s i >  whereas  (  % ) had p - val . <  .  and s i <  . ( ii ) In the ﬁrst aggregate method we calculated the mean citation impact z - score (cid:3)˜ z ( n ) (cid:4) across all researcher proﬁles within j for a given n , and then performed the ordinary least squares parameter estimation of the analogous aggregate model , (cid:2) ˜ z ( n ) (cid:3) = B + Sn + (cid:7) . (  ) We plot (cid:3)˜ z ( n ) (cid:4) ( solid black curve ) and the best - ﬁt regression ( dashed green line ) for each researcher subset in Figure  . To give an example , Figure  ( A ) , which refers to scientists in the Nat . / PNAS / Sci . subset with between  and  publications , shows that the mean impact trajectory decreases by S =  .  ±  .  - roughly  % of (cid:3)˜ z (  ) (cid:4) - with each sub - sequent publication . This means that after the th publication , the relative impact typically is ‘subpar’ with respect to a given scientist’s mean (cid:3) z i (cid:4) . Interestingly , for the cohort of sci - entists in Figure  ( B ) with between  and  publications , the impact trajectory starts at a higher value , and since the slope is approximately equal to the slope in panel ( A ) , the publications do not become subpar until after the th publication . We observe the analo - gous trends for the economics journal set . However , the S value for the relatively low - N p economics subset in panel ( C ) is signiﬁcantly more negative than the value estimated for the high - N p researcher set in panel ( D ) . ( iii ) The previous model doesn’t account for the fact that observations are not inde - pendent ( since ˜ z ( n ) values within each subset n also depend on i ) , and that the data are unbalanced ( since N p vary across researchers in each dataset ) . Hence , we apply a hierar - chical approach in this second aggregate method by running an unbalanced ﬁxed - eﬀects regression with standard errors clustered by author i , ˜ z i , p = b + sn i , p + (cid:7) i , p , (  ) implemented using the STATA regression ‘xtreg , vie ( robust ) fe’ . We used the ‘vce ( robust ) ’ option to implement the ‘Huber / White / sandwich’ estimate of the standard errors in order to account for possible heteroscedasticity in ˜ z i , p . This approach also ac - counts for time - invariant characteristics of the authors . The parameter estimates in Ta - ble  of this hierarchical regression model show that the estimated coeﬃcients B and b estimated in Eqs . (  ) and (  ) are consistent in value . The main diﬀerence is the explained variance provided by each method . Method ( ii ) indicates a large R  because it eliminates the variance in ˜ z by representing only the systemic average , whereas the low R  value in method ( iii ) is a reminder that there are important hidden covariates aﬀecting citation im - pact that are not captured by this simple model . Other covariates which have been shown Petersen and Penner EPJDataScience 2014 , 3 : 24 Page 16 of 25 http : / / www . epjdatascience . com / content / 3 / 1 / 24 Figure 6 Evidence consistent with conﬁrmation bias and a counter - effective role of cumulative advantage . We test whether the relative citation impact ˜ z i ( n ) decreases , increases , or is independent of n . While repeated publication in a highly competitive journals reﬂects the underlying quality of the researcher , it also indicates a strong role played by other factors such as author / institutional reputation and social ties with the journal editors and the referee base , and in the case of PNAS , membership in the US National Academy of Sciences . ( A ) Scientists with between 5 and 10 publications in the Nat . / PNAS / Sci . arena . ( B ) Scientists with between 11 and 20 publications in the Nat . / PNAS / Sci . arena . ( C ) Economists with between 4 and 9 publications in the top economics journal set arena . ( D ) Economists with between 10 and 20 publications in the top economics journal set arena . ( A - D ) For each cohort analyzed , the top panel shows a signiﬁcant negative trend in (cid:3)˜ z ( n ) (cid:4) ( black curve ) with each successive publication . Linear regression of each (cid:3)˜ z ( n ) (cid:4) is shown by the dashed green line , with the best - ﬁt slope and regression F - test p - value listed in each panel . In the lower half of each panel we show the empirical cumulative distribution P ( ≤ s i ) , and list the number of trajectories analyzed and the mean value (cid:3) s i (cid:4) ( indicated by the vertical solid blue line ) . For comparison , we also plot the P ( ≤ s i ) for the shuﬄed data ( dashed black curve ) , with the mean shuﬄed value ( vertical dashed gray line ) . We apply the Kolmogorov - Smirnov test between the empirical and shuﬄed distributions , and for each panel we list the p - values that conﬁrm that the underlying s i values belong to diﬀerent distributions . Only research proﬁles with L ≥ 5 years were analyzed . In order to ensure that the relative citation impact z p of a given publication had suﬃcient time to stabilize within the journal set dataset , only publications published prior to 2002 for Nat . / PNAS / Sci . ( since the publication citation counts used were current as of census year 2009 ) and 2005 for Economics ( since citation counts used were current as of census year 2012 ) were analyzed . In order to reduce censoring bias arising form careers that started before the beginning of each data sample , we only included trajectories with the ﬁrst publication year y ji , 0 ≥ 1970 for the Nat . / PNAS / Sci . and y ji , 0 ≥ 1960 for the economic sciences . Petersen and Penner EPJDataScience 2014 , 3 : 24 Page 17 of 25 http : / / www . epjdatascience . com / content / 3 / 1 / 24 to explain citation impact are team size [  ] , institutional prestige [  ] , conceptual novelty [  ] , and author reputation [  ] . Additionally , in order to check that our results are not aﬀected by systematic sampling bias , we analyzed the same sets of impact trajectories in panels ( A - D ) using a shuﬄing method to destroy the author - speciﬁc correlations across time . To be more speciﬁc , for a given scientist i we conserved his / her number of publications within the dataset . However , we randomly assigned a c jy to each of his / her publications , replacing the true citation value with a randomly drawn c jy value from the same year y and journal set j . Because in our shuﬄing algorithm we sampled without replacement , this technique conserves the overall probability distribution P jy ( c ) of citations within a given journal set within a given year , and hence (cid:3) ln c jy (cid:4) and σ [ ln c jy ] also remain unchanged , as do each P ( z ( n ) ) . This shuﬄing technique also permits an increase in the number of trajectories analyzed within each subsample since we can reshuﬄe the data numerous times . Hence , for each journal set we increased the sample size by producing  shuﬄed synthetic datasets , thereby increasing the number of trajectories we analyzed by the same factor . With respect to method ( i ) , we tested the likelihood that the original s i values and the shuﬄed s i values arise from the same distribution by applying the Kolmogorov - Smirnov test between the original and shuﬄed cumulative distributions , P ( ≤ s i ) . In each case the p - value is less than  –  , rejecting the null hypothesis that the two sets of s i values be - long to the same distribution ( values reported within each sub panel of Figure  ) . With respect to method ( ii ) , we also tested the model in Eq . (  ) for each shuﬄed (cid:3)˜ z i ( n ) (cid:4) , ﬁnding no signiﬁcant positive or negative trend ( see Table  for F - test p - values ) . Altogether , the comparison of the shuﬄed and empirical trajectories conﬁrms that our estimates of S and s i are not sensitive to systematic sampling artifacts . Figure  shows a scatter plot which allows for the visual comparison of four descrip - tive variables for each researcher trajectory : the impact score of the st publication z i (  ) , the trajectory slope s i , the mean impact value (cid:3) z i (cid:4) , and the total number of publica - tions N p , i . This scatter plot indicates an overall negative relation between z i (  ) and s i , indicative of the diﬃculty in sustaining high - impact research as well as the lack of pre - dictive information contained in early achievement , z i (  ) . To further investigate their re - lation , for each journal set we estimated the coeﬃcients of the linear regression model , s i = β  + β  z i (  ) + β  log  N p , i + β  (cid:3) z i (cid:4) . Consistent with the scatter plot , we observed the coeﬃcient for z i (  ) to be negative ( β  = –  .  for Econ . and Mgmt . Sci . and –  .  for Nat . / PNAS / Sci . , each estimate statistically signiﬁcant at the p ≈  level ) . Consistent with the S values for the medium versus large N p subsets , we also observed a positive coeﬃ - cient for ln N p , i ( β  =  .  for Econ . ,  .  for Mgmt . Sci . , and  .  for Nat . / PNAS / Sci . , each estimate statistically signiﬁcant at the p =  .  level ) . In each regression the coeﬃcient for (cid:3) z i (cid:4) was not statistically signiﬁcant and the adjusted R  was roughly  .  . 3 Conclusion What can data science oﬀer to the science of science ? By leveraging the rich longitudinal , geographic , and cross - sectional aspects of large publication and patent datasets , new in - sights into career growth amidst the unabating competition for scientiﬁc credit [  ] can provide institutions and policy makers important knowledge on how to assess and react to paradigm shifts in science . Petersen and Penner EPJDataScience 2014 , 3 : 24 Page 18 of 25 http : / / www . epjdatascience . com / content / 3 / 1 / 24 Figure 7 Visualizing the covariates underlying s i . Scatterplot visualization of the impact score of the 1st publication z i ( 1 ) , the trajectory slope s i , the mean impact value (cid:3) z i (cid:4) ( color of the data point ) , and the total number of publications N p ( proportional to the size of the data point ) . These scatter plots demonstrate that there is an increased likelihood that a decreasing trend ( s i < 0 ) starts with a positive above - average citation value ( z i ( 1 ) > 0 ) , indicative of how diﬃcult it can be to consistently publish above - average research . A linear regression model indicates a negative relation between s i and z i ( 1 ) and a positive relation between s i and N p ( see discussion in text ) . 3 . 1 Success distributions in science Here we have provided evidence that research careers exhibit the broad distributions of individual success characteristic of competitive systems in which cumulative advantage plays a key role . The inequality in research career activity in high - impact journals can be appreciated by considering the Gini coeﬃcient calculated from the distribution of individ - ual researcher productivity and impact . For example , pooling the Nat . / PNAS / Sci . publi - cation proﬁles that began within the period  -  , we observed a Gini index G =  .  for publications and G =  .  for citations . For economics we observed even higher lev - els of inequality , with G =  .  for publications and G =  .  for citations . The fraction f  % of the total output produced by the top  % further demonstrates the disproportionate productivity levels even among scientists publishing in top ranked journals : f  % =  .  for publications and f  % =  .  for citations ( economics ) , and f  % =  .  for publications and f  % =  .  for citations ( Nat . / PNAS / Sci . ) . Hence , it is important to note that the inequality amongst researchers is much greater when considering impact measures than for produc - tivity measures . For perspective , the G values we calculated are larger than those observed for individual income in many developed nations of the world [  ] . Nevertheless , with re - spect to individual achievement in science , we have provided evidence that the system became more equitable over the period  -  . 3 . 2 On the role of cumulative advantage in academic career evaluation The role played by the ‘Matthew eﬀect’ is largely considered to be positive [  ] . Indeed , cu - mulative advantage represents a ‘positive’ feedback mechanism that arises from the func - Petersen and Penner EPJDataScience 2014 , 3 : 24 Page 19 of 25 http : / / www . epjdatascience . com / content / 3 / 1 / 24 tionally meritocratic system of science , which aptly rewards scientists who succeed in pro - ducing high - quality research [  ] . Using a reasonably large and representative number of career proﬁles that satisﬁed our censoring bias criteria , we provided quantitative demonstration of how cumulative ad - vantage in the publication process emerges , showing that the time between publications in top journals decreases as function of how many publications a researcher has published in those journals . This decrease is evident not only in the mean waiting time , but as a sys - tematic shift in the distribution of waiting times towards smaller τ values . It is , perhaps , unsurprising to practicing researchers that as a researcher places more of his or her publications in a top journal that the preexisting publication barriers pro - gressively decrease . There are a number of anecdotally well - accepted mechanisms that likely contribute to this phenomena , being as simple as an increase in research funding resulting from previous high proﬁle publications , the ability to attract the best graduate students , election into a prestigious academy , or simply an editor spending ﬁve additional minutes evaluating a new submission by a prominent scientist before making the initial reject or review decision . Nonetheless , it is important that this phenomena be quantiﬁed using longitudinal researcher proﬁles from distinct research ﬁelds . Our ﬁrst quantitative observation of a decreasing waiting time between publications is consistent with the reasonable assumption that , given a researcher’s history of publishing in high - impact journals , his / her next publication is likely to also be high - impact . However , this hypothesis is inconsistent with our second quantitative ﬁnding that on average there is a statistically signiﬁcant decrease in the relative impact of each subsequent publication ( S <  ) when conditioning on the publication number n . We also observed this imbalance at the individual level , ﬁnding more researcher trajectories with statistically signiﬁcant de - creasing trend ( s i <  ) than with statistically signiﬁcant increasing trend ( s i >  ) , although this asymmetry contributes less to the overall negative S value than the aggregate trend across all scientists . In other words , the decreasing trend is not attributable to individual scientists per se , but rather , is representative of a larger aggregate trend . Nevertheless , it is important to consider how reputation arising from highly - cited pa - pers may contribute to a detrimental false - positive rate due to the intrinsic noise as - sociated with success outliers [  ] . For example , a side - eﬀect of a systematic type - II conﬁrmation - bias error in the identiﬁcation of high quality research ( ers ) may induce a ‘crowding out’ of young and inexperienced scientists . This is not to say that there are not enough opportunities to go around , but that in light of the broad distribution of N p , it is important to know what role reputation plays in detecting signal from noise . Interestingly , in our analysis of (cid:3)˜ z ( n ) (cid:4) , we found that the set of researchers with larger N p cross the zero baseline for a larger n value than the subset with smaller N p , which was also supported by the positive value of the β  coeﬃcient relating s i and N p . Together , these two observations indicate that cumulative advantage is functioning properly in the case of researchers with large N p . It will be important in follow - up research to add more researcher covariates to further test the origin of the non - zero s i . So what do our results mean in the context of academic careers ? It is diﬃcult to interpret the decreasing impact trend ( S <  ) as a desirable property of cumulative advantage in science . Since it is likely a researcher consistently publishing in high impact journals is also gaining access to greater resources , it is disappointing that the impact trend is not , at least , stable , if not increasing . But we also have to be careful in over - interpreting this result , Petersen and Penner EPJDataScience 2014 , 3 : 24 Page 20 of 25 http : / / www . epjdatascience . com / content / 3 / 1 / 24 since we have shown that impact decreases relative only to the author’s average citation impact (cid:3) z i (cid:4) . Additional explanations for the negative S value and the relative abundance of individual negative s i values are the diﬃculty in sustaining high - impact research in the top citation percentile , aging across intrinsic creativity and career life - cycles [  ,  ] , and aging within knowledge life - cycles reﬂecting the diﬃculty in staying at the innovative front of science [  –  ] . More generally it is important to discuss the impact of cumulative advantage upon how individual careers evolve and are evaluated . In a system with even a subtle feedback loop , small advantages at an early stage compound over time and can produce stratiﬁcation at later stages . In the case of academic careers this stratiﬁcation process can be accelerated by the fact that many careers leave academia at a relatively early stage . Recently that com - petition increased by the emergence of a ‘PhD bubble’ characterized by an unreasonably high market valuation of graduate education , resulting in an excessive supply of doctoral degrees . Evidence for this supply - demand imbalance in the US are evident in the number of PhDs awarded relative to tenure - track openings [  –  ,  ] . It is important to keep in mind that a small advantage in the early stage can just as easily be due to noise as due to signal . To avoid type I and II errors in career evaluation , extra care should to be taken in evaluating the entire publication portfolio of early stage researchers , not just their high - impact factor publications , to reduce the possibility that early publi - cation success is misinterpreted as a signal of high research potential . On the contrary , it is also important to avoid the scenario in which a scientist is eliminated merely because he / she failed to publish early and consistently in top journals . For early career researchers , especially those with relatively few ( and recent ) publications , quantitative citation metrics should be used mainly as an initial tool to reduce the candidate pool size [  ,  ] . Furthermore , a decreasing barrier to publication in top journals with increasing achieve - ment and reputation ( here proxied by n ) is important to consider for two reasons . First , one should consider the advantage an early stage researcher has in publishing in top jour - nals via collaboration with a senior research possessing an outstanding track record . Sec - ond , the lowering of impact with continued publishing means that , perhaps , higher im - pact publications by less established researchers are being overlooked by the top journals in favor of lower impact publications by more established ones . In this sense , due to the implicit competition for the select publication slots in highly visible and reputable jour - nals , the current system may be crowding out less established researchers , an ineﬃciency within the reward system of science suggesting that ‘the cream may not always rise to the top’ . It is clear that research careers are multifaceted and complex and in studying them many aspects must be taken into account . Speciﬁcally , it is crucial to better understand the role that both social and knowledge networks play in the career growth process , and perhaps one day , understanding how they can be predicted in order to manipulate both research and career success strategies . The most readily available data source for producing insight on careers , and scientiﬁc progress in general , is publication metadata . However , this data is shaping how careers are both studied by the science of science community , as well as how academics ad hoc measure their impact and the impact of colleagues . As a result citations are pushed to the forefront , again both in terms of how careers are studied and how researchers view themselves and colleagues . In this regard , we are entering an era where the ‘hunters become the hunted . ’ Petersen and Penner EPJDataScience 2014 , 3 : 24 Page 21 of 25 http : / / www . epjdatascience . com / content / 3 / 1 / 24 3 . 3 The role of scientometric data science Moving forward , what can scientometrics oﬀer towards our understanding of careers in science against the backdrop of implicit competition and reward ? On one hand , citation data are well - suited for developing testable models of longitudinal productivity and impact dynamics within and across research careers [  ,  ] . On the other hand , it can be quite technically challenging ( ex . overcoming author ambiguity [  ,  ] ) to extend these analy - ses beyond productivity and impact and into the social network even if we use the coarse proxy of co - authorship . In Merton’s seminal paper ‘The Matthew Eﬀect in Science’ [  ] he outlines the various speciﬁc mechanisms by which the reputation premium ( Matthew eﬀect ) is generated in academic careers . Those mechanisms , however , do not manifest themselves purely in the citation data . Thus it is also important that data outside pub - lication metadata be accessed to shed further light on the role of cumulative advantage . For example , it is important to better understand the embedding of researchers in other advantageous social networks , ones which cannot be captured by co - authorship . However complex a role cumulative advantage plays in research careers it is a key prob - lem that must be addressed both by the community of researchers studying careers , as well as the gatekeepers of the academic profession , which are often researchers themselves . As with nearly all advances in scientometrics , data must play a critical role and this work rep - resents a small example of how existing data can be exploited to better understand the vast issue of cumulative advantage , and raises the important question as to whether or not the cumulative advantage plays an overall positive roll in the scientiﬁc selection process . Appendix : Data and methods A . 1 Our data - science approach We deﬁned researcher subsets using several thresholds to account for sources of censor - ing bias in the data . ( a ) We removed career proﬁles with relatively short longevity L <  years between the ﬁrst and last publication . ( b ) We only analyzed proﬁles with ﬁrst pub - lication year y ji ,  at least a decade after the starting year of the dataset so that we could be reasonably conﬁdent that the ﬁrst publication observed was actually the researchers ﬁrst publication within the dataset . ( c ) We conditioned the careers on the number of publica - tions N p to ensure that there are suﬃcient statistics to quantify a trend in the citation im - pact trajectory ˜ z i ( n ) . ( d ) In our analysis of the citation impact trajectory we only included publications that were published at least  years before the TRWOK citation census year Y ( corresponding to the data download date which was Y =  for the economics jour - nals and Y =  for Nat . / PNAS / Sci . ) to ensure that each publication had a suﬃcient time to accrue citations which we use as a proxy for research impact . With this time lag , the distribution P jy ( c ) has time to converge to a log - normal distribution , and the ranking of publications within j is likely to become suﬃciently stable that the z value is a robust measure of relative impact . A . 2 Name disambiguation The ‘disambiguation problem’ is a major hurdle in the analysis of scientiﬁc careers as ca - reer proﬁles may be split or aggregated resulting in inaccurate portraits of productivity and impact . Recent methods have been proposed to solve this problem , ranging from rel - atively simple name disambiguation methods ( as employed here ) which provide suﬃcient Petersen and Penner EPJDataScience 2014 , 3 : 24 Page 22 of 25 http : / / www . epjdatascience . com / content / 3 / 1 / 24 accuracy within a reasonably small dataset [  ,  ] , to more sophisticated network - based solutions that are more appropriate for comprehensive databases like Thomson Reuters Web of Knowledge ( TRWOK ) [  ] and comprehensive patent oﬃce data ( e . g . USPTO ) [  ] . From TRWOK we downloaded annual publication data for  high - impact multidisci - plinary journals Nature , Proceeding of the National Academy of Sciences USA , and Science ;  discipline - speciﬁc journals Cell , the New England Journal of Medicine ( NEJM ) , Physical Review Letters ( PRL ) ;  top economics journals , American Economic Review , Economet - rica , Journal of Political Economy , Journal of Economic Theory , Journal of Econometrics , Journal of Financial Economics , Journal of Finance , Journal of Economic Growth , Journal of Economic Perspectives , Journal of Economic Literature , Quarterly Journal of Economics , Review of Economic Studies , Review of Financial Studies , Review of Economics and Statis - tics ; and  management science journals Management Science , Operations Research , Or - ganization Science . For the natural science journals we restricted our analysis to publica - tions denoted as ‘Articles’ , which excludes reviews , letters to editor , corrections , and other content types . For the economics publications we restricted our analysis to the publica - tion types : ‘Articles , ’ ‘Reviews’ and ‘Proceedings Paper’ . Natural science journal data were downloaded and curated in  , meaning that the citation counts we analyze do not include citations arriving afterwards . Similarly , the economics and management science journal data were downloaded in  . For a given journal set j we aggregate publications together and create a registry of sur - name and ﬁrst / middle - initial pairs { Surname , FM } where FM can consist of one , two , or three alphabetic characters α , hence FM = α  α  α  . For a given journal set , we aggregate and analyze the publications associated with { Surname , FM } if it is suﬃciently rare in the entire database using the following criteria : if there is only one instance of FM for a given { Surname , FM } then it is used ; however , if there is more than one type of α  α  for a given α  , then this surname and ﬁrst / middle - initial pairs is omitted from the analysis . For ex - ample , we consider Smith , AM and Smith , BM as not being in conﬂict , but treat { Smith , AM } and { Smith , A } as indeterminately distinct authors and so we exclude all proﬁles with { Smith , A α  α  } from our analysis . For each { Surname , FM } that meets this criteria , we aggregate the corresponding publi - cations together creating a proﬁle which is assigned to author i in a given journal set j . This simple initials - based disambiguation method is well - suited for datasets of similar size to those analyzed here , with demonstrated precision (  - ‘contamination rate’ ) ranging from  -  % [  ] . We use this method under the assumption that there is no intrinsic bias associated with selecting suﬃciently rare { Surname , FM } pairs , and hence , the set of ‘rare’ surname pro - ﬁles should provide a representative sample from the entire career distribution [  ] . In - deed , there are some notable scientists with suﬃciently common surnames that are omit - ted from our analysis , e . g . Stanley HE and Vogelstein B , but we maintain that the number of proﬁles analyzed is suﬃciently large to include a representative proportion of these elite careers comprising the tail of the productivity and citation impact distributions . This assumption appears to be valid , as recent analysis comparing the aggregate h - index dis - tribution P ( h ) comprising all scientist proﬁles within the TRWOK dataset with the P ( h ) comprising only the ‘extremely rare’ scientist proﬁles within the TRWOK dataset shows that the distributions are remarkably similar except in the extreme right tail , which is only a ﬁnite - size eﬀect due to the diﬀerence in dataset sizes [  ] . Petersen and Penner EPJDataScience 2014 , 3 : 24 Page 23 of 25 http : / / www . epjdatascience . com / content / 3 / 1 / 24 We also note that one source of selection bias arising from the selection of rare surnames is the bias against common Asian and Anglo - Saxon names and in favor of underrepre - sented nationalities in science . Correcting for this bias is diﬃcult without information on the distribution of surnames in science ; however , we assume that its aﬀect is negligible since our simple method was able to extract a signiﬁcant number of proliﬁc proﬁles with  ≤ N p ≤  within each journal set , providing ample statistics in order to analyze the overall longitudinal trends in citation impact . Future avenues of research in this general direction may beneﬁt from additional covariates , including gender , nationality , and ethnic background , in order to better understand the possible sources of bias . Additional material Additional ﬁle 1 : Supplementary additional ﬁgures . Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests . Authors’ contributions AMP downloaded , curated , and cleaned the data and performed the statistical analysis . AMP and OP designed research and wrote the manuscript . Author details 1 Laboratory for the Analysis of Complex Economic Systems , IMT Lucca Institute for Advanced Studies , Piazza San Francesco 19 , Lucca , IT - 55100 , Italy . 2 Laboratory of Innovation Management and Economics , IMT Lucca Institute for Advanced Studies , Piazza San Francesco 19 , Lucca , IT - 55100 , Italy . Acknowledgements The authors thank the four anonymous referees for their diligent service . We also thank the discussant P . Stephan and other participants of the ‘The Organization , Economics and Policy of Scientiﬁc Research’ 2013 BRICK conference for helpful comments on an early version of the manuscript , and A . Rungi and R . Metulini for guidance with the implementation of the ﬁxed - eﬀects regressions . The authors acknowledge support from Italian PNR project ‘CRISIS Lab . ’ AMP acknowledges the opportunity to present the research and receive feedback via COST Action TD1210 ‘KnowEscape . ’ OP acknowledges funding from the Canadian SSHRC . Received : 25 April 2014 Accepted : 19 September 2014 References 1 . Stephan P ( 2012 ) How economics shapes science . Harvard University Press , Cambridge 2 . Schillebeeckx M , Maricque B , Lewis C ( 2013 ) The missing piece to changing the university culture . Nat Biotechnol 31 ( 10 ) : 938 - 941 3 . Petersen AM , Pavlidis I , Semendeferi I ( 2014 ) A quantitative perspective on ethics in large team science . Sci Eng Ethics . doi : 10 . 1007 / s11948 - 014 - 9562 - 8 4 . Weinberg BA , Owen - Smith J , Rosen RF , Schwarz L , Allen BM , Weiss RE , Lane J ( 2014 ) Science funding and short - term economic activity . Science 344 ( 6179 ) : 41 - 43 5 . Alberts B , Kirschner MW , Tilghman S , Varmus H ( 2014 ) Rescuing us biomedical research from its systemic ﬂaws . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 111 : 5773 - 5777 6 . Schekman R ( 2013 ) How journals like Nature , Cell , and Science are damaging science . Guardian 12 / 09 / 2013 7 . Xie Y ( 2014 ) ‘Undemocracy’ : inequalities in science . Science 344 : 809 - 810 8 . Couzin - Frankel J ( 2014 ) Chasing the money . Science 344 : 24 - 25 9 . Maher B ( 2008 ) Poll results : look who’s doping . Nature 452 : 674 - 675 10 . Committee on the Conduct of Science ( 1989 ) On being a scientist . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 86 ( 23 ) : 9053 - 9074 11 . Committee on Science , Engineering , and Public Policy , National Academy of Sciences , National Academy of Engineering , and Institute of Medicine ( 2009 ) On being a scientist : a guide to responsible conduct in research , 3rd edn . The National Academies Press , Washington 12 . Fang FC , Steen RG , Casadevall A ( 2012 ) Misconduct accounts for the majority of retracted scientiﬁc publications . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 109 ( 42 ) : 17028 - 17033 13 . Martinson BC , Anderson MS , De Vries R ( 2005 ) Scientists behaving badly . Nature 435 : 737 - 738 14 . Martinson BC , Anderson MS , Crain AL , De Vries R ( 2006 ) Scientists’ perceptions of organizational justice and self - reported misbehaviors . J Empir Res Hum Res Ethics 1 : 51 - 66 15 . Anderson MS , Ronning EA , De Vries R , Martinson BC ( 2007 ) The perverse eﬀects of competition on scientists’ work and relationships . Sci Eng Ethics 13 : 437 - 461 16 . Martinson BC ( 2011 ) The academic birth rate . EMBO Rep 12 ( 8 ) : 758 - 762 17 . Freeman R , Weinstein E , Marincola E , Rosenbaum J , Solomon F ( 2001 ) Competition and careers in biosciences . Science 294 : 2293 - 2294 Petersen and Penner EPJDataScience 2014 , 3 : 24 Page 24 of 25 http : / / www . epjdatascience . com / content / 3 / 1 / 24 18 . Petersen AM , Riccaboni M , Stanley HE , Pammolli F ( 2012 ) Persistence and uncertainty in the academic career . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 109 : 5213 - 5218 19 . Committee on Science , Engineering , and Public Policy ( 2014 ) The arc of the academic research career issues and implications for U . S . science and engineering leadership , The National Academies Press , Washington 20 . Janger J , Nowotny K ( 2013 ) Career choices in academia . Welfare wealth work for Europe working paper . http : / / www . foreurope . eu / ﬁleadmin / documents / pdf / Workingpapers / WWWforEurope _ WPS _ no036 _ MS64 . pdf 21 . Janger J , Strauss A , Campbell DFJ ( 2013 ) Academic careers : a cross - country perspective . Welfare wealth work for Europe working paper . http : / / ideas . repec . org / p / feu / wfewop / y2013m8d0i37 . html 22 . Wuchty S , Jones BF , Uzzi B ( 2007 ) The increasing dominance of teams in production of knowledge . Science 316 ( 5827 ) : 1036 - 1039 23 . Uzzi B , Mukherjee S , Stringer M , Jones B ( 2013 ) Atypical combinations and scientiﬁc impact . Science 342 : 468 - 472 24 . Merton RK ( 1968 ) The Matthew eﬀect in science . Science 159 : 56 - 63 25 . Petersen AM , Jung W - S , Yang J - S , Stanley HE ( 2011 ) Quantitative and empirical demonstration of the Matthew eﬀect in a study of career longevity . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 108 ( 1 ) : 18 - 23 26 . Petersen AM , Fortunato S , Pan RK , Kaski K , Penner O , Rungi A , Riccaboni M , Stanley HE , Pammolli F ( 2014 ) Reputation and impact in academic careers . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1323111111 27 . Sarigl E , Pﬁtzner R , Scholtes I , Garas A , Schweitzer F ( 2014 ) Predicting scientiﬁc success based on coauthorship networks . EPJ Data Sci 2014 : 9 28 . Azoulay P , Stuart T , Wang YM ( 2014 ) Eﬀect or fable ? Manag Sci 60 : 92 - 109 29 . Duch J , Zeng XHT , Sales - Pardo M , Radicchi F , Otis S , Woodruﬀ TK , Amaral LAN ( 2012 ) The possible role of resource requirements and academic career - choice risk on gender diﬀerences in publication rate and impact . PLoS ONE 125 : 51332 30 . Azoulay P , Zivin JSG , Wang J ( 2010 ) Superstar extinction . Q J Econ 125 : 549 - 589 31 . Cole JR ( 1981 ) Social stratiﬁcation in science . The University of Chicago Press , Chicago 32 . Jones BF , Wuchty S , Uzzi B ( 2008 ) Multi - university research teams : shifting impact , geography , and stratiﬁcation in science . Science 322 ( 5905 ) : 1259 - 1262 33 . Deville P , Wang D , Sinatra R , Song C , Blondel VD , Barabasi A - L ( 2014 ) Career on the move : geography , stratiﬁcation , and scientiﬁc impact . Sci Rep 4 : 4770 34 . van de Rijt A , Kang SM , Restivo M , Patil A ( 2014 ) Field experiments of success - breeds - success dynamics . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 111 : 6934 - 6939 35 . Milojevic S ( 2013 ) Accuracy of simple , initials - based methods for author name disambiguation . J Informetr 7 : 767 - 773 36 . Radicchi F , Fortunato S , Castellano C ( 2008 ) Universality of citation distributions : toward an objective measure of scientiﬁc impact . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 105 : 17268 - 17272 37 . Radicchi F , Castellano C ( 2012 ) A reverse engineering approach to the suppression of citation biases reveals universal properties of citation distributions . PLoS ONE 7 : 33833 38 . Petersen AM , Wang F , Stanley HE ( 2010 ) Methods for measuring the citations and productivity of scientists across time and discipline . Phys Rev E 81 : 036114 39 . Radicchi F , Castellano C ( 2011 ) Rescaling citations of publications in physics . Phys Rev E 83 : 046116 40 . Petersen AM , Penner O , Stanley HE ( 2011 ) Methods for detrending success metrics to account for inﬂationary and deﬂationary factors . Eur Phys J B 79 : 67 - 78 41 . David PA ( 2008 ) The historical origins of ‘open science’ : an essay on patronage , reputation and common agency contracting in the scientiﬁc revolution . Capital Soc 3 : 5 42 . Fu D , Pammolli F , Buldyrev SV , Riccaboni M , Matia K , Yamasaki K , Stanley HE ( 2005 ) The growth of business ﬁrms : theoretical framework and empirical evidence . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 102 : 18801 - 18806 43 . Chin G , Culotta E ( 2014 ) The science of inequality : what the numbers tell us . Science 344 : 819 - 821 44 . Franzoni C , Scellato G , Stephan P ( 2011 ) Changing incentives to publish . Science 333 ( 6043 ) : 702 - 703 45 . Penner O , Petersen AM , Pan RK , Fortunato S ( 2013 ) Commentary : the case for caution in predicting scientists’ future impact . Phys Today 66 ( 4 ) : 8 - 9 46 . Penner O , Pan RK , Petersen AM , Fortunato S ( 2013 ) On the predictability of future impact in science . Sci Rep 3 : 3052 47 . Acuna DE , Penner O , Orton CG ( 2013 ) Point / counterpoint : the future h - index is an excellent way to predict scientists’ future impact . Med Phys 40 ( 11 ) : 110601 48 . Petersen AM , Succi S ( 2013 ) The Z - index : a geometric representation of productivity and impact which accounts for information in the entire rank - citation proﬁle . J Informetr 7 ( 4 ) : 823 - 832 49 . Petersen AM , Stanley HE , Succi S ( 2011 ) Statistical regularities in the rank - citation proﬁle of scientists . Sci Rep 1 : 181 50 . Radicchi F , Fortunato S , Markines B , Vespignani A ( 2009 ) Diﬀusion of scientiﬁc credits and the ranking of scientists . Phys Rev E 80 : 056103 51 . Kleinberg J , Oren S ( 2011 ) Mechanisms for ( mis ) allocating scientiﬁc credit . In : Proceedings of the forty - third annual ACM symposium on theory of computing . STOC ’11 . ACM , New York , pp 529 - 538 52 . Denrell J , Liu C ( 2012 ) Top performers are not the most impressive when extreme performance indicates unreliability . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 109 : 9331 - 9336 53 . Levin SG , Stephan PE ( 1991 ) Research productivity over the life cycle : evidence for academic scientists . Am Econ Rev 81 : 114 - 132 54 . Stephan PE , Levin SG ( 1993 ) Age and the Nobel prize revisited . Scientometrics 28 : 387 - 399 55 . Jones BF , Weinberg BA ( 2011 ) Age dynamics in scientiﬁc creativity . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 108 : 18910 - 18914 56 . Horlings E , Gurney T ( 2013 ) Search strategies along the academic lifecycle . Scientometrics 94 : 1137 - 1160 57 . Jones BF , Reedy EJ , Weinberg BA ( 2014 ) Age and scientiﬁc genius . NBER working paper , 19866 58 . Cyranoski D , Gilbert N , Ledford H , Nayar A , Yahia M ( 2011 ) Education : the PhD factory . Nature 472 : 276 - 279 59 . Lai R , D’Amour A , Yu A , Sun Y , Torvik V , Fleming L ( 2011 ) Disambiguation and co - authorship networks of the US patent inventor database , vol 2138 . Harvard Institute for Quantitative Social Science , Cambridge 60 . Schulz C , Mazloumian A , Petersen AM , Penner O , Helbing D ( 2014 ) Exploiting citation networks for large - scale author name disambiguation . EPJ Data Sci 2014 : 11 61 . Mazloumian A ( 2012 ) Predicting scholars’ scientiﬁc impact . PLoS ONE 7 ( 11 ) : 49246 Petersen and Penner EPJDataScience 2014 , 3 : 24 Page 25 of 25 http : / / www . epjdatascience . com / content / 3 / 1 / 24 doi : 10 . 1140 / epjds / s13688 - 014 - 0024 - y Cite this article as : Petersen and Penner : Inequality and cumulative advantage in science careers : a case study of high - impact journals . EPJDataScience 2014 3 : 24 .