Trafﬁc2012 ; 13 : 1653 – 1666 © 2012 John Wiley & Sons A / S doi : 10 . 1111 / tra . 12009 A Common Clathrin - Mediated Machinery Co - ordinates Cell – Cell Adhesion and Bacterial Internalization Matteo Bonazzi 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , ∗ , Andreas K ¨uhbacher 1 , 2 , 3 , Alejandro Toledo - Arana 5 , Adeline Mallet 6 , Lavanya Vasudevan 7 , Javier Pizarro - Cerd´a 1 , 2 , 3 , Frances M . Brodsky 7 and Pascale Cossart 1 , 2 , 3 , ∗ 1 InstitutPasteur , Unit´edesInteractions Bact´eries - Cellules , Paris , F - 75015France 2 Inserm , U604 , Paris , F - 75015France 3 INRA , USC2020 , Paris , F - 75015France 4 Currentaddress : CNRS , UMR5236 , CPBS , Montpellier F - 34965 , France 5 LaboratoryofMicrobialBioﬁlms , Institutode Agrobiotecnología , UniversidadP´ublicade Navarra - CSIC - GobiernodeNavarra , Campusde Arrosadía , 31006Pamplona , Spain 6 InstitutPasteur , PlateformedeMicroscopie Ultrastructurale , Imagopole , Paris , F - 75015France 7 TheG . W . HooperFoundation , Departmentsof BioengineeringandTherapeuticSciences , of MicrobiologyandImmunologyandofPharmaceuticalChemistry , UniversityofCalifornia , SanFrancisco , SanFrancisco , CA94143 - 0552 , USA * Correspondingauthors : MatteoBonazzi , matteo . bonazzi @ cpbs . cnrs . frandPascaleCossart , pcossart @ pasteur . fr Invasive bacterial pathogens often target cellular proteins involved in adhesion as a ﬁrst event during infection . For example , Listeriamonocytogenes uses the bacterial protein InlA to interact with E - cadherin , hijack the host adherens junction ( AJ ) machinery and invade non - phagocytic cells by a clathrin - dependent mechanism . Here , we investigate a potential role for clathrin in cell – cell adhesion . We observed that the initial steps of AJ formation trigger the phosphorylation of clathrin , and its transient localization at forming cell – cell contacts . Furthermore , we show that clathrin serves as a hub for the recruitment of proteins that are necessary for the actin rearrangements that accompany the maturation of AJs . Using an InlA / E - cadherin chimera , we show that adherent cells expressing the chimera form AJs with cells expressing E - cadherin . We demonstrate that non - adherent cells expressing the InlA chimera , as bacteria , can be internalized by E - cadherin - expressing adherent cells . Together these results reveal that a common clathrin - mediated machinery may regulate internalization and cell adhesion and that the relative mobility of one of the interacting partners plays an important role in the commitment to either one of these processes . Key words : E - cadherin , adherens junctions , actin , inter - nalin , Listeria monocytogenes Received 24 October 2011 , revised and accepted for publication 12 September 2012 , uncorrected manuscript published online 17 September 2012 , published online 11 October 2012 Cell – cell adhesion is a fundamental process in organo - genesis and development . It is subject to ﬁnely tuned regulation that determines the transition from a mes - enchymal to an epithelial state . Adult cells that escape this regulation become prone to metastatic development , and loss of cell adhesion is one of the main hallmarks of cancer ( 1 ) . Eukaryotic proteins involved in cell adhesion are often the targets of pathogens that adhere to and invade host cells ( 2 – 4 ) . Recently , our laboratory reported a fundamen - tal role for clathrin in the actin - dependent internalization of Listeriamonocytogenes , a bacterium that invades the host cell using the surface protein internalin ( InlA ) to interact with the cell adhesion molecule E - cadherin ( 5 – 7 ) . This sug - gested the possibility of a link between clathrin , actin and cell adhesion . E - cadherin is the cell surface protein respon - sible for establishment of adherens junctions ( AJs ) ( 8 , 9 ) , which form as a result of homotypic calcium - dependent interactions between E - cadherins on neighboring cells . Initial interaction produces so - called immature junctions . Then , E - cadherin clustering and downstream signaling are required for junction maturation and reorganization of the underlying actin cytoskeleton from branches to cables ( 10 – 12 ) . During InlA - mediated infection , Listeriaactivates the non - receptor tyrosine kinase Src , which initiates a series of post - translational modiﬁcations to proteins that are key to bacterial internalization , including cortactin and E - cadherin ( 5 , 13 ) . Bacterial internalization also involves the clathrin - dependent endocytosis machinery ( 7 ) in a newly described synergy with actin polymerization that is distinct from conventional clathrin - mediated endocytosis . We recently established that during Listeriainfection , clathrin recruitment is accompanied by tyrosine phosphorylation of the clathrin heavy chain ( CHC ) , an event that occurs prior to and is required for actin recruitment to bacterial entry sites ( 7 , 14 ) . CHC is the subunit of clathrin that mediates self - assembly of the clathrin coat and its tyrosine phosphorylation by Src - family kinases is a feature of sustained clathrin presence at sites of signaling receptors ( 15 – 17 ) . The associated clathrin light chain ( CLC ) subunit mediates clathrin – actin interactions via binding of Hip1R ( 18 – 24 ) . Interestingly , transcellular E - cadherin / E - cadherin interactions at the onset of AJ formation also activate Src ( 25 , 26 ) . Furthermore , we observed previously that both InlA - and E - cadherin - coated latex beads are internalized by a clathrin - mediated pathway ( 5 ) . Together , www . trafﬁc . dk 1653 Bonazzi et al . these observations led us to investigate whether the clathrin / actin interactions characteristic of bacterial invasion may also be involved in E - cadherin - mediated cell – cell adhesion . Here , we show that the onset of E - cadherin - mediated cell – cell adhesion triggers clathrin recruitment and CHC phosphorylation . In addition , clathrin recruitment is required for F - actin rearrangements during AJ maturation , which we show also depends on CLC and Hip1R . Finally , we expressed an InlA / E - cadherin chimeric protein at the surface of HeLa cells , to recapitulate , using epithelial cells , the host – pathogen interactions that result in the internalization of L . monocytogenes . By doing so , we show that a common clathrin - mediated machinery controls cell – cell adhesion or engulfment of non - adherent cells , the latter mimicking bacterial internalization . Results CHCisrecruitedatcell – cellcontactsandisrequired forAJformation Interaction of the Listeriasurface protein InlA with its host receptor E - cadherin triggers ( i ) tyrosine phosphorylation of CHC , ( ii ) clathrin accumulation at the plasma membrane and ( iii ) clathrin - dependent actin rearrangement at bacterial entry sites ( 14 ) . We addressed whether these events are also triggered by E - cadherin / E - cadherin interactions during the formation of AJs . We ﬁrst analyzed the distribution of phosphorylated CHC ( pCHC ) in freshly seeded Jeg3 cells that established new AJs using an antibody speciﬁc for pCHC ( 14 ) . Cells were subjected to cytosolic extraction before antibody labeling , to improve the detection of pCHC at the plasma membrane . Sixteen hours after seeding , pCHC showed extensive colocalization with E - cadherin and actin at sites of cell – cell contacts , in contrast with the distribution of total CHC detected with mAb X22 ( 27 ) , which displayed typical perinuclear enrichment of clathrin in the trans Golgi network region , as well as plasma membrane staining ( Figure 1A ) . This suggests that , similar to bacterial infections , E - cadherin / E - cadherin interactions can trigger the phosphorylation and stabilization of CHC at the plasma membrane . We then followed the dynamics of clathrin recruitment to cell – cell contacts by applying the calcium jump assay to MDCK cells transfected with GFP - tagged CLC . AJs were ﬁrst allowed to dissociate by incubating cells in calcium - free medium . Upon re - addition of calcium we observed the recruitment of clathrin to cell – cell contacts over a period of 15h ( Figure 1B and Movie S1 ) . Cells were then ﬁxed and labeled for E - cadherin and actin . Clathrin was recruited at cell – cell contacts in 70 % of cells 12h after re - addition of calcium , which represented a marked increase as compared to the 40 % of cells at steady state ( not subjected to the calcium jump ; Figure 1C ) . To address the role of clathrin at cell – cell contacts during AJ formation , Jeg3 cells were depleted of CHC by RNA interference and allowed to form new cell – cell contacts . As expected , CHC - depleted cells lost the pCHC recruitment at cell – cell contacts ( Figure 1A ) , but internal staining was less sensitive to siRNA depletion , as previously observed ( 28 ) . Notably however , we observed that in these cells , the localization of actin at cell – cell junctions was severely impaired ( Figure 1A ) . Indeed , control - treated cells exhibited a sharp and narrow ( 20 pixels in average ) peak of actin ﬂuorescence at cell – cell contacts , that corresponded to an equal peak of E - cadherin ( Figure 2A , charts 1 and 2 ) . In CHC - depleted cells E - cadherin still accumulated at AJs ( Figure 2C ) , although in many cases the ﬂuorescence was spread out and covered an average of 40 pixels ( Figure 2B , charts 3 and 4 ) . More importantly , accumulation of E - cadherin did not correspond to that of actin , which remained diffused or weakly concentrated at cell – cell junctions ( Figure 2B , charts 3 and 4 , C ) . Ultrastructural analysis by Correlative Light Scanning Electron Microscopy ( CLSEM ) showed that cells treated with control siRNA displayed thick ( 50nm ) actin cables parallel to cell – cell contacts [ Figure 3A , scanning electron microscopy ( SEM ) insets ] that colocalized with the phalloidin signal detected by light microscopy ( Figure 3A , SEM + actin ) . In CHC - depleted cells however , actin was organized in branched structures that are more typical of migrating cells , with scarce , very thin actin cables at cell – cell contacts ( Figure 3B , SEM insets ) . Finally , in an attempt to discriminate between a defect in actin polymerization at the AJ and a change in actin organization , we compared the localization of the Arp2 / 3 complex ( by using an anti - p34 antibody ) and mDia at cell – cell contacts between control cells and cells depleted of CHC , after cytosolic extraction . In control cells , both proteins showed a diffused cytoplasmic localization with an enrichment at sites of cell – cell contacts where they colocalized with E - cadherin and actin ( Figure S1B , C ) . Interestingly , despite the alteration of actin morphology observed at cell – cell contacts following CHC depletion , the localization of either p34 or mDia was only mildly affected by the same treatment ( Figure S1B , C ) . Together , our data indicate that , during the formation of AJs , phosphorylated clathrin is recruited at cell – cell contacts where it plays a role in recruitment and organization of the actin cytoskeleton , similar to what we have previously observed during bacterial infections . Theclathrin – actininteractionmachineryisrecruited atformingcell – cellcontacts Our recent observations suggest that , during infection , clathrin serves as a platform for the recruitment of a set of proteins that link F - actin to clathrin at bacteria / cell adhesion sites ( 14 ) . These include the clathrin adaptor Dab2 , the actin - binding protein Hip1R and the motor protein Myosin VI . To test the possibility that clathrin plays a similar role during the formation of AJs , we followed the recruitment of Hip1R , Myosin VI and Dab2 at cell – cell contacts in Jeg3 cells that established new AJs . In all cases , these proteins colocalized with E - cadherin and actin at sites of cell – cell contacts ( Figure 4A ) . After incubation of Jeg3 cells beyond 24h , allowing the maturation of AJs , the detected amount 1654 Trafﬁc2012 ; 13 : 1653 – 1666 Cell – Cell Adhesion and Bacterial Internalization A B C Figure 1 : AJ formation induces CHC phosphorylation and the recruitment of clathrin at cell – cell contacts . A ) Jeg3 cells were left untreated ( top ) , incubated with non - targeting ( middle ) or CHC - targeting ( bottom ) siRNA sequences , seeded and allowed to form AJs for 12 to 16h . Cells were then ﬁxed and labeled for immunoﬂuorescence as indicated . B ) Representative images ( acquired live ) of MDCK cells transfected with CLC - GFP and subjected to the calcium jump assay to follow clathrin recruitment at cell – cell contacts ( arrowheads ) during the formation of adherens junctions . C ) MDCK cells at steady state or 12h after the calcium jump were ﬁxed and labeled for clathrin , E - cadherin and actin . The frequency of clathrin recruitment at cell – cell junctions was assayed by ﬂuorescence microscopy . In ( C ) values are means ( ± SD ) of three independent experiments . Asterisks represent p values ( * * * p ≤ 0 . 001 , Student t - test ) . Scale bars 10 μ m . of these proteins at cell – cell contacts decreased ( data not shown ) . We next investigated a potential role for the clathrin – actin interaction machinery during the formation of AJs by depleting Jeg3 cells of the abovementioned proteins , including CLC , and allowed cells to form new AJs . The depletion of CLC , Dab2 , and , to a minor extent , that of Myosin VI , considerably reduced the presence of actin at cell – cell junctions , similarly to what we had previously observed when CHC was depleted ( Figure S2 ) . The depletion of Hip1R resulted in a milder phenotype , which is potentially attributed to the partial efﬁciency of the siRNA treatment ( Figure S2 ) . To address whether clathrin and associated components of the clathrin / actin machinery could directly inﬂuence AJ formation downstream of E - cadherin / E - cadherin complex formation or whether their depletion indirectly affects other aspects of AJ formation , we recapitulated AJ formation using the minimal system of E - cadherin - coated beads . These beads adhere to and eventually are internalized by E - cadherin - expressing cells ( 5 ) . First , Jeg3 cells were incubated with E - cadherin - coated beads for 1h and the recruitment of Dab2 , Myosin VI and Hip1R was followed by ﬂuorescence microscopy . All three proteins were recruited , together with actin , at the bead entry sites ( Figure 4B ) . We then individually depleted Dab2 , Myosin VI and Hip1R from Jeg3 cells , using two independent siRNA sequences for each , and tested treated cells for bead internalization . The depletion of each protein efﬁciently reduced the recruitment of actin around beads and the subsequent internalization of E - cadherin - coated beads ( Figure 4C ) . These bead studies indicate that formation of the clathrin – actin platform is directly downstream of formation of E - cadherin / E - cadherin complexes and Trafﬁc2012 ; 13 : 1653 – 1666 1655 Bonazzi et al . A B C Figure 2 : Clathrin is required for actin recruitment at cell – cell contacts . Jeg3 cells were transfected with Cy3 - tagged control ( A ) or clathrin - targeted siRNAs ( B ) . Forty - eight hours after transfection , cells were trypsinized and seeded on glass coverslips to allow the formation of new AJs . Twelve hours after seeding , cells were ﬁxed and labeled for E - cadherin ( green ) and actin ( red ) . The ﬂuorescence intensity proﬁles along arbitrary lines drawn perpendicular to cell – cell contacts ( dashed arrows 1 , 2 , 3 and 4 ) was measured for E - cadherin ( green ) and actin ( red ) ( right charts , numbers correspond to the dashed proﬁles on the left panels ) . C ) Quantiﬁcation of control and clathrin knocked - down cells presenting E - cadherin and actin at cell – cell junctions . Values are means ( ± SD ) of three independent experiments where approximately 100 cells were analyzed for each condition . Asterisks represent p values ( * * * p ≤ 0 . 001 , Student t - test ) . Scale bars 10 μ m . 1656 Trafﬁc2012 ; 13 : 1653 – 1666 Cell – Cell Adhesion and Bacterial Internalization A B Figure 3 : CLSEM analysis of actin at cell – cell contacts in control - and clathrin - depleted cells . Jeg3 cells transfected with Cy3 - tagged control ( A ) or anti - clathrin siRNAs ( B ) were permeabilized and labeled for actin ( red ) . Cells were ﬁrst imaged with an epiﬂuorescence microscope ( Actin and phase panels in A and B ) and then processed for SEM . The ultrastructure of the cytoskeleton in control and clathrin knocked down cells was compared . In both ( A ) and ( B ) , panels 2 and 3 represent higher magniﬁcations of the boxed areas in panel 1 . Full and empty arrowheads point at actin structures at cell – cell contacts . Trafﬁc2012 ; 13 : 1653 – 1666 1657 Bonazzi et al . A B C Figure 4 : The clathrin / actin interaction machinery is recruited at sites of AJs formation . A ) Jeg3 cells were seeded and allowed to form AJs for 12h . Cells were then ﬁxed and labeled for E - cadherin ( blue ) , actin ( red ) and Hip1R , Myosin VI , Dab2 ( green ) . Arrows indicate sites where Hip1R Myosin VI and Dab2 accumulate with E - cadherin and actin at AJs . Scale bars 10 μ m . B ) Jeg3 cells were incubated with E - cadherin - coated latex beads for 15min , ﬁxed and processed for immunoﬂuorescence . Arrows point at sites of colocalization . C ) Jeg3 cells were transfected with two siRNA sequences targeted to either Dab2 , Myosin VI or Hip1R or with scrambled control siRNA sequences and incubated 1h with E - cadherin - coated latex beads . Cells were then ﬁxed and differentially labeled to discriminate intracellular and extracellular beads and the efﬁciency of beads internalization was quantiﬁed by ﬂuorescence microscopy . Values are means ( ± SD ) of three independent experiments where approximately 100 beads were counted for each condition . Asterisks represent p values . Scale bars 10 μ m . that its disruption inhibits actin - based activity following complex formation . This minimal system supports the interpretation that disruption of actin organization at the AJ by clathrin depletion can be attributed directly to interference with events triggered by E - cadherin - mediated cell – cell adhesion . AnInlA - E - cadherinproteinchimeraallowscell adhesiontoE - cadherin - expressingcells We have previously demonstrated that the clathrin – actin interaction machinery is required for internalization of bacteria as well as E - cadherin - coated beads ( 5 , 14 ) and here we implicate the same molecular players 1658 Trafﬁc2012 ; 13 : 1653 – 1666 Cell – Cell Adhesion and Bacterial Internalization in cell – cell adhesion . These observations suggest that cell – cell adhesion and internalization pathways involving E - cadherin trigger a common clathrin - mediated machinery . To address this hypothesis , we generated a model system that allows the study of the same ligand / receptor interaction in both cell adhesion and internalization . To this aim , we focused on the InlA / E - cadherin interaction , known to induce clathrin - mediated internalization of L . monocytogenes . We generated a chimeric InlA - E - cadherin protein in which the EC repeats involved in E - cadherin / E - cadherin interactions were replaced with the InlA LRR repeats that mediate InlA / E - cadherin interactions ( Figure 5A ) ( 29 ) . To study the role of InlA / E - cadherin interactions in the context of cell – cell adhesion , the resulting InlA / E - cadherin chimera was expressed in HeLa cells , which do not express endogenous E - cadherin . We ﬁrst veriﬁed the expression of the chimera by western blot using an anti - InlA antibody ( Figure 5B ) and then analyzed the localization of the chimera by immunoﬂuorescence , using either an antibody against the intracellular domains of E - cadherin ( Figure S3A ) or an anti - InlA antibody in non - permeabilized cells ( Figure S3B ) . The functionality of the chimeric protein was then tested by incubating E - cadherin - coated beads with transfected HeLa cells ( Figure 5C ) . After 1h of incubation the chimera was efﬁciently recruited around the beads and , by differential labeling of beads before and after permeabilization , we observed that a large number of beads had been internalized ( Figure 5C ) . Clathrin was also recruited around internalized beads ( Figure S3C ) . Conversely , when chimera - transfected HeLa cells were incubated with L . innocua expressing InlA , we never observed bacterial adhesion or internalization ( data not shown ) , in agreement with the established observation that InlA / InlA interactions do not occur ( 29 ) . HeLa cells expressing the chimeric InlA / E - cadherin protein were then co - cultured with Jeg3 cells expressing endogenous E - cadherin . After 24h of co - culture , Jeg3 cells were labeled with an anti - E - cadherin antibody that targets the extracellular domain ( absent in the InlA / E - cadherin chimera ) and HeLa cells were labeled with an anti - InlA antibody ( Figure 5D ) . The InlA and E - cadherin labeling were strongly concentrated at the cell – cell contacts between Jeg3 and transfected HeLa cells indicating that E - cadherin / InlA interaction had occurred ( Figure 5D ) . In some cases we observed the formation of vesicles positive for both E - cadherin and InlA , suggesting that endocytic events occurred during cell – cell adhesion ( Figure 5D , lower panels ) . Typical components of AJs such as α - catenin and actin were also concentrated at these hybrid junctions ( Figure S3D , E ) . The speciﬁcity of the InlA / E - cadherin interaction at cell – cell contacts was tested by co - culturing transfected HeLa cells with ELB1 cells expressing mouse E - cadherin . InlA interacts speciﬁcally with E - cadherin of human , gerbil , guinea pig and rabbit origin that share a proline at position 16 . Mouse E - cadherin has a glutamate at position 16 and hence does not interact with InlA ( 30 , 31 ) . No accumulation of InlA or mouse E - cadherin was observed at cell – cell contacts between transfected HeLa cells and ELB1 cells ( Figure S3F ) conﬁrming the speciﬁcity of the adhesion sites we detected . These observations indicate that the molecular interactions between InlA and E - cadherin that mediate bacterial internalization can indeed support cell adhesion when InlA is expressed on the surface of adherent cells . CellsexpressingE - cadherincaninternalize non - adherentcellsexpressingtheInlA / E - cadherin chimera On the basis of our observations that InlA / E - cadherin interactions occurring between two adherent epithelial cells result in cell – cell adhesion , we hypothesized that the interaction of bacterial surface proteins or ligand - coated beads with their respective cell receptors result in the internalization of bacteria and beads because they are not anchored in the surrounding environment . We therefore tested whether elimination of cell – matrix interactions would convert the InlA / E - cadherin interaction into an inter - nalization signal , as in the case of bacterial infections . HeLa cells , transfected with the InlA / E - cadherin chimera , were detached from the substratum by trypsinization and then incubated with a conﬂuent layer of Jeg3 cells . After 1h of incubation , cells were ﬁxed and HeLa cells were differen - tially labeled with the anti - InlA antibody to distinguish inter - nalized and extracellular cells ( Figure 6A ) . Jeg3 cells were labeled with the anti - E - cadherin antibody as described above . Remarkably , approximately 60 % of detached transfected HeLa cells were internalized ( Figure 6B ) , or were in the process of being internalized by Jeg3 cells with evident concomitant recruitment of endogenous E - cadherin ( as indicated by double labeling ; Figure 6A ) . Non - transfected as well as control - transfected HeLa cells were never internalized by Jeg3 cells ( Figure 6B ) . In addition , transfected HeLa cells were never internalized by ELB1 cells expressing mouse E - cadherin ( Figure 6B ) . HeLa cells transfected with E - cadherin carrying a GFP tag at its C - terminus , formed AJs when incubated with Jeg3 cells expressing endogenous E - cadherin ( Figure S4A ) . However , when GFP - E - cadherin - expressing HeLa cells were trypsinized and incubated with adherent Jeg3 cells these latter efﬁciently internalized transfected HeLa cells ( Figure S4B ) . We used CLSEM to better visualize the internalization of transfected HeLa cells within Jeg3 cells . Transfected HeLa cells that contacted Jeg3 cells , but were not yet internalized , exhibited a thin rim of E - cadherin labeling that was limited to the site of cell – cell contact ( Figure 7A top left panel and orthogonal views ) . HeLa cells that were fully internalized by Jeg3 cells were surrounded by a marked accumulation of E - cadherin ﬂuorescence all along the cell Z - axis ( Figure 7B left panels ) . By SEM we observed recruitment of Jeg3 cell membranes that totally engulfed HeLa cells ( Figure 7B , SEM ) . In some cases we could observe cell doublets where a transfected HeLa cell was in contact with a non - transfected HeLa cell . When Trafﬁc2012 ; 13 : 1653 – 1666 1659 Bonazzi et al . A C D B Figure 5 : InlA / E - cadherin interactions generate hybrid cell – cell junctions . A ) The InlA / E - cadherin chimeric protein was generated by substituting the EC repeats of E - cadherin with the LRR repeats of the Listeriamonocytogenes surface protein InlA . B ) HeLa cells were transfected with a control plasmid or with a plasmid containing the chimeric DNA and the expression of the chimera was tested by western blots with an InlA - speciﬁc antibody . C ) HeLa cells transfected with the InlA - E - cadherin chimera were incubated with E - cadherin - coated beads for 1h . Beads were labeled with an anti - E - cadherin antibody before ( blue ) and after permeabilization ( red ) to distinguish extracellular and intracellular beads and cells were labeled with an anti - InlA antibody ( green ) to detect transfected cells . D ) HeLa cells transfected with the InlA / E - cadherin chimera were co - cultured with Jeg3 cells expressing endogenous E - cadherin . After an overnight incubation cells were ﬁxed and labeled with an antibody against the extracellular domain of E - cadherin , that speciﬁcally recognizes endogenous E - cadherin ( red ) , and with an InlA - speciﬁc antibody ( green ) . When cell – cell contacts were more interdigitated we could observe the presence of endocytic vesicles positive for both InlA ( green ) and E - cadherin ( red ) . Scale bars 10 μ m . 1660 Trafﬁc2012 ; 13 : 1653 – 1666 Cell – Cell Adhesion and Bacterial Internalization A B C Figure 6 : Cell adhesion mediates cell - in - cell events . A ) Maximum intensity projections ( MIP ) of image stacks acquired along the z - axis of HeLa cells transfected with the InlA / E - cadherin chimera ( long - dashed outline ) , trypsinized and incubated for 1h on a conﬂuent layer of Jeg3 cells ( short - dashed outline ) . HeLa cells were labeled for InlA before permeabilization ( blue ) to detect extracellular cells and after permeabilization ( green ) to detect total HeLa cells . Jeg3 cells were labeled for E - cadherin ( red ) . Images represent different stages of cell – cell internalization . B ) HeLa cells were either left untransfected ( N . T . ) , transfected with an empty vector ( mock ) , with the InlA / E - cadherin chimera ( InlA / hE - cad ) or with GFP - tagged E - cadherin ( E - cad / E - cad ) . Cells were trypsinized and incubated for 1h on adherent Jeg3 cells . As a control , HeLa cells transfected with the InlA / E - cadherin chimera were trypsinized and incubated for 1h on ELB1 cells expressing mouse E - cadherin ( InlA / mEcad ) . To test the role of clathrin in cell - in - cell events HeLa cells transfected with the InlA / E - cadherin chimera were incubated for 1h with adherent Jeg3 cells where clathrin heavy chain ( CHC ) had been previously knocked down by siRNA . In all cases the frequency of cell - in - cell events was quantiﬁed by ﬂuorescence microscopy were HeLa cells were differentially labeled before and after permeabilization . Values are means ( ± SD ) of three independent experiments where approximately 100 cells were analyzed for each condition . C ) Maximum intensity projections ( MIP ) of image stacks acquired along the z - axis of HeLa cells transfected with the InlA / E - cadherin chimera ( long - dashed outline ) , trypsinized and incubated for 1h on a conﬂuent layer of Jeg3 cells ( short - dashed outline ) . Cells were labeled for InlA ( green ) and clathrin ( red ) . Scale bars 10 μ m . Trafﬁc2012 ; 13 : 1653 – 1666 1661 Bonazzi et al . the mixture of transfected and non - transfected HeLa cells interacted with Jeg3 cells , only the transfected HeLa cells were engulfed by Jeg3 cells ( Figure S4C ) . We then followed the localization of clathrin in Jeg3 cells during cell – cell internalization and in all cases we observed strong recruitment of clathrin around HeLa cells transfected with the InlA / E - cadherin chimera ( Figure 6C ) . Clathrin never accumulated near non - transfected or control - transfected HeLa cells ( data not shown ) . Trypsinized , InlA / E - cadherin transfected HeLa cells were then incubated with Jeg3 cells depleted of CHC by siRNA and cell – cell internalization was quantiﬁed as described above . The efﬁciency of cell internalization was substan - tially reduced for Jeg3 cells depleted of CHC ( Figure 6B ) and the majority of InlA / E - cadherin transfected HeLa cells were still detectable by extracellular staining . Importantly , E - cadherin recruitment around InlA / E - cadherin transfected HeLa cells was still evident in the absence of clathrin , conﬁrming our previous observation that InlA / E - cadherin interactions , as well as E - cadherin / E - cadherin interactions are independent of clathrin at early stages of cell – cell or bacteria – cell interaction . Thus , our model system demonstrates that a cell adhesion pathway can be converted to an internalization pathway , depending on the mobility of one of the partners involved , which suggests that Listeriaexploit this conversion for cellular invasion . Discussion Pathogens that adhere to host cells during infection often target proteins involved in cell adhesion such as integrins and E - cadherin ( 2 – 4 ) . In the case of pathogens that invade cells , these receptors are also hijacked for entry using a clathrin - and actin - dependent mechanism ( 6 , 7 , 14 ) . We recently reported that bacterial infections trigger the formation of clathrin - coated pits at bacterial / cell contact sites and that the formation of clathrin - coated pits precedes and is required for the rearrangements of actin needed for bacterial adhesion or uptake ( 14 ) . Here we show that the process of cell – cell adhesion triggers the same sequence of intracellular events that occur during bacterial infections . These include the recruitment of the clathrin adaptor Dab2 , the tyrosine - phosphorylation of CHC , and the recruitment actin - binding protein Hip1R and the motor protein Myosin VI . In addition , we used siRNA to deplete cells of endogenous CHC and we show that clathrin recruitment at cell – cell contacts is required for subsequent reorganization of actin during the maturation of AJs . Because E - cadherin - coated beads bound to cells also recruit clathrin and actin and their uptake depends on these proteins , we propose that the actin alterations at the AJ following clathrin depletion result from direct interference with pathways triggered by transcellular E - cadherin complexes . We therefore suggest a novel role for clathrin as an actin organizer during the initiation of AJ formation that is independent of endocytosis and therefore distinct from clathrin - mediated E - cadherin internalization that occurs during AJ disruption ( 32 , 33 ) . To further explore the parallel between events triggered by E - cadherin / E - cadherin - mediated cell adhesion and those occurring during InlA / E - cadherin - mediated bacterial inter - nalization , we developed a model system by generating a chimeric protein that contains the E - cadherin - binding domain of the Listeria protein InlA fused with the trans - membrane and intracellular domains of E - cadherin . When HeLa cells that lack endogenous E - cadherin were trans - fected with this chimeric protein they were able to use the LRR E - cadherin binding domain of InlA to form hybrid AJs with Jeg3 expressing endogenous E - cadherin . The occa - sional observation of vesicles positive for both E - cadherin and InlA suggested the possibility that cell adhesion is accompanied by balanced ‘trogocytosis’ ( 34 ) , in which portions of one cell are internalized by the neighboring cell when both cells are anchored . We further observed that trypsinized ( unanchored ) HeLa cells expressing either InlA / E - cadherin or E - cadherin interact with and are internal - ized by adherent epithelial cells in a process reminiscent of bacterial uptake . This model system suggests that , in principle , the relative mobility of interacting partners may dictate the commitment to adhesion or internalization . We are aware that this is an artiﬁcial system demonstrating how bacteria could exploit adhesion for invasion , and can - not conclude that any such cell – cell internalization events based on E - cadherin interactions between epithelial cells occur in vivo . However , we note that a similar phe - nomenon of cell – cell internalization has been reported for other cell types . Macrophages can phagocytose other cells ( 35 ) and cells from metastatic tumors internalize immune effector cells in a process called cell - cannibalism as a way to escape the immune response and acquire nutrients ( 36 , 37 ) . Interestingly , this phagocytic activity correlates with increased tumor expression of the human homolog of the protein phg1A from Dictyosteliumdiscoideum ( 38 ) which uses AP1 and clathrin for phagocytosis ( 39 ) . In a related process called ‘entosis’ mammary epithelial cells that have detached from the extracellular matrix , but have escaped programmed cell death , are internalized by neigh - boring cells in suspension . This process differs from can - nibalism in that the fate of the internalized cells may vary from degradation to intracellular duplication ( 40 ) . Of note , entosis is initiated , and dependent on , the establishment of E - cadherin dependent cell – cell adhesion . Here , with the goal of demonstrating that adhesion can be subverted for internalization , we developed a model system that repro - duces a similar cell - in - cell phenomenon for non - metastatic epithelial cells . Further experiments will be required in order to assess whether this is a natural phenomenon of epithelial cells . We further note that in our model of conversion from adhesion to internalization , clathrin is involved in cell – cell internalization , whereas it has been previously shown that transcytosis of lymphocytes across epithelial cells is caveolin - and actin - dependent ( 41 ) . The E - cadherin - clathrin - actin dependent cell - in - cell inter - nalization described here has parallels with the internal - ization of Listeria . Both pathways share properties of AJ 1662 Trafﬁc2012 ; 13 : 1653 – 1666 Cell – Cell Adhesion and Bacterial Internalization A B Figure 7 : CLSEM analysis of cell - in - cell events . Early ( A ) and late ( B ) stages of cell - in - cell events . HeLa cells transfected with the InlA / E - cadherin chimera were trypsinized and incubated for 1h on a conﬂuent layer of Jeg3 cells . HeLa cells were labeled for InlA ( green ) and Jeg3 cells were labeled for E - cadherin ( red ) . Cells were imaged along the z - axis to visualize E - cadherin recruitment around transfected HeLa cells ( xz and yz orthogonal views of insets ) . Using CLSEM the same cells were scanned at the electron microscope to better visualize cell – cell internalization ( SEM and corresponding insets . Jeg3 cells are pseudo - colored in red , transfected HeLa cells are pseudo - colored in green ) . Arrows indicate examples of correlated structures visualized by immunoﬂuorescence and SEM . Scale bars 10 μ m . Trafﬁc2012 ; 13 : 1653 – 1666 1663 Bonazzi et al . formation . Listeria infection apparently represents bacte - rial exploitation of the junction formation pathway and its ability to convert to an internalization pathway . Through this analysis , we have now revealed a novel role for clathrin in organizing actin during cell – cell AJ formation , reinforc - ing the view that deﬁning pathogen infection strategies can reveal unappreciated features of normal host cell pathways . Materials and Methods Celllines Jeg3 cells ( human epithelial placental cells ATCC no : HTB - 36 ) , HeLa cells ( human cervix epithelial cells ATTC no : CCL - 2 ) and MDCK cells ( Madin Darby Canine Kidney cells ATCC no : CCL - 34 ) were all grown in MEM medium containing Glutamax , non - essential amino acids , sodium pyruvate and 10 % fetal bovine serum ( Biowest ) . PlasmidsandsiRNAsequences Double - stranded RNA targeting CHC sequence 1 : 5’ - GGG AAU UCU UCG UAC UCC ATT - 3’ , sequence 2 : 5’ - GAU UAU CAA UUA CCG UAC ATT - 3’ , or CLC sequences ( combined 5’ - AAA GAC AGT TAT GCA GCT ATT - 3’ against CLCa with 5’ - AAG GAA CCA GCG CCA GAG TGA - 3’ against CLCb ) , Cy3 - tagged CHC - targeted double - stranded RNA : 5’ - Cy3 / GGG CAA UUC AAA GAU AUC ATT - 3’ and control siRNA sequences were obtained from Ambion . Double - stranded RNA targeting the Hip1R sequence 1 : 5’ - AAC AGG AAC UUG CCA CAA GCC - 3’ , sequence 2 : 5’ - ACC GGA GAA TCT CAT TGA GAT CTT - 3’ and control siRNA sequences were obtained from Qiagen . Double - stranded RNA targeting the Myosin VI sequence 1 : 5’ - GCU GGC AGU UCA UAG GAA UTT - 3’ , sequence 2 : 5’ - AUU CCU AUG AAC UGC CAG CTT - 3’and control siRNA sequences were obtained from Eurogentec . Double - stranded RNA targeting the Dab2 sequence 1 : 5’ - GCA AAGAUAUCCUGUUAGUTT - 3’ , sequence2 : 5’ - GAACCAGCCUUCACC CUU UTT - 3’ and control siRNA sequences were obtained from Thermo Scientiﬁc . GFP - tagged E - cadherin was kindly provided by Prof . W . J . Nelson ( Stanford University , CA ) ; GFP - tagged CLC was kindly provided by Prof . Tomas Kirchhausen ( Harvard Medical School , MA ) . The InlA / E - cadherin chimera was generated as follows : the region of InlA encompassing the LRR repeats and the inter repeat region ( IR ) was PCR ampliﬁed from L . monocytogenes colonies ( BUG600 ) using InlA - Ecad Fw ( 5’ CTG CTG CAG GTC TCC TCT TGG CTC TGC CAG GAG GCT ACA ATT ACA CAA GAT ACT CCT AT 3’ ) and InlA - Ecad Rev ( 5’ GAC GCC GGC AGG ATT TTT CGT AAA TTG AGC GTA CAG 3’ ) that allowed the integration of a PstI and NgoMIV digestion sites that were used for digestion . We then digested a pcDNA3 - E - cadherin vector with NgoMIV producing two fragments , one containing the transmembrane and intracellular domains of E - cadherin and the other one the signal peptide and the EC repeats . The latter fragment was digested again with PstI generating a fragment containing only the EC repeats of E - cadherin and the other one containing the E - cadherin signal peptide . We then discarded the fragment containing the EC repeats and fused the other two fragments of E - cadherin with the InlA PCR product . We thus generated a chimera that maintained the signal peptide , the transmembrane and the intracellular domains of E - cadherin and substituted the EC - repeats region with the LRR and IR regions of InlA . Antibodiesandreagents HECD1 anti - human E - cadherin ( extracellular region ) and ECCD - 2 anti - mouse E - cadherin antibodies were obtained from Takara ( Shiga , Japan ) ; 24E10 anti - human E - cadherin antibody ( intracellular region ) was from Cell Signaling Technology ; anti - Hip1R and anti p34 polyclonal antibodies were from Millipore ; anti - α - catenin polyclonal antibody , anti - Dab2 polyclonal antibody , anti - Myosin VI polyclonal antibody were from Santa Cruz Biotechnology ; anti - GAPDH monoclonal antibody was from Abcam ; anti - mDia1 monoclonal antibody was from BD Transduction Laboratories ; X22 anti - CHC monoclonal antibody , anti - CLC polyclonal antibody and anti - phospho - CHC were produced in our laboratory as previously described ( 14 , 27 , 42 ) , anti - InlA polyclonal antibody R302 and anti - InlA monoclonal antibody L7 . 7 were produced in our laboratory . Alexa Fluor 647 - conjugated , Cy3 - conjugated and FITC - conjugated Phalloidin and Hoechst were from Molecular Probes . Paraformaldehyde was obtained from Electron Microscopy Solutions . Immunoﬂuorescenceanalysis Cells were ﬁxed in 4 % paraformaldehyde in PBS at room temperature , rinsed in PBS and incubated in blocking solution ( 0 . 5 % BSA , 50m M NH4Cl in PBS , pH 7 . 4 ) . A 0 . 05 % saponin was added to the blocking solution where needed . Cells were then incubated with the primary antibodies diluted in blocking solution for 1h at room temperature , rinsed ﬁve times in PBS and further incubated for 45min with the secondary antibodies diluted in the blocking solution . Fluorescent phalloidin was added to the secondary antibodies to label actin , where needed . Where indicated , cells were subjected to cytosolic extraction before ﬁxation . Brieﬂy , cells were incubated 30seconds in extraction buffer ( 80m M PIPES pH 6 . 9 , 0 . 9m M EGTA , 0 . 9m M EDTA , 30 % glycerol ) containing 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 , washed in extraction buffer and ﬁxed in 3 % paraformaldehyde in extraction buffer . After labeling , coverslips were mounted using Fluoromountmedium ( EMS ) . Hoechstwasaddedtothemountingmedium fornucleivisualization , whereneeded . SampleswereanalyzedwithaZeiss Axiovert 135 epiﬂuorescence microscope ( Carl Zeiss ) connected to a CCD camera . Images were acquired alternatively with a 100 × , 63 × or 40 × oil immersion objectives and processed with MetaMorph ( Universal Imaging Corp . ) . I MAGE J software was used for image analysis and quantiﬁcations . Differential immunoﬂuorescence labeling for extracellular and total beads andcellswasperformedaspreviouslydescribedforbacterialinfections ( 5 ) . Coated - beadinternalizationassays E - cadherin - coated bead internalization was performed as previously described ( 5 ) . Transienttransfections For DNA transient transfection cells were plated to 80 % conﬂuency and transfected using Gene Juice ( Merck ) according to manufacturers’ instructions . Cells were incubated for 24h with the transfectant before the experiment . For siRNA transfection 2 × 105 / mL cells were mixed with siRNA and Lipofectamine RNAiMAX prior to plating according to manufacturers’ instructions for reverse transfections . Cells were probed for siRNA efﬁcacy 72h after transfection by western blot . Calcium - jumpassay MDCK were cultured in glass - bottomed Petri dishes and transfected with GFP - tagged CLC as described above . Cells were then incubated until they reached conﬂuency ( 48h approximately ) , rinsed three times in PBS and incubated in HBSS culture medium without calcium . Cells were then imagedwitha40 × oilimmersionobjectiveusinganepiﬂuorescencemicro - scope equipped with a temperature - and CO 2 - controlled chamber . Images were acquired every 2min and as cells separated in response to calcium removal , complete culture medium was re - added to cells and imaging was continued for approximately 15h . Cells were then ﬁxed after imaging and processed for indirect immunoﬂuorescence where actin was labeled with ﬂuorescent phalloidin and E - cadherin with the HECD1 antibody . Cell – celladhesionassayandCLSEM To follow the effects of clathrin depletion during the onset of cell – cell adhesion , Jeg3 cells were transfected with Cy3 - tagged control or CHC - targeted siRNA sequences as described above . Cells were trypsinized 48h after transfection and re - seeded onto glass coverslips overnight before the experiment to allow the formation of new cell – cell contacts . Cells were then ﬁxed and processed for immunoﬂuorescence where actin and 1664 Trafﬁc2012 ; 13 : 1653 – 1666 Cell – Cell Adhesion and Bacterial Internalization E - cadherin at cell – cell contacts were labeled by Cy5 - tagged phalloidin and anti - E - cadherin HECD1 antibody , respectively . The frequency of E - cadherin and actin recruitment at cell – cell contact was quantiﬁed by ﬂuorescence microscopy where approximately 100 cells were analyzed for each con - dition . The ﬂuorescence proﬁle of E - cadherin and actin across cell – cell contact was measured along arbitrary lines perpendicular to cell junc - tions . Fluorescence measurements were applied to an average of 50 cells and multiple cell – cell junctions were probed for each cell . For CLSEM microscopy , cells were trypsinized the day before the experiment and re - seeded onto glass - bottomed Petri dishes with a Cellocator grid engraved for cell localization ( MatTek Corporation ) . On the day of the experiment cells were permeabilized before ﬁxation in a cytoskeleton - stabilizing buffer ( 1 % triton , 4 % PEG 8000 , 10m M PIPES , 0 . 1m M EGTA , 0 . 1m M MgCl 2 ) at 37 ◦ C . Cells were rinsed and ﬁxed in 3 % paraformaldehyde and 0 . 05 % glutaraldehyde . Cells were then labeled with ﬂuorescent phalloidin as previously described and imaged with an epiﬂuorescence microscope . In parallel , a sample of siRNA - transfected cells was used to test the efﬁcacy of clathrin knock down by western blot . Alternatively , Jeg3 cells were cultured onto glass - bottomed Petri dishes with a Cellocator grid engraved and subjected to the cell internalization assay ( see below ) . In all cases , for subsequent SEM analysis , the position of the cells of interest were iden - tiﬁed on the Cellocator grid and cells were ﬁxed in 2 . 5 % glutaraldehyde in 0 . 2 M cacodylate buffer ( pH 7 . 2 ) overnight at 4 ◦ C , then washed for 5min three times in 0 . 2 M cacodylate buffer ( pH 7 . 2 ) , postﬁxed for 1h in 1 % osmium and rinsed with distilled water . Cells were dehydrated through a graded ethanol series followed by critical point drying with CO 2 . Dried specimens were sputter - coated twice with gold / palladium with a gun ionic evaporator PEC 682 . The co - ordinates of the correlative imaged with ﬂuo - rescent microscopy were recovered in a JEOL JSM 6700F ﬁeld emission scanning electron microscope operating at 7kV . The same cells were then observed and imaged by using the secondary electron image detector . Hybridjunctionsandcellinternalizationassays HeLa cells and Jeg3 cells were cultured separately into six - well plates and HeLa cells were transfected with the InlA / E - cadherin chimera as previously described . Twenty - four hours after transfection HeLa and Jeg3 cells were trypsinized and co - cultured onto glass coverslips in 24 - well plates . Cells were then spinned 2min at 1000rpm to synchronize cell adhesion to the substrate and incubated overnight at 37 ◦ C . Cells were then ﬁxed in 4 % paraformaldehyde and processed for immunoﬂuorescence where trans - fected HeLa cells were labeled by the anti - InlA antibody and Jeg3 cells by the anti - E - cadherin antibody HECD1 . For cell – cell internalization , HeLa cells were cultured and transfected as above and Jeg3 cells were cultured directly onto glass coverslips in 24 - well plates . Twenty - four hours after transfection HeLa cells were trypsinized and incubated on a conﬂuent layer of Jeg3 cells . Cells were spinned as described above and incubated for 1h at 37 ◦ C . Cells were then ﬁxed as above and differentially labeled for InlA before and after permeabilization to distinguish extracellular and intracellu - lar cells . Jeg3 cells were labeled with the anti - E - cadherin antibody HECD1 . Cell – cell internalization was quantiﬁed by immunoﬂuorescence where approximately100transfectedHeLacellswerecountedforeachcondition . Acknowledgments ThisworkwassupportedbyInstitutPasteur , Inserm , INRA , ERC ( Advanced Grant 233348 ) to P . C . and NIH grant GM038093 to F . M . B . M . B . was supported by the Pasteur Roux Fellowship . A . T . - A . was an EMBO long - term fellow . A . K . is a recipient of a scholarship from the Pasteur - Paris University International Doctoral Program / Institut Carnot Maladies Infectieuses . P . C . is a senior international research scholar of the Howard Hughes Medical Institute . The authors have no conﬂict of interest . Supporting Information Additional Supporting Information may be found in the online version of this article : Figure S1 : Localization of actin polymerizing factors in CHC - depleted cells . Jeg3 cells were transfected with non - targeting ( Ctrl ) or CHC - targeted ( CHC siRNA ) RNA sequences . A ) 72h after transfection cell lysates were tested for CHC depletion by western blot . Alternatively , 56h after transfection cells were trypsinized and seeded on glass coverslips to allow the formation of new adherens junctions . 16h after seeding , cells were ﬁxed and labeled for actin and either E - cadherin and p34 ( B ) or α - catenin and mDia ( C ) . Scale bars 10 μ m . Figure S2 : The clathrin - actin interaction machinery plays a role in AJ formation . Jeg3 cells were transfected with non - targeting ( Ctrl ) or CLC , Dab2 , Hip1R or Myosin VI - targeted siRNA sequences . A ) 72h after transfection cell lysates were tested for protein depletion by western blot using the corresponding antibodies . Alternatively , 56h after transfection cellsweretrypsinizedandseededonglasscoverslipstoallowtheformation of new adherens junctions . 16h after seeding , cells were ﬁxed and labeled for E - cadherin , actin and DNA ( B ) . Scale bars 10 μ m . Figure S3 : Characterization of the InlA / E - cadherin chimera . HeLa cells were transfected with a plasmid expressing the InlA / E - cadherin chimera , ﬁxed and immunolabeled with either an antibody against the intracellular domain of E - cadherin after permeabilization ( A , green ) or with an anti - InlA antibody in non permeabilized cells ( B , green ) . C ) HeLa cells transfected with the InlA - E - cadherin chimera were incubated with E - cadherin - coated beads for 1h . E - cadherin - coated beads ( red ) efﬁciently recruited the InlA / E - cadherin chimera ( green ) and clathrin ( blue ) . D , E ) . HeLa cells transfected with the InlA / E - cadherin chimera were co - cultured with Jeg3 cells expressing endogenous E - cadherin . After an overnight incubation cells were ﬁxed and labeled with E - cadherin , InlA and typical markers of adherens junctions such as α - catenin ( D ) and actin ( E ) . F ) HeLa cells transfected with the InlA / E - cadherin chimera were co - cultured with ELB1 cells expressing endogenous mouse E - cadherin . After an overnight incubation cells were ﬁxed and labeled with an antibody against the extracellular domain of mouse E - cadherin , that speciﬁcally recognizes endogenous mouse E - cadherin ( red ) , and with an InlA - speciﬁc antibody ( green ) . Arrows point at sites of contact between HeLa and ELB1 cells . Scale bars 10 μ m . Figure S4 : Cell – cell internalization . HeLa cells transfected with GFP - E - cadherin were co - cultured with Jeg3 cells expressing endogenous E - cadherin to test the formation of adherens junctions . B ) Maximum intensity projections ( MIP ) of image stacks acquired along the z - axis of HeLa cells transfected with E - cadherin GFP ( green ) , trypsinized and incubated for 1h on a conﬂuent layer of Jeg3 cells . Jeg3 cells were labeled for endogenous E - cadherin ( red ) . B ) Example of a particular case of cell – cell internalization where two coupled HeLa cells ( 1 and 2 and dashed lines ) , one of which ( cell 2 ) is transfected with the InlA / E - cadherin chimera ( InlA labeling in green ) , are in contact with adherent Jeg3 cells ( E - cadherin labeling in red ) . CLSEM performed as in B , illustrates the non - transfected HeLa cell ( cell 1 , pseudo colored in blue ) is not internalized by Jeg3 cells ( pseudo colored in red ) , while cell 2 is surrounded by Jeg3 cell membrane and hidden from view . Scale bars 10 μ m . Movie S1 : Clathrin recruitment at forming adherens junctions . MDCK cells transfected with GFP - tagged CLC to follow clathrin were depleted of calcium ( 0 – 166min ) to allow adherens junction opening and incubated with calcium ( 168 – 1000min ) to follow clathrin recruitment at cell – cell contacts during thedenovoformation of adherens junctions . Images from phase contrast ( left ) and GFP ( right ) channels were acquired every 2min . References 1 . Cavallaro U , Christofori G . Cell adhesion and signalling by cadherins and Ig - CAMs in cancer . Nat Rev Cancer 2004 ; 4 : 118 – 132 . 2 . Bonazzi M , Cossart P . Impenetrable barriers or entry portals ? The role of cell - cell adhesion during infection . JCB 2011 ; 195 : 349 – 358 . 3 . Knodler LA , Celli J , Finlay BB . Pathogenic trickery : deception of host cell processes . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2001 ; 2 : 578 – 588 . 4 . Pizarro - Cerd´a J , Cossart P . Bacterial adhesion and entry into host cells . Cell 2006 ; 124 : 715 – 727 . Trafﬁc2012 ; 13 : 1653 – 1666 1665 Bonazzi et al . 5 . Bonazzi M , Veiga E , Pizarro - Cerd´a J , Cossart P . Successive post - translational modiﬁcations of E - cadherin are required for InlA - mediated internalization of Listeria monocytogenes . Cell Microbiol 2008 ; 10 : 2208 – 2222 . 6 . Veiga E , Cossart P . Listeriahijacks the clathrin - dependent endocytic machinery to invade mammalian cells . Nat Cell Biol 2005 ; 7 : 894 – 900 . 7 . Veiga E , Guttman JA , Bonazzi M , Boucrot E , Toledo - Arana A , Lin AE , Enninga J , Pizarro - Cerd´a J , Finlay BB , Kirchhausen T , Cossart P . Invasive and adherent bacterial pathogens co - opt host clathrin for infection . Cell Host Microbe 2007 ; 2 : 340 – 351 . 8 . Patel SD , Chen CP , Bahna F , Honig B , Shapiro L . Cadherin - mediated cell - cell adhesion : sticking together as a family . Curr Opin Struct Biol 2003 ; 13 : 690 – 698 . 9 . Roy F , Berx G . The cell - cell adhesion molecule E - cadherin . Cell Mol Life Sci 2008 ; 65 : 3756 – 3788 . 10 . Drees F . α - Catenin is a molecular switch that binds E - cadherin - β - catenin and regulates actin - ﬁlament assembly . Cell 2005 ; 123 : 903 – 915 . 11 . Verma S , Shewan AM , Scott JA , Helwani FM , Elzen den NR , Miki H , Takenawa T , Yap AS . Arp2 / 3 activity is necessary for efﬁcient formation of E - cadherin adhesive contacts . J Biol Chem 2004 ; 279 : 34062 – 34070 . 12 . Yamada S , Pokutta S , Drees F , Weis WI , Nelson WJ . Deconstructing the cadherin - catenin - actin complex . Cell 2005 ; 123 : 889 – 901 . 13 . Sousa S , Cabanes D , Bougn ` eres L , Lecuit M , Sansonetti P , Tran - Van - Nhieu G , Cossart P . Src , cortactin and Arp2 / 3 complex are required for E - cadherin - mediated internalization ofListeriainto cells . Cell Microbiol 2007 ; 9 : 2629 – 2643 . 14 . Bonazzi M , Vasudevan L , Mallet A , Sachse M , Sartori A , Pr´evost M - C , Roberts A , Taner S , Wilbur J , Brodsky F , Cossart P . Clathrin phosphorylation is required for actin recruitment at sites of bacterial adhesion and internalization . JCB 2011 ; 195 : 525 – 536 . 15 . Crotzer VL , Mabardy AS , Weiss A , Brodsky FM . T cell receptor engagement leads to phosphorylation of clathrin heavy chain during receptor internalization . J Exp Med 2004 ; 199 : 981 – 991 . 16 . Stoddart A , Dykstra ML , Brown BK , Song W , Pierce SK , Brodsky FM . Lipid rafts unite signaling cascades with clathrin to regulate BCR internalization . Immunity 2002 ; 17 : 451 – 462 . 17 . Wilde A , Beattie EC , Lem L , Riethof DA , Liu SH , Mobley WC , Soriano P , Brodsky FM . EGF receptor signaling stimulates SRC kinase phosphorylation of clathrin , inﬂuencing clathrin redistribution and EGF uptake . Cell 1999 ; 96 : 677 – 687 . 18 . Carreno S , Engqvist - Goldstein AE , Zhang CX , McDonald KL , Drubin DG . Actin dynamics coupled to clathrin - coated vesicle formation at the trans - Golgi network . J Cell Biol 2004 ; 165 : 781 – 788 . 19 . Chen C - Y , Brodsky FM . Huntingtin - interacting protein 1 ( Hip1 ) and Hip1 - related protein ( Hip1R ) bind the conserved sequence of clathrin light chains and thereby inﬂuence clathrin assembly in vitro and actin distribution in vivo . J Biol Chem 2005 ; 280 : 6109 – 6117 . 20 . Engqvist - Goldstein AEY . The actin - binding protein Hip1R associates with clathrin during early stages of endocytosis and promotes clathrin assembly in vitro . J Cell Biol 2001 ; 154 : 1209 – 1224 . 21 . Engqvist - Goldstein AEY , Zhang CX , Carreno S , Barroso C , Heuser JE , Drubin DG . RNAi - mediated Hip1R silencing results in stable association between the endocytic machinery and the actin assembly machinery . Mol Biol Cell 2004 ; 15 : 1666 – 1679 . 22 . Le Clainche C , Pauly BS , Zhang CX , Engqvist - Goldstein AEY , Cunningham K , Drubin DG . A Hip1R - cortactin complex negatively regulates actin assembly associated with endocytosis . EMBO J 2007 ; 26 : 1199 – 1210 . 23 . Newpher TM , Idrissi F - Z , Geli MI , Lemmon SK . Novel function of clathrin light chain in promoting endocytic vesicle formation . Mol Biol Cell 2006 ; 17 : 4343 – 4352 . 24 . Wilbur JD , Chen C - Y , Manalo V , Hwang PK , Fletterick RJ , Brodsky FM . Actin binding by Hip1 ( Huntingtin - interacting Protein 1 ) and Hip1R ( Hip1 - related Protein ) is regulated by clathrin light chain . J Biol Chem 2008 ; 283 : 32870 – 32879 . 25 . Mclachlan RW , Kraemer A , Helwani FM , Kovacs EM , Yap AS . E - cadherin adhesion activates c - Src signaling at cell - cell contacts . Mol Biol Cell 2007 ; 18 : 3214 – 3223 . 26 . Pang J - H , Kraemer A , Stehbens SJ , Frame MC , Yap AS . Recruitment of phosphoinositide 3 - kinase deﬁnes a positive contribution of tyrosine kinase signaling to E - cadherin function . J Biol Chem 2005 ; 280 : 3043 – 3050 . 27 . Brodsky FM . Clathrin structure characterized with monoclonal antibodies . I . Analysis of multiple antigenic sites . J Cell Biol 1985 ; 101 : 2047 – 2054 . 28 . Esk C , Chen C - Y , Johannes L , Brodsky FM . The clathrin heavy chain isoform CHC22 functions in a novel endosomal sorting step . J Cell Biol 2010 ; 188 : 131 . 29 . Schubert W - D , Urbanke C , Ziehm T , Beier V , Machner MP , Domann E , Wehland J , Chakraborty T , Heinz DW . Structure of internalin , a major invasion protein ofListeriamonocytogenes , in complex with its human receptor E - cadherin . Cell 2002 ; 111 : 825 – 836 . 30 . Bonazzi M , Lecuit M , Cossart P . Listeriamonocytogenes internalin and E - cadherin : from structure to pathogenesis . Cell Microbiol 2009 ; 11 : 693 – 702 . 31 . Lecuit M , Dramsi S , Gottardi C , Fedor - Chaiken M , Gumbiner B , Cossart P . A single amino acid in E - cadherin responsible for host speciﬁcity towards the human pathogen Listeria monocytogenes . EMBO J 1999 ; 18 : 3956 – 3963 . 32 . Le TL , Joseph SR , Yap AS , Stow JL . Protein kinase C regulates endocytosis and recycling of E - cadherin . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 2002 ; 283 : C489 – C499 . 33 . de Beco S , Gueudry C , Amblard F , Coscoy S . Endocytosis is required for E - cadherin redistribution at mature adherens junctions . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2009 ; 106 : 7010 – 7015 . 34 . Ahmed KA , Munegowda MA , Xie Y , Xiang J . Intercellular trogocytosis plays an important role in modulation of immune responses . Cell Mol Immunol 2008 ; 5 : 261 – 269 . 35 . Tsai RK , Discher DE . Inhibition of ”self” engulfment through deactivation of myosin - II at the phagocytic synapse between human cells . J Cell Biol 2008 ; 180 : 989 – 1003 . 36 . Lugini L , Matarrese P , Tinari A , Lozupone F , Federici C , Iessi E , Gentile M , Luciani F , Parmiani G , Rivoltini L , Malorni W , Fais S . Cannibalism of live lymphocytes by human metastatic but not primary melanoma cells . Cancer Res 2006 ; 66 : 3629 – 3638 . 37 . Wang S , Guo Z , Xia P , Liu T , Wang J , Li S , Sun L , Lu J , Wen Q , Zhou M , Ma L , Ding X , Wang X , Yao X . Internalization of NK cells into tumor cells requires ezrin and leads to programmed cell - in - cell death . Cell Res 2009 ; 19 : 1350 – 1362 . 38 . Lozupone F , Perdicchio M , Brambilla D , Borghi M , Meschini S , Barca S , Marino ML , Logozzi M , Federici C , Iessi E , de Milito A , Fais S . The human homologue of Dictyosteliumdiscoideum phg1A is expressed by human metastatic melanoma cells . EMBO Rep 2009 ; 10 : 1348 – 1354 . 39 . Lefkir Y , Malbouyres M , Gotthardt D , Ozinsky A , Cornillon S , Bruckert F , Aderem AA , Soldati T , Cosson P , Letourneur F . Involvement of the AP - 1 adaptor complex in early steps of phagocytosis and macropinocytosis . Mol Biol Cell 2004 ; 15 : 861 – 869 . 40 . Overholtzer M , Mailleux A , Mouneimne G , Normand G , Schnitt S , King R , Cibas E , Brugge J . A nonapoptotic cell death process , entosis , that occurs by cell - in - cell invasion . Cell 2007 ; 131 : 966 – 979 . 41 . Mill´an J , Hewlett L , Glyn M , Toomre D , Clark P , Ridley AJ . Lymphocyte transcellular migration occurs through recruitment of endothelial ICAM - 1 to caveola - and F - actin - rich domains . Nat Cell Biol 2006 ; 8 : 113 – 123 . 42 . Acton S , Wong D , Parham P , Brodsky F , Jackson A . Alteration of clathrin light chain expression by transfection and gene disruption . Mol Biol Cell 1993 ; 4 : 647 . 1666 Trafﬁc2012 ; 13 : 1653 – 1666