Characterization of the Cadherin – Catenin Complex of the Sea Anemone Nematostella vectensis and Implications for the Evolution of Metazoan Cell – Cell Adhesion Donald Nathaniel Clarke , 1 Phillip W . Miller , 2 Christopher J . Lowe , 1 William I . Weis , 2 , 3 and William James Nelson * , 1 , 2 1 Department of Biology , Stanford University 2 Department of Molecular and Cellular Physiology , Stanford University School of Medicine 3 Department of Structural Biology , Stanford University School of Medicine * Corresponding author : E - mail : wjnelson @ stanford . edu . Associate editor : Gregory Wray Abstract The cadherin – catenin complex ( CCC ) mediates cell – cell adhesion in bilaterian animals by linking extracellular cadherin - based adhesions to the actin cytoskeleton . However , it is unknown whether the basic organization of the complex is conserved across all metazoans . We tested whether protein interactions and actin - binding properties of the CCC are conserved in a nonbilaterian animal , the sea anemone Nematostella vectensis . We demonstrated that N . vectensis has a complete repertoire of cadherin – catenin proteins , including two classical cadherins , one a - catenin , and one b - catenin . Using size - exclusion chromatography and multi - angle light scattering , we showed that a - catenin and b - catenin formed a heterodimer that bound N . vectensis Cadherin - 1 and - 2 . Nematostella vectensis a - catenin bound F - actin with equivalent afﬁnity as either a monomer or an a / b - catenin heterodimer , and its afﬁnity for F - actin was , in part , regulated by a novel insert between the N - and C - terminal domains . Nematostella vectensis a - catenin inhibited Arp2 / 3 complex - mediated nucleation of actin ﬁlaments , a regulatory property previously thought to be unique to mammalian a E - catenin . Thus , despite signiﬁcant differences in sequence , the key interactions of the CCC are conserved between bilaterians and cnidarians , indicating that the core function of the CCC as a link between cell adhesions and the actin cytoskeleton is ancestral in the eumetazoans . Key words : adherens junction , cadherin , catenin , cell adhesion , evolution , cnidarians . Introduction In comparative cell and developmental biology , it is generally accepted that orthologous genes have largely conserved bio - chemical functions between organisms , and that new molec - ular functions are acquired through the emergence of novel genes through whole - gene duplication or by the shuffling of functional protein domains . In cases where this holds true , sequence comparison is a simple and useful tool for detecting the emergence of new genes , but it is far less definitive when searching for the acquisition of new molecular functions in highly conserved genes—Orthologous proteins that are over 95 % identical at the amino acid level can have dramatically different biochemical properties , which produce entirely dif - ferent phenotypes at the organismal level ( Schepis et al . 2012 ; Miller , Clarke , et al . 2013 ; Miller , Pokutta , et al . , 2013 ) . In comparison , the utility of a functional approach when inves - tigating the emergence of new functions in old genes is that it avoids generalities and assumptions , and produces results that are definitive rather than predictive . As demonstrated here with the cadherin – catenin complex ( CCC ) , in vitro bio - chemical experiments make it possible to directly test hy - potheses of conservation of protein function and , by further analysis of an expanded set of orthologs , may reveal how and when highly conserved proteins acquired novel functions in evolution . The CCC mediates intercellular adhesion , and is indispen - sible for normal development and tissue organization in com - plex animals ( Larue et al . 1996 ; Gumbiner 2005 ; Nelson 2008 ; Harris and Tepass 2010 ) . Cell adhesion coordinated by the CCC is thought to be ancestral in metazoans ( multicellular animals ) —Genes encoding its core component proteins , clas - sical cadherins , b - catenin , and a - catenin , are present in all metazoan phyla , and the assembly of the CCC into a func - tional cell adhesion complex is thought to have coincided with the evolution of animal multicellularity early in the metazoan stem lineage ( Abedin and King 2008 ; Nichols et al . 2012 ) . The cadherin complex forms a physical link be - tween cells by coupling transmembrane cadherin adhesion proteins to the actin cytoskeleton ( Borghi et al . 2012 ) . Cadherins on opposing cells bind to one another through calcium - dependent adhesion domains ( CADs ) in the extra - cellular region , and simultaneously bind to b - catenin through a conserved motif in the cytoplasmic region . b - Catenin binds to a - catenin , a filamentous ( F - ) actin - binding protein that A rt i c l e (cid:2) The Author 2016 . Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution . This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non - Commercial License ( http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by - nc / 4 . 0 / ) , which permits non - commercial re - use , distribution , and reproduction in any medium , provided the original work is properly cited . For commercial re - use , please contact journals . permissions @ oup . com Open Access 2016 Mol . Biol . Evol . 33 ( 8 ) : 2016 – 2029 doi : 10 . 1093 / molbev / msw084 Advance Access publication April 28 , 2016 links cadherins to the actin cytoskeleton . In mammals , a E - catenin also functions independently of the CCC as a homodimer in the cytosol to regulate actin dynamics and organization ( Rimm et al . 1995 ; Benjamin et al . 2010 ) . The evolutionary origin of the CCC and its core functions remain uncertain . The CCC appears to have arisen from two separate modules : a transmembrane cadherin adhesion module , and a cytoplasmic actin - binding module ( a - and b - catenin ) , both of which existed independently prior to be - ing co - opted into a single complex at an unknown point early in animal evolution ( Miller , Clarke , et al . 2013 ) . The nonmeta - zoan social amoeba Dictyostelium lacks cadherin proteins al - together , but expresses an a - catenin / b - catenin actin - binding module that is required for the organization of epithelial tis - sues in its multicellular form ( Dickinson , Nelson , et al . 2011 ) . Choanoflagellates , which are thought to be the closest extant eukaryotic relatives of metazoans , also lack classical cadherins , and use a distinct extracellular matrix ( ECM ) - based cell ad - hesion mechanism that relies on C - type lectin - like proteins and incomplete cytokinesis to enable limited multicellular development ( Fairclough et al . 2010 ; Dayel et al . 2011 ; Levin et al . 2014 ) . Sponges ( Porifera ) , one of the earliest evolved lineages of animals , have a complete complement of CCC genes ( Srivastava et al . 2010 ) , but experimental evidence in - dicates that secreted proteoglycans and ECM play a signifi - cant role in coordinating sponge cell – cell adhesion ( Misevic and Burger 1993 ; Varner 1995 ) , and there is not yet any direct evidence demonstrating a role for the CCC in sponge adhe - sion . In contrast , the CCC is required for cell adhesion in bilaterians ( Gumbiner 2005 ; Nelson 2008 ; Miller , Clarke , et al . 2013 ) . Thus , at some point , either coincident with the innovation of animal multicellularity or prior to the diver - gence of bilaterian animals , the modules of the CCC became linked and acquired a cell – cell adhesion function . It is uncertain when assembly of the CCC occurred during the early diversification of multicellular animals . Addressing this problem by sequence comparison is confounded by func - tional studies of the CCC in mouse ( Mus musculus ) and zebrafish ( Danio rerio ) , which demonstrated that small differ - ences in amino acid sequence of CCC proteins , particularly a - catenin , between species produce dramatically different protein functions ( Miller , Pokutta , et al . 2013 ) . Thus , the pres - ence of CCC orthologs in distantly related groups of animals alone is not sufficient to infer homologous CCC functions . Moreover , there is no direct evidence for an adhesion role of the CCC in early branching animal lineages , making it difficult to test the hypothesis that the assembly of the CCC was one of the critical events in the early evolution of animal multi - cellularity . Consequently , there is a need for rigorous func - tional analyses of these proteins in nonbilaterian animals . Here , we analyzed the CCC of the sea anemone , Nematostella vectensis , as a representative of the phylum Cnidaria . We identified all putative classical cadherin , a - cat - enin and b - catenin orthologs in the anemone genome , and tested their interactions in vitro . Our results showed that N . vectensis has a functional CCC that bound F - actin directly and regulated actin dynamics . In contrast to mammals , there did not appear to be an allosteric switch controlling N . vectensis a - catenin / F - actin binding . These results indicate that the an - cestral role of the CCC was to provide a robust , constitutive link between cadherin adhesions and the actin cytoskeleton , and hence the basic capacity for the CCC to interact with the actin cytoskeleton was present at the base of the Eumetazoa ( bilaterians and cnidarians—a majority of animal taxa ) . Materials and Methods Identification of N . vectensis CCC Orthologs and Sequence Analysis Annotated sequences of a - and b - catenin , and cadherin orthologs from representative bilaterian species were re - trieved from NCBI and Uniprot databases and used to con - duct a BLAST search against the N . vectensis genome ( Altschul et al . 1990 ; Putnam et al . 2007 ; Consortium 2015 ) . Predicted sequences were then verified via BLAST search against the N . vectensis transcriptome to recover full - length coding sequences ( Tulin et al . 2013 ) . Domain composition of putative N . vectensis CCC sequences was predicted using the HMMER and SMART webservers to annotate conserved do - main motifs from the PFam database ( Bateman et al . 2004 ; Finn et al . 2011 ; Letunic et al . 2012 ) . Protein characteristics ( MW , theoretical pI , extinction coefficient ) were predicted using the ProtParam tool on the ExPASy server ( Gasteiger et al . 2005 ) . To generate gene trees , sequences were first aligned using MUSCLE and trimmed manually in Jalview ( Edgar 2004 ; Waterhouse et al . 2009 ) . Due to the high vari - ability in the number of repeats in the extracellular region of cadherins , only the cadherin cytoplasmic region was used in phylogenetic analyses . Initial trees were made using FastTree2 , and the resulting tree topologies were verified using maxi - mum likelihood and Bayesian analysis with RAxML and MrBayes ( Price et al . 2010 ; Ronquist et al . 2012 ; Stamatakis 2014 ) . Molecular Cloning Sequences encoding full - length N . vectensis a - catenin , N . vec - tensis b - catenin , and the cytoplasmic region of N . vectensis Cadherin - 1 , Cadherin - 2 , and Dachsous , were amplified by PCR from N . vectensis cDNA using Q5 DNA polymerase ( NEB , Ipswich , MA ) ( see supplementary file S2 for amino acid sequences , Supplementary Material online ) . PCR prod - ucts were inserted into a modified pET vector to generate in - frame fusion proteins with N - terminal His6 - SUMO - TEV tags using Gibson cloning ( Gibson et al . 2008 , 2009 ) . The pET His6 Sumo TEV LIC cloning vector ( 2S - T ) was a gift from Scott Gradia ( Addgene plasmid # 29711 ) . Two variants of N . vecten - sis a - catenin , comprising a deletion construct lacking residues 638 – 1 , 021 of the N . vectensis - specific insert ( Nv a - N - M - ABD ) and the insert alone ( Nv a - I ) , were generated in a similar man - ner using PCR fragments amplified from the full - length N . vectensis a - catenin construct . Recombinant Protein Expression and Purification Recombinant fusion proteins were expressed in BL21 ( DE3 ) Codon Plus E . coli and purified on nickel – nitrilotriacetic acid – agarose beads . Proteins were either directly eluted with Cadherin – Catenin Complex of the Sea Anemone Nematostella vectensis . doi : 10 . 1093 / molbev / msw084 MBE 2017 imidazole ( N . vectensis b - catenin and all cadherins ) , or cleaved off the beads by overnight incubation with TEV protease at 4 (cid:2) C ( N . vectensis a - catenin ) . Following elution , protein was applied to a MonoQ anion exchange column and eluted at 200 mM NaCl in 20 mM HEPES , pH 8 . 0 , 1 mM DTT with a 0 – 1 M NaCl gradient . For proteins directly eluted with imidaz - ole , tags were removed following the MonoQ elution by over - night incubation with TEV protease at 4 (cid:2) C . Proteins were further purified by Superdex 200 size exclusion chromatogra - phy ( SEC ) in 20 mM HEPES , pH 8 . 0 , 150 mM NaCl , and 1 mM DTT . Purified proteins were used immediately for experiments . Limited Proteolysis and Edman Sequencing FPLC - purified full - length N . vectensis a - catenin and variants were diluted to 10 l M and incubated at room temperature in 0 . 05 mg / ml sequence - grade trypsin ( Roche Applied Science , Indianapolis , IN ) in 20 mM HEPES , pH 8 . 0 , 150 mM NaCl , and 1 mM DTT . Reactions were stopped with 2 (cid:3) Laemmli buffer at the indicated times , and samples were analyzed by SDS – PAGE . For N - terminal sequencing , digested peptides were blotted onto PVDF membrane , stained with 0 . 1 % Coomassie Brilliant Blue ( CBB R - 250 , 40 % methanol , and 1 % acetic acid ) , destained , and dried . Individual bands were excised and sequenced by Edman degradation . Native PAGE Purified full - length N . vectensis a - catenin and variants were prepared and separated in a 4 – 16 % Bis – Tris gel using the Novex NativePAGE Bis – Tris gel system and sample prep kit ( ThermoFisher , Waltham , MA ) according to the manufac - turer’s instructions . Gels were run in a XCell SureLock mini - cell at 150 V for 2 h at 4 (cid:2) C , fixed in a solution of 40 % meth - anol and 10 % acetic acid , stained with CBB , and imaged with a LI - COR scanner . Size Exclusion Chromatography Coupled to Multi - Angle Light Scattering Protein binding was assessed via SEC with inline multi - angle light scattering ( MALS ) using a Superdex 200 column at - tached to a UV detector , followed by a DAWN EOS MALS detector and a refractive index ( RI ) detector ( Wyatt Technology , Santa Barbara , CA ) . The system was equilibrated with 20 mM HEPES , pH 8 . 0 , 150 mM NaCl , and 1 mM DTT at 25 (cid:2) C . Detectors were calibrated by measuring the signal of monomeric bovine serum albumin . Molecular weights were calculated using ASTRA software ( Wyatt Technology ) using the signals from the MALS and the RI detectors . Isothermal Titration Calorimetry Isothermal titration calorimetry ( ITC ) experiments were con - ducted using a VP - ITC calorimeter ( Microcal , GE Healthcare , Little Chalfont , United Kingdom ) . For b - catenin / cadherin binding experiments , a 100 - l M solution of either N . vectensis Cadherin - 1 or - 2 was titrated into a cell containing 2 ml of 10 l M N . vectensis b - catenin using a series of 31 9 l l injec - tions . All experiments were conducted in 20 mM HEPES , pH 8 . 0 , 150 mM NaCl , and 1 mM DTT at 25 (cid:2) C . Heat change was measured for 240 s between injections . For all experiments , the average value calculated from heat changes measured at saturation was subtracted from all data points . Binding curves were then fit to these data using a one - site specific binding model in Microcal software ( GE Healthcare ) to obtain K d values . High - Speed Actin Cosedimentation Assays Chicken muscle G - actin ( Cytoskeleton , Inc . , Denver , CO ) was incubated in 1 (cid:3) actin polymerization buffer ( 20 mM Tris , pH 8 . 0 , 100 mM KCl , 2 mM MgCl 2 , 0 . 5 mM ATP , and 1 mM EGTA ) for 1 h at room temperature to polymerize actin fil - aments . Purified full - length N . vectensis a - catenin , variant Nv a - N - M - ABD , or N . vectensis a - catenin (cid:4) b - catenin hetero - dimer was diluted to the indicated concentrations in 1 (cid:3) re - action buffer ( 20 mM Tris , pH 8 . 0 , 150 mM NaCl , 2 mM MgCl 2 , 0 . 5 mM ATP , 1 mM EGTA , and 1 mM DTT ) in the presence or absence of 2 l M F - actin and incubated for 30 min at room temperature . Samples were centrifuged at 100 , 000 rpm in a TLA 120 . 1 rotor ( Beckman - Coulter , Brea , CA ) for 20 min to pellet F - actin , and sedimented proteins were analyzed by SDS – PAGE . CBB - stained gels were imaged with a LI - COR scanner , quantified using ImageJ software , and binding curves fit with a one - site specific binding model using GraphPad Prism software . Actin Polymerization Assays About 1 mg of lyophilized pyrene - labeled rabbit muscle G - actin ( Cytoskeleton , Inc . ) was resuspended and diluted to a concentration of 23 . 3 l M in Buffer A ( 2 mM Tris , pH 8 . 0 , 0 . 2 mM ATP , 0 . 1 mM CaCl 2 and 0 . 5 mM DTT ) . Pyrene - labeled actin was mixed with a laboratory stock of 23 . 3 l M rabbit muscle G - actin [ prepared following the protocol of ( Spudich and Watt 1971 ) ] to generate a 10 % pyrene - actin mix . The resulting pyrene - actin mix was incubated overnight at 4 (cid:2) C to allow for depolymerization , and then centrifuged for 30 min at 14 , 000 rpm to remove large protein aggregates . Prior to each experiment , Ca 2 þ was exchanged for Mg 2 þ by adding 1 / 10th volume of Mg - exchange buffer ( 50 l M MgCl 2 , 0 . 2 mM EGTA ) and incubating for 2 min at room tempera - ture . Following Mg 2 þ exchange , 10 (cid:3) polymerization buffer was added to a final concentration of 1 (cid:3) ( 20 mM Tris , pH 8 . 0 , 100 mM KCl , 2 mM MgCl 2 , 0 . 5 mM ATP , and 1 mM EGTA ) to initiate polymerization . Experiments were con - ducted in sets of 12 reactions mixed in parallel using a multi - channel pipette in a black half - area 96 - well plate ( Corning , Inc . , Corning , NY ) . Pyrene fluorescence ( 365 nm excitation , 407 nm emission ) was measured every 10 s until the fluorescence reached a stable value ( 1 , 000 s ) using a Tecan Infinite M1000 plate reader . For Arp2 / 3 - mediated actin nu - cleation , bovine Arp2 / 3 complex and human GST - WASp - VCA were added to the reactions with polymerization buffer to a final concentration of 50 nM each . Purified full - length N . vectensis a - catenin or pre - formed N . vectensis a - catenin (cid:4) b - catenin heterodimer were added with the polymerization buffer at the indicated final concentrations . The delay be - tween addition of polymerization buffer and commencement of measurements was normalized with a timer to 20 s for all experiments . Clarke et al . . doi : 10 . 1093 / molbev / msw084 MBE 2018 Results Nematostella vectensis Has a Complete Complement of CCC Orthologs A previous study identified four classical cadherins in protein sequences predicted from the N . vectensis genome assembly ( Hulpiau and Van Roy 2011 ) . However , we identified only three putative classical cadherins based on homology searches using the cadherin cytoplasmic region motif ( pFam PF01049 ) : Nematostella vectensis Cad - 1 and - 2 , and N . vectensis Dachsous . These three orthologs were identified based on complete gene models that corresponded to se - quences present in both the N . vectensis genome and tran - scriptome ; it is possible that the additional ortholog identified in a previous report may have included incomplete gene models ( Hulpiau et al . 2013 ) . Using a reciprocal BLAST search , we identified one a - catenin ortholog , N . vectensis a - catenin , with 2 N - terminal and 1 C - terminal VIN homology domains separated by a long intervening sequence ( fig . 1 A ) . Nematostella vectensis b - catenin was identified previously ( Wikramanayake et al . 2003 ) , and contains 12 ARM repeats ( fig . 1 A ) . All of the N . vectensis cadherins have a large extracellular region that contains 14 – 30 cadherin ( CAD ) repeats , and Laminin G ( LamG ) and epidermal growth factor - like ( EGF ) domains ( fig . 1 A ) , compared with vertebrate classical cadher - ins , which have five CAD repeats and lack LamG and EGF domains . Nematostella vectensis Cad - 1 , Cad - 2 and Dachsous are predicted to be single - pass transmembrane proteins with a short cytoplasmic region that contains conserved binding motifs for p120 - catenin and b - catenin ( fig . 1 A ) . Dachsous orthologs from other organisms also contain a putative b - catenin binding site ( Clark et al . 1995 ) , but a direct interaction between Dachsous and b - catenin has not been reported in any species , so we included N . vectensis Dachsous in our anal - ysis . To determine the relationship between the three N . vectensis cadherins and those in other organisms , we per - formed phylogenetic analyses using a trimmed alignment of the cytoplasmic region of N . vectensis cadherins and anno - tated cadherin sequences from different bilaterian organisms ( fig . 1 B ) . Tree topology and branch order varied to a small extent between analyses depending on the sequences in - cluded and the method of computation . However , the gen - eral clustering of N . vectensis cadherins within known cadherin families was stable across all analyses , which was corroborated by a previous analysis based on cadherin extra - cellular domain sequences ( Hulpiau and Van Roy 2011 ) . The a - catenin / vinculin superfamily may contain a distinct group of uncharacterized a - catenin - like proteins conserved across metazoan animal groups ( Miller , Clarke , et al . 2013 ) . In light of this , and due to the low level of sequence identity between N . vectensis a - catenin and well - studied orthologs ( 40 % identical ) , we performed a phylogenetic analysis with a set of metazoan a - catenin and vinculin orthologs to test whether N . vectensis a - catenin is a true a - catenin family pro - tein ( fig . 1 C ) . Nematostella vectensis a - catenin reliably grouped within the a - catenin clade using both Maximum Likelihood and Bayesian methods , and is therefore a member of the a - catenin family . Nematostella vectensis also contains one vinculin ortholog , which was not analyzed in this study . Domain Organization of N . vectensis (cid:2) - Catenin and Bilaterian Orthologs Is Partially Conserved Although the N - terminal and M domains , and the C - terminal ABD of mammalian and N . vectensis a - catenin are conserved , N . vectensis a - catenin has a large ( 362 aa ) insert of unknown structure and function within the hinge region of the protein ( fig . 2 A ; supplementary fig . S1 , Supplementary Material on - line ) . Except for the conservation of an 11 - residue motif in the middle of the insert that corresponds to the N - terminal 11 residues of the hinge region of mammalian a E - catenin ( M . musculus a E - catenin residues 631 – 642 ; supplementary fig . S1 , Supplementary Material online ) , this insert is unique to N . vectensis a - catenin : a - catenin orthologs from other cnidarian species or other nonbilaterian phyla do not have a similar insert . A BLAST search using the N . vectensis a - catenin insert as input did not return significant hits to other known pro - teins , but domain homology searches using the SMART and HMMER webservers predict that the insert has two regions of similarity to the Interleukin - like EMT inducer ( ILEI ) family domain ( pFam PF15711 ; e value : 5 . 7e - 11 ) that partially over - lap predicted vinculin homology regions . The insert is pre - dicted to have some secondary structure ( 13 % helical , 25 % extended strand , based on the jPred3 prediction server ) ( Drozdetskiy et al . 2015 ) . In order to characterize the conformation of N . vectensis a - catenin , we used limited proteolysis to compare the domain organization of full length N . vectensis a - catenin , a - catenin lacking the insert ( a - NM - ABD ) , and the insert alone ( a - I ) ( Pokutta and Weis 2000 ) . Trypsin digests of full - length N . vectensis a - catenin produced two stable domains of 25 and 37 kDa ( arrows , fig . 2 B ) . N - terminal amino acid sequencing revealed that these resistant domains corresponded to the protease - resistant M domain of bilaterian a - catenins ( fig . 2 A ; mammalian a E - catenin , residues 385 – 651 ) , and the N . vec - tensis - specific insert , respectively ( fig . 2A ; N . vectensis a - cate - nin , residues 627 – 1052 ) . The tryptic digest of a - NM - ABD revealed that the entire protein was largely resistant to deg - radation without the insert , indicating that the protein with - out the insert had adopted a stable conformation ( fig . 2 C ) . Tryptic digestion of a - I ( fig . 2 D ) resulted in a 37 - kDa fragment similar to that observed in the trypsin digest of full - length a - catenin , indicating that the insert is a conformationally stable sub - domain of N . vectensis a - catenin . Native - PAGE was used to compare the conformations of N . vectensis a - catenin , a - NM - ABD , and a - I ( fig . 2 E ) . All three a - catenin variants migrated as discrete bands . In contrast to full - length N . vectensis a - catenin and a - I , which both produce smeared bands , a - NM - ABD ran as a tight band , indicating that the conformation of a - NM - ABD is more compact . In addition to native - PAGE , oligomerization of N . vectensis a - catenin was measured by SEC with in - line inline multi - angle light scattering ( SEC - MALS ) . In comparison to molecular weight predictions ( table 1 ) , N . vectensis a - catenin eluted as a monomer at concentrations < 40 l M ( table 2 ) , but high Cadherin – Catenin Complex of the Sea Anemone Nematostella vectensis . doi : 10 . 1093 / molbev / msw084 MBE 2019 molecular weight species were observed at concentrations > 40 l M ( Clarke DN , unpublished data ) ; all subsequent ex - periments were performed at concentrations of N . vectensis a - catenin of 20 l M or less . Nematostella vectensis (cid:2) - and (cid:3) - Catenin Form a Heterodimer The full - length sequence of N . vectensis b - catenin is 68 % iden - tical to mammalian b - catenin , and there is a higher degree of sequence conservation within the a - catenin - binding region ( fig . 3 A and B ) . In the crystal structure of the mammalian a N - catenin (cid:4) b – catenin complex , b - catenin displaces the N - ter - minal a 1 helix from the N I bundle of a N - catenin , allowing the b 1 and b 2 helices of b - catenin to form 2 four - helix bundles with a - catenin helices a 1 – a 4 : a 1 and b 1 interact with a 4 and b 2 to form a small four - helix bundle that packs on the side of the larger bundle comprising b 2 , a 2 , a 3 , and a 4 ; the interven - ing loop that connects the two b - catenin helices interacts with the a N - catenin N II bundle ( Pokutta et al . 2014 ) . An alignment of N . vectensis b - catenin to bilaterian b - catenin orthologs ( fig . 3 B ) indicates that the N - terminal b 1 helix and loop represent conserved a - catenin - interacting surfaces in addition to the b 2 helix , as has been suggested previously ( Pokutta and Weis 2000 ; Miller , Clarke , et al . 2013 ) . To test for heterodimer formation , purified N . vectensis a - and b - catenin were incubated together in a 1 : 1 molar ratio and analyzed by SEC - MALS ( Drees et al . 2005 ) . The N . vecten - sis a - and b - catenin mixture eluted in a single peak with an F IG . 1 . Nematostella vectensis has a full complement of CCC components . ( A ) Predicted domain composition of N . vectensis cadherins , and a - and b - catenin examined in this study . Identiﬁed pFam motifs are annotated . Numbers for Nv Cad - 1 and - 2 and Nv Dachsous indicate the number of extracellular cadherin repeats . ( B and C ) Gene trees for N . vectensis cadherins and a - catenin . Nematostella vectensis genes are in red . Asterisks indicate the proteins examined in this study . Numbers indicate the posterior probability of each branch . Abbreviations for species names are as follows : Aq , A . queenslandica ; Bf , B . ﬂoridae ; Ce , C . elegans ; Cg , C . gigas ; Ci , C . intestinalis ; Ct , C . teleta ; Dd , D . discoideum ; Df , D . fasciculatum ; Dm , D . melanogaster ; Dp , D . purpureum ; Dr , D . rerio ; Lg , L . gigantea ; Mb , M . brevicollis ; Ml , M . leiydi ; Mm , M . musculus ; Nv , N . vectensis ; Oc , O . carmela ; Sk , S . kowalevskii ; Sp , S . purpuratus ; Sr , S . rosetta ; Ta , T . adhaerens ; Xl , X . laevis . ( B ) A consensus phylogeny of the N . vectensis cadherins that cluster within known cadherin sub - types from bilaterian organisms generated using FastTree2 . ( C ) A phylogeny of a - Catenin and Vinculin orthologs from metazoan organisms and related unicellular eukaryotes . Clarke et al . . doi : 10 . 1093 / molbev / msw084 MBE 2020 F IG . 2 . Domain organization is partially conserved between N . vectensis a - catenin and bilaterian orthologs . ( A ) Mus musculus a E - catenin is composed of 5 four - helix bundles , a hinge region , and a C - terminal ﬁve - helix bundle . Nematostella vectensis a - catenin has regional homology to the N - and C - terminal helical bundle regions ( blue ) of M . musculus a E - catenin , but also includes a novel insertion into the hinge region ( green ) . b - catenin ( b - cat ) binding / dimerization , modulation ( M ) , and F - actin binding ( ABD ) domains in M . musculus a E - catenin are annotated . Regions of homologyin N . vectensis a - cateninareindicatedbydashedlines . ( B – D ) Limitedproteolysisoffull - length N . vectensis a - catenin ( B ) , avariantlacking theinsert ( a - NM - ABD ; C ) , and theinsert alone ( a - I ; D ) . PredictedMWofvariantsare139 , 98 , and57 kDaforfull - length a - catenin , a - NM - ABD , and a - I , respectively . Protein schematics are included for reference to domains . Coomassie - stained SDS – PAGE of proteins incubated for the indicated times with 0 . 05mg / ml trypsin . The insert ( residues 663 – 902 ) and M - domain ( residues 392 – 642 ) , as identiﬁed by Edman degradation N - terminal sequencing , are marked with arrows . ( E ) Native - PAGE of 20 l M full - length N . vectensis a - catenin ( a - WT ) , a - NM - ABD and a - I ( from B – D ) . Table 1 . Predicted MW of N . vectensis CCC Proteins and Protein Complexes . Protein Predicted MW ( kDa ) Protein Complex Predicted MW ( kDa ) Nv a - cat . 139 . 1 a (cid:4) b heterodimer 221 . 1 Nv b - cat . 82 b þ Cad - 1 119 . 1 Nv Cad - 1 - cyto . 37 . 1 b þ Cad - 2 119 . 5 Nv Cad - 2 - cyto . 37 . 5 b þ Dachsous 138 . 6 Nv Dachsous - cyto . 56 . 6 a (cid:4) b þ Cad - 1 ternary complex 258 . 2 a (cid:4) b þ Cad - 2 ternary complex 258 . 6 a (cid:4) b þ Dachsous ternary complex 277 . 7 N OTE . —MWpredictionsderivedusingtheProtParamtoolontheExPASyserver ( Gasteigeretal . 2005 ) withfortheindividualproteinsexaminedinthisstudy . MWpredictions for protein complexes were calculated manually , and assume either 1 : 1 or 1 : 1 : 1 stoichiometry . Cadherin – Catenin Complex of the Sea Anemone Nematostella vectensis . doi : 10 . 1093 / molbev / msw084 MBE 2021 Table 2 . MW Measurements of N . vectensis CCC Proteins and Complex Derived from SEC - MALS Experiments . Experiment Corresponding Figure Peak 1 Peak 2 MW ( kDa ) Uncertainty ( % ) MW ( kDa ) Uncertainty ( % ) 20 l M a - cat . Fig . 3 C ( yellow ) 139 . 7 0 . 30 20 l M b - cat . Fig . 3 C ( blue ) 82 . 4 1 . 40 20 l M a - cat . þ 20 l M b - cat . Fig . 3 C ( green ) 223 . 9 0 . 60 20 l M Cad - 1 - cyto . Fig . 4 A ( yellow ) 39 0 . 50 20 l M Cad - 1 - cyto . þ 20 l M b - cat . Fig . 4 A ( blue ) 112 . 9 1 . 60 38 . 2 2 . 50 20 l M Cad - 1 - cyto . þ 20 l M a - cat . þ 20 l M b - cat . Fig . 4 A ( red ) 253 . 9 3 . 40 50 . 8 8 . 10 20 l M Cad - 2 - cyto . Fig . 4 B orange ) 41 . 8 3 . 00 20 l M Cad - 2 - cyto . þ 20 l M b - cat . Fig . 4 B ( blue ) 120 . 4 2 . 90 20 l M Cad - 2 - cyto . þ 20 l M a - cat . þ 20 l M b - cat . Fig . 4 B ( red ) 256 . 6 1 . 20 20 l M Dachsous - cyto . Fig . 4 C ( green ) 56 . 8 1 . 60 20 l M Dachsous - cyto . þ 20 l M b - cat . Fig . 4 C ( blue ) 80 . 8 0 . 20 58 . 1 0 . 90 20 l M Dachsous - cyto . þ 20 l M a - cat . þ 20 l M b - cat . Fig . 4 C ( red ) 219 . 8 0 . 30 56 0 . 70 N OTE . —MW measurements and percent uncertainty corresponding to the peaks depicted in ﬁgs . 3 C and 4 A – C . Protein concentrations are reported . Data shown were calculated from individual experiments , but are representative of at least three independent experiments . F IG . 3 . Nematostella vectensis a - and b - catenin bind to form a heterodimer . ( A ) Schematic of the a - catenin (cid:4) b - catenin complex based on crystal structures of mammalian orthologs . The interacting surface is highlighted ( red ) . b - catenin helices b 1 and b 2 displace the N - terminal a - catenin a 1 helix from the N I domain in order to form 2 four - helix bundles with a - catenin helices a 1 – a 4 ( Pokutta et al . 2014 ) . The loop connecting b - catenin helices b 1 and b 2 interacts with the N II bundle of a - catenin . Percent Identity and similarity between N . vectensis b - catenin and a bilaterian consensus sequence is compared for the interacting b 1 and b 2 helices and loop region , and the entire binding region . ( B ) A multiple alignment of the a - catenin binding regionof N . vectensis b - catenin with thecorresponding region of b - catenin orthologs from representative bilaterian species . b 1and b 2helices and loopregion ( boxes ) , as well as theentire binding region ( red bar ) , are annotated . Abbreviations used for species names areas follows : B . ﬂo . — B . ﬂoridae ; C . gig . — C . gigas ; D . mel . — D . melanogaster ; D . rer . — D . rerio ; M . mus . — M . musculus ; N . vec . — N . vectensis ; P . dum . — P . dumerilii ; S . kow . — S . kowalevskii ; S . pur . — S . purpuratus . ( C ) SEC - MALS elution proﬁles for N . vectensis a - and b - catenin ( yellow and blue , respectively ) run independently , and following co - incubation at 18 (cid:2) C for 30 min ( green ) . MW measurements corresponding to the UV peaks for each run are plotted in darker shades of the same color . ( D ) SDS – PAGE of fractions collected from ( C ) . Clarke et al . . doi : 10 . 1093 / molbev / msw084 MBE 2022 apparent mass of 223 . 9 kDa compared with the molecular mass of purified N . vectensis a - catenin ( 139 . 7 kDa ) and b - catenin ( 82 . 4 kDa ) ( table 2 ) , indicating the formation of a 1 : 1 stoichiometric a (cid:4) b – catenin complex ( fig . 3 C and D ) . Nematostella vectensis Cadherin - 1 and - 2 , but not Dachsous , Form a Ternary Complex with N . vectensis (cid:2) - and (cid:3) - Catenin To investigate N . vectensis CCC formation , the purified cyto - plasmic region of N . vectensis Cad - 1 , Cad - 2 or Dachsous was incubated with either N . vectensis b - catenin or a pre - assembled N . vectensis a (cid:4) b - catenin heterodimer in a 1 : 1 molar ratio , and analyzed by SEC - MALS ( fig . 4 A – C and tables 1 and 2 ) . Nematostella vectensis Cad - 1 and - 2 cytoplasmic regions bound to both N . vectensis b - catenin and the a (cid:4) b - catenin heterodimer ( fig . 4 A and B ) , but N . vectensis Dachsous cyto - plasmic region did not bind to either ( fig . 4 C ) . Studies of other organisms indicated a possible interaction between Dachsous and b - catenin ( Greaves et al . 1999 ) , but this may be indirect ( Axelrod et al . 1998 ) ; our data demonstrated that a direct N . vectensis Dachsous (cid:4) b - catenin interaction either does not oc - cur , or may be dependent in vivo on post - translational mod - ifications not present on the bacterially - produced proteins studied here . We next examined the binding affinity of N . vectensis Cad - 1 and - 2 for N . vectensis b - catenin . An alignment of the cadherin cytoplasmic region of N . vectensis Cad - 1 and - 2 and bilaterian classical cadherins revealed that the regions of mammalian E - cadherin involved in the E - cadherin (cid:4) b - catenin interaction are conserved in N . vectensis Cad - 1 and - 2 ( Huber and Weis 2001 ) ( fig . 5 A ) . We used ITC to measure binding affinities between the cytoplasmic region of N . vectensis Cad - 1 and - 2 , and N . vectensis b - catenin ( Choi et al . 2012 ) . The K d for N . vectensis Cad - 1 and - 2 binding to N . vectensis b - catenin was 7 . 9 and 1 . 3 nM , respectively ( fig . 5 B and C ) . Nematostella vectensis (cid:2) - Catenin and a N . vectensis (cid:2) (cid:4) (cid:3) - Catenin Heterodimer Bind F - Actin Binding and bundling of F - actin is an intrinsic property of a - catenin - family proteins ( Rimm et al . 1995 ; Dickinson , Nelson , et al . 2011 ; Miller , Pokutta , et al . 2013 ) , but the affinity for F - actin varies between oligomeric states . For example , the af - finity of mammalian a E - catenin for F - actin is highest in the homodimeric state , and decreases > 10 - fold in the a (cid:4) b - cate - nin heterodimeric state ( Kwiatkowski et al . 2010 ) . To investi - gate whether N . vectensis a - catenin interacts directly with F - actin , we used a traditional high - speed co - sedimentation assay . Nematostella vectensis a - catenin bound to F - actin with a K d of 0 . 8 6 0 . 2 l M ( fig . 6 A , D , and E ) , similar to vertebrate a - catenins ( 0 . 3 and 0 . 4 l M for homodimeric M . musculus and monomeric D . rerio a E - catenin , respectively ) and monomeric D . discoideum a - catenin ( 0 . 4 l M ) ( Rimm et al . 1995 ; F IG . 4 . Nematostella vectensis Cadherin - 1 and - 2 , but not Dachsous , bind to the a (cid:4) b - catenin heterodimer . ( A – C ) SEC - MALS elution proﬁles for the cytoplasmic tails of N . vectensis Cadherin - 1 ( A , yellow ) , Cadherin - 2 ( B , orange ) , and Dachsous ( C , green ) run independently , and following incubation at 18 (cid:2) C for 30 min with either b - catenin ( blue ) or a pre - assembled a (cid:4) b - catenin heterodimer ( red ) . MW measurements corresponding to the UV peaks for each run are plotted in darker shades of the same color . ( C ) SDS – PAGE analysis ( below ) of fractions collected from the elution of N . vectensis Dachsous incubated with the a (cid:4) b - heterodimer ( red ) indicate that the high - molecular - weight peak observed ( asterisk ) consists only of a (cid:4) b - heterodimer , and doesnot containDachsous , which elutes independently as a second , low - molecular - weight peak ( see table 2for observed MWs ) . Cadherin – Catenin Complex of the Sea Anemone Nematostella vectensis . doi : 10 . 1093 / molbev / msw084 MBE 2023 Dickinson , Nelson , et al . 2011 ; Miller , Pokutta , et al . 2013 ) . In contrast , a - NM - ABD bound to F - actin > 10 (cid:3) more weakly— Although binding saturation was not reached , we were able to fit a single - site binding model in order to estimate a lower boundary K d value of 12 l M ( fig . 6 B , D , and E ) . High - speed co - sedimentation assays with the N . vectensis a (cid:4) b - catenin heterodimer and F - actin were performed at lower range of concentrations from 0 . 2 to 3 l M to avoid nonspecific actin - independent sedimentation , as observed for vertebrate a (cid:4) b - catenin heterodimers ( Miller , Pokutta , et al . 2013 ) . Significantly , N . vectensis a (cid:4) b - catenin heterodimer bound F - actin with an affinity similar to that of monomeric N . vectensis a - catenin ( fig . 6 C – E ) . Together these data show that full - length N . vectensis a - catenin binds F - actin constitutively in solution , and that the insert relieves what would otherwise be a significantly auto - inhibited conformation . Thus , N . vectensis a - catenin likely provides a direct , constitutive link between the CCC and F - actin independent of mechanical force . Homodimeric M . musculus a - catenin , and monomeric D . discoideum and D . rerio a - catenin also bundle F - actin ( Rimm et al . 1995 ; Dickinson , Nelson , et al . 2011 ; Miller , Pokutta , et al . 2013 ) . We tested this property of N . vectensis a - catenin by negative stain transmission electron microscopy of N . vecten - sis a - catenin / F - actin . We did not detect F - actin bundling by N . vectensis a - catenin at concentrations up to 10 l M ; as a control , F - actin bundling was observed by D . rerio a E - catenin at 6 and 8 l M concentrations under similar conditions ( Miller , Pokutta , et al . 2013 ) ( Clarke DN , unpublished data ) . F IG . 5 . Nematostella vectensis Cadherin - 1 and - 2 bind to N . vectensis b - catenin with high afﬁnity . ( A ) Alignment of the cytoplasmic domain of N . vectensis Cadherin - 1and - 2withthoseof M . musculus E - cadherinand C . elegans HMR1 . Conservedresiduesshowntobecriticalforthemammalian E - cadherin (cid:4) b - catenin interaction are highlighted ( grey ) . Regions II – V as identiﬁed in ( Huber and Weis 2001 ) are annotated above with colored bars ; the thickened rectangles indicate helices . Known phosphorylated residues in mammalian E - cadherin are highlighted ( yellow boxes ) , and the conserved phosphoserine residue affecting b - catenin afﬁnity is indicated ( red arrow ) . Acidic residues within the phosphorylation site of N . vectensis cadherinsthatarenotpresentinmammalianE - cadherinareannotated ( blueboxes , asterisks ) . ( B and C ) Nematostellavectensis Cadherin - 1 and - 2 binding to N . vectensis b - catenin was quantiﬁed using ITC . ( B ) Nematostella vectensis Cadherin - 1 was titrated into N . vectensis b - catenin . The ratio of heat released ( Kcal ) per mole of N . vectensis Cadherin - 1 injected into N . vectensis b - catenin was plotted against the molar ratio of the two proteins , and the K d calculated from these measurements is indicated . ( C ) Nematostella vectensis Cadherin - 2 was titrated into N . vectensis b - catenin as in ( B ) . Clarke et al . . doi : 10 . 1093 / molbev / msw084 MBE 2024 Nematostella vectensis (cid:2) - catenin , but not a N . vectensis (cid:2) (cid:4) (cid:3) - Catenin Heterodimer , Inhibits Arp2 / 3 Complex - Mediated Nucleation of F - Actin In addition to bundling F - actin , mammalian a E - catenin homo - dimer inhibits Arp 2 / 3 complex nucleation of branched F - actin networks ( Drees et al . 2005 ; Hansen et al . 2013 ) . We tested whether N . vectensis a - catenin also inhibited Arp2 / 3 complex activity using a pyrene - actin assembly assay in the presence of Arp 2 / 3 complex and the VCA domain of WASp ( Mullins and Machesky 2000 ; Drees et al . 2005 ; Dickinson , Nelson , et al . 2011 ; Miller , Pokutta , et al . 2013 ) . Nematostella vectensis a - catenin in - hibitedtherateofArp2 / 3complex - inducedF - actinnucleationin a concentration - dependent manner ( fig . 7 A ) . In contrast , N . vec - tensis a (cid:4) b - catenin heterodimer did not inhibit Arp2 / 3 complex - induced F - actin nucleation across a similar concentration range ( fig . 7 B ) . This result is notable because it is the first observation of a nonmammalian a - catenin that can inhibit the Arp2 / 3 complex , which was thought previously to be an innovation unique to mammalian a - catenin ( Miller , Clarke , et al . 2013 ) . Discussion Testing evolutionary hypotheses about the emergence of new molecular pathways or cellular functions by determining the presence or absence of genes and key functional domains is a common approach when comparing different animal line - ages ( Putnam et al . 2007 ; Srivastava et al . 2010 ) . A common assumption made in such sequence comparisons is that sig - nificant shifts in protein function will correspond to large differences in sequence , but at the molecular level even changes in single residues can produce drastic changes in function ( Anderson et al . 2016 ) . Our ability to identify orthol - ogous genes far outpaces our ability to predict protein func - tion based on sequence , resulting in a false positive rate of over 50 % in studies that attempt to identify orthologous genes with equivalent protein functions ( Ponting 2001 ; Watson et al . 2005 ; Yu et al . 2012 ) . Further , highly similar sequences do not necessarily indicate conservation of protein function , as is the case in the CCC , the hedgehog signaling pathway , or the glucocorticoid receptor family ( Ortlund et al . 2007 ; Dickinson , Weis , et al . 2011 ; Miller , Pokutta , et al . 2013 ) ( see supplementary table S1 , e . g . , Supplementary Material online ) . The CCC is required for cell – cell adhesion in bilaterian animals , and its constituent proteins are conserved across the Metazoa , so it would therefore be expected that its in - teractions should be highly conserved in order to maintain this critical role . However , despite a general conservation of F IG . 6 . Nematostella vectensis a - catenin and a N . vectensis a (cid:4) b - catenin heterodimer bind to F - actin . ( A – E ) High - speed cosedimentation assays of full - length N . vectensis a - catenin ( A ) , the a - NM - ABD variant lacking the insert ( B ) , and the a (cid:4) b - catenin heterodimer ( C ) with F - actin . Proteins were incubated at the ﬁnal concentrations indicated with either 2 l M F - actin ( þ Actin ) or no - actin control ( (cid:5) Actin ) . Samples were analyzed by SDS – PAGE and CBB staining ( A – C ) , and bound protein was plotted against free protein and ﬁt with a hyperbolic function ( D —red line ; K d and B max are listed ) . ( E ) Mean K d values are reported . Cadherin – Catenin Complex of the Sea Anemone Nematostella vectensis . doi : 10 . 1093 / molbev / msw084 MBE 2025 CCC genes , the proteins of the CCC have divergent functions and domain organization between bilaterian lineages ( Miller , Clarke , et al . 2013 ) . At the sequence level , variations in CCC proteins appear predominately in domain organization of the cadherin extracellular region and in the sequence of a - cate - nin , with less variation across b - catenin orthologs ( Aberle et al . 1996 ; Schneider et al . 2003 ; Miller , Clarke , et al . 2013 ) . Divergence in function is most apparent in a - catenin , in which F - actin binding and regulatory functions for the cadherin - associated and cytoplasmic pools of a - catenin vary between organisms ( Drees et al . 2005 ; Yamada et al . 2005 ; Nelson 2008 ; Dickinson , Nelson , et al . 2011 ; Miller , Pokutta , et al . 2013 ) . Here , we characterized proteins in the CCC from N . vectensis , to provide insight into the function of the CCC deep in the evolutionary history of animals , before the origin of bilaterians , at the base of the Eumetazoa . The most notable differences between the classical cadher - ins found in N . vectensis and those from vertebrates are the number of sequences in the cadherin repertoire , and the size and organization of the cadherin extracellular region . Vertebrates have an extensive cadherin repertoire ( > 100 genes ) , with a large expansion in the numbers of classical cadherin ( 25 or more in most species ) ( Hulpiau and Van Roy 2009 ) . In contrast , N . vectentsis has 16 cadherin genes , and 2 classical cadherins ( Hulpiau and Van Roy 2011 ) . Typically , invertebrate genomes contain one to four classical cadherins ( Miller , Clarke , et al . 2013 ) . Thus , the N . vectensis classical cadherin repertoire of 2 genes is similar to the average number of cadherin genes for metazoans . The extracellular region of N . vectensis Cad - 1 and - 2 is large compared with that of bilaterian classical cadherins : mamma - lian E - and N - cadherin have 5 CADs ( Miller , Clarke , et al . 2013 ) , whereas N . vectensis Cad - 1 and - 2 contain 14 and 30 CADs , respectively , as well as additional LamG and EGF do - mains . A large cadherin extracellular region is also found in other basal metazoan groups , such as sponges and placozo - ans , and in some bilaterian groups , including arthropods , echinoderms , and chordates , as well as in the cadherins of choanoflagellates , the closest extant nonmetazoan relatives of animals ( Abedin and King 2008 ; Hulpiau and Van Roy 2011 ; Miller , Clarke , et al . 2013 ) . Thus , the large extracellular region in N . vectensis cadherins is likely representative of the ances - tral state in metazoan cadherins . Of the three predicted N . vectensis classical cadherins , Cad - 1 and - 2 bound directly to b - catenin and formed a ternary cadherin (cid:4) b – catenin (cid:4) a – catenin complex ; N . vectensis Dachous did not bind b - catenin . The binding affinities of N . vectensis Cad - 1 and - 2 for b - catenin ( (cid:6) 1 and 8 nM ) are in between the affinities of mammalian E - cadherin to b - catenin in phosphorylated ( 52 pM ) and un - phosphorylated states ( 46 nM ) ( Choi et al . 2006 ) . This may be due to the presence of acidic residues present in cadherin region IV ( fig . 5 A ) in - stead of serine residues at positions 684 and 693 that can be phosphorylated in mammalian cadherin ( Huber and Weis 2001 ; McEwen et al . 2014 ) . Interestingly , the phosphoserine residue identified as a conserved regulatory switch controlling b - catenin affinity in bilaterians ( S1212 in C . elegans HMR - 1 , and S686 in M . musculus E - cadherin ) is also conserved in N . vectensis ( fig . 4 A ) ; phosphorylation could play a role in regu - lating b - catenin affinity in N . vectensis cadherins , as phosphor - ylation at those sites in bilaterian cadherins increases affinity by three orders of magnitude ( Choi et al . 2006 , 2015 ) . However , since the N . vectensis cadherin (cid:4) b - catenin binding affinity is high in the absence of any post - translational mod - ification , binding in vivo may be constitutive , and phosphor - ylation at this site could moderate a shift in binding affinity , but not an overall switch to control cell adhesion such as that in vertebrates . Nematostella vectensis a - catenin is divergent compared with bilaterian a - catenins , but shares conserved functional domains , and would therefore be expected to have both conserved and unique functional properties . The sequence of N . vectensis a - catenin is 51 % identical to M . musculus a E - catenin , but regional similarities within the functional do - mains are higher . The N - terminal domain , M domain , and ABD are 56 % , 63 % , and 62 % identical between N . vectensis F IG . 7 . Nematostella vectensis a - catenin , but not a N . vectensis a (cid:4) b - catenin heterodimer , inhibits Arp2 / 3 complex - mediated nucleation of F - actin . ( A and B ) Effect of N . vectensis a - catenin ( A ) or N . vectensis a (cid:4) b - catenin heterodimer ( B ) on Arp2 / 3 - mediated actin polymeriza - tion in a pyrene - actin assay . Reactions contained 2 . 32 l M of a 10 % pyrene - actin mix ( (cid:5) control , black circles ) plus 12 . 5nM Arp2 / 3 com - plex and 23 . 2 nM WASp - VCA ( þ control , grey diamonds ) , and the indicated concentrations of protein . Examples shown are each rep - resentative of at least three independent experiments . Clarke et al . . doi : 10 . 1093 / molbev / msw084 MBE 2026 a - catenin and M . musculus a E - catenin , respectively , which indicates that there is some constraint on sequence variation within these regions . A striking similarity between N . vectensis and some mam - malian a - catenins is the capacity to regulate actin dynamics . Mammalian a - catenin regulates F - actin organization in the cytoplasm by bundling F - actin ( Rimm et al . 1995 ) , and in - hibiting F - actin nucleation and branching by the Arp2 / 3 com - plex ( Drees et al . 2005 ) . In contrast , D . rerio a E - catenin is a constitutive monomer that bundles F - actin poorly and does not inhibit the Arp2 / 3 complex ( Miller , Pokutta , et al . 2013 ) , suggesting that regulation of F - actin organization in the cy - toplasm may be a derived trait in mammals ( Miller , Clarke , et al . 2013 ) . Significantly , we demonstrated that monomeric N . vectensis a - catenin inhibits Arp2 / 3 complex function , in - dicating that regulation of Arp2 / 3 - mediated actin dynamics may be an ancestral property of metazoan a - catenins rather than a mammalian innovation . The most apparent difference between N . vectensis a - catenin and all other a - catenin orthologs analyzed thus far is a large , structured domain inserted between the M domain and ABD ( residues 638 – 1021 ) ( fig . 2 A ) . The insert allows N . vectensis a - catenin to bind to F - actin constitutively , as in its absence the binding affinity for F - actin is reduced significantly ( fig . 6 ) . How the insert affects N . vectensis a - catenin structure and function is unknown . However , our results from deleting this domain indicate 2 possibilities : ( 1 ) the insert confers conformational flexibility to a - catenin , since its removal results in a protein that is resistant to pro - teolysis and is likely more compact and ( 2 ) the insert inhibits interactions between the N - terminal or M domains and the ABD , which in some other a - catenin / vinculin superfamily proteins might cause autoinhibition of F - actin binding ( Bakolitsa et al . 2004 ; Ziegler et al . 2006 ; Choi et al . 2012 ; Rangarajan and Izard 2012 ) . We have not yet characterized enough a - catenin / vinculin superfamily members to infer if auto - inhibition of F - actin binding is the ancestral state among proteins in the a - catenin family , but if this were the case , the insert may represent a novel innovation to enable constitu - tive high - affinity F - actin binding . In vertebrates , the binding affinity of a - catenin for F - actin is regulated by its conformational state ( Drees et al . 2005 ) . Allosteric regulation of F - actin binding occurs through bind - ing to b - catenin : Mus musculus a E - catenin and D . rerio a E - catenin bind F - actin with a K d ¼ 0 . 3 – 0 . 4 l M ( Rimm et al . 1995 ; Drees et al . 2005 ; Miller , Pokutta , et al . 2013 ; Rangarajan and Izard 2013 ) , but in a complex with b - catenin they bind to F - actin > 10 (cid:3) more weakly in vitro ( Yamada et al . 2005 ; Miller , Pokutta , et al . 2013 ) . In both species , tension is required for high - affinity binding of E - cadherin (cid:4) b - catenin (cid:4) a E - catenin complexes to F - actin ( Yonemura et al . 2010 ; Borghi et al . 2012 ; Buckley et al . 2014 ) , although this has not been tested in CCCs from other species . In contrast , N . vectensis a - catenin binds F - actin as a monomer and in a complex with b - catenin with similar affinities . This suggests that the N . vectensis CCC is linked directly to the cortical actin cytoskeleton even in the absence of tension . The structural basis for differences in the regulation of actin binding between vertebrate and N . vectensis a - catenin is not clear , but differences in sequence provide some insights . First , compared with vertebrate a - catenins ( Kwiatkowski et al . 2010 ; Dickinson , Nelson , et al . 2011 ) , the N - terminal domain of N . vectensis a - catenin is not protease - resistant ( fig . 2 ) indicating a difference in conformation of this region between vertebrate and N . vectensis a - catenin ; this difference may reflect a vertebrate innovation for allosteric regulation of a - catenin binding to actin ( Pokutta and Weis 2000 ; Pokutta et al . 2002 ) . Second , the unique insert in N . vectensis a - catenin may uncouple binding of the N - domain to b - catenin from its allosteric regulation of the ABD . These observations raise two competing hypotheses for the evolution of allosteric regula - tion of the a - catenin (cid:4) F - actin interaction : ( 1 ) it is a derived trait in vertebrates , as it is absent in full - length N . vectensis a - catenin or ( 2 ) it is ancestral to eumetazoans , but lost in - dependently in cnidarians since the insert in N . vectensis a - catenin may be an innovation to allow constitutive F - actin binding without allosteric regulation . Characterization of a - catenin orthologs from other cnidarian species and nonbila - terian phyla will be necessary to resolve whether allosteric regulation of F - actin binding is an ancestral property of a - catenin proteins . A majority of cadherin - associated proteins , including the core components of the CCC , originated early in the evolution of Eukaryotes , long before the origins of metazoans ( Miller , Clarke , et al . 2013 ; Murray and Zaidel - Bar 2014 ) . Therefore , understanding how the CCC contributed to the origin of meta - zoan cell adhesion and multicellularity is not a question of pinpointing the evolutionary emergence of novel genes , but rather one of assessing changes in the functions of highly con - served proteins in order to detect when they were coopted to have new roles . Further experimental work on CCC orthologs from cnidarians and other nonbilaterian lineages , including ctenophores , sponges , and placozoans , will be necessary to develop the comparative framework necessary to understand the evolution of cadherin - mediated cell adhesion . Overall , the biochemical data presented here provide ex - perimental evidence that binding interactions of the CCC are conserved in early - branching animal groups outside of the Bilateria . The adhesive role of cadherins remains untested outside of bilaterian animals , but our findings demonstrate that the intracellular components of cadherin - based adhe - sion are broadly conserved across animals . Further experi - ments in vivo with loss - of - function mutants will be necessary to make a robust comparison between the func - tions of the CCC in N . vectensis and the essential role it has in coordinating cellular adhesion in other organisms , although our results indicate that the CCC remains a strong candidate for a conserved cell – cell adhesion system in animals . Supplementary Material Supplementary fig . S1 , table S1 and file S2 are available at Molecular Biology and Evolution online ( http : / / www . mbe . oxfordjournals . org / ) . Cadherin – Catenin Complex of the Sea Anemone Nematostella vectensis . doi : 10 . 1093 / molbev / msw084 MBE 2027 Acknowledgments We thank Andre Mueller for assistance with MALS measure - ments , Sabine Pokutta for help with ITC , and Scott Gradia for the pET protein expression vector . This work was supported by the National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship Program ( DGE - 114747 to D . N . C . ) , the National Science Foundation ( 1258169 to C . J . L . ) , and the National Institutes of Health ( GM35527 to W . J . N . ; GM094663 to W . J . N . and W . I . W . ) . The authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest with the contents of this article . References Abedin M , King N . 2008 . The premetazoan ancestry of cadherins . Science 319 : 946 – 948 . Aberle H , Schwartz H , Hoschuetzky H , Kemler R . 1996 . Single amino acid substitutions in proteins of the armadillo gene family abolish their binding to a - catenin . J Biol Chem . 271 : 1520 – 1526 . Altschul SF , Gish W , Miller W , Myers EW , Lipman DJ . 1990 . Basic local alignment search tool . J Mol Biol . 215 : 403 – 410 . AndersonDP , WhitneyDS , Hanson - SmithV , WoznicaA , Campodonico - Burnett W , Volkman BF , King N , Prehoda KE , Thornton JW . 2016 . Evolution of an ancient protein function involved in organized mul - ticellularity in animals . Elife 5 : e10147 . Axelrod JD , Miller JR , Shulman JM , Moon RT , Perrimon N . 1998 . Differential recruitment of Dishevelled provides signaling specificity in the planar cell polarity and Wingless signaling pathways . Genes Dev . 12 : 2610 – 2622 . Bakolitsa C , Cohen DM , Bankston LA , Bobkov AA , Cadwell GM , Jennings L , Critchley DR , Craig SW , LIddington RC . 2004 . Structural basis for vinculin activation at sites of cell adhesion . Nature 430 : 583 – 586 . Bateman A , Coin L , Durbin R , Finn RD , Hollich V , Griffiths - Jones S , Khanna A , Marshall M , Moxon S , Sonnhammer EL . 2004 . The Pfam protein families database . Nucleic Acids Res . 32 : D138 – D141 . Benjamin JM , Kwiatkowski AV , Yang C , Korobova F , Pokutta S , Svitkina T , Weis WI , Nelson WJ . 2010 . aE - catenin regulates actin dynamics independently of cadherin - mediated cell – cell adhesion . J Cell Biol . 189 : 339 – 352 . Borghi N , Sorokina M , Shcherbakova OG , Weis WI , Pruitt BL , Nelson WJ , Dunn AR . 2012 . E - cadherin is under constitutive actomyosin - generated tension that is increased at cell – cell contacts upon exter - nally applied stretch . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A . 109 : 12568 – 12573 . Buckley CD , Tan J , Anderson KL , Hanein D , Volkmann N , Weis WI , Nelson WJ , Dunn AR . 2014 . Cell adhesion . The minimal cadherin - catenin complex binds to actin filaments under force . Science 346 : 1254211 . Choi H - J , Huber AH , Weis WI . 2006 . Thermodynamics of b - catenin – ligand interactions . The roles of the N - and C - terminal tails in mod - ulating binding affinity . J Biol Chem . 281 : 1027 – 1038 . Choi H - J , Loveless T , Lynch AM , Bang I , Hardin J , Weis WI . 2015 . A Conserved Phosphorylation Switch Controls the Interaction be - tween Cadherin and b - Catenin In Vitro and In Vivo . Dev Cell . 33 : 82 – 93 . Choi HJ , Pokutta S , Cadwell GW , Bobkov AA , Bankston LA , Liddington RC , Weis WI . 2012 . alphaE - catenin is an autoinhibited molecule that coactivates vinculin . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A . 109 : 8576 – 8581 . Clark HF , Brentrup D , Schneitz K , Bieber A , Goodman C , Noll M . 1995 . Dachsous encodes a member of the cadherin superfamily that con - trols imaginal disc morphogenesis in Drosophila . Genes Dev . 9 : 1530 – 1542 . Consortium U 2015 . UniProt : a hub for protein information . Nucleic Acids Res . 43 : D204 – D212 . Dayel MJ , Alegado RA , Fairclough SR , Levin TC , Nichols SA , McDonald K , King N . 2011 . Cell differentiation and morphogenesis in the colony - forming choanoflagellate Salpingoeca rosetta . Dev Biol . 357 : 73 – 82 . Dickinson DJ , Nelson WJ , Weis WI . 2011 . A polarized epithelium orga - nized by beta - and alpha - catenin predates cadherin and metazoan origins . Science 331 : 1336 – 1339 . Dickinson DJ , Weis WI , Nelson WJ . 2011 . Protein evolution in cell and tissue development : going beyond sequence and transcriptional analysis . Dev Cell . 21 : 32 – 34 . Drees F , Pokutta S , Yamada S , Nelson WJ , Weis WI . 2005 . a - Catenin is a molecular switch that binds E - cadherin / b - catenin and regulates ac - tin filament assembly . Cell 123 : 903 – 915 . Drozdetskiy A , Cole C , Procter J , Barton GJ . 2015 . JPred4 : a protein sec - ondary structure prediction server . Nucleic Acids Res . 43 : W389 – W394 . Edgar RC . 2004 . MUSCLE : multiple sequence alignment with high accu - racy and high throughput . Nucleic Acids Res . 32 : 1792 – 1797 . Fairclough SR , Dayel MJ , King N . 2010 . Multicellular development in a choanoflagellate . Curr Biol . 20 : R875 – R876 . Finn RD , Clements J , Eddy SR . 2011 . HMMER web server : interactive sequence similarity searching . Nucleic Acids Res . 39 : W29 – W37 . Gasteiger E , Hoogland C , Gattiker A , Wilkins MR , Appel RD , Bairoch A . 2005 . Protein identification and analysis tools on the ExPASy server . New York : Humana Press . Gibson DG , Benders GA , Andrews - Pfannkoch C , Denisova EA , Baden - Tillson H , Zaveri J , Stockwell TB , Brownley A , Thomas DW , Algire MA , et al . 2008 . Complete chemical synthesis , assembly , and cloning of a Mycoplasma genitalium genome . Science 319 : 1215 – 1220 . Gibson DG , Young L , Chuang R - Y , Venter JC , Hutchison CA , Smith HO . 2009 . Enzymatic assembly of DNA molecules up to several hundred kilobases . Nat Methods . 6 : 343 – 345 . Greaves S , Sanson B , White P , Vincent J - P . 1999 . A screen for identifying genes interacting with armadillo , the Drosophila homolog of b - cat - enin . Genetics 153 : 1753 – 1766 . Gumbiner BM . 2005 . Regulation of cadherin - mediated adhesion in mor - phogenesis . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol . 6 : 622 – 634 . Hansen SD , Kwiatkowski AV , Ouyang CY , Liu H , Pokutta S , Watkins SC , Volkmann N , Hanein D , Weis WI , Mullins RD , et al . 2013 . alphaE - catenin actin - binding domain alters actin filament conformation and regulates binding of nucleation and disassembly factors . Mol Biol Cell . 24 : 3710 – 3720 . Harris TJ , Tepass U . 2010 . Adherens junctions : from molecules to mor - phogenesis . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol . 11 : 502 – 514 . Huber AH , Weis WI . ( cadherin / catenin co - authors ) . 2001 . The structure of the b - catenin / E - cadherin complex and the molecular basis of diverse ligand recognition by b - catenin . Cell 105 : 391 – 402 . Hulpiau P , Gul IS , van Roy F . 2013 . New insights into the evolution of metazoan cadherins and catenins . Prog Mol Biol Transl Sci . 116 : 71 – 94 . Hulpiau P , Van Roy F . 2009 . Molecular evolution of the cadherin super - family . Int J Biochem Cell Biol . 41 : 349 – 369 . Hulpiau P , Van Roy F . 2011 . New insights into the evolution of metazoan cadherins . Mol Biol Evol . 28 : 647 – 657 . Kwiatkowski AV , Maiden SL , Pokutta S , Choi HJ , Benjamin JM , Lynch AM , Nelson WJ , Weis WI , Hardin J . 2010 . In vitro and in vivo recon - stitution of the cadherin - catenin - actin complex from Caenorhabditis elegans . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A . 107 : 14591 – 14596 . Larue L , Antos C , Butz S , Huber O , Delmas V , Dominis M , Kemler R . 1996 . Aroleforcadherinsintissueformation . Development 122 : 3185 – 3194 . Letunic I , Doerks T , Bork P . 2012 . SMART 7 : recent updates to the protein domain annotation resource . Nucleic Acids Res . 40 : D302 – D305 . Levin TC , Greaney AJ , Wetzel L , King N . 2014 . The rosetteless gene controls development in the choanoflagellate S . rosetta . Elife 3 : e04070 . McEwen AE , Maher MT , Mo R , Gottardi CJ . 2014 . E - cadherin phosphor - ylation occurs during its biosynthesis to promote its cell surface stability and adhesion . Mol Biol Cell . 25 : 2365 – 2374 . Miller PW , Clarke DN , Weis WI , Lowe CJ , Nelson WJ . 2013 . The evolu - tionary origin of epithelial cell – cell adhesion mechanisms . Curr Top Membr . 72 : 267 – 311 . Clarke et al . . doi : 10 . 1093 / molbev / msw084 MBE 2028 Miller PW , Pokutta S , Ghosh A , Almo SC , Weis WI , Nelson WJ , Kwiatkowski AV . 2013 . Danio rerio alphaE - catenin is a monomeric F - actin binding protein with distinct properties from Mus musculus alphaE - catenin . J Biol Chem . 288 : 22324 – 22332 . Misevic GN , Burger M . 1993 . Carbohydrate - carbohydrate interactions of a novel acidic glycan can mediate sponge cell adhesion . J Biol Chem . 268 : 4922 – 4929 . Mullins RD , Machesky LM . 2000 . Actin assembly mediated by Arp2 / 3 complex and WASP family proteins . Methods Enzymol . 325 : 214 – 237 . MurrayPS , Zaidel - BarR . 2014 . Pre - metazoanorigins and evolutionofthe cadherin adhesome . Biol Open . 3 : 1183 – 1195 . Nelson WJ . 2008 . Regulation of cell – cell adhesion by the cadherin – catenin complex . Biochem Soc Trans . 36 : 149 . Nichols SA , Roberts BW , Richter DJ , Fairclough SR , King N . 2012 . Origin of metazoancadherindiversityandtheantiquityoftheclassicalcadherin / b - catenin complex . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA . 109 : 13046 – 13051 . Ortlund EA , Bridgham JT , Redinbo MR , Thornton JW . 2007 . Crystal structure of an ancient protein : evolution by conformational epis - tasis . Science 317 : 1544 – 1548 . Pokutta S , Choi H - J , Ahlsen G , Hansen SD , Weis WI . 2014 . Structural and thermodynamic characterization of cadherin (cid:4) b - catenin (cid:4) a - catenin complex formation . J Biol Chem . 289 : 13589 – 13601 . Pokutta S , Drees F , Takai Y , Nelson WJ , Weis WI . ( cadherin / catenin co - authors ) . 2002 . Biochemical and structural definition of the l - afadin - and actin - binding sites of a - catenin . J Biol Chem . 277 : 18868 – 18874 . Pokutta S , Weis WI . ( cadherin / catenin co - authors ) . 2000 . Structure of the dimerization and b - catenin binding region of a - catenin . Mol Cell . 5 : 533 – 543 . Ponting CP . 2001 . Issues in predicting protein function from sequence . Brief Bioinform . 2 : 19 – 29 . Price MN , Dehal PS , Arkin AP . 2010 . FastTree 2 – approximately maximum - likelihood trees for large alignments . PloS One 5 : e9490 . Putnam NH , Srivastava M , Hellsten U , Dirks B , Chapman J , Salamov A , Terry A , Shapiro H , Lindquist E , Kapitonov VV , et al . 2007 . Sea anem - one genome reveals ancestral eumetazoan gene repertoire and ge - nomic organization . Science 317 : 86 – 94 . Rangarajan ES , Izard T . 2012 . The cytoskeletal protein a - catenin unfurls upon binding to vinculin . J Biol Chem . 287 : 18492 – 18499 . Rangarajan ES , Izard T . 2013 . Dimer asymmetry defines alpha - catenin interactions . Nat Struct Mol Biol . 20 : 188 – 193 . Rimm DL , Koslov ER , Kebriaei P , Cianci CD , Morrow JS . ( cadherin / cat - enin co - authors ) . 1995 . a 1 ( E ) - catenin is an actin - binding and - bun - dling protein mediating the attachment of F - actin to the membrane adhesion complex . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A . 92 : 8813 – 8817 . Ronquist F , Teslenko M , van der Mark P , Ayres DL , Darling A , Ho¨hna S , Larget B , Liu L , Suchard MA , Huelsenbeck JP . 2012 . MrBayes 3 . 2 : efficient Bayesian phylogenetic inference and model choice across a large model space . Syst Biol . 61 : 539 – 542 . Schepis A , Sepich D , Nelson WJ . 2012 . a E - catenin regulates cell – cell adhesion and membrane blebbing during zebrafish epiboly . Development 139 : 537 – 546 . Schneider SQ , Finnerty JR , Martindale MQ . 2003 . Protein evolution : structure - function relationships of the oncogene beta - catenin in the evolution of multicellular animals . J Exp Zool B : Mol Devl Evol . 295 : 25 – 44 . Spudich JA , Watt S . 1971 . The regulation of rabbit skeletal muscle con - tractionI . Biochemicalstudiesoftheinteractionofthetropomyosin - troponin complex with actin and the proteolytic fragments of my - osin . J Biol Chem . 246 : 4866 – 4871 . Srivastava M , Simakov O , Chapman J , Fahey B , Gauthier ME , Mitros T , Richards GS , Conaco C , Dacre M , Hellsten U . 2010 . The Amphimedon queenslandica genome and the evolution of animal complexity . Nature 466 : 720 – 726 . Stamatakis A . 2014 . RAxML version 8 : a tool for phylogenetic analysis and post - analysis of large phylogenies . Bioinformatics 30 : 1312 – 1313 . Tulin S , Aguiar D , Istrail S , Smith J . 2013 . A quantitative reference tran - scriptome for Nematostella vectensis early embryonic development : a pipeline for de novo assembly in emerging model systems . EvoDevo . 4 : 16 . Varner JA . 1995 . Cell adhesion in sponges : potentiation by a cell surface 68 kDa proteoglycan - binding protein . J Cell Sci . 108 : 3119 – 3126 . Waterhouse AM , Procter JB , Martin DM , Clamp M , Barton GJ . 2009 . Jalview Version 2—a multiple sequence alignment editor and anal - ysis workbench . Bioinformatics 25 : 1189 – 1191 . Watson JD , Laskowski RA , Thornton JM . 2005 . Predicting protein func - tion from sequence and structural data . Current Opin Struct Biol . 15 : 275 – 284 . Wikramanayake AH , Hong M , Lee PN , Pang K , Byrum CA , Bince JM , Xu R , Martindale MQ . 2003 . An ancient role for nuclear beta - catenin in the evolution of axial polarity and germ layer segregation . Nature 426 : 446 – 450 . Yamada S , Pokutta S , Drees F , Weis WI , Nelson WJ . 2005 . Deconstructing the cadherin - catenin - actin complex . Cell 123 : 889 – 901 . Yonemura S , Wada Y , Watanabe T , Nagafuchi A , Shibata M . 2010 . alpha - Catenin as a tension transducer that induces adherens junction development . Nat Cell Biol . 12 : 533 – 542 . Yu DS , Lee DH , Kim SK , Lee CH , Song JY , Kong EB , Kim JF . 2012 . Algorithm for predicting functionally equivalent proteins from BLAST and HMMER searches . J Microbiol Biotechnol . 22 : 1054 – 1058 . Ziegler WH , Liddington RC , Critchley DR . 2006 . The structure and reg - ulation of vinculin . Trends Cell Biol . 16 : 453 – 460 . Cadherin – Catenin Complex of the Sea Anemone Nematostella vectensis . doi : 10 . 1093 / molbev / msw084 MBE 2029