 Supplemental materials Wen et al . , http : / / www . jcb . org / cgi / content / full / jcb . 200703055 / DC1 Methods used for data presented in supplemental figures RT - PCR analysis of BMPRII in Xenopus neural tube tissues . Xenopus embryos at 20 – 22 stages were dissected , the dorsal parts were subjected to 1 mg / ml collagenase for 30 min , and the neural tubes were separated from the myotome and notochord tissues . The first strand cDNA for PCR was synthesized from three neural tubes by the SuperScript III CellsDirect cDNA Synthesis kit ( Invitrogen ) , and one tenth of the product was used in a 20 - μ l PCR system . Negative control for amplification was performed using the product without reverse transcriptase . We designed two sets of Xenopus BMPRII - specific primers as follows : primer set 1 ( forward , 5 ′ - AA - GATGCAGAAGCCAGACT - 3 ′ ; reverse , 5 ′ - AGTTTTGGAGGCTTTCAAGC - 3 ′ ) , primer set 2 ( forward , 5 ′ - AGACGATTGAT - GATTGCTG - 3 ′ ; reverse , 5 ′ - CAGCGATTCCAGAACCACAA - 3 ′ ; forward primers are located in the mRNA sequence of the kinase domain , and the reverse primers are located in the 3 ′ untranslated region ) . Conditions for the PCR reaction were 94 ° C for 30 s , 53 ° C for primer set 1 and 49 ° C for primer set 2 for 30 s , 72 ° C for 1 min 45 s for 40 cycles , and a 10 - min 72 ° C final extension . PCR results were resolved on ethidium bromide – stained agarose gels , and the expected 1 . 7 - and 1 . 8 - kb bands showed the expression of Xenopus BMPRII mRNA . Our assays using both sets of primers did not detect the short form of BMPRII mRNA in Xenopus neural tubes . Western blotting of ADF / cofilin . 20 – 22 stages of Xenopus embryos were homogenized in lysis buffer ( 50 mM Tris - HCl , pH 7 . 4 , 150 mM NaCl , 1 mM EDTA , 1 % Triton X - 100 , 1 mM PMSF , 1 mg / ml aprotinin , 1 mg / ml leupeptin , and 1 mg / ml pepstatin ) . The cell lysates were subjected to 15 % SDS - PAGE and probed with XAC1 ( electrophoresis 25 : 2 , 611 ; Shaw et al . , 2004 ) or phos - phocofilin 1 ( Santa Cruz Biotechnology , Inc . ) antibodies . Live fluorescent imaging of cytoskeletal dynamics in growth cones . GFP – γ - actin and mRFP - EB3 were expressed in Xenopus neurons through the blastomere injection of mRNA molecules encoding these two constructs at the one - or two - cell stage . Neurons cultured from these embryos were examined by an imaging system consisting of an inverted microscope ( TE2000 ; Nikon ) equipped with a 60 × NA 1 . 4 plan Apo oil immersion objective ( Nikon ) , a CCD camera ( SensiCam QE ; Cooke Corp . ) , and a multispectral im - ager system ( Dual - View ; Optical Insights ) . To focally apply BMP7 , a micropipette ( 1 - μ m opening ) containing 5 μ M of BMP7 solu - tion was placed at 50 μ m , 45 ° away from the growth cone . IPLab software ( BD Biosciences ) was used for imaging and recording . Recorded time - lapse sequences were further processed by ImageJ software ( NIH ) , including contrast enhancement , cropping , and resizing . We also used the Z - project function of ImageJ to collapse the time - lapse sequence to generate a single image that illus - trates the distribution of GFP – γ - actin and mRFP - EB3 . Because mRFP - EB3 appeared as discrete comets , Z project of the maximal intensity was able to capture all mRFP - EB3 comets over the entire time - lapse sequence . Therefore , the resultant image depicts the tracking map of mRFP - EB3 ( + ) TIP s over the time period . For GFP - actin , we used Z project of the intensity sum to create the image that contains the spatial distribution and intensity of GFP – γ - actin over the time period . As a result , increased actin - based protrusion on one side of the growth cone would generate more fluorescence intensity and / or a large area of GFP – γ - actin . Thus , overlaying the mRFP - EB3 map and the GFP - actin image can reveal any difference in the spatial distribution of these two cytoskeletal components . Real - time PCR analysis of Xenopus TRPC1 and Xenopus BMPRII . Xenopus neural tubes were dissected from embryos at different stages . The first stand cDNA for real - time PCR ( Fig . S1 ) was synthesized as described in the RT - PCR analysis section above . The following primers specific to Xenopus β - actin , Xenopus TRPC1 , and Xenopus BMPRII were used : Xenopus β - actin ( forward , 5 ′ - AGCTGCCTGACGGACAAGT - 3 ′ ; reverse , 5 ′ - AATACCGCAGGATTCCATAC - 3 ′ ) , Xenopus TRPC1 ( forward , 5 ′ - AGCGAAT - CATGAGGACAAGGA - 3 ′ ; reverse , 5 ′ - GGCAGCGTGCATTTGTCA - 3 ′ ) , and Xenopus BMPRII ( forward , 5 ′ - GATCAAGATGCAGAAGCCAGACTA - 3 ′ ; reverse , 5 ′ - CCGTTCCCAAATCATCATGAG - 3 ′ ) . Reference Shaw , A . E . , L . S . Minamide , C . L . Bill , J . D . Funk , S . Maiti , and J . R . Bamburg . 2004 . Cross - reactivity of antibodies to actin - depolymerizing factor / cofilin family proteins and identification of the major epitope recognized by a mammalian actin - depolymerizing factor / cofilin antibody . Electrophoresis . 25 : 2611 – 2620 .