LARGE - SCALE BIOLOGY ARTICLE Gene Duplicability of Core Genes Is Highly Consistent across All Angiosperms OPEN Zhen Li , a , b , c , 1 Jonas Defoort , a , b , c , 1 Setareh Tasdighian , a , b , c Steven Maere , a , b , c Yves Van de Peer , a , b , c , d , 2 and Riet De Smet a , b , c , 2 a Department of Plant Systems Biology , VIB , B - 9052 Ghent , Belgium b Department of Plant Biotechnology and Bioinformatics , Ghent University , B - 9052 Ghent , Belgium c Bioinformatics Institute Ghent , Ghent University , B - 9052 Ghent , Belgium d Genomics Research Institute , University of Pretoria , Pretoria 0028 , South Africa ORCID IDs : 0000 - 0003 - 2393 - 6592 ( J . D . ) ; 0000 - 0002 - 7411 - 0136 ( S . T . ) ; 0000 - 0002 - 5341 - 136X ( S . M . ) Gene duplication is an important mechanism for adding to genomic novelty . Hence , which genes undergo duplication and are preserved following duplication is an important question . It has been observed that gene duplicability , or the ability of genes to be retained following duplication , is a nonrandom process , with certain genes being more amenable to survive duplication events than others . Primarily , gene essentiality and the type of duplication ( small - scale versus large - scale ) have been shown in different species to in ﬂ uence the ( long - term ) survival of novel genes . However , an overarching view of “ gene duplicability ” is lacking , mainly due to the fact that previous studies usually focused on individual species and did not account for the in ﬂ uence of genomic context and the time of duplication . Here , we present a large - scale study in which we investigated duplicate retention for 9178 gene families shared between 37 ﬂ owering plant species , referred to as angiosperm core gene families . For most gene families , we observe a strikingly consistent pattern of gene duplicability across species , with gene families being either primarily single - copy or multicopy in all species . An intermediate class contains gene families that are often retained in duplicate for periods extending to tens of millions of years after whole - genome duplication , but ultimately appear to be largely restored to singleton status , suggesting that these genes may be dosage balance sensitive . The distinction between single - copy and multicopy gene families is re ﬂ ected in their functional annotation , with single - copy genes being mainly involved in the maintenance of genome stability and organelle function and multicopy genes in signaling , transport , and metabolism . The intermediate class was overrepresented in regulatory genes , further suggesting that these represent putative dosage - balance - sensitive genes . INTRODUCTION Since the seminal work of Susumu Ohno ( Ohno , 1970 ) , the im - portance of gene and genome duplication for evolution and ad - aptation has been well appreciated . Indeed , ample examples of gene diversi ﬁ cation following duplication have been described and “ gene duplicability , ” by which we mean the ability of genes to be preserved in a population following duplication , has been extensively studied ( Davis and Petrov , 2004 ; Koonin et al . , 2004 ; He and Zhang , 2006 ; Liang et al . , 2008 ; Rambaldi et al . , 2008 ; Makino et al . , 2009 ; Woods et al . , 2013 ) . Studies published on a large array of species seem to converge on the idea that some duplicated genes are more likely to be preserved in a population , andassuchtopotentiallycontributetofunctionalinnovation , than other genes . One factor that seems to in ﬂ uence gene duplicability is the mode of duplication , as in several organisms that have undergone ancient whole - genome duplications ( WGDs ) it has been shown that different sets of genes were retained following WGD and small - scale duplication ( SSD ) events ( Papp et al . , 2003 ; Blanc andWolfe , 2004a ; Seoighe and Gehring , 2004 ; Maere et al . , 2005a ; Aury et al . , 2006 ; Freeling , 2009 ) . BothSSDsandWGDshaveoccurredfrequentlyinthe ﬂ owering plant lineage , and in particular WGDs have happened at a much higherratethanin , forinstance , fungioranimals ( VandePeeretal . , 2009a ; Vanneste et al . , 2014a ) . Studying the Arabidopsis thaliana genome , it has been observed that certain sets of genes have almost exclusively duplicated through WGDs ( Blanc and Wolfe , 2004a ; Seoighe and Gehring , 2004 ; Maere et al . , 2005a ) . These genes have distinctive functional features , as they primarily en - code transcription factors and components of multiprotein complexes and are involved in development and in signaling pathways ( Blanc and Wolfe , 2004a ; Seoighe and Gehring , 2004 ; Maereetal . , 2005a ; Freeling , 2009 ) . Apotentialexplanationforthis phenomenon is given by the gene dosage balance theory , which states that for many genes that participate in essential complex cellular networks or protein complexes , it is crucial that the stoichiometry between the gene products is maintained ( Papp 1 These authors contributed equally to this work . 2 Address correspondence to yves . vandepeer @ psb . vib - ugent . be or riet . desmet @ psb . vib - ugent . be . The author responsible for distribution of materials integral to the ﬁ ndings presented in this article in accordance with the policy described in the Instructions for Authors ( www . plantcell . org ) is : Riet De Smet ( riet . desmet @ psb . vib - ugent . be ) . OPEN Articles can be viewed online without a subscription . www . plantcell . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1105 / tpc . 15 . 00877 The Plant Cell , Vol . 28 : 326 – 344 , February 2016 , www . plantcell . org ã 2016 American Society of Plant Biologists . All rights reserved . et al . , 2003 ; Birchler et al . , 2005 ; Aury et al . , 2006 ; Birchler and Veitia , 2007 , 2012 ; Edger and Pires , 2009 ) . While WGD preserves the relative dosage between genes , the stoichiometry is dis - rupted when only one or few interaction partners are duplicated . In other plant species , vertebrate and unicellular organisms that have also undergone ancient WGDs , similar observations were made ( Auryetal . , 2006 ; Brunetetal . , 2006 ; HuminieckiandHeldin , 2010 ; Makino and McLysaght , 2010 ; Rodgers - Melnick et al . , 2012 ) . Hence , while gene loss following SSD is generally a rela - tivelyfastprocess , withaverageduplicatehalf - lifeestimatesbeing in the range of a few million years ( Lynch and Conery , 2000 ) , after WGD , a substantial set of genes is often retained in duplicate for a much longer time ( Maere et al . , 2005a ) . For instance , it is esti - mated that ; 16 % of the genes for Arabidopsis are still present in duplicate following the most recent WGD that occurred ; 49 million years ago ( mya ; Vanneste et al . , 2014a ) , while 75 % of the genesarestillpresentinduplicateinsoybean ( Glycinemax ) , which underwent a WGD ; 13 mya ( Schmutz et al . , 2010 ) . Whether these genes will be retained inde ﬁ nitely is still an unresolved question ( Buggs et al . , 2012 ; McGrath and Lynch , 2012 ; Douglas et al . , 2015 ) , although the lower numbers of retained genes re - ported for more ancient WGD events seems to suggest that , at least for a subset of genes , dosage constraints eventually get relaxed , leadingtofunctionaldiversi ﬁ cationorlossofthesegenes . In stark contrast to observations of prolonged retention of a set of dosage - sensitive genes are recent observations that a substantial fraction of core angiosperm genes , i . e . , genes that are present in all angiosperm genomes , occur as singletons throughout , suggestingthattheirduplicationmightbedetrimental ( Paterson etal . , 2006 ; Armisén etal . , 2008 ; EdgerandPires , 2009 ; Duarte et al . , 2010 ; De Smet et al . , 2013 ; Han et al . , 2014 ) . While these observations are not necessarily in contradiction with each other , as they likely concern different gene sets , an over - arching picture that uni ﬁ es the different observations regarding gene duplicability is currently still missing . Speci ﬁ cally , the fact that most studies concerning gene duplicability report species - speci ﬁ c patterns adds to the confusion , as genetic context , species biology , ecological requirements at the time of duplica - tion , and the timing of the WGD event might greatly in ﬂ uence the observed duplicate retention patterns ( Barker et al . , 2008 ; Soltis et al . , 2010 ; Carretero - Paulet and Fares , 2012 ; Conant , 2014 ) . Here , we undertake a large - scale comparative approach to determine whether patterns of gene duplicability can be gener - alized across diverse lineages . In particular , we investigate the duplicability of 9178 core angiosperm genes identi ﬁ ed across 37 different angiosperm genomes and covering 20 putative WGD events . For most gene families , our analyses reveal a striking nonrandom picture of gene duplicability , with the majority of the core genes occurring as single copies in almost all of the an - giospermgenomesandamorerestrictedsetofgenesoccurringin duplicate throughout . This pattern is supported by a strong functional dichotomy between both classes of gene families , with single - copy genes being involved in the maintenance of genome integrityandorganellefunctionandmulticopygenesbeingbiased toward signaling , transport , and metabolism . Next to these two extremes , wealsoidenti ﬁ edanintermediateclassofgenefamilies that show a pattern of prolonged duplicate retention spanning several tens of millions of years following WGD but appear to eventually also mostly return to singleton status . We hypothesize that dosage balance constraints prolong duplicate retention in these particular gene families . Overall , we advocate that , at least for genes present in all angiosperms , the so - called core genes , selection plays an important role in the long - term preservation or nonpreservation of duplicated genes , considering the highly nonrandom pattern that arises in this cross - species and cross - duplication event analysis . RESULTS Core Angiosperm Gene Families Show a Strong Preference toward the Single - Copy State We collected the protein coding sequences for 37 sequenced angiosperm genomes ( Figure 1 ) and constructed gene families using OrthoMCL ( see Methods ) . To ensure that each of these gene families traced back to a single angiosperm ancestral gene , we further processed these gene families using phylogenetic tree construction followed by reconciliation of the gene trees and the species tree ( see Methods ) . Of the 69 , 133 gene families that were obtained using OrthoMCL and veri ﬁ ed by phylogenetic analysis , 9178belongtotheangiosperm coregenome , de ﬁ nedas that part of the genome containing genes present in all angio - sperms , includingtheangiosperm ancestor . Toaccommodate for errors in genome annotation , the presence of partial genome sequences and errors in gene family construction and / or phylo - genetic analysis , weallowed forgene families inthis coresettobe missing in up to ﬁ ve genomes ( see Supplemental Figure 1 for a justi ﬁ cation of this threshold ) . This set of genes was used in this study for all subsequent analyses . For each gene family , we calculated the fraction of species for which the gene family contains exactly one copy , further referred to as single - copy percentage ( SCP ) . For instance , a value of 0 . 7 means that for that particular gene family , 70 % of the species examined have exactly onecopy , while30 % ofthespecieshavemorethanonecopy . The distribution of the SCPs for all core gene families is depicted in Figure 2 . As can be observed , the distribution is highly skewed towardhighSCPs , withthemeanofthedistributionlyingat66 . 8 % and the mode of the distribution at 87 . 5 % . Furthermore , if we remove genomes that still have a high number of retained du - plicates due to a recent ( < 20 mya ) WGD event ( such as soybean [ G . max ] , ﬂ ax [ Linum usitatissimum ] , maize [ Zea mays ] , and Brassica rapa ; Figure 1 ) , we observe an even stronger shift toward the single - copy state with the mode of the distribution being at 92 . 5 % ( Supplemental Figure 2 ) . Since the most likely outcome following gene duplication is duplicate loss , with average duplicate half - lives estimated at a few million years for SSDs ( Lynch and Conery , 2000 ) , we as - sessed whether our observations could be explained by simple stochastic gene duplication and loss dynamics . Therefore , we simulatedgenefamilycopynumberevolutionalongthe37species tree , using a probabilistic model in which SSD is modeled as a random birth - death ( BD ) process ( Bailey , 1964 ) and that takes into account known WGD events by assuming an instantaneous doubling ( or triplication ) of all genes , as by Rabier et al . ( 2014 ) ( see Methods ) . Using this model as a null hypothesis and using Nonrandom Duplicate Retention in Angiosperms 327 realisticratesofsmall - scalegeneduplicationandloss , l , sampled from a normal distribution with mean m = 0 . 53 and SD s = 0 . 156 duplications / losses per evolutionary time unit ( see Methods ) , we generated gene counts at the leaves of the species tree for 9178 3 1000 = 9 , 178 , 000 simulated gene families . We observe that the SCP distribution under the null model has a mode of 22 . 5 % on average , compared with 87 . 5 % for the core angiosperm gene families and that both distributions are signi ﬁ - cantly different ( P < 2 . 2e - 16 , Wilcoxon rank - sum test ) ( Figure 2 ) . Hence , under the neutral scenario of stochastic gene birth and death , there is no bias toward the single - copy state . We repeated this analysis for different sampling distributions of l - values and observed that the general trend of the distribution of SCPs for the simulated families remains similar , indicating that rejection of the Figure 1 . Angiosperm Species Tree . Phylogenetic tree depicting the relationships among the 37 angiosperm genomes used in this article . The tree topology was inferred from a concatenated alignment based on 107 almost single - copy gene families ( see Methods ) . Numbers on the branches represent bootstrap supports ( * for 100 % ) , internode certainty ( IC ) , and internode certainty all ( ICA ) , respectively . WGD events were inferred from literature ( Jiao et al . , 2014 ; Vanneste et al . , 2014a ) and are depicted by stars . Only WGD duplications were considered that are more recent than the angiosperm common ancestor . 328 The Plant Cell nullhypothesisisrobustwithrespecttochangesinthedistribution of l - values . Therefore , our observations suggest that gene families belonging to the so - called angiosperm core genome ( i . e . , gene families present in all angiosperm genomes ) are skewed toward the single - copy state more strongly than expected under a random gene duplication loss process and hence appear to be under ( strong ) selection to be single copy . Homoeologs Are Quickly Lost Following WGD The observation that many core gene families are single copy , in spite of the large number of both recent and ancient genome duplication events , seems to suggest that gene loss occurs rel - ativelyfastfollowingWGD . ThelargenumberofWGDeventsinthis study and their different ages ( Figure 1 ) provide an excellent case to study duplicate retention following WGD ( Lloyd et al . , 2014 ) . To study the dynamics of duplicate gene retention in the core gene families , we ﬁ rst assessed the contribution of WGDs com - pared with SSDs to duplicate retention in the core gene families . Speci ﬁ cally , we applied gene tree – species tree reconciliation to obtain predictions of duplication events and their associated timing for all gene families ( see Methods ) . To this end , we clas - si ﬁ ed each node in the species tree ( Figure 1 ) as either being associated with WGD or SSD , based on whether WGD events have been predicted on the branch leading to the speci ﬁ c node ( Supplemental Figure 3 ) . We then compared the predicted numbers of duplication events at WGD nodes versus SSD nodes for both core and noncore gene families , the latter referring to gene families that arose more recently than the angiosperm common ancestor or that underwent massive gene loss in some species since speciation from the angiosperm common ancestor . For the core gene families , we estimated that in total 69 . 8 % ( 65 , 531 out of 93 , 942 predicted duplication events ) of the dupli - cations could be attributed to WGDs , whereas for the noncore gene families , this was only 34 . 6 % ( 48 , 778 out of 140 , 786 pre - dicted duplication events ) ( Supplemental Figure 4 ) . Hence , for core families , comparedwithnoncore gene families , the presence of duplicates seems to be biased toward WGD - associated gene duplication ( P < 2 . 2e - 16 , Fisher ’ s exact test ) ( also see Supplemental Figure 5 ) . In further support of the hypothesis that core gene families were more heavily impacted by WGD than noncore gene families , we observed that K s - based ( number of synonymoussubstitutionspersynonymoussite ) agedistributions of duplicated gene pairs in the different species show clear peaks forthepredictedWGDeventsifonlyduplicatesfromthecoregene families are considered , while these peaks seemed to be absent for age distributions constructed for duplicates of noncore gene families ( Supplemental Figure 6 ) . Hence , core gene families ap - pear to be particularly suited to study duplicate preservation patterns following WGD . WetookadvantageofthelargenumberofWGDeventsandtheir different ages to study the dynamics of gene duplicate loss fol - lowing WGDs . To this end , we assigned retained duplicates in the core gene families to the different WGD events or as being created by SSD based on a Gaussian Mixture Modeling ( GMM ) approach ( see Methods ) . This way , for each species , we obtained predictions of the timing ( expressed in K s values ) of the WGD events they experienced and the number of gene families with Figure 2 . Overall Distribution of Single - Copy Percentage for All Angiosperm Core Gene Families . Thedistributiondepictsthedegreetowhichthe9178coregenefamiliesaresinglecopyinthe37angiospermspeciesinvestigated . The x axisrepresents , for eachgenefamily , thepercentageofspecieswithexactlyonegenecopywithrespecttothetotalnumberofspeciesinthefamily . Thedistributionillustrates a very strong tendency of angiosperm core gene families toward the single - copy state . The mode ( 87 . 5 % ) and the mean ( 66 . 8 % ) of the distribution are indicated by red and green lines , respectively . The observed distribution strongly deviates from the expected distribution under a stochastic duplicate BD model ( depicted by dashed lines ) . Nonrandom Duplicate Retention in Angiosperms 329 retained duplicates for each of the WGD events ( Lynch and Conery , 2003 ; BlancandWolfe , 2004b ; Vanneste etal . , 2013 ) ( see Methods ) . Weusedthesedatatoassess therelationshipbetween the number of gene families with retained duplicates and the estimated timing of the WGD events . As can be seen in Figure 3 , duplicate retention subsequent to WGD follows an L - shaped curve that can be approximated by a power - law function ( see Methods ) , con ﬁ rming common expectations that gene loss subsequent to WGD is initially fast and then slows down . A similar power - law pattern was recently also observed in a genome - wide analysisofduplicateretentionfollowingWGDforamorerestricted set of genomes ( Lloyd et al . , 2014 ) . For ease of interpretation , we grouped the WGD events into three different sets according to the overall time frame during which the WGD event occurred . “ Ancient ” refers to the WGD events that have been predicted to have occurred at least 75 mya ( Figure 1 ) . This includes the ancient g WGD event that is shared byall dicotsand the s WGDevent that is shared by the Poaceae . Using the mixture modeling approach , we could not ﬁ nd support for the predicted ancient t event that is shared by all monocots ( Jiao et al . , 2014 ) . “ K - Pg boundary ” refers to WGD events situated at approximately the K - Pg ( Cretaceous - Paleogene ) boundary , which re ﬂ ects a clustering of WGD events at ; 50 to 70 mya ( Vanneste et al . , 2014a ) . Finally , the “ recent WGD ” set includes the duplication events that are more recent thantheK - Pgboundary ( < 50mya ) . InFigure3 , duplicateretention patterns associated with the “ recent WGD ” events show a steep decline as a function of WGD age . Whereas on average 41 . 64 % ( SD 21 . 74 % ) of the core gene families retain duplicates for the recent WGD events , for the “ K - Pg boundary ” WGDs , the number of core gene families with retained duplicates has dropped to on average16 . 04 % ( SD 7 . 48 % ) , andforthe “ Ancientset , ” thisnumber further reduces to 8 . 37 % on average ( SD 2 . 24 % ) . The distinction between SSDand WGD duplicates in this article are approximate , and SSD numbers are likely underestimated by both strategies ( GMM and reconciliation method ) because some SSDs might be located on a WGD branch ( gene tree – species tree reconciliation ) or might be hidden under a WGD peak ( GMM analysis ) . However , wedonotexpectthistohavealargein ﬂ uence on the observations that core gene families in contrast to noncore gene families are mainly duplicated by WGD nor on observed differences in gene duplicability patterns for different gene family groups ( see further ) , as this underestimation likely affects all gene families equally . Core Gene Families Belong to Different Groups That Re ﬂ ect Major Differences in Gene Duplicability Our global analyses on duplicate retention following WGD show that the majority of the angiosperm core gene families revert quickly to the single - copy state following WGD . Yet , the distri - bution in Figure 2 suggests that certain gene families revert faster to single - copy status than others . Therefore , we explored gene family speci ﬁ c differences in duplicate retention by constructing a copy number pro ﬁ le matrix , which for each gene family lists the Figure 3 . Duplicate Gene Retention in Function of Time Since WGD . Eachdotrepresents thefractionofcoregenefamilieswithretainedduplicatesfollowingaspeci ﬁ cWGD ( y axis ) , asafunctionofWGDage , expressedin K s units ( x axis ) . The timingofthe WGD eventsandtheparticular gene familiesthatretained duplicates following aspeci ﬁ cWGD eventwere inferred by ﬁ tting Gaussianmixturemodelsto K s agedistributionsforall37speciesseparately ( seeMethods ) . Assuch , eachpointrepresentsaspecies - speci ﬁ cestimatefor aWGDandWGDeventssharedbymultipledescendantspecieswillberepresentedbymultipledatapointsthatcannotberegardedasbeingindependent . SSD - related peaks and dubious WGD peak callings were omitted . Additional information on all the peaks can be found in Supplemental Table 2 and Supplemental Figure 7 . A power - law function was ﬁ tted to the data ( x 2 goodness - of - ﬁ t = 0 . 77 , P = 1 ) . 330 The Plant Cell Figure 4 . Core Gene Families Partition into Three Groups Based on Clustering of the Copy - Number Pro ﬁ le Data . ( A ) Heatmapoftheclusteredcopynumberpro ﬁ lematrix . Rowsrepresentspeciesandcolumnsrepresentthecoregenefamilies . Genefamilies ( columns ) are sorted according to the three different groups obtained by k - means clustering . Symbols indicate for each species whether WGD events that might have contributed to duplicates in the species fall into the “ recent ” ( rectangle ) , “ K - Pg boundary ” ( circle ) , or “ ancient ” ( triangle ) category . Nonrandom Duplicate Retention in Angiosperms 331 number of genes for a given species . We classi ﬁ ed gene families intodifferentgroupsbasedonanunbiasedclusteringoftheircopy number pro ﬁ les . Using a subsampling strategy in combination withclustering ( Montietal . , 2003 ) ( seeMethods ) , wefoundthatthe data are best described by three stable clusters ( Figure 4A ; Supplemental Figures 8 and 9 ) : Group 1 contains 5097 gene families and covers 5473 Arabidopsis genes , Group 2 contains 2832 gene families and covers 4312 Arabidopsis genes , and Group3contains1249genefamiliesandcovers3255Arabidopsis genes . The heat map in Figure 4A clearly shows the overall ten - dency of gene families in Group 1 to occur as single copies . If duplicates are present , these are mainly biased toward species with recent WGDs . Gene families within Group 2 show mainly duplicate retention for species that are associated with “ recent ” and “ K - Pg Boundary ” WGDs , while being largely single copy for speciesthatonlyunderwent “ Ancient ” WGDs . Thelattersuggests that while duplicates for these gene families are in general pre - servedforprolongedtimes , theyeventuallylargelyreturntosingle - copy status . Finally , gene families in Group 3 have retained duplicates for all species , also for the ones that only underwent “ ancient ” WGDs . We also observe that the outgroup species Amborella trichopoda , which has no evidence of WGDs post - dating angiosperm diversi ﬁ cation ( Amborella Genome Project , 2013 ) , seems to be singleton for most of the core gene families , further substantiating the above observations that core gene families mainly duplicate through WGDs . Investigating the SCPs forthegenefamiliesinthethreegroupscon ﬁ rmsthatgenefamilies inthe ﬁ rstgroup showastrongpreferencetowardthesingle - copy state , whereas gene families in the third group represent gene families with a strong tendency to be multicopy in the majority of thespecies . TheSCPdistributionsforeachofthethreegroupsare signi ﬁ cantly different ( P < 2 . 2e - 16 for all comparisons , Kruskal - Wallis test followed by Dunn ’ s test with Benjamini - Hochberg multiple testing correction ) , and there is almost no overlap in SCPs for Groups 1 and 3 ( Figure 4B ) . We will further refer to the gene families in Group 1 as single - copy , those in Group 2 as intermediate , and those in Group 3 as multicopy . Whereas the analyses described above clearly show differ - ences in duplicate retention patterns for the different gene fami - lies , it does not provide direct information on the origin of the retained duplicates : For example , are duplicates in the multicopy group also more ancient than those in the other two groups or is the increased number of species with duplicates in the multicopy group mainly due to recent lineage - speci ﬁ c expansions ? There - fore , weinvestigatedwhetherthecopynumberpatternsobserved inFigure4arerelatedtodifferentagesofretainedduplicatesinthe three groups using duplication age predictions obtained by GMM of K s - based age distributions and gene tree – species tree rec - onciliation ( see Methods ) . The former approach ( GMM modeling ) provides us with species - speci ﬁ c estimates of duplication ages expressed on continuous time scales ( K s values ) , whereas the latter approach ( reconciliation ) gives estimates of the absolute counts of duplication events on a gene family base . Hence , the GMMapproachprovidesmultipleestimatesofduplicateretention per WGD for events with multiple descendant species , since the modeling is performed in a species - speci ﬁ c manner and as such predictions for the same event are obtained for the species separately . These predictions are not necessarily independent since gene losses following duplication might have predated speciation . However , since K s values and their distributions are not always comparable between species ( Smith and Donoghue , 2008 ) , the multiple estimates obtained for the same event in different species could not be collapsed . We used the GMM approachtostudyduplicateretentiondynamicsovertimeforgene families in the three different groups similarly as we did above for the full set of core gene families ( Figure 3 ) . Overall , when com - paringnumbersofretainedduplicatesforthecoregenefamilies in function of the WGD ages , we observed that gene families in the three different groups differ markedly in their duplicate retention dynamics over time ( P < 9 . 2e - 06 for all comparisons , Kruskall - Wallis test followed by Dunn ’ s test with Benjamini - Hochberg multiple testing correction ) ( Figure 5A ) . In particular , we observed higher duplicate retention for all WGD event classes ( i . e . , for “ recent , ” “ K - Pg boundary , ” and “ ancient ” WGD events ) for the core gene families in the multicopy group , whereas the proportion of core gene families in the single - copy group with retained du - plicates is consistently lower ( Figure 5A ) . Next , we used the gene tree – species tree reconciliation approach to obtain absolute counts of predicted duplications and their corresponding agesfor all core gene families and used these data to identify group - speci ﬁ c differences in duplicate retention for speci ﬁ c duplication ageclassescomparedwiththefullsetofcoregenefamilies ( Figure 5B ) . This shows that gene families in the single - copy group seem to be speci ﬁ cally biased toward duplicates from the “ recent ” WGDs ( P = 3 . 55e - 137 , Fisher ’ sexacttestwithBonferronimultiple - testing correction ) , while duplicates from the “ K - Pg boundary ” ( P = 5 . 79e - 83 , Fisher ’ s exact test with Bonferroni multiple - testing correction ) and “ ancient ” ( P = 6 . 36e - 98 , Fisher ’ s exact test with Bonferroni multiple - testing correction ) events are un - derrepresented . Duplicate retention for gene families in the in - termediate group is biased toward the “ K - Pg boundary ” events ( P = 5 . 05e - 45 , Fisher ’ s exact test with Bonferroni multiple - testing correction ) . Multicopy gene families are enriched for duplicates from the “ ancient ” events ( P = 2 . 09e - 50 , Fisher ’ s exact test with Bonferroni multiple - testing correction ) , while showing a de ﬁ cit in duplicationsfromthe “ recent ” events ( P = 1 . 81e - 73 , Fisher ’ sexact test with Bonferroni multiple - testing correction ) . SSDs are un - derrepresented in the intermediate group ( P = 1 . 65e - 23 , Fisher ’ s exacttestwithBonferronimultiple - testingcorrection ) , whilebeing overrepresented in the multicopy group ( P = 1 . 50e - 22 , Fisher ’ s exact test with Bonferroni multiple - testing correction ) . A com - parison of the relative number of duplications obtained for each duplication age class based on gene tree – species tree reconcil - iation and GMM of K s - based age distributions provide consistent Figure 4 . ( continued ) . ( B ) SCP distributions for the gene families in each of the three different groups . The distribution of the Full Group shows the SCP distribution of all core gene families together ( cf . Figure 2 ) . 332 The Plant Cell results ( Supplemental Figure 10 ) . Despite these differences in duplicate retention for the three groups , all groups have retained more duplicates from the “ recent ” events , followed by the “ K - Pg boundary ” and the “ ancient ” events ( Figures 5A and 5B ) . The Partitioning in Different Groups Is Mirrored by Gene Function We conducted a GOSlim enrichment analysis of the Arabidopsis genes in the three different groups , revealing that the three dif - ferent groups have a remarkably different functional composition ( Figure 6A ) . The “ single - copy ” group is enriched for genes that function in organelles ( e . g . , “ mitochondrion , ” “ thylakoid , ” and “ photosynthesis ” ) and that have to do with the maintenance of DNA repair and integrity ( e . g . , “ DNA metabolic process ” and “ nucleobase - containing compound metabolic process ” ) . An in - dependent analysis of 2090 nuclear - encoded chloroplast - targeted genes taken from The Chloroplast Function Database ( Myouga et al . , 2013 ) supported the overrepresentation of genes with chloroplast - associated functions in this particular group ( P = 1 . 1e - 59 , Fisher ’ s exact test with Bonferroni multiple - testing correction ) . No such overrepresentation was found for the “ intermediate ” and “ multicopy ” groups ( Supplemental Figure 11 ) . The “ intermediate ” groupisenrichedforgenesthatareinvolvedin development ( “ multicellular organism development ” ) and growth and regulation of transcription ( “ transcription factor activity ” and “ chromatin binding ” ) . This last observation was con ﬁ rmed by an independent analysis of 1795 putative transcription factors in Arabidopsis ( Pérez - Rodríguez et al . , 2010 ) , which showed that these genes were clearly overrepresented in the “ intermediate ” group ( P = 4 . 8e - 17 , Fisher ’ s exact test with Bonferroni multiple testing correction ) while not being enriched for the “ multicopy ” group and being underrepresented in the “ single - copy ” group ( Supplemental Figure 12 ) . The overrepresentation of regulatory genes in this group , together with the longer retention times for these gene families , suggests that this group mainly consists of dosage - balance - sensitive genes ( Birchler et al . , 2005 ; Maere et al . , 2005a ; Freeling and Thomas , 2006 ; Edger and Pires , 2009 ) . We further investigated this hypothesis by assessing the extent to which genes within this group are involved in protein interactions ( Papp et al . , 2003 ) and the contribution of WGD to duplicate re - tention for this speci ﬁ c group ( Papp et al . , 2003 ; Blanc and Wolfe , 2004a ; Maere et al . , 2005a ) , which represent two characteristics , other than functional overrepresentation , associated with dosage balance constraints . First , we observed that Arabidopsis inter - acting protein pairs ( see Methods ) are indeed most over - represented in the “ intermediate ” group , yet these results are only borderline signi ﬁ cant following multiple testing correction ( P = 0 . 01 , randomization test with Bonferroni multiple - testing cor - rections ) ( Supplemental Table 1 ) . Second , while all core gene familiesduplicatepreferentiallybyWGD , the “ intermediate ” group has a higher fraction of WGD - associated duplicates versus SSD - associated duplicates compared with the “ single - copy ” group ( P = 2 . 96e - 17 , Fisher ’ s exact test with Bonferroni multiple - testing correction ) or “ multicopy ” group ( P = 2 . 76e - 61 , Fisher ’ s exact test with Bonferroni multiple - testing correction ) , as de - rived from the gene tree – species tree reconciliation predictions , strengthening our belief that the “ intermediate ” group contains dosage - balance - sensitive gene families . Finally , “ multicopy ” gene families are enriched for genes that appear to be involved in the interaction with the environment ( “ signal transduction , ” “ transport , ” and “ cell wall ” ) , translation , and different metabolic processes ( “ carbohydrate and protein metabolic process , ” “ biosynthetic pro - cess , ” and “ catalytic activity ” ) . We also analyzed a data set that describes loss - of - function ( LOF ) phenotypes for 2400 Arabidopsis genes ( Lloyd and Meinke , 2012 ) of which 1521 are present in the core gene set . Genes within this data set are placed in four different groups accordingtotheirknockoutphenotype . We ﬁ ndthatthethreecore angiosperm groups show markedly different signatures with re - gards to their classi ﬁ cation into LOF phenotype groups ( Figure 6B ) . Inparticular , genesinthe “ single - copy ” groupareenrichedfor the “ essential ” category ( P = 1 . 44e - 39 , Fisher ’ s exact test with Bonferroni multiple - testing correction ) , consisting of genes that are essential for early development and survival . On the other hand , essential genes are underrepresented in the “ multicopy ” group . This is agreement with recent observations that lethal genes in Arabidopsis usually lack duplicates in this particular genome ( Lloyd et al . , 2015 ) . It is noteworthy that over - representationofessentialgenesinthe “ single - copy ” groupisnot speci ﬁ cally due to the genes involved in DNA integrity within the single - copy set , but also organelle genes are associated with essentiality ( Lloyd and Meinke , 2012 ) . The “ intermediate ” set is enriched for genes of the “ morphological ” class ( P = 6 . 96e - 05 , Fisher ’ s exact test with Bonferroni multiple - testing correction ) , which contains genes associated with clear morphological phe - notypes , involved in reproduction and timing ( e . g . , ﬂ owering time and senescence ) , in agreement with the strong over - representation of developmental genes in this particular group . Finally , the “ multicopy ” class is overrepresented for genes in the “ cellular and biochemical ” group ( i . e . , genes functioning in me - tabolism or other biochemical pathways or showing phenotypic effects at the cellular level ) ( P = 1 . 14e - 06 , Fisher ’ s exact test with Bonferroni multiple - testing correction ) and “ conditional ” class ( P = 6 . 84e - 04 , Fisher ’ s exact test with Bonferroni multiple - testing correction ) ( i . e . , genes that respond to biotic and abiotic stress ) , consistent with GOSlim enrichment results . In summary , both the GOSlim enrichment analysis and the analysis of LOF phenotype data indicate that the separation of core gene families into three different groups according to gene duplicability is mirrored by a separation of the gene families in the space of gene functions . DISCUSSION We assessed duplicate retention patterns for 9178 core angio - sperm gene families ( i . e . , gene families shared by all angiosperm species ) in 37 angiosperm genomes , covering 20 putative WGD events . Assessing the retention of duplicated genes across such a large number of genomes and duplication events allows for replicated tests of gene duplicability , mitigating potential biases due to differences between individual species and WGDs ( Barker et al . , 2008 ; Soltis et al . , 2010 ; Carretero - Paulet and Fares , 2012 ; Conantetal . , 2014 ) . Inaddition , becauseofthevariedagerangeof the WGD events in our data set and the observed large contri - bution of WGD to the expansion of core gene families , we were Nonrandom Duplicate Retention in Angiosperms 333 able to compare duplicate retention patterns across WGD events of different ages . We observe that gene duplicability is highly consistent across angiosperm genomes , with over 50 % of the core angiosperm genes reverting quickly to single - copy status following duplica - tion , whereasamuchsmallersetseemstooccurinmultiplecopies throughout . An intermediate group is formed by putative dosage - balance - sensitive genes that are maintained in duplicate for prolonged periods of time , but eventually mostly return to single - copy status . By showing that there is a clear distinction between genesthatgenerallyoccurasasingle - copythroughoutandgenes that show prolonged duplicate retention in the genome or that are retained “ inde ﬁ nitely ” following WGD , we reconcile previous observations on high numbers of single - copy genes shared across multiple angiosperm genomes , despite the many , often nested , WGD events they experienced ( Paterson et al . , 2006 ; Duarte et al . , 2010 ; De Smet et al . , 2013 ; Han et al . , 2014 ) , with observations that duplicates can be retained for long periods following WGD ( Blanc and Wolfe , 2004a ; Maere et al . , 2005a ) . Previous , smaller - scale comparisons of duplicate retention fol - lowing WGD in multiple plant species have observed strong dif - ferences between species ( Barker et al . , 2008 ; Carretero - Paulet and Fares , 2012 ) . These differences do most probably exist , yet , by focusing on a large number of species and a large number of WGD events , we were able to retrieve dominant and striking patterns of gene duplicability that have remained concealed in smaller - scale comparisons . As our study only focused on core gene families , it is possible that important differences between species result from duplicate retention patterns in gene families thatwerenotconsideredinthisanalysis . Inaddition , whileherewe showed that the overall duplicate retention tendency seems to be highlyconsistentacrossalargenumberofspeciesandduplication events for the angiosperm core gene families , further detailed cross - species exploration of duplications in both core and non - core angiosperm gene families might reveal other parallelisms in duplicateretentionthathaveremainedconcealedinthiswork . For instance , otherworks haveshownthatthe modeofSSD ( primarily tandem versus transposition duplication ) is also preserved cross - taxon for certain gene families ( Freeling et al . , 2008 ; Wang et al . , 2011 ; Woodhouse et al . , 2011 ) . We found that gene duplicability is highly associated with gene function , with single - copy genes being biased toward essential genes , functioning in genome integrity pathways and organelles and multicopy genes being biased toward functions involved in interactionswiththeenvironment . Anevaluationofduplicategene loss and retention patterns following the three successive WGDs in Arabidopsis uncovered similar correlations between duplicate retention pattern and gene function as the ones observed here ( Maere et al . , 2005a ) . Here , we show that these function retention patterns can be generalized across a large number of angiosperm genomes and WGD events . In addition , these patterns appear not to be limited to the plant kingdom : In a study focusing on the duplication history of genes across 17 ascomycete genomes , a similar functional separation was observed between genes that generallyoccurinduplicate andthosethataresinglecopy inmost ascomycetes ( Wapinski et al . , 2007 ) . Likewise , a large - scale analysis of prokaryotic genomes suggested that the number of genes functioning in DNA repair and replication remains relatively constant irrespective of genome size , whereas the number of transcription factors , genes involved in signaling , and transporter Figure 5 . Analyses of Duplication Events of the Three Groups . ( A ) ForeachoftheclustersinFigure4 , power - lawfunctionswere ﬁ ttedtothecorrespondingdatapointsrepresentingthefractionofcoregenefamilieswith retained duplicates following a particular WGD ( y axis ) as a function of WGD age ( x axis ) , as in Figure 3 ( x 2 goodness - of - ﬁ t single - copy group = 0 . 52 , P = 1 ; x 2 goodness - of - ﬁ t intermediate group = 1 . 38 , P = 1 ; x 2 goodness - of - ﬁ t multicopy group = 1 . 83 , P = 1 ) . The “ full set ” curve corresponds to the curve represented in Figure 3 . ( B ) Polardiagramdepictingthefractionofduplicationeventsineachgenefamilygroupbelongingtoeither “ recent , ”“ K - Pgboundary , ”“ ancient ” WGDs , or “ SSD ” events . Here , predictedduplicationeventswereinferredbasedongenetree – speciestreereconciliation . Greenandredasterisksdenotestatistically signi ﬁ cantover - andunderrepresentation , respectively , ofduplicatesofacertainclassforaspeci ﬁ cgroup , comparingeachtimethenumberofassociated duplicationsforeachgroupwiththatofthefullset ( graybar ) byFisher ’ sexacttest . Similarresultswereobtainedusingpredictedduplicationeventsinferred using Gaussian mixture modeling of K s distributions ( Supplemental Figure 10 ) . 334 The Plant Cell genes seems to increase with increasing genome size ( van Nimwegen , 2003 ; Molina and van Nimwegen , 2009 ) . Conse - quently , patterns of duplicate retention and loss for core genes in angiosperms and other organisms appear to abide by general function - based rules . The question remains what causes these speci ﬁ c duplication patterns to occur . Given the overall short half - lives of duplicate genes ( Lynch and Conery , 2000 ) , one could speculate that the observed high fraction of single - copy gene families and a more limited number of multicopy gene families are caused by a sto - chastic gene duplication and loss process . We tested this hy - pothesis and found that stochastic BD processes cannot reproduce the observed duplicability distribution , which is heavily skewed toward single - copy gene families . In addition , the ob - served overall consistency of patterns across genomes and across large - scale duplication events and the functional enrich - ments observed for the various duplicability classes of gene families argue against such a random scenario . Considering the strong association with gene function , a possibility is that gene function directly or indirectly constrains gene duplicability . The observedpatternsofgeneduplicabilityareindeedconsistentwith the idea of the existence of a conserved core that needs to remain untouched ( “ single - copy ” group ) and the existence of processes that are more amenable to modi ﬁ cations and that might be re - sponsible for adaptations to new environments and the evolution of distinct morphological features ( “ multicopy ” group ) ( Kitano , 2004 ) . Gene duplication in itself can indeed modulate gene function in a negative way and as such impact core gene function by , for instance , increasing absolute gene dosage of genes with strict gene expression constraints ( Siegel and Amon , 2012 ) through the accumulation of mutations in duplicate copies with potential pleiotropic negative effects on wild - type ﬁ tness ( Bridgham et al . , 2008 ; Dean et al . , 2008 ; De Smet et al . , 2013 ; Kaltenegger and Ober , 2015 ) or potential cytotoxic effects ( e . g . , proteinmisfolding ) ( ZhangandYang , 2015 ) . Asaresult , duplicates ofgenessensitivetotheseprocessesmightbeeradicatedquickly , also after WGD . On the other hand , repeated biased retention of certain duplicates for long periods of time ( “ intermediate ” group ) or inde ﬁ nitely ( “ multicopy ” group ) suggests a mechanism of du - plicate retention other than sub - / neofunctionalization , which are in general assumed to be slow processes ( Lynch and Katju , 2004 ) and would not be expected to lead to repeated biased retention . Considering the primary role of WGD in duplicate retention of the core genes and the speci ﬁ c association of gene functions en - riched in the “ intermediate ” and “ multicopy ” groups with pre - viously de ﬁ ned putative dosage - balance - sensitive genes ( Blanc Figure 6 . Functional Analyses of the Three Different Groups . ( A ) GOSlim enrichments and underrepresentations calculated for the Arabidopsis genes in each of the three gene family groups in Figure 4 . Dot sizes are representative for the statistical signi ﬁ cance of over - ( green ) or underrepresentation ( red ) . ( B ) Enrichment analysis of the three gene family groups for knockout mutant phenotype annotations ( Lloyd and Meinke , 2012 ) . Bars represent overrepresentation ( positive values ) or underrepresentation ( negative values ) of knockout phenotypes belonging to any of four functional cat - egories ( bar colors ) . Asterisks denote signi ﬁ cance levels as calculated by Fisher ’ s exact test ( * * * P < 0 . 001 and * * P < 0 . 05 ) . Nonrandom Duplicate Retention in Angiosperms 335 and Wolfe , 2004b ; Maere et al . , 2005a ) , we hypothesize that dosage balance constraints may have contributed to the pro - longed retention of duplicate genes in these sets . Prolonged retention of duplicate genes , accompanied by gradual circum - vention of dosage balance constraints , may increase the possi - bilitythatduplicategenesdiversifyandgetpermanentlypreserved ( Birchler and Veitia , 2012 ; Conant et al . , 2014 ) . Alternatively , duplicate genes could also be permanently retained through absolute dosage constraints replacing over time the relative dosage balance constraints responsible for initial duplicate re - tention ( Bekaert et al . , 2011 ; Conant , 2014 ) . In our results , the “ intermediate ” group of gene families exhibits the hallmarks of dosage balance constraints that wear off over time , leading to prolongedpreservationandultimatelylossofduplicates . Asubset of genes in the “ multicopy ” group may also have been retained initially because of dosage balance constraints and , in this in - stance , preserved inde ﬁ nitely through other mechanisms ; in particular , transporters , signaling transducers , and cell commu - nication genes have been reported earlier as potentially dosage balance sensitive ( Blanc and Wolfe , 2004a ; Maere et al . , 2005a ) . On the other hand , the “ multicopy ” set of gene families is also enriched in “ environmentally responsive ” genes . Consequently , their repeated and biased retention following WGD might be a consequence of an increased adaptive advantage of polyploidy under environmental stress . Indeed , increasing evidence sug - gests that polyploids show wider environmental tolerance and higher levels of phenotypic plasticity than diploids ( Van de Peer et al . , 2009b ; Hahn et al . , 2012 ; te Beest et al . , 2012 ; Yona et al . , 2012 ; Chao et al . , 2013 ; Vanneste et al . , 2014b ; Selmecki et al . , 2015 ; Sunshine et al . , 2015 ) . In particular , transporters and metabolic genes , enriched in the “ multicopy ” class , have been identi ﬁ ed before asputativedriver genes explaining the increased tolerance of polyploids for environmental stress ( Dunham et al . , 2002 ; Selmecki et al . , 2006 , 2015 ; Gresham et al . , 2008 ; Yang et al . , 2014 ; Sunshine et al . , 2015 ) . Despite the strong correlation between gene duplicability and gene function observed here , it remains to be further investigated which evolutionary mecha - nisms are responsible for the observed strong bias in duplicate retention patterns , and it remains to be established whether gene function directly in ﬂ uences gene duplicability or whether biased gene retention could be a by - product of other evolutionary phenomena instead , such as for instance the preservation of intermolecular interactions ( dosage balance ) or sequence con - straints related to high levels of gene expression ( Davis and Petrov , 2004 ; Drummond and Wilke , 2008 ) . In particular , since network structure is often believed to constrain protein evolution and to underlie complex phenotypic traits , future work into this direction might bene ﬁ t from investigating gene duplicability in a network context ( Bekaert et al . , 2011 ; D ’ Antonio and Ciccarelli , 2011 ; Alvarez - Ponce and Fares , 2012 ; Chae et al . , 2012 ; Conant , 2014 ) . METHODS Genome Data We employed protein - coding genes from 37 fully sequenced angiosperm genomes , 35ofwhichwereusedbyVannesteetal . ( 2014a ) . Protein - coding sequences for Amborella trichopoda ( Amborella Genome Project , 2013 ) and Capsella rubella ( Slotte et al . , 2013 ) were retrieved from the Amborella Genome Database ( http : / / www . amborella . org / ) and Phytozome V10 , re - spectively . Gene Family Prediction OrthoMCL We identi ﬁ ed gene families based on protein sequence similarities by OrthoMCL ( Li et al . , 2003 ) . After all - against - all BLASTP searches , OrthoMCL was used to group proteins withhigh sequence similarity into gene families . An important parameter of OrthoMCL is the in ﬂ ation pa - rameter , whichcontrolsclustertightness . Wecalculatedgenefamiliesfor differentin ﬂ ationparametervalues ( i . e . , 1 . 5 , 2 . 0 , 2 . 5 , and3 . 0 ) toassessits in ﬂ uence and observed large variations in the number of gene families detectedandtheiroverallsize . Wedecidedtousethein ﬂ ationparameter that gives on average the largest gene families ( i . e . , 1 . 5 ) , since the gene families are further processed by phylogenetic tree construction ( and split upif necessary ; see below ) . Assuch , we obtained 69 , 133 multigene families . Species Tree Construction A species tree was constructed from a concatenated multiple sequence alignment inferred from 107 gene families that are present in all of the 37 angiosperm species and contain no more than 40 genes in total . The genes within these 107 gene families are on average longer than 150 amino acid residues . If a species had paralogs in a gene family , we only kept the paralog with the most orthologous hits in the gene family in the intermediate OrthoMCL results ﬁ le . We used Muscle ( 3 . 8 . 31 ) ( Edgar , 2004 ) with default parameters to perform multiple sequence alignments for each gene family based on the amino acid sequences . We then used trimal ( 1 . 4 ) to remove low quality regions of the alignments based on an automatically selected threshold ( - strictplus ) , which depends on a dis - tribution of residue similarity inferred from multiple sequence alignment for each gene family ( Capella - Gutiérrez et al . , 2009 ) . Multiple sequence alignments of amino acid sequences were back - translated into align - ments of codon sequences and were concatenated one by one into an integrated alignment . In the end , we obtained an alignment of 36 , 631 codons with 109 , 893 nucleotide sites ( see Supplemental Data Set 1 for the alignment and Supplemental Data Set 2 for data source and ac - cession numbers of genes in the alignment ) . To construct the species tree , we used CodonPhyML ( 1 . 0 ) ( Gil et al . , 2013 ) under three different codon models that differ in their instantaneous substitution rates between codons , being the Muse and Gaut ( MG ) model ( Muse and Gaut , 1994 ) , the Goldman and Yang ( GY ) model ( Goldman and Yang , 1994 ) , andtheYAPmodel ( Yapetal . , 2010 ) . Thestationaryfrequency of codons and the transition - transversion ratio were estimated by maxi - mum likelihood . The different ratios of nonsynonymous to synonymous substitution rate ( v ) over the sequence alignment were drawn from a dis - cretegammadistributionwiththree , four , or ﬁ veclasses . Theparameters a and b ofthegammadistributionwereoptimizedbymaximumlikelihood . An initial tree was built using the BioNJ algorithm , based on the empirical model ECMK07 . CodonPhyML then employs Nearest Neighbor In - terchange and Subtree Pruning and Regrafting to optimize the tree to - pology . Branch lengths and model parameters are also fully optimized during this process . Basedonthedifferentcodonmodelsandparametersdescribedabove , we obtained nine phylogenetic trees with identical topology but with slightly different branch lengths . The branch lengths of the different trees have no effects on the phylogenetic placement of WGDs ( see “ Evolution 336 The Plant Cell of Gene Families under a Stochastic BD Null Model ” and Supplemental Figure 13 ) . We used the Akaike Information Criterion ( AIC ) to compare likelihoods for the different trees and selected the tree with the lowest AIC tree as the species tree in this study . This tree corresponds to the tree inferred under the MG model with ﬁ ve classes for v . We calculated bootstrap support values for all branches of the species tree by obtaining 100 bootstrap samples for the concatenated multiple sequence alignment and running CodonPhyML on each bootstrapped alignment using the same model and parameter settings as chosen for the species tree . The bootstrap values were added on each branch of the species tree by RAxML ( Stamatakis , 2014 ) . As an alternative support measure to the bootstrap , we assessed the degree of congruence between the species tree topology and the topology of the 107 gene trees , also obtained using codonPhyML with the same parameter settings , for the gene families used for species tree con - struction . Speci ﬁ cally , using RAxML , we calculated two measures : ( 1 ) internode certainty ( IC ) and ( 2 ) IC All ( ICA ) , which evaluate the support for an internode in the species tree by considering its frequency in the set of 107 gene trees ( Salichos and Rokas , 2013 ; Salichos et al . , 2014 ) . An IC value of one means that none of the gene tree topologies con ﬂ ict with the species tree topology , whereas a value close to zero for in - ternodes suggests that there is another possible bipartition that occurs with almost equal frequency to the inferred one . In the end , the species tree was rooted on the branch of the basal angiosperm species A . trichopoda and was visualized by FigTree ( http : / / tree . bio . ed . ac . uk / software / ﬁ gtree / ) . This obtained species tree is largely consistent with the APGIII tree ( Bremer et al . , 2009 ) ( see Supplemental Figure 14 for a comparison ) . Gene Tree Construction and Reconciliation Next , we implemented a pipeline to automatically construct phylogenetic treesforall69 , 133genefamiliesandtotestwhetherthesetreescouldbe tracedbacktoasingleangiospermancestralgene . We ﬁ rstremoved253 gene families with more than 200 genes because of the enormous computational resources required by large gene families . We then built maximum likelihood phylogenetic trees for each of the remaining gene families with more than two genes . Multiple sequence alignments based on protein sequences were produced using Muscle with default settings ( Edgar , 2004 ) andwerefurthertrimmedbytrimalinaheuristicautomated approach ( - automated1 ) ( Capella - Gutiérrez et al . , 2009 ) . The processed multiple sequence alignments were fed into PhyML 3 . 0 ( Guindon et al . , 2010 ) using the LG model with the equilibrium frequencies de ﬁ ned in the substitution model . The best trees produced from either Nearest Neighbor Interchange or Subtree Pruning and Regrafting were retained as maximum likelihood gene trees . To obtain branch support values for the gene trees , we used the SH - like approximate likelihood - ratio test ( Anisimova and Gascuel , 2006 ) instead of traditional bootstrap values because of its speed . For 28 , 946 gene families with at least four genes from at least two different species , we used gene tree – species tree reconciliation ( Stolzer etal . , 2012 ) torootthegenetreesandtoobtainestimatesofduplicationand speciationeventsalongthegenetree . Fortheremaining39 , 934genetrees , prediction of duplication and speciation events is trivial ( see below ) . Since the reconciliation process is error prone ( Hahn , 2007 ; Nguyen et al . , 2013 ; Wu et al . , 2013 ) and depends on the quality of the gene tree , species tree , and the parameter settings of the reconciliation method , we implemented apipelinetomitigatetheseproblemsasmuchaspossible : ( 1 ) SincePhyML does not explore the entire search space of possible tree topologies , we investigated whether alternative tree topologies with improved reconcili - ation duplication / loss costs , obtained by branch rearrangements of the originalgenetreesinthereconciliationstrep ( seebelow ) , hadanincreased likelihood under the multiple sequence alignment than the gene tree produced by PhyML . As such , we obtained a reconciled gene tree that is maximally supported by both the reconciliation criterion ( in this instance duplication / loss cost ) and the multiple sequence alignment as described by Wu et al . ( 2013 ) . ( 2 ) To deal with the problem of reconciliation solutions being dependent on the parameter settings , we performed the reconcili - ation with a range of different parameter settings and also considered multiple possible optimal reconciliations under the same parameter set - tings , if available . Sinceduplication / speciation events thatwere predicted for multiple parameter settings are assumed to be more reliable ( Nguyen et al . , 2013 ) , we built a majority - rule consensus reconciliation in which we only retained duplication / speciation events supported by at least 50 % of the reconciliations ( see “ Gene Tree – Species Tree Reconciliation Pipeline ” ) . If a duplication event was predicted at the Angiosperm - associated node , we split the phylogenetic tree into two subtrees ( and , hence , also two associated gene families ) , ensuring that each subtree traced back to a single ancestral Angiosperm gene . With this procedure , we obtained 11 , 131 gene families with gene trees tracing back to an an - giosperm ancestral gene . From this set we removed the gene families that did not have gene copies for at least 32 out of 37 species ( Supplemental Figure 1 ) , ending up with a ﬁ nal set of 9178 core gene families . For the remaining 39 , 934 gene families ( i . e . , gene families with at least two species but no more than three genes or gene families that are only present in one species ) , we inferred duplication events by simply applying the following rules ( Supplemental Figure 15 ) . For gene families with only one species , after mid - point rerooting of the gene tree , each node in the tree represents a duplication node . For gene families with two genes , nodeswereannotatedasduplicationnodesifthetwogeneswerefromthe samespecies . Forgenefamilieswiththreegenes , weusedthetopologyof the gene tree to infer the duplication events . Gene Tree – Species Tree Reconciliation Pipeline We used NOTUNG version 8 ( Stolzer et al . , 2012 ) for reconciliation . NOTUNG is based on the maximal parsimony criterion and outputs the reconciled tree that minimizes the overall duplication / loss cost . We ﬁ rst ran NOTUNG in the “ rooting ” mode , saving different trees with different optimal rootings under the given duplication / loss cost scheme . We then ran NOTUNG in the “ reconcile ” mode , again retaining different optimal reconciliation solutions . We also ran NOTUNG in the “ rearrange ” mode , which allows for weakly supported branches ( provided by aLRT scores ) to be rearranged . We used two different thresholds , a more stringent one in which only branches with an aLRT # 0 . 5 could be rearranged and a more relaxed one in which rearrangements were not restricted by aLRT scores . Since running NOTUNG in the rearrange mode essentially modi ﬁ es the unrootedtreetopology , weusedtheCONSELprogram ( Shimodaira , 2002 ) to select the tree topology that has the highest likelihood for the multiple sequence alignment . The motivation behind this whole procedure is to obtainthetreetopologythatbothminimizesduplication - losscostandhas the highest likelihood for the multiple sequence alignment , as was pro - posed by Nguyen et al . ( 2013 ) . We also performed tree reconciliation for different values for the duplication and loss cost parameters : { ( 1 , 1 ) , ( 1 , 2 ) , ( 2 , 1 ) , ( 2 , 2 ) } . Finally , we combined all “ optimal ” reconciliations according to the parsimony criterion and corresponding to the most optimal unrooted tree topology according to the multiple sequence alignment into one consensusreconciliation . NOTUNGpredictsforeachnodeinthegenetree whether it arose through duplication or speciation . We calculated two con ﬁ dence scores for the predicted duplication events since these are further used for downstream analyses : ( 1 ) the duplication consistency score ( Vilella et al . , 2009 ) , which assesses the imbalance of the predicted Nonrandom Duplicate Retention in Angiosperms 337 duplication event by comparing the overlap in species on the daughter branches with their union ; and ( 2 ) the annotation support score , which assesses the reliability of the duplication event based on the annotation or age given by NOTUNG to the duplication event . We noticed that there are duplication events with a high duplication consistency that seem to datebacktotheangiospermcommonancestorbutthatonlyencompass one monocot and one dicot species . Hence , we calculated the anno - tation support as the ratio of the total number of species associated with a duplication node in the gene tree to the expected number of species associated with that node in the species tree and deemed duplication events with low annotation support scores as being unreliable . In this article , we only considered duplication events exceeding a duplication consistency score of 0 . 2 and with an annotation support of at least 0 . 5 . Wefoundthatthenumberofpredictedduplicationeventsstaysrelatively stable for duplication consistency scores up until 0 . 4 ( Supplemental Figure 16 ) . K s - Based Age Distributions K s - Based Estimation of Timing of Duplication Estimates of K s values were obtained for all paralogous pairs associated withthepredictedduplicationeventsinferredbythegenetree – speciestree reconciliationprocess . Forcaseswheretherearemultiplepossiblepairsfor apredictedduplicationevent , wecalculated K s valuesforallpossiblegene pairsandselectedthegenepairwiththesmallest K s valuetorepresentthe timing of the duplication event . For each paralogous gene pair , we aligned the protein coding sequences using ClustalW ( Oliver et al . , 2005 ) using parameter recommendations from Hall ( 2004 ) . PAL2NAL ( Suyama et al . , 2006 ) was used to back - translate the aligned amino acids into corre - sponding codons without gaps . Then , codeml ( Goldman and Yang , 1994 ) from PAML ( Yang , 1997 , 2007 ) wasusedtoobtain K s values foreachgene pair using the GY model with stationary codon frequencies empirically estimated by the F3x4 model . Gaussian Mixture Modeling of K s - Based Age Distributions For each species in our data set , we ﬁ tted Gaussian mixtures to age distributions inferred from K s values ( Lynch and Conery , 2003 ; Blanc and Wolfe , 2004b ; Vanneste et al . , 2013 ) using the R package “ mixtools . ” We ignored K s values that exceeded 5 . 0 . First , we determined for each age distributionthenumberofcomponents ( k ) usingthe “ boot . comp ” function . Speci ﬁ cally , we performed parametric bootstraps with 1000 bootstrap realizations of the likelihood ratio statistic for testing the null hypothesis of a k - component ﬁ t versus the alternative hypothesis of a ( k + 1 ) - component ﬁ t . For this test , a signi ﬁ cance level of 0 . 01 was used . For each age dis - tribution , wetestedthepresenceofonetosixcomponents . Thenumberof components determined in this ﬁ rst step was used to ﬁ t a mixture of Gaussian models to the K s distribution , using the “ normalmixEM ” function with the following parameters : k = k , maxit = 1e30 , maxrestarts = 1e3 , epsilon = 1e - 50 . We manually curated the obtained peaks , only further focusing on solid WGD peaks ( Supplemental Figure 17 ) . Dispersed backgroundpeakswithmean m > 3andmodelpeakswithobviousmis ﬁ tsto the data were ignored for the purpose of duplication assignment . We assumethateachremainingpeakcorrespondstoaWGDevent , exceptfor the ﬁ rst peak , which likely consists of recent small - scale duplications ( Maere et al . , 2005a ) . A duplication was assigned to the peak that showed thehighestprobabilitydensityatthe K s valueobtainedforitsrepresentative paralog pair ( Maereetal . , 2005a ) . ForeachWGD , weobtainanassociated estimateofthenumberofgenefamilieswithretainedduplicatesastheratio ofthenumberofcoregenefamilieswithduplicatesforthateventtothetotal number of core gene families . Each peak was characterized by an age ( expressedin K s values ) thatcorrespondedtothemean ( m ) oftheGaussian mixture component ( see Supplemental Table 2 for detailed peak in - formation ) . To assess duplicate retention in function of time since dupli - cation , we plotted duplicate retention associated with a certain WGD ( y ) in function of the predicted age of that event ( x ) . We then ﬁ tted exponential and power - law functions to these data . Both functions have previously been used to describe the relationship between duplicate retention and time since duplication ( Lynch and Conery , 2000 ; Maere et al . , 2005a ) . In all instances , the power - law ﬁ t was preferred over the exponential ﬁ t based on the x 2 goodness - of - ﬁ t measure ( Supplemental Figure 18 and Supplemental Table 3 ) . Evolution of Gene Families under a Stochastic BD Null Model The Null Model The null hypothesis describes the evolution of gene families along the phylogeny as a random BD process with equal rates of SSD gene dupli - cation and loss per evolutionary time unit ( unit branch length ) , l , as proposed by Bailey ( 1964 ) . Since WGDs violate the assumption of in - dependency of duplication events in Bailey ’ s BD model ( Bailey , 1964 ) , we placedtheseeventsasseparatenodesonthebranchesofthespeciestree , similar to the strategy employed by Rabier et al . ( 2014 ) . At WGD nodes , all gene family members are instantaneously duplicated ( or triplicated , de - pending on the nature of the polyploidy event ) . As in the model of Rabier et al . ( 2014 ) , we assume that a given fraction of duplicates is lost very quickly after WGD , represented by an immediate loss rate parameter q in ourmodel . TheremainingWGDduplicatesarelostovertimeatalossrate l , the same as for SSD duplicates . A full description of the model will be published elsewhere . Our purpose is to use this BD model to generate gene counts at the leaves of the species tree for a number of simulated gene families and compare the SCP distribution of these simulated families to the SCP distribution observed for the core gene families . In each run , we simulated gene counts under the random BD model for 9178 gene families , corre - spondingtothenumberoffamiliesinthecoreset . Weperformed1000such runs and estimated the SCP null distribution as a kernel density function over the 9178 3 1000 simulations . For each simulated gene family , we sample a value for l and q from prede ﬁ neddistributions ( seebelow ) , andweassumethattheroot size ( the gene countatthe rootofthespecies tree ) isequal to 1 . Westartat theroot andgenerateagenecountforeachofthechildnodesoftherootthroughan MCMC process that samples a child node size from the node size prob - ability distribution function described in the BD model ( Bailey , 1964 ) ; 5000 MCMC steps were used as burn - in to guarantee MCMC convergence to the stationary BD probability distribution . The same procedure is used for any further progeny node up to the leaf nodes , each time starting from the previously generated gene count at its parent node . At WGD nodes , the node size is multiplied after node size sampling with 1 + d . ( 1 2 q ) to mimic the WGD effect , with d = 1 for duplications and d = 2 for tripli - cations . In our simulations , we imposed the limitation of generating at least 32 non - zero gene counts at the leaves of the species tree , to be consistentwiththefactthatthecoregenefamiliesstudiedwererequiredto be present in at least 32 out of 37 species . The q value to be used for a given duplicate BD simulation is uniformly sampled from the range [ 0 - 1 ] , with 0 being complete retention and 1 completelossofduplicatesimmediatelyafterWGD ( q isassumedtobethe sameforallWGDsacrossthetree ; i . e . , itisassumedtobeapropertyofthe genefamily ) . The l - valuetobeusedforagivensimulationissampledfrom anormaldistributionwithmean l av = 0 . 53and SD s = 0 . 156 . Therationalefor sampling birth rates from this speci ﬁ c distribution is the following . We assume that the average duplication rate per gene , l av , is approximately equal to the average synonymous substitution rate per synonymous site ( Lynch and Conery , 2003 ) : 338 The Plant Cell l av ¼ average # duplications = gene t time unit (cid:2) average # synonymous substitutions = syn : site t time unit ¼ average K s t time unit ð 1 Þ where “ t timeunit ” standsfortheevolutionarytimeunitusedinthespecies tree ( where branch lengths are expressed in terms of the number of substitutions per codon t ) , i . e . , the evolutionary time needed to obtain one substitution per codon on average ( unit branch length t = 1 ) . To assess approximately how manysynonymous substitutionsper synonymous site ( K s ) areexpectedtooccurper t timeunitinanaverageplantDNAsequence , we inferred an average relationship between t and K s from the following formula for the number of substitutions per codon t in a given sequence ( Yang and Nielsen , 2000 ) : t ¼ ð K S 3 S Þ þ ð K N 3 N Þ S þ N 3 ð 2 Þ with S and N the number of synonymous and nonsynonymous sites in the sequenceand K s and K N thenumberofsynonymousandnonsynonymous substitutions per ( non ) synonymous site , respectively . Equation 2 can be rewritten as : t ¼ 3 K S 3 ð 1 þ v 2 1 SN þ 1 Þ ð 3 Þ with v = K N / K s the ratio of nonsynonymous substitutions per non - synonymous site to synonymous substitutions per synonymous site and S / N the ratioof synonymous sites to nonsynonymous sites in asequence . For both v and S / N , we substitute genome - wide average estimates to obtain an approximate relationship between t and K s for an average sequence evolving under average selective pressure . Taking S / N = 0 . 345 for the average codon ( Nei and Gojobori , 1986 ) , and taking an v value of 0 . 5 on average ( as observed for Arabidopsis duplicates in the K s range [ 0 , 1 ] ; Vanneste et al . , 2013 ) , the following estimate of t as a function of K s is obtained for the average plant DNA sequence : t (cid:2) 1 : 884 K S ð 4 Þ Inotherwords , inone t timeunit , 1 / 1 . 884 ; 0 . 53synonymoussubstitutions are estimated to have accumulated per synonymous site on average . We use this estimate in Equation 1 to obtain an estimate of the average du - plication rate per gene l av = 0 . 53 / gene / ( t time unit ) . To assess how this l av estimate compares to literature estimates of duplication rates expressed per gene per million years , we used the average duplicate K s and absolute age estimates for fairly recent WGDs ( 0 < K s < 1 , in the range where K s estimates are reliable ) reported by Vanneste et al . ( 2014a ) to convert the resulting estimate l av = 0 . 53 / gene / ( t time unit ) = 1 / gene / ( K s time unit ) to an estimate of the duplication rate expressed per million years ( here , one K s timeunitistheevolutionarytimeittakestoobtain K s = 1onaverage , which corresponds to 1 / 0 . 53 ; 1 . 884 t time units according to Equation 4 ) . By dividingtheaverageWGDduplicatepair K s estimatesbytwicetheabsolute WGD age estimates reported by Vanneste et al . ( 2014a ) ( note that the evolutionary time elapsed between WGD duplicates in million years ( My ) is twice the age of the WGD ) and averaging over all WGDs , we get a K s / My conversion factor of 0 . 00585 , giving l av = 0 . 00585 / gene / My , which is reasonably comparable to earlier estimates of duplications / gene / Myacrossspecies ( LynchandConery , 2003 ; Hahnetal . , 2005 ) . With the average duplication rate l av in our tree estimated at 0 . 53 / gene / ( t time unit ) , we de ﬁ ned a l - distribution around this value with SD 0 . 156 , so that more than 99 % of the probability mass lies within the l interval [ 0 - 1 ] . Qualitatively similar results were obtained with other l av values and l - distribution shapes ( results not shown ) . Dating WGDs To run the simulations described above , WGD events need to be added to thephylogenetictree asnewnodeswithknown branchlengthsinterms of t , the number of substitutions per codon . To this end , for each of the WGDs , we averaged the t estimates for all ( predicted ) homoeologs for which the K s estimates fall within the WGD K s range described by Vanneste et al . ( 2014a ) . t and K s estimates for all homoeolog pairs were obtained using codeml ( Goldman and Yang , 1994 ) as described by Vanneste et al . ( 2014a ) . As we repeated this procedure for each species separately ( except for C . rubella and A . trichopoda , which were not ana - lyzed by Vanneste et al . [ 2014a ] ) , multiple t estimates were obtained for shared WGDs . In this case , we used the average species - speci ﬁ c t - esti - mates to position a given shared WGD on the tree . All of the resulting WGD estimates were positioned on the species phylogeny in a manner consistent with their taxonomic positioning re - ported earlier ( Jiao et al . , 2014 ; Vanneste et al . , 2014a ) , except for the most recent WGDs in Gossypium raimondii and maize ( Zea mays ) , which were inferred by our t - estimation protocol to be positioned on older branchesthantheacceptedones , likelybecauseof t and K s estimationand averaging inaccuracies . In these cases , we positioned the WGD in the beginning ofthebranchreportedinliterature . SeeSupplemental Figure13 for the tree that was obtained using this approach . Clustering of the Copy Number Pro ﬁ le Matrix To determine gene family - speci ﬁ c differences in duplicate retention , the genefamilydataweretransformedintoacountmatrix , inwhichelements representthenumberofgenecopiesforacertaingenefamily ( columns ) in a certain species ( rows ) . To reduce the in ﬂ uence of outliers ( families with lots of genes ) , we only used gene families with maximum three gene copies per species . We clustered this matrix in the direction of the gene families using ConsensusClusterPlus , which incorporates a sub - samplingapproachtoinferclusternumberandclustercon ﬁ dence ( Monti et al . , 2003 ; Wilkerson and Hayes , 2010 ) . This R implemented package was run using the following options : maxK = 8 , reps = 100 , pItem = 0 . 8 , pFeature = 1 , k - means , inner linkage = average , ﬁ nal linkage = average , distance = pearson . Asolutionwiththreeclusterswasfoundtobeoptimal accordingtothebuilt - inclusterstabilitycriterion ( SupplementalFigure8 ) ( Monti et al . , 2003 ) Functional Data PPI Data in Arabidopsis A compendium of protein - protein interactions in Arabidopsis was constructed combining the following sources : BioGRID 3 . 2 . 110 ( Chatr - Aryamontri et al . , 2013 ) , CORNET ( only experimentally validated inter - actions ) ( De Bodt et al . , 2012 ) , STRINGv9 . 1 ( only category Binding ) ( Franceschini et al . , 2013 ) , EVEX ( only category binding ) ( Van Landeghem etal . , 2013 ) , andaTAPdatasetassembledfromliterature ( Takahashietal . , 2008 ; Pauwels et al . , 2010 ; Van Leene et al . , 2010 ; Bassard et al . , 2012 ; Domenichinietal . , 2012 ; Eloyetal . , 2012 ; Antonietal . , 2013 ; Cromeretal . , 2013 ; Di Rubbo et al . , 2013 ; Heijde et al . , 2013 ; Spinner et al . , 2013 ; Fonseca etal . , 2014 ; Gadeyne etal . , 2014 ; Perezet al . , 2014 ; Vercruyssen et al . , 2014 ) . After removing redundancy and self - interactions , this lead to a set with a total of 46 , 113 interactions between 9813 proteins . Enrichment of PPI , LOF , Chloroplast Genes , and Transcription Factors The Fisher ’ s exact test was used to calculate if a class is overrepresented in a given set of genes . In order to test whether there are more protein Nonrandom Duplicate Retention in Angiosperms 339 interactions within a group than between a group , 1000 randomized in - teractionnetworkswiththesamedegreedistributionwereconstructed . For each group of genes a z - score was obtained by comparing the number of proteininteractions within thegroup basedon theextant PPI network with the distribution of within - group interaction counts observed in the ran - domizednetworks . Z - scoreswerethenconvertedintoone - tailedPvalues . Functional Enrichment Analysis The BINGO 2 . 44 Cytoscape plug - in ( Maere et al . , 2005b ) was used to calculatefunctionalenrichmentvaluesforthesetofArabidopsisgenes . We used a P value threshold of 0 . 05 , and P values were corrected for multiple testing using the Benjamini and Hochberg method ( Benjamini and Hochberg , 1995 ) . Accession Numbers Sequence data from this article can be found in the Arabidopsis Genome InitiativeorGenBank / EMBLdatabasesundertheaccessionnumberslisted in Supplemental Data Set 2 . Supplemental Data Supplemental Figure 1 . Motivation for the 32 out of 37 species cut - off to de ﬁ ne core gene families . Supplemental Figure 2 . The distribution of single - copy percentages ( SCPs ) for all core gene families , with SCPs calculated upon removing the highly duplicated genomes of Glycine max , Linum usitatissimum , Brassica rapa , and Zea mays . Supplemental Figure 3 . Classi ﬁ cation of species tree nodes as SSD or WGD . Supplemental Figure 4 . Core gene families mainly duplicate through WGD . Supplemental Figure 5 . Comparison of the number of duplications for core and noncore gene families at WGD and SSD nodes on a gene family base . Supplemental Figure 6 . K s distributions of duplicated pairs from core and noncore gene families in 12 species . Supplemental Figure 7 . Duplicate gene retention in function of time since WGD . Supplemental Figure 8 . Criteria that we used to choose the optimal number of clusters for k - means clustering of the copy - number matrix . Supplemental Figure 9 . Consensus matrices obtained for different number of clusters k . Supplemental Figure 10 . Polar diagrams depicting the fraction of duplication events in each gene family group belonging to either the “ recent , ” “ K - Pg boundary , ” “ ancient , ” or “ SSD ” duplication classes . Supplemental Figure 11 . Over - and underrepresentation of an independent set of 2090 nuclear - encoded chloroplast - targeted genes obtained from The Chloroplast Function Database . Supplemental Figure 12 . Over - and underrepresentation of an independent set of 1795 putative transcription factors . Supplemental Figure 13 . Mapping of the whole - genome duplications and triplications on the species tree . Supplemental Figure 14 . Con ﬂ icting clades between the species tree used in this paper and which we inferred from 107 core gene families and the APGIII tree . Supplemental Figure 15 . Explanation of how duplications were inferred for gene families with at least two species but no more than three genes or gene families that are only present in one species . Supplemental Figure 16 . The change in the total number of predicted duplication events in core gene families in function of the threshold on the duplication consistency score . Supplemental Figure 17 . Gaussian mixture models were ﬁ t to the K s distribution of each species . Supplemental Figure 18 . Comparison of power - law ﬁ t and exponen - tial ﬁ t to the data obtained from the Gaussian Mixture Modeling of K s - based age distributions . Supplemental Table 1 . Comparison of the numbers of interacting protein pairs in each group to those obtained from randomized networks . Supplemental Table 2 . Description of all identi ﬁ ed peaks inferred from the K s - based age distributions . Supplemental Table 3 . Comparison of the power - law and the exponential ﬁ t . Supplemental Data Set 1 . Concatenated multiple sequence align - ment for 107 genes to reconstruct the species tree . Supplemental Data Set 2 . Data source and accession numbers of 107 genes used for reconstruction of the species tree . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank three anonymous reviewers for their useful comments . R . D . S . is a postdoctoral fellow of The Research Foundation - Flanders ( FWO ) . Y . V . d . P acknowledges the Multidisciplinary Research Partnership “ Bioinformatics : from nucleotides to networks ” Project ( 01MR0310W ) of Ghent University and the European Union Seventh Framework Pro - gramme ( FP7 / 2007 - 2013 ) underEuropeanResearchCouncilAdvanced Grant Agreement 322739 - DOUBLE - UP . This project is supported by The Research Foundation - Flanders ( FWO ) ( G008812N ) . AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS R . D . S . and Y . V . d . P . designed the study . R . D . S . , Z . L . , J . D . F . , and S . T . performed research . Z . L . , J . D . F . , and R . D . S . designed and performed analyses on gene family data , gene family evolution , and gene function . S . T . and S . M . designed and performed the modeling approach . R . D . S . wrote the article with the assistance of the other coauthors . ReceivedOctober13 , 2015 ; revisedDecember 7 , 2015 ; acceptedJanuary 4 , 2016 ; published January 7 , 2016 . REFERENCES Alvarez - Ponce , D . , and Fares , M . A . ( 2012 ) . Evolutionary rate and duplicability in the Arabidopsis thaliana protein - protein interaction network . Genome Biol . Evol . 4 : 1263 – 1274 . Amborella Genome Project ( 2013 ) . The Amborella genome and the evolution of ﬂ owering plants . Science 342 : 1241089 . Anisimova , M . , and Gascuel , O . ( 2006 ) . Approximate likelihood - ratio test for branches : A fast , accurate , and powerful alternative . Syst . Biol . 55 : 539 – 552 . 340 The Plant Cell Antoni , R . , Gonzalez - Guzman , M . , Rodriguez , L . , Peirats - Llobet , M . , Pizzio , G . A . , Fernandez , M . A . , De Winne , N . , De Jaeger , G . , Dietrich , D . , Bennett , M . J . , and Rodriguez , P . L . ( 2013 ) . PYRABACTIN RESISTANCE1 - LIKE8 plays an important role for the regulation of abscisic acid signaling in root . Plant Physiol . 161 : 931 – 941 . Armisén , D . , Lecharny , A . , and Aubourg , S . ( 2008 ) . Unique genes in plants : speci ﬁ cities and conserved features throughout evolution . BMC Evol . Biol . 8 : 280 . Aury , J . M . , et al . ( 2006 ) . Global trends of whole - genome duplications revealed by the ciliate Paramecium tetraurelia . Nature 444 : 171 – 178 . Bailey , N . ( 1964 ) . The Elements of Stochastic Processes . ( New York : John Wiley & Sons ) . Barker , M . S . , Kane , N . C . , Matvienko , M . , Kozik , A . , Michelmore , R . W . , Knapp , S . J . , and Rieseberg , L . H . ( 2008 ) . Multiple paleo - polyploidizations during the evolution of the Compositae reveal parallel patterns of duplicate gene retention after millions of years . Mol . Biol . Evol . 25 : 2445 – 2455 . Bassard , J . E . , et al . ( 2012 ) . Protein - protein and protein - membrane associations in the lignin pathway . Plant Cell 24 : 4465 – 4482 . Bekaert , M . , Edger , P . P . , Pires , J . C . , and Conant , G . C . ( 2011 ) . Two - phase resolution of polyploidy in the Arabidopsis metabolic network gives rise to relative and absolute dosage constraints . Plant Cell 23 : 1719 – 1728 . Benjamini , Y . , and Hochberg , Y . ( 1995 ) . Controlling the false dis - covery rate - a practical and powerful approach to multiple testing . J . Roy . Stat . Soc . B Met . 57 : 289 – 300 . Birchler , J . A . , Riddle , N . C . , Auger , D . L . , and Veitia , R . A . ( 2005 ) . Dosage balance in gene regulation : biological implications . Trends Genet . 21 : 219 – 226 . Birchler , J . A . , and Veitia , R . A . ( 2007 ) . The gene balance hypothesis : from classical genetics to modern genomics . Plant Cell 19 : 395 – 402 . Birchler , J . A . , and Veitia , R . A . ( 2012 ) . Gene balance hypothesis : connecting issues of dosage sensitivity across biological dis - ciplines . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 109 : 14746 – 14753 . Blanc , G . , and Wolfe , K . H . ( 2004a ) . Functional divergence of dupli - cated genes formed by polyploidy during Arabidopsis evolution . Plant Cell 16 : 1679 – 1691 . Blanc , G . , and Wolfe , K . H . ( 2004b ) . Widespread paleopolyploidy in model plant species inferred from age distributions of duplicate genes . Plant Cell 16 : 1667 – 1678 . Bremer , B . , et al . ( 2009 ) . An update of the Angiosperm Phylogeny Group classi ﬁ cation for the orders and families of ﬂ owering plants : APG III . Bot . J . Linn . Soc . 161 : 105 – 121 . Bridgham , J . T . , Brown , J . E . , Rodríguez - Marí , A . , Catchen , J . M . , and Thornton , J . W . ( 2008 ) . Evolution of a new function by de - generative mutation in cephalochordate steroid receptors . PLoS Genet . 4 : e1000191 . Brunet , F . G . , Roest Crollius , H . , Paris , M . , Aury , J . M . , Gibert , P . , Jaillon , O . , Laudet , V . , and Robinson - Rechavi , M . ( 2006 ) . Gene loss and evolutionary rates following whole - genome duplication in teleost ﬁ shes . Mol . Biol . Evol . 23 : 1808 – 1816 . Buggs , R . J . , Chamala , S . , Wu , W . , Tate , J . A . , Schnable , P . S . , Soltis , D . E . , Soltis , P . S . , and Barbazuk , W . B . ( 2012 ) . Rapid , repeated , and clustered loss of duplicate genes in allopolyploid plant populations of independent origin . Curr . Biol . 22 : 248 – 252 . Capella - Gutiérrez , S . , Silla - Martínez , J . M . , and Gabaldón , T . ( 2009 ) . trimAl : a tool for automated alignment trimming in large - scale phylogenetic analyses . Bioinformatics 25 : 1972 – 1973 . Carretero - Paulet , L . , and Fares , M . A . ( 2012 ) . Evolutionary dynamics and functional specialization of plant paralogs formed by whole and small - scale genome duplications . Mol . Biol . Evol . 29 : 3541 – 3551 . Chae , L . , Lee , I . , Shin , J . , and Rhee , S . Y . ( 2012 ) . Towards un - derstanding how molecular networks evolve in plants . Curr . Opin . Plant Biol . 15 : 177 – 184 . Chao , D . Y . , Dilkes , B . , Luo , H . , Douglas , A . , Yakubova , E . , Lahner , B . , and Salt , D . E . ( 2013 ) . Polyploids exhibit higher potassium up - take and salinity tolerance in Arabidopsis . Science 341 : 658 – 659 . Chatr - Aryamontri , A . , et al . ( 2013 ) . The BioGRID interaction data - base : 2013 update . Nucleic Acids Res . 41 : D816 – D823 . Conant , G . C . ( 2014 ) . Comparative genomics as a time machine : how relative gene dosage and metabolic requirements shaped the time - dependent resolution of yeast polyploidy . Mol . Biol . Evol . 31 : 3184 – 3193 . Conant , G . C . , Birchler , J . A . , and Pires , J . C . ( 2014 ) . Dosage , duplication , and diploidization : clarifying the interplay of multiple models for dupli - cate gene evolution over time . Curr . Opin . Plant Biol . 19 : 91 – 98 . Cromer , L . , Jolivet , S . , Horlow , C . , Chelysheva , L . , Heyman , J . , De Jaeger , G . , Koncz , C . , De Veylder , L . , and Mercier , R . ( 2013 ) . Centromeric cohesion is protected twice at meiosis , by SHU - GOSHINs at anaphase I and by PATRONUS at interkinesis . Curr . Biol . 23 : 2090 – 2099 . D ’ Antonio , M . , and Ciccarelli , F . D . ( 2011 ) . Modi ﬁ cation of gene du - plicability during the evolution of protein interaction network . PLOS Comput . Biol . 7 : e1002029 . Davis , J . C . , and Petrov , D . A . ( 2004 ) . Preferential duplication of conserved proteins in eukaryotic genomes . PLoS Biol . 2 : E55 . Dean , E . J . , Davis , J . C . , Davis , R . W . , and Petrov , D . A . ( 2008 ) . Per - vasive and persistent redundancy among duplicated genes in yeast . PLoS Genet . 4 : e1000113 . De Bodt , S . , Hollunder , J . , Nelissen , H . , Meulemeester , N . , and Inzé , D . ( 2012 ) . CORNET 2 . 0 : integrating plant coexpression , pro - tein - protein interactions , regulatory interactions , gene associations and functional annotations . New Phytol . 195 : 707 – 720 . De Smet , R . , Adams , K . L . , Vandepoele , K . , Van Montagu , M . C . , Maere , S . , and Van de Peer , Y . ( 2013 ) . Convergent gene loss fol - lowing gene and genome duplications creates single - copy families in ﬂ owering plants . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 110 : 2898 – 2903 . Di Rubbo , S . , et al . ( 2013 ) . The clathrin adaptor complex AP - 2 me - diates endocytosis of brassinosteroid insensitive1 in Arabidopsis . Plant Cell 25 : 2986 – 2997 . Domenichini , S . , Benhamed , M . , De Jaeger , G . , Van De Slijke , E . , Blanchet , S . , Bourge , M . , De Veylder , L . , Bergounioux , C . , and Raynaud , C . ( 2012 ) . Evidence for a role of Arabidopsis CDT1 pro - teins in gametophyte development and maintenance of genome integrity . Plant Cell 24 : 2779 – 2791 . Douglas , G . M . , et al . ( 2015 ) . Hybrid origins and the earliest stages of diploidization in the highly successful recent polyploid Capsella bursa - pastoris . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 112 : 2806 – 2811 . Drummond , D . A . , and Wilke , C . O . ( 2008 ) . Mistranslation - induced protein misfolding as a dominant constraint on coding - sequence evolution . Cell 134 : 341 – 352 . Duarte , J . M . , Wall , P . K . , Edger , P . P . , Landherr , L . L . , Ma , H . , Pires , J . C . , Leebens - Mack , J . , and dePamphilis , C . W . ( 2010 ) . Identi ﬁ - cation of shared single copy nuclear genes in Arabidopsis , Populus , Vitis and Oryza and their phylogenetic utility across various taxo - nomic levels . BMC Evol . Biol . 10 : 61 . Dunham , M . J . , Badrane , H . , Ferea , T . , Adams , J . , Brown , P . O . , Rosenzweig , F . , and Botstein , D . ( 2002 ) . Characteristic genome rearrangements in experimental evolution of Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 99 : 16144 – 16149 . Edgar , R . C . ( 2004 ) . MUSCLE : multiple sequence alignment with high accuracy and high throughput . Nucleic Acids Res . 32 : 1792 – 1797 . Edger , P . P . , and Pires , J . C . ( 2009 ) . Gene and genome duplications : the impact of dosage - sensitivity on the fate of nuclear genes . Chromosome Res . 17 : 699 – 717 . Nonrandom Duplicate Retention in Angiosperms 341 Eloy , N . B . , et al . ( 2012 ) . SAMBA , a plant - speci ﬁ c anaphase - promoting complex / cyclosome regulator is involved in early development and A - type cyclin stabilization . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 109 : 13853 – 13858 . Fonseca , S . , Fernández - Calvo , P . , Fernández , G . M . , Díez - Díaz , M . , Gimenez - Ibanez , S . , López - Vidriero , I . , Godoy , M . , Fernández - Barbero , G . , Van Leene , J . , De Jaeger , G . , Franco - Zorrilla , J . M . , and Solano , R . ( 2014 ) . bHLH003 , bHLH013 and bHLH017 are new targets of JAZ repressors negatively regulating JA responses . PLoS One 9 : e86182 . Franceschini , A . , Szklarczyk , D . , Frankild , S . , Kuhn , M . , Simonovic , M . , Roth , A . , Lin , J . , Minguez , P . , Bork , P . , von Mering , C . , and Jensen , L . J . ( 2013 ) . STRING v9 . 1 : protein - protein interaction net - works , with increased coverage and integration . Nucleic Acids Res . 41 : D808 – D815 . Freeling , M . ( 2009 ) . Bias in plant gene content following different sorts of duplication : tandem , whole - genome , segmental , or by transposition . Annu . Rev . Plant Biol . 60 : 433 – 453 . Freeling , M . , Lyons , E . , Pedersen , B . , Alam , M . , Ming , R . , and Lisch , D . ( 2008 ) . Many or most genes in Arabidopsis transposed after the origin of the order Brassicales . Genome Res . 18 : 1924 – 1937 . Freeling , M . , and Thomas , B . C . ( 2006 ) . Gene - balanced duplications , like tetraploidy , provide predictable drive to increase morphological complexity . Genome Res . 16 : 805 – 814 . Gadeyne , A . , et al . ( 2014 ) . The TPLATE adaptor complex drives clathrin - mediated endocytosis in plants . Cell 156 : 691 – 704 . Gil , M . , Zanetti , M . S . , Zoller , S . , and Anisimova , M . ( 2013 ) . Co - donPhyML : fast maximum likelihood phylogeny estimation under codon substitution models . Mol . Biol . Evol . 30 : 1270 – 1280 . Goldman , N . , and Yang , Z . ( 1994 ) . A codon - based model of nucle - otide substitution for protein - coding DNA sequences . Mol . Biol . Evol . 11 : 725 – 736 . Gresham , D . , Desai , M . M . , Tucker , C . M . , Jenq , H . T . , Pai , D . A . , Ward , A . , DeSevo , C . G . , Botstein , D . , and Dunham , M . J . ( 2008 ) . The repertoire and dynamics of evolutionary adaptations to con - trolled nutrient - limited environments in yeast . PLoS Genet . 4 : e1000303 . Guindon , S . , Dufayard , J . F . , Lefort , V . , Anisimova , M . , Hordijk , W . , and Gascuel , O . ( 2010 ) . New algorithms and methods to estimate maximum - likelihood phylogenies : assessing the performance of PhyML 3 . 0 . Syst . Biol . 59 : 307 – 321 . Hahn , M . A . , van Kleunen , M . , and Müller - Schärer , H . ( 2012 ) . In - creased phenotypic plasticity to climate may have boosted the in - vasion success of polyploid Centaurea stoebe . PLoS One 7 : e50284 . Hahn , M . W . ( 2007 ) . Bias in phylogenetic tree reconciliation methods : implications for vertebrate genome evolution . Genome Biol . 8 : R141 . Hahn , M . W . , De Bie , T . , Stajich , J . E . , Nguyen , C . , and Cristianini , N . ( 2005 ) . Estimating the tempo and mode of gene family evolution from comparative genomic data . Genome Res . 15 : 1153 – 1160 . Hall , B . G . ( 2004 ) . Phylogenetic Trees Made Easy . ( Sunderland , MA : Sinauer Associates ) . Han , F . , Peng , Y . , Xu , L . , and Xiao , P . ( 2014 ) . Identi ﬁ cation , char - acterization , and utilization of single copy genes in 29 angiosperm genomes . BMC Genomics 15 : 504 . He , X . , and Zhang , J . ( 2006 ) . Higher duplicability of less important genes in yeast genomes . Mol . Biol . Evol . 23 : 144 – 151 . Heijde , M . , Binkert , M . , Yin , R . , Ares - Orpel , F . , Rizzini , L . , Van De Slijke , E . , Persiau , G . , Nolf , J . , Gevaert , K . , De Jaeger , G . , and Ulm , R . ( 2013 ) . Constitutively active UVR8 photoreceptor variant in Arabidopsis . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 110 : 20326 – 20331 . Huminiecki , L . , and Heldin , C . H . ( 2010 ) . 2R and remodeling of ver - tebrate signal transduction engine . BMC Biol . 8 : 146 . Jiao , Y . , Li , J . , Tang , H . , and Paterson , A . H . ( 2014 ) . Integrated syntenic and phylogenomic analyses reveal an ancient genome duplication in monocots . Plant Cell 26 : 2792 – 2802 . Kaltenegger , E . , and Ober , D . ( 2015 ) . Paralogue interference affects the dynamics after gene duplication . Trends Plant Sci . 20 : 814 – 821 . Kitano , H . ( 2004 ) . Biological robustness . Nat . Rev . Genet . 5 : 826 – 837 . Koonin , E . V . , et al . ( 2004 ) . A comprehensive evolutionary classi ﬁ ca - tion of proteins encoded in complete eukaryotic genomes . Genome Biol . 5 : R7 . Li , L . , Stoeckert , C . J . , Jr . , and Roos , D . S . ( 2003 ) . OrthoMCL : iden - ti ﬁ cation of ortholog groups for eukaryotic genomes . Genome Res . 13 : 2178 – 2189 . Liang , H . , Plazonic , K . R . , Chen , J . , Li , W . H . , and Fernández , A . ( 2008 ) . Protein under - wrapping causes dosage sensitivity and de - creases gene duplicability . PLoS Genet . 4 : e11 . Lloyd , A . H . , et al . ( 2014 ) . Meiotic gene evolution : can you teach a new dog new tricks ? Mol . Biol . Evol . 31 : 1724 – 1727 . Lloyd , J . , and Meinke , D . ( 2012 ) . A comprehensive dataset of genes with a loss - of - function mutant phenotype in Arabidopsis . Plant Physiol . 158 : 1115 – 1129 . Lloyd , J . P . , Seddon , A . E . , Moghe , G . D . , Simenc , M . C . , and Shiu , S . H . ( 2015 ) . Characteristics of plant essential genes allow for within - and between - species prediction of lethal mutant pheno - types . Plant Cell 27 : 2133 – 2147 . Lynch , M . , and Conery , J . S . ( 2000 ) . The evolutionary fate and con - sequences of duplicate genes . Science 290 : 1151 – 1155 . Lynch , M . , and Conery , J . S . ( 2003 ) . The evolutionary demography of duplicate genes . J . Struct . Funct . Genomics 3 : 35 – 44 . Lynch , M . , and Katju , V . ( 2004 ) . The altered evolutionary trajectories of gene duplicates . Trends Genet . 20 : 544 – 549 . Maere , S . , De Bodt , S . , Raes , J . , Casneuf , T . , Van Montagu , M . , Kuiper , M . , and Van de Peer , Y . ( 2005a ) . Modeling gene and ge - nome duplications in eukaryotes . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 102 : 5454 – 5459 . Maere , S . , Heymans , K . , and Kuiper , M . ( 2005b ) . BiNGO : a Cyto - scape plugin to assess overrepresentation of gene ontology cate - gories in biological networks . Bioinformatics 21 : 3448 – 3449 . Makino , T . , Hokamp , K . , and McLysaght , A . ( 2009 ) . The complex relationship of gene duplication and essentiality . Trends Genet . 25 : 152 – 155 . Makino , T . , and McLysaght , A . ( 2010 ) . Ohnologs in the human ge - nome are dosage balanced and frequently associated with disease . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 107 : 9270 – 9274 . McGrath , C . L . , and Lynch , M . ( 2012 ) . Evolutionary signi ﬁ cance of whole - genome duplication . In Polyploidy and Genome Evolution , P . S . Soltis and D . E . Soltis , eds ( Berlin : Springer - Verlag ) , pp . 1 – 20 . Molina , N . , and van Nimwegen , E . ( 2009 ) . Scaling laws in functional genome content across prokaryotic clades and lifestyles . Trends Genet . 25 : 243 – 247 . Monti , S . , Tamayo , P . , Mesirov , J . , and Golub , T . ( 2003 ) . Consensus clustering : A resampling - based method for class discovery and vi - sualization of gene expression microarray data . Mach . Learn . 52 : 91 – 118 . Muse , S . V . , and Gaut , B . S . ( 1994 ) . A likelihood approach for com - paring synonymous and nonsynonymous nucleotide substitution rates , with application to the chloroplast genome . Mol . Biol . Evol . 11 : 715 – 724 . Myouga , F . , Akiyama , K . , Tomonaga , Y . , Kato , A . , Sato , Y . , Kobayashi , M . , Nagata , N . , Sakurai , T . , and Shinozaki , K . ( 2013 ) . The Chloroplast Function Database II : a comprehensive collection of homozygous mutants and their phenotypic / genotypic 342 The Plant Cell traits for nuclear - encoded chloroplast proteins . Plant Cell Physiol . 54 : e2 . Nei , M . , and Gojobori , T . ( 1986 ) . Simple methods for estimating the numbers of synonymous and nonsynonymous nucleotide sub - stitutions . Mol . Biol . Evol . 3 : 418 – 426 . Nguyen , T . H . , Ranwez , V . , Berry , V . , and Scornavacca , C . ( 2013 ) . Support measures to estimate the reliability of evolutionary events predicted by reconciliation methods . PLoS One 8 : e73667 . Ohno , S . ( 1970 ) . Evolution by Gene Duplication . ( New York : Springer ) . Oliver , T . , Schmidt , B . , Nathan , D . , Clemens , R . , and Maskell , D . ( 2005 ) . Using recon ﬁ gurable hardware to accelerate multiple se - quence alignment with ClustalW . Bioinformatics 21 : 3431 – 3432 . Papp , B . , Pál , C . , and Hurst , L . D . ( 2003 ) . Dosage sensitivity and the evolution of gene families in yeast . Nature 424 : 194 – 197 . Paterson , A . H . , Chapman , B . A . , Kissinger , J . C . , Bowers , J . E . , Feltus , F . A . , and Estill , J . C . ( 2006 ) . Many gene and domain fami - lies have convergent fates following independent whole - genome duplication events in Arabidopsis , Oryza , Saccharomyces and Tetraodon . Trends Genet . 22 : 597 – 602 . Pauwels , L . , et al . ( 2010 ) . NINJA connects the co - repressor TOP - LESS to jasmonate signalling . Nature 464 : 788 – 791 . Perez , A . C . , Durand , A . N . , Vanden Bossche , R . , De Clercq , R . , Persiau , G . , Van Wees , S . C . M . , Pieterse , C . M . J . , Gevaert , K . , De Jaeger , G . , Goossens , A . , and Pauwels , L . ( 2014 ) . The Non - JAZ TIFY protein TIFY8 from Arabidopsis thaliana is a transcriptional repressor . PLoS One 9 : e84891 . Pérez - Rodríguez , P . , Riaño - Pachón , D . M . , Corrêa , L . G . , Rensing , S . A . , Kersten , B . , and Mueller - Roeber , B . ( 2010 ) . PlnTFDB : up - dated content and new features of the plant transcription factor database . Nucleic Acids Res . 38 : D822 – D827 . Rabier , C . E . , Ta , T . , and Ané , C . ( 2014 ) . Detecting and locating whole genome duplications on a phylogeny : a probabilistic approach . Mol . Biol . Evol . 31 : 750 – 762 . Rambaldi , D . , Giorgi , F . M . , Capuani , F . , Ciliberto , A . , and Ciccarelli , F . D . ( 2008 ) . Low duplicability and network fragility of cancer genes . Trends Genet . 24 : 427 – 430 . Rodgers - Melnick , E . , Mane , S . P . , Dharmawardhana , P . , Slavov , G . T . , Crasta , O . R . , Strauss , S . H . , Brunner , A . M . , and Difazio , S . P . ( 2012 ) . Contrasting patterns of evolution following whole genome versus tandem duplication events in Populus . Genome Res . 22 : 95 – 105 . Salichos , L . , and Rokas , A . ( 2013 ) . Inferring ancient divergences requires genes with strong phylogenetic signals . Nature 497 : 327 – 331 . Salichos , L . , Stamatakis , A . , and Rokas , A . ( 2014 ) . Novel information theory - based measures for quantifying incongruence among phy - logenetic trees . Mol . Biol . Evol . 31 : 1261 – 1271 . Schmutz , J . , et al . ( 2010 ) . Genome sequence of the palaeopolyploid soybean . Nature 463 : 178 – 183 . Selmecki , A . , Forche , A . , and Berman , J . ( 2006 ) . Aneuploidy and isochromosome formation in drug - resistant Candida albicans . Sci - ence 313 : 367 – 370 . Selmecki , A . M . , Maruvka , Y . E . , Richmond , P . A . , Guillet , M . , Shoresh , N . , Sorenson , A . L . , De , S . , Kishony , R . , Michor , F . , Dowell , R . , and Pellman , D . ( 2015 ) . Polyploidy can drive rapid adaptation in yeast . Nature 519 : 349 – 352 . Seoighe , C . , and Gehring , C . ( 2004 ) . Genome duplication led to highly selective expansion of the Arabidopsis thaliana proteome . Trends Genet . 20 : 461 – 464 . Shimodaira , H . ( 2002 ) . An approximately unbiased test of phyloge - netic tree selection . Syst . Biol . 51 : 492 – 508 . Siegel , J . J . , and Amon , A . ( 2012 ) . New insights into the troubles of aneuploidy . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 28 : 189 – 214 . Slotte , T . , et al . ( 2013 ) . The Capsella rubella genome and the genomic consequences of rapid mating system evolution . Nat . Genet . 45 : 831 – 835 . Smith , S . A . , and Donoghue , M . J . ( 2008 ) . Rates of molecular evolu - tion are linked to life history in ﬂ owering plants . Science 322 : 86 – 89 . Soltis , D . E . , Buggs , R . J . A . , Doyle , J . J . , and Soltis , P . S . ( 2010 ) . What we still don ’ t know about polyploidy . Taxon 59 : 1387 – 1403 . Spinner , L . , et al . ( 2013 ) . A protein phosphatase 2A complex spatially controls plant cell division . Nat . Commun . 4 : 1863 . Stamatakis , A . ( 2014 ) . RAxML version 8 : a tool for phylogenetic analysis and post - analysis of large phylogenies . Bioinformatics 30 : 1312 – 1313 . Stolzer , M . , Lai , H . , Xu , M . , Sathaye , D . , Vernot , B . , and Durand , D . ( 2012 ) . Inferring duplications , losses , transfers and incomplete lin - eage sorting with nonbinary species trees . Bioinformatics 28 : i409 – i415 . Sunshine , A . B . , Payen , C . , Ong , G . T . , Liachko , I . , Tan , K . M . , and Dunham , M . J . ( 2015 ) . The ﬁ tness consequences of aneuploidy are driven by condition - dependent gene effects . PLoS Biol . 13 : e1002155 . Suyama , M . , Torrents , D . , and Bork , P . ( 2006 ) . PAL2NAL : robust conversion of protein sequence alignments into the corresponding codon alignments . Nucleic Acids Res . 34 : W609 – W612 . Takahashi , N . , Lammens , T . , Boudolf , V . , Maes , S . , Yoshizumi , T . , De Jaeger , G . , Witters , E . , Inzé , D . , and De Veylder , L . ( 2008 ) . The DNA replication checkpoint aids survival of plants de ﬁ cient in the novel replisome factor ETG1 . EMBO J . 27 : 1840 – 1851 . te Beest , M . , Le Roux , J . J . , Richardson , D . M . , Brysting , A . K . , Suda , J . , Kubesová , M . , and Pysek , P . ( 2012 ) . The more the better ? The role of polyploidy in facilitating plant invasions . Ann . Bot . ( Lond . ) 109 : 19 – 45 . Van de Peer , Y . , Fawcett , J . A . , Proost , S . , Sterck , L . , and Vandepoele , K . ( 2009a ) . The ﬂ owering world : a tale of duplica - tions . Trends Plant Sci . 14 : 680 – 688 . Van de Peer , Y . , Maere , S . , and Meyer , A . ( 2009b ) . The evolutionary signi ﬁ cance of ancient genome duplications . Nat . Rev . Genet . 10 : 725 – 732 . Van Landeghem , S . , Björne , J . , Wei , C . H . , Hakala , K . , Pyysalo , S . , Ananiadou , S . , Kao , H . Y . , Lu , Z . , Salakoski , T . , Van de Peer , Y . , and Ginter , F . ( 2013 ) . Large - scale event extraction from literature with multi - level gene normalization . PLoS One 8 : e55814 . Van Leene , J . , et al . ( 2010 ) . Targeted interactomics reveals a complex core cell cycle machinery in Arabidopsis thaliana . Mol . Syst . Biol . 6 : 397 . Vanneste , K . , Baele , G . , Maere , S . , and Van de Peer , Y . ( 2014a ) . Analysis of 41 plant genomes supports a wave of successful ge - nome duplications in association with the Cretaceous - Paleogene boundary . Genome Res . 24 : 1334 – 1347 . Vanneste , K . , Maere , S . , and Van de Peer , Y . ( 2014b ) . Tangled up in two : a burst of genome duplications at the end of the Cretaceous and the consequences for plant evolution . Philos . Trans . R . Soc . Lond . B Biol . Sci . 369 : 20130353 . Vanneste , K . , Van de Peer , Y . , and Maere , S . ( 2013 ) . Inference of genome duplications from age distributions revisited . Mol . Biol . Evol . 30 : 177 – 190 . van Nimwegen , E . ( 2003 ) . Scaling laws in the functional content of genomes . Trends Genet . 19 : 479 – 484 . Vercruyssen , L . , et al . ( 2014 ) . ANGUSTIFOLIA3 binds to SWI / SNF chromatin remodeling complexes to regulate transcription during Arabidopsis leaf development . Plant Cell 26 : 210 – 229 . Vilella , A . J . , Severin , J . , Ureta - Vidal , A . , Heng , L . , Durbin , R . , and Birney , E . ( 2009 ) . EnsemblCompara GeneTrees : Complete , dupli - cation - aware phylogenetic trees in vertebrates . Genome Res . 19 : 327 – 335 . Nonrandom Duplicate Retention in Angiosperms 343 Wang , Y . , Wang , X . , Tang , H . , Tan , X . , Ficklin , S . P . , Feltus , F . A . , and Paterson , A . H . ( 2011 ) . Modes of gene duplication contribute dif - ferently to genetic novelty and redundancy , but show parallels across divergent angiosperms . PLoS One 6 : e28150 . Wapinski , I . , Pfeffer , A . , Friedman , N . , and Regev , A . ( 2007 ) . Natural history and evolutionary principles of gene duplication in fungi . Nature 449 : 54 – 61 . Wilkerson , M . D . , and Hayes , D . N . ( 2010 ) . ConsensusClusterPlus : a class discovery tool with con ﬁ dence assessments and item tracking . Bioinformatics 26 : 1572 – 1573 . Woodhouse , M . R . , Tang , H . , and Freeling , M . ( 2011 ) . Different gene families in Arabidopsis thaliana transposed in different epochs and at different frequencies throughout the rosids . Plant Cell 23 : 4241 – 4253 . Woods , S . , Coghlan , A . , Rivers , D . , Warnecke , T . , Jeffries , S . J . , Kwon , T . , Rogers , A . , Hurst , L . D . , and Ahringer , J . ( 2013 ) . Duplication and retention biases of essential and non - essential genes revealed by systematic knockdown analyses . PLoS Genet . 9 : e1003330 . Wu , Y . C . , Rasmussen , M . D . , Bansal , M . S . , and Kellis , M . ( 2013 ) . TreeFix : statistically informed gene tree error correction using species trees . Syst . Biol . 62 : 110 – 120 . Yang , C . , Zhao , L . , Zhang , H . , Yang , Z . , Wang , H . , Wen , S . , Zhang , C . , Rustgi , S . , von Wettstein , D . , and Liu , B . ( 2014 ) . Evolution of physiological responses to salt stress in hexaploid wheat . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 111 : 11882 – 11887 . Yang , Z . ( 1997 ) . PAML : a program package for phylogenetic analysis by maximum likelihood . Comput . Appl . Biosci . 13 : 555 – 556 . Yang , Z . ( 2007 ) . PAML 4 : phylogenetic analysis by maximum likeli - hood . Mol . Biol . Evol . 24 : 1586 – 1591 . Yang , Z . , and Nielsen , R . ( 2000 ) . Estimating synonymous and non - synonymous substitution rates under realistic evolutionary models . Mol . Biol . Evol . 17 : 32 – 43 . Yap , V . B . , Lindsay , H . , Easteal , S . , and Huttley , G . ( 2010 ) . Estimates of the effect of natural selection on protein - coding content . Mol . Biol . Evol . 27 : 726 – 734 . Yona , A . H . , Manor , Y . S . , Herbst , R . H . , Romano , G . H . , Mitchell , A . , Kupiec , M . , Pilpel , Y . , and Dahan , O . ( 2012 ) . Chromosomal du - plication is a transient evolutionary solution to stress . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 109 : 21010 – 21015 . Zhang , J . , and Yang , J . R . ( 2015 ) . Determinants of the rate of protein sequence evolution . Nat . Rev . Genet . 16 : 409 – 420 . 344 The Plant Cell Supplemental Data . Li and Defoort et al . ( 2016 ) . Plant Cell 10 . 1105 / tpc . 16 . 00877 Gene duplicability of core genes is highly consistent across all angiosperms - Supplemental Material - Zhen Li 1 , 2 , 3 * , Jonas Defoort 1 , 2 , 3 * , Setareh Tasdighian 1 , 2 , 3 , Steven Maere 1 , 2 , 3 , Yves Van de Peer 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , Riet De Smet 1 , 2 , 3 1 Department of Plant Systems Biology , VIB , Technologiepark 927 , B - 9052 Ghent , Belgium 2 Department of Plant Biotechnology and Bioinformatics , Ghent University , Technologiepark 927 , B - 9052 Ghent , Belgium 3 Bioinformatics Institute Ghent , Ghent University , Technologiepark 927 , B - 9052 Gent , Belgium 4 Genomics Research Institute , University of Pretoria , Hatfield Campus , Pretoria 0028 , South Africa * Equal contribution Correspondence should be sent to : Yves Van de Peer Riet De Smet VIB / Ghent University VIB / Ghent University Technologiepark 927 Technologiepark 927 Gent ( 9052 ) , Belgium Gent ( 9052 ) , Belgium Tel : + 32 ( 0 ) 9 331 3807 Tel : + 32 ( 0 ) 9 331 35 36 Fax : + 32 ( 0 ) 9 331 3809 Fax : + 32 ( 0 ) 9 331 3809 E - mail : yves . vandepeer @ psb . vib - ugent . be E - mail : riet . desmet @ psb . vib - ugent . be Supplemental Data . Li and Defoort et al . ( 2016 ) . Plant Cell 10 . 1105 / tpc . 16 . 00877 2 SUPPLEMENTAL FIGURES Supplemental Figure 1 . Motivation for the 32 out of 37 species cut - off to define core gene families . To distinguish core from non - core gene families we assessed the distribution of the number of species in each gene family based on all 69 , 542 gene families obtained by reconciliation . This distribution is U - shaped , suggesting a large number of gene families that are species - or lineage - specific ( left side of the distribution ) and also an excess of gene families present in the large majority of angiosperm species ( right side of the distribution ) . Based on this distribution we decided to consider all gene families containing genes from at least 32 species as being ‘core gene families’ . As such we account for a limited number of putative missing orthologs from core gene families due to for instance errors in genome annotation , gene family construction errors or the presence of incomplete genomes . Supplemental Data . Li and Defoort et al . ( 2016 ) . Plant Cell 10 . 1105 / tpc . 16 . 00877 3 Supplemental Figure 2 . The distribution of Single - Copy Percentages ( SCPs ) for all core gene families , with SCPs calculated upon removing the highly duplicated genomes of Glycine max , Linum usitatissimum , Brassica rapa , and Zea mays . This distribution has a mode of 92 % and a mean of 70 . 8 % . Supplemental Data . Li and Defoort et al . ( 2016 ) . Plant Cell 10 . 1105 / tpc . 16 . 00877 4 Supplemental Figure 3 . Classification of species tree nodes as SSD or WGD . On the species tree , nodes with WGDs on their parent branches were considered as WGD nodes ( orange dots ) , while the rest of the nodes were considered as SSD nodes . Next to each node are the number of duplication events predicted by gene tree - species tree reconciliation for both core and non - core gene families ( core / non - core ) . There are in total 93 , 942 predicted duplication events in core gene families and 140 , 786 duplication events in non - core gene families . Supplemental Data . Li and Defoort et al . ( 2016 ) . Plant Cell 10 . 1105 / tpc . 16 . 00877 5 Supplemental Figure 4 . Core gene families mainly duplicate through WGD . Bar plots represent the fraction of duplication events , summed over all gene families , attributed to WGD or SSD in core and non - core gene families . Panel ( A ) represents results obtained from all nodes in the species tree in ( Supplemental Figure 2 ) and shows that for core genes families , as compared to non - core gene families , the presence of duplicates seems to be biased towards WGD - associated gene duplication ( p < 2 . 2e - 16 , Fisher ' s exact test ) . In panel ( B ) we assessed the possibility that these observations might be caused by an overrepresentation of WGD - associated nodes in the species tree for core gene families as opposed to non - core gene families : since core gene families cover by definition a larger number of species , some of the more ancient WGD events that are shared by many species will only be represented by core gene families . Hence , we repeated this analysis by only considering nodes from the species tree that are also ubiquitously present in non - core gene families ( top 10 of the nodes ) and came to the same conclusion ( p < 2 . 2e - 16 , Fisher’s exact test ) . Supplemental Data . Li and Defoort et al . ( 2016 ) . Plant Cell 10 . 1105 / tpc . 16 . 00877 6 Supplemental Figure 5 . Comparison of the number of duplications for core and non - core gene families at WGD and SSD nodes on a gene family base ( only illustrating gene families with no more than 50 duplications ) . ( A ) The number of WGD and SSD duplications per gene family for core gene families . There are significantly more nodes associated with WGD derived duplications than SSD derived duplications ( p < 2 . 2e - 16 , Wilcoxon - rank - sum test ) . ( B ) The number of WGD and SSD duplication per gene family for non - core gene families . Here the number of WGD derived duplications is not significantly larger than those of SSD derived duplications ( p = 1 , Wilcoxon - rank - sum test ) . Predicted duplication events were obtained by gene tree - species tree reconciliation ( see Materials and Methods ) . Supplemental Data . Li and Defoort et al . ( 2016 ) . Plant Cell 10 . 1105 / tpc . 16 . 00877 7 Supplemental Figure 6 . K S - distributions of duplicated pairs from core and non - core gene families in 12 species , i . e . Arabidopsis thaliana , Amborella trichopoda , Brassica rapa , Cucumis melo , Glycine max , Gossypium raimondii , Oryza sativa , Prunus mume , Populus trichocarpa , Solanum lycopersicum , Vitis vinifera , and Zea mays . Supplemental Data . Li and Defoort et al . ( 2016 ) . Plant Cell 10 . 1105 / tpc . 16 . 00877 8 Supplemental Figure 7 . Duplicate gene retention in function of time since WGD . Each dot represents the fraction of core gene families with retained duplicates following a specific WGD ( y - axis ) , as a function of WGD age , expressed in K S - units ( x - axis ) . The timing of the WGD events and the particular gene families that retained duplicates following a specific WGD event were inferred by fitting Gaussian mixture models to K S - age distributions for all 37 species separately ( see Materials and Methods ) . This figure is related to Figure 3 , but here all WGD peak callings were included . Since the Dicot and Brassicaceae - Beta peaks can not be distinguished from each other they are denoted by the same color . Additional information on all the peaks is provided in the Supplemental Table 2 . Supplemental Data . Li and Defoort et al . ( 2016 ) . Plant Cell 10 . 1105 / tpc . 16 . 00877 9 Supplemental Figure 8 . Criteria that we used to choose the optimal number of clusters for k - means clustering of the copy - number matrix . ( A ) We used the Delta Area Plot from the ConsensusClusterPlus R - package to select the optimal number of clusters . The results of 1000 clustering runs , each time on subsampled matrices , are summarized into a consensus matrix , whose values represent the proportion of clustering runs in which two items ( i . e . gene families ) are grouped together . Hence , values in this matrix are between 0 and 1 ( = always clustered together ) . The Delta Area Plot assesses the ‘cleanness’ of this consensus matrix : if all clustering runs agree on the same solution than this matrix only consists of 0’s and 1’s ( bimodal distribution ) . To determine the optimal numbers of clusters the largest changes in these consensus values are detected by calculating the change in the area under the Cumulative Distribution of consensus values for increasing cluster number ( Monti et al . , 2003 ) . The ‘Delta area’ represents this change , with k corresponding to cluster number . ( B ) Corresponding multidimensional scaling plot of the copy - number matrix , with data points colored according to cluster membership . Supplemental Data . Li and Defoort et al . ( 2016 ) . Plant Cell 10 . 1105 / tpc . 16 . 00877 10 Supplemental Figure 9 . Consensus matrices obtained for different number of clusters k . The consensus matrix represents the number of times that two gene families belonged to the same cluster over 1 , 000 clustering runs of the subsampled copy - number matrix . The values within this matrix range from 0 ( gene families were never grouped into the same cluster ; white in this figure ) to 1 ( gene families were always grouped into the same cluster ; blue in this figure ) . Here results are shown for k = 2 - 5 clusters . Color bars on top of the visualized consensus matrix indicate cluster assignments . Supplemental Data . Li and Defoort et al . ( 2016 ) . Plant Cell 10 . 1105 / tpc . 16 . 00877 11 Supplemental Figure 10 . Polar diagrams depicting the fraction of duplication events in each gene family group belonging to either the ‘Recent’ , ‘K - Pg Boundary’ , ‘Ancient’ or ‘SSD’ duplication classes . ( A ) Represents predictions of duplication timing for all core gene families , obtained by using gene tree – species tree reconciliation . This Figure is the same as Figure 5B . In contrast to GMM ( see panel B ) , which provides estimates of the ages of the duplication events for each species separately , here estimates of the duplication age is based on a gene family basis and hence no averaging over species is necessary . To obtain the bar plots we normalised the absolute counts of duplication events for each node in the species tree with the number of nodes in the species tree of that duplication class , correcting for the fact that there are for instance more nodes associated to the ‘SSD’ duplication class . Significance values are indicated by asterisks ( green = overrepresentation , red = underrepresentation ) and were calculated based on the absolute counts of predicted duplications of each class , using the Fisher’s exact test with Bonferroni multiple - testing correction . ( B ) Represents predictions of duplication timing for all core gene families based on GMM of K S - based species - specific age distributions . We classified each duplicate pair to a certain duplication class depending on the K S - peak it belonged to ( see Supplemental Table 2 ) . The bars in the Figures represent averages , obtained from averaging over the number of duplications assigned to a certain class for all species . Statistical significant over - and underrepresentations were calculated based on the Wilcoxon - rank - sum test and are denoted by asterisks . Supplemental Data . Li and Defoort et al . ( 2016 ) . Plant Cell 10 . 1105 / tpc . 16 . 00877 12 Supplemental Figure 11 . Over - and underrepresentation of an independent set of 2 , 090 nuclear - encoded chloroplast - targeted genes obtained from The Chloroplast Function Database ( Myouga et al . , 2013 ) . The y - axis represents over - ( positive values ) or under - ( negative values ) representation of these chloroplast genes in the three different functional groups as compared to the full set . In specific , to obtain the values on the y - axis we calculated the ratio of the proportion of group genes ( i . e . ‘Single’ , ‘Intermediate’ or ‘Multi’ ) that are chloroplast genes to the proportion of genes in the full set that are chloroplast genes . Positive values for overrepresentation ( ratio > 1 ) and negative values for underrepresentation ( ratio < 1 ) were obtained by subtracting one from the above described ratio . P - values as obtained by Fisher’s exact test with Bonferroni multiple - testing correction are indicated on the bars . Supplemental Data . Li and Defoort et al . ( 2016 ) . Plant Cell 10 . 1105 / tpc . 16 . 00877 13 Supplemental Figure 12 . Over - and underrepresentation of an independent set of 1 , 795 putative transcription factors , obtained from ( Perez - Rodriguez et al . , 2010 ) . The y - axis represents over - ( positive values ) or under - ( negative values ) representations for transcription factor genes in the three different functional groups as compared to the full set . In specific , to obtain the values on the y - axis we calculated the ratio of the proportion of group genes ( i . e . ‘Single’ , ‘Intermediate’ or ‘Multi’ ) that are transcription factors to the proportion of genes in the full set that are transcription factors . Positive values for overrepresentation ( ratio > 1 ) and negative values for underrepresentation ( ratio < 1 ) were obtained by subtracting one from the above described ratio . P - values as obtained by Fisher’s exact test with Bonferroni multiple - testing correction are indicated on the bars . Supplemental Data . Li and Defoort et al . ( 2016 ) . Plant Cell 10 . 1105 / tpc . 16 . 00877 14 Supplemental Figure 13 . Mapping of the whole - genome duplications and triplications on the species tree as obtained by the approach outlined in ‘Dating whole - genome duplications’ and as used for the simulations of gene family evolution according to the stochastic gene birth - death null model . Supplemental Data . Li and Defoort et al . ( 2016 ) . Plant Cell 10 . 1105 / tpc . 16 . 00877 15 Supplemental Figure 14 . Conflicting clades between the species tree used in this paper and which we inferred from 107 core gene families ( left ) and the APGIII tree ( right ) . The here obtained species tree is largely consistent with the APGIII tree ( Bremer et al . , 2009 ) , yet there are some conflicts . The incongruence between the positions of the Malpighiales clade in trees constructed from nuclear genes versus chloroplast genes have long been recognized , and is thought to be caused by introgressive hybridization in the ancestral lineages of Fabidae and Malvidae ( Sun et al . , 2015 ) . Moreover , due to rapid diversification at the mid - Cretaceous , the relationships within Malpighiales are hard to determine ( Xi et al . , 2012 ) . The close to zero values of IC and ICA suggest incongruence of the gene trees and the species tree on the branch leading to Populus trichocarpa and on the branch leading to Jartropha curcas and Manihot esculenta . Similarly , the monophyletic group consisting of Cucurbitaceae and Fabaceae is also only supported by half of the gene families used to reconstruct the species tree . Supplemental Data . Li and Defoort et al . ( 2016 ) . Plant Cell 10 . 1105 / tpc . 16 . 00877 16 Supplemental Figure 15 . Explanation of how duplications were inferred for gene families with at least two species but no more than three genes or gene families that are only present in one species . For gene families with two genes in two species ( 10 , 740 gene families ) , the node connecting both genes is assumed to be a speciation node . For gene families with three genes ( 6 , 171 gene families ) , we mid - point rerooted the gene tree and distinguished between three possible scenarios . If the three genes come from two species , the duplication occurred either in one species or in the common ancestor of the two species , depending on the topology of the gene tree . If the three genes come from three species , we assume that no duplications have occurred in the history of the gene family ( most parsimonious scenario ) . For gene families that only cover one species ( 23 , 023 ) but with two genes or more , e . g . five genes in the figure , we mid - point rerooted the gene tree and considered all nodes in the tree to be duplication nodes . For the remaining 28 , 946 gene families with at least four genes ( including all core gene families ) duplications were inferred using the reconciliation pipelines as described in Materials and Methods . Supplemental Data . Li and Defoort et al . ( 2016 ) . Plant Cell 10 . 1105 / tpc . 16 . 00877 17 Supplemental Figure 16 . The change in the total number of predicted duplication events in core gene families in function of the threshold on the duplication consistency score . The predicted number of duplication events stays relatively stable for duplication consistency score thresholds up until 0 . 5 , yet shows a drop for duplication consistency scores larger than 0 . 5 . The large reduction at 0 . 5 can be explained by the large number of nodes in the species tree that only encompass two species and hence the large effect of an increase in the duplication consistency score threshold from 0 . 4 to 0 . 5 on the total number of duplication events : e . g . ( ( ath , aly ) ath ) will not make the cut of a duplication consistency score > 0 . 5 . Supplemental Data . Li and Defoort et al . ( 2016 ) . Plant Cell 10 . 1105 / tpc . 16 . 00877 18 Supplemental Figure 17 . Gaussian mixture models were fit to the K S - distribution of each species . Peaks were considered solid if they had a good visual fit with the density line ( dashed purple line ) and the K S - histogram and had a μ lower than 3 . Flat peaks , e . g . peaks which span the whole K S - distribution , where also removed . The annotation of the peaks was done using known literature ( Vanneste et al . , 2014 ) . The figure shows the K S - distribution for Sorghum bicolor . The red and green peaks have a good fit to the density line whereas the flat blue peak shows no correspondence to density line and spans the whole K S - distribution . Supplemental Data . Li and Defoort et al . ( 2016 ) . Plant Cell 10 . 1105 / tpc . 16 . 00877 19 Supplemental Figure 18 . Comparison of ( A ) power - law fit and ( B ) exponential fit to the data obtained from the Gaussian Mixture Modeling of K S - based age distributions . The power - law shows consistently a better fit than the exponential , as assessed by Chi - squared Goodness - Of - Fit test ( see Supplemental Table 3 ) . Supplemental Data . Li and Defoort et al . ( 2016 ) . Plant Cell 10 . 1105 / tpc . 16 . 00877 20 SUPPLEMENTAL TABLES Supplemental Table 1 . Comparison of the numbers of interacting protein pairs in each group to those obtained from randomized networks . Number of PPIs within group Average number of PPIs within group for 1000 randomized networks Z - score P - value enrichment of PPI vs random ( one - sided test ) P - value with multiple - testing correction ( Bonferroni ) Full 15949 15949 Single - copy 2550 2813 . 012 - 1 . 005 0 . 84 1 Intermediate 2277 1740 . 331 2 . 710 0 . 0034 0 . 010 Multi - copy 1034 990 . 558 0 . 322 0 . 374 1 Supplemental Data . Li and Defoort et al . ( 2016 ) . Plant Cell 10 . 1105 / tpc . 16 . 00877 21 Supplemental Table 2 . Description of all identified peaks inferred from the K S - based age distributions . Species k    L _ bound H _ bound Annotation WGD type Included Alyr1 4 0 . 095 0 . 086 0 . 131 0 . 000 0 . 289 SSD SSD NO Alyr2 4 0 . 723 0 . 258 0 . 579 0 . 289 1 . 199 BRAalpha KT YES Alyr3 4 2 . 038 0 . 720 0 . 227 1 . 199 2 . 970 BRABeta OLD NO Alyr4 4 3 . 848 0 . 631 0 . 063 2 . 970 5 . 000 HighKS HighKS NO Atha1 4 0 . 178 0 . 122 0 . 088 0 . 000 0 . 411 SSD SSD NO Atha2 4 0 . 778 0 . 243 0 . 574 0 . 411 1 . 231 BRAalpha KT YES Atha3 4 2 . 059 0 . 783 0 . 286 1 . 231 3 . 185 BRABeta OLD NO Atha4 4 4 . 083 0 . 533 0 . 052 3 . 185 5 . 000 HighKS HighKS NO Bdis1 4 0 . 182 0 . 108 0 . 144 0 . 000 0 . 400 SSD SSD NO Bdis2 4 0 . 802 0 . 263 0 . 374 0 . 400 1 . 240 MON1 KT YES Bdis3 4 1 . 878 0 . 613 0 . 383 1 . 240 2 . 762 MON2 OLD YES Bdis4 4 3 . 688 0 . 671 0 . 100 2 . 762 5 . 000 HighKS HighKS NO Brap1 3 0 . 331 0 . 082 0 . 513 0 . 000 0 . 479 REC REC YES Brap2 3 0 . 701 0 . 340 0 . 334 0 . 479 1 . 292 BRAalpha KT YES Brap3 3 2 . 220 1 . 025 0 . 153 1 . 292 5 . 000 BRABeta OLD NO Cari1 4 0 . 047 0 . 039 0 . 118 0 . 000 0 . 155 SSD SSD NO Cari2 4 0 . 735 0 . 316 0 . 543 0 . 155 1 . 273 LEG KT YES Cari3 4 2 . 078 0 . 725 0 . 277 1 . 273 3 . 064 DIC OLD YES Cari4 4 3 . 945 0 . 581 0 . 063 3 . 064 5 . 000 HighKS HighKS NO Ccaj1 4 0 . 032 0 . 037 0 . 100 0 . 000 0 . 138 SSD SSD NO Ccaj2 4 0 . 602 0 . 214 0 . 569 0 . 138 1 . 009 LEG KT YES Ccaj3 4 1 . 789 0 . 679 0 . 279 1 . 009 2 . 794 DIC OLD YES Ccaj4 4 3 . 746 0 . 617 0 . 052 2 . 794 5 . 000 HighKS HighKS NO Clan1 3 0 . 2643 0 . 1755 0 . 2239 0 . 0000 0 . 6731 SSD SSD NO Clan2 3 1 . 8231 0 . 7083 0 . 6317 0 . 6731 2 . 7961 DIC OLD YES Clan3 3 3 . 7459 0 . 6738 0 . 1444 2 . 7961 5 . 0000 HighKS HighKS NO Cmel1 3 0 . 2786 0 . 2019 0 . 1872 0 . 0000 0 . 7310 SSD SSD NO Cmel2 3 1 . 9139 0 . 7743 0 . 6712 0 . 7310 2 . 9552 DIC OLD YES Cmel3 3 3 . 8984 0 . 6355 0 . 1416 2 . 9552 5 . 0000 HighKS HighKS NO Cpap1 3 0 . 249 0 . 202 0 . 306 0 . 000 0 . 765 SSD SSD NO Cpap2 3 2 . 006 0 . 595 0 . 602 0 . 765 2 . 995 DIC OLD YES Cpap3 3 3 . 897 0 . 517 0 . 092 2 . 995 5 . 000 HighKS HighKS NO Crub1 4 0 . 124 0 . 075 0 . 070 0 . 000 0 . 308 SSD SSD NO Crub2 4 0 . 814 0 . 273 0 . 593 0 . 308 1 . 289 BRAalpha KT YES Crub3 4 2 . 039 0 . 724 0 . 263 1 . 289 3 . 027 BRABeta OLD NO Crub4 4 3 . 907 0 . 580 0 . 075 3 . 027 5 . 000 HighKS HighKS NO Csat1 3 0 . 318 0 . 216 0 . 192 0 . 000 0 . 777 SSD SSD NO Csat2 3 1 . 789 0 . 680 0 . 580 0 . 777 2 . 596 DIC OLD YES Csat3 3 3 . 425 0 . 773 0 . 228 2 . 596 5 . 000 HighKS HighKS NO Fves1 3 0 . 334 0 . 222 0 . 365 0 . 000 0 . 791 SSD SSD NO Fves2 3 1 . 735 0 . 658 0 . 552 0 . 791 2 . 631 DIC OLD YES Fves3 3 3 . 543 0 . 685 0 . 083 2 . 631 5 . 000 HighKS HighKS NO Gmax1 3 0 . 124 0 . 044 0 . 622 0 . 000 0 . 216 REC REC YES Gmax2 3 0 . 448 0 . 208 0 . 261 0 . 216 0 . 872 LEG KT YES Gmax3 3 1 . 868 0 . 967 0 . 117 0 . 872 5 . 000 DIC OLD NO Supplemental Data . Li and Defoort et al . ( 2016 ) . Plant Cell 10 . 1105 / tpc . 16 . 00877 22 Supplemental Table 2 . Description of all identified peaks inferred from the K S - based age distributions . Species k    L _ bound H _ bound Annotation WGD type Included Grai1 3 0 . 048 0 . 037 0 . 058 0 . 000 0 . 149 SSD SSD NO Grai2 3 0 . 499 0 . 166 0 . 703 0 . 149 0 . 858 KT KT YES Grai3 3 1 . 912 0 . 964 0 . 239 0 . 858 5 . 000 DIC OLD YES Hvul1 3 0 . 011 0 . 010 0 . 115 0 . 000 0 . 042 SSD SSD NO Hvul2 3 0 . 639 0 . 416 0 . 487 0 . 042 1 . 312 MON1 KT NO Hvul3 3 2 . 217 1 . 092 0 . 398 1 . 312 5 . 000 MON2 OLD NO Jcur1 3 0 . 120 0 . 116 0 . 274 0 . 000 0 . 432 SSD SSD NO Jcur2 3 1 . 943 0 . 831 0 . 669 0 . 432 3 . 377 DIC OLD YES Jcur3 3 4 . 271 0 . 432 0 . 057 3 . 377 5 . 000 HighKS HighKS NO Ljap1 4 0 . 051 0 . 058 0 . 144 0 . 000 0 . 180 SSD SSD NO Ljap2 4 0 . 541 0 . 268 0 . 490 0 . 180 1 . 018 LEG KT YES Ljap3 4 1 . 790 0 . 655 0 . 252 1 . 018 2 . 634 DIC OLD YES Ljap4 4 3 . 491 0 . 682 0 . 114 2 . 634 5 . 000 HighKS HighKS NO Lusi1 3 0 . 128 0 . 056 0 . 726 0 . 000 0 . 249 REC REC YES Lusi2 3 0 . 588 0 . 303 0 . 190 0 . 249 1 . 163 DIC OLD NO Lusi3 3 2 . 265 1 . 025 0 . 084 1 . 163 5 . 000 HighKS HighKS NO Macu1 5 0 . 075 0 . 039 0 . 021 0 . 000 0 . 198 SSD SSD NO Macu2 5 0 . 435 0 . 081 0 . 326 0 . 198 0 . 556 MAC KT NO Macu3 5 0 . 672 0 . 211 0 . 398 0 . 556 0 . 937 MAC KT NO Macu4 5 1 . 158 0 . 398 0 . 220 0 . 937 1 . 782 MAC OLD NO Macu5 5 2 . 538 1 . 049 0 . 036 1 . 782 5 . 000 HighKS HighKS NO Mesc1 4 0 . 071 0 . 040 0 . 044 0 . 000 0 . 171 SSD SSD NO Mesc2 4 0 . 359 0 . 086 0 . 671 0 . 171 0 . 580 REC REC YES Mesc3 4 1 . 633 0 . 664 0 . 251 0 . 580 2 . 667 DIC OLD YES Mesc4 4 3 . 717 0 . 681 0 . 034 2 . 667 5 . 000 HighKS HighKS NO Mtru1 3 0 . 159 0 . 122 0 . 342 0 . 000 0 . 379 SSD SSD NO Mtru2 3 0 . 744 0 . 324 0 . 414 0 . 379 1 . 330 LEG KT YES Mtru3 3 2 . 338 1 . 063 0 . 244 1 . 330 5 . 000 DIC OLD NO Osat1 4 0 . 143 0 . 114 0 . 197 0 . 000 0 . 396 SSD SSD NO Osat2 4 0 . 873 0 . 266 0 . 356 0 . 396 1 . 300 MON1 KT YES Osat3 4 1 . 884 0 . 598 0 . 365 1 . 300 2 . 829 MON2 OLD YES Osat4 4 3 . 779 0 . 602 0 . 082 2 . 829 5 . 000 HighKS HighKS NO Pbre1 3 0 . 010 0 . 010 0 . 290 0 . 000 0 . 038 SSD SSD NO Pbre2 3 0 . 168 0 . 071 0 . 550 0 . 038 0 . 353 REC REC NO Pbre3 3 1 . 564 0 . 950 0 . 160 0 . 353 5 . 000 DIC OLD NO Pdac1 3 0 . 291 0 . 078 0 . 548 0 . 100 0 . 440 REC KT YES Pdac2 3 0 . 706 0 . 375 0 . 394 0 . 440 1 . 354 ? ? NO Pdac3 3 2 . 350 1 . 130 0 . 057 1 . 354 5 . 000 ? ? NO Pmum1 3 0 . 167 0 . 150 0 . 418 0 . 000 0 . 534 SSD SSD NO Pmum2 3 1 . 516 0 . 522 0 . 488 0 . 577 2 . 185 DIC OLD YES Pmum3 3 2 . 813 0 . 957 0 . 094 2 . 162 5 . 000 HighKS HighKS NO Pper1 3 0 . 194 0 . 153 0 . 391 0 . 000 0 . 571 SSD SSD NO Pper2 3 1 . 519 0 . 488 0 . 519 0 . 571 2 . 189 DIC OLD YES Pper3 3 2 . 894 0 . 946 0 . 089 2 . 189 5 . 000 HighKS HighKS NO Ptri1 3 0 . 028 0 . 020 0 . 072 0 . 000 0 . 085 SSD SSD NO Supplemental Data . Li and Defoort et al . ( 2016 ) . Plant Cell 10 . 1105 / tpc . 16 . 00877 23 Supplemental Table 2 . Description of all identified peaks inferred from the K S - based age distributions . Species k    L _ bound H _ bound Annotation WGD type Included Ptri2 3 0 . 251 0 . 067 0 . 719 0 . 085 0 . 428 REC REC YES Ptri3 3 1 . 632 0 . 940 0 . 209 0 . 428 5 . 000 DIC OLD NO Rcom1 3 0 . 278 0 . 197 0 . 186 0 . 000 0 . 736 SSD SSD NO Rcom2 3 1 . 898 0 . 685 0 . 741 0 . 736 3 . 130 DIC OLD YES Rcom3 3 4 . 087 0 . 483 0 . 073 3 . 130 5 . 000 HighKS HighKS NO Sbic1 3 0 . 175 0 . 103 0 . 187 0 . 000 0 . 406 SSD SSD NO Sbic2 3 1 . 045 0 . 442 0 . 469 0 . 406 1 . 711 MON1 KT YES Sbic3 3 2 . 490 1 . 045 0 . 344 1 . 711 5 . 000 MON2 OLD NO Sita1 3 0 . 079 0 . 062 0 . 126 0 . 000 0 . 231 SSD SSD NO Sita2 3 0 . 837 0 . 398 0 . 490 0 . 231 1 . 461 MON1 KT YES Sita3 3 2 . 233 1 . 027 0 . 384 1 . 461 5 . 000 MON2 OLD YESB Slyc1 3 0 . 184 0 . 094 0 . 125 0 . 000 0 . 375 SSD SSD NO Slyc2 3 0 . 729 0 . 228 0 . 541 0 . 375 1 . 197 SOL KT YES Slyc3 3 2 . 327 1 . 068 0 . 334 1 . 197 5 . 000 DIC OLD YES Stub1 3 0 . 118 0 . 085 0 . 212 0 . 000 0 . 300 SSD SSD NO Stub2 3 0 . 658 0 . 223 0 . 501 0 . 300 1 . 121 SOL KT YES Stub3 3 2 . 289 1 . 071 0 . 286 1 . 121 5 . 000 DIC OLD YES Tcac1 3 0 . 128 0 . 061 0 . 142 0 . 000 0 . 311 SSD SSD NO Tcac2 3 1 . 656 0 . 663 0 . 787 0 . 311 2 . 802 DIC OLD YES Tcac3 3 3 . 874 0 . 600 0 . 071 2 . 802 5 . 000 HighKS HighKS NO Tpar1 3 0 . 680 0 . 356 0 . 707 0 . 000 1 . 309 BRAalpha KT YES Tpar2 3 2 . 140 0 . 555 0 . 211 1 . 309 2 . 959 BRABeta OLD NO Tpar3 3 3 . 835 0 . 632 0 . 082 2 . 959 5 . 000 HighKS HighKS NO Vvin1 3 0 . 088 0 . 067 0 . 292 0 . 000 0 . 258 SSD SSD NO Vvin2 3 1 . 038 0 . 494 0 . 611 0 . 258 1 . 767 DIC OLD YES Vvin3 3 2 . 608 1 . 089 0 . 097 1 . 767 5 . 000 HighKS HighKS NO Zmay1 3 0 . 191 0 . 104 0 . 532 0 . 000 0 . 392 REC REC YES Zmay2 3 0 . 795 0 . 394 0 . 226 0 . 392 1 . 426 MON1 KT YES Zmay3 3 2 . 248 1 . 036 0 . 242 1 . 426 5 . 000 MON2 OLD NO Each row in the table represents one peak : k denotes the number of components that were fitted ;  ,  and λ are the obtained parameters for fitted GMMs ; L _ bound and U _ bound represent respectively the lower - and upperbound K S - values associated with each peak ; Annotation represents the annotation of the peak based on data from ( Vanneste et al . , 2014 ) ; WGD types is the classification of the peak as either ‘SSD’ , ‘Recent’ ( REC ) , ‘K - Pg Boundary’ ( KT ) , ‘Ancient’ ( OLD ) or ‘HighKS’ if they had μ - values exceeding 3 . 5 ; ‘Included’ indicates whether we used the peak data to create Figure 3 and Figure 5B . Supplemental Data . Li and Defoort et al . ( 2016 ) . Plant Cell 10 . 1105 / tpc . 16 . 00877 24 Supplemental Table 3 . Comparison of the power - law and the exponential fit .   - goodness - of - fit ( p - value ) Power - law Exponential Full 0 . 76795 ( p = 1 ) 5 . 072 ( p = 1 ) Single - copy 0 . 52465 ( p = 1 ) 477 . 6 ( p < 2 . 2e - 16 ) Intermediate 1 . 3838 ( p = 1 ) 2 . 0733 ( p = 1 ) Multi - copy 1 . 8271 ( p = 1 ) 2 . 1274 ( p = 1 ) Supplemental Data . Li and Defoort et al . ( 2016 ) . Plant Cell 10 . 1105 / tpc . 16 . 00877 25 REFERENCES Bremer , B . , Bremer , K . , Chase , M . W . , Fay , M . F . , Reveal , J . L . , Soltis , D . E . , Soltis , P . S . , Stevens , P . F . , Anderberg , A . A . , Moore , M . J . , Olmstead , R . G . , Rudall , P . J . , Sytsma , K . J . , Tank , D . C . , Wurdack , K . , Xiang , J . Q . Y . , Zmarzty , S . , and Grp , A . P . ( 2009 ) . An update of the Angiosperm Phylogeny Group classification for the orders and families of flowering plants : APG III . Bot J Linn Soc 161 , 105 - 121 . Monti , S . , Tamayo , P . , Mesirov , J . , and Golub , T . ( 2003 ) . Consensus clustering : A resampling - based method for class discovery and visualization of gene expression microarray data . Mach Learn 52 , 91 - 118 . Myouga , F . , Akiyama , K . , Tomonaga , Y . , Kato , A . , Sato , Y . , Kobayashi , M . , Nagata , N . , Sakurai , T . , and Shinozaki , K . ( 2013 ) . The Chloroplast Function Database II : A Comprehensive Collection of Homozygous Mutants and Their Phenotypic / Genotypic Traits for Nuclear - Encoded Chloroplast Proteins . Plant Cell Physiol 54 , E2 - + . Perez - Rodriguez , P . , Riano - Pachon , D . M . , Correa , L . G . , Rensing , S . A . , Kersten , B . , and Mueller - Roeber , B . ( 2010 ) . PlnTFDB : updated content and new features of the plant transcription factor database . Nucleic Acids Res 38 , D822 - 827 . Sun , M . , Soltis , D . E . , Soltis , P . S . , Zhu , X . , Burleigh , J . G . , and Chen , Z . ( 2015 ) . Deep phylogenetic incongruence in the angiosperm clade Rosidae . Molecular phylogenetics and evolution 83 , 156 - 166 . Vanneste , K . , Baele , G . , Maere , S . , and Van de Peer , Y . ( 2014 ) . Analysis of 41 plant genomes supports a wave of successful genome duplications in association with the Cretaceous - Paleogene boundary . Genome Res 24 , 1334 - 1347 . Xi , Z . , Ruhfel , B . R . , Schaefer , H . , Amorim , A . M . , Sugumaran , M . , Wurdack , K . J . , Endress , P . K . , Matthews , M . L . , Stevens , P . F . , Mathews , S . , and Davis , C . C . ( 2012 ) . Phylogenomics and a posteriori data partitioning resolve the Cretaceous angiosperm radiation Malpighiales . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 109 , 17519 - 17524 . DOI 10 . 1105 / tpc . 15 . 00877 ; originally published online January 7 , 2016 ; 2016 ; 28 ; 326 - 344 Plant Cell Zhen Li , Jonas Defoort , Setareh Tasdighian , Steven Maere , Yves Van de Peer and Riet De Smet Gene Duplicability of Core Genes Is Highly Consistent across All Angiosperms This information is current as of March 31 , 2016 Supplemental Data http : / / www . plantcell . org / content / suppl / 2016 / 01 / 07 / tpc . 15 . 00877 . DC1 . html References http : / / www . plantcell . org / content / 28 / 2 / 326 . full . html # ref - list - 1 This article cites 128 articles , 71 of which can be accessed free at : Permissions https : / / www . copyright . com / ccc / openurl . do ? sid = pd _ hw1532298X & issn = 1532298X & WT . mc _ id = pd _ hw1532298X eTOCs http : / / www . plantcell . org / cgi / alerts / ctmain Sign up for eTOCs at : CiteTrack Alerts http : / / www . plantcell . org / cgi / alerts / ctmain Sign up for CiteTrack Alerts at : Subscription Information http : / / www . aspb . org / publications / subscriptions . cfm is available at : Plant Physiology and The Plant Cell Subscription Information for ADVANCING THE SCIENCE OF PLANT BIOLOGY © American Society of Plant Biologists