Understanding cytoskeletal avalanches using mechanical stability analysis Carlos Floyd Biophysics Program , University of Maryland , College Park , MD 20742 USA Herbert Levine Department of Bioengineering and Department of Physics , Northeastern University , Boston , MA 02115 USA Christopher Jarzynski ∗ Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry , Institute for Physical Science and Technology , and Department of Physics , University of Maryland , College Park , MD 20742 USA Garegin A . Papoian † Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry and Institute for Physical Science and Technology , University of Maryland , College Park , MD 20742 USA ( Dated : June 10 , 2021 ) Eukaryotic cells are mechanically supported by a polymer network called the cytoskeleton , which consumes chemical energy to dynamically remodel its structure . Recent experiments in vivo have revealed that this remodeling occasionally happens through anomalously large displacements , rem - iniscent of earthquakes or avalanches . These cytoskeletal avalanches might indicate that the cy - toskeleton’s structural response to a changing cellular environment is highly sensitive , and they are therefore of signiﬁcant biological interest . However , the physics underlying “cytoquakes” is poorly understood . Here , we use agent - based simulations of cytoskeletal self - organization to study ﬂuctuations in the network’s mechanical energy . We robustly observe non - Gaussian statistics and asymmetrically large rates of energy release compared to accumulation in a minimal cytoskeletal model . The large events of energy release are found to correlate with large , collective displace - ments of the cytoskeletal ﬁlaments . We also ﬁnd that the changes in the localization of tension and the projections of the network motion onto the vibrational normal modes are asymmetrically distributed for energy release and accumulation . These results imply an avalanche - like process of slow energy storage punctuated by fast , large events of energy release involving a collective network rearrangement . We further show that mechanical instability precedes cytoquake occurrence through a machine learning model that dynamically forecasts cytoquakes using the vibrational spectrum as input . Our results provide the ﬁrst connection between the cytoquake phenomenon and the net - work’s mechanical energy and can help guide future investigations of the cytoskeleton’s structural susceptibility . INTRODUCTION The actin - based cytoskeleton is an active biopoly - mer network that plays a central role in cell biology , providing the cell with a means to control its shape and produce mechanical forces during processes such as migration and cytokinesis [ 1 – 5 ] . These cellular - level forces arise from the collective non - equilibrium activity of molecular motors interacting with the actin ﬁlament scaﬀold , enabling dynamic , driven - dissipative cytoskeletal remodeling [ 6 – 8 ] . Recent experimental eﬀorts have uncovered a remarkable phenomenon exhibited by cytoskeletal networks in vivo : these networks undergo large , sudden struc - ∗ cjarzyns @ umd . edu † gpapoian @ umd . edu tural rearrangements signiﬁcantly more frequently than predicted by a Gaussian distribution [ 9 , 10 ] . Heavy - tailed distributions of event sizes are well - known in seismology , where the Gutenberg - Richter law describes the power - law relationship between the energy released by an earthquake and such an earthquake’s frequency [ 11 , 12 ] . Due to this anal - ogy the term “cytoquake , ” which we adopt here , has been coined by experimenters to describe large cytoskeletal remodeling events . In previous work we have reported the ﬁrst in silico observations of this phenomenon , appearing as heavy tails in the distributions of mechanical energy released by cy - toskeletal networks [ 13 ] . These ﬁndings suggest that avalanche - like processes may play a fundamental role in cytoskeletal dynamics . The physics underlying cytoquakes is not well un - derstood , as current explanations based on experi - a r X i v : 2 0 06 . 01884v4 [ phy s i c s . b i o - ph ] 8 J un 2021 2 mental data are mostly speculative and rely on quali - tative comparisons to systems amenable to computa - tional study which similarly exhibit non - exponential relaxation , such as jammed granular packings and spin glasses [ 9 , 10 , 14 , 15 ] . In particular , it is not known whether large cytoskeletal displacements ac - tually arise from an avalanche - like process of slow energy storage and fast , large events of energy re - lease . Alternative explanations of heavy - tailed dis - tributions of cytoskeletal displacements that do not involve avalanche - like dynamics have also been con - sidered . For instance , heterogeneity in the spatial distribution of molecular motors has been proposed as a possible mechanism for non - Gaussian distribu - tions of displacements [ 7 ] . Here , we describe the ﬁrst detailed numerical study focused on the mechani - cal energy of cytoskeletal networks exhibiting large displacements . We ﬁnd that the statistics of en - ergy accumulation and release support the hypothe - sis of avalanche - like dynamics occurring in cytoskele - tal networks , and thus that avalanche - like dynamics do at least contribute to the observed heavy - tailed distributions of cytoskeletal displacements . In addition , in previous studies little emphasis has been given to the possible biological roles played by cytoquakes . We propose one such role , that these large mechanical ﬂuctuations are concomitant with a large susceptibility to mechanical forces or chem - ical perturbations , allowing the cytoskeleton to be highly sensitive to physiological cues arriving via various cell signaling pathways [ 16 ] . Dynamic insta - bility is already an acknowledged feature of certain cytoskeletal components such as microtubules and ﬁlopodia [ 17 ] . A similar design principle may also apply to larger cytoskeletal structures to allow fast remodeling . For instance , avalanche - like dynamics may serve a useful purpose in the lamellipodia of migrating cells , which probe local chemical gradients and must quickly collapse protrusions in unsuccess - ful search directions as well as adaptively remodel their structure in response to changing mechanical loads [ 2 , 18 ] . However , to investigate such possible biological roles we ﬁrst need a more detailed account of the underlying causes of the observed large struc - tural rearrangements , which is the subject of this paper . Here , we perform detailed simulations of a min - imal cytoskeletal model system using the software package MEDYAN ( Mechanochemical Dynamics of Active Networks ) [ 19 ] . Our main qualitative re - sult is that there is a signiﬁcant asymmetry between how cytoskeletal networks accumulate and release mechanical energy . While both accumulation and release statistics are heavy - tailed , the magnitudes of energy release are more broadly distributed than those of energy accumulation . Several measures of network dynamics are also found to be distributed asymmetrically for energy release and accumulation , including the network displacement , the localization of tension , and the projection of the network motion onto the vibrational normal modes . These results support an avalanche - like picture of slow energy ac - cumulation punctuated by fast , broadly - distributed events of energy release that involve a collective structural rearrangement of the network . The asym - metric energy ﬂuctuations are found to be robust against changes in chemical concentrations and sys - tem size , suggesting that avalanches are intrinsic to cytoskeletal network dynamics . We further estab - lish a connection between cytoquakes and mechani - cal stability , both through the observed spatial delo - calization of tension during cytoquakes and the ma - chine learning - assisted ability to dynamically fore - cast cytoquakes using the Hessian eigenspectrum of the mechanical energy function . This implies that mechanical instability , as encoded in the Hessian eigenspectrum , precedes incipient cytoquakes which then act to homogenize tension in the network . At the end of the paper we pose several open questions based on these results , which can help to guide fu - ture investigations into cytoquakes and their possi - ble physiological functions . RESULTS Energy ﬂuctuations are asymmetric , heavy - tailed , and self - aﬃne We study a subsystem of the full cytoskeleton called an actomyosin network . This consists of semi - ﬂexible actin ﬁlaments and associated proteins , including active molecular motors ( e . g . miniﬁla - ments of non - muscle myosin IIA ) and passive cross - linkers ( e . g . α - actinin ) . An actomyosin network as represented in simulation is visualized in Figure 1 . The actin ﬁlaments hydrolyze ATP molecules in a directed polymerization process which reaches a steady state called “treadmilling” [ 20 ] . The myosin miniﬁlaments ( ∼ 200 nm in length ) transiently bind to pairs of actin ﬁlaments and also hydrolyze ATP as fuel to walk along the ﬁlaments , generating mo - tion and mechanical stresses . These active process drive the network away from equilibrium . The cross - linkers ( ∼ 35 nm ) bind more stably to nearby ﬁla - ments , serving to transmit the force produced by motors and to both store and through unbinding dis - sipate the resulting energy , heating the environment [ 21 – 27 ] . Dissipation of stored mechanical energy also occurs as ﬁlaments relax out of strained conﬁgura - tions , in a manner which depends on mutual con - straints ﬁlaments exert on each other through bound 3 cross - linkers and motors . Additionally , the rates of motor walking and unbinding as well as of cross - linker unbinding depend exponentially on the forces sustained by these molecules , giving rise to nonlinear coupling between the mechanical state of the net - work and its chemical propensities [ 28 , 29 ] . These processes by which the ability of the network to me - chanically relax depends on its current state set the stage for avalanche - like dynamics . FIG . 1 . A snapshot from a MEDYAN trajectory of an actomyosin network in a 1 µm 3 box for the condition C 3 , 3 ( see Materials and Methods ) . Actin ﬁlaments are shown in red , α - actinin is shown in green , and myosin motors are shown in blue . Beads representing the joined points ( i . e . hinges ) of thin cylinders ( at most 54 nm long ) are visualized as red spheres . The cyan ﬁlaments represent motion of the network corresponding to a soft , delocalized vibrational mode determined from Hessian analysis , as described in the main text . In the inset we zoom in on part of the network and exclude associated proteins to show greater detail of this vibrational motion . Using MEDYAN , we performed simulations of small cytoskeletal networks consisting of 50 actin ﬁl - aments in 1 µm 3 hard - walled cubic boxes with vary - ing concentrations of α - actinin cross - linkers ( [ α ] ) and of NMIIA myosin motor miniﬁlaments ( [ M ] ) [ 13 , 19 , 30 – 32 ] . We omit here other associated pro - teins , such as the branching agent Arp2 / 3 , ﬁnding that our minimal system is suﬃcient to produce heavy - tailed distributions of event sizes , although it has recently been discovered that branching acts to enhance avalanche - like processes [ 33 ] . MEDYAN simulations combine stochastic chemical dynamics with a mechanical representation of ﬁlaments and associated proteins ( see the SI Appendix , Descrip - tion of MEDYAN simulation platform for a detailed outline of the MEDYAN model ) . Simulations pro - ceed iteratively in a cycle of four steps : 1 ) stochas - tic chemical simulation for a time δt ( here 0 . 05 s ) , 2 ) computation of the resulting new forces , 3 ) equilibra - tion via minimization of the mechanical energy , and 4 ) updating of force - sensitive reaction rates such the as slip - bonds of cross - linkers , catch - bonds of motors , and motor stalling . Recent extensions to the ME - DYAN platform allow calculation of the change in the system’s Gibbs free energy during each of these steps [ 13 , 34 ] , originally applied to study the ther - modynamic eﬃciency of myosin motors in convert - ing chemical free energy to mechanical energy under various conditions of cross - linker and motor concen - tration . We employ this methodology here and focus on the statistics of the system’s mechanical energy U as it self - organizes . We ﬁrst characterize the observed occurrence of avalanche - like dynamics in these simulations . The simulations begin with short seed ﬁlaments that quickly polymerize ( tens of seconds ) to their steady - state lengths . Following this , the slower process ( hundreds of seconds ) of primarily myosin - driven self - organization occurs which for most conditions results in geometric contraction to a percolated net - work ( see Movie 1 ) [ 25 , 35 ] . The mechanical en - ergy U ( t ) ﬂuctuates near a quasi - steady state ( QSS ) value , which we analyze as a stochastic process . In Figure 2 . A we display the trajectory of U ( t ) for con - dition C 3 , 3 ( with α - actinin concentration [ α ] = 2 . 82 µM , and motor concentration [ M ] = 0 . 04 µM ; see the Materials and Methods for a description of the experimental conditions ) . We tracked the net changes of the mechanical energy ∆ U ( t ) = U ( t + δt ) − U ( t ) resulting from each complete cycle of sim - ulation steps 1 ) - 4 ) . For the purpose of analyz - ing the observed asymmetric heavy tails in the dis - tribution of ∆ U , we treat the negative increments ∆ U − ( energy release ) and positive increments ∆ U + ( energy accumulation ) as samples from separate dis - tributions with semi - inﬁnite domains . The comple - mentary cumulative distribution functions ( CCDFs or “tail distribution” , the probability P ( X ≥ x ) of observing a value of the random variable X above a threshold x , as a function of x ) of the observed samples collected from all ﬁve runs at QSS are il - 4 lustrated in Figure 2 . B . Both distributions display striking heavy tails relative to a ﬁtted half - normal distribution . The CCDFs are better ﬁt by stretched exponential ( Weibull ) functions of the form [ 36 ] P ( X ≥ x ) = e − ( x / λ ) k . ( 1 ) We justify this choice of distribution by construct - ing Weibull plots , as discussed in the SI Appendix , Weibull plots . We ﬁnd k = 0 . 60 ± 0 . 06 for | ∆ U − | and k = 0 . 83 ± 0 . 07 for ∆ U + with uncertainty taken over the ﬁve runs , indicating shallower tails for energy release compared to energy accumulation . We also measured parameter η that indicates non - Gaussianity : η = (cid:104) x 4 (cid:105) 3 (cid:104) x 2 (cid:105) 2 − 1 , ( 2 ) where (cid:104) x m (cid:105) is the m th moment about zero ; for a half - normal distribution η = 0 , and η > 0 quanti - ﬁes heavy - tailedness . We ﬁnd η = 11 . 37 ± 5 . 37 for | ∆ U − | and η = 1 . 96 ± 0 . 58 for ∆ U + . This , along with the shallower tails of the ﬁtted stretched exponen - tial functions , indicates greater deviation from Gaus - sianity for energy release compared to energy accu - mulation . These results support the picture that typically energy accumulates comparatively slowly and is released via large occasional events . We next analyze the temporal correlations of U ( t ) at QSS . A self - aﬃne stochastic time series G ( t ) , for which G ( t ) and | ζ | H a G ( t / ζ ) have the same statistics for any scaling parameter ζ , has a power spectral density S ( f ) exhibiting a power - law dependence on frequency f : S ( f ) ∝ f − β , where the spectral ex - ponent β is the persistence strength , related to the color of the signal [ 37 , 38 ] . We ﬁnd β = 1 . 72 ± 0 . 02 for U ( t ) , as shown in Figure 2 . C . With this value of β , U ( t ) is classiﬁed as a pinkish - brown signal , im - plying it is non - stationary and has temporally anti - correlated increments ∆ U . Self - aﬃne time series further obey the theoretical relationship β = 2 H a + 1 when 1 ≤ β ≤ 3 , where H a is the Hausdorﬀ exponent determined from the scaling of the semivariogram γ ( τ ) = 1 2 ( G ( t + τ ) − G ( t ) ) 2 ∼ τ 2 H a , ( 3 ) and where the overbar represents temporal averag - ing [ 39 , 40 ] . We ﬁnd that this relationship is sat - isﬁed by U ( t ) , as shown in Figure 2 . D , yielding H a = 0 . 36 ± 0 . 01 and conﬁrming that U ( t ) is self - aﬃne . Such non - Markovian and self - aﬃne time se - ries and spatial patterns commonly arise in various complex geophysical processes ( e . g . the temporal variation of river bed elevation ) , further supporting the analogy between the cytoskeleton and earth sys - tems [ 41 , 42 ] . 0 250 500 750 1000 1250 1500 1750 2000 Time ( s ) 0 1000 2000 3000 4000 U ( k B T ) A 1400 1401 1600 1800 2000 2200 10 1 10 2 | U | ( k B T ) 10 4 10 3 10 2 10 1 10 0 CC D F B U < 0 k B T U > 0 k B T 10 1 10 0 10 1 f ( Hz ) 10 3 10 2 10 1 10 0 S ( f ) C 10 1 10 0 10 1 ( s ) 10 4 10 5 D FIG . 2 . Statistics of ∆ U . A : Trajectory of the network’s mechanical energy U ( t ) for condition C 3 , 3 ( see Materi - als and Methods ) . Inset : A blow - up of the trajectory to show instances of rare events of energy release ( ∆ U < − 100 k B T , blue ) and accumulation ( ∆ U > 100 k B T , green ) . B : CCDFs of | ∆ U − | ( blue ) and ∆ U + ( green ) collected from ﬁve runs when the system is at QSS after 1000 s . Dotted lines in lighter colors represent ﬁts to the data of a half - normal CCDF , and dashed lines represent ﬁts of stretched exponentials . C : The normalized power spectral density of U ( t ) for a single run at QSS from which the spectral exponent β = 1 . 72 is determined by ﬁtting a power - law , shown oﬀset in red . D : The semi - variogram obeys the scaling relationship γ ∼ τ 2 H a over the scaling range . Distinguishing features of cytoquakes We ﬁnd that cytoquakes , deﬁned throughout as simulation cycles for which ∆ U < − 100 k b T ( cho - sen to lie well in the tail of the distribution of ∆ U , see Figure 2 ) , are correlated with several changes in the state of the network . In Figure 3 we show that rare large events of energy accumulation cor - respond to a greater than usual number of myosin motor steps whereas rare large events of energy re - lease correspond to greater than usual total displace - ment of the actin ﬁlaments and a slightly greater 5 number of linker unbinding events . The displace - ment between ﬁlaments from t to t + δt is calculated by triangulating the area between the two ﬁlament conﬁgurations and dividing the area by the ﬁlament length , as described in SI Appendix , Filament dis - placements . The total ﬁlament displacement at time t is computed as the sum of displacements over all ﬁl - aments during the time interval ( t , t + δt ) . This quan - tity is found to be largest during cytoquake events . Furthermore , these large total displacements do not come from highly localized motions . Instead , they depend on many ﬁlaments each displacing an unusu - ally large amount , as shown in Figure 4 where the ﬁlaments are ranked according to their displacement during a cycle . For cytoquake events , the typical dis - placement at almost every rank is greater than the corresponding displacement at that rank for other cycle types . This agrees with the notion of cyto - quakes as a large and collective structural rearrange - ment of the network . We also observe cytoquakes to induce a spatial homogenization of the tension sustained by the net - work during large events of energy release , as quan - tiﬁed by changes in the Shannon entropy of the spa - tial tension distribution H ( t ) ( see Figure 3 . D ) . The tension distribution P ijk is constructed by discretiz - ing the simulation volume of 1 µm 3 into a grid of 10 3 voxels indexed by i , j , k , and computing the pro - portion of the total network tension belonging to the mechanical elements ( ﬁlament cylinders , cross - linkers , and motors ) inside each voxel . Additional details for the calculation of H ( t ) can be found in Materials and Methods . The combination of large , collective rearrangement and a spatial homogeniza - tion of tension supports the interpretation of cyto - quakes as an avalanche - like event of energy release . Asymmetric statistics are robust across concentrations and system - size We next discuss how these results generalize to dif - ferent concentrations of associated proteins and dif - ferent system sizes . Five concentrations of α - actinin ( ranging from 0 . 17 to 5 . 48 µM ) and ﬁve concen - trations of myosin miniﬂaments ( ranging from 0 . 003 to 0 . 08 µM ) were tested with a constant G - actin monomer concentration of 13 . 3 µM , in the regime of physiological concentrations [ 44 ] . At the lowest concentrations of cross - linkers and motors , the net - work did not contract , representing a very diﬀer - ent actomyosin phase to which we omit comparisons . For all of the conditions producing contracting net - works , we found that asymmetric heavy - tailed dis - tributions of ∆ U persist , with large values of the non - Gaussian parameter for | ∆ U − | ( η ∼ 5 − 20 ) and ( , 100 ) ( 100 , 0 ) ( 0 , 100 ) ( 100 , ) 0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 T o t a l F il a m e n t D i s p l a c e m n t ( n m ) * * * - * * * * * * A ( , 100 ) ( 100 , 0 ) ( 0 , 100 ) ( 100 , ) 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 M o t o r W a l k i n g E v e n t s * * * * * * * * * * B ( , 100 ) ( 100 , 0 ) ( 0 , 100 ) ( 100 , ) 0 . 0 2 . 5 5 . 0 7 . 5 10 . 0 12 . 5 15 . 0 17 . 5 20 . 0 L i n k e r U n b i n d i n g E v e n t s * * * * - * * * C ( , 100 ) ( 100 , 0 ) ( 0 , 100 ) ( 100 , ) 0 . 1 0 . 0 0 . 1 0 . 2 H ( n a t s ) * * * * * * * * * * * * D FIG . 3 . A : Diﬀerences in the total ﬁlament displacement between simulation cycles for which ∆ U < − 100 k B T , cycles for which ∆ U ∈ ( − 100 k B T , 0 k B T ) , cycles for which ∆ U ∈ ( 0 k B T , 100 k B T ) , and ﬁnally cycles for which ∆ U > 100 k B T . To compare these distributions , the two - sided p - value of the Wilcoxon rank - sum test be - tween pairs of cycle types is reported as being either not signiﬁcant : - ( p ≥ 0 . 05 ) , signiﬁcant at level 1 : * ( p < 0 . 05 ) , at level 2 : * * ( p < 0 . 01 ) , or at level 3 : * * * ( p < 0 . 001 ) [ 43 ] . Since there many more simula - tion cycles for the categories ∆ U ∈ ( − 100 k B T , 0 k B T ) and ∆ U ∈ ( 0 k B T , 100 k B T ) , we took a random sub - sample ( ∼ 300 each ) of all events for these categories to be roughly equal to the number of events for which ∆ U < − 100 k B T and for which ∆ U > 100 k B T . In these combination violin and box - and - whisker plots , the red circle represents the mean , the red bar represents the median , and the notches in the box represent the 95 % conﬁdence interval of the median . B : Diﬀerences in the number of motor walking events between the dif - ferent cycle types as just described . C : Diﬀerences in the number of α - actinin unbinding events between the diﬀerent cycle types . D : Diﬀerences in the changes in Shannon entropy ∆ H of the spatial tension distribution of network tension between the diﬀerent cycle types . ∆ U + ( η ∼ 2 − 5 ) , although η for negative incre - ments was observed to decrease with the motor con - centration ( SI Appendix , Figure S1 ) . We conclude that the avalanche - like energy ﬂuctuations discussed above are not highly sensitive to associated protein concentrations . These ﬂuctuations may depend on the parameters of the force - sensitive reaction rates ( which are taken here to correspond to experimen - tal values ) , but we leave this interesting question for future work . We performed a ﬁnite - size scaling study by hold - 6 0 10 20 30 40 50 Rank 0 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 2 . 0 2 . 5 3 . 0 3 . 5 4 . 0 D i s p l a c e m e n t ( n m ) ∆ U Range ( , 100 ) ( 100 , 0 ) ( 0 , 100 ) ( 100 , ) FIG . 4 . Rank - size distribution of the displacements experienced by each of the 50 ﬁlaments during simu - lation cycles when ∆ U is in diﬀerent ranges , in units of k B T . For each cycle , the ﬁlaments are ranked ac - cording to their displacement and these ranks are plot - ted against the corresponding displacement . The aver - age and standard deviation of these rank - displacement curves are taken over each cycle in a given category . The curves for the categories ∆ U ∈ ( − 100 k B T , 0 k B T ) and ∆ U ∈ ( 0 k B T , 100 k B T ) are nearly coincident . This data is collected from one run of condition C 3 , 3 at QSS . ing the concentrations of condition C 3 , 3 ﬁxed ( with α - actinin concentration [ α ] = 2 . 82 µM and motor concentration [ M ] = 0 . 04 µM ) and varying the sys - tem volume V . Larger systems reach QSS at later times , and our simulations of larger systems did not reach QSS in the allotted computational time . As a result , we collected samples of ∆ U for these systems on the approach to QSS , from 300 to 800 s , once the networks had all nearly fully percolated ( i . e . nearly all ﬁlaments belonged to a single component con - nected by cross - linkers ) , trusting that the relevant scaling behavior could still be observed . Stretched exponential functions approximately ﬁt the distri - butions of ∆ U + and | ∆ U − | for all system sizes ( see Figure 5 . A for the ﬁts of | ∆ U − | ) . Larger systems displayed steeper tails as indicated by the observed power - law decay of η for | ∆ U − | and ∆ U + ( Figure 5 . B ) , although interestingly η for | ∆ U − | is larger than that for ∆ U + by a constant factor of roughly 3 for all systems sizes . The steeper tails are also evi - denced by the slow growth of the Kohlrausch expo - nents k with V ( Figure 5 . C ) . Thus , the distributions of energy release and accumulation across the en - tire network become narrower and more Gaussian for large systems . This , in contrast to driven - dissipative systems that exhibit self - organized criticality , sug - gests the existence of some intrinsic and ﬁnite scale for avalanche - like releases of energy in cytoskeletal networks . By summing over many local energy ﬂuc - tuations of this ﬁnite scale , the distribution of the ﬂuctuations in the total energy U becomes increas - ingly Gaussian for large systems owing to the central limit theorem . This intrinsic scale may be partly de - termined by the non - conservative transfer ( dissipa - tion ) of mechanical energy as it spreads through the network during avalanches [ 23 , 45 ] . 10 1 10 0 10 1 10 2 10 3 U / V ( k B T / m 3 ) 10 4 10 3 10 2 10 1 10 0 CC D F A V ( m 3 ) 0 . 125 1 . 0 3 . 375 8 . 0 15 . 625 10 1 10 0 10 1 V ( m 3 ) 10 1 10 0 10 1 10 2 B U < 0 k B T U > 0 k B T 0 5 10 15 V ( m 3 ) 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 1 . 2 1 . 4 k C FIG . 5 . A : CCDFs of | ∆ U − | normalized by the sys - tem volume V collected for 5 runs for increasing sys - tem sizes plotted against the ﬁtted stretched exponential functions . B : The non - Gaussian parameter η for | ∆ U − | and ∆ U + are plotted with uncertainty taken over the dif - ferent runs . C : The Kohlrausch exponents k for | ∆ U − | and ∆ U + . Local vs . global metrics Existing experimental studies of cytoquakes deﬁne them as large local displacements of the cytoskeleton probed using transmembrane attached microbeads or ﬂexible micropost arrays , rather than as large changes in the cytoskeleton’s total energy U as done here [ 9 , 10 ] . To roughly compare our results to ex - periments , we make the corresponding local mea - surements of the displacements of individual ﬁla - ments . Rather than summing over all ﬁlaments , we track each ﬁlament individually and measure the set { η f } N f f = 1 ( where N f = 50 is the number of ﬁl - aments ) of the non - Gaussian parameter η f corre - sponding to each ﬁlament f ’s distribution of dis - placements from 300 to 800 s . The calculation of ﬁlament displacements is described in SI Appendix , 7 Filament displacements . We ﬁnd that the result - ing distributions are heavy - tailed with values of the non - Gaussian parameter for most ﬁlaments in the range η ∼ 1 − 5 ( Figure 6 ) . This ﬁnding is in semi - quantitative agreement with in vivo measurements on micropost arrays , whose displacements have dis - tributions characterized by η ∼ 0 − 7 [ 10 ] . In ad - dition , we ﬁnd the distribution of η f itself to be heavy - tailed , also in agreement with the microp - ost experiments . We next estimated the instanta - neous ﬁlament speed as the ﬁlament displacement divided by δt . We ﬁnd the typical actin ﬁlament displacement speeds ( ∼ 10 nm / s ) to be consistent in order of magnitude with separate in vitro experi - ments on disordered , contractile networks which es - timate this speed as ∼ 10 − 50 nm / s [ 46 ] . These corroborations with existing measurements suggest that our simulations of a minimal cytoskeletal model system can approximately reproduce experimentally observed cytoskeletal dynamics . We ﬁnally men - tion in connection to experiments that it has re - cently been argued that more detailed understand - ing of mechanical dissipation by cytoskeletal net - works should help to precisely control traction - based measurements of cellular force production [ 27 ] . The discovery of avalanche - like dynamics in cytoskeletal networks reported in this and previous studies may help to resolve this experimental diﬃculty . The local measurements { η f } N f f = 1 , obtained by tracking each ﬁlament individually , can be compared to global measurements , obtained by summing over every ﬁlament to obtain the total displacement . The distribution of total displacements is closer to Gaus - sian , characterized by η ≈ 0 for most volumes tested ( Figure 6 ) . As with the increasing Gaussianity of ∆ U for large systems , this can be attributed to the central limit theorem since many ﬁlaments were summed over to determine the total displacement . We conclude that in large systems , metrics can be heavy - tailed when measured locally but Gaussian when measured globally . This distinction between local and global measurements may be important in interpreting future studies of anomalous statistics in cytoskeletal self - organization . Normal mode decomposition probes network’s mechanical state Having described the statistics of the increments ∆ U , we next aim to connect the occurrence of cy - toquakes , deﬁned as large values of | ∆ U − | , to the cytoskeletal network’s mechanical stability . To this end we implemented a method to compute the Hes - sian matrix H of the mechanical energy function U . The eigen - decomposition of H is Λ = { λ k } 3 Nk = 1 , 0 5 10 15 V ( m 3 ) 0 5 10 15 20 25 FIG . 6 . Plots for diﬀerent simulation volumes V of the distributions of non - Gaussian parameter η f of the dis - tributions of individual ﬁlament displacements . The box and whisker plots summarize the distribution of η f for all ﬁlaments in the system , with the median shown as a red bar , the box extending from the ﬁrst to the third quartiles , and the whiskers extending across the range of η , omitting outliers . The black diamonds indicate the value of η obtained when instead of tracking each ﬁla - ment’s displacement individually , the total summed dis - placement of all ﬁlaments from time point to time point is tracked . These global measurements of displacement are more Gaussian ( with η ≈ 0 ) than the corresponding local measurements obtained from tracking ﬁlaments in - dividually . where 3 N is the number of mechanical degrees of freedom in the system , which comprises N “beads” that are used to discretize the actin ﬁlaments . Λ is related to the mechanical stability of the cytoskele - tal network : the eigenvectors v k are the normal vibrational modes of the network , and the eigen - values λ k indicate the stiﬀness ( | λ k | ) and stabil - ity ( sgn ( λ k ) ) of the corresponding mode . Exam - ple vibrational modes are illustrated in Movies 2 - 5 . We draw inspiration for studying Λ in the cur - rent context from several sources : in single - molecule molecular dynamics studies , the saddle - points of U ( i . e . points in the landscape with some imaginary frequencies ) are associated with transition states [ 47 , 48 ] ; studies of polymer networks show that in - ternal stresses produce non - ﬂoppy vibrational modes even below the isostatic threshold [ 49 ] ; in simula - tions of glass - forming liquids , the instantaneous nor - mal mode spectrum allows inference about proxim - ity to the glass transition and determination of in - cipient plastic deformation regions [ 50 – 52 ] ; in deep learning models for predicting earthquake aftershock distributions , it was found that certain metrics also related to stability ( e . g . the von - Mises criterion ) are 8 informative model inputs [ 53 , 54 ] . We brieﬂy digress from the results on cytoquakes to describe some interesting observed trends of met - rics deﬁned on Λ . We distinguish between unsta - ble , stable , soft , and stiﬀ modes : for unstable modes λ k < 0 , for stable modes λ k ≥ 0 , for soft modes 0 ≤ λ k < λ T , and for stiﬀ modes λ k ≥ λ T , where we deﬁne the threshold λ T = 40 pN / nm to discriminate between the twin peaks in the density of states ( Fig - ure 7 . B ) . The set { λ k } 3 Nk = 1 is visualized with these modes labeled in Figure 7 . A for a QSS time point of condition C 3 , 3 . A very small number of unstable modes persist after each minimization cycle , later iterations stopping once the maximum force on any bead in the network is below a threshold F T ( here 1 pN ) . Thus the minimized conﬁgurations are in fact saddle - points of U ; this is expected as it is known from the theory of minimizing loss functions that the ratio of saddle - points to true local minima increases exponentially with the dimensionality of the domain [ 55 ] . We expect that in the space of all possible net - work topologies ( i . e . patterns of cross - linkers and motors binding to ﬁlaments ) , the energy landscape will be rugged , leading to the well - appreciated glassy dynamics of non - equilibrium cross - linked networks [ 56 , 57 ] . For a ﬁxed topology , however , which is the result of the chemical reactions occurring during step 1 ) of the iterative simulation cycle , the energy land - scape should be smooth ( i . e . not rugged ) with re - spect to the beads’ positions , with a single nearby lo - cal minimum being sought during mechanical mini - mization in step 3 ) . The residual unstable modes are therefore thought to be an unimportant artifact of thresholded stopping in the conjugate - gradient min - imization routine , and not representative of some physical feature of cytoskeletal networks . The ob - served quantitative dependence of the number of residual unstable modes on F T supports this con - clusion and is illustrated in SI Appendix , Figure S7 . We quantify the number of degrees of freedom in - volved in a given normalized eigenvector v k using the inverse participation ratio [ 50 ] : r k = (cid:32) N (cid:88) i = 1 3 (cid:88) µ = 1 ( v k , iµ ) 4 (cid:33) − 1 . ( 4 ) If the eigenmode involves only one degree of freedom , then one component of v k will be one and the rest will be zero , and r k = 1 . On the other hand , if the eigenmode is evenly spread over all 3 N degrees of freedom , then each component v k , iµ = ( 3 N ) − 1 / 2 , and r k = 3 N . In Figure 7 . B we plot r k for the unstable , soft , and stiﬀ modes along with the density of states , showing that the soft modes involve many degrees of freedom while the stiﬀ and unstable modes are comparatively localized . We ﬁnd that the mean value (cid:104) r k (cid:105) varies non - monotonically with myosin motor concentration [ M ] and α - actinin concentration [ α ] ( Figure 7 . C ) . To un - derstand this trend we implemented a mapping from the cytoskeletal network into a graph and measured its mean node connectivity , a purely topological measure of network percolation . The graph is con - structed to capture the cross - linker binding topology of cytoskeletal networks . Nodes in the graph corre - spond to actin ﬁlaments , and weighted edges ( which may be thresholded and converted to binary edges in an unweighted graph ) correspond to the num - ber of cross - linkers connecting the pair of ﬁlaments . The mean node connectivity is deﬁned as the aver - age over all pairs of nodes in the unweighted graph of the number of edges necessary to remove in or - der to disconnect them , thus quantifying the typical number of force chains between ﬁlaments , or equiv - alently the extent of network percolation [ 58 , 59 ] . Revealingly , the mean node connectivity correlates closely with (cid:104) r k (cid:105) for the stable modes across the var - ious conditions C i , j ( Figures 7 . C and 7 . D ) . We also ﬁnd the number of connected components of H and of the graph’s adjacency matrix to match for most time points , supporting this connection between net - work topology and stable mode delocalization . In - termediate concentrations of myosin motors enhance the network percolation , but as [ M ] continues to in - crease the motors act to disconnect cross - linked net - work structures causing the mean node connectivity and (cid:104) r k (cid:105) to decrease . We observe that as a network contracts and be - comes percolated during the process of myosin - driven self - organization , the stable modes steadily delocalize ( (cid:104) r k (cid:105) increases ) and stiﬀen ( the geomet - ric mean (cid:104) λ k (cid:105) g increases ) , as shown in Figures 7 . E and Figures 7 . F . During this process we also wit - ness a qualitative change in the level spacing statis - tics of the very soft and delocalized modes ( λ k < 10 pN / nm , r k > 100 ) from a Poisson to a Wigner - Dyson distribution ( SI Appendix , Figure S2 ) . This indicates that in the percolated state these vibra - tional modes interact and exhibit level repulsion , similar to soft particles near the jamming transi - tion [ 10 , 14 , 60 , 61 ] . Future studies may reveal further similarities between these systems and other marginally stable solids [ 57 , 62 ] . Cytoquakes are preceded by mechanical instability and deform along soft modes Can the eigen - decomposition of the Hessian ma - trix be used to forecast cytoquake occurrence ? In - tuition suggests that , by analogy with the connec - tion between imaginary frequencies ( i . e . unstable 9 0 500 1000 1500 Rank 0 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000 7000 8000 λ k ( p N / n m ) A Unstable Soft Stiff 10 4 10 2 10 0 10 2 10 4 | λ k | ( pN / nm ) 0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350 400 r k B 0 . 00 0 . 02 0 . 04 0 . 06 0 . 08 [ M ] ( µ M ) 40 60 80 100 120 140 › r k ﬁ C 0 . 00 0 . 02 0 . 04 0 . 06 0 . 08 [ M ] ( µ M ) 2 4 6 8 M e a n N o d e C o nn e c t i v i t y D [ α ] ( µ M ) 1 . 49 2 . 82 4 . 15 5 . 48 0 500 1000 1500 2000 Time ( s ) 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 › r k ﬁ E 0 500 1000 1500 2000 Time ( s ) 4 6 8 10 12 › λ k ﬁ g ( p N / n m ) F 0 . 00 0 . 01 0 . 02 0 . 03 0 . 04 0 . 05 0 . 06 0 . 07 D e n s i t y o f S t a t e s FIG . 7 . Metrics deﬁned on Hessian eigen - decomposition . A : Ordered eigenspectrum { λ k } 3 Nk = 1 at a QSS time point for condition C 3 , 3 . B : Scatter plot of the pairs | λ k | , r k ( circles ) plotted against the density of states ( solid line ) , i . e . the proportion of eigenvalues between λ and λ + dλ . C : The mean value at QSS of (cid:104) r k (cid:105) for the stable modes for various conditions C i , j . The conditions C 1 , j with low linker concentrations are not visualized as these networks did not percolate and obscure visualization for the re - maining conditions . The mean is taken over the last 500 s and over diﬀerent runs . D : The mean value of the mean node connectivity for various conditions . E : Trajectories of (cid:104) r k (cid:105) of the stable modes as the network self - organizes for the conditions C 2 , 3 , C 3 , 3 , C 4 , 3 , and C 5 , 3 , where the color indicates the α - actinin concentration as in the leg - end of D , and with the mean and standard deviation taken over the diﬀerent runs . F : Similar trajectories of the geometric mean of the stable modes (cid:104) λ k (cid:105) g . modes ) and molecular transition states , the vibra - tional modes of the cytoskeletal network may con - tain information that a large structural rearrange - ment is poised to occur [ 47 , 48 ] . To test this idea , and without detailed a priori knowledge about which features in Λ would be informative , we imple - mented a machine learning model using the eigen - decomposition as the input and outputting the pre - dicted probability of observing a large event of en - ergy release ( ∆ U < − 100 k B T ) occurring within the next 0 . 15 s . As detailed in SI Appendix , Machine learning model , we found that , indeed , the Hessian eigenspectrum Λ contains suﬃcient information to forecast cytoquake occurrence with signiﬁcant accu - racy compared to a random model . We ﬁrst reduced the dimensionality of Λ ( t ) using principal compo - nent analysis , ﬁnding that 30 dimensions suﬃced to explain > 95 % of the variance across time points , and then used the reduced input in a three layer feed - forward neural network . We validated our model us - ing receiver operating characteristic curves , achiev - ing an area under the curve ( AUC ) of 0 . 70 when using data from ﬁve runs of condition C 3 , 3 . This improvement in prediction performance over a ran - dom model ( which would have an AUC of 0 . 5 ) im - plies that mechanical instability , as encoded in the Hessian eigenspectrum , precedes the occurrence of cytoquakes . To further study the connection between cyto - quakes and mechanical stability , we measured the projections of the network’s displacements onto the vibrational normal modes { v k } 3 Nk = 1 . Network dis - placements d ( t ) were found by tracking the move - ment of each of the N ( t ) beads during simulation cycles . As a working approximation , beads that de - polymerized during a cycle were assigned a displace - ment of 0 , and beads that newly polymerized were not assigned elements in d ( t ) . The 3 N - dimensional displacement vectors d were then normalized to have unit length . We deﬁne d k = d · v k ( 5 ) as the projections of d onto the eigenmodes v k , which obey (cid:80) k d 2 k = 1 owing to the normalization of d and v k . Thus the quantity d 2 k is the weight of the displacement d along the k th eigenmode . With this we deﬁne the eﬀective stiﬀness λ P = (cid:88) k d 2 k λ k ( 6 ) as the displacement - weighted average of the eigen - values . In Figure 8 we display a scatter plot of the pairs ∆ U ( t ) , λ P ( t ) measured during QSS for a run of condition C 3 , 3 , along with a kernel density estimate of their joint probability density function ( PDF ) . We again distinguish between soft ( 0 ≤ λ k < λ T ) and stiﬀ ( λ k ≥ λ T ) eigenmodes , where λ T = 40 pN / nm separates the twin peaks in the density of states ( see Figure 7 . B ) . The structure of the joint PDF is markedly asymmetric about ∆ U = 0 and shows that λ P during cytoquake events is almost always soft , whereas for all other simulation cycles λ P could be soft or stiﬀ with similar probabilities . Because soft modes inherently involve a large number of degrees 10 of freedom as illustrated in Figure 7 . B , we also con - sider n k = d 2 k r k ( 7 ) as the weight of the displacement along eigenmode k per degree of freedom involved in the eigenmode , where r k is the inverse participation ratio deﬁned in Equation 4 . We deﬁne n soft and n stiﬀ as the mean of n k over the soft and stiﬀ subsets . Val - ues of n soft / n stiﬀ for diﬀerent simulation cycle types are displayed in the inset of Figure 8 , showing that n soft > n stiﬀ typically only during cytoquakes . Based on this analysis , we conclude that during the large collective rearrangements corresponding to cytoquakes , cytoskeletal networks exhibit enhanced displacement along the soft vibrational modes . We qualify these results by observing that , since cyto - quakes involve particularly large network displace - ments , it may be inappropriate to interpret them us - ing the local harmonic approximation to U implicit in Hessian analysis [ 52 ] . In addition , changes in net - work topology from linker and motor ( un ) binding cannot be captured using normal mode decomposi - tion of instantaneous network conﬁgurations . The eigenspectrum Λ ( t ) still informs on the stability of the energy minimized conﬁguration before a cyto - quake , but caution should be used in interpreting the cytoquake motion from t to t + δt as decompos - ing cleanly into non - interacting motions along the normal modes v k . We leave a detailed analysis of the anharmonicity of cytoquake deformations to fu - ture work . DISCUSSION We have presented evidence supporting the fol - lowing picture of active cytoskeletal network self - organization : cytoskeletal networks explore a rugged mechanical energy landscape in a stochastic process characterized by occasional , sudden jumps out of metastable conﬁgurations [ 56 , 57 ] . These jumps en - tail non - Gaussian dissipation of mechanical energy and are accomplished by an avalanche - like process of spreading destabilization , resulting in a collective structural rearrangement and a homogenization of tension . These collective motions have large projec - tions along the soft , delocalized vibrational modes , and , furthermore , properties of these modes can be used to predict when such relaxation events will occur . The key ﬁnding supporting the interpreta - tion of cytoskeletal dynamics as avalanche - like is the marked asymmetry about 0 in the distribution of ∆ U ( Figures 2 . B , 5 . B , and 5 . C ) . In addition , several key quantities including ﬁlament displacements ( Fig - 800 600 400 200 0 200 400 ∆ U ( k B T ) 10 0 10 1 10 2 10 3 λ P ( p N / n m ) 10 5 10 4 10 3 10 2 P r o b a b ili t y D e n s i t y ( , 100 ) ( 100 , 0 ) ( 0 , 100 ) ( 100 , ) 0 1 2 3 4 5 n s o f t / n s t i ff FIG . 8 . Scatter plot of the pairs ∆ U , λ P measured dur - ing QSS for a run of condition C 3 , 3 . From these points , a Gaussian kernel density estimate of the joint PDF ( treat - ing λ P on a log - scale ) is constructed and shown as a contour plot . Red guidelines demarcate regions of in - terest . Inset : Combination violin and box - and - whisker plots showing the ratio n soft / n stiﬀ for diﬀerent categories of simulation cycles , c . f . Figure 3 . The inset is not block - ing any of the scatter plot data . ures 3 . A and Figure 4 ) , tension delocalization ( Fig - ure 3 . D ) , and eﬀective stiﬀness of the motion ( Figure 8 ) are distributed asymmetrically about ∆ U = 0 , supporting the picture described above . An interesting possible interpretation of the heavy tails of | ∆ U − | is that cytoskeletal networks are at a point of self - organized criticality ( SOC ) [ 39 , 40 , 63 – 65 ] . Technical deﬁnitions of what constitutes SOC behavior are not universally agreed upon , but we may follow the deﬁnition of Ref . 40 which states that SOC systems must have event size distributions that tend to a power - law in the limit of an inﬁnite system size , and a temporal signal that integrates a pink noise process , giving β = 3 for the signal . The observed distribution of | ∆ U − | for this system size is ﬁt by a stretched exponential function and has β = 1 . 72 . Further , the distributions of | ∆ U − | become increasingly Gaussian for large system sizes ( Figure 5 ) . We thus conclude that cytoskeletal net - works for these physiological conditions display non - critical dynamics , at least as measured using the global energy release | ∆ U − | . The motor walking in the system may not be suﬃciently slow to yield SOC behavior , which requires a sharp separation of time scales between slow driving and fast dissipa - tion , and the non - conservative transfer of mechan - ical energy between network components may also play a role [ 13 , 23 , 45 , 65 , 66 ] . We note , however , 11 that recent studies have indicated that branched cy - toskeletal networks polymerizing against a ﬂexible membrane can produce shape ﬂuctuations of the membrane that exhibit true SOC , leaving open the question of whether criticality is an inherent feature of cytoskeletal dynamics [ 67 , 68 ] . Instead of scale - free ﬂuctuations , we conjecture that there exists a ﬁnite and intrinsic scale for avalanche - like releases of energy that , when summed over suﬃciently large systems to obtain the global measure | ∆ U | − , yields an approximately Gaussian distribution . An important next question is then what sets this scale and how it may be measured . We expect that the non - conservative transfer of mechan - ical energy through the network is one factor that attenuates the avalanches . This non - conservation of mechanical energy arises from damping by the cytosol , accounted for in simulation through peri - odic minimization of the energy following stochastic chemical activity ( see SI Appendix , Description of MEDYAN simulation platform ) . In the lattice - based Olami - Feder - Christensen model of earthquake sys - tems , non - conservation of energy was shown to in - troduce a stretched exponential cutoﬀ to the power - law distribution of event - sizes , supporting this idea [ 45 , 69 ] . A rough estimate of the intrinsic energy scale of avalanches can be obtained from the stan - dard deviation of the approximately Gaussian distri - butions of | ∆ U | − for large systems . However , a de - tailed measurement of the spatio - temporal scale will require spatially resolving the measured energy ﬂuc - tuations , which was not done in this study . In addi - tion , in this study the temporal extent of avalanches is assumed ﬁxed at the smallest resolved time inter - val δt = 0 . 05 s ( see SI Appendix , Dependence on δt and F T for a discussion of how varying δt aﬀects the distribution of | ∆ U − | ) . Characterizing in - depth the spatio - temporal scales of avalanches is thus an important avenue for future work . In addition to the question of what characterizes the spatio - temporal scale of cytoskeletal avalanches , several other open questions can be posed based on the results presented here . First , we may ask about the role of force - sensitive reaction rates , in - cluding cross - linker unbinding and motor walking and unbinding , in modulating cytoquakes ( see SI Appendix , Description of MEDYAN simulation plat - form for details of these reactions ) . The nonlinear coupling introduced by this force - sensitivity between the local tensions in the network and the local re - laxation propensities are expected to strongly ac - centuate avalanche - like dynamics , but in this study we held the force - sensitive reaction rate parame - ters ﬁxed at their physiological values . Second , we may ask whether the harmonic approximation to the energy implicit in Hessian analysis is suﬃcient to describe the energy landscape and how it leads to avalanches . The information on cytoquake dy - namics obtained by projecting the network motion onto the Hessian eigenmodes revealed an asymme - try between energy release events and energy accu - mulation events ( Figure 8 ) , and a neural network model detected correlations between the Hessian eigenspectrum and the time - varying likelihood for a cytoquake to occur ( SI Appendix , Machine learn - ing model ) . However , as cytoquakes are by deﬁni - tion large deformations of the network , we expect that the quadratic approximation will fail to accu - rately describe the energy landscape around a cy - toquake event . Higher order terms in the energy expansion or recently introduced nonlinear metrics of the local energy landscape such as the “ﬂatness parameter” may be used in future computational in - vestigations [ 52 , 70 ] . Third , we may ask about the role of thermal noise in inducing cytoquake events . In this study thermal noise enters in the stochastic non - equilibrium chemical dynamics which are simu - lated using a variant of the Gillespie algorithm over a reaction - diﬀusion compartment grid [ 13 ] . How - ever , the mechanical minimization routine is deter - ministic given the instantaneous chemical state of the network . Chemical reactions including motor walking and ﬁlament polymerization are expected to contribute the dominant structural ﬂuctuations in these far - from - equilibrium networks , but the ne - glected diﬀusive motion of the ﬁlaments should also help the network escape from metastable conﬁgu - rations and modulate the frequency and scale of avalanches . Elucidating whether cytoquakes can be thermally activated in this way remains another open direction for future work . Finally , perhaps the most interesting open ques - tion regarding cytoquakes pertains to their possi - ble physiological role in cell biology . We proposed here that cytoquakes may be concomitant with a large structural susceptibility , by analogy with well - studied systems like the Ising model that have large susceptibilities to applied ﬁelds near their critical point [ 16 , 71 ] . In this argument , the cytoskeleton may undergo large structural changes in response to small changes in the relevant mechanical or chemical signals , an ampliﬁcation that would serve to enhance cellular sensitivity during dynamic processes such as chemotaxis . This could also enhance mechani - cal adaptivity , an increasingly well - documented fea - ture of cytoskeletal networks [ 18 , 72 – 74 ] . This con - nection between large cytoskeletal ﬂuctuations and large susceptibility remains speculative at this stage , however , and would beneﬁt from dedicated study . Recent work has suggested that the branching agent Arp2 / 3 , which was not included in the minimal model studied here , can enhance cytoquake sizes 12 [ 33 ] . One can ask if by tuning the strength of this or other cytoquake - modulating factors the network is more or less responsive to external perturbation . This perturbation could be introduced either me - chanically , for example through a simulated or real force microscopy experiment , or chemically , through a variation of the chemical boundary conditions [ 32 ] . Such studies should clarify whether large events in cytoskeletal dynamics serve a biologically useful pur - pose . MATERIALS AND METHODS Simulation setup and conditions To computationally study cytoskeletal networks at high spatio - temporal resolution , we use the simu - lation platform MEDYAN [ 13 , 19 , 30 – 32 ] . We pro - vide an in - depth discussion of how MEDYAN works in SI Appendix , Description of MEDYAN simulation platform . MEDYAN simulations combine stochastic chemical dynamics with a mechanical representation of ﬁlaments and associated proteins . Simulations move forward in time by iterating through a cycle of four steps : 1 ) a short bust of stochastic chemical simulation using a variant of the Gillespie algorithm for a time δt , 2 ) computation of the new forces re - sulting from the reactions in step 1 ) , 3 ) equilibration of the network via minimization of the mechanical energy , and 4 ) updating of force - sensitive reaction rates . This protocol reﬂects an assumed separation of timescales between the slow chemical dynamics and the fast mechanical response , such that the me - chanical subsystem is assumed to always remain near equilibrium and to adiabatically follow the chemi - cal changes in the network . As argued in Ref . 19 , supported using experimental evidence from Refs . 21 , 75 , 76 , this timescale separation holds for typi - cal cytoskeletal networks which experience localized force deformations with fast relaxation times com - pared to the typical waiting time between myosin motor walking steps and ﬁlament growth - induced deformations . We performed MEDYAN simulations of small cy - toskeletal networks consisting of 50 actin ﬁlaments in 1 µm 3 cubic boxes with varying concentrations of α - actinin cross - linkers ( [ α ] ) and of NMIIA miniﬁla - ments ( [ M ] ) . The boundaries of the box exert an exponentially repulsive force against the ﬁlaments with a short screening length of 2 . 7 nm . Five con - centrations of α - actinin ( ranging from 0 . 17 to 5 . 48 µM ) and ﬁve concentrations of myosin miniﬂaments ( ranging from 0 . 003 to 0 . 08 µM ) were used with a constant G - actin monomer concentration of 13 . 3 µM , in the regime of physiological concentrations [ 44 ] . This led to a steady - state ﬁlament length dis - tribution with mean 0 . 48 µm and standard devia - tion 0 . 26 µm . We label these conditions C i , j , where i = 1 , . . . , 5 represents the rank of the cross - linker concentration and j = 1 , . . . , 5 represents the rank of the myosin motor concentration . Five runs of each condition C i , j were simulated , each for 2000 s . The length of the simulation cycle δt was chosen as 0 . 05 s for the results presented in this paper , al - though we explore dependence on this parameter in SI Appendix , Dependence on δt and F T . Entropy of spatial tension distribution The simulation volume of 1 µm 3 is discretized into 10 3 cubic voxels , each 0 . 1 µm in linear dimension . Let i , j , k = 1 , . . . , 10 index these voxels , which are an analysis tool and not related to the reaction - diﬀusion compartments used in MEDYAN . After each simu - lation cycle , the mechanical components of the cy - toskeletal network ( i . e . the ﬁlament cylinders , the myosin motors , and the passive cross - linkers ) are each under some compressive or tensile force T n , where n indexes the mechanical component . There are other mechanical potentials involving these com - ponents , but we focus here only on the tensions T n . Each mechanical component has a center of mass r n , and we deﬁne the indicator function χ ijk ( r n ) which is equal to 1 if r n is inside voxel i , j , k and 0 other - wise . The total tension magnitude inside voxel i , j , k is | T | ijk = (cid:88) n | T n | χ ijk ( r n ) . ( 8 ) The discrete non - negative scalar ﬁeld | T | ijk is con - verted to a distribution P ijk by normalization : P ijk = | T | ijk (cid:80) ijk | T | ijk . ( 9 ) Finally , we introduce the discrete Shannon entropy of this distribution at time t as H ( t ) = − (cid:88) ijk P ijk ( t ) ln P ijk ( t ) . ( 10 ) The units of H are nats , and large values indicate a homogeneous spatial distribution of tension mag - nitudes throughout the network . Reported trends using this metric are found to be essentially inde - pendent of the discretization length . Constructing the Hessian matrix In MEDYAN , semi - ﬂexible ﬁlaments are repre - sented as a connected sequence of thin cylinders 13 whose joined endpoints ( i . e . hinges ) are called beads . The set of potentials deﬁning the mechan - ical energy of the ﬁlaments and associated proteins is outlined in the SI Appendix , Description of ME - DYAN simulation platform . The mechanical energy U is a function of these beads’ positions , and ele - ments of the Hessian matrix are deﬁned as H iµ , jν = ∂ 2 U ∂x iµ ∂x jν = − ∂F iµ ∂x jν = − ∂F jν ∂x iµ , ( 11 ) where x iµ is the µ th Cartesian component of the position of the i th bead . We have µ = x , y , z and i = 1 , . . . , N where N is the number of beads in the network , so H is a square symmetric 3 N - dimensional matrix . The number of beads N ( t ) will change as ﬁlaments ( de ) polymerize ; in these simu - lations , at QSS a single ﬁlament of length 0 . 5 µm comprises ∼ 10 cylinders ( 11 beads ) , each ∼ 50 nm in length . After each mechanical minimization , H ( t ) is constructed by numerically computing the deriva - tives on the right of Equation 11 . The derivative ∂F iµ ∂x jν is found using a second - order central diﬀerence approximation by moving the j th bead in the ± ν directions by a small amount and determining the changes in the force component F iµ [ 77 ] . Due to issues of numerical accuracy , we do not assume the symmetry of the matrix H , but instead directly com - pute each component H iµ , jν and then symmetrize the result : 12 ( H (cid:124) + H ) → H . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank Qin Ni , Aravind Chandrasekaran , Michelle Girvan , Haoran Ni , Miloˇs Nikoli´c , and Hao Wu for helpful discussions and editing of the manuscript . This work was supported by the fol - lowing grants from the National Science Foundation : COMBINE 1632976 , CHE - 1800418 , DMR - 1506969 , and PHY - 1427654 . 14 Supporting Information Appendix I . SUPPLEMENTARY FIGURES 0 . 03 0 . 04 0 . 05 0 . 06 0 . 07 0 . 08 [ M ] ( M ) 0 5 10 15 20 [ ] ( M ) 1 . 49 2 . 82 4 . 15 5 . 48 FIG . 9 . Plots of the non - Gaussian parameter η for the distributions of | ∆ U − | ( solid lines ) and of ∆ U + ( dashed lines ) at QSS for various concentrations of myosin motor ( [ M ] ) and α - actinin cross - linkers ( [ α ] ) . The mean and standard deviation is shown over ﬁve runs of each condition . A small horizontal oﬀset is added to the points to ease visibility . 15 0 1 2 3 4 5 / 0 . 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 1 . 2 p ( / ) t = 15 s t = 2000 s FIG . 10 . Histograms of the level spacings ∆ ω = ω k + 1 − ω k , where ω k = √ λ k are ordered so that ω k increases as k increases , normalized by their average ∆ ω for the very soft ( λ k < 10 pN / nm ) and delocalized ( r k > 100 ) vibrational modes at diﬀerent times of a run of condition C 3 , 3 . The Poisson distribution p ( ∆ ω / ∆ ω ) = e − ∆ ω / ∆ ω and the Wigner - Dyson distribution p ( ∆ ω / ∆ ω ) = π 2 ( ∆ ω / ∆ ω ) e − π 4 ( ∆ ω / ∆ ω ) 2 are plotted as red and blue solid lines . This transition in distributions signiﬁes that in the percolated network at 2000 s the frequencies of these modes are no longer randomly spaced and begin to interact , exhibiting level repulsion for small ∆ ω / ∆ ω . 16 II . WEIBULL PLOTS The degree to which the plots of Q ( u ) = ln ( − ln ( P ( x ≥ u ) ) ) against ln ( u ) appear to be linear serves as a check of the appropriateness of modeling P ( x ) as a stretched exponential , or Weibull , distribution [ 36 ] . See Figure 11 for x = | ∆ U − | and Figure 12 for x = ∆ U + . On the basis of these plots we conclude that the Weibull distribution is a satisfactory choice for all values of V . In the main text , the Weibull parameters k and λ were determined by ﬁtting the stretched exponent e − ( x / λ ) k to the observed CCDF P ( | ∆ U − | ) on a log - scale , that is , by ﬁtting − ( x / λ ) k to ln ( P ( | ∆ U − | ) ) using standard nonlinear ﬁtting routines . Treating these functions on a log - scale ensured a better ﬁt to the distribution tails which are of most interest in the present case . 6 4 2 0 2 4 6 8 log ( u ) 10 8 6 4 2 0 2 Q ( u ) V ( m 3 ) 0 . 125 1 . 0 3 . 375 8 . 0 15 . 625 FIG . 11 . Plots of the function Q ( u ) = ln ( − ln ( P ( | ∆ U − | ≥ u ) ) ) for diﬀerent volumes V along with a ﬁtted line , where P ( | ∆ U − | ) is the observed CCDF obtained from ﬁve runs of each volume . 17 8 6 4 2 0 2 4 6 8 log ( u ) 10 8 6 4 2 0 2 Q ( u ) V ( m 3 ) 0 . 125 1 . 0 3 . 375 8 . 0 15 . 625 FIG . 12 . Plots of the function Q ( u ) = ln ( − ln ( P ( ∆ U + ≥ u ) ) ) for diﬀerent volumes V along with a ﬁtted line , where P ( ∆ U + ) is the observed CCDF obtained from ﬁve runs of each volume . 18 III . FILAMENT DISPLACEMENTS The area between the two ﬁlaments x and y is triangulated using the beads comprising the ﬁlaments ( { x i } n x − 1 i = 0 and { y j } n y − 1 j = 0 ) as vertices , where n x is the number of beads in x and similarly for n y . To compute the displacement of ﬁlament x during the time interval δt , we set y to the new conﬁguration of x at the end of the interval . The triangles come in pairs for most of the ﬁlament lengths , as shown using the dark and light colors of green of Figure 13 . If n x and n y are unequal ( say n x < n y ) , extra triangles are added using the last bead in x , x n x − 1 , as the only vertex in ﬁlament x . The sum of these triangle areas A tot is divided by the average of the two ﬁlament contour lengths L x and L y to give the measure of distance d = 2 A tot L x + L y . FIG . 13 . Illustration of how the area between two ﬁlaments x and y is triangulated to allow calculation of the distance between them . The beads comprising the ﬁlaments are labeled x i , y j , and areas between triplets of beads are labeled A i , j where the lowest indices of the beads x i and y j in the triplet are used . 19 IV . DESCRIPTION OF MEDYAN SIMULATION PLATFORM A detailed introduction to the MEDYAN ( Mechanochemical Dynamics of Active Networks ) model can be found in Ref . 19 , and additional extensions and applications of MEDYAN to study the dynamics of actomyosin networks are described in Refs . 13 , 25 , 30 – 32 , 34 , 78 , 79 . Here we outline the relevant aspects of MEDYAN to facilitate understanding the results in this paper , and direct the reader to the above references for a more thorough description . A . Simulation protocol A MEDYAN simulation proceeds by iterating a cycle of four steps which propagate the chemical and mechanical dynamics forward while maintaining a tight coupling between the two . The steps are as follows : 1 . Evolve system using stochastic chemical simulation for a time δt . 2 . Compute the changes in the mechanical energy resulting from the reactions that occurred in step 1 ) . 3 . Mechanically equilibrate the network in response to the new stresses from step 2 ) . 4 . Update the reaction rates of force - sensitive reactions based on the new tensions from step 3 ) . Further details related to these four steps are provided next . B . Chemistry In MEDYAN , diﬀusing chemical species are represented with discrete copy numbers belonging to several compartments , which form a regular grid comprising the simulation volume . The compartment size is chosen so that it may be assumed that inside the compartments the diﬀusing species are well - mixed , allowing the use of mass - action kinetics to determine their instantaneous propensities to participate in chemical reactions within compartments and diﬀusion events between adjacent compartments . The minimum Kuramoto length ( i . e . the mean free diﬀusional path length of a reactive species before it participates in a chemical reaction ) among the species sets this compartment size to ensure that the well - mixed assumption holds [ 80 ] . The diﬀusing chemical species may participate in local chemical reactions according to the copy numbers of the reactants in its compartment , or else they may jump to an adjacent compartment in a diﬀusion event with a propensity determined by its copy number in the original compartment [ 81 ] . The algorithm for stochastically choosing which event ( including local reactions or jumps between compartments ) will occur next is the Next Reaction Method , an accelerated variant of the Gillespie algorithm [ 81 , 82 ] . These are Monte Carlo methods which randomly select both the time to any next event and which event will occur at that time in accordance with each event’s instantaneous propensity . The user speciﬁes the diﬀerent chemical species and the reactions that they participate in . Several types of reactions are possible . Regular reactions involve only diﬀusing species ( e . g . the conversion of ADP - bound to ATP - bound G - actin monomer ) . Polymerization reactions result in the subtraction of a diﬀusing monomer from the local compartment and its conversion into a ﬁlament species , and depolymerization reactions do the opposite . Filaments in MEDYAN’s have deﬁnite spatial coordinates , rather than the compartment - level description of the diﬀusing species’ positions . This network of spatially resolved ﬁlaments is overlaid on the compartment grid , so that sections of ﬁlaments are able to react with diﬀusing species according to their local copy numbers . In addition , ﬁlaments have mechanical properties which will be discussed in the next section . A ﬁlament may react with a diﬀusing species such as a cross - linker ( e . g . α - actinin ) , branching ( e . g . Arp2 / 3 ) , or molecular motor ( e . g . NMIIA ) . Binding reactions involve a discrete set of binding sites along the ﬁlament , and they stochastically occur as chemical reaction events according to the number of those binding sites and the local copy number of diﬀusing binding molecules . A bound molecular motor may participate in a walking reaction , which causes it to move one of its ends to an adjacent binding site , stretching the motor and generating forces . Other reactions not used in this paper but encompassed by MEDYAN include ﬁlament nucleation , ﬁlament destruction , ﬁlament severing , and ﬁlament branching reactions . 20 C . Mechanics The mechanical energy U of networks in MEDYAN is a function of the positions of the ﬁlament beads and the lengths of the molecules bound to the ﬁlaments . There are also potentials describing a branched ﬁlament’s energy which are not included in this paper . Filament beads mark the joined end points ( i . e . hinges ) of the cylinders comprising the ﬁlament . Individual cylinders can stretch but not bend , but a bending energy term is included for pairs of adjacent cylinders . The energy term for the stretching of cylinders is U str = 1 2 K ﬁl , str ( l − l 0 ) 2 , ( 12 ) where l = | | r i + 1 − r i | | is the length of the cylinder whose beads are at positions r i + 1 and r i , l 0 is the cylinder’s equilibrium length , and K str is the spring constant of this harmonic potential . The energy term for the bending of adjacent cylinders is U bend = (cid:15) bend ( 1 − cos ( θ i , i + 1 ) ) , ( 13 ) where (cid:15) bend parameterizes the strength of the interaction and θ i , i + 1 is the angle between the cylinders . Molecules bound to pairs of ﬁlaments ( e . g . α - actinin and NMIIA ) of stretched length l bound have a harmonic stretching energy term : U bound , str = 1 2 K bound , str ( l bound − l 0bound ) 2 , ( 14 ) where the subscript “bound” indicates that the variables and parameters are speciﬁc to the bound molecule . An excluded volume interaction is included to prevent cylinders from overlapping . The analytical formula for this interaction is complicated but can be expressed as a double integral over the two lengths of the participating cylinders i and j : U vol , ij = K vol (cid:90) 1 0 (cid:90) 1 0 dsdt | | r i ( s ) − r j ( t ) | | 4 , ( 15 ) where r i ( s ) = r i + s ( r i + 1 − r i ) is the position along the i cylinder , which is parameterized by a variable s running from 0 to 1 along the cylinder’s length . These positions r i ( s ) are also therefore functions of the cylinders’ bead positions , r i and r i + 1 . Finally , an exponentially decaying boundary repulsion term prevents the ﬁlaments from poking outside the simulation volume : U boundary = (cid:15) boundary e − d i / λ , ( 16 ) where (cid:15) boundary parameterizes the interaction strength , d i is the distance from the boundary to the nearest endpoint of the i cylinder , and λ parameterizes the interaction screening length . At the end of each chemical evolution cycle , the positions of the bound molecules and the ﬁlament beads will have changed due to the chemical reactions which occurred , displacing the system from near - equilibrium . The positions of the ﬁlament beads are then updated in a mechanical equilibration cycle by minimizing the total mechanical energy function U . This is accomplished using the conjugate - gradient minimization algorithm . The minimization procedure ends when the maximum net force remaining in the network is below a user - speciﬁed force tolerance F T , as result of which the system returns to near mechanical equilibrium . D . Mechanochemical coupling An important facet of the dynamics of actomyosin networks is that the chemical reaction rates of the associated proteins depend on the forces they sustain : at high tension the myosin miniﬁlaments will walk and unbind more slowly ( stalling and catch - bond behavior ) whereas the passive cross - linkers are modeled as unbinding more quickly under tension ( slip - bond behavior ) [ 28 , 29 ] . These force - sensitive behaviors thus play the role of non - linearly coupling the mechanical state of the actomyosin network to its stochastic chemical dynamics . The myosin motors used in MEDYAN are modeled after non - muscle myosin IIA ( NMIIA ) , which exists in the cell as a miniﬁlament consisting of tens of individual myosin heads . The chemical dynamics of the 21 myosin miniﬁlaments are based on the Parallel Cluster Model of Erdmann et al . [ 22 , 83 ] . In this model , a myosin miniﬁlament contains a number N total of individual myosin heads and has a binding rate to the actin ﬁlament pair equal to k ﬁl , bind = N total k head , bind , ( 17 ) where k head , bind is the individual myosin head binding rate . In MEDYAN , N total is uniformly randomly selected between a minimum and maximum number of heads each time a miniﬁlament binds . The bound myosin miniﬁlament has a number of bound heads N 0bound under zero tension equal to the duty ratio ρ times the total number of heads : N 0bound = ρN total . ( 18 ) The duty ratio is determined by the individual head unbinding rate : ρ = k head , bind k 0head , unbind + k head , bind , ( 19 ) where k 0head , unbind is the head unbinding rate under zero tension . Under tension F ext the bound myosin miniﬁlament has altered walking and unbinding rates as well as an altered number of bound heads . The number of bound heads under tension is given by N bound ( F ext ) = min (cid:26) N total , N 0bound + β F ext N total (cid:27) , ( 20 ) where the parameter β = 2 . 0 is chosen to ﬁt experimental data . The myosin miniﬁlament walking rate under zero tension is k 0ﬁl , walk = s 1 − ρ ρ k head , bind , ( 21 ) where s is called the stepping fraction , deﬁned as the ratio of the user - speciﬁed real distance between binding sites on the ﬁlament d step to the distance between binding sites on the computational cylinder representing the ﬁlament segment d total : s = d step d total . Equation 21 is based on the PCM and is explained Refs . [ 19 , 22 ] . Under tension , the myosin miniﬁlament walking rate is altered according to a formula of the Hill type : k ﬁl , walk = max (cid:26) 0 . 0 , k 0ﬁl , walk F stall − F ext F stall + F ext / α (cid:27) , ( 22 ) where the stall force F stall is the maximum tension a miniﬁlament can sustain before it stops walking , and where α = 0 . 2 is another parameter chosen to ﬁt to experimental data . The myosin miniﬁlament will unbind from the pair of actin ﬁlaments under zero tension with a rate k 0ﬁl , unbind = k head , bind N total exp (cid:16) log (cid:16) k 0head , unbind + k head , bind k 0head , unbind (cid:17) N total (cid:17) − 1 . ( 23 ) This non - obvious expression is the inverse of the mean residence time of the miniﬁlament as determined using the PCM . Under tension , the myosin miniﬁlament unbinding is modeled with Kramers - type catch - bond behavior : k ﬁl , unbind ( F ext ) = k 0ﬁl , unbind max (cid:26) 0 . 1 , exp (cid:18) − F ext N bound ( F ext ) F 0 , head (cid:19)(cid:27) , ( 24 ) where F 0 , head is the characteristic force a single myosin head catch - bond , and the minimum unbinding factor 0 . 1 is a parameter to chosen to ensure the possibility to unbind under arbitrarily large tension . We assume for myosin miniﬁlaments that the stretching constant is given by K bound , str = K head , str N bound , ( 25 ) 22 where K head , str is the stretching constant for an individual head ; this equation assumes the bound heads share the load in parallel . The unbinding of passive cross - linkers ( e . g . α - actinin ) are modeled as Kramers - type slip - bond : k linker , unbind ( F ext ) = k 0linker , unbind exp (cid:18) F ext F 0 , linker (cid:19) , ( 26 ) where F 0 , linker is the characteristic force of the cross - linker slip - bond . Finally , the actin ﬁlament will polymerize with a rate that exponentially decreases with the component of the sustained force along the polymerizing tip , F ext . This dependence is based on the Brownian ratchet model of Peskin et al . [ 84 ] : k poly ( F ext ) = k 0poly exp (cid:18) − F ext F 0 , poly (cid:19) , ( 27 ) where F 0 , poly is the characteristic force of the Brownian ratchet model , and k 0poly is the zero - force polymer - ization rate . Any of the above characteristic forces F 0 may be converted to a corresponding characteristic distance x 0 via F 0 = k B T / x 0 , ( 28 ) where k B T is the thermal energy , casting expressions of the form F ext / F 0 to the form F ext x 0 / k B T . 23 E . Parameterization The following table lists the parameters chosen for the simulations presented in this paper . Parameter Description Value General Simulation Parameters k B T Thermal energy 4 . 1 pN · nm L comp Cubic compartment side length 500 nm N x , N y , N z Number of compartments in each dimension 2 , 2 , 2 L cyl Filament cylinder equilibrium length 54 nm δt Length of chemical evolution step 0 . 05 s F T Force tolerance of mechanical minimization 1 pN Mechanical Parameters K ﬁl , str Actin ﬁlament stretching constant 100 pN / nm [ 19 ] (cid:15) bend Actin ﬁlament bending energy 1344 pN · nm [ 19 , 85 ] K vol Cylinder excluded volume constant 10 5 pN / nm 4 [ 19 ] K head , str NMIIA head stretching constant 2 . 5 pN / nm [ 86 ] K α , str α - actinin stretching constant 8 pN / nm [ 87 ] (cid:15) boundary Boundary repulsion energy 41 pN · nm a λ Boundary repulsion screening length 2 . 7 nm b Mechanochemical Parameters N NMIIA , bind Binding sites per cylinder for myosin motors 8 c N α , bind Binding sites per cylinder for α - actinin 4 d d step NMIIA miniﬁlament step size 6 . 0 nm [ 86 ] N min , N max Range of number of NMIIA heads per miniﬁlament 15 , 25 e [ 88 ] F stall Stall force of NMIIA miniﬁlament 100 pN f F 0 , head Characteristic force of NMIIA catch - bond 12 . 6 pN [ 22 ] F 0 , α Characteristic force of α - actinin slip - bond 17 . 2 pN [ 89 ] F 0 , poly Characteristic force of actin Brownian ratchet 1 . 5 pN [ 90 ] l M Equilibrium length of NMIIA minﬁlament 175 − 225 nm [ 19 ] l α Equilibrium length of α - actinin 30 − 40 nm [ 19 ] Chemical Parameters k actin , diﬀ Diﬀusion constant of actin monomer 20 µMs − 1 [ 19 ] k α , diﬀ Diﬀusion constant of α - actinin 2 µMs − 1 [ 19 , 91 ] k motor , diﬀ Diﬀusion constant of NMIIA miniﬁlament 0 . 2 µMs − 1 [ 19 ] k actin , poly , + Actin plus - end polymerization 11 . 6 µMs − 1 [ 76 ] k actin , poly , - Actin minus - end polymerization 1 . 3 µMs − 1 [ 76 ] k actin , depoly , + Actin plus - end depolymerization 1 . 4 s − 1 [ 76 ] k actin , depoly , - Actin minus - end depolymerization 0 . 8 s − 1 [ 76 ] k head , bind NMIIA head binding 0 . 2 s − 1 [ 21 ] k 0head , unbind NMIIA head unbinding under zero tension 1 . 7 s − 1 [ 19 , 21 ] k α , bind α - actinin binding 0 . 7 µMs − 1 [ 92 ] k 0 α , unbind α - actinin unbinding under zero tension 0 . 3 s − 1 [ 92 ] TABLE I . All parameters used in the simulations reported in this paper . a - Chosen for the energy scale to be 10 k B T . b - Chosen as the the length of a G - actin monomer . c - Chosen to allow the spacing between binding sites to be roughly equal to its physiological value near 6 nm [ 86 ] . d - Chosen to allow the spacing between binding sites to be roughly equal to its physiological value near 30 nm [ 93 ] . e - Chosen to given an average N total = 20 in approximate agreement with literature values [ 88 ] . f - A wide range of values are found in the literature for the stall force of the miniﬁlament . We take an order of magnitude estimate for this parameter based on the stall force of a single head ( on the order of 10 pN , estimated as d step K head , str [ 19 ] ) times the number of bound heads in the miniﬁlament ( on the order of 10 ) . This parameter choice is empirically valid as it yields observable network contraction . 24 V . DEPENDENCE ON δt AND F T The heavy - tailed distributions of | ∆ U − | , the magnitudes of the negative energy increments which are the chief subject of this paper , may have strong dependence on certain key parameters governing the mechanical equilibration protocol . To ensure that these distributions are not artifacts of simulation we investigate whether changing the parameters F T and δt alters the qualitative properties of the distributions . In Figure 14 we compare these distributions using 3 runs for each parameter choice . Only weak dependence on F T is observed ( Figure 14 . A ) . We ﬁnd strong dependence on δt ( Figure 14 . B ) , however for each parameter choice heavy tails exist and thus we may conclude that the cytoquake phenomenon is not an artifact despite their frequency and magnitude having dependence on δt . We can ask whether the observed discrepancy between the distributions for diﬀerent choices of δt is due to a change in the underlying dynamics or due to the eﬀect of summing over larger time intervals to obtain the quantities ∆ U . We expect that by summing over larger time intervals , the heavy tails are “averaged out , ” or coarse - grained , causing them to be increasingly Gaussian for larger δt . We can check this by summing consecutive increments ∆ U for small choices of δt over time windows equal to the largest value of δt tested . When this is done ( shown in Figure 14 . C ) , we ﬁnd the distributions for all choices of δt to approximately collapse on each other . This suggests that coarse - graining in time indeed explains the discrepancy in the distributions of | ∆ U | − in Figure 14 . B . Without showing the data , we ﬁnd a similar picture to apply for the distributions of positive increments ∆ U + , with a similar asymmetry in the non - Gaussian parameters for all choices of δt and F T as observed for conditions used in main text , δt = 0 . 05 s and F T = 1 pN . While a smaller choice for F T and δt should correspond more closely to reality , we ﬁnd that for the smallest of the tested values for these parameters the simulations did not complete in the allotted computer wall time of 2 weeks . Thus our choices for these parameters used in this paper are chosen to be small while still allowing us to run full 2 , 000 s simulations . 25 10 0 10 1 10 2 10 3 U ( k B T ) 10 4 10 3 10 2 10 1 10 0 CC D F A F T ( pN ) 0 . 1 1 5 10 10 1 10 2 10 3 10 4 10 5 U / t ( k B T / s ) 10 4 10 3 10 2 10 1 10 0 CC D F B t ( s ) 0 . 01 0 . 05 0 . 1 0 . 2 10 1 10 2 10 3 U ( k B T ) 10 4 10 3 10 2 10 1 10 0 CC D F C t ( s ) 0 . 01 0 . 05 0 . 1 0 . 2 FIG . 14 . A : Complementary cumulative distribution functions of the negative increments | ∆ U − | at QSS for various choices of the force tolerance parameter F T plotted against ﬁtted half - normal CCDFs . For these runs condition C 3 , 3 is used with δt = 0 . 05 s . B : CCDFs of the negative increments | ∆ U − | at QSS for various choices of the time between minimization , δt . The energy increments are normalized by δt for more direct comparison between these curves . For these runs condition C 3 , 3 is used with F T = 2 pN . B : Complementary cumulative distribution functions of the negative increments | ∆ U − | at QSS for various choices of the time between minimization , δt . The energy increments are normalized by δt for more direct comparison between these curves . For these runs condition C 3 , 3 is used with F T = 1 pN . C : The same data is shown as in part B , except here ∆ U for each choice of δt is obtained by summing consecutive energy increments over time windows equal to 0 . 2 s . In this way the values of ∆ U for each choice of δt correspond to the same duration of time . 26 We also investigated how the fraction of negative eigenvalues persisting after mechanical minimization depends on the force threshold F T . When minimization ceases at higher forces , more negative eigenvalues are left remaining , as expected . This behavior is illustrated in Figure 15 . 0 2 4 6 8 10 F T ( pN ) 0 . 0000 0 . 0025 0 . 0050 0 . 0075 0 . 0100 0 . 0125 0 . 0150 0 . 0175 0 . 0200 F r a c t i o n N e g a t i v e E i g e n v a l u e s FIG . 15 . Scatter plot showing the fraction of negative eigenvalues remaining after mechanical minimization when diﬀerent choices of the parameter F T are used . The data is collected from QSS for 3 runs of C 3 , 3 , with the standard deviation taken over time and over the runs . 27 VI . MACHINE LEARNING MODEL A . Cytoquake classiﬁcation To forecast the occurrence of cytoquakes , we resorted to using a high - dimensional ML model ( 3 layer feed - forward neural network ) after it was found that several simple features in the eigenspectrum which we believed might reﬂect mechanical stability ( for instance the value of the smallest positive eigenvalue ) did not by themselves signiﬁcantly correlate with cytoquake occurrence . We pose the forecasting of cytoquakes as a binary classiﬁcation problem . A trajectory ∆ U ( t ) = U ( t + δt ) − U ( t ) at QSS ( after 1 , 000 s ) is converted to a binary sequence such that each t for which ∆ U ( t ) ≤ ∆ U T , as well as the t W = 0 . 15 previous seconds ( i . e . 3 previous time points ) are classiﬁed as cytoquakes , and the rest are not . This t W window is chosen to help overcome the stochasticity inherent in the chemical dynamics which , along with the instantaneous mechanical stability we are using as a predictor , controls cytoquake occurrence . We focus here on the ﬁve runs of conditions C 3 , 3 . ∆ U T = − 100 k B T is chosen to lie well in the tail of the distribution of | ∆ U − | for this condition and therefore distinguishes rare events , as shown in Figure 1 in the main text . With these choices , ∼ 10 % of samples across all runs are labeled as events in the classiﬁcation problem . B . Model inputs The predictors of the model capture information about the network’s mechanical stability . The ordered sets of eigenvalues { λ k } 3 Nk = 1 at each time t is padded by adding zero eigenvalues between the unstable ( λ k < 0 ) and stable ( λ k ≥ 0 ) parts of the spectrum to maintain a ﬁxed input dimension across all time points and runs . We then collect these eigenvalues into a tuple M ( t ) such that the ﬁrst element of M ( t ) is the largest negative λ k at time t and the last element is the largest positive λ k at time t . We optionally include the the inverse participation ratios { r k } 3 Nk = 1 in this vector by ﬁrst adding zeros in the places of the set { r k } 3 Nk = 1 corresponding to where zeros were added in the set { λ k } 3 Nk = 1 , and then interleaving the λ k and r k in the now doubly sized tuple M ( t ) , so that now for example the ﬁrst two elements of M ( t ) correspond to the largest negative λ k and the associated r k at time t . The tuples M ( t ) are then linearly rescaled , so for each element M i ( t ) the average over all times of a run is 0 and the variance is 1 . These rescaled tuples are labeled (cid:102) M ( t ) . When only the λ k are included then (cid:102) M ( t ) has ∼ 1 , 600 dimensions , and with the r k are also included it has ∼ 3 , 200 dimensions . To avoid overﬁtting the model , we ﬁrst reduce the dimensionality of (cid:102) M ( t ) via principal component analysis ( PCA ) using all QSS time points in a run . We choose 30 dimensions as the size of the reduced tuple m ( t ) because this allows for more than 95 % of the variance of (cid:102) M ( t ) to be explained when just the λ k are included as shown in Figure 16 . A . Model performance appreciably decreases when fewer than 30 dimension are used and improves only marginally if more are used . A row of ones is added as a 31 st dimension to m ( t ) as a bias for the neural network . As an additional indicator of the network’s mechanical stability we also consider its mechanical energy U at time t . U ( t ) is linearly rescaled to give (cid:101) U ( t ) so that it has zero mean and unit variance . We then optionally augment with input tuple m ( t ) with the (cid:101) U ( t ) as a 32 nd dimension . C . Treating multiple trials We can treat the data from all ﬁve runs of condition C 3 , 3 separately or combine all data together to train a larger model . Model performance is generally found to be better when trained on data from a single run , however by combining data from all runs we probe more general underlying trends that are not speciﬁc to the network organization of one run . When describing trends from varying model inputs , as in Figure 16 . D , we focus on results obtained by combining all runs due to their greater generality . For a single run there are ∼ 20 , 000 samples , giving 100 , 000 samples when combining all runs . When combining runs , we ﬁrst rescale and perform PCA on the predictors using only the data within a single run , and then concatenate the resulting m ( t ) with their associated labels into a larger data set . This way the relative variation of the predictors compared to their typical values for a particular organization of the actomyosin network is retained , and the typical values of particular network organizations themselves aﬀect the model inputs to a lesser degree . 28 0 10 20 30 Number of Components 0 . 70 0 . 75 0 . 80 0 . 85 0 . 90 0 . 95 1 . 00 C u m u l a t i v e E x p l a i n e d V a r i a n c e A B 0 . 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 FPR 0 . 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 T P R AUC : 0 . 810 C s o f t s t i ff , I U , U , I , U , I + 0 . 66 0 . 68 0 . 70 0 . 72 0 . 74 0 . 76 0 . 78 0 . 80 A U C D FIG . 16 . A : Cumulative explained variance from PCA of the ∼ 1 , 600 eigenvalues { λ k ( t ) } 3 Nk = 1 . B : Schematic depiction of the feed - forward neural network architecture . C : ROC curves for the model using only { λ k } 3 Nk = 1 as input and trained on a single run of condition C 3 , 3 , with ﬁve realizations of the stochastic batch network training and their average shown . The ROC curve of a random model is plotted as the red dotted line . D : Bar plot indicating the AUC of ROC curves using diﬀerent combinations of inputs for the model trained on data collected from all runs of condition C 3 , 3 . From left to right , the labels indicate that the model inputs are : { λ k } 3 Nk = 1 ; { λ k | 0 ≤ λ k < λ T } ; { λ k | λ T ≤ λ k } ; { λ k } 3 Nk = 1 and { r k } 3 Nk = 1 ; U , using a logistic regression model ; { λ k } 3 Nk = 1 , { r k } 3 Nk = 1 , and U ; { λ k } 3 Nk = 1 , { r k } 3 Nk = 1 , and U with forecasting done for large positive increments ∆ U > 100 k B T . Error bars indicate uncertainty from ﬁve realizations of stochastic batch training . D . Neural network architecture We used the Python modules scikit - learn and Keras with a Tensorﬂow back end to train a deep feed - forward neural network and a logistic regression model for the binary classiﬁcation problem [ 94 , 95 ] . The 31 or 32 - dimensional ( depending on if (cid:101) U ( t ) is included as a predictor ) input tuple m is fed into three fully connected hidden layers L i , i = 1 , 2 , 3 , each with either 30 or 100 nodes depending on if the data consists of a single run ( 20 , 000 samples ) or of all ﬁve runs ( 100 , 000 samples ) . Each node in the hidden layers uses a rectiﬁed linear unit activation function . The output of the network is two nodes using a softmax activation function whose values are p and 1 − p , where p is the predicted probability of a cytoquake event at that time t . This architecture is schematically illustrated in Figure 16 . B . The network is trained for either 400 or 200 epochs using a categorical cross - entropy loss function with Adam optimization in stochastically chosen batches of 29 either 1 , 000 or 10 , 000 samples , depending on the whether the single or multiple run data sets , respectively , are used . The cytoquake samples are given a higher weight ( × 3 ) than the non - cytoquake samples during training . A L2 penalty of 0 . 05 is used to curb overﬁtting . When using only (cid:101) U ( t ) as a predictor , a logistic regression model is ﬁt using the same sample weights . E . Model validation Of all the data samples , we use 2 / 3 to train the model with and validate the model on the remaining 1 / 3 . We repeat these random training / testing set splits to gather statistics on model performance . The binary classiﬁcation procedure involves the probability threshold p T ( such that p > p T means the model predicts a cytoquake ) . Model performance is measured by varying p T from 0 to 1 and measuring the true positive rate ( TPR , the proportion of actual cytoquakes correctly predicted as such ) and false positive rate ( FPR , the proportion of actual non - cytoquakes incorrectly predicted as cytoquakes ) on the test data ; the locus of these points forms the receiver operator characteristic ( ROC ) curve . A random model would have FPR = TPR , so an area under the curve ( AUC ) of the ROC curve greater than 0 . 5 indicates a good model , and a perfect model would have an AUC of 1 . One can also consider precision - recall ( PR ) curves , which contain points in the space of model precision ( the proportion of predicted cytoquakes which were actual cytoquakes ) and recall ( the same as TPR ) . A random model would have the same precision , equal to the proportion of actual cytoquakes in the testing data , for all values of recall as p T is varied , giving an AUC equal to that proportion . When the test data is unbalanced , i . e . when there are many more non - cytoquake events than cytoquake events , it has been shown that the AUC of the PR curve is a more faithful metric for model performance ( since a model may score a high AUC of the ROC curve by overestimating that events are not cytoquakes ) [ 96 , 97 ] . To overcome this limitation of ROC curves , which we believe has a more intuitive interpretation that PR curves , we balance the testing data , keeping all cytoquake events and randomly keeping an equal number of non - cytoquake events . We conﬁrmed that trends observed in the AUC of the ROC curves as the model is varied also hold when considering the AUC of PR curves on the full test set . In Figure 17 we show examples of these PR and ROC curves on the training and testing data for a model trained on a single run . The very high AUC of the PR and ROC curves evaluated on the training data indicates that the model has nearly perfected its prediction on those samples and may indicate overﬁtting , however this high performance generalizes nicely to the unseen testing data . Note that the AUC of the ROC evaluated on the testing data is signiﬁcantly higher than shown in Figure 16 . D reﬂecting the generally higher performance of models trained on data from a single run compared to models trained on data from all runs . Finally , as a sanity check , we conﬁrmed that randomly shuﬄing the labels on the training set decreases performance on the training set and causes the performance on the test set to decrease to that of a random model , as shown in Figure 18 . F . Varying the machine learning model inputs Applying the model using the Hessian eigenspectrum as the input , we obtained an AUC of 0 . 81 when using data from a single run of condition C 3 , 3 ( Figure 16 . C ) and of 0 . 70 when using data from ﬁve runs , i . e . from ﬁve diﬀerent network realizations . In Figure 16 . D , we display the eﬀects of varying the machine learning model inputs on prediction performance , reﬂecting the degree to which cytoquake occurrence depends on the various inputs . We point out that these trends from varying the model inputs are not particularly strong , contributing only marginal changes ( though greater the measured uncertainty ) to the model performance . These diﬀerences are less than the diﬀerence resulting from combing all ﬁve runs in a data set rather than using one run . We report them here mainly out of completeness , rather than in support of some strong conclusion . Uncertainty in AUC from ﬁve repetitions of stochastic batch training is roughly 0 . 01 for all reported values . Keeping only the eigenvalues of the soft modes does not harm performance ( AUC 0 . 71 ) , while keeping only the stiﬀ modes does harm performance ( AUC 0 . 68 ) . Performance is not harmed ( AUC 0 . 72 ) upon augmenting the input with the inverse participation ratios { r k ( t ) } 3 Nk = 1 . Interestingly , we found that a logistic regression model using only the mechanical energy U ( t ) as an input feature performs well ( AUC 0 . 74 , with a smaller uncertainty around 0 . 002 for this simpler model ) , reminiscent of the debate concerning one neuron vs . deep 30 learning models of earthquake aftershock prediction [ 53 , 54 ] . This logistic regression model has learned an optimal cutoﬀ for U that indicates instability and likely cytoquake occurrence . We may seemingly conclude that the machine learning model using the Hessian eigenspectrum as an input has merely learned what the mechanical energy is , however we ﬁnd that by far the best performance results from combining { λ k ( t ) } 3 Nk = 1 , { r k ( t ) } 3 Nk = 1 , and U ( t ) in the ML model , reaching an AUC of 0 . 79 when using data from all ﬁve runs . This suggests that the learned features of the Hessian eigenspectrum are not redundant given U , i . e . that their mutual information is low . Finally , we found that prediction of large positive increments ( ∆ U > 100 k B T ) is also possible , with an AUC of 0 . 74 when combining all inputs . 0 . 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 Recall 0 . 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 P r e c i s i o n AUC * : 0 . 808 A 0 . 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 FPR 0 . 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 T P R AUC : 0 . 993 B 0 . 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 Recall 0 . 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 P r e c i s i o n AUC * : 0 . 363 C 0 . 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 FPR 0 . 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 T P R AUC : 0 . 855 D FIG . 17 . A : PR curve evaluated for a model using { λ k } 3 Nk = 1 , { r k } 3 Nk = 1 , and U as inputs trained on data from a single run at QSS of condition C 3 , 3 and evaluated on the training data . The red line indicates the performance of a random model on the data set . The asterisk on the AUC indicates that the fraction of cytoquake samples in the data set ( for this run ∼ 0 . 06 ) has been subtracted from the actual AUC , to give the area between the black and red curves . B : ROC curve for the same model evaluated on the training data . C : PR curve for the same model evaluated on the balanced testing data . D : ROC curve for the same model evaluated on the balanced testing data . 31 0 . 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 Recall 0 . 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 P r e c i s i o n AUC * : 0 . 383 A 0 . 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 FPR 0 . 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 T P R AUC : 0 . 918 B 0 . 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 Recall 0 . 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 P r e c i s i o n AUC * : - 0 . 009 C 0 . 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 FPR 0 . 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 T P R AUC : 0 . 462 D FIG . 18 . A : PR curve evaluated for a model using { λ k } 3 Nk = 1 , { r k } 3 Nk = 1 , and U as inputs trained on data from a single run at QSS of condition C 3 , 3 and evaluated on the training data , when the training data labels have been randomly shuﬄed . The red line indicates the performance of a random model on the data set . B : ROC curve for the same model evaluated on the training data . C : PR curve for the same model evaluated on the balanced testing data . D : ROC curve for the same model evaluated on the balanced testing data . 32 [ 1 ] Daniel A Fletcher and R Dyche Mullins . Cell mechanics and the cytoskeleton . Nature , 463 ( 7280 ) : 485 – 492 , 2010 . [ 2 ] David Boal . Mechanics of the Cell . Cambridge University Press , 2012 . [ 3 ] Alexander Mogilner and George Oster . Cell motility driven by actin polymerization . Biophysical journal , 71 ( 6 ) : 3030 – 3045 , 1996 . [ 4 ] Alex Mogilner . On the edge : modeling protrusion . Current opinion in cell biology , 18 ( 1 ) : 32 – 39 , 2006 . [ 5 ] J H - C Wang and B P Thampatty . An introductory review of cell mechanobiology . Biomechanics and modeling in mechanobiology , 5 ( 1 ) : 1 – 16 , 2006 . [ 6 ] R Tyler´aMcLaughlin et al . Collective dynamics of processive cytoskeletal motors . Soft matter , 12 ( 1 ) : 14 – 21 , 2016 . [ 7 ] Toshihiro Toyota , David A Head , Christoph F Schmidt , and Daisuke Mizuno . Non - gaussian athermal ﬂuctuations in active gels . Soft Matter , 7 ( 7 ) : 3234 – 3239 , 2011 . [ 8 ] Fred C MacKintosh and Alex J Levine . Nonequilibrium mechanics and dynamics of motor - activated gels . Physical review letters , 100 ( 1 ) : 018104 , 2008 . [ 9 ] Adriano Mesquita Alencar , Mariana Sacrini Ayres Ferraz , Chan Young Park , Emil Millet , Xavier Trepat , Jeﬀrey J Fredberg , and James P Butler . Non - equilibrium cytoquake dynamics in cytoskeletal remodeling and stabilization . Soft matter , 12 ( 41 ) : 8506 – 8511 , 2016 . [ 10 ] Yu Shi , Christopher L Porter , John C Crocker , and Daniel H Reich . Dissecting fat - tailed ﬂuctuations in the cytoskeleton with active micropost arrays . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 116 ( 28 ) : 13839 – 13846 , 2019 . [ 11 ] Beno Gutenberg and Charles Richter . Seismicity of the earth and associated phenomena . Princeton University Press , 1949 . [ 12 ] Per Bak , Kim Christensen , Leon Danon , and Tim Scanlon . Uniﬁed scaling law for earthquakes . Physical Review Letters , 88 ( 17 ) : 178501 , 2002 . [ 13 ] Carlos Floyd , Garegin A Papoian , and Christopher Jarzynski . Quantifying dissipation in actomyosin networks . Interface focus , 9 ( 3 ) : 20180078 , 2019 . [ 14 ] Martin van Hecke . Jamming of soft particles : geometry , mechanics , scaling and isostaticity . Journal of Physics : Condensed Matter , 22 ( 3 ) : 033101 , 2009 . [ 15 ] Jean - Philippe Bouchaud . Weak ergodicity breaking and aging in disordered systems . Journal de Physique I , 2 ( 9 ) : 1705 – 1713 , 1992 . [ 16 ] Pavel I Zhuravlev and Garegin A Papoian . Molecular noise of capping protein binding induces macroscopic instability in ﬁlopodial dynamics . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 106 ( 28 ) : 11570 – 11575 , 2009 . [ 17 ] Tim Mitchison and Marc Kirschner . Dynamic instability of microtubule growth . nature , 312 ( 5991 ) : 237 – 242 , 1984 . [ 18 ] Jan Mueller , Gregory Szep , Maria Nemethova , Ingrid De Vries , Arnon D Lieber , Christoph Winkler , Karsten Kruse , J Victor Small , Christian Schmeiser , Kinneret Keren , et al . Load adaptation of lamellipodial actin networks . Cell , 171 ( 1 ) : 188 – 200 , 2017 . [ 19 ] Konstantin Popov , James Komianos , and Garegin A Papoian . Medyan : mechanochemical simulations of con - traction and polarity alignment in actomyosin networks . PLoS computational biology , 12 ( 4 ) , 2016 . [ 20 ] Carlos Floyd , Christopher Jarzynski , and Garegin Papoian . Low - dimensional manifold of actin polymerization dynamics . New Journal of Physics , 19 ( 12 ) : 125012 , 2017 . [ 21 ] Mih´aly Kov´acs , Fei Wang , Aihua Hu , Yue Zhang , and James R Sellers . Functional divergence of human cy - toplasmic myosin ii kinetic characterization of the non - muscle iia isoform . Journal of Biological Chemistry , 278 ( 40 ) : 38132 – 38140 , 2003 . [ 22 ] Thorsten Erdmann , Philipp J Albert , and Ulrich S Schwarz . Stochastic dynamics of small ensembles of non - processive molecular motors : The parallel cluster model . The Journal of chemical physics , 139 ( 17 ) : 11B604 1 , 2013 . [ 23 ] Jonathon Howard et al . Mechanics of motor proteins and the cytoskeleton . 2001 . [ 24 ] Carol A Otey and Olli Carpen . α - actinin revisited : A fresh look at an old player . Cell motility and the cytoskeleton , 58 ( 2 ) : 104 – 111 , 2004 . [ 25 ] James E Komianos and Garegin A Papoian . Stochastic ratcheting on a funneled energy landscape is necessary for highly eﬃcient contractility of actomyosin force dipoles . Physical Review X , 8 ( 2 ) : 021006 , 2018 . [ 26 ] O Lieleg , Mireille Maria Anna Elisabeth Claessens , Y Luan , and AR Bausch . Transient binding and dissipation in cross - linked actin networks . Physical review letters , 101 ( 10 ) : 108101 , 2008 . [ 27 ] Laetitia Kurzawa , Benoit Vianay , Fabrice Senger , Timoth´ee Vignaud , Laurent Blanchoin , and Manuel Th´ery . Dissipation of contractile forces : the missing piece in cell mechanics . Molecular biology of the cell , 28 ( 14 ) : 1825 – 1832 , 2017 . [ 28 ] David Keller and Carlos Bustamante . The mechanochemistry of molecular motors . Biophysical journal , 78 ( 2 ) : 541 – 556 , 2000 . [ 29 ] Yuriy V Pereverzev , Oleg V Prezhdo , Manu Forero , Evgeni V Sokurenko , and Wendy E Thomas . The two - pathway model for the catch - slip transition in biological adhesion . Biophysical journal , 89 ( 3 ) : 1446 – 1454 , 2005 . 33 [ 30 ] Aravind Chandrasekaran , Arpita Upadhyaya , and Garegin A Papoian . Remarkable structural transformations of actin bundles are driven by their initial polarity , motor activity , crosslinking , and ﬁlament treadmilling . PLoS computational biology , 15 ( 7 ) , 2019 . [ 31 ] Qin Ni and Garegin A Papoian . Turnover versus treadmilling in actin network assembly and remodeling . Cy - toskeleton , 2019 . [ 32 ] Xiaona Li , Qin Ni , Xiuxiu He , Jun Kong , Soon - Mi Lim , Garegin A Papoian , Jerome P Trzeciakowski , Andreea Trache , and Yi Jiang . Tensile force induced cytoskeletal reorganization : Mechanics before chemistry . BioRxiv , 2020 . [ 33 ] James Liman , Carlos Bueno , Yossi Eliaz , Nicholas P Schafer , M Neal Waxham , Peter G Wolynes , Herbert Levine , and Margaret S Cheung . The role of the arp2 / 3 complex in shaping the dynamics and structures of branched actomyosin networks . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 2020 . [ 34 ] Carlos Floyd , Garegin A Papoian , and Christopher Jarzynski . Gibbs free energy change of a discrete chemical reaction event . The Journal of Chemical Physics , 152 ( 8 ) : 084116 , 2020 . [ 35 ] Shenshen Wang and Peter G Wolynes . Active contractility in actomyosin networks . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 109 ( 17 ) : 6446 – 6451 , 2012 . [ 36 ] DN Prabhakar Murthy , Min Xie , and Renyan Jiang . Weibull models , volume 505 . John Wiley & Sons , 2004 . [ 37 ] Bruce D Malamud and Donald L Turcotte . Self - aﬃne time series : I . generation and analyses . Adv . Geophys , 40 : 1 – 90 , 1999 . [ 38 ] Jon D Pelletier and Donald L Turcotte . Self - aﬃne time series : Ii . applications and models . In Advances in Geophysics , volume 40 , pages 91 – 166 . Elsevier , 1999 . [ 39 ] Donald L Turcotte . Fractals and chaos in geology and geophysics . Cambridge university press , 1997 . [ 40 ] Stefan Hergarten . Self organized criticality in earth systems , volume 2 . Springer , 2002 . [ 41 ] Annette Witt and Bruce D Malamud . Quantiﬁcation of long - range persistence in geophysical time series : con - ventional and benchmark - based improvement techniques . Surveys in Geophysics , 34 ( 5 ) : 541 – 651 , 2013 . [ 42 ] ZC Williams , JD Pelletier , and Thomas Meixner . Self - aﬃne fractal spatial and temporal variability of the san pedro river , southern arizona . Journal of Geophysical Research : Earth Surface , 124 ( 6 ) : 1540 – 1558 , 2019 . [ 43 ] Robert V Hogg , Joseph McKean , and Allen T Craig . Introduction to mathematical statistics . Pearson Education , 2005 . [ 44 ] Ron Milo and Rob Phillips . Cell biology by the numbers . Garland Science , 2015 . [ 45 ] Chon - Kit Pun , Sakib Matin , W Klein , and Harvey Gould . Prediction in a driven - dissipative system displaying a continuous phase transition using machine learning . Physical Review E , 101 ( 2 ) : 022102 , 2020 . [ 46 ] Ian Linsmeier , Shiladitya Banerjee , Patrick W Oakes , Wonyeong Jung , Taeyoon Kim , and Michael P Mur - rell . Disordered actomyosin networks are suﬃcient to produce cooperative and telescopic contractility . Nature communications , 7 ( 1 ) : 1 – 9 , 2016 . [ 47 ] Tamar Schlick . Molecular modeling and simulation : an interdisciplinary guide : an interdisciplinary guide , vol - ume 21 . Springer Science & Business Media , 2010 . [ 48 ] Andrew R Leach and Andrew R Leach . Molecular modelling : principles and applications . Pearson education , 2001 . [ 49 ] EM Huisman and Thomas C Lubensky . Internal stresses , normal modes , and nonaﬃnity in three - dimensional biopolymer networks . Physical review letters , 106 ( 8 ) : 088301 , 2011 . [ 50 ] Minhaeng Cho , Graham R Fleming , Shinji Saito , Iwao Ohmine , and Richard M Stratt . Instantaneous normal mode analysis of liquid water . The Journal of chemical physics , 100 ( 9 ) : 6672 – 6683 , 1994 . [ 51 ] Scott D Bembenek and Brian B Laird . Instantaneous normal modes and the glass transition . Physical review letters , 74 ( 6 ) : 936 , 1995 . [ 52 ] David Richard , Geert Kapteijns , Julia A Giannini , M Lisa Manning , and Edan Lerner . Simple and broadly applicable deﬁnition of shear transformation zones . Physical Review Letters , 126 ( 1 ) : 015501 , 2021 . [ 53 ] Phoebe MR DeVries , Fernanda Vi´egas , Martin Wattenberg , and Brendan J Meade . Deep learning of aftershock patterns following large earthquakes . Nature , 560 ( 7720 ) : 632 – 634 , 2018 . [ 54 ] Arnaud Mignan and Marco Broccardo . One neuron versus deep learning in aftershock prediction . Nature , 574 ( 7776 ) : E1 – E3 , 2019 . [ 55 ] Yann N Dauphin , Razvan Pascanu , Caglar Gulcehre , Kyunghyun Cho , Surya Ganguli , and Yoshua Bengio . Identifying and attacking the saddle point problem in high - dimensional non - convex optimization . In Advances in neural information processing systems , pages 2933 – 2941 , 2014 . [ 56 ] Shenshen Wang and Peter G Wolynes . Microscopic theory of the glassy dynamics of passive and active network materials . The Journal of chemical physics , 138 ( 12 ) : 12A521 , 2013 . [ 57 ] Tongye Shen and Peter G Wolynes . Stability and dynamics of crystals and glasses of motorized particles . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 101 ( 23 ) : 8547 – 8550 , 2004 . [ 58 ] Mark Newman . Networks . Oxford university press , 2018 . [ 59 ] Jos´e Alvarado , Michael Sheinman , Abhinav Sharma , Fred C MacKintosh , and Gijsje H Koenderink . Force percolation of contractile active gels . Soft matter , 13 ( 34 ) : 5624 – 5644 , 2017 . [ 60 ] Leonardo E Silbert , Andrea J Liu , and Sidney R Nagel . Normal modes in model jammed systems in three 34 dimensions . Physical Review E , 79 ( 2 ) : 021308 , 2009 . [ 61 ] Zorana Zeravcic , Wim van Saarloos , and David R Nelson . Localization behavior of vibrational modes in granular packings . EPL ( Europhysics Letters ) , 83 ( 4 ) : 44001 , 2008 . [ 62 ] Shenshen Wang and Peter G Wolynes . Communication : Eﬀective temperature and glassy dynamics of active matter , 2011 . [ 63 ] Per Bak , Chao Tang , and Kurt Wiesenfeld . Self - organized criticality : An explanation of the 1 / f noise . Physical review letters , 59 ( 4 ) : 381 , 1987 . [ 64 ] Per Bak and Chao Tang . Earthquakes as a self - organized critical phenomenon . Journal of Geophysical Research : Solid Earth , 94 ( B11 ) : 15635 – 15637 , 1989 . [ 65 ] Henrik Jeldtoft Jensen . Self - organized criticality : emergent complex behavior in physical and biological systems , volume 10 . Cambridge university press , 1998 . [ 66 ] Daniel S Seara , Vikrant Yadav , Ian Linsmeier , A Pasha Tabatabai , Patrick W Oakes , SM Ali Tabei , Shiladitya Banerjee , and Michael P Murrell . Entropy production rate is maximized in non - contractile actomyosin . Nature communications , 9 ( 1 ) : 1 – 10 , 2018 . [ 67 ] Luca Cardamone , Alessandro Laio , Vincent Torre , Rajesh Shahapure , and Antonio DeSimone . Cytoskeletal actin networks in motile cells are critically self - organized systems synchronized by mechanical interactions . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 108 ( 34 ) : 13978 – 13983 , 2011 . [ 68 ] Mayte Bonilla - Quintana , Florentin W¨org¨otter , Elisa D’Este , Christian Tetzlaﬀ , and Michael Fauth . Reproducing asymmetrical spine shape ﬂuctuations in a model of actin dynamics predicts self - organized criticality . Scientiﬁc reports , 11 ( 1 ) : 1 – 17 , 2021 . [ 69 ] Sakib Matin , Chon - Kit Pun , Harvey Gould , and W Klein . Eﬀective ergodicity breaking phase transition in a driven - dissipative system . Physical Review E , 101 ( 2 ) : 022103 , 2020 . [ 70 ] Yu Feng and Yuhai Tu . The inverse variance – ﬂatness relation in stochastic gradient descent is critical for ﬁnding ﬂat minima . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 118 ( 9 ) , 2021 . [ 71 ] James J Binney , Nigel J Dowrick , Andrew J Fisher , and Mark EJ Newman . The theory of critical phenomena : an introduction to the renormalization group . Oxford University Press , 1992 . [ 72 ] Shiladitya Banerjee , Margaret L Gardel , and Ulrich S Schwarz . The actin cytoskeleton as an active adaptive material . 2020 . [ 73 ] Menachem Stern , Matthew B Pinson , and Arvind Murugan . Continual learning of multiple memories in me - chanical networks . Physical Review X , 10 ( 3 ) : 031044 , 2020 . [ 74 ] Alan Pasha Tabatabai , Daniel S Seara , Joseph Tibbs , Vikrant Yadav , Ian Linsmeier , and Michael P Murrell . Detailed balance broken by catch bond kinetics enables mechanical - adaptation in active materials . Advanced Functional Materials , 31 ( 10 ) : 2006745 , 2021 . [ 75 ] Tobias T Falzone , Savanna Blair , and Rae M Robertson - Anderson . Entangled f - actin displays a unique crossover to microscale nonlinearity dominated by entanglement segment dynamics . Soft matter , 11 ( 22 ) : 4418 – 4423 , 2015 . [ 76 ] Ikuko Fujiwara , Dimitrios Vavylonis , and Thomas D Pollard . Polymerization kinetics of adp - and adp - pi - actin determined by ﬂuorescence microscopy . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 104 ( 21 ) : 8827 – 8832 , 2007 . [ 77 ] Bernard R Brooks , Duˇsanka Janeˇziˇc , and Martin Karplus . Harmonic analysis of large systems . i . methodology . Journal of computational chemistry , 16 ( 12 ) : 1522 – 1542 , 1995 . [ 78 ] Haoran Ni and Garegin A Papoian . Membrane - medyan : Simulating deformable vesicles containing complex cytoskeletal networks . bioRxiv , 2021 . [ 79 ] Carlos Floyd , Aravind Chandresekaran , Haoran Ni , Qin Ni , and Garegin A Papoian . Segmental lennard - jones interactions for semi - ﬂexible polymer networks . Molecular Physics , page e1910358 , 2021 . [ 80 ] Olaf Wolkenhauer , Peter Wellstead , Kwang - Hyun Cho , Ramon Grima , and Santiago Schnell . Modelling reaction kinetics inside cells . Essays in biochemistry , 45 : 41 – 56 , 2008 . [ 81 ] David Bernstein . Simulating mesoscopic reaction - diﬀusion systems using the gillespie algorithm . Physical Review E , 71 ( 4 ) : 041103 , 2005 . [ 82 ] Daniel T Gillespie . Exact stochastic simulation of coupled chemical reactions . The journal of physical chemistry , 81 ( 25 ) : 2340 – 2361 , 1977 . [ 83 ] Thorsten Erdmann , Kathrin Bartelheimer , and Ulrich S Schwarz . Sensitivity of small myosin ii ensembles from diﬀerent isoforms to mechanical load and atp concentration . Physical Review E , 94 ( 5 ) : 052403 , 2016 . [ 84 ] Charles S Peskin , Garrett M Odell , and George F Oster . Cellular motions and thermal ﬂuctuations : the brownian ratchet . Biophysical journal , 65 ( 1 ) : 316 – 324 , 1993 . [ 85 ] A Ott , M Magnasco , A Simon , and A Libchaber . Measurement of the persistence length of polymerized actin using ﬂuorescence microscopy . Physical Review E , 48 ( 3 ) : R1642 , 1993 . [ 86 ] Andrej Vilfan and Thomas Duke . Instabilities in the transient response of muscle . Biophysical Journal , 85 ( 2 ) : 818 – 827 , 2003 . [ 87 ] BA DiDonna and Alex J Levine . Unfolding cross - linkers as rheology regulators in f - actin networks . Physical Review E , 75 ( 4 ) : 041909 , 2007 . [ 88 ] Neil Billington , Aibing Wang , Jian Mao , Robert S Adelstein , and James R Sellers . Characterization of three 35 full - length human nonmuscle myosin ii paralogs . Journal of Biological Chemistry , 288 ( 46 ) : 33398 – 33410 , 2013 . [ 89 ] Jorge M Ferrer , Hyungsuk Lee , Jiong Chen , Benjamin Pelz , Fumihiko Nakamura , Roger D Kamm , and Matthew J Lang . Measuring molecular rupture forces between single actin ﬁlaments and actin - binding proteins . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 105 ( 27 ) : 9221 – 9226 , 2008 . [ 90 ] Matthew J Footer , Jacob WJ Kerssemakers , Julie A Theriot , and Marileen Dogterom . Direct measurement of force generation by actin ﬁlament polymerization using an optical trap . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 104 ( 7 ) : 2181 – 2186 , 2007 . [ 91 ] Longhua Hu and Garegin A Papoian . Mechano - chemical feedbacks regulate actin mesh growth in lamellipodial protrusions . Biophysical journal , 98 ( 8 ) : 1375 – 1384 , 2010 . [ 92 ] Daniel H Wachsstock , WH Schwartz , and Thomas D Pollard . Aﬃnity of alpha - actinin for actin determines the structure and mechanical properties of actin ﬁlament gels . Biophysical journal , 65 ( 1 ) : 205 , 1993 . [ 93 ] Rudolf K Meyer and Ueli Aebi . Bundling of actin ﬁlaments by alpha - actinin depends on its molecular length . The Journal of cell biology , 110 ( 6 ) : 2013 – 2024 , 1990 . [ 94 ] Fran¸cois Chollet et al . Keras . https : / / keras . io , 2015 . [ 95 ] F . Pedregosa , G . Varoquaux , A . Gramfort , V . Michel , B . Thirion , O . Grisel , M . Blondel , P . Prettenhofer , R . Weiss , V . Dubourg , J . Vanderplas , A . Passos , D . Cournapeau , M . Brucher , M . Perrot , and E . Duchesnay . Scikit - learn : Machine learning in Python . Journal of Machine Learning Research , 12 : 2825 – 2830 , 2011 . [ 96 ] Jesse Davis and Mark Goadrich . The relationship between precision - recall and roc curves . In Proceedings of the 23rd international conference on Machine learning , pages 233 – 240 , 2006 . [ 97 ] Takaya Saito and Marc Rehmsmeier . The precision - recall plot is more informative than the roc plot when evaluating binary classiﬁers on imbalanced datasets . PloS one , 10 ( 3 ) , 2015 .