VASP Governs Actin Dynamics by Modulating Filament Anchoring Le´a Trichet , Otger Campa ` s , Ce´cile Sykes , and Julie Plastino Laboratoire Physicochimie Curie UMR 168 CNRS , Institut Curie - Section de Recherche , 11 rue Pierre et Marie Curie , 75231 Paris , cedex 05 , France ABSTRACT Actinﬁlament dynamicsatthecell membrane areimportantforcell - matrix andcell - celladhesions andtheprotrusion of the leading edge . Since actin ﬁlaments must be connected to the cell membrane to exert forces but must also detach from the membrane to allow it to move and evolve , the balance between actin ﬁlament tethering and detachment at adhesion sites and the leading edge is key for cell shape changes and motility . How this ﬁne tuning is performed in cells remains an open question , but possible candidates are the Drosophila enabled / vasodilator - stimulated phosphoprotein ( Ena / VASP ) family of proteins , which localize to dynamic actin structures in the cell . Here we study VASP - mediated actin - related proteins 2 / 3 ( Arp2 / 3 ) complex - dependent actin dynamics using a substrate that mimics the ﬂuid properties of the cell membrane : an oil - water interface . We show evidence that polymerization activators undergo diffusion and convection on the ﬂuid surface , due to continual attachment and detachment to the actin network . These dynamics are enhanced in the presence of VASP , and we observe cycles of catastrophic detachment of the actin network from the surface , resulting in stop - and - go motion . These results point to a role for VASP in the modulation of ﬁlament anchoring , with implications for actin dynamics at cell adhesions and at the leading edge of the cell . INTRODUCTION Major players in cellular actin dynamics include the poly - merization nucleating factors : the actin related proteins 2 / 3 ( Arp2 / 3 ) complex ( 1 ) and formins ( 2 ) , which often act in concert with the Drosophila enabled / Vasodilator - stimulated phophoprotein ( Ena / VASP ) family of proteins ( 3 ) . Ena / VASP proteins enhance actin dynamics by mechanisms that remain unclear although various functions have been attributed to them , including actin ﬁlament nucleation ( 4 ) , proﬁlin and G - actin recruitment ( 5 , 6 ) , anticapping activity ( 7 , 8 ) , ﬁlament detaching capability ( 9 ) , and ﬁlament bundling ( 10 ) . Much of what we know about how these and other actin - binding proteins affect actin structure formation and actin - based movement derives from studies performed using in vitro sys - tems , with either Listeria monocytogenes , beads , or vesicles as the substrate for actin polymerization ( ( 11 ) and references therein ) . The role of VASP in cells remains likewise unclear as VASP has been reported to be both a positive and negative regulator of cell motility and adhesion . VASP null ﬁbroblasts show an increase in overall cell motility ( 8 , 12 ) , whereas VASP null Dictyostelium shows a decrease in chemotaxis efﬁciency ( 13 ) . However , increased adhesion and migration are ob - served when VASP is speciﬁcally removed from integrin adhesion sites by genetic ablation of zyxin in ﬁbroblasts ( 14 ) . Likewise , VASP null platelets show enhanced aggregation ( 15 ) . Conversely , either an increase or a decrease in VASP in - teraction with cell - matrix adhesion sites by altering migﬁlin levels is detrimental to cell motility ( 16 ) . In regard to cell - cell contacts , VASP is present there and has been implicated in the actin reorganization accompanying early junction assembly ( 17 – 19 ) . All together , these results beg the question as to the role of VASP in the cell , in particular at adhesion sites . HerewestudyhowVASPaffectsArp2 / 3complex - catalyzed actin ﬁlament formation , using an oil droplet system that more closely mimics a cell membrane than previously used beads or Listeria , which have nonﬂuid surfaces . We ﬁnd that the presence of VASP provokes a transition from continuous to jumping motion , concomitant with changes in drop shape and inthe actin shell aroundthe drop . Werelatethese changes tothe interplay between the diffusive movement of unbound activa - tors and the convective movement of activators bound to actin ﬁlaments on the ﬂuid surface , highlighting the importance of the dynamic attachment of the membrane to the actin network in actin - based processes . MATERIALS AND METHODS Proteins and extracts Glutathione S - transferase ( GST ) fusions of the VCA fragment of WASP ( amino acids 402 – 503 ) , the PRO domain of ActA ( amino acids 235 – 584 ) , and the ActA - C domain of ActA ( amino acids 394 – 584 ) were cloned and puriﬁed as previously described ( 20 , 21 ) . These proteins are called simply VCA , PRO , and ActA - C in the text . Alexa 488 - labeled VCA and PRO were prepared following manufacturer’s instructions using Alexa Fluor 488 carboxylic acid succinimidyl ester ( Molecular Probes , Eugene , OR ) , at pH 8 , followed by dialysis into phosphate buffered saline ( PBS ) to remove excess label . HeLa cell extract was prepared and supplemented as previously described ( 22 ) with the following changes . The total protein concentration was 26 mg / ml by Bradford analysis and the extract was diluted 2 : 3 or 3 : 4 with buffer ( 10 mM Tris , 10 mM EGTA , 2 mM CaCl 2 , pH 7 . 5 ) before use . Extracts were supple - mentedwith1 m Mactinthatincludedupto0 . 5 m Mactin - Alexa594 ( Molecular Probes ) for epiﬂuorescence and confocal experiments . Droplet preparation Oil droplets were formed by sonicating ( Misonix Ultrasonic Liquid Pro - cessor , Farmingdale , NY ) a 10 % v / v oil ( Isio4 ) / protein mixture for 10 – 15 s Submitted June 28 , 2006 , and accepted for publication October 23 , 2006 . Address reprint requests to Julie Plastino , Tel . : 33 - 0 - 1 - 42 - 34 - 64 - 84 ; Fax : 33 - 0 - 1 - 42 - 34 - 67 - 96 ; E - mail : julie . plastino @ curie . fr . (cid:2) 2007 by the Biophysical Society 0006 - 3495 / 07 / 02 / 1081 / 09 $ 2 . 00 doi : 10 . 1529 / biophysj . 106 . 091884 Biophysical Journal Volume 92 February 2007 1081 – 1089 1081 at 50 – 100 W . Final protein concentrations in the sonicated mixture were 5 . 0 – 6 . 0 m M VCA and 0 . 8 m M PRO or ActA - C in PBS . The amount of VCA and PRO on the surface of the droplets is approximately the same as on the surface of hard beads ( 22 ) , with 6 nm between VCA molecules and 50 nm between PRO molecules , as evaluated by ﬂuorescently labeling the proteins and comparing drop ﬂuorescence to hard bead ﬂuorescence . For a typical reaction , 0 . 2 m L of the sonicate was mixed with 4 – 6 m L of extract , placed between slide and coverslip , sealed , and incubated at 23 (cid:3) C for 1 – 5 h before observation . Microscopy and immunolabeling Phase contrast and ﬂuorescence microscopy were performed on an Olympus ( Melville , NY ) upright microscope with a 100 3 oil objective . Images were obtained using an intensiﬁed charge - coupled device Coolsnap camera ( Roper Scientiﬁc , Evry , France ) . Confocal optical sections were taken us - ing a 100 3 oil objective on a Leica ( Wetzlar , Germany ) TCS SP2 confocal microscope . The z - series increment was 0 . 3 m m . Immunolabeling for VASP on droplet surfaces was performed using ﬂowcells composed of two parallel 165 m m - thick spacers overlaid by a coverslip and sealed on two sides with nail polish . Reagents were added , and washes were performed by pipetting on one side of the ﬂowcell and drawing out the liquid on the other side with a piece of Whatman ﬁlter paper . Reactions of 40 m L were incubated in the ﬂowcells in a moist chamber , ﬁxed with 1 % glutaraldehyde in cytoskeleton buffer ( 10 mM MES , 150 mM NaCl , 5 mM EGTA , 5 mM MgCl 2 , 5 mM glucose , pH 6 . 1 ) , and then probed with anti - VASP ( mouse IgG , BD Biosciences , Le Pont de Claix , France ) , followed by visualization with anti - mouse Alexa 488 ( Molecular Probes ) . Analysis of phase contrast and ﬂuorescence images Time - lapse tracking analyses were performed using Metamorph software . Unless noted otherwise , indicated velocities correspond to the velocity of the centroid of the drop . All indicated drop sizes are the radii of the spheres corresponding to the equivalent prolate volumes of the drops as estimated by Metamorph , using phase contrast or bright ﬁeld images . The error on the radii is estimated to be ; 1 pixel ( 6 0 . 1 m m ) . Elliptical form factors were given by Metamorph and e ratios were calculated by manually ﬁtting circles to the front and the back of drops . Measurements on confocal images were performed using confocal slices that passed through the center of the comet . Thickness measurements on phase contrast and confocal images were taken to be the distance between inﬂection points in the intensity curves obtained by linescan analysis . Back to front VCA ratios were calculated by performing linescan analysis along the axis of rotation of continuously moving drops and taking the quotient of the two maxima . Likewise , amounts of actin along the sides of drops was measured by performing linescan analysis across the span of the drop , perpendicular to the axis of rotation , and midway between the front and the back of the drop . The average of the maximum intensities was taken . For both linescan analyses , the line width was 0 . 7 m m and the average intensity across the line width was used . For all data , error bars are 6 one standard deviation from the mean . Points without errors bars indicate that a single measurement was taken . Contour analysis The experimentally obtained drop shape was digitized , and the ( x , y ) coor - dinates of the proﬁle were determined . The digitized drop proﬁle was then smoothed , using a 5 – 12 pixel window to soften the initial contour . The local radii of curvature at every point along the drop were obtained by differentia - tion of the smoothed drop proﬁle . A further smoothing step was performed to ﬁlter out the high frequency noise . A small region at the very front of the drop was used to determine the radius of curvature , R , in the absence of stress . Results remained unchanged upon reasonable variations of the size of this region , conﬁrming the determination of R . Any other point of the contour was deﬁned by two radii of curvature , r 1 ð x ; y Þ , characterizing the curvature in the direction determined by the local tangent of the drop proﬁle , and r 2 ð x ; y Þ , characterizing the curvature in the direction which is perpendicular to the local tangent of the drop proﬁle . ( Note that at the front of the droplet , r 1 ¼ r 2 ¼ R . ) To obtain the normal stress , s nn , we used Laplace’s law comparing the front and each point of the contour of coordinates ( x , y ) , s nn ð x ; y Þ ¼ g 1 r 1 ð x ; y Þ 1 1 r 2 ð x ; y Þ (cid:2) 2 R (cid:2) (cid:3) , with g the surface tension of the oil - extract interface , experimentally determined as 4 nN / m m ( 23 ) . The term 1 r 1 ð x ; y Þ 1 1 r 2 ð x ; y Þ (cid:2) (cid:3) represents the total curvature at the point ( x , y ) . Where the actin ﬁlaments are pushing on the surface of the drop , they ﬂatten the drop , r 1 and r 2 increase , and the normal stress is negative . Where actin ﬁlaments are pulling on the surface , the local curvature is larger than 2 = R , and the stress is positive . RESULTS VASP - mediated Arp2 / 3 complex - dependent actin polymerization on oil droplets We used two protein fragments , the VCA domain of the Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein ( WASP ) and the PRO portion of the ActA protein from Listeria to recruit the Arp2 / 3 complex and VASP , respectively , to oil droplet surfaces . Emulsions were prepared by sonicating mixes of VCA and oil , with or without PRO . Using ﬂuorescently labeled pro - teins , we observed that VCA and PRO bound to the oil droplet surfaces ( see below ) , probably via hydrophobic interactions . When VCA and VCA 1 PRO - coated droplets were placed in HeLa cell extracts , homogenous actin clouds formed and then the clouds polarized to form comets after 1 – 3 h of incubation ( Fig . 1 , a and b ) . Immunolabeling showed that VASP associated with the entire length of both VCA 1 PRO and VCA comets and with the surface of VCA 1 PRO drops under the comet but not with the surface of VCA drops ( Fig . 1 , c and d , respectively ) . VCA oil droplets , recruiting only the Arp2 / 3 complex at their surface , were pear - shaped ( Fig . 1 a ; ( 23 ) ) and displayed continuous motion at an average velocity of 0 . 15 6 0 . 07 m m / min , independent of drop size ( Supple - mentary Material , Fig . S1 ) . VCA 1 PRO droplets , recruiting VASP in addition to the Arp2 / 3 complex at their surface , were oval - shaped ( Fig . 1 b ) , moved ﬁve times faster than drops recruiting the Arp2 / 3 complex alone , 0 . 7 6 0 . 4 m m / min regardless of drop size ( Supplementary Material , Fig . S1 ) , and the comets were partially hollow ( Fig . 1 e ) . When ActA - C , corresponding to the PRO molecule but lacking the VASP binding site , was absorbed to droplet surfaces instead of PRO , the VCA 1 ActA - C droplets gave the VCA - only pheno - type , identical to Fig . 1 a . Depending on the sizes of the drops , up to ; 40 % of VASP - recruiting droplets displayed jumping movement , with high - and low - speed phases accompanied by optical density variations in the comet ( Fig . 1 f and Table 1 ) . For both continuous and jumping motion , the thickness of the side walls of the comet cylinder was not constant but in - creased with increasing drop size ( Fig . 1 g and Supplementary Material , Fig . S2 ) . 1082 Trichet et al . Biophysical Journal 92 ( 3 ) 1081 – 1089 For continuously moving drops , we quantiﬁed the shape differences shown in Fig . 1 , a and b , using two parameters : the elliptical form factor and the ratio e ( Fig . 2 , a and b ) . The elliptical form factor is the length of the long axis divided by the length of the short axis of the drop , and the ratio e is the radius of curvature of the back of the drop ( under the comet ) divided by the radius of curvature of the front of the drop ( schemes , Fig . 2 , a and b ) . These parameters give an eval - uation of the extent of drop elongation and asymmetry , re - spectively . On average , droplets recruiting VASP in addition to the Arp2 / 3 complex had higher elliptical form factors and e ratios closer to 1 than droplets recruiting the Arp2 / 3 complex alone , giving the VASP - recruiting drops a kiwi shape as opposed to a pear shape . The decrease in the e ratio and the increase in elliptical form factors with increasing drop size in both the presence and absence of VASP are explained by Laplace’s law : large drops have a smaller internal pressure and are thus more easily deformed than small drops . Using ﬂuorescently labeled proteins , we visualized the lo - calization of VCA and PRO on droplets undergoing contin - uous motion ( Fig . 2 , c – g ) . We observed that the VCA density at the back of the drop as compared to the front in - creased with drop radius , showing exponential relations for both VCA 1 PRO droplets , exponent 0 . 30 6 0 . 01 m m (cid:2) 1 , and VCA droplets , exponent 0 . 34 6 0 . 02 m m (cid:2) 1 ( Fig . 2 h , red and blue curves , respectively , and images c – f ) . Fluorescently labeled PRO on VCA 1 PRO droplets resembled VCA distri - bution ( Fig . 2 g ) . Hopping motion of oil droplets VCA 1 PRO droplets differ from VCA droplets in their shape , comet morphology , and displacement speed . More impor - tantly , VCA 1 PRO droplets often displayed hopping motion , whereas VCA droplets never did . To understand how jumping motion could result from the presence of VASP , we did an in - depth study of hopping droplets . Typical jumping droplets of various sizes are shown in Fig . 3 , a – c , by phase contrast microscopy with the accompanying velocity cycle measured for the center of mass of the drop . ( For movies of drops of Fig . 3 , a and c , see Supplementary Material , Videos 1 – 2 . ) The maximum and minimum velocities of the center of mass of the droplets were independent of drop size , 6 . 0 6 2 . 0 m m / min and 0 . 7 6 0 . 2 m m / min , respectively . Low - speed phases were associatedwithdenseactinbuildup , whereashigh - speedphases were characterized by reduced actin accumulation , giving the comets a striped appearance by phase contrast microscopy . During a velocity cycle , the droplets changed shape , Fig . 3 , d – o . The arrows on the velocity graphs indicate where each image was taken , and Fig . 3 p shows traces of elliptical form factor and ratio e over the course of a velocity cycle of the drop shown in Fig . 3 b . Overall , droplets were essentially round coming out of the high - speed phase ( ratio e equaled 1 and the elliptical form factor was at a minimum ) , and they FIGURE 1 Actin comets form on oil droplets recruiting the Arp2 / 3 com - plex and VASP . Phase contrast microscopy of droplets coated with VCA shows a full comet that pinches the drop into a pear shape ( a ) , whereas drops coated with a mixture of VCA and PRO have partially hollow comets and are deformed into an oval shape ( b ) . Immunolabeling of VCA 1 PRO drop - lets ( c ) and VCA droplets ( d ) ; left panel : phase contrast and right panel : anti - VASP , shows VASP localization at the surface of VCA 1 PRO droplets , and a stain throughout the comets on both VCA and VCA 1 PRO droplets . ( e ) Comet hollowness is conﬁrmed by confocal microscopy . Actin in red , VCA in green . ( f ) Phase contrast microscopy shows the striped comet of a jumping droplet . All bars are 2 m m except for the confocal image where the bar is 10 m m . ( g ) Comet wall thicknesses ( red circles ) and interior cavity spans ( blue squares ) as a function of drop radius . Measurements were performed using confocal sections ( solid symbols ) and phase contrast images ( open symbols ) . Both wall thickness and interior span increase linearly with increasing drop size giving line slopes of 0 . 3 ( correlation factor ¼ 0 . 91 ) and 0 . 9 ( correlation factor , 0 . 95 ) , respectively . TABLE 1 Percentage of hopping drops ( in relation to the total number of comets , both continuous and jumping ) as a function radius Droplet radius ( m m ) % Hopping Comet count 0 – 1 43 . 3 30 1 – 2 35 . 2 88 2 – 3 18 . 2 55 3 – 4 14 . 9 47 4 – 5 12 . 2 41 5 – 6 15 . 4 26 6 – 7 7 . 1 14 7 – 8 0 8 VASP Modulates Filament Anchoring 1083 Biophysical Journal 92 ( 3 ) 1081 – 1089 subsequently assumed an inverted pear shape ( ratio e . 1 ) . Note that inverted pear shapes were also observed preceding comet formation on droplets ( Fig . 3 q ) . As the low - speed phase progressed , the back of the drop became pinched ( ratio e decreased ) and the drop also elongated ( increasing elliptical form factor ) . Importantly , only after the elliptical form factor reached a maximum and started to decline did the drop begin accelerating , attaining its maximum velocity and reverting to a round shape . Drop shapes are indicative of the forces exerted by the actin ﬁlaments growing on the drop surface , and the force per unit surface , or normal stress , can be estimated by using the Laplace equation , as developed previously ( 23 – 25 ) . As such , changes in shape are the signature of a redistribution of forces on the surface . Inverted pear - , kiwi - , and round - shaped drops during atypical jump are shown in Fig . 4 , a – c , with the surface stresses plotted as a function of the position along the drop proﬁle ( Fig . 4 , d and e ) . ( See also Supplementary Material , Video 3 . ) Compressive stresses are negative , and pulling stresses are positive . The top traces describe the stresses in play along the front of the drops , and the bottom traces along the back halves of the drops . A round drop had a stress that hovered around zero within the error of the measurement at every point along the contour ( green curves ) . For the kiwi shape , compressive stresses developed along the sides of the drop , whereas pulling stresses were evident at the back ( blue curves ) . More importantly , for the inverted pear shape , only squeezing stresses were at work ( negative values for the red curves in Fig . 4 , d and e ) except at the very front of the drop where the stress vanished . As a result of these compressive stresses , the drop was squeezed out the front of the actin pouch , where there was no ( or little ) actin , reminiscent of sym - metry breaking events on droplets ( Fig . 3 q ) . To see how the center of mass measurements compared to the velocities of the front and the back of the drop , we performed a kymograph analysis ( Fig . 5 a ) . During the low - speed phase , the back of the drop moved more slowly than the front due to elongation of the drop , in this case , 1 . 0 m m / min vs . 1 . 3 m m / min . The front and the back appeared to jump together ( follow the light gray vertical rule in Fig . 5 a ) although the back began picking up speed slightly before the front . As the back snapped forward into the round shape , it made up for the difference incurred during the slow phase by moving faster than the front , for this particular jump , 8 . 0 m m / min vs . 6 . 1 m m / min . Drops stepped forward one diameter during each cycle , as can be seen in Fig . 5 a ( the distance between dark stripes in the comet ) and as is quantiﬁed for a whole population of jumping drops of different sizes in Fig . 5 b ( red curve ) . In addition , large droplets spent more time performing each cycle , as shown by the linear increase in the time interval ( time between two maximum velocities ) with increasing drop size ( Fig . 5 b , blue curve ) . To a ﬁrst approximation , we can say that during the entire step time the drop was moving at the low - speed velocity of 0 . 7 m m / min ( 0 . 01 m m / s ) , since the time spent in the low - speed phase greatly exceeded the time spent in the high - speed phase ( kymograph , horizontal projection of the yellow and green lines , respectively ) . The low - speed velocity multiplied FIGURE 2 Droplets recruiting VASP in addition to the Arp2 / 3 complex are more elongated but less pinched than droplets recruiting the Arp2 / 3 complex alone , and both drop types accumulate VCA under the comet . ( a ) Elliptical form factors , calculated by dividing the long axis ‘‘ b ’’ of the drop by the small axis ‘‘ a ’’ and ( b ) Values of the e ratio , calculated by transcribing the front and the back of the drop as circles , and then dividing the radius of the back circle ‘‘ l ’’ by the radius of the front circle ‘‘ R ’’ . Both parameters are plotted as a function of radius for drops recruiting the Arp2 / 3 complex only ( blue squares ) or VASP in addition to the Arp2 / 3 complex ( red circles ) . Paired phase contrast ( top ) andﬂuorescence ( bottom ) images of VCA ( c , d ) and VCA 1 PRO ( e – g ) drops undergoing con - tinuous motion . The asterisks in the labels indicate which molecules are ﬂuorescently labeled . Bars 2 m m . ( h ) Inten - sities of VCA ﬂuorescence were recorded along the long axis of moving drops , and the intensity under the comet was divided by the intensity at the front of the drop to give the VCA ratio in arbitrary units , which was plotted as a function of drop radius . Droplets coated with VCA alone ( blue squares ) and droplets coated with VCA 1 PRO ( red circles ) . The points ﬁt to exponential functions ( solid lines ) with exponents of 0 . 34 6 0 . 02 m m (cid:2) 1 and 0 . 30 6 0 . 01 m m (cid:2) 1 , respectively . Letters on the graph refer to the images ( c – f ) . 1084 Trichet et al . Biophysical Journal 92 ( 3 ) 1081 – 1089 by the step time of ( 100 s / m m ) 3 R ( Fig . 5 b , blue curve ) therefore gives R as the distance traveled during the low - speed phase , where R is the radius of the droplet . Since the step size is 2 R ( Fig . 5 b , red curve , slope 2 . 1 ) , this means that the droplet traveled a radius length at low velocity and another radius length during the high velocity phase . Indeed , from the kymograph , we can see that the distance traveled during the low - speed phase ( vertical projection of the yellow line ) is approximately equal to the distance traveled during the high - speed phase ( vertical projection of the green line ) . To visualize the waves of actin accumulation at the drop surface during a velocity cycle , we used extract supplemented with ﬂuorescently labeled actin monomers and recorded ﬂuorescence images during jumps ( Fig . 6 , a and b ) . A con - tinuously moving drop is shown for comparison ( Fig . 6 , c and d ) . The inverted pear in the low - speed phase had more actin along the sides than the kiwi in the acceleration phase , whereas the ﬂuorescence intensity along the sides of the con - tinuously moving drop was almost invariant over the course of the observation . These waves of actin accumulation would be presumed to reﬂect a redistribution of VCA molecules on the drop surface . To test this , we compared VCA polarization on 2 – 3 - m m radius jumping drops in the low - speed round phase or accelerating kiwi phase and observed no signiﬁcant differences in VCA distribution ( data not shown ) , indicating that ﬂuctuations were small . In fact , even in the round phase of a jump , the drop is still moving , so we would not expect VCA to be completely homogenous . DISCUSSION The function of VASP in cell migration and adhesion remains an open question , as different effects have been reported depending on what cell line and organelle are under study . Furthermore , in vitro studies have pointed toward multiple and sometimes contradictory functions for VASP , including actin ﬁlament nucleation , G - actin recruitment , proﬁlin re - cruitment , competition with capping protein , and detachment FIGURE 3 VASP - recruiting droplets in a range of sizes display jumping behavior involving velocity changes , actin density variations in the comet , and shape modulations . Phase contrast microscopy of ( a ) radius ¼ 1 . 2 m m , ( b ) radius ¼ 2 . 1 m m , and ( c ) radius ¼ 3 . 4 m m jumping drops and their accompanying velocity cycles as a function of elapsed time . Arrows on the velocity cycle graphs refer to blowups ( d – o ) featuring drop deformations at various times of each cycle . ( p ) A summary of how shape changes are asso - ciated with velocity changes , with elliptical form fac - tors ( blue ) and e ratios ( red ) plotted as an overlay on a velocity cycle . ( q ) shows a droplet where the symmet - rical actin cloud that precedes comet formation is breaking open , phase contrast ( left panel ) and ﬂuores - cence microscopy using labeled actin ( right panel ) . All bars are 2 m m . VASP Modulates Filament Anchoring 1085 Biophysical Journal 92 ( 3 ) 1081 – 1089 of Arp2 / 3 complex branch complexes from activating pro - teins . Here we use deformable , ﬂuid oil droplet surfaces to study VASP - mediated Arp2 / 3 complex - catalyzed actin poly - merization under conditions that mimic the plasma membrane of the cell , and attempt to shed light on what VASP might be doing in cells . Immunolabeling for VASP of VCA 1 PRO oil droplets shows a crescent of stain directly on the surface of the drop , whereas drops coated with VCA alone have no speciﬁc surface recruitment of VASP ( Fig . 1 , c and d ) . The distribution of VASP on the VCA 1 PRO drop surface is asymmetric and mirrorsthePROdistribution ( Fig . 2 g ) , asexpected . Inaddition , consistent with its F - actin binding properties ( 4 ) , VASP is present along the entire length of both VCA and VCA 1 PRO comets and is in fact less intense on VCA 1 PRO comets because they are hollow . We conclude from this that VASP affects droplet movement only when positioned directly on the surface , close to the VCA molecules , and that similar levels of VASP in the body of the comet do not inﬂuence drop motility . In the presence of VASP at the surface , oil droplets produce partially hollow comets ( Fig . 1 e ) , similar to what we previ - ously observed for hard beads ( 22 ) . Hollow comets could be explained by monomer diffusion limitation of polymerization at the center of the comet . If this were the case , comet wall thickness would be expected to be constant , whereas we ﬁnd that the thickness of the side walls of comets increases with increasing drop size ( Fig . 1 g ) , ruling out diffusion limitation . Hollow comets on kiwi - shaped drops are speciﬁcally as - sociated with the surface recruitment of VASP and are not due to the PRO molecule itself . Indeed , when VCA is co - adsorbed with ActA - C , which is identical to PRO but lacks the VASP binding site , full comets on pear - shaped droplets were observed , as for VCA - coated droplets . The kiwi shape ob - served for VCA 1 PRO droplets results directly from partial comet hollowness since there is little actin at the back of the drop , and therefore the normal ( pulling ) stresses are small , on the order of 1 . 5 nN / m m 2 ( data not shown ) as opposed to 16 nN / m m 2 for the normal stress at the rear of a pear - shaped droplet ( 23 ) . The fact that the normal stress at the back of the kiwi is not zero indicates that actin is still polymerizing there , in agreement with the observation that there is still some ﬂuorescent actin signal in the comet cavity and that VCA mole - cules are present along the whole back part of the drop . VCA is concentrated under the comet in the case of both VCA and VCA 1 PRO droplets ( Fig . 2 , c – f and h ) , a situation different from hard beads where VCA molecules are immo - bilized and symmetrically absorbed . The extent of VCA asymmetry increases exponentially with droplet radius . To understand this dependency , we have to consider how VCA molecules move on a ﬂuid surface during actin - based move - ment . The asymmetrical distribution of VCA molecules sug - gests that the VCA molecules are convected ( dragged ) by the FIGURE 4 Analysis of contours indicates that the distribution and mag - nitudeofpushingandpullingnormalstressesonthedropvaryoverthecourse ofa jump . ( a – c ) Blowupsofphasecontrastimagesofinvertedpear , kiwi , and round shapes recorded during the velocity jump of a 1 . 7 - m m radius drop and analysis of the stresses developedat the drop surface as a function of position along the contour for the front ( d ) and the back ( e ) of the drop . The x coordinatecorresponds to the distancealong the contourlength from the zero position , which is placed at the extreme front and back of the drop ( ‘‘ F ’’ and ‘‘ B ’’ in a – c ) . The gray bands in d and e indicate the estimated error in the calculated normalstress , 6 0 . 5nN / m m 2 , derivedfromerrorsinthegeneration of r 1 , r 2 , and R valuesfromthesmoothedproﬁle ( seeMaterialsandMethods ) . The traces in d and e correspond to stresses in the regions traced out in the same color on the phasecontrast images . The gaps in the contours are a result of the smoothing process . Bar , 2 m m . FIGURE 5 Kymograph analysis of jumps and parameters of the velocity cycle . ( a ) Kymograph derived from a phase contrast time - lapse acquisition of the drop shown in Fig . 3 c , radius ¼ 3 . 4 m m . The drop is moving upward , the edges of the drop appear white , and the slopes of the white portions correspond to the velocities of the front and back of the drop . Green and yellow lines depict the front of the drop during the high - speed and low - speed phases , respectively , and blue and red lines mark out the back of the drop during the high - speed and low - speed phases , respectively . Dark stripes behind the drop indicate the high density phases of the comet , which do not extend to the right side of the kymograph due to a change in focal plane of the drop . ( b ) Step time and step size are dependent on the size of the drop . In blue ( squares ) , the elapsed time between maximum velocity peaks as a function of drop size . The dependence is linear with a slope of 100 . 4 s / m m ( correlation factor ¼ 0 . 78 ) . In red ( circles ) the distance between actin - rich stripes as a function of drop radius , measured on phase contrast images ( open symbols ) and confocal slices ( ﬁlled symbols ) . The dependence is linear with a slope of 2 . 1 ( correlation factor , 0 . 95 ) . 1086 Trichet et al . Biophysical Journal 92 ( 3 ) 1081 – 1089 actin ﬁlaments that form the comet toward the rear of the drop at a velocity equal to the droplet velocity . However convec - tion alone would give the same VCA distribution for all drop sizes , not the exponential relation that we observe . To explain this , we have to take into account the dynamics of the ﬁlament - VCA interaction , in particular the possibility that the VCA mol - ecules can detach from the ﬁlaments . Once the VCA molecules detach from a ﬁlament , they would be free to diffuse on the droplet surface until they reattach to another ﬁlament . We propose that it is the interplay of convection , unbind - ing , diffusion , and rebinding that determines the ratio of VCA density between the back and the front of the droplet . In keeping with this , a simple model of this interplay ( Supple - mentary Material , Discussion ) predicts an exponential de - pendence of VCA ratio on drop size , ð r back = r front Þ ¼ e ð R = l Þ , where R is the droplet radius , r is the VCA density ( propor - tional to the ﬂuorescence intensity ) , and ‘ is the characteristic length of the exponential , ‘ ¼ 2 p ‘ 1 3 1 = ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ 1 1 2 ‘ 1 ‘ 2 (cid:2) (cid:3) 2 r (cid:2) 1 . The value of ‘ depends on two other characteristic lengths : ‘ 1 ¼ ð V = k u Þ , the convection - unbinding length ( the distance traveled by a VCA molecule attached to a ﬁlament until it detaches ) and ‘ 2 ¼ ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ ð D = k b Þ p , the diffusion - binding length ( the distance traveled by a free VCA molecule before it attaches to a ﬁlament ) , where V is the drop velocity , k u is the rate constant of unbinding , D is the diffusion coefﬁcient of VCA molecules on the drop surface , and k b is the rate con - stant of binding . For simplicity , we assume that D is invari - ant on drop surfaces . The surfaces are saturated by proteins absorbed from the cell extracts ( 23 ) , and these proteins do not interact with the actin comet and therefore would not create signiﬁcant gradients in diffusion coefﬁcients or surface tension . Experimentally the lengths ‘ of the exponential are found to be 3 . 3 m m and 2 . 9 m m for VCA 1 PRO and VCA drops , respectively ( the inverse of the exponents 0 . 30 m m (cid:2) 1 and 0 . 34 m m (cid:2) 1 in Fig . 2 h ) . For drop radii larger than ‘ , each small increase in drop size results in a large increase in the VCA density at the back of the drop as compared to the front , producing a slightly steeper curve for VCA drops as opposed to VCA 1 PRO drops . This is surprising , given the fact that VASP - recruiting drops move ﬁvefold more quickly and therefore would be expected to have a larger convection term ( larger ‘ 1 ) , resulting in a higher concentration of VCA under the comet . The velocity effect could be canceled out by an increase in unbinding ( k u ) or a decrease in binding ( k b ) , which would decrease the convection length and increase the diffusion length , respectively . These changes in the associ - ation constants translate to a weakening of the attachment of ﬁlaments to VCA molecules in the presence of VASP . This result adds to a growing body of evidence that VASP is not just involved in polymerization enhancement but , in addition , is associated with an overall physical effect of de - creasing the attachment of actin ﬁlaments to polymerizing proteins acting from a surface . Since attached ﬁlaments func - tion as a brake to forward movement , a decrease in attach - ment results in enhanced motility . The weakening of comet / surface links can also explain the occurrence of hollow com - ets in the presence of VASP as the weakened links rupture at the center of the comet where pulling forces are highest ( 22 ) . Furthermore , temperature compensation experiments using mutant Listeria support the idea that VASP affects motility via a de - adhesion effect ( 26 ) . Under certain conditions , VASP does not enhance actin polymerization in solution but never - theless catalyzes F - actin production when polymerization - activating proteins are immobilized on a surface ( 9 ) , again pointing to an effect that is not wholly dependant on poly - merization enhancement . Finally , when VASP is enriched at the plasma membrane of cells , the actin network appears to collapse beneath the membrane instead of undergoing sus - tained protrusion ( 8 ) , and the ﬁlament ends no longer abut the plasma membrane in the direction of movement . All of these independent observations , together with this study , point toward an attenuation of the attachment of growing ﬁlaments to polymerization - activating proteins in the presence of VASP . This result , together with the fact that we only observed hopping motion in the presence of VASP and almost never FIGURE 6 Form changes during the velocity cycle of jumping drops are associated with changes in the amount of actin along the sides of the drop , variations that are not observed during continuous motion . Fluorescence microscopy images using labeled actin of a jumping 1 . 6 - m m radius drop in inverted pear form ( a ) and kiwi form ( b ) and a continuous 1 . 7 - m m radius drop ( c – d ) . Accompanying velocity cycle graphs for each drop are shown below the images . Fluorescence intensity ( red curves , arbitrary units ) was measured along the sides of the drop at various times during drop movement using line scans of ﬂuorescence intensity of the center of the drop , per - pendicular to the direction of movement . For the images shown , the region where the ﬂuorescence was measured is marked by the red rectangles , and these points are indicated by the small letters in the velocity graphs . The error bars on the ﬂuorescence intensity indicate the standard deviations from the average of the two sides of the drop . Bar , 2 m m . VASP Modulates Filament Anchoring 1087 Biophysical Journal 92 ( 3 ) 1081 – 1089 on hard beads under the same conditions ( 22 ) , suggested to us that jumping movement was triggered by the conjunction of weakened ﬁlament attachment and surface ﬂuidity , as fol - lows . Going through a velocity cycle step by step , just after a peak in velocity , stresses exerted on the surface of the drop are small , and the droplet has a rounded shape with ratio e values of 1 , in keeping with the fact that there is little actin around the drop . However since the droplets are in a low Reynolds number situation and inertial effects are therefore negligible , the nonzero velocity of the low - speed phase indi - cates that there is still some contact between the drop and the actin network . In agreement with this , elliptical form factors only approach 1 , indicating that the drops are still slightly elongated , due to residual contact with the actin comet along the droplet sides . Subsequently , actin accumulates almost all around the drop , compressing it , and leading to the inverted pear shape . Convection of actin ﬁlaments / VCA molecules toward the rear of the drop then occurs , expelling the drop out the front , as for a symmetry breaking event . The drop assumes a more elongated shape as actin accumulates at the back of the drop , increasing the pulling forces and leading to rupture of the links between the comet and the surface . De - tached VCA molecules may diffuse away on the ﬂuid sur - face , decreasing attachment to the comet still further . Since diminishing the number of links puts even more stress on the existing links , their rupture may proceed in a cascade fashion , leading to a catastrophic breakage of the links and the forward jump of the drop . In keeping with this order of events , we observe that the drop begins to relax ( decrease in elliptical form factor ) , implying link breakage , just before the velocity begins to increase ( Fig . 3 p ) . The jump is sustained until complete loss of contact with the hemispheric pouch of actin , meaning over a distance R . In the absence of VASP , the connection between the actin ﬁlaments and the VCA mole - cules is more robust , and thus jumping is rarely observed . In the framework of our model and using the distances calculated using Fig . 5 ( see Results ) , we can suggest that the low - speed phase is the convection of actin ﬁlaments / VCA molecules toward the rear of the drop , clearing the forward hemisphere of the drop over a distance of R and that the high - speed phase is the expulsion of the drop from the hemisphere of actin that transcribes the back of the drop , thus also giving rise to a distance R . These measurements bring to light fun - damental differences concerning previously observed hop - ping hard beads where jump distance , as well as maximal jump velocities , decreased with increasing bead size ( 20 , 27 ) . In the case of hard beads , jumping motion is due to the op - position of the elastic propulsion force and the friction force . Friction develops when the sliding of the actin network to - ward the rear of the bead during movement is impeded by the attachment between the immobile VCA molecules on the bead surface and the actin ﬁlaments ( 27 ) . We propose that , in this study , diffusion and convection of VCA , not friction and elasticity , determine step character - istics . We observe waves of actin accumulation along the sides of jumping drops ( Fig . 6 ) , indicating that VCA is also moving on the drop surface over the course of a jump . Two other pieces of data also point toward VCA movement during jumps . First , for hard beads recruiting VASP , links break to produce hollow comets ( 22 ) , but complete rupture is rare , maybe because detached activators cannot diffuse away on the surface . This would predict that if the rupture of the links at the back of droplets is only partial , continuous hol - low comets would be observed , and experimentally , it is at this stage of the velocity cycle that jumping drops sometimes become continuous . In support of this idea , the thickness of the sides of the actin pouches during jumping motion were approximately equal to the sides of continuous hollow com - ets with a similar dependence on droplet radius ( Supple - mentary Material , Fig . S2 ) . A second indication that VCA molecules move during jumps is that jumping events are rare for larger drops ( Table 1 ) . In this case , catastrophes may be reduced by the fact that the diffusion length ‘ 2 ¼ ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ ð D = k b Þ p is small compared to the portion of the drop under the comet , meaning that the detached VCA molecules cannot diffuse out from under the comet before reattaching . At a mesoscopic scale , we can explain our results with a convection - unbinding - diffusion - binding model , in conjunc - tion with the idea that VASP weakens the attachment be - tween the comet and the VCA molecules on the drop surface . VASP enhancement of barbed end polymerization ( either via nucleation , G - actin / proﬁlin recruitment , or anticapping ac - tivity ) is probably operational as well ; however polymeriza - tion enhancement alone does not explain certain aspects of our work . In particular , comet hollowness is difﬁcult to ex - plain by an increase in polymerization efﬁciency . It is clear from this study that hollowness does not result from dif - fusion limitation of monomers to the center of the comet . In addition , as pointed out in the discussion of jumping drops , rupture precedes velocity enhancement ( the kiwi shape of the drop begins to relax just before the jump takes place ) . If en - hanced polymerization were the cause of rupture , we would expect the opposite sequence of events . However the molecular basis of VASP de - adhesion activity remains unclear . One possibility is reduced branching of actin ﬁlamentsinthepresenceofVASP , asobservedinsolution ( 28 ) , on beads ( 22 ) , and in cells ( 8 ) . This may lead to a less robust attachment between the actin network and VCA molecules on the drop surface either because ﬁlaments are sparser or because VCA interaction with ﬁlamentous actin via the Arp2 / 3 complex is reduced . Another possibility is that VASP acts by catalyzingthedetachmentofArp2 / 3complexbranchstructures from polymerization - activating molecules ( 9 ) , although there is no direct evidence for this , and furthermore VASP does not seem to interact directly with the Arp2 / 3 complex ( 29 ) . CONCLUSION Overall the results observed here in the presence of VASP are consistent with a model where attachment and detachment 1088 Trichet et al . Biophysical Journal 92 ( 3 ) 1081 – 1089 of actin ﬁlaments to polymerization activators , coupled with diffusion and convection of activators on the surface , governs the growth and collapse of an actin network . Furthermore , the idea that VASP ﬁne tunes the anchoring of the actin cyto - skeleton to the cell membrane at the leading edge and at adhesion sites can explain much of what has been observed in cells . This VASP activity may be particularly important in cell - cell adhesions where it has been shown that the link between the cadherin - catenin complex and the underlying actin cytoskeleton is surprisingly dynamic to allow morpho - genic changes over the course of development ( 30 ) . SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL An online supplement to this article can be found by visiting BJ Online at http : / / www . biophysj . org . We thank Jean - Franc x ois Joanny for fruitful discussions and Jasper van der Gucht for discussions and comments on the manuscript . This work was funded in part by a grant from the Human Frontiers Science Program to C . S . and a grant ACI from the French Ministe ` re de la recherche to J . P . L . T . is supported by a Ministe ` re de la recherche fellowship . O . C . thanks the European Network PHYNECS ( HPRN - CT - 2006 - 00312 ) and the Ministerio de Educacio´n y Ciencia for ﬁnancial support . REFERENCES 1 . Pollard , T . D . , L . Blanchoin , and R . D . Mullins . 2000 . Molecular mech - anisms controlling actin ﬁlament dynamics in nonmuscle cells . Annu . Rev . Biophys . Biomol . Struct . 29 : 545 – 576 . 2 . Kovar , D . R . 2006 . Molecular details of formin - mediated actin assembly . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 18 : 11 – 17 . 3 . Krause , M . , E . W . Dent , J . E . Bear , J . J . Loureiro , and F . B . Gertler . 2003 . Ena / VASP proteins : regulators of the actin cytoskeleton and cell migration . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 19 : 541 – 564 . 4 . Hu¨ttelmaier , S . , B . Harbeck , O . Steffens , T . Messerschmidt , S . Illenberger , and B . M . Jockusch . 1999 . Characterization of the actin binding properties of the vasodilator - stimulated phosphoprotein VASP . FEBS Lett . 451 : 68 – 74 . 5 . Reinhard , M . , C . Giehl , K . Abel , C . Haffner , T . Jarchau , V . Hoppe , B . M . Jockusch , and U . Walter . 1995 . The proline - rich focal adhesion and microﬁlament protein VASP is a ligand for proﬁlins . EMBO J . 14 : 1583 – 1589 . 6 . Walders - Harbeck , B . , S . Y . Khaitlina , H . Hinssen , B . M . Jockusch , and S . Illenberger . 2002 . The vasodilator - stimulated phosphoprotein pro - motes actin polymerisation through direct binding to monomeric actin . FEBS Lett . 529 : 275 – 280 . 7 . Barzik , M . , T . I . Kotova , H . N . Higgs , L . Hazelwood , D . Hanein , F . B . Gertler , and D . A . Schafer . 2005 . Ena / VASP proteins enhance actin poly - merization in the presence of barbed end capping proteins . J . Biol . Chem . 280 : 28653 – 28662 . 8 . Bear , J . E . , T . M . Svitkina , M . Krause , D . A . Schafer , J . J . Loureiro , G . A . Strasser , I . V . Maly , O . Y . Chaga , J . A . Cooper , G . G . Borisy , and F . B . Gertler . 2002 . Antagonism between Ena / VASP proteins and actin ﬁlament capping regulates ﬁbroblast motility . Cell . 109 : 509 – 521 . 9 . Samarin , S . , S . Romero , C . Kocks , D . Didry , D . Pantaloni , and M . - F . Carlier . 2003 . How VASP enhances actin - based motility . J . Cell Biol . 163 : 131 – 142 . 10 . Schirenbeck , A . , R . Arasada , T . Bretschneider , T . Stradal , M . Schleicher , and J . Faix . 2006 . The bundling activity of vasodilator - stimulated phosphoprotein is required for ﬁlopodium formation . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 103 : 7694 – 7699 . 11 . Plastino , J . , and C . Sykes . 2005 . The actin slingshot . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 17 : 62 – 66 . 12 . Bear , J . E . , J . J . Loureiro , I . Libova , R . Fa¨ssler , J . Wehland , and F . B . Gertler . 2000 . Negative regulation of ﬁbroblast motility by Ena / VASP proteins . Cell . 101 : 717 – 728 . 13 . Han , Y . - H . , C . Y . Chung , D . Wessels , S . Stephens , M . A . Titus , D . R . Soll , and R . A . Firtel . 2002 . Requirement of a vasodilator - stimulated phos - phoprotein family member for cell adhesion , the formation of ﬁlopodia and chemotaxis in Dictyostelium . J . Biol . Chem . 277 : 49877 – 49887 . 14 . Hoffman , L . M . , C . C . Jensen , S . Kloeker , C . - L . A . Wang , M . Yoshigi , and M . C . Beckerle . 2006 . Genetic ablation of zyxin causes Mena / VASP mislocalization , increased motility , and deﬁcits in actin remodeling . J . Cell Biol . 172 : 771 – 782 . 15 . Aszo´di , A . , A . Pfeifer , M . Ahmad , M . Glauner , X . - H . Zhou , L . Ny , K . - E . Andersson , B . Kehrel , S . Offermanns , and R . Fa¨ssler . 1999 . The vasodilator - stimulated phosphoprotein ( VASP ) is involved in cGMP - and cAMP - mediated inhibition of agonist - induced platelet aggregation , but is dispensable for smooth muscle function . EMBO J . 18 : 37 – 48 . 16 . Zhang , Y . , Y . Tu , V . Gkretsi , and C . Wu . 2006 . Migﬁlin interacts with vasodilator - stimulated phosphoprotein ( VASP ) and regulates VASP localization to cell - matrix adhesions and migration . J . Biol . Chem . 281 : 12397 – 12407 . 17 . Vasioukhin , V . , C . Bauer , M . Yin , and E . Fuchs . 2000 . Directed actin polymerization is the driving force for epithelial cell - cell adhesion . Cell . 100 : 209 – 219 . 18 . Hansen , M . D . H . , and M . C . Beckerle . 2006 . Opposing roles of zyxin / LPP ACTA repeats and the LIM domain region in cell - cell adhesion . J . Biol . Chem . 281 : 16178 – 16188 . 19 . Scott , J . A . , A . M . Shewan , N . R . den Elzen , J . J . Loureiro , F . B . Gertler , and A . S . Yap . 2006 . Ena / VASP proteins can regulate distinct modes of actin organization at cadherin - sensitive contacts . Mol . Biol . Cell . 17 : 1085 – 1095 . 20 . Bernheim - Groswasser , A . , S . Wiesner , R . M . Golsteyn , M . - F . Carlier , and C . Sykes . 2002 . The dynamics of actin - based motility depend on surface parameters . Nature . 417 : 308 – 311 . 21 . Golsteyn , R . M . , M . C . Beckerle , T . Koay , and E . Friederich . 1997 . Structural and functional similarities between the human cytoskeletal protein zyxin and the ActA protein of Listeria monocytogenes . J . Cell Sci . 110 : 1893 – 1906 . 22 . Plastino , J . , S . Olivier , and C . Sykes . 2004 . Actin ﬁlaments align into hollow comets for rapid VASP - mediated propulsion . Curr . Biol . 14 : 1766 – 1771 . 23 . Boukellal , H . , O . Campas , J . - F . Joanny , J . Prost , and C . Sykes . 2004 . Soft Listeria : actin - based propulsion of liquid drops . Phys . Rev . E . 69 : 061906 . 24 . Upadhyaya , A . , J . R . Chabot , A . Andreeva , A . Samadani , and A . van Oudenaarden . 2003 . Probing polymerization forces by using actin - propelled lipid vesicles . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 100 : 4521 – 4526 . 25 . Giardini , P . A . , D . A . Fletcher , and J . A . Theriot . 2003 . Compression forces generated by actin comet tails on lipid vesicles . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 100 : 6493 – 6498 . 26 . Soo , F . S . , and J . A . Theriot . 2005 . Adhesion controls bacterial actin polymerization - based movement . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 102 : 16233 – 16238 . 27 . Bernheim - Groswasser , A . , J . Prost , and C . Sykes . 2005 . Mechanism of actin - based motility : a dynamic state diagram . Biophys . J . 89 : 1411 – 1419 . 28 . Skoble , J . , V . Auerbuch , E . D . Goley , M . D . Welch , and D . A . Portnoy . 2001 . Pivotal role of VASP in Arp2 / 3 complex - mediated actin nucle - ation , actin branch - formation , and Listeria monocytogenes motility . J . Cell Biol . 155 : 89 – 100 . 29 . Boujemaa - Paterski , R . , E . Gouin , G . Hansen , S . Samarin , C . Le Clainche , D . Didry , P . Dehoux , P . Cossart , C . Kocks , M . - F . Carlier , and D . Pantaloni . 2001 . Listeria protein ActA mimics WASP family proteins : it activates ﬁlament barbed end branching by Arp2 / 3 com - plex . Biochemistry . 40 : 11390 – 11404 . 30 . Yamada , S . , S . Pokutta , F . Drees , W . I . Weis , and W . J . Nelson . 2005 . Deconstructing the cadherin - catenin - actin complex . Cell . 123 : 889 – 901 . VASP Modulates Filament Anchoring 1089 Biophysical Journal 92 ( 3 ) 1081 – 1089