Jointly published by Akadémiai Kiadó , Budapest Scientometrics , Vol . 74 , No . 2 ( 2008 ) 175 – 189 and Springer , Dordrecht DOI : 10 . 1007 / s11192 - 008 - 0211 - 3 Received February 12 , 2007 Address for correspondence : U LF S ANDSTRÖM Department for Studies of Social Change and Culture , Linköping University Lingköping , Sweden E - mail : ulfsa @ tema . liu . se 0138 – 9130 / US $ 20 . 00 Copyright © 2007 Akadémiai Kiadó , Budapest All rights reserved Persistent nepotism in peer - review U LF S ANDSTRÖM , a M ARTIN H ÄLLSTENb a Department for Studies of Social Change and Culture , Linköping University , Lingköping ( Sweden ) b Departmen of Sociology & Swedish Institute for Social Research , Stockholm University , Stockholm ( Sweden ) In a replication of the high - profile contribution by Wennerås and Wold on grant peer - review , we investigate new applications processed by the medical research council in Sweden . Introducing a normalisation method for ranking applications that takes into account the differences between committees , we also use a normalisation of bibliometric measures by field . Finally , we perform a regression analysis with interaction effects . Our results indicate that female principal investigators ( PIs ) receive a bonus of 10 % on scores , in relation to their male colleagues . However , male and female PIs having a reviewer affiliation collect an even higher bonus , approximately 15 % . Nepotism seems to be a persistent problem in the Swedish grant peer review system . Introduction Gender bias in the grant peer - review procedures of research councils is a crucial issue that generates serious discussion in core scientific journals [ W ESSELEY , 1998 ; B ORNMANN & D ANIEL , 2005 ] . Any type of bias would be detrimental towards strategies for scientific excellence . The proposed European Research Council is but one illustration of the importance of this debate . Since W ENNERÅS & W OLD [ 1997 ] U . S ANDSTRÖM , M . H ÄLLSTEN : Persistent nepotism in peer - review 176 Scientometrics 74 ( 2008 ) published the first ever analysis of peer - review scores for postdoctoral fellowship applications no studies have been able to use the same variables , including reviewer affiliation . This study aims to trace the influence of gender and conflict - of - interest on scores , controlling for performance measures ( bibliometrics ) , academic status ( professor , assistant professor , and researcher ) , experience ( years since dissertation ) , faculty discipline ( medicine or not ) , university affiliation and committee assignment . Research councils and peer review An essential principle of the classical model for research councils is that scientists , unrestricted by and unaffiliated with external factors , should govern research . In Sweden , active researchers constitute a majority on the council’s board , i . e . in all bodies where applications are assessed and evaluated and grants decided upon . Committee members are chosen through an electoral process involving all members of the research community in the university system . Peer review is used to guarantee the quality and diversity of basic research . A specific feature of the Swedish councils is that scientific committees are in command of the work . As a consequence , and in comparison to the situation at NSF and NIH ( main U . S . financing bodies ) , programme officers in Sweden have little or no influence over granting procedures , initiatives and priorities ( see [ S ANDSTRÖM & AL . , 1997 ] ) . Peer review is a documented , critical review performed by peers ( persons having technical expertise in the subject matter to be reviewed ) who are independent of the work to be reviewed . It is a tool that funding agencies ( and programme managers ) can use to obtain high - quality technical and scientific input for decisions on allocating resources . Peer review is intended to improve both the technical quality of projects in R & D and the credibility of the decision - making process . The independence of peers should make them more effective than internal reviewers . Generally , the procedures among the councils in Sweden were similar during the 1990s . Each applicant ( principal investigator ) submitted a CV , bibliography and a research proposal . Applications were reviewed by one of 10 to 12 committees , each covering a specified research field or discipline . Each application was rated by several reviewers in the committee to which it was assigned . Reviewers graded the proposals and “track records” with a score , and that score formed the basis for the ranking used in funding decisions . Accordingly , review committees set up a conflict - of - interest protocol stating which members of the committee that have an affiliation with applicants . Affiliation might be maternal , kinship or supervisor relations . These protocols are open for public access according to Swedish legislation . U . S ANDSTRÖM , M . H ÄLLSTEN : Persistent nepotism in peer - review Scientometrics 74 ( 2008 ) 177 The gender gap During the first half of 1990s , success rates for applicants to the Swedish Medical Research Council ( MFR ) were marked by a significant gender gap . Women often had 10 % lower rates than men did . A study published in 1995 by Wennerås and Wold ( later a full study was published in Nature [ W ENNERÅS & W OLD , 1997 ] ) disclosed a gender bias in the evaluation of merits for postdoctoral fellowships at the MFR . Thereafter , a shift in policy was implemented . Practices among most other research councils changed , and the gap narrowed significantly during the second half of the 1990s ( Figure 1 ) . Wennerås and Wold showed that female productivity was credited lower than male productivity in the evaluation of applications for postdoctoral fellowships ( N = 114 ) submitted to the Swedish MFR . The conclusion was clear : “Our study” , they said , “strongly suggests that peer reviewers cannot judge scientific merit independent of gender . ” ( 1997 , p . 341 ) . Affiliation with a committee member further increased the chances of being funded . The disclosure of discriminating procedures and nepotism resulted in an intensive debate . A detailed examination of male and female success rates within the research councils from 1989 to 2000 reveal that success rates for males were generally 5 to 10 percentage points higher than the success rates for females . This difference decreased after the 1995 turning point ( Figure 1 ) , which indicates a positive effect on female funding chances . Figure 1 . The Wold effect . Success rates of male applicants and the gender gap in the Medical Research Council 1994 – 2000 U . S ANDSTRÖM , M . H ÄLLSTEN : Persistent nepotism in peer - review 178 Scientometrics 74 ( 2008 ) This change in policy from the MFR could be called “the Wold Effect” However , the success rates for male applicants remained higher even after 1995 . Obviously , the differences are partially explained by male domination in upper academic positions . Hence , a positive difference in success rates between males and females is not by itself an indication of discriminating procedures . According to W OLD & C HRAPKOWSKA [ 2004 ] policy changes already in 1997 were effective : “ [ I ] ncreased knowledge on how prejudice influence peer decisions led to a reform of council procedure in 1997 so that it is now completely gender neutral” ( our translation ) . We consider this as a controversial statement . A closer look at success rates for women indicate that structural factors for the group as distribution over committees and age / time elapsed since PhD etc . favour higher success rates , which leads toward closing the gender gap . Nevertheless , we will need a more comprehensive approach in order to fully understand the gender gap phenomena – our intention is to point at the nepotism factor which have not been investigated after the Wennerås & Wold article . Lack of data is a considerable problem for researching that question , but as already indicated we have reliable data produced by the scientific committees themselves . Research on gender and Research Councils Gender in science is becoming a rather well - researched question [ W ESSELY , 1998 ] . Productivity issues was one of the first to be discussed ( the productivity puzzle ) by C OLE & Z UCKERMAN [ 1987 ] , L ONG [ 1992 ] , K YVIK & T EIGEN [ 1996 ] and X IE & S HAUMAN [ 1998 ] . Further investigations have both challenged this discussion but also placed in wider context . There seem to be no significant differences when age , field and other variables are held constant ; L EVIN & S TEPHAN [ 1998 ] , P RPIC [ 2002 ] , A SMAR [ 1999 ] , B LACK & H OLDEN [ 1998 ] . G ANDER [ 1999 ] finds a higher marginal productivity among female researchers at liberal arts institutions . Results from a large sample of faculty from 57 universities in Netherlands indicated that factors affecting research productivity were identical for men and women , and that a family - related variable such as small children in the family , had no effects on research productivity . The territorial segregation issue , the gendered stratification of the scientific work force along disciplinary lines , has also raised interest . R OSSITER [ 1978 ] and K ULIS & AL . [ 2002 ] are contributions to that literature . Women are overrepresented in fields like chemistry and microbiology , areas with high journal impact factors . The paper by W ENNERÅS & W OLD [ 1997 ] is a landmark in research on gender bias . Their article is one of the most frequently cited in this area of research ( http : / / garfield . library . upenn . edu / histcomp / peer - review _ to / list / au - lcs . html ) . It should be underlined that they showed that bias due to nepotism was as strong as the gender bias effect . Unfortunately , virtually none of the papers citing their article have attempted to replicate nepotism issues . U . S ANDSTRÖM , M . H ÄLLSTEN : Persistent nepotism in peer - review Scientometrics 74 ( 2008 ) 179 There are , however , a few exceptions to this observation : reports from funding agencies in the Netherlands and the UK have discussed fairness and funding in gender research from the perspective of modernising peer review . Other research projects have presented results from Denmark and the Netherlands [ B ROUNS , 2000 ] . However , none of these reports have been able to challenge the methodological excellence of the Wennerås & Wold paper . Especially , their combination of data extracted from applications ( council database ) , bibliometric data ( from CV and publication list ) and conflict - of - interest ( protocol from committees ) are unusual , and a replication after ten years is warranted . In a thorough analysis M OED [ 2005 , CH . 20 ] shows that in a national research council ( the council was held anonymous ) proximity between applicant and expert committee was a strong determinant for priority rating of the application . Being member of the committee was considered as the highest level of proximity . Using a large data set , output and field normalised impact figures for 3 , 300 applicants and committee members were calculated . Proximity was indexed according to whether the applicant or co - applicants were members of the committee . The study is relevant in this context , although the Swedish case is somewhat different , as data on conflict of interest is available . Confidence in the peer review system is essential to the academic community . The legitimacy of funding procedures is based largely on trust . Therefore , conclusions about the functions and performance of research councils should be scrutinised and well researched . The problem with several of the studies on gender bias in research councils is that they cover only small samples and short periods of time i . e . mostly cross - sectional studies . Although most of the work to date is careful and methodologically sound science , the lack of data is a general concern . For the development of this area of research richness and quality of data is necessary . Generally , investigations on this subject have had problems in finding relevant data on the applicants and their research areas . Due to restrictions and economy of the research process , many of the studies have used only simple descriptors , e . g . age , time lapsed since dissertation , affiliation , publications , review grade , etc . as explanatory factors in relation to decisions taken by the councils . Now , we can add reliable data on reviewer affiliation , and advanced bibliometric analysis . Table 1 . Linear combinations of gender and conflict of interest coefficients male PI female PI no association point estimate 0 . 000 0 . 097 confidence interval [ – – ] [ 0 . 027 0 . 167 ] conflict of interest point estimate 0 . 151 0 . 167 confidence interval [ 0 . 032 0 . 271 ] [ 0 . 051 0 . 282 ] Source : Table 2 , model 10 . U . S ANDSTRÖM , M . H ÄLLSTEN : Persistent nepotism in peer - review 180 Scientometrics 74 ( 2008 ) U . S ANDSTRÖM , M . H ÄLLSTEN : Persistent nepotism in peer - review Scientometrics 74 ( 2008 ) 181 The 1990s were a dynamic period as regards Swedish research policy . New aspects to consider were introduced , e . g . gender , support of young researchers , interdisciplinary areas , strategic research etc . It was a period when research councils had to learn how to adjust to a changing environment . What has happened after ten years of time ? Are female investigators still discriminated ? Is reviewer affiliation no longer , as Wold has suggested , a disturbing factor in peer decisions on grant applications ? Data and methods Our research draws on data from the sub - council for Medicine ( a division of the Swedish Research Council ) on the research grant applications submitted , reviewed and acted upon during 2004 . A stratified sample was drawn from the 611 proposals for new projects , 63 % of which had been submitted by male applicants . The Scientific Council for Medicine consists of eleven committees representing different medical disciplines or areas of research . Since female applicants were under - represented , and our primary interest is the effect of gender , we over - sampled women and adjusted our estimates accordingly . Our data include 280 applications , of which 118 are from female principal investigators ( PIs ) . Beside the new projects a number renewals are reviewed each year . Renewals are projects that had funding the earlier two or three year period ( see Figure 2 ) . Applicants submit an electronic research proposal to the Council . Each proposal is scored by 5 of the 6 reviewers on the committee to which the application is assigned . Reviewers assign a score between 1 and 7 on the following parameters : scientific competence , methodology and research question . Then an average for each parameter yields a final score on which the ranking is based . Policies of secrecy within the Scientific Council for Medicine classify “white sheets” from committee meetings as non - public documents . Consequently , we do not have the scores on scientific competence , the parameter used by Wennerås and Wold . Instead , we use the final ratings that are good estimates of competence scores ( for 313 applications in year 2005 , r = 0 . 90 ) . Figure 2 . The review process of the Swedish Medical Research Sub - Council in 2004 U . S ANDSTRÖM , M . H ÄLLSTEN : Persistent nepotism in peer - review 182 Scientometrics 74 ( 2008 ) Rating practises differ among committees . Our methodology to compensate for this is to normalise all scores within each committee in relation to the committee mean value . Wennerås and Wold were unable to normalise because they would have needed data on all projects to produce a committee average . However , as they had only data on applications for post - doctoral fellowships they could not create a normalised score per committee . Figure 3 describes the distribution of grades for applications in the council’s committees . It is evident that scoring practises differ across committees with respect to mean value , variance and overall shape of the distribution . A normalisation procedure is thus necessary to adequately compare applications form different committees . We normalise by dividing each score by its committee’s mean value , hence the normalised grade range from 0 . 6 – 1 . 6 . Note that the mean value is calculated for all applications in the committee , not only our sample . We will interpret the grade points as percentage points . The dependent variable ( normalised grade ) ranges between 0 . 66 and 1 . 67 ( with mean 1 . 16 and standard deviation 0 . 178 ) . Since the range is very close to 1 , the coefficients * 100 can be interpreted as percentage point changes . The Swedish Research Council’s conflict - of - interest policy specify that committees shall not review applications submitted by their own members , and that any such applications shall be re - assigned to other committees . Reviewers who declare a conflict of interest , normally due to supervisor , collaborative or kinship associations , are not permitted to score the proposal in question . Conflict - of - interest data are available by virtue of the principle of public access to official records . Figure 3 . The distribution of grades in different committees prior to normalisation . Kernel density estimates U . S ANDSTRÖM , M . H ÄLLSTEN : Persistent nepotism in peer - review Scientometrics 74 ( 2008 ) 183 Full bibliometric information for publications from 1998 through 2004 was collected from the publication lists attached to the proposals . We double - checked against Internet Web of Science to have a secure basis for the bibliometric measures . To determine whether a certain volume of citations is high or low , it is necessary to measure against an international reference value . Journal citation score ( JCS ) is the average citation rate of all papers in journals where a researcher has published . Field citation score ( FCS ) is an average citation rate based on all journals within a specific subject code . These codes were produced by Thomson / ISI in order to classify journals . The JCS / FCS ratio gives the expected relative citation impact for journals , which is a more stable indicator of journal quality than the impact factor from Thomson / ISI . As an additional performance measure , we use number of papers ( P ) . The measured impact of a researcher , the number of citations per publication ( CPP ) , concerns the actual citation rate . We apply standard bibliometric methods with field - normalised impact , e . g . CPP / FCS gives a relative figure of citation rates [ VAN R AAN , 2006 ] Reference values , designed for each type of article ( article , letter note or review ) and for each year , is the basis for all subsequent ratios . For the analysis we use a two - three year citation window . We have not been able to correct for self - citations [ G LÄNZEL & AL . , 2006 ] . Having data on all journals in each category , we can determine whether citation performance is higher or lower than the field average . With the FCS indicator , we also have a more precise description of scientific field than Wennerås and Wold . They classified researchers in ten fields according to their main area of research . Web of Science classification of journals in which articles are published provides much more detailed information , and we can benefit from this field indicator . Results : Nepotism in the medical sub - council Are there systematic differences in ratings between men and women , and if so , which are the determining factors ? First of all , we examine how grading procedures is related to gender of the applicant . To fully asses the impact of nepotism and gender on grading procedures , it is important to explore all interactions with productivity . Figures 4a – c show the relation between quintiles of productivity measures and awarded scores . For citations per paper ( Figure 4a ) , the awarded score increases with productivity for male PIs but not for female PIs . Instead , female PIs are rewarded the same score regardless of productivity . In Figure 4b , male PIs seem to be reward higher grades than female PIs in the highest quintile of the impact score , but female PIs seem to have small advantage in the lower quintiles . In Figure 4c , awarded scores increase with number of publications to a similar extent for male and female PIs . U . S ANDSTRÖM , M . H ÄLLSTEN : Persistent nepotism in peer - review 184 Scientometrics 74 ( 2008 ) a ) b ) c ) Figure 4 . The association between grade and three different productivity measures in quantiles . a ) Citations per paper ( CPP / JCS ) ; b ) Journal Impact ( JCS / FCS ) ; c ) Number of publications Separate estimates for male and female principal investigators U . S ANDSTRÖM , M . H ÄLLSTEN : Persistent nepotism in peer - review Scientometrics 74 ( 2008 ) 185 a ) b ) c ) Figure 5 . The association between grade and three different productivity measures in quantiles . a ) Citations per paper ( CPP / JCS ) ; b ) Journal Impact ( JCS / FCS ) ; c ) Number of publications Separate estimates applicants with and without reviewer affiliation U . S ANDSTRÖM , M . H ÄLLSTEN : Persistent nepotism in peer - review 186 Scientometrics 74 ( 2008 ) Second , we examine how grading procedures is related to nepotism in Figures 5a – c . The pattern is very similar across productivity measures . Principal investigators with reviewer affiliation always receive a higher grade than applicants with no reviewer affiliation . There are no indications of interacting effects . In the final step , we conduct regression of normalised scores analyses to elucidate the effect of nepotism and female gender . We specify models with control for individual characteristics and several productivity measures . All interaction effects between nepotism , gender and the productivity measures are explored ( for descriptive statistics see Table 3 in Appendix ) . Since we have over - sampled female PIs , we use a weighted linear regression estimator . The results have been thoroughly checked and found robust . We conducted standard regression diagnostics ( examination of residuals and influence statistics ) and found no evidence that the results are due to the influence of outliers or other mis - specification problems . We also tested alternative specifications of the regression model ( i . e . a piecewise linear spline regression model that may handle the nonlinearities of the productivity measures more adequately ) , but the same conclusions apply . The explained variance range from 0 . 35 in the simplest specification to almost 0 . 5 with a full set of control variables and interactions , which we believe is quite high . In model 1 – 3 we examine each productivity variable and its interaction with gender separately . The effect of female PI is positive , albeit not significant , but the conflict of interest measure highly significant . It appears that nepotism is persistent in the practices of the research council . Impact score and number of publications influence awarded grades positively , whereas actual citations do not have any influence at all . Surprisingly , none of the productivity measures interact with gender : male and female PIs are judged similarly with reference to productivity . When we control for all productivity measures and interactions in model 4 , the positive coefficient for female PIs becomes significant . It appears that female PIs receive a bonus compare to male PIs . In model 5 – 7 we examine conflict of interest and its interaction with productivity variables separately . The effect of conflict of interest clearly varies by productivity measures . In model 4 , there is no baseline effect of conflict of interest . However , for each publication PIs with research committee association receive a bonus of 0 . 4 percent . The conflict of interest effect is indifferent to actual citations ( model 5 ) . There is a quite strong interaction between impact score and conflict of interest . PIs with low impact have a very large nepotism bonus , whereas high impact PIs receive a lower bonus ( it declines with eight percentage points for each normalised impact score ) . When we control for all productivity measures and interactions in model 8 , only the interaction between conflict of interest and number of publications remain significant . Controlling for all interaction effects in model 9 , the conclusions for model 4 and 8 remain . U . S ANDSTRÖM , M . H ÄLLSTEN : Persistent nepotism in peer - review Scientometrics 74 ( 2008 ) 187 However , the conflict of interest effect is not insignificant , but females receive bonus of around 9 percentage points ( point estimate ; it is at least 2 . 4 percentage points according to the confidence interval ) . Finally , in model 10 , we introduce an interaction term between gender and conflict of interest . The interaction term is significant and negative ; the non - significance of the main effect in the previous model was due to a concealed interaction effect . Both the gender and the conflict of interest coefficient are positive and highly significant . We combine the coefficients in Table 1 for all combinations of gender and nepotism . Looking at the point estimates we find that female PIs with association are awarded the same grade as male PIs , whereas , female PIs without association are awarded a higher grade than male PIs . Taking the confidence intervals into consideration , the only significant difference is between males without reviewer affiliation and other applicants . Discussion There is a “productivism bias” in ordinary grant peer review . Our results show that expected impact score and number of publications influence awarded grades positively , whereas actual citations have no influence . The conflict of interest effect increases with number of publications . Males without reviewer affiliation are awarded lower scores than other applicants . The concluding words of W ENNERÅS & W OLD [ 1997 ] still apply : “We see no reason why an applicant who manages to produce research of high quality despite not being affiliated with a prestigious research group should not be similarly rewarded . ” Beyond this , we would conclude that the prestige of peer - review and the Scientific Council for Medicine is under threat if conflicts of interest overshadow the procedures . Still , after ten years , the system seems to be riddled with factors external to science . Nepotism matters . * Research was supported by the Bank of Sweden Tercentenary Foundation , grant no . 97 - 5085 . Bibliometric data from the Swedish Research Council ( VR ) database . The authors thank Daniel Wadskog ( VR ) for bibliometric assistance . Data used for this article will soon be published at www . forskningspolitik . se / data . asp . U . S ANDSTRÖM , M . H ÄLLSTEN : Persistent nepotism in peer - review 188 Scientometrics 74 ( 2008 ) References B LACK , M . M . , H OLDEN , E . W . ( 1998 ) , The impact of gender on productivity and satisfaction among medical school psychologists , Journal of Clinical Psychology in Medical Settings , 5 ( 1 ) : 117 – 131 . B ORNMANN , L . , D ANIEL , H . D . ( 2005 ) , Selection of research fellowship recipients by committee peer review . Reliability , fairness and predictive validity of Board of Trustees’ decisions , Scientometrics , 63 ( 2 ) : 297 – 320 . B ROUNS , M . ( 2000 ) , The gendered nature of assessment procedures on scientific research funding : the dutch case , Higher Education in Europe , 25 : 193 – 199 . C OLE , J . R . , Z UCKERMAN , H . ( 1987 ) , Marriage , Motherhood and Research Performance in Science Scientific American , 256 ( 2 ) : 119 . G ANDER , J . P . ( 1999 ) , Faculty gender effects on academic research and teaching , Research in Higher Education , 40 ( 2 ) : 171 – 184 . G LÄNZEL , W . , D EBACKERE , K . , T HIJS , B . , S CHUBERT , A . ( 2006 ) , A concise review on the role of author self - citations in information science , bibliometrics and science policy , Scientometrics , 67 ( 2 ) : 263 – 277 . K ULIS , S . , S ICOTTE , D . , C OLLINS , S . ( 2002 ) , More than a pipeline problem : Labor supply constraints and gender stratification across academic science disciplines , Research in Higher Education , 43 ( 6 ) : 657 – 691 . K YVIK , S . , T EIGEN , M . ( 1996 ) , Child care , research collaboration , and gender differences in scientific productivity , Science Technology & Human Values , 21 ( 1 ) : 54 – 71 . L EVIN , S . G . , S TEPHAN , P . E . ( 1998 ) , Gender differences in the rewards to publishing in academe : Science in the 1970s , Sex Roles , 38 ( 11 – 12 ) : 1049 – 1064 . L ONG , J . S . ( 1992 ) , Measures of sex differences in scientific productivity , Social Forces , 71 ( 1 ) : 159 – 178 . M OED , H . F . ( 2005 ) , Citation Analysis in Research Evaluation . Springer Verlag . P RPIC , K . ( 2002 ) , Gender and productivity differentials in science , Scientometrics , 55 ( 1 ) : 27 – 58 . R OSSITER , M . W . ( 1993 ) , The Matilda Effect in science , Social Studies of Science , 23 : 325 – 341 . S ANDSTRÖM , U . & AL . ( 1997 ) , “ Does Peer Review Matter ? ” Peers on Peers . Allocations Policy and Review Procedures at TFR . Stockholm , Swedish Research Council for Engineering Sciences . VAN R AAN , A . F . J . ( 2006 ) , Statistical properties of bibliometric indicators : Research group indicator distributions and correlations , Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology , 57 ( 3 ) : 408 – 430 . W ENNERÅS , C . , W OLD , A . ( 1997 ) , Nepotism and sexism in peer - review , Nature , 387 ( 6631 ) : 341 – 343 . W ESSELY , S . ( 1998 ) , Peer review of grant applications : what do we know ? Lancet , 352 ( 9124 ) : 301 – 305 . W OLD , A . , C HRAPKOWSKA , C . ( 2004 ) , Förbjuden frukt på kunskapens träd . Atlantis . [ in Swedish ] X IE , Y . , S HAUMAN , K . A . ( 1998 ) , Sex differences in research productivity : New evidence about an old puzzle , American Sociological Review , 63 ( 6 ) : 847 – 870 . U . S ANDSTRÖM , M . H ÄLLSTEN : Persistent nepotism in peer - review Scientometrics 74 ( 2008 ) 189 Appendix Table 3 . Descriptive statistics Variable observations mean stddev min max percent number granted application 280 0 1 11 . 1 31 normalised grade score 280 1 . 163 0 . 178 0 . 669 1 . 676 conflict of interest 280 0 1 21 . 4 59 principal investigator is female 280 0 1 42 . 1 118 quality ( cpp / fcs ) 280 1 . 203 0 . 878 0 10 . 899 expected impact ( jcs / fcs ) 280 1 . 128 0 . 364 0 . 324 2 . 356 number of publications 280 16 . 686 15 . 231 1 108 assistant professor 280 0 1 35 97 professor 280 0 1 21 . 1 59 experience 280 11 . 821 8 . 145 0 41 medical faculty 280 0 1 68 . 2 191 university : GU 280 0 1 11 . 8 32 university : LIU 280 0 1 9 . 3 25 university : LU 280 0 1 9 . 6 27 university : UMU 280 0 1 8 . 9 24 university : UU 280 0 1 7 . 5 21 university : other 280 0 1 13 . 2 37 committee : health and care 280 0 1 17 . 9 49 committee : clinical science 280 0 1 17 . 9 49 committee : medical chemistry 280 0 1 7 . 9 21 committee : microbiology 280 0 1 17 . 9 49 committee : psychiatry 280 0 1 8 . 9 24 committee : pharmacology 280 0 1 12 . 1 34