D R A F T Idea engines : Unifying innovation & obsolescence from markets & genetic evolution to science Edward D . Lee a , Christopher P . Kempes b , and Geoffrey B . West b a Complexity Science Hub , Josefstædter Strasse 39 , Vienna , Austria ; b Santa Fe Institute , 1399 Hyde Park Rd , Santa Fe , USA This manuscript was compiled on December 8 , 2022 Innovation and obsolescence describe dynamics of ever - churning and adapting social and biological systems , concepts that encom - pass ﬁeld - speciﬁc formulations . We formalize the connection with a reduced model of the dynamics of the “space of the possible” ( e . g . technologies , mutations , theories ) to which agents ( e . g . ﬁrms , organisms , scientists ) couple as they grow , die , and replicate . We predict three regimes : the space is ﬁnite , ever growing , or a Schum - peterian dystopia in which obsolescence drives the system to col - lapse . We reveal a critical boundary at which the space of the pos - sible ﬂuctuates dramatically in size , displaying recurrent periods of minimal and of veritable diversity . When the space is ﬁnite , corre - sponding to physically realizable systems , we ﬁnd surprising struc - ture . This structure predicts a taxonomy for the density of agents near and away from the innovative frontier that we compare with dis - tributions of ﬁrm productivity , covid diversity , and citation rates for scientiﬁc publications . Remarkably , our minimal model derived from ﬁrst principles aligns with empirical examples , implying a follow - the - leader dynamic in ﬁrm cost efﬁciency and biological evolution , whereas scientiﬁc progress reﬂects consensus that waits on old ideas to go obsolete . Our theory introduces a fresh and empirically testable framework for unifying innovation and obsolescence across ﬁelds . innovation | creative destruction | productivity | evolution | citations U nderstanding the dynamics and structure of innovation and obsolescence has been a subject of considerable in - terest across many domains ranging from business , economics , and technology to evolutionary biology , medicine , and the physical sciences . The forces of innovation and obsolescence deﬁne classical capitalist markets , summarized in Schumpeter’s iconic term “creative destruction , ” based on the idea that new methods of production survive by eliminating existing ones ( 1 ) . This is echoed in Spencer’s description of evolution as the “survival of the ﬁttest , ” and in Spielrein’s “destruction as the cause of coming into being” for psychological development ( 2 ) . In the natural sciences , we have the more charitable adage from Newton that we build “on the shoulders of giants . ” Each of these aphorisms implies that the new destroys or eclipses the old . A key point is that innovation of one thing often causes the obsolescence of another . A second key point is that agents , such as ﬁrms , organisms , or scientists , are themselves creating technologies , behaviors , or capacities that they could adopt from the set of the possible , while disregarding the irrelevant . In the substantial literature , each area has developed its own particular formalization of the problem that has masked their fundamental similarities . Furthermore , there have been few attempts to formulate the problem of innovation and obsoles - cence in an analytic framework that is quantitative , predictive , and testable . Indeed , one of the major obstacles for validating models of innovation and obsolescence is that they make pre - dictions that are diﬃcult to test empirically — not to mention across examples as diverse as economics , genetics , and science . One of our contributions is to map proxies of innovativeness from empirical examples to model predictions of the density of agents near the innovative frontier . We demonstrate align - ment with our theory using examples of ﬁrm productivity , the emergence of new clades in viral mutations , and citation rates that represent the wave of attention across the innovation front . These concrete examples surprisingly align with our theory derived from ﬁrst principles , capture essential features of shared dynamics , and thus connect diverse systems within a uniﬁed theory . A primary distinction between ﬁelds is the relationship as - sumed between innovation and obsolescence . In Schumpeter’s creative destruction , the relationship is one of conservation , where productive innovation comes at the expense of an ex - isting mode of production . A realization of this is the study of economic competition as new methods of production are innovated ( 3 , 4 ) . It follows that ﬁrms live on a line of produc - tivity margins ( 5 , 6 ) , and obsolescence occurs endogenously either from desuetude or unsustainable proﬁt margins ( 7 ) . In Signiﬁcance Statement We show that ﬁrm competition , viral mutations , and scientiﬁc progress are connected through a fundamental process of in - novation and obsolescence . When innovations are indexed by ﬁrm productivity , genetic mutations , or scientiﬁc contributions , they describe a space of the possible that grows and shrinks over time . We propose a reduced model of these dynamics to discover three possible worlds : one where innovation is matched by obsolescence , one of abundant diversity because innovation forever outpaces obsolescence , one of no diversity because of fast obsolescence . The boundary between the latter two can be boom and bust , where the space alternates from sparse to abundant . The ﬁrst is “creative destruction , ” where the space of the possible is a ﬁxed size , but the size is surprisingly sensitive to innovating agent behavior . From this , we predict characteristic proﬁles for how many ﬁrms , vi - ral variants , or scientiﬁc publications are near the innovative frontier . To our surprise , the examples are comparable to one another , our model aligns with data , and we ﬁnd a general measure of innovativeness . Thus , we introduce a fresh and testable perspective on how systems express shared principles of innovation and obsolescence . All authors collaboratively designed the research . E . D . L . wrote the code and initially drafted the manuscript . All authors contributed to the analysis and edited the manuscript . The authors declare no competing interests . 2 To whom correspondence should be addressed . E - mail : edlee @ csh . ac . at December 8 , 2022 | vol . XXX | no . XX | 1 – 19 a r X i v : 2 2 03 . 14611v2 [ phy s i c s . s o c - ph ] 6 D ec 2022 D R A F T Fig . 1 . Model diagram on ( a ) a random graph structure , ( b ) linear lattice projection , ( c ) tree . ( a ) In the most realistic approximation , agents can span a single or multiple ideas on a random , dynamic idea lattice . We approximate this with the base case of ( b ) a linear lattice with length L that grows along the innovation front at x = 0 into the adjacent possible to the right and is obliterated along the obsolescence front to the left at x = L − 1 . This can be extended to other structure such as ( c ) trees . Lattice index x is shown at bottom . the study of scientiﬁc progress ( 8 – 10 ) , social change ( 11 ) , and biological evolution ( 12 ) , obsolescence is the complement of innovation : reduced citation rates imply that articles are for - gotten , norms switch in a binary way from one to another ( 13 ) , and extinction is a natural result of being outcompeted ( 2 ) . Other examples , however , reveal more complicated rela - tionships between innovation and obsolescence . In markets , obsolescence may be driven by external research developments funded by government programs ( e . g . GPS , Internet , mRNA vaccines ) or by products from technologically advanced neigh - bors . Some innovations open many more possibilities than they close ( 14 ) . In biological evolution , obsolescence may depend on environmental shifts ( 15 ) . Thus , a general theory must encompass diﬀerent relationships between innovation and obso - lescence of which “creative destruction” and complementarity are special cases . A secondary distinction between ﬁelds is the ontological choice of what is being innovated ( the space of the possible represented as an idea lattice ) and who is doing the innovating ( the agent ) . For example , a lattice site may represent a product oﬀered or a manufacturing method used by a ﬁrm . Alterna - tively , the lattice could be new mutations in a population or a time - ordered list of topics that have emerged in the scientiﬁc literature . The deﬁnition of the unit of innovation has been an especially vexing problem in biology , where innovations can 0 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 time t 0 100 200 l a tt i c e l e n g t h L ( t ) r o = 1 / 2 r o = 0 r o = 1 0 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 time t 0 2 i nn o v . o cc u p a n c y n ( x = 0 , t ) r o ( Ir ) 1 0 5 10 15 20 distance from innov . front x 0 10 20 t i m e - a v e r a g e d o cc u p a n c y n ( x ) ( a ) ( b ) ( c ) Fig . 2 . Static , runaway , and collapsed dynamics in automaton simulation measured by ( a ) lattice length , ( b ) occupancy number at innovation front , and ( c ) pseudogap shape averaged over time . ( b ) Dashed lines indicate steady - state conditions , which obsolescence rate r o = 1 / 2 satisﬁes . ( c ) Error bars , shaded areas , show standard deviation over 10 3 time steps . Colors indicate the same three conditions across all panels with orange for stasis , blue for runaway , and green for collapsed . Parameters growth rate G = 4 , replication rate r = 0 . 395 , death rate r d = 0 . 4 , innovativeness I = 0 . 9 . be genotypic , phenotypic , behavioral , or environmental ( 16 ) . Such distinctions can be important . For example , resource constraints shape organism metabolism ( 17 , 18 ) , or physical constraints act on the distribution of new mutations ( 19 , 20 ) . By focusing on the elementary tension between innovation and obsolescence , we integrate particular mappings and par - ticular constraints , the details of which could be represented as mathematical relations between a general set of dynamical parameters . A generalized model from ﬁrst principles We picture innovation and obsolescence to take place in a space of possibilities , an idea lattice , in which agents live and that is itself constantly churning as shown in Fig . 1a . Here , each vertex x represents an “idea” in which an agent is invested . Ideas share an edge with related ideas , denoting either material similarity , shared inputs and skills , or common ancestry ( 21 ) . Clustering of similar ideas allows us to compress related items into a single site , which leads to the linear lattice approximation in Fig . 1b . This simpliﬁcation is equivalent to choosing a scale of analysis , where agents can be neatly assigned to sets such as by clustering them with industry sector codes or with function for genetic mutations ( 22 , 23 ) . Then , we deﬁne an obsolescence front at which ideas go defunct ( vertices removed ) and an innovation front at which agents drive ahead into the “adjacent possible” ( vertices added ) ( 24 ) . 2 | Lee et al . D R A F T We consider simple agent dynamics that represent their mean tendencies to grow , die , and replicate in a way that sum - marizes more detailed processes . New agents such as ﬁrms , mutants , or publications enter the system with a rate G dis - tributed uniformly amongst the number of lattice sites L ( t ) at time t . Agents may replicate into the adjacent innovative site with rate r — for example , by copying more innovative ideas — and leave the system with death rate r d . Our treatment considers these as two basic independent parameters whose interrelationship maps to a wide range of scenarios . At the innovation front , agents encounter the additional diﬃculty of inventing what is possible before occupying it . In the case where agents innovate independently , the rate of successful innovation is proportional to how often they seek to expand , r , their innovativeness , I , and the number of agents at the innovation front , n ( x = 0 , t ) , thereby summarizing the complex process of discovery in terms of a mean rate ( 25 , 26 ) ( see Appendix A ) . Finally , we incorporate obsolescence by assuming that the oldest idea goes obsolete with a rate r o . Consequently , the rate of change of the lattice length ˙ L ( t ) is the diﬀerence between the rates of innovation and obsolescence , ˙ L ( t ) = rIn ( 0 , t ) − r o . [ 1 ] A minimum allowed length of L = 1 corresponds to when the two fronts coalesce . When the lattice length is stable ˙ L ( t ) = 0 , the system looks like an “innovation train” moving into the innovation frontier with innovativeness directly related to obsolescence with n ( 0 , t ) = r o ( rI ) − 1 . [ 2 ] To simplify the mathematical treatment , we imagine “sitting” on the train and ﬁxing the coordinate system such that the innovation front is at the origin x = 0 with its movement represented by the train tracks moving past us to the right ( this reverses the coordinate system from left to right from what is depicted in Fig . 1 ) . Putting these together , the rate of increase in the number of agents ˙ n ( x , t ) at lattice site x at time t is ˙ n ( x , t ) = G L ( t ) + rn ( x + 1 , t ) − r d n ( x , t ) − rIn ( 0 , t ) [ n ( x , t ) − n ( x − 1 , t ) ] . [ 3 ] The ﬁrst term is the rate at which new ﬁrms enter the sys - tem , the second the rate at which they expand by mimetic innovation ( 27 ) , the third the rate at which they leave the system , and the last term the eﬀective shift from the motion of the innovation front . We solve Eqs 1 and 3 using both analytic approximation and numerical calculation including simulations that are further detailed in Appendix B . These results summarize the mean - ﬁeld dynamics of a simple system of agents growing , dying , and innovating in a one - dimensional space . Below , we show how these equations can be straight - forwardly generalized to include more complex dynamics such as cooperative innovation , higher - dimensional graphs , and inverted obsolescence - driven innovation . Creative destruction , runaway innovation , & collapse Eq 1 predicts three regimes of idea graph dynamics : i ) in - novation and obsolescence are roughly balanced , leading to a typical size of the idea space ; ii ) innovation outpaces ob - solescence and the system grows indeﬁnitely , providing an unbounded “marketplace” for exploitation ; iii ) obsolescence outpaces innovation and the system collapses to only a few , transient ideas . In order to demonstrate the three regimes , we provide three examples of a stochastic automaton simulation following the dynamics speciﬁed in Eqs 1 and 3 , and illus - trated in Fig . 2 ( Appendix B ) . When the rate of obsolescence r o is suﬃciently small ( blue line ) , we are in the regime of runaway innovation . As we increase r o , we pass through a regime of steady lattice length ( orange line ) to a small lattice that repeatedly collapses to its minimum size L = 1 ( green line ) . As a point of departure for analysis , we start with a stationary conﬁguration in which each innovation extinguishes one old idea , the assumption underlying Schumpeter’s original formulation of creative destruction ( 1 ) . The stationary condition is a fundamentally collective prop - erty . In Eq 2 , global stability means that the number of agents on the leading edge is proportional to the rate at which ideas go obsolete , i . e . faster obsolescence means more highly inno - vative agents to sustain rapid progress . Alternatively , faster innovation leads to a drop in the number of innovative agents because fewer agents keep innovations apace . Under stochastic variation , this observation means that a temporary increase in the number of innovative agents n ( 0 , t ) above steady state drives the innovation front ahead quickly , consequently reduc - ing the number of innovative agents . This reduced number then slows the innovation front down and allows for agents to ﬂow in from the existing lattice , resulting in oscillations around steady state occupancy ( Fig . 2b ) . Thus , the age of an idea near the innovation front is naturally related to the number of agents because newer sites have fewer agents . ∗ Following the logic that older ideas will have accumulated more agents , we expect the typical number of agents to be minimal near the innovation front and to increase as we move towards older ideas . This describes what in physics is referred to as a “pseudogap” , namely a drop in the density of excited states , around x = 0 . If this is assumed to be approximately linear at stationarity , i . e . ∆ n ( x = 0 ) ≈ constant , then n ( 1 ) − n ( 0 ) ≈ n ( 0 ) − n ( − 1 ) . Since , by deﬁnition , the site at x = − 1 is unoccupied , i . e . n ( − 1 ) = 0 , this gives n ( 1 ) ≈ 2 n ( 0 ) . Setting x = 0 in Eq 3 we can then solve for lattice length at stationarity : L = GIrr − 1 o [ r o + r d − 2 r ] − 1 . [ 4 ] While Eq 4 is only an approximation to the exact nontrivial solution , which manifests surprisingly complex variation ( see Appendix A and Fig . SA . 2 ) , it does provide a rather revealing starting point for capturing the essential characteristics of the resulting idea space . Two pivotal points are indicated by Eq 4 : ( i ) where obso - lescence is perpetually outpaced by innovation and L → ∞ ; and ( ii ) where obsolescence outpaces innovation and L → 1 signaling the collapse of the system . Formally , the ﬁrst can occur when G , I , or r become inﬁnite , or when r o = 0 , none of which is realistic because they require inﬁnitely fast rates or perpetual suppression of obsolescence . On the other hand , the singularity at r o + r d − 2 r = 0 requires only balancing r o / r ∗ Thisresultagreeswiththeintuition , forexample , thatﬁrmsexpandinto“adjacentmarkets”because there is less competition ( 28 ) . Lee et al . December 8 , 2022 | vol . XXX | no . XX | 3 D R A F T 0 10 d e a t h r a t e r d / r ( a ) basic stasis runaway collapse ( b ) anti - cooperative 0 10 obsolescence rate r o / r 0 10 d e a t h r a t e r d / r ( c ) cooperative 0 10 obsolescence rate r o / r ( d ) tree Q = 3 0 3 0 3 Fig . 3 . Model phase space . ( a ) Basic model predicts regimes in which the size of the space of the possible , or the lattice length , stabilizes ( white ) , grows indeﬁnitely ( red ) , or collapses ( blue ) . Parameter values rescaled growth rate G / r = 1 , innovativeness I = 1 . ( inset ) Empirical examples located in the phase space include metal stamping ﬁrms from Fig . 4d ( brown triangle ) , Indian ﬁrms from Fig . 4g ( small / large green stars for small / large ﬁrms ) , patent citation curves from Fig . 4f ( least / most as small / large purple circles ) , and Physical Review B citation curves from Fig . 4j ( few / many citations as small / large black X’s ) . Model extensions to ( b ) anti - cooperative innovation , α = 1 / 2 , ( c ) cooperative innovation , α = 3 / 2 , and ( d ) tree graph with branching ratio Q = 3 . and r d / r such that r o / r ≤ 2 − r d / r . [ 5 ] We delineate this region in red in Fig . 3 . Eq 5 indicates that the typical number of times an agent reproduces before it dies is a crucial order parameter and that agent - level properties can drive unbounded growth of the idea lattice , leading to runaway innovation ( the ﬁrst pivotal point ) . The second pivotal point is reached when the innova - tion front number falls below a self - sustaining threshold , n ( 0 , t ) < ( r / r o ) I . From Eq 1 , growth becomes negative , ˙ L ( t ) < 0 , driving the system to collapse to its minimum length L ∼ 1 . From Eq 4 , we can solve for the corresponding cutoﬀ obsolescence rate as r o / r ∼ 1 − r d / 2 r + p ( 1 − r d / 2 r ) 2 + GI / r . [ 6 ] In the limit GI / r → 0 , the boundary between collapse and growth shrinks to a line and eliminates the region of stability ( white region in Fig . 3a ) . Consequently , we expect to ﬁnd a sharp transition between collapse and growth , and the sys - tem can display long time scales and large ﬂuctuations ( 29 ) ( Appendix D ) . Thus , Eqs 5 and 6 elucidate the three regimes of lattice dynamics : a balanced , a runaway , and a collapsed regime . Extensions This picture holds for several key generalizations such as co - operative innovation , higher - dimensional graphs , and inverted obsolescence - driven innovation , a reversed picture where obso - lescence furthers system progress , as we clarify below : ( i ) Cooperative innovation implies that the front velocity scales nonlinearly with the number of agents as rIn ( 0 ) α . The default value of α = 1 , as in Eq 3 , corresponds to agents innovating independently of one another . Here superlinear - ity , α > 1 , signals cooperation , whereas sublinearity , α < 1 , implies competition . From Eq 2 , these diﬀerences can be mapped back to Eq 3 by the transformation I α → I and ( r o / r ) α → r o / r . ( ii ) For tree graphs , shown in Fig . 1c , each sequential site branches into Q − 1 additional branches , one of which must be chosen by a new agent . If branches are equally likely , the replication term in Eq 3 acquires an additional factor ( Q − 1 ) − 1 ( see Eq S27 ) , such that the number of agents systematically decreases towards the innovation front . This argument makes clear the importance of the relative dimensions of agent repli - cation and the idea space . When next - generation agents do not ﬁll all of the available space , then agents necessarily oc - cupy a small fraction of the idea space . Nevertheless , the dimensional depletion eﬀect does not fundamentally alter the dynamics . If we rescale r → ( Q − 1 ) r and I → I / ( Q − 1 ) , then we again recover Eq 3 . As argued in Appendix C , higher Euclidean dimensions can also be approximated by the linear model . Thus , important classes of dynamical or structural generalizations do not appreciably alter the basic model . ( iii ) Obsolescence - driven innovation is the antithesis of forward - looking innovative dynamics . By reversing the direc - tion of the x - axis in Fig . 1 and setting the innovation front at the origin , agents now replicate towards obsolescence . For stable pseudogaps , the introduction of a new idea propels every agent towards the innovative front , making the entire system more innovative . As a result , innovation is driven at a rate proportional to the number of agents on the verge of extinction , which is still given by Eq 2 . Agents occupying newer ideas tend to beget agents on older ideas , which then drive themselves to extinction by eventually increasing occu - pancy at the obsolescence front . This is evocative of Kuhnian scientiﬁc progress , where invalidation of old ideas permits new ideas , new ideas stimulate revision of existing topics , and the system as a whole progresses ( 36 ) . Innovation distributions in model & data Our model predicts several characteristic forms for the density of agents near the adjacent possible , or the shape of the pseudogap n ( x ) , that holds across structural , dimensional , and reversed extensions of our model ( see Appendix Fig . SD . 8 ) . Does this predicted taxonomy align with empirical examples ? We compare with several examples in Figure 4 including from ﬁrms , viral genetic evolution , and technology and science , putting together examples that have so far been considered independently in the literature . In each of the panels and with the dashed black lines , we show that the functional form of the model — a characteristic exponential rise to a skewed peak with a decaying tail — aligns surprisingly well with the data . As we discuss in further detail below , we must determine the appropriate axis along which to map the idea lattice coordinate . For ﬁrms , we use histograms along a economic proxy for innovativeness , although the outcome depends on whether one aggregates industries or not ( panels a and d ) . In genetic evolution , a natural measure of innovativeness is in 4 | Lee et al . D R A F T 0 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 cost per output 0 . 00 0 . 05 0 . 10 0 . 15 0 . 20 f i r m c o un t Schumpeterian 1958 1963 100 50 0 mutations from root 0 2 4 6 8 c l a d e c o un t Darwinian 100 50 0 10 0 10 5 10 10 Europe N . Am . 0 20 40 years 0 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 c i t a t i o n c o un t Socratic 0 20 40 10 3 10 2 10 1 10 0 5 - 9 20 - 39 80 - 159 0 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 cost efficiency 0 1 2 3 f i r m c o un t small large 0 10 20 years 0 . 00 0 . 25 0 . 50 0 . 75 1 . 00 c i t a t i o n c o un t 0 10 20 10 2 10 1 10 0 2 - 3 8 - 15 32 - 63 0 25 50mutations from root 0 1 c l a d e s × 10 2 * 0 20000 40000generation 0 5 m u t . × 10 2 * ( a ) ( b ) ( c ) ( d ) ( e ) ( f ) ( g ) Fig . 4 . Empirical vs . model predictions for innovativeness pseudogaps in ( a , d ) ﬁrms , ( b ) genetic mutations , and ( c , g ) scientiﬁc citations . Data is in color and model ﬁts are dashed black lines . Histogram for ( a ) U . S . metal stamping industry with model ﬁt ( black ) to the year 1958 ( 5 ) and ( d ) cross - industry Indian ﬁrms grouped by size ( 30 ) . ( b ) SARS - CoV - 2 diversity by number of base pair mutations from ﬁrst detected strain hCoV - 19 / Wuhan / Hu - 1 / 2019 normalized by branching rate ( 31 , 32 ) . Model overpredicts occupancy number near the origin , implying variants were missed by limited surveillance at the beginning of the pandemic ( 33 ) . ( c ) Normalized citation rate for Physical Review B articles published in 1980 and separated by total citations as of 2020 . ( g ) Normalized citation rates for patent applications in electrical and electronic technologies ﬁled in 1990 and granted before 2022 separated by total citations within 20 years of ﬁling ( 34 ) . Sharp Einsteinian innovation events change the very parameters of innovation such as with ( e ) the emergence of strains in the Delta clade and ( f ) fast mutator strain in long - term E . Coli experiments where starred ( 35 ) . Further details in Methods . terms of the number of base - pair mutations that distinguish a particular viral strain . Then , plotting the number of unique strains per number of mutations leads to a histogram relative to the innovative frontier , which is the most genetically distant strain from origin ( panel b ) . Finally , in science and technology , we do not explicitly map the idea lattice . Instead , we follow in the footsteps of previous work to consider papers and patents as innovative combinations of ideas ( 25 , 36 ) . This implies that papers are typically somewhere on the frontier , and so the citation rate serves as a proxy for the density of agents near the frontier ( panels c and g ) . We go through each example in more detail below to explain how we unify these examples within the context of our model . Economics provides the classic example of Schumpeterian innovation measured in terms of cost eﬃciency , or the ability of a ﬁrm to extract proﬁt from a ﬁxed amount of investment ( 5 – 7 , 37 ) . This imposes a seemingly natural one - dimensional axis for ordering ﬁrms , where more innovative ﬁrms progressively decrease cost per unit output . Fig . 4b shows an example of the distribution of labor costs per value added for the US metal stamp industry in 1958 and 1963 from Iwai’s classic work ( 5 , 6 ) . The fewest number of ﬁrms are the most and the least cost - eﬃcient , although the distribution is skewed to the right because many ﬁrms with higher costs survive . This characteristic form also appears in recent distributions of Indian ﬁrms in Fig . 4g , but when plotted against cost eﬃciency , which is essentially the reversed x - axis ( 30 ) . In this case , larger ﬁrms as measured by total assets are typically less cost eﬃcient than smaller ﬁrms . While this would be taken as evidence of poor innovation in the canonical sense , ﬁt of the density curves with our model indicates the opposite , that ineﬃcient ﬁrms are more innovative ( see Methods for details about ﬁtting procedure ) . This is consistent with the narrative that disruptive technologies are ineﬃcient to develop and only later are produced eﬃciently . While this seems to be at odds with the ﬁrst example , Iwai’s histograms are speciﬁc to a single industry , whereas Indian ﬁrms are aggregated across industries . More generally , innovativeness is a multi - faceted concept with many deﬁnitions in the economics literature ( 38 ) . Our dynamical formulation provides a derivation of the shape of economic distributions as a function of innovative distance and thus a way of resolving discrepancies by inferring the innovative frontier from data . As an example of biological , or Darwinian , innovation , we consider the tree of SARS - CoV - 2 clades measured from the GISAID repository of sequences ( 31 , 32 ) . The set of possible innovations , measured by base pair mutations , is a phylogenetic tree with a branching ratio Q ≈ 2 . 3 per unit phylogenetic branch length ( see Methods ) . We take the number of base pair mutations from the ﬁrst known strain hCoV - 19 / Wuhan / Hu - 1 / 2019 to order mutants in innovative order . Then , our model presents a recursive relation ( Eq S1 ) that determines how the number of strains with k − 2 and k − 1 mutations determine the number of strains with k mutations . As shown in Fig . 4e , the resulting occupancy plot again shows the same aforementioned characteristic form , which our model ﬁts closely over nearly the entire period of observation . As conﬁrmation of what our model leaves out , we fail to Lee et al . December 8 , 2022 | vol . XXX | no . XX | 5 D R A F T capture the sharp , temporary increases when variants such as Delta emerge , indicating an important deviation from model predictions : these punctuated , unpredictable , and singular innovations violate our model assumptions — Einsteinian in - novations represent a discontinuous shift in parameters ( 11 ) . We highlight an example in Fig . 4h , where only the number of Delta clades are shown as a function of mutations from root . A similar Einsteinian innovation is revealed in long - term evo - lution experiments , where the sudden emergence of a mutator strain increases the mutation rate in an E . Coli population , indicated by the discontinuity in accumulated mutations in Fig . 4i ( 35 ) . The punctuated changes in innovation rates reveal a meta - dynamic in the space of parameters notably speciﬁc to genetic innovation . Science and technology , in contrast , builds on an ediﬁce . New technological and scientiﬁc ideas must be tethered to the past and are often judged by their consistency with established knowledge , theory , and pedagogy ( 39 ) . It is only when existing frameworks have been proved insuﬃcient that a new idea can ﬂourish . This suggests a reversed dynamics , where innovation is driven by the obsolescence of old ideas . Scientiﬁc and patent citation rates support this picture as we show in Fig . 4 panels c and g . Citation rates peak to maximal prominence quickly then slowly fall out of favor with age , a horizontally mirrored version of the previous ex - amples . In our formulation , we take the citation proﬁle to be proportional to the occupancy function which measures the wave of agents moving across a graph of sequential papers that mark the progression to new ideas ( 36 ) . Since papers contribute diﬀerent levels of innovation attributed to some in - trinsic ﬁtness ( 8 , 40 , 41 ) , we bin them based on citation count . Furthermore , we account for citation inﬂation ( see Methods ) . We show yearly variation in normalized citations received by scientiﬁc papers in Physical Review B published in 1980 in Fig . 4c and for patent applications ﬁled in 1990 in electrical and electronics in Fig . 4g . To test the predictive power of our model , we ﬁt to only the ﬁrst quarter of the duration shown , or the ﬁrst decade after publication for PRB and the ﬁrst ﬁve years after publication for patents . Our model ﬁts remarkably well the beginning of the citation curves and captures the generic shape of the tails , but tends to under - predict their longer - term behavior . Possible explanations for the deviations are unconsidered eﬀects such as bimodal memory ( 42 ) and debated “runaway” events ( 41 , 43 , 44 ) . In addition , citation rates are biased in more recent years because citations from the newest papers and patents are missing . † This bias is stronger for patents because we do not have information about appli - cations that are pending review , a process that typically takes several years . Yet remarkably , innovation and obsolescence dynamics lead to a ﬁrst - principles , predictive explanation for citation curves . These examples demonstrate how the dynamics of innova - tion and obsolescence align with the distributions of social and biological agents from the innovative to the obsolete . Distance to runaway innovation A natural way to compare the systems is to measure their distance ∆ from the boundary of runaway innovation as an indicator of innovativeness . We deﬁne the distance in terms of † Accountingforsucheffectscouldtodrivedownthetailbyincreasingthenormalizationfactor ( Meth - ods ) . 0 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 distance to runaway inn . PRB ( 80 - 159 ) PRB ( 20 - 39 ) PRB ( 5 - 9 ) patents ( 32 - 63 ) patents ( 8 - 15 ) patents ( 2 - 3 ) SARS - CoV - 2 ( N . Am . ) SARS - CoV - 2 ( Europe ) large Indian firms small Indian firms metal stamping ( 1953 ) Fig . 5 . Distance to runaway innovation for best ﬁt model . Numbers following patents and Physical Review B ( PRB ) indicate the range of citation counts as in Fig . 4 . Error bars represent variability in the ﬁt as the minimum and maximum of the ﬁve parameter sets with smallest ﬁt residuals . the change in the rescaled parameters r o / r and r d / r required to reach the threshold deﬁned in Eq 5 or visually the distance from the red region in the examples plotted in the inset of Fig . 3a . It is only determined by the aforementioned rescaled rates , allowing us to compare systems that diﬀer along other dynamical parameters , growth and innovation rates . Reassuringly , we ﬁnd similar distances between the dynam - ics of SARS - CoV - 2 evolution in Europe and North America as we show in Fig . 5 . This aligns with our expectations that the overall dynamics of viral evolution were alike . In contrast , small and large non - ﬁnancial Indian ﬁrms diﬀer , and this dif - ference extends far beyond the variation in the parameters measured across the ten closest ﬁts . The minuscule ∆ for small Indian ﬁrms suggests that they , unlike large ones , lie at the boundary of creative destruction , a critical boundary at which we predict enhanced ﬂuctuations in cost eﬃciency and correspondingly of population size . When comparing patents and PRB , we ﬁnd that documents with more citations tend to lie closer to runaway innovation . This diﬀerence is especially pronounced for patents when com - paring those with fewer than eight citations versus those with at least eight ( see Fig . SD . 10 for all citation classes ) . A simi - lar pattern disparity appears for PRB , although the distance decays slower with citation number . This observation suggests patents with fewer citations are on the whole more innovative than of scientiﬁc citations . As has been noted elsewhere , a scientiﬁc citation is not just an indicator of innovativeness because they can refer to established pedagogy , corrections , substantiating evidence , etc . in contrast with how patents tend to cite patents ( 45 , 46 ) . Our ﬁndings highlight variation in innovativeness from systematically comparing seemingly unre - lated systems as a demonstration of our generalized dynamical formulation . Discussion Constituents of social and biological systems constantly un - dergo turnover , expanding , exploiting , or reducing the space of realized capabilities in a sequence of innovations that eventu - ally renders the innovator obsolete . In any particular system , 6 | Lee et al . D R A F T the exact details of this process may be modeled by com - petition ( 7 ) , innovative risks ( 47 ) , resource constraints ( 48 ) , limited attention ( 44 , 49 ) , and strategy ( 50 ) , amongst other factors . Furthermore , we know that the process of innovation displays combinatorial dynamics ( 25 , 26 , 51 ) , depends on the topology and dimension of the adjacent possible ( 36 , 52 ) , and is inﬂuenced by agent interaction ( 26 , 53 ) . While important , the plethora of factors obscures the fact that the same eﬀec - tive dynamics couple agents with the lattice on which they live ( Fig . 1 ) . The power of our generalization originates from incorporating these processes into mean rates that highlight three fundamental innovative regimes ( Fig . 3 ) common across dynamical , dimensional , and structural extensions of the basic model . When we focus on the region of parameter space corre - sponding to creative destruction — where each innovative advance is matched by obsolescence — we ﬁnd a surprisingly rich taxonomy for agent density around the innovative frontier ( Fig . SA . 2 ) . In the region of parameter space where repli - cation rate dominates over death , or r d / r < 1 , we ﬁnd a skewed density characterized by a peak opposite a decaying tail that extends to the innovation front . Remarkably , the shape aligns with empirical examples on ﬁrm productivity , genetic evolution , and scientiﬁc citation ( Fig . 4 ) . Our provides one explanation for why we would expect to ﬁnd empirical similarity . Thus , our framework provides a way of unifying phenomena that have so far been studied separately . As one consequence , we can locate the examples within the same parameter space and compare them systematically . For instance , our ﬁt parameters indicate that the systems are distinct in terms of the ratio of death to replication rate r d / r , where a value close to unity can correspond to a dynamic if agents hopping from lattice site to lattice site . We mea - sure for PRB citations r d / r > 0 . 98 and for metal stamping ﬁrms r d / r = 0 . 7 . For citations , this would mean that agents progressively become less innovative over time , whereas for ﬁrms it would mean the opposite because the same ﬁrms are becoming more cost eﬃcient over time . In contrast , the other examples indicate many replication events per site such as for Indian ﬁrms ( r d / r ≈ 1 / 4 ) , SARS - CoV - 2 ( r d / r < 1 / 20 ) , and patents ( r d / r < 10 − 2 ) . This suggests that these systems are dominated by newcomers building on past innovations . As a second point of comparison , we deﬁne a distance to runaway innovation ( Fig . 5 ) . We ﬁnd that SARS - CoV - 2 mutations were similarly innovative in both North America and Europe . In contrast , we ﬁnd that small , non - ﬁnancial Indian ﬁrms are more innovative than large ones and that patents are typi - cally more so than PRB articles with a comparable number of citations . In the context of debates about unleashing in - novative forces in science and the economy , such metrics are a ﬁrst step in deciding how the systems might be modiﬁed to promote certain collective outcomes . Finally , we ﬁnd all the systems are relatively close to the boundary of runaway innovation . Whether or not this feature is representative of the ensemble of natural systems ( e . g . because evolutionary pressures drive systems towards diversity ) or if researchers tend to study vibrant systems are amongst the many questions that our analysis raises . Importantly , our theory fails to capture sudden changes that are not included such as in genetic mutation rates . Such eﬀects could reﬂect unpredictable Einsteinian revolutions that modify the parameters of innovation , obsolescence , competitive eﬀects , or atypical scientiﬁc papers with unusual citation trajectories . The deviations present additional questions to investigate as extensions of our basic model . A natural question that arises from this work is whether our framework could be used to promote innovative economies , inhibit viral evolution , or shape scientiﬁc progress . Our start - ing principles lead to several relevant insights . First , some system parameters may be more opportune than others in forcing a transition in idea lattice dynamics . It may be coun - terintuitive that boosting growth or innovativeness or reducing obsolescence are not the most forceful ways of maintaining a diverse set of ideas but balancing death and obsolescence rates is ( Eq 5 ) . A second intriguing prediction is that transitions from Schumpeterian dystopia and runaway innovation can be sudden ( Appendix D ) . The ﬂuctuations near the critical point highlight an opening for dynamical classiﬁcation of systems through rate parameters or signaling when systems are on the verge of collapse ( 54 ) , and it may reﬂect endogenous dy - namics that drive large - ﬂuctuations in biodiversity ( 15 , 55 ) , economic growth ( 56 ) , or scientiﬁc decline ( 48 ) . This puts forth the possibility of a comparative meta dynamics , where we envision tracking systems in the innovative - obsolescence space with ﬁner - scale dynamical data . Our model organizes these hypotheses and opens up a new framework for thinking about the forces of innovation and obsolescence . After all , an engine may explode from having too much fuel or putter out from having too little , so likewise , an idea engine need be ﬁne - tuned . Methods Data . We test our model with several data sets . Here , we describe the sources of the data sets and how we calculated the values that we show in Fig . 4 . The distributions of ﬁrm cost eﬃciency in Fig . 4a are digitized from Fig . 1 of reference 5 by Iwai , and the densities in Fig . 4b are digitized from the third panel of Fig . 3 from reference 30 by Jangili . In Iwai’s plot , we are showing the cost of labor relative to the cost of the product such that a cost of zero implies that the value of the sale is only proﬁt neglecting other capital costs . Iwai also notes that a similar histogram appears across industries at the time of his investigation citing Sato’s 1975 publication . Iwai’s interpretation of the ﬁgure aligns with the classic interpretation of ﬁrm innovativeness in that more innovative ﬁrms are the ones lowering their cost ratios ( 7 ) . On the other hand , Jangili’s distribution derives from an estimate of the relative cost eﬃciency of ﬁrms using a technique called stochastic frontier analysis ( 57 ) . In short , this technique involves estimating the maximal cost eﬃciency that ﬁrms could hope to obtain from a given set of measures about ﬁrms ( e . g . size , age , liquidity , leverage , capital - labor ratio , etc . ) that convey information about the costs ﬁrms incur . When cost eﬃciency is unity , ﬁrms have reached maximal possible eﬃciency . Jangili’s work shows that the shape of ﬁrm distribution is relatively consistent over long periods of time , and the distribution does not drift towards perfect cost eﬃciency of one . Jangili’s Figs . A . 1 and A . 2 are of particular interest , which show nearly the same inferred distribution of ﬁrm cost eﬃciency over 20 years . Another example of this characteristic shape is for European ﬁnancial ﬁrms ( 58 ) . The classic assumption is that more eﬃcient methods of Lee et al . December 8 , 2022 | vol . XXX | no . XX | 7 D R A F T production are more innovative because ﬁrms compete to improve their proﬁt margins ( 5 , 28 ) . The level of aggregation , however , is important for comparing ﬁrms . As we point out in the main text , the level of aggregation is one major point of contrast between Iwai’s and Jangili’s analysis . As another counterpoint to the classic assumption , we note that it is at odds with the observation that disruptive ﬁrms , at ﬁrst , are cost ineﬃcient such as Tesla , which had been producing vehicles at a loss for many years ( 59 , 60 ) . In contrast , we do not start with the assumption that higher cost eﬃciency is more innovative , but instead have a distribution for which we seek the most reasonable mapping of the given economic variable to our model . We emphasize that our measure of innovativeness takes into account the shape of ﬁrm density , not their absolute values of cost eﬃciency . In this sense , we discover the appropriate axes for innovativeness in metal stamping vs . Indian ﬁrms . As is detailed in reference ( 5 ) , Iwai obtains the data from Sato ( 1975 ) that were originally obtained from the U . S . De - partment of Commerce . As is detailed in reference ( 30 ) , Jangili samples 11 , 410 non - ﬁnancial , public , Indian ﬁrms between the years 1995 - 2014 listed in the PROWESS database maintained by the Centre for Monitoring Indian Economy , ‡ but the data is not publicly available . Small ﬁrms and large ﬁrms are distin - guished by either belonging to the lowest or highest quartile of total assets . We obtain the SARS - CoV - 2 clade data from the Nextstrain project downloaded on August 10 , 2022 . § We use the inferred phylogenetic trees based in the GISAID sequence repository that contains millions of global samples of SARS - CoV - 2 strains . We focus on the European and North American subset since we expect these to be particularly well - sampled though generally it is nigh impossible to track all circulating strains . After mapping the imputed phylogenetic tree from Nextstrain into distance marked by base pair mutations , we calculate the average number of branches into which any unit length of the tree divides . In other words , a non - branching unit contributes a branch Q − 1 = 1 , one that leads to two clades Q − 1 = 2 , etc . , where Q is deﬁned as the branching ratio . Taking the average number of outgoing branches , we then ﬁnd the branching ratio Q = 2 . 317 for North America and Q = 2 . 344 for Europe . Using the calculated value , we normalize the number of unique individual clades as by ( Q − 1 ) y , where y is the number of mutations from the original detected strain in order to calculate the typical number of strains per branch . This will lead to an exponential decay if the number of detected strains remains constant as is approximately the case in the data far from the root strain hCoV - 19 / Wuhan / Hu - 1 / 2019 . The scientiﬁc article and patent citation data in panels f and i come from the American Physical Society’s repository for Physical Review B ( PRB ) and PatentsView ( a repository for the US Patent and Trademark Oﬃce ) ( 61 ) , respectively . For PRB citations , we consider 1 , 369 papers published in 1980 and only citations within the universe of PRB papers . We ﬁrst bin these papers by total cumulative citations to the papers til 2020 as a measure of ﬁtness . While we wish to obtain a measure of interest in a paper over time , we also know that not only is the number of annual publications increasing over time but also the length of bibliographies . To obtain a citation ‡ https : / / prowessiq . cmie . com § https : / / nextstrain . org / ncov / gisaid / global rate that accounts for the changes exogenous to our model , we normalize the citation counts for each paper published in 1980 by the typical number of citations made by every paper published in each following year , i . e . we count eﬀective citations relative to the typical number of citations made per paper per year . On the other hand , we separate US patents by the six tech - nology classes that are identiﬁed in reference ( 34 ) . In Fig . 4 , we consider the 21 , 896 patents ﬁled in category 4 ( electrical & electronic ) from 1990 . We normalize the citation rates , following convention , by the number of patents ﬁled each year within the focus technology category , a normalization factor that grows with the number of potential citation recipients within the same technology category ( 41 , 42 ) . This procedure again accounts for change in the population of citing patents ( assumed to the proportional to the density of agents ) that would not be captured in our simple model . The observed citation rates — because they initially peak then slowly decay — are consistent with the hypothesis that scientiﬁc ideas are driven by the extinction of obsolete ones . In both cases of citations we consider , the overall shapes align with our obsolescence - driven formulation . Our analysis implies that the majority of agents in the scientiﬁc system are closer to the innovative edge , whereas most agents are closer to the obsolescence front in the other examples . This means that science as a whole is relatively innovative . This is a result of the fact that driving an idea obsolete in the stationary case eﬀectively makes every agent more innovative . Perversely , the same dynamic drives out the most innovative agents from the system whose exit reﬂects the fact that scientiﬁc experts are not particularly good at valuing novel ideas ( 62 ) . Firms and viral evolution , on the other hand , are forward - looking because the front is only driven ahead by most innovative agents . That means that fewer agents are near the innovative edge . Fitting the model . We ﬁt model parameters by scanning through parameter space consisting of rescaled rates for growth G / r , obsolescence r o / r , death r d / r . Innovativeness I does not need to be rescaled because it is unitless . At each test parameter combination , we ﬁnd the unit conversion for the lattice coordinate a and the density b that minimizes the linear ( e . g . ﬁrm densities ) or logarithmic ( e . g . genetic and citation curves ) squared distance between the data and the model as visible in Fig . 4 . In order to calculate the distance , we must decide on how to align model lattice coordinates with data coordinates . It not always clear if the leftmost or the rightmost data coordi - nates correspond to innovation and obsolescence fronts . This problem is especially vexing in the context of ﬁrms , where one can have in principle any real - valued positive or negative cost eﬃciency or productivity ( such as after accounting for subsidies or other external costs ) . In viral mutations , this question arises with establishing the “origin” from which the virus descends , which in principle could be traced back to the origins of life . For citations , the deﬁnition the origin is seemingly straightforward since the innovation front cannot precede the publication of the paper or patent , but again there are some practical considerations that muddy the boundary . Papers might have been cited in the ﬁrst year of publication , while in preprint form , or by the authors before publication in any form . In all of these cases , we take the simplest mapping 8 | Lee et al . D R A F T from the innovation or obsolescence front to the data . With ﬁrms , we take the leftmost point to correspond to the innovation front but allow the distance minimization pro - cedure to choose the optimal location of the obsolescence front given by the scales a and b . For SARS - CoV - 2 muta - tions , we assume that the origin is the ﬁrst detected hCoV - 19 / Wuhan / Hu - 1 / 2019 strain . Since citations can occur as soon as a publication or patent ﬁling appears , it would be natural to set the innovation front at the ﬁrst year . We do so for patents . With the PRB citations , however , we ﬁnd as the optimal ﬁt with this assumption returns unusually large parameters that are diﬃcult to handle with our grid search algorithm . Instead , by assuming that the innovation front corresponds to the year following publication such that the ﬁrst year has density of zero in our model , we ﬁnd similarly good ﬁts except that the parameters are well bounded . Thus , we rely on this more controlled procedure . A secondary question is how to map the spacing of our discrete lattice to the units of the data . Since the solution cor - responds to discrete values of a continuous partial diﬀerential equation , we solve the lattice solution using our ﬂow mean - ﬁeld solution , interpolate the lattice solution with a cubic spline , and use the spline values to minimize the distance between data and model . We elucidate upon each ﬁt in the panels of Figure 4 beyond what has been already speciﬁed : a . Metal stamping ﬁrms : We present the solution to the histogram for 1953 upon minimizing the linear squared distance . As mentioned , the location of the obsolescence front is ﬁt . b . SARS - CoV - 2 clades : After using the estimated branching ratio of the phylogenetic tree Q as described above , we minimize the logarithmic squared distance . c . Article citations : We minimize the logarithmic distance to the ﬁrst decade after publication ( i . e . all citations in the years 1980 through 1990 ) while asserting that the best ﬁt curve extend to at least 40 years . Thus , the later years are a predictive test of our model . d . Inferred cost eﬃciency for Indian ﬁrms : We minimize the linear squared distance . The location of the obsolescence front is ﬁt . g . Patent citations : We minimize the logarithmic distance to ﬁrst ﬁve years after publication ( i . e . 1990 - 1995 inclusive ) while asserting that the best ﬁt curve must extend to at least 20 years . Thus , the later years are a predictive test of our model . To approximate the model occupancy densities , we rely on the second - order calculation of lattice length described in Appendix A and calculate the density with the ﬂow mean - ﬁeld calculation in Appendix B . Code availability . The code for processing the data , calculating the model , and producing all the plots as described below is available at https : / / github . com / eltrompetero / innovation and will be put on an archive repository to be determined upon publi - cation . Acknowledgments E . D . L . thanks Frank Neﬀke , Anjali Bhatt , Alan Kwan , and the CSH theory group including Tuan Pham , Jan Korbel , Stefan Thurner , Ernesto Ortega , and Rudi Hanel ( who sug - gested the term “innovation train” ) for inspiring discussions at various stages of ideation . E . D . L . acknowledges funding from BMBWF , HRSM 2016 ( Complexity Science Hub Vi - enna ) . We thank the American Physical Society for access to journal citation data . We thank Jeﬀ Barrick for help with the E . Coli phylogenetic data and Amélie Desvar - Larrive for covid - 19 references . Competing interests The authors declare no competing interests . Materials & correspondence Correspondence and questions about code should be sent to E . D . L . 1 . Schumpeter J ( 1983 ) The Theory of Economic Development : An Inquiry into Proﬁts , Capi - tal , Credit , Interest , and the Business Cycle , Economics Third World Studies . ( Transaction Books ) . 2 . Spencer H ( 1864 ) The Principles of Biology , Nineteenth Century Collections Online ( NCCO ) : Science , Technology , and Medicine : 1780 - 1925 . ( Williams and Norgate ) No . Bd . 1 . 3 . Franke R ( 2001 ) Wavetrains , innovationnoise , and longwaves . JournalofEconomic Behav - ior & Organization 45 ( 1 ) : 49 – 68 . 4 . Andergassen R , Nardini F , Ricottilli M ( 2006 ) Innovation waves , self - organized criticality and technological convergence . Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 61 ( 4 ) : 710 – 728 . 5 . Iwai K ( 1984 ) Schumpeterian dynamics . Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 5 ( 2 ) : 159 – 190 . 6 . IwaiK ( 1984 ) Schumpeteriandynamics , PartII . JournalofEconomicBehavior & Organization 5 ( 3 - 4 ) : 321 – 351 . 7 . AghionP , HowittP ( 1990 ) AModelofGrowthThroughCreativeDestruction , ( NationalBureau of Economic Research , Cambridge , MA ) , Technical Report 3223 . 8 . Valverde S , Solé RV , Bedau MA , Packard N ( 2007 ) Topology and evolution of technology innovation networks . Phys . Rev . E 76 ( 5 ) : 056118 . 9 . Valverde S , Solé RV ( 2015 ) Punctuated equilibrium in the large - scale evolution of program - ming languages . J . R . Soc . Interface . 12 ( 107 ) : 20150249 . 10 . Fortunato S , et al . ( 2018 ) Science of science . Science 359 ( 6379 ) : eaao0185 . 11 . Kolodny O , Creanza N , Feldman MW ( 2016 ) Game - Changing Innovations : How Culture Can Change the Parameters of Its Own Evolution and Induce Abrupt Cultural Shifts . PLOS Com - putational Biology p . 15 . 12 . Venditti C , Pagel M ( 2008 ) Speciation and Bursts of Evolution . Evo Edu Outreach 1 ( 3 ) : 274 – 280 . 13 . Amato R , Lacasa L , Díaz - Guilera A , Baronchelli A ( 2018 ) The dynamics of norm change in the cultural evolution of language . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 115 ( 33 ) : 8260 – 8265 . 14 . HanelR , KauffmanSA , ThurnerS ( 2005 ) Phasetransitioninrandomcatalyticnetworks . Phys . Rev . E 72 ( 3 ) : 036117 . 15 . Mayhew PJ , Bell MA , Benton TG , McGowan AJ ( 2012 ) Biodiversity tracks temperature over time . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 109 ( 38 ) : 15141 – 15145 . 16 . Erwin DH , Krakauer DC ( 2004 ) Insights into Innovation . Science 304 ( 5674 ) : 1117 – 1119 . 17 . Kempes CP , West GB , Crowell K , Girvan M ( 2011 ) Predicting Maximum Tree Heights and Other Traits from Allometric Scaling and Resource Limitations . PLoS ONE 6 ( 6 ) : e20551 . 18 . Lee ED , Kempes CP , West GB ( 2021 ) Growth , death , and resource competition in sessile organisms . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 118 ( 15 ) : e2020424118 . 19 . Mulligan PJ , Chen YJ , Phillips R , Spakowitz AJ ( 2015 ) Interplay of Protein Binding In - teractions , DNA Mechanics , and Entropy in DNA Looping Kinetics . Biophysical Journal 109 ( 3 ) : 618 – 629 . 20 . Prieler S , et al . ( 2021 ) Spo11 generates gaps through concerted cuts at sites of topological stress . Nature 594 ( 7864 ) : 577 – 582 . 21 . Teece DJ , Rumelt R , Dosi G , Winter S ( 1994 ) Understanding corporate coherence . Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 23 ( 1 ) : 1 – 30 . 22 . Hidalgo CA , Klinger B , Barabasi AL , Hausmann R ( 2007 ) The Product Space Conditions the Development of Nations . Science 317 ( 5837 ) : 482 – 487 . 23 . Neffke F , Henning M , Boschma R ( 2011 ) How Do Regions Diversify over Time ? Industry Relatedness and the Development of New Growth Paths in Regions . Economic Geography 87 ( 3 ) : 237 – 265 . 24 . Kauffman SA ( 2000 ) Investigations . ( Oxford University Press , Oxford ) . 25 . Youn H , Strumsky D , Bettencourt LMA , Lobo J ( 2015 ) Invention as a combinatorial process : Evidence from US patents . J . R . Soc . Interface 12 ( 106 ) : 20150272 . 26 . Iacopini I , Di Bona G , Ubaldi E , Loreto V , Latora V ( 2020 ) Interacting Discovery Processes on Complex Networks . Phys . Rev . Lett . 125 ( 24 ) : 248301 . 27 . Dawkins R ( 2016 ) The Selﬁsh Gene , Oxford Landmark Science . ( Oxford University Press ) . 28 . Barro RJ , Sala - I - Martin XI ( 2003 ) Economic Growth . ( MIT Press ) , Second edition . 29 . Thurner S , Klimek P , Hanel R ( 2010 ) Schumpeterian economic dynamics as a quantiﬁable model of evolution . New J . Phys . 12 ( 7 ) : 075029 . Lee et al . December 8 , 2022 | vol . XXX | no . XX | 9 D R A F T 30 . Jangili R ( 2019 ) The Impact of Size and Group Afﬁliation in Emerging Markets : A Cost Efﬁ - ciency Analysis of Indian Firms , ( Indira Gandhi Institute of Development Research , Mumbai ) , Technical Report WP - 2019 - 036 . 31 . Hadﬁeld J , et al . ( 2018 ) Nextstrain : Real - time tracking of pathogen evolution . Bioinformatics 34 ( 23 ) : 4121 – 4123 . 32 . Sagulenko P , Puller V , Neher RA ( 2018 ) TreeTime : Maximum - likelihood phylodynamic analy - sis . Virus Evolution 4 ( 1 ) . 33 . Mallapaty S ( 2022 ) Where did Omicron come from ? Three key theories . Nature . 34 . Hall BH , Jaffe AB , Trajtenberg M ( 2002 ) The NBER Patent Citations Data File : Lessons , Insights , and Methodological Tools in Patents , Citations , and Innovations : A Window on the Knowledge Economy . ( MIT Press , Cambridge , Mass ) , pp . 403 – 459 . 35 . Blount ZD , Barrick JE , Davidson CJ , Lenski RE ( 2012 ) Genomic analysis of a key innovation in an experimental Escherichia coli population . Nature 489 ( 7417 ) : 513 – 518 . 36 . Foster JG , Rzhetsky A , Evans JA ( 2015 ) Tradition and Innovation in Scientists’ Research Strategies . Am Sociol Rev 80 ( 5 ) : 875 – 908 . 37 . Farrell MJ ( 1957 ) The Measurement of Productive Efﬁciency . Journal of the Royal Statistical Society . Series A ( General ) 120 ( 3 ) : 253 . 38 . CoadA ( 2011 ) Appropriatebusinessstrategyforleadersandlaggards . IndustrialandCorpo - rate Change 20 ( 4 ) : 1049 – 1079 . 39 . Kuhn TS ( 2000 ) The Essential Tension : Selected Studies in Scientiﬁc Tradition and Change . ( University of Chicago Press , Chicago , Ill . ) , 11 . print . edition . 40 . Wang D , Song C , Barabási AL ( 2013 ) Quantifying Long - Term Scientiﬁc Impact . Science 342 ( 6154 ) : 127 – 132 . 41 . HighamKW , GovernaleM , JaffeAB , ZülickeU ( 2017 ) Fameandobsolescence : Disentangling growth and aging dynamics of patent citations . Phys . Rev . E 95 ( 4 ) : 042309 . 42 . Candia C , Jara - Figueroa C , Rodriguez - Sickert C , Barabási AL , Hidalgo CA ( 2019 ) The uni - versal decay of collective memory and attention . Nat Hum Behav 3 ( 1 ) : 82 – 91 . 43 . Golosovsky M , Solomon S ( 2012 ) Runaway events dominate the heavy tail of citation distri - butions . Eur . Phys . J . Spec . Top . 205 ( 1 ) : 303 – 311 . 44 . Parolo PDB , et al . ( 2015 ) Attention decay in science . Journal of Informetrics 9 ( 4 ) : 734 – 745 . 45 . TrajtenbergM ( 1990 ) APennyforYourQuotes : PatentCitationsandtheValueofInnovations . The RAND Journal of Economics 21 ( 1 ) : 172 . 46 . AksnesDW , LangfeldtL , WoutersP ( 2019 ) Citations , CitationIndicators , andResearchQual - ity : An Overview of Basic Concepts and Theories . SAGE Open 9 ( 1 ) : 215824401982957 . 47 . Rzhetsky A , Foster JG , Foster IT , Evans JA ( 2015 ) Choosing experiments to accelerate col - lective discovery . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 112 ( 47 ) : 14569 – 14574 . 48 . BloomN , JonesCI , VanReenenJ , WebbM ( 2020 ) Areideasgettinghardertoﬁnd ? American Economic Review 110 ( 4 ) : 1104 – 44 . 49 . Golosovsky M , Solomon S ( 2017 ) Growing complex network of citations of scientiﬁc papers : Modeling and measurements . Phys . Rev . E 95 ( 1 ) : 012324 . 50 . Scherer F ( 2001 ) The Link Between Gross Proﬁtability And Pharmaceutical R & D Spending . Health Affairs 20 ( 5 ) : 216 – 220 . 51 . TriaF , LoretoV , ServedioVDP , StrogatzSH ( 2015 ) Thedynamics ofcorrelatednovelties . Sci Rep 4 ( 1 ) : 5890 . 52 . Kauffman SA , Weinberger ED ( 1989 ) The NK model of rugged ﬁtness landscapes and its applicationtomaturationoftheimmuneresponse . JournalofTheoreticalBiology 141 ( 2 ) : 211 – 245 . 53 . Ubaldi E , Burioni R , Loreto V , Tria F ( 2021 ) Emergence and evolution of social networks through exploration of the Adjacent Possible space . Commun Phys 4 ( 1 ) : 28 . 54 . Scheffer M , et al . ( 2009 ) Early - warning signals for critical transitions . Nature 461 ( 7260 ) : 53 – 59 . 55 . Rohde RA , Muller RA ( 2005 ) Cycles in fossil diversity . Nature 434 ( 7030 ) : 208 – 210 . 56 . SilverbergG , Verspagen B ( 1995 ) AnEvolutionaryModelofLongTermCyclicalVariationsof Catching Up and Falling Behind . Catching Up and Falling Behind p . 24 . 57 . Kumbhakar S , Lovell CAK ( 2004 ) Stochastic Frontier Analysis . ( Cambridge University Press , Cambridge ) . 58 . Badunenko O , Kumbhakar SC , Lozano - Vivas A ( 2021 ) Achieving a sustainable cost - efﬁcient business model in banking : The case of European commercial banks . European Journal of Operational Research 293 ( 2 ) : 773 – 785 . 59 . Alvarez S ( 2022 ) Tesla’s vehicle manufacturing cost in 2017 was $ 84k per car – it has since dropped to $ 36k . 60 . Tesla ( 2022 ) Q4 and FY2021 Update , Tesla Financial Results . 61 . PatentsView ( 2022 ) PatentsView . 62 . Boudreau KJ , Guinan EC , Lakhani KR , Riedl C ( 2016 ) Looking Across and Looking Beyond the Knowledge Frontier : Intellectual Distance , Novelty , and Resource Allocation in Science . Management Science 62 ( 10 ) : 2765 – 2783 . 10 | Lee et al . D R A F T A . Model motivation , derivation , and solution In Eq 3 , we propose a general model for innovation and obso - lescence dynamics of an idea lattice with replicating agents . The parameters in the model correspond to the rates at which various events occur , which could encapsulate multiple diﬀer - ent processes at the level of our analysis . The proper mapping from each system of interest to model parameters must be operationalized , which essentially accounts for the proper units of the variables . 1 . The entry rate G at which new agents enter the system requires deﬁning a threshold at which we observe new agents entering . In the context of ﬁrms , we might think this to be straightforwardly the entry of a new incorpo - rated ﬁrm in an industry . As is discussed in more detail in the study of ﬁrm demographics , however , the “birth” of a ﬁrm is a matter of measurement and deﬁnition . It depends on the universe of study such as listed public ﬁrms vs . hard - to - measure private ﬁrms ( ? ) . The study of the former at the exclusion of the latter eﬀectively establishes a minimum capital size ; in other words , the eﬀective rate at which agents enter can also depend on the level of data resolution . For viral evolution , entry captures the emergence of new strains that do not derive from existing ones , which must be from the fact that we can only observe a small fraction of circulating strains at any given time and must necessarily impute the missing pieces of the phylogenetic tree . For scientiﬁc citations , entry rate combines the rates at which new authors enter as well as that of existing authors moving into a new area . 2 . The rate of agent replication r refers to the typical timescale at which an agents spawns a more innovative copy of itself , and the death rate r d refers to the typical timescale on which agents leave the system . Though these can be treated separately , they in combination describe various situations . As one example , r = r d corresponds to the scenario where agents hop from one site to the adjacent one because death is commensurate with a single replication event . When r > r d , agents tend to stimulate more innovative copies , whereas when r < r d , agents tend to die before they can replicate , akin to the scenario where agents only progress a few steps towards the innovative frontier before dying . The parameters individually can encapsulate several diﬀerent types of events . For example , r may be the sum of two diﬀerent process like mimetic innovation and replication , but events that we would sum together into a single rate because they eﬀectively in - crease the number of agents on the adjacent innovative site . Likewise , death could consist of the disappearance of an agent from a site because of mimetic innovation and death . The key assumption is that the combination of these types of events can be separately considered as mean rates that can be then summed together . 3 . The rate of obsolescence r o details when ideas fall into desuetude . While we explicitly write down a rate that acts on the idea lattice , usually it is considered in terms of an endogenous variable like when a production method is no longer used by ﬁrms . As we point out in the main text , not all obsolescent events can be traced back to an endogenous cause , and so this parameter is a way of representing the results of either kind of dynamics . 4 . Innovativeness I sets a scale on which attempts at innovat - ing into the adjacent possible are successful , distinguishing mimetic innovation from serendipitous innovation at the frontier . As with the other rates , this parameterization assumes that there is a typical rate at which innovative events occur as when new technologies are created , un - seen mutations emerge , or ideas are introduced into the literature . When an Einsteinian innovation occurs , the parameters them - selves must be changed , which violates the assumption of ﬁxed mean rates . Accounting for these rates means that we only need describe the number of agents n ( x , t ) at some lattice site x at time t . As a start , we take the innovation front to be the rightmost point in the linear lattice as pictured in Fig . 1B . First , we account for the rates entry G over L ( t ) lattice sites and the rate at which any single agent dies r d . Next , the probability that at least one agent successfully advances the innovation front is 1 − ( 1 − rIdt ) n ( L , t ) = rIn ( L , t ) dt + O ( dt 2 ) , where the latter term refers to all terms of order dt 2 and smaller . On the other hand , with probability ( 1 − rIdt ) n ( L , t ) ≈ 1 − rIn ( L , t ) dt , the front does not move and rn ( x − 1 , t ) dt agents move in from the left . To arrive at Eq 3 , we move into a ﬁxed reference frame that does not change as the lattice moves . We reverse the coordinate system such that the innovation front is ﬁxed at x = 0 . Flow comes in from the right and vice versa , and innovation events shift the occupancy number to the right by one . This mathematical simpliﬁcations focuses our attention on the innovation front and the shape of the pseudogap around it . At stationarity , we obtain a formal solution to the time - independent occupancy number n ( x ) = In ( 0 ) [ n ( x − 1 ) − n ( x − 2 ) ] + r d r n ( x − 1 ) − G rL . [ S1 ] By rescaling parameters in units of r as is indicated by bars , we obtain a form that reveals that replication rate sets a shared relative timescale for all the remaining parameters , n ( x ) = ¯ r o [ n ( x − 1 ) − n ( x − 2 ) ] + ¯ r d n ( x − 1 ) − ¯ G L . [ S2 ] It is the relative diﬀerences between entry , obsolescence , and death with respect to replication that distinguish the regimes of the model . To solve for the innovation front density , we use the fact that n ( − 1 ) = 0 . We also take as an assumption n ( 1 ) − n ( 0 ) = n ( 0 ) , which is to say that the shape of the occupancy number about the innovation front is linear , or that the pseudogap is rather wide . ˙ n ( 0 , t ) = ¯ G L + ( 2 − ¯ r d ) n ( 0 , t ) − In ( 0 , t ) 2 [ S3 ] At stationarity , we ﬁnd the innovation front number to be n ( 0 ) = 1 2 I " 2 − ¯ r d + r ( 2 − ¯ r d ) 2 + 4 ¯ GI L # , [ S4 ] having put aside the unphysical negative solution to the quadratic equation . Eq S4 reveals that the density at the innovation front is inversely proportional to the diﬃculty of advancing the front to the adjacent possible I . Increasing the Lee et al . December 8 , 2022 | vol . XXX | no . XX | 11 D R A F T replication rate r or G also leads to higher innovation front density as agents pile up faster . Thus , we ﬁnd simple depen - dence of the innovation front density on the local dynamics of agent innovation , death , and replication . A . Improving the linearized estimate for lattice width . While the linearity assumption n ( 1 ) ≈ 2 n ( 0 ) was revealing , it was meant as starting approximation . We reﬁne the calculation of L , essentially solving the ﬁrst - order diﬀerential equation , by considering corrections to the linear approximation . We start with the ﬁrst - order ordinary diﬀerential equation ( ODE ) 0 = G L + ( r − r d ) n ( x ) + r ( 1 − In ( 0 ) ) n 0 ( x ) , [ S5 ] but we add on top of our local Taylor expansion to ﬁrst order at x = 0 a correction n ( 1 ) = 2 [ n ( 0 ) + (cid:15) ] . [ S6 ] This correction really comes from the fact that derivatives of higher order matter in the full Taylor series expansion , or n ( − 1 ) = n ( 0 ) − n 0 ( 0 ) + n 00 ( 0 ) / 2 ! − · · · . [ S7 ] In this context , the linearization in Eq S5 determines the form of these higher derivatives in a compact way . Since n ( − 1 ) = 0 , n 0 ( 0 ) = n ( 0 ) + n 00 ( 0 ) / 2 ! − n ( 3 ) ( 0 ) / 3 ! + · · · [ S8 ] This is a restatement of our assertion that if n 00 ( 0 ) and all higher order derivatives are suﬃciently small , then we could use a linear approximation to specify n ( x = 1 ) . Returning to Eq S5 , we solve for the higher order derivatives . We can do this by taking the k th derivative with k ≥ 1 , 0 = ( r − r d ) n ( k ) ( x ) + r [ 1 − In ( 0 ) ] n ( k + 1 ) ( x ) [ S9 ] and the recursion relation n ( k ) ( 0 ) = z k − 1 n 0 ( 0 ) [ S10 ] having deﬁned z ≡ r − r d r [ In ( 0 ) − 1 ] = − 1 − ¯ r d 1 − ¯ r o . [ S11 ] This means that our approximation for linearity at the front is also the condition that z (cid:28) 1 , an approximation that fails as 1 − ¯ r o → 0 for ﬁnite 1 − ¯ r d . We show the eﬀects of this factor in terms of the expected stationary value at n ( 0 ) in Fig . SB . 5 . Putting these calculations together , the corrected pseudo - gap slope from Eq S8 is n 0 ( 0 ) = n ( 0 ) + n 0 ( 0 ) z − 1 (cid:20) z 2 2 − z 3 3 ! + · · · (cid:21) = n ( 0 ) + n 0 ( 0 ) z − 1 (cid:2) e − z − 1 + z (cid:3) n 0 ( 0 ) = n ( 0 ) 1 − C C ≡ ( e − z − 1 + z ) / z . [ S12 ] 0 1 2 3 4 obsolescence rate r o 0 1 2 3 4 d e a t h r a t e r d collapse stasis growth Fig . SA . 1 . Phase space according to solution to the ﬁrst - order ODE in Eqs S14 and S17 . Going back to the stationary condition in Eq S5 , we can solve for L but now accounting for this correction L = − ¯ G (cid:16) n ( 0 ) h 1 − ¯ r d + 1 1 − C ( 1 − In ( 0 ) ) i(cid:17) − 1 . [ S13 ] Replacing n ( 0 ) with the stationary condition for innovation front occupancy = ¯ GI (cid:16) ¯ r o h ¯ r d + ¯ r o 1 − C − (cid:16) 1 + 1 1 − C (cid:17)i(cid:17) − 1 . [ S14 ] In order to check what happens to the singularity where L diverges with ¯ r o , we check when the denominator of Eq S14 goes to 0 , ¯ r o 1 − C = (cid:16) 1 + 1 1 − C (cid:17) − ¯ r d , [ S15 ] where C depends implicitly on both ¯ r d and ¯ r o . Eq S14 modiﬁes the boundaries of the phase space as graphed in Fig . SA . 1 . B . First - order solution . We can also take a direct approach to solving the ﬁrst - order ODE by simply integrating Eq S5 . Then , n ( x ) = (cid:18) ¯ r o I + ¯ G L ( 1 − ¯ r d ) (cid:19) exp (cid:16) − 1 − ¯ r d 1 − ¯ r o x (cid:17) − ¯ G L ( 1 − ¯ r d ) , [ S16 ] having used the starting assumption n ( 0 ) = ¯ r o / I . This approx - imation shows clearly that the slope of the exponential rise at x = 0 and its concavity are determined by the competition between death ¯ r d and competition ¯ r o . We obtain an a simple form for lattice length by using the boundary condition n ( x = − 1 ) = 0 , L = ¯ G 1 − ¯ r d I ¯ r o h exp (cid:16) − 1 − ¯ r d 1 − ¯ r o (cid:17) − 1 i . [ S17 ] 12 | Lee et al . D R A F T Eq S17 is equal to Eq S14 , but the latter gives a form that aligns with the derivation presented in the main text . We note that lattice length is not a physical quantity in the ﬁrst - order ODE because the occupancy function never intersects with the x - axis beyond x = − 1 . This observation suggests that we must at least go to a second derivative of n ( x ) before we can expect to approximate well the occupancy function . C . Second - order solution . A solvable , continuum formulation that captures the rise and drop required for a ﬁnite lattice would be helpful for solving for lattice length L . Here , we present a second - order ordinary diﬀerential equation approxi - mation for an interpolation through the iterative solution in Eq S1 . Expanding the discrete formulation about x , we obtain ˙ n ( x , t ) = G L ( t ) + ( r − r d ) n ( x ) + r [ 1 − In ( 0 ) ] n 0 ( x ) + r 2 [ 1 + In ( 0 ) ] n 00 ( x ) , [ S18 ] where we have stopped at second - order to leverage the two conditions , n ( 0 ) = r o ( rI ) − 1 and n ( − 1 ) = 0 . Replace n ( 0 ) with the stationary condition and taking rescaled rates , we obtain 0 = ¯ G L ( t ) + ( 1 − ¯ r d ) n ( x ) + [ 1 − ¯ r o ] n 0 ( x ) + 1 2 [ 1 + ¯ r o ] n 00 ( x ) . [ S19 ] Eq S19 is an inhomogeneous second - order diﬀerential equation that we can solve using the standard method of variation of coeﬃcients after having solved the homogenous equation . Since the inhomogenous term is a constant , the particular solution is likewise a constant . Then , the particular solution with characteristic eigenvalues λ + and λ − from the homogenous equation is n ( x ) = Ae λ + x + Be λ − x + C λ ± = 1 1 + ¯ r o (cid:16) ¯ r o − 1 ± p ( 1 − ¯ r o ) 2 − 2 ( 1 − ¯ r d ) ( 1 + ¯ r o ) (cid:17) . [ S20 ] By using Eqs S19 and S20 , we ﬁnd C = − ¯ G L ( 1 − ¯ r d ) . [ S21 ] We then solve for A and B using the boundary conditions . A = Ge ¯ ro − 1 −√ z 1 + ¯ ro L ( 1 − ¯ r d ) − (cid:16) 2 G ( 1 + ¯ r o ) L [ ( 1 − ¯ r o ) 2 − z ] + ¯ r o I (cid:17) e − 2 √ z 1 + ¯ ro − 1 B = Ge ¯ ro − 1 + √ z 1 + ¯ ro L ( 1 − ¯ r d ) − (cid:16) 2 G ( 1 + ¯ r o ) L [ ( 1 − ¯ r o ) 2 − z ] + ¯ r o I (cid:17) e 2 √ z 1 + ¯ ro − 1 z = ( 1 − ¯ r o ) 2 − 2 ( 1 − ¯ r d ) ( 1 + ¯ r o ) . [ S22 ] Eq S20 provides us two potential consistency equations for solving for L . Since we know that n ( − 1 ) = 0 , we have the following transcendental equation that must be satisﬁed : L = ¯ G 1 − ¯ r d (cid:0) Ae − λ + + Be − λ − (cid:1) − 1 . [ S23 ] 0 1 2 3 4 obsolescence rate r o 0 1 2 3 4 d e a t h r a t e r d collapse stasis growth 1 15 30 l a tt i c e l e n g t h L Fig . SA . 2 . Numerical calculation of phase space from reﬁned , second - order differ - ential equation approximation in Appendix C . Solved by setting the initial condition to the linear approximation in Eq 4 and the self - consistency condition in Eq S24 . Static region is shaded such that darker is a longer lattice as indicated by the color map . Critical point at r o = r d = r shows different behavior depending on angle of approach . For example , we anticipate from the ﬁrst - order solution that concavity of the curve at the pseudogap depends on the ratio ( 1 − ¯ r d ) / ( 1 − ¯ r o ) , which can diverge , be negative , or be positive depending on the limit taken towards the critical point . Alternatively , we have the condition n ( L ) = 0 , L = ¯ G 1 − ¯ r d (cid:0) Ae λ + L + Be λ − L (cid:1) − 1 . [ S24 ] Eqs S23 and S24 do not in general return the same result for L , but we ﬁnd that the latter agrees better with automaton simulations . For some parameter regimes , this condition is numerically degenerate for L . In these cases , we rely on either the heuristic solution for the iterative equation as discussed in Appendix A or the linear approximation discussed in the main text . B . Numerical calculations We calculate the occupancy number using the iterative form of Eq S1 , the analytic approximation presented in Appendix C , an automaton simulation of agents , and a mean - ﬁeld ﬂow implementation of the dynamics in Eq 3 . Each of these cal - culations have respective weaknesses and strengths that we discuss brieﬂy in the following bullet points . More details about the implementation follow , and the code for each solu - tion is located in the aforementioned repository . • While it is exact , the iterative calculation can be subject to numerical precision errors that grow with the lattice co - ordinate . It also requires a precise estimate of L , without which it may diverge or return negative values . Because of such divergence , the iterative calculation does not always permit an easy estimate of L using self - consistency of the equation . • The analytic solution , on the other hand , provides a ready way to estimate L by using the consistency condition in Eq S23 . It is an excellent approximation to the iterative solution for small densities and lattice widths , but its Lee et al . December 8 , 2022 | vol . XXX | no . XX | 13 D R A F T accuracy decreases as higher derivatives become increas - ingly important far from the pseudogap and for larger values of n . • The automaton model allows us to access non - stationary dynamics and stochastic ﬂuctuations , but it is relatively slow to calculate . It only gives an stochastic estimate of the lattice width L , which is necessary to condition upon to compare with the mean - ﬁeld models of occupancy number . • Finally , the dynamical mean - ﬁeld ﬂow calculation couples ﬂow of agent density between adjacent lattice sites . This approach obtains temporal trajectories like with the au - tomaton model but is much faster . It is , however , subject to discrete lattice corrections and requires knowledge of L beforehand . We leverage the set of alternative calculations to shed light on corrections and details that arise with each respective calculation . Some of the limitations may be important to consider when applying our results to practice . We describe the calculations in more detail below . A . Iterative calculation . Assuming that we have an estimate of lattice length L , we start with the stipulation n ( − 1 ) = 0 and n ( 0 ) = r o ( rI ) − 1 to calculate the occupancy number up to x = b L − 1 c . Note that we set the innovation front to be at x = L − 1 and n ( x = L ) = 0 such that the lattice consists of L sites . A heuristic approach to estimating the lattice length for a given set of parameter relies on the observation that agent number must be ﬁnite and positive when stationarity . We run the iterative solution starting with the initial estimate for L from linearized mean - ﬁeld theory . When L is slightly to large , the function diverges quickly to inﬁnity and when it is slightly too small it quickly diverges to negative inﬁnity . Using the wiggling of the tail , we can in many cases narrow our estimate of L precisely . We do not expect L to always depend so sensitively on errors this heuristic technique is not guaranteed to work . B . Analytic solution . The solution to the second - order ap - proximation of the diﬀerence equation presents a self - consistency condition for L . We use a standard Broy - den – Fletcher – Goldfarb – Shanno ( BFGS ) minimization algo - rithm implemented in NumPy to solve for L starting with the initial condition given by the linearized mean - ﬁeld approxima - tion . C . Automaton model . We simulate the dynamics with an au - tomaton model that consists of individual agents that follow the rules stipulated in Eq 3 but with a moving coordinate sys - tem ( instead of with an innovation front ﬁxed at x = 0 ) . At a given step in time , each individual agent dies with probability r d dt , replicates towards the innovation front with probability rdt , and the agents on the front each extend with probability rIdt . The obsolescence front progresses with probability r o dt . In the limit dt → 0 , each of these steps commutes with the others ( the non - commuting corrections are of lowest order dt 2 ) . Furthermore , we no longer need to consider each agent separately but just the sum of the rates of all the agents on any site n ( x ) . Thus , the small time step limit allows us sim - plify the calculation as is speciﬁed in the code repository and summarized below . Assuming that x = − 1 is the obsolescence front and x = L − 1 is the innovation front , one algorithm is 1 . Instantiate lattice of size 1 . 2 . Extend right side of lattice at x = L ( t ) − 1 by unit length with probability rIn ( L − 1 ) dt . 3 . Remove a lattice site from the left hand side with proba - bility r o dt unless lattice is already of size 1 . 4 . For each lattice site x in the order of the rightmost to the leftmost do the following : a . If x < L ( t ) − 1 , add a new agent to site x + 1 with probability rn ( x ) dt . b . Remove one agent with probability r d n ( x ) dt . c . Add one agent with probability G dt / L ( t ) . 5 . Return to Step 2 . Note that variations of this algorithm give exactly the same results in the limit dt → 0 though some may converge to the limit slower than others with dt . The important point is that terms of order dt be preserved in the calculation . The mean - ﬁeld model that we discuss will not generally agree with the time or ensemble averaged occupancy number of automaton simulations . This is because the mean - ﬁeld is based on the assumption that the average lattice width is the same as the average of its inverse . From the Cauchy inequality , however , we know that the typical width of the lattice in the automaton simulation will always be smaller , eﬀectively mapping the automaton model to another mean - ﬁeld equation . In order to align the mean - ﬁeld theory with automaton results , we recognize that it is necessary to rescale L → cL and x → cx in Eq S1 . This transformation corresponds to the rescaling G → cG and I → cI . A second factor that we must account for is the variation about L . To obtain an averaged occupancy number function for comparison , we restrict the average to the snapshots that are close to the stable value of L . In this way , we simply average over the occupancy number in the lattice relative to the innovation front up to the length of the shortest considered lattice ( unless speciﬁed to the contrary ) . We show just one example of such a comparison that accounts for these two corrections in Fig . SB . 3 , which shows close alignment between automaton and the corresponding mean - ﬁeld calculation . D . Mean - ﬁeld ﬂow . Having ﬁxed the lattice size to be L using the algorithm speciﬁed for the analytic calculation , we couple adjacent site densities from Eq 3 and evolve the densities in time increments of dt . We stop the iteration when a conver - gence criterion has been met for the maximum absolute change ˙ n ( x , t ) . This allows us to track the evolution of the occupancy number function from any initial condition as in Fig . SB . 4 . C . Model extensions A . Cooperative innovation . Cooperative innovation implies that front velocity scales nonlinearly with the number of agents , or that rIn ( 0 ) α for α ∈ [ 0 , ∞ ] . The stationary condition is now 14 | Lee et al . D R A F T 0 20 40 60 distance from innov . front x 0 25 50 75 100 o cc u p a n c y n ( x ) r > r d r < r d Fig . SB . 3 . Comparison of automaton simulation ( markers ) with rescaled mean - ﬁeld theory ( lines ) . Error bars represent two standard deviations over independent lattice trajectories that have length close to the stable conﬁguration from L − 1 to L + 1 . Parameters are speciﬁed in the code repository . 10 1 10 2 10 5 ( a ) time t = 0 t = 100 t = 200 t = 300 t = 400 t = 500 10 1 10 2 10 5 o cc u p a n c y n o . n ( x , t ) ( b ) 0 10 20 30 40 50 lattice site x 10 1 10 2 10 5 ( c ) 0 500 time t 0 . 0 2 . 5 n ( 0 , t ) 0 500 time t 0 . 0 2 . 5 n ( 0 , t ) 0 500 time t 0 . 0 2 . 5 n ( 0 , t ) Fig . SB . 4 . Simulated dynamics from mean - ﬁeld ﬂow . Numerical solution is close to expected density at the innovation front when ( a ) the stationarity condition is fulﬁlled for r < r d and ( b ) r > r d but not when ( c ) stationarity is violated in the growing regime . 0 . 00 0 . 05 0 . 10 0 . 15 0 . 20 distance from singularity r o r 0 . 75 1 . 00 1 . 25 1 . 50 n ( x = 0 ) exact linear MFT MFT + correction Fig . SB . 5 . Comparison of innovation front number n ( 0 ) approximations for different mean - ﬁeld theories ( MFT ) . 0 50 lattice width x 0 10 20 30 o cc u p a n c y n ( x ) = 1 / 2 = 1 = 2 0 50 lattice width x 10 0 10 1 10 2 r e s c a l e d o cc u p a n c y n ( x ) ( a ) ( b ) Fig . SC . 6 . Examples of cooperative α = 1 / 2 , competitive α = 1 , and anti - cooperative α = 2 occupancies for mean - ﬁeld theory ( dashed line ) and automaton simulation ( marker ) . ( b ) Under appropriate rescaling , the innovation fronts collapse . For α = 1 / 2 and α = 1 , we take an average over simulations where L is close to the mean - ﬁeld estimate , but mean - ﬁeld theory does not accurate estimate the divergence in lattice width for α = 2 . Error bars show standard deviation over independent trajectories though they are small in panel b . n ( 0 ) α = r o / rI . When α > 1 , we have cooperative behavior , and α < 1 implies anti - cooperativity . The nonlinearity means that the innovation fronts coincide under the rescaling n ( x ) 1 / β as in Fig . SC . 6 . Modifying Eq 3 accordingly , we ﬁnd that L = G [ n ( 0 ) ( r d + rIn ( 0 ) α − 2 r ) ] − 1 , corresponding to the phase boundaries shown in Fig . 3b and c . The boundary separating stasis from growth is ¯ r o ≤ ( 2 − ¯ r d ) 1 / α I ( α − 1 ) / α [ S25 ] whereas the boundary separating stasis from collapse requires solving for the zeros of the fractional polynomial ¯ G = ( ¯ r o / I ) 1 / α ( ¯ r d + ¯ r o − 2 ) . [ S26 ] With the transformation I α → I and ( r o / r ) α → r o / r , the stationary cooperative equation maps back to Eq 3 . Thus , cooperativity does not alter the qualitative aspects of the model . B . Bethe lattices and higher dimensions . Bethe lattices and Euclidean graphs of higher dimension imply that the number of agents per site decreases every sequential step from the origin . In the Bethe lattice picture from Fig . 1c , each sequential site branches into Q − 1 additional branches . A new agent must choose a branch and thus the replication term from Eq 3 Lee et al . December 8 , 2022 | vol . XXX | no . XX | 15 D R A F T acquires a factor of ( Q − 1 ) − 1 , and agent number decreases towards the innovation front faster than in a linear graph . As we show in Fig . 3b , collapsed and stable regimes grow larger at the expense of the growing regime . This argument makes clear the importance of the relative dimensions of agent replication and the idea space : when next - generation agents do not ﬁll all of the available space , then agents necessarily occupy a small fraction of the idea space . To make this explicit , we show the transformed equations for the Bethe lattice . Assuming that every step further out into the adjacent possible opens up Q possibilities , where Q = 2 corresponds to the linear case , then the density per site should decrease per branching point as agents decide on a branch to take . The site - speciﬁc dynamics — including death , startup , and shift — remain the same . To treat each branch as a replica of the one - dimensional case , we assume that the entry rate term takes the same form and decays inversely only with lattice length , which means that the total number of incoming agents scales with the number of branches . Then , the analogous equation to Eq 3 is ˙ n ( x , ¯ t ) = ¯ G L ( t ) − ¯ r d n ( x , t ) + 1 Q − 1 n ( x + 1 , t ) − In ( 0 , t ) [ n ( x , t ) − n ( x − 1 , t ) ] . [ S27 ] We have rescaled time in units of the replication rate ¯ t ≡ rt . Eq S27 is the dynamical equation for a Bethe lattice , where L ( ¯ t ) refers to the number of branching steps ( not sites ) between the innovation and obsolescent fronts at time ¯ t . The stationary solution is n ( x ) = ( Q − 1 ) (cid:26) In ( 0 ) [ n ( x − 1 ) − n ( x − 2 ) ] + ¯ r d n ( x − 1 ) − ¯ G L (cid:27) . [ S28 ] Then , the divergent growth condition is 0 ≤ ¯ r o ≤ 2 / ( Q − 1 ) − ¯ r d , and the collapse condition from Eq 6 is ¯ r o ∼ ( Q − 1 ) − 1 − ¯ r d / 2 + p ( ( Q − 1 ) − 1 − ¯ r d / 2 ) 2 + ¯ GI / L . The dimensional depletion eﬀect does not fundamentally alter the dynamics . If we rescale r → ( Q − 1 ) r and I → I / ( Q − 1 ) , then we recover Eq 3 . In a similar sense , we consider how the local density of agents living in a d - dimensional space must divide themselves as they move outwards from the origin at distance x . The local density decreases as ( x − 1 ) d − 1 x d − 1 = ( 1 − 1 / x ) d − 1 [ S29 ] ≈ 1 − ( d − 1 ) 1 / x [ S30 ] Clearly , the local curvature of the surface determines how thinly agents have to spread themselves out as they move further out . In the limit of a long - running lattice , x → ∞ , and ﬁnite dimension , this case reduces to the one - dimensional model . Thus , considering a tree - like lattice or higher dimen - sions does not appreciably alter the basic model . C . Obsolescence - driven innovation . Obsolescence - driven in - novation is the antithesis of forward - looking innovative sys - tems . By reversing the direction of the x - axis and ﬁxing the new innovation front at the origin , agents now replicate to - wards obsolescence . For stable pseudogaps , the introduction of a new idea drives every agent to left , making the whole system more innovative . As a result , innovation is driven at a rate proportional to the number of ideas on the verge of being extinguished . Newer ideas tend to beget agents on older ideas with rate r , which then drive themselves to extinction by eventually increasing occupancy at the obsolescence front . We have a mirrored version of Eq 3 ˙ n ( x , ¯ t ) = ¯ G L ( ¯ t ) − ¯ r d n ( x , ¯ t ) − n ( x − 1 , ¯ t ) + In ( 0 , t ) [ n ( x , ¯ t ) − n ( x + 1 , ¯ t ) ] . [ S31 ] Let us consider the stationary case . Since sites are now added at the obsolescent front , the addition of a new site shifts all the agents one lattice site towards the innovation front . In other words , an innovation in this system means that all agents move to the left , introducing a new site adjacent to the obsolescence front and removing all agents previously at the innovation front . The removal of agents at the innovation front eﬀectively imposes an threshold below which we are unable to detect innovative agents at stationarity . These agents beyond the known innovative frontier do not contribute any longer to lattice dynamics . ¶ We might interpret this as the fact that innovative ideas are around in some form before they are measured , so this establishes a threshold above which we recognize an innovative idea . This threshold is linked to the obsolescence rate r o , which determines how quickly the most innovative agents leave the system . This process , the disappearance of the most innovative agents , either is slow enough for lattice growth or suﬃciently rapid for collapse . In this sense , it is more appropriate to call the obsolescence rate an indulgence of unconventional ideas , which , in the stationary case , is equal to the innovation rate . D . Critical lines Eq S14 suggests that the dynamics of lattice width are deter - mined by a competition between forces that drive the system towards 0 such as via small innovativeness I → 0 and those that drive the system towards inﬁnite growth . In a randomly growing system , we expect such gyrations to be most promi - nent when slight changes to the innovation front number n ( 0 , t ) push us quickly from one extreme to another . Indeed , we noted exactly this in the collapsed limit in Eq 6 , where for GIr → 0 , the width of the stable regime shrank to 0 . Recalling that we had substituted in stationary values for n ( 0 ) , we recognize the essential role of the innovation front number n ( 0 ) in deter - mining the balance of the innovation and obsolescence fronts . This suggests as an order parameter , the typical ﬂuctuation , or the noise - to - signal ratio , of the innovation front number , σ 2 / µ = (cid:0)(cid:10) n ( 0 , t ) 2 (cid:11) − h n ( 0 , t ) i 2 (cid:1) / h n ( 0 , t ) i . [ S32 ] We use Eq S32 characterize the ﬂuctuations in the system when I (cid:28) 1 , and we approach the critical point r ∗ in Fig . SD . 7 . The appearance of a critical point is clear in the normalized variance of the order parameter n 0 , which takes ﬁnite values beyond the critical r . As we approach the critical point , we see increasingly large ﬂuctuations in the width of the lattice as shown in the example trajectory in Fig . SD . 7A . The ¶ Evenintheoriginalformulation , anassumptionofacontinuousdensityfunctionthatsmoothlygoes to 0 would imply that some agents exist in the innovative adjacent possible and in the obsolescent adjacent possible . 16 | Lee et al . D R A F T Fig . SD . 7 . Large ﬂuctuations at the critical point generate ﬂourishing periods that eventually collapse . ( a , b ) Time series from automaton simulation near critical point r = 0 . 4 for lattice width and innovation front number , respectively . ( c ) Normalized variance at innovation front around critical replication rate r . Critical point seems to be continuous because of slow , sublinear scaling of lattice size with simulation time beyond the critical point , but simulations show that lattice length will diverge for sufﬁciently long times . ( d ) Distribution of time periods of ﬂourishing ideas deﬁned as periods during which lattice width was greater than the mean . maximum durations for which the lattice breaks away from the collapsed state ∆ t become longer as we approach the critical point , extending the cutoﬀ of a heavy - tailed distribution as in Fig . SD . 7C . Short of the critical point , the system eventually returns to the collapsed conﬁguration . Fig . SD . 8 . Examples of pseudogap types . Sublinear ( blue ) , none ( orange ) , and su - perlinear ( green ) . These have been rescaled along both axes to facilitate comparison . 0 20 40 60 80 100 120 branch length 500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 t a x a Fig . SD . 9 . Example SARS - CoV - 2 phylogeny tree from Nextstrain for North America . Lee et al . December 8 , 2022 | vol . XXX | no . XX | 17 D R A F T 5 - 9 10 - 19 20 - 39 40 - 79 80 - 159 citations 0 . 0 0 . 1 0 . 2 0 . 3 0 . 4 d i s t . t o r un a w a y i nn o v . PRB 2 - 3 4 - 7 8 - 15 16 - 31 32 - 63 64 - 127 citations patents Fig . SD . 10 . Distance to runaway innovation for all patent and PRB citation classes . T a b l e S 1 . M od e l d y n a m i cs a nd p o ss i b l e a tt r i bu t i on s . Th e p r o v i d e d se t ex t e nd s b ey ond t h e d a t a se t s c on s i d e r e d i n t h e m a i n t ex t . a g e n t g r o w t h G e x p a n s i o n r e d ea t h r d ob s o l e s ce n ce r o i nn o v a t i v e n e ss I ﬁ r m s s t a r t - u p s p i n - o ﬀ b a n k r u p t y n o l o n g e r p r o ﬁ t a b l e t ec h . a v a il a b ili t y o f p u b li c r e s ea r c h a b o v e m i n . ca p i t a li z a t i o n i m p r o v e d p r o d u c t i v i t y i m p r o v e d p r o d u c t i v i t y n o d e m a n d ea s e o f t ec h . c h a ll e n g e I P O m a r k e t r e p o s i t i o n m a r k e t r e p o s i t i o n p r o h i b i t e d b y l e g a l m ea n s o r c u l t u r a l n o r m s r o b u s t n e ss o f n e w m a r k e t s m e r g e r n a t u r a l r e s o u r ce i n p u t d e p l e t e d b e l o w m i n . ca p i t a li z a t i o n g e n e t i c e v o l u t i o n c r o ss o v e r f r o m un o b s e r v e d li n ea g e b a s e p a i r m u t a t i o n e x t i n c t i o n f r o m n e u t r a l d r i f t o r s e l ec t i o n n o n - v i a b l e a d a p t a t i o n i n c h a n g i n g e n v i r o n m e n t r a t e o f v i a b l e m u t a t i o n e n v i r o n m e n t a l d i v e r s i t y c i t a t i o n n e w a u t h o r f o ll o w - u p w o r k r e t i r e m e n t d i s p r o v e d t h e o r y r a t e o f “ j u m p s ” [ 36 ] e x i s t i n g a u t h o r i n n e w ﬁ e l d “ t r a d i t i o n a l ” w o r k [ 36 ] d ea t h f o r go tt e n t h e o r y r i s k i n c li n a t i o n o f p r ac t i t i o n e r 18 | Lee et al . D R A F T T a b l e S 2 . M od e l s t r u c t u r e a nd po ss i b l e a tt r i bu t i on s . Th e p r o v i d e d se t ex t e nd s b ey ond t h e d a t a se t s c on s i d e r e d i n t h e m a i n t ex t . c o n t e x t a g e n t l a tt i ce s i t e e dg e o r d e r m a r ke t s ﬁ r m t ec hn o l og y u s e d s h a r e d p a t e n t c i t a t i o n t i m e un i t o f i n v e s t e d ca p i t a l c o s t e ﬃ c i e n c y s m a ll d i s t a n ce m a t e r i a l i n p u t c o m p o s i t i o n l a b o r s k ill c o m p o s i t i o n g e n e t i c e v o l u t i o n c l a d e b a s e p a i r m u t a t i o n s s m a ll d i s t a n ce t i m e n o . o f m u t a t i o n s s c i e n ce p u b li ca t i o n p u b li ca t i o n t e m p o r a ll y s i m il a r t i m e k e ys t o n e p u b li ca t i o n p a t e n t s i m il a r i m p ac t c i t a t i o n h i e r a r c h y a u t h o r t e r m i n o l og y s h a r e d t o p i c f r o m l e ss t o m o r e r e ﬁ n e d m o d e l s a u t h o r c o m b i n a t i o n m o d e l s h a r e d a u t h o r s p a t e n t t ec hn o l og y s h a r e d t ec hn o l og y Lee et al . December 8 , 2022 | vol . XXX | no . XX | 19