Benchmarks www . BioTechniques . com 40 Vol . 56 | No . 1 | 2014 Analogous to chemical signaling , the biophysical properties of the substratum are capable of potently altering cellular behavior and mechanotransduction in response to therapeutic agents ( 1 – 3 ) . To further increase the utility of investiga - tions pertaining to cellular mechanotrans - duction and consequences of biophysical stimuli , rigorous evaluation of relevant tissue properties is required . Unfortu - nately , extracting tissue mechanics is made difficult by two properties that differ from those of traditional engineering materials . First , the apparent elastic modulus ( E app ) of tissue ( typically ~ 10 2 – 10 4 Pa ) is several orders of magnitude lower than that of non - biological materials ( typically ~ 10 7 – 10 11 Pa ) . Second , the oriented nature of matrix proteins leads to highly anisotropic material properties . This can make techniques such as tensile testing unsuitable when trying to determine local nanoscale properties experienced by cells ( 4 ) . Additionally , most tissues are hydrated in vivo , and their material properties change dramatically upon drying ( 5 – 8 ) . While atomic force microscopy ( AFM ) has emerged as the gold standard for assaying tissue properties owing to nanoscale resolution and sensitivity in liquid environments ( 4 , 9 ) , accurate AFM measurements require sample immobili - zation , which frequently means either ( i ) measuring the sample dry or ( ii ) gluing the sample using fibrin or cyanoacrylate glue . Both of these methods introduce artifacts ( 5 , 6 , 10 ) . Although artifacts can be minimized by keeping the tissue partially moist , minimizing the amount of glue , or discarding obviously artifactual data , such error control methods are subjective and add substantially to the time and expense of accurately measuring tissue samples . To facilitate easier , more consistent AFM measurements , we have developed a robust methodology for mounting hydrated tissue without the need for direct gluing . Our new technique had to satisfy five major requirements : First , the tissue had to be immobilized in a dish suitable for AFM . Second , the tissue had to be maintained in a hydrated state to prevent drying artifacts . Third , there could be no contact with chemicals that could poten - tially leach into the tissue and alter its mechanics . Fourth , as tissue samples , especially those from conventional lab animals such as mice , rats , and rabbits , can be quite small , the method had to be adaptable down to sample sizes of 2 × 0 . 1 × 0 . 1 mm . Fifth , the method must be nondestructive and allow the sample to be used for further processing . Our method , which satisfies these require - ments , is described below and in Figure 1 . To begin , the sample is placed in the center of an AFM dish coated with a layer of silicone ( Sylgard 527 ; 4 h cure at 65°C ; Dow Corning , Midland , MI ) , which helps maintain tissue positioning . A Soft - Clamping Immobilizing Retainer of Tissue ( SCIRT ) is made by using a 1 . 25 – 4 mm biopsy punch to create a window in a 13 mm Thermanox coverslip ( ThermoFisher Scientific , Waltham , MA ) , and small droplets of cyanoacrylate glue are placed around its periphery . Utilizing a dissection microscope ( Stemi V6 , Carl Zeiss AG , Oberkochen , Germany ) , the SCIRT is then placed such that the tissue is accessible through the window , allowing for it to be monitored throughout the mounting process ; this helps to ensure the sample is not physi - cally stretched or compressed by the SCIRT or comes into contact with the Robust and artifact - free mounting of tissue samples for atomic force microscopy Joshua T . Morgan 1 , * , Vijay Krishna Raghunathan 1 , * , Sara M . Thomasy 1 , Christopher J . Murphy 1 , 2 , and Paul Russell 1 1 Department of Surgical and Radiological Sciences , School of Veterinary Medicine , University of California , Davis , One Shields Ave , Davis , CA and 2 Department of Ophthalmology and Vision Science , School of Medicine , University of California , Davis , One Shields Ave , Davis , CA * J . T . M . and V . K . R . contributed equally to this work . BioTechniques 56 : 40 - 42 ( January 2014 ) doi 10 . 2144 / 000114126 Keywords : atomic force microscopy ; tissue mechanics ; cornea ; trabecular meshwork ; sample preparation Immobilization of tissue - samples for atomic for microscopy ( AFM ) is typi - cally done using either semi - dry tissue or by gluing the tissue sample down , both of which can introduce artifacts . Here , we describe the design of a Soft - Clamping Immobilizing Retainer of Tissue ( SCIRT ) for consistent and nondestructive immobilization of tissues for AFM analysis . We compare the performance of our SCIRT method with glue - immobilization for two diffi - cult to handle tissue types : human trabecular meshwork ( HTM ) and rabbit cornea ( RC ) . Our results demonstrate that the SCIRT method has several advantages , including : ( i ) allowing for small sample sizes , ( ii ) enabling con - tinuous hydration , ( iii ) eliminating contact with glue or associated solvents , ( iv ) permitting sample recovery following measurement , and ( v ) ease of use . In conclusion , the SCIRT method is a simple and effective means of im - mobilizing soft , hydrated tissue samples consistently and without artifacts . Benchmarks www . BioTechniques . com 40 Vol . 56 | No . 1 | 2014 Method summary : Here we describe an effective and robust glue - less methodology to immobilize soft , hydrated tissue samples for atomic force microscopy without artifact or tissue - damage . R E P R I N T W I T H P E R M I S S I O N O N L Y Benchmarks www . BioTechniques . com 41 Vol . 56 | No . 1 | 2014 glue . Sample buffer [ typically Dulbecco’s phosphate buffered saline ( DPBS ) ] is immediately added to the dish to cure the glue and keep the tissue hydrated . The mounting procedure , which includes transfer of the tissue , placement of the SCIRT , and addition of buffer , generally takes an experienced handler less than 30 s ; during this time the tissue typically remains wet . If continuous hydration is required , it may be helpful to place a few drops of buffer on the AFM dish during tissue placement . This should not impact SCIRT placement . To evaluate this method , we chose two previously studied tissue types , rabbit corneal stroma ( RC ) and human trabecular meshwork ( HTM ) ( 11 , 12 ) . Both tissues are sensitive to hydration . HTM is also an extremely small tissue , with cross - sectional dimensions on the order of 0 . 1 mm and sample lengths available for investigation as short as a few millimeters . For each tissue type , we chose six normal donors and split the tissue into two groups . For the first group , the tissue samples were affixed to the dish using an extremely thin layer of glue , as previously described ( 11 , 12 ) . For the second group , the tissues were affixed using the method described above ( Figure 1 ) , with 4 mm windows for RC and 1 . 5 – 2 mm windows for HTM . All human tissue was handled in accordance with the tenets of the Decla - ration of Helsinki , and all animal tissue was acquired under a protocol approved by the University of California , Davis Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee . Both tissues were carefully isolated from the surrounding tissue as previously described ( 11 , 12 ) and mounted on AFM dishes . After mounting , force versus inden - tation curves were obtained as previously described ( 11 , 13 , 14 ) using an MFP - 3D Bio AFM system ( Asylum Research , Goleta , CA ) and silicon nitride cantilevers ( PNP - TR - 50 , NanoWorld , Neuchâtel , Switzerland ) with attached borosilicate microspheres ( radius = 4 – 6 µm , Thermo - Fisher Scientific ) . Each sample was measured at 4 – 6 locations with 4 – 7 curves collected at each location . The contact point was determined by a masked analyst and data were fit to a Hertz model ( 4 ) . The results of these measurements are shown in Figure 2 . It is apparent the SCIRT method yields more consistent median values between samples , although both methods point to an E app on the order of 10 2 – 10 3 Pa , consistent with published results . The difference between the two methods is more striking in the RC samples , with glued samples displaying dramatic intra - sample variability . Also , the SCIRT method results in a far more consistent data range with minimal spread . Notably , although the glue - immobi - lized samples can exhibit similar median values compared to samples prepared using our SCIRT method , they also can exhibit a remarkable skew toward stiffer values . Taken together , these data suggest that glue immobilization has the potential to produce artifactually stiff experimental data . While the results presented here only address the elastic properties of the tissue , the method could be readily extended to creep or stress relaxation studies as well . The mechanism ( s ) underlying the observed artifactual skew toward stiffness for glue - immobilized tissues is unclear . One likely possibility is glue leaching into the tissue sample . A previous report demonstrated that fibrin glue can increase measured tissue stiffness ( 10 ) , and it is possible cyanoacrylate glues have a similar effect , which would be exacerbated in thin , porous tissues such as RC and HTM . By avoiding contact between the tissue and glue , the SCIRT method provides a simple and effective way to immobilize hydrated samples for AFM analysis . Importantly , using the SCIRT method , tissue samples remain undamaged after AFM measure - ments and could therefore be used to isolate RNA / protein or for histology , enabling direct correlation of the mechanical and biological properties of the tissue . Figure 1 . Technique to mount samples using the SCIRT method . ( A ) D iagram of Soft - Clamping Im - mobilizing Retainer of Tissue ( SCIRT ) usage . A 13 mm Thermanox coverslip is modified using a biopsy punch to allow for a tissue access window . Small ( ~ 0 . 5 mm ) droplets of cyanoacrylate glue are added to the perimeter of the SCIRT using a 22 gauge needle . The SCIRT is placed over the tis - sue , clamping it into place . The dish is then filled with buffer , curing the glue and keeping the tissue hydrated . ( B ) Ima ge of rabbit cornea ( tissue ) held in place using the SCIRT system . Figure 2 . Scatter plot of the force analysis data for HTM ( left ) and RC ( right ) . The central line indicates the median of the sample . The samples prepared with glue show large variability both within and among the samples for both tissue types . In contrast , the SCIRT immobilized samples had increased consistency of measurement . Benchmarks Author contributions JTM and VKR designed the study , obtained and analyzed data , and prepared the manuscript . STM did the surgical prepa - ration of cornea tissue and was engaged in editing the manuscript , PR and CJM were involved in study design and manuscript preparation . Acknowledgments We thank Shaun Garland for his technical assistance in this study . This work is supported by grants from the National Institute of Health ( R01 EY019475 , R01 EY019970 and P30 EY12576 ) and an unrestricted grant from Research to Prevent Blindness . This paper is subject to the NIH Public Access Policy . Competing interests The authors declare no competing interests . References 1 . Discher , D . E . , P . Janmey , and Y . L . Wang . 2005 . Tissue cells feel and respond to the stiffness of their substrate . Science 310 : 1139 - 1143 . 2 . Yeung , T . , P . C . Georges , L . A . Flanagan , B . Marg , M . Ortiz , M . Funaki , N . Zahir , W . Ming , et al . 2005 . Effects of substrate stiffness on cell morphology , cytoskeletal structure , and adhesion . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton 60 : 24 - 34 . 3 . Thomasy , S . M . , J . A . Wood , P . H . Kass , C . J . Murphy , and P . Russell . 2012 . Substratum stiffness and latrunculin B regulate matrix gene and protein expression in human trabecular meshwork cells . Invest . Ophthalmol . Vis . Sci . 53 : 952 - 958 . 4 . McKee , C . T . , J . A . Last , P . Russell , and C . J . Murphy . 2011 . Indentation versus tensile measurements of Young’s modulus for soft biological tissues . Tissue Eng . Part B Rev . 17 : 155 - 164 . 5 . Ebenstein , D . M . and L . A . Pruitt . 2006 . Nanoindentation of biological materials . Nano Today 1 : 26 - 33 . 6 . Oyen , M . L . 2011 . Nanoindentation of Biological and Biomimetic Materials . Exp . Techniques 37 : 73 - 87 . 7 . Haut , T . L . and R . C . Haut . 1997 . The state of tissue hydration determines the strain - rate - sensitive stiffness of human patellar tendon . J . Biomech . 30 : 79 - 81 . 8 . Constantinides , G . , Z . I . Kalcioglu , M . McFarland , J . F . Smith , and K . J . Van Vliet . 2008 . Probing mechanical properties of fully hydrated gels and biological tissues . J . Biomech . 41 : 3285 - 3289 . 9 . Radmacher , M . 1997 . Measuring the elastic properties of biological samples with the AFM . IEEE Eng . Med . Biol . Mag . 16 : 47 - 57 . 10 . Chaurasia , S . S . , R . Champakalakshmi , A . Li , R . Poh , X . W . Tan , R . Lakshminarayanan , C . T . Lim , D . T . Tan , and J . S . Mehta . 2012 . Effect of fibrin glue on the biomechanical properties of human Descemet’s membrane . PLoS ONE 7 : e37456 . 11 . Last , J . A . , T . Pan , Y . Ding , C . M . Reilly , K . Keller , T . S . Acott , M . P . Fautsch , C . J . Murphy , and P . Russell . 2011 . Elastic modulus deter - mination of normal and glaucomatous human trabecular meshwork . Invest . Ophthalmol . Vis . Sci . 52 : 2147 - 2152 . 12 . Thomasy , S . M . , V . K . Raghunathan , M . Winkler , C . M . Reilly , A . R . Sadeli , P . Russell , J . V . Jester , and C . J . Murphy . Elastic modulus and collagen organization of the rabbit cornea : epithelium to endothelium . Acta Biomater . ( In press ) . 13 . Last , J . A . , S . J . Liliensiek , P . F . Nealey , and C . J . Murphy . 2009 . Determining the mechanical properties of human corneal basement membranes with atomic force microscopy . J . Struct . Biol . 167 : 19 - 24 . 14 . Last , J . A . , S . M . Thomasy , C . R . Croasdale , P . Russell , and C . J . Murphy . 2012 . Compliance profile of the human cornea as measured by atomic force microscopy . Micron 43 : 1293 - 1298 . Received 08 October 2013 ; accepted 12 December 2013 . Address correspondence to Paul Russell , Department of Surgical & Radiological Sciences , School of Veterinary Medicine , University of California Davis , Davis , CA . E - mail : prussell @ ucdavis . edu To purchase reprints of this article , contact : biotechniques @ fosterprinting . com Your Daily Science Fix BioTechniques Newsletters and Alerts complement the print journal by highlighting late - breaking news , feature articles , advanced access to upcoming content , industry events , videos , and more . Join the more than 80 , 000 subscribers who receive one or all : n Daily and Weekly Newsletters n Electronic Table of Contents and BenchTalk Podcast Alerts n Technology - specific Newsletters Newsletters n Cell Analysis / Culture n DNA Sequencing n Genetic Engineering Tools & Techniques n Genomics / Genetics Tools n In Vivo Imaging n PCR / Cloning n Protein Purification & Analysis www . BioTechniques . com / Email ® ® Newsletters Half 2014 . indd 1 1 / 8 / 14 3 : 16 PM