ANRV376 - BB38 - 15 ARI 27 March 2009 11 : 7 Particle - Tracking Microrheology of Living Cells : Principles and Applications Denis Wirtz Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering and Institute for NanoBioTechnology , Johns Hopkins University , Baltimore , Maryland 21218 ; email : wirtz @ jhu . edu Annu . Rev . Biophys . 2009 . 38 : 301 – 26 The Annual Review of Biophysics is online at biophys . annualreviews . org This article’s doi : 10 . 1146 / annurev . biophys . 050708 . 133724 Copyright c (cid:2) 2009 by Annual Reviews . All rights reserved 1936 - 122X / 09 / 0609 - 0301 $ 20 . 00 Key Words cell mechanics , nanorheology , viscosity , elasticity , LINC complex , laminopathies , emerin Abstract A multitude of cellular and subcellular processes depend critically on the mechanical deformability of the cytoplasm . We have recently in - troduced the method of particle - tracking microrheology , which mea - sures the viscoelastic properties of the cytoplasm locally and with high spatiotemporal resolution . Here we establish the basic principles of particle - tracking microrheology , describing the advantages of this approach over more conventional approaches to cell mechanics . We present basic concepts of molecular mechanics and polymer physics relevant to the microrheological response of cells . Particle - tracking mi - crorheology can probe the mechanical properties of live cells in experi - mentally difﬁcult , yet more physiological , environments , including cells embedded inside a 3D matrix , adherent cells subjected to shear ﬂows , and cells inside a developing embryo . Particle - tracking microrheology can readily reveal the lost ability of diseased cells to resist shear forces . 301 A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . 2009 . 38 : 301 - 326 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f C a li f o r n i a - D a v i s on 01 / 07 / 12 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV376 - BB38 - 15 ARI 27 March 2009 11 : 7 Contents INTRODUCTION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 302 BASIC CONCEPTS OF MOLECULAR CELL MECHANICS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 305 Working Deﬁnitions of Stress , Viscosity , Elasticity , and Compliance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 305 A Model System : A Solution of Actin Filaments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 306 BASIC PRINCIPLES OF PARTICLE - TRACKING MICRORHEOLOGY . . . . . . . . . . . . . 308 Particle - Tracking Microrheology of a Viscous Liquid . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 308 Particle - Tracking Microrheology of an Elastic Solid . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 312 Particle - Tracking Microrheology of a Viscoelastic Material . . . . . . . . 313 Dynamic Viscosity Versus Shear Viscosity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 314 Creep Compliance from Particle - Tracking Measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 314 PARTICLE - TRACKING MICRORHEOLOGY OF CELLS . 315 Interstitial Viscosity Versus Mesoscale Viscoelasticity of the Cytoplasm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 315 Active Versus Passive Microrheology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 316 Advantages of Particle - Tracking Microrheology Over Current Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 317 Illustrative Example of Particle - Tracking Microrheology of Living Cells . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 319 INTRODUCTION Many cellular and subcellular processes depend critically on the mechanical deformability of the cytoplasm . For example , the translocation of organelles ( e . g . , nucleus , mitochondria , and endoplasmic reticulum ) within the cytoplasm is partly controlled by their frictional drag and therefore by the local viscoelastic properties of the cytoplasm ( 54 , 55 , 59 , 68 ) . Migrating cells at the edge of a wound signiﬁcantly increase the stiffness of their cytoplasm to enable dendritic ﬁlamentous actin ( F - actin ) assemblies to pro - duce net protruding forces against the plasma membrane ( 50 , 80 ) . Axonal elongation depends directly on the highly regulated intracellular viscosity of the growth cone ( 72 ) . Cells need to adapt their intracellular physical properties to the physical properties of their extracellular mi - lieu to grow , differentiate , and migrate ( 20 , 22 , 78 ) . Moreover , changesinthemechanicalprop - erties of cells often correlate with disease state ( 14 , 34 , 58 ) . For instance , cells derived from mouse models of progeria ( premature aging ) or muscular dystrophy display signiﬁcantly softer ( i . e . , less elastic ) cytoplasm ( 55 ) than wild - type controls . This affects the ability of these cells to resist shear forces and to migrate to the edge of a wound ( 60 ) . We have recently introduced the method of particle - tracking microrheology ( 102 ) to mea - sure the viscoelastic properties of the cytoplasm locallyandwithhighspatiotemporalresolution . In this approach , ﬂuorescent beads of less than 1 μ m in diameter are injected directly into the cytoplasm of live cells ( Figure 1 ) . These beads rapidly disperse throughout the cytoplasm and are subsequently tracked by ﬂuorescence mi - croscopy ( 102 ) . The recorded movements of the beads are analyzed in terms of viscosity and elasticity of the cytoplasm . We and oth - ers have exploited particle - tracking microrhe - ology to probe the viscoelastic properties of various types of cells in a wide range of con - ditions ( 12 , 37 , 45 , 57 , 60 , 61 , 67 , 73 , 77 , 85 , 92 , 95 , 103 ) . These measurements have re - vealed important new mechanistic insights into how the physical properties of the cytoplasm adapt to various chemical and physical stimuli , how they can control basic cell functions , and howthesepropertiescanbesigniﬁcantlyaltered in diseased cells . Below , we brieﬂy describe different cell biological questions , which have been recently addressed using particle - tracking microrheology . 302 Wirtz A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . 2009 . 38 : 301 - 326 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f C a li f o r n i a - D a v i s on 01 / 07 / 12 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV376 - BB38 - 15 ARI 27 March 2009 11 : 7 a b c d e f ( x 1 , y 1 ) ( x 2 , y 2 ) 2 2 1 1 3 3 Figure 1 Particle - tracking microrheology . ( a ) Submicron ﬂuorescent beads are dialyzed . ( b , c ) These beads are spread on a grid , which is placed inside a ballistic injection machine . After ballistic injection , the beads disperse rapidly within the cytoplasm . ( d ) The cells are placed under a high - magniﬁcation ﬂuorescence microscope . The random spontaneous movements of the beads are monitored with high spatial and temporal resolution . The numerals 1 , 2 , and 3 refer to the order of steps in which particle - tracking is conducted . ( e ) Using the appropriate software , the time - dependent ( x , y ) coordinates of the beads are mathematically transformed into mean squared displacements ( MSDs ) . ( f ) The time lag - dependent MSDs of the beads are subsequently transformed into local values of either the frequency - dependent viscoelastic moduli , G (cid:2) ( ω ) and G (cid:2)(cid:2) ( ω ) , or the creep compliance , (cid:2) ( t ) , of the cytoplasm . Modiﬁed with permission from Reference 76 . Particle - tracking microrheology ( also called nanorheology ) shows that the cytoplasm of ad - herent cells at rest , such as endothelial cells and ﬁbroblasts on planar substrates , is typi - cally more elastic than viscous ( i . e . , these cells show a rheological behavior which is akin to that of a solid ) for timescales between 0 . 1 and ∼ 10s ( 102 ) . However , at timescales greater than 10 – 20 s , these cells show a predominantly viscous response to shear forces : The cyto - plasm behaves like a liquid ( 102 ) . In general , the viscoelastic properties of adherent cells are dominated by the actin ﬁlament cytoskeleton . Indeed pharmacological treatment inducing the disassembly of actin ﬁlaments elimi - nates the deformability of the cytoplasm and renders the cytoplasm mostly viscous at all timescales ( 107 , 116 ) . Moreover , the level of elasticity in the cell correlates with the local concentration of F - actin present in the cytoplasm : The actin - rich cell periph - ery ( i . e . , the lamella ) is signiﬁcantly stiffer than the perinuclear region , which con - tains less actin . Serum - starved cells , which show little organized F - actin , have both a low viscosity and a low elasticity . However , when suddenly subjected to a shear ﬂow similar to that present in blood vessels , the cy - toplasmofserum - starvedcellsdisplaysrapidas - sembly of actin ﬁlaments into organized struc - tures ( 61 , 76 ) . Particle - tracking microrheology reveals that ﬂow - induced actin ﬁlament assem - bly is accompanied by a rapid rise in cyto - plasmic stiffness , followed by an equally rapid decrease in stiffness ( 61 ) . This transient in - crease in cytoplasmic stiffness correlates with the transient activation of the Rho / Rho ki - nase ( ROCK ) pathway and the associated as - sembly and transient contraction of the actin ﬁlament network by myosin II . These results suggest that when an adherent cell is subjected to shear stresses , its ﬁrst action is to prevent de - tachment from its substratum by greatly stiff - ening the cytoplasm through enhanced actin ﬁlament assembly and Rho - kinase - mediated contractility . During migration at the edge of a wound , cells polarize their overall morphology and www . annualreviews . org • Particle - Tracking Microrheology of Living Cells 303 A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . 2009 . 38 : 301 - 326 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f C a li f o r n i a - D a v i s on 01 / 07 / 12 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV376 - BB38 - 15 ARI 27 March 2009 11 : 7 position the microtubule organizing center ( MTOC ) towardthecell’sleadingedge ( 31 , 59 ) . Particle - tracking microrheology indicates that the mechanical properties of the cytoplasm be - come spatially polarized as well : The cytoplasm is much stiffer at the leading edge than at the trailing edge of the migrating cell , i . e . , the re - gion near the nucleus that is positioned near the back of the cell ( 50 ) . MTOC repositioning at the edge of the wound is abrogated in cells transfectedwithadominant - negativemutantof the small GTPase Cdc42 ( 98 ) . Similarly , cells with deactivated Cdc42 show no spatial polar - ization in their mechanical properties . These results suggest that a differential distribution of subcellular mechanical microenvironments is essential for directed cell migration and is coordinated through microtubules ( 50 ) . Particle - tracking microrheology has also shown that the elasticity of the cytoplasm is much lower than that of the nucleus in the same cell . The nucleus is also more elastic than vis - cous , which reveals that the intranuclear region displays an unexpectedly strong solid - like be - havior ( 103 ) . Indeed , when cells move though a dense extracellular matrix , a rate - limiting step in the 3D migration process is the squeezing of the nucleus by the pores of the matrix , not the deformation of the cytoplasm ( 6 , 56 ) . Measurements of the mean shear viscosity and the elasticity of the intranuclear region deter - mine a lower bound of the propulsive forces ( 3 – 15 pN ) required for nuclear organelles such as the promyelocytic leukemia body to undergo processive transport within the nucleus by overcoming the friction forces set by the intranuclear viscosity . Dynamic analysis of the spontaneous movements of submicron beads embedded in the nucleus also reveals the presence of transient nuclear microdomains of mean size 290 nm that are mostly absent in the cytoplasm ( 32 , 103 ) . The strong elastic charac - ter and the micro - organization of the intranu - clear region revealed by particle - tracking anal - ysis may help the nucleus preserve its structural coherence . This study highlights the difference between the low interstitial nucleoplasmic vis - cosity , which controls the transport of nuclear proteins and molecules , and the much higher mesoscale viscosity , which affects the diffusion and the directed transport of nuclear organelles and reorganization of interphase chromosomes ( 103 ) . Finally , particle - tracking microrheology has shown that when human endothelial cells are placed inside a 3D matrix , their cytoplasm is much softer than when the same cells are placed on a thin planar layer of the same ma - trix ( 77 ) . Vascular endothelial growth factor ( VEGF ) treatment , whichenhancesendothelial migration in the 3D matrix , increases the de - formability of the cytoplasm of endothelial cells in the matrix . This VEGF - induced softening response of the cytoplasm is abrogated by spe - ciﬁc ROCK inhibition . These results suggest that ROCK plays an essential role in the regu - lation of the intracellular mechanical response to VEGF of endothelial cells in a 3D matrix . The above measurements could only have been achieved thanks to particle - tracking microrheology , which can reveal the me - chanical properties of live cells in experi - mentally difﬁcult—yet more physiological— environments . For instance , particle - tracking microrheology is the only cell mechanics method that can probe the mechanical proper - ties of individual cells deeply embedded inside a 3D matrix and their mechanical response to agonists and / or drug treatments ( 77 ) , monitor changes in cytoskeleton elasticity in cells sub - jected to shear ﬂows ( 61 ) , or measure in vivo the local viscoelastic properties of a Caenorhab - ditis elegans embryo embedded in an impenetra - ble shell ( 16 ) . Cells in these more physiologi - cal environments cannot be probed by existing methods of cell mechanics , such as atomic force microscopy ( AFM ) , becausethesecells areinac - cessible to direct physical contact and can only be probed at a distance . This review describes basic concepts of molecular mechanics and polymer physics applied to cells and introduces the funda - mental principles underlying particle - tracking microrheology and its advantages over tradi - tional cell mechanics methods . This review also showshowparticle - trackingmicrorheologycan 304 Wirtz A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . 2009 . 38 : 301 - 326 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f C a li f o r n i a - D a v i s on 01 / 07 / 12 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV376 - BB38 - 15 ARI 27 March 2009 11 : 7 readily reveal the lost ability of diseased cells to resist shear forces . BASIC CONCEPTS OF MOLECULAR CELL MECHANICS Working Deﬁnitions of Stress , Viscosity , Elasticity , and Compliance Because different experimental methods mea - sure different ( but often related ) rheological quantities , the intracellular mechanics of a living cell is best characterized by multiple rheological parameters , including viscosity , elasticity , and creep compliance . These rheo - logical parameters simply describe the mechan - ical response of a material ( such as the cell’s cytoplasm ) subjected to a force and how it mea - sures the resulting deformation and , vice versa , the mechanical response of a material subjected to a deformation and how it measures the force required to produce the deformation . The rhe - ological response of the cytoplasm can be either predominantly viscous or elastic , depending on the time of application and the magnitude of theforce . Theseforcescanbeexternallyapplied as in the case of endothelial cells subjected to blood ﬂow ( 61 ) , result from internal tension as in the case of actomyosin contractility , or both ( 49 ) . The shear viscosity of a liquid measures its propensity to ﬂow under random or applied forces . The shear viscosity generates the drag forces that slow down the motion of organelles and protein complexes in the cytoplasm and nu - cleus . A simple way to measure the viscosity of a material or liquid is to use a falling - ball vis - cometer . Here the speed at which heavy metal - lic beads fall through the probed material de - pends on an effective viscosity . This method is highly approximate due to the uncontrolled in - teractions between the beads and the material , the inherent difﬁculty to measure the terminal velocity of the beads , and the assumptions that need to be made to compute this viscosity . Al - ternatively , the material can be subjected to a steady shear deformation of controlled rate us - ing a rheometer . Here , the material is placed between two parallel plates or between a cone and plate . The viscosity is the ratio of the stress ( force per unit area ) induced in the material by the imposed deformation to the rate of shear deformation . In cells , the viscosity of the cyto - plasm predominantly governs the transport and movements of subcellular organelles and cy - toskeleton structures at long timescales . A ma - terial that is only viscous ( and not elastic ) , such aswater , cannotresistmechanicalstresses ; itcan only slow down its deformation by the imposed mechanical stress . Upon cessation of the stress , the material or liquid has lost all memory of its original shape and location . Below , we show how the viscosity of a material or a liquid can be obtained by tracking the random movements of submicron beads embedded in the material . The elasticity ( also called the elastic modu - lus ) of a material measures its stretchiness . Elas - ticity measures the ability of cytoplasmic struc - tures to resist forces and store energy caused by deformation . A material that is only elastic ( and not viscous ) can deform under stress but can - not ﬂow . As no viscous dissipation occurs dur - ing its deformation , the elastic material snaps back to its original shape upon cessation of the stress . Elasticity typically governs the response of the cytoplasm to mechanical stresses at short timescales . Some materials , such as Silly Putty ® , can be both viscous and elastic . Silly Putty can bounce as it deforms upon impact , but quickly regains its shape , which means it is elastic . It is also viscous , as Silly Putty rolled into a ball will par - tiallyﬂattenduetoitsownweightwhenleftona ﬂat surface . These simple observations indicate that Silly Putty is elastic at short timescales ( i . e . , during impact ) and viscous at long timescales . Similarly , the cytoplasm of living cells is both viscous and elastic , i . e . , it is viscoelastic . Instead of working in the time domain , rhe - ologists tend to work in the frequency do - main . The frequency - dependent elastic mod - ulus of a material , G (cid:2) ( ω ) , can be obtained by subjecting it to oscillatory deformations of controlled frequency ω and constant ( small ) amplitude . When an oscillatory deformation is applied and is given by a sine function of time , www . annualreviews . org • Particle - Tracking Microrheology of Living Cells 305 A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . 2009 . 38 : 301 - 326 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f C a li f o r n i a - D a v i s on 01 / 07 / 12 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV376 - BB38 - 15 ARI 27 March 2009 11 : 7 γ ( t ) = γ 0 sin ω t , the stress , τ , induced within the material by this deformation will typi - cally have both sine and cosine components . Speciﬁcally , the stress can be decomposed into a sine ( in - phase ) component and a cosine ( out - of - phase ) component : τ ( t ) = τ (cid:2) sin ω t + τ (cid:2)(cid:2) cos ω t = γ 0 ( G (cid:2) sin ω t + G (cid:2)(cid:2) cos ω t ) . The elastic modulus of the material , G (cid:2) , is equal to the in - phase component of the frequency - dependent stress divided by the amplitude of theoscillatorydeformation , i . e . , G (cid:2) ( ω ) = τ (cid:2) / γ 0 . The viscous modulus of the same material , G (cid:2)(cid:2) ( ω ) , can be obtained during the same mea - surement by extracting the out - of - phase com - ponent of the frequency - dependent stress and dividing by the amplitude of the oscillatory de - formation , i . e . , G (cid:2)(cid:2) ( ω ) = τ (cid:2)(cid:2) / γ 0 ( 24 ) . If the ma - terial is an elastic solid ( no or little viscosity ) , such as rubber , then the induced stress is ex - actly in phase with the input deformation and τ ( t ) = τ (cid:2) sin ω t . In this case , G (cid:2)(cid:2) = 0 . If the material is a viscous liquid ( no elasticity ) , such as water or glycerol , then the induced stress is out of phase with the input deformation , and τ ( t ) = τ (cid:2)(cid:2) cos ω t . In this case , G (cid:2) = 0 . Typicalbiologicalmaterials , suchascellsand tissues , have rheological properties that depend on the rate of deformation , ω , i . e . , both G (cid:2) and G (cid:2)(cid:2) depend on ω . At low frequencies , the cyto - plasm has the time to reorganize its cytoskele - ton polymers and it can ﬂow , behaving as a vis - cous liquid . At high frequencies , the cytoplasm does not have the time to reorganize and the cy - toplasm behaves as an elastic solid , which resists thedeformation . Thisunderliestheimportance of measuring the full frequency - dependent re - sponse of cells and tissues , which undergo both slow and rapid movements . However , the rhe - ology of individual cells cannot be measured with a macroscopic device , such as a rheometer . Moreover , even if a microscopic rheometer ex - isted , measuring the full frequency - dependent rheological response of the cytoplasm to oscil - latorydeformationswouldbetedious , asthisre - sponse would have to be probed one frequency at a time over a wide range of frequencies . Below , we show that the frequency - dependent viscous and elastic moduli of a cell can be ob - tained in ∼ 10 s from the dynamic movements of submicron probe beads embedded in the cytoplasm , without subjecting the cell to any external force or deformation . A material that is only viscous and has no elasticity , such as water , is a liquid and G (cid:2) = 0 . A material that is only elastic and has no or little viscosity , such as rubber or Jell - O , is a solid and G (cid:2)(cid:2) ≈ 0 . A material that is more viscous than elastic , i . e . , G (cid:2)(cid:2) ( ω ) > G (cid:2) ( ω ) , is a viscoelastic liq - uid ; a material that is more elastic than viscous , G (cid:2) ( ω ) > G (cid:2)(cid:2) ( ω ) , is a viscoelastic solid . Finally , the creep compliance of the cyto - plasm refers to its deformability . Experimen - tally , it is measured by the deformation of the cytoplasm resulting from an applied mechan - ical stress ( applied force ) . A high compliance indicates that a material has a low propensity to resist mechanical deformation following ap - plication of a shear stress ; a low compliance indicates that it can resist such stress . When the material is only viscous or only elastic and not both , the creep compliance of the mate - rial is inversely proportional to its viscosity or elasticity , respectively . Below , we show how the time - dependent creep compliance of the cyto - plasm can be obtained directly from tracking the movements of submicron probe beads em - beddedinthecytoplasm , withoutsubjectingthe cell to any external force . Viscoelastic moduli ( G (cid:2) and G (cid:2)(cid:2) ) and creep compliance of the cytoplasm are related . In - deed , it is possible to compute the time - dependent cytoplasmic creep compliance from the frequency - dependent viscoelastic parame - ters and , vice versa , the viscoelastic moduli of the cytoplasm can be computed from the time - dependent creep compliance . The shear viscos - ity can also be estimated from the frequency - dependent viscous and elastic moduli . A Model System : A Solution of Actin Filaments To obtain a more intuitive understanding of the rheological concepts deﬁned above , we con - sider the simple ( but not trivial ) system of a concentrated solution of actin ﬁlaments . A 306 Wirtz A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . 2009 . 38 : 301 - 326 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f C a li f o r n i a - D a v i s on 01 / 07 / 12 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV376 - BB38 - 15 ARI 27 March 2009 11 : 7 key contributor to cytoplasmic stiffness is the cytoskeleton , which is composed of three ma - jor ﬁlamentous proteins : F - actin , microtubules , and intermediate ﬁlaments ( 92 ) . The cytoskele - ton provides the cytoplasm with its structure and shape . In the cell , actin monomers as - semble into semiﬂexible F - actin polymers that readily form entangled networks ( 30 , 97 , 108 ) whose viscoelastic properties can be controlled by either altering the local density of actin ﬁl - aments or the cross - linking / bundling activity of F - actin - binding proteins , such as α - actinin or ﬁlamin ( 43 , 113 ) . In most cells , F - actin and intermediate ﬁlaments are the primary contrib - utors to cytoplasmic stiffness ( 92 ) . The cytoplasm of adherent cells is rheolog - ically complex : It typically behaves as a vis - coelastic liquid when sheared either slowly or for a long time , and as a viscoelastic solid when sheared either rapidly or for a short time . This rheological complexity can be captured by a solution of entangled actin ﬁlaments in vitro in the absence of motor or cross - linking pro - teins ( 3 , 47 ) . Below a threshold concentration of ∼ 0 . 2 mg / ml , actin ﬁlaments cannot resist shear deformations ; their global rheological re - sponse is viscous , with a viscosity equal to that of buffer , with a small additional correction due to the presence of the ﬁlaments ( 17 ) . However , past this threshold concentration , the actin ﬁl - aments in suspension begin to form entangle - ments . Because these ﬁlaments are rigid ( 30 ) , they form entanglements more readily than ﬂexible polymers that have the same contour length . These entanglements form topological obstacles in the network that impede the lat - eral bending motion of the ﬁlaments , but not their longitudinal movements . These polymer entanglements render the solution of actin ﬁl - aments elastic . At short timescales , the ﬁlaments only undergo thermally driven lateral ﬂuctuations Slow longitudinal back - and - forth fluctuations ( τ > τ e ) Fast lateral fluctuations ( τ > τ e ) Cytoskeleton polymer Time lag ( s ) a bbb c τ R τ e M ea n s q u a r e d d i s p l a c e m e n t ( μ m 2 ) Γ ( t ) ~ < Δ r 2 ( t ) > ~ t ~ t 3 / 4 ~ t ~ t 3 / 4 C r ee p c o m p l i a n c e Γ ( t ) Time lag τ R τ e Figure 2 Physical origin of the displacements of beads in the cytoplasm . ( a ) Ballistically injected beads are lodged within the cytoskeleton . The size of the beads is larger than the average mesh size of the cytoskeleton network , which is ∼ 50 nm in ﬁbroblasts . ( b ) The spontaneous movements of the cytoskeleton ﬁlaments that surround each bead induce displacements of the beads . At short timescales , the displacements of the beads are predominantly induced by the fast lateral bending ﬂuctuations of the cytoskeleton ﬁlaments . At long times , the displacements of the beads are predominantly induced by the slow longitudinal back - and - forth lateral ﬂuctuations of the cytoskeleton ﬁlaments . Finally , ﬁlaments move sufﬁciently to allow beads to escape the cage to move to the next cage . ( c ) Accordingly , the mean squared displacements ( MSDs ) of the beads show a t 3 / 4 power - law dependence at short timescales , a quasi plateau value at intermediate timescales between τ e and τ R , and a linear dependence at long times caused by the slow viscous diffusion of the beads . ( Inset ) The deformability of the cytoplasm [ creep compliance , (cid:2) ( t ) ] is proportional to the MSD of the beads , (cid:5) (cid:3) r 2 ( t ) (cid:6) . See text for details . www . annualreviews . org • Particle - Tracking Microrheology of Living Cells 307 A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . 2009 . 38 : 301 - 326 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f C a li f o r n i a - D a v i s on 01 / 07 / 12 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV376 - BB38 - 15 ARI 27 March 2009 11 : 7 ( Figure 2 ) . These ﬂuctuations are fast , as they involve small sections of the ﬁlaments between network entanglements . A fast camera shows each actin ﬁlament undergoing lateral ﬂuc - tuations within a conﬁning tube - like region formed by the surrounding ﬁlaments ( 17 , 18 , 46 ) . At intermediate timescales that are longer than the time for the lateral ﬂuctuations to begin to hit the walls of the tube region , the back - and - forth longitudinal movements of the ﬁlament in the network can take place ( Figure 2 ) . These longitudinal motions are slow because they involve the entire ﬁlament . But these back - and - forth movements result in no net displacement of the ﬁlaments : The movements of the ﬁlaments are effectively curved 1D random walks . Finally , at timescales longer than a characteristic terminal relaxation time of the network , which depends on the length of the ﬁlament , the ﬁlament can ﬁnally escape the tube - like region ( 39 , 70 ) . This description of the timescale - dependent movements of individual ﬁlaments in a dense networkcanberedescribedinrheologicalterms for the whole ﬁlament network following de Gennes’ original concept ( 17 ) . Consider an actin ﬁlament network subjected to a con - stant stress ( force per unit area ) of relatively small magnitude . At short timescales , the ﬁl - aments can only relax the energetically unfa - vorable distortions , which are created in the polymer network by the externally applied stress , through lateral ﬂuctuations ( 70 ) . The creep compliance—or the deformation of the network—increases as a function of time as t 3 / 4 ( 114 ) ( Figure 2 c ) . The exponent 3 / 4 re - ﬂects the lateral bending ﬂuctuations of the ﬁlaments ( 70 , 74 ) . At longer timescales , the network cannot relax anymore because no net ﬁlament motion occurs at these timescales . Accordingly , the creep compliance of the ﬁla - ment network becomes approximately constant ( or a quasi plateau , Figure 2 c ) and the network behaves mostly as an elastic gel , as the elastic modulus becomes much larger than the viscous modulus . A stably cross - linked actin ﬁlament network behaves similarly , but at all timescales ( 44 ) . Atlongtimescales , theﬁlamentscanﬁnally diffuse out of their conﬁning tubes , the network can relax the stress , and the creep compliance grows linearly with time , a proportionality that reﬂects viscous diffusion ( 21 ) . The network be - comesaviscoelasticliquid , forwhichtheviscous modulus is much larger than the elastic modu - lus ( 24 ) . If the actin ﬁlament network is stably cross - linked , the polymer cannot undergo this terminal relaxation and the plateau value of the compliancepersistsindeﬁnitely . Oftenthetran - sition from the plateau region to the terminal relaxation is not sharp because actin ﬁlaments have a wide distribution of lengths , which de - ﬁne a broad distribution of relaxation times . A permanently cross - linked actin ﬁlament network provides cells with structural stability but does not allow them to readily soften to al - low for cell shape changes that are , for instance , required during intravasation and extravasation of cancer cells in and out of blood vessels ( 110 ) . To circumvent this problem and allow for a stiff but malleable cytoskeleton , cells have evolved an ingenious mechanism . This mechanism does not require dynamic disassembly and reassem - bly of the ﬁlaments themselves to modulate the mechanical properties of the network . Instead F - actin networks exploit dynamic cross - linking proteins , such as ﬁlamin or α - actinin ( 25 , 99 , 109 , 110 ) . When such a network is sheared more slowly than the lifetime of binding of the cross - linking protein , the network can ﬂow and behaves mostly as a liquid . When sheared at a rate faster than the inverse binding lifetime of the cross - linking protein , the actin ﬁlament network behaves as an elastic gel and cannot ﬂow ( 109 , 110 , 115 ) . BASIC PRINCIPLES OF PARTICLE - TRACKING MICRORHEOLOGY Particle - Tracking Microrheology of a Viscous Liquid To understand how the viscoelastic properties of the cytoplasm of cells can be obtained by tracking the movements of beads embedded in it , we consider ﬁrst the simpler limit case of 308 Wirtz A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . 2009 . 38 : 301 - 326 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f C a li f o r n i a - D a v i s on 01 / 07 / 12 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV376 - BB38 - 15 ARI 27 March 2009 11 : 7 submicron beads suspended in a viscous liquid ( no elasticity ) . These beads are smaller than 1 μ m so that they undergo Brownian motion , as inertial forces ( gravity ) are negligible . If active transport of the nanoparticles is also negligible , only two types of forces act on the beads inside the cytoplasm : (cid:2) The small random force produced by the random bombardment of water molecules generated by the thermal en - ergy k B T and the movements of other cy - toplasmic structures , such as cytoskeleton ﬁlaments and other organelles ( 102 ) . (cid:2) The counteracting frictional force , which results from the movement of the beads driven by thermal energy . The frictional force is proportional to the velocity of the bead and the bead’s friction coefﬁcient , which depends on the viscoelastic prop - erties of the cytoplasm and the size of the bead . Because we neglect inertia and directed mo - tion , the mathematical equation describing the motion of a bead simply states that the sum of these two forces is zero . This resulting equa - tion is not deterministic , but stochastic , be - cause the force that powers the bead move - ments is random in amplitude and direction . Thesolutionofthisstochasticequation , i . e . , the time - dependent coordinates of the bead , is the conventional random walk ( 5 ) . Therefore , on average , the bead remains at the same posi - tion . However , the standard deviation of the displacements or the mean squared displace - ment ( MSD ) of the bead , (cid:5) (cid:3) r 2 (cid:6) , is not zero . In a liquid of unknown shear viscosity , η , the submicron bead undergoes Brownian motion driven by the thermal energy k B T . Each time the bead takes a step in a random direc - tion , it loses all memory of where it just came from . The next step occurs in an uncorrelated direction . Einstein showed that , in these con - ditions , the bead undergoes a random walk and its time - averaged MSD is simply (cid:5) (cid:3) r 2 (cid:6) = 4 Dt ( Figure 3 a ) . Here t is time lag , (cid:5) . . . (cid:6) indicates time - averaging , and D is the diffusion coefﬁ - cient of the bead . The linear dependence of the MSD on time lag is a signature of pure vis - cous diffusion of the bead ( 81 ) . Equivalently , the square - root dependence of the root MSD with time , (cid:2) (cid:5) (cid:3) r 2 (cid:6) = √ 4 Dt ∼ t 1 / 2 , is a sig - nature of viscous diffusion ( 5 ) . For a spherical bead , the diffusion coefﬁcient is given by the relation D = k B T / ξ ( Stokes - Einstein relation ) , where ξ = 6 πη a is the friction coefﬁcient of the bead in the liquid and a is the radius of the bead . After rearrangements , one ﬁnds that the Time lag ( t ) a b d i s p l a c e m e n t < Δ r 2 ( t ) > Time dependent Time independent Figure 3 Particle - tracking microrheology of a viscous liquid and an elastic solid . ( a ) The mean squared displacement ( MSD ) of beads immersed in a viscous liquid ( such as water or glycerol ) grows linearly with time lag , with a slope inversely proportional to the viscosity of the liquid and the radius of the bead . ( b ) The MSD of beads embedded in an elastic solid ( such as rubber ) is independent of time lag . The plateau value is inversely proportional to the elasticity of the solid . www . annualreviews . org • Particle - Tracking Microrheology of Living Cells 309 A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . 2009 . 38 : 301 - 326 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f C a li f o r n i a - D a v i s on 01 / 07 / 12 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV376 - BB38 - 15 ARI 27 March 2009 11 : 7 viscosity of the liquid can be estimated as soon as the MSD of the bead is measured ( 114 ) : η = 2 k B T 3 π a t (cid:5) (cid:3) r 2 ( t ) (cid:6) . 1 . This expression explains how one can esti - mate the viscosity of a liquid merely by sus - pendingsmallbeadsinthatliquid , subsequently tracking their thermally excited random mo - tion using ﬂuorescence light microscopy and appropriate particle - tracking software , and ﬁ - nally computing the MSD from the trajectories of the beads . In practice , tens to hundreds of beads need to be tracked to ensure adequate statistical av - eraging . In this case , the ensemble - averaged MSD , (cid:5)(cid:5) (cid:3) r 2 ( t ) (cid:6)(cid:6) , which is the means of all mea - sured MSDs , is used instead of (cid:5) (cid:3) r 2 (cid:6) . If the sus - pending ﬂuid is indeed a liquid , then t / (cid:5) (cid:3) r 2 ( t ) (cid:6) should be a constant independent of t ( see Equation 1 ) , which is a stringent test of viscous diffusion . If t / (cid:5) (cid:3) r 2 ( t ) (cid:6) is nonconstant , it usually indicatesthatthesuspendingﬂuidisaviscoelas - tic material instead of a viscous liquid ( 65 ) . We consider a 100 - nm - diameter bead sus - pended in corn syrup , which has a shear viscos - ity close to that of the cytoplasm of ﬁbroblasts , η = 20 P = 2 Pa . s ( typical values of viscos - ity are listed in Table 1 ) . The thermal energy is k B T ≈ 4 . 2 pN . nm ( where T = 37 ◦ C ) and the diffusion coefﬁcient of the bead is D ≈ 0 . 0022 μ m 2 / s . By comparison , the diffusion of the same bead in water is 4 . 4 μ m 2 / s . There - fore , the value of the time - averaged MSD of the bead after t = 0 . 1 s , 1 s , and 10 s of tracking is ≈ 0 . 00088 μ m 2 ( or 88 nm 2 ) , 0 . 0088 μ m 2 , and 0 . 088 μ m 2 , respectively . This result indicates that the average size of the region crisscrossed by the Brownian movements of the bead after the same times is (cid:2) (cid:5) (cid:3) r 2 (cid:6) = √ 4 Dt ≈ 30 , 94 , and 300 nm , respectively . This result suggests that high - resolution tracking is required to ob - tain good measurements of MSDs of 100 - nm beads in a highly viscous liquid within a 10 - s - long tracking time . The prefactor 4 in the expression (cid:5) (cid:3) r 2 (cid:6) = 4 Dt stems from the fact that microscopy probes the 2D projection of an intrinsically 3D movement of the bead . This is correct only if the material in the proximity of the bead is isotropic , i . e . , this material or liquid has the same physical properties in all three ( x , y , and z ) directions . To test whether this is likely to be true without tracking the move - ments of the beads in all three directions ( 19 ) , one can compute the MSDs of the bead in the x and y directions independently . Indeed , from the measured time - dependent coordi - nates of the bead , x ( t ) and y ( t ) , the MSD is given by (cid:5) (cid:3) r 2 ( t ) (cid:6) = (cid:5) [ x ( t ) − x ( 0 ) ] 2 + [ y ( t ) − y ( 0 ) ] 2 (cid:6) , where x ( 0 ) and y ( 0 ) correspond to the initial position of the bead . If the material is isotropic , then (cid:5) [ x ( t ) − x ( 0 ) ] 2 (cid:6) = (cid:5) [ y ( t ) − y ( 0 ) ] 2 (cid:6) and therefore (cid:5) (cid:3) r 2 ( t ) (cid:6) = 2 (cid:5) [ x ( t ) − x ( 0 ) ] 2 (cid:6) = 2 (cid:5) [ y ( t ) − y ( 0 ) ] 2 (cid:6) . If the MSDs of the bead in the x and y directions are indeed Brow - nian ( corresponding to two independent 1D random walks ) , then (cid:5) [ x ( t ) − x ( 0 ) ] 2 (cid:6) = (cid:5) [ y ( t ) − y ( 0 ) ] 2 (cid:6) = 2 Dt . Hence , (cid:5) (cid:3) r 2 ( t ) (cid:6) = 4 Dt , and therefore it is likely that the MSDs of the bead in the z direction are also Brownian and equal to those in the x and y directions , which indicates that the viscoelastic properties of the cytoplasm in the vicinity of the bead are isotropic ( 38 ) . In the case of a viscous liquid , the elastic modulus of the liquid is of course zero , G (cid:2) = 0 , and it can be shown that the viscous modulus is simply G (cid:2)(cid:2) = η ω . Here ω is the frequency ( or rate ) of deformation in an oscillatory mode of deformation and is equal to the inverse of the time lag t , ω = 1 / t . This means that if this liq - uid were placed in a rheometer and subjected to oscillatory deformations , then the elastic modulus would be negligible and the viscous modulus would increase linearly with the input frequency ω . Equivalent to the linear depen - dence of the MSD with time , that the viscous modulus of a given material increases linearly with the rate of deformation indicates that this material is a viscous liquid . This rheological re - sponse , i . e . , G (cid:2) ≈ 0andG (cid:2)(cid:2) = η ω , isforinstance that of an unpolymerized G - actin solution in vitro or that of the cytoplasm of a cell treated withanactin - depolymerizingdrug ( e . g . , latrun - culin A or cytochalasin D ) . 310 Wirtz A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . 2009 . 38 : 301 - 326 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f C a li f o r n i a - D a v i s on 01 / 07 / 12 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV376 - BB38 - 15 ARI 27 March 2009 11 : 7 Table 1 Elasticity and shear viscosity of the cytoplasm of different types of cells measured by particle - tracking microrheology a Cell type and condition ; values of viscoelastic parameters Average viscosity ( poise ) Average elasticity at 1 Hz ( dyne / cm 2 ) Reference Serum - starved Swiss3T3 ﬁbroblast b 10 ± 3 50 ± 20 ( 49 ) Serum - starved Swiss 3T3 ﬁbroblast treated with LPA c 95 ± 20 120 ± 30 ( 49 ) Serum - starved Swiss3T3 ﬁbroblast subjected to shear ﬂow d 300 ± 40 600 ± 50 ( 61 ) Swiss 3T3 ﬁbroblast at the edge of a wound e 45 ± 15 330 ± 30 ( 50 ) Swiss 3T3 ﬁbroblast treated with bradykinin f 22 ± 13 90 ± 20 ( 50 ) Swiss 3T3 ﬁbroblast treated with PDGF g 24 ± 8 190 ± 30 ( 50 ) Mouse embryonic ﬁbroblast ( Lmna + / + MEF ) h 18 ± 2 140 ± 30 ( 60 ) MEF treated with latrunculin B i NA 80 ± 4 ( 60 ) MEF treated with nocodazole j NA 50 ± 4 ( 60 ) MEF deﬁcient in lamin A / C ( Lmna − / − MEF ) 8 ± 1 60 ± 4 ( 60 ) HUVEC on a planar 2D peptide matrix k 17 ± 1 130 ± 10 P . Panorchan , J . S . H . Lee , D . Wirtz , unpublished data HUVEC on a planar 2D peptide matrix and treated with VEGF l 8 ± 1 100 ± 5 P . Panorchan , J . S . H . Lee , D . Wirtz , unpublished data HUVEC inside a 3D peptide matrix k 14 ± 1 55 ± 4 ( 77 ) HUVEC inside a 3D peptide matrix treated with VEGF l 18 ± 1 40 ± 3 ( 77 ) HUVEC inside a 3D ﬁbronectin matrix NA 58 ± 6 ( 117 ) HUVEC inside a 3D ﬁbronectin matrix treated with inhibiting FN peptide NA 20 ± 4 ( 117 ) Single - cell C . elegans embryo m 10 ± 1 Negligible ( 16 ) Interphase nucleus of Swiss 3T3 ﬁbroblast n 520 ± 50 180 ± 30 ( 103 ) a Particle - tracking microrheology was used to study the mechanical properties of many varieties of cells under a wide range of conditions . Unless stated , all values of viscosity and elasticity in the table are for the cytoplasm . The elasticity was evaluated at a shear frequency of 1 s − 1 ( 1 s − 1 = 1 Hz ) and the shear viscosity was estimated as the product of plateau modulus and the relaxation time . The plateau modulus is the value of the elastic modulus at intermediate frequencies where it reaches a quasi plateau value . The relaxation time is the inverse of the frequency where elastic and viscous moduli are equal . All measurements are mean ± sem . Unit conversions are 1 dyne / cm 2 = 0 . 1 Pa = 0 . 1 N / m 2 = 0 . 1 pN / μ m 2 . Pa , Pascal ; pN , piconewton ; NA , not available . b Cells placed on 50 μ g / ml ﬁbronectin deposited on glass were serum starved for 48 h before measurements . c Serum - starved cells placed on 50 μ g / ml ﬁbronectin deposited on glass were treated with 1 μ g / ml lysophosphatidic acid ( LPA ) , which activates Rho - mediated actomyosin contractility . LPA was applied 15 min before measurements . d Cells were grown on 20 μ g / ml ﬁbronectin for 24 h and exposed to shear ﬂow ( wall shear stress , 9 . 4 dyne / cm 2 ) for 40 min before measurements . e Cells in complete medium and grown on 50 μ g / ml ﬁbronectin to conﬂuence were wounded to induce migration . Measurements were conducted 4 h after wounding . f Cells in complete medium and grown on 50 μ g / ml ﬁbronectin were treated with 100 ng / ml bradykinin for 10 min before measurements . g Cells in complete medium and grown on 50 μ g / ml ﬁbronectin were treated with 10 ng / ml platelet - derived growth factor ( PDGF ) for 10 min before measurements . h Cells in complete medium were grown on glass . i Lmna + / + mouse embryonic ﬁbroblasts ( MEFs ) in complete medium grown on glass were treated with 5 μ g / ml actin - ﬁlament disassembly drug latrunculin B . j Lmna + / + MEFs in complete medium and grown on glass were treated with 5 μ g / ml microtubule disassembly drug nocodazole . k Cells in complete medium were placed in a 0 . 5 % puramatrix gel . HUVEC , human umbilical vein endothelial cell . l Cells in complete medium were placed in a 0 . 5 % puramatrix gel and treated with 4 ng / ml vascular endothelial growth factor ( VEGF ) for 24 h prior to the measurements . m Young Caenorhabditis elegans eggs were obtained by cutting gravid hermaphrodites from worms in egg salts . The nanoparticles were then microinjected into the syncytial gonads of gravid hermaphrodites . n Cells in complete medium . www . annualreviews . org • Particle - Tracking Microrheology of Living Cells 311 A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . 2009 . 38 : 301 - 326 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f C a li f o r n i a - D a v i s on 01 / 07 / 12 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV376 - BB38 - 15 ARI 27 March 2009 11 : 7 If the probed system were in equilibrium and perfectly uniform , tracking one bead for a long time ( e . g . , 1000 s ) and dividing this time span into 100 equal time spans of 10 s should be equivalent to tracking 100 beads each for 10 s . Although it is impractical to track a single bead for a long time even in in vitro systems because of drift problems , this equivalency is correct for liquids such as water and glycerol , a signature of ergodicity . But it is incorrect in sus - pensions of actin ﬁlaments in vitro and in live cells , which are systems far from equilibrium and highly spatially heterogeneous ( 100 , 104 ) . Indeed , beads well dispersed in the cytoplasm show a wide distribution in MSDs ( 102 ) . We note that individual trajectories of the beads , even in water , are typically highly asym - metric in shape ( 38 ) . Even the overall shape of a computer - generated random walk is highly asymmetric ( 5 , 87 ) , i . e . , it is not a circle . The shape of the object encompassing an individual trajectory of a single bead in a liquid is an el - lipse in the 2D space ( e . g . , a protein diffusing within the plasma membrane ) and an ellipsoid in the 3D space ( e . g . , GFP diffusing in the cyto - plasm ) ( 36 ) . However , when these trajectories are ensemble - averaged and the trajectories are superimposed , the object encompassing these individual trajectories is a circle in 2D and a sphere in 3D . Particle - Tracking Microrheology of an Elastic Solid The second limit example involves the same bead , but this time embedded in a highly elastic material of negligible viscosity , such as rubber . Each time the bead is driven by the thermal energy in a random direction , the surrounding materialpushesbackinstantaneouslywithequal force in the opposite direction . Therefore , the MSD of the bead is ﬁnite but constant : (cid:5) (cid:3) r 2 (cid:6) = K at all timescales ( Figure 3 b ) . The indepen - dence of the MSD with time is a signature of purely elastic solid behavior . The viscous mod - ulus of this elastic solid is of course G (cid:2)(cid:2) ( ω ) = 0 . The elastic modulus of an elastic solid is sim - ply G (cid:2) ( ω ) = 2 k B T / 3 π a (cid:5) (cid:3) r 2 (cid:6) = 2 k B T / 3 π aK , which is a constant independent of ω , i . e . , the elastic modulus of an elastic solid is inversely proportional to the MSD of the beads embed - ded in it . This expression shows that one can compute the elastic modulus of an elastic solid from particle - tracking measurements of (cid:5) (cid:3) r 2 (cid:6) without imposing any oscillatory deformation . The fact that the elastic modulus of a given ma - terial is independent of the rate of deforma - tion or frequency , ω , is a signature of purely elastic behavior . This would be the rheological response of a permanently cross - linked actin ﬁlament network ( 75 ) or Jell - O , where G (cid:2) is approximately a constant independent of fre - quency and G (cid:2)(cid:2) is much smaller than G (cid:2) . Let us consider a 100 - nm - diameter bead suspended in a stiff elastic material of frequency - independent elasticity of G (cid:2) = 10 Pa = 100 dyne / cm 2 . Typical values of elasticity are given in Table 1 . Then , the time - averaged MSD of the bead in this material at all timescales is (cid:5) (cid:3) r 2 (cid:6) = 2 k B T / 3 π aG (cid:2) ≈ 0 . 002 μ m 2 , which can readily be measured by ﬂuorescence microscopy and appropriate particle - tracking software . These two examples—viscous liquid and elastic solid—illustrate how the time depen - dence of the MSD of beads inside a given mate - rialcanhelprapidlydiagnosekeyphysicalprop - erties of the material , including whether it is a liquid ( then , (cid:5) (cid:3) r 2 (cid:6) ∼ t or (cid:5) (cid:3) r 2 (cid:6) / t is a constant ) or an elastic solid ( then , (cid:5) (cid:3) r 2 (cid:6) is a constant ) . The results above indicate that to estimate the viscosity of a liquid , a spatial resolution of at least 30 nm is required when tracking 100 - nm - diameter beads for 10 s using a camera that collects images at a rate of 10 frames per second . In practice , the spatial resolution on the displacements of the beads must be an order of magnitude better , approximately 3 nm for a 100 - nm - diameter ﬂuorescent bead . Such a high , subpixel spatial resolution can be obtained by using either quadrant detection or ﬂuorescence video microscopy . The advantage of quadrant detection is its superior detection capability ( < 1 nm ) ( 93 ) , but quadrant detection can only track one or two beads at a time ( 28 , 29 , 116 ) . This is a serious problem when it is 312 Wirtz A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . 2009 . 38 : 301 - 326 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f C a li f o r n i a - D a v i s on 01 / 07 / 12 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV376 - BB38 - 15 ARI 27 March 2009 11 : 7 desirable to monitor simultaneously the vis - coelastic properties of various locations within the cell . When using high - magniﬁcation , high - numerical - aperture lenses ( 11 ) , video mi - croscopy allows one to track hundreds of beads at the same time ( 13 , 86 , 102 ) but has a maxi - mum resolution of the order of 3 – 10 nm , de - pending on the experimental setup . The spatial resolution of the measurements will vary from one instrument to another as it also depends on the stability of the microscope system used to track the beads . For a material that is essentially elastic and with a maximum spatial resolution of 3 nm , the highest elasticity that can still be measured with accuracy using particle - tracking microrheology is approximately G (cid:2) max = 2 k B T / 3 π a ( 3nm ) 2 ≈ 1 , 900Pa ≈ 19 , 000dyne / cm 2 ( 88 , 89 ) , which is much higher than typical values of the elasticity of the cytoplasm . Therefore , using video microscopy and high - resolution tracking allows for the measurements of highly elastic materials . Particle - Tracking Microrheology of a Viscoelastic Material The rheological behavior of the cytoplasm or a reconstituted actin ﬁlament network is inter - mediate between the two limit behaviors of a viscous liquid and an elastic solid , as described above . Indeed , the cytoplasm is predominantly viscous at long timescales ( t > τ R ) or low rates of shear , G (cid:2)(cid:2) ( ω ) (cid:9) G (cid:2) ( ω ) for ω < ω R , and pre - dominantly elastic at short timescales or high rates of shear , G (cid:2)(cid:2) ( ω ) (cid:10) G (cid:2) ( ω ) for ω > ω R , where ω R is the inverse of the relaxation time of the cytoskeleton network , τ R ( Figure 4 ) . At high frequencies , ω > ω e , both G (cid:2) and G (cid:2)(cid:2) are proportional to ω 3 / 4 , a power - law dependence that reﬂects the bending lateral ﬂuctuations of the semiﬂexible ﬁlaments in the network ( 40 , 90 ) . The exponent would be 1 / 2 if the polymers constituting the cytoskeleton were ﬂexible ( 21 ) , but intermediate ﬁlaments , actin ﬁlaments , and microtubules in live cells are semiﬂexible ( 1 ) . The frequency ω e is approximately equal to the Softer Stiffer Relaxation time : τ R = 1 ω R – 1 Shear viscosity : η ≈ G ' p τ R ω e ω R Frequency ( ω ) Time lag ( t ) C r ee p c o m p l i a n c e Γ ( t ) V i s c o e l a s t i c m o d u l i G ’ ( ω ) , G ’’ ( ω ) G ' p a b τ R τ e Figure 4 Creep compliance and viscoelastic moduli of the cytoplasm . ( a ) Typical creep compliance of the cytoplasm measured by the spontaneous displacements of beads embedded in the cytoplasm of a living cell ( see also the inset in Figure 2 c ) . The creep compliance deﬁnes two characteristic timescales , τ e and τ R . ( b ) The frequency - dependent elastic ( or storage ) modulus , G (cid:2) ( ω ) , and viscous ( or loss ) modulus , G (cid:2)(cid:2) ( ω ) , of the cytoplasm can be approximately computed from the mean squared displacement of the beads or equivalently from the time - dependent creep compliance shown in panel a . In general , the cytoplasm behaves as a viscoelastic liquid at low frequencies ( corresponding to long timescales , t > τ R ) : G (cid:2)(cid:2) ( ω ) > G (cid:2) ( ω ) for ω < ω R . The cytoplasm behaves as a viscoelastic solid at intermediate frequencies : G (cid:2) ( ω ) > G (cid:2)(cid:2) ( ω ) for ω e > ω > ω R . Finally , the cytoplasm behaves again as a viscous liquid at high frequencies : ω > ω e , for which G (cid:2) ( ω ) ∼ G (cid:2)(cid:2) ( ω ) ∼ ω 3 / 4 . www . annualreviews . org • Particle - Tracking Microrheology of Living Cells 313 A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . 2009 . 38 : 301 - 326 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f C a li f o r n i a - D a v i s on 01 / 07 / 12 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV376 - BB38 - 15 ARI 27 March 2009 11 : 7 inverse of the time required for lateral ﬂuctua - tionstobegintotouchthewallsoftheconﬁning tube - like region ( Figure 4 ) . In particle - tracking microrheology of living cells , the size of the probing beads is larger than the average mesh size of the cytoskeleton , typically 50 nm for ﬁbroblasts ( 62 , 63 ) . Here again , without applying oscillatory deforma - tions or mechanical stresses to the cytoplasm of the cells , the frequency - dependent elastic mod - ulusandviscousmoduluscanbecomputedfrom the MSDs of embedded beads . In this case , the viscoelastic moduli can be obtained from the so - called complex modulus , G ∗ ( ω ) , as ( 66 ) G ∗ ( ω ) = 2 k B T 3 π ai ω F u [ (cid:3) r 2 ( t ) ] , 2 . where F u [ (cid:5) (cid:3) r 2 ( t ) (cid:6) ] is the unilateral Fourier transform of (cid:5) (cid:3) r 2 ( t ) (cid:6) . The above equation can be solved analytically ( 65 ) , if we allow the frequency - dependent elastic modulus to be cal - culated algebraically using the following rela - tionship : G (cid:2) ( ω ) = | G ∗ ( ω ) | cos (cid:3) πα ( ω ) 2 (cid:4) , 3 . and the amplitude can be approximated as | G ∗ ( ω ) | ≈ 2 k B T 3 π a (cid:5) (cid:3) r 2 ( 1 / ω ) (cid:6) (cid:2) [ 1 + α ( ω ) ] . 4 . Here α is the local logarithmic slope of (cid:5) (cid:3) r 2 ( t ) (cid:6) estimated at the frequency of interest and (cid:2) is the gamma function . Dynamic Viscosity Versus Shear Viscosity The viscous modulus ( also called the loss mod - ulus ) , G (cid:2)(cid:2) ( ω ) , or alternatively the dynamic vis - cosity , η (cid:2)(cid:2) ( ω ) = G (cid:2)(cid:2) ( ω ) / ω , and the shear vis - cosity , η , of a material ought not to be confused with each other . G (cid:2)(cid:2) ( ω ) has units of pressure ( Pa or dyne / cm 2 ) and represents the fraction of the energy induced by the imposed deforma - tion , which is lost by viscous dissipation as op - posed to stored elastically by the material . In a rheometer , it is computed by imposing an oscil - latory deformation of controlled frequency and measuring the out - of - phase component of the frequency - dependent stress induced in the ma - terial . In contrast , the shear viscosity η has units of Pa . s and is measured by imposing a steady deformation of constant rate . It is the ratio of the stress induced in the material to the rate of deformation . Here again without applying any external forces to the cytoplasm , one can compute an approximate value of its shear viscosity η from the frequency - dependent viscoelastic moduli , G (cid:2) ( ω ) and G (cid:2)(cid:2) ( ω ) : η ≈ G (cid:2) P τ R , 5 . where G (cid:2) P is the plateau value of the elastic modulusG (cid:2) ( ω ) atintermediatefrequencies ( be - tween ω e and ω R ) , and τ R is the inverse of the frequency ω R at which G (cid:2) ( ω ) and G (cid:2)(cid:2) ( ω ) are equal ( see deﬁnitions in Figure 4 a , b ) . Typical values of shear viscosity of the cytoplasm are given in Table 1 . Particle - tracking microrheology not only shows that the rheology of the cytoplasm is timescale dependent , but also that the frequency - dependent viscoelastic moduli de - ﬁne a single crossover frequency , ω R , at low frequencies ( Figure 4 b ) . Below this frequency , the cytoplasm behaves essentially as a viscous liquid . Equivalently , in the time domain , if the cytoplasm were subjected to a step deforma - tion , the time - dependent stress induced in the cytoplasm would adopt a plateau value at inter - mediate timescales , crossing over at a charac - teristic time τ R ( = 1 / ω R ) to a terminal viscous relaxation at long timescales ( 15 ) . Creep Compliance from Particle - Tracking Measurements From a rheological point of view , the cy - toplasm is a viscoelastic material . As sug - gested above , the mathematical transformation of the measured time - dependent MSD into frequency - dependent elastic and viscous mod - uli , G (cid:2) ( ω ) and G (cid:2)(cid:2) ( ω ) , is not trivial ( 65 , 66 ) ( see Equations 2 – 4 ) . This transformation in - volves Fourier / Laplace integrals that presume the knowledge of the MSD over an inﬁnite range of timescales . Therefore , large errors can 314 Wirtz A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . 2009 . 38 : 301 - 326 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f C a li f o r n i a - D a v i s on 01 / 07 / 12 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV376 - BB38 - 15 ARI 27 March 2009 11 : 7 be introduced into the computation of G (cid:2) ( ω ) and G (cid:2)(cid:2) ( ω ) at low and high frequencies , corre - sponding to the maximum time of capture ( at longtimescales ) andtherateofimagecaptureof the camera for the MSD ( at short timescales ) , respectively . However , the MSD of a bead is proportional to the creep compliance , (cid:2) ( t ) , of the material in which the bead is embedded ( 114 ) ( Figures 2 c and 4 a ) : (cid:2) ( t ) = 3 π a 2 k B T (cid:5) (cid:3) r 2 ( t ) (cid:6) . 6 . The creep compliance of a material is its deformability and , in classical rheological measurements , is obtained by imposing a steady mechanical stress of constant magnitude and measuring the resulting deformation of the ma - terial . Here we can compute the creep com - pliance from particle - tracking measurements without imposing any deformations . If we return to the examples of vis - cous liquid and elastic solid described above , then simple substitution of the expressions of (cid:5) (cid:3) r 2 (cid:6) , (cid:5) (cid:3) r 2 (cid:6) = ( 2 k B T / 3 π a η ) t and (cid:5) (cid:3) r 2 (cid:6) = K in Equation 6 indicates that the creep compli - ance of a viscous liquid is (cid:2) ( t ) = t / η , while the creep compliance of a highly elastic solid ( neg - ligible viscosity ) is (cid:2) ( t ) = ( 3 π aK / 2 k B T ) = constant . Therefore , the creep compliance of a viscous liquid is inversely proportional to the shear viscosity , (cid:2) ( t ) ∼ 1 / η , and the creep com - pliance of an elastic solid is the inverse of the material’s elasticity , (cid:2) = 1 / G (cid:2) , where G (cid:2) is a constant . All the rheological information about the cytoplasm or the material in which the prob - ing beads are embedded is contained in both the time dependence of creep compliance and its magnitude ( 94 ) ( Figure 4 a ) . To illustrate this , we return to the relatively simple example of a concentrated suspension of uncross - linked actin ﬁlaments , in which 100 - nm - diameter beads have now been embedded . This bead is larger than the mesh size of the network . Hence the bead is in intimate physical con - tact with the ﬁlaments that , for a time , form a cage that conﬁnes the bead ( Figure 2 a ) . At short timescales , the motion of the bead is dictated by the lateral ﬂuctuations of the ﬁl - aments in contact with the bead ( Figure 2 b ) . Hence the MSD of the bead grows with time as t 3 / 4 ( Figure 2 c ) . An ultrafast camera would show that the bead undergoes random , small - magnitude , rapid displacements created by the lateral ﬂuctuations of the conﬁning ﬁlaments . At intermediate timescales , the bead does not undergo net motion anymore . A camera cap - turing images at that rate would not capture any net motion of the bead because , at in - termediate timescales , the ﬁlaments surround - ing it cannot get out of their conﬁning tube - like region . Finally , at long timescales , the ﬁlaments surrounding the bead can escape their tube - likeregionsthroughlarge - magnitudelon - gitudinal motion ( Figure 2 b ) . Accordingly , the ﬁlamentous cage that was conﬁning the bead disappears because its constitutive ﬁlaments have moved out of the way . A slow camera wouldcapturethebeadgoingfromcagetocage , undergoing a random walk—albeit at a slow pace set by the high viscosity of the actin ﬁl - ament solution . The MSD of the bead grows proportionally with time , a signature of viscous diffusion . PARTICLE - TRACKING MICRORHEOLOGY OF CELLS Interstitial Viscosity Versus Mesoscale Viscoelasticity of the Cytoplasm The viscosity of the intracellular space depends critically on the length scale being probed . At small length scales , the viscosity of the cyto - plasm is essentially that of water [ more pre - cisely , 1 . 2 – 1 . 4 times the viscosity of water ( 27 ) ] or approximately 0 . 01 P ( 64 , 91 ) . It can be mea - sured by monitoring the diffusion of GFP or small ﬂuorescently labeled DNA fragments in the cell . This interstitial viscosity is a key pa - rameter that controls the transport of small globular proteins and it varies slightly for vari - ous cell conditions . At length scales larger than the effective mesh size of the cytoskeleton meshwork , the apparent viscosity is much higher , typically www . annualreviews . org • Particle - Tracking Microrheology of Living Cells 315 A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . 2009 . 38 : 301 - 326 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f C a li f o r n i a - D a v i s on 01 / 07 / 12 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV376 - BB38 - 15 ARI 27 March 2009 11 : 7 > 10 P , or 1000 times the viscosity of water . This effective mesh size can be mea - sured by probing the diffusion of ﬂuorescently labeled dextran or DNA inside the cell . The diffusion of dextran polymers with a gyration radius of < 50 nm within the cytoplasm ( of ﬁ - broblasts ) is largely unhindered , whereas poly - mers with a gyration radius of > 50 nm be - come immobilized ( 63 , 64 , 91 ) . At length scales larger than the effective mesh size of the cyto - plasm , the viscoelastic moduli and creep com - pliance computed from particle - tracking mea - surements should be independent of the size of the probe beads used in the experiments . This is readily seen from the expression in Equation 1 in the limit case of a viscous liquid : The creep compliance depends linearly on both bead size and MSD , which itself depends inversely on bead size . The above discussion about how viscoelas - tic parameters of the cytoplasm can be obtained from particle - tracking measurements assumes that the probing beads are larger than the effec - tive mesh size of the cytoplasm or the network being probed ( Figure 4 a ) . We call this viscos - ity mesoscale viscosity , as it describes the rheo - logical properties at length scales intermediate between small globular proteins in the inter - stitial space and the whole cell . The mesoscale viscosity controls the rate of movements of mi - tochondria ( 53 ) , nuclei ( 59 ) , and phagosomes ( 96 ) , as well as viruses , bacteria , and engineered drug delivery microcarriers ( 96 ) , because these entities are larger than the effective mesh size of the cytoskeleton . The mesoscaleviscosityofthe cytoplasm also controls the rates of cell spread - ing and migration ( 35 ) . Active Versus Passive Microrheology Direct injection of the beads into the cyto - plasm ( 102 ) , as opposed to passive engulfment of the beads inside the cytoplasm , circum - vents the endocytic pathway and therefore the engulfment of the beads in vesicles tethered to cytoskeleton ﬁlaments by motor proteins ( 96 ) . These vesicles move toward the nucleus ; therefore , the probe beads undergo directed motion . Although interesting in their own right , such directed displacements prevent the computation of the viscoelastic parameters of the cytoplasm from MSDs . Nevertheless , evenintheabsenceofdirected motion , actomyosin contractility could affect the movements of beads . Recent work with re - constituted actin ﬁlament networks containing myosin II has shown that in this in vitro sys - tem the movements of beads can be affected 10 - fold , and even more at long timescales by the activity of motor proteins ( 69 ) . Even with - out producing a net movement of the ﬁlaments , motor proteins enhance the random move - ments of the beads , akin to an effective > 10 - fold increase in the temperature of the sys - tem ( 69 ) . These enhanced movements allow for faster relaxation of mechanical stresses . This result obtained with puriﬁed proteins suggests that particle - tracking measurements of the me - chanical properties of the cytoplasm signif - icantly underestimate the values of the vis - coelastic properties of the cytoplasm in live cells . However , our unpublished results suggest that reducing or eliminating actomyosin con - tractility in a live cell using either blebbistatin , which blocks the myosin heads in a complex with low actin afﬁnity ( 52 ) , or ML - 7 , which speciﬁcally inhibits MLCK ( myosin light chain kinase ) , which normally phosphorylates myosin II , has no signiﬁcant effect on the magnitude of the displacements of the beads compared with control cells . This absence of effect may result because myosin II molecules are mostly localized to the contractile actin stress ﬁbers localized to the ventral side of the cell and the leading edge and are not present in large quantities in the body of the cell ( 108 ) , where beads used for particle - tracking microrheology are lodged . Therefore , a direct extrapolation of results obtained in vitro with puriﬁed proteins , although often instructive of the more complex behavior of cytoskeleton in cells ( 79 ) , can be misleading . The movements of the cell itself can add an additional contribution to the overall move - ments of the probing beads . The speed of 316 Wirtz A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . 2009 . 38 : 301 - 326 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f C a li f o r n i a - D a v i s on 01 / 07 / 12 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV376 - BB38 - 15 ARI 27 March 2009 11 : 7 adherent cells ( 7 ) is typically much lower than the speed of the probing beads embedded in the cytoplasm . Therefore , the movements of the cell will be felt by the beads embedded in the cytoplasm only when they are monitored for a long time . The contribution of cell move - ments to the overall movements of the beads can readily be detected by the curvature of the MSDs of the embedded beads . To illustrate this effect , we consider the simple case of a viscous liquid . If an overall movement is added to the thermally driven random motion of the bead , then the MSD can be rewritten as ( 81 ) (cid:5) (cid:3) r 2 (cid:6) = 4 Dt + v 2 t 2 , 7 . where v is the overall speed of the suspending liquid . The ﬁrst term in this expression corre - sponds to the random thermally driven motion of the bead , and the second term corresponds to the motion of the bead imposed by the over - all movement of the liquid . At short timescales , the second term is negligible and we recover (cid:5) (cid:3) r 2 (cid:6) ≈ 4 Dt , i . e . , bead movements are domi - nated by viscous diffusion . At long timescales , the second term dominates , (cid:5) (cid:3) r 2 (cid:6) ≈ v 2 t 2 , cor - responding to a quadratic dependence on time , which is readily observed at long timescales in the MSD proﬁle . The timescale at which the crossover between these two regimes occurs ( when 4 Dt = v 2 t 2 ) is t = 4 D / v 2 . For instance , for a 100 - nm - diameter bead in a 20 P viscous liquid , D ≈ 0 . 0022 μ m 2 / s , moving at a constant speed of 5 μ m / h ( a typical speed for a cultured adherent cell ) , the crossover time is equal to t = 4 D / v 2 = 1 . 3 s , which is readily detected when tracking a bead for 10 s . Advantages of Particle - Tracking Microrheology Over Current Methods Particle - tracking microrheology can measure directly the mechanical properties of the cytoplasm because of the intimate contact between the probing beads and subcellular structures ( 103 ) . In contrast , most current single - cell mechanics methods rely on a direct contact between the cell surface and a physical probe . For example , AFM probes the mechanical properties of cells using soft cantilevers ( 41 ) ; magnetocytometry ( 106 , 111 ) measures cell mechanics by subjecting large beads coated with extracellular matrix molecules bound to cell receptors to rotational movements . These methods cannot distinguish the contribution of the plasma membrane from the combined response of the nucleus and the cytoplasm without making drastic assumptions . If two elastic elements of different stiffness are connected to one another ( here the nucleus and the cytoskeleton ) , their total response is dominated by the stiffer element . Therefore , methods such as AFM , magnetocytometry , or micropipette suction probe the combined response of the nucleus and cytoplasm , even when the probe is positioned far away from the nucleus . In contrast , particle - tracking microrheology , which relies on the smallest energy possible—thermal energy—is a highly localized measurement inside the cytoplasm . Unlike most other approaches to cell me - chanics , particle - tracking microrheology mea - sures frequency - rate - dependent viscoelastic moduli , G (cid:2) ( ω ) and G (cid:2)(cid:2) ( ω ) . This is particu - larly crucial for the cytoskeleton , which be - haves like a liquid at long timescales ( or low rates of shear ) and like an elastic solid at short timescales ( or high rates of shear ) . The frequency - dependent mechanical response of the cytoplasm of a live cell can be measured in about 10 s by particle - tracking microrheology , atleastfortimescalesrelevanttocellmotility . In contrast , AFMmeasurementsmaytakeupto1h for high - resolution mechanical measurements ( 82 ) . Such time - consuming measurements can - not capture fast subcellular dynamics and are unsuitable for motile cells . Particle - tracking microrheology requires short times of data collection , typically 10 – 20s , to measure frequency - dependent viscoelastic moduli over two decades in frequency ( or timescales ) . This is not the case for other particle - tracking methods for which the cor - related motion between two particles is used instead of the motion of individual parti - cles as a probe of local cytoplasmic rheology ( 13 ) . These methods are inappropriate for the www . annualreviews . org • Particle - Tracking Microrheology of Living Cells 317 A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . 2009 . 38 : 301 - 326 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f C a li f o r n i a - D a v i s on 01 / 07 / 12 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV376 - BB38 - 15 ARI 27 March 2009 11 : 7 measurement of the mechanical properties of live cells because they incorrectly assume that the intracellular milieu is homogeneous and static . Furthermore , to obtain statistically sig - niﬁcant data , measurement times are on the or - der of 30 – 60 min , timescales for which migrat - ing cells cannot be assumed to be stationary . By tracking multiple beads simultaneously , microrheology can measure simultaneously the micromechanical responses to stimuli in vari - ous parts of the cell . This is particularly im - portant because the viscoelastic properties can vary by more than 2 orders of magnitude within the same cell ( 51 , 102 , 103 ) . By using video - based , multiple - particle tracking instead of laser - deﬂection particle tracking ( 65 , 116 ) , hundreds of beads embedded in the cytoplasm can be tracked at the same time . Particle - tracking microrheology measure - ments of the cytoplasm of live cells are typi - cally conducted using carboxylated polystyrene beads or polyethylene glycol ( PEG ) - coated beads . The rheology of reconstituted actin ﬁl - ament networks or DNA solutions measured by particle - tracking microrheology and using these beads is quantitatively similar to that measured by rheometry ( 75 , 114 ) . This indi - cates that the presence of the beads in poly - mer networks does not affect the global me - chanical properties of the networks . Moreover , our unpublished results show that carboxy - lated polystyrene beads or PEG - coated beads yield the same frequency - dependent viscoelas - tic moduli for the cytoplasm of ﬁbroblasts , but not for amino - modiﬁed beads ( 102 ) . Finally , the proximity of some of the beads to the plasma membrane will not signiﬁcantly affect the movements of the beads because hydrody - namic interactions caused by the movements of the beads and reﬂecting off the membrane are effectively screened by the cytoskeleton mesh ( 21 , 116 ) . Subcellular organelles can also be used as probing particles ( 40 , 86 , 116 ) . How - ever , because their interactions with subcellu - lar structures are ill - deﬁned , only the frequency dependence of the viscoelastic moduli is mean - ingful , at least at high frequency , not the abso - lute value of moduli . Microrheological measurements are abso - lute and compare favorably with traditional rheometric measurements of standard ﬂuids of known viscosity and elasticity ( 2 , 65 , 112 , 114 ) . This is not the case of some single - cell ap - proaches that rely on a direct physical contact between the cell surface and the probe ( such as a cantilever or a macroscopic bead ) . For in - stance , the apparent viscoelastic moduli mea - sured by magnetocytometry and AFM depend greatly on the type of ligands coated on the magnetic beads or the AFM cantilever . Extra - cellular matrix ligands—including ﬁbronectin or RGD peptide—coated onto magnetic beads and AFM cantilevers lead to vastly different val - ues of ( apparent ) cell stiffness . Therefore , the measurementsofviscoelasticpropertiesofstan - dard materials using these methods cannot be readily compared with those obtained using a rheometer . Furthermore , particle - tracking mi - crorheology measures both elasticity and vis - cosity , whereas many other approaches cannot directly distinguish the elastic response from the viscous response of the cell . Importantly , values of shear viscosity and elastic moduli of the cytoplasm in live cells measured by particle - tracking microrheology ( Table 1 ) are similar to those measured in reconstituted actin ﬁlament networks in the presence of cross - linking / bundling proteins ( Table 2 ) . The elasticity of live cells , such as mouse embryonic ﬁbroblasts or human umbili - cal vein endothelial cells ( HUVECs ) , which are commonly used as models of cell biology , and of reconstituted actin ﬁlament networks are on the order of tens of Pascal ( hundreds of dyne per cm 2 ) . This is in striking contrast to values of cell elasticity obtained using AFM , which is of the order of hundreds and even thou - sands of Pascal ( 82 ) . To our knowledge , no actin ﬁlament network reconstituted in vitro that contains a physiological concentration of actin polymerized in the presence of cross - linking and bundling proteins and under mechanical tension ( which can further increase the network elasticity ) reaches these high levels of elastic - ity ( 99 ) . The discrepancy between values of cell elasticity measured by AFM and those obtained 318 Wirtz A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . 2009 . 38 : 301 - 326 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f C a li f o r n i a - D a v i s on 01 / 07 / 12 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV376 - BB38 - 15 ARI 27 March 2009 11 : 7 Table 2 Viscosity and elasticity of common liquids and cytoskeletal ﬁlament networks measured by a cone - and - plate rheometer Type of material ; values of viscoelastic parameters Average viscosity ( poise ) Average elasticity at 1 rad / s ( dyne / cm 2 ) Reference Water 0 . 01 0 – Blood 0 . 1 Negligible – Glycerol ∼ 1 Negligible – Corn syrup ∼ 20 Negligible – Ketchup ∼ 500 Negligible – Jell - O Negligible 1 , 000 – Polyacrylamide gel – 500 ( 26 ) F - actin network – 8 ± 3 ( 113 ) F - actin + ﬁlamin – 450 ± 60 ( 99 ) F - actin + α - actinin – 120 ± 20 ( 113 ) F - actin + Arp2 / 3 complex / WASp – 60 ± 15 ( 105 ) F - actin + fascin – 80 ± 10 ( 101 ) F - actin + ﬁmbrin – 300 ± 30 ( 48 ) Vimentin network – 14 ± 2 ( 23 ) a Measurements are mean ± sem . The elasticity was measured at a shear amplitude of 1 % and a shear frequency of 1 rad / s . Shear viscosity of the F - actin and vimentin networks was not measured because these ﬁlaments break under continuous shear . b The concentrations of actin and vimentin solutions are 24 μ M . The concentrations of α - actinin , fascin , ﬁmbrin , and ﬁlamin in solutions are 0 . 24 μ M . The concentration of the Arp2 / 3 complex is 0 . 12 μ M and that of its activator WASp is 0 . 06 μ M . The concentration of acrylamide and bis - acrylamide in the polyacrylamide gel is 0 . 04 % and 0 . 05 % , respectively . Unit conversions are 1 P = 0 . 1 Pa . s ; 1 dyne / cm 2 = 0 . 1 Pa . with actin ﬁlament networks by conventional rheometry or particle - tracking microrheology remains unexplained . Applications of particle - tracking microrhe - ology discussed in the Introduction were ren - dered possible thanks to the replacement of manual microinjection of beads into cells with ballistic injection ( 61 , 76 , 77 ) . In a single bal - listic injection , the number of injected cells amenable to measurements increases 1000 - fold compared with conventional microinjec - tion ( 61 , 77 ) . With a large sample size per condition ( typical number of probed cells is ∼ 30 ) , particle - tracking microrheology results become more precise and signiﬁcant . Ballis - tic transfer of beads to the cytoplasm coupled with particle tracking ( named ballistic injection nanorheology , or BIN ) provides a more precise and consistent value for global and local vis - coelastic properties . Illustrative Example of Particle - Tracking Microrheology of Living Cells In typical measurements of cell mechanics ( e . g . , AFM ) ( 82 – 84 ) , it is assumed that the nucleus and the cytoplasm contribute independently to global cell stiffness . This assumption is an over - simpliﬁcation that overlooks the existence of criticalfunctionallinksbetweenthenucleusand the cytoskeleton . These connections are estab - lished by speciﬁc linker proteins located at the nuclear envelope , including the LINC complex ( 10 ) , and they physically connect the ﬁlamen - tous nuclear lamina underneath the nuclear en - velope to the actin / microtubule / intermediate ﬁlament cytoskeleton in the cytoplasm . These physical connections between nucleus and cy - toskeleton are as important to cell mechanics as the intrinsic mechanical properties of the nu - cleus and the cytoskeleton themselves . Indeed , www . annualreviews . org • Particle - Tracking Microrheology of Living Cells 319 A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . 2009 . 38 : 301 - 326 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f C a li f o r n i a - D a v i s on 01 / 07 / 12 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV376 - BB38 - 15 ARI 27 March 2009 11 : 7 when these functional links are disrupted , the elasticityofthecytoplasmisdrasticallyreduced ; the magnitude of this reduction is as important as when the actin cytoskeleton is completely disassembled with drugs ( 60 ) . Particle - tracking microrheology shows that the loss of the LINC complex dramatically af - fects the ability of cells to resist mechanical shear forces ( 95 ) . Mutations scattered along Lmna , which encodes A - type lamins , have been associated with a broad range of human diseases collectively called laminopathies ( 4 , 8 , 9 , 33 , 42 , 71 ) . These diseases involve either speciﬁc or combined pathologies of neurons , muscle , and bone tissue ( 4 , 42 ) . Cytoplasmic fragility as measured by particle - tracking microrheol - ogy correlates with the loss of the LINC com - plex from the nuclear envelope in cells derived from mouse models of laminopathy ( 37 , 60 , 95 ) ( Figure 5 ) . 10 – 2 10 – 3 b 10 – 1 M S D < Δ r 2 ( τ ) > ( μ m 2 ) c Healthy cell Laminopathic cell Softness detected Defunctnucleocytoskeletalconnection Cytoplasm Nucleus Actin No resistance Force Stiffness detected Resistance Force MAF WT MAF Lmna L530P / L530P 10 – 2 10 – 1 10 0 10 1 Time lag τ ( s ) MAF Lmna L530P / L530P MAF WT 20 μm 0 . 1 μm a Figure 5 Intracellular microrheology of laminopathic ﬁbroblasts . ( a ) Fluorescent 100 - nm - diameter polystyrene beads are ballistically injected into wild - type ( WT ) ( left panel ) and Lmna L530P / L530P ( right panel ) mouse adult ﬁbroblasts ( MAFs ) , derived from a mouse model of progeria . Fluorescent micrographs of beads ( outlined in white circles ) are superimposed onto phase - contrast micrographs of cells . Representative trajectories of nanoparticles are shown at the top right of each micrograph ( inset ) . ( b ) Ensemble - averaged mean squared displacements ( MSDs ) of the beads embedded in the cytoplasm of WT ( blue curve ) and Lmna L530P / L530P ( red curve ) MAFs are shown . ( c ) Model for the intracellular mechanics of healthy and laminopathic cells . Healthy cells in which the nucleocytoskeletal connections are intact can resist forces of large magnitude , whereas laminopathic cells cannot resist such forces because of defunct nucleocytoskeletal connections . Modiﬁed with permission from Reference 37 . 320 Wirtz A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . 2009 . 38 : 301 - 326 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f C a li f o r n i a - D a v i s on 01 / 07 / 12 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV376 - BB38 - 15 ARI 27 March 2009 11 : 7 SUMMARY POINTS 1 . The viscoelastic properties of the cytoplasm and nucleoplasm control key cell functions , including cell motility , cell adhesion , and the regulated movements of organelles . 2 . Particle - tracking microrheology can measure the viscoelastic properties of living cells without subjecting them to applied forces . In this approach , ﬂuorescent submicron beads areinjecteddirectlyintothecytoplasmoflivecells . Thesebeadsrapidlydispersethrough - out the cytoplasm and are subsequently tracked by ﬂuorescence microscopy . Analysis of the recorded movements of the beads transforms the MSDs of the beads in terms of either viscosity and elasticity or the compliance of the cytoplasm . 3 . Particle - tracking microrheology can reveal the micromechanical properties of cells in more physiological environments , such as a 3D extracellular matrix or inside an embryo , better than traditional approaches to cell mechanics . 4 . Particle - tracking microrheology measurements , which are fast , acknowledge that the mechanical properties of the cytoplasm are spatially variable and depend on timescale . 5 . Particle - tracking microrheology reveals the reduced ability of cells from mouse models of laminopathies to resist mechanical shear forces . FUTURE ISSUES 1 . The levels of viscosity , elasticity , and compliance of the cytoplasm , as measured by particle - tracking microrheology , should be tested to determine whether they can serve as reliable diagnostic markers of disease , in particular cancer and laminopathies . 2 . To circumvent the need of beads to probe cytoplasmic microrheology , exogenous beads should be rationally replaced with endogenous subcellular markers . 3 . Researchers should assess quantitatively the role of motor proteins ( e . g . , myosins ) on the movements of beads lodged in the cytoskeleton of living cells and therefore the computation of viscoelastic parameters . 4 . Can the wide range of phenotypes associated with human laminopathy be explained by the differential mechanical response at the cellular level ? 5 . A high - throughput device based on particle - tracking microrheology would allow the method to become a diagnostic tool for human disease . 6 . Particle - tracking microrheology should be extended to in vivo measurements . DISCLOSURE STATEMENT The author is not aware of any biases that might be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The author thanks Yiider Tseng , Thomas P . Kole , Jerry S . H . Lee , Porntula Panorchan , Brian R . Daniels , and Melissa S . Thompson for key contributions to the development of particle - tracking www . annualreviews . org • Particle - Tracking Microrheology of Living Cells 321 A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . 2009 . 38 : 301 - 326 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f C a li f o r n i a - D a v i s on 01 / 07 / 12 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV376 - BB38 - 15 ARI 27 March 2009 11 : 7 microrheology and its applications in cell biology , as well as Didier Hodzic , Christopher M . Hale , Shyam B . Khatau , Philip Stewart - Hutchinson , and Colin L . Stewart , who contributed to the work on nucleocytoskeleton protein linkers . The author also thanks members of the Wirtz group for reading and editing the manuscript . Work in the author’s laboratory is supported by the National Institutes of Health ( NIGMS , NIBIB , and NCI ) , the Howard Hughes Medical Institute , and the American Heart Association . LITERATURE CITED 1 . Alberts B , Bray D , Lewis J , Raff M , Roberts K , Watson JD . 1994 . Molecular Biology of the Cell . New York : Garland . 1408 pp . 2 . Apgar J , Tseng Y , Federov E , Herwig MB , Almo SC , Wirtz D . 2000 . Multiple - particle tracking measurementsofheterogeneitiesinsolutionsofactinﬁlamentsandactinbundles . Biophys . J . 79 : 1095 – 106 3 . Bausch AR , Kroy K . 2006 . A bottom - up approach to cell mechanics . Nat . Phys . 2 : 231 – 38 4 . Ben Yaou R , Muchir A , Arimura T , Massart C , Demay L , et al . 2005 . Genetics of laminopathies . Novartis Found . Symp . 264 : 81 – 90 5 . Berg HC . 1993 . Random Walks in Biology . Princeton , NJ : Princeton Univ . Press . 152 pp . 6 . Bloom RJ , George JP , Celedon A , Sun SX , Wirtz D . 2008 . Mapping local matrix remodeling induced by a migrating tumor cell using three - dimensional multiple - particle tracking . Biophys . J . 95 : 4077 – 88 7 . Bray D . 2001 . Cell Movements : From Molecules to Motility . New York : Garland . 371 pp . 8 . Broers JL , Hutchison CJ , Ramaekers FC . 2004 . Laminopathies . J . Pathol . 204 : 478 – 88 9 . Capell BC , Collins FS . 2006 . Human laminopathies : Nuclei gone genetically awry . Nat . Rev . Genet . 7 : 940 – 52 10 . Crisp M , Liu Q , Roux K , Rattner JB , Shanahan C , et al . 2006 . Coupling of the nucleus and cytoplasm : role of the LINC complex . J . Cell Biol . 172 : 41 – 53 11 . CrockerJC , GrierDG . 1996 . Methodsofdigitalvideomicroscopyforcolloidalstudies . J . ColloidInterface Sci . 179 : 298 – 310 12 . Crocker JC , Hoffman BD . 2007 . Multiple - particle tracking and two - point microrheology in cells . Methods Cell Biol . 83 : 141 – 78 13 . Crocker JC , Valentine MT , Weeks ER , Gisler T , Kaplan PD , et al . 2000 . Two - point microrheology of inhomogeneous soft materials . Phys . Rev . Lett . 85 : 888 – 91 14 . Cross SE , Jin YS , Rao J , Gimzewski JK . 2007 . Nanomechanical analysis of cells from cancer patients . Nat . Nanotechnol . 2 : 780 – 83 15 . Dahl KN , Engler AJ , Pajerowski JD , Discher DE . 2005 . Power - law rheology of isolated nuclei with deformation mapping of nuclear substructures . Biophys . J . 89 : 2855 – 64 16 . Daniels BR , Masi BC , Wirtz D . 2006 . Probing single - cell micromechanics in vivo : the microrheology of C . elegans developing embryos . Biophys . J . 90 : 4712 – 19 17 . de Gennes P - G . 1991 . Scaling Concepts in Polymer Physics . Ithaca , NY : Cornell Univ . Press 18 . de Gennes P - G , Leger L . 1982 . Dynamics of entangled polymer chains . Annu . Rev . Phys . Chem . 33 : 49 – 61 19 . Desai KV , Bishop TG , Vicci L , O’Brien ET Sr , Taylor RM 2nd , Superﬁne R . 2008 . Agnostic particle tracking for three - dimensional motion of cellular granules and membrane - tethered bead dynamics . Biophys . J . 94 : 2374 – 84 20 . Discher DE , Janmey P , Wang YL . 2005 . Tissue cells feel and respond to the stiffness of their substrate . Science 310 : 1139 – 43 21 . Doi M , Edwards SF . 1989 . The Theory of Polymer Dynamics . Oxford : Clarendon . 391 pp . 22 . EnglerAJ , SenA , SweeneyHL , DischerDE . 2006 . Matrixelasticitydirectsstemcelllineagespeciﬁcation . Cell 126 : 677 – 89 23 . Esue O , Carson AA , Tseng Y , Wirtz D . 2006 . A direct interaction between actin and vimentin ﬁlaments mediated by the tail domain of vimentin . J . Biol . Chem . 281 : 30393 – 99 24 . Ferry JD . 1980 . Viscoelastic Properties of Polymers . New York : Wiley . 672 pp . 25 . Flanagan LA , Chou J , Falet H , Neujahr R , Hartwig JH , Stossel TP . 2001 . Filamin A , Arp2 / 3 complex , and the morphology and function of cortical actin ﬁlaments in human melanoma cells . J . Cell Biol . 155 : 511 – 18 322 Wirtz A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . 2009 . 38 : 301 - 326 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f C a li f o r n i a - D a v i s on 01 / 07 / 12 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV376 - BB38 - 15 ARI 27 March 2009 11 : 7 26 . Flanagan LA , Ju YE , Marg B , Osterﬁeld M , Janmey PA . 2002 . Neurite branching on deformable sub - strates . NeuroReport 13 : 2411 – 17 27 . Fushimi K , Verkman AS . 1991 . Low viscosity in the aqueous domain of cell cytoplasm measured by picosecond polarization microﬂuorimetry . J . Cell Biol . 112 : 719 – 25 28 . Girard KD , Chaney C , Delannoy M , Kuo SC , Robinson DN . 2004 . Dynacortin contributes to cortical viscoelasticity and helps deﬁne the shape changes of cytokinesis . EMBO J . 23 : 1536 – 46 29 . Girard KD , Kuo SC , Robinson DN . 2006 . Dictyostelium myosin II mechanochemistry promotes active behavior of the cortex on long time scales . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 103 : 2103 – 8 30 . Gittes F , Mickey B , Nettleton J , Howard J . 1993 . Flexural rigidity of microtubules and actin ﬁlaments measured from thermal ﬂuctuations in shape . J . Cell Biol . 120 : 923 – 34 31 . Gomes ER , Jani S , Gundersen GG . 2005 . Nuclear movement regulated by Cdc42 , MRCK , myosin , and actin ﬂow establishes MTOC polarization in migrating cells . Cell 121 : 451 – 63 32 . Gorisch SM , Wachsmuth M , Ittrich C , Bacher CP , Rippe K , Lichter P . 2004 . Nuclear body movement is determined by chromatin accessibility and dynamics . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 101 : 13221 – 26 33 . Gruenbaum Y , Margalit A , Goldman RD , Shumaker DK , Wilson KL . 2005 . The nuclear lamina comes of age . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell . Biol . 6 : 21 – 31 34 . Guck J , Schinkinger S , Lincoln B , Wottawah F , Ebert S , et al . 2005 . Optical deformability as an inherent cell marker for testing malignant transformation and metastatic competence . Biophys . J . 88 : 3689 – 98 35 . Gupton SL , Anderson KL , Kole TP , Fischer RS , Ponti A , et al . 2005 . Cell migration without a lamel - lipodium : translation of actin dynamics into cell movement mediated by tropomyosin . J . Cell Biol . 168 : 619 – 31 36 . Haber C , Ruiz SA , Wirtz D . 2000 . Shape anisotropy of a single random - walk polymer . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 97 : 10792 – 95 37 . Hale CM , Shrestha AL , Khatau SB , Stewart - Hutchinson PJ , Hernandez L , et al . 2008 . Dysfunctional connectionsbetweenthenucleusandtheactinandmicrotubulenetworksinlaminopathicmodels . Biophys . J . 95 : 5462 – 75 38 . Hasnain IA , Donald AM . 2006 . Microrheological characterization of anisotropic materials . Phys . Rev . E 73 : 031901 39 . HinnerB , TempelM , SackmannE , KroyK , FreyE . 1998 . Entanglement , elasticity , andviscousrelaxation of actin solutions . Phys . Rev . Lett . 81 : 2614 – 17 40 . Hoffman BD , Massiera G , Van Citters KM , Crocker JC . 2006 . The consensus mechanics of cultured mammalian cells . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 103 : 10259 – 64 41 . Hoh JH , Schoenenberger CA . 1994 . Surface morphology and mechanical properties of MDCK mono - layers by atomic force microscopy . J . Cell Sci . 107 ( Pt . 5 ) : 1105 – 14 42 . Jacob KN , Garg A . 2006 . Laminopathies : multisystem dystrophy syndromes . Mol . Genet . Metab . 87 : 289 – 302 43 . Janmey PA . 1991 . Mechanical properties of cytoskeletal polymers . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 2 : 4 – 11 44 . Janmey PA , Hvidt S , Lamb J , Stossel TP . 1990 . Resemblance of actin - binding protein / actin gels to covalently crosslinked networks . Nature 345 : 89 – 92 45 . Jonas M , Huang H , Kamm RD , So PT . 2008 . Fast ﬂuorescence laser tracking microrheometry . II . Quantitative studies of cytoskeletal mechanotransduction . Biophys . J . 95 : 895 – 909 46 . Kas J , Strey H , Sackmann E . 1994 . Direct imaging of reptation for semiﬂexible actin ﬁlaments . Nature 368 : 226 – 29 47 . Kas J , Strey H , Tang JX , Fanger D , Sackmann E , Janmey P . 1996 . F - actin , a model polymer for semi - ﬂexible chains in dilute , semidilute , and liquid crystalline solutions . Biophys . J . 70 : 609 – 25 48 . Klein MG , Shi W , Ramagopal U , Tseng Y , Wirtz D , et al . 2004 . Structure of the actin crosslinking core of ﬁmbrin . Structure 12 : 999 – 1013 49 . Kole TP , Tseng Y , Huang L , Katz JL , Wirtz D . 2004 . Rho kinase regulates the intracellular microme - chanical response of adherent cells to rho activation . Mol . Biol . Cell 15 : 3475 – 84 50 . Kole TP , Tseng Y , Jiang I , Katz JL , Wirtz D . 2005 . Intracellular mechanics of migrating ﬁbroblasts . Mol . Biol . Cell 16 : 328 – 38 51 . Kole TP , Tseng Y , Wirtz D . 2004 . Intracellular microrheology as a tool for the measurement of the local mechanical properties of live cells . Methods Cell Biol . 78 : 45 – 64 www . annualreviews . org • Particle - Tracking Microrheology of Living Cells 323 A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . 2009 . 38 : 301 - 326 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f C a li f o r n i a - D a v i s on 01 / 07 / 12 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV376 - BB38 - 15 ARI 27 March 2009 11 : 7 52 . Kovacs M , Toth J , Hetenyi C , Malnasi - Csizmadia A , Sellers JR . 2004 . Mechanism of blebbistatin inhi - bition of myosin II . J . Biol . Chem . 279 : 35557 – 63 53 . Lacayo CI , Theriot JA . 2004 . Listeria monocytogenes actin - based motility varies depending on subcel - lular location : a kinematic probe for cytoarchitecture . Mol . Biol . Cell 15 : 2164 – 75 54 . Lammerding J , Lee RT . 2005 . The nuclear membrane and mechanotransduction : impaired nuclear mechanics and mechanotransduction in lamin A / C deﬁcient cells . Novartis Found . Symp . 264 : 264 – 73 55 . Lammerding J , Schulze PC , Takahashi T , Kozlov S , Sullivan T , et al . 2004 . Lamin A / C deﬁciency causes defective nuclear mechanics and mechanotransduction . J . Clin . Invest . 113 : 370 – 78 56 . Lammermann T , Bader BL , Monkley SJ , Worbs T , Wedlich - Soldner R , et al . 2008 . Rapid leukocyte migration by integrin - independent ﬂowing and squeezing . Nature 453 : 51 – 55 57 . Lau AW , Hoffman BD , Davies A , Crocker JC , Lubensky TC . 2003 . Microrheology , stress ﬂuctuations , and active behavior of living cells . Phys . Rev . Lett . 91 : 198101 58 . LeeGY , LimCT . 2007 . Biomechanicsapproachestostudyinghumandiseases . TrendsBiotechnol . 25 : 111 – 18 59 . LeeJS , ChangMI , TsengY , WirtzD . 2005 . Cdc42mediatesnucleusmovementandMTOCpolarization in Swiss 3T3 ﬁbroblasts under mechanical shear stress . Mol . Biol . Cell 16 : 871 – 80 60 . LeeJS , HaleCM , PanorchanP , KhatauSB , GeorgeJP , etal . 2007 . NuclearlaminA / Cdeﬁciencyinduces defects in cell mechanics , polarization , and migration . Biophys . J . 93 : 2542 – 52 61 . Lee JS , Panorchan P , Hale CM , Khatau SB , Kole TP , et al . 2006 . Ballistic intracellular nanorheology reveals ROCK - hard cytoplasmic stiffening response to ﬂuid ﬂow . J . Cell Sci . 119 : 1760 – 68 62 . Luby - Phelps K , Castle PE , Taylor DL , Lanni F . 1987 . Hindered diffusion of inert tracer particles in the cytoplasm of mouse 3T3 cells . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 84 : 4910 – 13 63 . Luby - Phelps K , Taylor DL , Lanni F . 1986 . Probing the structure of cytoplasm . J . Cell Biol . 102 : 2015 – 22 64 . Lukacs GL , Haggie P , Seksek O , Lechardeur D , Freedman N , Verkman AS . 2000 . Size - dependent DNA mobility in cytoplasm and nucleus . J . Biol . Chem . 275 : 1625 – 29 65 . Mason TG , Ganesan K , van Zanten JV , Wirtz D , Kuo SC . 1997 . Particle - tracking microrheology of complex ﬂuids . Phys . Rev . Lett . 79 : 3282 – 85 66 . Mason TG , Weitz D . 1995 . Optical measurements of frequency - dependent linear viscoelastic moduli of complex ﬂuids . Phys . Rev . Lett . 74 : 1254 – 56 67 . Massiera G , Van Citters KM , Biancaniello PL , Crocker JC . 2007 . Mechanics of single cells : rheology , time dependence , and ﬂuctuations . Biophys . J . 93 : 3703 – 13 68 . Minin AA , Kulik AV , Gyoeva FK , Li Y , Goshima G , Gelfand VI . 2006 . Regulation of mitochondria distribution by RhoA and formins . J . Cell Sci . 119 : 659 – 70 69 . MizunoD , TardinC , SchmidtCF , MackintoshFC . 2007 . Nonequilibriummechanicsofactivecytoskele - tal networks . Science 315 : 370 – 73 70 . Morse DC . 1998 . Viscoelasticity of concentrated isotropic solutions of semiﬂexible polymers . 1 . Model and stress tensor . Macromolecules 31 : 7030 – 43 71 . Mounkes L , Kozlov S , Burke B , Stewart CL . 2003 . The laminopathies : nuclear structure meets disease . Curr . Opin . Genet . Dev . 13 : 223 – 30 72 . O’Toole M , Lamoureux P , Miller KE . 2008 . A physical model of axonal elongation : force , viscosity , and adhesions govern the mode of outgrowth . Biophys . J . 94 : 2610 – 20 73 . Pai A , Sundd P , Tees DF . 2008 . In situ microrheological determination of neutrophil stiffening following adhesion in a model capillary . Ann . Biomed . Eng . 36 : 596 – 603 74 . Palmer A , Xu J , Kuo SC , Wirtz D . 1999 . Diffusing wave spectroscopy microrheology of actin ﬁlament networks . Biophys . J . 76 : 1063 – 71 75 . Palmer A , Xu J , Wirtz D . 1998 . High - frequency rheology of crosslinked actin networks measured by diffusing wave spectroscopy . Rheol . Acta 37 : 97 – 108 76 . Panorchan P , Lee JS , Daniels BR , Kole TP , Tseng Y , Wirtz D . 2007 . Probing cellular mechanical responses to stimuli using ballistic intracellular nanorheology . Methods Cell Biol . 83 : 115 – 40 77 . Panorchan P , Lee JS , Kole TP , Tseng Y , Wirtz D . 2006 . Microrheology and ROCK signaling of human endothelial cells embedded in a 3D matrix . Biophys . J . 91 : 3499 – 507 78 . Pelham RJ Jr , Wang Y . 1997 . Cell locomotion and focal adhesions are regulated by substrate ﬂexibility . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 94 : 13661 – 65 324 Wirtz A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . 2009 . 38 : 301 - 326 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f C a li f o r n i a - D a v i s on 01 / 07 / 12 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV376 - BB38 - 15 ARI 27 March 2009 11 : 7 79 . Pollard TD . 2003 . The cytoskeleton , cellular motility and the reductionist agenda . Nature 422 : 741 – 45 80 . Pollard TD , Borisy GG . 2003 . Cellular motility driven by assembly and disassembly of actin ﬁlaments . Cell 112 : 453 – 65 81 . Qian H , Sheetz MP , Elson EL . 1991 . Single particle tracking . Analysis of diffusion and ﬂow in two - dimensional systems . Biophys . J . 60 : 910 – 21 82 . Radmacher M . 2007 . Studying the mechanics of cellular processes by atomic force microscopy . Methods Cell Biol . 83 : 347 – 72 83 . Radmacher M , Cleveland JP , Fritz M , Hansma HG , Hansma PK . 1994 . Mapping interaction forces with the atomic force microscope . Biophys . J . 66 : 2159 – 65 84 . Radmacher M , Fritz M , Kacher CM , Cleveland JP , Hansma PK . 1996 . Measuring the viscoelastic properties of human platelets with the atomic force microscope . Biophys . J . 70 : 556 – 67 85 . Rogers SS , Waigh TA , Lu JR . 2008 . Intracellular microrheology of motile Amoeba proteus . Biophys . J . 94 : 3313 – 22 86 . Rogers SS , Waigh TA , Zhao X , Lu JR . 2007 . Precise particle tracking against a complicated background : polynomial ﬁtting with Gaussian weight . Phys . Biol . 4 : 220 – 27 87 . Rudnick J , Gaspari G . 1987 . The shapes of random walks . Science 237 : 384 – 89 88 . Savin T , Doyle PS . 2005 . Role of a ﬁnite exposure time on measuring an elastic modulus using microrhe - ology . Phys . Rev . E 71 : 041106 89 . Savin T , Doyle PS . 2005 . Static and dynamic errors in particle tracking microrheology . Biophys . J . 88 : 623 – 38 90 . Schnurr B , Gittes F , MacKintosh FC , Schmidt CF . 1997 . Determining microscopic viscoelasticity in ﬂexible and semiﬂexible polymer networks from thermal ﬂuctuations . Macromolecules 30 : 7781 – 92 91 . Seksek O , Biwersi J , Verkman AS . 1997 . Translational diffusion of macromolecule - sized solutes in cyto - plasm and nucleus . J . Cell Biol . 138 : 131 – 42 92 . Sivaramakrishnan S , DeGiulio JV , Lorand L , Goldman RD , Ridge KM . 2008 . Micromechanical prop - erties of keratin intermediate ﬁlament networks . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 105 : 889 – 94 93 . Smith SB , Finzi L , Bustamante C . 1992 . Direct mechanical measurements of the elasticity of single DNA molecules by using magnetic beads . Science 258 : 1122 – 26 94 . StamenovicD , RosenblattN , Montoya - ZavalaM , MatthewsBD , HuS , etal . 2007 . Rheologicalbehavior of living cells is timescale - dependent . Biophys . J . 93 : L39 – 41 95 . Stewart - Hutchinson PJ , Hale CM , Wirtz D , Hodzic D . 2008 . Structural requirements for the assembly of LINC complexes and their function in cellular mechanical stiffness . Exp . Cell Res . 314 : 1892 – 905 96 . Suh J , Wirtz D , Hanes J . 2003 . Efﬁcient active transport of gene nanocarriers to the cell nucleus . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 100 : 3878 – 82 97 . Svitkina TM , Verkhovsky AB , McQuade KM , Borisy GG . 1997 . Analysis of the actin - myosin II system in ﬁsh epidermal keratocytes : mechanism of cell body translocation . J . Cell Biol . 139 : 397 – 414 98 . TaponN , HallA . 1997 . Rho , RacandCdc42GTPasesregulatetheorganizationoftheactincytoskeleton . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 9 : 86 – 92 99 . Tseng Y , An KM , Esue O , Wirtz D . 2004 . The bimodal role of ﬁlamin in controlling the architecture and mechanics of F - actin networks . J . Biol . Chem . 279 : 1819 – 26 100 . Tseng Y , An KM , Wirtz D . 2002 . Microheterogeneity controls the rate of gelation of actin ﬁlament networks . J . Biol . Chem . 277 : 18143 – 50 101 . Tseng Y , Fedorov E , McCaffery JM , Almo SC , Wirtz D . 2001 . Micromechanics and microstructure of actin ﬁlament networks in the presence of the actin - bundling protein human fascin : a comparison with α - actinin . J . Mol . Biol . 310 : 351 – 66 102 . Tseng Y , Kole TP , Wirtz D . 2002 . Micromechanical mapping of live cells by multiple - particle - tracking microrheology . Biophys . J . 83 : 3162 – 76 103 . Tseng Y , Lee JS , Kole TP , Jiang I , Wirtz D . 2004 . Micro - organization and visco - elasticity of the inter - phase nucleus revealed by particle nanotracking . J . Cell Sci . 117 : 2159 – 67 104 . Tseng Y , Wirtz D . 2001 . Mechanics and multiple - particle tracking microheterogeneity of alpha - actinin - cross - linked actin ﬁlament networks . Biophys . J . 81 : 1643 – 56 105 . TsengY , WirtzD . 2004 . DendriticbranchingandhomogenizationofactinnetworksmediatedbyArp2 / 3 complex . Phys . Rev . Lett . 93 : 258104 www . annualreviews . org • Particle - Tracking Microrheology of Living Cells 325 A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . 2009 . 38 : 301 - 326 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f C a li f o r n i a - D a v i s on 01 / 07 / 12 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV376 - BB38 - 15 ARI 27 March 2009 11 : 7 106 . Valberg PA , Albertini DF . 1985 . Cytoplasmic motions , rheology , and structure probed by a novel mag - netic particle method . J . Cell Biol . 101 : 130 – 40 107 . Van Citters KM , Hoffman BD , Massiera G , Crocker JC . 2006 . The role of F - actin and myosin in epithelial cell rheology . Biophys . J . 91 : 3946 – 56 108 . Verkhovsky AB , Svitkina TM , Borisy GG . 1995 . Myosin II ﬁlament assemblies in the active lamella of ﬁbroblasts : their morphogenesis and role in the formation of actin ﬁlament bundles . J . Cell Biol . 131 : 989 – 1002 109 . Wachsstock DH , Schwartz WH , Pollard TD . 1993 . Afﬁnity of alpha - actinin for actin determines the structure and mechanical properties of actin ﬁlament gels . Biophys . J . 65 : 205 – 14 110 . Wachsstock DH , Schwartz WH , Pollard TD . 1994 . Crosslinker dynamics determine the mechanical properties of actin gels . Biophys . J . 66 : 801 – 9 111 . Wang N , Butler JP , Ingber DE . 1993 . Mechanotransduction across the cell surface and through the cytoskeleton . Science 260 : 1124 – 27 112 . Xu J , Palmer A , Wirtz D . 1998 . Rheology and microrheology of semiﬂexible polymer solutions : actin ﬁlament networks . Macromolecules 31 : 6486 – 92 113 . Xu J , Tseng Y , Wirtz D . 2000 . Strain - hardening of actin ﬁlament networks—regulation by the dynamic crosslinking protein α - actinin . J . Biol . Chem . 275 : 35886 – 92 114 . Xu J , Viasnoff V , Wirtz D . 1998 . Compliance of actin ﬁlament networks measured by particle - tracking microrheology and diffusing wave spectroscopy . Rheol . Acta 37 : 387 – 98 115 . Xu J , Wirtz D , Pollard TD . 1998 . Dynamic cross - linking by alpha - actinin determines the mechanical properties of actin ﬁlament networks . J . Biol . Chem . 273 : 9570 – 76 116 . Yamada S , Wirtz D , Kuo SC . 2000 . Mechanics of living cells measured by laser tracking microrheology . Biophys . J . 78 : 1736 – 47 117 . Zhou X , Rowe RG , Hiraoka N , George JP , Wirtz D , et al . 2008 . Fibronectin ﬁbrillogenesis regulates three - dimensional neovessel formation . Genes Dev . 22 : 1231 – 43 326 Wirtz A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . 2009 . 38 : 301 - 326 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f C a li f o r n i a - D a v i s on 01 / 07 / 12 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . AR376 - FM ARI 23 March 2009 21 : 15 Annual Review of Biophysics Volume 38 , 2009 Contents Frontispiece Sunney I . Chan (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) xii A Physical Chemist’s Expedition to Explore the World of Membrane Proteins Sunney I . Chan (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 1 Crystallizing Membrane Proteins for Structure Determination : Use of Lipidic Mesophases Martin Caffrey (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 29 Advances in Imaging Secondary Ion Mass Spectrometry for Biological Samples Steven G . Boxer , Mary L . Kraft , and Peter K . Weber (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 53 Controlling Proteins Through Molecular Springs Giovanni Zocchi (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 75 Electron Crystallography as a Technique to Study the Structure on Membrane Proteins in a Lipidic Environment Stefan Raunser and Thomas Walz (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 89 Nuclear Envelope Formation : Mind the Gaps Banafshé Larijani and Dominic L . Poccia (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 107 The Interplay of Catalysis and Toxicity by Amyloid Intermediates on Lipid Bilayers : Insights from Type II Diabetes James A . Hebda and Andrew D . Miranker (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 125 Advances in High - Pressure Biophysics : Status and Prospects of Macromolecular Crystallography Roger Fourme , Eric Girard , Richard Kahn , Anne - Claire Dhaussy , and Isabella Ascone (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 153 Imaging Transcription in Living Cells Xavier Darzacq , Jie Yao , Daniel R . Larson , Sébastien Z . Causse , Lana Bosanac , Valeria de Turris , Vera M . Ruda , Timothee Lionnet , Daniel Zenklusen , Benjamin Guglielmi , Robert Tjian , and Robert H . Singer (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 173 v A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . 2009 . 38 : 301 - 326 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f C a li f o r n i a - D a v i s on 01 / 07 / 12 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . AR376 - FM ARI 23 March 2009 21 : 15 A Complex Assembly Landscape for the 30S Ribosomal Subunit Michael T . Sykes and James R . Williamson (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 197 Mechanical Signaling in Networks of Motor and Cytoskeletal Proteins Jonathon Howard (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 217 Biochemical and Structural Properties of the Integrin - Associated Cytoskeletal Protein Talin David R . Critchley (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 235 Single - Molecule Approaches to Stochastic Gene Expression Arjun Raj and Alexander van Oudenaarden (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 255 Comparative Enzymology and Structural Biology of RNA Self - Cleavage Martha J . Fedor (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 271 Particle - Tracking Microrheology of Living Cells : Principles and Applications Denis Wirtz (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 301 Bioimage Informatics for Experimental Biology Jason R . Swedlow , Ilya G . Goldberg , Kevin W . Eliceiri , and the OME Consortium (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 327 Site - Directed Spectroscopic Probes of Actomyosin Structural Dynamics David D . Thomas , David Kast , and Vicci L . Korman (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 347 Lessons from Structural Genomics Thomas C . Terwilliger , David Stuart , and Shigeyuki Yokoyama (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 371 Structure and Dynamics of Membrane Proteins by Magic Angle Spinning Solid - State NMR Ann McDermott (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 385 Index Cumulative Index of Contributing Authors , Volumes 34 – 38 (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 405 Errata An online log of corrections to Annual Review of Biophysics articles may be found at http : / / biophys . annualreviews . org / errata . shtml vi Contents A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . 2009 . 38 : 301 - 326 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f C a li f o r n i a - D a v i s on 01 / 07 / 12 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y .