350 JOURNAL OF NEUROTRAUMA 25 : 350 – 370 ( April 2008 ) © Mary Ann Liebert , Inc . DOI : 10 . 1089 / neu . 2007 . 0426 A Graded Forceps Crush Spinal Cord Injury Model in Mice JASON R . PLEMEL , 1 , 2 * GREG DUNCAN , 1 , 3 * KAI - WEI K . CHEN , 4 CASEY SHANNON , 1 SOPHIA PARK , 1 , 3 JOSEPH S . SPARLING , 1 , 2 and WOLFRAM TETZLAFF 1 , 2 , 3 ABSTRACT Given the rising availability and use of genetically modified animals in basic science research , it has become increasingly important to develop clinically relevant models for spinal cord injury ( SCI ) for use in mice . We developed a graded forceps crush model of SCI in mice that uses three different forceps with spacers of 0 . 25 , 0 . 4 , and 0 . 55 mm , to produce severe , moderate , and mild injuries , re - spectively . Briefly , each mouse was subjected to laminectomy of T5 - T7 , 15 - second spinal cord crush using one of those forceps , behavioral assessments , and post - mortem neuroanatomical analyses . There were significant differences among the three injury severity groups on behavioral measures ( Basso Mouse Score , footprint , and ladder analyses ) , demonstrating an increase in neurological deficits for groups with greater injury severity . Quantitative analysis of the lesion demonstrated that as injury severity increased , lesion size and GFAP negative area increased , and spared tissue , spinal cord cross - sectional area , spared grey matter and spared white matter decreased . These measures strongly correlated with the behavioral outcomes . Similar to other studies of SCI in mice , we report a dense laminin and fibronectin positive extracellular matrix in the lesion sites of injured mice , but unlike those previous studies , we also report the presence of numerous p75 positive Schwann cells in and around the lesion epicenter . These results provide evidence that the graded forceps crush model is an attractive alternative for the study of SCI and related therapeutic interventions . Be - cause of its demonstrated consistency , ease of use , low cost , and clinical relevance , this graded for - ceps crush is an attractive alternative to the other mouse models of SCI currently available . Key words : behavioral assessments ; extracellular matrix ; glial cell response ; models of injury ; neural in - jury 1 ICORD ( International Collaboration on Repair Discoveries ) , Departments of 2 Neuroscience and 3 Zoology , University of British Columbia , Vancouver , British Columbia , Canada . 4 School of Medicine Chung - Shan Medical University , Taichung , Taiwan , R . O . C . * These two authors contributed equally . INTRODUCTION A NIMAL MODELS of spinal cord injury ( SCI ) have been instrumental in advancing our understanding of the pathological mechanisms and functional deficits that re - sult from spinal cord trauma ( Kwon et al . , 2002 , 2004 ) . These injury models include transections , crushes , con - tusions or compressions ( Kwon et al . , 2002 ) and more recently distraction and dislocation ( Choo et al . , 2007 ) . To date , most SCI models have been established in rats because they are relatively inexpensive , their physical size is suitable for surgical interventions , they have sev - eral similarities to humans in regard to spinal cord pathol - ogy , and there are numerous well - established batteries of behavioral tests available for assessing their locomotor and sensory functions ( Hargreaves et al . , 1988 ; Behrmann et al . , 1992 ; Kunkel - Bagden et al . , 1993 ; Basso et al . , 1995 ; Christensen et al . , 1996 ; Hamers et al . , 2001 ; Bruce et al . , 2002 ; Metz and Whishaw , 2002 ; Vrinten and Hamers , 2003 ) . However , one important lim - itation of using rats to study SCI is the paucity of trans - genic rat strains . The past decade has seen a great expansion in the num - ber of genetically modified mice enabling the study of molecular events in vi vo . Given the wide spectrum of ge - netic manipulations ranging from over - expressions to in - ducible cell - specific deletions , mouse - based research provides an immensely powerful opportunity to study the role of specific genes after SCI in vivo . Unfortunately , the development of SCI models in mice is hindered by a number of challenges , the foremost of which is the in - creased technical difficulty of surgical procedures ( in - jury / treatment ) due to the small physical size of these an - imals . Despite these challenges , there has been a recent rise in the development of SCI models in mice using a variety of types of injuries . Although clinically rare ( Bunge et al . , 1993 ; Noren - berg et al . , 2004 ) , complete transections and partial tran - sections have been used extensively in mouse SCI re - search as they are of particular utility in understanding the regeneration of specific axonal tracts ( Bartholdi and Schwab , 1997 ; Huang et al . , 1999 ; Kim et al . , 2003 ; Ker - schensteiner et al . , 2005 ; Deumens et al . , 2007 ) . Several graded contusion models have been adapted to mice , in - cluding weight - drop ( Kuhn and Wrathall , 1998 ) , OSU - ESCID ( Jakeman et al . , 2000 ; Ma et al . , 2001 ) , pneu - matic impactor ( Seki et al . , 2002 ) , and Infinite Horizon impactor ( Ghasemlou et al . , 2005 ) devices . Contusion in - juries are clinically relevant and suited to studying neu - roprotective strategies , and can accurately model ap - proximately 49 % of SCI in humans ( Bunge et al . , 1993 ; Norenberg et al . , 2004 ) . However , such injuries require very expensive equipment and complex surgeries , so sev - eral less expensive and / or surgically simple graded com - pressive type injuries have been adapted to mice as well . These include the no - laminectomy ( Sheng et al . , 2004 ) , static load ( Farooque et al . , 1999 ; Farooque , 2000 ) , and graded clip compression ( Joshi and Fehlings , 2002a , b ) injury models . An alternative to these compressive injuries is a for - ceps crush injury . This injury has thus far only been adapted to mice previously using a single , severe ( i . e . , non - graded ) injury ( Fujiki et al . , 1996 ; Zhang et al . , 1996 ; Inman et al . , 2002 ) . However , it produces an injury that is so severe that the animals are unlikely to regain weight supported stepping , which is arguably necessary for test - ing the efficacy of therapeutic interventions using some of the standard behavioral tests in the field ( e . g . , ladder tests and footprint analysis ) . A graded forceps model has been used previously in rats to produce a reliable injury ( Gruner et al . , 1996 ) , but to our knowledge , no study has directly determined if this model can produce the range of injuries needed to be an effective model for SCI in mice . Here we established a graded forceps crush model of SCI that produces consistent behavioral and histolog - ical deficiencies in mice . Because of its demonstrated consistency , ease of use , low cost , and clinical relevance , this graded forceps crush is an attractive alternative to the other mouse models of SCI currently available . METHODS Animals A total of 42 adult male C57B / 6 mice ( 22 – 29 g ; Charles River Laboratories , Wilmington , MA ) were used in this study . All procedures were approved by the Uni - versity of British Columbia , in accordance with guide - lines of the Canadian Council on Animal Care . Forceps Modifications Three pairs of 5 Dumont type forceps ( Fine Science Tools , North Vancouver , Canada ) were modified using methods similar to those previously used by Faulkner et al . ( 2004 ) . The forceps blades were ground down to widths of 0 . 5 mm , and then metal epoxy putty ( PC Metals , Bridgeport , CT ) spacers were added to alter the distance between their blades when completely closed . The epoxy spacers were sanded down to precisely provide a differ - ent closure distance for each of the three pairs of forceps , thereby providing a means to laterally compress the spinal cords to a thickness of 0 . 25 , 0 . 4 , or 0 . 55 mm , depending on the forceps used . Spacers were placed both at the han - dle and near the tip on each pair of forceps , to ensure that closure distance did not vary with force applied . Spinal Cord Crush Injury All surgeries were performed under aseptic conditions . Blood oxygenation level and heart rate were monitored throughout the surgical and post - surgical period , as well as body temperature , which was maintained above 36 . 5°C throughout , with a temperature range of 36 . 6 – 37 . 1°C at the time of crush . Rats were anesthetized with inhalant isoflurane mixed with carboxygen ( 95 % O 2 / 5 % CO 2 ) . The skin of the back was shaved and dis - infected and the dorsal aspect of the spinal column ex - posed at the T1 - T10 vertebrae . A laminectomy of verte - bra T6 - T7 ( potentially T5 - T6 as a result of surgical variability ) was performed using a fine pair of rongeurs GRADED FORCEPS CRUSH SCI IN MICE 351 and care was taken not to damage the dura . Although there was a certain degree of variability in the segment of injury , there was little variability regarding distance from the injury site to the obex , which ranged from 1 . 7 to 2 . 1 cm . Moreover , this variability did not affect the outcomes . For each mouse , one of the three pairs of for - ceps were used to laterally compress the spinal cord to the corresponding thickness ( 0 . 25 , 0 . 4 , or 0 . 55 mm , de - pending on the pair of forceps ) and these compressions were held for 15 sec , thereby establishing three groups with varying injury severity : the 0 . 25 - mm ( severe ) , 0 . 4 - mm ( moderate ) , and 0 . 55 - mm ( mild ) injury groups . A sham injury control group was also included in the pre - sent study . That group received identical treatment , in - cluding exposure , laminectomy and placement of the for - ceps around the spinal cord , but no crush injury was inflicted . The total number of animals used was n (cid:2) 42 ; with n (cid:2) 12 in the 0 . 25 - mm group , n (cid:2) 11 in the 0 . 4 - mm group , n (cid:2) 9 in the 0 . 55 - mm group , and n (cid:2) 10 in the control group . Four animals died due to various com - plications ( one control animal during surgery , and three were found dead in the cage several days after injury : two from the 0 . 25 - mm group and one from the 0 . 4 - mm group ) . Another five needed to be euthanized as per our protocol requirements : one due to bladder infection ( 0 . 25 - mm crush , despite antibiotics ) and four due to skin in - fections . We attributed the skin infections to our shaving technique , and in a more recent study with this forceps compression model we implemented a less abrasive method using clippers and overcame this problem . The mortality of both studies combined was less than 13 % ( not counting the skin infections ) . As a result of mortal - ity and morbidity , the animal numbers in the present study are as follows : in the BMS analysis and the blad - der scores , there were nine animals in the 0 . 25 - mm group and eight animals in the 0 . 4 - mm , 0 . 55 - mm , and control groups ; whereas in all subsequent analysis , including footprint , ladder , spared white , gray matter , lesion mor - phometry and spared tissue , there were eight animals in the 0 . 25 - mm group and six animals in the 0 . 4 - mm , 0 . 55 - mm , and control groups . Immediately following the surgery and for an additional day , mice received Ringer’s solution for hydration ( 1 mL , s . c . ) and Buprenorphine ( 0 . 01 mg / kg ) twice daily for 3 days to alleviate pain . Blad - ders were expressed twice daily until the mice reached spontaneous micturition . Antibiotics ( Baytril , 0 . 01 mL , i . p . ) were given to treat / prevent bladder infection . Behavioral Assessment Behavioral assessments of locomotor function were conducted to characterize the injury severity of the graded forceps crush . Hindlimb locomotor function was assessed by open field locomotion , and footprint and horizontal ladder paradigms . All behavioral tests were conducted 1 – 2 days prior to injury to establish baseline values . Open field testing was done at 2 , 4 , and 7 days post - injury and then conducted on a weekly basis thereafter . All other behavioral tests were delayed following injury until the animals had regained plantar placement with weight sup - port . Animals that did not recover to a Basso Mouse Scale ( BMS ) score of 5 were excluded from footprint and hor - izontal ladder . This exclusion criteria resulted in the re - moval of only one animal ( out of six ) from the 0 . 4 - mm injury group , but more than 50 % of the 0 . 25 - mm injured animals , so the latter group was excluded from footprint and ladder analyses altogether . For the remaining ani - mals , the horizontal ladder and footprint tests were con - ducted again at 4 and 6 weeks post - injury , with behav - ioral habituation on off weeks ( i . e . , week 5 ) . Open Field Locomotion For open field locomotion testing , the animals were placed in a large Plexiglas field ( 150 cm long (cid:3) 120 cm wide (cid:3) 15 cm high ) free of any tactile stimulation and observed by two raters ( blinded to treatment ) for 4 min in order to assess their performance using the BMS and the related subscale to score locomotor performance ( En - gesser - Cesar et al . , 2005 ; Basso et al . , 2006 ) . The BMS was used to assess locomotor behavior because it has been demonstrated to be more sensitive and reliable than the Basso , Beattie , and Bresnahan ( BBB ) scale when as - sessing mouse locomotion with an inter - rater reliability of 0 . 5 ( Basso et al . , 2006 ) . Briefly , the BMS is a 10 - point scale that provides a gross indication of locomotor abil - ity . Scores of 0 – 2 indicate improving degrees of move - ment of ankle joints ; scores of 3 – 6 indicate various stages of weight support , stepping , and coordination ; and scores of 7 – 9 account for paw position and trunk stability . We used the BMS subscale to assess qualitative improve - ments in individual locomotor components separate from the overall BMS score . This subscore is based on a 12 - point scale , with 0 corresponding to occasional / frequent plantar stepping , severe trunk instability , no coordination , no parallel paw positioning , no tail lifts , and 11 corre - sponding to consistent plantar stepping , mostly coordi - nated , normal trunk stability , parallel paw positioning at initial contact and liftoff , and a raised tail during loco - motion . All animals included in the present study scored a 9 on the BMS and an 11 on the subscale during base - line assessments . Horizontal Ladder Error ( i . e . , slip or miss ) frequency was assessed using a horizontal ladder modified as previously described PLEMEL ET AL . 352 ( Engesser - Cesar et al . , 2005 ; Cummings et al . , 2007 ) . Briefly , mice were videotaped with a high - definition camera ( Sony , HDR - HC1 ) as they walked along a 5 . 2 - cm - wide horizontal ladder with 26 rungs each spaced 1 . 3 cm apart . Subsequent video analysis provided scores for number of steps overall , number of errors ( i . e . , missteps , footslips or drags ) , and the total number of errors was di - vided by the total number of steps to provide a percent - age error as well . The inter - rater reliability for this test was 4 % . Footprint Analysis To examine gait patterns , mice were required to tra - verse a transparent platform ( 5 . 2 cm wide and 60 cm long ) with opaque , black walls in a darkened room . The animals were recorded from beneath with a high - defini - tion camera ( Sony , HDR - HC1 ) illuminated with a light source below the platform . Footprints were marked us - ing frame - by - frame video replay ( Zoom Player ; Inmatrix , Haifa , Israel ) on four uninterrupted crossings per animal . Stride length for both hindpaw and forepaw , and hind - paw angle of rotation were measured , as was base of sup - port , which was defined as the horizontal distance be - tween the centers of two hindprints . Coordination was also assessed , and was defined as the distance between the ipsilateral forelimb print immediately preceding a given hindlimb print ( prints that would normally overlap almost entirely ) . The inter - rater reliability for this test was 2 , 3 , and 4 mm for the coordination , hindlimb stride length , and forelimb stride length assessments , respec - tively . Bladder Score To determine if injury severity had an effect on the time until an animal regained partial or complete bladder function , the number of days after injury until a partially full or empty bladder was noted for 3 days in a row was recorded as a measure of the time until control of mic - turition had returned ( Engesser - Cesar et al . , 2005 ) . Tissue Processing , Immunohistochemistry , and Staining Immunohistochemistry and staining procedures were performed on 20 - (cid:2) m spinal cord cross - sections cut in the coronal plane using a cryostat and mounted on Superfrost Plus slides ( Fisher , Houston , TX ) . For immunohisto - chemistry , sections were permeabilized with 0 . 2 % Tri - ton - X 100 , and non - specific binding sites were subse - quently blocked with 10 % normal donkey serum . For immunodetection of myelin proteins , tissue sections were delipidized prior to immunolabeling procedures . Primary antibodies were incubated overnight at room temperature , washed and then incubated with fluorescent - conjugated secondary antibodies for 2 h at room temperature . The following primary antibodies were used : rabbit poly - clonal anti - GFAP ( 1 : 500 ; DakoCytomation , Carpinteria , CA ) , chicken polyclonal anti - neurofilament - 200 ( NF - H ; 1 : 1000 ; Chemicon , Temecula , CA ) , chicken polyclonal anti - P 0 ( 1 : 100 ; AvesLabs , Tigard , OR ) , chicken poly - clonal anti - myelin basic protein ( MBP ; 1 : 100 ; Aves - Labs ) , rabbit polyclonal anti - p75 ( 1 : 400 ; Chemicon ) , mouse monoclonal anti - Fibronectin ( 1 : 200 ; Sigma , St Louis , MO ) , and rabbit anti - Laminin ( 1 : 1000 ; Sigma ) . Secondary antibodies used were FITC - conjugated and Cy3 - conjugated donkey anti - mouse , rabbit or chicken ( Jackson ImmunoResearch , West Grove , PA ) . Following immunohistochemistry , all tissue was incubated for 2 min with ToPro3 ( 1 : 5000 , Invitrogen ) stain in order to visu - alize cell nuclei using a confocal microscopy . Eriochrome cyanine ( Fluka , Switzerland ) staining with a neutral red ( Sigma ) counterstain was used to assess white matter and gray matter loss . Slides were first hydrated in decreasing concentrations of alcohol followed by incubation in xy - lene . Tissue was then placed in eriochrome cyanine for 10 min , followed by submergence in NH 4 OH and neu - tral red for 2 min each . Tissue was then dehydrated in ascending alcohol concentrations , rinsed in xylene , and coverslipped . Immunofluorescence and eriochrome cyanine staining were visualized using a Zeiss Axioplan 2 microscope fit - ted with deconvolution software ( Northern Eclipse , Em - pix , Mississauga , Canada ) . Immunolabeled sections were examined with a Nikon C1 Laser Scanning Confocal Mi - croscope ( Mississauga , Canada ) . Further processing of pictures for display purposes was done using Photoshop 7 . 0 ( Adobe , San Jose , CA ) . Histological Quantification In order to quantify white matter and gray matter spar - ing , images were taken at the epicenter of injury and every 400 (cid:2) m rostrally and caudally . Tissue loosely as - sociated with the spinal cord or damaged by an artifact of tissue preparation was discounted . White matter was considered spared when it was both dark and consistent in texture after eriochrome cyanine staining , whereas gray matter was considered spared when it was a stereo - typic light gray color with a consistent neuropil texture containing neuronal and glial cell bodies . Multiple out - comes were assessed using the quantification of GFAP - immunopositive tissue : GFAP - negative area was defined as tissue that had no or only very occasional GFAP - pos - itive branches projecting into it , lesion area was defined as areas of disrupted cytoarchitecture , spinal cord cross - sectional area was defined as the area contained within GRADED FORCEPS CRUSH SCI IN MICE 353 PLEMEL ET AL . 354 the dura , and spared tissue was defined as the spinal cord area minus the lesion area . SigmaScan Pro 5 . 0 ( SPSS Inc . , Chicago , IL ) was used to measure area in all image analyses . Statistical Analysis All data were presented as mean (cid:4) standard error of the mean ( SEM ) . Histological and bladder score data were analyzed using one - way analysis of variance ( ANOVA ) , and group differences were ascertained using Tukey’s post hoc comparisons when appropriate . BMS , ladder and footprint data were analyzed using two - way repeated measures ANOVA and / or one - way ANOVA with Tukey’s post hoc tests , again , when appropriate . Correlation analysis were analyzed with the Pearson test . The significance level for all tests was set at p (cid:5) 0 . 05 . RESULTS Post - Operative Recovery Mouse spinal cord injury was inflicted with a lateral forceps crush using one of three forceps with defined clo - sure distances of 0 . 25 , 0 . 4 , and 0 . 55 mm , corresponding to severe , moderate , and mild injuries , respectively . Post - injury mortality was less then 13 % and happened to oc - cur mainly in the more severe injury groups ( 0 . 4 and 0 . 25 mm ) . All mice that survived appeared active and healthy , and exhibited varying degrees of functional loss and spontaneous recovery depending on injury severity . Most experimental animals lost 10 – 20 % weight post - injury but recovered baseline weight during the eight week period of the experiment with only five animals falling short of their baseline weight by 5 – 10 % . Manipulation of Closure Gap in Forceps Produces Groups with Graded Functional Recovery To assess functional recovery following spinal cord in - jury animals were assessed in an open field over 8 weeks using the BMS scores ( Fig . 1A ) and subscores ( Fig 1B ) . The BMS provides a reliable gross motor assessment and , unlike the BBB , it is tailored for use in mice ( Basso et al . , 2006 ) . In all injury groups , recovery reached a plateau 3 – 4 weeks following injury , and by 8 weeks post - injury these groups showed statistically significant differences ( two - way repeated - measures ANOVA ; p (cid:5) 0 . 0001 ) . The most severe , 0 . 25 - mm , injury group reached an average BMS score of 4 . 2 (cid:4) 0 . 57 , which indicates occasional plantar stepping ( Fig . 1A ) . This group was significantly different at all time points compared to both sham con - trol and the 0 . 55 - mm ( mild ) injury group ( Tukey’s post hoc test ; p (cid:5) 0 . 05 ) . The 0 . 4 - mm ( moderate ) injury group , achieved an average BMS score of 7 . 6 (cid:4) 0 . 51 , indicat - ing that the mice regained frequent plantar stepping , mostly coordinated forelimbs and hindlimbs , achieved parallel paw placement , but were either severely unsta - ble or rotated their paws on lift - off . This group was sig - nificantly different from the other groups until 28 days post - injury ( Tukey post hoc test ; p (cid:6) 0 . 05 ) , but were no FIG . 1 . Graded severity of injury as assessed by average Basso Mouse Scale ( BMS ) score ( A ) and BMS subscore ( B ) for mice in severe ( 0 . 25 mm , n (cid:2) 9 ) , moderate ( 0 . 4 mm , n (cid:2) 8 ) , and mild ( 0 . 55 mm , n (cid:2) 8 ) crush injury groups and sham control ani - mals ( n (cid:2) 8 ) . ( A , B ) There were significant differences between groups across time points ( p (cid:6) 0 . 0001 ; repeated measures analy - sis - of - variance [ ANOVA ] ) and comparisons at individual time points between groups ( * p (cid:6) 0 . 05 , repeated - measures analysis of variance [ ANOVA ] ) . ( A ) At all time points , the average BMS score of the 0 . 25 - mm injury group is significantly different from that of the 0 . 55 - mm injury group ( p (cid:6) 0 . 001 ) and the 0 . 4 - mm injury group ( p (cid:6) 0 . 05 ) . The 0 . 4 - mm injury group is significantly different ( p (cid:6) 0 . 05 ) from the 0 . 55 - mm injury group for the first week post - injury but not after that time point . ( B ) At all time points for the average BMS subscore , the 0 . 25 - mm injury group is significantly different from the 0 . 55 - mm injury group ( p (cid:6) 0 . 001 ) , and from 14 days post - injury until the end of the study at 56 days post - injury , the 0 . 25 - mm injury group was also sig - nificantly different from the 0 . 4 - mm injury group ( p (cid:6) 0 . 001 ) . GRADED FORCEPS CRUSH SCI IN MICE 355 longer significantly different from sham controls there - after . The mild , 0 . 55 - mm injury group displayed very mi - nor and transient impairments in the open field and reached an average BMS score of 8 . 6 (cid:4) 0 . 12 , indicating that the animals only remaining deficits were mild trunk instability or abnormal tail positions . This 0 . 55 - mm group was not significantly different from sham controls at any time point except 2 days post - injury ( Tukey’s post hoc test ; p (cid:6) 0 . 05 ) . The BMS subscore further distin - guishes fine motor differences between animals that are capable of plantar stepping ( Engesser - Cesar et al . , 2005 ) and here the subscore illustrated the same relationships among the injury groups as the BMS score ( Fig . 1B ) . Horizontal ladder ( Fig . 2A – C ) and footprint ( Fig . 2D – F ) analyses were used in order to further quantita - tively distinguish differences in functional recovery among the injury groups . However , these tests yield un - ambiguous data only in animals with plantar stepping and so only groups and animals that could frequently plantar step ( a BMS score of (cid:7) 5 ) were used for ladder or foot - print analyses . Consequently , one animal from the 0 . 4 - mm group and the entire 0 . 25 - mm group were excluded from the footprint and ladder analyses . The results of the horizontal ladder test indicated significant differences across time points for the following parameters : total er - rors ( Fig . 2A ) , percentage errors ( Fig . 2B ) , and average steps per run ( Fig . 2C ; two - way repeated measures ANOVA ; p (cid:5) 0 . 05 ) . In agreement with the BMS , for all three ladder measures , the 0 . 4 - mm injury group differed significantly from the 0 . 55 - mm groups and from sham FIG . 2 . Graded severity of injury as assessed with both horizontal ladder test ( A – C ; error is defined as a slip , miss , or drag ) and footprint analysis ( D – F ) for mice in the mild ( 0 . 55 mm , n (cid:2) 6 ) and moderate ( 0 . 4 mm , n (cid:2) 5 ) injury groups , as well as sham control animals ( n (cid:2) 6 ) . ( A – E ) There were significant differences between groups across time points ( p (cid:6) 0 . 05 , repeated - mea - sures analysis of variance [ ANOVA ] ) . At individual time points , there were differences compared to the sham control ( * p (cid:6) 0 . 05 ) and compared to the 0 . 55 - mm injury groups ( (cid:8) p (cid:6) 0 . 05 , Tukey’s ) . ( E ) There were no significant difference between the 0 . 55 - mm group and the sham control group , but there was a trend ( p (cid:2) 0 . 076 and p (cid:2) 0 . 082 at 4 and 6 weeks post - injury , respec - tively ) . control animals at all time points ( Tukey’s post hoc test ; p (cid:6) 0 . 05 ) . Follow - up testing revealed that the 0 . 4 - mm group also was significantly more impaired than the 0 . 55 - mm injury group ( Tukey’s post hoc test ; p (cid:5) 0 . 05 ) for both percentage and total errors at all time points , as well as the average steps per run at 6 weeks post - injury . Footprint analysis was also employed to quantitatively assess differences in gait , amongst the injury groups . An - gle of paw rotation and base of support , two measure - ments known to vary in several rat spinal cord injury par - adigms ( Metz et al . , 2000 ; Chan et al . , 2005 ) showed no differences between groups ( data not shown ) . Con - versely , coordination ( distance between matched fore - limb - hindlimb steps ; Fig . 2D ) , hindlimb stride length ( Fig . 2E ) and forelimb stride length ( Fig . 2F ) were all significantly different amongst the groups ( two - way re - peated measures ANOVA ; p (cid:5) 0 . 05 ) . The moderately se - vere 0 . 4 - mm group displayed significantly worse coor - dination than sham controls 6 weeks post - injury ( Tukey’s post hoc test ; p (cid:6) 0 . 05 ) , and exhibited significantly smaller hindlimb and forelimb stride lengths than sham controls at all time points ( Tukey’s post hoc test ; p (cid:6) 0 . 05 ) . The mild severity , 0 . 55 mm injury group , with very little impairment on the BMS or ladder , did display a sin - gle , sustained deficit on the footprint analysis , demon - strating significantly impaired forelimb - hindlimb coordi - nation compared to sham controls at all time points . Although this mild injury group also tended to have a smaller hindlimb stride length than sham controls , that difference failed to reach significance ( Tukey’s post hoc test ; p (cid:2) 0 . 76 and p (cid:2) 0 . 82 at 4 and 6 weeks post - injury , respectively ) . In order to determine how injury severity impacted au - tonomic function , the recovery of bladder function was assessed and based on the number of days of recovery required to achieve control of micturition . As with motor function , bladder scores correlated with injury severity . On average , the 0 . 25 - mm group did not recover bladder function until 19 . 6 (cid:4) 5 . 1 days , which was significantly slower than the average for the 0 . 55 - mm injury and sham control groups . The 0 . 4 - mm , 0 . 55 - mm , and sham control animals recovered bladder function by 11 . 7 (cid:4) 1 . 9 , 3 . 5 (cid:4) 1 . 6 , and 2 . 2 (cid:4) 1 . 2 days on average , respectively ( Fig . 3 ) , and these groups were not significantly different from one another , likely because of the conservative nature of the Tukey’s post hoc test ( 0 . 4 mm vs . 0 . 25 mm p (cid:2) 0 . 35 ; 0 . 4 vs . control p (cid:2) 0 . 26 ) . Defined Forceps Crush Produced Graded Histological Damage The histological disruption of the spinal cord follow - ing a calibrated spinal cord crush was assessed by ex - PLEMEL ET AL . 356 amining immunoreactivity for an antibody specific to GFAP , which is typically used as a marker for astrocytes ( Fig . 4 ) . A small central area of GFAP - negative tissue was consistently present in the gray matter of the mild ( 0 . 55 - mm ) injury group with additional patches of in - creased GFAP immunoreactivity in the lateral columns of the lesion epicenter ( Fig . 4B ) . This central GFAP - neg - ative area expanded significantly in size with increased injury severity ( Fig . 4C , H ) , including most of the gray matter and sparing only a rim of spinal cord white mat - ter after moderate crush ( 0 . 4 - mm ) , and sparing isolated patches of GFAP - positive tissue in the periphery follow - ing severe ( 0 . 25 - mm ) injury . The GFAP immunoreac - tivity was clearly enhanced in these spared GFAP - posi - tive areas , indicating a massive astrocyte reaction and disrupted cytoarchitecture . At high magnification , the presence of small astrocytic processes within the lesions became apparent ( Fig . 4E , F ) . Quantitative analyses revealed that spinal cord area was significantly reduced in all injury groups compared to sham controls ( one - way ANOVA ; p (cid:5) 0 . 001 ; Tukey’s post hoc test ; p (cid:5) 0 . 05 ) , but the injury groups did not dif - fer significantly from one another ( Fig . 4G ) . The GFAP - negative areas were significantly larger in the 0 . 25 - mm group than all other groups ( p (cid:5) 0 . 05 , Tukey’s post hoc test following one - way ANOVA p (cid:5) 0 . 001 ) , whereas the 0 . 4 - mm injury resulted in a significantly larger GFAP - negative lesion than sham controls only ( p (cid:5) 0 . 05 ; Fig . 4H ) . This lesion area , as defined by regions of disrupted FIG . 3 . Bladder scores ( expressed as days of recovery re - quired for mice to regain control of micturition ) of mice post - surgery for sham control , and mild , moderate , and severe in - jury groups . As injury severity increased across groups , average bladder score also increased . The groups differed significantly ( p (cid:5) 0 . 01 , one - way analysis of variance [ ANOVA ] ) , and ani - mals in the 0 . 25 - mm injury group differed significantly from sham control animals and those in the 0 . 55 - mm injury group ( * p (cid:5) 0 . 05 , Tukey’s ) . GRADED FORCEPS CRUSH SCI IN MICE 357 FIG . 4 . Astrocyte disruption correlates with injury severity . ( A – F ) Representative photomicrographs of coronal sections taken at the lesion epicenter in animals 8 weeks after a graded forceps crush injury and immunolabeled for the astrocytic marker , glial fibrillary acidic protein ( GFAP ) . The structural phenotypes differ between the sham control group ( A ) and the 0 . 55 - mm ( B ) , 0 . 4 - mm ( C ) or 0 . 25 - mm ( D ) injury groups . ( E , F ) Demonstration of GFAP ( red ) processes projecting into lesion epicenter filled with auto - fluorescent phagocytes ( blue ) at low ( E ) and high magnification ( F ) . Quantification of total spinal cord area ( G ) , GFAP - negative area ( H ) , lesion area ( disruption of cytoarchitecture based on GFAP immunostaining ; I ) , and spared tissue area ( spinal cord area minus lesion ; H ) demonstrate GFAP - associated quantifiable structural phenotypes . All measures significantly differed between injury groups ( p (cid:5) 0 . 0001 , one - way analysis of variance [ ANOVA ] ) . ( G ) Sham control animals had significantly larger spinal cords than the 0 . 25 - mm , 0 . 4 - mm , and 0 . 55 - mm injury groups ( p (cid:5) 0 . 05 , Tukey’s ) . ( H ) The 0 . 25 - mm injury group had sig - nificantly more GFAP - negative tissue than sham control , 0 . 55 - mm , or 0 . 4 - mm injury groups ( p (cid:5) 0 . 05 , Tukey’s ) . The 0 . 4 - mm injury group also had significantly more GFAP - negative tissue then the sham control group . ( I ) The 0 . 25 - mm injury group had a significantly larger lesion size than both sham control and 0 . 55 - mm injury groups ( p (cid:6) 0 . 001 , Tukey’s ) . ( J ) Sham control an - imals had significantly larger spared tissue area than all groups ( p (cid:5) 0 . 05 , Tukey’s ) . The 0 . 55 - mm injury group had significantly larger spared tissue area than the 0 . 25 - mm group . Micrographs were taken at 10 (cid:3) ( A – E ) or 40 (cid:3) ( F ) primary magnification with epifluorescent illumination . Scale bar (cid:2) 250 (cid:2) m ( A – E ) , 63 . 5 (cid:2) m ( F ) . PLEMEL ET AL . 358 FIG . 5 . Myelin disruption increased with increased injury severity . ( A – L ) Representative photomicrographs of myelin basic protein ( MBP ) immunolabeled coronal sections taken at the lesion epicenter and (cid:4) 800 (cid:2) m in mice at 8 weeks after a graded for - ceps crush injury . The structural phenotypes differ between the sham control group ( A – C ) and the 0 . 55 - mm ( D – F ) , 0 . 4 - mm ( G – I ) , or 0 . 25 - mm ( J – L ) injury groups . Scale bar (cid:2) 250 (cid:2) m . GRADED FORCEPS CRUSH SCI IN MICE 359 cytoarchitecture , increased with increasing injury sever - ity ( Fig . 4I ) . The spared tissue areas ( total cord minus le - sion areas ) were significantly smaller in the 0 . 25 - mm group than all other groups ( p (cid:5) 0 . 05 , Tukey’s post hoc test , following one - way ANOVA , p (cid:5) 0 . 001 ) , whereas the 0 . 4 - mm injury resulted in significantly less spared tis - sue than sham controls ( p (cid:5) 0 . 05 , Tukey’s post hoc test ; Fig . 4J ) . The degree of myelin disruption associated with each injury severity was assessed by MBP immunoreactivity ( Fig . 5 ) . The mild injury group , 0 . 55 - mm , showed some disruptions in the MBP staining pattern in the lateral fu - niculi at the lesion epicenter , but appeared normal 800 (cid:2) m rostral and caudal to that point ( Fig . 5D – F ) , where some minor myelin degeneration was only apparent at high magnifications ( data not shown ) . After these mild in - juries , fewer MBP positive projections were visible through the gray matter at the epicenter . In contrast , the 0 . 4 - mm injured group showed a central lesion surrounded by a rim of spared white matter at the lesion epicenter ( Fig . 5 H ) . At distal regions rostral and caudal to the le - sion , this group had punctate staining in regions that were MBP positive , likely indicating myelin degeneration ( Fig . 5G , I ) . Within the lesion epicenter of the most severely injured 0 . 25 - mm group , myelin was almost completely absent ( Fig . 5K ) . More distal regions , 800 (cid:2) m rostral and caudal , also appeared to have significant defects ( Fig . 5J , L ) . Eriochrome cyanine staining and neutral red counter - staining was used to determine white and gray matter sparing , respectively . In the most severe , 0 . 25 - mm , in - jury group , there was a pronounced degeneration of both the white and gray matter occurring over 1200 (cid:2) m ros - tral and caudal ( Figs . 6 and 7 ) . Consistent with other stud - ies in mice , granulated tissue was present in the regions of degeneration ( Zhang et al . , 1996 ; Jakeman et al . , 2000 ; Joshi and Fehlings , 2002a ) . Many of the 0 . 4 - mm injuries showed some granulated tissue at their epicenter as well ( Fig . 6 ) . The extent of gray ( Fig . 7A ) and white ( Fig . 7B ) matter sparing was quantified using digital morphomet - rics both 1200 (cid:2) m rostral and caudal to the epicenter , which was defined as the location with the least amount of spared white and gray matter . For both spared white and gray matter , there were significant differences be - tween groups across all locations ( two - way repeated - measures ANOVA ; p (cid:5) 0 . 001 ) . At the lesion epicenter all three injury groups significantly differed from sham control ( Tukey’s post hoc test ; p (cid:5) 0 . 05 ) with regard to gray matter sparing and the 0 . 25 - mm and 0 . 4 - mm injury groups differed significantly from sham control ( Tukey’s post hoc test ; p (cid:5) 0 . 05 ) with regard to white matter spar - ing as well . Damage to the sham control was minimal with 97 . 0 (cid:4) 1 . 0 % and 96 . 0 (cid:4) 0 . 7 % gray and white mat - ter sparing , respectively . The 0 . 55 - mm group had the most sparing among injury groups with 72 . 7 (cid:4) 6 . 3 % and 85 . 2 (cid:4) 3 . 4 % sparing of gray and white matter , respec - FIG . 6 . White and gray matter cytoarchitecture differ according to injury severity . Coronal sections stained with eri - ochrome / neutral red from mice 8 weeks following a graded forceps crush injury were taken at 400 - (cid:2) m intervals both rostral ( (cid:9) ) and caudal ( (cid:8) ) to the lesion epicenter for sham control ( top row ) , and 0 . 55 - mm ( second row ) , 0 . 4 - mm ( third row ) , or 0 . 25 - mm ( bottom row ) injury groups . Scale bar (cid:2) 500 (cid:2) m . PLEMEL ET AL . 360 tively ; whereas , the 0 . 40mm injury group showed less sparing with 60 . 2 (cid:4) 3 . 1 % and 58 . 0 (cid:4) 3 . 6 % gray and white matter sparing , respectively . The 0 . 25 - mm injury group exhibited the most severe degeneration with only 47 . 2 (cid:4) 2 . 9 % and 37 . 5 (cid:4) 4 . 7 % of gray matter and white matter sparing , respectively . Characterization of Lesion Cytoarchitecture Unlike rats , that develop a fluid - filled cavity ( Fehlings and Tator , 1995 ; Basso et al . , 1996 ; Beattie et al . , 1997 ) , mice acquire a dense fibrous lesion core ( Zhang et al . , 1996 ; Jakeman et al . , 2000 ; Inman et al . , 2002 ; Joshi and Fehlings , 2002a ) after SCI . This dense fibrous tissue con - tains an extracellular matrix rich in fibronectin and laminin immunoreactive material , as well as numerous GFAP - positive processes and auto - fluorescent phago - cytic cells , but few NF - H – positive axons . Accordingly , laminin and fibronectin ( Fig . 8 ) immunostaining was used to compare the lesion cytoarchitecture following in - juries of different severity and analyzed by confocal mi - croscopy , which in our hands also minimized auto - fluo - rescent signals . The 0 . 55 - mm injury group typically contained small lesions of less than 0 . 2 mm 2 at the epi - center , filled with auto - fluorescent debris and phagocytic cells , and surrounded by a dense circle of laminin and fi - bronectin immunoreactive material ( Fig . 8E – H ) . Typi - cally these lesions also contained granular appearing NF - H – positive densities , indicative of axonal degeneration ( Fig . 9G ) . These lesions were larger and more pro - nounced in the moderate 0 . 4 - mm injuries , leaving only a rim of spared spinal cord tissue bridged by numerous laminin positive structures ( Fig . 8I – L ) . Within the lesion site of these animals , few NF - H – positive axons were pre - sent under high magnification confocal microscopy ( Fig . 9H ) . In the most severe ( 0 . 25 - mm ) injury group , the le - sions expanded further , resulting in laminin and fi - bronectin staining throughout the injury site ( Fig . 8M – P ) . Within the lesion site of these severely injured animals , a dense meshwork of fibronectin - and laminin - positive structures occupied most of the cord and the laminin - pos - itive bridges seen in the lighter injury groups were no longer encountered ( cf . Fig . 8G , K with Fig . 8O and Fig . 9A , D ) . These lesion sites were filled with auto - fluores - cent phagocytes ( Fig . 9F ) , other small cells ( presumably fibroblasts ) embedded in a dense fibronectin positive ex - tracellular matrix ( Fig . 9C , E , F ) , as well as a few NF – H positive axons ( Fig . 9I ) . NF - H immunoreactivity , in the 0 . 25 - mm injury group , showed the typical pattern of ax - onal structures cut at various angles resulting in curved short lines or a punctate staining pattern near the spared rim ( Fig . 9I ) . Observation of such punctate structures even at high magnification using confocal microscopy confirmed that this expression pattern was not due to auto - fluorescent debris . In human SCI cases , a dense ECM is typically associ - ated with regions rich in Schwann cells ( Buss et al . , 2007 ) . Schwann cell invasion is also known to occur fol - lowing injury in the rat spinal cord ( Beattie et al . , 1997 ; Brook et al . , 1998 ) , but has only recently been studied in mice ( Papastefanaki et al . , 2007 ) . Accordingly , we used p75 as a marker to examine the presence of Schwann cells in and around the crush injuries of our mice ( Fig . 10 ) . In all injury groups , but especially in the more se - verely injured mice , numerous Schwann cells were pre - sent at the lesion epicenter , indicative of robust Schwann cell infiltration following injury ( Fig . 10G , H ) . Given that p75 can be expressed in axotomized neurons , it is im - portant to note that the p75 - positive processes were of - ten present in spaces devoid of NF - positive axons ( Fig . 10I ) and p75 - positive cells commonly showed a bipolar morphology ( Fig . 11F – H ) , as both of these observations are consistent with those one would expect for p75 la - beled Schwann cells . This is further supported by the sig - FIG . 7 . Quantification of eriochrome / neutral red – stained sections revealed graded severity of gray ( A ) and white matter ( B ) sparing ( measured as a percentage of the total spinal cord area ) . For both white and gray matter sparing , injury groups differ sig - nificantly across distance from epicenter ( p (cid:5) 0 . 0001 , repeated - measures analysis of variance [ ANOVA ] ) , and at individual lo - cations , there were significant differences versus sham control ( * p (cid:5) 0 . 05 , Tukey’s ) . GRADED FORCEPS CRUSH SCI IN MICE 361 nificant amount of Schwann cell myelination , as assessed by the peripheral myelin product P 0 in the spared rim sur - rounding the lesion site of the 0 . 25 - mm injured animals ( Fig . 10A – E ) . The longitudinal orientation of the P 0 - pos - itive fibers in the spared rim is indicative of remyelina - tion by Schwann cells . Within the central portions of the lesion , the orientation of P 0 myelinated axons was more random , and we could no longer distinguish between re - myelination of spared axons versus myelination of axons ( including peripheral ) that had grown into the lesion site post - injury . Histological Outcomes Correlate with Behavior The extent of damage for all histological outcomes measured correlated well with behavioral outcomes ( Fig . 11 ) . Considering that the behavior tended to plateau at 4 weeks post - injury , the BMS scores were averaged for each animal between weeks 4 and 8 to reduce some of the noise in the behavioral outcomes prior to assessing correlations . Those averaged BMS scores showed sig - nificant positive correlations with white matter ( r (cid:2) 0 . 781 ; p (cid:5) 0 . 0001 ) and gray matter ( r (cid:2) 0 . 680 ; p (cid:5) FIG . 8 . ToPro3 staining , and laminin and fibronectin immunostaining vary according to injury severity . Representative pho - tomicrographs from the lesion epicenter for sham control animals ( A – C ) and animals in the mild ( 0 . 55 mm ; D – F ) , moderate ( 0 . 4 mm ; G – I ) , and severe ( 0 . 25 mm ; J – L ) injury groups . Coronal sections taken from mice 8 weeks after a graded forceps crush in - jury were stained for ToPro3 ( A , D , G , J ) and immunostained for fibronectin ( B , E , H , K ) and laminin ( C , F , I , L ) , then visualized us - ing a confocal microscope . Scale bar (cid:2) 200 (cid:2) m . PLEMEL ET AL . 362 0 . 001 ) sparing and significant negative correlations with lesion area ( r (cid:2) (cid:9) 0 . 851 ; p (cid:5) 0 . 001 ) and GFAP - negative area ( r (cid:2) (cid:9) 0 . 873 ; p (cid:5) 0 . 001 ) . In addition , days to reach bladder control correlated positively with lesion area ( r (cid:2) 0 . 792 ; p (cid:5) 0 . 001 ) and GFAP - negative area ( r (cid:2) 0 . 788 ; p (cid:5) 0 . 001 ) and correlated negatively with white matter ( r (cid:2) (cid:9) 0 . 626 ; p (cid:5) 0 . 001 ) and gray matter ( r (cid:2) (cid:9) 0 . 621 ; p (cid:5) 0 . 001 ) sparing . FIG . 9 . Lesion sites contain laminin and fibronectin positive cells . ( A ) Coronal sections from mice 8 weeks after a severe ( 0 . 25 - mm - spaced ) forceps crush injury , stained for ToPro3 ( B ) , fibronectin ( C ) , and laminin ( D ) . ( B – E ) High magnification ( 60 (cid:3) ) con - focal stack revealed extensive infiltration of the lesion by both laminin , and fibronectin positive cells . ( E ) Digital merger indi - cates the close vicinity of laminin and fibronectin positive structures . ( F ) Light micrographs demonstrate infiltration of ( auto - fluorescent ) phagocytic cells into the lesion site that are surrounded by fibronectin . ( A – E ) Green is laminin , red is fibro - nectin , and blue is topro - 3 . ( F ) Green is auto - fluorescent , red is fibronectin , and blue is Hoechst . ( G – I ) Neurofilament - H immuno - staining varies according to injury severity . Representative confocal micrographs immunostained for neurofilament - H ( green ) and GFAP ( red ) taken from the lesion boundary of mice in the 0 . 55 - mm ( G ) , 0 . 40 - mm ( H ) , or 0 . 25 - mm ( I ) crush injury groups . Scale bar (cid:2) 200 (cid:2) m ( A ) , 50 (cid:2) m ( B – E , G – I ) , 125 (cid:2) m ( F ) . GRADED FORCEPS CRUSH SCI IN MICE 363 FIG . 10 . Schwann cells infiltrate and myelinate processes found in lesion epicenter . ( A – D ) Coronal sections from mice 8 weeks after a 0 . 25 - mm forceps crush injury were immunostained for MBP ( red ) and Po ( green ) with corresponding auto - fluorescent phagocytes ( ( blue ) A , B only ) . Epifluorescent ( A , B ) and confocal ( C , D ) micrographs of lesion epicenters demonstrate the pres - ence of p0 - positive myelin sheaths , indicative of Schwann cell myelination . ( E – H ) Confocal micrographs p75 - IR ( green ) and MBP - IR ( red ) material at the lesion epicenter of 0 . 25 - mm ( E , H ) , 0 . 55 - mm ( F ) , and 0 . 4 - mm ( G ) injured animals are highly sug - gestive of robust Schwann cell infiltration . ( I ) Confocal micrograph of the lesion epicenter from a mouse in the moderate injury group demonstrates the near absence of NF - H positive axons ( green ) within the lesion epicenter demarcated by GFAP ( red ) . Com - paring G and I , it seems unlikely that axons are responsible for the robust p75 - IR in those animals . Scale bar (cid:2) 250 (cid:2) m ( A ) , 62 . 5 (cid:2) m ( B ) , 200 (cid:2) m ( C , E ) , 50 (cid:2) m ( D , F – I ) . PLEMEL ET AL . 364 DISCUSSION The present study sought to characterize the patho - physiological and behavioral outcomes of a graded for - ceps crush injury in mice in order to determine whether this animal model of spinal cord injury is suitable for studying the effects of such injuries as well as examin - ing the efficacy of potential treatments . For those pur - poses , a suitable animal model of spinal cord injury , ide - ally , should employ a clinically relevant mechanism of injury , and provide a range of injury severities that cor - relate to both histopathological and functional outcomes . For the purposes of testing treatments for spinal cord in - jury , it is also desirable for an injury to cause a long - term or chronic behavioral deficit , as spontaneous recovery can make it difficult to attribute improvements to treat - ment , and long term functional impairments allow for the use of multiple and repeated behavioral tests commonly used to establish treatment efficacy . To those ends , we conducted multiple behavioral and histological analyses to examine spinal cord crush in - juries with forceps containing 0 . 25 , 0 . 4 , and 0 . 55 mm spacers , which directly limited the amount of tissue dam - age and corresponded to severe , moderate and mild in - juries , respectively . This model is clinically relevant , as it mimics compression injuries that account for approxi - mately 20 % of human clinical spinal cord injury cases ( Bunge et al . , 1993 ; Norenberg et al . , 2004 ) . Our results indicated that stepwise increases in injury severity , from mild to moderate or severe , resulted in increased loco - motor deficits as measured by multiple behavioral tests , as well as increased tissue damage and decreased tissue sparing upon subsequent histological examination . Fur - thermore , those behavioral and histological measures were significantly inter - correlated , and the moderate and severe injuries provided more persistent functional deficits . Taken together , these findings provide strong ev - idence that the graded forceps crush model is suitable for studying spinal cord injury , and potential treatments for such injuries , in mice . Behavioral Outcomes after Graded Crush Injury In this study , we measured locomotor impairment at various time points following forceps crushes using three behavioral tests : open field ( BMS scoring and subscor - ing ) , footprint and ladder analysis . The results of these tests demonstrate that by decreasing the closure distance of a pair of forceps it is possible to produce a stepwise increase in injury severity . Moreover , using multiple forms of behavioral assessment , the behavioral deficits were also found to persist long term ( i . e . , 8 weeks ) . Pre - FIG . 11 . Open - field behavior correlates significantly ( Pearson ; p (cid:5) 0 . 0001 ) with white matter ( A ) and gray matter ( B ) sparing and negatively correlates with lesion area ( C ) and glial fibrillary acidic protein ( GFAP ) negative area ( D ) . ( A , B ) Open - field be - havior was assessed by averaging Basso Mouse Scale ( BMS ) scores from 4 - 8 weeks post - injury and correlated positively with white matter ( A ) ( r (cid:2) 0 . 781 ) and gray matter ( B ) ( r (cid:2) 0 . 680 ) sparing . ( C , D ) Average BMS scores correlated negatively with le - sion size ( r (cid:2) (cid:9) 0 . 853 ) ( C ) , and GFAP negative area ( r (cid:2) (cid:9) 0 . 873 ) ( D ) . vious studies of no - laminectomy ( Sheng et al . , 2004 ) and static load ( Farooque et al . , 1999 ; Farooque , 2000 ) crush / compression injuries in mice lacked long - term behavioral measures for comparison , but this persistent behavioral deficit is in agreement with the clip compression model used by Joshi and Fehlings ( 2002a , b ) . With regards to in - jury severity , the forceps crush using a spacer of 0 . 55mm was described as mild herein because it demonstrated very minor and often transient behavioral impairments . Conversely , the 0 . 4mm - spaced ( i . e . , moderate ) crush re - sulted in consistent plantar stepping with several other persistent locomotor perturbations , whereas the 0 . 25 - mm - spaced ( i . e . , severe ) crush resulted in a failure of mice to achieve consistent plantar stepping post - injury . Prior to the introduction of the BMS , studies of mouse models of spinal cord injury commonly relied on the BBB scale to rate open field locomotion ( Jakeman et al . , 2000 ; Ma et al . , 2001 ; Joshi and Fehlings , 2002a ; Sheng et al . , 2004 ) . This was less than ideal , as the BBB was designed to quantify rat locomotion , and as a result , inter - rater vari - ability increased substantially when the scale was applied to mice in the open field ( Basso et al . , 2006 ) . This com - plication was avoided in the present study by strictly us - ing the BMS and the related subscale to rate all open field locomotion . The BMS was specifically designed to allow the quantification of hindlimb locomotor function during open field testing of mice subjected to thoracic spinal cord contusions ( Basso et al . , 2006 ) , so scoring on the BMS assumes a specific pattern of recovery ( that seen for mice recovering from contusion injury in the absence of treatment ) , such that aspects of locomotion including paw position and toe clearance do not come into consid - eration until an animal has achieved consistent weight supported stepping and forelimb - hindlimb coordination . In contrast , those finer details of locomotion contribute to the BMS subscale score in a cumulative fashion , which does not assume any specific pattern of recovery . In our study , the relationships between groups was nearly iden - tical for BMS score and subscore , suggesting that mice subjected to a crush injury show a similar pattern of re - covery as those subjected to contusion injury in the hands of Basso et al . ( 2006 ) . The open field is a useful test in which to study be - havior throughout a range of injury severities , but our findings indicated that BMS scoring was less sensitive than both ladder and footprint , as behavioral differences between the mild and moderate injury groups on the lat - ter two measures were not seen with the BMS . The dif - ference in sensitivity most likely occurred because of the ordinal ( non - ratiometric / non - linear ) nature of the BMS , although the fact that it is scored in real time over the course of 4 min makes it difficult to rule out the influ - ence of subjectivity , as the ladder and footprint analyses provide more precise and objective quantitative mea - sures . Although others have used the ladder to assess se - vere injuries ( Cummings et al . , 2007 ) , for the purpose of the present study , mice that continued to drag their hindlimbs were not subjected to either ladder or footprint analyses . As a result , the ladder and footprint analyses were not conducted on the most severe injury group , as 50 % of these animals failed to regain consistent plantar stepping post - injury . In summary , different degrees of injury severity for the three injury groups were successfully demonstrated using a combination of three behavioral tests . The BMS distin - guished the most severe from the other two groups , whereas the more sensitive ladder and footprint analyses proved use - ful in assessing mice with mild to moderate injuries . Foot - print analysis was even able to demonstrate a statistically significant difference between the mild , 0 . 55mm - spaced in - jury and sham control groups . It is important to note that injury severity was also found to impact autonomic func - tion , as animals with more severe injuries took longer to regain bladder function , as indicated by number of days re - covery required to regain control of micturition . Histological Outcomes after Graded Crush Injury The present study used multiple histological outcomes to assess the extent of damage to the spinal cord , and to examine the lesion cytoarchitecture and extracellular matrix components following forceps crush injuries of varying severity . The amount of spared tissue was as - sessed by quantifying intact white matter , gray matter and GFAP - positive tissue . Group averages indicated that all three of these measures of spared tissue were greatest in the mild ( 0 . 55 - mm ) , less in the moderate ( 0 . 4 - mm ) , and least in the severe ( 0 . 25 - mm ) crush injury groups . Fur - thermore , the size of the lesion and GFAP - negative tis - sue also increased with injury severity ( i . e . , decreasing spacer size ) , so all of the histological measures of spar - ing / damage differed according to the injury severity . Taken together , these findings provide strong support for the notion that the forceps spacer distances used in this study provide for varying degrees of damage and / or spar - ing in the spinal cord that can be distinguished in subse - quent histological examinations . The damage that occurred during surgery to sham con - trol animals was minimal at the epicenter with 1 . 2 % , 3 % , and 4 % disruption of tissue , gray matter and white mat - ter , respectively . This is much lower than the damage seen using the clip compression model in mice , where sham control animals lost approximately 8 % of tissue at the epicenter ( Joshi and Fehlings , 2002a ) . The damage to the sham surgery control in the clip compression model was likely the result of the surgery required for the in - GRADED FORCEPS CRUSH SCI IN MICE 365 sertion of the clip itself ; in particular the ventral dissec - tion with a microsurgical hook to clear an extradural path ventral to the spinal cord . The graded forceps crush model proposed herein does not require this surgical step and is therefore less disruptive to the dura than clip compres - sion , which may result in reduced injury variability ( i . e . , greater consistency in injuries ) . In addition to the stepwise change in histological mea - surements with increasing injury severity , the graded for - ceps crush model also demonstrated strong correlations between histological and behavioral outcomes . There was a positive correlation of sparing measurements ( gray mat - ter , white matter , and overall tissue ) with BMS score and a negative correlation of damage measurements ( lesion area and GFAP - negative area ) with BMS score . This was a stronger relationship with regards to damage measure - ments ( r (cid:2) (cid:9) 0 . 853 and r (cid:2) (cid:9) 0 . 873 for lesion size and GFAP - negative area , respectively ) than sparing measure - ments ( r (cid:2) 0 . 781 and r (cid:2) 0 . 680 for white matter sparing and gray matter sparing , respectively ) . It seems likely that the difference may be the result of a measurement arti - fact , as one would expect the spared tissue to correlate stronger with behavior because it represents the substrate upon which any sprouting , regeneration or remyelination that might convey functional improvements would occur . Interestingly , recovery time of bladder function correlated negatively with spared tissue in exactly that fashion , in - dicating that reduced loss of substrate may hasten the re - pair of fibers controlling micturition and thereby speed the recovery of autonomic control . Immunohistochemistry revealed that the lesion sites in the spinal cords of the crush - injured mice had few neu - rons , numerous phagocytes and astrocytic branches , a mas - sive amount of Schwann cells ( both myelinating and non - myelinating ) , and a dense extracellular matrix ( ECM ) containing fibronectin and occasionally laminin . Fi - bronectin and laminin are both axon growth - promoting ECM proteins that are expressed by a variety of cells types . Fibronectin is produced extensively by fibroblasts , and is largely restricted to the ependyma ( along blood ves - sels and the meninges ) in the uninjured CNS . The injured mouse CNS is open to invasion by fibroblasts and Schwann cells , which may both be sources of fibronectin , but it also contains numerous astrocytes that have been proposed to express fibronectin as well ( Chernousov et al . , 1998 ; Tom et al . , 2004 ) . The latter seems an unlikely source of fibronectin in the present study however , par - ticularly given the fact that fibronectin expression is most dense in regions that are largely GFAP - negative ( i . e . , containing only a few GFAP - positive astrocytic branches ) . Under most conditions , the basal lamina as - sembled by Schwann cells in co - culture with nerve cells does not contain fibronectin , so it has been postulated that fibronectin expression in such lamina actually arises from fibroblasts ( Cornbrooks et al . , 1983 ) . However , the fact that in vitro stimulation of Schwann cells with ascor - bic acid elicits fibronectin expression has led to the sug - gestion that fibronectin may also be expressed by early Schwann cells ( Chernousov et al . , 1998 ) . Given the pres - ence of large numbers of Schwann cells in the lesion site , we are unable to rule out the possibility that these cells may contribute to the level of fibronectin expression . However , it seems likely that meningeal or nerve - derived fibroblasts contribute a significant portion of the fi - bronectin as fibroblasts are both present in the spinal cord ( Okada et al . , 2007 ) and produce fibronectin extensively . Laminin expression is normally restricted to blood ves - sel walls in the CNS . Given that these walls are damaged by injury , immunoreactive laminin - debris might be found in the injury site of the spinal cord , but its expression may also be upregulated following injury as a result of increased angiogenesis . However , laminin is also se - creted by Schwann cells and found in the basal lamina surrounding myelinated axons ( Cornbrooks et al . , 1983 ; Bunge et al . , 1986 ) , so the Schwann cells in the lesion likely contribute largely to the laminin found in regions within and adjacent to the lesion site . Unlike rats , which develop a fluid filled cavity after SCI ( Fehlings and Tator , 1995 ; Basso et al . , 1996 ; Beat - tie et al . , 1997 ) , mice commonly develop a dense fibrous lesion core ( Zhang et al . , 1996 ; Jakeman et al . , 2000 ; In - man et al . , 2002 ; Joshi and Fehlings , 2002a ) post - injury . Given that rats do not show the same level of Schwann cell infiltration in the absence of treatment ( Biernaskie et al . , 2007 ) , it seems likely that this dense fibrous lesion may somehow promote spontaneous Schwann cell pro - liferation / migration / infiltration . Fibronectin promotes proliferation and enhanced motility of Schwann cells ( Baron - Van Evercooren et al . , 1982 ) and is a common feature of Schwannomas ( Buss et al . , 2007 ) , indicating that fibronectin present in the lesion could promote in - filtration or proliferation of Schwann cells post - injury . This domain rich in ECM proteins and Schwann cells could be similar to the Schwann cell / ECM territories commonly found in human spinal cord lesion sites ( Buss et al . , 2007 ) highlighting at least some common aspects between mouse and human spinal cord pathology . Adaptation of a Graded Crush Model of SCI to Mice In the past decade there has been a great expansion the number of genetically modified animals available , and this expansion has enabled the study of pathophysiological events in vivo , predominantly in mice . For instance , with gene targeting , a commonly used technique , it is possible PLEMEL ET AL . 366 to target and alter a loci ( Mansour et al . , 1988 ; Bradley et al . , 1992 ) , allowing the generation of virtually any desired mutation , including deletions , insertions and point muta - tions ( Hasty et al . , 1991 ) . More recently , with the use of conditional systems such as Cre / Lox , it has been possible to generate tissue specific ( Gu et al . , 1994 ) and inducible ( Kuhn et al . , 1995 ) knock out mice . Moreover , with the use of transgenic animals it has been further possible to ablate cells , either in a developmental context ( Wu et al . , 2006 ) or a pathological context such as SCI ( Faulkner et al . , 2004 ) or stab injuries to the cortex ( Bush et al . , 1999 ) . With so many possibilities , it is clear that genetically ma - nipulated mice may provide an immensely powerful sci - entific approach to study SCI in vivo . Therefore it is be - coming increasingly important to adapt SCI models , previously only characterized in rats , to mice . However , adaptation of SCI models to mice is diffi - cult , specifically because of their small size , and the re - lated fragility of the extremely thin lamina surrounding their spinal cords . In the present study , it was our hope to develop a model that required only moderately exten - sive laminectomy , to increase the bony support around the spinal cord injury site and allow for reliable long - term behavioral assessment . This objective was achieved using the graded crush model , which required a hole in the lamina only large enough to fit a pair of forceps around the spinal cord ( roughly 2mm by 2mm ) . Other benefits of this model are that it is fast ( each surgery took approximately 20min ) , which allows more surgeries to be completed in a given day and less anesthesia is needed thereby minimizing the risk of anesthesia related mortal - ity / morbidity . Moreover this method is inexpensive , as the forceps can be modified in house ( as detailed above ) , or could be purchased as a commercial custom - order for a relatively low price compared to the cost of other avail - able injury devices . The variability of this model may not differ from other mouse spinal cord compression / contu - sion models , although we have not determined this sys - tematically in our hands . One obvious shortcoming of this model is that the forceps were produced with tools that had a 0 . 05mm reading error , so precise duplication of the forceps used in the present study may be prob - lematic , and some degree of variability should be ex - pected if an independent laboratory attempts to replicate this work . Finally , this experiment only used C57 / Bl6 mice and so further validation of this model awaits repli - cation of our findings using other strains of mice . CONCLUSION Here , we characterized a model that was readily avail - able , easy to reproduce , affordable and clinically relevant . Toward that end , we chose to develop a graded forceps crush injury model that adequately met all of those crite - ria . We have shown here that by using forceps with dif - ferent separation distances at closure it is possible to achieve mild , moderate and severe injuries that can be distinguished both behaviorally and histologically . In regards to patho - physiology , we demonstrated that with increased injury severity there is an increase in lesion size and a decrease in spared tissue , spared gray matter and spared white mat - ter , which all correlate well with behavioral outcomes . The moderate and severe injury lesions were characterized by a dense ECM containing both fibronectin and laminin , and associated with enhanced Schwann cell infiltration . In such regions there were few axons present indicating it was not an overly favorable environment for regeneration . Consid - ering the expansion of mouse cell lines and their increas - ing use to study aspects of spinal cord injury in vivo , the need for mouse models of spinal cord injury is great . Given the results of this study , and particularly the strong and con - sistent correlations between behavioral and histological out - comes , ease of use and clinical relevance , the graded for - ceps crush is an attractive and viable alternative to the other mouse models spinal cord injury currently available . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We would like to thank Ward Plunet for his critical analysis and proofreading of this manuscript , Bahareh Ajami for her assistance with the confocal microscope , and Clarrie Lam for technical assistance on immunohisto - chemistry and tissue staining , respectively . J . P . is funded by Michael Smith Foundation of Health Research . This work is funded by a grant from Neuroscience Canada . DISCLOSURE STATEMENT No competing financial interests exist . REFERENCES Baron - Van Evercooren , A . , Kleinman , H . K . , Seppa , H . E . , Ren - tier , B . , and Dubois - Dalcq , M . ( 1982 ) . Fibronectin promotes rat Schwann cell growth and motility . J . Cell Biol . 93 , 211 – 216 . Bartholdi , D . , and Schwab , M . E . ( 1997 ) . Expression of pro - in - flammatory cytokine and chemokine mRNA upon experi - mental spinal cord injury in mouse : an in situ hybridization study . Eur . J . Neurosci . 9 , 1422 – 1438 . Basso , D . M . , Beattie , M . S . , and Bresnahan , J . C . ( 1995 ) . A sen - sitive and reliable locomotor rating scale for open field test - ing in rats . J . Neurotrauma 12 , 1 – 21 . GRADED FORCEPS CRUSH SCI IN MICE 367 Basso , D . M . , Beattie , M . S . , and Bresnahan , J . C . ( 1996 ) . Graded histological and locomotor outcomes after spinal cord con - tusion using the NYU weight - drop device versus transection . Exp . Neurol . 139 , 244 – 256 . Basso , D . M . , Fisher , L . C . , Anderson , A . J . , Jakeman , L . B . , Mc - Tigue , D . M . , and Popovich , P . G . ( 2006 ) . Basso Mouse Scale for locomotion detects differences in recovery after spinal cord injury in five common mouse strains . J . Neurotrauma 23 , 635 – 659 . Beattie , M . S . , Bresnahan , J . C . , Komon , J . , et al . ( 1997 ) . En - dogenous repair after spinal cord contusion injuries in the rat . Exp . Neurol . 148 , 453 – 463 . Behrmann , D . L . , Bresnahan , J . C . , Beattie , M . S . , and Shah , B . R . ( 1992 ) . Spinal cord injury produced by consistent mechani - cal displacement of the cord in rats : behavioral and histo - logic analysis . J . Neurotrauma 9 , 197 – 217 . Biernaskie , J . , Sparling , J . S . , Liu , J . , et al . ( 2007 ) . Skin - derived precursors generate myelinating Schwann cells that promote remyelination and functional recovery after contusion spinal cord injury . J . Neurosci . 27 , 9545 – 9559 . Bradley , A . , Hasty , P . , Davis , A . , and Ramirez - Solis , R . ( 1992 ) . Modifying the mouse : design and desire . Biotechnology ( NY ) 10 , 534 – 539 . Brook , G . A . , Plate , D . , Franzen , R . , et al . ( 1998 ) . Spontaneous longitudinally orientated axonal regeneration is associated with the Schwann cell framework within the lesion site fol - lowing spinal cord compression injury of the rat . J . Neurosci . Res . 53 , 51 – 65 . Bruce , J . C . , Oatway , M . A . , and Weaver , L . C . ( 2002 ) . Chronic pain after clip - compression injury of the rat spinal cord . Exp . Neurol . 178 , 33 – 48 . Bunge , R . P . , Bunge , M . B . , and Eldridge , C . F . ( 1986 ) . Linkage between axonal ensheathment and basal lamina production by Schwann cells . Annu . Rev . Neurosci . 9 , 305 – 328 . Bunge , R . P . , Puckett , W . R . , Becerra , J . L . , Marcillo , A . , and Quencer , R . M . ( 1993 ) . Observations on the pathology of hu - man spinal cord injury . A review and classification of 22 new cases with details from a case of chronic cord compression with extensive focal demyelination . Adv . Neurol . 59 , 75 – 89 . Bush , T . G . , Puvanachandra , N . , Horner , C . H . , et al . ( 1999 ) . Leukocyte infiltration , neuronal degeneration , and neurite outgrowth after ablation of scar - forming , reactive astrocytes in adult transgenic mice . Neuron 23 , 297 – 308 . Buss , A . , Pech , K . , Kakulas , B . A . , et al . ( 2007 ) . Growth - mod - ulating molecules are associated with invading Schwann cells and not astrocytes in human traumatic spinal cord injury . Brain 130 , 940 – 953 . Chan , C . C . , Khodarahmi , K . , Liu , J . , et al . ( 2005 ) . Dose - de - pendent beneficial and detrimental effects of ROCK inhibitor Y27632 on axonal sprouting and functional recovery after rat spinal cord injury . Exp . Neurol . 196 , 352 – 364 . Chernousov , M . A . , Stahl , R . C . , and Carey , D . J . ( 1998 ) . Schwann cells use a novel collagen - dependent mechanism for fibronectin fibril assembly . J . Cell . Sci . 111 , 2763 – 2777 . Choo , A . M . , Liu , J . , Lam , C . K . , Dvorak , M . , Tetzlaff , W . , and Oxland , T . R . ( 2007 ) . Contusion , dislocation , and distraction : primary hemorrhage and membrane permeability in distinct mechanisms of spinal cord injury . J . Neurosurg . Spine 6 , 255 – 266 . Christensen , M . D . , Everhart , A . W . , Pickelman , J . T . , and Hulse - bosch , C . E . ( 1996 ) . Mechanical and thermal allodynia in chronic central pain following spinal cord injury . Pain 68 , 97 – 107 . Cornbrooks , C . J . , Carey , D . J . , McDonald , J . A . , Timpl , R . , and Bunge , R . P . ( 1983 ) . In vivo and in vitro observations on laminin production by Schwann cells . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 80 , 3850 – 3854 . Cummings , B . J . , Engesser - Cesar , C . , Cadena , G . , and Ander - son , A . J . ( 2007 ) . Adaptation of a ladder beam walking task to assess locomotor recovery in mice following spinal cord injury . Behav . Brain Res . 177 , 232 – 241 . Deumens , R . , Lubbers , M . , Jaken , R . J . , et al . ( 2007 ) . Mice lack - ing L1 have reduced CGRP fibre in - growth into spinal tran - section lesions . Neurosci . Lett . 420 , 277 – 281 . Engesser - Cesar , C . , Anderson , A . J . , Basso , D . M . , Edgerton , V . R . , and Cotman , C . W . ( 2005 ) . Voluntary wheel running improves recovery from a moderate spinal cord injury . J . Neurotrauma 22 , 157 – 171 . Farooque , M . ( 2000 ) . Spinal cord compression injury in the mouse : presentation of a model including assessment of mo - tor dysfunction . Acta Neuropathol . ( Berl . ) 100 , 13 – 22 . Farooque , M . , Isaksson , J . , and Olsson , Y . ( 1999 ) . Improved recovery after spinal cord trauma in ICAM - 1 and P - selectin knockout mice . Neuroreport 10 , 131 – 134 . Faulkner , J . R . , Herrmann , J . E . , Woo , M . J . , Tansey , K . E . , Doan , N . B . , and Sofroniew , M . V . ( 2004 ) . Reactive astrocytes pro - tect tissue and preserve function after spinal cord injury . J . Neurosci . 24 , 2143 – 2155 . Fehlings , M . G . , and Tator , C . H . ( 1995 ) . The relationships among the severity of spinal cord injury , residual neurolog - ical function , axon counts , and counts of retrogradely labeled neurons after experimental spinal cord injury . Exp . Neurol . 132 , 220 – 228 . Fujiki , M . , Zhang , Z . , Guth , L . , and Steward , O . ( 1996 ) . Ge - netic influences on cellular reactions to spinal cord injury : activation of macrophages / microglia and astrocytes is de - layed in mice carrying a mutation ( WldS ) that causes delayed Wallerian degeneration . J . Comp . Neurol . 371 , 469 – 484 . Ghasemlou , N . , Kerr , B . J . , and David , S . ( 2005 ) . Tissue dis - placement and impact force are important contributors to out - come after spinal cord contusion injury . Exp . Neurol . 196 , 9 – 17 . PLEMEL ET AL . 368 GRADED FORCEPS CRUSH SCI IN MICE 369 Gruner , J . A . , Yee , A . K . , and Blight , A . R . ( 1996 ) . Histological and functional evaluation of experimental spinal cord injury : evidence of a stepwise response to graded compression . Brain Res . 729 , 90 – 101 . Gu , H . , Marth , J . D . , Orban , P . C . , Mossmann , H . , and Rajew - sky , K . ( 1994 ) . Deletion of a DNA polymerase beta gene seg - ment in T cells using cell type - specific gene targeting . Sci - ence 265 , 103 – 106 . Hamers , F . P . , Lankhorst , A . J . , van Laar , T . J . , Veldhuis , W . B . , and Gispen , W . H . ( 2001 ) . Automated quantitative gait analy - sis during overground locomotion in the rat : its application to spinal cord contusion and transection injuries . J . Neuro - trauma 18 , 187 – 201 . Hargreaves , K . , Dubner , R . , Brown , F . , Flores , C . , and Joris , J . ( 1988 ) . A new and sensitive method for measuring thermal nociception in cutaneous hyperalgesia . Pain 32 , 77 – 88 . Hasty , P . , Ramirez - Solis , R . , Krumlauf , R . , and Bradley , A . ( 1991 ) . Introduction of a subtle mutation into the Hox - 2 . 6 lo - cus in embryonic stem cells . Nature 350 , 243 – 246 . Huang , D . W . , McKerracher , L . , Braun , P . E . , and David , S . ( 1999 ) . A therapeutic vaccine approach to stimulate axon re - generation in the adult mammalian spinal cord . Neuron 24 , 639 – 647 . Inman , D . , Guth , L . , and Steward , O . ( 2002 ) . Genetic influences on secondary degeneration and wound healing following spinal cord injury in various strains of mice . J . Comp . Neu - rol . 451 , 225 – 235 . Jakeman , L . B . , Guan , Z . , Wei , P . , et al . ( 2000 ) . Traumatic spinal cord injury produced by controlled contusion in mouse . J . Neurotrauma 17 , 299 – 319 . Joshi , M . , and Fehlings , M . G . ( 2002a ) . Development and char - acterization of a novel , graded model of clip compressive spinal cord injury in the mouse : Part 1 . Clip design , behav - ioral outcomes , and histopathology . J . Neurotrauma 19 , 175 – 190 . Joshi , M . , and Fehlings , M . G . ( 2002b ) . Development and char - acterization of a novel , graded model of clip compressive spinal cord injury in the mouse : Part 2 . Quantitative neu - roanatomical assessment and analysis of the relationships be - tween axonal tracts , residual tissue , and locomotor recovery . J . Neurotrauma 19 , 191 – 203 . Kerschensteiner , M . , Schwab , M . E . , Lichtman , J . W . , and Mis - geld , T . ( 2005 ) . In vivo imaging of axonal degeneration and regeneration in the injured spinal cord . Nat . Med . 11 , 572 – 577 . Kim , J . E . , Li , S . , GrandPre , T . , Qiu , D . , and Strittmatter , S . M . ( 2003 ) . Axon regeneration in young adult mice lacking Nogo - A / B . Neuron 38 , 187 – 199 . Kuhn , P . L . , and Wrathall , J . R . ( 1998 ) . A mouse model of graded contusive spinal cord injury . J . Neurotrauma 15 , 125 – 140 . Kuhn , R . , Schwenk , F . , Aguet , M . , and Rajewsky , K . ( 1995 ) . Inducible gene targeting in mice . Science 269 , 1427 – 1429 . Kunkel - Bagden , E . , Dai , H . N . , and Bregman , B . S . ( 1993 ) . Methods to assess the development and recovery of loco - motor function after spinal cord injury in rats . Exp . Neurol . 119 , 153 – 164 . Kwon , B . K . , Oxland , T . R . , and Tetzlaff , W . ( 2002 ) . Animal models used in spinal cord regeneration research . Spine 27 , 1504 – 1510 . Kwon , B . K . , Tetzlaff , W . , Grauer , J . N . , Beiner , J . , and Vac - caro , A . R . ( 2004 ) . Pathophysiology and pharmacologic treat - ment of acute spinal cord injury . Spine J . 4 , 451 – 464 . Ma , M . , Basso , D . M . , Walters , P . , Stokes , B . T . , and Jakeman , L . B . ( 2001 ) . Behavioral and histological outcomes following graded spinal cord contusion injury in the C57Bl / 6 mouse . Exp . Neurol . 169 , 239 – 254 . Mansour , S . L . , Thomas , K . R . , and Capecchi , M . R . ( 1988 ) . Dis - ruption of the proto - oncogene int - 2 in mouse embryo - derived stem cells : a general strategy for targeting mutations to non - selectable genes . Nature 336 , 348 – 352 . Metz , G . A . , and Whishaw , I . Q . ( 2002 ) . Cortical and subcorti - cal lesions impair skilled walking in the ladder rung walking test : a new task to evaluate fore - and hindlimb stepping , plac - ing , and coordination . J . Neurosci . Methods . 115 , 169 – 179 . Metz , G . A . , Merkler , D . , Dietz , V . , Schwab , M . E . , and Fouad , K . ( 2000 ) . Efficient testing of motor function in spinal cord injured rats . Brain Res . 883 , 165 – 177 . Norenberg , M . D . , Smith , J . , and Marcillo , A . ( 2004 ) . The pathology of human spinal cord injury : defining the prob - lems . J . Neurotrauma 21 , 429 – 440 . Okada , M . , Miyamoto , O . , Shibuya , S . , Zhang , X . , Yamamoto , T . , and Itano , T . ( 2007 ) . Expression and role of type I col - lagen in a rat spinal cord contusion injury model . Neurosci . Res . 58 , 371 – 377 . Papastefanaki , F . , Chen , J . , Lavdas , A . A . , Thomaidou , D . , Schachner , M . , and Matsas , R . ( 2007 ) . Grafts of Schwann cells engineered to express PSA - NCAM promote functional recovery after spinal cord injury . Brain 130 , 2159 – 2174 . Seki , T . , Hida , K . , Tada , M . , Koyanagi , I . , and Iwasaki , Y . ( 2002 ) . Graded contusion model of the mouse spinal cord us - ing a pneumatic impact device . Neurosurgery 50 , 1075 – 1081 . Sheng , H . , Wang , H . , Homi , H . M . , et al . ( 2004 ) . A no - laminec - tomy spinal cord compression injury model in mice . J . Neu - rotrauma 21 , 595 – 603 . Tom , V . J . , Doller , C . M . , Malouf , A . T . , and Silver , J . ( 2004 ) . Astrocyte - associated fibronectin is critical for axonal re - generation in adult white matter . J . Neurosci . 24 , 9282 – 9290 . Vrinten , D . H . , and Hamers , F . F . ( 2003 ) . “CatWalk” automated quantitative gait analysis as a novel method to assess me - PLEMEL ET AL . 370 chanical allodynia in the rat ; a comparison with von Frey testing . Pain 102 , 203 – 209 . Wu , S . , Wu , Y . , and Capecchi , M . R . ( 2006 ) . Motoneurons and oligodendrocytes are sequentially generated from neural stem cells but do not appear to share common lineage - restricted progenitors in vivo . Development 133 , 581 – 590 . Zhang , Z . , Fujiki , M . , Guth , L . , and Steward , O . ( 1996 ) . Ge - netic influences on cellular reactions to spinal cord injury : a wound - healing response present in normal mice is impaired in mice carrying a mutation ( WldS ) that causes delayed Wal - lerian degeneration . J . Comp . Neurol . 371 , 485 – 495 . Address reprint requests to : Wolfram Tetzlaff , Ph . D . ICORD Biological Sciences Building Zoology / ICORD Room 2469 University of British Columbia 6270 University Drive Vancouver , BC , Canada , V6T 1Z4 E - mail : tetzlaff @ icord . org