Policy Sciences 4 ( 1973 ) , 155 - 169 © Elsevier Scientific Publishing Company , Amsterdam - - Printed in Scotland Dilemmas in a General Theory of Planning * HORST W . J . RITTEL Professor of the Science of Design , University of California , Berkeley MELVIN M . WEBBER Professor of City Planning , University of California , Berkeley ABSTRACT The search for scientific bases for confronting problems of social policy is bound to fail , because of the nature of these problems . They are " wicked " problems , whereas science has developed to deal with " tame " problems . Policy problems cannot be definitively described . Moreover , in a pluralistic society there is nothing like the undisputable public good ; there is no objective definition of equity ; policies that respond to social problems cannot be meaningfully correct or false ; and it makes no sense to talk about " optinaal solutions " to social probIems unless severe qualifications are imposed first . Even worse , there are no " solutions " in the sense of definitive and objective answers . George Bernard Shaw diagnosed the case several years ago ; in more recent times popular protest may have already become a social movement . Shaw averred that " every profession is a conspiracy against the laity . " The contemporary publics are responding as though they have made the same discovery . Few of the modern professionals seem to be immune from the popular attack - - whether they be social workers , educators , housers , public health officials , policemen , city planners , highway engineers or physicians . Our restive clients have been telling us that they don ' t like the educational programs that schoolmen have been offering , the redevelopment projects urban renewal agencies have been proposing , the law - enforcement styles of the police , the administrative behavior of the welfare agencies , the locations of the highways , and so on . In the courts , the streets , and the political campaigns , we ' ve been hearing ever - louder public protests against the professions ' diagnoses of the clients ' problems , against professionally designed governmental programs , against professionally certified standards for the public services . It does seem odd that this attack should be coming just when professionals in * This is a modification of a paper presented to the Panel on Policy Sciences , American Association for the Advancement of Science , Boston , December 1969 . 12 155 the social services are beginning to acquire professional competencies . It might seem that our publics are being perverse , having condoned professionalism when it was really only dressed - up amateurism and condemning professionalism when we finally seem to be getting good at our jobs . Perverse though the laity may be , surely the professionals themselves have been behind this attack as well . Some of the generators of the confrontation have been intellectual in origin . The anti - professional movement stems in part from a reconceptualization of the pro - fessional ' s task . Others are more in the character of historical imperatives , i . e . con - ditions have been thrown up by the course of societal events that call for different modes of intervention . The professional ' s job was once seen as solving an assortment of problems that appeared to be definable , understandable and consensual . He was hired to eliminate those conditions that predominant opinion judged undesirable . His record has been quite spectacular , of course ; the contemporary city and contemporary urban society stand as clean evidences of professional prowess . The streets have been paved , and roads now connect all places ; houses shelter virtually everyone ; the dread diseases are virtually gone ; clean water is piped into nearly every building ; sanitary sewers carry wastes from them ; schools and hospitals serve virtually every district ; and so on . The accomplishments of the past century in these respects have been truly pheno - menal , however short of some persons ' aspirations they might have been . But now that these relatively easy problems have been dealt with , we have been turning our attention to others that are much more stubborn . The tests for efficiency , that were once so useful as measures of accomplishment , are being challenged by a renewed preoccupation with consequences for equity . The seeming consensus , that might once have allowed distributional problems to be dealt with , is being eroded by the growing awareness of the nation ' s pluralism and of the differentiation of values that accompanies differentiation of publics . The professionalized cognitive and occupational styles that were refined in the first half of this century , based in Newtonian mechanistic physics , are not readily adapted to contemporary conceptions of interacting open systems and to contemporary concerns with equity . A growing sensitivity to the waves of repercussions that ripple through such systemic networks and to the value consequences of those repercussions has generated the recent re - examination of received values and the recent search for national goals . There seems to be a growing realization that a weak strut in the professional ' s support system lies at the juncture where goal - formulation , problem - definition and equity issues meet . We should like to address these matters in turn . I . Goal Formulation The search for explicit goals was initiated in force with the opening of the 1960s . In a 1960 RAND publication , Charles J . Hitch urged that " We must learn to look at our objectives as critically and as professionally as we look at our models and our other inputs . " 1 The subsequent work in systems analysis reaffirmed that injunction . 1 Charles J . Hitch , " On the Choice of Objectives in Systems Studies " ( Santa Monica , California : The RAND Corporation , 1960 ; P - 1955 ) , p . 19 . 156 Men in a wide array of fields were prompted to redefine the systems they dealt with in the syntax of verbs rather than nouns - - to ask " What do the systems do ? " rather than " What are they made of ? " - - and then to ask the most difficult question of all : " What shouM these systems do ? " Also 1960 was inaugurated with the publication of Goals for Americans , the report of President Eisenhower ' s Commission on National Goals . 2 There followed then a wave of similar efforts . The Committee for Economic Development commissioned a fo ! low - u p re - examination . So did the Brookings Institution , the American Academy of Arts and Sciences , and then President Nixon through his National Goals Research Staff . But2these may be only the most apparent attempts to clarify the nation ' s directions . 3 Perhaps more symptomatic in the U . S . were the efforts to install PPBS , which requires explication of desired outcomes ; and then the more recent attempts to build systems of social indicators , which are in effect surrogates for statements of desired conditions . As we all now know , it has turned out to be terribly difficult , if not im - possible , to make either of these systems operational . Although there are some small success stories recounted in a few civilian agencies , successes are still rare . Goal - finding is turning out to be an extraordinarily obstinate task . Because goal - finding is one of the central functions of planning , we shall shortly want to ask why that must be so . At the same time that these formalized attempts were being made to discover our latent aims , the nation was buffeted by the revolt of the blacks , then by the revolt of the students , then by the widespread revolt against the war , more recently with a new consumerism and conservationism . All these movements were striking out at the underlying systemic processes of contemporary American society . In a style rather different from those of the systems analysts and the Presidential commissioners , participants in these revolts were seeking to restructure the value and goal systems that affect the distribution of social product and shape the directions of national policy . Systems analysis , goals commissions , PPBS , social indicators , the several revolts , the poverty program , model cities , the current concerns with environmental quality and with the qualities of urban life , the search for new religions among contemporary youth , and the increasing attractiveness of the planning idea - - all seem to be driven by a common quest . Each in its peculiar way is asking for a clarification of purposes , for a redefinition of problems , for a re - ordering of priorities to match stated purposes , for the design of new kinds of goal - directed actions , for a reorientation of the pro - fessions to the outputs of professional activities rather than to the inputs into them , and then for a redistribution of the outputs of governmental programs among the competing publics . A deep - running current of optimism in American thought seems to have been propelling these diverse searches for direction - finding instruments . But at the same time , the Americans ' traditional faith in a guaranteed Progress is being eroded by the same waves that are wearing down old beliefs in the social order ' s inherent goodness and in history ' s intrinsic benevolence . Candide is dead . His place is being 2 The report was published by Spectrum Books , Prentice - Hall , 1960 . 3 At the same time to be sure , counter voices - - uncomfortable to many - - were claiming that the " nation ' s direction " presents no meaningful reference system at all , owing to the worldwide character of the problems and the overspill of crises across national boundaries . 157 occupied by a new conception of future history that , rejecting historicism , is searching for ways of exploiting the intellectual and inventive capabilities of men . This belief comes in two quite contradictory forms . On the one hand , there is the belief in the " makeability , " or unrestricted malleability , of future history by means of the planning intellect - - by reasoning , rational discourse , and civilized negotiation . At the same time , there are vocal proponents of the " feeling approach , " of com - passionate engagement and dramatic action , even of a revival of mysticism , aiming at overcoming The System which is seen as the evil source of misery and suffering . The Enlightenment may be coming to full maturity in the late 20th century , or it may be on its deathbed . Many Americans seem to believe both that we can perfect future history - - that we can deliberately shape future outcomes to accord with our wishes - - and that there will be no future history . Some have arrived at deep pessimism and some at resignation . To them , planning for large social systems has proved to be impossible without loss of liberty and equity . Hence , for them the ultimate goal of planning should be anarchy , because it should aim at the elimination of govern - ment over others . Still another group has arrived at the conclusion that liberty and equity are luxuries which cannot be afforded by a modern society , and that they should be substituted by " cybernetically feasible " values . Professionalism has been understood to be one of the major instruments for perfectability , an agent sustaining the traditional American optimism . Based in modern science , each of the professions has been conceived as the medium through which the knowledge of science is applied . In effect , each profession has been seen as a subset of engineering . Planning and the emerging policy sciences are among the more optimistic of those professions . Their representatives refuse to believe that planning for betterment is impossible , however grave their misgivings about the appropriateness of past and present modes of planning . They have not abandoned the hope that the instruments of perfectability can be perfected . It is that view that we want to examine , in an effort to ask whether the social professions are equipped to do what they are expected to do . H . Problem Definition During the industrial age , the idea of planning , in common with the idea of pro - fessionalism , was dominated by the pervasive idea of efficiency . Drawn from 18th century physics , classical economics and the principle of least - means , efficiency was seen as a condition in which a specified task could be performed with low inputs of resources . That has been a powerful idea . It has long been the guiding concept of civil engineering , the scientific management movement , much of contemporary operations research ; and it still pervades modern government and industry . When attached to the idea of planning , it became dominating there too . Planning was then seen as a process of designing problem - solutions that might be installed and operated cheaply . Because it was fairly easy to get consensus on the nature of problems during the early industrial period , the task could be assigned to the technically skilled , who in turn could be trusted to accomplish the simplified end - in - view . Or , in the more work - a - day setting , we could rely upon the efficiency expert to diagnose a problem 158 and then solve it , while simultaneously reducing the resource inputs into whatever it was we were doing . We have come to think about the planning task in very different ways in recent years . We have been learning to ask whether what we are doing is the right thing to do . That is to say , we have been learning to ask questions about the outputs of actions and to pose problem statements in valuative frameworks . We have been learning to see social processes as the links tying open systems into large and interconnected networks of systems , such that outputs from one become inputs to others . In that structural framework it has become less apparent where problem centers lie , and less apparent where and how we should intervene even if we do happen to know what aims we seek . We are now sensitized to the waves of repercussions generated by a problem - solving action directed to any one node in the network , and we are no longer surprised to find it inducing problems of greater severity at some other node . And so we have been forced to expand the boundaries of the systems we deal with , trying to internalize those externalities . This was the professional style of the systems analysts , who were commonly seen as forebearers of the universal problem - solvers . With arrogant confidence , the early systems analysts pronounced themselves ready to take on anyone ' s perceived problem , diagnostically to discover its hidden character , and then , having exposed its true nature , skillfully to excise its root causes . Two decades of experience have worn the self - assurances thin . These analysts are coming to realize how valid their model really is , for they themselves have been caught by the very same diagnostic difficulties that troubled their clients . By now we are all beginning to realize that one of the most intractable problems is that of defining problems ( of knowing what distinguishes an observed condition from a desired condition ) and of locating problems ( finding where in the complex causal networks the trouble really lies ) . In turn , and equally intractable , is the problem of identifying the actions that might effectively narrow the gap between what - is and what - ought - to - be . As we seek to improve the effectiveness of actions in pursuit of valued outcomes , as system boundaries get stretched , and as we become more sophisticated about the complex workings of open societal systems , it becomes ever more difficult to make the planning idea operational . Many now have an image of how an idealized planning system would function . It is being seen as an on - going , cybernetic process of governance , incorporating systematic procedures for continuously searching out goals ; identifying problems ; forecasting uncontrollable contextual changes ; inventing alternative strategies , tactics , and time - sequenced actions ; stimulating alternative and plausible action sets and their con - sequences ; evaluating alternatively forecasted outcomes ; statistically monitoring those conditions of the publics and of systems that are judged to be germane ; feeding back information to the simulation and decision channels so that errors can be corrected - - all in a simultaneously functioning governing process . That set of steps is familiar to all of us , for it comprises what is by now the modern - classical model of planning . And yet we all know that such a planning system is unattainable , even as we seek more closely to approximate it . It is even questionable whether such a plan - ning system is desirable . 159 IH . Planning Problems are Wicked Problems A great many barriers keep us from perfecting such a planning / governing system : theory is inadequate for decent forecasting ; our intelligence is insufficient to our tasks ; plurality of objectives held by pluralities of politics makes it impossible to pursue unitary aims ; and so on . The difficulties attached to rationality are tenacious , and we have so far been unable to get untangled from their web . This is partly because the classical paradigm of science and engineering - - the paradigm that has underlain modern professionalism - - is not applicable to the problems of open societal systems . One reason the publics have been attacking the social professions , we believe , is that the cognitive and occupational styles of the professions - - mimicking the cognitive style of science and the occupational style of engineering - - - have just not worked on a wide array of social problems . The lay customers are complaining because planners and other professionals have not succeeded in solving the problems they claimed they could solve . We shall want to suggest that the social professions were misled somewhere along the line into assmning they could be applied scientists - - that they could solve problems in the ways scientists can solve their sorts of problems . The error has been a serious one . The kinds of problems that planners deal with - - societal problems - - are inherently different from the problems that scientists and perhaps some classes of engineers deal with . Planning problems are inherently wicked . As distinguished from problems in the natural sciences , which are definable and separable and may have solutions that are findable , the proNems of governmental planning - - and especially those of social or policy planning - - are ill - defined ; and they rely upon elusive political judgment for resolution . ( Not " solution . " Social problems are never solved . At best they are only re - solved - - over and over again . ) Permit us to draw a cartoon that will help clarify the distinction we intend . The problems that scientists and engineers have usually focused upon are mostly " tame " or " benign " ones . As an example , consider a problem of mathematics , such as solving an equation ; or the task of an organic chemist in analyzing the structure of some unknown compound ; or that of the chessplayer attempting to accomplish checkmate in five moves . For each the mission is clear . It is clear , in turn , whether or not the problems have been solved . Wicked problems , in contrast , have neither of these clarifying traits ; and they include nearly all public policy issues - - whether the question concerns the location of a freeway , the adjustment of a tax rate , the modification of school curricula , or the confrontation of crime . There are at least ten distinguishing properties of planning - type problems , i . e . wicked ones , that planners had better be alert to and which we shall comment upon in turn . As you will see , we are calling them " wicked " not because these properties are themselves ethically deplorable . We use the term " wicked " in a meaning akin to that of " malignant " ( in contrast to " benign " ) or " vicious " ( like a circle ) or " tricky " ( like a leprechaun ) or " aggressive " ( like a lion , in contrast to the docility of a lamb ) . We do not mean to personify these properties of social systems by implying malicious 160 intent . But then , you may agree that it becomes morally objectionable for the planner to treat a wicked problem as though it were a tame one , or to tame a wicked problem prematurely , or to refuse to recognize the inherent wickedness of social problems . 1 . There is no definitive formulation of a wicked problem For any given tame problem , an exhaustive formulation can be stated containing all the information the problem - solver needs for understanding and solving the problem - - provided he knows his " art , " of course . This is not possible with wicked - problems . The information needed to understand the problem depends upon one ' s idea for solving it . That is to say : in order to describe a wicked - problem in sufficient detail , one has to develop an exhaustive inventory of all conceivable solutions ahead of time . The reason is that every question asking for additional information depends upon the understanding of the problem - - and its resolution - - at that time . Problem understanding and problem resolution are con - comitant to each other . Therefore , in order to anticipate all questions ( in order to anticipate all information required for resolution ahead of time ) , knowledge of all conceivable solutions is required . Consider , for example , what would be necessary in identifying the nature of the poverty problem . Does poverty mean low income ? Yes , in part . But what are the determinants of low income ? Is it deficiency of the national and regional economies , or is it deficiencies of cognitive and occupational skills within the labor force ? If the latter , the problem statement and the problem " solution " must encompass the educa - tional processes . But , then , where within the educational system does the real problem lie ? What then might it mean to " improve the educational system " ? Or does the poverty problem reside in deficient physical and mental health ? If so , we must add those etiologies to our information package , and search inside the health services for a plausible cause . Does it include cultural deprivation ? spatial dislocation ? problems of ego identity ? deficient political and social skills ? - - and so on . If we can formulate the problem by tracing it to some sorts of sources - - such that we can say , " Aha ! That ' s the locus of the difficulty , " i . e . those are the root causes of the differences between the " is " and the " ought to be " conditions - - then we have thereby also formulated a solution . To find the problem is thus the same thing as finding the solution ; the problem can ' t be defined until the solution has been found . The formulation of a wicked problem is the problem ! The process of formulating the problem and of conceiving a solution ( or re - solution ) are identical , since every specification of the problem is a specification of the direction in which a treatment is considered . Thus , if we recognize deficient mental health services as part of the problem , then - - trivially enough - - " improvement of mental health services " is a specification of solution . If , as the next step , we declare the lack of community centers one deficiency of the mental health services system , then " procurement of community centers " is the next specification of solution . If it is inadequate treatment within community centers , then improved therapy training of staff may be the locus of solution , and so on . This property sheds some tight on the usefulness of the famed " systems - approach " 161 for treating wicked problems . The classical systems - approach of the military and the space programs is based on the assumption that a planning project can be organized into distinct phases . Every textbook of systems engineering starts with an enumeration of these phases : " understand the problems or the mission , " " gather information , " " analyze information , " " synthesize information and wait for the creative leap , " " work out solution , " or the like . For wicked problems , however , this type of scheme does not work . One cannot understand the problem without knowing about its context ; one cannot meaningfully search for information without the orientation of a solution concept ; one cannot first understand , then solve . The systems - approach " of the first generation " is inadequate for dealing with wicked - problems . Approaches of the " second generation " should be based on a : model of planning as an argumen - tative process in the course of which an image of the problem and of the solution emerges gradually among the participants , as a product of incessant judgment , subjected to critical argument . The methods of Operations Research play a prominent role in the systems - approach of the first generation ; they become operational , how - ever , only after the most important decisions have already been made , i . e . after the problem has already been tamed . Take an optimization model . Here the inputs needed include the definition of the solution space , the system of constraints , and the performance measure as a function of the planning and contextual variables . But setting up and constraining the solution space and constructing the measure of performance is the wicked part of the problem . Very likely it is more essential than the remaining steps of searching for a solution which is optimal relative to the measure of performance and the constraint system . 2 . Wicked problems have no stopping rule In solving a chess problem or a mathematical equation , the problem - solver knows when he has done his job . There are criteria that tell when the or a solution has been found . Not so with planning problems . Because ( according to Proposition 1 ) the process of solving the problem is identical with the process of understanding its nature , because there are no criteria for sufficient understanding and because there are no ends to the causal chains that link interacting open systems , the would - be planner can always try to do better . Some additional investment of effort might increase the chances of finding a better solution . The planner terminates work on a wicked problem , not for reasons inherent in the " logic " of the problem . He stops for considerations that are external to the problem : he runs out of time , or money , or patience . He finally says , " That ' s good enough , " or " This is the best I can do within the limitations of the project , " or " I like this solution , " etc . 3 . Solutions to wicked problems are not true - or - false , but good - or - bad There are conventionalized criteria for objectively deciding whether the offered solution to an equation or whether the proposed structural formula of a chemical compound is correct or false . They can be independently checked by other qualified t62 persons who are familiar with the established criteria ; and the answer will be normally unambiguous . For wicked planning problems , there are no true or false answers . Normally , many parties are equally equipped , interested , and / or entitled to judge the solutions , although none has the power to set formal decision rules to determine correctness . Their judgments are likely to differ widely to accord with their group or personal interests , their special value - sets , and their ideological predilections . Their assess - ments of proposed solutions are expressed as " good " or " bad " or , more likely , as " better or worse " or " satisfying " or " good enough . " 4 . There is no immediate and no ultimate test of a solution to a wicked problem For tame - problems one can determine on the spot how good a solution - attempt has been . More accurately , the test of a solution is entirely under the control of the few people who are involved and interested in the problem . With wicked problems , on the other hand , any solution , after being implemented , will generate waves of consequences over an extended - - virtually an unbounded - - period of time . Moreover , the next day ' s consequences of the solution may yield utterly undesirable repercussions which outweigh the intended advantages or the advantages accomplished hitherto . In such cases , one would have been better off if the plan had never been carried out . The full consequences cannot be appraised until the waves of repercussions have completely run out , and we have no way of tracing all the waves through all the affected lives ahead of time or within a limited time span . 5 . Every solution to a wicked problem is a " one - shot operation " ; because there is no opportunity to learn by trial - and - error , every attempt counts significantly In the sciences and in fields like mathematics , chess , puzzle - solving or mechanical engineering design , the problem - solver can try various runs without penalty . What - ever his outcome on these individual experimental runs , it doesn ' t matter much to the subject - system or to the course of societal affairs . A lost chess game is seldom consequential for other chess games or for non - chess - players . With wicked planning problems , however , every implemented solution is con - sequential . It leaves " traces " that cannot be undone . One cannot build a freeway to see how it works , and then easily correct it after unsatisfactory performance . Large public - works are effectively irreversible , and the consequences they generate have long half - lives . Many people ' s lives will have been irreversibly influenced , and large amounts of money will have been spent - - another irreversible act . The same happens with most other large - scale public works and with virtually all puNic - service pro - grams . The effects of an experimental curriculum will follow the pupils into their adult lives . Whenever actions are effectively irreversible and whenever the half - lives of the consequences are long , every trial counts . And every attempt to reverse a decision or to correct for the undesired consequences poses another set of wicked problems , which are in turn subject to the same dilemmas . 163 6 . Wicked problems do not have an enumerable ( or an exhaustively describable ) set of potential solutions , nor is there a well - described set of permissible operations that may be incorporated into the plan There are no criteria which enable one to prove that all solutions to a wicked problem have been identified and considered . It may happen that no solution is found , owing to logical inconsistencies in the " picture " of the problem . ( For example , the problem - solver may arrive at a problem description requiring that both A and not - A should happen at the same time . ) Or it might result from his failing to develop an idea for solution ( which does not mean that someone else might be more successful ) . But normally , in the pursuit of a wicked planning problem , a host of potential solutions arises ; and another host is never thought up . It is then a matter of judgment whether one should try to enlarge the available set or not . And it is , of course , a matter of judgment which of these solutions should be pursued and implemented . Chess has a finite set of rules , accounting for all situations that can occur . In mathematics , the tool chest of operations is also explicit ; so , too , although less rigorously , in chemistry . But not so in the world of social policy . Which strategies - or - moves are permissible in dealing with crime in the streets , for example , have been enumerated nowhere . " Anything goes , " or at least , any : new idea for a planning measure may become a serious candidate for a re - solution : What should we do to reduce street crime ? Should we disarm the police , as they do in England , since even criminals are less likely to shoot unarmed men ? Or repeal the laws that define crime , such as those that make marijuana use a criminal act or those that make car theft a criminal act ? That would reduce crime by changing definitions . Try moral rearmament and substitute ethical self - control for police and court control ? Shoot all criminals and thus reduce the numbers who commit crime ? Give away free loot to would - be - thieves , and so reduce the incentive to crime ? And so on . In such fields of ill - defined problems and hence ill - definable solutions , the set of feasible plans of action relies on realistic judgment , the capability to appraise " exotic " ideas and on the amount of trust and credibility between planner and clientele that wilt lead to the conclusion , " OK let ' s try that . " 7 . Every wicked problem is essentially unique Of course , for any two problems at least one distinguishing property can be found ( just as any number of properties can be found which they share in common ) , and each of them is therefore unique in a trivial sense . But by " ' essentially unique " we mean that , despite long lists of similarities between a current problem and a previous one , there always might be an additional distinguishing property that is of overriding importance . Part of the art of dealing with wicked problems is the art of not knowing too early which type of solution to apply . There are no classes of wicked problems in the sense that principles of solution can be developed to fit all members of a class . In mathematics there are rules for classifying families of problems - - say , of solving a class of equations - - whenever a 164 certain , quite - well - specified set of characteristics matches the problem . There are explicit characteristics of tame problems that define similarities among them , in such fashion that the same set of techniques is likely to be effective on all of them . Despite seeming similarities among wicked problems , one can never be certain that the particulars of a problem do not override its commonalities with other prob - lems already dealt with . The conditions in a city constructing a subway may look similar to the conditions in San Francisco , say ; but planners would be ill - advised to transfer the San Francisco solutions directly . Differences in commuter habits or residential patterns may far outweigh similarities in subway layout , downtown layout and the rest . In the more complex world of social policy planning , every situation is likely to be one - of - a - kind . If we are right about that , the direct transference of the physical - science and engineer - ing thoughtways into social policy might be dysfunctional , i . e . positively harmful . " Solutions " might be applied to seemingly familiar problems which are quite in - compatiNe with them . 8 . Every wicked problem can be considered to be a symptom of another problem Problems can be described as discrepancies between the state of affairs as it is and the state as it ought to be . The process of resolving the problem starts with the search for causal explanation of the discrepancy . Removal of that cause poses another problem of which the original problem is a " symptom . " In turn , it can be considered the symptom of still another , " higher level " problem . Thus " crime in the streets " can be considered as a symptom of general moral decay , or permissiveness , or deficient opportunity , or wealth , or poverty , or whatever causal explanation you happen to like best . The level at which a problem is settled depends upon the self - confidence of the analyst and cannot be decided on logical grounds . There is nothing like a natural level of a wicked problem . Of course , the higher the level of a problem ' s formulation , the broader and more general it becomes : and the more difficult it becomes to do something about it . On the other hand , one should not try to cure symptoms : and therefore one should try to settle the problem on as high a level as possible . Here lies a difficulty with incrementalism , as well . This doctrine advertises a policy of small steps , in the hope of contributing systematically to overall improvement . If , however , the problem is attacked on too low a level ( an increment ) , then success of resolution may result in making things worse , because it may become more difficult to deal with the higher problems . Marginal improvement does not guarantee overall improvement . For example , computerization of an administrative process may result in reduced cost , ease of operation , etc . But at the same time it becomes more difficult to incur structural changes in the organization , because technical perfection reinforces organizational patterns and normally increases the cost of change . The newly acquired power of the controllers of information may then deter later modifications of their roles . Under these circumstances it is not surprising that the members of an organization tend to see the problems on a level below their own level . If you ask a police chief what the problems of the police are , he is likely to demand better hardware . t65 9 . The existence of a discrepancy representing a wicked problem can be explained in numerous ways . The choice of explanation determines the nature of the problem ' s resolution " Crime in the streets " can be explained by not enough police , by too many criminals , by inadequate laws , too many police , cultural deprivation , deficient opportunity , too many guns , phrenologic aberrations , etc . Each of these offers a direction for attacking crime in the streets . Which one is right ? There is no rule or procedure to determine the " correct " explanation or combination of them . The reason is that in dealing with wicked problems there are several more ways of refuting a hypothesis than there are permissible in the sciences . The mode of dealing with conflicting evidence that is customary in science is as follows : " Under conditions C and assuming the validity of hypothesis H , effect E must occur . Now , given C , E does not occur . Consequently H is to be refuted . " In the context of wicked problems , however , further modes are admissible : one can deny that the effect E has not occurred , or one can explain the nonoccurrence of E by intervening processes without having to abandon H . Here ' s an example : Assume that somebody chooses to explain crime in the streets by " not enough police . " This is made the basis of a plan , and the size of the police force is increased . Assume further that in the subsequent years there is an increased number of arrests , but an increase of offenses at a rate slightly lower than the increase of GNP . Has the effect E occurred ? Has crime in the streets been reduced by increasing the police force ? If the answer is no , several nonscientific explanations may be tried in order to rescue the hypothesis H ( " Increasing the police force reduces crime in the streets " ) : " If we had not increased the number of officers , the increase in crime would have been even greater ; . . . . This case is an exception from rule H because there was an irregular influx of criminal elements ; . . . . Time is too short to feel the effects yet ; " etc . But also the answer " Yes , E has occurred " can be defended : " The number of arrests was increased , " etc . In dealing with wicked problems , the modes of reasoning used in the argument are much richer than those permissible in the scientific discourse . Because of the essential uniqueness of the problem ( see Proposition 7 ) and lacking opportunity for rigorous experimentation ( see Proposition 5 ) , it is not possible to put H to a crucial test . That is to say , the choice of explanation is arbitrary in the logical sense . In actuality , attitudinal criteria guide the choice . People choose those explanations which are most plausible to them . Somewhat but not much exaggerated , you might say that everybody picks that explanation of a discrepancy which fits his intentions best and which conforms to the action - prospects that are available to him . The analyst ' s " world view " is the strongest determining factor in explaining a discrepancy and , therefore , in resolving a wicked problem . 10 . The planner has no right to be wrong As Karl Popper argues in The Logic of Scientific Discovery , 4 it is a principle of science that solutions to problems are only hypotheses offered for refutation . This 4 Science Editions , New York , 1961 . 166 habit is based on the insight that there are no proofs to hypotheses , only potential refutations . The more a hypothesis withstands numerous attempts at refutation , the better its " corroboration " is considered to be . Consequently , the scientific community does not blame its members for postulating hypotheses that are later refuted - so long as the author abides by the rules of the game , of course . In the world of planning and wicked problems no such immunity is tolerated . Here the aim is not to find the truth , but to improve some characteristics of the world where people live . Planners are liable for the consequences of the actions they generate ; the effects can matter a great deal to those people that are touched by those actions . We are thus led to conclude that the problems that planners must deal with are wicked and incorrigible ones , for they defy efforts to delineate their boundaries and to identify their causes , and thus to expose their problematic nature . The planner who works with open systems is caught up in the ambiguity of their causal webs . Moreover , his would - be solutions are confounded by a still further set of dilemmas posed by the growing pluralism of the contemporary publics , whose valuations of his proposals are judged against an array of different and contradicting scales . Let us turn to these dilemmas next . IV . The Social Context There was a time during the ' Fifties when the quasi - sociological literature was pre - dicting a Mass Society - - foreseen as a rather homogeneously shared culture in which most persons would share values and beliefs , would hold to common aims , would follow similar life - styles , and thus would behave in similar ways . ( You will recall the popular literature on suburbia of ten years ago . ) It is now apparent that those fore - casts were wrong . Instead , the high - scale societies of the Western world are becoming increasingly heterogeneous . They are becoming increasingly differentiated , comprising thousands of minority groups , each joined around common interests , common value systems , and shared stylistic preferences that differ from those of other groups . As the sheer volume of information and knowledge increases , as ] technological developments further expand the range of options , and as awareness of the liberty to deviate and differentiate spreads , more variations are possible . Rising atttuence or , even more , growing desire for at least subcultural identity induces groups to exploit those options and to invent new ones . We almost dare say that irregular cultural permutations are becoming the rule . We have come to realize that the melting pot never worked for large numbers of immigrants to America , 5 and that the unitary conception of " ' The American Way of Life " is now giving way to a recognition that there are numerous ways of life that are also American . It was pre - industrial society that was culturally homogeneous . The industrial age greatly expanded cultural diversity . Post - industrial society is likely to be far more differentiated than any in all of past history . It is still too early to know whether the current politicization of subpublics is 5 See an early sign of this growing realization in Nathan Glazer and Daniel Patrick Moynihan , Beyond the Melting Pot ( Cambridge : Harvard and MIT Presses , 1963 ) . 167 going to be a long - run phenomenon or not . One could write scenarios that would be equally plausible either way . But one thing is clear : large population size will mean that small minorities can comprise large numbers of people ; and , as we have been seeing , even small minorities can swing large political influence . In a setting in which a plurality of publics is politically pursuing a diversity of goals , how is the larger society to deal with its wicked problems in a planful way ? How are goals to be set , when the valuative bases are so diverse ? Surely a unitary conception of a unitary " public welfare " is an anachronistic one . We do not even have a theory that tells us how to find out what might be considered a societally best state . We have no theory that tells us what distribution of the social product is best - - whether those outputs are expressed in the coinage of money income , information income , cultural opportunities , or whatever . We have come to realize that the concept of the social product is not very meaningful ; possibly there is no aggregate measure for the welfare of a highly diversified society , if this measure is claimed to be objective and non - partisan . Social science has simply been unable to uncover a social - welfare function that would suggest which decisions would contri - bute to a societally best state . Instead , we have had to rely upon the axioms of in - dividualism that underlie economic and political theory , deducing , in effect , that the larger - public welfare derives from summation of individualistic choices . And yet , we know that this is not necessarily so , as our current experience with air pollution has dramatized . We also know that many societal processes have the character of zero - sum games . As the population becomes increasingly pluralistic , inter - group differences are likely to be reflected as inter - group rivalries of the zero - sum sorts . If they do , the prospects for inventing positive non - zero - sum development strategies would become increasingly difficult . Perhaps we can illustrate . A few years ago there was a nearly universal consensus in America that full - employment , high productivity , and widespread distribution of consumer durables fitted into a development strategy in which all would be winners . That consensus is now being eroded . Now , when substitutes for wages are being disbursed to the poor , the college student , and the retired , as well as to the more traditional recipient of nonwage incomes , our conceptions of " employment " and of a full - employment economy are having to be revised . Now , when it is recognized that raw materials that enter the economy end up as residuals polluting the air mantle and the rivers , many are becoming wary of rising manufacturing production . And , when some of the new middle - class religions are exorcising worldly goods in favor of less tangible communal " goods , " the consumption - oriented society is being chal - lenged - oddly enough , to be sure , by those who were reared in its affluence . What was once a clear - cut win - win strategy , that had the status of a near - truism , has now become a source of contentious differences among subpublics . Or , if these illustrations seem to be posed at too high a level of generality , consider the sorts of inter - group conflicts imbedded in urban renewal , roadway construction , or curriculum design in the public schools . Our observation is not only that values are changing . That is true enough , and the probabilities of parametric changes are large enough to humble even the most perceptive observer of contemporary norms . 168 Our point , rather , is that diverse values are held by different groups of individuals - - that what satisfies one may be abhorrent to another , that what comprises problem - solution for one is problem - generation for another . Under such circumstances , and in the absence of an overriding social theory or an overriding social ethic , there is no gainsaying which group is right and which should have its ends served . One traditional approach to the reconciliation of social values and individual choice is to entrust de facto decision - making to the wise and knowledgeable professional experts and politicians . But whether one finds that ethically tolerable or not , we hope we have made it clear that even such a tactic only begs the question , tbr there are no value - free , true - false answers to any of the wicked problems governments must deal with . To substitute expert professional judgment for those of contending political groups may make the rationales and the repercussions more explicit , but it would not necessarily make the outcomes better . The one - best answer is possible with tame problems , but not with wicked ones . Another traditional approach to the reconciliation of social values and individual choice is to bias in favor of the latter . Accordingly , one would promote widened differentiation of goods , services , environments , and opportunities , such that indivi - duals might more closely satisfy their individual preferences . Where large - system problems are generated , he would seek to ameliorate the effects that he judges most deleterious . Where latent opportunities become visible , he would seek to exploit them . Where positive non - zero - sum developmental strategies can be designed , he would of course work hard to install them . Whichever the tactic , though , it should be clear that the expert is also the player in a political game , seeking to promote his private vision of goodness over others ' . Planning is a component of politics . There is no escaping that truism . We are also suggesting that none of these tactics will answer the difficult questions attached to the sorts of wicked problems planners must deal with . We have neither a theory that can locate societal goodness , nor one that might dispel wickedness , nor one that might resolve the problems of equity that rising pluralism is provoking . We are inclined to think that these theoretic dilemmas may be the most wicked conditions that confront us . 169