PS66CH30 - Lerner ARI 12 November 2014 15 : 22 Emotion and Decision Making Jennifer S . Lerner , 1 Ye Li , 2 Piercarlo Valdesolo , 3 and Karim S . Kassam 4 1 Harvard Kennedy School , Harvard University , Cambridge , Massachusetts 02138 ; email : jennifer _ lerner @ harvard . edu 2 School of Business Administration , University of California , Riverside , California 92521 ; email : ye . li @ ucr . edu 3 Department of Psychology , Claremont McKenna College , Claremont , California 91711 ; email : pvaldesolo @ cmc . edu 4 Department of Social and Decision Sciences , Carnegie Mellon University , Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania 15213 ; email : kskassam @ andrew . cmu . edu Annu . Rev . Psychol . 2015 . 66 : 799 – 823 First published online as a Review in Advance on September 22 , 2014 The Annual Review of Psychology is online at psych . annualreviews . org This article’s doi : 10 . 1146 / annurev - psych - 010213 - 115043 Copyright c (cid:2) 2015 by Annual Reviews . All rights reserved Keywords affect , mood , appraisal tendency , judgment , choice , behavioral economics Abstract A revolution in the science of emotion has emerged in recent decades , with the potential to create a paradigm shift in decision theories . The research reveals that emotions constitute potent , pervasive , predictable , sometimes harmful and sometimes beneﬁcial drivers of decision making . Across dif - ferent domains , important regularities appear in the mechanisms through which emotions inﬂuence judgments and choices . We organize and analyze what has been learned from the past 35 years of work on emotion and de - cision making . In so doing , we propose the emotion - imbued choice model , which accounts for inputs from traditional rational choice theory and from newer emotion research , synthesizing scientiﬁc models . 799 A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2015 . 66 : 799 - 823 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g A cce ss p r ov i d e d by H a r v a r d U n i v e r s it y on 01 / 29 / 15 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . PS66CH30 - Lerner ARI 12 November 2014 15 : 22 Bounded rationality : the idea that decision making deviates from rationality due to such inherently human factors as limitations in cognitive capacity and willpower , and situational constraints Normative : how and / or what people should ideally judge or decide Emotion : multifaceted , biologically mediated , concomitant reactions ( experiential , cognitive , behavioral , expressive ) regarding survival - relevant events JDM : judgment and decision making Contents INTRODUCTION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 800 Objectives and Approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 801 EMOTIONAL IMPACT ON JUDGMENT AND DECISION MAKING : EIGHT MAJOR THEMES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 802 Theme 1 . Integral Emotions Inﬂuence Decision Making . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 802 Theme 2 . Incidental Emotions Inﬂuence Decision Making . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 803 Theme 3 . Emotional Valence Is Only One of Several Dimensions That Shape Emotions’ Inﬂuence on Decision Making . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 804 Theme 4 . Emotions Shape Decisions via the Content of Thought . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 806 Theme 5 . Emotions Shape Decisions via the Depth of Thought . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 807 Theme 6 . Emotions Shape Decisions via Goal Activation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 808 Theme 7 . Emotions Inﬂuence Interpersonal Decision Making . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 809 Theme 8 . Unwanted Effects of Emotion on Decision Making Can Be Reduced Under Certain Circumstances . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 811 GENERAL MODEL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 814 CONCLUSIONS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 816 INTRODUCTION Hence , in order to have anything like a complete theory of human rationality , we have to understand what role emotion plays in it . Herbert Simon ( 1983 , p . 29 ) Nobel laureate Herbert Simon ( 1967 , 1983 ) launched a revolution in decision theory when he introduced bounded rationality , a concept that would require reﬁning existing normative models of rational choice to include cognitive and situational constraints . But as the quote above reveals , Simon knew his theory would be incomplete until the role of emotion was speciﬁed , thus presaging the critical attention contemporary science has begun to give emotion in decision research . Across disciplines ranging from philosophy ( Solomon 1993 ) to neuroscience ( e . g . , Phelps et al . 2014 ) , an increasingly vibrant quest to identify the effects of emotion on judgment and decision making ( JDM ) is under way . Such vibrancy was not always apparent . In economics , the historically dominant discipline for research on decision theory , the role of emotion , or affect more generally , in decision making rarely appeared for most of the twentieth century , despite featuring prominently in inﬂuential eighteenth - and nineteenth - century economic treatises ( for review , see Loewenstein & Lerner 2003 ) . The case was similar in psychology for most of the twentieth century . Even psychologists’ critiques of expected utility theory focused primarily on understanding cognitive processes ( see Kahneman & Tversky 1979 ) . Moreover , research examining emotion in all ﬁelds of psychology remained scant ( for review , see Keltner & Lerner 2010 ) . The online Supplemental Text for this article examines the curious history of scientiﬁc attention to emotion ( follow the Supplemental Material link from the Annual Reviews home page at http : / / www . annualreviews . org ) . The supplement also includes primers on the respective ﬁelds of ( a ) emotion and ( b ) JDM . But a veritable revolution in the science of emotion has begun . As shown in Figure 1 , yearly scholarly papers on emotion and decision making doubled from 2004 to 2007 and again from 800 Lerner et al . Supplemental Material A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2015 . 66 : 799 - 823 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g A cce ss p r ov i d e d by H a r v a r d U n i v e r s it y on 01 / 29 / 15 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . PS66CH30 - Lerner ARI 12 November 2014 15 : 22 0 50 100 Year 150 200 250 300 350 500 400 450 0 . 0000 0 . 0005 0 . 0010 0 . 0015 0 . 0020 0 . 0025 0 . 0030 N u m b e r o f p a p e r s o n " e m o t i o n ( s ) / a ff e c t / m oo d a n d d e c i s i o n m a k i n g " P r o p o r t i o n o f a ll " d e c i s i o n m a k i n g " p a p e r s o n e m o t i o n ( s ) / a ff e c t / m oo d 1970 1980 1972 1974 1976 1978 1990 1982 1984 1986 1988 2000 2004 2006 2002 2008 2010 2012 1992 1994 1996 1998 Figure 1 Number of scholarly publications from 1970 to 2013 that refer to “emotion ( s ) / affect / mood and decision making” ( green bars ) and proportion of all scholarly publications referring to “decision making” that this number represents ( blue line ) . Affect : unspeciﬁed feelings ; the superordinateumbrellaofconstructsinvolvingemotion , mood , and emotion - related traits 2007 to 2011 , and increased by an order of magnitude as a proportion of all scholarly publica - tions on “decision making” ( already a quickly growing ﬁeld ) from 2001 to 2013 . Indeed , many psychological scientists now assume that emotions are , for better or worse , the dominant driver of most meaningful decisions in life ( e . g . , Ekman 2007 , Frijda 1988 , Gilbert 2006 , Keltner et al . 2014 , Keltner & Lerner 2010 , Lazarus 1991 , Loewenstein et al . 2001 , Scherer & Ekman 1984 ) . Decisions can be viewed as a conduit through which emotions guide everyday attempts at avoiding negative feelings ( e . g . , guilt and regret ) and increasing positive feelings ( e . g . , pride and happiness ) , even when they do so without awareness ( for reviews , see Keltner & Lerner 2010 , Loewen - stein & Lerner 2003 ) . Similarly , decisions can serve as the conduit for increasing a negative emotion or decreasing a positive emotion , tendencies associated with mental illness . Regardless of whether the decisions are adaptive or not , once the outcomes of our decisions materialize , we typically feel new emotions ( e . g . , elation , surprise , and regret ; Coughlan & Connolly 2001 , Mellers 2000 , Zeelenberg et al . 1998 ) . Put succinctly , emotion and decision making go hand in hand . Objectives and Approach We examine theories and evidence from the nascent ﬁeld of emotion and decision making , ranging from approximately 1970 until the present . Our objective is to provide organizational structure to and critical analysis of the ﬁeld . We place emphasis on studies in the behavioral sciences , especially psychology ( including all its subdisciplines ) , noting that a complementary review of studies emphasizing neuroscience appears in the Annual Review of Neuroscience ( see Phelps et al . 2014 ) . www . annualreviews . org • Emotion and Decision Making 801 A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2015 . 66 : 799 - 823 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g A cce ss p r ov i d e d by H a r v a r d U n i v e r s it y on 01 / 29 / 15 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . PS66CH30 - Lerner ARI 12 November 2014 15 : 22 Integral emotion : feelings arising from a decision at hand , e . g . , fear of losing money when deciding between investments ; a normatively defensible input to JDM Owing to strict space and citation - count limits as well as to the unusually long ( three - decade ) span of material to be covered , research included here is exceedingly selective . When multiple studies represented reliable scientiﬁc discoveries , for example , we necessarily restricted ourselves to one prototypic study . We have also given preference to studies that contribute to theoretical development over studies that , as yet , stand alone as interesting phenomena . EMOTIONAL IMPACT ON JUDGMENT AND DECISION MAKING : EIGHT MAJOR THEMES In our survey of research on emotion and decision making , eight major themes of scientiﬁc in - quiry emerged . Consistent with the fact that the ﬁeld is in its infancy , these themes typically ( a ) vary in the amount of research conducted , ( b ) contain few competing theories , ( c ) include few deﬁnitive conclusions , ( d ) display relative homogeneity in methodology , and ( e ) examine funda - mental questions about the nature of emotion and decision making rather than reﬁnements about known phenomena . Nonetheless , the themes reveal rapid progress in mapping the psychology of emotion and decision making . Collectively , they elucidate one overarching conclusion : Emotions powerfully , predictably , and pervasively inﬂuence decision making . Theme 1 . Integral Emotions Inﬂuence Decision Making It is useful , when surveying the ﬁeld , to identify distinct types of emotion . We start with emotions arising from the judgment or choice at hand ( i . e . , integral emotion ) , a type of emotion that strongly and routinely shapes decision making ( Damasio 1994 , Greene & Haidt 2002 ) . For example , a person who feels anxious about the potential outcome of a risky choice may choose a safer option ratherthanapotentiallymorelucrativeoption . Apersonwhofeelsgratefultoaschools / heattended may decide to donate a large sum of money to that school even though it limits the decision maker’s own spending . Such effects of integral emotions operate at conscious and nonconscious levels . Integral emotion as beneﬁcial guide . Although a negative view of emotion’s role in reason has dominated much of Western thought ( for discussion , see Keltner & Lerner 2010 ) , a few philosophers pioneered the idea that integral emotion could be a beneﬁcial guide . David Hume ( 1978 [ 1738 ] , p . 415 ) , for example , argued that the dominant predisposition toward viewing emo - tion as secondary to reason is entirely backward : “Reason is , and ought only to be , the slave of the passions , and can never pretend to any other ofﬁce than to serve and obey them . ” Fol - lowing this view , anger , for example , provides the motivation to respond to injustice ( Solomon 1993 ) , and anticipation of regret provides a reason to avoid excessive risk - taking ( Loomes & Sugden 1982 ) . Compelling scientiﬁc evidence for this view comes from emotionally impaired patients who have sustained injuries to the ventromedial prefrontal cortex ( vmPFC ) , a key area of the brain for integrating emotion and cognition . Studies ﬁnd that such neurological impairments reduce both ( a ) patients’ ability to feel emotion and ( b ) the optimality of their decisions , reductions that cannot be explained by simple cognitive changes ( Bechara et al . 1999 , Damasio 1994 ) . Participants with vmPFC injuries repeatedly select a riskier ﬁnancial option over a safer one , even to the point of bankruptcy in a game with real money , despite their cognitive understanding of the suboptimality of their choices . Physiological measures of galvanic skin response suggest that these participants behave this way because they do not experience the emotional signals—somatic markers—that lead normal decision makers to have a reasonable fear of high risks . 802 Lerner et al . A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2015 . 66 : 799 - 823 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g A cce ss p r ov i d e d by H a r v a r d U n i v e r s it y on 01 / 29 / 15 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . PS66CH30 - Lerner ARI 12 November 2014 15 : 22 Bias : systematic deviation from normative JDM Valence : the positive versus negative value of affect Mood : diffuse feeling that persists in duration without a necessary speciﬁc triggering target ; can be integral or incidental to the decision at hand Incidental affect ( encompassingemotionand / or mood ) : feelings at the time of decision not normatively relevant for deciding , e . g . , fear about giving a speech when deciding between investments Integral emotion as bias . Despite arising from the judgment or decision at hand , integral emo - tions can also bias decision making . For example , one may feel afraid to ﬂy and decide to drive instead , even though base rates for death by driving are much higher than are base rates for death by ﬂying the equivalent mileage ( Gigerenzer 2004 ) . Integral emotions can be remarkably inﬂuen - tial even in the presence of cognitive information that would suggest alternative courses of action ( for review , see Loewenstein 1996 ) . Once integral emotions attach themselves to decision targets , they become difﬁcult to detach ( Rozin et al . 1986 ) . Prior reviews have described myriad ways in which integral emotion inputs to decision making , especially perceptually vivid ones , can override otherwise rational courses of action ( Loewenstein et al . 2001 ) . Theme 2 . Incidental Emotions Inﬂuence Decision Making Researchers have found that incidental emotions pervasively carry over from one situation to the next , affecting decisions that should , from a normative perspective , be unrelated to that emotion ( for selective reviews , Han et al . 2007 , Keltner & Lerner 2010 , Lerner & Keltner 2000 , Lerner & Tiedens 2006 , Loewenstein & Lerner 2003 , Pham 2007 , Vohs et al . 2007 , Yates 2007 ) , a process known as the carryover of incidental emotion ( Bodenhausen 1993 , Loewenstein & Lerner 2003 ) . For example , incidental anger triggered in one situation automatically elicits a motive to blame individuals in other situations even though the targets of such anger have nothing to do with the source of the anger ( Quigley & Tedeschi 1996 ) . Moreover , carryover of incidental emotions typically occurs without awareness . Incidental emotion as bias . Psychological models have begun to elucidate the mechanisms through which the carryover effect occurs as well as the moderators that amplify or attenuate the effect . Early studies of carryover either implicitly or explicitly took a valence - based approach , dividing emotions into positive and negative categories and positing that emotions of the same valence would have similar effects . For example , such models hypothesized that people in good moods would make optimistic judgments , and people in bad moods would make pessimistic judg - ments ( for reviews , see Han et al . 2007 , Keltner & Lerner 2010 , Loewenstein & Lerner 2003 ) . Using a valence - grounded approach , Johnson & Tversky ( 1983 ) conducted the ﬁrst empirical demonstration of incidental mood effects on risk perception . This foundational study developed a compelling methodological procedure for assessing the effects of incidental emotion , features of which would be replicated numerous times . Participants read newspaper stories designed to induce positive or negative mood , and then estimated fatality frequencies for various potential causes of death ( e . g . , heart disease ) . As compared with participants who read positive stories , participants who read negative stories offered pessimistic estimates of fatalities . The inﬂuence of mood on judgment did not depend on the similarity between the content of stories and the content of subsequent judgments . Rather , the mood itself generally affected all judgments . In an equally foundational set of studies that same year , Schwarz & Clore ( 1983 ) found that ambient weather inﬂuenced people’s self - reported life satisfaction , setting the stage for research across disciplines that would study relationships between macro - level phenomena ( e . g . , weather , sports outcomes ) and individual - level behavior . For example , based on Schwarz & Clore’s ( 1983 ) ﬁnding that people have a greater sense of happiness and satisfaction on sunny days , economists have found a positive correlation between the amount of sunshine on a given day and stock market performance across 26 countries ( Hirshleifer & Shumway 2003 , Kamstra et al . 2003 ) . In a related example , stock market returns declined when a country’s soccer team was eliminated from the World Cup ( Edmans et al . 2007 ) . Increasingly , such studies make a promising connection between microlevel and macrolevel phenomena that should be further reﬁned as promising new www . annualreviews . org • Emotion and Decision Making 803 A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2015 . 66 : 799 - 823 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g A cce ss p r ov i d e d by H a r v a r d U n i v e r s it y on 01 / 29 / 15 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . PS66CH30 - Lerner ARI 12 November 2014 15 : 22 Appraisal - tendency framework ( ATF ) : a multidimensional theoretical framework for linking speciﬁc emotions to speciﬁc JDM outcomes ; proposed by Lerner & Keltner ( 2000 , 2001 ) methods emerge for measuring public mood and emotion ( e . g . , Bollen et al . 2011 ) as well as for measuring individual subjective experiences across time and situations ( for promising methods , see Barrett & Barrett 2001 , Stayman & Aaker 1993 ) . Moderating factors . The ﬁeld is starting to identify moderating factors for carryover of inciden - tal emotion . One auspicious line of work is Forgas’s ( 1995 ) affect infusion model , which elaborates on the circumstances under which affect—integral and / or incidental—inﬂuences social judgment . The model predicts that the degree of affect infusion into judgments varies along a processing continuum , such that affect is most likely to inﬂuence judgment in complex and unanticipated situations . Another promising line of research on moderating factors revolves around the hy - pothesis ( e . g . , Yip & Cˆot´e 2013 ) that individuals with high emotional intelligence can correctly identify which events caused their emotions and , therefore , can screen out the potential impact of incidental emotion . In one study , individuals high in emotion - understanding ability showed less impact of incidental anxiety on risk estimates when informed about the incidental source of their anxiety . Although solid evidence supports both of these emerging approaches to mapping moderators , the ﬁeld needs more attention to moderators in order to understand how emotion and decision making processes occur in the varied private and high - stakes public settings in which decisions are made . In future reviews , we hope to see studies of emotion and decision making in such contexts as federal governing bodies , diplomatic negotiations , operating rooms , intelligence agencies , and major ﬁnancial institutions . Theme 3 . Emotional Valence Is Only One of Several Dimensions That Shape Emotions’ Inﬂuence on Decision Making Most literature on emotion and JDM has implicitly or explicitly taken a valence - based approach ( e . g . , Finucane et al . 2000 , Schwarz & Clore 1983 ) , revealing powerful and provocative effects for that dimension of emotion . But valence cannot account for all inﬂuences of affect on judgment and choice . Though parsimonious , hypotheses relying only on the valence dimension explain less variance across JDM outcomes than would be ideal because they do not take into account evidence that emotions of the same valence differ in essential ways . For example , emotions of the same valence , such as anger and sadness , are associated with different antecedent appraisals ( Smith & Ellsworth 1985 ) ; depths of processing ( Bodenhausen et al . 1994b ) ; brain hemispheric activation ( Harmon - Jones & Sigelman 2001 ) ; facial expressions ( Ekman 2007 ) ; autonomic responses ( Lev - enson et al . 1990 ) ; and central nervous system activity ( Phelps et al . 2014 ) . At least as far back as 1998 , an Annual Review of Psychology article on JDM noted the insufﬁciency of valence and arousal in predicting JDM outcomes : “Even a two - dimensional model seems inadequate for describing emotional experiences . Anger , sadness , and disgust are all forms of negative affect , and arousal does not capture all of the differences among them . . . . A more detailed approach is required to understand relationships between emotions and decisions” ( Mellers et al . 1998 , p . 454 ) . To increase the predictive power and precision of JDM models of emotion , Lerner & Keltner ( 2000 , 2001 ) proposed examining multidimensional discrete emotions with their appraisal - tendency framework ( ATF ) . The ATF systematically links the appraisal processes associated with speciﬁc emotions to different judgment and choice outcomes . Unlike valence - based models , the ATF predicts that emotions of the same valence ( such as fear and anger ) can exert opposing inﬂuences on choices and judgments , whereas emotions of the opposite valence ( such as anger and happiness ) can exert similar inﬂuences . The ATF rests on three broad assumptions : ( a ) that a discrete set of cognitive dimensions differentiates emotional experience ( e . g . , Ellsworth & Smith 1988 , Lazarus 1991 , Ortony et al . 804 Lerner et al . A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2015 . 66 : 799 - 823 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g A cce ss p r ov i d e d by H a r v a r d U n i v e r s it y on 01 / 29 / 15 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . PS66CH30 - Lerner ARI 12 November 2014 15 : 22 Appraisal theme : each emotion’s macrolevel summary of speciﬁc harms / beneﬁts that may arise in the environment , which inﬂuence a speciﬁc course of action 1988 , Scherer 1999 , Smith & Ellsworth 1985 ) ; ( b ) that emotions serve a coordination role , auto - matically triggering a set of concomitant responses ( physiological , behavioral , experiential , and communication ) that enable the individual to address problems or opportunities quickly ( e . g . , Frijda 1988 , Levenson 1994 , Oatley & Jenkins 1992 ) ; and ( c ) that emotions have motivational properties that depend on both an emotion’s intensity and its qualitative character . That is , spe - ciﬁc emotions carry speciﬁc “action tendencies” ( e . g . , Frijda 1986 ) , or implicit goals , that signal the most adaptive response . In this view , emotions save cognitive processing by triggering what Levenson and colleagues call time - tested responses to universal experiences ( such as loss , injustice , and threat ) ( Levenson 1994 , Tooby & Cosmides 1990 ) . For example , anger triggers aggression , and fear triggers ﬂight . Relatedly , Lazarus ( 1991 ) has argued that each emotion is associated with a “core - relational” or appraisal theme—the central relational harm or beneﬁt that underlies each speciﬁc emotion . The ATF points to a clear empirical strategy : Research should compare emotions whose ap - praisal themes are highly differentiated on judgments and choices that relate to that appraisal theme ( Lerner & Keltner 2000 ) . Han and colleagues ( 2007 ) refer to this strategy as the “matching principle , ” which we discuss further in the next section . By illuminating the cognitive and mo - tivational processes associated with different emotions , the model provides a ﬂexible yet speciﬁc framework for developing a host of testable hypotheses concerning affect and JDM . The appraisal - tendency hypothesis . According to the ATF , appraisal tendencies are goal - directed processes through which emotions exert effects on judgments and decisions until the emotion - eliciting problem is resolved ( Lerner & Keltner 2000 , 2001 ) . The ATF predicts that an emotion , once activated , can trigger a cognitive predisposition to assess future events in line with the central appraisal dimensions that triggered the emotion ( for examples , see Table 1 ) . Such appraisals become an implicit perceptual lens for interpreting subsequent situations . Just as emotions include action tendencies that predispose individuals to act in speciﬁc ways to meet environmental problems and opportunities ( e . g . , Frijda 1986 ) , the ATF posits that emotions predispose individuals to appraise the environment in speciﬁc ways toward similar functional ends . An early study that contributed to the development of the ATF examined the effects of anger and sadness on causal attributions ( Keltner et al . 1993 ) . Although both anger and sadness have a negative valence , appraisals of individual control characterize anger , whereas appraisals of sit - uational control characterize sadness . The authors predicted that these differences would drive attributions of responsibility for subsequent events . Consistent with this hypothesis , incidental anger increased attributions of individual responsibility for life outcomes , whereas incidental sad - ness increased the tendency to perceive fate or situational circumstances as responsible for life outcomes . In an early test of ATF - based predictions , Lerner & Keltner ( 2000 ) compared risk perceptions of fearful and angry people . Consistent with the ATF , dispositionally fearful people made pes - simistic judgments of future events , whereas dispositionally angry people were optimistic about future events . Subsequent studies experimentally induced participants to feel incidental anger or fear and found similar patterns ( Lerner & Keltner 2001 ) . Participants’ appraisals of certainty and control mediated the causal effects of fear and anger on optimism . Findings consistent with the ATF in many other contexts have further supported this approach ( for discussion , see Bagneux et al . 2012 , Cavanaugh et al . 2007 , Han et al . 2007 , Horberg et al . 2011 , Lerner & Tiedens 2006 , Yates 2007 ) . For example , one study challenged the valence - based idea that people in positive moods make positive judgments and vice versa for negative moods , ﬁnding differential effects of sadness and anger on judgments of likelihood , despite both www . annualreviews . org • Emotion and Decision Making 805 A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2015 . 66 : 799 - 823 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g A cce ss p r ov i d e d by H a r v a r d U n i v e r s it y on 01 / 29 / 15 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . PS66CH30 - Lerner ARI 12 November 2014 15 : 22 Table 1 Two illustrations of the appraisal - tendency framework , originally developed by Lerner & Keltner ( 2000 , 2001 ) and updated here . a Table adapted from Lerner JS , Keltner D . 2000 . Beyond valence : toward a model of emotion - speciﬁc inﬂuences on judgment and choice . Cogn . Emot . 14 ( 4 ) : 479 , table 1 , with permission from the publisher Cognitive appraisal Illustrations : negative emotions Illustrations : positive emotions dimensions Anger Fear Pride Surprise Certainty High Low High Low Pleasantness Low Low High High Attentional activity Medium Medium High Medium Anticipated effort High High Low Low Individual control High Low High Medium Others’ responsibility High Medium Low High Appraisal tendency Perceive negative events as predictable , under human control , and brought about by others Perceive negative events as unpredictable and under situational control Perceive positive events as brought about by self Perceive positive events as unpredictable and brought about by others Inﬂuence on relevant outcome Inﬂuence on risk perception Inﬂuence on attribution Perceive low risk Perceive high risk Perceive self as responsible Perceive others as responsible a Certainty is the degree to which future events seem predictable and comprehensible ( high ) versus unpredictable and incomprehensible ( low ) . Pleasantness is the degree to which one feels pleasure ( high ) versus displeasure ( low ) . Attentional activity is the degree to which something draws one’s attention ( high ) versus repels one’s attention ( low ) . Control is the degree to which events seem to be brought about by individual agency ( high ) versus situational agency ( low ) . Anticipated effort is the degree to which physical or mental exertion seems to be needed ( high ) versus not needed ( low ) . Others’ responsibility is the degree to which someone or something other than oneself ( high ) versus oneself ( low ) seems to be responsible . We refer interested readers to Smith & Ellsworth ( 1985 ) for comprehensive descriptions of each dimension and each emotion’s scale values along the dimensions . Cognitive appraisal : cognitive meaning making that leads to emotions , usually along dimensions of certainty , pleasantness , attentional activity , control , anticipated effort , and self - other responsibility emotions having a negative valence ( DeSteno et al . 2000 ) . DeSteno and colleagues have also shown several ways that positive emotions predict behavior beyond the contributions of the valence ( Bartlett & DeSteno 2006 , Williams & DeSteno 2008 ) . For example , several studies show that speciﬁc positive emotions , such as gratitude and pride , have unique effects on helping behavior and task perseverance . Other studies have delineated the unique proﬁles of various positive states in accordance with differences in their appraisal themes ( Campos & Keltner 2014 , Valdesolo & Graham 2014 ) . Theme 4 . Emotions Shape Decisions via the Content of Thought Based on evidence that discrete emotions are associated with different patterns of cognitive ap - praisal ( for review , see Keltner & Lerner 2010 ) and that such appraisal dimensions involve themes that have been central to JDM research , a natural opportunity for linking discrete emotions to JDM outcomes arises . Consider two illustrations of how emotions shape the content of thought via appraisal tendencies , drawn from Lerner & Keltner ( 2000 ) . Table 1 compares two pairs of emotions from the same valence that are highly differentiated in their central appraisal themes on a judgment related to those appraisal themes . Each of these four emotions can be characterized in terms of the six emotion appraisal dimensions originally identiﬁed by Smith & Ellsworth ( 1985 ) : certainty , pleasantness , attentional activity , anticipated effort , control , and others’ responsibility . The ATF predicts that dimensions on which an emotion scores particularly low or high are likely 806 Lerner et al . A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2015 . 66 : 799 - 823 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g A cce ss p r ov i d e d by H a r v a r d U n i v e r s it y on 01 / 29 / 15 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . PS66CH30 - Lerner ARI 12 November 2014 15 : 22 Appraisal tendency : from the ATF , a hypothesizedmechanismthroughwhichemotionsactivateacognitiveandmotivationalpredispositiontoappraisefutureeventsaccordingtoappraisaldimensionsthattriggeredtheemotion ( emotion - to - cognition ) to activate an appraisal tendency that inﬂuences JDM , even for incidental emotions . The penulti - mate row in the table lists appraisal tendencies for each emotion that follow from the dimensions on which the emotion is low or high . For example , anger scores high on the dimensions of certainty , control , and others’ responsi - bility and low on pleasantness . These characteristics suggest that angry people will view negative events as predictably caused by , and under the control of , other individuals . In contrast , fear in - volves low certainty and a low sense of control , which are likely to produce a perception of negative events as unpredictable and situationally determined . These differences in appraisal tendencies are particularly relevant to risk perception ; fearful people tend to see greater risk , and angry people tend to see less risk . As described above , correlational and experimental research support this idea ( Lerner & Keltner 2000 , 2001 ) . The last row of Table 1 illustrates the ATF matching principle , introduced in the prior section . Speciﬁcally , a match between the appraisal themes of a speciﬁc emotion and the particular domain of a judgment or decision predicts the likelihood that a given emotion will inﬂuence a given judgment or decision . Differences in appraisal dimensions of pride and surprise , meanwhile , suggest different effects on attributions of responsibility . Speciﬁcally , pride scores lower than surprise on the dimension of others’ responsibility , whereas surprise scores low on certainty . These differences suggest that pride will produce an appraisal tendency to attribute favorable events to one’s own efforts , whereas surprise will produce an appraisal tendency to see favorable events as unpredictable and outside one’s own control . These differences are likely to be relevant to judgments of attribution ; pride increases perceptions of one’s own responsibility for positive events and surprise increases per - ceptions of others’ responsibility for positive events , even when the judgment is unrelated to the source of the pride or surprise . Once again , this last part illustrates the ATF matching principle . An experiment conducted in the wake of the 9 / 11 terrorist attacks tested whether these patterns would scale up to the population level . A nationally representative sample of US citizens read either a real news story ( on the threat of anthrax ) selected to elicit fear or a real news story ( on celebrations of the attacks by some people in Arab countries ) selected to elicit anger , and then participants were asked a series of questions about perceived risks and policy preferences ( Lerner et al . 2003 ) . Participants induced with fear perceived greater risk in the world , whereas those induced with anger perceived lower risk , for events both related and unrelated to terrorism . Participants in the anger condition also supported harsher policies against suspected terrorists than did participants in the fear condition . Theme 5 . Emotions Shape Decisions via the Depth of Thought In addition to inﬂuencing the content of thought , emotions also inﬂuence the depth of information processing related to decision making . One interesting school of thought ( Schwarz 1990 , Schwarz & Bless 1991 ) proposes that , if emotions serve in an adaptive role by signaling when a situation demands additional attention , then negative mood should signal threat and thus increase vigilant , systematic processing , and positive mood should signal a safe environment and lead to more heuristic processing . Indeed , numerous studies have shown that people in positive ( negative ) affective states were more ( less ) inﬂuenced by heuristic cues , such as the expertise , attractiveness , or likeability of the source , and by the length rather than the quality of the message ; they also relied more on stereotypes ( Bless et al . 1996 , Bodenhausen et al . 1994a ) . Note that systematic processing is not necessarily more desirable than automatic processing . Studies have shown that increased systematic processing from negative affect can aggravate an - choring effects owing to increased focus on the anchor ( Bodenhausen et al . 2000 ) . Similarly , negative affect reduced the accuracy of thin - slice judgments of teacher effectiveness except when www . annualreviews . org • Emotion and Decision Making 807 A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2015 . 66 : 799 - 823 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g A cce ss p r ov i d e d by H a r v a r d U n i v e r s it y on 01 / 29 / 15 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . PS66CH30 - Lerner ARI 12 November 2014 15 : 22 Endowment effect : an anomaly in economic transactions wherein sellers value goods more than buyers value the same goods , possibly because sellers see the sale as a loss of ownership participants were under cognitive load , suggesting that the accuracy decrease for sad participants was caused by more deliberative processing ( Ambady & Gray 2002 ) . Finally , dysphoric people show excessive rumination ( Lyubomirsky & Nolen - Hoeksema 1995 ) . Although this research shows clear inﬂuences of positive versus negative affect on processing depth , it has typically operationalized positive affect as happiness and negative affect as sadness . In one exception , Bodenhausen and colleagues ( 1994b ) compared the effects of sadness and anger , both negatively valenced emotions . Relative to neutral or sad participants , angry participants showed greater reliance on stereotypic judgments and on heuristic cues , a result that is inconsistent with valence - based explanations but may be consistent with the affect - as - information view that anger carries positive information about one’s own position ( Clore et al . 2001 ) . Tiedens & Linton ( 2001 ) suggested an alternative explanation for the difference between hap - piness and sadness in depth of processing : Happiness involves appraisals of high certainty , and sadness involves appraisals of low certainty . In a series of four studies , the investigators showed that high - certainty emotions ( e . g . , happiness , anger , disgust ) increased heuristic processing by increasing reliance on the source expertise of a persuasive message as opposed to its content , increasing usage of stereotypes , and decreasing attention to argument quality . Furthermore , by manipulating certainty appraisals independently from emotion , they showed that certainty plays a causal role in determining whether people engage in heuristic or systematic processing . Since Lerner & Tiedens ( 2006 ) introduced emotion effects on depth of thought into the ATF framework , studies have revealed effects of discrete emotion on depth of processing across numer - ous domains . For example , Small & Lerner ( 2008 ) found that , relative to neutral - state participants , angry participants allocated less to welfare recipients , and sad participants allocated more—an effect that was eliminated under cognitive load , suggesting that allocations were predicted by differences in depth of processing between sad and angry participants . Theme 6 . Emotions Shape Decisions via Goal Activation Many theorists have proposed that emotions serve an adaptive coordination role , triggering a set of responses ( physiological , behavioral , experiential , and communication ) that enable individuals to address encountered problems or opportunities quickly ( for review , see Keltner et al . 2014 ) . For example , in their investigation of action tendencies , Frijda and colleagues ( 1989 ) found that anger was associated with the desire to change the situation and move against another person or obstacle by ﬁghting , harming , or conquering it . As one would expect , readiness to ﬁght manifests not only experientially but also physiologically . For example , anger is associated with neural activation characteristics of approach motivation ( Harmon - Jones & Sigelman 2001 ) and sometimes with changes in peripheral physiology that might prepare one to ﬁght , such as increasing blood ﬂow to the hands ( Ekman & Davidson 1994 ) . Such emotion - speciﬁc action tendencies map onto appraisal themes . For example , given that anxiety is characterized by the appraisal theme of facing uncertain existential threats ( Lazarus 1991 ) , it accompanies the action tendency to reduce uncertainty ( Raghunathan & Pham 1999 ) . Sadness , by contrast , is characterized by the appraisal theme of experiencing irrevocable loss ( Lazarus 1991 ) and thus accompanies the action tendency to change one’s circumstances , perhaps by seeking rewards ( Lerner et al . 2004 ) . Consistent with this logic , a set of studies contrasted the effects of incidental anxiety and sadness on hypothetical gambling and job - selection decisions and found that sadness increased tendencies to favor high - risk , high - reward options , whereas anxiety increased tendencies to favor low - risk , low - reward options ( Raghunathan & Pham 1999 ) . Lerner and colleagues ( 2004 ) followed a similar logic in a series of studies that tested the effects of incidental sadness and disgust on the endowment effect ( Kahneman et al . 1991 ) . The authors 808 Lerner et al . A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2015 . 66 : 799 - 823 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g A cce ss p r ov i d e d by H a r v a r d U n i v e r s it y on 01 / 29 / 15 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . PS66CH30 - Lerner ARI 12 November 2014 15 : 22 hypothesized that disgust , which revolves around the appraisal theme of being too close to a potentially contaminating object ( Lazarus 1991 ) , would evoke an implicit goal to expel current objects and to avoid taking in anything new ( Rozin et al . 2008 ) . Consistent with this hypothesis , experimentally induced incidental disgust reduced selling prices among participants who owned the experimental object ( an “expel” goal ) and reduced buying prices among participants who did not own the object ( an “avoid taking anything in” goal ) . For sadness , associated with the appraisal themes of loss and misfortune , both selling old goods and buying new goods present opportunities to change one’s circumstances . Consistent with predictions , sadness reduced selling prices but increased buying prices . In sum , incidental disgust eliminated the endowment effect , whereas incidental sadness reversed it . Han and colleagues ( 2012 ) further tested the effects of disgust on implicit goals in the context of the status - quo bias , a preference for keeping a current option over switching to another option ( Samuelson & Zeckhauser 1988 ) , and ruled out more general valence - or arousal - based disgust effects : A valence - based account would predict that any negative emotion should devalue all choice options , preserving the status - quo bias ( Forgas 2003 ) . An arousal - based account would predict that disgust would exacerbate status - quo bias by amplifying the dominant response option ( Foster et al . 1998 ) . In contrast , an implicit goals - based account would predict that disgust would trigger a goal ofexpellingthecurrentoption . Datasupportedthislatterinterpretation : Giventhechoicebetween keeping one unknown good ( the status quo ) or switching to another unknown good , disgust - state participants were signiﬁcantly more likely than were neutral - state participants to switch . As is commonly the case with effects of incidental emotion , the effects of disgust on choices eluded participants’ awareness . Lerner and colleagues ( 2013 ) tested whether the effect of sadness on implicit goals would increase impatience in ﬁnancial decisions , possibly creating a myopic focus on obtaining money immediately instead of later , even if immediate rewards were much smaller than later awards . As predicted , relative to median neutral - state participants , median sad - state participants across studies accepted 13 – 34 % less money immediately to avoid waiting 3 months for payment . Again , valence - based accounts cannot explain this effect : Disgusted participants were just as patient as were neutral participants . The view that discrete emotions trigger discrete implicit goals is consistent with the “feeling is fordoing”model ( Zeelenbergetal . 2008 ) , atheoreticalframeworkassertingthattheadaptivefunc - tion of emotion is deﬁned by the behaviors that speciﬁc states motivate . According to Zeelenberg and colleagues , these motivational orientations derive from the experiential qualities of such emo - tions , as opposed to , for example , the appraisal tendencies giving rise to their experience . Thus , the behavioral effects depend only on the perceived relevance of an emotion to a current goal , regard - less of whether the emotion is integral or incidental to the decision at hand . Given that the ATF does not distinguish informational versus experiential pathways , an important agenda for future work is to develop more granular evidence of the mechanisms through which emotions activate implicit goals in judgment and choice . At present , the models appear to make similar predictions . Theme 7 . Emotions Inﬂuence Interpersonal Decision Making Emotions are inherently social ( for review , see Keltner & Lerner 2010 ) , and a full explanation of their adaptive utility requires an understanding of their reciprocal inﬂuence on interaction partners . As an example of how complex such inﬂuences can be , people derive happiness merely from opportunities to help and give to others with no expectation of concrete gains ( Dunn et al . 2008 ) . Indeed , prosociality is sometimes used instrumentally to manage one’s mood , relieving sadness or distress ( Schaller & Cialdini 1988 ) . www . annualreviews . org • Emotion and Decision Making 809 A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2015 . 66 : 799 - 823 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g A cce ss p r ov i d e d by H a r v a r d U n i v e r s it y on 01 / 29 / 15 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . PS66CH30 - Lerner ARI 12 November 2014 15 : 22 Emotions help optimally navigate social decisions . Many scholars have conceptualized emo - tions as communication systems that help people navigate and coordinate social interactions by providing information about others’ motives and dispositions , ultimately allowing for the creation and maintenance of healthy and productive social relationships ( Keltner et al . 2014 , Morris & Keltner 2000 ) . In the case of psychopathology ( e . g . , narcissism ) , emotions impede healthy and productive social relationships ( Kring 2008 ) . Frank ( 1988 ) argues that the communicative function of emotions has played a crucial role in helping people solve important commitment problems raised by mixed motives . That is , whether we decide to pursue cooperative or competitive strategies with others depends on our beliefs about their intentions ( cf . Singer & Fehr 2005 ) , information that is often inferred from their emotions ( Fessler 2007 ) . This approach has been particularly evident in the study of mixed - motive situations ( e . g . , negotiation and bargaining ; cf . Van Kleef et al . 2010 ) . For example , communicating gratitude triggers others’ generosity ( Rind & Bordia 1995 ) and ultimately helps an individual build social and economic capital ( DeSteno 2009 ) . Research to date leads to the conclusion that emotion may serve at least three functions in interpersonal decision making : ( a ) helping individuals understand one another’s emotions , be - liefs , and intentions ; ( b ) incentivizing or imposing a cost on others’ behavior ; and ( c ) evoking complementary , reciprocal , or shared emotions in others ( Keltner & Haidt 1999 ) . For example , expressions of anger prompt concessions from negotiation partners ( Van Kleef et al . 2004a ) and more cooperative strategies in bargaining games ( Van Dijk et al . 2008 ) because anger signals a desire for behavioral adjustment ( Fischer & Roseman 2007 ) . This effect is qualiﬁed by contextual variables , such as the motivation and ability of interaction partners to process emotional infor - mation ( Van Kleef et al . 2004b ) as well as the morally charged nature of a negotiation ( Dehghani et al . 2014 ) . Multiparty negotiations show different effects ; for example , communicated anger can lead to exclusion in these contexts ( Van Beest et al . 2008 ) . One study investigating this mechanism found that people seem to use others’ emotional displays to make inferences about their appraisals and , subsequently , their mental states ( de Melo et al . 2014 ) . Discrete supplication emotions ( disappointment or worry ) evoke higher concessions from negotiators as compared with similarly valenced appeasement emotions ( guilt or regret ; Van Kleef et al . 2006 ) . As compared with anger , disappointment also engenders more cooperation : In the “give - some game” ( Wubben et al . 2009 ) , two participants simultaneously decide how much money to give to the other participant or keep for themselves . Any money given is doubled , and this procedure is repeated over 14 trials . After perceived failures of reciprocity , expressing disappointment communicates a forgiving nature and motivates greater cooperation , whereas expressing anger communicates a retaliatory nature and promotes escalation of defection . Although interpersonal emotions can inﬂuence others’ behavior by communicating informa - tion about an emoter’s intentions , they can also change decisions and behavior as a function of the corresponding or complementary emotional states they evoke in others . Anger can elicit fear when communicated by those high in power ( or corresponding anger when communicated by those low in power ; Lelieveld et al . 2012 ) and also a desire for retaliation ( Wang et al . 2012 ) . Communicating disappointment with a proposal can evoke guilt in a bargaining partner and motivate reparative action ( Lelieveld et al . 2013 ) . Decision makers try to use the emotional communications of bargaining partners as sources of strategic information ( Andrade & Ho 2007 ) . Increasing knowledge of how emotion communi - cation inﬂuences others’ decisions also raises the possibility for the strategic display of emotional expression . The few studies investigating this possibility have produced mixed results : Although such strategies can prompt greater concessions ( Kopelman et al . 2006 ) , inauthentic displays that 810 Lerner et al . A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2015 . 66 : 799 - 823 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g A cce ss p r ov i d e d by H a r v a r d U n i v e r s it y on 01 / 29 / 15 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . PS66CH30 - Lerner ARI 12 November 2014 15 : 22 are detected are met with increased demands and reduced trust ( Cˆot´e et al . 2013 ) . The costs and beneﬁts of intentionally deploying emotional expressions in such contexts will be an interesting area of future research . For example , initial work ( Elfenbein et al . 2007 , Mueller & Curhan 2006 ) suggests that emotionally intelligent individuals should be better able to elicit desired emotions from counterparts and , therefore , might ( consciously or nonconsciously ) use such skills to achieve desired outcomes . Emotion inﬂuences on group processes and perceptions of groups . Research on group - level emotional processes is surprisingly scant , given that so many high - stakes decisions are made in groups and that the existing research reveals important effects . For example , research has found that , although team members tend to feel happy and to enjoy groups that have a shared sense of reality , such feelings are associated with groupthink—the destructive tendency to minimize conﬂict and maximize harmony and conformity ( Janis 1972 ) . Given that general positivity or negativity can spread through groups and inﬂuence performance outcomes ( e . g . , Barsade 2002 , Hatﬁeld et al . 1993 , Totterdell 2000 ) , considerably more research in this area is needed , especially at the level of speciﬁc emotions . Theme 8 . Unwanted Effects of Emotion on Decision Making Can Be Reduced Under Certain Circumstances Numerous strategies have been examined for minimizing the effects of emotions on decision making in situations where such effects are seen as deleterious . These strategies broadly take one of two forms : ( a ) minimizing the magnitude of the emotional response ( e . g . , through time delay , reappraisal , or induction of a counteracting emotional state ) , or ( b ) insulating the judgment or decision process from the emotion ( e . g . , by crowding out emotion , increasing awareness of misattribution , or modifying the choice architecture ) . Solutions that Seek to Minimize the Emotional Response Time delay . In theory , the simplest strategy for minimizing emotional magnitude is to let time pass before making a decision . Full - blown emotions are short - lived ( Levenson 1994 ) . Facial ex - pressions are ﬂeeting ( Keltner et al . 2003 ) , and physiological responses quickly fade ( e . g . , Mauss et al . 2005 ) . The extensive literature on affective forecasting has documented the surprising power of adaptation and rationalization to bring our emotional states back toward baseline even after traumatic events ( see Wilson & Gilbert 2005 ) . In certain instances , perhaps rare ones , induced anger may cause immediate changes in participants’ decisions but show no such effects when the induction and decision are separated by a 10 - minute delay ( Gneezy & Imas 2014 ) . Anyone who has ever observed a family member nurse a grudge for years may question the boundary condi - tions of time delay . In short , although it cannot be said that time heals all wounds , research in psychology has revealed that humans revert back to baseline states over time , an effect we typically underestimate ( Gilbert 2006 , Loewenstein 2000 ) . That said , there is a reason why a strategy as simple as waiting is so rarely used : Delay is fundamentally antithetical to the function of many emotional states , which motivate immediate behavioral responses to adaptive concerns . Most would agree that taking a moment to decide how to react after discovering a spouse in the arms of another would be prudent . Few would be capable of doing so . The immediate effects of emotional states can render us “out of control” and incapable of waiting for a neutral state to return ( Loewenstein 1996 ) . www . annualreviews . org • Emotion and Decision Making 811 A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2015 . 66 : 799 - 823 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g A cce ss p r ov i d e d by H a r v a r d U n i v e r s it y on 01 / 29 / 15 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . PS66CH30 - Lerner ARI 12 November 2014 15 : 22 Discount rate : degree to which an individual devalues future outcomes ( e . g . , $ 100 next week ) relative to immediate outcomes ; a measure of impatience Suppression . Although suppression is often touted in the popular literature ( e . g . , “control your anger” ) , research indicates that it is often counterproductive , intensifying the very emotional state one had hoped to regulate ( Wenzlaff & Wegner 2000 ) . Attempting to avoid feeling an emotion will typicallyreduceone’sexpressivebehaviorbuthavelittleornoimpactonone’ssubjectiveexperience of the emotion ( Gross & Levenson 1993 ) . Indeed , physiological reactions to suppression are often mixed and frequently deleterious ( Gross 2002 , Gross & Levenson 1993 ) . Speciﬁcally , attempts at suppression are cognitively costly , impairing memory for details of what triggered the emotion ( Richards & Gross 1999 ) . This effect has important practical implications for how individuals might best respond to unexpected accidents that trigger intense emotion . Reappraisal . Reframingthemeaningofstimulithatledtoanemotionalresponse , i . e . , reappraisal , hasconsistentlyemergedasasuperiorstrategyfordissipatingtheemotionalresponse ( Gross2002 ) . Reappraisal includes such behaviors as reminding oneself “it’s just a test” after receiving a poor exam grade , adopting the mind - set of a nurse or medical professional to minimize the emotional impact of viewing someone’s injury , or viewing a job layoff as an opportunity to pursue long - forgotten dreams ( Gross 1998 , 2002 ) . In contrast to suppression , reappraisal not only reduces self - reported negative feelings in response to negative events but also mitigates physiological and neural responses to those events ( Jamieson et al . 2012 , Ochsner et al . 2002 ) . Those who employ strategic reappraisal typically have more positive emotional experiences ( Gross & John 2003 ) and show fewer incidences of psychopathology ( Aldao et al . 2010 ) . As yet , we ﬁnd few studies applying reappraisal techniques to emotion effects on JDM , but one groundbreaking paper suggests that this area holds promise . Halperin and colleagues ( 2012 ) examined the responses of Israelis to the recent Palestinian bid for United Nations recognition . Participants who were randomly assigned to a reappraisal training condition ( compared with a control condition ) showed greater support for conciliatory policies and less support for aggressive policies toward Palestinians at planned assessments both one week later and ﬁve months later . The relative efﬁcacy of suppression and reappraisal techniques derives from the content of thoughts about emotions ( i . e . , don’t think about this , or think about this differently ) . A separate literature on mood repair suggests the possibility of another route to regulation : triggering other target emotional states that neutralize the original state . The “dual - emotion solution” ( inducing a counteracting emotional state ) . Theoretically , one could counteract an unwanted decision effect by inducing another emotion—one that triggers opposing tendencies in JDM . We call this the “dual - emotion solution” even though the decision process would still involve bias because the decision outcome would not . A provocative example of this approach examined the well - known phenomenon of excessively high ﬁnancial discount rates , as described in the JDM primer . Whereas sadness is known to increase excessive discount rates ( Lerner et al . 2013 ) , gratitude has now been shown to reduce such rates , even below the levels one would experience in a neutral state ( DeSteno et al . 2014 ) . These results suggest the unusual possibility that inducing an incidental emotion ( in this case , gratitude ) may reduce an existing bias . Akin to the creative paper by Loewenstein et al . ( 2012 ) , one might use one bias to counteract another . Solutions that Seek ( but Sometimes Fail ) to Insulate the Decision Process from the Emotion Increasing cognitive effort through ﬁnancial incentives . Few studies have systematically tested ways to reduce the carryover of incidental emotion ; results to date suggest that such 812 Lerner et al . A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2015 . 66 : 799 - 823 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g A cce ss p r ov i d e d by H a r v a r d U n i v e r s it y on 01 / 29 / 15 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . PS66CH30 - Lerner ARI 12 November 2014 15 : 22 reductionwillbedifﬁcult . Increasingadecisionmaker’sattentiontothedecisiontaskbyhavingreal ﬁnancial outcomes is often considered a good way to reduce bias , but this intuition does not seem to be effective . Incidental emotions routinely serve as perceptual lenses even when real ﬁnancial rewards are at stake ( e . g . , DeSteno et al . 2014 ; Lerner et al . 2004 , 2013 ; Loewenstein et al . 2001 ) . Crowding out emotion . Saturating the decision maker with cognitive facts about a particular decision domain and making the domain relevant might also seem like useful ways to diminish the carryover effect . Unfortunately , neither strategy appears promising . For example , although US citizens paid close attention to matters of risk and safety in the wake of 9 / 11 , incidental emotions induced shortly after the attacks shaped citizens’ global perceptions of risk and their preferences for risky courses of action ( Lerner et al . 2003 ) . Increasing awareness of misattribution . Onthebasisoftheideathatemotion - relatedappraisals are automatic ( Ekman 1992 , Lazarus 1991 , LeDoux 1996 ) , the “cognitive - awareness hypothesis” ( Han et al . 2007 ) posits that appraisal tendencies will be deactivated when decision makers become more cognitively aware of their decision - making processes . Schwarz & Clore ( 1983 ) pioneered this approach , discovering in a seminal study that ambient weather effects on judgments of subjective well - being disappeared when people were reminded of the weather . Thus , they demonstrated that a simple reminder to attribute ( positive or ) negative mood to its correct source could eliminate the carryover of incidental mood . Inasimilarvein , Lernerandcolleagues ( 1998 ) showedthatinducingdecisionmakerstomonitor their judgment processes in a preemptively self - critical way , via the expectation that they would need to justify their decisions to an expert audience ( i . e . , accountability ) , reduced the impact of incidental anger on punishment decisions by leading people to focus on judgment - relevant information and dismiss incidental affect as irrelevant to the judgment . Notably , the accountable decision makers did not feel any less anger than the nonaccountable decision makers ; they simply used better judgment cues . These examples of deactivation of emotional carryover may be more the exception than the rule , as numerous factors can thwart cognitive awareness . First , people often lack the motivation to monitor their decision - making processes . Moreover , even when people are motivated , attaining accurate awareness of their decision processes is a difﬁcult task ( for review , see Wilson & Brekke 1994 ) . For example , incidental disgust led participants to get rid of their possessions even when they were directly warned to avoid this carryover effect of disgust ( Han et al . 2012 ) . Stepping back to consider broader frameworks for organizing and understanding bias in JDM , the type of incidental emotion carryover observed appears most consistent with what Wilson & Brekke ( 1994 ) refer to as “mental contamination” and Arkes ( 1991 ) calls “association based errors”—processes wherein bias ( e . g . , incidental emotion carryover ) arises because of mental pro - cessing that is unconscious or uncontrollable . These models suggest that the best strategy for reducing such biases would be to control one’s exposure to biasing information in the ﬁrst place . This is a difﬁcult task for the decision maker . Thus , debiasing may be accomplished more effec - tively by altering the structure of the choice context , as we describe below . Choice architecture . All the strategies discussed so far are effortful and therefore unlikely to be broadly successful tactics for helping busy decision makers . By contrast , the burgeoning literature onchoicearchitectureoffersanalternativesetoftacticsthataffectsbehaviorsautomaticallywithout restricting choices ( Thaler & Sunstein 2008 ) . It does so by changing the framing and structure of choices and environments in a way that relies on JDM’s understanding of people’s sometimes www . annualreviews . org • Emotion and Decision Making 813 A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2015 . 66 : 799 - 823 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g A cce ss p r ov i d e d by H a r v a r d U n i v e r s it y on 01 / 29 / 15 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . PS66CH30 - Lerner ARI 12 November 2014 15 : 22 faulty decision processes to counteract more pernicious errors . For example , Thaler & Sunstein ( 2003 ) suggest that cafeterias should be organized so that the ﬁrst foods consumers encounter are healthier options , thus increasing the chance that the combination of visceral hunger and mindless consumption does not derail their health goals . The cafeteria example illustrates that one of the most powerful yet simple forms of choice architecture is setting good defaults . For example , setting a default to enroll new employees in a 401 ( k ) plan automatically is highly effective at increasing saving rates ( Madrian & Shea 2001 ) . Setting good defaults is especially important when emotions such as happiness or anger reduce the depth of cognitive processing ( Tiedens & Linton 2001 ) . That is , when people rely on easily accessible cues and heuristic processing , a good default is especially likely to improve average decision quality . More heavy - handed choice architecture can also be utilized to help consumers delay their choices to reduce the inﬂuence of immediate emotion . For example , most US states require a waiting period before individuals can buy guns , thereby reducing any immediate inﬂuences of temporary anger . Similarly , 21 US states require couples to wait from 1 to 6 days to get married after receiving a marriage license . By involving relatively unconscious inﬂuences , choice architecture provides a promising avenue for reducing the impact of unwanted emotions in a way that can actually beneﬁt the general public . Yet , most choice architecture is designed with only cognitive decision - making processes in mind , overlooking emotion , and this omission may limit its effectiveness . The ﬁeld would beneﬁt by initiating research in the spirit of choice architecture that speciﬁcally targets unwanted emotional inﬂuences . GENERAL MODEL Here we propose a model of decision making that attempts to account for both traditional ( rational choice ) inputs and newly evident emotional inputs , thus synthesizing the ﬁndings above . Speciﬁ - cally , we propose the emotion - imbued choice ( EIC ) model ( Figure 2 ) , descriptively summarizing ways in which emotion permeates choice processes . The model intentionally draws inspiration from prior models , especially the risk - as - feelings model ( Loewenstein et al . 2001 , ﬁgure 3 , p . 270 ) and Loewenstein & Lerner’s ( 2003 , ﬁgure 31 . 1 , p . 621 ) model of the determinants and conse - quences of emotions . For the purposes of this article , the EIC model assumes that the decision maker faces a one - time choice between given options , without the possibility of seeking additional information or options . The model ends at the moment of decision and does not include actual ( as opposed to expected ) outcomes and feelings that occur as a result of the decision . Finally , although we include visceral inﬂuences that shape decision processes , we do not account for reﬂexive behav - ior , such as when one jumps back or freezes upon hearing an unexpected , loud blast . That is , our model attempts to explain conscious or nonconscious decision making but not all human behavior . We begin by discussing the aspects this model shares with normative , rational choice models of decision making such as expected utility and discounted utility theories ( Figure 2 , solid lines ) . Decision theory requires the decision maker to evaluate the options at hand by assessing the utility of each expected outcome for each option . These outcome utilities are combined with characteristics of the options , such as probabilities and time delays , and characteristics of the decision maker , such as risk aversion and discount rate . These factors are combined ( Figure 2 , lines A , B , and C ) to form an overall evaluation of each option , and the best option is chosen ( Figure 2 , line D ) . The EIC model adds emotions to this process in two ways . The ﬁrst departure from the strictest rational choice models is to allow for constructed rather than stable preferences ( Payne 814 Lerner et al . A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2015 . 66 : 799 - 823 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g A cce ss p r ov i d e d by H a r v a r d U n i v e r s it y on 01 / 29 / 15 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . PS66CH30 - Lerner ARI 12 November 2014 15 : 22 Incidentalinfluences e . g . , mood , weather , carryover effects Decision Characteristics of decision maker e . g . , preferences , personality Characteristics of options e . g . , likelihood or probability , time delay , interpersonal outcomes Conscious and / or nonconscious evaluation A D E B H I F G G ' B ' C C ' Paths included in traditional rational choice models Paths not included in traditional rational choice models Current emotions i . e . , emotions felt at time of decision Expected outcomes ( including expected emotions ) Figure 2 Toward a general model of affective inﬂuences on decision making : the emotion - imbued choice model . et al . 1993 , Slovic 1995 ) , such that the utility for each decision outcome is judged by predicting one’s emotional response to that outcome . These predicted emotions still enter as rational inputs in the decision process ( Figure 2 , line A ) and are evaluated much like utility , consistent with the concept of “somatic markers” ( Damasio 1994 ) . The second kind of emotion in the EIC model consists of emotions that are felt at the time of decision making ( referred to as current emotions in the ﬁgure ) , which are entirely outside the scope of conventional rational choice models . Green dotted lines depict ﬁve potential sources of currentemotions . First , characteristicsofthedecisionmaker , suchaschronicanxietyordepression , can lead to a baseline level of current emotion ( Figure 2 , line B (cid:2) ) . Second , characteristics of the choice options can directly impact current feelings ( Figure 2 , line C (cid:2) ) . For example , ambiguous information or uncertain probabilities can directly lead to anxiety , or time delays may lead to anger . Third , predicted emotions can have an anticipatory inﬂuence on current emotions ( Figure 2 , line F ) . For example , someone anticipating a painful shock may feel fear now . Fourth , contemplating the decision can directly cause frustration ( Figure 2 , line G (cid:2) ) , particularly if the options are nearly equivalent or feature difﬁcult , possibly even taboo , trade - offs ( Luce et al . 1997 ) . Finally , whereas the ﬁrst four sources contribute to integral emotions , incidental emotions due to normatively unrelated factors—such as emotions arising from an unrelated event , the weather , or mood—can also carry over ( Figure 2 , line H ) . As described above , current emotions directly inﬂuence the evaluation of the outcomes ( Figure 2 , line G ) by affecting which dimensions the decision maker focuses on , whether s / he uses heuristic or analytic processing , and which motivational goals are active—the three tenets www . annualreviews . org • Emotion and Decision Making 815 A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2015 . 66 : 799 - 823 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g A cce ss p r ov i d e d by H a r v a r d U n i v e r s it y on 01 / 29 / 15 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . PS66CH30 - Lerner ARI 12 November 2014 15 : 22 Intertemporalchoice : decisions involving trade - offs among costs and / or beneﬁts occurring at different times of the ATF . These affective inﬂuences change how rational inputs are evaluated . For example , speciﬁc emotions may increase the weight put on certain dimensions ( e . g . , Lerner & Keltner 2000 , 2001 ) , reduce the number of dimensions considered ( e . g . , Tiedens & Linton 2001 ) , distort probabilities ( Rottenstreich & Hsee 2001 ) , increase or decrease discount rates ( DeSteno et al . 2014 , Lerner et al . 2013 ) , and set different motivational goals ( Lerner et al . 2004 , Raghunathan & Pham 1999 ) . Current emotions can also indirectly inﬂuence decision making ( Figure 2 , line I ) by changing predicted utility for possible decision outcomes ( Loewenstein et al . 2003 ) . The following example illustrates the EIC model in action , although it is not an exhaustive account of the relationships among the model’s links . Imagine that someone experiencing sadness due to the death of her dog is offered an intertemporal choice : She can receive $ 50 now or $ 100 in 1 month . As noted above , her decision could be affected by personal characteristics ; for example , if she has a high discount rate , she would be less likely to choose the delayed amount ( Figure 2 , line B ) . In accordance with the ATF , her sadness , though incidental to the decision ( Figure 2 , line H ) , would increase her motivation to attain rewards immediately , even at the expense of longer - term gains ( Figure 2 , line G ) . However , the anticipatory inﬂuences of expected positive outcomes might mitigate her sadness by triggering a positive feeling in the future , such as excitement over the prospect of receiving money either way ( Figure 2 , line F ) . Conversely , current sadness might also temper such expectations , making both outcomes seem less rewarding ( Figure 2 , line I ) . Finally , frustration about waiting for a time - delayed reward ( line C (cid:2) ) and anxiety about the size of the discrepancy between the rewards ( line G (cid:2) ) may further color her current emotions . The ultimate decision will be predicted by the combination of her sadness - modiﬁed discount rate , her monetary goals , and how she values the potential rewards ( Figure 2 , line D ) . CONCLUSIONS The psychological ﬁeld of emotion science , originally slow to develop , is undergoing a revolution - ary phase that has already begun to impact theories of decision making ( Keltner & Lerner 2010 , Loewenstein et al . 2001 , Loewenstein & Lerner 2003 ) . Major conclusions from the past 35 years of research on emotion and decision making include the following : 1 . Emotions constitute potent , pervasive , predictable , sometimes harmful and sometimes ben - eﬁcial drivers of decision making . Across different types of decisions , important regularities appear in the underlying mechanisms through which emotions inﬂuence judgment and choice . Thus , emotion effects are neither random nor epiphenomenal . 2 . Emotion effects on JDM can take the form of integral or incidental inﬂuences ; incidental emotions often produce inﬂuences that are unwanted and nonconscious . 3 . Path - breaking valence - based theories of emotion and JDM characterized research in the 1980s – 1990s . More recent theories treat the valence dimension as only one of multiple emotion dimensions that drive JDM outcomes , affording more precise and nonintuitive predictions . 4 . Although emotions may inﬂuence decisions through multiple mechanisms , considerable evidence reveals that effects occur via changes in ( a ) content of thought , ( b ) depth of thought , and ( c ) content of implicit goals—three mechanisms summarized within the ATF . 5 . Whether a speciﬁc emotion ultimately improves or degrades a speciﬁc judgment or decision depends on interactions among the cognitive and motivational mechanisms triggered by each emotion ( as identiﬁed in conclusion 4 ) and the default mechanisms that drive any given judgment or decision . 6 . Emotions are not necessarily a form of heuristic thought . Emotions are initially elicited rapidly and can trigger swift action . But once activated , some emotions ( e . g . , sadness ) can 816 Lerner et al . A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2015 . 66 : 799 - 823 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g A cce ss p r ov i d e d by H a r v a r d U n i v e r s it y on 01 / 29 / 15 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . PS66CH30 - Lerner ARI 12 November 2014 15 : 22 trigger more systematic thought . Distinguishing between the cognitive consequences of an emotion - elicitation phase and an emotion - persistence phase may be useful in linking emotion to modes of thought . 7 . When emotional inﬂuences are unwanted , it is difﬁcult to reduce their effects through effort alone . Strategies for reducing such inﬂuences cluster into three broad categories—those that aim at ( a ) reducing the intensity of emotion , ( b ) reducing the use of emotion as an input to decisions , or ( c ) counteracting an emotion - based bias with a bias in the opposite direction . Overall , we suggest that less effortful strategies , particularly those involving choice architecture , provide the most promising avenues here . 8 . The ﬁeld of emotion and decision making is growing at an accelerating rate but is far from mature . Most subareas contain few competing theories , and many areas remain relatively unexplored . Existing studies can raise as many questions as they answer . The research path - ways ahead therefore contain many fundamental questions about human behavior , all ripe for study . 9 . Despite the nascent state of research on emotion and decision making , the ﬁeld has accumu - lated enough evidence to move toward a general model of affective inﬂuences on decision making . Here we propose the EIC model , building on existing models and nesting rational choice models . We hope it provides a useful framework for organizing research in the future . Inasmuch as emotions exert causal effects on the quality of our relationships ( Ekman 2007 , Keltner et al . 2014 ) , sleep patterns ( e . g . , Harvey 2008 ) , economic choices ( Lerner et al . 2004 , Rick & Loewenstein 2008 ) , political and policy choices ( Lerner et al . 2003 , Small & Lerner 2008 ) , creativity ( Fredrickson 2001 ) , physical ( Taylor 2011 ) and mental health ( e . g . , Kring 2010 ) , and overall well - being ( e . g . , Ryff & Singer 1998 ) , the theories and effects reviewed here represent key foundations for understanding not only human decision making but also much of human behavior as a whole . DISCLOSURE STATEMENT The authors are not aware of any afﬁliations , memberships , funding , or ﬁnancial holdings that might be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank Dacher Keltner , George Loewenstein , and George Wu for helpful discussions . We thank Celia Gaertig and Katie Shonk for help in preparing the manuscript and Paul Meosky , Charlotte D’Acierno , Samir Gupta , Connie Yan , Joowon Kim , Lauren Fields , and Amanda Gokee for exceptional research assistance . The research was supported by a fellowship from the Radcliffe Institute for Advanced Study ( to J . L . ) and by an NSF grant ( SES - 0820441 , to J . L . ) . LITERATURE CITED Aldao A , Nolen - Hoeksema S , Schweizer S . 2010 . Emotion - regulation strategies across psychopathology : a meta - analytic review . Clin . Psychol . Rev . 30 : 217 – 37 Ambady N , Gray HM . 2002 . On being sad and mistaken : mood effects on the accuracy of thin - slice judgments . J . Personal . Soc . Psychol . 83 : 947 – 61 Andrade EB , Ho T - H . 2007 . How is the boss’s mood today ? I want a raise . Psychol . Sci . 18 : 668 – 71 Arkes HR . 1991 . Costs and beneﬁts of judgment errors : implications for debiasing . Psychol . Bull . 110 : 486 – 98 BagneuxV , BollonT , DantzerC . 2012 . Do ( un ) certaintyappraisaltendenciesreversetheinﬂuenceofemotions on risk taking in sequential tasks ? Cogn . Emot . 26 : 568 – 76 www . annualreviews . org • Emotion and Decision Making 817 A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2015 . 66 : 799 - 823 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g A cce ss p r ov i d e d by H a r v a r d U n i v e r s it y on 01 / 29 / 15 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . PS66CH30 - Lerner ARI 12 November 2014 15 : 22 Barrett LF , Barrett DJ . 2001 . An introduction to computerized experience sampling in psychology . Soc . Sci . Comput . Rev . 19 : 175 – 85 Barsade SG . 2002 . The ripple effect : emotional contagion and its inﬂuence on group behavior . Adm . Sci . Q . 47 : 644 – 75 Bartlett MY , DeSteno D . 2006 . Gratitude and prosocial behavior : helping when it costs you . Psychol . Sci . 17 : 319 – 25 Bechara A , Damasio H , Damasio AR , Lee GP . 1999 . Different contributions of the human amygdala and ventromedial prefrontal cortex to decision - making . J . Neurosci . 19 : 5473 – 81 Bless H , Schwarz N , Clore GL , Golisano V , Rabe C , W¨olk M . 1996 . Mood and the use of scripts : Does a happy mood really lead to mindlessness ? J . Personal . Soc . Psychol . 71 : 665 – 79 Bodenhausen GV . 1993 . Emotions , arousal , and stereotypic judgments : a heuristic model of affect and stereo - typing . In Affect , Cognition , and Stereotyping : Interactive Processes in Group Perception , ed . DM Mackie , DL Hamilton , pp . 13 – 37 . San Diego , CA : Academic Bodenhausen GV , Gabriel S , Lineberger M . 2000 . Sadness and susceptibility to judgmental bias : the case of anchoring . Psychol . Sci . 11 : 320 – 23 Bodenhausen GV , Kramer GP , S¨usser K . 1994a . Happiness and stereotypic thinking in social judgment . J . Personal . Soc . Psychol . 66 : 621 – 32 Bodenhausen GV , Sheppard LA , Kramer GP . 1994b . Negative affect and social judgment : the differential impact of anger and sadness . Eur . J . Soc . Psychol . 24 : 45 – 62 Bollen J , Pepe A , Mao H . 2011 . Modeling public mood and emotion : Twitter sentiment and socio - economic phenomena . Proc . Int . AAAI Conf . on Weblogs and Soc . Media ( ICWSM 2011 ) , 5th , Barcelona , July 17 – 21 . arXiv : 0911 . 1583 Campos B , Keltner D . 2014 . Shared and differentiating features of the positive emotion domain . In Positive Emotion : Integrating the Light Sides and Dark Sides , ed . J Gruber , JT Moskowitz , pp . 52 – 71 . New York : Oxford Univ . Press Cavanaugh LA , Bettman JR , Luce MF , Payne JW . 2007 . Appraising the Appraisal - Tendency Framework . J . Consum . Psychol . 17 : 169 – 73 Clore GL , Wyer RS Jr , Dienes B , Gasper K , Gohm C , Isbell L . 2001 . Affective feelings as feedback : some cognitive consequences . In Theories of Mood and Cognition : A User’s Guidebook , ed . LL Martin , GL Clore , pp . 27 – 62 . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum Cˆot´e S , Hideg I , van Kleef GA . 2013 . The consequences of faking anger in negotiations . J . Exp . Soc . Psychol . 49 : 453 – 63 Coughlan R , Connolly T . 2001 . Predicting affective responses to unexpected outcomes . Organ . Behav . Hum . Decis . Process . 85 : 211 – 25 Damasio AR . 1994 . Descartes’ Error : Emotion , Reason , and the Human Brain . New York : Putnam Davidson RJ , Scherer KR , Goldsmith KR , eds . 2003 . Handbook of Affective Science . New York : Oxford Univ . Press de Melo CM , Carnevale PJ , Read SJ , Gratch J . 2014 . Reading people’s minds from emotion expressions in interdependent decision making . J . Personal . Soc . Psychol . 106 : 73 – 88 Dehghani M , Carnevale PJ , Gratch J . 2014 . Interpersonal effects of expressed anger and sorrow in morally charged negotiation . Judgm . Decis . Mak . 9 : 104 – 13 DeSteno D . 2009 . Social emotions and intertemporal choice : “hot” mechanisms for building social and eco - nomic capital . Curr . Dir . Psychol . Sci . 18 : 280 – 84 DeSteno D , Li Y , Dickens L , Lerner JS . 2014 . Gratitude : a tool for reducing economic impatience . Psychol . Sci . 25 : 1262 – 67 DeSteno D , Petty RE , Wegener DT , Rucker DD . 2000 . Beyond valence in the perception of likelihood : the role of emotion speciﬁcity . J . Personal . Soc . Psychol . 78 : 397 – 416 Dunn EW , Aknin LB , Norton MI . 2008 . Spending money on others promotes happiness . Science 319 : 1687 – 88 Edmans A , Garc´ıa D , Norli Ø . 2007 . Sports sentiment and stock returns . J . Finance 62 : 1967 – 98 Ekman P . 1992 . An argument for basic emotions . Cogn . Emot . 6 : 169 – 200 Ekman P . 2007 . Emotions Revealed : Recognizing Faces and Feelings to Improve Communication and Emotional Life . New York : Holt 818 Lerner et al . A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2015 . 66 : 799 - 823 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g A cce ss p r ov i d e d by H a r v a r d U n i v e r s it y on 01 / 29 / 15 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . PS66CH30 - Lerner ARI 12 November 2014 15 : 22 Ekman P , Davidson RJ , eds . 1994 . The Nature of Emotion : Fundamental Questions . New York : Oxford Univ . Press Elfenbein HA , Polzer JT , Ambady N . 2007 . Team emotion recognition accuracy and team performance . In Research on Emotion in Organizations . Vol . 3 : Functionality , Intentionality and Morality , ed . CEJ H¨artel , NM Ashkanasy , WJ Zerbe , pp . 87 – 119 . Oxford , UK : Elsevier Ellsworth PC , Smith CA . 1988 . Shades of joy : patterns of appraisal differentiating pleasant emotions . Cogn . Emot . 2 : 301 – 31 Fessler DMT . 2007 . From appeasement to conformity : evolutionary and cultural perspectives on shame , competition , and cooperation . In The Self - Conscious Emotions : Theory and Research , ed . JL Tracy , RW Robins , JP Tangney , pp . 174 – 93 . New York : Guilford Finucane ML , Alhakami A , SlovicP , JohnsonSM . 2000 . Theaffectheuristicinjudgmentsofrisksandbeneﬁts . J . Behav . Decis . Mak . 13 ( 1 ) : 1 – 17 Fischer AH , Roseman IJ . 2007 . Beat them or ban them : the characteristics and social functions of anger and contempt . J . Personal . Soc . Psychol . 93 : 103 – 15 Forgas JP . 1995 . Mood and judgment : the affect infusion model ( AIM ) . Psychol . Bull . 117 : 39 – 66 Forgas JP . 2003 . Affective inﬂuences on attitudes and judgments . See Davidson et al . 2003 , pp . 596 – 618 Foster CA , Witcher BS , Campbell WK , Green JD . 1998 . Arousal and attraction : evidence for automatic and controlled processes . J . Personal . Soc . Psychol . 74 : 86 – 101 Frank RH . 1988 . Passions Within Reason : The Strategic Role of the Emotions . New York : Norton Fredrickson BL . 2001 . The role of positive emotions in positive psychology : the broaden - and - build theory of positive emotions . Am . Psychol . 56 : 218 – 26 Frijda NH . 1986 . The Emotions . Cambridge , UK : Cambridge Univ . Press Frijda NH . 1988 . The laws of emotion . Am . Psychol . 43 : 349 – 58 FrijdaNH , KuipersP , terSchureE . 1989 . Relationsamongemotion , appraisal , andemotionalactionreadiness . J . Personal . Soc . Psychol . 57 : 212 – 28 Gigerenzer G . 2004 . Dread risk , September 11 , and fatal trafﬁc accidents . Psychol . Sci . 15 : 286 – 87 Gilbert DT . 2006 . Stumbling on Happiness . New York : Knopf Gneezy U , Imas A . 2014 . Materazzi effect and the strategic use of anger in competitive interactions . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 111 : 1334 – 37 Greene JD , Haidt J . 2002 . How ( and where ) does moral judgment work ? Trends Cogn . Sci . 6 : 517 – 23 Gross JJ . 1998 . The emerging ﬁeld of emotion regulation : an integrative review . Rev . Gen . Psychol . 2 : 271 – 99 Gross JJ . 2002 . Emotion regulation : affective , cognitive , and social consequences . Psychophysiology 39 : 281 – 91 Gross JJ , John OP . 2003 . Individual differences in two emotion regulation processes : implications for affect , relationships , and well - being . J . Personal . Soc . Psychol . 85 : 348 – 62 Gross JJ , Levenson RW . 1993 . Emotional suppression : physiology , self - report , and expressive behavior . J . Personal . Soc . Psychol . 64 : 970 – 86 HalperinE , PoratR , TamirM , GrossJJ . 2012 . Canemotionregulationchangepoliticalattitudesinintractable conﬂicts ? From the laboratory to the ﬁeld . Psychol . Sci . 24 : 106 – 11 HanS , LernerJS , KeltnerD . 2007 . Feelingsandconsumerdecisionmaking : theappraisal - tendencyframework . J . Consum . Psychol . 17 : 158 – 68 Han S , Lerner JS , Zeckhauser R . 2012 . The disgust - promotes - disposal effect . J . Risk Uncertain . 44 : 101 – 13 Harmon - Jones E , Sigelman J . 2001 . State anger and prefrontal brain activity : evidence that insult - related relative left - prefrontal activation is associated with experienced anger and aggression . J . Personal . Soc . Psychol . 80 : 797 – 803 Harvey AG . 2008 . Sleep and circadian rhythms in bipolar disorder : seeking synchrony , harmony , and regula - tion . Am . J . Psychiatry 165 : 820 – 29 Hatﬁeld E , Cacioppo JT , Rapson RL . 1993 . Emotional contagion . Curr . Dir . Psychol . Sci . 2 : 96 – 100 Hirshleifer D , Shumway T . 2003 . Good day sunshine : stock returns and the weather . J . Finance 58 : 1009 – 32 Horberg EJ , Oveis C , Keltner D . 2011 . Emotions as moral ampliﬁers : an appraisal tendency approach to the inﬂuences of distinct emotions upon moral judgment . Emot . Rev . 3 : 237 – 44 Hume D . 1978 ( 1738 ) . A Treatise of Human Nature . Oxford , UK : Claredon Jamieson JP , Nock MK , Mendes WB . 2012 . Mind over matter : Reappraising arousal improves cardiovascular and cognitive responses to stress . J . Exp . Psychol . : Gen . 141 : 417 – 22 www . annualreviews . org • Emotion and Decision Making 819 A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2015 . 66 : 799 - 823 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g A cce ss p r ov i d e d by H a r v a r d U n i v e r s it y on 01 / 29 / 15 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . PS66CH30 - Lerner ARI 12 November 2014 15 : 22 Janis IL . 1972 . Victims of Groupthink : A Psychological Study of Foreign - Policy Decisions and Fiascoes . Oxford , UK : Houghton Mifﬂin Johnson EJ , Tversky A . 1983 . Affect , generalization , and the perception of risk . J . Personal . Soc . Psychol . 45 : 20 – 31 Kahneman D , Tversky A . 1979 . Prospect theory : an analysis of decision under risk . Econometrica 47 : 263 – 92 Kahneman D , Knetsch JL , Thaler RH . 1991 . Anomalies : the endowment effect , loss aversion , and status quo bias . J . Econ . Perspect . 5 : 193 – 206 Kamstra MJ , Kramer LA , Levi MD . 2003 . Winter blues : a SAD stock market cycle . Am . Econ . Rev . 93 : 324 – 43 Keltner D , Ekman P , Gonzaga GC , Beer J . 2003 . Facial expression of emotion . See Davidson et al . 2003 , pp . 415 – 32 Keltner D , Ellsworth PC , Edwards K . 1993 . Beyond simple pessimism : effects of sadness and anger on social perception . J . Personal . Soc . Psychol . 64 : 740 – 52 Keltner D , Haidt J . 1999 . Social functions of emotions at four levels of analysis . Cogn . Emot . 13 : 505 – 21 Keltner DT , Lerner JS . 2010 . Emotion . In The Handbook of Social Psychology , Vol . 1 , ed . DT Gilbert , ST Fiske , G Lindzey , pp . 317 – 52 . New York : Wiley Keltner D , Oatley K , Jenkins JM . 2014 . Understanding Emotions . Hoboken , NJ : Wiley Kopelman S , Rosette AS , Thompson L . 2006 . The three faces of Eve : strategic displays of positive , negative , and neutral emotions in negotiations . Organ . Behav . Hum . Decis . Process . 99 : 81 – 101 Kring AM . 2008 . Emotion disturbances as transdiagnostic processes in psychopathology . See Lewis et al . 2008 , pp . 691 – 708 Kring AM . 2010 . The future of emotion research in the study of psychopathology . Emot . Rev . 2 : 225 – 28 Lazarus RS . 1991 . Emotion and Adaptation . New York : Oxford Univ . Press LeDoux JE . 1996 . The Emotional Brain : The Mysterious Underpinnings of Emotional Life . New York : Simon and Schuster Lelieveld G - J , Van Dijk E , Van Beest I , Van Kleef GA . 2012 . Why anger and disappointment affect other’s bargaining behavior differently : the moderating role of power and the mediating role of reciprocal and complementary emotions . Personal . Soc . Psychol . Bull . 38 : 1209 – 21 Lelieveld G - J , Van Dijk E , Van Beest I , Van Kleef GA . 2013 . Does communicating disappointment in nego - tiations help or hurt ? Solving an apparent inconsistency in the social - functional approach to emotions . J . Personal . Soc . Psychol . 105 : 605 – 20 Lerner JS , Goldberg JH , Tetlock PE . 1998 . Sober second thought : the effects of accountability , anger , and authoritarianism on attributions of responsibility . Personal . Soc . Psychol . Bull . 24 : 563 – 74 LernerJS , GonzalezRM , SmallDA , FischhoffB . 2003 . Effectsoffearandangeronperceivedrisksofterrorism : a national ﬁeld experiment . Psychol . Sci . 14 : 144 – 50 Lerner JS , Keltner D . 2000 . Beyond valence : toward a model of emotion - speciﬁc inﬂuences on judgement and choice . Cogn . Emot . 14 : 473 – 93 Lerner JS , Keltner D . 2001 . Fear , anger , and risk . J . Personal . Soc . Psychol . 81 : 146 – 59 Lerner JS , Li Y , Weber EU . 2013 . The ﬁnancial costs of sadness . Psychol . Sci . 24 : 72 – 79 Lerner JS , Small DA , Loewenstein G . 2004 . Heart strings and purse strings : carryover effects of emotions on economic decisions . Psychol . Sci . 15 : 337 – 41 Lerner JS , Tiedens LZ . 2006 . Portrait of the angry decision maker : how appraisal tendencies shape anger’s inﬂuence on cognition . J . Behav . Decis . Mak . 19 : 115 – 37 Levenson RW . 1994 . Human emotion : a functional view . See Ekman & Davidson 1994 , pp . 123 – 26 Levenson RW , Ekman P , Friesen WV . 1990 . Voluntary facial action generates emotion - speciﬁc autonomic nervous system activity . Psychophysiology 27 : 363 – 84 Lewis IM , Haviland - Hones JM , Barrett LF , eds . 2008 . Handbook of Emotions . New York : Guilford Loewenstein G . 1996 . Out of control : visceral inﬂuences on behavior . Organ . Behav . Hum . Decis . Process . 65 : 272 – 92 Loewenstein G . 2000 . Emotions in economic theory and economic behavior . Am . Econ . Rev . 90 : 426 – 32 Loewenstein G , John L , Volpp KG . 2012 . Using decision errors to help people help themselves . In The Behavioral Foundations of Public Policy , ed . E Shaﬁr , pp . 361 – 79 . Princeton , NJ : Princeton Univ . Press Loewenstein G , Lerner JS . 2003 . The role of affect in decision making . See Davidson et al . 2003 , pp . 619 – 42 820 Lerner et al . A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2015 . 66 : 799 - 823 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g A cce ss p r ov i d e d by H a r v a r d U n i v e r s it y on 01 / 29 / 15 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . PS66CH30 - Lerner ARI 12 November 2014 15 : 22 Loewenstein G , O’Donoghue T , Rabin M . 2003 . Projection bias in predicting future utility . Q . J . Econ . 118 : 1209 – 48 Loewenstein G , Weber EU , Hsee CK , Welch N . 2001 . Risk as feelings . Psychol . Bull . 127 : 267 – 86 Loomes G , Sugden R . 1982 . Regret theory : an alternative theory of rational choice under uncertainty . Econ . J . 92 : 805 – 24 Luce MF , Bettman JR , Payne JW . 1997 . Choice processing in emotionally difﬁcult decisions . J . Exp . Psychol . : Learn . Mem . Cogn . 23 : 384 – 405 Lyubomirsky S , Nolen - Hoeksema S . 1995 . Effects of self - focused rumination on negative thinking and inter - personal problem solving . J . Personal . Soc . Psychol . 69 : 176 – 90 Madrian BC , Shea DF . 2001 . The power of suggestion : inertia in 401 ( k ) participation and savings behavior . Q . J . Econ . 116 : 1149 – 87 Mauss IB , Levenson RW , McCarter L , Wilhelm FH , Gross JJ . 2005 . The tie that binds ? Coherence among emotion experience , behavior , and physiology . Emotion 5 : 175 – 90 Mellers BA . 2000 . Choice and the relative pleasure of consequences . Psychol . Bull . 126 : 910 – 24 Mellers BA , Schwartz A , Cooke ADJ . 1998 . Judgment and decision making . Annu . Rev . Psychol . 49 : 447 – 77 Morris MW , Keltner D . 2000 . How emotions work : the social functions of emotional expression in negotia - tions . Res . Organ . Behav . 22 : 1 – 50 Mueller JS , Curhan JR . 2006 . Emotional intelligence and counterpart mood induction in a negotiation . Int . J . Conﬂ . Manag . 17 : 110 – 28 Oatley K , Jenkins JM . 1992 . Human emotions : function and dysfunction . Annu . Rev . Psychol . 43 : 55 – 85 Ochsner KN , Bunge SA , Gross JJ , Gabrieli JDE . 2002 . Rethinking feelings : an fMRI study of the cognitive regulation of emotion . J . Cogn . Neurosci . 14 : 1215 – 29 Ortony A , Clore GL , Collins A . 1988 . The Cognitive Structure of Emotions . Cambridge , UK : Cambridge Univ . Press Payne JW , Bettman JR , Johnson EJ . 1993 . The Adaptive Decision Maker . Cambridge , UK : Cambridge Univ . Press Pham MT . 2007 . Emotion and rationality : a critical review and interpretation of empirical evidence . Rev . Gen . Psychol . 11 : 155 – 78 Phelps EA , Lempert KM , Sokol - Hessner P . 2014 . Emotion and decision making : multiple modulatory neural circuits . Annu . Rev . Neurosci . 37 : 263 – 88 Quigley BM , Tedeschi JT . 1996 . Mediating effects of blame attributions on feelings of anger . Personal . Soc . Psychol . Bull . 22 : 1280 – 88 Raghunathan R , Pham MT . 1999 . All negative moods are not equal : motivational inﬂuences of anxiety and sadness on decision making . Organ . Behav . Hum . Decis . Process . 79 : 56 – 77 Richards JM , Gross JJ . 1999 . Composure at any cost ? The cognitive consequences of emotion suppression . Personal . Soc . Psychol . Bull . 25 : 1033 – 44 Rick S , Loewenstein G . 2008 . Intangibility in intertemporal choice . Philos . Trans . R . Soc . B 363 : 3813 – 24 Rind B , Bordia P . 1995 . Effect of server’s “thank you” and personalization on restaurant tipping . J . Appl . Soc . Psychol . 25 : 745 – 51 RottenstreichY , HseeCK . 2001 . Money , kisses , andelectricshocks : ontheaffectivepsychologyofrisk . Psychol . Sci . 12 : 185 – 90 Rozin P , Haidt J , McCauley CR . 2008 . Disgust . See Lewis et al . 2008 , pp . 757 – 76 Rozin P , Millman L , Nemeroff C . 1986 . Operation of the laws of sympathetic magic in disgust and other domains . J . Personal . Soc . Psychol . 50 : 703 – 12 Ryff CD , Singer B . 1998 . The contours of positive human health . Psychol . Inq . 9 : 1 – 28 Samuelson W , Zeckhauser R . 1988 . Status quo bias in decision making . J . Risk Uncertain . 1 : 7 – 59 Schaller M , Cialdini RB . 1988 . The economics of empathic helping : support for a mood management motive . J . Exp . Soc . Psychol . 24 : 163 – 81 Scherer KR . 1999 . On the sequential nature of appraisal processes : indirect evidence from a recognition task . Cogn . Emot . 13 : 763 – 93 Scherer KR , Ekman P , eds . 1984 . Approaches to Emotion . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum www . annualreviews . org • Emotion and Decision Making 821 A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2015 . 66 : 799 - 823 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g A cce ss p r ov i d e d by H a r v a r d U n i v e r s it y on 01 / 29 / 15 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . PS66CH30 - Lerner ARI 12 November 2014 15 : 22 Schwarz N . 1990 . Feelings as information : informational and motivational functions of affective states . In HandbookofMotivationandCognition , Vol . 2 : FoundationsofSocialBehavior , ed . ETHiggins , RMSorrentino , pp . 527 – 61 . New York : Guilford Schwarz N , Bless H . 1991 . Happy and mindless , but sad and smart ? The impact of affective states on analytic reasoning . In Emotion and Social Judgments , ed . JP Forgas , pp . 55 – 71 . Oxford , UK : Pergamon Schwarz N , Clore GL . 1983 . Mood , misattribution , and judgments of well - being : informative and directive functions of affective states . J . Personal . Soc . Psychol . 45 : 513 – 23 Simon HA . 1967 . Motivational and emotional controls of cognition . Psychol . Rev . 74 : 29 – 39 Simon HA . 1983 . Reason in Human Affairs . Stanford , CA : Stanford Univ . Press Singer T , Fehr E . 2005 . The neuroeconomics of mind reading and empathy . Am . Econ . Rev . 95 : 340 – 45 Slovic P . 1995 . The construction of preference . Am . Psychol . 50 : 364 – 71 Small DA , Lerner JS . 2008 . Emotional policy : Personal sadness and anger shape judgments about a welfare case . Polit . Psychol . 29 : 149 – 68 Smith CA , Ellsworth PC . 1985 . Patterns of cognitive appraisal in emotion . J . Personal . Soc . Psychol . 48 : 813 – 38 Solomon RC . 1993 . The Passions : Emotions and the Meaning of Life . Indianapolis , IN : Hackett Stayman DM , Aaker DA . 1993 . Continuous measurement of self - report of emotional response . Psychol . Mark . 10 : 199 – 214 Taylor SE . 2011 . Health Psychology . New York : McGraw - Hill Thaler RH , Sunstein CR . 2003 . Libertarian paternalism . Am . Econ . Rev . 93 : 175 – 79 Thaler RH , Sunstein CR . 2008 . Nudge : Improving Decisions about Health , Wealth , and Happiness . New Haven , CT : Yale Univ . Press Tiedens LZ , Linton S . 2001 . Judgment under emotional certainty and uncertainty : the effects of speciﬁc emotions on information processing . J . Personal . Soc . Psychol . 81 : 973 – 88 ToobyJ , CosmidesL . 1990 . Thepastexplainsthepresent : emotionaladaptationsandthestructureofancestral environments . Ethol . Sociobiol . 11 : 375 – 424 TotterdellP . 2000 . Catchingmoodsandhittingruns : moodlinkageandsubjectiveperformanceinprofessional sport teams . J . Appl . Psychol . 85 : 848 – 59 Valdesolo P , Graham J . 2014 . Awe , uncertainty , and agency detection . Psychol . Sci . 25 : 170 – 78 Van Beest I , Van Kleef GA , Van Dijk E . 2008 . Get angry , get out : the interpersonal effects of anger commu - nication in multiparty negotiation . J . Exp . Soc . Psychol . 44 : 993 – 1002 vanDijkE , vanKleefGA , SteinelW , vanBeestI . 2008 . Asocialfunctionalapproachtoemotionsinbargaining : when communicating anger pays and when it backﬁres . J . Personal . Soc . Psychol . 94 : 600 – 14 Van Kleef GA , De Dreu CKW , Manstead ASR . 2004a . The interpersonal effects of anger and happiness in negotiations . J . Personal . Soc . Psychol . 86 : 57 – 76 Van Kleef GA , De Dreu CKW , Manstead ASR . 2004b . The interpersonal effects of emotions in negotiations : a motivated information processing approach . J . Personal . Soc . Psychol . 87 : 510 – 28 Van Kleef GA , De Dreu CKW , Manstead ASR . 2006 . Supplication and appeasement in conﬂict and ne - gotiation : the interpersonal effects of disappointment , worry , guilt , and regret . J . Personal . Soc . Psychol . 91 : 124 – 42 Van Kleef GA , De Dreu CKW , Manstead ASR . 2010 . An interpersonal approach to emotion in social decision making : the emotions as social information model . In Advances in Experimental Social Psychology , Vol . 42 , ed . MP Zanna , pp . 45 – 96 . Burlington , MA : Academic Vohs KD , Baumeister RF , Loewenstein G . 2007 . Do Emotions Help or Hurt Decision Making ? A Hedgefoxian Perspective . New York : Sage Wang L , Northcraft GB , Van Kleef GA . 2012 . Beyond negotiated outcomes : the hidden costs of anger expression in dyadic negotiation . Organ . Behav . Hum . Decis . Process . 119 : 54 – 63 Wenzlaff RM , Wegner DM . 2000 . Thought suppression . Annu . Rev . Psychol . 51 : 59 – 91 Williams LA , DeSteno D . 2008 . Pride and perseverance : the motivational role of pride . J . Personal . Soc . Psychol . 94 : 1007 – 17 WilsonTD , BrekkeN . 1994 . Mentalcontaminationandmentalcorrection : unwantedinﬂuencesonjudgments and evaluations . Psychol . Bull . 116 : 117 – 42 Wilson TD , Gilbert DT . 2005 . Affective forecasting : knowing what to want . Curr . Dir . Psychol . Sci . 14 : 131 – 34 822 Lerner et al . A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2015 . 66 : 799 - 823 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g A cce ss p r ov i d e d by H a r v a r d U n i v e r s it y on 01 / 29 / 15 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . PS66CH30 - Lerner ARI 12 November 2014 15 : 22 Wubben MJJ , De Cremer D , van Dijk E . 2009 . How emotion communication guides reciprocity : establishing cooperation through disappointment and anger . J . Exp . Soc . Psychol . 45 : 987 – 90 Yates JF . 2007 . Emotion appraisal tendencies and carryover : how , why , and . . . therefore ? J . Consum . Psychol . 17 : 179 – 83 Yip JA , Cˆot´e S . 2013 . The emotionally intelligent decision maker : Emotion - understanding ability reduces the effect of incidental anxiety on risk taking . Psychol . Sci . 24 : 48 – 55 Zeelenberg M , Nelissen RMA , Breugelmans SM , Pieters R . 2008 . On emotion speciﬁcity in decision making : why feeling is for doing . Judgm . Decis . Mak . 3 : 18 – 27 Zeelenberg M , Van Dijk WW , Manstead ASR , Van der Pligt J . 1998 . The experience of regret and disap - pointment . Cogn . Emot . 12 : 221 – 30 www . annualreviews . org • Emotion and Decision Making 823 A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2015 . 66 : 799 - 823 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g A cce ss p r ov i d e d by H a r v a r d U n i v e r s it y on 01 / 29 / 15 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . PS66 - FrontMatter ARI 19 November 2014 10 : 16 Annual Review of Psychology Volume 66 , 2015 Contents Consolidating Memories James L . McGaugh (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 1 The Nucleus Accumbens : An Interface Between Cognition , Emotion , and Action Stan B . Floresco (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 25 Adult Neurogenesis : Beyond Learning and Memory Heather A . Cameron and Lucas R . Glover (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 53 Motivation and Cognitive Control : From Behavior to Neural Mechanism Matthew Botvinick and Todd Braver (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 83 The Cognitive Neuroscience of Working Memory Mark D’Esposito and Bradley R . Postle (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 115 Why Sleep Is Important for Health : A Psychoneuroimmunology Perspective Michael R . Irwin (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 143 Critical Periods in Speech Perception : New Directions Janet F . Werker and Takao K . Hensch (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 173 Perceptual Learning : Toward a Comprehensive Theory Takeo Watanabe and Yuka Sasaki (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 197 Causality in Thought Steven A . Sloman and David Lagnado (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 223 Perspectives on Culture and Concepts bethany l . ojalehto and Douglas L . Medin (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 249 Information Processing as a Paradigm for Decision Making Daniel M . Oppenheimer and Evan Kelso (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 277 Beyond Simple Models of Self - Control to Circuit - Based Accounts of Adolescent Behavior B . J . Casey (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 295 The Evolutionary Roots of Human Decision Making Laurie R . Santos and Alexandra G . Rosati (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 321 Hemodynamic Correlates of Cognition in Human Infants Richard N . Aslin , Mohinish Shukla , and Lauren L . Emberson (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 349 vi A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2015 . 66 : 799 - 823 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g A cce ss p r ov i d e d by H a r v a r d U n i v e r s it y on 01 / 29 / 15 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . PS66 - FrontMatter ARI 19 November 2014 10 : 16 The Hidden Efﬁcacy of Interventions : Gene × Environment Experiments from a Differential Susceptibility Perspective Marian J . Bakermans - Kranenburg and Marinus H . van IJzendoorn (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 381 Developmental Flexibility in the Age of Globalization : Autonomy and Identity Development Among Immigrant Adolescents Andrew J . Fuligni and Kim M . Tsai (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 411 Global Health and Development in Early Childhood Frances E . Aboud and Aisha K . Yousafzai (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 433 Childhood Antecedents and Risk for Adult Mental Disorders Daniel S . Pine and Nathan A . Fox (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 459 The Science of Mind Wandering : Empirically Navigating the Stream of Consciousness Jonathan Smallwood and Jonathan W . Schooler (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 487 Social Attributions from Faces : Determinants , Consequences , Accuracy , and Functional Signiﬁcance Alexander Todorov , Christopher Y . Olivola , Ron Dotsch , and Peter Mende - Siedlecki (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 519 Multiple Identities in Social Perception and Interaction : Challenges and Opportunities Sonia K . Kang and Galen V . Bodenhausen (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 547 The Evolution of Altruism in Humans Robert Kurzban , Maxwell N . Burton - Chellew , and Stuart A . West (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 575 Social Pain and the Brain : Controversies , Questions , and Where to Go from Here Naomi I . Eisenberger (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 601 Polycultural Psychology Michael W . Morris , Chi - yue Chiu , and Zhi Liu (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 631 Action Errors , Error Management , and Learning in Organizations Michael Frese and Nina Keith (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 661 Nonverbal Generics : Human Infants Interpret Objects as Symbols of Object Kinds Gergely Csibra and Rubeena Shamsudheen (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 689 School Readiness and Self - Regulation : A Developmental Psychobiological Approach Clancy Blair and C . Cybele Raver (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 711 The Neuroendocrinology of Social Isolation John T . Cacioppo , Stephanie Cacioppo , John P . Capitanio , and Steven W . Cole (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 733 Contents vii A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2015 . 66 : 799 - 823 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g A cce ss p r ov i d e d by H a r v a r d U n i v e r s it y on 01 / 29 / 15 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . PS66 - FrontMatter ARI 19 November 2014 10 : 16 Physical Activity and Cognitive Vitality Ruchika Shaurya Prakash , Michelle W . Voss , Kirk I . Erickson , and Arthur F . Kramer (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 769 Emotion and Decision Making Jennifer S . Lerner , Ye Li , Piercarlo Valdesolo , and Karim S . Kassam (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 799 Advances in Mediation Analysis : A Survey and Synthesis of New Developments Kristopher J . Preacher (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 825 Diffusion Tensor Imaging for Understanding Brain Development in Early Life Anqi Qiu , Susumu Mori , and Michael I . Miller (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 853 Internet Research in Psychology Samuel D . Gosling and Winter Mason (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 877 Indexes Cumulative Index of Contributing Authors , Volumes 56 – 66 (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 903 Cumulative Index of Article Titles , Volumes 56 – 66 (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 908 Errata An online log of corrections to Annual Review of Psychology articles may be found at http : / / www . annualreviews . org / errata / psych viii Contents A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2015 . 66 : 799 - 823 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g A cce ss p r ov i d e d by H a r v a r d U n i v e r s it y on 01 / 29 / 15 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y .