Changes in brain cell shape create residual extracellular space volume and explain tortuosity behavior during osmotic challenge Kevin C . Chen and Charles Nicholson * Department of Physiology and Neuroscience , New York University Medical School , 550 First Avenue , New York , NY 10016 Edited by Richard W . Tsien , Stanford University School of Medicine , Stanford , CA , and approved May 30 , 2000 ( received for review August 10 , 1999 ) . Diffusion of molecules in brain extracellular space is constrained by two macroscopic parameters , tortuosity factor l and volume frac - tion a . Recent studies in brain slices show that when osmolarity is reduced , l increases while a decreases . In contrast , with increased osmolarity , a increases , but l attains a plateau . Using homogeni - zation theory and a variety of lattice models , we found that the plateau behavior of l can be explained if the shape of brain cells changes nonuniformly during the shrinking or swelling induced by osmotic challenge . The nonuniform cellular shrinkage creates re - sidual extracellular space that temporarily traps diffusing mole - cules , thus impeding the macroscopic diffusion . The paper also discusses the deﬁnition of tortuosity and its independence of the measurement frame of reference . diffusion u lattice u volume transmission u cell swelling and shrinkage u numerical simulation M any biological processes involve diffusion of substances through a disordered heterogeneous medium . Diverse ex - amples are intracellular signaling ( 1 ) , intercellular signaling ( 2 ) , volume transmission ( 3 , 4 ) , and drug delivery ( 5 , 6 ) . The rapid increase in the use of diffusion - weighted MRI has raised further issues about diffusion in tissues ( 7 ) . In approaching such problems , two essential parameters are the extracellular space ( ECS ) volume fraction a , the volume ratio of the ECS compared to the whole tissue , and the tortuosity l , a measure of how diffusing molecules are hindered by cellular obstructions . Recent studies by using osmotic challenge in brain tissue ( 8 , 9 ) have shown a complex relation between these two parameters . In this paper , we apply the mathematical technique of homogenization to show that changes in cell shape provide an explanation for osmotic data and are likely to be applicable in a much wider context . To quantify diffusion in a complex biological medium , it is necessary to apply the diffusion equation through the use of some macroscopically effective properties , such as the local average concentration , ^ C & , and the apparent ( or effective ) diffusion coefficient , D * . Such macroscopic formulations have been applied successfully in the ECS of brain tissues ( 8 – 15 ) . When discussing the ECS , l 2 is frequently defined as the ratio between the diffusion coefficient , D , of a given molecule in a bulk liquid and the apparent diffusion coefficient D * of the same molecule in the ECS , l 2 ; D y D * , [ 1 ] although other definitions have been used . Furthermore , some authors ( 16 – 18 ) include terms for viscosity of the ECS and hydrodynamic interaction of the diffusing molecule in their definition of l ; we exclude such factors here , to focus on the relationship between geometry and tortuosity , but briefly discuss them later in the paper and in the Appendix , which also com - ments on the independence of tortuosity from its measurement frame of reference . The question of whether l and a are related has been explored in many contexts , but because it depends on the structure of the heterogeneous medium , no universal relationship is known . It is expected that l will decrease monotonically as a increases . This conjecture has been explored in recent experiments that varied the osmotic pressure of media bathing isolated brain tissues while measuring l and a ( 8 , 9 , 15 ) . These experiments changed the size of the ECS by causing cells to shrink or swell . Studies on rat cortex ( 9 ) revealed that , whereas a decreased with hypoosmolarity and increasedwithhyperosmolarity , l behaveddifferently . Inhypotonic media , l increased monotonically as a fell , but with hypertonic media , l reached a plateau while a continued to increase . This constant l with increasing a cannot be accounted for easily by the influence of either the viscosity of the interstitial matrix or the size of diffusing molecules relative to the interstitial channels . Here we show that these data can be explained on a geometric basis , provided the cells change their shape during osmotic challenge . Methods Our analysis takes place in two dimensions . Later , we will discuss why this is sufficient to reveal all the essential features of the three - dimensional problem . Although aimed at brain tissue , the lattice models explored in this work can also be applied to other situations , e . g . , a cross section of striated muscle ( 19 ) or the lateral intercellular space between epithelial cells ( 20 ) . Lattice Arrangements and Governing Equation . Our approach was based on homogenization theory ( 21 , 22 ) applied to planar diffu - sion through the ECS , regarded as a porous medium composed of repeating obstacles in the form of cellular elements . Cellular elements were defined as sections of cell bodies , dendrites , axons , or glial processes . These were idealized into the unit two - dimensional arrays shown in Fig . 1 . Because values of a in typical brain regions are small ( ; 0 . 2 ) ( 13 ) , and brain interstitial clefts are highly connected , the models shown in Fig . 1 capture the essential properties of the ECS . The diameter of the diffusing molecules was taken to be vanishingly small . The dimensionless center - to - center distance between neighboring cells was set to a nominal value of 2 , and the center of each cellular element was assumed to be immobile during swelling y shrinkage . To allow cellular elements to alter their shape , the corners were rounded with an arc of a radius a . The parameter a , together with the intercleft distance 2 h and the fixed center - to - center distance , determined the void area fraction , which we continued to denote by a . A crucial aspect of the analysis was the identification of a repeating unit , enclosed by the outer dashed lines , for each arrangement depicted in Fig . 1 . Because the repeat - This paper was submitted directly ( Track II ) to the PNAS ofﬁce . Abbreviation : ECS , extracellular space . * To whom reprint requests should be addressed at : E - mail : cn7 @ is . nyu . edu . Articlepublishedonlinebeforeprint : Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA , 10 . 1073 y pnas . 150338197 . Article and publication date are at www . pnas . org y cgi y doi y 10 . 1073 y pnas . 150338197 8306 – 8311 u PNAS u July 18 , 2000 u vol . 97 u no . 15 ing units depicted in Fig . 1 must capture the symmetry aspects of a given problem , they apply only when the macroscopic diffusion direction eˆ is aligned in the Cartesian axes ( x or y ) . Assuming the cell membranes are impermeable to the diffus - ing molecules , we can define a function v that represents the small periodic component of the macroscopic concentration field . Then the differential equation for this periodic function in the void space of the repeating unit , V , is given by ( 16 , 23 ) , „ 2 v5 0 . [ 2 ] The repeating scale has the same order as the ratio of the individual size of the cellular elements to the whole tissue , which is therefore small , and v is regarded as a perturbation term in the macroscopic concentration profile . It is implicitly assumed that D * is time independent so long as the lattice structure remains unchanged , so that the D * derived under steady - state conditions should apply also in transient diffusion . Derivations of Eq . 2 and its boundary conditions have been given by Blum et al . ( 23 ) , who considered the statistical properties of long - range random walks , and by El - Kareh et al . ( 16 ) , who directly applied homogenization theory . In most cases , because of symmetry in the arrangements of the lattice elements , only one - half or one - quarter of the entire repeat - ing unit needs to be solved . The boundary conditions for v depend on the direction of eˆ , the macroscopic diffusion direction , and on whether the boundary is an interface separating successive units in the void space or the impermeable cell walls . Let the rectangular unit be bounded between x [ [ 0 , G x ] and y [ [ 0 , G y ] , where G x and G y are defined in Fig . 1 and its legend . Assuming that eˆ aligns with the x axis , at the interface we have v ~ 0 , y ! 5 v ~ G x , y ! 5 0 [ 3 ] because of periodicity of the repeating unit , and „ y v ~ x , 0 ! 5 „ y v ~ x , G y ! 5 0 [ 4 ] because of symmetry . Across the impermeable boundaries , the gradient for v is specified by ( 16 , 22 ) nˆ z „ v5 nˆ z eˆ , [ 5 ] where nˆ designates the outward normal at the solid boundaries . If eˆ aligns with the y axis , Eqs . 3 and 4 must be interchanged accordingly . An examination of Eq . 5 reveals that if a 5 0 , a singularity in „ v occurs at the corner shared by two adjacent straight edges of the cell . Inclusion of a smooth arc between such edges thus not only removes the singularity but also provides the transition between polyhedral and circular cells . The apparent diffusion coefficient D * in the direction of eˆ is estimated from ( 16 ) D * D 5 1 A E V ~ 1 2 eˆ z „ v ! d V 5 1 l 2 , [ 6 ] where A is the area of the void space in V . The l calculated from Eq . 6 will be a purely geometric tortuosity factor , because hydro - dynamic y viscous effects are not included in the present develop - ment . Eq . 2 was solved in a similar lattice arrangement by Bell and Crank ( 24 ) , but with a different interpretation of v . Hence their boundary conditions and the definition of D * y D also differ from ours . In the work of Blum et al . ( 23 ) , a line integral along the appropriate cell boundary was adopted to define D * y D . By apply - ing Green’s theorem , the equivalence between both integral ex - pressions can be shown . Here , however , the use of the area integral ( Eq . 6 ) reduces the influence of numerical errors from possible singularities on the cell boundaries . Numerical Solutions . Eq . 2 with the corresponding boundary conditions was solved by using the numerical package PLTMG 8 . 0 [ Piecewise Linear Triangular Multi - Grid ( 25 ) finite element method ] . PLTMG features adaptive local mesh refinement , mul - tigrid iteration , and a pseudoarclength continuation option for parameter dependencies . A curved boundary edge , if present , was approximated by a circular arc passing through the end - points of the edge . PLTMG uses a posteriori error estimates based on the computed solution to create refined meshes . The local error in each mesh element is defined as e h 5 v 2 v h , where v h is the piecewise polynomial approximation to v . The value of e h is found by solving a local Neumann problem in each element ( 26 ) . All of the final solutions were obtained after four levels of mesh refinement with a total of 3 , 000 triangular vertices . Our results showed that the fourth digit after the decimal point of the D * y D value could be changed only when the number of the vertices was increased to 9 , 000 . Fig . 2 shows numerical solutions output from PLTMG for the x - staggered arrangement ( Fig . 1 c ) to demonstrate the adaptive feature of mesh refinement . Fig . 2 Upper illustrates both the colored contours and the refined mesh . Note that the mesh is denser in the regions that require it , i . e . , where the solution gradient is large or a singularity is likely to occur . Fig . 2 Lower shows the corresponding a posteriori error estimate , the * 1 norm i e h i * 1 ( 26 ) . The largest numerical errors occur at the corners of the cells and result from the Fig . 1 . Schematic diagrams of the two - dimensional lattice arrangements in different situations . Impermeable cell obstacles are represented by the de - picted gray - colored cells arranged in a lattice structure . The distance 2 h representstheintercleftwidth , andtheradius a representsthesmallcurvature ofthecellmembraneindeformedregions . TheECSdomainswerehighlighted in light gray , with the rectangular dimension G x 3 G y deﬁned as : G x 5 G y 5 1 for lattice ( a ) ; G x 5 G y 5 ˇ 2 for lattice ( b ) ; G x 5 2 , G y 5 1 for lattice ( c ) ; G x 5 ˇ 3 , G y 5 1 for lattice ( d ) ; and G x 5 ˇ 3 , G y 5 3 for lattice ( e ) . Chen and Nicholson PNAS u July 18 , 2000 u vol . 97 u no . 15 u 8307 B I O P H Y S I C S singularity because of a 5 0 . Nevertheless , the local error is only on the order of 10 2 5 at the corners and 10 2 7 elsewhere , both of which are acceptably small . If a small arc of radius a 5 0 . 1 was added to modify the corner , the largest local errors were further reduced by three orders of magnitude . Results and Discussion Definition of Tortuosity . An appropriate definition of tortuosity is crucial to both the interpretation of the present results and mean - ingful comparison with other studies . Several definitions occur in the literature . All seek to measure the hindrance a diffusing particle encounters in a porous medium in comparison to a free medium , usually equated with water . ‘‘Hindrance’’ is an intuitive but vague term , which may include both constitutive and geometric factors . One such factor is the viscosity of the medium , most likely arising from the extracellular matrix . Another factor stems from the finite size and specific nature of the diffusing molecules and embodies hydrodynamic interactions with the boundaries that define the pore structure . Both these factors are largely empirical , though attempts have been made to calculate them ( 17 ) . These are potentially importantcomponentsoftortuosity , butweomitthemheretofocus on the geometric factors . Broadly , there are two approaches to the calculation of geometric tortuosity in the literature . The first is to construct a detailed model representing a small region of the local structure and then to attempt to calculate how this model would increase the local path length of a diffusing particle when compared to a free medium ( 17 , 18 , 24 , 28 ) . This approach can yield useful insight , but it has the drawback that it is hard to adequately ‘‘weight’’ the different paths involved to arrive at the appropriate mean value . In attempting such a weighting , some authors ( 27 , 28 ) have concluded that the local geometric factor itself can be decomposed into additional compo - nents that roughly correspond to a ‘‘wiggle’’ factor ( how much the local pore geometry deviates from straight line ) , a constriction factor ( how local pore size varies ) , and a topological factor ( con - nectivity of porous medium ) . Assessing the relative contributions of these factors is often problematic . An approach that alleviates the problems of detailed analysis of path length in representative models is to derive the tortuosity from an averaging process that mimics the diffusion process itself . This involves defining the tortuosity as the solution to a diffusion problem based on an ensemble description of the porous medium . When done properly , this solution incorporates all the geometric factors mentioned above with their correct weighting . This was the approach taken in refs . 16 , 23 , and 24 , which is adopted here . Tortuosity is then expressed as a function involving an integral ( Eq . 6 ) over the resulting concentration distribution . The diffusion problem is usually solved in the steady state , where it reduces to Laplace’s equation with appropriate boundary conditions . An advantage of this approach is that it agrees explicitly with the practical definition of tortuosity used in laboratory experiments . In such experiments , the diffusion coefficient measured in a free medium is experimentally compared to that in a porous medium ; this is mimicked by the mathematical experiment . Lattice Model Solutions . Each lattice configuration shown in Fig . 1 was solved with a variety of combinations of a and h , and the value of l was then plotted against a and h in Fig . 3 . First , we verified that our numerical results for the configuration depicted in Fig . 1 a agreed with those of Blum et al . ( 23 ) for square ( a 5 0 ) and circular cell elements ( a 5 1 2 h ) . We note that along the line a 5 0 , the tortuosity approaches = 2 as h approaches zero . According to Blum et al . ( 23 ) , when arrays of square cells approach each other so that the interstices between them become vanishingly small , the random walks within each inter - cleft channel become effectively one dimensional . In this limit , l depends only on the topology of the connecting channels . Interestingly , for hexagonal and triangular cells the same limit , lim ( a 5 0 , h n 0 ) l 2 5 2 , occurs ( Fig . 3 ) . This is because at a 5 0 and h n 0 , the lattice structure becomes a perfect pore network . Fig . 2 . Numerical solutions ( Upper ) of Eq . 2 by PLTMG ( 25 ) and the * 1 error estimates ( Lower ) forthestaggeredlatticearrangement ( c ) with a 5 0 , h 5 0 . 5 , and eˆ aligned with the x axis . The * 1 norm , deﬁned as i e h i * 1 ; [ * V e h 2 d V 1 * V ( „ e h ) 2 d V ] 1 / 2 ( 25 ) , estimates the sum of the magnitudes of the error itself and the gradient of the error . For visual clarity , only 1 , 000 vertices were shown . Fig . 3 . Distributionsof l vs . a and h foreachlatticearrangementdepictedinFig . 1 , exceptthediamondformation ( b ) displayedintheformofthedifference l ( a ) 2 l ( b ) . Superscripts in l denote the lattice arrangement , and subscripts ( x or y ) denote the direction of the macroscopic diffusion eˆ . If l x 5 l y , the subscripts x , y are omitted . Judging from the smallness of l ( a ) 2 l ( b ) , we concluded that the differencebetween l ( a ) and l ( b ) arosepurelyfromnumericalerrors , notbecause of intrinsic differences in lattice structure or orientations of eˆ . 8308 u www . pnas . org Chen and Nicholson According to pore - network theory ( 27 , 29 – 32 ) , l 2 5 N for N - dimensional isotropic pore networks , regardless of the num - ber of connecting pores at each node . Our lattice simulation results obtained with a 5 0 and h n 0 support this conclusion for N 5 2 . This result was also noted by Adrian et al . in their study of impedance in muscle fibers ( 33 ) . In regions of small h , l decreases slightly at first , but then increases as a increases . This is because the circular cellular elements , in the limit h n 0 , always retain residual space between the elements . Within this space , molecules executing a random walk are likely to be trapped locally . Obviously this entrapment cannot occur if h is too large , which explains why the rising l occurs only when h is small . In other words , under the same small intercleft distance h , the ECS gained from cellular shrinkage in the form of residual space does not help molecules diffuse through the ECS but , on the contrary , reduces macro - scopic diffusion . Similar rising trends for l along a for small h occurred for hexagonal and triangular cells . For the same h , the rising phase of l in arrangements ( d ) and ( e ) was weaker and stronger , respectively , than for the square cells . This is to be expected , because the shape closest to that of a circular cell ( a polygon with infinite number of edges ) is the hexagonal cell ( six edges ) followed by the square cell ( four edges ) , whereas the triangular cell ( three edges ) least resembles a circle . Staggered arrangements of cells are of interest because it has been presumed that this configuration forces the diffusing mole - cules to meander through longer pathways than they would have taken if the cells were aligned ( 16 ) . There is , however , a subtle issue of how to define a truly aligned or staggered array , and we demonstrated this point using the arrangements shown in Fig . 1 b and c . From a local viewpoint , the diamond formation in Fig . 1 b is indeed staggered in the orthogonal x and y axes , even though , from a macroscopic perspective , Fig . 1 b is the diagonal rotation of the aligned square formation in Fig . 1 a . However , we found that the l x and l y for the same a and h in the diamond formation ( b ) were indistinguishable from those of the square arrangement ( a ) . The insignificance of the differences l ( a ) 2 l ( b ) in Fig . 3 implies that l in an isotropic porous medium is independent of the orientation of eˆ , consistent with our argument in the Appendix . Such a conclusion can be arrived at easily from homogenization theory . Even from a microscopic perspective , a random walker executes independent random walks regardless of the orientation of eˆ . On the other hand , the staggered arrangement depicted in Fig . 1 c relocated the cell positions and thus had a different lattice structure from those in ( a ) or ( b ) . An objective determination of the extent to which elements are staggered therefore should be arrived at from changes in the connectivity of the ECS channels ( four for Fig . 1 b and three for Fig . 1 c ) . Because the cellular elements shown in Fig . 1 c were staggered only in the x direction , arrangement ( c ) was anisotropic , and we did find that l x . l y for most combinations of a and h . In addition , the rising trend of l y along a at small h quickly vanished . To summarize the results in Fig . 3 obtained with the lattices shown in Fig . 1 : we have demonstrated that , when the intercleft h is small , the geometric l increases with the formation of residual interstitial space between cells . This counterintuitive result offers a possible explanation of the plateau behavior of l during osmotic challenge observed in refs . 9 and 15 . In reality , however , the brain ECS does not conform to a periodic structure with a single repeating unit of identical shape . To test whether the increase in l with increasing residual space between cells was a peculiarity of a regular lattice structure , we designed in Fig . 4 a more complex and realistic ECS unit domain comprised of many cellular elements in random shapes and arrangements , representative of a typical section of ECS ultrastructure . The value of a was incrementally increased from 0 . 13 to 0 . 22 by shrinking the area of the cellular elements in the figure . To alter the residual space between cellular elements , we assumed that , as an element diminished in size , it tended toward a round shape by selectively retracting the regions with small radii of curvature first ( see the evolution of the Fig . 4 A – D ) . In this way , some intercleft distances between two opposing cell walls were kept approximately constant , whereas in other regions a residual space enclosed by the portions of distorted cellular elements was gradually formed . The domain for the case a 5 0 . 22 was shown in Fig . 5 , with the PLTMG - generated mesh triangulation on the left and the corresponding numerical solution for v in Inset . Because , for the realistic case it was impossible to ensure exact isotropy , both l x and l y were evaluated and the results summarized in Table 1 . Over the range of a values tested here , we found that l y increased monotonically with a , whereas a slight decrease preceded the subsequent increase in l x . Both trends of l x and l y with a were seen in Fig . 3 , suggesting that the increasing behavior of l is independent of the cell shape and does not require a lattice structure . A dead - end pore ( 34 ) is a more effective trap for random walkers and , if present , would be expected to raise l to even higher values but should not affect the conclusion about the rising l with the residual space . Depending on how the ECS plane is sectioned relative to the cell orientation , the profiles of some cellular elements ( e . g . , dendritic shafts or somata ) in the plane of sectionwillnotshrinkinthepreferreddirections , asideallydepicted in Fig . 4 . But this does not alter our conclusion about the formation of the residual space in three dimensions as cell volume shrinks . Relationship Between Two and Three Dimensions . Because all our calculations were made in two dimensions , it is important to ask Fig . 4 . Conﬁgurations of the more realistic brain extracellular space , com - putergeneratedtomimicthetwo - dimensionalsectionofneuropilultrastruc - ture commonly seen in electron microscopy . The fractions of the void area , a , were calculated to be 0 . 13 in A , 0 . 16 in B , 0 . 18 in C , and 0 . 22 in D . Fig . 5 . Triangulation of the ECS domain ( 12 3 12 ) by PLTMG for case D ( a 5 0 . 22 ) in Fig . 4 with 1 , 000 vertices . Subset shows the corresponding numerical solution for eˆ aligned in the x axis . Table 1 . Simulation results of l x and l y in the ECS of Fig . 4 A B C D a 0 . 13 0 . 16 0 . 18 0 . 22 l x 1 . 556 1 . 543 1 . 554 1 . 601 l y 1 . 587 1 . 591 1 . 612 1 . 664 Chen and Nicholson PNAS u July 18 , 2000 u vol . 97 u no . 15 u 8309 B I O P H Y S I C S whether the conclusions will apply in the three - dimensional world . Dealing first with a , the volume fraction , we note that according to the Delisse Principle ( 35 ) , random sections in one and two dimen - sions through a heterogeneous three - dimensional medium will accurately estimate the value of a in the medium . Although the depictions in Fig . 1 are not strictly random sections ( for some configurations , one could find a plane or line that would lie entirely in void space ) , they do represent the most common random section . These simple considerations do not apply directly to tortuosity . We note that the range of values of l , obtained with different arrange - ments , vary ( Fig . 3 and Table 1 ) depending on the shape of the cellular element in the lattice unit . Because some of these values are the same as those obtained experimentally in brain , one might assume that the values computed in two dimensions mimicked the three - dimensional case . But the discussion above of the limiting values for ideal pore networks , which can be regarded as a basic test of the relationship between dimensionality and tortuosity , indicates that here l scales as the square root of the dimension , and one may conjecture that this scaling would hold for lattice models . Although the complexity of finite element analysis in three dimensions has prevented us from testing this conjecture , we do not think that the basic conclusions of this paper are altered by this issue . A Hypothesis Concerning Cell Shape . From our simulations , we conclude that the rising l with increasing a is independent of cell type and arrangement ; rather , it is a consequence of the enlarge - ment of the residual space trapped between surrounding cells . For thisincreasingphaseof l toappear , h mustbesmall , andthecellular elements must shrink nonuniformly , in the sense that cells shrink faster in some regions than in others . Because such residual space will always occur when cells shrink differentially , it seems clear that the effect is independent of spatial dimensionality , so this behavior , revealed by two - dimensional simulations , is expected to appear also in three - dimensional situations . Indeed , examples of ‘‘lakes’’ ap - pearing between cells in the brain have been shown in appropriately prepared electron micrographs ( 36 – 38 ) . Thus the existence of localized residual space can provide a physical explanation for the unchanging l seen experimentally as a increases . This hypothesis seems plausible . In the absence of mechanical strains , an isolated cell tends to maintain a spherical shape . But brain cells ( which include neurons and glial cells ) and their processes in vivo usually are densely packed , which means a small intercleft distance ( ; 200 Å wide ) and that the cell membrane is unavoidably deformed . When the cellular elements of the brain shrink , it is possible that their distorted regions , where additional local strains are loaded because of the small radii of the curvature of the membrane ( assumed to be an elastic lipid bilayer ) , will shrink first to unload the strains . An equally plausible conjecture is that constraints imposed by the cytoskeleton may distort cell shape as volume changes . Data on shape changes in ensembles of brain cells are not available ; however , the present results indicate that it would be useful to try to obtain them . The distribution of l for the arrangement in Fig . 3 a was analyzed further in Fig . 6 to demonstrate how nonuniform cell shrinkage can account for the experimental plateau in l . To maintain a constant l while the cellular elements change shape , the path made by a and h must follow the contour lines . Trace A shows one possible path that will maintain a constant l during cellular shrinkage by increas - ing a faster than h . It is also possible to have h fixed while a increases ( trace B ) . One would not expect the plateau l to be maintained indefinitely . When a becomes sufficiently large , l must start to decline ( trace C ) . The blue lines indicate the paths required for the perspective ratio of the cell shape to be preserved , ( 1 2 h ) y a 5 constant $ 1 . Trace D ( increasing h while reducing a ) is physically impossible , because its slope is smaller than 1 . Thus , all possible traces reside in small h regions . To clarify the meaning of this discussion , the theoretical values of l vs . a , following trace B in Fig . 6 , were plotted together with recent experimental data in Fig . 7 . Similar trends in the curves indicate that the nonuniform changes in cell volume can well explain the asymmetric behavior of l in the hyper - and hypotonic solutions . Nevertheless , we do not mean to imply that trace B is the actual path followed during osmotic challenge , because in the real ECS the shape of the cellular elements and arrangement probably cannot be completely characterized by so few as two parameters ( a and h ) . We also should not expect any quantitative agreement between the theoretical and experimental values , because the theoretical l in Fig . 7 is derived from two - dimensional simulations by using square arrays and represents only the pure geometric tortuosity of a specific lattice arrange - ment , whereas the experimental l is an overall tortuosity factor in an ECS of three dimensions that may involve the issues discussed above . What our results do show , however , is that a change in cell shape resulting in the formation of residual space may be sufficient to explain present observations . Physiological Significance . Brain cells swell when exposed to hypo - tonic media and shrink when exposed to hypertonic media , with reciprocal changes in the ECS ( 8 , 9 ) . It is also true that brain cells swell , withreductioninvolumeoftheECSundernormalconditions of neuronal activity , and many pathophysiological conditions , in - cluding ischemia and anoxia ( 39 ) . ECS can also enlarge under some normal physiological conditions ( 40 , 41 ) . Indeed , changes in ECS volume may be more common than supposed , because most Fig . 7 . Comparison of theoretical and experimental l vs . a . The theoretical linerepresentstraceBinFig . 6derivedfromcalculationsbyusingarrangement a inFig . 1 . Experimentaldataaretakenfromref . 9andJ . Kume - Kick , T . Mazel , I . Vor˘ís˘ek , L . Tao , S . Hrabe˘tova´ , & C . N . ( unpublished work ) . Arrows on curves indicate appropriate ordinates and abscissa . Fig . 6 . Contour distribution of the l in lattice arrangement ( a ) . Along each contour line ( red ) , the value of l , labeled by the nearby numbers , remains constant . Arrowsatthelower - leftcornerindicatethedirectionsofincreasing a , whichcoincidewiththedirectionsofincreasing a and h . Thickgreencurves denotepossiblepathsofcell - shapechangesduringosmoticchallenge . Dashed blue lines indicate the paths that preserve the shape perspective during shrinking with a constant slope deﬁned as ( 1 2 h ) y a . 8310 u www . pnas . org Chen and Nicholson experiments are not instrumented to record such variations . Our results also offer an explanation for the asymmetric tissue imped - ance seen under varying bathing osmolarities in the hippocampus ofrats ( 42 , 43 ) . Thedecreaseoftheapparenttissueresistanceunder hypertonia was far less than expected from the measured relative increase of the interstitial volume . Huang and Somjen ( 43 ) attrib - uted this discrepancy to : ( i ) a substantial proportion of the current applied to measure impedance passing through the cells , and ( ii ) reduction of the cellular membrane conductance during hypertonic exposure . This explanation cannot completely resolve the discrep - ancy , because an increased cellular membrane resistance only shunts more currents through the low - resistance interstitial pathways , thus revealing more of the true impedance of the enlarging ECS . Our hypothesis of differential cellular shrinkage , on the other hand , provides a plausible alternate explanation for these experiments . Another example of where a shape change might provide an explanation of puzzling data is during brain development . The volume fraction of the ECS is 40 % immediately after birth in the cerebral cortex of the rat but diminishes to 20 % by postnatal day 21 ( 11 ) ; however , the tortuosity does not change significantly . On the basis of this paper , one explanation for this paradox is that the brain cells undergo a change in shape during development . Our work implies that changes in the ECS are confined not only to the volume fraction a but also to the structure of the ECS ( represented by a and h in our model ) . As we show , the latter can affect diffusion properties , and this may be especially critical in the intersynaptic diffusion of neurotransmitters ( 18 , 44 ) . Our results are also relevant to nonneuronal tissue ; for example , in describing diffusion in skeletal muscle ( 19 ) , the lateral intercel - lular space of epithelial cells ( 20 ) , and morphological studies of endothelial y epithelial cells under altered osmolarities ( 45 , 46 ) . Hitherto , changes in cell shape have not been recognized in attempts to describe the relation between volume fraction and tortuosity in the ECS , but this mechanism introduces a new factor that may be of widespread relevance in a variety of problems that involve diffusion . Appendix Geometric Tortuosity and Coordinate Systems . A fundamental im - plicit assumption in the concept of tortuosity is that , in a globally uniform but locally heterogeneous isotropic medium , one would obtain the same value regardless of the way the diffusion measure - ments were performed . In particular , the older methods of using radiotracers ( 10 ) used diffusion from a planar surface so that the flux was normal to that surface , whereas more recent work has used a point source ( 11 – 15 ) so that flux was radial . A recent theoretical paper ( 17 ) implied that the two types of experiment would lead to different values of geometric tortuosity . This would obviously have serious implications for the whole field of porous media research . From a fundamental perspective , however , l must have a unique value that depends only on the properties of the medium , not on the coordinate system implicit in the measurement . Macroscopic concentrations are defined as averages of the corresponding microscopic quantities . Such averages are taken over volumes that are small compared to the volume of the system but large enough for the transport equation to hold when applied to the volume ( 12 , 16 , 44 ) . Consequently , the apparent diffusion coeffi - cient of an isotropic porous medium is , in a macroscopic sense , also isotropic . The effect of different coordinate systems will be re - flected in the different forms of the diffusion equation , not in the value of the apparent diffusion coefficient . Rusakov and Kullmann ( 17 ) , however , derived a geometric tortuosity factor that was different in the geometry of planar and spherically symmetric diffusion , which naturally assumes the adoption of the rectangular Cartesian and spherical coordinate systems , respectively . Because the coordinate system is usually determined on the basis of geom - etry of diffusion symmetry that can be utilized , their theory implied a coordinate dependency in the geometric tortuosity factor . To relate such a coordinate - dependent geometric tortuosity ( hereafter denoted as l RK ) to the coordinate - independent D * , one must have , following the definitions in ref . 17 for consistency and introducing the viscosity of the extracellular matrix , which plays a role in that analysis , D * 5 D y ~ l RK f c f h ! 2 , [ 7 ] in which the function f h represents the influence of viscosity , and f c is a coordinate - dependent geometric factor used to compensate the coordinate dependence in l RK . The product l RK f c is the conven - tional coordinate - independent geometric tortuosity . The applica - bility of l RK alone will be limited , because all the experimental data in the literature are based on either Eq . 1 or other similarly macroscopic definitions . Indeed , one can define l RK , but such a tortuosity factor cannot be immediately related to D * without specifying f c first . Unless f c can be defined and shown to be a parameter with physical significance , there seems to be no need to introduce l RK . A further analysis of the methods in ref . 17 suggests that the differences obtained in planar and spherical geometry might be traced to subtleties in analyzing the detailed models used . As noted in the text , this issue has been a frequent problem with such approaches . ThisresearchwassupportedbyNationalInstitutesofHealthgrantNS28642fromNationalInstituteofNeurologicalDisordersandStroke . 1 . Allbritton , N . L . , Meyer , T . & Stryer , L . ( 1992 ) Science 258 , 1812 – 1815 . 2 . Francis , K . & Palsson , B . O . ( 1997 ) Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 94 , 12258 – 12262 . 3 . Agnati , L . F . , Zoli , M . , Stromberg , I . & Fuxe , K . ( 1995 ) Neuroscience 69 , 711 – 726 . 4 . Agnati , L . F . , Fuxe , K . , Nicholson , C . & Sykova´ , E . ( 2000 ) Volume Transmission Revisited , ( Elsevier , Amsterdam ) . 5 . Morrison , P . F . , Laske , D . W . , Bobo , H . , Oldfield , E . H . & Dedrick , R . L . ( 1994 ) Am . J . Physiol . 266 , R292 – R305 . 6 . Haller , M . F . & Saltzman , W . M . ( 1998 ) Pharm . Res . 15 , 377 – 385 . 7 . Latour , L . L . , Svoboda , K . , Mitra , P . P . & Sotak , C . H . ( 1994 ) Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 91 , 1229 – 1233 . 8 . Krizaj , D . , Rice , M . E . , Wardle , R . A . & Nicholson , C . ( 1996 ) J . Physiol . 492 , 887 – 896 . 9 . Nicholson , C . , Tao , L . & Kume - Kick , J . ( 1998 ) J . Physiol . 511 , 8S – 9S . 10 . Patlak , C . S . & Fenstermacher , J . D . ( 1975 ) Am . J . Physiol . 229 , 877 – 884 . 11 . Lehmenku¨hler , A . , Sykova´ , E . , Svoboda , J . , Zilles , K . & Nicholson , C . ( 1993 ) Neuroscience 55 , 339 – 351 . 12 . Nicholson , C . & Phillips , J . M . ( 1981 ) J . Physiol . 321 , 225 – 257 . 13 . Nicholson , C . & Sykova´ , E . ( 1998 ) Trends Neurosci . 21 , 207 – 215 . 14 . Nicholson , C . & Tao , L . ( 1993 ) Biophys . J . 65 , 2277 – 2290 . 15 . Tao , L . ( 1999 ) J . Neurophysiol . 81 , 2501 – 2507 . 16 . El - Kareh , A . W . , Braunstein , S . L . & Secomb , T . W . ( 1993 ) Biophy . J . 64 , 1638 – 1646 . 17 . Rusakov , D . A . & Kullmann , D . M . ( 1998 ) Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 95 , 8975 – 8980 . 18 . Rusakov , D . A . & Kullmann , D . M . ( 1998 ) J . Neurosci . 18 , 3158 – 3170 . 19 . Snyder , G . K . ( 1987 ) J . Appl . Physiol . 63 , 2154 – 2158 . 20 . Xia , P . , Bungay , P . M . , Gibson , C . C . , Kovbasnjuk , O . N . & Spring , K . R . ( 1998 ) Biophys . J . 74 , 3302 – 3312 . 21 . Bensoussan , A . , Lions , J . L . & Papanicolaou , G . ( 1978 ) Asymptotic Analysis for Periodic Structures , ( North – Holland , New York ) . 22 . Hornung , U . ( 1996 ) Homogenization and Porous Media ( Springer , New York ) . 23 . Blum , J . J . , Lawler , G . , Reed , M . & Shin , I . ( 1989 ) Biophys . J . 56 , 995 – 1005 . 24 . Bell , G . E . & Crank , J . ( 1974 ) J . Chem . Soc . Faraday Trans . 70 , 1259 – 2732 . 25 . Bank , R . E . ( 1998 ) PLTMG : A Software Package for Solving Elliptic Partial Differential Equations – User’s Guide , Ver . 8 . 0 ( Soc . Indust . Appl . Math . , Philadelphia ) . 26 . Bank , R . E . & Weiser , A . ( 1985 ) Math . Comp . 44 , 283 – 301 . 27 . Mathias , R . T . ( 1983 ) Biophys . J . 42 , 55 – 59 . 28 . Boyack , J . R . & Giddings , J . C . ( 1963 ) Arch . Biochem . Biophys . 100 , 16 – 25 . 29 . Johnson , F . L . & Stewart , W . E . ( 1965 ) J . Catal . 4 , 248 – 252 . 30 . Feng , C . & Stewart , W . E . ( 1973 ) Ind . Eng . Chem . Fundam . 12 , 143 – 147 . 31 . Burganos , V . N . & Sotirchos , S . V . ( 1987 ) Am . Inst . Chem . Eng . J . 33 , 1678 – 1689 . 32 . Friedman , S . P . & Seaton , N . A . ( 1995 ) Chem . Eng . Sci . 50 , 897 – 900 . 33 . Adrian , R . H . , Chandler , W . K . & Hodgkin , A . L . ( 1969 ) J . Physiol . 204 , 207 – 230 . 34 . Goodknight , R . C . & Fatt , I . ( 1961 ) J . Phys . Chem . 65 , 1709 – 1712 . 35 . Underwood , E . E . ( 1970 ) Quantitative Stereology , ( Addison – Wesley , Reading , MA ) . 36 . Van Harreveld , A . & Khattab , F . I . ( 1967 ) J . Neurophysiol . 30 , 911 – 929 . 37 . Bondareff , W . & Pysh , J . J . ( 1968 ) Anat . Rec . 160 , 773 – 780 . 38 . Cragg , B . ( 1980 ) Tissue Cell 12 , 63 – 72 . 39 . Sykova´ , E . ( 1997 ) Neuroscientist 3 , 28 – 41 . 40 . Huang , B . & Karwoski , C . J . ( 1992 ) J . Neurosci . 12 , 4243 – 4252 . 41 . Dmitriev , A . V . , Govardovskii , V . I . , Schwahn , H . N . & Steinberg , R . H . ( 1999 ) Visual Neurosci . 16 , 1157 – 1167 . 42 . Chebabo , S . R . , Hester , M . A . , Jing , J . , Aitken , P . G . & Somjen , G . G . ( 1995 ) J . Physiol . 487 , 685 – 697 . 43 . Huang , R . & Somjen , G . G . ( 1995 ) Brain Res . 702 , 181 – 187 . 44 . Barbour , B . & Ha¨usser , M . ( 1997 ) Trends Neurosci . 20 , 377 – 384 . 45 . Tiruppathi , C . , Malik , A . B . , DelVecchio , P . J . , Keese , C . R . & Giaever , I . ( 1992 ) Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 89 , 7919 – 7923 . 46 . Roy , G . & Sauve , R . ( 1987 ) J . Mem . Biol . 100 , 83 – 96 . Chen and Nicholson PNAS u July 18 , 2000 u vol . 97 u no . 15 u 8311 B I O P H Y S I C S