Spatial Hypertext : An Alternative to Navigational and Semantic Links Introduction : The Emergence of Spatial Hypertext Hypertext began as a vision of interconnected reference materials [ Bush 45 ] and literature [ Nelson 84 ] . These early visions were joined by working systems that supported link - based navigation among documents as well as branching points within ( hyper ) documents [ Engelbart 84 ] . As the use of hypertext systems became more widespread , researchers realized that readers could become confused or lost as they navigated large networks [ Conklin 87 ] . Systems such as NoteCards [ Halasz et al . 87 ] addressed this problem by displaying maps of the hypertext ' s network structure . The success of NoteCards ' s " browser cards " and other hypertext maps gave rise to systems in which the user’s main interaction with the hypertext was through a network map rather than a document viewer . For example , systems such as gIBIS [ Conklin , Begeman 88 ] and Aquanet [ Marshall et al . 91 ] presented a visual network containing typed links and nodes where the types are visually distinguished within the map ; the network could be edited and manipulated through this presentation . The move from document - centered hypertext systems to map - based hypertext systems had some unforeseen but far - reaching implications : relationships between nodes could be expressed in more than one way . Maps showed interconnectedness explicitly , usually in the form of a directed graph . But also node proximity came into play ; relationships among different nodes or documents could be indicated simply on the basis of their relative location . The use of these map - based hypertext systems to author new information spaces uncovered an interesting phenomenon . Users avoided the explicit linking mechanisms in favor of the more implicit expression of relationships through spatial proximity and visual attributes [ Marshall , Rogers 92 ] . Further analysis showed that the use of these spatial and visual cues to imply relationships applied not only to map - based hypertext systems , but also to traditional hypertext systems and in the physical arrangement of paper and notecards [ Marshall , Shipman 93 ] . New interface requirements arose from these observations of practice . Specifically , there was a need to support the expression of the implicit and transient relationships that develop between nodes . With that requirement came the concomitant need to support manipulation , the movement of nodes – and structures of nodes – within the information space . Spatial hypertext systems like VIKI [ Marshall et al . 94 ] emerged to support this new method of interacting with information . Commonly used visual attributes like color , shape , and border width can be readily changed to enable " information triage " , the rapid interpretation and assimilation of new information [ Marshall , Shipman 97 ] . To better support the manipulation of transient perceptual structures , VIKI includes a spatial parser that recognizes patterns such as vertical and horizontal lists , stacks , and composites . Recognized structures provide easy access to the different levels of perceptual structure within a complicated information space and support the transition of these implicit structures into explicit hypertext [ Shipman et al . 95 ] . Benefits of Spatial Hypertext Given this historical perspective on spatial hypertext and a range of experiences with its use , what can we infer about the types of activities for which it will be useful ? The most basic question is why is a spatial interface useful at all ( compared to document - centered interfaces ) . Our experience indicates four major benefits : ( 1 ) it takes advantage of people ' s considerable visual recognition and intelligence ; ( 2 ) it facilitates constructive ambiguity ; ( 3 ) it supports emerging problem - solving strategies ; and ( 4 ) it reduces overhead in communicating with others . A spatial interface allows users to take advantage of their visual memory and pattern recognition . Remembering where one saw a document in a visual workspace is a process of recognizing the area in which a document was located at a progressively finer - grained level rather than having to remember the navigational path one took to get to the document . Visual recognition also enables the expression of relation variations - - people recognize visual patterns as being of the same or similar type even when they are not identical ; this introduces a way to compose and share imperfect composites . Another benefit of spatial hypertext is its facility for constructive ambiguity . Where a link in a document - centered hypertext either exists or does not in a particular presentation of the material , placement of a node close but not quite with others can imply some indecision or potential for a relation between the nodes . Allowing people to express ambiguity more easily enables them to perform tasks such as analysis or design where interpretations form as they work with the materials . It is not only the case that the interpretation of individual documents changes over time in a spatial hypertext , but the visual language representing the interpretation changes as well . A study of users performing short - term interpretation tasks showed that visual languages emerge as users’ understanding of the task and their method of approaching the task co - evolved [ Marshall , Shipman 97 ] . The use of a visual attribute to represent some abstract information about node content changed over time – for example , color might start off indicating the usefulness of a document but later be used to encode domain - specific characteristics of the content . Such changes indicate that users adapt their solution strategies as they gain more insight into their task . Aquanet and other systems with predefined types and relations make the overhead for making such changes in mid - task overwhelming and very unlikely to occur . Many tasks require information to be shared among a group of collaborators . Hypertext ' s application to information sharing has been investigated by many systems including the Virtual Notebook System [ Shipman et al . 89 ] and Sepia [ Streitz et al . 92 ] . The initial study of spatial layouts of information implied a correlation between the number of people sharing an information space and the degree of visual structure apparent in the arrangement . When it was necessary for more people to understand the information space , they created a higher degree of perceptual structure and followed it more strictly . As with sharing information in a navigational hypertext or file system , users must agree on a basic framework in order to effectively communicate . In contrast with a navigational hypertext or file system , effective use of ambiguous and implicit relationships means the spatial hypertext does not require users to agree on particular relationships or agree on their interpretation . Impact of Spatial Hypertext Hypertext research has evolved into a number of interrelated sub - areas of specialization . Spatial hypertext has contributed to a number of these lines of hypertext research : playing into the discussion of hypertext literary theory ; framing the discussion of visualization and interaction techniques for hypertext information ; challenging the open - hypermedia research community with a different model of hypertext ; and motivating work on Web workspaces . Theoretical discussions of hypertext have long explored the role of the reader . Spatial hypertext becomes intertwined with these discussions when theorists begin to take a closer look at how readers may interact with texts , taking a step beyond the reader - as - writer foundation . As an important example , Rosenberg has introduced the notion of the reader as gatherer [ Rosenberg 96 ] . In his vision of interaction , document - centered hypertexts invite “or” style traversal : a reader can choose to go to this document or that ; by contrast , spatial hypertexts invite “and” interactions in which the reader can simultaneously apprehend many different nodes [ Rosenberg 97 ] . The representational malleability of spatial hypertext is also considered important ; early critiques of the rhetoric of hypertext call for a need to reform the established structural rigidity of hypertext and move to a more exploratory one [ Moulthrop 91 ] . In fact , one element of Greco’s call for a political praxis of hypertext – the use of hypertext to explore interpretive frameworks and theories – reflects the most basic goals of spatial hypertext [ Greco 96 ] . Kolb , a philosopher , further discusses the role of flexible representations of interpretation [ Kolb 97 ] . The properties of ambiguity and emergence are appealing to those who are interested in reframing existing texts . Visualizations of hypertext networks have evolved since the original hypertext maps that inspired spatial hypertext . There are now visualizations involving algorithms that cluster nodes or infer a hierarchy to generate visual representations that are simpler and easier to use than the map of the entire link network [ Durand , Kahn 98 ] . Additionally , visualizations have explored the use of three - dimensional representations for hypertext - - including the placement of text into virtual renditions of physical worlds [ Dieberger , Bolter 95 ] , or text - based spatial environments [ Dieberger 96 ] . Within VIKI , the constant shortage of screen real estate and the practice of performing multiple tasks simultaneously led to the development of a multi - focus fisheye view [ Shipman et al . 99 ] . The goal of open - hypermedia research is to create a protocol that allows links to exist across different hypertext systems and information stored in one system to be displayed and manipulated in another . For systems that are based on a node and link model of hypertext the primary concerns involve versioning , permissions , and composites . Spatial hypertext , because of the lack of links or other explicit relationships between nodes , challenges the open - hypermedia research protocols to consider information structuring at a more abstract level [ Nürnberg , Ashman 99 ] . Relationships implied in a spatial layout may need to be converted to a link in a document - centered hypertext system while links in such a system need to be converted into a generated layout in a spatial system . Additionally , the ambiguity of links and spatial composites in a spatial hypertext are difficult to express in a node - and - link based system . The growth of the Web has led to a growing number of systems that provide " Web workspaces " in which users can collect , organize , and otherwise work with information . VIKI itself includes a number of interconnections with the Web including the ability to author presentations containing Web - based information [ Shipman et al . 97 ] . Additionally , systems like Web Squirrel [ Bernstein 96 ] , D - LITE [ Cousins et al . 97 ] , Web Forager [ Card et al . 96 ] , and Data Mountain [ Robertson 98 ] provide workspaces for analysis and interpretation similar to that of VIKI . Future of Spatial Hypertext Spatial hypertext emerged from the graphical presentation of traditional hypertexts as maps . The problems of understanding the context of the information currently being read and remembering how one got to a particular location are ever more a problem with the growth of the Web as a central public information resource . The benefits of spatial representations and interfaces ensure continued research into spatial hypertext and Web workspaces . The current legal dispute about the bundling of Internet browsers and operating systems aside , the vision of the computer as an information appliance will push new operating system interfaces to combine current OS desktop features with those of spatial hypertext . References [ Bernstein 96 ] M . Bernstein . Web Squirrel . Eastgate Systems , Watertown . 1996 . [ Bush 45 ] V . Bush . As We May Think . The Atlantic Monthly , 6 ( 1 ) : 101 - 108 , July 1945 . [ Card et al . 96 ] S . K . Card , G . G . Robertson , and W . York , “The WebBook and the Web Forager : an information workspace for the World - Wide Web” Proceedings of CHI ' 96 , 1996 , pp . 111 - 118 . [ Conklin 87 ] J . Conklin . Hypertext : An Introduction and Survey . IEEE Computer , 20 , 9 , pp . 17 - 41 . [ Conklin , Begeman 88 ] J . Conklin , M . Begeman . gIBIS : A Hypertext Tool for Exploratory Policy Discussion . Proceedings of the Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work . 1988 , pp . 140 - 152 . [ Cousins et al . 97 ] S . B . Cousins , A . Paepcke , T . Winograd , E . Bier , and K . Pier . “The digital library integrated task environment ( DLITE ) . Proceedings of Digital Libraries ’97 . 1997 , pp . 142 - 151 . [ Dieberger , Bolter 95 ] A . Dieberger and J . D . Bolter . On the Design of Hyper “Spaces . ” Communications of the ACM , 38 ( 8 ) ( August 1995 ) , p . 98 . [ Dieberger 96 ] A . Dieberger . “Browsing the WWW by interacting with a textual virtual environment - - A framework for experimenting with navigational metaphors . ” Proceedings of Hypertext ' 96 , 1996 , pp . 170 - 179 . [ Durand , Kahn 98 ] D . Durand and P . Kahn . “MAPA : a system for inducing and visualizing hierarchy in websites . ” Proceedings of Hypertext ` 98 , New York : ACM ( 1997 ) , pp . 66 - 76 . [ Engelbart 84 ] D . C . Engelbart , D . C . “ Authorship Provisions in Augment . ” Proc . of 28th IEEE International Conference , San Francisco , CA ( Feb . 27 - Mar . 1 , 1984 ) , pp . 465 - 472 . [ Greco 96 ] D . Greco . “Hypertext with Consequences : Recovering a Politics of Hypertext . ” Proceedings of HT ' 96 , New York : ACM ( March , 1996 ) , pp . 85 - 92 . [ Halasz et al . 87 ] F . G . Halasz , T . P . Moran , R . H . Trigg . ( April 1987 ) . NoteCards in a Nutshell . CHI + GI ' 87 Conference Proceedings ( Toronto , Canada ) . New York : ACM , pp . 345 - 365 . [ Kolb 97 ] D . Kolb . “Scholarly Hypertext : Self - Represented Complexity . ” Proceedings of Hypertext ` 97 , New York : ACM ( 1997 ) , pp . 29 - 37 . [ Marshall et al . 91 ] C . Marshall , F . Halasz , R . Rogers , W . Janssen . Aquanet : a hypertext tool to hold your knowledge in place . Proceedings of Hypertext ` 91 , New York : ACM , 1991 , pp . 261 - 275 . [ Marshall et al . 94 ] C . Marshall , F . Shipman , J . Coombs , " VIKI : Spatial Hypertext Supporting Emergent Structure " , Proc . of European Conference of Hypermedia Technologies ( ECHT ` 94 ) , 1994 , pp . 13 - 23 . [ Marshall , Rogers 92 ] C . C . Marshall , R . A . Rogers . Two Years before the Mist : Experiences with Aquanet . Proceedings of the European Conference on Hypertext ( ECHT ` 92 ) . 1992 , pp . 53 - 62 . [ Marshall , Shipman 93 ] C . C . Marshall , F . M . Shipman , " Searching for the Missing Link : Discovering Implicit Structure in Spatial Hypertext . " Proceedings of Hypertext ` 93 , Seattle , WA ( 1993 ) , pp . 217 - 230 . [ Marshall , Shipman 95 ] C . Marshall and F . Shipman , " Spatial Hypertext : Designing for Change " , Communications of the ACM , 38 ( 8 ) ( August 1995 ) , pp . 88 - 97 . [ Marshall , Shipman 97 ] C . Marshall and F . Shipman , " Effects of Hypertext Technology on the Practice of Information Triage " , Proceedings of Hypertext ` 97 , New York : ACM ( 1997 ) , pp . 167 - 176 . [ Moulthrop 91 ] S . Moulthrop . ( 1991 ) “Beyond the Electronic Book : A Critique of Hypertext Rhetoric . ” Proceedings of Hypertext ’91 . New York : ACM , pp . 291 - 298 . [ Nelson 84 ] T . H . Nelson . Literary Machines . South Bend , Indiana : The Distributors . Edition 87 . 1 . Also 6th Edition , 1984 . [ Nürnberg , Ashman 99 ] P . J . Nürnberg¸ H . Ashman . “What was the question ? Reconciling open hypermedia and World Wide Web research . ” to appear in the Proceedings of Hypertext ’99 . [ Robertson 98 ] G . Robertson , M . Czerwinski , K . Larson , D . Robbins , D . Thiel , and M . van Dantzich , " Data Mountain : Using Spatial Memory for Document Management " , Proceedings of UIST ` 98 , New York : ACM ( November 1998 ) , pp . 153 - 162 . [ Rosenberg 96 ] J . Rosenberg , " The Structure of Hypertext Activity " , Proceedings of HT ' 96 , New York : ACM ( March , 1996 ) , pp . 22 - 30 . [ Rosenberg 97 ] J . Rosenberg . “ The Interactive Diagram Sentence : Hypertext as a Medium of Thought . ” Visible Language , 30 . 2 , pp . 103 - 116 . [ Shipman et al . 89 ] F . Shipman , R . Chaney , T . Gorry . ( November 1989 ) . Distributed Hypertext for Collaborative Research : The Virtual Notebook System . Proceedings of Hypertext ' 89 ( Pittsburgh , PA ) . New York : ACM , pp . 129 - 135 . [ Shipman et al . 95 ] F . M . Shipman , C . C . Marshall , T . P . Moran , " Finding and Using Implicit Structure in Human - Organized Spatial Layouts of Information . " Proc . of CHI ` 95 , ( May 7 - 11 , 1995 ) , pp . 346 - 353 . [ Shipman et al . 97 ] F . M . Shipman , R . Furuta , and C . C . Marshall , " Generating Web - Based Presentations in Spatial Hypertext " , Proceedings of Intelligent User Interfaces ` 97 , New York : ACM ( 1997 ) , pp . 71 - 78 . [ Shipman et al . 99 ] F . M . Shipman , C . C . Marshall , M . LeMere , " Beyond Location : Hypertext Workspaces and Non - Linear Views " , to appear in ACM Hypertext ` 99 Proceedings , 1999 . [ Streitz et al . 92 ] N . Streitz , J . Haake , J . Hannemann , A . Lemke , W . Schuler , H . Schutt , and M . Thüring . ( 1992 ) “SEPIA : A cooperative hypermedia authoring environment . ” Proceedings of ECHT ’92 , New York : ACM , pp . 11 - 22 .