Dynamics of endosomal sorting complex required for transport ( ESCRT ) machinery during cytokinesis and its role in abscission Natalie Elia a , Rachid Sougrat a , Tighe A . Spurlin b , James H . Hurley c , and Jennifer Lippincott - Schwartz a , 1 a Cell Biology and Metabolism Program , The Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Development , National Institutes of Health , Bethesda , MD 20892 ; b National Institute of Standards and Technology , Gaithersburg , MD , 20878 ; and c Laboratory of Molecular Biology , National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases , National Institutes of Health , Bethesda , MD 20892 Contributed by Jennifer Lippincott - Schwartz , February 17 , 2011 ( sent for review February 5 , 2011 ) The ﬁ nal stage of cytokinesis is abscission , the cutting of the narrow membrane bridge connecting two daughter cells . The endosomal sorting complex required for transport ( ESCRT ) machin - ery is required for cytokinesis , and ESCRT - III has membrane scission activity in vitro , but the role of ESCRTs in abscission has been un - de ﬁ ned . Here , we use structured illumination microscopy and time - lapse imaging to dissect the behavior of ESCRTs during abscission . Our data reveal that the ESCRT - I subunit tumor - susceptibility gene 101 ( TSG101 ) and the ESCRT - III subunit charged multivesicular body protein 4b ( CHMP4B ) are sequentially recruited to the center of the intercellular bridge , forming a series of cortical rings . Late in cyto - kinesis , however , CHMP4B is acutely recruited to the narrow con - striction site where abscission occurs . The ESCRT disassembly factor vacuolar protein sorting 4 ( VPS4 ) follows CHMP4B to this site , and cell separation occurs immediately . That arrival of ESCRT - III and VPS4 correlates both spatially and temporally with the abscission event suggests a direct role for these proteins in cytokinetic mem - brane abscission . superresolution imaging | cell division | centrosomal protein of 55 kDa | mitotic kinesin - like protein 1 | Madin – Darby canine kidney cells M embrane severing of the thin , microtubule - enriched in - tercellular bridge connecting the two daughter cells at the end of cytokinesis , termed “ abscission , ” is thought to be regulated at the midbody , a highly dense structure at the center of the in - tercellular bridge ( 1 – 5 ) . Despite the abundance of factors local - ized to the midbody and known to be necessary for abscission ( 1 – 6 ) , the mechanism for mediating the ﬁ nal scission event remains unclear . One family of factors that has been suggested to be in - volved is the endosomal sorting complex required for transport ( ESCRT ) machinery ( 3 , 7 ) . Comprising several components , in - cluding ESCRT - I , ESCRT - II , ESCRT - III , and vacuolar protein sorting 4 ( VPS4 ) , ESCRTs are sequentially recruited to mem - branes to mediate ﬁ ssion events ( 8 ) and have membrane scission activity in vitro ( 9 , 10 ) . During cytokinesis , ESCRT components ( including ESCRT - I , ESCRT - III , and VPS4 ) localize to the midbody ( 11 – 13 ) . ESCRT - I localization is mediated by GPPX 3 Y motifs of the ESCRT - I subunit tumor - susceptibility gene 101 ( TSG101 ) and the ESCRT - related protein apoptosis - linked gene 2 - interacting protein X ( ALIX ) that interact with a non - canonical coiled - coil region of centrosomal protein of 55 kDa ( CEP55 ) ( 14 ) . CEP55 translocates to the midbody following cyclin - dependent kinase 1 ( Cdk1 ) and Polo - like kinase 1 ( Plk1 ) phosphorylation ( 15 ) , where it binds to the central spindlin sub - unit mitotic kinesin - like protein 1 ( MKLP1 ) . The ESCRT - III subunit charged multivesicular body protein 1b ( CHMP1B ) binds to the microtubule - severing enzyme spastin , which is essential for cytokinesis ( 16 , 17 ) . Cell depletion of any of these ESCRT pro - teins leads to cytokinetic failure , as evidenced by an increase in multinucleated cells ( 11 – 13 ) . These characteristics make ESCRTs attractive candidates for mediating neck cleavage during cytokinetic abscission . However , other properties of cytokinesis and ESCRTs are not consistent with their having a role in abscission ( 7 ) . The membrane - cutting event during abscission , for example , is thought to occur at a narrow constriction site along the intercellular bridge that is distant from the midbody ( 3 , 5 ) and where ESCRTs previously have not been localized . In addition , ESCRTs are known to mediate ﬁ ssion of small vesicles ( < 50 nm diameter ) or viruses ( < 100 nm ) ( 7 ) , making it unclear how they could mediate large - scale scission of membranes > 1 μ m in diameter ( 3 , 5 ) , as exist within the intercellular bridge during cytokinetic abscission . Fi - nally , cytokinetic failure in the absence of ESCRTs could be an indirect effect of ESCRTs ’ having multiple functions in cell di - vision , including roles in maintaining the integrity of centrosomes ( 18 ) and the midbody ( 13 ) . One way to assess the role of ESCRTs in cytokinesis is to characterize their organization and dynamics during cytokinesis directly using imaging techniques . Todoso , we usedhigh - resolution structured illumination microscopy ( SIM ) and high - sensitivity temporal imaging of ﬂ uorescently labeled ESCRT proteins to dis - sect the spatiotemporal dynamics of ESCRTs at the intercellular bridge during cytokinesis . Our results suggest ESCRTs have a di - rect role in membrane abscission during cytokinesis . We ﬁ nd that ESCRT proteins assemble into a series of ring - like structures at the midbody center . Immediately before the abscission event , ESCRT - III and VPS4 redistribute to a nearby constriction site where ab - scission occurs . The tightly correlated recruitment of ESCRT - III / VPS4 to the constriction site and timing of abscission reveal an intimate function for ESCRT machinery in the ﬁ nal events of cy - tokinetic membrane abscission . Results To gain insight into the precise site and timing of cytokinesis , we examined the overall anatomical characteristics of the inter - cellular bridge found during cytokinesis . EM images of cells undergoing cytokinesis reveal a narrow intercellular bridge with tightly compressed microtubule bundles ( Fig . 1 A ) . In the center is a thickened “ dark ” zone , 0 . 6 μ m wide and with maximum diameter of 1 . 0 μ m ( excluding membrane outgrowths ) . Micro - tubule bundles extending from either side of the dark zone converge in two narrow membrane - constriction zones that are about 2 μ m apart . Imaging using atomic force microscopy ( AFM ) yields similar horizontal dimensions for the intercellular bridge , con ﬁ rming the EM data . In addition , AFM reveals a height pro ﬁ le along the intercellular bridge , with the midbody center Author contributions : N . E . designed research ; N . E . , R . S . , and T . A . S . performed research ; N . E . , J . H . H . , and J . L . - S . analyzed data ; and N . E . , J . H . H . , and J . L . - S . wrote the paper . The authors declare no con ﬂ ict of interest . Freely available online through the PNAS open access option . 1 To whom correspondence should be addressed . E - mail : JLippin @ helix . nih . gov . Thisarticlecontainssupportinginformationonlineatwww . pnas . org / lookup / suppl / doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1102714108 / - / DCSupplemental . 4846 – 4851 | PNAS | March 22 , 2011 | vol . 108 | no . 12 www . pnas . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1102714108 bulging out about 150 – 200 nm above the narrow constriction zones found on either side of the midbody ( Fig . 1 B ) . Completion of cytokinesis requires both membrane and mi - crotubule severing . Indeed , microtubule severing is known to correlate tightly with abscission time ( 19 ) . To test whether the two narrow constriction zones seen by EM and AFM represent sites of cutting during abscission , we imaged dividing Madin – Darby canine kidney ( MDCK ) cells expressing GFP - tagged α - tubulin . The entire process of cytokinesis in MDCK cells takes about 110 ± 30 min ( n = 50 ) . Abscission occurs during the last ∼ 20 min and is characterized by acute narrowing of one side of the midbody bulge followed by microtubule breakage and membrane cutting ( arrows in Fig . 1 C and in Fig S1 ; see also Fig . 1 D ) . Narrowing and scission of the other side of the midbody bulge then occurs , leaving a midbody remnant ∼ 2 μ m in length ( Fig . 1 C and Fig . S1 ) . All cells exhibited this abscission pheno - type , involving two distinct cuts , separated in time , that occur on either side of the midbody bulge to produce a midbody remnant dissociated from both daughter cells . To examine whether the remnant includes portions of the intercellular bridge ﬂ anking the midbody dark zone , we imaged the microtubule - binding protein AuroraB - GFP during cytoki - nesis . AuroraB - GFP is excluded from the central region of the midbody representing the dark zone ( Fig . 1 E Left ) . Notably , the protein is included in the midbody remnant , rimming either side of the dark zone at a distance of ∼ 1 μ m ( Fig . 1 E Right ) . This observation suggests that abscission occurs at a similar distance on either side of the midbody dark zone . This distance is con - sistent with cutting occurring at the two constriction zones seen by EM and AFM . These zones would be cleaved sequentially , giving rise to a 2 - μ m midbody remnant . To determine the spatial organization of the ESCRT proteins in the midbody , ﬂ uorescently tagged versions of the proteins were imaged by SIM . Antibody staining , with the exception of tu - bulin , generally was avoided because of known dif ﬁ culties of la - beling the midbody dark zone . Only cells expressing low levels of the ﬂ uorescently tagged ESCRT proteins were imaged and ana - lyzed to avoid potential artifacts from overexpression . Indeed , in these cells the overall midbody appearance is normal ( Fig . 2 A – D ) . Moreover , under these conditions the ﬂ uorescently tagged ESCRT proteins show their expected interphase cytosolic locali - zation ( 8 , 20 , 21 ) , and there is no increase in multinucleated cells , indicating that cytokinesis is not disrupted ( Fig . S2 ) . SIM images of ﬂ uorescently tagged ESCRT proteins in the intercellular bridge of dividing cells revealed that the midbody structural protein , CEP55 , concentrates in a 0 . 75 - μ m - wide zone in the midbody ( Fig . 2 A ) . This observation is consistent with previous immunolabeling results describing CEP55 midbody localization ( 22 ) . When the 3D image of CEP55 is rotated , a patchy signal is visible in the interior of the midbody , where microtubules are enriched . This localization pat - tern indicates that CEP55 extends into the interior of the midbody ( as a solid disk ) , as may be expected since CEP55 associate with microtubules ( 15 , 22 ) . A similar disk - like distribution is seen for the CEP55 binding partner MKLP1 ( 15 , 22 ) ( Fig . S3 ) . TSG101 binds directly to CEP55 ( 11 – 14 ) and is one of the most upstream components of the ESCRT machinery ( 10 , 23 ) . In SIM images , TSG101 localizes in two distinct , hollow rings located on either side of the midbody center . The rings are 0 . 28 μ m in thickness and about 0 . 25 μ m apart from one another Fig . 1 . Anatomical characteristics of the intercellular bridge during cytokinesis . ( A ) EM sections of the in - tercellular bridge from MDCK cells at early to late stages in cytokinesis ( left to right ) shows that the midbody dark zone ( 1 μ m in diameter and 0 . 6 μ m in width ) is separated by constriction zones ( arrows ) that are 2 μ m apart and has adiameter of0 . 1 – 0 . 5 μ m . ( Scale bar : 1 μ m . ) ( B ) AFM of the intercellular bridge from MDCK cells in cytokinesis . Shown are de ﬂ ection channels of the same midbody in different scales and a height channel of the zoomed in image . A height pro ﬁ le along the intercellular bridge indicates two constriction zones that are 2 μ m apart and are 150 – 200 nm below the highest point of the midbody . ( Scale bars : Left , 5 μ m ; Right . 2 μ m . ) ( C ) Live MDCK cells expressing α - tubulin – GFP during cytokinesis . The length of the midbody remnant ( see bar ) as measured by the ﬂ uorescent intensity pro ﬁ le is 2 . 18 ± 0 . 35 μ m ( n = 17 ) ( Scale bar : 2 μ m ) . ( D ) The relative change in microtubule diameter over time during cytokinesis at the position in - dicated by the arrow . Microtubule diameter was nor - malized to the maximal diameter measured for each cell . Abscission time ( time 0 ) was de ﬁ ned as the time of the ﬁ rst breakage of the microtubule bridge . n = 17 . ( E ) ( Left ) SIM images of the intercellular bridge of MDCK cells expressing AuroraB - GFP . ( Right ) Live - cell imaging of cells expressing AuroraB - GFP ( green ) together with α - tubulin – mCherry ( red ) during cytokinesis . n = 4 . ( Scale bars : 2 μ m . ) Elia et al . PNAS | March 22 , 2011 | vol . 108 | no . 12 | 4847 C E LL B I O L O G Y ( Fig . 2 B ) . The rings appear to associate with the cortical surface of the midbody , excluded from the interior of the midbody , in contrast to the disk - like shape of CEP55 . The inner diameters of the TSG101 rings are ∼ 1 . 0 μ m , suggesting their presence in the outermost layer of the proteinaceous part of the midbody in close association with the surrounding plasma membrane . The outer diameters of the rings are 1 . 7 μ m on average , suggesting that TSG101 also is localized to the membrane outgrowth seen by EM ( Fig . 1 A ) . Indeed , SIM images of the intercellular bridge labeled with a membrane marker show a maximum bridge di - ameter of 1 . 6 μ m ( Fig . S4 ) . The distribution of TSG101 , there - fore , is consistent with its functioning at the plasma membrane of the intercellular bridge on both sides of the midbody center . CHMP4 is a subunit of the downstream ESCRT - III complex . SIM imaging of the CHMP4 subunit CHMP4B at the intercellular bridge reveals that it , like TSG101 , is organized into two distinct ring - like structures . Previous reports also have shown an accu - mulation of ESCRT III on both sides of the midbody dark zone ( 12 ) . Our SIM images show the CHMP4B rings extend more pe - ripherally toward the rims of the dark zone than TSG101 ( Fig . 2 C ) . The rings are separated by ∼ 0 . 45 μ m , indicating a 50 % overlap with TSG101 in the midbody region . The CHMP4B rings coloc - alize with the outer membrane of the intercellular bridge ( Fig . S4 ) , suggesting they are associated with the plasma membrane . ESCRT - I and - III components ( i . e . , TSG101 and CHMP4B ) thus are organized symmetrically in a series of partially overlapping Fig . 2 . Spatial organization of the ESCRT complex in the midbody de - termined by SIM . MDCK cells expressing CEP55 - GFP ( A ) , TSG101 - GFP ( B ) , or CHMP4B - mCherry ( C and D ) were synchronized , ﬁ xed , stained with anti – α - tubulin antibodies , and imaged by SIM . ( A – D ) Each panel shows ( from left to right ) a single slice , a 3D rendering , a 3D rendering rotated 90° , and a zoomed - in image of the structure . Microtubules are colored in white , CEP55 - GFP in green , TSG101 - GFP in orange , and CHMP4B - mCherry in red . ( A ) CEP55 form a diffusely ﬁ lled structure that is 1 . 4 ± 0 . 15 μ m in diameter and 0 . 75 ± 0 . 07 μ m in width . n = 10 . A similar structure was observed for MKLP1 ( Fig . S3 A ) . ( Scale bar : 2 μ m . ) ( B ) TSG101 forms a tightly packed double - ring struc - ture surrounding the microtubules at the center of the midbody dark zone ( width = 0 . 82 ± 0 . 03 μ m ) . The rings are 1 . 7 ± 0 . 07 μ m in their outer diameter and are 0 . 23 ± 0 . 02 μ m apart . ( Inset ) A rotated image demonstrating the existence of two separate rings ( n = 5 ) . ( C and D ) CHMP4B concentrates in two broken rings that are 0 . 43 ± 0 . 08 μ m apart . The diameter of each broken ring is 1 . 25 ± 0 . 18 μ m . In some cells CHMP4B also shows an additional pool that is located asymmetrically 1 . 2 μ m away from the center of the dark zone ( arrow in D ) and is perfectly colocalized to the site of microtubule constriction . ( Insets ) CHMP4B signal alone ( n = 14 ) . The average diameter of the micro - tubules in all the measurements ( excluding D ) is 0 . 98 ± 0 . 12 μ m . The larger diameter measured for the proteins localized to the dark zone correlates with the diameter measured for this area using a membrane marker ( 1 . 6 μ m ; Fig . S3 ) . The dark zone ( the zone of no microtubule staining ) is 0 . 7 ± 0 . 1 μ m in width . ( E ) Confocal 3D - rendered images of antibody staining of endogenous CHMP4A ( red ) and tubulin ( white ) on the intercellular bridge of dividing MDCK cells . Images are consistent with the CHMP4B - mCherry localization described by SIM ( D ) . ( F ) A model for ESCRT organization at the midbody integrating the SIM measurements indicated above . Fig . 3 . Live - cell imaging of MDCK cells undergoing cytokinesis reveals se - quential recruitment of the ESCRT components to the midbody bulge . Cells expressing low levels of CEP55 - GFP ( A ) , TSG101 - GFP ( B ) , and CHMP4B - mCherry ( C ) together with α - tubulin – mCherry ( A and B ) or α - tubulin – GFP ( C ) imaged using a spinning - disk confocal microscope at 7 - min intervals . Each panel shows maximum intensity projection merged images of the micro - tubules ( red ) and the protein speci ﬁ ed ( green ) in different stages during cy - tokinesis . Maximum intensity projections of the protein of interest alone are shown below . Intensities above background were measured from the sum intensity projection at each time point and are plotted to the right of each panel . Background intensities or lower were set as 0 . Time 0 was determined as thetime of the ﬁ rst microtubule breakage . The arrow in C indicates thesite of acute increase in CHMP4B signal . The mean times for cytokinesis in thecells analyzed were CEP55 , 89 ± 9 min ( A ) ; TSG101 , 105 ± 12 min ( B ) ; and CHMP4B , 102 ± 16 min ( C ) . These values are in the normal range for cytokinesis in MDCK cells , which is de ﬁ ned as abscission within 110 ± 30 min ( as measured in 50 MDCK cells stably expressing α - tubulin – GFP ) . The double - ring structure observed for TSG101 by SIM could not be resolved here because it is below the optical resolution of this system . n = 8 . ( Scale bars : 2 μ m . ) 4848 | www . pnas . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1102714108 Elia et al . cortical rings adjacent to the plasma membrane on both sides of the midbody center ( Fig . 2 F ) . Interestingly , in SIM images of midbodies corresponding to late time points in the abscission process ( i . e . , midbodies having a very narrow constriction with a thinned or broken microtubule bridge ) , CHMP4B additionally localizes to puncta about 1 μ m away from the center of the midbody dark zone , where tubulin antibody labeling is excluded [ Fig . 2 D ( arrows ) and F ] . This position of CHMP4B puncta ( representing a second , later pool ) closely coincides with the site of constriction in the intercellular bridge , where membrane abscission occurs ( Fig . 2 D , arrows ) . A second puncta pool also is seen with antibody staining for the endogenous ESCRT - III subunit CHMP4A using conventional confocal microscopy ( Fig . 2 E ) . Thus , both endogenous and ﬂ u - orescently tagged CHMP4 proteins localize to the membrane cut site at late time points of cytokinesis . This localization raises the possibility that ESCRT - III proteins are involved directly in the ﬁ nal membrane abscission event . To investigate this scenario further , we compared the SIM data with the temporal kinetics of abscission . Live MDCK cells ex - pressing ultralow levels of ﬂ uorescent protein - tagged versions of MKLP1 , CEP55 , TSG101 , CHMP4B , and VPS4B together with ﬂ uorescently tagged tubulin were monitored by time - lapse video microscopy during cytokinesis . In these cells , the mean times for cytokinesis were in the normal range ( Fig . 3 and Movies S1 , S2 , S3 , S4 , and S5 ) , indicating that expression of the proteins did not affect the temporal kinetics of cytokinesis . CEP55 is steadily present at the midbody bulge from the start of cytokinesis ( Fig . 3 A and Movie S1 ) . A nearly identical kinetic pro ﬁ le is seen for MKLP1 ( Fig . S3 B and Movie S5 ) . TSG101 levels associated with the midbody bulge , on the other hand , begin to increase only at the midphase , rising continuously until abscission ( Fig . 3 B and Movie S2 ) . The kinetic pro ﬁ le for levels of the ESCRT - III com - ponent CHMP4B at the midbody bulge is different from that of either CEP55 or TSG101 : It increases in two steps before ab - scission . CHMP4B begins incorporating into the midbody at midphase . Then , very close to the timing of the abscission event , there is an acute increase in CHMP4B labeling in the second puncta pool localized at one of the constriction sites ( arrow in Fig . 3 C and Movie S3 ) . Notably , the peak of CHMP4B association with the constriction site always coincides with an acute decrease in tubulin diameter that is followed by abscission ( Fig . 4 A ) . This timing indicates that CHMP4B association at the constriction site correlates with membrane abscission . Membrane abscission in MDCK cells involves two consecutive cuts on the membrane necks facing either side of the midbody bulge ( Fig . 1 C and Fig . S1 ) . We therefore compared ESCRT protein recruitment to both cut sites by time - lapse imaging ( Fig . 4 A ) . On either side of the midbody bulge , CHMP4B peaks at the constriction site about 20 min before abscission followed by an acute decrease in microtubule diameter that ends in membrane cutting ( Fig . 4 A and Movie S3 ) . Notably , the microtubule di - Fig . 4 . Acute increases in CHMP4B and VPS4B levels at the constriction site are tightly correlated in time with acute constriction of the microtubule bridge . MDCK cells expressing CHMP4B - mCherry ( green ) and α - tubulin – GFP ( red ) ( A ) or VPS4B - GFP ( green ) and α - tubulin – mCherry ( red ) ( B ) were imaged during cytokinesis . The images shown are sequential frames of the last steps of abscission . ( A and B Upper ) The upper rows show an overlay of CHMP4B ( A ) or VPS4B ( B ) on the microtubule signal ; the lower rows show the tubulin signal alone . ( A and B Lower ) Plots of the change in microtubule diameter and ﬂ uorescence intensity of CHMP4B ( A ) or VPS4B ( B ) in the constriction zones ( see diagrams at right of graph ) . ( Scale bar : 2 μ m . ) ( C ) The average peak time of CHMP4B and VPS4B in the constriction zones relative to the abscission event ( time 0 ) is plotted . n = 5 . Elia et al . PNAS | March 22 , 2011 | vol . 108 | no . 12 | 4849 C E LL B I O L O G Y ameter of the second scission site does not change throughout the ﬁ rst scission event and drops only after the appearance of CHMP4B at this second site . This observation implies a direct cause - and - effect relationship between CHMP4B recruitment to the constriction site and membrane abscission . VPS4B , the ATPase responsible for recycling ESCRT - III and the most downstream component of the ESCRT machinery , shows similar characteristics , but it peaks closer to the time of abscission ( ∼ 10 min before abscission ) ( Fig . 4 B and C and Movie S4 ) . Thus , there is a lag in the peak of VPS4B relative to that of CHMP4B , consistent with a function of VPS4 down - stream of CHMP4B . To investigate how the localization pattern observed for the different ESCRT components relates to the event of abscission , we examined more closely the dynamics of the ESCRT - III protein CHMP4B late in cytokinesis . In particular , we focused on the two pools of CHMP4B seen at this time , which , as described above , include an initial pool localizing in rings at positions overlapping with the TSG101 rings and a second pool seen transiently at the abscission sites ( Fig . 2 D and Fig . 4 A ) . Quantitative imaging of live MDCK cells coexpressing CHMP4B - mCherry and tubulin - GFP close to the time of abscission reveals an acute increase in CHMP4B intensity located asymmetrically on one of the CHMP4B initial rings near the midbody center ( Fig . 5 A ) . This new pool of CHMP4B then appears to move outward until it stabilizes at a distance ∼ 1 . 0 μ m away from the center of the midbody , where acute membrane constriction and abscission occur ( Fig . 5 A , arrows ) . Although , we cannot not rule out the possibility that the second ESCRT - III pool arises independently of the initial ESCRT - III ring , our ﬁ nding suggests that these two pools are closely related to one another . Indeed , after the intensity of CHMP4B spikes at the initial ring , no further increase in intensity of the complex occurs as it moves outward , only a loss . ESCRT assembly at the midbody thus could serve as a staging area for nucleation of the ESCRT - III complex , which then relocalizes to the constriction zone where abscission takes place . Discussion The current model for ESCRT function demonstrated in vitro ( 9 , 24 ) involves sequential membrane recruitment of different ESCRT components to orchestrate ﬁ ssion . As discussed above , a similar sequential recruitment of ESCRTs is seen during cyto - kinetic abscission . ESCRT - I incorporates into the midbody center after CEP55 . The arrival of ESCRT - III at the midbody correlates closely with that of ESCRT - I , but its levels also peak acutely very close to the abscission event . VPS4 follows CHMP4B , with its peak intensity lagging that of CHMP4B and coinciding with membrane cutting . The preservation of the ordered mechanism of ESCRT activity at the cut sites therefore supports a funda - mental role for ESCRT machinery in the abscission event itself . Abscission consists of the nearly simultaneous cleavage of the microtubule bridge and membrane severing . Because these events are coupled by the recruitment of the microtubule - severing enzyme spastin to the late ESCRT - III protein CHMP1B ( 16 , 17 ) , ESCRT - III machinery probably functions both in microtubule severing and membrane scission . That said , our results do not differentiate the extent of direct involvement of ESCRT - III in microtubule severing versus membrane scission , but the latter would be most consistent with the in vitro activity of this complex . CHMP4B is thought to be one of the two earliest ESCRT - III proteins to assemble and the most important for membrane scission , by analogy to its yeast ortholog ( 10 , 23 ) . CHMP4B also has been shown to form spiral - shaped ﬁ laments when overex - pressed in cells ( 25 ) . In addition , in vitro studies have shown that ESCRT - III components spontaneously polymerize into spiral ﬁ laments that expose their membrane interaction sites on the surface , allowing them to bind tightly to surrounding membranes ( 26 ) . A plausible model ( Fig . 5 B ) , therefore , is that the ﬁ rst pool of CHMP4B ( having a ring - like shape with a large diameter ) corresponds to the nuclei of CHMP4 ﬁ laments . These ﬁ laments subsequently extend away from the center of the midbody to give rise to the second CHMP4B pool , which deforms the membrane neck into a narrow constriction . We do not observe a continuous distribution of CHMP4B from the TSG101 ring region to the narrow constriction , but we might not be able to detect such ﬂ uorescence because the cells express very low levels of tagged CHMP4B . An alternative model is that the midbody CHMP4B rings are staging points for the activation of CHMP4 and other ESCRT - III monomers , which then diffuse across the gap to the site of abscission . Whatever the mechanism , the model ( Fig . 5 B ) clari ﬁ es the role of the midbody as an organizing center for abscission , in that upstream ESCRT proteins ( TSG101 ) of the midbody serve to recruit and activate ESCRT - III proteins . The ESCRT - III proteins then invade the zone immediately distal to the midbody center , inducing the abscission event . In conclusion , our central observation is that ESCRT - III and VPS4 concentrate transiently at the narrow constriction sites on Fig . 5 . Suggested model for ESCRT - mediated abscission . ( A ) MDCK cells expressing CHMP4B - mCherry ( green ) and α - tubulin – GFP ( red ) were imaged during late cytokinesis at 3 - min intervals . ( Upper ) The images shown are sequential frames of the merged image ( upper row ) and the CHMP4B channel alone ( lower row ) . ( Scale bars : 2 μ m . ) ( Lower Left ) The graph shows the change in CHMP4B intensity on the side that is about to break . ( Lower Right ) The graph shows the distance between the highest - intensity CHMP4B pixel and the lowest - intensity CHMP4B pixel ( located between the two initial rings ) measured from a line intensity pro ﬁ le plotted along the midbody bridge on the side that is about break . This measurement was used as an indication of the location of the second CHMP4B pool relative to the center of the midbody . Time 0 was determined as the time CHMP4B intensity reached its maximal value . n = 5 . ( B ) Suggested model for ESCRT - mediated constriction and ﬁ ssion during cytokinetic abscission . Assembly of CEP55 ( green ) , TSG101 ( yellow ) , and CHMP4B ( red ) at the midbody center forms a platform for initiation of abscission . Closer to abscission , ESCRTIII levels increases at the midbody and then relocalizes to the constriction zones , probably by polymerizing into a spiral . This relocalization induces constric - tion that is followed by breakage of the intercellular bridge , leading to complete separation of the two daughter cells . 4850 | www . pnas . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1102714108 Elia et al . either side of the midbody bulge with the appropriate timing to carry out scission . This ﬁ nding strongly supports the model that ESCRT - III is directly responsible for cytokinetic membrane abscission in mammalian cells using the same type of membrane scission activity observed in vitro for yeast ESCRT - III ( 9 , 24 ) . This mechanism parallels the mechanism for membrane abscis - sion in the Crenarchaea ( 27 , 28 ) , which have ESCRT - III and VPS4 but lack known orthologs of other eukaryotic membrane - traf ﬁ cking proteins . Materials and Methods SIM Imaging . MDCKcellswereseededat30 % densityonnumber1 . 5coverslips ( Zeiss ) and were transfected 16 h later with MKLP1 - GFP , CEP55 - GFP , TSG101 - GFP , orCHMP4B - mCherry . Asdescribedin SIMaterialsandMethods , cellsthen weresynchronizedwithaphidicolin ( Sigma ) and ﬁ xed ( 4 % paraformaldehyde ) 10 – 11h later . Allsampleswerestainedwithanti – α - tubulinantibodies ( DM1A ; Sigma ) . With the exception of tubulin , we chose to use direct imaging of ﬂ uorescently tagged proteins rather than antibody staining to avoid known artifacts of midbody - protein staining that probably are caused by the high density of proteins in this region . Thin ( 0 . 15 – 0 . 2 μ m ) z - stacksofhigh - resolutionimageswerecollectedin ﬁ ve rotations for each midbody using an ELYRA PS . 1 ( Carl Zeiss MicroImaging ) microscope . Images then were reconstructed using ZEN software ( Carl Zeiss MicroImaging ) based on the structured illumination algorithm developed by Heintzmann and Cremer ( 29 ) . All measurements were performed on recon - structed superresolution images of single z - sections in ZEN . 3D rendering was done in Volocity 4 ( Perkin - Elmer ) . For CHMP4A antibody staining , cells were synchronized and ﬁ xed as de - scribed above . Cells then were stained with anti - CHMP4A polyclonal anti - bodies ( 20 ) ( kindly provided by Dr . Phyllis Hanson , Washington University , St . Louis , MO ) and anti – α - tubulin antibodies and imaged by the Marianas confocal spinning - disk microscope ( described below ) . Live - Cell Imaging . MDCKcellswereplatedinlowdensityonafour - wellchamber slide ( Nunc ) and were cotransfected with a combination of MKLP1 - GFP , CEP55 - GFP , TSG101 - GFP , orVPS4 - GFPwithtubulin - mCherryorCHMP4B - mCherrywith tubulin - GFP . Cellswereimaged16 – 40haftertransfection . Z - stacksofselected low - expressing cells undergoing cytokinesis were collected at the speci ﬁ ed intervals using a confocal spinning disk microscope ( Marianas ; Intelligent Imaging ) and were video recorded on an EM - CCD camera ( evolve ; Photo - metrics ) . Image processing and analysis were done using Slidebook 5 ( In - telligent Imaging ) . Only cells that successfully completed cytokinesis and showed normal kinetics ( de ﬁ ned as abscission within 110 ± 30 min as ob - served in the cytokinesis of 50 MDCK cells stably expressing α - tubulin – GFP ) were analyzed . Extra care was taken in imaging CHMP4B - mCherry and VPS4B - GFP because of the known potential dominant negative effect of expressing these proteins . Therefore , only cells that showed a uniform dim cytosolic distribution of these proteins were imaged and analyzed . All in - tensity measurements were done on sum projection images of the 3D movie series after background subtraction . The microtubule diameter was de - termined basedonthemicrotubule ﬂ uorescenceintensitypro ﬁ lealongaline that was positioned about 1 μ m away from the center of the midbody ( from both sides ) perpendicular tothe intracellular bridge . The position of CHMP4B in time ( Fig . 5 A ) was determined by measuring the distance between the lowest - intensity pixel and the highest - intensity pixel from a line intensity pro ﬁ le positioned along the intercellular bridge . The lowest - intensity pixel was found experimentally to represent the center of the area between the twoCHMP4Binitialringsandthereforewasusedasareferenceformeasuring the position of CHMP4B . A more detailed description of the methods and descriptions of the EM and AFM methods are given in SI Materials and Methods . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS . We thank Misha Kozlov for mechanistic insights and fruitful discussion . We thank Carl Zeiss Microimaging , LLC for access to the ELYRA PS . 1 microscope and speci ﬁ cally thank Maya Everret for coordinating that access . We also thank Rainer Heintzmann for technical suggestions on SIM acquisition and reconstruction parameters , Mike Davidson for kindly proving the CAAX - tdEOS construct , and Phyllis Hanson for providing the CHMP4A polyclonal antibodies . We thank members of the J . L . - S . laboratory and Jeremy Swan , Angelika Rambold , and Nichole Jonas for help with the illustrations . This research was supported by the Intramural Program of the National Institutes of Health , National Institute of Child Health and Human Development , National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases , and Intramural AIDS Targeted Antiviral Program . 1 . Glotzer M ( 2005 ) The molecular requirements for cytokinesis . Science 307 : 1735 – 1739 . 2 . Eggert US , Mitchison TJ , Field CM ( 2006 ) Animal cytokinesis : From parts list to mechanisms . Annu Rev Biochem 75 : 543 – 566 . 3 . Steigemann P , Gerlich DW ( 2009 ) Cytokinetic abscission : Cellular dynamics at the midbody . Trends Cell Biol 19 : 606 – 616 . 4 . Sagona AP , Stenmark H ( 2010 ) Cytokinesis and cancer . FEBS Lett 584 : 2652 – 2661 . 5 . Mullins JM , Biesele JJ ( 1977 ) Terminal phase of cytokinesis in D - 98s cells . J Cell Biol 73 : 672 – 684 . 6 . Gromley A , et al . ( 2005 ) Centriolin anchoring of exocyst and SNARE complexes at the midbody is required for secretory - vesicle - mediated abscission . Cell 123 : 75 – 87 . 7 . Schiel JA , Prekeris R ( 2010 ) Making the ﬁ nal cut — mechanisms mediating the abscission step of cytokinesis . Scienti ﬁ cWorldJournal 10 : 1424 – 1434 . 8 . Wollert T , et al . ( 2009 ) The ESCRT machinery at a glance . J Cell Sci 122 : 2163 – 2166 . 9 . Wollert T , Wunder C , Lippincott - Schwartz J , Hurley JH ( 2009 ) Membrane scission by the ESCRT - III complex . Nature 458 : 172 – 177 . 10 . Hurley JH , HansonPI ( 2010 ) Membranebuddingandscission by the ESCRT machinery : It ’ s all in the neck . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 11 : 556 – 566 . 11 . Carlton JG , Martin - Serrano J ( 2007 ) Parallels between cytokinesis and retroviral budding : A role for the ESCRT machinery . Science 316 : 1908 – 1912 . 12 . Morita E , et al . ( 2007 ) Human ESCRT and ALIX proteins interact with proteins of the midbody and function in cytokinesis . EMBO J 26 : 4215 – 4227 . 13 . Carlton JG , Agromayor M , Martin - Serrano J ( 2008 ) Differential requirements for Alix and ESCRT - III in cytokinesis and HIV - 1 release . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 105 : 10541 – 10546 . 14 . Lee HH , Elia N , Ghirlando R , Lippincott - Schwartz J , Hurley JH ( 2008 ) Midbody targetingof the ESCRT machinery by a noncanonicalcoiled coil in CEP55 . Science 322 : 576 – 580 . 15 . Fabbro M , et al . ( 2005 ) Cdk1 / Erk2 - and Plk1 - dependent phosphorylation of a centrosome protein , Cep55 , is required for its recruitment to midbody and cytoki - nesis . Dev Cell 9 : 477 – 488 . 16 . Yang D , et al . ( 2008 ) Structural basis for midbodytargeting of spastin by the ESCRT - III protein CHMP1B . Nat Struct Mol Biol 15 : 1278 – 1286 . 17 . Connell JW , Lindon C , Luzio JP , Reid E ( 2009 ) Spastin couples microtubule severing to membrane traf ﬁ c in completion of cytokinesis and secretion . Traf ﬁ c 10 : 42 – 56 . 18 . MoritaE , etal . ( 2010 ) HumanESCRT - IIIandVPS4proteinsarerequiredforcentrosome and spindle maintenance . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 107 : 12889 – 12894 . 19 . Steigemann P , et al . ( 2009 ) Aurora B - mediated abscission checkpoint protects against tetraploidization . Cell 136 : 473 – 484 . 20 . Lin Y , Kimpler LA , Naismith TV , Lauer JM , Hanson PI ( 2005 ) Interaction of the mammalian endosomal sorting complex required for transport ( ESCRT ) III protein hSnf7 - 1 with itself , membranes , and the AAA + ATPase SKD1 . J Biol Chem 280 : 12799 – 12809 . 21 . Shim S , Kimpler LA , HansonPI ( 2007 ) Structure / functionanalysis of fourcoreESCRT - III proteins reveals common regulatory role for extreme C - terminal domain . Traf ﬁ c 8 : 1068 – 1079 . 22 . Zhao WM , Seki A , Fang G ( 2006 ) Cep55 , a microtubule - bundling protein , associates with centralspindlin to control the midbody integrity and cell abscission during cytokinesis . Mol Biol Cell 17 : 3881 – 3896 . 23 . Raiborg C , Stenmark H ( 2009 ) The ESCRT machinery in endosomal sorting of ubiquitylated membrane proteins . Nature 458 : 445 – 452 . 24 . Wollert T , Hurley JH ( 2010 ) Molecular mechanism of multivesicular body biogenesis by ESCRT complexes . Nature 464 : 864 – 869 . 25 . Hanson PI , Roth R , Lin Y , Heuser JE ( 2008 ) Plasma membrane deformation by circular arrays of ESCRT - III protein ﬁ laments . J Cell Biol 180 : 389 – 402 . 26 . Lata S , et al . ( 2008 ) Helical structures of ESCRT - III are disassembled by VPS4 . Science 321 : 1354 – 1357 . 27 . Samson RY , Obita T , Freund SM , Williams RL , Bell SD ( 2008 ) A role for the ESCRT system in cell division in archaea . Science 322 : 1710 – 1713 . 28 . Lindås AC , Karlsson EA , Lindgren MT , Ettema TJ , Bernander R ( 2008 ) A unique cell division machinery in the Archaea . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 105 : 18942 – 18946 . 29 . Heintzmann R , Cremer CG ( 1999 ) Laterally modulated excitation microscopy : Improvement of resolution by using a diffraction grating . Proc SPIE 3568 : 185 – 196 . Elia et al . PNAS | March 22 , 2011 | vol . 108 | no . 12 | 4851 C E LL B I O L O G Y