University of Wollongong Research Online Faculty of Social Sciences - Papers Faculty of Social Sciences 2017 Pharmacology students ' perceptions of creating multimodal digital explanations Wendy S . Nielsen University of Wollongong , wnielsen @ uow . edu . au Garry F . Hoban University of Wollongong , ghoban @ uow . edu . au Christopher J . T Hyland University of Wollongong , chrhyl @ uow . edu . au Research Online is the open access institutional repository for the University of Wollongong . For further information contact the UOW Library : research - pubs @ uow . edu . au Publication Details Nielsen , W . , Hoban , G . & Hyland , C . J . T . ( 2017 ) . Pharmacology students ' perceptions of creating multimodal digital explanations . Chemistry Education Research and Practice , 18 329 - 339 . Pharmacology students ' perceptions of creating multimodal digital explanations Abstract Students can now digitally construct their own representations of scientific concepts using a variety of modes including writing , diagrams , 2 - D and 3 - D models , images or speech , all of which communicate meaning . In this study , final - year chemistry students studying a pharmacology subject created a ' ' blended media ' ' digital product as an assignment to summarize an independently prepared technical literature review on a current research topic in pharmacology for a non - expert audience . A blended media is a simplified way for students to combine a variety of modes to complement a narration to explain a concept to others . In this study , the students learned how to create a blended media during a one - hour workshop , and used the technique to create the representation as an assessment task . The research question that guided the study was , ' ' What are the students ' perceptions of making a digital product such as blended media and how did these shape their multimodal awareness ? ' ' We draw from theoretical perspectives in multimodalities , representations and meaning making . Data included interviews at three points of the semester , the literature review and the digital media product . We present three case studies with volunteering students , who demonstrated a strong awareness of effective communications techniques as they attended to the audience . Making a blended media is a creative way for chemistry students to summarize complex scientific information and as a task may help to focus their multimodal awareness and developing communications skills . Keywords digital , explanations , multimodal , creating , students ' , perceptions , pharmacology Disciplines Education | Social and Behavioral Sciences Publication Details Nielsen , W . , Hoban , G . & Hyland , C . J . T . ( 2017 ) . Pharmacology students ' perceptions of creating multimodal digital explanations . Chemistry Education Research and Practice , 18 329 - 339 . This journal article is available at Research Online : http : / / ro . uow . edu . au / sspapers / 2939 Chemistry Education Research and Practice Paper This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 20xx J . Name . , 2013 , 00 , 1 - 3 | 1 Please do not adjust margins Please do not adjust margins a . School of Education , University of Wollongong , Australia . b . School of Chemistry , University of Wollongong , Australia . Electronic Supplementary Information ( ESI ) available : [ details of any supplementary information available should be included here ] . See DOI : 10 . 1039 / x0xx00000x Received 00th January 20xx , Accepted 00th January 20xx DOI : 10 . 1039 / x0xx00000x www . rsc . org / Pharmacology Students’ Perceptions of Creating Multimodal Digital Explanations W . Nielsen , a G . Hoban a and C . Hyland b Students can now digitally construct their own representations of scientific concepts using a variety of modes including writing , diagrams , 2 - D and 3 - D models , images or speech , all of which communicate meaning . In this study , final - year chemistry students studying a pharmacology subject created a “blended media” digital product as an assignment to summarize an independently prepared technical literature review on a current research topic in pharmacology for a non - expert audience . A blended media is a simplified way for students to combine a variety of modes to complement a narration to explain a concept to others . In this study , the students learned how to create a blended media during a one - hour workshop , and used the technique to create the representation as an assessment task . The research question that guided the study was , “What are the students’ perceptions of making a digital product such as blended media and how did these shape their multimodal awareness ? ” We draw from theoretical perspectives in multimodalities , representations and meaning making . Data included interviews at three points of the semester , the literature review and the digital media product . We present three case studies with volunteering students , who demonstrated a strong awareness of effective communications techniques as they attended to the audience . Making a blended media is a creative way for chemistry students to summarize complex scientific information and as a task may help to focus their multimodal awareness and developing communications skills . Introduction Chemistry education and science education more generally have long recognized the value of having students interpret and / or generate single or multiple representations ( Adandan , 2014 ; Ainsworth , 1999 , 2006 ; Cheng and Gilbert , 2009 ; Davidowitz et al , 2010 ; Ferk et al . , 2003 ; Gilbert and Treagust , 2009 ; Goldman , 2003 ; Kozma , 2003 ; Seufert , 2003 ; van der Meij and de Jong , 2006 ) . There is a new and growing body of research in science learning that demonstrates the value of students constructing their own representations of science concepts using a range of modes ( Cooper et al , 2015 ; Hand et al , 2009 ; Prain and Waldrip , 2006 ; Tytler et al , 2013 ; Waldrip et al , 2006 ) . Researchers in language and literacy describe a mode as a “meaning - making system in order to articulate the meanings demanded by the social requirements of particular communities” ( Kress et al , 2001 , p . 43 ) . Specific to chemistry learning , there are a number of forms or modes of meaning making including writing ( Hand and Choi , 2010 ; Prain , 2006 ; Ritchie et al , 2010 ) ; diagrams ( Carlisle et al , 2015 ; Hubber et al , 2010 ; Prain and Waldrip , 2006 ; Subramaniam and Padalkar , 2009 ) ; flow charts ( Davidowitz et al , 2005 ) ; visualisations ( de Berg , 2012 ; Gilbert , 2007 ) ; physical models ( Prins et al , 2008 ) ; and powerpoint presentations ( Waldrip et al . , 2006 ) . Each of these has a role in communicating scientific knowledge . When students represent their own ideas through generating writing , images , models and voice , or , a combination of modes ( Lemke , 2000 ; Prain , 2006 ; Prain and Waldrip , 2006 ) , they make meaning . Meaning is made when learners create their own representations because they ‘translate’ information into different representational forms . Further , when creating multiple representations there is an added benefit for learning : “multiple representations refers to the practice of re - representing the same concept through different forms , including verbal , graphic and numerical modes , as well as repeated student exposures to the same concept” ( Prain and Waldrip , 2006 , p . 1844 ) . Thus , when students re - represent information by creating additional representational forms using different modes , they may enhance their understanding of the science concepts . According to Yore and Hand ( 2010 ) , “The transformation among multimodal representations has the greatest potential in promoting learning and depth of processing” ( p . 96 ) . While this translational work is important , it may be limited in upper - level university chemistry programs or subjects due to the heavy content load and dependence on written assignments and examinations . In the contemporary context of university chemistry education in Australia , Learning and Teaching Academic Standards ( Jones et al , 2011 ) specify that tertiary science graduates should be effective communicators of science . More particularly , the standards expect science graduates to “engage with their audience and be able to convey their message in a clear and understandable manner” ( p . 14 ) . The audience could be peers , scientific non - experts or the general community . Thus , effective communication for a range of audiences and purposes , and represented in a variety of modes including new media , is an important graduate outcome for university chemistry programs . Theoretical Background Creating Digital Explanations Chemistry Education Research and Practice 2 | J . Name . , 2012 , 00 , 1 - 3 This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 20xx Please do not adjust margins Please do not adjust margins In order to better understand how students make meaning when they develop multiple representations , we draw from the field of semiotics , which is about sign systems . When learners interpret information in a representation generated elsewhere , such as in a diagram or piece of text , they must compare their own interpretation of the expert - generated representation to the referent or object being represented ( Peirce , 1931 / 1955 ) . The dynamic interplay between the representation ( the sign ) , the referent ( the concept / content being represented ) and the meaning made ( personal interpretation ) creates an important triadic relationship for meaning making : A sign , or representamen , is something which stands to somebody for something in some respect or capacity . It addresses somebody , that is , creates in the mind of that person an equivalent sign , or perhaps a more developed sign . That sign which it creates I call the interpretant of the first sign . The sign stands for something , its object . It stands for that object , not in all respects , but in reference to a sort of idea…that is to have a like content… . The triadic relationship is genuine , that is its three members are bound together by it in a way that does not consist of any complexus of dyadic relations . ( italics in original ) ( Peirce , 1931 , p . 99 - 100 ) Peirce diagrammed this dynamic relationship between the representation , the referent and the meaning or idea generated in his triadic model of a semiotic system , as shown in Figure 1 . Science educator Jay Lemke ( 1998 ) built on Peirce’s ( 1931 / 1955 ) model and explained the interplay of three influences on the semiotic system : When we construct meaning we always simultaneously construct a ‘presentation’ of some state - of - affairs , orient to this presentation and orient it to others and in doing so create an organized structure of related elements… . How much more is this true when we take into account the co - deployment of visual , gestural , graphical , mathematical and other resource systems ! ( Lemke , p . 91 - 92 ) Semiotic theory helps us understand why it is important to have learners interpret representations made by experts and then generate their own . Thus , the field still holds currency for science learning , even though Peirce’s work originated early in the 20 th century . According to Waldrip et al , ( 2010 ) , “with any topic in science , students’ understandings will change as they seek to clarify relationships between their intended meanings , key conceptual meanings within the subject matter , their referents to the world , and ways to express these meanings” ( p . 67 ) . If university students are given opportunity to design and make their own representations or “signs” of scientific concepts , they must make decisions about the relationship between the content ( referent ) , the construction ( representation ) and the most appropriate mode / s to use . Hoban and Nielsen ( 2012 ) showed that it is important for pre - service teachers to consider which mode to use—written , auditory or visual—as the most suitable for a particular concept and for a particular representation . The wide range of possible modes means that students now have creative opportunity for multimodal representation in the context of their disciplinary science learning in university . INSERT FIGURE 1 ABOUT HERE Representations that include more than one mode are ‘multimodal’ and student awareness of modal choices helps to create a coherent product , as noted by Jewitt ( 2009 ) : “semiotic mode [ s ] combine as resources for meaning making…as the resources of different modes are combined , meanings are corresponding , complementary or dissonant as they harmonize in an integrated whole” ( p . 301 ) . Royce ( 2007 ) called this ‘intersemiotic complementarity , ’ where modal choices are made in the design process so that representations are complementary . Chemistry , as a science discipline in universities , is heavily dependent on limited modes of communication such as writing and sketches as exemplified in written examinations and laboratory reports . However , digital technologies enable students to not only use more modes to communicate , but also to combine them in interesting ways . Attending to the need for complementarity across a range of representational forms enhances meaning making and may provide opportunity for chemistry students to therefore develop communications skills if they have to explain the concepts to someone else . In our digital world , students have increasing opportunity to be multimodal designers and can utilize a wide range of easily accessible digital media forms , where novel multimodal assessment tasks become possible . Creating Representations with Web 2 . 0 Technology In countries such as Australia , mobile digital devices are ubiquitous . Virtually every university student has a smartphone , tablet and / or laptop . Many science learners use several of these devices concurrently ( Moll and Nielsen , 2016 ) and Gen Y learners are assumed to be highly proficient in their use . Since Prensky ( 2001 ) labelled them ‘digital natives , ’ learners have gained unparalleled access to technological devices such as smartphones , digital still cameras , video cameras and tablets , supported by Web 2 . 0 affordances . The ease of access means that students can learn from technology by accessing information , but this access also enables them to learn with technology by working with this information to generate different forms of representations across multiple modes to illustrate their own knowledge ( Jonassen et al , 1996 ; Kim and Reeves , 2007 ; Willett , 2007 ) . As a result , new media is increasingly being used in science teaching at all levels and provides exciting opportunities for learning : “manipulation of computer - generated texts , where students integrate imagery , sound , mathematical symbols , diagrams , and writing , alters the role of written language as the major or dominant medium of learning” ( Prain , 2006 , p . 180 ) . Teachers in schools have found it challenging to integrate the use of new technology forms in their classroom practice ( Howard et al , 2015 ; Howard and Gigliotti , 2016 ) and academics similarly struggle to meaningfully integrate contemporary educational technologies into their teaching ( Bennett et al , 2015 ; Martinovic and Zhang , 2012 ) . Part of the challenge of integrating digital technologies involves pedagogies and strategies to have students use the technologies for learning . For example , having students create media forms , such as animations ( Sperling et al , 2003 ; Yang et al , 2003 ) or simulations , has previously involved expensive or complicated software , and thus , these media forms were difficult for students to produce in the classroom . A very Journal Name ARTICLE This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 20xx J . Name . , 2013 , 00 , 1 - 3 | 3 Please do not adjust margins Please do not adjust margins simple form of student - generated animation is now available . and colleagues ( Hoban , 2007 , 2009 ; Hoban , Loughran , and Nielsen , 2011 ; Hoban and Nielsen , 2010 , 2012 ) developed slowmation as a stop - motion animation technique where the creator manually moves the objects whilst taking digital still photographs at predetermined intervals . This technique overcomes the limitations of complicated software programs in animating objects and has been used with a wide range of learners , including pre - schoolers ( Fleer and Hoban , 2012 ) ; preservice primary teachers ( Hoban and Nielsen , 2012 ) ; and preservice secondary science teachers ( Amos , 2015 ; Keast and Cooper , 2016 ; Kidman et al , 2013 ; Paige et al , 2016 ) . There are even simpler techniques for students to create other forms of digital representations . A podcast is an audio file , recorded using a microphone attached to a computer or using the built - in microphone on a smartphone . Bartle and colleagues ( Bartle , 2016 ; Bartle et al , 2011 ; Pegrum et al , 2014 ) introduced a podcast assignment in their undergraduate chemistry course . The task was constrained to a three - minute recording based on one of two key chemical concepts : ‘acid and base’ or ‘oxidation and reduction . ’ Students created a wide range of podcasts , many of which were simple reproductions of facts about the types of reactions . However , some students developed highly contextualized and creative podcasts where metaphors or analogies were used to explain the concept . The entertaining and informative media products developed by students in pairs represent high levels of student knowledge as well as deep engagement . A more complex example of student - generated media is offered by Vanderlelie ( 2013 ) , who has biochemistry students create a ‘musical explanation’ ( Vanderlelie , 2016 ) to explain a biochemical pathway . She reports that students create video products that are often highly engaging and very creative and use a range of representational forms within the video to complement music , images , diagrams and labels . A recent edited book by Hoban , Nielsen , and Shepherd ( 2016 ) includes many more examples of a variety of student - generated media products , clearly demonstrating the range of strategies in current use at universities around the world to engage science learners . As students become designers of media , they ‘think like teachers’ which promotes multiple ways to make meaning : The process of articulating their knowledge about the domain…forced them to reflect on that knowledge in new and meaningful ways . We have all stated at one time or another that the quickest way to learn about subject matter is to have to teach ( design ) it…when learners actively construct knowledge from multimedia , they acquire cognitive , metacognitive and motivational advantage over learners who attempt to absorb knowledge ( Jonassen et al , 1996 , p . 95 - 97 ) Drawing from the fields of student - generated media in science learning , representations , multimodalities and semiotics , this study explores the experiences of chemistry students taking a pharmacology subject and making a blended media explanation . We ask the following research question : What are the pharmacology students’ perceptions of making a digital product such as blended media and does this help them develop communication skills and multimodal awareness ? Method Participants and Context A class of 40 final year students were enrolled in a 13 - week subject , Principles of Pharmacology , which is required in the Medicinal Chemistry degree and a final year elective in other Bachelor of Science degrees at the University of _ _ _ _ _ _ _ in Australia . Principles of Pharmacology is an introductory subject for chemistry students covering basic concepts and the molecular basis of drug action , including receptors , kinetics , bioavailability and factors affecting drug activity . The subject involves a laboratory component that includes computer simulations , but for the purposes of this paper , the key tasks are a literature review ( 15 % of the subject mark , due in Week 10 ) on a contemporary area of investigation in pharmacology that is complementary to lecture material and a culminating presentation ( 5 % of the subject mark , due in Week 12 ) on the findings of the literature review that is presented as a ‘blended media’ ( Hoban , Nielsen , and Hyland , 2016 ) . Students choose three preferred topic s from an instructor - supplied list that frames the inquiry as a question . Examples of questions include : Is Ferroquine a novel anti - malarial ? What therapeutic options are available for treating Crohn’s Disease ? And , Could the spice Curcumin be a useful drug in the clinic ? The list also includes a leading journal article for each question as a starting point for the literature review . Students ‘bid’ on topics during Week 2 , where randomly , students are called on to nominate their preference among the remaining topics . Students also had a one - hour training session on using tools such as Scopus and SciFinder to search the chemical literature and a one - hour workshop where they learned about developing a blended media as an explanation . The literature review was specified as a scientific report of length 8 - 10 pages that the students had eight weeks to prepare . Chemistry students are increasingly expected to engage with primary literature ( see for example , Forest & Rayne , 2009 ; Ma , 2015 ; Shea et al , 2016 ) and tasks such as a literature review offer students a means to synthesise such reading . The 3 - 5 minute blended media presentation was to outline the literature review and answer the guiding question for a non - expert audience , which gives the students the opportunity to work with additional representational forms ( of their choosing ) to recontextualise the information—a key element of multimodal learning and effective communication of complex information . A mini ‘film festival’ was held in Week 12 , which was two weeks following submission of the literature review and each blended media was played for the class . While the literature review task is not the focus of the current article , it is important to acknowledge the relationship between this task and the blended media product . Participants in the current study include three students ( two male , one female ) who volunteered to take part in this research . The three case students were among seven who were studying either Medicinal Chemistry or Medical Health Science and volunteered to participate in the research . Each of these students constitutes a case ( Merriam , 2007 ; Stake , 1995 ; Yin 2014 ) . The three examples were chosen for this paper because the range exemplifies the wider data set and the participants used very different styles in their presentations . The research was conducted according to protocols reviewed by the university’s Human Research Ethics Committee . Data Gathering Methods The current study used several qualitative methods to gather data for subsequent analysis : Creating Digital Explanations Chemistry Education Research and Practice 4 | J . Name . , 2012 , 00 , 1 - 3 This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 20xx Please do not adjust margins Please do not adjust margins Interviews with participating students . The first and second authors conducted three interviews with each participant at three points in the term . A preliminary interview was conducted immediately after students chose the topic in Week 2 . These interviews probed the students’ prior knowledge on the chosen topic ; reasons for choosing that topic ; how they planned to conduct the literature review ; and their experience in making digital media products . The second interview took place right after the students submitted the literature review task . Questions asked students to summarise the topic , including what they had learned about it and further probed how they had conducted the literature review . They were also asked about their general approaches to learning new and complex information and some basic demographic questions . The final interview occurred in the two weeks following submission of the blended media assignment and focused on their perceptions of the task , and included decision making during construction . Interview with the subject instructor ( Author 3 ) . The instructor was interviewed early in the term and questioned about his goals for the task ; the students’ responses to it , including how they engage with the parts of the task ; the intentions behind the parts of the literature review and blended media tasks ; and his experience with different kinds of student presentation formats . Collection of artifacts . The literature review and blended media were collected as artifacts . All interviews were transcribed verbatim and scripts for the blended media products were collected where available or generated by a research assistant . In this study , no data were gathered during the time that the students were actually constructing their blended media products . Instead , interview data provide a window into students’ perceptions of the tasks . Their design choices are explored as possible indicators of multimodal awareness and knowledge of effective communications strategies . Data Analysis The data were analysed qualitatively for : ( i ) students’ perceptions about their experiences of making the blended media products , including how this developed out of the literature review part of the overall task ; and ( ii ) the students’ design choices in making the blended media . We were assisted in our analysis through a specialised software program called Multimodal Analysis [ MMA ] ( O’Halloran , 2013 ) . This software allows for fined - grained coding and synthesis of video ( e . g . blended media ) and text - based data ( e . g . interview transcripts ) . In our coding , we used a framework of ‘intermodality’ ( Painter et al , 2013 ) to focus on how meaning is communicated through the modal choices made in the blended media presentation . Intermodality refers to the relations between meaning portrayed in text type , in this case the blended media , and what is represented using various modes such as text , labels , diagrams , video or narration . To process each blended media product in the data set , we segmented the digital media into clauses and with the MMA software , identified the mode used in each segment along with a time stamp for each transition across the explanation . This served to summarise the participants’ modal choices as represented in the blended media , but also to highlight interesting and creative depictions that subsequently served as a form of stimulated recall in the final interviews . Interview data were analysed thematically with a focus on the students’ design intentions , in particular , for communicating the scientific information . For example , during the final interview , episodes identified in the MMA analysis were the focus of interview questions that asked about the reasons for the design choice . Thus , in the MMA analysis we identified semiotic resources that appeared to support the explanation , and through the final interviews , we interpret how the students’ decisions to utilise particular resources supported meaning making through construction of the blended media product . Results Results are presented as case studies of the three students . Each case begins with background about each student and the question that was the focus of the literature review task . All participating students had some experience with making digital media products prior to this subject , although none had made such a product as a task in any subject during their degree programs . During the literature review task , the students primarily read journal articles but also reviewed notes and texts from the subject . The blended media summarised the literature review for a non - expert audience . Case Study 1 . David : The Therapeutic Potential of TRPV Receptors David was studying a Medical Health Science degree and was interested in the medical effects of drugs and how they can be used to improve health . He chose the following question for his literature review and blended media presentation : What are the therapeutic possibilities for targeting vanilloid ( TRPV1 ) receptors and what problems are associated with this drug target ? During the first interview , David indicated that he chose the topic because he had never heard of TRPV receptors and so was curious to learn about them and what they did . David knew that receptors in general were “important in terms of cell - to - cell communication and hormone action…and vastly important for biological processes” ( First interview , March 16 , 2015 ) . During the second interview ( May 14 , 2015 ) , which followed the submission of the literature review assignment , he was asked what he had learned about TRPV receptors , but also about his process for learning about the topic . Through reading a number of research articles while preparing the literature review , he came to understand that TRPV receptors play an important role in pain detection , relaying information to the central nervous system . A response can be evoked by both agonists and antagonists . Further , TRPV receptors are also involved in temperature regulation , but the mechanisms are unclear . Representations and perceptions of making a blended media . In David’s third interview , which occurred after the blended media assignment was submitted , we asked him about his process of making the blended media . David explained that he used images or videos found via a Google search to portray aspects of his literature review , including animated molecular Journal Name ARTICLE This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 20xx J . Name . , 2013 , 00 , 1 - 3 | 5 Please do not adjust margins Please do not adjust margins models ; still images taken from the internet ; hand - drawn posters depicting therapeutic pathways and effects using highlighter pens to add colour to labels ; and an analogy of a competition between two contemporary rap music artists to compare activation by antagonists and agonists . David used a 3 - D computer - generated rotating colour model of the TRPV receptor depicting all of the subunits and binding sites while the voiceover narration described the molecule and its activity in the body : “The TRPV1 receptor is a serpentine receptor consisting of six trans - membrane helices and one core domain between helices five and six . ” The short video clip showed the molecule rotating first in the horizontal plane and then in the vertical plane , which displayed the membrane helices and peripheral projections . To illustrate three mechanisms for activating the molecule , David presented a hand - drawn poster ( shown in Figure 2 ) that added colour highlights as the words were stated in the narration . A 01 : 09 of the blended media , an 18 - second animation of a generalised cell membrane ion channel opens as activators attach . Molecules enter the channel as the voiceover says , “In regards to the therapeutic potential of targeting TRPV1 receptors , both agonists and antagonists have proven beneficial at reducing pain and other disease symptoms , but which one is more useful in a clinical context ? ” While the channel depicted was not actually the TRPV receptor ( because a Google search did not produce any ) , David aimed to illustrate a molecular passage in the body , which helped to set the context for the viewer to understand the functioning of TRPV receptors in the body . Drawing labels and adding colours was also part of his blended media , which reflected his own style of learning , as he noted during the third interview : “I write all my study notes and I go through with a highlighter…I do like to visualise things , especially in regards to pathways . ” He added colour highlights to the labels for the activity of the TRPV receptor , using the same colour pattern consistently throughout the blended media . His choice to include similar modal choices in his blended media reflected his own way of learning : “if I was to read ‘it binds here and it does this and it activates this which goes to the brain’ , that’s a lot harder for me to interpret as opposed to seeing a diagram of it . So yeah , that’s my personal way of learning put into there” ( third interview ) . INSERT FIGURE 2 ABOUT HERE Figure 2 . David’s hand - drawn poster from his blended media David used an analogy of a competition between the two rappers Kanye West and Dr . Dre to personify ( Lakoff & Johnson , 2003 ) the differing pathways for agonist and antagonist activation : “they’re like music artists that I like… . and they both kind of compete ; it’s like who is the most popular rapper ? ” During the third interview , David spoke about using the analogy of two popular rappers to introduce an element of humour , but also to help the viewer understand the nature of the competition in agonist and antagonist pathways for pain relief . Other aspects of the explanation for the agonist pathway were emphasised with still images of , for example , topical analgesic creams such as Zostrix and Capzasin - P and an image of a red hot chilli pepper . David’s presentation in the blended media also included other hand - drawn lists of diseases and symptoms eased through agonist action on the TRPV receptor to decrease the sensation of pain . David scripted the narration for his blended media using an iPad and organised the presentation according to the headings in his literature review . The flow of the blended media was similar to the literature review , not in terms of complexity of content represented , but in sequence of sections : both tasks began with a definition and the context for where the receptor functions , but while the literature review moved to a technical comparison of the agonist and antagonist functions of TRPV , the blended media introduced the analogy of the rap artists . He recorded the narration as the last step in his production process . In the follow - up interview , David noted that he had not made a ‘blended media’ previously in the degree program , but had much experience with PowerPoint presentations , writing essays and lab reports . David noted in the third interview that the blended media task afforded a different kind of learning experience : “I was able to learn about as opposed to just writing something in a Word document . ” The more typical kinds of assessment tasks in science degrees rely on working with written texts and then generating a text - based product . Working with multiple modes for the blended media provided a context for using a range of visualisations , which makes for interesting viewing , but can also help learning , according to David . Case Study 2 . Ruby : The Potential of Interleukin - 21 Ruby was studying Medicinal Chemistry and was also interested in the medical effects of drugs and how they can be used to improve health . Her question for the literature review and blended media presentation was : What is the potential for targeting Interleukin - 21 ( IL - 21 ) in immune - related diseases ? Even as Ruby had chosen the topic , she admitted that she did not know much about it and was interested in the specificity of the topic rather than a more general question that other students seemed to favour : “so it was very specific , talking about one receptor…and I thought it’s targeting lots of different autoimmune diseases and that’ll give me lots of different things to talk about” ( First interview , March 12 , 2015 ) . In choosing the topic , she had quickly searched the internet with the search term ‘Interleukin - 21’ and found many references to rheumatoid arthritis and autoimmune diseases , which she interpreted favourably because it meant that she could readily find information about the topic . Consistent with the task to generate a literature review to answer the guiding question , she made a plan to begin with the structure of the receptors , then learn how they work while considering treatments for different diseases . Ruby had some prior experience with digital media production , having previously helped a PhD student with research on slowmation . Her work on that project involved making a ‘claymation’ of a process from analytic chemistry , so she was familiar with the technology tools and software to use in generating a media product . Representations and perceptions of making a blended media . Ruby used the free version of VideoScribe to make her blended media , which ran for 05 : 43 and used a combination of modes , including VideoScribe objects ; still images ; animations ; diagrams of the JAK - STAT pathway ; text ; labels ; and a Creating Digital Explanations Chemistry Education Research and Practice 6 | J . Name . , 2012 , 00 , 1 - 3 This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 20xx Please do not adjust margins Please do not adjust margins narration . She chose VideoScribe because of its collection of digital objects including pictures , cartoon - like characters and arrows , all of which can be easily manipulated : “you just put them wherever you want them to go” ( third interview ) . The user can also import pictures or videos from elsewhere and easily record an audio track . Ruby prepared a script for the narration , made an overall plan similar to a storyboard and then assembled images and objects into the blended media . Finally , she adjusted timing within VideoScribe until she was satisfied with the overall alignment . The blended media begins with a cartoon of a castle protected by ninja warriors ( see Figure 3 ) . The analogy with IL - 21 was developed through the cartoon imagery , and explained the system in general terms , including the action of cytokines . The media product moves on to the more specific description of interleukin - 21 , including where it is produced and the roles it plays in the body controlling the activity of T cells , B cells and NK cells . At 01 : 26 of the blended media , the voiceover describes how Il - 21 binds to its receptor . Ruby used objects from within the VideoScribe program and animated them to simulate operation of the immune response as a cytokine binds and activates the JAK - STAT pathway . Further imagery is shown in animated form to illustrate the hypothesised role of interleukin - 21 in immune - mediated diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis and lupus , using the ninja analogy introduced at the beginning . During the first interview , Ruby was asked to consider the upcoming blended media task in this final - year chemistry subject . She noted : “I think it’s an interesting approach . ” INSERT FIGURE 3 ABOUT HERE Figure 3 . Ruby’s castle diagram However , writing was her preferred way of learning : “I’ll probably learn best from writing the actual scientific article , from reading the things and then writing and trying to understand it that way as opposed to actually doing a movie . ” On some level , she felt that reading and writing were more efficient for learning . During the second interview , which followed the submission of the literature review portion of the task , we queried what she now understood about the topic . She offered a detailed explanation starting with what interleukins are and how they function as cell signals when binding to a specific receptor , and admitted : “it was definitely difficult to condense a very difficult topic into something more generally for a wider science - based audience as opposed to a very specific immunologist . ” The difficulty was a result of the nature of the complexity of the topic and the need to include specific immune cells and responses . During the third interview , she was asked to reflect on the value of the blended media task for her learning : I don’t know if it necessarily benefits me any more than doing the literature review because I feel I’m just doing it because [ that is ] the assessment task that I needed to do , whereas I’d done all of the learning and the research and all of that kind of thing in the paper . Ruby felt confident with a more standard format of presentation to demonstrate her learning . She did , however , admit during the final interview that there was a different sort of communication element to the blended media task : They are definitely based more on the audience than say the topic or anything like that or how much knowledge you have beforehand… . I tried to make it look a little bit nicer having little images and a castle and having cute little bugs and stuff like that so it isn’t just text . I try not to have a lot of text in it because that is really boring to look at . Ruby is clearly aware of the value of using different media forms and modes to represent information so that the product is interesting for the viewer . Attending to the viewer is a key aspect of effective communications and the final case is about Parker , who developed an interesting storyline in his blended media . Case Study 3 . Parker : Organometallics Like Ruby , Parker was also studying Medicinal Chemistry . He was interested in the history of drugs and knew that early therapeutic approaches involved metals and metal compounds . He chose the following question for the literature review and blended media presentation : Organometallic anti - cancer compounds : Can metals save the day ? This question had not been his first choice for the task , although he was interested in new discoveries in the field , which made the topic appealing to him . Representations and perceptions of making a blended media . Parker’s blended media runs for 05 : 27 and involves a role play with three characters : The President , The Surgeon General and The Scientist , all played by Parker , including costumes , hats , glasses and props ( see Figure 4 ) . The storyline involves The Surgeon General imploring The President to start a new battle on cancer , and then calls in The Scientist who makes a presentation about three organometallics and their potential as anti - cancer drugs . In the three - way dialogue , The Scientist makes a pitch for funding to continue the research , which The President handsomely rewards along with a team of top - notch graduate students . Parker prepared his blended media using iMovie . For labels or text , he wrote on a piece of white poster paper with a black marking pen . The Surgeon General is dressed as a general complete with military cap and uniform and refers to a hand - drawn graph posted on a backdrop of a bed sheet secured to the brick wall behind him . The graph depicts “Battles lost” in the war on cancer while introducing the nature of cancer and disease progression . The camera cuts away to The President , in business suit and tie looking thoughtful and authoritative . The President sits in front of a red curtain , agrees that current treatments are not working and calls off - camera to “Bring in the Scientist ! ” The Scientist ( Parker ) , dressed in lab coat and safety glasses , nervously addresses The President and gives a presentation that describes three different organometallic drugs as possible treatments for cancer . The Scientist uses props of hand - drawn diagrams of a generic organometallic molecule , diagrams of each molecule and pathways for each of the molecules as he describes the reaction pathways and how each compound might be utilised in cancer treatment . Journal Name ARTICLE This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 20xx J . Name . , 2013 , 00 , 1 - 3 | 7 Please do not adjust margins Please do not adjust margins Parker chose to make the presentation as a video instead of stop - motion techniques because he had found them time - consuming and ‘fidgety’ in his previous experience with the technique . In the final interview , he was asked about preparing the presentation . He noted that he attended to the audience by considering the kinds of questions they may ask and through this , “realised that there was actually a lot of gaps in the papers on the basic chemistry of it all so I had to just go through and come up with all different sort of formulations and mechanism . ” For example , the journal article that dealt with rhenium did not talk about how the radical species actually react with tissue . Parker’s diagrams of chemical pathways were originally going to be more complicated , but he INSERT FIGURE 4 ABOUT HERE Figure 4 . Parker as The Surgeon General realised that to explain them would require much more time , so instead , he provided a diagrammatic overview . Parker’s presentation used humour effectively and this was intentional as he commented during the third interview : I have a tendency to be quite official when I’m giving a presentation ; I guess just to the point and saying all that information , having really planned slides , easy to understand…but with this , especially the way it was introduced to us , it said to me ‘You can do this funny and you won’t get punished for it , ’ like , go crazy , do whatever , be creative . His comments reflect a sense that this was a different kind of presentation that allowed for some creative license in a way that a standard presentation does not . He chose the storyline on purpose : “I felt it was kind of important to , rather just giving information…have a story that people can follow and then putting humour factors makes people laugh so keep them interested . ” Blended Media as Presentation of the Literature Review Written tasks are a common part of assessment tasks in chemistry subjects and science degrees . In previous iterations of the subject at the centre of this research , the literature review task included an oral presentation , which had become “a bit of a stale task for everybody” , according to the instructor . Further , the subject had grown from 15 to 50 students over time , with future increases expected , so that a 15 - minute presentation for each student had become untenable . While valuing both the literature review and presentation parts of the task , the instructor sought a way to adapt the presentation portion of the task . He also valued other aspects of the task , as noted during the interview : we found that our students , especially the ones coming in to PhDs are very good at their specialised topic and talking about that and we wanted to create students that could communicate more broadly , so using other media forms and also talking to a broader audience because communicating science and health topics is extremely important…so that communication bridge is a big picture kind of thing . While the focus of the current paper is not on evaluating the quality of the blended media products that the students made , the tasks were marked in class during a final class meeting of the semester . The instructor used a rubric identifying categories including “Organization” ( 2 marks : logical sequence , references cited appropriately ) ; “Content” ( 4 marks : attention - grabbing introduction , terms defined , accuracy , relevant material , balance of detail and generality ) ; “Presentation” ( 4 marks : clear , high quality digital media , conveys material to a general audience , suitable length ) . As a 5 % assignment , some students felt that the amount of work involved was inconsistent , however , all three case students in the study earned 5 out of 5 , while the overall class average was 3 . 85 . Our case participants reported minimal technical challenges in producing their blended media . While some had much prior experience with a range of digital production techniques , most had not . That they attempted new techniques and produced interesting and engaging blended media presentations suggests that any challenges faced were manageable . Discussion Each of the students in this study produced a digital product using blended media to explain a pharmacology topic that was an extension of an earlier literature review task where they answered a guiding question about the topic . The main finding from this study is that in making a digital explanation for non - experts , each of these final - year chemistry students generated a scientific explanation and demonstrated an awareness of how to represent scientific content in a variety of ways using a range of modes that were integrated in a digital media product intended for a non - expert audience . Furthermore , the students used modes of communication that they had not previously incorporated into assignments , which makes blended media a different kind of assignment . With affordances beyond producing a presentation in PowerPoint , generating a digital explanation uses a combination of modes while using personal technology tools ( smartphone , digital camera , everyday materials and software on their own laptop computers ) . Today’s students have easy access to such technology and are fluent users . With a minimum of guidance , they can utilise these tools to generate digital presentations of complex scientific information . This makes their use in assessment tasks relatively straightforward . Importantly , such tasks go beyond concept development to include communications skills and multimodal awareness . The task can also provide creative opportunity as it engages students in media making or translating other expert - generated representations for use in the blended media . The study also adds to the body of science education literature on the range of modal forms of representations and forms of communication beyond diagrams ( Hubber et al , 2010 ; Prain and Waldrip , 2006 : Subramanian and Padalkar , 2009 ) ; flow charts ( Davidowitz et al , 2005 ) ; models ( Prins et al , 2008 ) ; PowerPoint presentations ( Waldrip et al , 2006 ) ; and slowmation ( Hoban , 2005 , 2007 ; Hoban and Nielsen , 2013 ; Hoban , Nielsen , and Shepherd , 2016 ) . In the current study , the chemistry students used knowledge they developed through the literature review component of the task and then developed a digital explanation to communicate this knowledge for a non - expert audience . In developing a digital explanation , the students made many decisions about how to best represent the science concept ( s ) , which involved the use of different combinations Creating Digital Explanations Chemistry Education Research and Practice 8 | J . Name . , 2012 , 00 , 1 - 3 This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 20xx Please do not adjust margins Please do not adjust margins of modes . For example , David used an analogy to support and personify the illustration of the agonist and antagonist activity of TRPV1 , making it memorable . Further , he had decided to take on the topic of TRPV1 receptors because he did not know very much about them . As a final year medical health student , he sought to develop his own knowledge through the task . Parker was focused on generating an interesting and humorous presentation through the digital media and believed that he had license to do so within the format . The result was an engaging and interesting presentation . Some of our participating students commented on the length of time it took to prepare the blended media . The fact that it was a very small percentage of the overall subject mark ( 5 % ) meant that some students felt their efforts were not adequately rewarded . However , we see a key benefit of this strategy in the fact that students need to attend to the audience as they construct the blended media . By doing so , they consider not only the information represented through the modes used , but also how to use the different modes to make the messages and information engaging and interesting . We suggest that this is a manifestation of multimodal awareness that is enabled by virtue of the task , seemingly affording a creative license beyond a traditional PowerPoint presentation , which students acknowledged had not been occasioned in their degree programs before . Implications From a theoretical perspective , when chemistry students make a digital explanation , they must think about the concept they are trying to represent ( the referent ) ; which representation ( s ) to use ; and which modes can be used in a complementary manner to provide a coherent explanation of a scientific concept ( Kress et al , 2001 ; Lemke , 1998 ; Peirce , 1931 / 1955 ) . For example , David used several modes in his blended media ( diagrams , text , photos of real objects , images of 2 - D and 3 - D models , voiceover and an analogy ) to explain the activity of the TRPV1 receptor ; Ruby used digital objects found in the VideoScribe program in addition to images and video she found on the internet ; and Parker told a story through a role play and used a range of props . The challenge for the chemistry students is to re - represent scientific content by using technology to choose and / or match different modes so that the voiceover of the narration complements the visual mode of images , video or other modes to clearly explain the science concept . In essence , the task required the students to design the blended media as a multimodal representation with ‘intersemiotic complementarity’ ( Royce , 2007 , p . 63 ) . There is value in creating blended media presentations that will be shared . Because a blended media is a digital product that can be displayed in class or shared online , the sharing is a potentially powerful teaching and learning tool for others to use . As a teaching and learning strategy in chemistry , blended media makes the students’ representations of their content knowledge ‘public’ and demonstrates their attention to the audience and hence , their communicative skill . We believe that blended media provides important potential for chemistry students to develop communications skills through a focus on multimodal awareness by creating a digital media product . By translating information for a non - expert audience , the students considered how to best represent the content using different modes , then create or find the actual modes , integrating them using technology into a digital product . Conclusions Science education literature emphasises the value of students constructing their own multimodal representations of science concepts . Translating these into other representational forms holds additional possibilities for both learning the content and developing communications skills . The creation process for blended media is accessible and relatively simple , which makes it appealing for a presentation task in chemistry or other science disciplines . Learners use their own technology ( digital still or video camera , computer ) , free software and everyday materials to construct models or other representations and are motivated to work with multiple modes and accurately present relevant information about the topic in a way that is appealing and informative for the audience . The content is also expressed in the form of a multimodal digital representation that is easily shared , which opens up other possibilities for critique by peers or instructors . A limitation of this study is that our methods did not capture the actual creation process as students developed their blended media products . We did , however , gather students’ perceptions of this task and we are able to make reasonable judgements on how effectively the blended media product communicates scientific knowledge to a non - expert audience . When language is clear , images are aligned to the narration and an engaging storyline underpins the blended media , we can justifiably claim that the creators are aware of the affordances of multiple modes to effectively communicate meaning . In this research , we have relied on interviews with participating students ( and the instructor ) to gather perceptions of the blended media task . The interviews occurred at three points over the semester in relation to the parts of the assessment tasks , which were also iterative . Data gathering built from earlier steps in task production , thus , taken together , these offer a form of triangulation for our analyses and a reasonable means to deal with threats to validity in this qualitative research project . Further research on blended media is needed . According to Yore and Treagust ( 2006 ) , there is need to investigate the “enhanced cognition that occurs during the transformation from one representation to another representation or one mode to another” ( p . 308 ) . There is also scope to more deeply explore the use of analogies or metaphors by the creators of the blended media products . Following Orgill and Bodner ( 2003 ) , who argued that chemistry instructors could be more effective in how they use analogies , students likewise could likely benefit from understanding about how to use analogies as tools for reasoning , particularly for abstract concepts . It is our aim , following this small case study , to better understand the significance of the multimodal transformations that happen as part of the design process to create a blended media . And , media - making technologies are ever more accessible to learners and with the benefits seen for these chemistry students , blended media is a useful form of meaning making activity that is accessible to all . Journal Name ARTICLE This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 20xx J . Name . , 2013 , 00 , 1 - 3 | 9 Please do not adjust margins Please do not adjust margins Acknowledgements This research was funded by a faculty grant from the university . The s would also like to thank the students who participated in this study and the anonymous reviewers whose feedback helped to sharpen the paper’s focus . Notes and references Adandan , E . , ( 2014 ) , Investigating the influence of pre - service chemistry teachers’ understanding of the particle nature of matter on their conceptual understanding of solution chemistry , Chem . Educ . Res . Pract . , 15 , 219 - 238 . Ainsworth , S . , ( 1999 ) , The functions of multiple representations , Comp . & Educ . , 33 , 131 - 152 . Ainsworth , S . , ( 2006 ) , A conceptual framework for considering learning with multiple representations , Learn . & Inst . , 16 ( 3 ) , 183 - 198 . Amos , R . , ( 2015 ) , Using technologies to support learning science , in R . Toplis ( ed . ) , Learning to teach in the secondary school , Abingdon , UK : Routledge , pp . 204 - 219 . Bartle , E . , ( 2016 ) , Creative podcasting in chemistry : A case study , in G . Hoban , W . Nielsen and A . Shepherd ( eds . ) , Student - generated digital media in science education : Learning , explaining and communicating science content , London : Routledge , pp . 16 - 28 . Bartle , E . , Longnecker , N . , and Pegrum , N . , ( 2011 ) , Collaboration , contextualisation and communication using new media : Introducing podcasting into an undergraduate chemistry class , Int . J . Innov . Sci . , 19 ( 1 ) , 16 - 28 . Bennett , S . , Agostinho , S . , & Lockyer , L . , ( 2015 ) , Technology tools to support learning design : Implications derived from an investigation of university teachers’ design practices , Comp . & Educ . , 81 , 211 - 220 . Carlisle , D . , Tyson , J . , and Nieswandt , M . , ( 2015 ) , Fostering spatial skill acquisition by general chemistry students , Chem . Educ . Res . Pract . , 16 , 478 - 517 . Cheng , M . , and Gilbert , J . K . , ( 2009 ) , Towards a better utilization of diagrams in research into the use of representative levels in chemical education , in Gilbert , J . K . , and Treagust , D . ( eds . ) , Multiple representations in chemical education , Dordrecht : Springer , pp . 55 - 73 . Cooper , M . M . , Williams , L . C . , and Underwood , S . M . , ( 2015 ) , Student understanding of molecular forces : A multimodal story , J . Chem . Educ . , 92 ( 8 ) , 1288 - 1298 . Davidowitz , B . , Chittleborough , G . , and Murray , E . , ( 2010 ) , Student - generated submicro diagrams : A useful tool for teaching and learning chemical equations and stoichiometry , Chem . Educ . Res . Pract . , 11 , 154 - 164 . Davidowitz , B . , Rollnick , M . , and Fakudze , C . , ( 2005 ) , Development and application of a rubric for analysis of novice students’ laboratory flow diagrams , Int . J . Sci . Educ . , 27 ( 1 ) , 43 - 59 . de Berg , K . , ( 2012 ) , A study of first - year chemistry students’ understanding of solution concentration at the tertiary level . Chem . Educ . Res . Pract . , 13 , 8 - 16 . Fleer , M . , and Hoban , G . , ( 2012 ) , Using ‘slowmation’ for intentional teaching in early childhood centres : Possibilities and imaginings . Austr . J . Early Child . , 37 ( 3 ) , 61 - 70 . Ferk , V . , Vrtacnik , M . , Blejec , A . , and Gril , A . , ( 2003 ) , Students’ understanding of molecular structure representations , Int . J . Sci . Educ . , 25 ( 10 ) , 1227 - 1245 . Forest , K . , and Rayne , S . , ( 2009 ) , Incorporating primary literature summary projects into a first - year chemistry curriculum , J . Chem . Ed . , 86 , 592 - 594 . Gilbert , J . , ( 2007 ) , Visualization in science education , Dordrecht : Springer . Gilbert , J . , and Treagust , D . , ( 2009 ) , Multiple representations in chemical education , Dordrecht : Springer . Goldman , S . , ( 2003 ) , Learning in complex domains : When and why do multiple representations help ? Learn . Instr . , 13 , 239 - 244 . Hand , B . , and Choi , A . , ( 2010 ) , Examining the impact of student use of multiple modal representations in constructing arguments in organic chemistry laboratory classes , Res . Sci . Educ . , 40 ( 1 ) , 29 - 44 . Hand , B . , Gunel , M . , and Ulu , C . , ( 2009 ) , Sequencing embedded multimodal representations in a writing to learn approach to the teaching of electricity , J . Res . Sci . Teach . , 46 ( 3 ) , 225 - 247 . Hoban , G . , ( 2005 ) , From Claymation to slowmation : A teaching procedure to develop science knowledge , Teach . Sci . , 51 , 26 - 30 . Hoban , G . , ( 2007 ) , Using slowmation to engage preservice teachers with science . Contemp . Iss . Techn . , 7 , 1 - 9 . Hoban , G . , ( 2009 ) , Facilitating learner - generated animations with slowmation , in Lockyer , L . , Bennett , S . , Agostinho , S . , and Harper , B . , ( eds . ) , Handbook of research on learning design and learning objects : Issues , applications , and technologies , Hershey , PA : IGI Global , pp . 313 - 330 . Hoban , G . , Loughran , J . , and Nielsen , W . , ( 2011 ) , Slowmation : Preservice primary teachers representing science knowledge through creating multimodal digital animations , J . Res . Sci . Teach . , 48 , 985 - 1009 . Hoban , G . , and Nielsen , W . , ( 2010 ) , The 5 Rs : Student - generated animations of science concepts . Teach . Sci . , 56 , 33 - 37 . Hoban , G . , and Nielsen , W . , ( 2012 ) , Encouraging preservice primary teachers to create multimodal representations of science concepts with ‘Slowmation , ’ Res . Sci . Ed . , 42 , 1101 - 1119 . Hoban , G . , and Nielsen , W . , ( 2013 ) , Learning science through creating a ‘Slowmation’ : A case study of preservice primary teachers , Int . J . Sci . Ed . , 35 , 119 - 146 . Hoban , G . , Nielsen , W . , and Hyland , C . , ( 2016 ) , Blended media : Student - generated mash - ups to promote engagement with science content , Int . J . Mob . Blend . Media , 8 , 35 - 48 . Hoban , G . , Nielsen , W . , and Shepherd , A . , ( 2016 ) ( Eds ) , Student - Generated digital media in science education : Engaging students in learning , explaining and communicating content . London : Routledge . Howard , S . K . , Chan , A . , Mozejko , A . , and Caputi , P . , ( 2015 ) , Technology practices : Confirmatory factor analysis and exploration of teachers’ technology integration in subject areas , Comp . & Educ . , 90 , 24 - 35 . Howard , S . K . , and Giglotti , A . , ( 2016 ) , Having a go : Looking at teachers’ experience of risk - taking in technology integration , Educ . Info . Techn . , 21 ( 5 ) , 1351 - 1366 . Hubber , P . , Tytler , R . , and Haslam , F . , ( 2010 ) , Teaching and learning about force with a representational focus : Pedagogy and teacher change , Res . Sci . Educ . , 40 ( 1 ) , 5 - 28 . Jewitt , C . , ( 2009 ) , The Routledge handbook of multimodal analysis , London : Routledge . Creating Digital Explanations Chemistry Education Research and Practice 10 | J . Name . , 2012 , 00 , 1 - 3 This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 20xx Please do not adjust margins Please do not adjust margins Jonassen , D . , Myers , J . M . , and McKillop , A . M . , ( 1996 ) , From constructivism to constructionism : Learning with hypermedia / multimedia rather than from it , in Wilson , B . G . ( ed . ) , Constructivist learning environments , Englewood Cliffs , NJ : Educational Technology Publications , pp . 93 - 106 . Jones , S . , Yates , B . , and Kelder , J . , ( 2011 ) , Learning and teaching academic standards statement , Strawberry Hills , NSW : Australia Learning and Teaching Council . Keast , S . , and Cooper , R . , ( 2016 ) , Developing pedagogical content knowledge of pre - service teachers using slowmation as a shared experience , in Hoban , G . , Nielsen , W . , and Shepherd , A . ( eds . ) , Student - generated digital media in science education : Learning , explaining and communicating content , London : Routledge , pp . 151 - 165 . Kidman , G . , Keast , S . , and Cooper , R . , ( 2013 ) , Enhancing pre - service teacher learning through slowmation animation , Int . J . Eng . Educ . , 29 ( 4 ) , 846 - 855 . Kim , B . , and Reeves , T . , ( 2007 ) , Reframing research on learning with technology : In search of the meaning of cognitive tools , Instr . Sci . , 35 , 207 - 256 . Kozma , R . , ( 2003 ) , The material features of multiple representations and their cognitive affordances for science understanding , Learn . Instr . , 13 , 205 - 226 . Kress , G . , Jewitt , C . , Ogborn , J . , and Tsatsarelis , C . , ( 2001 ) , Multimodal teaching and learning : Rhetorics of the science classroom , London : Continuum . Lakoff , G . , and Johnson , M . , ( 2003 ) , Metaphors we live by . Chicago : University of Chicago . Lemke , J . , ( 1988 ) , Multiplying meaning : Visual and verbal semiotics in scientific text , in Martin , J . R . , and Veel , R . ( eds . ) , Reading science : Critical and functional perspectives in discourses of science , New York : Routledge , pp . 87 - 113 . Lemke , J . , ( 2000 ) , Across the scales of time : Artifacts , activities , and meanings in ecosocial systems , Mind , Cult . Act . , 7 ( 4 ) , 273 - 290 . Ma , J . , ( 2015 ) , Incorporating research - based problems from primary literature into a large - scale organic structure analysis course , J . Chem . Ed . , 92 , 2176 - 2181 . Martinovic , D . , and Zhang , Z . , ( 2012 ) , Situating ICT in the teacher education program : Overcoming challenges , fulfilling expectations , Teach . Teacher . Educ . , 28 , 461 - 469 . Merriam , S . , ( 2007 ) , Qualitative research and case study applications in education , San Francisco : Jossey - Bass . Moll , R . F . , and Nielsen , W . , ( 2016 ) , Development and validation of a social media and science learning survey , Int . J . Sci . Educ . , online April 8 , 2016 , 16pp . O’Halloran , K . , ( 2013 ) , Multimodal analysis ( software package ) , Available : www . multimodal - analysis . com Orgill , M . , and Bodner , G . ( 2004 ) , What research tells us about using analogies to teach chemistry , Chem . Educ . Res . Pract . , 5 , 15 - 32 . Paige , K . , Bentley , B . , & Dobson , S . , ( 2016 ) , Slowmation : An innovative twenty - first century teaching and learning tool for science and mathematics pre - service teachers , Aust . J . Teach . Educ . , 41 ( 2 ) , 16pp . Painter , C . , Martin , J . R . , and Unsworth , L . , ( 2014 ) , Reading visual narratives , Sheffield , UK : Equinox . Peirce , C . , ( 1931 / 1955 ) , Logic as semiotic : The theory of signs , in Justus , B . ( ed . ) , Philosophical writings of Peirce ( 1893 - 1910 ) , New York : Dover , pp . 98 - 119 . Pegrum , M . , Bartle , E . , and Longnecker , N . , ( 2014 ) , Can creative podcasting promote deep learning ? The use of podcasting for learning content in an undergraduate science unit , Brit . J . Educ . Techn . , 46 ( 1 ) , 142 - 152 . Prain , V . , ( 2006 ) , Learning from writing in secondary science : Some theoretical and practical implications , Int . J . Sci . Educ . , 28 ( 2 - 3 ) , 179 - 201 . Prain , V . , and Waldrip , B . , ( 2006 ) , An exploratory study of teachers’ and students’ use of multi - modal representations of concepts in primary science , Int . J . Sci . Educ . , 28 ( 15 ) , 1843 - 1866 . Prensky , M . , ( 2001 ) , Digital natives , digital immigrants , On Horiz . , 9 ( 5 ) , 1 - 6 . Prins , G . , Bulte , A . , van Driel , J . , and Pilot , A . , ( 2008 ) , Selection of authentic modelling practices as contexts for chemistry education , Int . J . Sci . Educ . , 30 , 1867 - 1890 . Ritchie , S . , Tomas , L . , and Tones , M . , ( 2010 ) , Writing stories to enhance scientific literacy , Int . J . , Sci . Educ . , 33 ( 5 ) , 685 - 707 . Royce , T . D . , ( 2007 ) , Intersemiotic complementarity : A framework for multimodal discourse analysis , in Royce , T . D . , and Bowcher , W . L . ( eds . ) , New directions in the analysis of multimodal discourse , Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum , pp . 63 - 109 . Seufert , T . , ( 2003 ) , Supporting coherence formation in learning from multiple representations , Learn . Instr . , 13 ( 2 ) , 227 - 237 . Shea , K . M . , Gorin , D . J . , and Buck , M . E . , ( 2016 ) , Literature - based problems for introductory organic chemistry quizzes and exams , J . Chem . Ed . , 93 , 886 - 890 . Sperling , R . , Seyedmonir , M . , Aleksic , M . , and Meadows , G . , ( 2003 ) , Animations as learning tools in authentic science materials , Int . J . Instr . Media , 30 ( 2 ) , 213 - 221 . Stake , R . , ( 1995 ) , The art of case study research , Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . Subramaniam , K . , and Padalkar , S . , ( 2009 ) , Visualisation and reasoning in explaining the phases of the moon , Int . J . Sci . Educ . , 31 , 395 - 417 . Tytler , R . , Prain , V . , Hubber , P . , and Waldrip , B . , ( 2013 ) , Constructing representations to learn science , Amsterdam : Sense Publishers . Vanderlelie , J . , ( 2013 ) . Improving the student experience of learning and teaching in second year biochemistry : Assessment to foster a creative application of biochemical concepts , Int . J . Innov . Sci . Math . Educ . , 21 ( 4 ) , 46 - 57 . Vanderlelie , J . , ( 2015 ) , Musical explanations for learning biochemistry , in Hoban , G . , Nielsen , W . , and Shepherd , A . ( eds . ) , Student - generated digital media in science education : Learning , explaining and communicating content , London : Routledge , pp . 225 - 238 . van der Meij , J . , and de Jong , T . , ( 2006 ) , Supporting students’ learning with multiple representations in a dynamic simulation - based learning environment , Learn . Instr . , 16 , 199 - 212 . Waldrip , B . , Prain , V . , and Carolan , J . , ( 2006 ) , Learning junior secondary science through multi - modal representations , Elect . J . Sci . Educ . , 11 ( 1 ) , 21 pp . Waldrip , B . , Prain , V . , and Carolan , J . , ( 2010 ) , Using multi - modal representations to improve learning in junior secondary science , Res . Sci . Educ . , 40 , 65 - 80 . Willett , R . , ( 2007 ) , Technology , pedagogy and digital production : A case study of children learning new media skills , Learn , Med . Techn . , 32 ( 2 ) , 167 - 181 . Yang , E . , Andre , T . , Greenbowe , T . , and Tibell , L . , ( 2003 ) , Spatial ability and the impact of visualization / animation on learning electrochemistry , Int . J . Sci . Educ . , 25 , 329 - 349 . Journal Name ARTICLE This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 20xx J . Name . , 2013 , 00 , 1 - 3 | 11 Please do not adjust margins Please do not adjust margins Yin , R . , ( 2014 ) , Case study research : Design and methods , Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . Yore , L . D . , & Hand , B . , ( 2010 ) , Epilogue : Plotting a research agenda for multiple representations , multiple modality and multimodal representational competency , Res . Sci . Educ . , 40 , 93 - 101 . Yore , L . D . , & Treagust , D . F . , ( 2006 ) , Current realities and future possibilities : Language and science literacy—empowering research and informing instruction , Int . J . Sci . Educ . , 28 ( 2 - 3 ) , 291 - 314 .