MEDICAL ROBOTS Quantifying stiffness and forces of tumor colonies and embryos using a magnetic microrobot Erfan Mohagheghian 1 † , Junyu Luo 2 † , F . Max Yavitt 3 , 4 † , Fuxiang Wei 2 † , Parth Bhala 1 † , Kshitij Amar 1 † , Fazlur Rashid 1 , Yuzheng Wang 5 , Xingchen Liu 6 , Chenyang Ji 2 , Junwei Chen 2 , David P . Arnold 5 , Zhen Liu 6 , Kristi S . Anseth 3 , 4 * , Ning Wang 1 * Stiffness and forces are two fundamental quantities essential to living cells and tissues . However , it has been a challenge to quantify both 3D traction forces and stiffness ( or modulus ) using the same probe in vivo . Here , we describe an approach that overcomes this challenge by creating a magnetic microrobot probe with controllable functionality . Biocompatible ferromagnetic cobalt - platinum microcrosses were fabricated , and each microcross ( about 30 micrometers ) was trapped inside an arginine – glycine – apartic acid – conjugated stiff poly ( ethylene glycol ) ( PEG ) round microgel ( about 50 micrometers ) using a microfluidic device . The stiff magnetic microrobot was seeded inside a cell colony and acted as a stiffness probe by rigidly rotating in response to an oscillatory magnetic field . Then , brief episodes of ultraviolet light exposurewere applied to dynamically photodegrade and soften the fluorescent nanoparticle – embedded PEG microgel , whose deformation and 3D traction forces were quantified . Using the microrobot probe , we show that malignant tumor – repopulating cell colonies altered their modulus but not traction forces in response to different 3D substrate elasticities . Stiffness and 3D traction forces were measured , and both normal and shear traction force oscillations were observed in zebrafish embryos from blastula to gastrula . Mouse embryos generated larger tensile and compressive traction force oscillations than shear traction force oscillations during blastocyst . The microrobot probewith controllable functionality via mag - netic fields could potentially be useful for studying the mechanoregulation of cells , tissues , and embryos . Copyright © 2023 The Authors , some rights reserved ; exclusive licensee American Association for the Advancement of Science . No claim to original U . S . Government Works INTRODUCTION Increasing evidence demonstrates that cell - generated contractile forces ( traction forces ) as well as cell and / or tissue stiffness are two mechanical parameters fundamental to the functions of living cells and tissues in physiology , development , and diseases , such as cancer , cardiovascular disease , and fibrosis ( 1 ) . Cell stiff - ness , the resistance to cell deformation , is known to be proportional to and depend on myosin II – mediated traction forces ( interfacial forces ) in single living tissue cells ( 2 , 3 ) . However , a recent report found that actomyosin - dependent traction forces dominate archi - tectures in monolayer epithelia , whereas tissue stiffness dominates multilayer epithelia architectures in mouse embryos ( 4 ) , suggesting that these two quantities play different roles in embryonic develop - ment . Yet it has been challenging to quantify both three - dimension - al ( 3D ) traction force and stiffness ( or modulus , which is the ratio of stress to deformation ) at the same location of a biological sample . The reason for the difficulty is that to quantify traction forces , the probe must be soft and flexible so that deformation ( strain ) of the probe can be used to calculate the traction force if the probe ’ s intrin - sic stiffness ( or modulus ) is known . On the other hand , to quantify stiffness , the probe must be stiff enough that the probe can apply an exogenous force ( a stress or a torque ) to deform the biological sample , and hence , the stiffness can be calculated from the mea - sured strain of the sample . Because it requires the probe to be both soft and rigid to measure these two independent mechanical quantities , it is technically challenging . Over the past 60 years , various types of probes have been devel - oped to quantify cell stiffness in culture . The micropipette aspira - tion technique ( 5 ) and the optical stretcher ( 6 ) to measure the stiffness of suspended cells have been developed . Methods have also been developed to quantify adherent cells ’ mechanical proper - ties . These methods include particle tracking microrheology ( 7 , 8 ) , laser tweezers to trap a particle on the cell surface ( 9 ) , and atomic force microscopy ( AFM ) to use a cantilever to indent a cell on its surface ( 10 ) . Other methods include magnetic twisting cytometry ( MTC ) that uses ligand - coated magnetic beads to stress the cell surface via integrin receptors or other specific receptors with a torque load ( 11 , 12 ) and a magnetic gradient pulling device ( 13 ) . MTC has been substantially improved in recent years such that a 3D MTC can apply local stresses in any controlled direction ( 14 ) and can be integrated with confocal microscopy and stimulated emission detection nanoscopy to quantify cell surface complex stress or surface shear stress – induced chromatin deformation ( 15 , 16 ) . A comparison of various methods to measure cell stiffness in the same cell type showed that different methods probe various components of the mechanical properties of the cells , but AFM and MTC measure similar values of cell stiffness ( 17 ) . However , only a limited number of approaches can be used to quantify stiff - ness ex vivo or in vivo . Spatiotemporal viscoelastic properties of a 1 Department of Mechanical Science and Engineering , Grainger College of Engi - neering , University of Illinois at Urbana - Champaign , Urbana , IL 61801 , USA . 2 Key LaboratoryofMolecularBiophysicsoftheMinistryofEducation , LaboratoryforCel - lular Biomechanics and Regenerative Medicine , College of Life Science and Tech - nology , Huazhong University of Science and Technology , Wuhan , Hubei 430074 , China . 3 Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering , University of Colora - do , Boulder , CO 80303 , USA . 4 BioFrontiers Institute , University of Colorado , Boulder , CO 80303 , USA . 5 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering , University of Florida , Gainesville , FL 32611 , USA . 6 Institute of Neuroscience , Key Laboratory of Primate Neurobiology , CAS Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology , Chinese Academy of Sciences , Shanghai 200031 , China . * Corresponding author . Email : nwangrw @ illinois . edu ( N . W . ) ; kristi . anseth @ colora - do . edu ( K . S . A . ) † These authors contributed equally to this work . Mohagheghian et al . , Sci . Robot . 8 , eadc9800 ( 2023 ) 25 January 2023 1 of 12 S C I E N C E RO B OT I C S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E zebrafish embryo have been quantified by injecting oil droplets loaded with magnetic nanoparticles , with data suggesting that the posterior elongating region has lower stiffness and more viscosity than the anterior region ( 18 ) . Furthermore , a stiffness gradient was observed in the developing Xenopus brain using AFM ( 19 ) . Various methods of measuring traction forces on 2D ( 20 – 26 ) and 3D substrates ( 27 – 32 ) have been developed . Single - cell traction force mapping has also been extended to monolayer stress micros - copy in collective cell migration ( 33 , 34 ) . A high - resolution cell me - chanical imaging platform was developed to estimate intracellular contractile forces ( 35 ) . However , few methods are able to measure traction forces ex vivo or in vivo . For example , force was quantified using a gel - based force sensor in an isolated Xenopus laevis embry - onic tissue ( 36 ) . Using an oil - droplet force sensor microinjected into living tissues , anisotropic forces were quantified in living dis - sected mouse mandibles ( 37 ) , and supracellular stresses were found to decrease from anterior to posterior regions and guide solid - to fluid - like transition in zebrafish embryos ( 38 ) . Polyacrylamide ( PA ) bead force sensors were developed to measure forces in devel - oping zebrafish embryos ( 39 ) . Using ultrasound for deep tissue pen - etration , quantifications of solid stress in excised or in situ tumors have been achieved but with limited spatial resolution ( 40 ) . Similar - ly , magnetic resonance elastography and ultrasound elastography have been applied to quantify tissue stiffness in patients with liver fibrosis or breast tumors , but the spatial resolution of these tech - niques is in the range of millimeters to centimeters ( 41 – 43 ) . We have published a different approach of using an elastic microgel that can quantify isotropic and anisotropic surface stresses and has been used to quantify forces in developing zebrafish embryos in vivo ( 44 ) . The results revealed spatial and temporal traction force variations ( with a spatial resolution of 1 to 2 μm ) inside the embryo from 3 to 10 hours after fertilization ( 44 ) , suggesting that these traction forces and their spatial variations might be important in the patterning and morphogenesis of zebrafish embryos . In this study , we present an approach by which both traction force and stiffness can be quantified at the same location of a tumor cell colony embedded in 3D matrices and in a developing vertebrate embryo using a microrobot probe controlled remotely by magnetic fields . We demonstrate that shear modulus of stem cell – like tumor repopulating cell colonies varies with 3D substrate elasticity , but their 3D traction forces do not . Moreover , traction force oscillations are observed in zebrafish embryos from blastula to gastrula . We also demonstrate that mouse embryos exhibit sub - stantial oscillations in tensile and compressive traction forces during early to late stages of blastocyst development . Fig . 1 . Fabrication of the magnetic microrobot probe . ( A ) Computer - aided design layout of microfluidic device illustrating its working mechanism and different modules , including the inlets , T junction , picoinjection , mixing , and outlet . Polydisperse droplets of 8 - arm PEG20K - DBCO ( blue ) with an embedded microcross are passed through multiple filters at the inlet and merged by the applied AC electric field at electrode 1 ( i ) . PEG - DBCO droplets are formed at the T junction ( ii ) and moved down to the picoinjection module , where the 8 - arm PEG 8 - NBA ( red ) is injected to the passing droplets by the applied AC electric field at electrode 2 ( iii ) . After injection , passing the droplet through the serpentine channel enhances the mixing to form a homogenous microgel containing one microcross ( iv ) . ( B ) Schematic showing steps to resuspend the microgels from oil to cell culture medium and isolate the microrobot probe ( a microgel with an embedded microcross ) from the rest of themicrogelsusingamagnetizedAllenwrench ( andsubsequentdemagnetization ) . ( C ) Effectofappliedfieldatelectrode1onsizedistributionofthecollectedmicrogels . ( D ) Confocal section of the microrobot probe with embedded 500 - nm red fluorescent nanoparticles and biocompatible ferromagnetic microcross used to measure stiffness and traction force . Scale bar , 25 μ m . Mohagheghian et al . , Sci . Robot . 8 , eadc9800 ( 2023 ) 25 January 2023 2 of 12 S C I E N C E RO B OT I C S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E RESULTS Fabrication and characterization of the magnetic microrobot probe We recently developed a method of using a soft elastic round micro - gel to quantify 3D traction forces in a 3D cell colony or a living ze - brafish embryo ( 44 ) . To quantify stiffness or modulus of the biological sample ( cancer cell colony or an embryo ) , we applied shear stresses , measured sample deformation , and calculated stiff - ness ( stiffness was the ratio of stress to deformation ) . To achieve this goal , we first microfabricated a multilayered ferromagnetic cobalt - platinum ( Co - Pt ) alloy microcross using a layer - by - layer electrodeposition strategy ( fig . S1A ) . This microcross was uniform with the following dimensions : thickness was 10 . 62 ± 1 . 64 μm ( means ± SD ) , lengths were 30 . 86 ± 2 . 86 μm ( long arm ) and 21 . 01 ± 2 . 15 μm ( short arm ) , and volume was 5116 . 09 ± 2041 . 54 μm 3 ( figs . S1 , B and C , and S2 ) . The applied torque was proportional to the microcross volume , and thus , it varied by 39 . 9 % for micro - crosses from different locations on the wafer . However , the variabil - ity of the applied torque had no effect on the measured modulus because the stress - strain relationship was linear in the range of the applied stress , and thus , the modulus was independent of the stress magnitudes . The magnetic moment of the microcross varied with the external magnetic field with hysteresis ( fig . S1D ) , suggesting that the microcross is ferromagnetic and suitable for mi - crorobot actuation . Next , we used a microfluidic device to embed the microcross inside a poly ( ethylene glycol ) ( PEG ) microgel ( Fig . 1A ) . An azide - functionalized adhesive peptide , RGD ( Arg - Gly - Asp ) azide , and an eight - arm PEG macromer functionalized with dibenzylcy - clooctyne ( 8 - arm PEG20K - DBCO ; blue ) were first prepared to con - jugate RGD to the PEG macromer through a strain - promoted azide - alkyne cycloaddition . This mixture was then injected as poly - disperse droplets ( blue in Fig . 1Ai ) , passed through multiple filters at the inlet , and merged by the applied AC electric field at electrode 1 ( Fig . 1Ai ) to assemble the microcross inside the PEG polymer . Then , the PEG20K - DBCO droplets were formed at the T junction ( Fig . 1Aii ) and transported to the picoinjection module , where the eight - arm PEG - nitrobenzyl azide ( PEG 8 - NBA ) ( fig . S3 ) was inject - ed into the passing droplets by the applied AC electric field at elec - trode 2 ( Fig . 1Aiii ) . After injection , the mixing was enhanced by passing the droplet through the serpentine channel to form a ho - mogenous cross - linked microgel containing a magnetic microcross ( Fig . 1Aiv ) . The microgels ( each with a magnetic microcross ) were gently removed using a weakly magnetizable steel wrench ( Allen wrench ) that was subsequently demagnetized to release the micro - cross - containing microgels into a test tube . This allowed us to resus - pend them from oil to cell culture medium and separate them from the microgels that did not contain microcrosses ( Fig . 1B ) . In the absence of the electrode 1 , the microgels , with or without micro - crosses , were polydisperse ( Fig . 1C ) , and with the electrode 1 , the size range of the probes was much narrower , with a diameter of 49 . 78 ± 0 . 91 μm ( means ± SD ) ( Fig . 1 , C and D ) . Next , we magne - tized the microrobot probes in a 2 . 9 - T constant magnetic field of an MRI ( magnetic resonance imaging ) machine ( Fig . 2Ai ) . Then , we exposed the probes in the 3D fibrin gels of homogenous polymers to sinusoidal magnetic twisting fields in the x - y plane ( 0 to 25 G ) ( Fig . 2Aii ) that were too weak to remagnetize the magnetic micro - crosses but generated torques on the microrobot probe via the ferromagnetic microcross . To use the microrobot as a probe for stiffness measurement , we initially polymerized the PEG to be very stiff , with a modulus of ~ 10 kPa ( 45 ) , and so , when the external magnetic field was applied , the whole microgel rotated with the mi - crocross as a rigid body rotation without any slippage or deforma - tion ( Fig . 2Aiii ) . After the stiffness measurement , the microrobot probe was substantially softened by several brief episodes ( 5 to 10 s ) of ultraviolet ( UV ) light exposure ( 50 mW / cm 2 ) via the radical - mediated mechanism of cleavage of the nitrobenzyl ether moiety integrated into the cross - links ( fig . S4 ) ( 45 ) ; the magnetic field was turned off , and the probe was deformed by traction forces gen - erated by the nearby cells / tissues and thus acted as a force sensor ( Fig . 2Aiv ) . The effects of the microrobot probe size on UV expo - sure are shown in Fig . 2B . The swelling of the probe ( Fig . 2C and fig . S5 ) , as the PEG gel was depolymerized by UV light , was attributed to the binding of the water molecules to the dissociated PEG mol - ecules . There were no effects on cell viability when the cells were exposed to UV light of 50 mW / cm 2 for up to 5 min ( fig . S6 ) , much longer than the exposure duration ( < 45 s ) , to soften the mi - crogels in living tumor cell colonies , consistent with the published observation that exposing human mesenchymal stem cells to a com - parable UV energy does not affect cell viability and traction forces ( 46 ) . To determine the bulk modulus of the swollen microrobot probe after UV irradiation , we added dextran ( 2 MDa ; MilliporeSig - ma ) at various concentrations to the medium containing the probes and measured the corresponding compressive bulk strains as a func - tion of the dextran osmotic pressure ( Fig . 2D ) ( 47 ) . Using a Poisson ratio of 0 . 44 for PEG gels ( 48 ) , we computed the Young ’ s moduli of the probes from their bulk moduli as a function of the softened mi - crogel probes ’ final diameters ( Fig . 2E ) . The microrobot probe modulus calibration was used later for computing 3D traction forces in 3D culture . To convert the applied magnetic field strength in gauss to the shear stress onto the probe , we embedded a micro - robot probe in a homogenous elastic PEG gel of 115 - Pa elastic modulus ( Fig . 2F , top , and fig . S7 ) and quantified the angular rota - tions of the probes , which exhibited zero - phase lag and linear rota - tional effects to applied sinusoidal magnetic fields [ Fig . 2 , F ( bottom ) and G ] . From the calibrations in the PEG gel , we deter - mined that the shear stress of the microrobot probe was 0 . 126 Pa / G of magnetic field . Quantifying cancer cell colony modulus by the microrobot probe We used the probe to quantify cell colony modulus in 3D cultures . Using a previously published method ( 49 ) , we first selected and grew single malignant tumor - repopulating cells ( TRCs ) from a general population of the mouse melanoma B16 - F1 cell line into cell colonies in a soft ( 90 - Pa ) fibrin gel for 3 days ( Fig . 3A ) . Subse - quently , the tumor cell colonies were gently removed , mixed with the RGD - conjugated PEG microrobot probes , and cultured on rigid glass dishes covered with 400 - Pa fibrin gel ( to mimic hetero - geneous substrate stiffness ) ( Fig . 3B , top left ) . Alternatively , the mixture of cancer cell colony probe was plated on 1 - kPa PA gel – coated glass [ the PA gel was about 70 μm in thickness , so there was no rigid glass ( around 1 GPa ) effect ] , and the mixture was covered with 1 - kPa fibrin gel ( to mimic uniform 3D substrate stiff - ness ) for three additional days ( Fig . 3B , bottom left and right ) . The tumor cell colonies exhibited more spread morphologies ( fig . S8 ) and grew more rapidly in the 400 - Pa fibrin gels ( Fig . 3B , top Mohagheghian et al . , Sci . Robot . 8 , eadc9800 ( 2023 ) 25 January 2023 3 of 12 S C I E N C E RO B OT I C S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E right ) than in the 1 - kPa fibrin gels ( Fig . 3B , bottom right ) , which is consistent with a published report that TRCs grow very slowly and enter dormancy in 1 - kPa fibrin gels by expressing COUP transcrip - tion factor 1 and inhibiting Ki67 ( 50 ) . The distance between micro - robot midplane and top surface of 1 - kPa PA gel was 48 . 06 ± 5 . 26 μm ( means ±SEM ) , and there was little probe rotation – induced PA gel deformation ( fig . S9 ) . As expected , the colony exhibited viscoelastic behaviors , with phase lags in response to the shear stress from the microrobot probe ’ s in - plane rotation as a result of a sinusoidal mag - netic field at 0 . 1 Hz ( Fig . 3C ) . The tumor cell colonies exhibited more angular rotations in 1 - kPa PA gel + 1 - kPa fibrin gel than in rigid glass + 400 - Pa fibrin gel ( Fig . 3D ) , but the phase lags were similar under both conditions and were independent of the applied stress ( Fig . 3E ) . From these stress - strain relationships , complex shear modulus , storage shear modulus , and loss shear modulus were computed ( fig . S10 ) . Disrupting F - actin with latrun - culin A increased rotation of the probe , and polymerizing F - actin with jasplakinolide decreased rotation of the probe ( fig . S11 ) , con - sistent with the published observation that actomyosin bundles from the cells surrounding the microgel are the primary contributor to the measured traction forces and extending published findings in stiffness in single cancer cells and normal cells . Quantification of modulus and 3D traction forces in a cancer cell colony After the colony stiffness measurement , we used UV light to degrade and soften the PEG gel of the microrobot probe , quantified the deformation of the probe induced by the surrounding cells ( Fig . 4A ) , and treated the cells with Tween 20 , which had no effects on microgel diameter ( fig . S12 ) that killed the cells to obtain stress - free conditions ( Fig . 4B ) . Displacements , normal trac - tion force , shear traction force , and total traction force were mea - sured in a TRC colony , showing that the traction forces were dominated by compressive traction forces ( Fig . 4C ) . Although Fig . 2 . The magnetic microrobot as a stiffness probe and a force sensor . ( A ) Schematic showing steps of using the microrobot to measure stiffness and 3D traction forces . The microrobot is permanently magnetized along the x axis ( white arrow ) in a 2 . 9 - T MRI machine ( red arrow ) ( i ) , followed bya sinusoidal twisting field along the y axis , resulting in the oscillating magnetic torque in the z direction ( ii ) . The applied torque ( red arrow ) deformsthe microenvironment for stiffness measurements ( iii ) , and then the microrobot probe is softened by 405 - nm UV to measure the 3D traction forces exerted onto the probe ( iv ) . ( B ) UV degradation ( fig . S3 ) and swelling evolution of the microgels withrespect to the stepwise UV irradiation ( exposure times not to scale ) showsthe stable size of the microgel aftereach softening exposure ( 10 or 5 s ) with UV irradiation ( 50 mW / cm 2 ) . For each time point of gel measurement after UV degradation , means ± SD , n = 15 microgels . ( C ) Representative fluorescent image of the microgel after UV irradiation shows partial degradation and microgel swelling with wider distribution of fluorescent particles ( green dashed line , before UV ; red dashed line , after UV ) . Scale bar , 25 μ m . ( D ) Volumetric compressive strains of the UV - degraded microrobot probes in response to hypertonic osmotic pressure ( as a result of dextran addition ) . The microrobot probes were first softened with different UV irradiations ( 45 , 35 , 30 , or 10 s ) and allowed to swell to their final diameter . Subsequently , dextran with different concentrations was added to compress the UV - degraded microrobot probes . Means ± SEM , n = 20 microgels per UV irradiation condition . ( E ) Relationship between Young ’ s modulus of the softened microrobot probe with respect to its diameter , converted from bulk modulus that was calculated from the linear fit on the first three data points of the curves in ( D ) , using a Poisson ratio of 0 . 44 for PEG hydrogels . ( F ) Schematic showing the calibration of the microrobot probe embedded inside the PEG elastic hydrogel ( top ) ; the applied sinusoidal magnetic field was 25 G at 0 . 1 Hz , the peak applied shear stress was 3 . 15 Pa , and the corresponding rotation did not exhibit any phase lags ( bottom ) . ( G ) The relationship between the applied twisting field and the microrobot probe rotation was linear , showing that the probe generated 0 . 126 Pa / G . For each applied twisting field , means ± SEM , n = 7 microrobots . Mohagheghian et al . , Sci . Robot . 8 , eadc9800 ( 2023 ) 25 January 2023 4 of 12 S C I E N C E RO B OT I C S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E there were differences in probe rotations between the cells plated on 1 - kPa PA gel and those on rigid glass ( Fig . 4D ; also see Fig . 3D and fig . S10 ) , the mean traction forces ( normal or shear ) were similar ( Fig . 4E ) , suggesting that for these malignant tumor cell colonies in 3D , stiffness changes do not follow traction force changes . This is in contrast to published observations in noncancerous single tissue cells ( 3 ) . Quantifying stiffness and traction forces in zebrafish embryos Next , microrobot probes were injected into zebrafish embryos , and stiffness and traction forces were quantified ( Fig . 5 , A to J , and fig . S13 ) using a similar protocol as that for the above tumor cell colony . Zebrafish embryos exhibited viscoelastic responses to the applied shear stress ( Fig . 5 , B and G , and fig . S13 ) , and complex modulus , storage modulus , and loss modulus were computed ; the complex modulus was dominated by the storage modulus because the loss modulus was lower ( Fig . 5K ) . The embryos exhibited both normal ( tensile and compressive ) and shear traction force oscillations ( Fig . 5 , L and M ) . Taking a closer look , we found that there existed two ( large and small ) distinct sets of traction force oscilla - tion amplitudes ( Fig . 5N ) . The large traction force oscillation am - plitudes were associated with the microgel probes that were located at the embryos ( four probes in three embryos ) ; the small traction force oscillation amplitudes were associated with the microgel probes that were located at the embryo - yolk boundaries ( eight probes at the embryo - yolk boundaries or in the yolk cell ) ( figs . S14 to S16 ) . These results suggest that different cells at various lo - cations in the embryo generate different amplitudes of normal and shear traction force oscillations . The data of small normal oscilla - tions in normal traction forces are in the same range as those pub - lished previously ( 18 , 37 – 39 ) . However , in those previous studies , no shear traction forces or large normal traction force oscillations were reported . Our results suggest that normal traction forces , shear traction forces , and local moduli might help drive development and shape changes of early zebrafish embryos . Fig . 3 . The microrobot probe quantifies stress - strain relationship of a cancer cell colony in a 3D substrate . ( A ) Schematic of preparation of cells for stiffness and force measurements . ( B ) TRCs plated on rigid glass or 1 - kPa PA gel and embedded in 400 - Pa or 1 - kPa fibrin gels , exhibiting distinct nuclear morphologies ( blue , stained withHoechst33342nuclearstain ) aroundthemicrorobotprobe ( red ) . Thetopandbottomimagesontherightsidecorrespondtoschematicsofrigidglassand1 - kPagels on the left . Scalebars , 50 μ m . ( C ) An example of quantified angularrotation of amicrorobot probe in responseto applied shear stress forasingle colonyon a1 - kPaPAgel at 25 G and 0 . 1 Hz . ( D ) Stress - strain relationship of cancer cell colonies at 0 . 1 Hz ; greater strains ( rad , radians ) indicate softer cell colonies on 1 - kPa PA gels . Note that because of variations in microcross size , there were 39 . 9 % errors ( SD ) in actual values of applied shear stress . ( E ) Associated phase lags [ degrees ( deg ) ] do not vary with appliedstressorwith substratestiffness . For ( D ) and ( E ) , means + SEM ; n = 31microrobotprobesfor 0 . 63 , 1 . 25 , and1 . 89Paonrigidglass ; n = 30probesfor3 . 15Paonrigid glass ; n = 28 probes on 1 - kPa PA gel for 0 . 63 , 1 . 89 , and 3 . 15 Pa ; n = 27 probes for 1 . 25 Pa ; three independent experiments for rigid glass condition ; four independent experiments for 1 - kPa PA gel condition ; ns , not statistically different . Two - tailed Student ’ s t test was used . Mohagheghian et al . , Sci . Robot . 8 , eadc9800 ( 2023 ) 25 January 2023 5 of 12 S C I E N C E RO B OT I C S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E Mouse embryos exhibit large tension and compression oscillations We further explored whether it was possible to quantify forces in a developing mouse embryo . Because the mouse embryos are too small ( < 100 μm in diameter ) to be injected with the microgel with the magnetic cross ( ~ 50 μm in diameter ) , we injected a small - sized RGD - alginate soft ( Young ’ s modulus = 3 . 1 kPa ; Poisson ratio = 0 . 4 ) elastic round microgel ( 25 μm in diameter ) without the magnetic cross ( 44 ) into a mouse embryo . Microgels were injected at the 16 - cell stage ( morula ) [ embryonic day 3 . 0 ( E3 . 0 ) ] into mouse embryos , and substantial deformations of mul - tiple microgels in several embryos were observed at E4 . 0 ( fig . S17 ) . An individual microgel in an embryo was tracked such that normal traction forces and shear traction forces were mapped from the time of injection ( 0 hour ) to 27 hours later ( fig . S18 , A and B ) . The trac - tion forces were dominated by normal traction forces because the magnitudes of shear traction forces were much smaller ; large oscil - latory normal ( tensile and compressive ) traction forces were ob - served , suggesting that the embryo was generating pulling and pushing forces during the blastocyst stage ( fig . S18C ) . Another microgel at similar x - y positions in the same embryo but at a differ - ent z height ( around 25 μm below ) exhibited similar traction force oscillations , except that the magnitudes and the direction of normal traction forces from 7 to 9 hours were different ( fig . S19 ) . The embryo pushed and squeezed the two microgels out between 27 and 31 hours after microgel injection ( movies S1 to S3 ) , suggest - ing the protective response from this embryo to extrude the inert and biocompatible microgels , reminiscent of the observation of an - euploid cell removal in human embryos and gastruloids ( 51 ) . Similar large traction force oscillations were observed in three other embryos , and the amplitudes of normal traction forces ( ~ 1000 Pa ) were much greater than those of shear traction forces ( ~ 100 Pa ) ( fig . S18F ) , distinct from what was observed in zebrafish embryos . These results suggest that cell - generated traction forces are important in regulating early embryogenic development and that different species of vertebrate might use different types of forces ( normal versus shear ) to drive embryogenesis . Fig . 4 . Quantification of modulus and traction forces in a cancer cell colony using the microrobot probe . ( A ) An example of the microrobot probe encapsulated insidethe3DTRCson rigidglasscoveredwith400 - Pafibrin gels ( left ) ; measuredangularrotationof theprobein responsetoasinusoidal magnetictwistingfield at0 . 1Hz ( right ) . Scale bar , 50 μ m . ( B ) The microrobot probe was then softened by 405 - nm UV irradiation for 30 s ( left ) to obtain its 3D deformation field ( note the surface de - formation of the probe ) , followed by treating the cell colony with Tween 20 to get stress - free conditions for traction force calculation ( right ) . Scale bar , 50 μ m ( applies to both images ) . ( C ) 3D deformationand traction force mapsof the correspondingmicrorobot probe . ( D ) Forangularrotation ( rad , radians ) : Reddots denote trackedprobes for which corresponding normal and shear traction forces are shown ; black dots are partial data from rotations of the probes in Fig . 3D . All strains are measured in response to 3 . 15 - Pa stress at 0 . 1 Hz . Corresponding calculated complex shear modulus for 1 - kPa and rigid glass are 203 . 3 ± 16 . 4 and 315 . 6 ± 51 . 5 Pa , respectively ; means ±SEM ; n = 58probesonrigidglass ; n = 56probeson 1 - kPaPAgel . ( E ) Summarized averagenormalandshear traction forceswith corresponding angular rotations ( inversely proportional to modulus ) of microrobot probes embedded in TRC colonies on 1 - kPaPA gel + 1 - kPafibrin gels oron rigid glass + 400 - Pafibrin gels . Solid lines in the box plots correspond to 25th percentile , median , and 75th percentile ; n = 27 probes on rigid glass ; n = 28 probes on 1 - kPa PA gel for traction force data ; three independent experiments . Two - tailed Student ’ s t test was used . Mohagheghian et al . , Sci . Robot . 8 , eadc9800 ( 2023 ) 25 January 2023 6 of 12 S C I E N C E RO B OT I C S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E DISCUSSION In this study , we report the development of a microrobot probe that was used to quantify 3D traction forces and stiffness at the same lo - cation of a cell colony in 3D culture and a developing vertebrate embryo . We show that the modulus of malignant tumor – repopulat - ing cell colonies varies with 3D substrate elasticity , but their 3D trac - tion forces do not . This conclusion is further supported by the observation that there is no correlation between traction force and modulus in tumor cell colonies when local modulus and traction force at the same site in each colony are analyzed ( fig . S20 ) . This finding is in accord with the observation that skin tumor stem cell invasion in multiepithelia architecture in mouse embryos in vivo depends on local tissue stiffness heterogeneity but not on cel - lular forces ( 4 ) . Both zebrafish and mouse embryos generate sub - stantial traction force oscillations during early embryonic development , but in zebrafish , normal and shear traction force oscillations were comparable in amplitude , whereas in mouse embryos , normal traction force oscillations dominate over shear traction forces . A method of injecting oil droplets loaded with magnetic nano - particles was used to quantify the stiffness of zebrafish embryos in a previous study ( 18 ) . However , this magnetic nanoparticle – filled oil droplet approach used eight permanent magnets ; in addition , the application of an on - or - off step function force depends on the movement of the magnets to exert magnetic fields to the nanomag - netic particles , and hence , no dynamic properties of biological samples can be measured . In contrast , our microrobot probe can be used to apply dynamic mechanical loading of physiological fre - quencies ( 0 . 1 Hz , comparable to the human resting breathing fre - quency of about 0 . 2 Hz ) and amplitudes ( 0 . 6 to 3 . 5 Pa , covering the range of about 1 . 5 - Pa shear stress due to fluid shear flow in blood vessels ) . Rheological properties , such as storage modulus Fig . 5 . Quantification of modulus and traction forces in a zebrafish embryo by the microrobot probe . ( A to E ) Experimental results of zebrafish embryo # 1 . ( A ) An microrobot probewas injected into an embryo at ~ 3 . 0 hpf ( hour post fertilization ) and imaged at 4 . 0 hpf ( left , low magnification ; right , high magnification ) . Scale bars , 50 μ m . ( B ) A sinusoidal magnetic field ( red ) was applied at 3 . 5 Pa at 0 . 1 Hz , and the resulting probe angular rotation ( black ) was quantified . The phase lag between input signal and output signal was 30° . ( C ) Brief UV light ( 5 mW / cm 2 ) was exposed for 6 min to photodegrade and soften the PEG microgel to the final diameter of 60 μ m and Young ’ s modulus of 2 . 5 kPa . ( D and E ) Normal and shear traction forces exerted onto the probe by the surrounding cells . ( F to J ) Experimental results of zebrafish embryo # 2 . Notethatyellow - greenfluorescentnanoparticleswereembeddedintothismicrorobotprobefortractionforcequantificationandthatthereisanotherprobenearthis probe at a different height . Scale bars , 50 μ m . The phase lag between input signal and output signal was 50° . ( K ) Normalized moduli ( complex modulus G , storage modulus G ′ , and loss modulus G ″ ) from the original data in ( B ) and ( G ) and fig . S13 , using the phase lags of 30° , 50° , and 36° and the probe - tissue contact area ( which was 20 % for embryo # 1 , 60 % for embryo # 2 , and 10 % for embryo # 10 ) to adjust to the final effective applied shear stress . The average complex modulus G is 242 ± 62 . 7 Pa . Means ± SEM ; n = 3 embryos ; three separate experiments . P = 0 . 0394 between G and G ″ ; P = 0 . 0768 between G and G ′ ; and P = 0 . 2092 between G ′ and G ″ . * P < 0 . 05 ; ns , not significantly different . ( L and M ) Average normal traction forces ( L ) and shear traction forces ( M ) as afunction of development from blastulato gastrula . ( N ) Amplitudes of normal and shear traction force oscillations in zebrafish embryos . The traction forces were subdivided into two groups depending on the position of microgels . Traction forces in each group at different time points were averaged . Note that absolute amplitudes ( but not directions , tensile or compressive ) are averaged . Means ± SEM ; n = 43 oscillations from four embryos for the embryo group ; n = 77 oscillations from eight embryos from embryo - yolk group , respectively . P = 0 . 0046 between embryo and embryo - yolk for normal tractions ; P = 0 . 0054 for shear tractions . * * P < 0 . 01 ; two tailed Student ’ s t test was used . Mohagheghian et al . , Sci . Robot . 8 , eadc9800 ( 2023 ) 25 January 2023 7 of 12 S C I E N C E RO B OT I C S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E and loss modulus , of living samples in the range of 10 to 500 Pa ( considering the limit in rigid body rotation assumption for the probe of 10 kPa ; for the higher biological sample modulus of 5 kPa , the probe modulus needs to be increased to 100 kPa ) can be quantified . In addition , because of the intrinsic incompressibility of the oil droplet ( 38 , 39 ) , no isotropic tensile or compressive trac - tion forces or shear traction forces can be measured . In contrast , 3D isotropic or anisotropic normal or shear traction forces in the range of 10 to 3000 Pa at the same local site of a biological sample can be quantified using the microrobot probe . Because the microrobot probe can be dynamically softened by varying the duration of the UV exposure to tune its modulus , our current probe was capable of quantifying a wide range of 3D normal and shear traction forces generated by a biological sample or tissue . This has not been achieved by the oil droplet method ( 37 , 38 ) or the PA bead force sensor methods ( 39 , 52 ) , which can only measure normal trac - tion forces . One technical issue is whether the presence of the magnetic mi - crocross within the elastic PEG microgel alters the measured trac - tion forces . We explored this possibility and found that the presence of the magnetic cross inside the microgel gel had little effect on the traction forces ( fig . S21 ) . Furthermore , after the microgels were swollen and softened by UV light , the normal and shear traction forces did not vary with the microgel diameter ( fig . S21 ) . These findings suggest that brief exposures to UV light in TRCs in a colony to a different local substrate stiffness do not alter the cells ’ traction forces , suggesting the existence of mechanical memory in these cells , consistent with a previous finding of mechanical memory in stem cell fate ( 53 ) . Another technical issue is whether the position and orientation of the ferromagnetic microcross inside the microgel relative to the magnetizing field affects the torque generation . Comparing the microgel containing the micro - cross at the center with the microgel containing the microcross at an offset position , we found that both microgels and in - plane and out - of - plane microcrosses generated similar angular rotations and maximum centroid displacements ( fig . S22 ) . This suggests that the effects of microcross offset – generated pivoting on probe rota - tions were negligible and that the orientation of the microcrosses did not influence modulus measurements . When exposing sensors to UV light to soften them , the light might travel through the surrounding tissue and degrade the polymer , but it is possible that the metallic microcrosses could present a barrier to light pen - etration and soften the gel in a nonhomogeneous manner , yielding stiffness variability across the surface of the sensors and thus result - ing in underreporting of traction force stresses on the nondegraded side of the microgels . To specifically investigate this possibility , we exposed a microgel containing the microcross to UV light and quantified the change in area at 5 μm above and below the micro - cross . The rationale was that if the effect of the presence of the me - tallic microcross was substantial , then the area below the microcross would not change much because the PEG gel in this area would not be degraded . We found that the changes in area at both places were very similar ( fig . S23 ) , suggesting that the presence of metallic mi - crocross did not play a notable role in preventing degradation of the PEG gel in response to UV exposure . The PEG microgel below the microcross may still be masked from the UV light , but this part of the PEG might have negligible effect on the microgel strains because the stress from the outside decreases very quickly from the micro - gel surface . The data for the microrobot probes of different diameters show similar traction forces , suggesting that the short duration of UV softening ( < 45 s ) does not alter the traction force measurements , consistent with the report that within 60 s , the traction forces exhibit negligible changes in response to substrate stiffness elevation ( 25 ) . However , alteration of substrate stiffness for 5 to 15 min does change cellular traction forces ( 25 ) . The average traction force of TRC colonies on 1 - kPa gel or on rigid glass is 1 . 3 kPa , 3 . 5 - fold higher than the published result of 400 - Pa mean traction force of tumor cell colonies in 0 . 4 - kPa fibrin gels ( 44 ) . Part of the difference in traction forces might be due to the fact that before UV exposure , the microgel had a stiffness of 10 kPa , whereas the microgel in the previous study ( 44 ) had a stiffness of 1 . 5 kPa . This will be investi - gated in future work by using soft microgels to quantify traction forces and then stiffening the microgel dynamically to examine the local changes in traction forces for a given substrate stiffness . In addition , the orientation of the magnetic cross relative to the magnetization field might affect the magnetic moment of the cross in response to the external magnetic field because the dimen - sions of the cross were not symmetrical . We have found that the magnetic moments of the microcross were very similar for in - plane and out - of - plane magnetizations ( fig . S1D ) , suggesting that the microcross orientation had little effect on the magnetic moment of the microcross . Because the microcross is ferromagnet - ic , the probe can function as a microrobot controlled by external magnetic fields , useful for remote actuation in in vivo settings . In the current study , the PEG - based microgel was softened and swollen by UV exposure to degrade cross - links of the PEG polymer . This introduced a uniform tensile stress on the microgel sensor , which might be biased toward increased normal stresses . However , because the viscous behaviors of the surrounding cells have a delay time of less than 1 s ( Fig . 3 , C and E ) , this was too short to contribute to images of the traction quantification taken tens of seconds after UV exposure and 2 hours after Tween 20 treat - ment to obtain stress - free conditions . To further determine whether the presence of fibrin gels influenced the PEG microgel swelling , we measured microgel diameters in response to UV before and after degradation of the 1 - kPa fibrin gel . There was no significant differ - ence between microgel diameters before and after fibrin gel degra - dation ( fig . S24 ) , suggesting that the presence of the fibrin gel did not contribute to the microgel swelling as a result of UV light – me - diated PEG polymer degradation . Because the stiffness of the tumor cell colony was lower than 1 kPa ( fig . S10 ) , the restrictive effect of both tumor cells and fibrin gels on microgel swelling would be less than the fibrin gel alone . All these data suggest that the uniform and static tensile swelling stress on the microgel does not contribute to the compressive and shear stresses on the microgel sensor from tumor cell colonies and dynamic force oscillations from embryos . The microrobot probe could quantify both subcellular tractions ( Fig . 4C ) and total traction forces from multiple cells ( Fig . 4E ) on the microgel . The total traction measurements were on the same length scale as the stiffness measurement , in which multiple cells contribute to the resistance to rotation of the same probe . These results suggest that the magnetic microrobot could be used to probe both stiffness and traction forces at the same location of living tissues . Previous studies have found that cell stiffness is proportional to cell prestress and thus to cell traction forces in single living tissue cells ( 3 ) . In addition , cell stiffness and cell prestress ( traction Mohagheghian et al . , Sci . Robot . 8 , eadc9800 ( 2023 ) 25 January 2023 8 of 12 S C I E N C E RO B OT I C S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E forces ) increase with 2D substrate elasticity ( 54 ) . In contrast , we found that mouse melanoma tumor – repopulating cell colonies in 3D culture vary their stiffness but not traction forces in response to changes in 3D substrate elasticity , distinct from previous findings in single normal cells but reminiscent of the observation of multi - layer epithelia in mouse embryos ( 4 ) . It is possible that the TRCs that were seeded directly on the substrate or very close to the sub - strate ( < 5 μm above ) varied in both traction forces and moduli with substrate elasticity . However , a previous study showed that cell stiff - ness and traction forces on 2D substrates were not correlated in breast cancer cells but were correlated in noncancerous epithelial cells ( 55 ) . Our current finding is consistent with this observation but extends it to melanoma tumor – repopulating cells in 3D sub - strates , suggesting that the noncorrelation between stiffness and traction forces might be a distinct feature of malignant tumor cells . It was reported that mammary epithelial cells on a 2D soft ( < 150 Pa ) matrix exhibit spheroid shapes and , on a 2D stiff ( > 3000 Pa ) matrix , exhibit spread shapes and transform into malig - nant tumor cells ( 56 ) . In this study , we have generated two different 3D matrix microenvironments . Under one condition , stem cell – like tumor – repopulating cells were plated on top of rigid glass and were covered with 400 - Pa fibrin gels to simulate a heterogeneous me - chanical tumor microenvironment . Under another condition , the TRCs were plated on 1000 - Pa PA gels and were covered with 1000 - Pa fibrin gels to simulate a uniform mechanical microenviron - ment . The mouse melanoma tumor – repopulating cell colonies were spread and grown under the heterogeneous mechanical microenvi - ronment condition but stayed round in the uniform mechanical mi - croenvironment and were likely dormant , as reported recently ( 50 ) . It appears that heterogeneous and homogeneous 3D mechanical en - vironments have different effects on tumor cell behaviors and func - tions . Additional studies are needed to determine why these tumor cells alter their stiffness but not traction forces in these two different mechanical microenvironments . A recent study that used fluores - cent nanoparticles to decorate the extracellular matrix and embed magnetic particles to measure local matrix mechanics found that cancer cell protrusions generated forces in the nano - Newton range during invasion ( 57 ) . In contrast , our probe could be used to quantify traction force and modulus using the same probe at the same location of the cancer cell colony . Furthermore , we found that the modulus of zebrafish embryos was on the order of a few hundred pascal , in the same range as the stiffness measured with the oil droplet probe , where spring - dashpot models have to be introduced to extract elastic modulus or viscosity ( 18 ) . In con - trast , our microrobot probe was model independent . Few studies have been able to quantify forces generated by devel - oping vertebrate embryos . Although it is generally accepted that nonmuscle myosin II – mediated forces regulate embryonic develop - ment , whether the magnitude of the forces and what forces ( shear or normal ) are important in shaping embryonic development remain elusive . It is known that calcium signaling regulates embryonic de - velopment ( 58 ) ; however , it is not clear how calcium signaling in individual cells is manifested as oscillations of normal and shear forces of cells , which drive cell shape changes and possibly tissue pattern formation in embryos . In a previous study , internalized nanodevices were used to track intracellular forces and mechanical properties in a one - cell mouse embryo ( 59 ) . In the present study , using the alginate - microgel and the PEG - microrobot probes , we found that zebrafish and mouse embryos generate substantial oscillations of traction forces during early stages of development , suggesting that these force oscillations might be important in driving patterning , organization , and development of the embryos . Our results of force oscillation in zebrafish are consistent with the findings of bulk periodic actomyosin oscillation waves that drive segregation of ooplasm from yolk granules in zebrafish ( 60 ) . Shear traction forces in mouse embryos are smaller than normal traction forces and are 100 to 200 Pa in magnitude ( fig . S18 ) , lower than the 300 - Pa pressure observed during hydraulic fractur - ing of cell - cell contacts to form a blastocoel ( 61 ) . We have found that the compressive and tensile stresses oscillate between 1000 and 2000 Pa when the microgel probe was squeezed and pulled by the embryo before blastocyst hatching , comparable in magnitude to the value of about 1500 Pa of the maximum pressure ( normal stress ) of mouse blastocyst hatching using a hydrogel - based microdeformation assay in a previous study ( 62 ) . The protective response of the mouse embryo by extruding a foreign , inert , biocompatible , and micro - sized object in this study is reminiscent of the observation of aneu - ploid cell depletion in mammalian embryos ( 51 ) . The zona pellucida is necessary for successful implantation , and implantation rate is critically dependent on the physiological range of the zona pellucida shear modulus ( 63 ) . Using a micropipette aspiration method to measure surface tension of blastomeres of mouse embryos whose zona pellucidae are dissected out , researchers have shown that different contractilities in blastomeres trigger cell sorting ( 64 ) and that pulsatile membrane contraction forces drive compaction ( 65 ) . However , normal and shear traction forces in the embryos cannot be quantified with the micropipette aspiration approach . In addition , the magnitudes of surface tension obtained from the embryos devoid of zona pellucida are possibly lower than those from intact embryos because shear modulus of the zona pel - lucida is likely to be important in force generation in embryos . In contrast , our alginate - based elastic microgel probe could quantify normal and shear traction forces in intact mouse embryos , and large tensile and compressive traction force oscillations were ob - served in the mouse embryos , demonstrating its utility for mouse embryos under physiological conditions . In conclusion , we have developed a microrobot probe that can quantify stiffness and cell traction forces in in vitro culture and in vivo . This probe could potentially be used to remotely stimulate cells , embryos , and tissues to study force - regulated cell fate and dif - ferentiation by extending the duration of force application via the in - plane or out - of - plane magnetic twisting fields . The microrobot probe may also be controlled via x , y , and z magnetic fields with different amplitudes , frequencies , and phase lags to generate spiral rotations and movements of the microprobe ( 14 , 15 ) to stim - ulate living cells in tissues and embryos and to assay for biochemical activities and biological responses . This microrobot probe could po - tentially be particularly useful for remote control under in vivo con - ditions using various modalities of the magnetic field , akin to a micrometer - sized version of a magnetically controlled telerobot ( 66 ) . By tuning the microrobot ’ s stiffness and size and combining the probe with recently developed approaches of embryo culturing platforms for ex utero culture of mouse embryos ( 67 , 68 ) , it might be possible to gain insights into the role of forces and mechanics in gastrulation and organogenesis during mammalian embryonic development . Mohagheghian et al . , Sci . Robot . 8 , eadc9800 ( 2023 ) 25 January 2023 9 of 12 S C I E N C E RO B OT I C S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E MATERIALS AND METHODS Fabrication of biocompatible ferromagnetic microcrosses An array of Co - Pt ( cobalt - platinum ) microcrosses was fabricated onto a 4 - inch single - side - polished silicon wafer ( Pure Wafer , San Jose , CA ) following previously reported methods with some modi - fications ( 69 ) . First , the seed - layer stack of titanium ( Ti ) adhesion layer ( 45 nm ) , TiN ( titanium nitride ) diffusion barrier ( 45 nm ) , ti - tanium ( Ti ) adhesion layer ( 45 nm ) , and Cu ( copper ) conductive layer ( 80 nm ) were sequentially sputtered ( AJA ATC Orion 8 UVH , AJA International ) onto the wafer as shown in fig . S1 . A mi - crocross pattern was then transferred on to the 10 - μm spin - coated positive photoresist AZ9260 ( Microchemicals Inc . ) by exposing it to UV light ( I line 365 , EVG 620 Mask Aligner , EV Group ) through a chrome mask designed by AutoCAD ( Autodesk Inc . ) . The resulting wafer was treated with oxygen plasma for 3 min under 150 - W power ( March Jupiter III ) to remove any resist residues . Before the electro - deposition , the wafer was soaked in diluted sulfuric acid [ H 2 SO 4 ( 95 to 98 % ) , H 2 O = 1 : 10 volume ratio ] to remove any layer of copper oxide that may have formed on the wafer . The electrolyte solution was made by first heating the 0 . 025 M diamine - dinitrito platinum ( II ) solution [ Pt ( NH 3 ) 2 ( NO 2 ) 2 ] ( MilliporeSigma ) at 75°C for 4 hours , followed by addition of cobaltous sulfamate [ Co ( NH 2 ) 2 - ( SO 3 ) 2 ] ( Alfa Aesar ) and ammonium citrate [ ( NH 4 ) 2 C 6 H 6 O 7 ] ( MilliporeSigma ) to get the final concentration of 0 . 1 M for each solution . Subsequently , pH was adjusted to 7 by NaOH . Electroplat - ing was carried out in a custom - made galvanostatic cell with 1 liter of electrolyte at room temperature without stirring , using a Pt counter electrode . A current density of 50 mA / cm 2 was applied between two electrodes for 60 min to deposit 10 to 11 μm of Co - Pt . The deposited Co - Pt was then annealed to induce phase transi - tion from disordered A1 phase to the ordered L1 0 phase with high coercivity . The annealing step was performed in a tube furnace under forming gas ( 4 % H 2 + 96 % N 2 ) at 675°C with a ramp rate of 20°C / min and a dwell time of 30 min . Cobalt and platinum are known to be biocompatible ( 70 , 71 ) . The biocompatible Co - Pt fer - romagnetic microcrosses were then detached from the wafer by light sonication in a water bath and subsequently collected in a 15 - ml centrifuge tube . Initially , two designs were considered for the ferro - magnetic microstructure : cross and bar . For the bar structure , we were able to consider the filter channel width less than the junction width because the individual bar and even two bars ( aggregated to - gether ) were able to align themselves to the filtration channel and pass through without clogging the junction . However , we noticed that the cross design was less prone to aggregation because of the smaller contact area between the crosses , but the cross structure tended to clog the microfluidic device much more at its T junction . Reducing the filter channel width at the inlet to the same width as in the junction resulted in the filtration of most of the crosses , shorter lifespan of the microfluidic device , and much fewer collected micro - robots with crosses . On the basis of the above observation , we decided to design the microcross with one side ( 21 μm ) smaller than the other side ( 31 μm ) and with small protrusions to reduce the contact area between the microcrosses to optimize the processes of collection and encapsulation of the microcrosses inside the PEG gels in the microfluidics channel . Microrobot probe generation Microfluidic T junctions were used to manufacture photodegrad - able microgels using picoinjection to introduce cross - linkers in the droplets for high - throughput microdroplet manufacturing . The device contained one inlet for oil phase injection and two inlets for aqueous solutions , including the solution that forms drop - lets and the cross - linker solution injecting at the picoinjection channel . A total volume of 400 μl of mixture was obtained for forming the droplets by prereacting 4 . 5 weight % ( wt % ) 8 - arm PEG - DBCO [ molecular weight ( MW ) = 20 kDa ] containing 2 × 10 4 microcrosses with 0 . 5 mM Cyclo - RGD - azide ( Vivitide , catalog no . RGD - 3749 - PI ) for 15 min on ice in deionized water , fol - lowed by addition of red fluorescent nanoparticles ( 0 . 5 μm in diam - eter , carboxylate - modified ; Thermo Fisher Scientific ) or yellow - green fluorescent nanoparticles ( 0 . 5 μm in diameter , nonfunction - alized ; Polysciences ) to the solution ( 75 μl / ml ) . The solution was then sonicated and immediately vortexed in 500 μl of oil phase [ HFE - 7500 oil ( 3M ) supplemented with 2 wt % of 008 - FluoroSur - factant ( RAN Biotech ) ] to form polydisperse droplets with an indi - vidual microcross inside , preventing the settlement and aggregation of microcrosses . The droplet - forming solution and oil phase were coinjected into the microfluidics via PE ( polyethylene ) tubing [ inside diameter ( ID ) , 1 / 32 inch ; outer diameter ( OD ) , 1 / 16 inch ; Intramedic ] and 20 - gauge × 1 / 4 needles connected to 1 ml ( for aqueous stream ) and PE tubing ( ID , 0 . 022 inch ; OD , 0 . 042 inch ; In - tramedic ) and 23 - gauge × 1 / 4 needles connected to 5 - ml ( for oil stream ) syringes . The syringes were mounted upright on the syringe pump ( PHD 2000 , Harvard Apparatus , Holliston , MA , USA ) , and the fluids were pumped with a flow rate of 50 μl / hour based on the 1 - ml syringe . Cross - linker solution ( 120 μl ) containing 15 wt % of PEG 8 - NBA ( MW = 20 kDa ) was also infused into the device through picoinjection channel by PE tubing ( ID , 1 / 32 inch ; OD , 1 / 16 inch ; Intramedic ) connected to the pressurized solution at 280 mbar inside the 1 . 5 - ml tube using the Fluigent LineUp Series pressure pump . After the system became stable , the high AC voltage ( 250 V at 1 kHz ) was applied to the inlet and picoinjection elec - trodes , creating a high electric field to merge the polydisperse drop - lets into a continuous flow and to trigger the injection of the cross - linker , respectively . After the injection , the droplets were passed through a downstream serpentine structure for passive mixing to homogenously cross - link before the complete gelation at the collec - tion chamber . The final microgels were then collected in a 5 - ml cen - trifuge tube . After the collection of the microgels , the oil phase was aspirated off , and 20 % ( v / v ) of PFO ( 1 H , 1 H , 2 H , 2 H - perfluoro - 1 - octanol ; 97 % ; MilliporeSigma ) in Novec 7500 oil was added to break the emulsions . After the removal of oil / PFO phase , the drop - lets were washed three times with Novec 7500 oil , hexane ( Millipor - eSigma ) , and 0 . 1 wt % of Pluronic F - 127 ( MilliporeSigma ) , in that order . To collect the microrobot probes from the rest of the micro - gel , an Allen wrench was magnetized , submerged in the microgel solution , and transferred to 1 ml of deionized water , followed by demagnetization of the wrench and subsequent vortexing to allow the microrobot probes to be suspended in solution . Materials characterization The elemental composition of the electroplated Co - Pt was charac - terized with a scanning electron microscope equipped with energy - dispersive x - ray spectroscopy ( EDS ) ( FEI NOVA 430 ) with the column voltage of 18 kV ( 63 ) . EDS analysis showed a near Mohagheghian et al . , Sci . Robot . 8 , eadc9800 ( 2023 ) 25 January 2023 10 of 12 S C I E N C E RO B OT I C S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E equiatomic composition of the electroplated microcross ( 51 % Co and 49 % Pt ) . Avibrating sample magnetometer ( ADE Technologies Model EV9 ) capable of applying magnetic field up to 2 . 5 T was used to measure the magnetic properties of the Co - Pt film , including co - ercivity , remanence , and saturation magnetization . The film thick - ness was measured with a Keyence VK - X1000 3D laser scanning confocal microscope . Additional Materials and Methods are listed in the Supplementary Materials . Statistical analysis Two - tailed paired or unpaired Student ’ s t test was performed for analyses . Supplementary Materials This PDF file includes : Materials and Methods Figs . S1 to S24 References ( 72 – 74 ) Other Supplementary Material for this manuscript includes the following : Movies S1 to S3 MDAR Reproducibility Checklist REFERENCES AND NOTES 1 . F . Chowdhury , B . Huang , N . Wang , Cytoskeletal prestress : The cellular hallmark in mechanobiology and mechanomedicine . Cytoskeleton ( Hoboken ) . 78 , 249 – 276 ( 2021 ) . 2 . N . Wang , K . Naruse , D . Stamenović , J . J . Fredberg , S . M . Mijailovich , I . M . Tolić - Nørrelykke , T . Polte , R . Mannix , D . E . Ingber , Mechanical behavior in living cells consistent with the tensegrity model . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 98 , 7765 – 7770 ( 2001 ) . 3 . N . Wang , I . M . Tolić - Nørrelykke , J . Chen , S . M . Mijailovich , J . P . Butler , J . J . Fredberg , D . Stamenović , Cell prestress . I . Stiffness and prestress are closely associated in adherent contractile cells . Am . J . Physiol . Cell Physiol . 282 , C606 – C616 ( 2002 ) . 4 . V . F . Fiore , M . Krajnc , F . G . Quiroz , J . Levorse , H . A . Pasolli , S . Y . Shvartsman , E . Fuchs , Mechanics of a multilayer epithelium instruct tumour architecture and function . Nature 585 , 433 – 439 ( 2020 ) . 5 . R . M . Hochmuth , Micropipette aspiration of living cells . J . Biomech . 33 , 15 – 22 ( 2000 ) . 6 . J . Guck , R . Ananthakrishnan , H . Mahmood , T . J . Moon , C . C . Cunningham , J . Käs , Theoptical stretcher : A novel laser tool to micromanipulate cells . Biophys . J . 81 , 767 – 784 ( 2001 ) . 7 . J . C . Crocker , M . T . Valentine , E . R . Weeks , T . Gisler , P . D . Kaplan , A . G . Yodh , D . A . Weitz , Two - pointmicrorheologyofinhomogeneoussoftmaterials . Phys . Rev . Lett . 85 , 888 – 891 ( 2000 ) . 8 . Y . Tseng , T . P . Kole , D . Wirtz , Micromechanical mapping of live cells by multiple - particle - tracking microrheology . Biophys . J . 83 , 3162 – 3176 ( 2002 ) . 9 . A . Ashkin , J . Dziedzic , Optical trapping and manipulation of viruses and bacteria . Science 235 , 1517 – 1520 ( 1987 ) . 10 . G . Binnig , C . F . Quate , C . Gerber , Atomic force microscope . Phys . Rev . Lett . 56 , 930 – 933 ( 1986 ) . 11 . N . Wang , J . Butler , D . Ingber , Mechanotransductionacrossthecellsurfaceandthroughthe cytoskeleton . Science 260 , 1124 – 1127 ( 1993 ) . 12 . B . Fabry , G . N . Maksym , S . A . Shore , P . E . Moore , R . A . PanettieriJr . , J . P . Butler , J . J . Fredberg , Selectedcontribution : Timecourseandheterogeneityofcontractileresponsesin cultured human airway smooth muscle cells . J . Appl . Physiol . 91 , 986 – 994 ( 2001 ) . 13 . A . R . Bausch , F . Ziemann , A . A . Boulbitch , K . Jacobson , E . Sackmann , Localmeasurementsof viscoelastic parameters of adherent cell surfaces by magnetic bead microrheometry . Biophys . J . 75 , 2038 – 2049 ( 1998 ) . 14 . S . Hu , L . Eberhard , J . Chen , J . C . Love , J . P . Butler , J . J . Fredberg , G . M . Whitesides , N . Wang , Mechanicalanisotropyofadherentcellsprobedbyathree - dimensionalmagnetictwisting device . Am . J . Physiol . Cell Physiol . 287 , C1184 – C1191 ( 2004 ) . 15 . Y . Zhang , F . Wei , Y . - C . Poh , Q . Jia , J . Chen , J . Chen , J . Luo , W . Yao , W . Zhou , W . Huang , F . Yang , Y . Zhang , N . Wang , Interfacing3Dmagnetictwistingcytometrywithconfocalfluorescence microscopy to image force responses in living cells . Nat . Protoc . 12 , 1437 – 1450 ( 2017 ) . 16 . F . Wei , X . Xu , C . Zhang , Y . Liao , B . Ji , N . Wang , Stress fiber anisotropy contributes to force - mode dependent chromatin stretching and gene upregulation in living cells . Nat . Commun . 11 , 4902 ( 2020 ) . 17 . P . - H . Wu , D . R . - B . Aroush , A . Asnacios , W . - C . Chen , M . E . Dokukin , B . L . Doss , D . Wirtz , A comparison of methods to assess cell mechanical properties . Nat . Methods 15 , 491 – 498 ( 2018 ) . 18 . F . Serwane , A . Mongera , P . Rowghanian , D . A . Kealhofer , A . A . Lucio , Z . M . Hockenbery , O . Campàs , Invivoquantificationofspatiallyvaryingmechanicalpropertiesindeveloping tissues . Nat . Methods 14 , 181 – 186 ( 2017 ) . 19 . A . J . Thompson , E . K . Pillai , I . B . Dimov , S . K . Foster , C . E . Holt , K . Franze , Rapid changes in tissue mechanics regulate cell behaviour in the developing embryonic brain . eLife 8 , e39356 ( 2019 ) . 20 . M . Dembo , Y . - L . Wang , Stresses at the cell - to - substrate interface during locomotion of fibroblasts . Biophys . J . 76 , 2307 – 2316 ( 1999 ) . 21 . N . Q . Balaban , U . S . Schwarz , D . Riveline , P . Goichberg , G . Tzur , I . Sabanay , B . Geiger , Force and focal adhesion assembly : A close relationship studied using elastic micropatterned substrates . Nat . Cell Biol . 3 , 466 – 472 ( 2001 ) . 22 . J . P . Butler , I . M . Tolić - Nørrelykke , B . Fabry , J . J . Fredberg , Traction fields , moments , and strain energy that cells exert on their surroundings . Am . J . Physiol . Cell Physiol . 282 , C595 – C605 ( 2002 ) . 23 . I . M . Tolić - Nørrelykke , J . P . Butler , J . Chen , N . Wang , Spatialandtemporaltractionresponse in human airway smooth muscle cells . Am . J . Physiol . Cell Physiol . 283 , C1254 – C1266 ( 2002 ) . 24 . J . L . Tan , J . Tien , D . M . Pirone , D . S . Gray , K . Bhadriraju , C . S . Chen , Cells lying on a bed of microneedles : An approach to isolate mechanical force . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 100 , 1484 – 1489 ( 2003 ) . 25 . J . P . Califano , C . A . Reinhart - King , Substrate stiffness and cell area predict cellular traction stresses in single cells and cells in contact . Cell . Mol . Bioeng . 3 , 68 – 75 ( 2010 ) . 26 . L . Trichet , J . Le Digabel , R . J . Hawkins , S . R . Vedula , M . Gupta , C . Ribrault , P . Hersen , R . Voituriez , B . Ladoux , Evidence of a large - scale mechanosensing mechanism forcellular adaptation to substrate stiffness . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 109 , 6933 – 6938 ( 2012 ) . 27 . S . A . Maskarinec , C . Franck , D . A . Tirrell , G . Ravichandran , Quantifyingcellulartractionforces in three dimensions . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 106 , 22108 – 22113 ( 2009 ) . 28 . W . R . Legant , J . S . Miller , B . L . Blakely , D . M . Cohen , G . M . Genin , C . S . Chen , Measurementof mechanical tractions exerted by cells in three - dimensional matrices . Nat . Methods 7 , 969 – 971 ( 2010 ) . 29 . J . C . del Álamo , R . Meili , B . Álvarez - González , B . Alonso - Latorre , E . Bastounis , R . Firtel , J . C . Lasheras , Three - dimensional quantification of cellular traction forces and mechano - sensingofthinsubstratabyfouriertractionforcemicroscopy . PLOSONE 8 , e69850 ( 2013 ) . 30 . B . Álvarez - González , S . Zhang , M . Gómez - González , R . Meili , R . A . Firtel , J . C . Lasheras , J . C . Del Álamo , Two - layer elastographic 3 - D traction force microscopy . Sci . Rep . 7 , 39315 ( 2017 ) . 31 . M . Cóndor , J . Steinwachs , C . Mark , J . M . García - Aznar , B . Fabry , Tractionforcemicroscopyin 3 - dimensional extracellular matrix networks . Curr . Protoc . Cell Biol . 75 , 10 . 22 . 1 – 10 . 22 . 20 ( 2017 ) . 32 . D . Vorselen , Y . Wang , M . M . de Jesus , P . K . Shah , M . J . Footer , M . Huse , W . Cai , J . A . Theriot , Microparticle traction force microscopy reveals subcellular force exertion patterns in immune cell - target interactions . Nat . Commun . 11 , 20 ( 2020 ) . 33 . J . H . Kim , X . Serra - Picamal , D . T . Tambe , E . H . Zhou , C . Y . Park , M . Sadati , J . A . Park , R . Krishnan , B . Gweon , E . Millet , J . P . Butler , X . Trepat , J . J . Fredberg , Propulsion and nav - igation within the advancing monolayer sheet . Nat . Mater . 12 , 856 – 863 ( 2013 ) . 34 . R . Serrano , A . Aung , Y . T . Yeh , S . Varghese , J . C . Lasheras , J . C . DelÁlamo , Three - dimensional monolayer stress microscopy . Biophys . J . 117 , 111 – 128 ( 2019 ) . 35 . N . Mandriota , C . Friedsam , J . A . Jones - Molina , K . V . Tatem , D . E . Ingber , O . Sahin , Cellular nanoscale stiffness patterns governed by intracellular forces . Nat . Mater . 18 , 1071 – 1077 ( 2019 ) . 36 . J . Zhou , S . Pal , S . Maiti , L . A . Davidson , Force production and mechanical accommodation during convergent extension . Development 142 , 692 – 701 ( 2015 ) . 37 . O . Campàs , T . Mammoto , S . Hasso , R . A . Sperling , D . O ’ Connell , A . G . Bischof , R . Maas , D . A . Weitz , L . Mahadevan , D . E . Ingber , Quantifying cell - generated mechanical forces within living embryonic tissues . Nat . Methods 11 , 183 – 189 ( 2014 ) . 38 . A . Mongera , P . Rowghanian , H . J . Gustafson , E . Shelton , D . A . Kealhofer , E . K . Carn , F . Serwane , A . A . Lucio , J . Giammona , O . Campàs , A fluid - to - solid jamming transition un - derlies vertebrate body axis elongation . Nature 561 , 401 – 405 ( 2018 ) . 39 . N . Träber , K . Uhlmann , S . Girardo , G . Kesavan , K . Wagner , J . Friedrichs , R . Goswami , K . Bai , M . Brand , C . Werner , D . Balzani , J . Guck , Polyacrylamide bead sensors for in vivo quantification of cell - scale stress in zebrafish development . Sci . Rep . 9 , 17031 ( 2019 ) . 40 . H . T . Nia , H . Liu , G . Seano , M . Datta , D . Jones , N . Rahbari , J . Incio , V . P . Chauhan , K . Jung , J . D . Martin , V . Askoxylakis , T . P . Padera , D . Fukumura , Y . Boucher , F . J . Hornicek , A . J . Grodzinsky , J . W . Baish , L . L . Munn , R . K . Jain , Solid stress and elastic energy as measures of tumour mechanopathology . Nat . Biomed . Eng . 1 , 0004 ( 2017 ) . Mohagheghian et al . , Sci . Robot . 8 , eadc9800 ( 2023 ) 25 January 2023 11 of 12 S C I E N C E RO B OT I C S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E 41 . A . Manduca , T . E . Oliphant , M . A . Dresner , J . L . Mahowald , S . A . Kruse , E . Amromin , J . P . Felmlee , J . F . Greenleaf , R . L . Ehman , Magnetic resonance elastography : Non - invasive mapping of tissue elasticity . Med . Image Anal . 5 , 237 – 254 ( 2001 ) . 42 . C . C . Park , P . Nguyen , C . Hernandez , R . Bettencourt , K . Ramirez , L . Fortney , J . Hooker , E . Sy , M . T . Savides , M . H . Alquiraish , M . A . Valasek , E . Rizo , L . Richards , D . Brenner , C . B . Sirlin , R . Loomba , Magnetic resonance elastography vs transient elastography in detection of fibrosis and noninvasive measurement of steatosis in patients with biopsy - proven nonalcoholic fatty liver disease . Gastroenterology 152 , 598 – 607 . e2 ( 2017 ) . 43 . A . Qayyum , K . P . Hwang , J . Stafford , A . Verma , D . M . Maru , S . Sandesh , J . Sun , R . C . Pestana , R . Avritscher , M . M . Hassan , H . Amin , A . Rashid , I . I . Wistuba , R . L . Ehman , J . Ma , A . O . Kaseb , Immunotherapy response evaluation with magnetic resonance elastography ( MRE ) in advanced HCC . J . Immunother . Cancer 7 , 329 ( 2019 ) . 44 . E . Mohagheghian , J . Luo , J . Chen , G . Chaudhary , J . Chen , J . Sun , R . H . Ewoldt , N . Wang , Quantifying compressive forces between living cell layers and within tissues using elastic round microgels . Nat . Commun . 9 , 1878 ( 2018 ) . 45 . D . D . McKinnon , T . E . Brown , K . A . Kyburz , E . Kiyotake , K . S . Anseth , Design and characterization of a syntheticallyaccessible , photodegradable hydrogel for user - directed formation of neural networks . Biomacromolecules 15 , 2808 – 2816 ( 2014 ) . 46 . S . Khetan , M . Guvendiren , W . R . Legant , D . M . Cohen , C . S . Chen , J . A . Burdick , Degradation - mediatedcellulartractiondirectsstemcellfateincovalentlycrosslinkedthree - dimensional hydrogels . Nat . Mater . 12 , 458 – 465 ( 2013 ) . 47 . C . Bonnet - Gonnet , L . Belloni , B . Cabane , Osmotic pressure of latex dispersions . Langmuir 10 , 4012 – 4021 ( 1994 ) . 48 . J . Cappello , V . d ’ Herbemont , A . Lindner , O . du Roure , Microfluidic in - situ measurement of Poisson ’ s ratio of hydrogels . Micromachines ( Basel ) . 11 , 318 ( 2020 ) . 49 . J . Liu , Y . Tan , H . Zhang , Y . Zhang , P . Xu , J . Chen , Y . C . Poh , K . Tang , N . Wang , B . Huang , Soft fibrin gels promote selection and growth of tumorigenic cells . Nat . Mater . 11 , 734 – 741 ( 2012 ) . 50 . Y . Liu , J . Lv , X . Liang , X . Yin , L . Zhang , D . Chen , X . Jin , R . Fiskesund , K . Tang , J . Ma , H . Zhang , W . Dong , S . Mo , T . Zhang , F . Cheng , Y . Zhou , J . Xie , N . Wang , B . Huang , Fibrin stiffness mediates dormancy of tumor - repopulating cells via a Cdc42 - driven Tet2 epigenetic program . Cancer Res . 78 , 3926 – 3937 ( 2018 ) . 51 . M . Yang , T . Rito , J . Metzger , J . Naftaly , R . Soman , J . Hu , D . F . Albertini , D . H . Barad , A . H . Brivanlou , N . Gleicher , Depletion of aneuploid cells in human embryos and gastruloids . Nat . Cell Biol . 23 , 314 – 321 ( 2021 ) . 52 . M . E . Dolega , M . Delarue , F . Ingremeau , J . Prost , A . Delon , G . Cappello , Cell - like pressure sensors reveal increase of mechanical stress towards the core of multicellular spheroids under compression . Nat . Commun . 8 , 14056 ( 2017 ) . 53 . C . Yang , M . W . Tibbitt , L . Basta , K . S . Anseth , Mechanicalmemoryanddosinginfluencestem cell fate . Nat . Mater . 13 , 645 – 652 ( 2014 ) . 54 . A . J . Engler , S . Sen , H . L . Sweeney , D . E . Discher , Matrix elasticity directs stem cell lineage specification . Cell 126 , 677 – 689 ( 2006 ) . 55 . J . Rheinlaender , H . Wirbel , T . E . Schäffer , Spatial correlation of cell stiffness and traction forces in cancer cells measured with combined SICM and TFM . RSC Adv . 11 , 13951 – 13956 ( 2021 ) . 56 . M . G . Ondeck , A . Kumar , J . K . Placone , C . M . Plunkett , B . F . Matte , K . C . Wong , L . Fattet , J . Yang , A . J . Engler , Dynamically stiffened matrix promotes malignant transformation of mammary epithelial cells via collective mechanical signaling . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 116 , 3502 – 3507 ( 2019 ) . 57 . L . Sikic , E . Schulman , A . Kosklin , A . Saraswathibhatla , O . Chaudhuri , J . Pokki , Nanoscale tracking combined with cell - scale microrheology reveals stepwise increases in force generated by cancer cell protrusions . Nano Lett . 22 , 7742 – 7750 ( 2022 ) . 58 . S . E . Webb , A . L . Miller , Calcium signalling during embryonic development . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 4 , 539 – 551 ( 2003 ) . 59 . M . Duch , N . Torras , M . Asami , T . Suzuki , M . I . Arjona , R . Gómez - Martínez , M . D . VerMilyea , R . Castilla , J . A . Plaza , A . C . F . Perry , Tracking intracellular forces and mechanical property changes in mouse one - cell embryo development . Nat . Mater . 19 , 1114 – 1123 ( 2020 ) . 60 . S . Shamipour , R . Kardos , S . L . Xue , B . Hof , E . Hannezo , C . P . Heisenberg , Bulkactindynamics drive phase segregation in zebrafish oocytes . Cell 177 , 1463 – 1479 . e18 ( 2019 ) . 61 . J . G . Dumortier , M . Le Verge - Serandour , A . F . Tortorelli , A . Mielke , L . de Plater , H . Turlier , J . L . Maître , Hydraulic fracturing and active coarsening position the lumen of the mouse blastocyst . Science 365 , 465 – 468 ( 2019 ) . 62 . K . Leonavicius , C . Royer , C . Preece , B . Davies , J . S . Biggins , S . Srinivas , Mechanics of mouse blastocyst hatching revealed by a hydrogel - based microdeformation assay . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 115 , 10375 – 10380 ( 2018 ) . 63 . E . Priel , T . Priel , I . Szaingurten - Solodkin , T . Wainstock , Y . Perets , A . Zeadna , A . Harlev , E . Lunenfeld , E . Levitas , I . Har - Vardi , Zona pellucida shear modulus , a possible novel non - invasive method to assist in embryo selection during in - vitro fertilization treatment . Sci . Rep . 10 , 14066 ( 2020 ) . 64 . J . L . Maître , H . Turlier , R . Illukkumbura , B . Eismann , R . Niwayama , F . Nédélec , T . Hiiragi , Asymmetricdivisionofcontractiledomainscouplescellpositioningandfatespecification . Nature 536 , 344 – 348 ( 2016 ) . 65 . J . L . Maître , R . Niwayama , H . Turlier , F . Nédélec , T . Hiiragi , Pulsatile cell - autonomous contractility drives compaction in the mouse embryo . Nat . Cell Biol . 17 , 849 – 855 ( 2015 ) . 66 . Y . Kim , E . Genevriere , P . Harker , J . Choe , M . Balicki , R . W . Regenhardt , J . E . Vranic , A . A . Dmytriw , A . B . Patel , X . Zhao , Telerobotic neurovascular interventions with magnetic manipulation . Sci . Robot . 7 , eabg9907 ( 2022 ) . 67 . G . Amadei , C . E . Handford , C . Qiu , J . De Jonghe , H . Greenfeld , M . Tran , B . K . Martin , D . Y . Chen , A . Aguilera - Castrejon , J . H . Hanna , M . B . Elowitz , F . Hollfelder , J . Shendure , D . M . Glover , M . Zernicka - Goetz , Embryomodelcompletesgastrulationtoneurulationand organogenesis . Nature 610 , 143 – 153 ( 2022 ) . 68 . A . Aguilera - Castrejon , B . Oldak , T . Shani , N . Ghanem , C . Itzkovich , S . Slomovich , S . Tarazi , J . Bayerl , V . Chugaeva , M . Ayyash , S . Ashouokhi , D . Sheban , N . Livnat , L . Lasman , S . Viukov , M . Zerbib , Y . Addadi , Y . Rais , S . Cheng , Y . Stelzer , H . Keren - Shaul , R . Shlomo , R . Massarwa , N . Novershtern , I . Maza , J . H . Hanna , Exuteromouseembryogenesisfrompre - gastrulation to late organogenesis . Nature 593 , 119 – 124 ( 2021 ) . 69 . O . D . Oniku , B . Qi , D . P . Arnold , Electroplated thick - film cobalt platinum permanent magnets . J . Magnetism Magnetic Mater . 416 , 417 – 428 ( 2016 ) . 70 . S . Moise , E . Céspedes , D . Soukup , J . M . Byrne , A . J . ElHaj , N . D . Telling , Thecellularmagnetic response and biocompatibility of biogenic zinc - and cobalt - doped magnetite nanoparticles . Sci . Rep . 7 , 39922 ( 2017 ) . 71 . J . F . FowlerJr . , J . H . Perryman , B . Quinlan , Positivepatch - testreactionstoplatinumarerare . Dermatitis 19 , 146 – 147 ( 2008 ) . 72 . D . Turner , P . Crozier , P . Reu , Digital Image Correlation Engine . Computer software , version 00 . 6 October 2015 ; https : / / osti . gov / / servlets / purl / 1245432 . 73 . J . R . Tse , A . J . Engler , Preparation of hydrogel substrates with tunable mechanical prop - erties . Curr . Protoc . Cell Biol . 47 , 10 . 16 . 1 – 10 . 16 . 16 ( 2010 ) . 74 . E . Bar - Kochba , J . Toyjanova , E . Andrews , K . - S . Kim , C . A . Franck , A fast iterative digital volume correlation algorithm for large deformations . Exp . Mech . 55 , 261 – 274 ( 2015 ) . Acknowledgments : We thank G . A . Mensing and J . Maduzia at the Micro - Nano - Mechanical SystemsCleanroomLaboratoryofDepartmentofMechanicalScienceandEngineering atUIUC for technical assistance . Funding : This study was funded by the National Institutes of Health grants R01 GM072744 ( to N . W . ) , F31 DK126427 ( to F . M . Y . ) , and R01 DK120921 ( to K . S . A . ) ; National Science Foundation ( NSF 2033723 ) ( to K . S . A . ) ; National Natural Science Foundation of China ( 11902121 and 32071306 ) ( to J . C . ) ; Program for Huazhong University of Science and Technology Academic Frontier Youth Team ( 2018QYTD01 ) ( to J . C . ) ; and the Leonard C . and Mary Lou Hoeft Endowed Professorship in Engineering at UIUC ( to N . W . ) . Author contributions : Conceptualization : N . W . Methodology : N . W . , E . M . , J . L . , F . M . Y . , F . W . , P . B . , and K . A . Investigation : E . M . , J . L . , F . M . Y . , F . W . , P . B . , K . A . , F . R . , Y . W . , X . L . , and C . J . Funding acquisition : N . W . , F . M . Y . , K . S . A . , and J . C . Project administration : N . W . Supervision : N . W . Writing — original draft : N . W . , E . M . , J . L . , F . M . Y . , and F . W . Writing — review and editing : N . W . , Z . L . , J . C . , D . P . A . , and K . S . A . Competing interests : The authors declare that they have no competing interests . Data and materialsavailability : Alldataneededtoevaluatethefindingsarepresentinthepaperand / or the Supplementary Materials . The codes for traction force calculations can be retrieved from https : / / github . com / pvbhala / 3D - traction force - MATLAB - code . Submitted 12 May 2022 Resubmitted 28 May 2022 Accepted 22 December 2022 Published 25 January 2023 10 . 1126 / scirobotics . adc9800 Mohagheghian et al . , Sci . Robot . 8 , eadc9800 ( 2023 ) 25 January 2023 12 of 12 S C I E N C E RO B OT I C S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E