© 2007 Nature Publishing Group nature nanotechnology | VOL 2 | DECEMBER 2007 | www . nature . com / naturenanotechnology 751 REVIEW ARTICLE Nanocarriers as an emerging platform for cancer therapy Nanotechnology has the potential to revolutionize cancer diagnosis and therapy . Advances in protein engineering and materials science have contributed to novel nanoscale targeting approaches that may bring new hope to cancer patients . Several therapeutic nanocarriers have been approved for clinical use . However , to date , there are only a few clinically approved nanocarriers that incorporate molecules to selectively bind and target cancer cells . This review examines some of the approved formulations and discusses the challenges in translating basic research to the clinic . We detail the arsenal of nanocarriers and molecules available for selective tumour targeting , and emphasize the challenges in cancer treatment . Dan Peer 1† , Jeffrey M . KarP 2 , 3† , SeungPyo Hong 4† , oMiD C . faroKHzaD 5 , riMona Margalit 6 anD robert langer 3 , 4 * 1 Immune Disease Institute and Department of Anesthesia , Harvard Medical School , Boston , Massachusetts 02115 , USA ; 2 HST Center for Biomedical Engineering , Department of Medicine , Brigham and Women’s Hospital , Harvard Medical School , Cambridge , Massachusetts 02139 , USA ; 3 Harvard - MIT Division of Health Sciences and Technology , Massachusetts Institute of Technology , Cambridge , Massachusetts 02139 , USA ; 4 Department of Chemical Engineering , Massachusetts Institute of Technology , Cambridge , Massachusetts 02139 , USA ; 5 Laboratory of Nanomedicine and Biomaterials and Department of Anesthesiology , Brigham and Women’s Hospital , Harvard Medical School , Boston , Massachusetts 02115 , USA ; 6 Department of Biochemistry , George S . Wise Faculty of Life Sciences , and the Center for Nanoscience and Nanotechnology , Tel Aviv University , Tel Aviv , 69978 , Israel † These authors contributed equally to this review * e - mail : rlanger @ mit . edu Cancer remains one of the world’s most devastating diseases , with more than 10 million new cases every year 1 . However , mortality has decreased in the past two years 2 owing to better understanding of tumour biology and improved diagnostic devices and treatments . Current cancer treatments include surgical intervention , radiation and chemotherapeutic drugs , which often also kill healthy cells and cause toxicity to the patient . It would therefore be desirable to develop chemotherapeutics that can either passively or actively target cancerous cells . Passive targeting exploits the characteristic features of tumour biology that allow nanocarriers to accumulate in the tumour by the enhanced permeability and retention ( EPR ) effect 2 . Passively targeting nanocarriers first reached clinical trials in the mid - 1980s , and the first products , based on liposomes and polymer – protein conjugates , were marketed in the mid - 1990s . Later , therapeutic nanocarriers based on this strategy were approved for wider use ( Table 1 ) and methods of further enhancing targeting of drugs to cancer cells were investigated . Active approaches achieve this by conjugating nanocarriers containing chemotherapeutics with molecules that bind to overexpressed antigens or receptors on the target cells . Recent reviews provide perspective on the use of nanotechnology as a fundamental tool in cancer research and nanomedicine 3 , 4 . Here we focus on the potential of nanocarriers and molecules that can selectively target tumours , and highlight the challenges in translating some of the basic research to the clinic . PaSSive anD aCtive targeting Nanocarriers encounter numerous barriers en route to their target , such as mucosal barriers and non - specific uptake 5 , 6 . To address the challenges of targeting tumours with nanotechnology , it is necessary to combine the rational design of nanocarriers with the fundamental understanding of tumour biology ( Box 1 ) . General features of tumours include leaky blood vessels and poor lymphatic drainage . Whereas free drugs may diffuse non - specifically , a nanocarrier can extravasate ( escape ) into the tumour tissues via the leaky vessels by the EPR effect 7 ( Fig . 1 ) . The increased permeability of the blood vessels in tumours is characteristic of rapid and defective angiogenesis ( formation of new blood vessels from existing ones ) . Furthermore , the dysfunctional lymphatic drainage in tumours retains the accumulated nanocarriers and allows them to release drugs into the vicinity of the tumour cells . Experiments using liposomes of different mean size suggest that the threshold vesicle size for extravasation into tumours is ∼ 400 nm ( ref . 8 ) , but other studies have shown that particles with diameters < 200 nm are more effective 5 , 8 – 10 . Although passive targeting approaches form the basis of clinical therapy , they suffer from several limitations . Ubiquitously targeting cells within a tumour is not always feasible because some drugs cannot diffuse efficiently and the random nature of the approach makes it difficult to control the process . This lack of control may induce multiple - drug resistance ( MDR ) — a situation where chemotherapy treatments fail patients owing to resistance of cancer cells towards one or more drugs . MDR occurs because transporter proteins that expel drugs from cells are overexpressed on the surface of cancer cells 4 , 11 , 12 . Expelling drugs inevitably lowers the therapeutic effect and cancer cells soon develop resistance to a variety of drugs . The passive strategy is further limited because certain tumours do not exhibit © 2007 Nature Publishing Group REVIEW ARTICLE 752 nature nanotechnology | VOL 2 | DECEMBER 2007 | www . nature . com / naturenanotechnology the EPR effect , and the permeability of vessels may not be the same throughout a single tumour 13 . One way to overcome these limitations is to programme the nanocarriers so they actively bind to specific cells after extravasation . This binding may be achieved by attaching targeting agents such as ligands — molecules that bind to specific receptors on the cell surface — to the surface of the nanocarrier by a variety of conjugation chemistries 9 . Nanocarriers will recognize and bind to target cells through ligand – receptor interactions , and bound carriers are internalized before the drug is released inside the cell ( Fig 1 ) . In general , when using a targeting agent to deliver nanocarriers to cancer cells , it is imperative that the agent binds with high selectivity to molecules that are uniquely expressed on the cell surface . Other important considerations are outlined below . To maximize specificity , a surface marker ( antigen or receptor ) should be overexpressed on target cells relative to normal cells . For example , to efficiently deliver liposomes to B - cell receptors using the anti - CD19 monoclonal antibody ( mAb ) , the density of receptors should be in the range of 10 4 – 10 5 copies per cell . Those with lower density are less effectively targeted 14 . In a breast cancer model , a receptor density of 10 5 copies of ErbB2 receptors per cell was necessary to improve the therapeutic efficacy of an anti - ErbB2 - targeted liposomal doxorubicin relative to its non - targeted counterpart 15 . The binding of certain ligands to their receptors may cause receptor - mediated internalization , which is often necessary if nanocarriers are to release drugs inside the cell 16 – 18 . For example , a more significant therapeutic outcome was achieved when immunoliposomes targeted to human blood cancer ( B - cell lymphoma ) were labelled with an internalizing anti - CD19 ligand rather than a non - internalizing anti - CD20 ligand 19 . In contrast , targeting nanocarriers to non - internalizing receptors may sometimes be advantageous in solid tumours owing to the bystander effect , where cells lacking the target receptor can be killed through drug release at the surface of the neighbouring cells , where carriers can bind 20 . It is generally known that higher binding affinity increases targeting efficacy . However , for solid tumours , there is evidence that high binding affinity can decrease penetration of nanocarriers due to a ‘binding - site barrier’ , where the nanocarrier binds to its target so strongly that penetration into the tissue is prevented 16 , 21 . In addition to enhanced affinity , multivalent binding effects ( or avidity ) may also be used to improve targeting . The collective binding in a multivalent interaction is much stronger than monovalent binding . For example , dendrimer nanocarriers conjugated to 3 – 15 folate molecules showed a 2 , 500 – 170 , 000 - fold enhancement in dissociation constants ( K D ) over free folate when attaching to folate - binding proteins immobilized on a surface . This was attributed to the avidity of the multiple folic acid groups on the periphery of the dendrimers 22 . Table 1 Representative examples of nanocarrier - based drugs on the market Compound Commercial name nanocarrier indications Styrene maleic anhydride - neocarzinostatin ( SManCS ) zinostatin / Stimalmer Polymer – protein conjugate Hepatocellular carcinoma Peg - l - asparaginase oncaspar Polymer – protein conjugate acute lymphoblastic leukemia Peg - granulocyte colony - stimulating factor ( g - CSf ) neulasta / Pegfilgrastim Polymer – protein conjugate Prevention of chemotherapy - associated neutropenia il2 fused to diphtheria toxin ontak ( Denilelukin diftitox ) immunotoxin ( fusion protein ) Cutaneous t - cell lymphoma anti - CD33 antibody conjugated to calicheamicin Mylotarg Chemo - immunoconjugate acute myelogenous leukemia anti - CD20 conjugated to yttrium - 90 or indium - 111 zevalin radio - immunoconjugate relapsed or refractory , low - grade , follicular , or transformed non - Hodgkin’s lymphoma anti - CD20 conjugated to iodine - 131 bexxar radio - immunoconjugate relapsed or refractory , low - grade , follicular , or transformed non - Hodgkin’s lymphoma Daunorubicin DaunoXome liposomes Kaposi’s sarcoma Doxorubicin Myocet liposomes Combinational therapy of recurrent breast cancer , ovarian cancer , Kaposi’s sarcoma Doxorubicin Doxil / Caelyx Peg - liposomes refractory Kaposi’s sarcoma , recurrent breast cancer , ovarian cancer vincristine onco tCS liposomes relapsed aggressive non - Hodgkin’s lymphoma ( nHl ) Paclitaxel abraxane albumin - bound paclitaxel nanoparticles Metastatic breast cancer Nanocarriers can offer many advantages over free drugs . They : • protect the drug from premature degradation ; • prevent drugs from prematurely interacting with the biological environment ; • enhance absorption of the drugs into a selected tissue ( for example , solid tumour ) ; • control the pharmacokinetic and drug tissue distribution profile ; • improve intracellular penetration . For rapid and effective clinical translation , the nanocarrier should : • be made from a material that is biocompatible , well characterized , and easily functionalized ; • exhibit high differential uptake efficiency in the target cells over normal cells ( or tissue ) ; • be either soluble or colloidal under aqueous conditions for increased effectiveness ; • have an extended circulating half - life , a low rate of aggregation , and a long shelf life . Box 1 Rational design of nanocarriers for cancer therapy © 2007 Nature Publishing Group REVIEW ARTICLE nature nanotechnology | VOL 2 | DECEMBER 2007 | www . nature . com / naturenanotechnology 753 tyPeS of targeting agentS Targeting agents can be broadly classified as proteins ( mainly antibodies and their fragments ) , nucleic acids ( aptamers ) , or other receptor ligands ( peptides , vitamins , and carbohydrates ) . Targeting cancer with a mAb was described by Milstein in 1981 23 . Over the past two decades , the feasibility of antibody - based tissue targeting has been clinically demonstrated ( reviewed in refs 24 , 25 ) with 17 different mAbs approved by the US Food and Drug Administration ( FDA ) 26 . The mAb rituximab ( Rituxan ) was approved in 1997 for treatment of patients with non - Hodgkin’s lymphoma — a type of cancer that originates in lymphocytes 27 . A year later , Trastuzumab ( Herceptin ) , an anti - HER2 mAb that binds to ErbB2 receptors , was approved for the treatment of breast cancer 28 . The first angiogenesis inhibitor for treating colorectal cancer , Bevacizumab ( Avastin ) , an anti - VEGF mAb that inhibits the factor responsible for the growth of new blood vessels , was approved in 2004 29 . Today , over 200 delivery systems based on antibodies or their fragments are in preclinical and clinical trials 16 , 30 . Recent developments in the field of antibody engineering have resulted in the production of antibodies that contain animal and human origins such chimeric mAbs , humanized mAbs ( those with a greater human contribution ) , and antibody fragments . Antibodies may be used in their native state or as fragments for targeting ( Fig . 2a ) . However , use of whole mAbs is advantageous because the presence of two binding sites ( within a single antibody ) gives rise to a higher binding avidity . Furthermore , when immune cells bind to the Fc portion of the antibody , a signalling cascade is initiated to kill the cancer cells . However , the Fc domain of an intact mAb can also bind to the Fc receptors on normal cells , as occurs with macrophages . This may lead to increased immunogenicity — the ability to evoke an immune response — and liver and spleen uptake of the nanocarrier . An additional advantage of whole / intact antibodies is their ability to maintain stability during long - term storage . Although antibody fragments including antigen - binding fragments ( Fab ) , dimers of antigen - binding fragments ( F ( ab ′ ) 2 ) , single - chain fragment variables ( scFv ) and other engineered fragments are less stable than whole antibodies , they are considered safer when injected systemically owing to reduced non - specific binding 16 , 30 . To rapidly select antibodies or their fragments that bind to and internalize within cancer cells , phage display libraries that involve a high throughput approach may be used 31 , 32 . This method generates a multitude of potentially useful antibodies that bind to the same target cells but to different epitopes ( a part of a macromolecule that is recognized by antibodies ; one receptor may have several epitopes that will be recognized by multiple antibodies ) . For example , through a selective Active cellular targeting Ligand Drug Receptor Nucleus i ii iii Blood vessel Endothelial cell Passive tissue targeting Nanoparticle EPR effect Angiogenic vessels Ineffective lymphatic drainage Tumour Lymphatic vessel En l a r g e m e n t o f t u m o u r c e ll x Figure 1 Schematic representation of different mechanisms by which nanocarriers can deliver drugs to tumours . Polymeric nanoparticles are shown as representative nanocarriers ( circles ) . Passive tissue targeting is achieved by extravasation of nanoparticles through increased permeability of the tumour vasculature and ineffective lymphatic drainage ( ePr effect ) . active cellular targeting ( inset ) can be achieved by functionalizing the surface of nanoparticles with ligands that promote cell - specific recognition and binding . the nanoparticles can ( i ) release their contents in close proximity to the target cells ; ( ii ) attach to the membrane of the cell and act as an extracellular sustained - release drug depot ; or ( iii ) internalize into the cell . © 2007 Nature Publishing Group REVIEW ARTICLE 754 nature nanotechnology | VOL 2 | DECEMBER 2007 | www . nature . com / naturenanotechnology process , scFv antibodies have been identified for superior binding and internalization properties for prostate cancer cells 33 . It is possible to increase the efficacy of antibodies by conjugating a therapeutic agent directly to it for targeted delivery . For example , in 2000 , the chemotherapeutic drug , calicheamicin , which is conjugated with the anti - CD33 antibody ( marketed under the trade name Mylotarg ) , was the first clinically approved formulation that targets cancerous cells . Others include Zevalin and Bexxar , which use anti - CD20 antibodies to target radioisotopes to cancer cells ( Table 1 ) . Although the efficacy of these therapies has been proven , lethal side effects have been observed , likely due to non - specific binding 34 between the targeting agent and non - target moieties on the cell surface . Another reason could be the interaction of the targeting agent with its target expressed on non - cancerous cells . For example , BR96 - doxorubicin — an immunoconjugate linked with doxorubicin and comprising an antibody that targets and binds to the Lewis - Y antigen ( expressed on 75 % of all breast cancers ) — demonstrated significant anti - tumour activity in mouse tumour models . BR96 - doxorubicin showed lower toxicity than that resulting from doxorubicin alone and it was efficacious in these animal models 35 . However , in dogs , an acute enteropathy ( pathology of the intestine ) was observed presumably due to binding of the conjugate to Lewis - Y - related antigens expressed by non - targeted gastrointestinal epithelial cells . In Phase II human clinical studies , BR96 - doxorubicin immunoconjugates had limited anti - tumour activity and caused severe gastrointestinal toxicity , leading to termination of the study 36 . Although using genomics and proteomics technology to choose appropriate targets is an active area of research , to date no clinically effective targets have been identified . Creating new technologies to enhance selectivity and targeting efficacy with existing targets seem more promising . For example , fusion proteins can be created by combining two or more genes to produce a new protein with desired properties . Antibodies can be engineered so they bind to their target with high affinity , and using molecular biology techniques , it is possible to design protein - based ligand mimetics based on the structure of a receptor . Dimerization of proteins or peptides can increase ligand affinity through divalency — two simultaneous binding events , usually involving concurrent binding of a protein or a peptide to the two Fc domains of an antibody ( Fig 2b ) . For example , dimerization of a low - affinity scFv ( also known as diabody ) against the ErbB2 , led to enhanced tumour localization in a mouse tumour model 37 . It is also possible to increase binding affinity and selectivity to cell surface targets by engineering proteins that detect a specific conformation of a target receptor . In a recent in vivo study using a fusion protein consisting of an scFv antibody fragment to target and deliver small interfering RNA ( siRNA ) to lymphocytes — a type of white blood cell — a 10 , 000 - fold increased affinity for the target receptor , integrin LFA - 1 , was observed 18 . Integrin LFA - 1 is usually present in a low - affinity non - adhesive form on naïve leukocytes ( white blood cells that are not activated by cancer cells or pathogens that enter the body ) , but converts to the high - affinity adhesive form through conformational changes on activation of the immune system . Therefore , targeting the high - affinity form of LFA - 1 enables drugs to be selectively delivered to the activated and adhesive leukocytes . New classes of targeting molecules can be engineered to target specific conformations . These include small protein domains , known as affibodies , that can be engineered to bind specifically to different target proteins in a conformational - sensitive manner . Other small proteins that act like antibodies — called avimers — are used to bind selectively to target receptors through multivalent effects . Nanobodies , which are heavy - chain antibodies engineered to one tenth of the size of an intact antibody with a missing light chain , have been used to Antibody F ( ab ' ) 2 Fab ' ScFv Diabody Non - antibody ligand Aptamer Ligand Ligand dimerization Binding surface Alpha helix bundle Binding domain 1 Binding domain 2 Binding domain 3 Affibody Avimer Fc - s - s - - s - s - - s - s - - s - s - - s - s - - s - s - C H C L V L V H F C Figure 2 Common targeting agents and ways to improve their affinity and selectivity . a , the panel shows a variety of targeting molecules such as a monoclonal antibody or antibodies’ fragments , non - antibody ligands , and aptamers . the antibody fragments f ( ab′ ) 2 and fab′ are generated by enzymatic cleavage whereas the fab′ , scfv , and bivalent scfv ( diabody ) fragments are created by molecular biology techniques . v H : variable heavy chain ; v l : variable light chain ; C H : constant heavy chain ; C l : constant light chain . non - antibody ligands include vitamins , carbohydrates , peptides , and other proteins . aptamers can be composed of either Dna or rna . b , affinity and selectivity can be increased through ligand dimerization or by screening for conformational - sensitive targeting agents such as affibodies , avimers and nanobodies , as well as intact antibodies and their fragments . © 2007 Nature Publishing Group REVIEW ARTICLE nature nanotechnology | VOL 2 | DECEMBER 2007 | www . nature . com / naturenanotechnology 755 bind to carcinoembryonic antigen ( CEA ) , a protein used as a tumour marker 38 – 40 ( Fig . 2b ) . In addition to the rational design of antibodies , high - throughput approaches have been used to generate targeting agents such as aptamers , which are short single - stranded DNA or RNA oligonucleotides selected in vitro from a large number of random sequences ( ∼ 10 14 – 10 15 ) . Aptamers are selected to bind to a wide variety of targets , including intracellular proteins , transmembrane proteins , soluble proteins , carbohydrates , and small molecule drugs . Several aptamers have also been developed to bind specifically to receptors on cancer cells , and thus may be suitable for nanoparticle - aptamer conjugate therapy 41 . For example , docetaxel ( Dtxl ) - encapsulated nanoparticles whose surface is modified with an aptamer that targets the antigen on the surface of prostate cancer cells , were delivered with high selectivity and efficacy in vivo 42 . Growth factor or vitamin interactions with cancer cells represent a commonly used targeting strategy , as cancer cells often overexpress the receptors for nutrition to maintain their fast - growing metabolism . Epidermal growth factor ( EGF ) has been shown to block and reduce tumour expression of the EGF receptor , which is overexpressed in a variety of tumour cells such as breast and tongue cancer 43 . Additionally , based on the same idea , the vitamin folic acid ( folate ) has also been used for cancer targeting because folate receptors ( FRs ) are frequently overexpressed in a range of tumour cells including ovarian , endometrial and kidney cancer 44 . Transferrin ( Tf ) interacts with Tf receptors ( TfRs ) , which are overexpressed on a variety of tumour cells ( including pancreatic , colon , lung , and bladder cancer ) owing to increased metabolic rates 45 . Direct coupling of these targeting agents to nanocarriers containing chemotherapies such as drugs has improved intracellular delivery and therapeutic outcome in animal tumour models 46 – 48 . One challenge with targeting receptors whose expression correlates with metabolic rate , such as folate and Tf , is that these receptors are also expressed in fast - growing healthy cells such as fibroblasts , epithelial and endothelial cells . This could lead to non - specific targeting and subsequently decrease the effectiveness of the drug and increase toxicity 49 . The use of peptides as targeting agents — including arginine – glycine – aspartic acid ( RGD ) , which is the ligand of the cell adhesion integrin α v β 3 on endothelial cells — results in increased intracellular drug delivery in different murine tumour models 50 , 51 . However , RGD also binds to other integrins such as α 5 β 1 and α 4 β 1 and therefore is not specific to cancer cells , which may limit its use . In addition to cell surface antigens , extracellular matrices ( ECMs ) overexpressed in tumours , such as heparin sulphate , chondroitin sulphate , and hyaluronan ( HA ) , may also serve as effective targets for specific ECM receptors 52 , 53 . Coating liposomes with HA improves circulation time and enhances targeting to HA receptor - expressing tumours in vivo 54 , 55 . tHe arSenal of nanoCarrierS Nanocarriers are nanosized materials ( diameter 1 – 100 nm ) that can carry multiple drugs and / or imaging agents . Owing to their high surface - area - to - volume ratio , it is possible to achieve high ligand density on the surface for targeting purposes . Nanocarriers can also be used to increase local drug concentration by carrying the drug within and control - releasing it when bound to the targets . Currently , natural and synthetic polymers and lipids are typically used as drug delivery vectors ; clinically approved formulations are listed in Table 1 . The family of nanocarriers includes polymer Table 2 Examples of nano - based platforms and their current stage of development for use in cancer therapy type of carrier and mean diameter ( nm ) Drug entrapped or linked Current stage of development type of cancer ( for clinical trials ) references Polymer – drug conjugates ( 6 – 15 ) Doxorubicin , Paclitaxel , Camptothecin , Platinate , tnP - 470 12 products under clinical trials ( Phases i – iii ) and in vivo various tumours reviewed in 3 , 61 liposomes ( both Peg and non - Peg coated ) ( 85 – 100 ) lurtotecan , platinum compounds , annamycin Several products in clinical trials ( Phases i – iii ) and in vivo Solid tumours , renal cell carcinoma , mesothelioma , ovarian and acute lymphoblastic leukaemia reviewed in 9 Polymeric nanoparticles ( 50 – 200 ) Doxorubicin , Paclitaxel , platinum - based drugs , Docetaxel Several products are in clinical trials ( Phases i – iii ) and in vivo adenocarcinoma of the oesophagus , metastatic breast cancer and acute lymphoblastic leukemia 5 , 91 , 100 , 101 Polymersomes ( ~ 100 ) Doxorubicin , Paclitaxel In vivo 73 , 74 Micelles ( lipid based and polymeric ) ( 5 – 100 ) Doxorubicin Clinical trials ( Phase i ) Metastatic or recurrent solid tumours refractory to conventional chemotherapy 77 , 92 , 102 Paclitaxel Clinical trials ( Phase i ) Pancreatic , bile duct , gastric and colonic cancers Platinum - based drugs ( carboplatin / cisplatin ) , Camptothecin , tamoxifen , epirubicin In vivo and in vitro reviewed in 75 nanoshells ( gold - silica ) ( ~ 130 ) no drug ( for photothermal therapy ) In vivo 37 , 103 gold nanoparticles ( 10 – 40 ) no drug ( for photothermal ablation ) In vivo 104 nanocages ( 30 – 40 ) no drug Chemistry , structural analysis and in vitro 90 , 105 Dendrimers ( ~ 5 ) Methotrexate In vitro / in vivo 46 , 86 immuno - Peg - liposomes ( 100 ) Doxorubicin Clinical trials ( Phase i ) Metastatic stomach cancer 76 immunoliposomes ( 100 – 150 ) Doxorubicin , platinum - based drugs , vinblastin , vincristin , topotecan , Paclitaxel In vivo reviewed in 9 , 106 immunotoxins , immunopolymers , and fusion proteins ( 3 – 15 ) various drugs , toxins Clinical trials ( Phases i – iii ) various types of cancer reviewed in 16 , 17 , 61 © 2007 Nature Publishing Group REVIEW ARTICLE 756 nature nanotechnology | VOL 2 | DECEMBER 2007 | www . nature . com / naturenanotechnology conjugates , polymeric nanoparticles , lipid - based carriers such as liposomes and micelles , dendrimers , carbon nanotubes , and gold nanoparticles , including nanoshells and nanocages ( Fig . 3a ) . These nanocarriers have been explored for a variety of applications such as drug delivery , imaging , photothermal ablation of tumours , radiation sensitizers , detection of apoptosis , and sentinel lymph - node mapping 3 , 4 , 56 ( Table 2 ) . To date , at least 12 polymer – drug conjugates have entered Phase I and II clinical trials ( Table 2 and Fig . 3a ) and are especially useful for targeting blood vessels in tumours . Examples include anti - endothelial immunoconjugates , fusion proteins 57 – 59 , and caplostatin , the first polymer - angiogenesis inhibitor conjugates 60 . Polymers that are chemically conjugated with drugs are often considered new chemical entities ( NCEs ) owing to a distinct pharmacokinetic profile from Figure 3 examples of nanocarriers for targeting cancer . a , a whole range of delivery agents are possible but the main components typically include a nanocarrier , a targeting moiety conjugated to the nanocarrier , and a cargo ( such as the desired chemotherapeutic drugs ) . b , Schematic diagram of the drug conjugation and entrapment processes . the chemotherapeutics could be bound to the nanocarrier , as in the use of polymer – drug conjugates , dendrimers and some particulate carriers , or they could be entrapped inside the nanocarrier . Immuno - toxin / drug fusion protein Carbon nanotube Micelles Polymer - conjugate drug / protein Nanobased carriers for cancer detection and therapy Dendrimers Nanoshells Liposomes Polymeric carriers Drug conjugation Drug entrapment Ligand - bound nanocarrier Liposome Biodegradable polymer Chemotherapeutic Surface functionality Targeting molecule ( aptamers , antibodies and their fragments ) Spacer group / long circulating agent Inorganic particle Metallic shell Amphipathic molecule Dendrimer Carbon nanotube © 2007 Nature Publishing Group REVIEW ARTICLE nature nanotechnology | VOL 2 | DECEMBER 2007 | www . nature . com / naturenanotechnology 757 that of the parent drug . Despite the variety of novel drug targets and sophisticated chemistries available , only four drugs ( doxorubicin , camptothecin , paclitaxel , and platinate ) and four polymers ( N - ( 2 - hydroxylpropyl ) methacrylamide ( HPMA ) copolymer , poly - L - glutamic acid , poly ( ethylene glycol ) ( PEG ) , and Dextran ) have been repeatedly used to develop polymer – drug conjugates 3 , 61 . Polymers are the most commonly explored materials for constructing nanoparticle - based drug carriers . One of the earliest reports of their use for cancer therapy dates back to 1979 62 when adsorption of anticancer drugs to polyalkylcyanoacrylate nanoparticles was described . Couvreur et al . revealed the release mechanism of the drugs from the polymer in calf serum , followed by tissue distribution and efficacy studies in a tumour model 63 . This work laid the foundation for the development of doxorubicin - loaded nanoparticles that were tested in clinical trials in the mid - 1980s 64 . Polymeric nanoparticles can be made from synthetic polymers , including poly ( lactic acid ) ( PLA ) and poly ( lactic co - glycolic acid ) 65 , or from natural polymers such as chitosan 66 and collagen 67 and may be used to encapsulate drugs without chemical modification . The drugs can be released in a controlled manner through surface or bulk erosion , diffusion through the polymer matrix , swelling followed by diffusion , or in response to the local environment . Several multifunctional polymeric nanoparticles are now in various stages of pre - clinical and clinical development 4 , 56 , 68 , 69 . Concerns arising from the use of polymer - based nanocarriers include the inherent structural heterogeneity of polymers , reflected , for example , in a high polydispersity index ( the ratio of the weight - and - number - average molecular weight ( M w / M n ) ) . There are , however , a few examples of polymeric nanoparticles that show near - homogenous size distribution 70 . Lipid - based carriers have attractive biological properties , including general biocompatibility , biodegradability , isolation of drugs from the surrounding environment , and the ability to entrap both hydrophilic and hydrophobic drugs . Through the addition of agents to the lipid membrane or by the alteration of the surface chemistry , properties of lipid - based carriers , such as their size , charge , and surface functionality , can easily be modified . Liposomes , polymersomes , and micelles represent a class of amphiphile - based particles . Liposomes are spherical , self - closed structures formed by one or several concentric lipid bilayers with inner aqueous phases . Today , liposomes are approved by regulatory agencies to carry a range of chemotherapeutics 26 , 71 , 72 ( Table 1 ) . Polymersomes have an architecture similar to that of liposomes , but they are composed of synthetic polymer amphiphiles , including PLA - based copolymers 73 , 74 ( Table 2 ) . However , as with polymer therapeutics , there are still no clinically approved strategies that use active cellular targeting for lipid - based carriers . Micelles , which are self - assembling closed lipid monolayers with a hydrophobic core and hydrophilic shell , have been successfully used as pharmaceutical carriers for water - insoluble drugs ( Table 2 ) 75 . They belong to a group of amphiphilic colloids that can be formed spontaneously under certain concentrations and temperatures from amphiphilic or surface - active agents ( surfactants ) ( Fig . 3a ) . An example of a polymeric micelle under clinical evaluation is NK911 , which is a block copolymer of PEG and poly ( aspartic acid ) . NK911 , which consists of a bound doxorubicin fraction ( ~ 45 % ) ( Fig . 3b ) and a free drug 76 , was evaluated for metastatic pancreatic cancer treatment . Another carrier is NK105 , a micelle containing paclitaxel , was evaluated for pancreatic , colonic and gastric tumour treatment 77 . Lipid - based carriers pose several challenges , which represent general issues in the use of other targeted nanocarriers such as polymeric nanoparticles . For example , upon intravenous injection , particles are rapidly cleared from the bloodstream by the reticuloendothelial defence mechanism , regardless of particle composition 78 , 79 . Moreover , instability of the carrier and burst drug release , as well as non - specific uptake by the mononuclear phagocytic system ( MPS ) , provides additional challenges for translating these carriers to the clinic . Given their long history , liposome - based carriers serve as a classic example of the challenges encountered in the development of nanocarriers and the solutions that have been attempted . For example , PEG has been used to improve circulation time by stabilizing and protecting micelles and liposomes from opsonization — a plasma protein deposition process that signals Kupffer cells in the liver to remove the carriers from circulation 75 , 80 . However , Daunosome and Myocet are examples of clinically used liposomes ( 80 – 90 nm in diameter ) without PEG coating that have been reported to exhibit enhanced circulation times , although to a lesser degree than PEGylated liposomes such as Doxil / Caelyx ( Table 1 ) . In addition to rapid clearance , another challenge is the fast burst release of the chemotherapeutic drugs from the liposomes . To overcome this phenomenon , doxorubicin , for example , may be encapsulated in the liposomal aqueous phase by an ammonium sulphate gradient 81 . This method achieves a stable drug entrapment with negligible drug leakage during circulation , even after prolonged residence in the blood stream 82 . In clinical practice , liposomal systems have shown preferential accumulation in tumours , via the EPR effect , and reduced toxicity of their cargo ( Tables 1 and 2 ) . However , long - circulating liposomes may lead to extravasation of the drug in unexpected sites . The most commonly experienced clinical toxic effect from the PEGylated liposomal doxorubicin is palmar - plantar erythrodysesthesia ( PPE ) , also called the hand - foot syndrome . PPE — a dermatologic toxicity reaction seen with high doses of many types of chemotherapy — can be addressed by changing the dosing and scheduling of the treatment 83 . Other challenges facing the use of liposomes in the clinic include the high production cost , fast oxidation of some phospholipids , and lack of controlled - release properties of encapsulated drugs . To achieve temporal release of two drugs , polymers and phospholipids can be combined as a single delivery agent ( polymer core / lipid shell ) . After locating at a tumour site through the EPR effect , the outer phospholipid shell releases an anti - angiogenesis agent , and the inner polymeric nanoparticle subsequently releases a chemotherapy agent in response to local hypoxia — shortage of oxygen . This strategy led to reduced toxicity and enhanced anti - metastatic effects in two different mouse tumour models , emphasizing the advantages of a mechanism - based design for targeted nanocarriers 84 . Organic nanoparticles include dendrimers , viral capsids and nanostructures made from biological building blocks such as proteins . Abraxane is an albumin - bound paclitaxel nanoparticle formulation approved by the FDA in 2005 as a second - line treatment for metastatic breast cancer . Abraxane was designed to address insolubility problems encountered with paclitaxel . Its use eliminates the need for toxic solvents like Cremophor EL ( polyoxyethylated castor oil ) , which has been shown to limit the dose of Taxol that can be administered 85 . Dendrimers are synthetic , branched macromolecules that form a tree - like structure whose synthesis represents a relatively new field in polymer chemistry . Polyamidoamine dendrimers have shown promise for biomedical applications because they ( 1 ) can be easily conjugated with targeting molecules , imaging agents , and drugs , ( 2 ) have high water solubility and well - defined chemical structures , ( 3 ) are biocompatible , and ( 4 ) are rapidly cleared from the blood through the kidneys , made possible by their small size ( < 5 nm ) , which eliminates the need for biodegradability . In vivo delivery of dendrimer – methotrexate conjugates using multivalent targeting results in a tenfold reduction in tumour size compared with that achieved with the same molar concentration of free systemic methotrexate 22 , 46 . This work provided motivation for further pre - clinical development , and a variety of dendrimers are now under investigation for cancer treatment and are extensively reviewed elsewhere 86 , 87 . Although © 2007 Nature Publishing Group REVIEW ARTICLE 758 nature nanotechnology | VOL 2 | DECEMBER 2007 | www . nature . com / naturenanotechnology promising , dendrimers are more expensive than other nanoparticles and require many repetitive steps for synthesis , posing a challenge for large - scale production . Inorganic nanoparticles are primarily metal based and have the potential to be produced with near monodispersity . Inorganic materials have been extensively studied for magnetic resonance imaging and high - resolution superconducting quantum interference devices 88 . Inorganic particles may also be functionalized to introduce targeting molecules and drugs . Specific types of recently developed inorganic nanoparticles include nanoshells and gold nanoparticles . Nanoshells ( 100 – 200 nm ) may use the same carrier for both imaging and therapy ( Table 2 ) . They are composed of a silica core and a metallic outer layer . Nanoshells have optical resonances that can be adjusted to absorb or scatter essentially anywhere in the electromagnetic spectrum , including the near infrared region ( NIR , 820 nm , 4 W cm – 2 ) , where transmission of light through tissue is optimal . Absorbing nanoshells are suitable for hyperthermia - based therapeutics , where the nanoshells absorb radiation and heat up the surrounding cancer tissue . Scattering nanoshells , on the other hand , are desirable as contrast agents for imaging applications . Recently , a cancer therapy was developed based on absorption of NIR light by nanoshells , resulting in rapid localized heating to selectively kill tumours implanted in mice . Tissues heated above the thermal damage threshold displayed coagulation , cell shrinkage and loss of nuclear staining , which are indicators of irreversible thermal damage , whereas control tissues appeared undamaged 37 , 89 . A similar approach involves gold nanocages which are smaller ( < 50 nm ) than the nanoshells . These gold nanocages ( Table 2 ) can be constructed to generate heat in response to NIR light and thus may also be useful in hyperthermia - based therapeutics 90 . Unlike nanoshells and nanocages , pure gold nanoparticles ( Table 2 ) are relatively easy to synthesize and manipulate . Non - specific interactions that cause toxicity in healthy tissues may impede the use of many types of nanoparticles , but using inorganic particles for photo - ablation significantly limits non - specific toxicity because light is locally directed . However , inorganic particles may not provide advantages over other types of nanoparticles for systemic targeting of individual cancer cells because they are not biodegradable or small enough to be cleared easily , resulting in potential accumulation in the body , which may cause long - term toxicity . tHe CHallengeS of MultiDrug reSiStanCe The delivery of drugs through targeted nanocarriers that are internalized by cells provides an alternative route to diffusion of drugs into cells . This approach may allow targeted carriers to bypass the activity of integral membrane proteins , known as MDR transporters , which transport a variety of anticancer drugs out of the cancer cell and produce resistance against chemotherapy 11 . The molecular basis of cancer drug resistance is complex and has been correlated to elevated levels of enzymes that can neutralize chemotherapeutic drugs . More often , however , it is due to the overexpression of MDR transporters that actively pump chemotherapeutic drugs out of the cell and reduce the intracellular drug doses below lethal threshold levels . Because not all cancer cells express the MDR transporters , chemotherapy will kill only drug - sensitive cells that do not or only mildly express MDR transporters , while leaving behind a small population of drug - resistant cells that highly express MDR transporters . With tumour recurrence , chemotherapy may fail because residual drug - resistant cells dominate the tumour population . Among the MDR transporters , the most widely investigated proteins are : P - glycoprotein ( also referred to as MDR1 or ABCB1 ) ; the multidrug resistance associated proteins ( MRPs ) , of which the most studied is the MRP1 ( or ABCC1 ) ; and the breast cancer resistance protein ( ABCG2 ) . These proteins have different structures , but they share a similar function of expelling chemotherapy drugs from the cells 12 . Several studies have demonstrated the possibility of using nanocarriers to bypass the MDR transporters . SP1049C is a non - ionic ( pluronic or also known as poloxamer ) block copolymer composed of a hydrophobic core and hydrophilic tail that contains doxorubicin . SP1049C has been shown to circumvent p - glycoprotein - mediated drug resistance in a mouse model of leukaemia and is now under clinical evaluation 91 , 92 . Folate receptor - mediated cell uptake of doxorubicin – loaded liposomes into an MDR cell line was shown to be unaffected by P - glycoprotein ( Pgp ) - mediated drug efflux , in contrast to the uptake of free doxorubicin 93 . In an attempt to reverse MDR , vincristine - loaded lipid nanoparticles conjugated to an anti - Pgp mAb ( MRK - 16 ) , showed greater cytotoxicity in resistant human myelogenous leukaemia cell lines than control non - targeted particles — a response attributed to the inhibition of the Pgp - mediated efflux of vincristine by MRK - 16 94 . Additional reports have addressed the challenge of MDR using polymer therapeutics 95 , polymeric nanoparticles 96 , lipid nanocapsules 97 and micelles 98 within cell lines or in mouse tumour models . Combination treatments with targeted nanocarriers for selective delivery of drugs and MDR pump inhibitors will likely address some of the problems posed by resistant tumours . into tHe future The choice of an appropriate nanocarrier is not obvious , and the few existing comparative studies are difficult to interpret because several factors may simultaneously affect biodistribution and targeting . In addition , developing suitable screening methodologies for determining optimal characteristics of nanocarriers remains elusive . Therefore , successful targeting strategies must be determined experimentally on a case - by - case basis , which is laborious . In addition , systemic therapies using nanocarriers require methods that can overcome non - specific uptake by mononuclear phagocytic cells and by non - targeted cells . It is also not clear to what extent this is possible without substantially increasing the complexity of the nanocarrier and without influencing commercial scale - up . Improved therapeutic efficacy of targeted nanocarriers has been established in multiple animal models of cancer , and currently more than 120 clinical trials are underway with various antibody - containing nanocarrier formulations 99 . For the clinician , in addition to enhancing confidence through the ability to image the type and location of the tumour , it is imperative to construct appropriate therapeutic regimens . When targeting cell surface markers presents a significant challenge , as in the case for solid tumours , targeting tumour vasculature or the extracellular matrix surrounding the tumour microenvironment may be necessary . In the case of circulating cancer cells , as in leukaemia and lymphoma , a therapy that targets surface antigens with high affinity and includes a carrier with a long circulating half - life may be the most efficacious . Similar to combination drug strategies that may be personalized to optimize treatment regimens , oncologists in the near future may be presented with the ability to choose specific nanocarrier / targeting molecule combinations which could lead to improved therapeutic outcomes and reduced costs . Although we are still far from Nobel Prize winner Paul Ehrlich’s ‘magic bullet’ , many believe that we will soon enter an era in which nanocarrier - based approaches will represent an important modality within therapeutic and diagnostic oncology . doi : 10 . 1038 / nnano . 2007 . 387 references 1 . Stewart , B . W . & Kleihues , P . World Cancer Report ( World Health Organization Press , Geneva , 2003 ) . 2 . Cancer Facts & Figures 2007 ( American Cancer Society , Atlanta , 2007 ) . 3 . Duncan , R . Polymer conjugates as anticancer nanomedicines . Nat . Rev . Cancer 6 , 688 – 701 ( 2006 ) . 4 . Ferrari , M . Cancer nanotechnology : opportunities and challenges . Nat . Rev . Cancer 5 , 161 – 171 ( 2005 ) . © 2007 Nature Publishing Group REVIEW ARTICLE nature nanotechnology | VOL 2 | DECEMBER 2007 | www . nature . com / naturenanotechnology 759 5 . Couvreur , P . & Vauthier , C . Nanotechnology : Intelligent design to treat complex disease . Pharm . Res . 23 , 1417 – 1450 ( 2006 ) . 6 . Alonso , M . J . Nanomedicines for overcoming biological barriers . Biomed . Pharmacother . 58 , 168 – 172 ( 2004 ) . 7 . Matsumura , Y . & Maeda , H . A new concept for macromolecular therapeutics in cancer - chemotherapy — Mechanism of tumoritropic accumulation of proteins and the antitumor agent smancs . Cancer Res . 46 , 6387 – 6392 ( 1986 ) . 8 . Yuan , F . et al . Vascular - permeability in a human tumor xenograft — Molecular - size dependence and cutoff size . Cancer Res . 55 , 3752 – 3756 ( 1995 ) . 9 . Torchilin , V . P . Recent advances with liposomes as pharmaceutical carriers . Nat . Rev . Drug Discov . 4 , 145 – 160 ( 2005 ) . 10 . Hobbs , S . K . et al . Regulation of transport pathways in tumor vessels : role of tumor type and microenvironment . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 95 , 4607 – 4612 ( 1998 ) . 11 . Gottesman , M . M . , Fojo , T . & Bates , S . E . Multidrug resistance in cancer : Role of ATP - dependent transporters . Nat . Rev . Cancer 2 , 48 – 58 ( 2002 ) . 12 . Peer , D . & Margalit , R . Fluoxetine and reversal of multidrug resistance . Cancer Lett . 237 , 180 – 187 ( 2006 ) . 13 . Jain , R . K . Barriers to drug - delivery in solid tumors . Sci . Am . 271 , 58 – 65 ( 1994 ) . 14 . de Menezes , D . E . L . , Pilarski , L . M . & Allen , T . M . In vitro and in vivo targeting of immunoliposomal doxorubicin to human B - cell lymphoma . Cancer Res . 58 , 3320 – 3330 ( 1998 ) . 15 . Park , J . W . et al . Anti - HER2 immunoliposomes : enhanced efficacy attributable to targeted delivery . Clin . Cancer Res . 8 , 1172 – 1181 ( 2002 ) . 16 . Allen , T . M . Ligand - targeted therapeutics in anticancer therapy . Nat . Rev . Cancer 2 , 750 – 763 ( 2002 ) . 17 . Pastan , I . , Hassan , R . , FitzGerald , D . J . & Kreitman , R . J . Immunotoxin therapy of cancer . Nat . Rev . Cancer 6 , 559 – 565 ( 2006 ) . 18 . Peer , D . , Zhu , P . , Carman , C . V . , Lieberman , J . & Shimaoka , M . Selective gene silencing in activated leukocytes by targeting siRNAs to the integrin lymphocyte function - associated antigen - 1 . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 104 , 4095 – 4100 ( 2007 ) . 19 . Sapra , P . & Allen , T . M . Internalizing antibodies are necessary for improved therapeutic efficacy of antibody - targeted liposomal drugs . Cancer Res . 62 , 7190 – 7194 ( 2002 ) . 20 . Allen , T . M . Long - circulating ( sterically stabilized ) liposomes for targeted drug - delivery . Trends Pharmacol . Sci . 15 , 215 – 220 ( 1994 ) . 21 . Adams , G . P . et al . High affinity restricts the localization and tumor penetration of single - chain Fv antibody molecules . Cancer Res . 61 , 4750 – 4755 ( 2001 ) . 22 . Hong , S . et al . The binding avidity of a nanoparticle - based multivalent targeted drug delivery platform . Chem . Biol . 14 , 107 – 115 ( 2007 ) . 23 . Warenius , H . M . , Galfre , G . , Bleehen , N . M . & Milstein , C . Attempted targeting of A monoclonal - antibody in a human - tumor xenograft system . Eur . J . Cancer Clin . Oncology 17 , 1009 – 1015 ( 1981 ) . 24 . von Mehren , A . G . , Weiner L . M . Monoclonal antibody therapy for cancer . Annu . Rev . Med . 54 , 343 – 369 ( 2003 ) . 25 . Weiner , L . M . & Adams , G . P . New approaches to antibody therapy . Oncogene 19 , 6144 – 6151 ( 2000 ) . 26 . Gabizon , A . A . Pegylated liposomal doxorubicin : metamorphosis of an old drug into a new form of chemotherapy . Cancer Invest . 19 , 424 – 436 ( 2001 ) . 27 . James , J . S . & Dubs , G . FDA approves new kind of lymphoma treatment . AIDS Treat . News 284 , 2 – 3 ( 1997 ) . 28 . Albanell , J . & Baselga , J . Trastuzumab , a humanized anti - HER2 monoclonal antibody , for the treatment of breast cancer . Drugs Today 35 , 931 – 946 ( 1999 ) . 29 . Ferrara , N . VEGF as a therapeutic target in cancer . Oncology 69 ( Suppl . 3 ) , 11 – 16 ( 2005 ) . 30 . Carter , P . Improving the efficacy of antibody - based cancer therapies . Nat . Rev . Cancer 1 , 118 – 129 ( 2001 ) . 31 . Marks , J . D . Selection of internalizing antibodies for drug delivery . Methods Mol . Biol . 248 , 201 – 208 ( 2004 ) . 32 . Marks , J . D . et al . Human - antibody fragments specific for human blood - groups antigens from a phage display library . Bio - Technol . 11 , 1145 – 1149 ( 1993 ) . 33 . Liu , B . , Conrad , F . , Cooperberg , M . R . , Kirpotin , D . B . & Marks , J . D . Mapping tumor epitope space by direct selection of single - chain Fv antibody libraries on prostate cancer cells . Cancer Res . 64 , 704 – 710 ( 2004 ) . 34 . Arnold , D . M . et al . Systematic review : efficacy and safety of rituximab for adults with idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura . Ann . Intern . Med . 146 , 25 – 33 ( 2007 ) . 35 . Trail , P . A . et al . Cure of xenografted human carcinomas by Br96 - doxorubicin immunoconjugates . Science 261 , 212 – 215 ( 1993 ) . 36 . Tolcher , A . W . et al . Randomized phase II study of BR96 - doxorubicin conjugate in patients with metastatic breast cancer . J . Clin . Oncology 17 , 478 – 484 ( 1999 ) . 37 . Hirsch , L . R . et al . Nanoshell - mediated near - infrared thermal therapy of tumors under magnetic resonance guidance . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 100 , 13549 – 13554 ( 2003 ) . 38 . Silverman , J . et al . Multivalent avimer proteins evolved by exon shuffling of a family of human receptor domains . Nat . Biotechnol . 23 , 1556 – 1561 ( 2005 ) . 39 . Cortez - Retamozo , V . et al . Efficient cancer therapy with a nanobody - based conjugate . Cancer Res . 64 , 2853 – 2857 ( 2004 ) . 40 . Nord , K . et al . Binding proteins selected from combinatorial libraries of an alpha - helical bacterial receptor domain . Nat . Biotechnol . 15 , 772 – 777 ( 1997 ) . 41 . White , R . R . , Sullenger , B . A . & Rusconi , C . P . Developing aptamers into therapeutics . J . Clin . Invest . 106 , 929 – 934 ( 2000 ) . 42 . Farokhzad , O . C . et al . Targeted nanoparticle - aptamer bioconjugates for cancer chemotherapy in vivo . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 103 , 6315 – 6320 ( 2006 ) . 43 . Sanfilippo , J . S . et al . Quantitative analyses of epidermal growth factor receptors , HER - 2 / neu oncoprotein and cathepsin D in nonmalignant and malignant uteri . Cancer 77 , 710 – 716 ( 1996 ) . 44 . Antony , A . C . The biological chemistry of folate receptors . Blood 79 , 2807 – 2820 ( 1992 ) . 45 . Prost , A . C . et al . Differential transferrin receptor density in human colorectal cancer : A potential probe for diagnosis and therapy . Int . J . Oncol . 13 , 871 – 875 ( 1998 ) . 46 . Kukowska - Latallo , J . F . et al . Nanoparticle targeting of anticancer drug improves therapeutic response in animal model of human epithelial cancer . Cancer Res . 65 , 5317 – 5324 ( 2005 ) . 47 . Iinuma , H . et al . Intracellular targeting therapy of cisplatin - encapsulated transferrin - polyethylene glycol liposome on peritoneal dissemination of gastric cancer . Int . J . Cancer 99 , 130 – 137 ( 2002 ) . 48 . Ishida , O . et al . Liposomes bearing polyethyleneglycol - coupled transferrin with intracellular targeting property to the solid tumors in vivo . Pharm . Res . 18 , 1042 – 1048 ( 2001 ) . 49 . Ekblom , P . , Thesleff , I . , Lehto , V . P . & Virtanen , I . Distribution of the transferrin receptor in normal human - fibroblasts and fibro - sarcoma cells . Int . J . Cancer 31 , 111 – 117 ( 1983 ) . 50 . Li , J . et al . Fusion protein from RGD peptide and Fc fragment of mouse immunoglobulin G inhibits angiogenesis in tumor . Cancer Gene Ther . 11 , 363 – 370 ( 2004 ) . 51 . Ruoslahti , E . Cell adhesion and tumor metastasis . Princess Takamatsu Symp . 24 , 99 – 105 ( 1994 ) . 52 . Peer , D . & Margalit , R . Tumor - targeted hyaluronan nanoliposomes increase the antitumor activity of liposomal Doxorubicin in syngeneic and human xenograft mouse tumor models . Neoplasia 6 , 343 – 353 ( 2004 ) . 53 . Hu , Z . , Sun , Y . & Garen , A . Targeting tumor vasculature endothelial cells and tumor cells for immunotherapy of human melanoma in a mouse xenograft model . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 96 , 8161 – 8166 ( 1999 ) . 54 . Peer , D . & Margalit , R . Loading mitomycin C inside long circulating hyaluronan targeted nano - liposomes increases its antitumor activity in three mice tumor models . Int . J . Cancer 108 , 780 – 789 ( 2004 ) . 55 . Eliaz , R . E . & Szoka , F . C . Jr . Liposome - encapsulated doxorubicin targeted to CD44 : a strategy to kill CD44 - overexpressing tumor cells . Cancer Res . 61 , 2592 – 2601 ( 2001 ) . 56 . LaVan , D . A . , McGuire , T . & Langer , R . Small - scale systems for in vivo drug delivery . Nat . Biotechnol . 21 , 1184 – 1191 ( 2003 ) . 57 . Arap , W . , Pasqualini , R . & Ruoslahti , E . Cancer treatment by targeted drug delivery to tumor vasculature in a mouse model . Science 279 , 377 – 380 ( 1998 ) . 58 . Schraa , A . J . et al . Targeting of RGD - modified proteins to tumor vasculature : A pharmacokinetic and cellular distribution study . Int . J . Cancer 102 , 469 – 475 ( 2002 ) . 59 . Halin , C . et al . Enhancement of the antitumor activity of interleukin - 12 by targeted delivery to neovasculature . Nat . Biotechnol . 20 , 264 – 269 ( 2002 ) . 60 . Satchi - Fainaro , R . et al . Targeting angiogenesis with a conjugate of HPMA copolymer and TNP - 470 . Nat . Med . 10 , 255 – 261 ( 2004 ) . 61 . Satchi - Fainaro , R . , Duncan , R . & Barnes , C . M . in Polymer Therapeutics II : Polymers as Drugs , Conjugates and Gene Delivery Systems Vol . 193 ( eds Satchi - Fainaro , R . & Duncan , R . ) 1 – 65 ( Springer - Verlag , Berlin , 2006 ) . 62 . Couvreur , P . , Kante , B . , Roland , M . & Speiser , P . Adsorption of anti - neoplastic drugs to polyalkylcyanoacrylate nanoparticles and their release in calf serum . J . Pharm . Sci . 68 , 1521 – 1524 ( 1979 ) . 63 . Couvreur , P . et al . Tissue distribution of anti - tumor drugs associated with polyalkylcyanoacrylate nanoparticles . J . Pharm . Sci . 69 , 199 – 202 ( 1980 ) . 64 . Couvreur , P . , Kante , B . , Grislain , L . , Roland , M . & Speiser , P . Toxicity of polyalkylcyanoacrylate nanoparticles II : Doxorubicin - loaded nanoparticles . J . Pharm . Sci . 71 , 790 – 792 ( 1982 ) . 65 . Hrkach , J . S . , Peracchia , M . T . , Domb , A . , Lotan , N . & Langer , R . Nanotechnology for biomaterials engineering : Structural characterization of amphiphilic polymeric nanoparticles by H - 1 NMR spectroscopy . Biomaterials 18 , 27 – 30 ( 1997 ) . 66 . Calvo , P . , RemunanLopez , C . , VilaJato , J . L . & Alonso , M . J . Chitosan and chitosan ethylene oxide propylene oxide block copolymer nanoparticles as novel carriers for proteins and vaccines . Pharm . Res . 14 , 1431 – 1436 ( 1997 ) . 67 . Elsamaligy , M . S . & Rohdewald , P . Reconstituted collagen nanoparticles , a novel drug carrier delivery system . J . Pharm . Pharmacol . 35 , 537 – 539 ( 1983 ) . 68 . Moses , M . A . , Brem , H . & Langer , R . Advancing the field of drug delivery : taking aim at cancer . Cancer Cell 4 , 337 – 341 ( 2003 ) . 69 . Farokhzad , O . C . & Langer , R . Nanomedicine : Developing smarter therapeutic and diagnostic modalities . Adv . Drug Deliv . Rev . 58 , 1456 – 1459 ( 2006 ) . 70 . Guo , R . et al . Synthesis of alginic acid - poly [ 2 - ( diethylamino ) ethyl methacrylate ] monodispersed nanoparticles by a polymer - monomer pair reaction system . Biomacromolecules 8 , 843 – 850 ( 2007 ) . 71 . Gabizon , A . A . Stealth liposomes and tumor targeting : one step further in the quest for the magic bullet . Clin . Cancer Res . 7 , 223 – 225 ( 2001 ) . 72 . Safra , T . et al . Pegylated liposomal doxorubicin ( doxil ) : reduced clinical cardiotoxicity in patients reaching or exceeding cumulative doses of 500 mg / m 2 . Ann . Oncol . 11 , 1029 – 1033 ( 2000 ) . 73 . Ahmed , F . et al . Shrinkage of a rapidly growing tumor by drug - loaded polymersomes : pH - triggered release through copolymer degradation . Mol . Pharm . 3 , 340 – 350 ( 2006 ) . 74 . Discher , D . E . & Ahmed , F . Polymersomes . Annu . Rev . Biomed . Eng . 8 , 323 – 341 ( 2006 ) . 75 . Matsumura , Y . et al . Phase I clinical trial and pharmacokinetic evaluation of NK911 , a micelle - encapsulated doxorubicin . Brit . J . Cancer 91 , 1775 – 1781 ( 2004 ) . 76 . Kato , K . et al . Phase I study of NK105 , a paclitaxel - incorporating micellar nanoparticle , in patients with advanced cancer . J . Clin . Oncol 24 ( suppl . ) , 2018 ( 2006 ) . 77 . Torchilin , V . P . Micellar nanocarriers : Pharmaceutical perspectives . Pharm . Res . 24 , 1 – 16 ( 2007 ) . 78 . Brigger , I . , Dubernet , C . & Couvreur , P . Nanoparticles in cancer therapy and diagnosis . Adv . Drug Deliv . Rev . 54 , 631 – 651 ( 2002 ) . 79 . Kreuter , J . & Higuchi , T . Improved delivery of methoxsalen . J . Pharm . Sci . 68 , 451 – 454 ( 1979 ) . 80 . Papahadjopoulos , D . et al . Sterically stabilized liposomes - improvements in pharmacokinetics and antitumor therapeutic efficacy . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 88 , 11460 – 11464 ( 1991 ) . 81 . Haran , G . , Cohen , R . , Bar , L . K . & Barenholz , Y . Transmembrane ammonium - sulfate gradients in liposomes produce efficient and stable entrapment of amphipathic weak bases . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1151 , 201 – 215 ( 1993 ) . 82 . Gabizon , A . A . , Shmeeda , H . & Zalipsky , S . Pros and cons of the liposome platform in cancer drug targeting . J . Liposome Res . 16 , 175 – 183 ( 2006 ) . 83 . Lorusso , D . et al . Pegylated liposomal doxorubicin - related palmar - plantar erythrodysesthesia ( ‘hand - foot’ syndrome ) . Ann . Oncol . ( 2007 ) . 84 . Sengupta , S . et al . Temporal targeting of tumour cells and neovasculature with a nanoscale delivery system . Nature 436 , 568 – 572 ( 2005 ) . 85 . Damascelli , B . et al . Intraarterial chemotherapy with polyoxyethylated castor oil free paclitaxel , incorporated in albumin nanoparticles ( ABI - 007 ) . Cancer 92 , 2592 – 2602 ( 2001 ) . 86 . Gillies , E . R . & Frechet , J . M . J . Dendrimers and dendritic polymers in drug delivery . Drug Discov . Today 10 , 35 – 43 ( 2005 ) . © 2007 Nature Publishing Group REVIEW ARTICLE 760 nature nanotechnology | VOL 2 | DECEMBER 2007 | www . nature . com / naturenanotechnology 87 . Malik , N . et al . Dendrimers : Relationship between structure and biocompatibility in vitro , and preliminary studies on the biodistribution of I - 125 - labelled polyamidoamine dendrimers in vivo . J . Control . Release 65 , 133 – 148 ( 2000 ) . 88 . Morawski , A . M . , Lanza , G . A . & Wickline , S . A . Targeted contrast agents for magnetic resonance imaging and ultrasound . Curr . Opin . Biotechnol . 16 , 89 – 92 ( 2005 ) . 89 . Loo , C . , Lowery , A . , Halas , N . , West , J . , Drezek , R . Immunotargeted nanoshells for integrated cancer imaging and therapy . Nano Lett . 5 , 709 – 711 ( 2005 ) . 90 . Chen , J . et al . Gold nanocages : Bioconjugation and their potential use as optical imaging contrast agents . Nano Lett . 5 , 473 – 477 ( 2005 ) . 91 . Danson , S . et al . Phase I dose escalation and pharmacokinetic study of pluronic polymer - bound doxorubicin ( SP 1049C ) in patients with advanced cancer . Brit . J . Cancer 90 , 2085 – 2091 ( 2004 ) . 92 . Batrakova , E . V . et al . Anthracycline antibiotics non - covalently incorporated into the block copolymer micelles : In vivo evaluation of anti - cancer activity . Brit . J . Cancer 74 , 1545 – 1552 ( 1996 ) . 93 . Goren , D . et al . Nuclear delivery of doxorubicin via folate - targeted liposomes with bypass of multidrug - resistance efflux pump . Clin . Cancer Res . 6 , 1949 – 1957 ( 2000 ) . 94 . Matsuo , H . et al . Possibility of the reversal of multidrug resistance and the avoidance of side effects by liposomes modified with MRK - 16 , a monoclonal antibody to P - glycoprotein . J . Control . Release 77 , 77 – 86 ( 2001 ) . 95 . Duncan , R . , Vicent , M . J . , Greco , F . & Nicholson , R . I . Polymer - drug conjugates : towards a novel approach for the treatment of endrocine - related cancer . Endocrine - Relat . Cancer 12 , S189 – S199 ( 2005 ) . 96 . Wong , H . L . et al . A new polymer - lipid hybrid nanoparticle system increases cytotoxicity of doxorubicin against multidrug - resistant human breast cancer cells . Pharm . Res . 23 , 1574 – 1585 ( 2006 ) . 97 . Garcion , E . et al . A new generation of anticancer , drug - loaded , colloidal vectors reverses multidrug resistance in glioma and reduces tumor progression in rats . Mol . Cancer Ther . 5 , 1710 – 1722 ( 2006 ) . 98 . Lee , E . S . , Na , K . & Bae , Y . H . Doxorubicin loaded pH - sensitive polymeric micelles for reversal of resistant MCF - 7 tumor . J . Control . Release 103 , 405 – 418 ( 2005 ) . 99 . Sapra , P . & Allen , T . M . Ligand - targeted liposomal anticancer drugs . Prog . Lipid Res . 42 , 439 – 462 ( 2003 ) . 100 . Moghimi , S . M . Recent developments in polymeric nanoparticle engineering and their applications in experimental and clinical oncology . Anticancer Agents Med . Chem . 6 , 553 – 561 ( 2006 ) . 101 . Lee , K . S . et al . Multicenter phase II trial of Genexol - PM , a Cremophor - free , polymeric micelle formulation of paclitaxel , in patients with metastatic breast cancer . Breast Cancer Res . Treat . ( 2007 ) . 102 . Nakanishi , T . et al . Development of the polymer micelle carrier system for doxorubicin . J . Control . Release 74 , 295 – 302 ( 2001 ) . 103 . Hirsch , L . R . et al . Metal nanoshells . Ann . Biomed . Engin . 34 , 15 – 22 ( 2006 ) . 104 . Sokolov , K . et al . Real - time vital optical imaging of precancer using anti - epidermal growth factor receptor antibodies conjugated to gold nanoparticles . Cancer Res . 63 , 1999 – 2004 ( 2003 ) . 105 . Chen , J . Y . et al . Facile synthesis of gold - silver nanocages with controllable pores on the surface . J . Am . Chem . Soc . 128 , 14776 – 14777 ( 2006 ) . 106 . Kontermann , R . E . Immunolliposomes for cancer therapy . Curr . Opin . Mol . Ther . 8 , 39 – 45 ( 2006 ) . acknowledgments We would like to acknowledge Shiladitya Sengupta for critically reviewing the manuscript and Maeve Cullinane for helpful discussions . This work was supported by federal funds NIH / NCI CA119349 , NIH / NIBIB EB 003647 , and NIH R01 - EB000244 . The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official view of the NIH . Competing financial interests The authors declare competing financial interests : details accompany the full - text HTML version of the paper at www . nature . com / naturenanotechnology .