132 User Experience Research in the Work Context : Maps , Gaps and Agenda PINAR ŞIMŞEK ÇAĞLAR , VIRPI ROTO , and TEIJA VAINIO , Aalto University , Finland User experience ( UX ) research has been criticized for focusing on leisure contexts and overlooking the work contexts . Moreover , researchers have been drawing attention to how UX at work differs from UX in leisure contexts , requiring development of domain specific knowledge . Inspired by these discussions , our motivation is to see the current state of UX at work research . Based on the systematic review of 52 papers , our results revealed that UX at work research is still immature . It is run by dichotomies ; the conceptualizations such as the definition and the dimensions of UX at work are ambiguous ; the variety of the studied work domains are limited and do not contribute to the understanding of UX at work ; and the consideration of contextual factors are arbitrary and coincidental . To advance this important field of research , we indicate the research gaps and suggest a research agenda introducing areas for future research . CCS Concepts : • Human - centered computing → Human computer interaction ( HCI ) ; Additional Key Words and Phrases : UX ; user experience ; work context ; work tool ; context ; review ACM Reference Format : Pınar Şimşek Çağlar , Virpi Roto , and Teija Vainio . 2022 . User Experience Research in the Work Context : Maps , Gaps and Agenda . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . 6 , CSCW1 , Article 132 ( April 2022 ) , 28 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3512979 1 INTRODUCTION Within the field of Human - Computer Interaction ( HCI ) , the research emphasis has radically changed in three major waves . From the first wave to the second , the research orientation shifted from product to process , from individual interactions with the products to group interactions and collaborations , as well as from laboratory to real work settings [ 7 ] . From the second wave to the third , the emphasis has shifted from pragmatic aspects of technology use towards its emotional , experiential , and cultural aspects . The most important transitions from the second to the third wave happened within the context of research , which shifted from work to leisure and daily life [ 7 ] . Within the third wave of HCI , user experience ( UX ) is an important research topic . Although early UX studies criticized traditional HCI for being highly concentrated on work context and usability issues , it seems that UX has adopted a similar unidirectional interest in the opposite direction : non - work and non - utilitarian contexts of technology use [ 8 , 38 , 66 , 86 , 98 , 107 ] . This situation has created two major issues regarding UX research . First , it causes emotions and experiences around the usage of work tools to fall behind pragmatic considerations , such as efficiency and ease of use . Secondly , existing work models rely heavily on the narratives of the experiences gathered from the leisure domain resulting in a biased approach [ 8 , 98 ] . Authors’ address : Pınar Şimşek Çağlar , pinar . simsek @ aalto . fi ; Virpi Roto , virpi . roto @ aalto . fi ; Teija Vainio , teija . vainio @ aalto . fi , Aalto University , PO Box 11000 , Espoo , Finland , 00076 . Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author ( s ) must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from permissions @ acm . org . © 2022 Copyright held by the owner / author ( s ) . Publication rights licensed to ACM . 2573 - 0142 / 2022 / 4 - ART132 $ 15 . 00 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3512979 Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 6 , No . CSCW1 , Article 132 . Publication date : April 2022 . 132 : 2 Pınar Şimşek Çağlar , Virpi Roto , and Teija Vainio Lately , the importance of UX research at work has started to garner more attention among UX researchers [ 8 , 22 , 38 , 64 , 66 , 86 , 98 ] . Scholars have been highlighting the differences between the experiences in work and leisure . Tuch et al . showed that work and leisure experiences differ from each other in terms of location , social environment , the technology used , and the activity carried out with the technology [ 98 ] . For example , whereas the social environment in the leisure context more commonly includes a partner or a friend , in the work context , it would include an acquaintance or a colleague . Tuch et al . also found that among the psychological human needs , competence , popularity , and security are associated more with the work experiences , while pleasure / stimulation and relatedness are associated more with leisure experiences . On the other hand , Harbich and Hassenzahl [ 38 ] argue that in the work context , goal achievement is at the fore and , unlike needs , goals are externally motivated in most cases . Therefore , the need - oriented approach might be insufficient to understand the characteristics of UX at work . Clemmensen et al . argue that while UX studies of consumer products focus on the standalone products , UX at work is highly influenced by the work structure and context ; therefore , the studies should focus on the division of labor , managerial hierarchy , organizational culture , and norms for expressing emotions [ 22 ] . UX research needs to develop a knowledge base about UX at work not only to understand the mechanisms of work - specific user experiences and to bring experiential and emotional concerns into work context , but also to generate holistic UX models and theories that embrace both work and leisure [ 11 ] . UX research lacks a systematic review focusing on particularly the UX at work context . Bargas - Avila and Hornbaek reported on the products , dimensions , and methodologies used in UX research focusing on both work and leisure contexts [ 8 ] . We also acknowledge the challenge of developing such a knowledge base in an environment in which UX research has been criticized for being ambiguous , regardless of focusing on the leisure or the work context . This ambiguity concerns conceptualizations of UX at work [ 31 , 41 , 98 ] , the explosion of new dimensions [ 8 ] , and addressing the contextual factors in the research process [ 8 , 11 ] . We address these ambiguities in our research questions ( conceptualization ( RQ2 ) , dimension explosion ( RQ3 ) , context inclusion ( RQ5 ) . Furthermore , we strive to understand the main motivation behind UX at work research ( RQ1 ) , to seek and identify the primary force driving UX at work research , as well as to determine which work domains ( RQ4 ) have been under scrutiny to - date . We follow the definition by Kaasinen et al . stating that UX at work is ’the way a person feels about using a product , service , or system in a work context , and how this shapes the image of oneself as a professional’ [ 51 , p . 976 ] . This definition places the focus on the emotions of the employees , rather than the pragmatic aspects of completing work tasks , such as system usability , or as suggested by the Technology acceptance model ( TAM ) , on perceived ease of use or perceived usefulness [ 24 ] . This focus of ours addresses the lesser studied area of HCI , user experiences of interactive tools at work . In this study , our overarching research objective is to clarify the current status of UX at work research and identify the research gaps . This is to help UX at work researchers to get an overview of research in this area and to move the field further by tackling the research gaps . Considering that UX at work is still at an early stage , it is timely to initiate creating a solid understanding on which researchers can build . Specifically , this study seeks answers to the following research questions . • RQ1 : What has been the main motivation in UX research at work ? • RQ2 : How has UX been defined in UX at work research ? • RQ3 : What UX dimensions have been studied in UX at work research ? • RQ4 : Which are the most common work domains that have been studied from a UX perspec - tive ? • RQ5 : What contextual factors have been considered when studying UX at work ? Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 6 , No . CSCW1 , Article 132 . Publication date : April 2022 . User Experience Research in the Work Context : Maps , Gaps and Agenda 132 : 3 We present two major contributions in this paper . First , we map the existing UX at work research based on the literature analysed . Secondly , based on the perceived gaps in the literature , we provide an agenda for researchers who wish to advance the research of UX at work . 2 METHODOLOGY To address our main objective about the current status of UX at work research , we chose a systematic literature review as the study method . Our aim was to identify and synthesize the research published in the most prominent venues of the field regarding UX at work . Our research strives to explore the approaches towards user experience research conducted in the work context which has already been mentioned as an under - explored area [ 8 , 38 , 98 ] . In this section , we present our methodology for comprehensively reviewing 52 publications using a systematic literature review approach . We followed the PRISMA statement [ 70 ] , which defines a procedure for systematic literature reviews . The literature review process is explained below , including venue selection , search phrase , publication inclusion criteria , phases of publication filtering , and the full text analysis . 2 . 1 Publication Venue Selection To focus on the most recent UX research in the field of HCI , we narrowed down our search to the two most relevant venues : Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ) and Computer - Supported Collaborative Work Conference ( CSCW ) . The CHI and CSCW conferences were considered as appropriate venues for our search since our early exploration of the literature showed them to be the most active venues in terms of discussion on user experience and work context . Both venues are among the top publication forums in their areas and provide a high volume of publications . Therefore , although our sample does not cover the whole area , we believe that the papers included display face validity for UX at work and can be considered as a representative sample . Since the CSCW conference experienced some changes in its publication venue , we included all the venues related to CSCW , including CSCWD and CSCW An International Journal . 2 . 2 Search Terms This review aimed at finding publications that study the intersection of user experience , work context , and interactive work tools . After defining the scope , we tested tens of search terms and their combinations to locate relevant publications . After this phase , the full search phrase was formed consisting of three clusters . The first cluster includes the venues , while the second and third clusters include the search terms . The second cluster aims to verify that the publications mention experience , and the third cluster aims to locate papers related to the work context . The search examined the publication’s title , abstract , or author keywords to verify that the UX at work is at the core of the paper . The final search phrase used to extract the data set from Scopus was as follows . SRCTITLE ( ( " conference on human factors in computing systems " ) OR ( * computer AND supported AND cooperative AND work * ) ) AND TITLE - ABS - KEY ( ( " user experience " OR " employee experience " OR " experience design " OR " work * experience " ) AND ( work * OR employee OR occupation * OR organization * OR organisation * OR “enterprise * ” ) ) 2 . 3 Publication Inclusion Criteria For this review study , we adopted four criteria to include the CHI and CSCW publications in each phase of filtering . First , in addition to full conference papers on empirical research and literature reviews , panel , workshops , and SIG proposals , doctoral consortium papers were also included , as Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 6 , No . CSCW1 , Article 132 . Publication date : April 2022 . 132 : 4 Pınar Şimşek Çağlar , Virpi Roto , and Teija Vainio well as late - breaking works as they reflect the current trends , emerging topics , and the areas that require further research . Secondly , we included papers that present a user experience - related discussion . Most of the papers ( 46 out of 52 ) in our data set explicitly mention the terms " user experience " or " UX " . However , six papers ( out of 52 ) do not explicitly mention these terms . They mention the experiences of employees with regard to work tools either by mentioning the terms " employee experience " [ 29 ] or " work experience " [ 101 ] , or they carry out the discussion without any specific terms , but by using phrases such as " workers experience " [ 10 , 35 , 61 ] or " users experience " [ 43 ] . Thirdly , we expected chosen publications to focus on the use of interactive work tools . This study counts all types of digital interactive tools with which employees accomplish work - related tasks . The work tools in the scope of this study are expected to facilitate the completion of a work task or knowledge sharing , or socialization activities with the colleagues . The publications about interactive technologies at work in general without specifying the tools were also included since they provide a holistic understanding of UX at work ( e . g . , [ 107 ] ) . Fourthly , we expected studies to be concerned with the work context . We do not subscribe to a specific definition of work context as it does not have a widely accepted definition [ 84 ] . We regarded the context of the studies as work if they explicitly mention the context as work , or if they mention the participants of the study as employees or workers , or if the research revolves around one or more specific occupations . Since factors that define work context , such as the work motivation , job characteristics , the organization of work , and the patterns of social interaction [ 80 ] , are different in voluntary work , art work , and crowd - sourcing , they are excluded from this study . Moreover , if the study mixed work and non - work contexts , for example , not all study participants were employees [ 36 , 67 ] , it was excluded . Although some of the tools , such as photo editors , can be used in both work and non - work contexts , the experiences related to tool usage tend to be different in both because of the contextual factors and driving mechanisms of the experiences [ 98 ] . In the scope of this study , we exclusively focus on UX at work . 2 . 4 Phases of Publication Filtering The search with our phrase in the Scopus database on 25th May 2021 resulted in a data set of 389 unique publications . 335 of these originated from CHI and 54 from CSCW . The search was restricted to papers published after the year 2000 , since attempts to define UX as a specific domain [ 31 , 39 , 41 ] as well as attempts to generate approaches incorporating various non - instrumental needs started in the early 2000s [ 33 , 39 , 67 ] . The publication - filtering process consisted of four phases ( see Figure 1 ) . For a publication to be selected for the next phase , it was expected to satisfy all four inclusion criteria stated in the previous subsection . First , the title and the author keywords were analyzed resulting in 107 publications being excluded ( e . g . , [ 5 , 32 , 74 , 105 ] ) . Secondly , the abstracts were reviewed with 189 publications being excluded ( e . g . , [ 48 , 63 ] ) . Thirdly , introductions of the publications were reviewed , after which , 23 publications were eliminated ( e . g . , [ 73 , 90 ] ) . Fourthly , full texts of 70 publications were reviewed and 18 of them were excluded in this phase . These 18 papers were also eliminated using the same criteria . However , it was only possible to assess the papers after reading the full text ( e . g . , [ 92 , 104 ] ) . In total , 52 publications were included in the final phase of the full text analysis . By the end of the selection phase , we had 44 relevant articles from CHI and 8 articles from CSCW . 2 . 5 Full Text Analysis We adopted the Conventional Content Analysis [ 44 ] to analyze the 52 articles . One researcher repeatedly read all the articles to achieve immersion and drive initial codes [ 96 ] . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 6 , No . CSCW1 , Article 132 . Publication date : April 2022 . User Experience Research in the Work Context : Maps , Gaps and Agenda 132 : 5 Fig . 1 . Phases of Systematic Review ( adapted from PRISMA ) We also scanned the literature to gather any relevant aspects for which UX research has been criticized . These included ambiguity in the conceptualization of UX [ 31 , 41 , 98 ] , the explosion of UX dimensions [ 8 ] , and the inclusion of contextual factors into UX research [ 8 , 11 ] . We then merged these three concerns with the two we derived from our initial coding : motivation of the studies and work domains . We continued our process with a summative content analysis [ 44 ] to address our five specific research questions . During this round , we derived additional codes , and merged or eliminated some of the codes when necessary . The final set of codes included problem definitions , problem solutions , efficiency , effectiveness , productivity , ease of use , simplification of work , creativity support , exploratory research , discursive space , definitions of UX , UX - usability differentiation , experiences , occupations , job descriptions , task context , temporal context , social context , technical context , and physical context . The final set of codes was grouped under each topic that has been addressed in our research questions : the main motivation behind UX at work research ( RQ1 ) , the conceptualization of UX ( RQ2 ) , the dimensions of UX ( RQ3 ) , work domains have been under scrutiny ( RQ4 ) , and contextual factors ( RQ5 ) in UX . Figure 2 presents a summary of the analysis together with the codes listed under the corresponding topics . For the coding approach see Appendix A . 3 RESULTS AND DISCUSSION This systematic literature review consisted of 389 publications in total , 335 from CHI and 54 from CSCW . After the systematic filtering , 52 of the most relevant publications were identified for the full - text analysis . This selection of publications included 16 full papers , 26 extended abstracts , 4 workshop papers , 3 SIG papers , 2 doctoral consortium papers , and 1 panel paper . Figure 2 presents the structure of our analysis . It consists of four major components in which we address our research questions : the motivation ( RQ1 ) , concepts ( RQ2 , RQ3 ) , domains ( RQ4 ) , and context ( RQ5 ) . This chapter presents the results and related discussion regarding each of these Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 6 , No . CSCW1 , Article 132 . Publication date : April 2022 . 132 : 6 Pınar Şimşek Çağlar , Virpi Roto , and Teija Vainio . Fig . 2 . The Analysis Structure components . Note that the total number of publications under each category may surpass the number of studies in our data set , due to some studies being categorized under several themes . 3 . 1 Motivation In this section , we address our first research question : What has been the main motivation in the UX research on work context ? Our results indicate that the motivations to explore experiences at work are fixing problems , improving the work itself , supporting design , and raising discussion in order to move this research area forward . The frequency distributions for each purpose are presented in Table 1 . 3 . 1 . 1 Fix Problems . The articles in this category adopt a problem - centric perspective and aim to target existing problems and pain points . The studies detect problems to fix them either by using a new product design [ 17 , 56 , 79 ] or improvement of the existing design [ 4 , 69 , 106 ] . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 6 , No . CSCW1 , Article 132 . Publication date : April 2022 . User Experience Research in the Work Context : Maps , Gaps and Agenda 132 : 7 Table 1 . The motivation of the publications Motivation Publications Fix problems ( 21 ) [ 3 , 4 , 6 , 17 , 23 , 27 – 30 , 52 , 53 , 56 , 69 , 77 , 78 , 81 , 82 , 91 , 95 , 102 , 106 ] Improve work ( 22 ) Effectiveness ( 21 ) [ 9 , 19 , 23 , 25 , 27 , 29 , 43 , 45 , 52 , 53 , 56 , 57 , 61 , 76 – 78 , 81 , 91 , 99 , 101 , 106 ] Efficiency ( 19 ) [ 3 , 4 , 18 , 19 , 25 , 28 , 29 , 34 , 46 , 53 , 56 , 57 , 61 , 69 , 72 , 78 , 82 , 91 , 101 ] Productivity ( 13 ) [ 4 , 23 , 29 , 43 , 52 , 56 , 57 , 69 , 72 , 77 , 81 , 95 , 102 ] Simplification of work ( 15 ) [ 9 , 13 , 17 , 27 , 29 , 34 , 42 , 43 , 46 , 53 , 57 , 57 , 77 , 95 , 101 ] Ease of use ( 12 ) [ 3 , 4 , 18 , 52 , 54 , 57 , 57 , 69 , 77 , 81 , 91 , 102 ] Creativity support ( 2 ) [ 71 , 72 ] Support Design ( 23 ) [ 4 , 9 , 10 , 13 – 15 , 18 , 19 , 25 , 35 , 42 , 43 , 45 , 46 , 61 , 62 , 76 , 82 , 88 , 99 , 101 , 102 , 107 ] Raise discussions ( 7 ) [ 2 , 8 , 20 , 21 , 37 , 71 , 72 ] While , in most of the cases , the problem descriptions are based on user research [ 3 , 4 , 23 , 95 ] , some of the articles use predefined problems either from the literature that identifies problem areas [ 77 , 81 ] or based on the researchers’ / designers’ own experiences in cases in which the researchers / designers are also employees [ 28 ] . Although few in number , in some cases , researchers utilized both user research and literature to define the problem areas [ 27 ] . The problems are identified either specifically or more generally . Specific problems include not being able to easily share and access the best design practices [ 91 ] , or the difficulty of finding and using the commenting tool of a specific software [ 69 ] . The articles that identify more general problems address general UX improvement without specifying the problem . For example , [ 53 ] defines the current process of tool usage as being tedious and time - consuming . The authors aimed to improve general UX by easing the process with a new tool design . The articles that aim to detect and fix problems seem to adopt the rational and pragmatic mindset of HCI as well as lack the notion of the third wave of HCI that focuses more on emotions and experiences [ 11 ] . Almost half of the papers in our data set adopt a problem - centric perspective with an emphasis on usability . We also observed that although discussing usability problems , there are papers indicating the beneficiaries of the problem - solution process as being not only the end users but also the businesses . They discuss usability problems as obstacles in the way of successful completion of the job [ 82 ] , or they tightly connect employee needs and satisfaction to employee retention and / or performance [ 29 , 56 ] . This shows that as much as removing frustrations for the users , they also are targeted at solving business - related problems . This finding is highly connected to the next section 3 . 1 . 2 in which we analyze the overarching motivation of the UX at work papers . 3 . 1 . 2 Improve Work . Work improvement is the most frequent motivation in UX research at work . We have found that there is a higher - level motivation from which most of the studies originate : Improving the work performance . The terms mentioned in the publications , such as efficiency , effectiveness , productivity , ease of use , simplification of work , and creativity support , are interpreted as indicators of work improvement . Regarding work improvement , effectiveness and efficiency are the most commonly mentioned topics . The usage of these concepts is in line with each other in terms of the use contexts : efficiency and effectiveness of the tools or interfaces [ 3 , 19 , 61 , 91 ] , of work or task [ 25 , 46 , 53 , 56 , 79 ] , and of individual employees or teams concerning tool usage [ 29 , 53 ] . Productivity is discussed concerning tool usage at work . It is argued that productivity can be increased by improving the tool design through actions including creating better networks between employees [ 43 ] , providing easy access to relevant information [ 95 ] , and improving employee satisfaction with regard to tool Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 6 , No . CSCW1 , Article 132 . Publication date : April 2022 . 132 : 8 Pınar Şimşek Çağlar , Virpi Roto , and Teija Vainio usage [ 107 ] . Ease of use concerns the intuitiveness of tools [ 4 ] , discoverability of tool features [ 69 ] , increased visibility of functions [ 102 ] and low learning curve [ 57 , 77 ] . Simplification of work is mentioned regarding easy mental workload [ 17 ] , simpler multitasking [ 101 ] , easier or simpler tasks [ 27 , 46 , 53 ] , easy access to information [ 13 ] , and easy access to tool features [ 77 ] . Finally , creativity and innovation are mentioned in relation to tool usage at work . While some of the articles espouse tools as possessing the ability to improve creativity and innovation [ 72 ] , the other paper presents ways to facilitate the development of creativity support tools [ 71 ] . Although the papers in this category do not explicitly state their motivation as improving the work , their emphasis of certain terms , such as efficiency , effectiveness , productivity , usefulness , ease of use , simplification of work , and creativity support , indicate a concentration on performance improvement . This higher - level motivation reveals that UX research in the work context possesses an underlying purpose . The purpose of improving work performance with the help of UX design of the work tools is a unique feature of UX at work research . Both 3 . 1 . 1 Fix Problems and 3 . 1 . 2 Improve Work sections demonstrate the business - centered perspective of UX at work studies . Therefore , UX at work not only heavily carries the concerns of rationality and pragmatism , but also shows a business - centric perspective rather than a user - centric one . 3 . 1 . 3 Support design . In this category , the motivation of the papers is to better explain the nature of experiences , needs , work processes , practices , and routines to support the design process of the work tools . Unlike " Fix Problems " , the papers aiming to support design are not focused on the problems and their specific solutions . Rather , they adopt a broader perspective in understanding the mechanisms affecting tool usage at work . The approaches that they choose are varied . They aim to improve the design of the work tools by supporting positive experiences at work [ 76 , 107 ] , balancing business and user needs [ 4 , 18 , 42 , 76 ] , exploring the mechanisms of a specific negative experience [ 10 , 35 ] , generating a baseline for the design process by providing recommendations , suggestions , guidelines and / or new approaches [ 25 , 62 , 82 , 101 , 102 ] , generating tool evaluation methods [ 99 ] , generating a tool to support the design process [ 45 , 88 ] , and analyzing user behavior [ 14 , 43 ] . Among the abovementioned approaches , supporting positive UX as well as balancing business and user needs are conspicuous because they offer a change in the direction of the current design process of work tools . Positive UX stands for the third wave of HCI . It stems from positive psychology , which focuses on the aspects that render life worth living [ 26 ] . The problem - centric approach has been argued as representing the opposite of positive design . In positive design , the aim is to stimulate well - being , rather than reduce or solve problems and provide a neutral state [ 26 ] . When we compare the number of papers focused on fixing problems ( see 3 . 1 . 1 Fix Problems ) and positive UX , it is obvious that UX at work has been dominated by a problem - centric approach . This reveals our desire to emphasize the existence of the two positive UX papers . Although they are not numerous , they indicate a potential change in the mindset towards well - being . One of the positive UX papers in our data set aims to elicit positive experiences at work [ 107 ] , and the other one reports on the application of positive UX at work [ 76 ] . The papers highlighting the need to balance business and user needs [ 4 , 18 , 42 , 76 ] focus on the existence of different expectations deriving from two major stakeholders : employees as users and business owners as investors . Their expectations for the tools used at work are not always the same , they might even clash [ 4 , 18 , 42 , 76 ] . Therefore , the tools are expected to satisfy both the user and the purchaser ; naturally , balancing these needs poses a unique challenge in the work context [ 76 ] . Thus far , business values have been the most influential factor in UX at work design [ 4 , 18 ] . Furthermore , our findings in 3 . 1 . 2 Improve Work indicate that work tool design has adopted a business - centered approach . We hold in high esteem the publications that champion the call to balance business and Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 6 , No . CSCW1 , Article 132 . Publication date : April 2022 . User Experience Research in the Work Context : Maps , Gaps and Agenda 132 : 9 user needs , since , similarly to positive design papers , they suggest a new way of designing work tools . They bring forth the idea that work tool designers should not focus on either a user - centric or business - centric approach , but they should find the middle - ground . 3 . 1 . 4 Raise discussion to move the field forward . In addition to the three motivation categories presented above , there are also workshop , SIG , panel , and literature review papers that aim to raise discussion concerning UX at work . Their motivation varies including broaching discussions as well as inviting researchers and practitioners to share opinions , thus introducing a new approach with regards to UX at work and reviewing empirical research in the UX domain . The discussion topics in - clude gamification at work [ 2 ] , machine learning in the industrial workplace [ 20 ] , new perspectives on HCI and CSCW in industrial context with regards to IIoT [ 72 ] , social and spatial connectedness in virtual and mediated work environments [ 37 ] , the collaboration between diverse backgrounds to improve creativity support tools [ 71 ] , establishing human work interaction design [ 21 ] , and under explored areas in UX [ 8 ] . The discussion topics presented here are too scattered to form clear categories . Nevertheless , it could be said that they either introduce relatively new topics into UX research ( e . g . , [ 20 , 72 ] ) or present topics that have been raised for some time but still have room for further development ( e . g . , [ 37 ] ) . Their common motivation is to launch a discursive space for further elaboration of these topics . 3 . 2 Concepts Despite the UX discussions in the early 2000s [ 31 , 41 , 98 ] , the definition and the scope of UX has remained unclear [ 58 ] . This section addresses our second and third research questions : How has UX been defined in UX at work research ? What UX dimensions have been studied in UX at work research ? We present the definitions ( or the lack thereof ) and the dimensions of UX provided in the articles . 3 . 2 . 1 Defining UX . Most of the fully analyzed papers ( 46 out of 52 ) use the term ‘user experience’ ( UX ) . Among these , only six of them explicitly define or talk about the characteristics of UX . One of these papers indicates the ambiguous understanding of UX definition [ 8 ] and has identified two different conceptions of UX through their literature review . The first conception refers to the design and use of user interfaces , which is used as a synonym for interaction via a user interface , usability , and even user - centered design . The second refers to an emerging movement in research that focuses on non - instrumental needs and experience in a more complex sense . Two of these six papers [ 76 , 107 ] use Hassenzahl’s definition of UX [ 40 , p . 12 ] which is “a momentary , primarily evaluative feeling ( good - bad ) while interacting with a product or service . ” This definition and in turn these two articles emphasize the human side and subjectivity of UX , which differentiates UX from sole usability . Two of these six papers , although lacking a definition of UX , do differentiate instrumental needs from non - instrumental ones . [ 62 ] discusses employees’ conversational interactions in terms of both instrumental and non - instrumental needs . While they categorize informational needs as merely instrumental , they discuss the enjoyment of conversations and playful interactions as differing from the instrumental needs . [ 19 ] differentiates the efficiency concerns from the aesthetics of a sound editing tool by indicating that the measurement of those two might not always correlate . The last paper [ 6 ] discusses their conscious choice of using the term ‘user experience’ rather than usability by stating that user experience encompasses more than usability . They argue that usability is " one aspect of user experience among others such as interaction design , user research , and usability engineering . " However , it is notable that they do not mention the non - instrumental aspects that have been argued as being the main factor differentiating user experience from usability [ 41 ] . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 6 , No . CSCW1 , Article 132 . Publication date : April 2022 . 132 : 10 Pınar Şimşek Çağlar , Virpi Roto , and Teija Vainio The rest of the papers in our data set do not indicate their stance on the notion of UX . The studies that supposedly discuss UX , focus on different aspects of it based on their specific needs . The reason for the lack of widely accepted understanding of UX has been discussed by [ 94 ] and claimed to be due to UX being a domain shared by various disciplines . Sward and Macarthur argue that characteristics of UX vary depending on the researcher’s discipline in academia or the organization’s perspective from which it is executed in practice [ 94 ] . We argue that this situation is even more complicated in UX at work research considering that B2B organizations delivering work tools are expected to satisfy the needs of both the purchaser [ 76 ] and the user , which might be incompatible or even at variance [ 4 ] . Moreover , papers that do not define UX tend to focus on pragmatic aspects of it , such as usability . On the other hand , the ones that provide a notion of UX tend to include non - instrumental aspects . Those papers whose focus is beyond usability seem to require a justification for this perspective by providing a definition . We observed that there is an interest in using UX keyword without having a clear understanding of the exact elements it incorporates . This is evident in the papers that use UX term interchangeably with usability or interface ( e . g . , [ 13 , 23 , 30 , 46 ] ) . Moreover , several papers ( 10 out of 46 ) use the term ’user experience’ only in the abstract and / or as keywords without further discussing it later in the text . This confuses the relevance of the discussions in the papers on user experience domain . Our findings mirror previous research by arguing that it is hard to agree on the nature and scope of UX [ 58 ] , and that UX is used as an umbrella term without any clarifications [ 8 ] . Moreover , considering that these issues have been raised more than a decade ago , it is quite striking to see that there has been little improvement . The same concerns are still relevant . 3 . 2 . 2 UX Dimensions . We collected all the experiences with technology mentioned in the set of 52 fully analysed papers , regardless of the depth or shallowness of their mention , in order to provide a comprehensive list of UX dimensions at work . We stated the experiences as they were phrased in the original texts . The dimensions were thematically grouped based on their similarities under three titles : connectedness , enthusiasm , and performance ( see Table 2 ) . The category of connectedness involves physical , virtual , and social connectedness . Physical connectedness means feeling ownership of the workplaces or the creating the illusion of co - location by physical cues in virtual work environments with the help of the tools . Virtual connectedness represents the experiences related to virtual communication tools , such as video - conferencing . Social connectedness means forming and supporting a community through work tools . It includes experiences mediated through collaborative processes and the interactions among people as well as between people and the work tools . To illustrate , the visibility dimension found in Table 2 indicates the company - wide recognition of the employees’ best practices . Enthusiasm involves eagerness towards using a particular work tool or the excitement towards the work itself through the agency of the tool . It includes both positive and negative experiences that potentially encourage or discourage employees at work . For example , the tediousness dimension ( see Table 2 ) refers to a long and exhaustive process of task accomplishment . The performance category represents the feelings and opinions of employees regarding their work processes and work tools . The dimensions under this category are dominated by usability metrics and the disruptions that might result in negative experiences . For instance , the uncertainty dimension ( see Table 2 ) indicates the ambiguity that disrupts the assimilation process into a new role or an organization . Usability metrics , such as efficiency and effectiveness , although not directly considered as experiences , were included in the studies as they refer to the perceptions of employees rather than being objective measurements . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 6 , No . CSCW1 , Article 132 . Publication date : April 2022 . User Experience Research in the Work Context : Maps , Gaps and Agenda 132 : 11 Table 2 . UX Dimensions Connectedness Enthusiasm Performance Cohesiveness Gratification Moral Stress Acceptance Blending experience Encouragement Being Monitored Appropriation Immersiveness Control Being Ignored Motivation Naturalness Stimulation Dynamism Engagement Experience of proximity Playfulness Freedom Satisfaction Sense of community Willingness Casual Dissatisfaction Sharing Tediousness Relaxed Ease of Learn Relatedness Flow Game - like Ease of Use Social connection Annoyance Uniqueness Difficulty Feeling connected Frustration Self - determination Irritation Popularity Confusion Autonomy Usefulness Spatial connection Being Delighted Fulfilment Productivity Sympathy Being Impressed Stimulation Efficiency Presence Excitement Support Effectiveness Visibility Enjoyment Fear of Rejection Task Performance Appreciation Fun Appearing Stupid Creativity Support Ownership Trust Physical Intimacy Intuitiveness Sense of territory Wow Effect Interactivity Discontinuity Feeling welcomed Joy Uncomfortable Overload Feeling valued Pride Stress Interruption Friendliness Happiness Interference Competency Uncertainty Lacking Freedom of Choice Dissatisfaction Empowerment Awareness Confidence Mental Workload Concern Inattentional Blindness As presented in Table 2 , there is an abundance of UX dimensions mentioned in the papers . However , the meaning of these dimensions are rarely defined within their respective publications . These emerging UX dimensions require further explanation to establish these terms for future use , as well as to explore the way these dimensions relate to each other . Based on the sheer amount of dimensions listed in our UX dimensions table , it appears that hedonic aspects in UX at work studies are awarded much importance . However , hedonic dimensions , such as fun , joy , enjoyment , happiness , pride , fulfilment , stimulation , and the wow effect , are found in only 12 out of 52 papers . Moreover , even in most of those papers , the hedonic aspects are only touched upon without being discussed in detail . Emotions or feelings are often mentioned by the participants of the studies without any prompting . The involvement of hedonic aspects , emotions , and feelings seem arbitrary and coincidental . They are rarely a part of the main discussion . The three experience dimensions we identified are not identical to the basic psychological needs of competence , popularity , and security that Tuch et al . found to be associated with work experiences [ 98 ] . Most experiences in our Performance dimension match to the need of competence , either directly ( Difficulty ) or indirectly ( Inattentional blindness , Overload ) . The basic psychological need of popularity relates to our Connectedness category , although only two articles directly focused on Popularity experience [ 76 , 107 ] . It is notable that most of the experiences in the Connectedness category are closer to the need of relatedness than popularity ( e . g . , Feeling connected ) , although popularity is associated more to work context and relatedness to leisure context [ 98 ] . Similarly , Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 6 , No . CSCW1 , Article 132 . Publication date : April 2022 . 132 : 12 Pınar Şimşek Çağlar , Virpi Roto , and Teija Vainio the publications we analysed have studied a wide variety of experiences that address the basic psychological need of pleasure / stimulation ( Enjoyment / Wow effect ) , although Tuch found it to be associated more with leisure experiences . There is thus a conflict between the results of our literature review and of the experiments by Tuch et al . It seems scholars still see the basic human needs of pleasure , stimulation and relatedness important also in work contexts , but more work is needed to see how prominent these needs actually are in creating positive experiences in work contexts . In addition to our study , similar attempts to identify and categorize UX dimensions were apparent in [ 107 ] and [ 8 ] . We would like to compare our results with theirs . In [ 8 ] , based on the literature review of empirical research on UX , the researchers provided a list of UX dimensions . Although their sample includes the studies from both work and leisure products , the researchers reported that the UX domain , that is , their sample , is dominated by the leisure products . The UX dimensions are listed as : affect and emotion , enjoyment and fun , aesthetics and appeal , hedonic quality , engagement and flow , motivation , enchantment , frustration , and other constructs . Despite this list providing an overview of UX researchers’ concentration on UX dimensions , it is not directly applicable to the work context . For example , the dimensions that we listed under the performance category do not seem to exist in the list provided by [ 8 ] . In [ 107 ] , the researchers aimed to identify positive experience categories at work . They found 21 categories including receiving feedback , rising to a challenge , and helping others ( for the rest of the list , see [ 107 ] ) . However , we argue that these categories are situations that mediate experiences rather than the experiences themselves . In contrast , the categories that we found refer to the result of situations . In that sense , our approach of categorization differs from [ 107 ] . Moreover , whereas [ 107 ] specifically focuses on positive experiences , our UX dimensions incorporate both positive and negative experiences . The UX dimensions presented above is the first list describing the specific experiences studied particularly in UX at work papers . We adopt a grounded approach in reporting experiences as they are mentioned , without categorization or interpretation . Therefore , we provide a more comprehen - sive but work - specific list that consists of positive and negative experiences from the work context . Our list of UX dimensions serves as a starting point for future research in comparing experiences between work and leisure , which is an important endeavor towards understanding UX at work . 3 . 3 Domains This section addresses the following question : Which are the most common work domains that have been studied from a UX perspective ? We present the work domains in which the studies are conducted . The aim is to see the orientation of domains , which is one of the major determinant factors of work experiences . In Table 3 , we present the ways in which the papers identify the work domain . The work and the categorization presented here can be used by future UX at work researchers to see a sample of domains in which UX at work studies had been previously carried out . The work domains are indicated either by mentioning the work type , occupation , a specific practice in the workplace , or a specific type of work tool . There is also another category : Non - specified . It represents papers indicating the work domain in general by using the words ’work’ and / or ’employee’ . The occupations explicitly mentioned could be categorized under four terms : services , design and development , artistic disciplines , and researchers . Although the occupations listed are quite varied within themselves , they still represent a relatively limited area of work overall . In addition to the direct mention of knowledge and information work , most of the occupations could be categorized under the knowledge work domain . It seems that UX studies at work have started to emerge in Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 6 , No . CSCW1 , Article 132 . Publication date : April 2022 . User Experience Research in the Work Context : Maps , Gaps and Agenda 132 : 13 knowledge - intensive work domains . This could be explained by the shift to knowledge - based industry and , consequently , the escalated war for talent [ 83 ] . This shift raises concerns , such as attracting , retaining , and engaging employees [ 16 ] , which , in turn , increases the importance of UX of work tools in the workplace . It is also evident that the industrial work domain is overlooked , as it is only mentioned in one paper . This indicates that human factors and usability are still more prominent than UX within the industrial work domain . In order to gain a holistic view , UX at work requires diversification in terms of occupations . Looking at Table 3 , we see the concentration of UX studies under the services category , which targets serving and / or engaging the customers . It is the largest category of occupations investigating service employees’ experiences . We believe the reason for this is that service employees’ experiences are found to affect their customers’ experiences [ 75 , 100 ] ; therefore , organizations are interested in improving UX at work . Moreover , most papers that mention the work domain only do so as part of the participant information without any further consideration of the effects of a particular occupational culture on tool usage . For example , in some studies which utilize participants from different occupations , the effects of their respective occupation cultures were not addressed . While we understand that this was not the focus of these papers , we believe it is noteworthy to identify these limitations . 3 . 4 Context An insufficient description of context , as well as a lack of analysis of its roles has drawn criticism in UX studies [ 8 , 11 ] . Carrying these concerns over to our scope of interest , we explored the status of context inclusion in UX at work studies . Our question is : What contextual factors have been considered when studying UX at work ? We analyzed the papers in terms of the involvement of the context of use . The analysis includes extended abstracts , doctoral consortiums , and full papers , but excludes SIGs , panels , and workshop papers , since they do not refer to empirical data collected in a specific context . Therefore , 44 articles were analyzed in terms of context inclusion . It was impossible to analyze all the context factors that have been evaluated in the reviewed papers without the guidance of a framework . In most of the cases , the authors of the reviewed papers , although discussing some of the contextual factors , do not explicitly state them as contextual factors . Moreover , the involvement of the factors seems quite random . We decided to collect all the context - related data although they have not been explicitly mentioned as a context factor . We utilized one of the most comprehensive models for the context of use : the CoU - MHCI model [ 49 ] to be able to detect all the data that could be considered as contextual factors . In this model , five components of context are listed as task , temporal , social , technical , and physical [ 49 ] . The frequency distributions of the contextual factors are presented in Table 4 . 3 . 4 . 1 Task Context . With the guidance of the CoU - MHCI model [ 49 ] , we collected all the task - related contextual data and categorized them under three types : routine tasks , specific tasks , and temporary tasks . Routine tasks include everyday work practices and work styles , which may reveal themselves to be hard to clarify . They emphasize the variety of the tasks that the tools need to address , such as knowledge work practices being highly diverse and individualized [ 101 ] , or work styles in a company varying between event - driven and self - paced [ 28 ] . Routine tasks also include high - level descriptions of daily practices and the changes happening before and after the usage of a specific tool [ 14 , 82 , 106 ] . When UX is studied in the context of a specific task , the level of details can be higher . Examples include selecting , putting , and moving virtual geometric objects in a virtual environment for a computer - animated movie [ 53 ] ; curating information during a chemical Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 6 , No . CSCW1 , Article 132 . Publication date : April 2022 . 132 : 14 Pınar Şimşek Çağlar , Virpi Roto , and Teija Vainio Table 3 . The ways in which papers identify the work domains W o r k T y p e O cc u p a t i o n P r a c t i c e N o t S p e c i fi e d I n f o r m a t i o n w o r k [ 2 ] S e r v i c e s H e a l t h c a r e p r o f e ss i o n a l s [ 14 , 15 , 30 ] C o m p u t e r - m e d i a t e d c o mm u n i c a t i o n [ 3 7 , 52 ] [ 107 ] K n o w l e d g e w o r k [ 43 , 56 , 92 , 95 , 99 ] I n v e s t m e n t m a n a g e r s [ 28 ] C o ll a b o r a t i o n [ 9 , 54 , 57 , 81 ] [ 8 ] I n d u s t r i a l w o r k [ 72 ] I n s u r a n c e b r o k e r s a n d a g e n t s [ 18 ] [ 29 ] M o b i l e w o r k [ 61 ] C o n s u l t a n t s [ 62 ] [ 21 ] O n l i n e f r ee l a n c e r s [ 10 ] [ 42 ] C a ll c e n t e r w o r k e r s [ 76 ] [ 4 ] T r a v e l c o n s u l t a n t s [ 77 ] [ 69 ] R e a l e s t a t e a g e n t s [ 3 ] [ 20 ] D r i v e r s [ 106 ] [ 34 ] S u r v e i ll a n c e o p e r a t o r s [ 82 ] [ 23 ] S o c i a l m e d i a o ffi c e r s [ 88 ] [ 45 ] D i g i t a l m a r k e t e r s [ 88 ] [ 13 ] S y s t e m c o n t r o ll e r s [ 88 ] S u pp o r t s t a ff [ 9 ] D e s i g n a n d d e v e l o p m e n t U X d e s i g n e r s [ 6 , 91 ] D e s i g n e r s [ 62 ] E n g i n ee r s [ 25 , 62 , 78 ] A n a l y s t s [ 25 , 35 , 46 , 88 ] S o f t w a r e d e v e l o p e r s [ 35 ] M a n a g e r s [ 9 , 35 , 88 ] A d m i n i s t r a t o r s [ 9 , 27 ] A r t i s t i c d i s c i p l i n e s S e t c o n s t r u c t i o n a r t i s t s [ 53 ] M u s i c i a n s [ 19 , 71 ] P h o t o g r a p h e r s [ 71 ] W r i t e r s [ 71 ] R e s e a r c h e r s F a c u l t y m e m b e r s [ 25 , 101 ] G r a d u a t e s t u d e n t s [ 25 , 101 ] G e o l o g i s t s [ 17 ] S c i e n t i s t s [ 9 ] R e s e a r c h s t a ff [ 25 , 102 ] Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 6 , No . CSCW1 , Article 132 . Publication date : April 2022 . User Experience Research in the Work Context : Maps , Gaps and Agenda 132 : 15 Table 4 . The contextual factors found in the publications Context factors Publications Task ( 33 ) [ 4 , 6 , 9 , 10 , 13 – 15 , 17 – 19 , 25 , 27 , 28 , 30 , 35 , 43 , 46 , 53 , 54 , 56 , 57 , 62 , 76 – 78 , 82 , 88 , 91 , 95 , 99 , 101 , 102 , 106 ] Temporal ( 19 ) [ 3 , 4 , 10 , 14 , 17 , 25 , 28 , 30 , 35 , 43 , 56 , 62 , 76 , 77 , 82 , 88 , 95 , 101 , 102 ] Social ( 21 ) [ 3 , 6 , 9 , 10 , 14 , 15 , 17 , 18 , 30 , 35 , 45 , 52 , 56 , 57 , 61 , 62 , 77 , 91 , 95 , 101 , 102 ] Technical ( 21 ) [ 3 , 6 , 9 , 15 , 17 , 23 , 25 , 28 , 35 , 43 , 45 , 46 , 53 , 54 , 56 , 81 , 82 , 95 , 99 , 101 , 102 ] Physical ( 17 ) [ 3 , 9 , 10 , 15 , 17 , 25 , 35 , 43 , 45 , 53 , 69 , 77 , 79 , 81 , 82 , 91 , 106 ] incident [ 46 ] ; and managing access control policies [ 102 ] . Temporary tasks refer to non - routine or one - time tasks , such as the tasks that a newcomer is expected to accomplish during the process of assimilation [ 10 ] . Based on our analysis , the task context is the most common and scrutinized context factor . This is not surprising since interactive technologies typically aim to ease the given tasks of employees . The way in which the papers discussed the task context supports the view that UX at work is largely concerned with increasing work performance , while the variety of experiences at work is richer . Task context is mostly discussed from a problem - centric perspective . The aim is to detect specific pain points in tool use by observing the way in which tasks are performed , which helps to define related design requirements . 3 . 4 . 2 Temporal Context . Temporal context discussion in relation to tool usage at work has tran - spired in five ways in the reviewed articles . First , the temporal context was discussed in terms of a constraint , such as working between deadlines [ 35 ] , being in a busy work period [ 3 ] , and time limi - tations [ 14 , 56 ] . Secondly , it is discussed in terms of the duration of task completion [ 4 , 77 , 88 , 95 ] . Thirdly , it refers to a specific phase of work , such as the ’early assimilation phase’ [ 10 ] . Fourthly , it indicates the repetition of the task over time [ 102 ] . The final mention of temporal context refers to the duration of research , such as longer research periods to observe long - time effects or temporal use patterns [ 43 , 62 , 76 ] . 3 . 4 . 3 Social Context . In majority of the papers , the involvement of the social context appears as interpersonal interactions , such as collaboration practices , teamwork , information sharing , consulting , and communication structures [ 9 , 14 , 15 , 45 , 57 , 77 , 91 ] . An example of discussing interpersonal interactions with regards to a work tool presented by Calderon et al . [ 15 ] , studies the existing communication and information - sharing practices before and after a new design was introduced . Another example describes [ 14 ] the moment at which the authors discuss changing communication dynamics between the doctors and their patients after the introduction of a work tool . Unlike these two examples , the papers under this category rarely connect social context with their findings [ 56 ] . While the interpersonal interactions indicate a micro - level social context , there is also a macro - level social context involving values , norms , and attitudes [ 49 ] . In the work context , they refer to work and organizational culture . Very few of the articles account for macro - level social context . We detected only nine papers which mentioned the macro - level social context , such as organizational culture [ 17 , 18 , 35 , 91 ] ; work culture and moral norms [ 30 , 61 ] ; social practices and structures [ 6 ] ; social conventions , norms , and control models [ 45 , 102 ] . 3 . 4 . 4 Technical Context . We identified four ways in which the technical context is discussed . In the first one , the previous technology experience of the participants is acknowledged [ 15 ] . In the second , the existing tool environment is described to see the existing practices , needs , and Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 6 , No . CSCW1 , Article 132 . Publication date : April 2022 . 132 : 16 Pınar Şimşek Çağlar , Virpi Roto , and Teija Vainio problems [ 3 , 6 , 53 , 82 ] . In the third , a new tool’s technical features are raised [ 9 ] . Finally , multiple - tool usage was emphasized [ 17 , 25 , 35 , 95 , 101 ] . The variety of tools mentioned in the technical context was quite high , from online tools to physical ones . Among these are online resources , knowledge repositories , company intranet , websites , desktop or web - based applications , blogs , instant messaging , video , teleconferencing , wikis , email , applications , digital , physical devices , PDAs , voice recorders , portable media , GPS devices , and cell phones . 3 . 4 . 5 Physical Context . Physical context is discussed in terms of : off - site or distributed work [ 10 , 43 , 69 , 79 , 91 ] ; work in a mixed environment including both on - site and off - site [ 3 ] ; bodily movements during the tool usage , such as hand gestures [ 53 ] ; location of use [ 25 , 45 ] ; and description of the physical settings of work , such as furniture , lighting , audio and traffic , as well as weather conditions [ 9 , 17 , 35 , 77 , 81 , 106 ] . Despite the definition of UX remaining unclear , three main factors impacting UX are consistently stated to be user , system , and context [ 41 , 55 , 59 ] . However , in our data set , we have not found a shared understanding of context . We acknowledge the challenge of finding a common ground on considering the numerous factors that could be regarded as context . Even the factors that are categorized under the same context factor are quite varied . This difficulty has also attracted attention earlier resulting in some context models being created in the literature to help researchers and designers to identify these factors [ 1 , 12 , 50 ] . However , we have not found any mention of these models in the reviewed articles . We observed that the context factors are stated using various combinations . However , their inclusion seems arbitrary . There is no systematic way of capturing them . Moreover , the authors , although capturing one or multiple factors , do not acknowledge them as context factors . These raise some concerns regarding the role of the context in the analysis of the studies . In most of the cases , it seems as if they do not move beyond being superficial observations . Detailed descriptions of the captured contextual factors are not provided . Moreover , we do not see the ways in which they contribute to the analysis . For example , if the study ends with a product design , there is no mention of the way that these factors affected the process of design . If the study is about the evaluation of UX , there is no mention of the ways the contextual factors contributed to the results . In that sense , our finding concords with [ 8 ] , in which the authors have found that the role of context is underexplored . On the other hand , in [ 8 ] the authors showed that almost half of the UX studies were conducted in lab settings . In our data set , we have not found any studies that were carried out in controlled environments . Compared to [ 8 ] , UX at work studies are better at capturing contextual factors . Based on the numbers , in which even the least mentioned context factor was mentioned in 17 papers , we cannot say that context is overlooked in UX at work . However , as we stated above , the arbitrary inclusion hinders the systematic analysis of context . Thus , it is hard to say that context is treated as an essential factors of UX . We acknowledge that it is challenging to account for all the contextual factors in each study . As expected , a simultaneous inclusion of all these five components is rare . Only 3 out of 44 studies actually address all five components together [ 17 , 35 , 43 ] . These studies gathered in - depth inside data and applied multiple data collection methods to understand the role of context factors in UX at work . Holzblatt et al . [ 43 ] utilized multiple data collection techniques including in - depth interviews , log data , and online surveys . Gonzalez and Mark [ 35 ] used ethnographic methods including participant observation ( shadowing ) and in - depth interviews . Finally , Chen et al . [ 17 ] applied an empathetic immersive design approach in which one of the developers of the planned software was subjected to the same training procedure as the company scientists would be in order Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 6 , No . CSCW1 , Article 132 . Publication date : April 2022 . User Experience Research in the Work Context : Maps , Gaps and Agenda 132 : 17 to develop domain knowledge . In addition to capturing all five context factors , these articles were able to connect these factors to their analysis . 3 . 5 Limitations Our systematic review has at least two shortcomings . First , the selection of the literature sources is a common limitation of all literature reviews , and the major limitation of our review as well . However , both CHI and CSCW are respected venues providing a high volume of representative UX at work publications , therefore we consider them the best sources to clarify the state - of - the - art in this area . We were surprised to see the immature status of UX at work research even in these high class venues . Secondly , it was challenging to identify relevant search terms to find publications addressing UX at work . Exclusively using work - related search terms was a practical requirement , but we understand that this approach may have ruled out studies focusing on work - related software without referring to work domain . The search terms are a common limitation of studies that identify relevant literature by keyword search . We still consider the 389 found publications as an adequate number for the purpose of this study . 4 AGENDA FOR UX RESEARCH AT WORK Based on our literature review , UX at work research is still immature and there is need for more research even in creating the very grounding for more research . Our review reveals the state of the UX at work research , based on which we now present the acknowledged research gaps and suggest a research agenda for future UX research at work . 4 . 1 Motivation Overall , our analysis of the motivations showed that the discussions around the UX design and research of work tools are run by dichotomies : work performance vs . employee well - being ; in - strumental goals vs . non - instrumental goals ; and business needs vs . user needs . Based on these dichotomies , we suggest three potential research areas for future studies . From performance towards engagement and well - being . We showed that the most cited reason behind studying UX at work is to improve work performance and , consequently , business success . To do so , studies adopt a problem - centric approach in which the aim is to detect and solve usability problems . Although this is not a surprising finding per se , it shows the lack of studies in understanding the ways in which work tools could improve employee well - being , engagement , and satisfaction . Although problem - centric approaches help eliminate frustrations with regards to tool usage , it does not necessarily improve employee motivation and well - being [ 107 ] . The connection between meaningful experiences at work and employee well - being has been previously emphasized by psychology and organizational behavior scholars [ 65 , 68 , 85 , 103 ] . Although the tools play a prominent role in the degree to which the whole activity is satisfying , exciting , and meaningful for the employee [ 89 ] , experiences resulting from work tool usage and the effect of them on well - being have not been sufficiently studied in UX at work research [ 66 ] . Considering that work is a dominant part of human lives , well - being at work is a prominent topic to which UX at work should attend . We suggest future research to develop a UX specific knowledge on well - being at work [ 38 ] . Furthermore , as also argued by [ 66 ] , we suggest a mindset change of designers and researchers from problem - solving to possibility - seeking . Non - instrumental needs and goals of the users . Our results indicate that most of the UX at work studies are guided by the second wave of HCI . They are more concerned with the instrumental aspects of UX than non - instrumental ones . This stems partially from work tool design mostly being conducted in business - to - business domains in which the end user is not the purchaser of the Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 6 , No . CSCW1 , Article 132 . Publication date : April 2022 . 132 : 18 Pınar Şimşek Çağlar , Virpi Roto , and Teija Vainio products . The purchasing decisions are made according to pragmatic aspects , such as performance and productivity concerns , rather than the end user’s experiences [ 66 ] . Non - instrumental needs and goals are closely related to employee well - being and meaningful work as we pointed out earlier . A way of improving well - being at work is to include the non - instrumental aspects and positive user experiences of tool usage . Our knowledge of the non - instrumental side of UX and positive experiences is still heavily based on the research conducted in leisure contexts . Previous research provided evidence that the motives behind driving behavior at work and in leisure differ [ 97 ] . Moreover , work and leisure experiences vary in terms of need fulfilment [ 38 , 98 ] . We suggest future research to focus on non - instrumental aspects in UX at work in addition to pragmatic ones . While engaged in this , researchers should pay attention to the ways in which the work context differs from leisure contexts in relation to the sources of positive experiences , the factors that trigger or hinder them , the special conditions of designing for and evaluating positive experiences , as well as the impact of positive experiences on employee well - being and the whole organization . Balancing between user and business needs . Although few , there are papers dedicated to showing the necessity to balance business needs and user needs . Similar to improving work performance , this is also a unique feature of UX at work . We argue that this is one of the reasons for it being challenging to adopt the third wave of UX in the work context . We also acknowledge that work tool design cannot abandon its rational and business perspective , as well as completely adopt a non - rational approach of the third wave . Nevertheless , work tool design could and should find a balance between user - and business - centric approaches . This unique feature of UX at work necessitates more research ; inspired by [ 4 , 18 , 42 , 76 ] , we call for more research on the means to gain the balance . How could a good balance between business and user needs be achieved ? How could business and user needs be systematically collected ? What are the typical needs in each work domain ? 4 . 2 Concepts From ambiguity to more consistent understanding of UX . UX has been criticized as lacking a consensual definition [ 8 , 58 , 60 ] . Our data has shown that as a branch of UX research , UX at work also reflects the same problem . The papers rarely refer to an existing definition or mention their stance on the notion of UX . Considering that lack of a widely accepted understanding of UX has been broached more than a decade ago [ 8 , 58 ] , it is quite striking to see that the concern is still valid . The usage of the term UX is quite ambiguous and diverse . It has been mostly interchangeably used with usability , user interface , and user - centred design . We also observed that the term UX has been used as a buzzword without much attention being paid to the role it plays in the respective research . Overall , the lack of common ground and a shared view of the precise definition of UX causes multiple problems leading to various situations , such as lack of a scientific discourse , communication breakdowns , and difficulties in teaching the notion of UX [ 58 ] . Moreover , it hinders the generation of methodologies on designing for and evaluating UX [ 60 ] . As a result , it leads to an erosion of the UX concept : the original meaning of UX becomes obfuscated and the quality of UX research deteriorates . Now that UX at work research is starting to garner attention , first , we call the researchers in this field to acknowledge the non - instrumental side of UX to avoid UX at work research becoming just a new bottle for the same usability wine [ 8 ] . Secondly , we suggest that researchers be more descriptive about their exact meaning and definition of UX in their respective study . This could be accomplished by positioning the paper amongst studies with a similar understanding , referencing literature on UX at work definitions , or describing the authors’ own stance . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 6 , No . CSCW1 , Article 132 . Publication date : April 2022 . User Experience Research in the Work Context : Maps , Gaps and Agenda 132 : 19 Towards a better understanding of UX dimensions . Tuch et al . have found that the pos - itive experiences at work are derived most often from fulfilling the basic psychological needs of Competence , Popularity and Security [ 98 ] . According to their study , experiences related to Pleasure / Stimulation and Relatedness needs are more typical in the leisure domain , but our results indicate that researchers seem to expect the same experiences appear in work contexts as in leisure contexts . More research is needed in clarifying if Tuch et al . ’s findings hold true or if the experience dimensions are the same in both contexts . We have found that there is a proliferation of experience dimensions studied in the articles . As Bargas - Avila and Hornbaek have discussed , researchers prefer to invent their own terms for experi - ences instead of building on previous research [ 8 ] . Despite the abundance of dimensions , papers rarely pay attention to explaining their meaning ; therefore , we have a very vague understanding of their essence and links to each other . Based on these findings , we would like to suggest two agenda items with regard to the UX dimensions at work . First , we suggest future research consider the meanings of and interrelations between the UX dimensions at work . Elaborating on the meanings can help prevent generating multiple dimensions for describing the same phenomenon as well as build a more complete understanding of the dimensions . For example , " spatial connectedness " in [ 37 ] and " blending experience " in [ 81 ] evoke similar meanings . They both address the experiences of mediated interaction spaces , but we lack any certainty of their possible differences and the ways in which they might differ from each other . Case studies with a grounded theory approach would be a convenient methodology for revealing these intricacies [ 93 ] . Case studies can help gather rich , comparable , and context - specific dimensions . A grounded theory - based analysis can help reveal the properties and interrelations between dimensions . Secondly , we propose that researchers expand our UX at work - originated dimensions list and categories with further research . Our list is an initial attempt to provide context - specific knowledge base regarding UX dimensions at work . Utilization of the list would provide researchers with a database enabling the reuse of dimensions if applicable . If not , the list could be expanded by emphasizing the similarities and differences between the proposed dimensions . This would help alleviate their confusing ill - defined proliferation . Furthermore , the UX dimensions list provides a perspective from which to compare experiences at work and leisure . Our knowledge about UX and its dimensions rely much on the research conducted in leisure contexts . Existing research provides evidence that while some of the experiences are more prominent in work contexts , the others are in leisure contexts [ 98 ] . Nevertheless , we need to investigate whether some dimensions are more exclusive to work and leisure . This would help build a more inclusive understanding of UX without overemphasizing the leisure context . 4 . 3 Domains Focusing on different work domains and occupational cultures . Our results indicate a concentration of studies on knowledge and information work . With the shift to the knowledge - based economy [ 83 ] , it is unsurprising that UX at work studies lay a heavier emphasis on the knowledge work domains . However , industrial work domains should not be overlooked . There is an ongoing , massive transformation of industrial work with technological innovations , such as artificial intelligence and automation , invading the workplaces [ 47 ] . This sort of transformation is expected to dramatically influence UX in these domains . We suggest future research further investigates industrial workplaces . For example , the UX dimensions in automated work domains would be highly interesting to compare to the traditional tools mastered by employees . Our results have shown that the service category is the largest one targeting the occupations . As we discussed in 3 . 3 Domains , the reason might be that the employees’ experiences in these Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 6 , No . CSCW1 , Article 132 . Publication date : April 2022 . 132 : 20 Pınar Şimşek Çağlar , Virpi Roto , and Teija Vainio domains are found to affect customer experiences [ 75 , 100 ] . Yet , regardless of the indirect effect on customer experience , UX at work should be addressed in all sorts of occupations to improve employee well - being . Furthermore , increasing the diversity in UX at work research in terms of work domains will provide a more inclusive understanding and comparable results on which to build a knowledge base and improve UX at work . For future research , we encourage researchers not only to mention the work domain as a background information , but also to observe and report aspects of the occupational culture . These can include the shared values , norms , and experiences ; common tools , tasks , and constraints ; as well as the physical and social environment . This level of detail will help the UX at work research community start to see the connections between the domains , the above factors , and UX . Furthermore , depending on the work domain , employees may have different kinds of psychological needs ; thus , the UX design goals could be different . Some of the UX dimension might outweigh or be non - existent in some of the work domains . Therefore , exploring the domain - specific psychological needs , work cultures , practices , and routines on work tool usage would thereby add UX as an additional item to the UX at work research agenda . 4 . 4 Context While context is widely accepted as an important factor affecting UX , UX research lacks evidence on the ways in which the work contexts affect UX . Understanding this is especially important if we want to understand how work context differs from leisure context . Without scholars reporting findings of the influence of work context in UX , we cannot advance the field of UX research . Unfortunately , few scholars today seem to pay attention to context factors . We identified three major issues that may prohibit us from establishing a better understanding of work context . First , there is no shared understanding of the concept of context . There is an arbitrary and coincidental inclusion of context factors without them even being acknowledged as context factors . Secondly , even though some of the contextual factors are captured , the papers do not venture beyond merely mentioning them . Finally , despite some of the contextual factors being elaborated , the studies fail to provide context - specific insights and associate them with their analysis , designs , and resulting experiences . The diversity and variety of contexts factors . Regarding the first issue , the questions we would like to pose are : How does work contexts differ from leisure contexts ? What should be captured as context in the work context ? Are all the context factors equally important in each work domain ? Which contextual factors are critical in which conditions ? Further research could focus on providing a comprehensive list of contextual factors in UX at work . This would help researchers to hold a shared understanding of UX at work context factors and to more deliberately decide on which factors to include . More information on the typical factors affecting UX would support especially UX evaluation in which researchers need to understand the role of context factors on the work tool UX . If the most common contextual factors at work become well known , then UX evaluation studies can pay special attention to the aspects that should be captured , thereby gaining more reliable results . Capturing contexts factors . Regarding the second issue , we would like to ask : Are the factors affecting UX the same in work and leisure contexts ? How should the context be captured ? What are the best practices of capturing context in a systematic , unobtrusive , and ethical way in a work context ? We observed that three papers in our data set [ 17 , 35 , 43 ] captured some level of information about all five contextual factors ; all these papers utilized ethnographic methods and multiple data collection techniques . Based on that , we encourage future research to more efficiently harness ethnographic sensibilities and apply multiple data collection techniques addressing both Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 6 , No . CSCW1 , Article 132 . Publication date : April 2022 . User Experience Research in the Work Context : Maps , Gaps and Agenda 132 : 21 subjective and objective data when applicable [ 87 ] . Combining different methods fed by different data sources would help researchers gain a more holistic understanding of contextual factors . Analyzing context factors . The third issue addresses the question : Is UX at work different from UX in leisure contexts ? How should this influence UX studies and designs ? How can the effect of contextual factors on experiences be assessed ? As with the above examples , ethnographic approaches and multiple data collection methods would encourage researchers to generate rich descriptions of contextual factors . Rich descriptions of context and narrative inquiry methods would help researchers to identify and correlate the relevant contextual factors with the results and analysis of their studies . In addition , they would also help in analysing the differentiating factors between work and leisure contexts . Overall , our aim is not to advise researchers to simultaneously consider all the contextual factors in each study , but to be aware of critical context factors affecting UX at work . For example , the social context in UX at work should be afforded special interest . As argued by Clemmensen et al . , UX at work is highly influenced by the work structure , the division of labor , managerial hierarchy , organizational culture , and norms for expressing emotions [ 22 ] . All of these are regarded as social factors specific to the work context . They are capable of producing experiences unique to work environments . They represent the major features that differentiate work experiences from the leisure ones . 5 CONCLUSION Our research has been inspired by the discussions on UX research being concentrated on the leisure context , but ignoring the work context , and of UX at work being different from UX in the leisure context . The aim is to bring researchers to a common ground and to increase awareness on the controversies of UX at work research . Our review advances the research on UX at work by presenting the current state of research from the perspective of the motivations to carry out UX at work research , definitions and dimensions of UX , as well as work domains and contextual factors of work . Thus , we provide the first collection of UX at work dimensions ( see Table 2 ) as an initial attempt to generate a context - specific knowledge base . Secondly , we identify the research gaps and , based on that , we provide a research agenda to advance the UX at work research . Below is a summary of the findings and research agenda items . We report that UX at work places rational and pragmatic aspects at the fore , and adopts a problem - centric approach . Moreover , these problems focus on the improvement of work rather than employee’s experiences and well - being . The beneficiaries of the proposed solutions are not only users but also the businesses . All these indicate that UX at work research follows a business - centric rather than user - centric perspective . Finally , positive UX and the need to balance out business and user needs are emerging approaches with only a few publications in our data set . The long - standing issue of UX lacking a common understanding is still valid and also reflected in UX at work research . Most of the studies do not base their discussions on an existing UX definition or clarify their stance on UX . This creates an ambiguity on the precise meaning of UX in UX at work studies . There is an abundance of UX dimensions studied in UX at work papers . However , we lack an understanding of their meaning and the ways in which they are related to each other . The high number of hedonic dimensions presented in Table 2 contrasts with the low number of papers ( 12 ) from which they are derived . The domains mentioned in the reviewed papers indicate an overall limited area of studied work contexts . Moreover , occupations are only vaguely mentioned as part of participant information without regarding them as a factor impacting the UX of work tools . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 6 , No . CSCW1 , Article 132 . Publication date : April 2022 . 132 : 22 Pınar Şimşek Çağlar , Virpi Roto , and Teija Vainio The analysis of the context factors has shown that there is a lack of common understanding on the exact definition of context and explanation of the role of context in the reviewed studies . Moreover , the ways in which the captured context factors contribute to the analysis of the studies remains unclear . In summary , the state of UX at work is still immature and scattered . We hope the present study helps the UX at work research to develop from a more solid grounding . To advance research in this area , we conclude by proposing the following research agenda : • In the spirit of the 3rd wave of HCI that introduced experiential aspects of technology use , more research is needed on employee’s engagement and well - being . It is important to analyze the non - instrumental needs and goals of the users also at work . The specific challenge with this research line is to find the balance between user and business needs . • The researchers should be clear and explicit in their definition UX and about their research contribution to UX research , instead of using UX as a loose vague term . UX at work dimensions necessitate further investigation on the meaning of and the interrelations between them . We also invite researchers to expand our UX at work dimensions list , which is an initial attempt to generate context - specific knowledge . • The focus of research should more widely cover different work domains and occupational cultures . We hope to see more attention on their influence on UX at work . • The research should focus on the identification of essential contextual factors in the work - places . Social factors , such as organizational and occupational culture , hierarchy , work practices and norms , should become a focus . The researchers could avail themselves more of ethnographic sensibilities and multiple data collection methods to capture the contextual factors , and to correlate them with the results and analysis of the studies . 6 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This work was partly supported by Academy of Finland , University Profiling Funding . The authors would also like to thank Elisa Mekler and Aarne Leinonen for their valuable feedback . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 6 , No . CSCW1 , Article 132 . Publication date : April 2022 . User Experience Research in the Work Context : Maps , Gaps and Agenda 132 : 23 A CODES Table 5 . Codes and Their Descriptions Section Subsection Coding Description Motivation Fix problems Problem definition Explicit mentions of a design problem , with the purpose of solving them . Solution Explicit mentions of a design solution to a previously stated design problem . Improve work Efficiency Mentions of improving work performance . ( The authors derived the given codes from direct mentions of the phrases , without any interpretations in the context of work tool usage . ) Effectiveness Productivity Ease of use Simplification of work Creativity support Support design Exploratory research Mentions of explorations regarding the nature of experi - ences , users , and the work itself ; done for understanding the context . ( Without directly focusing on specific prob - lem definitions or solutions ) Raise discussions Discursive space Mentionsofanaimforcreatingorsupportingadiscursivespace . Concepts Definitions Definition of UX Mentions or references to explicit UX definitions . UX - usability differenti - ation Explicit mentions or discussion on the differences be - tween UX and usability . Dimensions Experience All mentions of concepts that can be considered as ex - periences based on Hassenzahl’s [ 40 ] definition : " a mo - mentary , primarily evaluative feeling ( good - bad ) while interacting with a product or service . " Domains Occupation Direct mentions of occupations of the participants of the studies . Job description Descriptions of work in the absence of direct mentions of occupations . Context Task context Task context Mentions of task types ( routine , specific , or temporary ) . Based on [ 49 ] . Temporal context Temporal context Mentions of time constraints , duration of task comple - tion , phases of work , task repetition , or the duration of research . Based on [ 49 ] . Social context Social context Mentions of interpersonal relationships , values , norms , or attitudes . Based on [ 49 ] . Technical context Technical context Mentionsofprevioustechnologyexperience , existingtool environment , technical features of the tools , or multiple tool usage . Based on [ 49 ] . Physical context Physical context Mentions of work location , body movements ; the descrip - tions of furniture , lighting , audio , traffic , or weather con - ditions . Based on [ 49 ] . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 6 , No . CSCW1 , Article 132 . Publication date : April 2022 . 132 : 24 Pınar Şimşek Çağlar , Virpi Roto , and Teija Vainio REFERENCES [ 1 ] Gregory D . Abowd , Anind K . Dey , Peter J . Brown , Nigel Davies , Mark Smith , and Pete Steggles . 1999 . Towards a better understanding of context and context - awareness . Lecture Notes in Computer Science ( including subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics ) 1707 ( 1999 ) , 304 – 307 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 3 - 540 - 48157 - 5 { _ } 29 [ 2 ] Palo Alto , Mario Herger , Palo Alto , Sebastian Deterding , Scott Schnaars , Badgeville Europe , Matt Landes , Mountain View , Erika Webb , and Oracle Corporation . 2013 . Gamification @ Work . In CHI ’13 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems on - CHI EA ’13 . ACM , 2427 – 2431 . [ 3 ] Shweta Aneja and Youn Kyung Lim . 2007 . Designing for totality of mobile and non - mobile interaction : A case study . In CHI 2007 . ACM , New York City , NY , 1685 – 1690 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1240866 . 1240884 [ 4 ] Jonathan Arnowitz , Diana Gray , Naomi Dorsch , Monica Heidelberg , and Michael Arent . 2005 . The stakeholder forest : Designing an expenses application for the enterprise . In CHI 2005 . ACM , 941 – 956 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1056808 . 1056810 [ 5 ] Mariam Asad , Christopher A Le Dantec , Becky Nielsen , and Kate Diedrick . 2017 . Creating a Sociotechnical API : Designing City - Scale Community Engagement . In CHI 2017 . ACM , 2295 – 2306 . [ 6 ] Paula M Bach , Robert Deline , and John M Carroll . 2009 . Designers wanted : Participation and the user experience in open source software development . Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - Proceedings ( 2009 ) , 985 – 994 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1518701 . 1518852 [ 7 ] Liam J Bannon . 1995 . From Human Factors to Human Actors : The Role of Psychology and Human - Computer Interaction Studies in System Design . In Readings in Human – Computer Interaction , Ronald M Baecker , Jonathan Grudin , William A S Buxton , and Saul Greenberg ( Eds . ) . Morgan Kaufmann Publishers , Inc . , 205 – 214 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / b978 - 0 - 08 - 051574 - 8 . 50024 - 8 [ 8 ] Javier A Bargas - Avila and Kasper Hornbæk . 2011 . Old wine in new bottles or novel challenges ? A critical analysis of empirical studies of User Experience . In CHI 2011 . ACM , 2689 – 2698 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1978942 . 1979336 [ 9 ] David Benyon and Oli Mival . 2015 . Blended Spaces for Collaboration . Computer Supported Cooperative Work : CSCW : An International Journal 24 , 2 - 3 ( 2015 ) , 223 – 249 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10606 - 015 - 9223 - 8 [ 10 ] Allie Blaising , Chinmay Kulkarni , and Yasmine Kotturi . 2019 . Navigating uncertainty in the future of work : Information - seeking and critical events among online freelancers . In CHI’19 Extended Abstracts . ACM , 1 – 6 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290607 . 3312922 [ 11 ] Susanne Bødker . 2006 . When second wave HCI meets third wave challenges . In NordiCHI 2006 : Changing Roles , Vol . 189 . ACM , 1 – 8 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1182475 . 1182476 [ 12 ] Nicholas A . Bradley and Mark D . Dunlop . 2005 . Toward a multidisciplinary model of context to support context - aware computing . Human - Computer Interaction 20 , 4 ( 2005 ) , 403 – 446 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1207 / s15327051hci2004 { _ } 2 [ 13 ] J J Cadiz , Attila Narin , Gavin Jancke , Anoop Gupta , and Michael Boyle . 2004 . Exploring PC - telephone convergence with the enhanced telephony prototype . Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - Proceedings 6 , 1 ( 2004 ) , 215 – 222 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 985692 . 985720 [ 14 ] Åsa Cajander and Christiane Grünloh . 2019 . Electronic health records are more than a work tool conflicting needs of direct and indirect stakeholders . Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - Proceedings ( 2019 ) , 1 – 13 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290605 . 3300865 [ 15 ] Roberto Calderon , Junia Anacleto , Sidney Fels , and Jônatas Leite De Oliveira . 2013 . Towards Supporting Informal Information and Communication Practices Within a Brazilian Healthcare Environment . . In CHI 2013 Extended Abstracts , Vol . 2013 - April . ACM , 517 – 522 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2468356 . 2468447 [ 16 ] Janice Caplan . 2014 . Develop and engage all your people for business success . Strategic HR Review 13 , 2 ( 2014 ) , 75 – 80 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1108 / shr - 11 - 2013 - 0105 [ 17 ] Yu Chung Chen , Sangyoon Lee , Hyejung Hur , Jason Leigh , Andrew Johnson , and Luc Renambot . 2010 . Case study : Designing an advanced visualization system for geological core drilling expeditions . In CHI 2010 . ACM , 4645 – 4659 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1753846 . 1754206 [ 18 ] Dana Chisnell and Meredith Brown . 2004 . Matching user and business goals . In CHI 2004 . ACM , 943 – 958 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 985921 . 985951 [ 19 ] Lonny L Chu . 2002 . User performance and haptic design issues for a force - feedback sound editing interface . ( 2002 ) , 544 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 506468 . 506473 [ 20 ] Michael F Clarke , Joseph Gonzales , Richard Harper , David Randall , Thomas Ludwig , and Nozomi Ikeya . 2019 . Better Supporting Workers in ML Workplaces . In CSCW’19 Companion . ACM , 443 – 448 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3311957 . 3359429 [ 21 ] Torkil Clemmensen , Pedro F Campos , Dinesh S Katre , Jose Abdelnour - Nocera , Arminda Lopes , Rikke Orngreen , and Shailey Minocha . 2013 . CHI 2013 Human Work Interaction Design ( HWID ) SIG : Past History and Future Challenges . In CHI 2013 Extended Abstracts , Vol . 2013 - April . ACM , 2537 – 2540 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2468356 . 2468824 Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 6 , No . CSCW1 , Article 132 . Publication date : April 2022 . User Experience Research in the Work Context : Maps , Gaps and Agenda 132 : 25 [ 22 ] Torkil Clemmensen , Morten Hertzum , and Jose Abdelnour - Nocera . 2020 . Ordinary User Experiences at Work . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction 27 , 3 ( 2020 ) , 1 – 31 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3386089 [ 23 ] Mary Czerwinski , George Robertson , Brian Meyers , Greg Smith , Daniel Robbins , and Desney Tan . 2006 . Large display research overview . Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - Proceedings ( 2006 ) , 69 – 74 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1125451 . 1125471 [ 24 ] Fred D . Davis . 1989 . Perceived usefulness , perceived ease of use , and user acceptance of information technology . MIS Quarterly : Management Information Systems 13 , 3 ( 1989 ) , 319 – 339 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2307 / 249008 [ 25 ] David Dearman and Jeffrey S Pierce . 2008 . " It’s on my other computer ! " : Computing with multiple devices . Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - Proceedings ( 2008 ) , 767 – 776 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1357054 . 1357177 [ 26 ] Pieter M A Desmet and Anna E Pohlmeyer . 2013 . Positive Design : An Introduction to Design for Subjective Well - Being Pieter . International Journal of Design 7 , 3 ( 2013 ) , 5 – 19 . [ 27 ] Andreas Dieberger , Eser Kandogan , and Cheryl A Kieliszewski . 2006 . Scalability in system management GUIs : A designer’s nightmare . Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - Proceedings ( 2006 ) , 99 – 104 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1125451 . 1125477 [ 28 ] Wei Ding , Mareia L Morelli , Bala Kalyanasundarum , and Michael Magoolaghan . 2008 . Fighting fragmentation : An enterprise framework for creating unified online workspaces . In CHI 2008 . ACM , 3009 – 3014 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1358628 . 1358799 [ 29 ] CarolFarnsworth , LaurenMcEwen , andStephenWilliams . 2017 . SIG : Currentandfutureprocessmappingtoreimagine work . In CHI’17 Extended Abstracts , Vol . Part F1276 . ACM , 1364 – 1367 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3027063 . 3049282 [ 30 ] Tony Fernandes . 2012 . User centered design in the OR . Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - Proceedings ( 2012 ) , 717 – 720 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2212776 . 2212843 [ 31 ] Jodi Forlizzi and Katja Battarbee . 2004 . Understanding experience in interactive systems . In DIS2004 - Designing Interactive Systems : Across the Spectrum . ACM , 261 – 268 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1013115 . 1013152 [ 32 ] Anna Katharina Frison , Philipp Wintersberger , Andreas Riener , Clemens Schartmüller , Linda Ng Boyle , Erika Miller , and Klemens Weigl . 2019 . In UX we trust investigation of aesthetics and usability of driver - vehicle interfaces and their impact on the perception of automated driving . In CHI 2019 . ACM , 1 – 13 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290605 . 3300374 [ 33 ] Bill Gaver and Heather Martin . 2000 . Alternatives : Exploring information appliances through conceptual design proposals . In CHI 2000 , Vol . 2 . ACM , 209 – 216 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 332040 . 332433 [ 34 ] Audrey Girouard , Aneesh P Tarun , and Roel Vertegaal . 2012 . Display Stacks : Interaction techniques for stacks of flexible thin - film displays . Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - Proceedings ( 2012 ) , 2431 – 2440 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2207676 . 2208406 [ 35 ] Victor M González and Gloria Mark . 2004 . " Constant , constant , multi - tasking craziness " : Managing multiple working spheres . In CHI 2004 , Vol . 6 . ACM , 113 – 120 . [ 36 ] Nitesh Goyal and Susan R Fussell . 2016 . Effects of Sensemaking Translucence on Distributed Collaborative Analysis . In CSCW ’16 . ACM , 288 – 302 . [ 37 ] Charlie Gullström . 2016 . Where did my Office go ? Is it in the Cloud ! ? – Workshop on Spatial and Social Connectedness in Virtual and Mediated Work Environments . In CSCW ’16 Companion . ACM , 457 – 464 . [ 38 ] Stefanie Harbich and Marc Hassenzahl . 2016 . User Experience in the Work Domain : A Longitudinal Field Study . Interacting with Computers 29 , 3 ( 2016 ) , 306 – 324 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1093 / iwc / iww022 [ 39 ] Marc Hassenzahl . 2003 . The Thing and I : Understanding the Relationship Between User and Product . In Funology . Human - Computer Interaction Series , M . A . Blythe , K . Overbeeke , A . F . Monk , and P . C . Wright ( Eds . ) . Springer , Chapter 3 , 31 – 42 . [ 40 ] Marc Hassenzahl . 2008 . User experience ( UX ) : Towards an experiential perspective on product quality . In IHM ’08 : Proceedings of the 20th Conference on l’Interaction Homme - Machine . ACM , 11 – 15 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1512714 . 1512717 [ 41 ] Marc Hassenzahl and Noam Tractinsky . 2006 . User experience - A research agenda . Behaviour and Information Technology 25 , 2 ( 2006 ) , 91 – 97 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 01449290500330331 [ 42 ] Karen Holtzblatt , Joshua Barr , and Les Holtzblatt . 2009 . Driving user centered design into organizations - Is it possible ? . In CHI 2009 . ACM , 2727 – 2729 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1520340 . 1520392 [ 43 ] Lester Holtzblatt , Jill L Drury , Daniel Weiss , Laurie E Damianos , and Donna L Cuomo . 2012 . Evaluation of the uses and benefits of a social business platform . In CHI’12 . ACM , 721 – 736 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2212776 . 2212844 [ 44 ] Hsiu Fang Hsieh and Sarah E Shannon . 2005 . Three approaches to qualitative content analysis . Qualitative Health Research 15 , 9 ( 2005 ) , 1277 – 1288 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 1049732305276687 [ 45 ] Elaine M Huang . 2005 . Design and analysis of groupware for large displays . Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - Proceedings ( 2005 ) , 1118 – 1119 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1056808 . 1056840 [ 46 ] Zhuanyi Huang , Kyungsik Han , Lauren Charles - Smith , and Michael J Henry . 2017 . Design science methodology applied to a chemical surveillance tool . Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - Proceedings Part F1276 Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 6 , No . CSCW1 , Article 132 . Publication date : April 2022 . 132 : 26 Pınar Şimşek Çağlar , Virpi Roto , and Teija Vainio ( 2017 ) , 2652 – 2658 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3027063 . 3053263 [ 47 ] ILO . 2019 . ILO Centenary Declaration for the Future of Work . June ( 2019 ) . https : / / www . ilo . org / ilc / ILCSessions / 108 / reports / texts - adopted / WCMS _ 711674 / lang - - en / index . htm [ 48 ] Tejinder K Judge , Tara Matthews , and Steve Whittaker . 2012 . Comparing collaboration and individual personas for the design and evaluation of collaboration software . In CHI’12 . ACM , 1997 – 2000 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2207676 . 2208344 [ 49 ] Satu Jumisko - Pyykkö and Teija Vainio . 2010 . Framing the context of use for mobile HCI . International Journal of Mobile Human Computer Interaction 2 , 4 ( 2010 ) , 1 – 28 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 4018 / jmhci . 2010100101 [ 50 ] Satu Jumisko - Pyykkö and Teija Vainio . 2010 . Framing the context of use for mobile HCI . International Journal of Mobile Human Computer Interaction 2 , 4 ( 2010 ) , 1 – 28 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 4018 / jmhci . 2010100101 [ 51 ] Eija Kaasinen , Virpi Roto , Jaakko Hakulinen , Tomi Heimonen , Jussi P P Jokinen , Hannu Karvonen , Tuuli Keskinen , Hanna Koskinen , Yichen Lu , Pertti Saariluoma , Helena Tokkonen , and Markku Turunen . 2015 . Defining user experience goals to guide the design of industrial systems . Behaviour and Information Technology 34 , 10 ( 2015 ) , 976 – 991 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 0144929X . 2015 . 1035335 [ 52 ] Wendy A Kellogg , Thomas Erickson , Tracee Vetting Wolf , Stephen Levy , Jim Christensen , Jeremy Sussman , and William E Bennett . 2006 . Leveraging digital backchannels to enhance user experience in electronically mediated communication . In CSCW ’06 : Proceedings of the 2006 20th anniversary conference on computer supported cooperative work . ACM , 451 – 454 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1180875 . 1180943 [ 53 ] Kenrick Kin , Tom Miller , Björn Bollensdorff , Tony DeRose , Björn Hartmann , and Maneesh Agrawala . 2011 . Eden : A professional multitouch tool for constructing virtual organic environments . In CHI 2011 . ACM , 1343 – 1352 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1978942 . 1979141 [ 54 ] Romina Kühn , Mandy Korzetz , Lukas Büschel , Christina Korger , Philip Manja , and Thomas Schlegel . 2016 . Natural voting interactions for collaborative work with mobile devices . Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - Proceedings 07 - 12 - May - ( 2016 ) , 2570 – 2575 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2851581 . 2892300 [ 55 ] Carine Lallemand and Vincent Koenig . 2020 . Measuring the Contextual Dimension of User Experience : Development of the User Experience Context Scale ( UXCS ) . ACM International Conference Proceeding Series ( 2020 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3419249 . 3420156 [ 56 ] Sven Laqua , M Angela Sasse , Steven Greenspan , and Carrie Gates . 2011 . Do you knowdis ? A user study of a knowledge discovery tool for organizations . In CHI 2011 . ACM , 2887 – 2896 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1978942 . 1979371 [ 57 ] Laszlo Laufer , Peter Halacsy , and Adam Somlai - Fischer . 2011 . Prezi meeting : Collaboration in a zoomable canvas based environment . Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - Proceedings ( 2011 ) , 749 – 752 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1979742 . 1979673 [ 58 ] Effie L C Law , Virpi Roto , Marc Hassenzahl , Arnold P O S Vermeeren , and Joke Kort . 2009 . Understanding , scoping and defining user experience : A survey approach . In CHI 2009 . ACM , 719 – 728 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1518701 . 1518813 [ 59 ] Effie L C Law and Paul Van Schaik . 2010 . Modelling user experience - An agenda for research and practice . Interacting with Computers 22 , 5 ( 2010 ) , 313 – 322 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . intcom . 2010 . 04 . 006 [ 60 ] Effie Lai - Chong Law , Arnold P . O . S . Vermeeren , Marc Hassenzahl , and Mark Blythe . 2007 . Towards a UX Manifesto . In Towards a UX Manifesto , Effie Lai - Chong Law , Arnold P . O . S . Vermeeren , Marc Hassenzahl , and Mark Blythe ( Eds . ) . COST , Lancaster . [ 61 ] Minha Lee , Lily Frank , Femke Beute , Yvonne De Kort , and Wijnand IJsselsteijn . 2017 . Bots mind the social - Technical gap . ECSCW 2017 - Proceedings of the 15th European Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( 2017 ) , 1 – 20 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 18420 / ecscw2017 - 14 [ 62 ] Q Vera Liao , Muhammed Mas Ud Hussain , Praveen Chandar , Matthew Davis , Yasaman Khazaen , Marco Patricio Crasso , Dakuo Wang , Michael Muller , N Sadat Shami , and Werner Geyer . 2018 . All work and no play ? Conversations with a question - and - answer chatbot in the wild . In CHI 2018 , Vol . 2018 - April . ACM , 1 – 13 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3173574 . 3173577 [ 63 ] Jiaxin Lin and Jie Li . 2016 . An effective user centered approach : Using web design framework to support user experience design of interactive multi - functional product . In CHI’16 Extended Abstracts , Vol . May 07 - 12 . ACM , 3129 – 3135 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2851581 . 2892518 [ 64 ] Gitte Lindgaard . 2012 . Commentary on : Tractinsky , Noam ( 2013 ) : Visual aesthetics . In The Encyclopedia of Human - Computer Interaction , Mads Soegaard and Rikke Friis Dam ( Eds . ) . The Interaction Design Foundation . [ 65 ] Marjolein Lips - Wiersma and Lani Morris . 2011 . The Map of Meaning : A Guide to Sustaining our Humanity in the World of Work . Greenleaf Publishing , Sheffield . 216 pages . [ 66 ] Yichen Lu and Virpi Roto . 2015 . Evoking meaningful experiences at work – a positive design framework for work tools . Journal of Engineering Design 26 , 4 - 6 ( 2015 ) , 99 – 120 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 09544828 . 2015 . 1041461 [ 67 ] Mirko Mandic and Andruid Kerne . 2005 . Using intimacy , chronology and zooming to visualize rhythms in email experience . In CHI 2005 . ACM , 1617 – 1620 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1056808 . 1056980 Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 6 , No . CSCW1 , Article 132 . Publication date : April 2022 . User Experience Research in the Work Context : Maps , Gaps and Agenda 132 : 27 [ 68 ] D . R . May , R . L . Gilson , and L . M . Harter . 2004 . The Psychological Conditions of Meaningfulness , Safety and Availability and the Engagement of the Human Spirit at Work . Journal of Occupational and Organizational Psychology 77 , 1 ( 2004 ) , 11 – 37 . [ 69 ] Ron Mendoza and Kaari Peterson . 2004 . From tools to tasks . In CHI 2004 . ACM , 912 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 985921 . 985949 [ 70 ] David Moher , Alessandro Liberati , Jennifer Tetzlaff , and Douglas G Altman . 2010 . Preferred reporting items for systematic reviews and meta - analyses : The PRISMA statement . International Journal of Surgery 8 , 5 ( 2010 ) , 336 – 341 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijsu . 2010 . 02 . 007 [ 71 ] Dan Morris and Jimmy Secretan . 2009 . Computational creativity support : Using algorithms and machine learning to help people be more creative . In CHI 2009 . ACM , 4733 – 4736 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1520340 . 1520728 [ 72 ] Henrik Mucha , Carsten Roecker , Thomas Ludwig , Corinna Ogonowski , Martin Stein , Sebastian Robert , Lukas Galla , Martin Hill , and Volker Wulf . 2018 . The industrial internet of things : New perspectives on HCI and CSCW within industry settings . In CSCW’18 Companion . ACM , 393 – 400 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3272973 . 3273009 [ 73 ] Jens Müller , Roman Rädle , and Harald Reiterer . 2017 . Remote collaboration with Mixed Reality displays : How shared virtual landmarks facilitate spatial referencing . In CHI 2017 , Vol . 2017 - May . ACM , 6481 – 6486 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3025453 . 3025717 [ 74 ] Steven Nagels , Raf Ramakers , Kris Luyten , and Wim Deferme . 2018 . Silicone Devices : A Scalable DIY Approach for Fabricating Self - Contained Multi - Layered Soft Circuits using Microfluidic . In CHI’18 . ACM , 1 – 13 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3173574 . 3173762 [ 75 ] Afshan Naseem , Sadia Ejaz Sheikh , and Khusro P Malik GPHR . 2011 . Impact of Employee Satisfaction on Suc - cess of Organization : Relation between Customer Experience and Employee Satisfaction . International Journal of Multidisciplinary Sciences and Engineering 2 , 5 ( 2011 ) , 41 – 46 . www . ijmse . org [ 76 ] Claudia Nass , Daniel Kerkow , and Jessica Jung . 2010 . The fulfillment of user needs and the course of time in field investigation . In Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - Proceedings . 4541 – 4552 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1753846 . 1754192 [ 77 ] Jasminko Novak , Mattias Aggeler , and Gerhard Schwabe . 2008 . Designing large - display workspaces for cooperative travel consultancy . In CHI 2008 . ACM , 2877 – 2882 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1358628 . 1358777 [ 78 ] Tom Nysetvold and Chia Chi Teng . 2013 . Collaboration tools for multi - user CAD . Proceedings of the 2013 IEEE 17th International Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work in Design , CSCWD 2013 ( 2013 ) , 241 – 245 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / CSCWD . 2013 . 6580969 [ 79 ] Tom Nysetvold and Chia Chi Teng . 2013 . Collaboration tools for multi - user CAD . Proceedings of the 2013 IEEE 17th International Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work in Design , CSCWD 2013 ( 2013 ) , 241 – 245 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / CSCWD . 2013 . 6580969 [ 80 ] Greg R . Oldham and Markus Baer . 2012 . Creativity and the work context . Elsevier Inc . 387 – 420 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / B978 - 0 - 12 - 374714 - 3 . 00016 - 1 [ 81 ] Jeni Paay , Jesper Kjeldskov , and Kenton O’Hara . 2011 . BISi : A Blended Interaction Space . In CHI 2011 . ACM , 185 – 200 . [ 82 ] Serge Pelletier and Joel Suss . 2015 . Atypical Visual Display for Monitoring Multiple CCTV Feeds . ( 2015 ) , 1145 – 1150 . [ 83 ] Josh Plaskoff . 2017 . Employee experience : the new human resource management approach . Strategic HR Review 16 , 3 ( 2017 ) , 136 – 141 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1108 / shr - 12 - 2016 - 0108 [ 84 ] Chris Provis . 2014 . Labour & Industry : a journal of the social and economic relations of work . Journal of the Association of Industrial Relations Academics of Australia and New Zealand 20 , 2 ( 2014 ) , 123 – 137 . [ 85 ] L . Roberson . 1990 . Functions ofWork Meanings in Organizations : Work Meanings andWork Motivation . In Meanings of Occupational Work : A Collection of Essays , A . BriefandW . Nord ( Ed . ) . Lexington Books , Lexington , MA , 107 – 134 . [ 86 ] Virpi Roto , Torkil Clemmensen , Heli Vaataja , and Effie Lai - Chong Law . 2018 . Designing Interactive Systems for Work Engagement . Human Technology 14 , 2 ( 2018 ) , 135 – 139 . https : / / www . dawsonera . com / readonline / 9781292013848 [ 87 ] Virpi Roto , Heli Väätäjä , Satu Jumisko - Pyykkö , and Kaisa Väänänen - Vainio - Mattila . 2011 . Best practices for capturing context in user experience studies in the wild . Proceedings of the 15th International Academic MindTrek Conference : Envisioning Future Media Environments , MindTrek 2011 ( 2011 ) , 91 – 98 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2181037 . 2181054 [ 88 ] Joni Salminen , Soon Gyo Jung , Jisun An , Haewoon Kwak , and Bernard J Jansen . 2018 . Findings of a user study of automatically generated personas . Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - Proceedings 2018 - April ( 2018 ) , 1 – 6 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3170427 . 3188470 [ 89 ] Paula Savioja , Marja Liinasuo , and Hanna Koskinen . 2014 . User experience : does it matter in complex systems ? Cognition , Technology { \ & } Work 16 , 4 ( 2014 ) , 429 – 449 . [ 90 ] N Sadat Shami , Michael Muller , Aditya Pal , Mikhil Masli , and Werner Geyer . 2015 . Inferring employee engagement from social media . In CHI 2015 , Vol . 2015 - April . ACM , 3999 – 4008 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2702123 . 2702445 [ 91 ] Preston Smalley and Jeff Herman . 2005 . Creating a system to share user experience best practices at ebay . In CHI 2005 . ACM , 1797 – 1800 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1056808 . 1057025 Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 6 , No . CSCW1 , Article 132 . Publication date : April 2022 . 132 : 28 Pınar Şimşek Çağlar , Virpi Roto , and Teija Vainio [ 92 ] Tong Sun , Nancy Doubleday , and Adam Smith . 2012 . Designing experiential prototypes for the future workplace . In CHI’12 . ACM , 331 – 334 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2212776 . 2212812 [ 93 ] David Swallow , Mark Blythe , and Peter Wright . 2005 . Grounding Experience : Relating Theory and Method to Evaluate the User Experience of Smartphones . Proceedings of the 2005 annual conference on European association of cognitive ergonomics 29 , July ( 2005 ) , 91 – 98 . [ 94 ] David Sward and Gavin Macarthur . 2007 . Making User Experience a Business Strategy . In Towards a UX Manifesto , Effie Lai - Chong Law , Arnold P . O . S . Vermeeren , Marc Hassenzahl , and Mark Blythe ( Eds . ) . COST , Lancaster , 35 – 42 . [ 95 ] John C Tang , James Lin , Jeffrey Pierce , Steve Whittaker , and Clemens Drews . 2007 . Recent shortcuts : Using recent interactions to support shared activities . In CHI 2007 . ACM , 1263 – 1272 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1240624 . 1240816 [ 96 ] Reneta Tesch . 1990 . Qualitative Research : Analysis Types and Software Tools . Routledge , London . [ 97 ] Howard E A Tinsley , Janise A Hinson , Diane J Tinsley , and Mary S Holt . 1993 . Attributes of Leisure and Work Experiences . , 447 – 455 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1037 / 0022 - 0167 . 40 . 4 . 447 [ 98 ] Alexandre N Tuch , Paul van Schaik , and Kasper Hornbæk . 2016 . Leisure and Work , Good and Bad : The Role of Activity Domain and Valence in Modeling User Experience . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction ( TOCHI ) 23 , 6 ( 2016 ) , 35 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2994147 [ 99 ] Manas Tungare and Manuel A Pérez - Quiñones . 2009 . Mental workload in multi - device personal information management . In CHI 2009 . ACM , 3431 – 3436 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1520340 . 1520498 [ 100 ] Kirsikka Vaajakallio , Tuuli Mattelmäki , Virpi Roto , and Yichen Lu . 2016 . Customer experience and service employee experience : two sides of the same coin . In An Introduction to Industrial Service Design . Routledge , 35 – 42 . [ 101 ] Stephen Voida and Elizabeth D Mynatt . 2009 . It feels better than filing : Everyday work experiences in an activity - based computing system . In CHI 2009 . ACM , 259 – 268 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1518701 . 1518744 [ 102 ] Tara Whalen , Diana Smetters , and Elizabeth F Churchill . 2006 . User experiences with sharing and access control . Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - Proceedings ( 2006 ) , 1517 – 1522 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1125451 . 1125729 [ 103 ] A . Wrzesniewski , N . LoBuglio , J . E . Dutton , and J . M . Berg . 2013 . Job Crafting and Cultivating Positive Meaning and Identity in Work . Advances in Positive Organizational Psychology 1 , 1 ( 2013 ) , 281 – 3002 . [ 104 ] Takashi Yamauchi , Takehiko Ohno , Momoko Nakatani , Yoichi Kato , and Arthur Markman . 2012 . Psychology of user experience in a collaborative video - conference system . In CSCW ’12 . ACM , 187 – 196 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2145204 . 2145234 [ 105 ] Yaxing Yao , Justin Reed Basdeo , Smirity Kaushik , and Yang Wang . 2019 . Defending my castle : A co - design study of privacy mechanisms for smart homes . In CHI 2019 . ACM , 1 – 12 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290605 . 3300428 [ 106 ] Himanshu Zade and Jacki O’Neill . 2016 . Design illustrations to make adoption of ola technology more beneficial for Indian auto - rickshaw drivers . Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work , CSCW 26 - Februar ( 2016 ) , 453 – 456 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2818052 . 2869131 [ 107 ] Katharina M Zeiner , Magdalena Laib , Katharina Schippert , and Michael Burmester . 2016 . Identifying experience categories to design for positive experiences with technology at work . In CHI’16 Extended Abstracts , Vol . 07 - 12 - May - . ACM , 3013 – 3020 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2851581 . 2892548 Received January 2021 ; revised July 2021 ; accepted November 2021 Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 6 , No . CSCW1 , Article 132 . Publication date : April 2022 .