Social Media Recruitment and Online Data Collection : A Beginner’s Guide and Best Practices for Accessing Low - Prevalence and Hard - to - Reach Populations David B . King and Norm O’Rourke IRMACS Centre , Simon Fraser University Anita DeLongis University of British Columbia One facet of the growing social media phenomenon is the opportunity to directly appeal to prospective research participants . An example of this is Facebook advertising to defined populations . In conjunction with online data collection , social media advertising can simplify and accelerate data collection , and it can do so at greatly reduced costs . Thanks to these contemporary tools , responses can be collected at the same time from participants living in Vancouver , Toronto , and St . John’s . In this article , we describe how social media can be used for rapid and cost - effective data collection . Moreover , these methods allow researchers to directly access prospective study participants who may be otherwise difficult to reach ( because of their low prevalence , their remote location , or organisational barriers ) . For illustrative purposes , we review methods from 2 studies : 1 of older adults with bipolar disorder and 1 of Canadian paramedics and their spouses . In both cases , participants clicked sociodemographically targeted Face - book advertisements and were directed to online study questionnaires . Based primarily on these 2 lines of research , we offer recommendations and best practices for researchers interested in utilizing social media for online recruitment and data collection . We contend that in many instances , social media may be the most effective means to recruit participants from low - prevalence and invisible populations . The majority of Canadians , and indeed much more of the world population than was previously accessible , can be reached via social media today . In addition to offering strategies to improve participant communication , we also review the limitations of social media advertising and online research . Keywords : participant recruitment , data collection , technology , social media , Facebook Not so very long ago , survey data were commonly collected via pen , paper , and Canada Post . Reminder cards were often mailed once or twice ( DeVellis , 2012 ) and participant lists were manually edited as completed questionnaires were returned . Often , however , these reminders were received after questionnaires were posted , irritating participants and wasting postage . Completed question - naires were returned in the mail over weeks or months , with responses then manually transferred to coding forms or electronic spreadsheets . With large scale studies , data were entered in dupli - cate by separate research assistants ( RAs ) , reducing human error but doubling the cost of this tedious task ( e . g . , Canadian Study of Health and Aging Working Group , 1994 ) . This was in addition , of course , to the expensive print advertising . Participant recruitment and data collection for large scale studies invariably required enormous planning , teams of research assistants across multiple study sites , and many years of effort . Fortunately , new technologies have allowed researchers to elim - inate many of the aforementioned challenges . More precisely , social media platforms such as Facebook offer innovative means to target and reach participants , whereas online data collection en - ables participants to enter their responses directly into electronic databases , virtually eliminating data transfer time along with data entry costs and errors . For example , in one of our recent studies , online responses from participants were collected almost immedi - ately from Canada and Israel and received simultaneously in Van - couver ( O’Rourke , Carmel , Chaudhury , Polchenko , & Bachner , 2013 ) . Cross - national research today is much less complicated thanks to the Internet and social media . In this article , we describe how to use social media to target and recruit participants to undertake online data collection . We contend that in combination , these strategies confer advantages to psychol - ogists and other social scientists conducting questionnaire re - search . To offer recommendations for best practices , we report David B . King and Norm O’Rourke , Interdisciplinary Research in the Mathematical and Computational Sciences ( IRMACS ) Centre , Simon Fraser University ; Anita DeLongis , Department of Psychology , University of British Columbia . Support for the Bipolar Affective Disorder and Older Adults Study ( BADAS ) project was provided by the Canadian Institutes of Health Research ( CIHR ) to Norm O’Rourke and Anita DeLongis , and to the BADAS Working Group ( MOP 134209 - 259022 ) . Support for the study of paramedics and their spouses was provided by the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council ( SSHRC ) of Canada to Anita DeLongis and by a SSHRC doctoral fellowship to David B . King . We thank Eddy Elmer for assisting with Facebook recruitment . The authors have no conflicting interests that might be seen as influencing any of the conclusions or recommendations made in this article . Namely , there exist no relationship ( financial or otherwise ) between Facebook and any of the authors . Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to David B . King , IRMACS Centre , Simon Fraser University , 8888 University Drive , Burnaby , BC , Canada V5A 1S6 . E - mail : d _ king @ sfu . ca Canadian Psychology / Psychologie canadienne © 2014 Canadian Psychological Association 2014 , Vol . 55 , No . 4 , 240 – 249 0708 - 5591 / 14 / $ 12 . 00 http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1037 / a0038087 240 descriptive findings from two recent studies using these methods : ( a ) a study of older adults with bipolar disorder ( BD ) from 30 countries ; and ( b ) a study of Canadian paramedics or emergency medical service ( EMS ) personnel and their spouses . The preva - lence of both populations is low ; for instance , roughly 2 % of Canadians have BD ( Schaffer , Cairney , Cheung , Veldhuizen , & Levitt , 2006 ) . Online recruitment and data collection enable rapid and cost - effective means to access low - prevalence , invisible , and other hard - to - reach populations . Perhaps more problematic than low prevalence , psychologists have often required the permission and / or assistance of employers and professional associations ( e . g . , EMSs ) or psychiatrists and / or psychiatric clinics ( e . g . , BD ) for access to many study populations . The Internet allows us to bypass these traditional barriers by directly reaching prospective study participants . The importance of this ability to make targeted appeals cannot be overstated ; in this way , social media advertising democratizes data collection . Appeals to prospective participants can be targeted very nar - rowly . For example , in our study of older adults with BD , we recently shifted our recruitment efforts in the last days of data collection to those 60 (cid:2) years of age to avoid positive skewness ( i . e . , age normally distributed ) . Using social media , prospective participants can be targeted by age , language , location , relationship status , political opinion , favourite sport , or any combination of these and other study inclusion criteria . Although a range of social media are at our disposal , both examples we describe in this article used targeted Facebook advertising to recruit samples . Immediacy is an integral advantage of combining social media recruitment and online data collection . More precisely , social media advertisements can bring prospective participants directly to study questionnaires in a single click . After reading information on the splashpage ( i . e . , landing page ) and providing electronic con - sent ( by means of clicking on an appropriate button or providing an electronic signature ) , participants can be directed to the first study instrument before interest subsides . As they are using social media when the request is received ( vs . preparing meals , working , or caring for children ) , prospective participants may well have 20 – 30 min at that moment to complete questionnaires . In other words , social media recruitment allows the social scientist to approach prospective participants during down - times when they are more likely to take part in questionnaire research . This assess - ment is in accord with altruism research indicating that people are more willing to help others ( e . g . , psychologists ) when requests are made at opportune times ( e . g . , Hui , Xu , Li , Crowcroft , Latora , & Lio , 2009 ) . Furthermore , responses provided in the privacy of one’s home tend to be less biased by impression management ( i . e . , social desirability ; Paulhus , 1998 ) . Online Data Collection For the majority of our online studies , we publish dedicated Web sites with unique domain names or Internet addresses ( e . g . , https : / / www . sfu . ca / agingresearch / reminiscence ) . University study Web sites and questionnaires are hosted on secure ( https ) servers so that participant responses are encrypted before being transmit - ted over the Internet , a process similar to online credit card purchases . Responses are then entered directly into spreadsheets that can later be imported into statistical software quite easily . Participation Response Incentives for Online Research To facilitate data collection , we commonly award a lottery prize as a response incentive to a randomly selected participant . Sur - prisingly , however , we have to select and contact two or three prospective winners before we receive a reply . This is likely because of the volume of spam or bogus email messages we all receive . We now ask for our participants to provide unique nick - names ( e . g . , Carlos Danger ) to include in email subject lines to prompt study recall before the message is deleted . Note that the word “lottery” should not appear in subject lines to avoid being filtered as spam . For studies with more intensive demands , we sometimes remu - nerate participants with a gift card or gift certificate ( vs . chance of winning with a lottery response incentive ) . As part of a recent later - life divorce study , for example , we mailed participants $ 10 Starbucks or Tim Horton’s gift cards ( their choice ) . Both para - medics and spouses were mailed $ 40 Starbucks or Chapters gift cards in the EMS study . Alternatively , PayPal or similar online payment services enable direct cash remuneration to study partic - ipants ( i . e . , credit applied to the bank account or credit card linked to that participant’s email address ) . We intend to use the latter in the future now that many people have PayPal accounts . Retailers ( e . g . , Cineplex ) are also beginning to offer electronic gift certifi - cates that may be redeemed either online or in - store , delivered conveniently by email . As technologies continue to advance , so too do the ease and utility of online recruitment and data collec - tion . Online Data Quality To maintain participant engagement , we often intersperse factoids between questionnaires specific to that population ( e . g . , Canadians 85 (cid:2) years are the fastest growing age group ) . These factoids should be topical but not directly related to the variables and behaviours under study , to avoid potential priming or skewing participant re - sponses . Our participants often report that these factoids help to maintain interest as they proceed though study questionnaires ( i . e . , feedback we receive in a final open - ended question ) . Even with strictly quantitative research , participants appreciate the opportunity to provide helpful feedback . Progress bars at the bottom of each page allow participants to see how far they have progressed and what remains . This reduces discontinuation ( i . e . , closing the browser because they do not know how much remains to be completed ) . For example , if a participant sees she has completed 2 / 3 , she is more likely to complete the remaining questionnaires knowing that only 1 / 3 remains ; in other words , most of the time required to participate has already been invested . In our experience , asking participants to dedicate much more than 30 – 35 min of questionnaire responding ( (cid:3) 200 ques - tions ) can be too burdensome and result in higher rates of non - completion . If more time is required , either a second battery of questionnaires can be completed or a follow - up request can be sent to participants ( e . g . , Elmer , 2012 ) . Our experience is that 40 – 50 % of Time 1 online participants will take part in one or more subsequent waves of online data collection ( e . g . , O’Rourke et al . , 2013 ) . These retention rates are high compared with more tradi - tional methods of questionnaire research ( DeVellis , 2012 ) . One advantage of online data collection is the ability to deter - mine how long each participant takes to complete study instru - 241 SOCIAL MEDIA RECRUITMENT AND ONLINE DATA COLLECTION ments . This allows us to identify participants who race through online questionnaires without reading questions . This can occur more frequently when offering a lottery prize or direct remunera - tion in online studies . According to their discretion , researchers can flag and exclude these atypical responses to reduce measure - ment error ( e . g . , O’Rourke , Cappeliez , & Claxton , 2011 ) . Unless completed under observation , social scientists generally do not know how long participants take to complete self - report question - naires . Electronic questionnaires offer such additional insights into participant behaviour . Online Data Collection 2 . 0 One limitation of first - generation Web - based research was higher rates of item nonresponse compared with other self - selection recruitment methods ( Granello & Wheaton , 2004 ) . To redress this limitation , we ask participants if they intended to skip items before proceeding to the next page or questionnaire ( items without responses are displayed within a pop - up JavaScript box ) . Although participants are allowed to skip questions ( i . e . , proceed without responding to questions ) , this feature reduces if not elim - inates inadvertently missed data ( less than 0 . 5 % , missing data at random ; O’Rourke et al . , 2013 ) . One risk when conducting online data collection is the possi - bility of receiving multiple responses from the same respondent . We are able to identify duplicate submissions by comparing In - ternet Protocol ( IP ) addresses ; moreover , we are able to compare reported country of residence with that participant’s IP address . In effect , this serves as a validity check or single - item deception scale . Of course , comparing IP addresses is problematic in couples research as partners may share the same computer . In these in - stances , other identifying information ( e . g . , a unique username ) should be used to distinguish between dyad members . IP addresses nonetheless offer a degree of verification that couples are in fact residing together . What About Online Selection Biases ? Existing research suggests few differences between data ob - tained online and that which is collected using traditional self - report methods ( O’Rourke & Chou , 2008 ) . This conclusion was reached by Gosling and colleagues ( 2004 ) who compared re - sponses and participant sociodemographic characteristics from studies published in the Journal of Personality and Social Psy - chology ( 2002 ; n (cid:4) 102 , 959 ) to data obtained from two large online studies ( n (cid:4) 361 , 703 and n (cid:4) 132 , 515 ) . Contrary to common misconceptions , participants recruited via the Internet are more demographically diverse and equally motivated to provide viable data ( Gosling , Vazire , Srivastava , & John , 2004 ) . In other words , Web - based study participants do not appear to differ from participants recruited by more traditional means ( Gosling et al . , 2004 ) . It should be noted that opinion polling firms today use online data collection instead of random dialing to home phone numbers ( Palmer , 2013 ) . Special Issues in Online Research The immediacy and ease of online recruitment and data collec - tion may engender additional points of concern , such as the limited dialogue between participants and researchers . In our research , we have taken a number of steps to ensure opportunities for commu - nication at all stages of online recruitment and data collection . For instance , participants are encouraged to contact researchers by email or toll - free phone number with questions or concerns . Con - tact information is typically displayed prominently on study Web sites . In studies involving repeated measurement , we commonly contact participants at recruitment by phone or Skype to provide clarification and ensure that they are clear as to the study’s re - quirements and expectations ( e . g . , King & DeLongis , 2014 ) . Initial contact can help foster greater participant commitment ( i . e . , reten - tion ) in longitudinal studies . In our experience , a dedicated study Web site has the advantage of providing more detailed information that participants can read at their leisure . Well - designed study Web sites also convey profes - sionalism and credibility that can further facilitate recruitment and data collection ( e . g . , http : / / www . badas . ca ) . We typically include a “frequently asked questions” section to address common partici - pant questions and concerns . Other steps such as providing links to online mental health and support services can be considered de - pending on the nature of the research . Online recruitment and data collection also have the advantage of allowing participants to make decisions without the pressures that can occur in face - to - face research ( e . g . , feeling compelled to decide whether or not to participate when initially asked ) . Social Media Recruitment Although researchers have at their disposal a variety of online recruitment methods , social media present unique opportunities for rapid , cost - effective data collection from populations with very specific demographics or interests . Exposure is a primary advan - tage . For example , Media Technology Monitor ( 2012 , as cited in Oliveira , 2013 ) reported that 70 % of Internet users in Canada access social media on a daily or nearly daily basis , up 6 % from 2011 ( N (cid:4) 4 , 001 ) . Among the available platforms ( e . g . , Twitter , LinkedIn , and Pinterest ) , Facebook accounts for (cid:3) 93 % of all social media and is used by 63 % of all Internet users ( Oliveira , 2013 ) . What’s more , social media are no longer restricted to technology enthusiasts or younger generations ( Oliveira , 2013 ; Turcotte & Schellenberg , 2006 ) . The omnipresence of social me - dia and its growing integration into daily life make resources like Facebook uniquely positioned for research recruitment , even from highly circumscribed populations . Large and growing numbers of Canadians—in fact , the majority—can now be reached by this single method of advertising ( Oliveira , 2013 ) and at relatively low cost ( Elmer , 2012 ) . Facebook Advertising Today , Facebook is the most effective social media platform , not only for its global reach but also for its sociodemographic targeting options . Generally speaking , Facebook ads operate on either a cost - per - click ( CPC ) or a cost - for - impressions ( CPM ) basis that determine both the means of payment and how ad exposure is optimized . An impression refers to each occasion in which an ad is shown to a user . Advertisers may choose to pay every time a user clicks on an ad ( i . e . , CPC ) or for every 1 , 000 impressions regardless of whether users click through ( i . e . , CPM ) . 242 KING , O’ROURKE , AND D E LONGIS In either case , advertisers bid ( with ranges suggested by Facebook ) to compete against other advertisers for a designated audience ( e . g . , 50 (cid:2) years , gay , and in South Africa ; Elmer , 2012 ) . The higher one’s CPC or CPM bid , the more likely the ad will be shown to targeted Facebook users . CPC and CPM bids can be as low as $ 0 . 01 or as high as the prespecified daily budget . Spending can accumulate quickly depending on the scope of the advertising campaign , but preset daily and weekly budgets help control spending . Start and end dates for Facebook advertising campaigns can also be fixed . One key measure of a campaign’s effectiveness is the click - through rate ( CTR ) or the ratio of total clicks to total impressions . For instance , a 1 % CTR means that there is 1 click for every 100 impressions or ad displays . CTRs commonly range between 0 . 04 % and 0 . 05 % , sometimes reaching above 0 . 11 % . CTRs vary for a number of reasons that we discuss later . Advertisers may also calculate a unique CTR by dividing the number of unique people who clicked on the ad by the number of unique people the ad reached ( also referred to as unique impres - sions or reach ) . Because the same ad can be shown to the same person multiple times , and since a single person may click on the same ad more than once , the unique CTR may provide a more accurate metric of ad performance . In consideration of more traditional means of participant recruit - ment and data collection , the CTR and unique CTR serve as the best indicators of response rate within a social media context . As an alternative measure of response rate , researchers may also divide the number of clicks ( i . e . , visits to the Web site ) by the number of completed surveys . In the studies examined in this article , we explore a number of these methods for illustrative purposes . Regardless of preference , however , such statistics pro - vide researchers with precise quantifiable means of monitoring questionnaire response rates in real - time . This underscores a fur - ther advantage of social media recruitment , as advertisements may be edited and adjusted based on any parameter while the ad is active . Being able to better monitor and respond to indices of effectiveness may be especially important in studies using rolling or ongoing recruitment , allowing the researcher to reduce wasted time , effort , and resources while honing the precision of online recruitment methods . As social media become more ubiquitous , and as the use of social media on portable devices expands , researchers are faced with a growing number of options for online recruitment . In addition to its standard methods , Facebook also offers more or - ganic advertising options based on user activity ( e . g . , sponsored stories , page post ads ) , allowing advertisers to capitalize on the natural distribution of ads by users themselves . Many of these methods are similar to traditional snowballing and word - of - mouth approaches to recruitment . As well as paying for advertising on Facebook , constructing a Facebook “page” for a particular re - search study is another method of online snowballing that is also free . As more people “like” our Foundation for Wellness with Bipolar Disorder page ( https : / / www . facebook . com / WellwithBD ) , for instance , their friends who may also have BD ( e . g . , family members ) can choose to follow the foundation on Facebook . News articles and study results disseminated via Facebook are com - monly shared by those who have liked the page . Whether one chooses CPC or CPM depends on a number of important factors . For mass campaigns targeting large and diverse populations , a cost - for - impressions strategy can increase the fre - quency with which an advertisement will be shown to targeted users . In more focused or more circumscribed campaigns , a cost - per - click strategy is generally preferable ( i . e . , to optimise click - through rates ) . Both strategies can be tested simultaneously by rotating multiple ads , allowing the researcher to adjust tactics depending on relative ad performance . Targeting of advertisements . The prime utility of social me - dia advertising is the ability to apply filters so that the researcher can target prospective participants using sociodemographically defined criteria . This reduces funds wasted promoting the study to those who do not meet inclusion criteria ( and who we want to exclude ) . In other words , we can be generally confident that participants are from our target population because they are the only ones we directly approach . In this way , sociodemographically targeted advertising differs from mass advertising ( e . g . , newspaper ads ) . The precision in targeting and wide reach make Facebook advertising highly cost - effective , especially with narrowly defined populations . Ad campaign exposure may be defined by location ( e . g . , coun - try , county / region , and town / city ) , age , gender , ethnicity , lan - guage , sexual orientation , relationship status , education , workplace and / or occupation , and behaviours such as travel and mobile device use . These options enable defined recruitment based on very specific demographic information , allowing for large - scale recruitment from otherwise invisible and inaccessible populations . However , targeting options are not restricted to demographics ; Facebook also allows researchers to target prospective participants with precise interests , from gardening and teaching to politics and sports . Newly added parameters such as parental status , generation ( e . g . , Baby Boomers , Generation X ) , and U . S . political affiliation reflect Facebook’s continuing diversification of its targeting capa - bilities . The researcher can be creative when specifying and refining targeting tactics . As advertisements are created and adjusted , Fa - cebook displays updated audience summaries reporting the num - ber of reachable users according to specific filter settings . These filters and parameters can be updated any time and several ads targeting different groups can be run simultaneously as part of the same ad campaign and budget . Facebook Advertisement Specifications With the volume of information on Facebook newsfeeds and timelines , it is necessary to catch the attention of prospective participants . There are a variety of specifications in Facebook ads that are worth considering in this regard ; namely , the ad headline , text , and image . For example , advertisements with male silhouettes enabled recruitment and data collection from a global sample of 3 , 600 gay and bisexual men in just 10 days ( Elmer & O’Rourke , 2012 ) . Later we compare the effectiveness of three different ad - vertisements from our BD study and describe factors that helped draw the attention of prospective participants . In traditional Facebook advertisements , headlines ( ad titles ) are restricted to 25 characters ( including spaces ) and text ( ad bodies ) to 90 characters ; ad images may be 100 pixels ( width ) by 72 pixels ( height ) . These restrictions refer specifically to ads that appear on the right - hand column of Facebook’s Web interface . Different advertising options with fewer restrictions are available in other ad types allowing for larger ads with higher character counts and 243 SOCIAL MEDIA RECRUITMENT AND ONLINE DATA COLLECTION images . These other ad options are becoming increasingly relevant given the more widespread use of social media on smart phones and tablets . All ads must include a link to a Facebook page or external Web site where participants are directed upon clicking the ad . As Facebook is an evolving and dynamic medium , restrictions will likely become fewer over time . In conjunction with online data collection , social media recruit - ment is an invaluable tool for social scientists . Although the studies discussed in this article refer specifically to Facebook , the most popular social media platform in Canada ( Oliveira , 2013 ) , similar forms of advertising are now offered by Twitter and Google Plus . The potential utility of these alternative platforms , however , vary depending on study goals . In the case of Twitter , advertisements are restricted to the site’s traditional 140 - character limit . CPC and CPM methods of online advertising are also avail - able with Yahoo and Google search engines , though the same precision of demographic targeting is not possible . Instead , search engine advertising is based on key words and phrases entered into search queries ( e . g . , particular environmental threats or social circum - stances ) ; these ads are presented to users searching for particular topics with varying degrees of specificity during defined windows of data collection ( e . g . , Lee - Baggley , DeLongis , Voorhoeave , & Greenglass , 2004 ) . There are certainly instances when search engine advertising may be ideal . Next we discuss our successes with social media recruitment using Facebook . We caution , however , that different studies re - quire different recruitment strategies . The specific features of the targeted population , as well as the goals of the research , need to be considered in tandem when planning social media recruitment campaigns . It is our goal to offer a general introduction to re - searchers who have not yet seized this recruitment opportunity . Social Media Recruitment and Online Data Collection Example 1 : Older Adults With BD Contrary to common misconceptions , older Canadians are regular Internet users . For instance , those 65 – 74 years of age use the Internet as often as Canadians in their 30s ( Turcotte & Schellenberg , 2006 ) . This is commensurate with our experience having conducted Web - based geropsychology research for the past 15 years . Moreover , Internet usage by older adults is likely to increase as baby boomers and other generations grow older . We recently completed the instrument development and valida - tion phase for our Bipolar Affective Disorder and older Adults ( BADAS ) Study . Using both Facebook advertising and more tra - ditional methods ( e . g . , online newsletters ) , we recruited 1 , 011 adults with BD and 1 , 100 control participants from 30 different countries , most living in the United States , Canada , the United Kingdom , Australia / New Zealand , and Ireland . By design , half were 45 (cid:2) years of age . Facebook advertisements were targeted to a global population of (cid:3) 6 . 2 million English - speaking Facebook users with interests related to BD , psychology , psychiatry , and the like . Over the course of 19 days , ads were seen 35 . 3 million times ( i . e . , six times on average to each person in this population ) . In total , 12 , 094 clicked on the advertisement directing them to the study splashpage and 3 , 572 proceeded to the second page for a click - through rate of 0 . 04 % . The average cost per click was $ 0 . 49 , whereas the most expensive was $ 0 . 73 . We asked participants to indicate how they came to hear of the BADAS Study . More than 90 % indicated that they were recruited via Facebook advertising or posts on Facebook timelines and newsfeeds ; the latter at no cost . Stated otherwise , fewer than 10 % of participants were recruited via mental health association news - letters , BD listserv notices , or postings on Web sites . Of note , all Participants 50 (cid:2) years of age with BD were recruited via Face - book . To our surprise , this method of recruitment appeared par - ticularly effective with our older participants . Although costs will vary depending on the demographic criteria used by any one Facebook ad campaign , the recruitment of over 900 adults using social media required just under $ 6 , 000 in total expenditure . This amounts to a minimal recruitment cost of approximately $ 7 per participant . For our BADAS Study , we tested the relative utility of three different Facebook advertisements ( see Figure 1 ) . The text was identical for each ; only the accompanying image differed . To our surprise , least effective was the Simon Fraser University ( SFU ) logo with a CTR of just 0 . 027 % ; next was our more abstract BADAS Study logo ( aka “Charlie” ) at 0 . 035 % . Most effective was the version with a photo of a despondent woman at 0 . 04 % . In other words , the advertisement with the photo was three times more effective , and cost efficient , than the version with the SFU logo . To better demonstrate the performance of our top performing ad , the despondent woman resulted in a unique CTR of 0 . 47 % , indicating that of the unique people reached by the ad , 0 . 47 % clicked through to the study Web page . This miniexperiment suggests that there can be considerable variability in the effectiveness of ads , and that accompanying images should be selected with deliberation . The remaining Facebook participants were recruited via notices ap - Figure 1 . BADAS Study Facebook advertisements . The color version of this figure appears in the online article only . 244 KING , O’ROURKE , AND D E LONGIS pearing on the timelines and newsfeeds of participants ( i . e . , by going viral ) . More than 90 % of BADAS study participants provided us with email addresses and permission to contact them in the future . This enabled us to undertake a follow - up test – retest study , and to retain a large pool of prospective participants for future BD research . In total , roughly 40 % of Time 1 participants also provided us with Time 2 responses , with an average of 67 days between points of measurement ( age range of 19 – 89 years ) . This rate of retention is high compared with other data collection procedures ( DeVellis , 2012 ) . Over time , we have devised a three - reminder system for longi - tudinal online research . An initial notice is sent followed by a reminder 2 – 3 weeks thereafter ; a third and final notice is sent 3 – 4 week after the second reminder . This method allows us to maxi - mize longitudinal data collection without antagonizing partici - pants . ( We have used this procedure for several waves of data collection ; O’Rourke et al . , 2011 . ) The response graph in Figure 2 depicts Time 2 BADAS Study data collection . Peaks appear on days notices are sent with decreasing effectiveness over time ; moreover , the trail - off becomes more pronounced with each suc - cessive notice . Two waves of data collection were completed within 4 months , with 428 adults with BD providing complete Time 1 and Time 2 responses . To put this achievement in context , another recent Vancouver research group required roughly 2 years to recruit 200 adults with BD ( Michalak & Murray , 2010 ) ; with targeted Facebook advertising , we were able to do the same in days . At both points of measurement , we asked participants to indicate their diagnosis ( and BD subtype ) , date of birth , and country of residence . This was done to compare responses between points of measurement to provide us with greater confidence in the validity of participant identity ( i . e . , whether responses were truly from persons diagnosed with BD ) . Regarding diagnosis , participants were asked two distinct questions at Time 1 and Time 2 , respec - tively : Do you have BD ? and Have you been diagnosed with BD ? According to participant responses , there was a 97 % agreement in report of BD diagnosis between time points . Similar agreement rates of 96 % and 97 % were observed between Times 1 and 2 for reports of date of birth and country of residence , respectively . The consistency of information between Time 1 and Time 2 reports , separated by 67 days on average ( SD (cid:4) 18 , range (cid:4) 43 – 143 ) , further supports the reliability of responses and the validity of social media recruitment . We also asked participants to list their prescribed medications by category ( mood stabilizers , antidepressants , anxiolytics , and antipsychotics ) . This supplemental information offered an innova - tive means of verifying BD diagnosis , allowing us to determine the frequency with which participants accurately listed and cat - egorised their prescriptions . Accuracy was high across groups . Of the 202 participants listing medications in the anxiolytics category , 97 % were correct in their classification . This was compared with accuracy frequencies of 95 % for both mood stabilizers ( n (cid:4) 293 ) and antidepressants ( n – 337 ) , and 84 % for antipsychotics ( n (cid:4) 193 ) . Given participants’ ability to describe their pharmacotherapy with such accuracy , we contend that it is highly unlikely that participants obfuscated their identities . In other words , these are truly participants with BD . Example 2 : Paramedics and Their Spouses Within 13 months , we recruited 87 paramedics and their cohabiting spouses who together took part in an intensive longitudinal study of daily stress and interpersonal support processes ( King & DeLongis , 2014 ) . This allowed us to undertake a daily process study of couples in which one partner was employed in a high - stress occupation . Both partners completed online questions multiple times daily for a period of 1 week as well as standardized measures of individual differences and traits . According to Statistics Canada ( 2006 ) , there are over 21 , 000 paramedics working in this country . Facebook advertising was the primary means used to recruit this very narrowly defined sample . In just over a year , we received 558 inquiries of interest from paramedics ; roughly 75 % via Facebook advertising . Other methods of recruitment included pamphlets and flyers posted at emergency medical service stations and hospitals , newspaper advertising , employer - sponsored emails , and listserv announcements . In total , we spent approximately $ 3 , 000 on re - cruitment using Facebook advertising . To offer perspective on this 0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200 30 - A p r 02 - M a y 04 - M a y 06 - M a y 08 - M a y 10 - M a y 12 - M a y 14 - M a y 16 - M a y 18 - M a y 20 - M a y 22 - M a y 24 - M a y 26 - M a y 28 - M a y 30 - M a y 01 - J un 03 - J un 05 - J un 07 - J un 09 - J un 11 - J un 13 - J un 15 - J un 17 - J un Figure 2 . Time 2 BADAS response graph ( three email reminders ) . 245 SOCIAL MEDIA RECRUITMENT AND ONLINE DATA COLLECTION number , we paid $ 450 for a 1 - day ad in a local newspaper that led to no noticeable increase in study interest . Given the highly de - fined nature of this population , the cost effectiveness of Facebook recruitment was quite evident . Facebook recruitment appears to be especially cost advantageous when recruiting participants from small and circumscribed populations . This conclusion is in line with previous studies with Canadian youth ( Chu & Snider , 2013 ) and young adult smokers ( Ramo & Prochaska , 2012 ) . We utilized three images in Facebook ads , each salient to paramedicine : an emergency call ( i . e . , ambulance with its lights on ) ; a jacket with EMS on the back ; and a white - outlined , six - pointed blue star with the rod of Asclepius in the centre ( this Star of Life is the international symbol for emergency medical services and EMS personnel ) . It was this third image that had the highest CTR ( i . e . , most effective ) , likely because the symbol’s authorita - tive appearance bolstered the perceived credibility of the ad . More - over , the contrast of solid blue against white may have more effectively captured the attention of Facebook users . See Figure 3 for an example of one of our Facebook ads that utilized this image . Our overall CTR average was 0 . 035 . For the ad with the Star of Life ; the average CTR was slightly higher at 0 . 042 . For this study , we were unable to filter ads for “paramedic” as a reported occupation . This is because Facebook does not allow advertisers to target an occupation until the number of Facebook users specifying that occupation surpasses a certain threshold . However , we circumvented this by targeting users on the basis of profession - related interests ( i . e . , paramedics , paramedicine , emer - gency medicine , EMS , prehospital care , or emergency health care ) . Even when possible to target on the basis of occupation , it is ideal to also select on the basis of related interests , as users may choose not to disclose certain demographic information in their Facebook profiles . We have effectively recruited participants from several narrowly defined populations using such interests in tar - geted advertising campaigns ( e . g . , BD interests ) . When prospective participants clicked on the Facebook ads , they were directed to a study Web site . Given our specific inclusion criteria ( i . e . , full - time paramedics in cohabiting relationships ) , we first asked prospective participants to read a page describing inclusion criteria and complete a short eligibility questionnaire . Those who met criteria and provided email addresses were later contacted to confirm eligi - bility and discuss next steps in the study . Having phone contact with paramedics offered an additional means of verifying identity ; given that schedules are unique to paramedics within certain regions , we were able to gain confidence in their employment as paramedics . This was further reflected in their daily descriptive reports of most stressful work experiences , which characterised paramedics’ job duties in such a way that would have been difficult to fabricate ( e . g . , “My partner had trouble intubating an unconscious trauma patient” ) . Regarding the verification of cohabitation with spouses , partners independently con - firmed mailing addresses for purposes of remuneration . These data gave us confidence that the sample we recruited was most certainly composed of paramedics and their spouses . Figure 4 offers a perspective on the relationship between num - ber of Facebook ad clicks and the number of submitted eligibility questionnaires . As can be seen in this graph , changes in Facebook ad clicks over the 13 - month period were reflected by similar changes in number of submitted eligibility questionnaires . The bivariate correlation between these monthly clicks and monthly eligibility questionnaires was 0 . 67 ( p (cid:5) . 05 ) . Discussion It is somewhat disconcerting how easily those of us who pop - ulate social media can be identified and contacted with efficiency and precision . However , as social scientists , opportunities abound because of this newfound ability to make appeals directly to prospective participants ; low - prevalence and remote populations can now be targeted who would have been otherwise impossible or difficult to reach in years past , and rarely ( if ever ) in large numbers . This is exemplified by our research with older adults with BD , a low - prevalence and ( generally ) invisible sector of the population ( King et al . , 2013 ) , and by our research on paramedics and their spouses throughout Canada ( King & DeLongis , 2014 ) . In addition to these core examples , we have also successfully implemented sociodemographically targeted Facebook advertising to recruit gay men 18 – 88 years of age ( N (cid:4) 3 , 600 from 40 countries ; Elmer & O’Rourke , 2012 ) and older yoga enthusiasts living in Vancouver ( Wertman , 2012 ) . Other authors have simi - larly noted the utility and cost - effectiveness of Facebook adver - tising for recruiting circumscribed populations ( e . g . , Chu & Snider , 2013 ) . Ramo and Prochaska ( 2012 ) underscore the poten - tial reach of Facebook as one of its primary benefits . We remind readers , however , that Facebook is one of multiple online plat - forms that can be utilized for these means . For instance , Google search engine advertising has proven useful in previous research on thoughts and behaviours related to infectious disease outbreaks ( e . g . , Lee - Baggley et al . , 2004 ) . Most certainly , new opportunities will arise in the future . The breadth of possible applications of such recruitment strat - egies within the social sciences is clearly great . The effectiveness of social media recruitment is due in part to the sheer size of social media databases ( e . g . , 10 million Facebook users worldwide with BD interests ) ; and also the precision with which we can make appeals directly to prospective participants . This precision pro - vides greater confidence in the homogeneity of samples and the integrity of participant data . However , in the examples cited , social media efforts did not result in overly homogenous samples in terms of age , sex , or ethnicity , common concerns among research - ers exploring innovative means of participant recruitment . Further - more , regarding age , it is a misconception that older Canadians do not use the Internet or visit social media sites ( Oliveira , 2013 ; Turcotte & Schellenberg , 2006 ) . It has been our experience that indeed the Internet and social media platforms are used by a variety of Canadians whose demographics and psychosocial char - acteristics are diverse ( e . g . , O’Rourke et al . , 2013 ) . Figure 3 . Facebook advertisement targeting paramedics ( star of life ) . The color version of this figure appears in the online article only . 246 KING , O’ROURKE , AND D E LONGIS Given the novelty of these online methods for many social scientists , it may be best to summarise with a few recommenda - tions for best practice . These recommendations are intended as points of reference for the novice based on our experience with the aforementioned populations . 1 . Create a Dedicated Study Web Site A dedicated study Web site can offer a number of benefits to both researchers and participants , linking to study questionnaires and electronic consent forms on secure servers and providing additional contact information . In lieu of or in tandem with a unique URL , a study Facebook page can also be used to recruit additional participants and to further enhance participant engage - ment . When the page is liked it appears on the newsfeeds of one’s Facebook friends , offering an effective means of snowballing . Following the completion of a study , a Facebook page can also serve to communicate study results to participants and all end users , addressing the additional goal of knowledge translation . 2 . Use a Multipronged Recruitment Strategy With any online ad campaign ( on Facebook or otherwise ) , we recommend using multiple advertisement tactics simultaneously , as well as a variety of images , headlines , and text . If a particular strategy , ad , or image elicits a higher click - through rate relative to others , it should be favoured and others dropped ( except in cases where the ads are targeting different subsamples of the same population ) . In studies where large and diverse populations are targeted ( as opposed to more narrow campaigns ) , a CPM strategy may be most effective , as it increases the frequency with which an ad will be shown to the users of one’s choice . Nevertheless , researchers may benefit from testing both CPM and CPC strategies simultaneously under the same campaign budget , and adjusting their efforts according to user responses . Our experience suggests that images are integral to the success of social media recruitment , and that several should be tested . Images should be germane to the population under investigation and attract the user’s eye through social media clutter . In our BD in later life study , a photo of a despondent woman proved most effective ; whereas with paramedics , the profession’s logo was best . We recommend that researchers compare the performance of 2 – 3 images and make few assumptions ( e . g . , that a university logo carries credibility ) . 3 . Incorporate Online Data Collection Whenever Possible Social media recruitment appears most advantageous to re - searchers when used together with online data collection . By clicking a Facebook advertisement , for instance , prospective par - ticipants can be taken directly to a study splashpage followed by an electronic consent form and the first questionnaire , all within a few minutes . However , even when online data collection is not feasi - ble , social media recruitment can be effectively used in studies requiring laboratory visits and direct researcher contact ( as in experimental research ) . In these cases , social media can aid re - searchers in identifying and recruiting samples , particularly if a population is difficult to access . 4 . Maximize Results by Considering All Parameters Online studies should be as brief as possible to maximize data collection and minimise participant burden and subsequent discon - tinuation . We have found that (cid:3) 200 questions appear to be a ceiling , requiring no more than 40 – 45 min to complete ; after this point , participants may be more likely to give up before complet - ing all questionnaires . Factoids can help maintain interest and response incentives such as direct PayPal payments or electronic gift cards will expedite data collection . What’s the Catch ? Although we advocate strongly for the use of social media for participant recruitment , some limitations exist . For instance , there may be limits to the generalizability of findings obtained from social media platforms such as Facebook . However , this is of little concern for psychologists who tend to be interested primarily ( or exclusively ) in individual differences ( vs . describing populations ) . If necessary , sociodemographic weights can be applied to reflect the composition of populations and subpopulations can be over - sampled . Although validating participant identities may be seen as an additional limitation of online recruitment , a number of meth - ods are available to improve researchers’ confidence in the validity of data ( i . e . , that participants are who they say they are ) . These methods include confirming reports of demographic information at multiple time points ( reliability of measurement ) , cross - referencing mailing addresses in dyadic research , and matching IP addresses to reported countries of residence , among others . Such electronic methods also limit the opportunity for face - to - face participant contact and the subsequent development of par - ticipant rapport . This can be a concern for researchers studying participants longitudinally or remotely . However , participant re - tention was good in both our BADAS follow - up study ( 40 % ) and in our daily diary study of paramedics ( with 80 % completing at least 9 of 12 time points during a 4 - day work period ) . Neverthe - less , these concerns can be easily mitigated by offering additional online resources for participants , such as a study Web site or Facebook page with frequently asked questions , information on the research team , and contact information . Occasional thank - you emails and study updates can also offer encouragement , and phone 0 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 Monthly Eligibility Apps Total Monthly Clicks Figure 4 . Monthly Facebook advertisement clicks and eligibility ques - tionnaires received . 247 SOCIAL MEDIA RECRUITMENT AND ONLINE DATA COLLECTION calls can be utilized where long - term commitment is sought ( King & DeLongis , 2014 ) . Recent research suggests that socially anxious individuals ex - perience greater state anxiety while using Facebook , and that these two factors interact to predict greater use of the social networking site ( McCord , Rodebaugh , & Levinson , 2014 ) . Although the reach of social media is considerable ( Gosling et al . , 2004 ; Oliveira , 2013 ) , psychosocial variables such as these should be considered in regards to participant self - selection . Research has further sug - gested an association between Facebook use and social compari - son , which in turn appears negatively correlated with self - esteem ( Lee , 2014 ) . Such phenomena should be examined in research that is particularly sensitive to these variables . Moving Forward By and large , the limitations are few ( and not altogether unsur - mountable ) compared with the many advantages these methods have to offer . Although this information may at first seem daunt - ing , social media advertising is becoming increasingly user - friendly and can be readily adopted by the novice . With invisible and low - prevalence populations in particular , this may be one of the most effective means of participant recruitment . Indeed , re - gardless of the population of interest , the cost effectiveness and potential reach of social media are well noted . As social media and online technologies continue to evolve , new and exciting oppor - tunities will undoubtedly emerge for Canadian researchers . Résumé La possibilité de solliciter directement des sujets potentiels pour la recherche est l’un des avantages du phénomène croissant des médias sociaux . Sur Facebook , la publicité ciblant certains seg - ments de la population en constitue un exemple . Parallèlement a ` la collecte de données en ligne , la publicité diffusée sur les médias sociaux peut simplifier et accélérer le processus de collecte de données , cela a ` un coût beaucoup moindre . Grâce a ` ces outils modernes , il est possible de recevoir simultanément les réponses de répondants habitant a ` Vancouver , a ` Toronto et a ` St . John’s . Dans cet article , nous expliquons la façon d’utiliser les médias sociaux pour effectuer une collecte de données rapide , efficace et peu onéreuse . De plus , ces méthodes permettent aux chercheurs de communiquer directement avec des participants aux études pro - spectives qui seraient difficiles a ` joindre autrement — en raison d’une faible prévalence , de leur lieu d’habitation dans une région éloignée ou d’obstacles organisationnels . À titre d’information , nous examinons les méthodes employées dans deux études : une consacrée aux adultes âgés présentant un trouble bipolaire , et l’autre consacrée au personnel paramédical canadien et a ` leurs épouses ou époux . Dans les deux cas , les répondants ont cliqué sur les annonces de Facebook ciblées sur le plan sociodémographique et ont été dirigés vers des questionnaires d’étude . En nous basant principalement sur ces deux domaines de recherche , nous présen - tons des recommandations et des pratiques exemplaires aux cher - cheurs souhaitant utiliser les médias sociaux pour effectuer un recrutement et une collecte de données en ligne . Nous estimons que , dans de nombreux cas , les médias sociaux constituent le moyen le plus efficace de recruter des sujets au sein de segments de population a ` faible prévalence et méconnus . Aujourd’hui , la plupart des Canadiens — et , bien entendu , une plus grande partie de la population mondiale qu’auparavant — peuvent être joints par l’intermédiaire des médias sociaux . En plus de proposer des stra - tégies pour améliorer la communication avec les répondants , nous étudions les limites de la publicité sur les médias sociaux et celles de la recherche en ligne . Mots - clés : recrutement de sujets , collecte de données , technologie , médias sociaux , Facebook . References Canadian Study of Health and Aging Working Group . ( 1994 ) . Canadian Study of Health and Aging : Study methods and prevalence of dementia . Canadian Medical Association Journal , 150 , 899 – 913 . Chu , J . L . , & Snider , C . E . ( 2013 ) . Use of social networking web site for recruiting Canadian youth for medical research . Journal of Adolescent Health , 52 , 792 – 794 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jadohealth . 2012 . 12 . 002 DeVellis , R . F . ( 2012 ) . Scale development : Theory and applications ( 3rd ed . ) . New York , NY : Sage . Elmer , E . ( 2012 ) . Development and initial validation of the Gay Men’s Physical Attractiveness Scale . Unpublished master’s thesis , Simon Fraser University , Vancouver , BC . Elmer , E . , & O’Rourke , N . ( 2012 , October ) . The latent structure of physical attractiveness judgements among young and older gay men . Poster presented at the annual meeting of the Canadian Association on Gerontology , Vancouver , BC . Gosling , S . D . , Vazire , S . , Srivastava , S . , & John , O . P . ( 2004 ) . Should we trust web - based studies ? A comparative analysis of six preconceptions about Internet questionnaires . American Psychologist , 59 , 93 – 104 . doi : 10 . 1037 / 0003 - 066X . 59 . 2 . 93 Granello , D . H . , & Wheaton , J . E . ( 2004 ) . Online data collection : Strategies for research . Journal of Counseling & Development , 82 , 387 – 393 . doi : 10 . 1002 / j . 1556 - 6678 . 2004 . tb00325 . x Hui , P . , Xu , K . , Li , V . O . , Crowcroft , J . , Latora , V . , & Lio , P . ( 2009 , April ) . Selfishness , altruism and message spreading in mobile social networks . INFOCOM Workshops 2009 , IEEE ( pp . 1 – 6 ) . IEEE . doi : 10 . 1109 / INFCOMW . 2009 . 5072186 King , D . B . , & DeLongis , A . ( 2014 ) . When couples disconnect : Rumina - tion and withdrawal as maladaptive responses to everyday stress . Jour - nal of Family Psychology , 28 , 460 – 469 . doi : 10 . 1037 / a0037160 King , D . , O’Rourke , N . , Michalak , E . , Sixsmith , A . , & the BADAS Working Group . ( 2013 , June ) . The Bipolar Affective Disorders and older Adults ( BADAS ) Study . Poster presented at the VCH Research Institute - Research Revival , Vancouver , BC . Lee , S . Y . ( 2014 ) . How do people compare themselves with others on social network sites ? : The case of Facebook . Computers in Human Behavior , 32 , 253 – 260 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . chb . 2013 . 12 . 009 Lee - Baggley , D . , DeLongis , A . , Voorhoeave , P . , & Greenglass , E . ( 2004 ) . Coping with the threat of severe acute respiratory syndrome : Role of threat appraisals and coping responses in health behaviors . Asian Jour - nal of Social Psychology , 7 , 9 – 23 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1467 - 839X . 2004 . 00131 . x McCord , B . , Rodebaugh , T . L . , & Levinson , C . A . ( 2014 ) . Facebook : Social uses and anxiety . Computers in Human Behavior , 34 , 23 – 27 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . chb . 2014 . 01 . 020 Michalak , E . E . , Murray , G . , & CREST . BD . ( 2010 ) . Development of the QoL BD : A disorder - specific scale to assess quality of life in bipolar disorder . Bipolar Disorders , 12 , 727 – 740 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1399 - 5618 . 2010 . 00865 . x Oliveira , M . ( 2013 , April 29 ) . How do you compare ? New report reveals stats about social media usage in Canada . The Canadian Press . Re - trieved from http : / / www . mtm - otm . ca / press . asp 248 KING , O’ROURKE , AND D E LONGIS O’Rourke , N . , Cappeliez , P . , & Claxton , A . ( 2011 ) . Functions of reminis - cence and the psychological well - being of young - old and older adults over time . Aging & Mental Health , 15 , 272 – 281 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 13607861003713281 O’Rourke , N . , Carmel , S . , Chaudhury , H . , Polchenko , N . , & Bachner , Y . G . ( 2013 ) . A cross - national comparison of reminiscence functions between Canadian and Israeli older adults . The Journals of Gerontology : Series B : Psychological Sciences and Social Sciences , 68 , 184 – 192 . doi : 10 . 1093 / geronb / gbs058 O’Rourke , N . , & Chou , B . ( July , 2008 ) . A comparison of printed - page versus web - based data obtained from older adult study participants . Poster session presented at the International Congress of Psychology , Berlin , Germany . Palmer , A . ( 2013 , July 8 ) . Angus Reid blames missed election call on too - heavy sampling of young voters . Vancouver Sun . Retrieved from http : / / www . vancouversun . com Paulhus , D . L . ( 1998 ) . Paulhus Deception Scales ( PDS ) : The Balanced Inventory of Desired Responding - 7 : User’s manual . Toronto , ON : Multi - Health Systems . Ramo , D . E . , & Prochaska , J . J . ( 2012 ) . Broad reach and targeted recruit - ment using Facebook for an online survey of young adult substance use . Journal of Medical Internet Research , 14 , e28 . doi : 10 . 2196 / jmir . 1878 Schaffer , A . , Cairney , J . , Cheung , A . , Veldhuizen , S . , & Levitt , A . ( 2006 ) . Community survey of bipolar disorder in Canada : Lifetime prevalence and illness characteristics . Canadian Journal of Psychiatry , 51 , 9 – 16 . Statistics Canada . ( 2006 ) . Occupation : National occupational classifica - tion for statistics 2006 . Retrieved from http : / / www12 . statcan . ca / census - recensement / 2006 / dp - pd / index - eng . cfm Turcotte , M . , & Schellenberg , G . ( 2006 ) . A portrait of seniors in Canada ( Catalogue no . 89 – 519 - XIE ) . Retrieved from http : / / www . statcan . gc . ca / pub / 89 - 519 - x / 89 - 519 - x2006001 - eng . pdf Wertman , A . ( 2012 , October ) . Chair yoga . Workshop presentation at the 41st Annual Scientific and Educational Meeting of the Canadian Asso - ciation on Gerontology , Vancouver , BC . Received April 10 , 2014 Revision received July 7 , 2014 Accepted August 11 , 2014 (cid:2) E - Mail Notification of Your Latest CPA Issue Online ! Would you like to know when the next issue of your favorite Canadian Psychological Association journal will be available online ? This service is now available . Sign up at http : / / notify . apa . org / and you will be notified by e - mail when issues of interest to you become available ! Avis par courriel de la disponibilité des revues de la SCP en ligne ! Vous voulez savoir quand sera accessible en ligne le prochain numéro de votre revue de la Sociétè canadienne de psychologie préférée ? Il est désormais possible de le faire . Inscrivez - vous a ` http : / / notify . apa . org / et vous serez avisé par courriel de la date de parution en ligne des numéros qui vous intéressent ! 249 SOCIAL MEDIA RECRUITMENT AND ONLINE DATA COLLECTION Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner . Further reproduction prohibited without permission .