Reimagining and Co - designing with Youth an Hour of Code Activity for Critical Engagement with Computing Luis Morales - Navarro ∗ luismn @ upenn . edu University of Pennsylvania Philadelphia , Pennsylvania , USA Naomi Thompson ∗ naomi . thompson @ northwestern . edu Northwestern University Evanston , Illinois , USA Yasmin B . Kafai ∗ kafai @ upenn . edu University of Pennsylvania Philadelphia , Pennsylvania , USA Mia S . Shaw ∗ mshaw12 @ gse . upenn . edu University of Pennsylvania Philadelphia , Pennsylvania , USA Nichole Pinkard nichole . pinkard @ northwestern . edu Northwestern University Evanston , Illinois , USA ABSTRACT In this paper , we examine a co - design workshop in which youth redesigned a learning activity for critical engagement with com - puting for the Hour of Code , an annual event that offers hour - long introductory computing activities to youth . We conducted co - design workshops during summer 2021 in two cities with 12 youth of Color ( ages 11 - 15 years ) , in which we employed differ - ent reflective , collaborative and making activities to investigate youths’ critical perceptions of computing and address the following research questions : ( 1 ) What are the perspectives of youth from groups historically marginalized in computing on critical issues in computing ? ( 2 ) What kinds of projects do youth create in Scratch to address critical issues in computing ? and ( 3 ) How do youth reflect on the learning activity and make changes to implement it with their peers ? In the discussion , we address what we learned about co - designing a critical computing learning activity with youth . CCS CONCEPTS • Human - centered computing → Participatory design ; • So - cial and professional topics → Computing literacy . KEYWORDS Co - design ; Critical design ; Scratch ; Hour of Code ; Critical comput - ing ; Creative computing ACM Reference Format : Luis Morales - Navarro , Naomi Thompson , Yasmin B . Kafai , Mia S . Shaw , and Nichole Pinkard . 2022 . Reimagining and Co - designing with Youth an Hour of Code Activity for Critical Engagement with Computing . In Interac - tion Design and Children ( IDC ’22 ) , June 27 – 30 , 2022 , Braga , Portugal . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 9 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3501712 . 3529730 ∗ Authors contributed equally to this research . Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author ( s ) must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , topostonserversortoredistributetolists , requirespriorspecificpermission and / or a fee . Request permissions from permissions @ acm . org . IDC ’22 , June 27 – 30 , 2022 , Braga , Portugal © 2022 Copyright held by the owner / author ( s ) . Publication rights licensed to ACM . ACM ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 9197 - 9 / 22 / 06 . . . $ 15 . 00 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3501712 . 3529730 1 INTRODUCTION Recent studies in child - computer interaction ( hereafter : CCI ) have noted the need to expand computational thinking to include think - ing critically about social and ethical implications of computing ( e . g . , [ 12 ] ) . For instance , in a recent review on promoting a critical design agenda , Iivari and colleagues [ 11 ] stated that “we could even more explicitly aim to educate children to adopt a critical mind - set , to look at society critically , and to take action to overcome marginalization , injustice , domination , exclusion , and alienation and / or to promote emancipation , empowerment , liberation—using design and technology , among other things " ( p . 13 ) . This resonates with calls to promote children’s empowerment in K - 12 computing education . Here computational empowerment is proposed as a par - ticipatory design alternative to computational thinking that focuses on how young people build their understanding of technology and gain agency with computing by asking how youth can become “em - powered through constructive , analytical and critical engagement with technology” [ 4 ] ( p . 66 ) to address prominent social and ethical implications , consequences , and limitations of computing . Within computational empowerment , researchers highlight the need to co - design activities with youth to investigate how they engage critically while making with computing [ 4 , 12 ] . While , we must involve children in more speculative , reflective , and socially responsible designs concerned with critiquing tech - nologies and imagining alternatives ; engaging children in criticality through participatory design research [ 16 ] is challenging because certain concepts may be difficult to comprehend as not to subvert the critical design to mere provocation or simplistic opposition [ 11 ] . This challenge is not new to CCI , a field that has strived to make the design process more inclusive for younger participants [ 6 , 7 ] . Indeed , recent studies have examined how participatory methods can be used to engage children and youth in critical reflection , de - sign , and imagination [ 5 , 14 , 19 , 23 ] revealing that although this kind of research is underdeveloped in CCI , youth have a desire to engage with criticality in reflective and playful ways . In this paper , we examine the redesign of an Hour of Code ( HoC ) activity for critical engagement with computing in the hopes of developing youth’s computational empowerment . We invited youth to participate as informants , testers , and co - designers in examining , designing , and remixing the activity . HoC is an annual event that offers hour - long activities to introduce K - 12 youth to computing 288 IDC ’22 , June 27 – 30 , 2022 , Braga , Portugal Morales - Navarro , et al . [ 2 ] , providing many with their first hands - on experience with cod - ing . While criticisms of HoC have mostly focused on the scripted nature of the activities [ 28 ] , elsewhere researchers also have high - lighted barriers to participation [ 1 ] and the lack of creative and critical foci in activities [ 15 ] . We report on co - design workshops conducted in two different cities during the summer of 2021 . During these workshops we employed different activities to investigate youth’s critical perceptions of computing to re - imagine the ongo - ing dominant narratives around who and what is computing for . We addressed the following research questions : ( 1 ) What are the perspectives of youth from groups historically marginalized in com - puting on critical issues in computing ? ( 2 ) What kinds of projects do youth create in Scratch to address critical issues in computing ? and ( 3 ) How do youth reflect on the learning activity and make changes to implement it with their peers ? In the discussion , we address what we learned about researching and designing a critical computing activity with the purpose of supporting the development of computational empowerment among youth . 2 BACKGROUND While youth’s computational thinking has been the focus of many studies , more recently how youth think critically about various computing technologies and their design has gained traction [ 12 ] . Thinking critically here is defined as the ability to go beyond un - derstanding computational concepts to “learn to reason about and evaluate the benefits and limitations of specific technology appli - cations” [ 14 ] ( p . 1 ) . For instance , studies have explored how youth evaluate personal and experimental sensor data in their accuracy and limitations [ 14 ] , how primary school children understand the impact of gender and social norms in the decision - making processes of artificial intelligence systems [ 19 ] , or how teens understand the various ways in which personal data is collected and further shared or monetized [ 5 ] . These studies piloted various techniques from CCI research [ 7 ] —ranging from field journals , brainstorming ses - sions , to reflective writing— providing insights into how youth from upper primary to secondary school engage with criticality . In our case , we examined youth’s critical perceptions about cod - ing and computing by redesigning an HoC activity called CodeQuilt . HoC has been successful at introducing youth to computing with over one billion activities completed by K - 12 youth since its launch in 2013 . In 2021 alone , more than 85 , 000 HoC events were organized in 164 countries across the globe [ 3 ] . Yet , despite its immense popu - larity , there is surprisingly little research on the design and impact of HoC activities , especially with K - 12 youth [ 28 ] . HoC activities have been criticized for their often - scripted nature guiding youth in a lock - step sequence through 60 - minute - long activities , leaving little room for open - ended designs or even critical examinations [ 24 , 26 ] . Indeed , an analysis of over 300 HoC activities available in December 2020 for middle and high schoolers revealed little cre - ative engagement [ 15 ] . Furthermore , only four out of all available activities addressed critical issues within computing as a field ( such as who can and even why everyone should learn to code ) mostly by having youth talk about computing instead of code . In a pilot study [ 13 ] , we designed a HoC - style activity called CodeQuilt with the goal of creating room for youth to thinking critically about computing while introducing basic computational concepts and practices . In developing and implementing CodeQuilt , we introduced critical engagement with computing by inviting youth to restory [ 20 , 21 ] the ongoing dominant narratives around who is computing and what is computing , while also providing them with hands - on experiences in coding . We situated the mak - ing of critically engaged projects in a public context by using a digital quilt as a metaphor for illustrating how various projects come together to create a joint message . By selecting a “quilt” as an organizing format we built on the use of quilts for conceptualizing cultural identity and representing Black , LGBTQ , and Women’s histories . Rather than containing design and discussions to individ - ual classrooms , contributing to a public display meant to capture a diversity of issues and voices by letting youth not only create but also share their designs with a public audience . From the pilot implementation in December 2020 , in which over 100 middle school youth participated , we observed that many projects posted in Cod - eQuilt engaged creatively while only a small number of projects engaged with critical issues [ 13 ] . These findings led us to reconsider the design of the activity and involve youth in its redesign to have their voices , perspectives , and interests guide critical engagement in CodeQuilt . This paper builds on the findings from the pilot study by includ - ing middle and high school youth ( the target audience ) as infor - mants , testers , and co - designers in revising the CodeQuilt activity . We used diverse methods to support youth in making sense of themselves and others in relation to computing and its implications . While prominent social and ethical issues—such as the field’s lack of diversity , the bias prevalent in many algorithms , privacy issues with online data collection—are the topic of many public and aca - demic discussions and publications , it is unclear how these topics resonate with youth . What concerns do they have ? What issues are important to them ? By inviting youth to become co - designers of a public HoC learning activity about restorying dominant narratives related to coding , we wanted to engage them not only in identifying critical features but also in developing their own counternarratives and rethinking the critical computing learning activity itself . 3 METHODS 3 . 1 Participants We conducted in - person co - design workshops in two different sites with 12 pre - teens and teens ( ages 11 - 15 years ) who had demon - strated an interest in computing by participating in out of school programs designed to deepen STEM participation for historically marginalized communities . At a science center located in the North - eastern United States , we invited youth who had previously par - ticipated in a STEM after - school and summer program to join the co - design workshop . This one - time workshop took place in a class - room at the science center . Here , participants included six highly motivated young people that had taken part in the science center program for at least one year . Two youths had previously partic - ipated in HoC and two other youth had taken computer science courses at school . Two of them reported being very interested in pursuing computing in the future and the remaining participants were somewhat interested in computing . Half of the participants identified as female , two youths self - identified as Black , two as Black Latinx , and two as Asian . The other one - time workshop was 289 Reimagining and Co - designing with Youth IDC ’22 , June 27 – 30 , 2022 , Braga , Portugal conducted in a recreational room adjacent to a public park in the Midwestern United States with six participants . Here , we sent tar - geted invitations to families of youth who were participating in a local STEAM summer camp program . The youth we invited showed interest in exploring STEAM topics in combination with outdoor activities such as sports and games . Additionally , two of the youth also participated in an out - of - school STEAM program specifically for girls . Five of the youth who agreed to participate identified as Black and one as Asian . Five of the youth identified as female , and one as male . Workshops lasted four hours in total with a short pizza break . All participants at both sites had encountered block programming before the workshop , with one being an avid Scratch user . 3 . 2 Workshop Design We designed the workshops to provide youth with activities that al - lowed them to play distinct roles as informants , testers , and design partners [ 6 ] in the redesign process of a learning activity ( see Appen - dix A . 1 , Table 1 ) . First , we engaged youth as informants [ 7 ] asking them to “brainstorm” using either paper or online sticky - notes ( i . e . , Jamboard ) to respond to a series of questions [ 30 ] . Following , we involved youth as testers [ 6 ] asking them to design [ 18 ] a patch for CodeQuilt , an HoC activity that had been implemented in a school setting in 2020 [ 13 ] , and reflect on their experience using a big paper method [ 25 , 27 ] . Finally , as design partners , we asked participants to remix the activity for their peers and provide feedback to each other [ 10 ] . Brainstorming about Code : First we invited youth to be our in - formants and share their perspectives on coding and computer programming using stickies . Youth recorded one idea per sticky note responding to the following questions : What comes to mind when you hear coding or computer programming ? Do you think it is important to learn to code ? Why or why not ? Who do you think can code ? What is coding for ? How can computers and technology help people and communities ? How can they harm people and communities ? If you could code , how would you use your coding abilities to create for you or your friends ? Participants shared their ideas on individual physical and digital sticky notes which then were organized by facilitators and afterwards discussed in a whole group to make connections across ideas [ 30 ] ( see Appendix A . 2 , Fig . 1 ) . This activity lasted 20 minutes . Testing CodeQuilt : Afterwards , we invited them to test the hour - long CodeQuilt activity described above . As testers the goal was for youth to experience the activity while being observed and to provide feedback on their experience [ 6 ] . The CodeQuilt invited participants to reflect on what is coding and who gets to participate in computing while designing a project [ 18 ] . During the CodeQuilt activity participants first explored a quilt created by other youth made of Scratch patches that addressed the question “Who codes and what creations are made with code ? ” . Following they made their own Scratch projects responding to the guiding question , added their projects to the quilt ( see Appendix A . 2 , Fig . 2 ) and afterwards reflected on how their projects contributed to the stories represented on the quilt as a whole . Reflecting on CodeQuilt : We then asked participants to move around the room and respond to the following prompts on big sheets of paper : What was your favorite part of the activity ? What was your least favorite part of this activity ? How would you tell your peers / classmates about this project ? Do you think they would like it ? What other conversations about computing would you like to have ? Following participants were invited to read , reflect , and organize and annotate the ideas on the sheets of paper and to share them with the whole group [ 25 , 27 ] ( see Appendix A . 2 , Fig . 3 ) . As participants shared , facilitators asked follow - up questions . This activity lasted 40 minutes . Remixing CodeQuilt for peers : Finally , participants reviewed the CodeQuilt learning activity , providing suggestions for changes [ 10 ] . Here youth took on the role of design partners . We invited youth to take the CodeQuilt activity plan as a starting point and modify it with the goal of engaging their peers and other youth their age in discussions about computing . To facilitate remixing , we created a remix sheet with three columns : Introduction , coding activity , and discussion and a section for the intention of the activity ( see Appendix A . 2 , Fig . 4 ) . We required all remixes to have these sections and provided a sample remix sheet . Youth could come up with any changes and any possible arrangements if they had the three parts and addressed issues of who is computing , what is computing , and the relationships between computing and society . We also gave participants a printed version of the CodeQuilt site in case they wanted to annotate it or redesign it . After 30 - 40 minutes working on their remixes participants spent 20 minutes sharing their proposals and providing feedback to each other . 3 . 3 Data Collection and Analysis The co - design workshops were led by three of the authors acting as facilitators and data collectors . Across both workshop sites , we col - lected and catalogued participants’ artifacts during each workshop activity , including sticky notes during the initial brainstorm and CodeQuilt reflection activity , participants’ Scratch quilt patches , and remix sheets ( usually 1 - 3 sentences written for each section ) . We also collected and transcribed audio that was recorded during the discussions . Participant - generated data were anonymized and organized into spreadsheets by the first and fourth author . Au - thors independently coded all 101 sticky note responses , 15 Scratch projects , and 34 remix sheet responses , examining data for youth’s perspectives on computing and its creative and critical aspects . Data was coded inductively looking for emergent common themes . Projects with ambiguity were discussed with the research team and new categories were generated to accommodate them . Participant reflections in the form of sticky notes and worksheet responses were also analyzed inductively to capture the overall sentiment students expressed about the CodeQuilt learning activity and sug - gestions they would make to change it . We analyzed the audio recordings of discussions for explanation building [ 29 ] , that is look - ing for vignettes that explain what youth did while completing the activities , particularly their perspectives and thoughts beyond and behind the artifacts created . This multisource analysis and specifically triangulating the artifacts with the audio recordings provided us with a better understanding of youth’s experiences during the workshops . Throughout the analysis process all authors had iterative discussions to define themes , discuss data and come to consensus in our findings . We present the results of our analysis 290 IDC ’22 , June 27 – 30 , 2022 , Braga , Portugal Morales - Navarro , et al . using youths’ quotes to illustrate their perspectives on the activities ( all youths are identified with pseudonyms ) . 4 FINDINGS To address the research questions we highlight the patterns of critical engagement we saw across the brainstorming , designing , reflecting , and remixing activities . 4 . 1 What are the perspectives of youth from groups historically marginalized in computing on critical issues in computing ? In the brainstorming about code activity , out of the 11 stickies re - sponses pertaining to who codes , eight responses suggested that anyone is capable of learning to code , with three responses specify - ing anyone with access and one specifying anyone with love for CS . Youth expressed utilitarian and creative perspectives about coding : on the stickies , youth articulated that coding provides communities with opportunities to learn ( n = 5 ) , make things ( n = 5 ) , and solve complex problems ( n = 2 ) ; and that they were interested in using coding to create games ( n = 4 ) and software applications for work , school , or tedious tasks ( n = 3 ) . When inquiring about youth’s initial ideas of what coding is , responses varied , including but not limited to : technology such as video games , robots , or computers ( n = 4 ) ; learning activities that involve programming ( e . g . , quilt workshop or Scratch ; n = 5 ) ; celebrities like Bill Gates or Scratch youtuber griff - patch ( n = 2 ) ; and emotions like stress or shock ( n = 4 ) . Reflecting on who comes to mind when hearing the words coding or computer programming , six stickies identified programmers and develop - ers , including hackers and famous programmers . Additionally , two youths specified that individuals with bad intentions can use coding to harm communities . Youth across both sites suggested that it is important to learn to code ( 11 out of 11 sticky responses ) . However , while participants identified that learning to code is important for their possible future careers ( n = 3 ) or developing new skills ( n = 4 ) , some students pushed back . For instance , Angel argued that “there’s nothing wrong with having knowledge about it , but I feel like overall , it’s not super important . ” Thomas agreed , “it’s not the most important thing , it doesn’t have to be at the top of your priority list . ” These moments of pushback showcase how youth can critically assess value state - ments about coding that have become mainstream and ubiquitous today . Participants also determined that some questions were easier to approach than others . Aliyah , for instance , shared that “Why is it important to learn to code ? ” was an easy question to answer and expressed frustration that “people don’t quite understand the importance of [ learning to code ] . ” When adults think of computers , she said , they picture “kids playing video games all day and don’t think about how what kids are doing on computers can be impor - tant . ” For her , learning to code “can be about learning life skills like critical thinking and problem solving that come with coding . ” On the other hand , Aliyah found addressing the question “Who do you think can code ? ” difficult and described it as a “loaded question , because it forces us to think about biases and what we have been told , it also makes us think about access . ” Similarly , Roger explained that thinking about how computing can harm people can be uncom - fortable to talk about because sometimes the benefits of computing also create possibilities for harm . Aliyah added that addressing the negative consequences of technology or who has access to learning to code is “not a one stop answer” and requires going beyond “the surface level . ” And although she experienced discomfort , she said “being uncomfortable with questions is really good , because if we don’t ask them , then they just kind of get brushed over . ” These examples showcase youth grappling with difficult issues as they discuss the potential harms and downfalls of computing . 4 . 2 What kinds of projects do youth create in Scratch to address critical issues in computing ? Out of the 15 CodeQuilt patches created by youth when testing CodeQuilt , only seven Scratch projects included themes related to coding . Regarding who codes , four projects echoed previous perspectives from the Brainstorming activity that anyone— “not just fancy shmancy people” as expressed by Angel—can code . These quilt patches included animals , video game and fantasy characters ( e . g . , princesses and elves ) , and even a mad scientist . In terms of what coding is for , three quilt patches highlighted how youth can create programs as well as bring new " ideas to life , " while two patches emphasized how coding can make peoples’ lives easier . Despite there being eight quilt patches that did not address critical aspects of computing , participants were still able to engage with the creative and personally meaningful aspects of coding , with youth incorporating humorous gifs , games , and their family and peers . After completing their projects , some participants such as Thomas highlighted the importance of being able to make some - thing fun and creative that at the same time addressed the question posed : “Who codes and what creations are made with code ? ” . He said he was inspired by looking at other youth’s projects already on the quilt , “once I saw that , I realized I didn’t have to be so serious . So that’s when I kind of felt more comfortable doing something that wasn’t boring . ” His original plan was to make a patch with a computer scientist and a robot using the sprites already included in Scratch . However , after seeing the patches already on the quilt , he decided to make a Black mad scientist who coded a cyborg - version of the female rapper Nicki Minaj . “It definitely made me more in - terested in the project [ . . . ] being able to do what I wanted to do , I paid more attention to it , and I enjoyed it more , ” he explained . He purposefully made the computer scientist in his project a Black teeneager wearing baggy clothes to challenge the dominant narra - tives that frame “Black people people with baggy clothes often seen as ‘thuggish’” and not as computer scientists . Thomas explained : “I guess what inspired me is that I live life as a Black person . So everything I see , I see through the lens of a Black person . So when I look at , um , computing and stuff like that , I want to know more about what it’s like for Black people in those fields , and like , racism they might encounter working in those fields , and stuff like that , and how rare and how hard it is to get into those fields as a person of Color and stuff . ” Given that narratives provide identity resources for youth to make sense of themselves and others ( e . g . , computer scientists ) [ 9 , 17 ] , designing a quilt patch that reimagines existing 291 Reimagining and Co - designing with Youth IDC ’22 , June 27 – 30 , 2022 , Braga , Portugal narratives supported Thomas in revealing his critical considerations regarding who codes . Thomas’s project and subsequent reflection provided examples of how creativity and criticality are intertwined when youth are given opportunities to create projects that express their identiy and their perspectives on computing . While talking to another participant , Angel , who was interested in the politics of computing , Thomas proposed “maybe we could talk about how race for example , how racially insensitive some of the Snapchat filters are , if you talked about politics and how that influences coding . ” Through sharing stories with one another about issues of power and ethics related to computing in society , youth like Thomas and Angel illustrate how youth’s political identities can be seen as assets to learning about and engaging in critical creative computing [ 22 ] . 4 . 3 How do youth reflect on the learning activity and make changes to implement it with their peers ? When reflecting about their experience with CodeQuilt , partici - pants’ favorite parts of the activity varied , with youth “generally [ enjoying ] the big idea part of the project and seeing what they can do with what they’re given . ” At one site , participants read over their peers’ stickies and annotated common themes from the answers . “The 3 different outlooks are almost like a step - by - step process on how to go about most projects , ” one participant noted , “Inspiration [ looking at peers’ projects , 1 sticky ] , Conceptualiza - tion [ brainstorming ideas , 2 stickies ] and finally executing your previous ideas [ 4 stickies ] . ” Other participants reflected that they found it interesting how open - ended the CodeQuilt activity was in allowing youth to express themselves creatively . Aliyah explained “I like that some of them [ the Scratch projects ] kind of had a little bit to do with code or like a lot , but they were all really creative . ” Roger agreed with Aliyah saying that making a patch for the quilt “it’s kind of [ making ] your own thing . ” He described that creating a project showed him how programming could be used for many things , “for like telling your story or making something new or fun . ”Participants expressed their concern that other youth , their friends , or classmates at school , would have trouble addressing the guiding question . “I think they would like the coding part , but I think some would be thrown off with the question , ” Angel explained . Martha elaborated that usually while some people “get it” others need more explanation , she said that “seeing the examples did help , but for some of the people that I do know , I feel like having like a really broad question , would like throw them off , and it would take them a while to like , get an idea in their heads of what they wanted to do . ” To address these issues , youth suggested having more time to brainstorm before starting to code or to have participants work in pairs . It is important to note that not all participants had a vision of criticality that addressed systemic inequities and issues of power . When we asked youth what other topics about computing and society they wanted to explore , at one site they focused on the importance of making computing and the coding of real - world , computational technologies more accessible and transparent . For instance , Brandon explained he wanted to learn more about how coding impacts the way the public transportation system in the city works , Roger was interested in how software and hardware interact and Aliyah in learning about how computing is used creatively in the arts . For the final activity , remixing CodeQuilt , participants from both sites provided ideas and suggestions for remixing the activity . In addition to focusing on who codes ( 4 responses ) and what coding is for ( 4 responses ) , participants adapted the activity to focus on the why of computing . For example , for half of the learning objectives provided , youth highlighted learning ( 1 ) the relevance of computing for individuals ( “what does coding mean to you ? ” and to have fun ) and communities , ( 2 ) its real - world applications , and ( 3 ) how to feel confident and have fun coding . To introduce the CodeQuilt activity and the relevance of coding , five responses suggested asking learners “big” questions about their prior knowledge of coding , what coding means to them personally , and how they can “make their mark with coding . ” In addition , youth highlighted making learners aware of how easy it is to learn coding and how much fun they can have doing so ( n = 2 ) . Given that the CodeQuilt activity asks learners to simultaneously learn how to code while reflecting on who codes / what coding is for , participants suggested inviting youth to collaborate with their peers ( n = 3 ) and share ideas with others ( n = 2 ) , offer multiple ways to do complete the project ( n = 2 ) , and providing Scratch tutorials or cheat sheets ( n = 2 ) . Lastly , participants suggested wrapping up the activity by discussing the quilts that were made ( noting similar themes and likes / dislikes , n = 4 ) ; reflecting on the learning activity ( what they learned , challenges they faced , how they felt , n = 5 ) ; and providing learners with alternative or future opportunities to practice coding . Several participants suggested adding a brainstorming section to the activity where learners can come up with an idea , discuss it with their partners and afterwards work on making their Scratch patches . Brandon argued this is important because “there are many things you want to do , but to choose is difficult . ” Angel suggested making the process of creating the quilt patches iterative by having learners work on them , check - in with their classmates and revise their projects . Other participants suggested providing more time for learners to get acquainted with Scratch and to encourage col - laboration among peers by having them share ideas and then work on patches together . While some youth proposed changes to the structure of the learning activity ( time allocation , brainstorming , iterative design ) , others proposed content changes to focus the attention of participants on specific issues related to computing . Thomas proposed centering the HoC activity around issues of par - ticipation , representation , and the experiences of Black and PoC people in computing . Brandon , on the other hand , proposed fram - ing the HoC activity around how code and how computing affect people’s everyday lives . 5 DISCUSSION We took away several lessons from this research that can help us move towards computational empowerment by informing work on critical computing with youth , expanding on restorying as an ap - proach for critical engagement , and considering design implications for introductory activities around criticality . 292 IDC ’22 , June 27 – 30 , 2022 , Braga , Portugal Morales - Navarro , et al . First , in the workshops youth provided numerous examples of what they perceived as critical in coding and computing . Many youths saw a need for more transparency in understanding how technology at large works . Here youth focused on the importance of making computing and the coding of real - world , computational technologies more accessible and understandable . Youth also sug - gested that talking about participation and representation in com - puting should more explicitly include the experiences of people of Color . Here youth addressed who can be involved in coding and challenged dominant narratives of what computer scientists look like , not just “fancy - schmancy” people , but also people who wear “baggy clothes” . More importantly , some youth pushed back on the HoC mantra and asked , “Why should everyone learn to code ? ” These findings illustrate that youth can engage in thinking critically about coding and computing in different ways . They cast a wide net in how they saw code and computing impacting their own and other people’s everyday lives—much in the same way that Iivari and colleagues [ 11 ] identified criticality ranging from ‘mild to wild’ in CCI studies . These findings suggest that criticality is not a fixed , universal entity but rather contextual , here we need further research on how to engage youth in critical conversations to promote computational empowerment . Second , we used “restorying” as a technique to engage youth in articulating and revising dominant narratives around comput - ing [ 20 , 21 ] . Storyboarding is a commonly used technique in CCI research [ 7 ] which provides participants with a structure to map out interactions in a narrative context . Restorying also provides structure but with the goal of rewriting existing narratives along dif - ferent dimensions such as race and gender [ 21 ] . Youth like Thomas restoried how computer scientists could be represented . We also built on the long tradition of quilts to represent multiple narratives that co - exist , complement , or even challenge each other . In general , youth appreciated the creative freedom that restorying provided them to engage with stories around computing they found relevant . In restorying , youth engaged with criticality while coding , rather than just talking about it . These activities that bring together criti - cal and conceptual engagement with computing are well aligned with the goals of promoting computational empowerment through hands - on computing activities that engage learners critically in re - imagining the future [ 4 ] . However , we also saw that some youth showed resistance to the types of activities we asked them to do . When prompted to consider what their friends might think of the CodeQuilt activity , one of the youths responded that their friends and peers would not like to answer such broad questions ( e . g . , “What is coding for ? ” ) . While we incorporated structures to support brainstorming in the co - design sessions , some of the youth we worked with mentioned that there should be more time dedicated to this exercise . We know that brain - storming is a productive way to prompt and focus discussion and are reminded here that youth themselves find this time valuable . We also found that the prototyping structures helped youth engage with criticality by uplifting their agency to answer broad questions in ways that are connected to their own interests and lived expe - riences . One design change might involve shifting the activities discussed here to take place over several days rather than one day to provide youth with more time to process on their own . Finally , we saw that the remixing structures also supported youth agency as they are very rarely given opportunities in other educational spaces to rethink and redesign learning activities . Third , we would be amiss to not mention the feelings of discom - fort that several youths expressed in being asked to consider the potential harms that computing can cause communities . As design - ers and educators , we need to consider how much of this discomfort is productive and necessary , and at what point does this potentially become harmful ? Additionally , this suggests further consideration on who is left out of conversations that may potentially feel unsafe [ 8 ] . One of the youths noted that for learners to feel safe to discuss critical issues it is important to prepare teachers and facilitators to be critical with youth and embrace the discomfort that often comes with discussing sociopolitical issues . For instance , Thomas suggested providing teacher and facilitator workshops prior to the learning activity to address their concerns about having critical conversations , because “no teacher should be uncomfortable talk - ing about politics , race or stuff like that . ” Building on this , Angel highlighted that it is important for facilitators to acknowledge that not all learners will have the same perspectives or opinions to create spaces where youth feel comfortable to share their views . 6 CONCLUSIONS In our study we focused on an Hour of Code activity . One could argue that such short activities , just barely an hour long as the name suggests , do not provide enough time to begin engaging critically with computing , and thus perhaps are better left to the end ( rather than the beginning ) of introductory computing . Indeed , one of Code . org’s reviewers provided the following feedback when we submitted the CodeQuilt HoC activity for review : “I see this more as an end of year assignment for a CS class , rather than an hour of code . ” Our observations from the co - design workshops suggest otherwise . Youth voiced concerns , not only with the general message that everyone needs to learn to code but also with many larger issues associated with computing . To fully realize the goals of computational empowerment , these issues deserve to be addressed from the beginning , and not much later when youth have already decided on or are engaged in a STEM career . 7 SELECTION AND PARTICIPATION OF CHILDREN We recruited youth already enrolled in two STEAM afterschool and summer programs in two cities located in the Northeastern and Midwestern United States . Youth were invited by the organizers of the STEAM programs to participate via email and through paper handouts . Parents received consent forms prior to the study which included a brief explanation of the research and youth assented to their participation . Research protocols and data collection methods were approved by the IRB boards of the University of Pennsylvania and Northwestern University . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS Special thanks to Gayithri Jayathirta for support in the design of the CodeQuilt activity . 293 Reimagining and Co - designing with Youth IDC ’22 , June 27 – 30 , 2022 , Braga , Portugal REFERENCES [ 1 ] Ugochi Acholonu , Jessa Dickinson , Dominic Amato , and Nichole Pinkard . 2016 . Lessons learned from hosting an Hour of Code event . In 2016 Research on Equity andSustainedParticipationinEngineering , Computing , andTechnology ( RESPECT ) . IEEE , 1 – 4 . [ 2 ] William Aspray . 2016 . Participation in computing . The National Science Foun - dation’s Expansionary Programs . Springer International Publishing , Switzerland ( 2016 ) . [ 3 ] Code . org . 2022 . How Hour of Code 2021 showed us # CSEverywhere . https : / / web . archive . org / web / 20220310192233 / https : / / codeorg . medium . com / how - hour - of - code - 2021 - showed - us - cseverywhere - 26010a485da5 [ 4 ] Christian Dindler , Rachel Smith , and Ole Sejer Iversen . 2020 . Computational empowerment : participatory design in education . CoDesign 16 , 1 ( 2020 ) , 66 – 80 . [ 5 ] Liz Dowthwaite , Helen Creswick , Virginia Portillo , Jun Zhao , Menisha Patel , Elvira Perez Vallejos , Ansgar Koene , and Marina Jirotka . 2020 . " It’s your private information . it’s your life . " young people’s views of personal data use by online technologies . In Proceedings of the Interaction Design and Children Conference . 121 – 134 . [ 6 ] Allison Druin . 2002 . The role of children in the design of new technology . Behaviour and information technology 21 , 1 ( 2002 ) , 1 – 25 . [ 7 ] Jerry Alan Fails , Mona Leigh Guha , and Allison Druin . 2013 . Methods and techniques for involving children in the design of new technology for children . Foundations and Trends in Human - Computer Interaction 6 , 2 ( 2013 ) , 85 – 166 . [ 8 ] AnnieGentèsandMaxMollon . 2015 . Criticaldesign . In Empoweringusersthrough design . Springer , 79 – 101 . [ 9 ] Melissa Gresalfi and Victoria M Hand . 2019 . Coordinating situated identities in mathematics classrooms with sociohistorical narratives : A consideration for design . ZDM 51 , 3 ( 2019 ) , 493 – 504 . [ 10 ] Mona Leigh Guha , Allison Druin , Gene Chipman , Jerry Alan Fails , Sante Simms , and Allison Farber . 2004 . Mixing ideas : a new technique for working with young children as design partners . In Proceedings of the 2004 conference on Interaction design and children : building a community . 35 – 42 . [ 11 ] Netta Iivari , Sumita Sharma , Leena Ventä - Olkkonen , Tonja Molin - Juustila , Kari Kuutti , Jenni Holappa , and Essi Kinnunen . 2021 . Critical agenda driving child – computer interaction research—Taking a stock of the past and envisioning the future . International Journal of Child - Computer Interaction ( 2021 ) , 100408 . [ 12 ] Ole Sejer Iversen , Rachel Charlotte Smith , and Christian Dindler . 2018 . From computational thinking to computational empowerment : a 21st century PD agenda . In Proceedings of the 15th Participatory Design Conference : Full Papers - Volume 1 . 1 – 11 . [ 13 ] Yasmin Kafai , Gayithri Jayathirtha , Mia Shaw , and Luis Morales - Navarro . 2021 . Codequilt : Designinganhourofcodeactivityforcreativeandcriticalengagement with computing . In Interaction Design and Children . 573 – 576 . [ 14 ] Susan Lechelt , Yvonne Rogers , and Nicolai Marquardt . 2020 . Coming to your senses : promoting critical thinking about sensors through playful interaction in classrooms . In Proceedings of the Interaction Design and Children Conference . 11 – 22 . [ 15 ] Luis Morales - Navarro , Yasmin Kafai , Gayithri Jayathirtha , and Mia Shaw . 2021 . Investigating creative and critical engagement with computing in the Hour of Code ( Practicalreport ) . In The16thworkshopinprimaryandsecondarycomputing education . 1 – 6 . [ 16 ] James Pierce , Phoebe Sengers , Tad Hirsch , Tom Jenkins , William Gaver , and Carl DiSalvo . 2015 . Expanding and refining design and criticality in HCI . In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 2083 – 2092 . [ 17 ] Julian Rappaport . 1995 . Empowerment meets narrative : Listening to stories and creating settings . American Journal of community psychology 23 , 5 ( 1995 ) , 795 – 807 . [ 18 ] Elizabeth B - N Sanders and Pieter Jan Stappers . 2014 . Probes , toolkits and pro - totypes : three approaches to making in codesigning . CoDesign 10 , 1 ( 2014 ) , 5 – 14 . [ 19 ] Marie - Monique Schaper , Laura Malinverni , and Cristina Valero . 2020 . Robot Presidents : Whoshouldruletheworld ? TeachingCriticalThinkinginAIthrough Reflections upon Food Traditions . In Proceedings of the 11th Nordic Conference on Human - Computer Interaction : Shaping Experiences , Shaping Society . 1 – 4 . [ 20 ] Mia S Shaw , GaYeon Ji , Yi Zhang , and Yasmin B Kafai . 2021 . Promoting socio - political identification with computer science : How high school youth restory their identities through electronic textile quilts . In 2021 Conference on Research in Equitable and Sustained Participation in Engineering , Computing , and Technology ( RESPECT ) . IEEE , 1 – 8 . [ 21 ] EbonyElizabethThomasandAmyStornaiuolo . 2016 . Restoryingtheself : Bending toward textual justice . Harvard Educational Review 86 , 3 ( 2016 ) , 313 – 338 . [ 22 ] SepehrVakil . 2018 . Ethics , identity , andpoliticalvision : Towardajustice - centered approach to equity in computer science education . Harvard Educational Review 88 , 1 ( 2018 ) , 26 – 52 . [ 23 ] Maarten Van Mechelen , Line Have Musaeus , Ole Sejer Iversen , Christian Dindler , andArthurHjorth . 2021 . Asystematicreviewofempowermentinchild - computer interaction research . In Interaction Design and Children . 119 – 130 . [ 24 ] Sara Vogel . 2019 . Power , Discourse , and Knowledge in Computer Science Educa - tion Advocacy : An Analysis of Popular Code . org Videos . ( 2019 ) . [ 25 ] Greg Walsh , Elizabeth Foss , Jason Yip , and Allison Druin . 2013 . FACIT PD : a framework for analysis and creation of intergenerational techniques for par - ticipatory design . In proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 2893 – 2902 . [ 26 ] Ben Williamson . 2016 . Political computational thinking : Policy networks , digital governance and ‘learning to code’ . Critical Policy Studies 10 , 1 ( 2016 ) , 39 – 58 . [ 27 ] Julia Woodward , Zari McFadden , Nicole Shiver , Amir Ben - Hayon , Jason C Yip , and Lisa Anthony . 2018 . Using co - design to examine how children conceptualize intelligent interfaces . In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1 – 14 . [ 28 ] Jessica Yauney , Scott R Bartholomew , and Peter Rich . 2022 . A systematic review of “Hour of Code” research . Computer Science Education ( 2022 ) , 1 – 33 . [ 29 ] Robert K Yin . 2018 . Case study Research and Applications : Design and methods . Sage . [ 30 ] Jason Yip , Tamara Clegg , Elizabeth Bonsignore , Helene Gelderblom , Emily Rhodes , and Allison Druin . 2013 . Brownies or bags - of - stuff ? Domain exper - tise in cooperative inquiry with children . In Proceedings of the 12th International conference on interaction design and children . 201 – 210 . A CO - DESIGN WORKSHOP A . 1 Overview of co - design workshop WorkshopActivity Description Artifactscreated DataSources Brainstormingaboutcode Reflected on learning about and participating in computing Sortedstickies Stickies , audiorecordings TestingCodeQuilt Tested CodeQuilt Scratchprojects Scratchprojects ReflectingonCodeQuilt Reflected on experienceswithactivity Annotatedstickies Stickies , audiorecordings RemixingCodeQuilt Redesignedactivityforpeers Remixsheets Remixsheets , audiorecordings A . 2 Images of co - design workshop activities 294 IDC ’22 , June 27 – 30 , 2022 , Braga , Portugal Morales - Navarro , et al . Figure 1 : Brainstorming about code activity : a participant in the Northeastern site added stickies to big sheets of paper ; youth in the Midwestern site brainstormed using digital stickies . Figure 2 : Testing CodeQuilt : quilt with patches created by youth . 295 Reimagining and Co - designing with Youth IDC ’22 , June 27 – 30 , 2022 , Braga , Portugal Figure 3 : Reflecting on CodeQuilt : youth annotated sticky notes on a big sheet of paper ; annotated stickies . Figure 4 : Remixing CodeQuilt : a remix sheet completed by a participant . 296