ListenReader : an electronically augmented paper - based book Maribeth Back , Jonathan Cohen , Rich Gold , Steve Harrison , Scott Minneman Xerox PARC 3333 Coyote Hill Road Palo Alto , CA USA + 1 650 812 4726 back , harrison , minneman , richgold @ parc . xerox . com ; cohen @ dnai . com ABSTRACT While predictions abound that electronic books will supplant traditional paper - based books , many people bemoan the coming loss of the book as cultural artifact . In this project we deliberately keep the affordances of paper books while adding electronic augmentation . The Listen Reader combines the look and feel of a real book — a beautiful binding , paper pages and printed images and text — with the rich , evocative quality of a movie soundtrack . The book ' s multi - layered interactive soundtrack consists of music and sound effects . Electric field sensors located in the book binding sense the proximity of the reader ' s hands and control audio parameters , while RFID tags embedded in each page allow fast , robust page identification . Three different Listen Readers were built as part of a six - month museum exhibit , with more than 350 , 000 visitors . This paper discusses design , implementation , and lessons learned through the iterative design process , observation , and visitor interviews . Keywords Audio books , interactive museum exhibits , electronic books , augmented reality , augmented books , multimodal i / o , new genres , sound design , interactive audio , interactive books , page detection , RFID tags , embedded tags , gestural input , smart documents . PROBLEM STATEMENT : ELECTRONIC BOOKS Electronic books have been the focus of an enormous amount of research , both commercial and academic . Prior art ranges from Alan Kay’s DynaBook to the current crop of commercial CD - ROM publishers and PDA and e - book manufacturers . None , however , have taken the approach of enabling complex electronic interaction through the physical use of a real book . These electronic books are generally presented as an onscreen computer application , as in a CD - ROM , or as a handheld device with a computer screen . The electronic book is almost never conceived as a real book , with real paper pages . Even in the case of " electric paper " the so - called paper is unlikely to offer the look and feel of paper constructed of wood chips , nor will the book much resemble the traditional bound book . Currently , electronically augmented books tend towards three models : a ) button - based interactive children ' s storybooks , with embedded audio buttons ; b ) online or CD - ROM books and storybooks ; and c ) the handheld e - book or PDA - style electronic reader , generally designed for downloadable texts . ( As of this writing , a real e - paper book is not available . ) The first instance , where the electronic book is a real book , is children ' s audio storybooks , which often have short sounds associated with particular images . The sound in these interactive books , in particular those with buttons built into the pages or bindings , is simplistic and often distracts the reader rather than enhancing or illustrating the reading material . However , nearly all of them are designed in a fashion that interrupts the reader’s attention to the story by forcing a search for the “hot spots” in the images or text - - the trigger points for the sound , which requires the activation of a button or switch to play and pause . In addition , the sound itself is usually very poor quality , played in short , harsh bursts . The frequency content of such bursts is such that it is difficult for the human perceptual system to successfully put them in the background ; this too can disrupt the reader’s involvement with the story . Online or CD - ROM - based " books " lack many of the attributes of books . They retain a book - like depth of content and sometimes a book design interaction metaphor , using pages and chapters , for example ; and publishers of CD - ROM books talk about their product as books . But these " books " must be read on a computer , and the distinction between a CD - ROM or online " book " and other computer applications is unclear . In this case the term " electronic book " is stretched thin , and clearly has more to do with the structure of content than with form or physical affordances . The e - book or PDA handheld device model of the electronic book has gained a great hold on the imagination of the publishing industry . Though several companies are now marketing these devices , the e - book model of the future of the book has spurred many complaints . [ 8 ] In sum : e - books are expensive hardware , they are not sufficiently robust , they have poor resolution or contrast or font formation or there is some other difficulty which makes the screen hard to read for very long . The interface is too present ; it requires too much attention ; downloading is too difficult and requires extra equipment . Readers find themselves aware of the device , rather than the content ; thus immersive reading is difficult if not impossible . Though many of these issues should ease with time and developments in both technology and social expectations around reading , some large questions remain : do people really want to do all their reading on one single device ? Is the form and feel of a book a major affordance in focusing the attention of the person reading it ? The Listen Reader draws from research in ubiquitous computing , tangible media , and augmented reality . [ 3 , 11 , 12 ] It pushes back on the concepts of the convergent reading device ( as in e - books ) , of book - as - application ( CD - ROMs ) or book - as - keyboard ( button - based audio storybooks ) . The Listen Reader is designed to preserve the cherished experience of immersive reading and to preserve the beauty of the paper - based book as token object . Earlier work : the SIT Book The Listen Reader is the fruition of several years of research focused on new document genres and the multimodal possibilities of interactive reading , especially . We reported on the SIT ( Sound - Image - Text ) Book , an early version of this work , in a short paper at CHI ' 99 . [ 2 ] With the SIT Book we were primarily interested in the use of audio as an added layer of illustration for a children ' s book . We also were interested in applying audio as a peripheral layer , added information that was nice to have but that was not necessary to understanding the book . In contrast , the Listen Reader ' s sounds are an integral part of the interactive reading experience . Context : museum setting The Listen Readers are part of a museum exhibition featuring eleven interactive experiences designed to explore the relationship between technology and reading . The six - month exhibit XFR : Experiments in the Future of Reading was installed at the Tech Museum of Innovation in San Jose , California . More than 350 , 000 visitors came through the exhibit between March and September 2000 . Because the exhibit took place within the context of a modern technology museum , the XFR exhibits are primarily interactive and hands - on , in keeping with many of the other exhibits . Fig . 1 . The Listen Reader provides a classic immersive reading environment : a comfortable chair , a polished hardwood reading stand , and beautiful paper pages in a soft leather book binder . High - quality embedded audio and responsive proximity ( " magic " ) sensors add to the sense of immersion . Description The Listen Reader consists of a large comfortable wingback chair with a small but excellent sound system embedded in it : a small speaker in each wing , not far from a person’s ear , and a subwoofer under the seat . A wooden swing arm table sits to the right of the chair ; on this table is affixed a book with leather and brass binding and hand - sewn , colorful paper pages . Embedded in the pages and binding of the book – but invisible to the user – are the sensors that enable the electronic augmentation of the book . The Listen Reader combines an interactive multi - track audio environment with text and images printed on traditional paper pages . Ambient sounds added to each page heighten the drama of the story . As the reader casually fingers different parts of the page , the sound gently adapts to the different moods and scenes . The sound environment is continuous ; it stops only when the reader finishes the book , turning the last page . Here are some examples of typical interactions with a Listen Reader : A museum visitor - - in this case , a 12 - year - old girl - - approaches the three Listen Readers sitting in a calm corner of the museum . Curious at finding comfortable stuffed chairs in this high - tech environment and attracted by the brightly colored books , she sinks into one of the chairs and pulls the book towards her . Suddenly , in response to her hand on the book ' s cover , she hears a cat ' s purr . The sounds come from the chair she ' s sitting in ; her head swings around for a moment , trying to locate the source of the sounds , but then she is drawn back to the book . As she opens it to the first page , a rich soundscape fades in : a burbling stream , buzzing cicadas , chirping birds , and an excerpt from John Coltrane ' s version of " Stairway to the Stars . " At this point the girl realizes she has encountered something new , and she pauses a moment to read the instructional signage mounted on the table next to the book . " Move your hands all around the book – you don ' t even have to touch the pages " she is advised , and as she progresses through the book , reading the story on each page , she plays with the sounds by moving her hands , exploring the different atmospheres she can create . As she turns each page , the current soundscape crossfades into the soundscape for the next page ; she is never left sitting in silence , not is there an abrupt , harsh transition . Typically , she stays to finish the entire book , and then moves on to read the next Listen Reader . Another visitor clearly has had much experience with the audio - button storybooks ; he tries punching various illustrations to elicit sounds , and is confused when the response is not an instant on / off but rather a volume fade - up or down . Eventually he figures out that he has a different type of control over this sound , and gives up on punching the illustrations . Though he never looks at the instructional signage and does not figure out how to use all of the interaction , he stays to read through the book , content with the shifting soundscapes he gets from simply turning the pages . A mother sits down in the Listen Reader and piles her three kids around her on the arms of the chair and on her lap . She reads the story aloud to them as they all play with the sounds in the book . Happy to have found a group experience for all of them ( and relieved to be off their feet ) they read the book all the way through . MULTIMODAL INTERACTION DESIGN Listen Reader is an experiment in multimodal reading . In addition to rich graphics and imaginative text , the modality of sound is woven into the storyline . We are interested in sound as well as graphics as part of a multimodal symbol set for reading . Sound as well as graphics can offer strongly affective imagery . Sound also serves to establish a sense of place . Thus , sound can operate as its own additional stylized symbol system , to be read along with the graphics and text . [ 4 ] In the Listen Reader , another point of the audio is to enhance the feeling of communing with a private world , one that gently acknowledges one’s own presence . This is similar to the sense of immersion one feels in reading a good book . Combining the two provides an even more immersive experience . Continuous control versus buttons An important feature of the Listen Reader is its design for integrating the audio illustration into the story . Interactive children ' s books often encourage the reader to turn to a new page and immediately punch every image to see whether it makes a noise . We move away from the binary button methodology by giving the reader the soundscape for each page immediately , and then providing the reader with continuous control mechanisms . The task is no longer to find the sounds ; it is rather to mix them is a satisfying way , as an accompaniment to the story . The continuous controllers were mapped to relate the volume of a sound to the proximity of a hand ( or other body part ) . As the reader’s hand approaches a certain area of the page , the sound gets louder . It fades when the hand is removed . The continuous controller is tuned to react at the same apparent rate of speed as the hand’s motion . The continuous interaction is less likely to induce the seek - and - punch behaviors common in button - based systems . We feel that this allows an important shift in focus for the interactive reader . SOUND DESIGN AND CONTENT We chose to begin work with childrens’ books , a type of literature where images and text tend to have an almost equal relationship . The three Listen Readers were all children ' s books from San Francisco ' s Chronicle Books , for which we designed unique soundtracks . The books were Hipcat , by Jonathan London , illustrated by Woodleigh Hubbard ; Armadillo Ray , by John Beifuss , illustrated by Peggy Turley ( we used the Spanish language version , translated by Augustin Antreasayan ) ; and Frank was a Monster Who Wanted To Dance , by Keith Graves . Music for HipCat was from several John Coltrane albums , used with permission from Atlantic Records ; we designed the sound effects . Each book had a relatively small amount of text per page , and full - page color illustrations ranging from natural settings ( deserts , streams , the ocean ) to depictions of characters and activities ( dancing , eating , driving , reading cat poetry , applauding ) . The sounds available on each page were related to the images found there . When the page is opened , all the sounds for that page begin to run softly in a continuous loop . There are four sounds associated with each page , one in each quadrant , and each loop is of a different length ; thus the effect is that of a changing sonic landscape , not a repeating sound loop . We chose a running background ambience so that the reader would never fall out of the immersive atmosphere created by the sound . Silence , especially abrupt silence upon a page turn , seems to require the visitor to do something . In the Listen Readers , focus is designed to remain on the story and the multimodal reading experience , rather than on the interaction . SYSTEM DESIGN The Listen Reader system combines two technologies : embedded RFID tagging for page identification , and electric field sensing to read proximity data from the hands of the person ( s ) reading the book . From these two data streams we can establish which sets of sounds are to be played , and what kind of manipulation should be performed on each sound ( usually volume or pitch control , or both ) . Fig . 2 . RFID transponders ( tags ) . Flexible copper printed onto clear plastic , embedded between two printed sheets to create one page thickness for the Listen Reader books . Each transponder has a unique ID . As of September 2000 , tags about half this size are available . Page identification Systems that gather accurate page - ID data from paper - based books have generally involved either mechanical switch - based systems that are prone to false reads or optical systems that have particular lighting or visual requirements . Though many systems have been attempted , none are in common use . Camera - based page recognition systems require line - of - sight placement and particular lighting conditions . There are also page - ID systems that require the reader to perform a specific act , such as press a button , run a pen over a barcode , or pass the page through a reader . However these solutions are not transparent ; they interfere with a person’s natural interaction with the book . For example , Stifelman showed a paper - based electronic notebook that allowed the user to take notes on real paper [ 9 ] . Those notes could be cross - indexed electronically because the page - ID was known ; but the user had to make sure the edge of the page fit into an optical reader along the side of the notebook . Although it was an elegant solution , it was not completely transparent to the user . Our method of page - ID uses a new RFID technology ( the TIRIS TagIt system from Texas Instruments , with simultaneous ID ) to recognize what page a book is open to . [ 1 , 10 ] A thin flexible transponder tag with a unique ID is embedded in the paper of each page , and a special tag - reader is affixed to the binding of the back of the book . As the pages turn , the tag - reader notices which tags are within its read range and which have moved out of its range ( which is about four inches ) . The human interacts with the book naturally , and is not required to perform any actions that are not usual in book interaction . The Listen Reader code ( written in Director Lingo , with a specially written serial Xtra ) sets the tag - reader so that it continually checks for a list of tags within its reading range . This list is received by the computer ( WinNT 4 . 0 ) and updated as frequently as possible ( approximately once a second ) . As a page is turned , the embedded tag leaves the reading range of the tag - reader , and its absence is noticed . Geometry in tag layout on the pages is of some account . In this system , two tags may overlap by 80 % or more , but not completely . This overlap issue is addressable through the development of smaller tags ( now available ) or multichannel tag readers , or better SID ( Simultaneous ID ) algorithms . We use this information to provide appropriate contextual information associated with that page in the book : in this instance , music and sound effects . When a page is turned , the sounds associated with the first page fade down in volume while the sounds associated with the new page fade up in volume . Other possibilities include spoken word , specific point lighting , ambient room lighting , moving graphics on a computer screen , and scrolling text . Other tag systems The Motorola Bistatix tag - based ID system is another example of a thin , flexible tag system that could be used to determine pageturning in realtime . Unlike the Texas Instruments RFID system , which is a passive transponder , the Bistatix is a capacitive field sensing tag , each having its own rewritable ID . This system , though still in development , is perhaps even more useful for our application since it could conceivably be printed directly onto a paper page , rather than having to be embedded between two sheets like the TagIt . Paradiso’s swept - frequency tags are another interesting tag technology that could be used in this fashion [ 5 ] . Fig . 3 . The RFID antenna is built onto the binding behind right - hand page . As the page is turned , its transponder moves out of the read range of the antenna ; the software notices and switches priority to the next page beneath . Proximity sensing mapped to control parameters The other technology used in the Listen Readers is electric field sensing . We use it as proximity - sensing technology , embedded in what is essentially a smart binder for the pages of a book . Early versions of this work used an eight - channel sensor called the LazyFish that was developed at the MIT Media Laboratory . [ 6 ] The Listen Reader uses a similar commercially available sensor from Quantum Research Labs , the QT110 . [ 7 ] The sensor measures conductivity within a field . Placing a hand in the sensor ' s electromagnetic fields will shunt some of the current to ground . The sensor detects the slight current drop , and can track the hand as it passes through the field in all three dimensions . The sensor does not provide a solid x - y - z set of coordinates , as the variables are many ( size and shape of person ' s arm / hand , muscle density , angle of approach , whether they ' re wearing any metal , etc . ) . However , it does provide a good real - time set of data that mirrors a user’s activity accurately . In this configuration there are four electrodes in the book binding , one in each of the four corners . This configuration establishes an electromagnetic field corresponding to each quadrant of the book . The sensor is detecting and tracking the reader’s hand as it passes through each of the four quadrants . Physical design Because of the museum setting , with its huge number of expected visitors ( more than 350 , 000 ) the Listen Readers were required to be extremely robust , both electronically and in physical design . The pages were a non - tear paper and the book signatures were hand - sewn with a high - strength kite string . The book was attached to a swing arm table , which , along with the chair , was bolted down to a heavy steel plate . All electronics were hidden . We also wanted to encourage some specific behaviors associated with reading : sitting and spending some time with a book , for example . So , the Listen Readers were designed to provide the look and feel of the comfortable reading corner in one ' s living room : a cozy chair , good but intimate lighting , beautiful hardwood furniture . The books themselves were hand - bound with brass and leather , and printed on high - quality color printers . The audio was stereo CD - quality , and care was taken to tune each system for premium frequency response ( taking into consideration that the speakers were chair - mounted ) . By creating a “classy” look and feel , we encouraged visitors to treat the Listen Readers with greater care than if the chairs had been encased in vinyl and the books bolted down with laminated pages . RESULTS We were frankly surprised at some of our observations on the Listen Readers , both technical and ideological . Other observations bore out or expanded our original suppositions . The reports below were based on our daily repair and maintenance reports and on observations by our group and museum staff . Repair , remediation and redesign Some adjustments were made over the course of the six - month - long exhibition . We developed better systems for replacing the books and their associated files and for A / D converterwithserialoutput WINNTPCw / Director RFIDreader Antenna in binding rebooting the machines . We fine - tuned the sound content and adjusted the sensitivity of the sensors . As we expected , we had to reset the volume levels to take into account the noisy environment of an active museum . To begin with , we were afraid that the proximity of the three Listen Readers to each other ( about fifteen feet apart , set in a triangle ) would create cacaphony , with audio from each interfering with the others . However , due to the focus and placement of the speakers within the wings and seat of the armchair , the sound was much louder for the person in the chair than for people standing around watching . In this way the sound added to the personal immersive experience provided by the Listen Reader : a sort of " sound sphere " surrounded people in the chair , an audio atmosphere which rapidly dropped off even two feet away . We found several different " failure modes " as follows : a ) all hardware fine , software frozen ; b ) software fine , RFID hardware system fine , but the A / D card for the proximity - sensing hardware frozen ; or c ) all hardware and software apparently fine but the system making no noise . Some occurred once or twice a week , and others occurred only once or twice total ( no sound , or RFID frozen ) . We quickly learned the different types of disk cleanups , reboots and power cycles that should be applied in each case , and designed a script - based daily reboot system that addressed most of these conditions satisfactorily . By midway through the exhibition ' s run , maintenance on the Listen Readers was routine . In general , they worked ; the Listen Readers ( like the rest of the XFR exhibit ) had less downtime than most of the other museum exhibits . Robustness One pleasant surprise was the robust nature of the Listen Readers . We worried that the wooden swing - arm tables might crack under the weight of children leaning on them ; that the books would be the target of graffiti artists ; that the books were too fragile to withstand daily handling by hundreds of museum goers and that we ' d need to replace them every few days . ( It turned out be about once every three weeks . ) We expected to have to replace or at least launder the heavy cotton chair covers ; but over the course of six months , they withstood the daily onslaught without trauma . In fact , none of our envisioned disaster scenarios occurred . We believe that this is in part due to the " living room " look and feel of the Listen Readers : beautiful wood , high - quality colorful printed books with real leather binders , soft pooled lighting that highlighted the chair and the person in it . The design of the exhibit itself invited visitors to slow down , sink into the cushions , and enter a calmer state of mind . Our musuem partners also believe that it is in part due to the general character of the visitors to the San Jose Tech Museum ; some museums in some areas of the country are notoriously harder on exhibits than others . Visitor interviews We observed or interviewed a number of the museum visitors who visited the XFR show . This was done in four ways : informally , through watching and videotaping the visitors ' interactions with the Listen Readers ; through conversations with the visitors ; more formally in an observation report done by museum staff ; and a set of ten sit - down interviews with museum visitors who had just finished using the Listen Readers . Flaunting museum conventions Received wisdom in the museum world is that visitors do not read . About 30 seconds of time is all that most exhibits can expect to receive , according to the consultants and museum staff we talked with . However , the average time spent at a Listen Reader was much longer , at least several minutes . Frequently visitors would read all the way through one Listen Reader , and then move on to the next . We had hoped that we could encourage people to linger ( that ' s why we built three ) but this exceeded our expectations . We believe this is partly because we presented reading as the content of the exhibit , not as signage . Social reading One surprise was that the Listen Readers encouraged social reading among the museum visitors . It was at least as common to see two or three or four people ( usually children ) piled up in one Listen Reader chair as it was to see a single person . Often one person would read the book aloud while the others played with the sounds ( this was especially common among family groups , such as a parent with children ) . Understanding the interaction Some visitors were confused by the proximity sensors , expecting to find the kind of on / off functionality of button - based systems . Some such visitors would figure out the difference after reading a few pages , watching other visitors , or reading the instructional signage ; others remained frustrated , wanting a clearly causal relationship between the images and the sound , rather than hand motion and sound . We believe that this problem is addressable through a more fine - grained matrix of control ( more than four sensors per page spread ) . It ' s also addressable through the complete authoring of books for the Listen Reader system , rather than using existing books to which we add soundtracks . FUTURE WORK The XFR : Experiments in the Future of Reading museum exhibition , of which the Listen Reader is part , will visit several other museums in the next few years . The lessons learned in each new installation will produce even more robust versions of the Listen Reader ' s software and hardware . Content may also be redesigned and rewritten ; one project is to author a multimodal book for the Listen Reader from start to finish , rather than our current method of adding a soundtrack to existing books . Authoring a Listen Reader from start to finish means we can address the apparent mismatch in causality ( what sound is related to which image ? ) that a few of our visitors mentioned . We can make sure that either the content is authored to each quadrant of the book page , or that the sensors adapt themselves to understand where the important illustrations are upon each page . Versions of the Listen Reader have applications in several areas other than museum exhibits : for example , language training , musical training , auditory illustration for the blind , and multimodal books for those with ADD ( attention deficit disorder ) . Although the current set of Listen Readers control audio , the same technology could easily drive any kind of dynamic content , such as lights , projections , and so on . For example , a contractor’s book of blueprints could control a computer projection or a 3D set of blueprints – by turning to a particular page in a notebook , the contractor could access appropriate and up - to - the - minute drawings , cost estimates , or design samples . We intend to explore some of these applications . We also intend to make a portable version of the Listen Reader , with built - in wireless electronics and a data link to a local area network . CONCLUSION Our model of a paper - based electronic book holds promise . People understood its use with far greater alacrity than we had expected , and at least in this application , were delighted to discover such complex functionality in what appeared to be a real book . The Listen Readers were designed with the idea that form affects meaning , and in fact is inextricable from it . We found that by authoring the form as conscientiously as the content , we were able to achieve some unusual goals : getting people to read deeply in a museum setting , for example , and getting people to read socially , in groups , often aloud to each other . By leveraging people ' s own knowledge and expectations about the uses of real books , we were able to augment the affordances of the book form with those of an electronic information system . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The authors would like to thank our colleagues in the RED group at Xerox PARC , as well as the San Jose Tech Museum of Innovation , Atlantic Records , and Chronicle Books of San Francisco . We would also like to thank Peggy Szymanski and Victoria Bellotti who aided us with the visitor interviews , and Terry Murphy of Exhibit Engineering . REFERENCES 1 . Back , Maribeth , and J . Cohen . " Page Detection Using Embedded Tags . " Proceedings of UIST 2000 , ACM Press , 2000 . 2 . Back , Maribeth , R . Gold and D . Kirsch , “The SIT Book : Audio as Affective Imagery in Interactive Storybooks . ” Human Factors in Computing Systems ; CHI99 Extended Abstracts , 1999 . 3 . Ishii , H . and Ullmer , B . , Tangible Bits : Towards Seamless Interfaces between People , Bits and Atoms , in Proceedings of Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ' 97 ) , ( Atlanta , March 1997 ) , ACM Press , pp . 234 - 241 . 4 . Mynatt , E . , M . Back and R . Want , “Designing Audio Aura . ” Proceedings of CHI ’98 , ACM Press , 566 - 573 . 5 . Paradiso , Joseph and K . Hsiao , " Swept - Frequency , Magnetically - Coupled Resonant Tags for Realtime , Continuous , Multiparameter Control , " Human Factors in Computing Systems ; CHI99 Extended Abstracts , 1999 . 6 . Paradiso , J . and N . Gershenfeld , “Musical Applications of Electric Field Sensing . ” October 1995 Computer Music Journal ) . Also jrs . www . media . mit . edu / people / jrs / lazyfish / 7 . Quantum Research Group . White paper on proximity sensors . http : / / www . qprox . com / whatis . htm 8 . Silberman , Steve . “Ex Libris . ” Wired , July 1998 . 9 . Stifelman , Lisa . “Augmenting Real - World Objects : A Paper - Based Audio Notebook . ” Proceedings of CHI’96 , ACM Press . 10 . TIRIS . Tag - it Inlays , www . tiris . com , Product Bulletin , Texas Instruments , 1999 . 11 . Want , Roy , Ken Fishkin , Beverly Harrison , Anuj Gujar . " Bridging Real and Virtual Worlds with Electronic Tags " , ACM SIGCHI . May 1999 , Pittsburgh , PA . 12 . Weiser , M . " The Computer for the 21st Century . " Scientific American , 265 ( 3 ) , 1991 , pp . 94 - 104 .