Postcolonial Language and Culture Theory for HCI4D Abstract As technology design spreads to less technologically developed countries , issues of cultural identity , language , and values manifest in the form of methodological and ethical challenges for HCI4D designers . We offer a new theoretical perspective , in the context of HCI4D design , to advance the HCI postcolonial critique and highlight fundamentally Western design practices . Application of Thiong’o’s language and culture theory provides a tool for designers and researchers to face assumptions , cultural communication , and the potential repercussions in cross - cultural design . Upon future development , this postcolonial orientation could be used to create responsible , successful designs and create awareness of inadvertent Western language culture embedded in HCI4D design . Keywords Postcolonialism , ICT4D , HCI4D , language , critical theory , cultural theory ACM Classification Keywords H5 . m . Information interfaces and presentation ( e . g . , HCI ) : Miscellaneous General Terms Theory Copyright is held by the author / owner ( s ) . CHI 2011 , May 7 – 12 , 2011 , Vancouver , BC , Canada . ACM 978 - 1 - 4503 - 0268 - 5 / 11 / 05 . Samantha Merritt Indiana University School of Informatics and Computing 901 East 10 th Street Bloomington , IN 47408 USA sasumerr @ indiana . edu Shaowen Bardzell Indiana University School of Informatics and Computing 919 East 10 th Street Bloomington , IN 47408 USA selu @ indiana . edu CHI 2011 • Work - in - Progress May 7 – 12 , 2011 • Vancouver , BC , Canada 1675 Introduction Interactions with , and mediated by , technology have become mundane , routine and embedded in common life for nearly everyone in industrialized countries . For people in less industrialized countries , technology is infiltrating daily life in new , unpredictable ways . A classic example , the One Laptop Per Child ( OLPC ) endeavor [ 11 ] , set out to produce and widely distribute low - cost laptops to revolutionize youth education in developing countries . Not received as anticipated , OLPC designers neglected to consider the social circumstances of deployment in a developing country [ 10 ] . Aside from the often - reported hardware shortcomings , Kraemer , et al . assert “innovation diffusion failed due to cultural norms and the effects of such innovation on existing institutional arrangements , ” as was the case in Peru [ 10 ] . In Peru—where political , social , infrastructure , training , and support were less than ideal for the OLPC device—adoption was low , despite high distribution . In contrast , a generally positive deployment outcome was seen in Uruguay , as reported by Hourcade et al , likely due to cultural norms and positive results with socio - political tensions [ 7 ] . Within the industry of international development , the application of information and communication technology now commands attention of HCI professionals . This created HCI for development ( HCI4D ) —a topic gaining momentum among HCI researchers and industry professionals . HCI4D researchers are producing foundational work in design methods [ 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 ] and design challenges [ 6 , 7 , 9 , 12 , 13 , 17 ] facing HCI4D designers . Recent research from studies around the world has addressed HCI4D topics of theory [ 13 ] , technology usage patterns [ 12 , 17 ] , interface design [ 2 ] , mobile computing [ 3 , 6 ] , health technology [ 4 , 9 ] , educational technology [ 7 ] , domestic technology design [ 1 ] , and computer supported cooperative work ( CSCW ) [ 9 ] . A rapidly increasing volume of HCI4D work was presented in various ACM conferences . Technology designed for global distribution creates new challenges for designers and researchers . As researchers and designers of potentially culture - shaping technologies , HCI should be aware of our inherent bias and Westernized thinking . This work offers a new theoretical perspective in the context of HCI4D design to advance the HCI postcolonial critique and provoke cognizance of fundamentally Western design practices , assumptions , cultural communication , and the potential repercussions of cross - cultural design . In particular , we will introduce Thiong’o’s language and culture theory and argue that its application enables designers and researchers to create responsible and successful cross - cultural designs . Postcolonialism and Technology While the construct of colonialism—the forced colonization of a nation by another—offers a potentially insightful metaphor to describe the spread of Western - designed technology ; that discourse remains outside of the scope of this paper . Instead , the concepts of particular interest come from theoretical work produced by scholars aiming to challenge the cultural , social , and psychological consequences of the forced subordination of one culture to another . The critical discipline of postcolonialism has amassed a rich understanding of inter - cultural ethics , communication , and influence . Postcolonialism challenges pervasive , dominant CHI 2011 • Work - in - Progress May 7 – 12 , 2011 • Vancouver , BC , Canada 1676 assumptions in countries previously colonized , bringing attention to indigenous cultures . Postcolonialism , as a discipline of theory and criticism , began to notably spread to both electronic media and technology in 1999 . Fernández argued the postcolonial studies body of work “has been notoriously absent from electronic media practice , theory , and criticism . ” She explains that postcolonialism and media theory grew simultaneously with regard to the other discipline . Fernández took issue with the technological utopianisms—implied by technology theorists—making arguments for validity and usefulness of particular technologies , and arguing that certain technologies are “value - free or inherently liberatory . ” [ 5 ] The same year , Turk and Trees explored “ways to operationalise the concept of culturally appropriate computer - mediated communication , utilising information systems ( IS ) development methodologies and adopting a postmodern and postcolonial perspective . ” [ 16 ] Focused on participatory approaches , the authors employed carefully chosen perspectives and methods to address the ethical issues designing technology for an indigenous population . After a decade of inactivity , postcolonial critique returned to technology and computing design discourse [ 1 , 2 , 8 , 9 ] . In a project conducted in India , highlighting “the importance of situating domestic technology research in local culture , ” Bardzell , et al . called for interaction designers “to find constructive ways to engage with users in such a way as to avoid oversimplified constructs such as ‘the Orient’ . ” [ 1 ] Employing phenomenological artifact ecology interpretations , the authors used mixed methods to combat cross - cultural design research challenges . [ 1 ] Irani and Dourish addressed “Postcolonial Intercultuality” and critiqued some status quo assumptions in HCI4D : the popular work of Hofstede and common conceptualizations of the culture construct . The authors argue globalization is not served by the limited taxonomies traditionally used and direct the industry to postcolonial analytical work to address intercultural CSCW design . [ 8 ] In a subsequent paper , coining the term “postcolonial computing , ” [ 9 ] Irani , et al . introduce a postcolonial lens as “an alternative sensibility to the process of design and analysis . ” The authors identify four key shifts for HCI4D efforts : “generative models of culture , development as a historical program , uneven economic relations , and cultural epistemologies . ” These shifts give way to “an alternate formulation of design work” for designers . [ 9 ] The recent work in HCI postcolonial critique pours a foundation for a discourse , that if pursued , offers HCI4D designers and researchers a body of sensibilities , knowledge , and methods that are culturally informed and ensure more sustainable , consistent technology design and internationalization in developing countries . Language and Culture : A New Direction for Postcolonial Computing Thiong’o’s Model of Language and Culture Ng ũ g ĩ wa Thiong ' o , a Kenyan author and postcolonial theorist , addressed the relationship between culture and language . Thiong ' o argues that language and CHI 2011 • Work - in - Progress May 7 – 12 , 2011 • Vancouver , BC , Canada 1677 culture are inseparable , stating “communication creates culture ; culture is a means of communication . ” He proposes language as communication and language as culture , each with three elements . [ 15 ] Concisely , language as communication is comprised of the Marxist notion of “language of real life” or the relationships between humans ; communication as oral speech imitating that “language of real life ; ” and written signs of language . Language as culture is comprised of the cultural result of humans coming together to create and control wealth ; a self - image forming capacity to view the world creatively ; and cultural transmissions of self - images through language . According to Thiong ' o communication between people is the very process that creates and evolves culture . “In doing similar kinds of things and actions over and over again under similar circumstances … certain patterns , moves , rhythms , habits , attitudes , experiences , and knowledge emerge” and are passed to subsequent generations . All of this is carried by language . [ 15 ] Thiong’o asserts the most affected element of culture and communication is that of the written signs of language [ 15 ] . The newer written language imposed by colonialism will not immediately replace the cultural language . This control and imposition of a new language creates a chasm between a person’s cultural , lived surroundings of every day , and the medium of that language . This disconnect can manifest itself in many ways , but most commonly , according to this postcolonial theory , changes the way people understand themselves and the world around them . Thiong’o and HCI4D We see a direct contribution of Thiong’o’s theory in the advancement of postcolonial computing research . Language ( and the culture embedded within it ) is not only verbal , but it is also visually semiotic . That is , even if a given Western - designed technology has been linguistically translated to match the receiving user , that designer implicitly embeds Western culture and communication . To demonstrate an instance of Western designers attempting a design embedded with communication structures culturally unavailable to users , consider the following passage from a design case study for an interactive video kiosk system for Liberian deployment [ 2 ] , known as MOSES [ 14 ] . Our first exercise involved paper prototypes of our initial design… . We learned two main things from this first exercise . The first was that a change in navigation structure was necessary . Several users had trouble with the hierarchical , multi - screen system , which formed the initial design . Given that the content admitted to a flatter navigation structure without sacrificing much functionality , we resolved to change it . Second , the importance of more carefully designing the system’s voice prompts became clear… We found that users almost always pressed whichever button was announced first , without considering the other choices . Ostensibly , they were not understanding or recognizing the conditional part of the statement , and treating it as a command . We suspect that both this observation and the CHI 2011 • Work - in - Progress May 7 – 12 , 2011 • Vancouver , BC , Canada 1678 previous one could be the result of cultural differences between researcher and designer ( such as familiarity with hierarchies ) . However , isolating the specific causes goes beyond the scope of this work . [ 2 ] Embedded culture may go consciously unnoticed or perhaps result in seemingly trivial user “errors” in a traditional usability evaluation . Either way , the results remain problematic . As it was for the design case study above , a designer probably begins an informed trial - and - error design iteration cycle until an accepted result is achieved—costing time and resources . Applying Thiong’o’s theory of language and culture to the resultant scenario of the unnoticed cultural additions yields an intriguing set of questions without immediate answers . In what ways will Western culture manifest in the receiving culture as a result of this design’s introduction ? Could the cultural chasm be identified ? Thiong’o asserts that it would change the way people understand themselves and their cultural surroundings . The identification and scale of that change would depend on the technology’s role in the creation and control of wealth ; the capacity to view the world creatively ; and cultural transmissions of self - image through language [ 15 ] . The MOSES system played a role in all three of these conditions of Thiong’o’s language as culture construction . The MOSES team conducted a very lengthy , but careful , and culturally situated design process , and consequently minimized the potential for deep cultural communication changes . Discussion If daily life for a person in a developing—or less technologically developed—country operates according to familiar culture , then repeated , interactive experiences with a newly introduced Western - designed technology create new culture components carried by the verbal and visual language embedded in that design . If the visual semiotics differ enough from the surrounding culture , the technology will either not be adopted or will force a user to leave his or her surrounding culture behind while interacting with the newly implemented technology . Considering the internal struggle for the structure of language that is associated with one’s identity , inadvertent cultural impositions may have unintended effects with ethical consequences on an entire culture for generations . Language—and the meanings , effects , and syntax that accompany it—is embedded in HCI design . Some vigilance to this notion is necessary for culturally sensitive , successful HCI4D design . Conclusion As Turk demonstrated , when applying a postcolonial framework during the design process , different issues and solutions of sensitivity emerge , thus creating a more holistic understanding of culturally situated designed technological artifacts [ 16 ] . Further work is required in determining specific methodologies for design research in the HCI4D problem space . Advances beyond existing research , about methodological appropriateness and means of minimizing Western cultural interference with consistency should be a salient objective in the HCI4D movement . With further development , application of Thiong’o’s language and culture theory to current research methods could help CHI 2011 • Work - in - Progress May 7 – 12 , 2011 • Vancouver , BC , Canada 1679 designers and researchers create responsible , successful cross - cultural designs—aware of Western language culture embedded in HCI4D design . Acknowledgements The authors would like to thank Ammar Halabi , Lynn Dombrowski , Anjana Thirumalai , and Lilly Irani for engaging dialogue and inspiration . References [ 1 ] Bardzell , S . , Rege , R . , Huang , C . , Chaudry , B . ( 2009 ) . Designing for the cultural other : Materiality and technology in Indian homes . In Proc . of International Conference on Designing for Pleasurable Products and Interfaces , DPPI 2009 . [ 2 ] Best , M . L . , Smyth , T . N . , Serrano - Baquero , D . , and Etherton , J . Designing for and with diaspora : a case study of work for the truth and reconciliation commission of Liberia . In Proc . CHI 2009 . ACM Press ( 2009 ) , 2903 - 2918 . [ 3 ] Bidwell , N . J . , Reitmaier , T . , Marsden , G . , and Hansen , S . Designing with mobile digital storytelling in rural Africa . In Proc . CHI 2010 . ACM Press ( 2010 ) , 1593 - 1602 . [ 4 ] Chetty , M . and Chetty , R . G . HCI4D : HCI challenges in the global south . In Ext . Abstracts CHI 2007 , ACM Press ( 2007 ) , 2327 - 2332 . [ 5 ] Fernández , M . Postcolonial Media Theory . Art Journal , 58 ( 3 ) , College Art Association , ( 1999 ) , 59 - 73 . [ 6 ] Gitau , S . , Marsden , G . , and Donner , J . After access : challenges facing mobile - only Internet users in the developing world . In Proc . CHI 2010 . ACM Press ( 2010 ) , 2603 - 2606 . [ 7 ] Hourcade , J . , Beitler , D . , Cormenzana , F . , and Flores , P . Early OLPC experiences in a rural Uruguayan school . In Ext . Abstracts CHI 2008 . ACM Press ( 2008 ) , 2503 - 2512 . [ 8 ] Irani , L . , Dourish , P . Postcolonial interculturality . In Proc . IWIC 2009 , ACM Press ( 2009 ) , 249 - 252 . [ 9 ] Irani , L . , Vertesi , J . , Dourish , P . , Philip , K . , Grinter , R . Postcolonial Computing : A Lens on Design and Development . In Proc CHI 2010 , ACM Press ( 2010 ) , 1311 - 1320 . [ 10 ] Kraemer , K . L . , Dedrick , J . , and Sharma , P . One laptop per child : vision vs . reality . Commun . ACM 52 ( 6 ) ( 2009 ) , 66 - 73 . [ 11 ] One Laptop Per Child . [ http : / / laptop . org / en / vision / index . shtml ] accessed on 2 / 15 / 10 . [ 12 ] Sambasivan , N . , Cutrell , E . , and Toyama , K . ViralVCD : tracing information - diffusion paths with low cost media in developing communities . In Proc . CHI 2010 , ACM Press ( 2010 ) , 2607 - 2610 . [ 13 ] Sambasivan , N . , Cutrell , E . , Toyama , K . , and Nardi , B . Intermediated technology use in developing communities . In Proc . CHI 2010 , ACM Press ( 2010 ) , 2583 - 2592 . [ 14 ] Smyth , T . N . , Etherton , J . , and Best , M . L . MOSES : exploring new ground in media and post - conflict reconciliation . In Proc . CHI 2010 . ACM Press ( 2010 ) , 1059 - 1068 . [ 15 ] Thiong’o , N . The Language of African Literature in Postcolonialisms : an anthology of cultural theory and criticism . Desai , G . and Nair , S . eds . Rutgers University Press ( 2005 ) , 143 - 168 . [ 16 ] Turk , A . , Trees , K . Appropriate Computer - Mediated Communication : An Austrailian Indigenous Information System Case Study . AI & Society 13 ( 4 ) , Springer ( 1999 ) , 377 - 388 . [ 17 ] Wyche , S . P . , Smyth , T . N . , Chetty , M . , Aoki , P . M . , and Grinter , R . E . Deliberate interactions : characterizing technology use in Nairobi , Kenya . In Proc . CHI 2010 , ACM Press ( 2010 ) , 2593 - 2602 . CHI 2011 • Work - in - Progress May 7 – 12 , 2011 • Vancouver , BC , Canada 1680