A fluorescent sphingolipid binding domain peptide probe interacts with sphingolipids and cholesterol - dependent raft domains Sarita Hebbar , * Esther Lee , * Manoj Manna , * , † Steffen Steinert , 1 , * Goparaju Sravan Kumar , 2 , § Markus Wenk , § Thorsten Wohland , † and Rachel Kraut 3 , * Institute of Bioengineering and Nanotechnology , * The Nanos , Singapore 138669 ; and Department of Chemistry , † and Department of Biochemistry , § National University of Singapore , Singapore Abstract We have designed a tagged probe [ sphingolipid binding domain ( SBD ) ] to facilitate the tracking of intra - cellular movements of sphingolipids in living neuronal cells . SBD is a small peptide consisting of the SBD of the amyloid precursor protein . It can be conjugated to a fluorophore of choice and exogenously applied to cells , thus allowing for in vivo imaging . Here , we present evidence to describe the characteristics of the SBD association with the plasma membrane . Our experiments demonstrate that SBD binds to isolated raft fractions from human neuroblastomas and insect neuronal cells . In protein - lipid overlay experi - ments , SBD interacts with a subset of glycosphingolipids and sphingomyelin , consistent with its raft association in neurons . We also provide evidence that SBD is taken up by neuronal cells in a cholesterol - and sphingolipid - dependent manner via detergent - resistant microdomains . Further - more , using fluorescence correlation spectroscopy to as - say the mobility of SBD in live cells , we show that SBD’s behavior at the plasma membrane is similar to that of the previously described raft marker cholera toxin B , displaying both a fast and a slow component . Our data suggest that fluorescently tagged SBD can be used to investigate the dynamic nature of glycosphingolipid - rich detergent - resistant microdomains that are cholesterol - dependent . — Hebbar , S . , E . Lee , M . Manna , S . Steinert , G . S . Kumar , M . Wenk , T . Wohland , and R . Kraut . A fluorescent sphin - golipid binding domain peptide probe interacts with sphin - golipids and cholesterol - dependent raft domains . J . Lipid Res . 2008 . 49 : 1077 – 1089 . Supplementary key words fluorescent probe & lipid rafts & detergent - resistant microdomains & amyloid b peptide & fluorescence correla - tion spectroscopy The involvement of cholesterol and sphingolipid - rich membrane microdomains known as lipid rafts in a vari - ety of cellular processes is well established ( reviewed in Refs . 1 , 2 ) , and raft - borne lipids and proteins have been implicated in several pathological conditions , including neurodegeneration and inflammation ( reviewed in Ref . 3 ) . Previously , cholera toxin B ( CtxB ) was used to study the intracellular trafficking of raft - borne lipids ( 4 – 8 ) . Stud - ies on the uptake mechanisms , intracellular itineraries , and biophysical properties of raft - associated proteins at the plasma membrane have revealed heterogeneity in their trafficking and dynamic behavior ( 9 – 12 ) . Currently , very little is known about how different ligands associ - ate with raft domains , to what extent the lipid content in those domains differs , and what effect raft lipids have on intracellular targeting . To begin to answer these ques - tions , it will be necessary to develop a diverse battery of markers to characterize the determinants of binding and trafficking behaviors . Here , we present the biochemical and biophysical char - acterization of a novel , fluorescently tagged sphingolipid binding raft probe , the sphingolipid binding domain ( SBD ) , derived from the amyloid b peptide ( A b ) . This motif , identified by Fantini ( 13 ) in several glycolipid - associated proteins , was postulated to form a V3 loop structure that interacts with the sugar rings in glyco - sphingolipid head groups . In a separate study ( S . Steinert and E . Lee , unpublished data ) , we showed that fluores - cent SBD is targeted to endolysosmal compartments in a cholesterol - dependent manner and that it interacts with Manuscript received 26 November 2007 and in revised form 28 January 2008 . Published , JLR Papers in Press , February 8 , 2008 . DOI 10 . 1194 / jlr . M700543 - JLR200 Abbreviations : A b , amyloid b peptide ; c6 , cell line DL - DMBG2 - c6 ; CtxB , cholera toxin B ; DiI , dialkyl - indocarbocyanine ; DRM , detergent - resistant membrane ; FB1 , fumonisin B1 ; FCS , fluorescence correlation spectroscopy ; GFP , green fluorescent protein ; HFIP , 1 , 1 , 1 , 3 , 3 , 3 - hexa - fluoro - 2 - propanol ; M b CD , methyl - b - cyclodextrin ; OG , Oregon green ; SBD , sphingolipid binding domain ; TMR , tetramethyl rhodamine . 1 Present address of S . Steinert : Physikalisches Institut , Technische Universitaet Stuttgart , Pfaffenwaldring 5 , D - 70550 Stuttgart , Germany . 2 Present address of G . S . Kumar : Division of Biochemistry , De - partment of Molecular and Cellular Biology , Kobe University Graduate School of Medicine , Kobe 650 - 0017 , Japan . 3 To whom correspondence should be addressed . e - mail : rkraut @ ibn . a - star . edu . sg The online version of this article ( available at http : / / www . jlr . org ) contains supplementary data in the form of four figures . Copyright D 2008 by the American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology , Inc . This article is available online at http : / / www . jlr . org Journal of Lipid Research Volume 49 , 2008 1077 b y gue s t , on N o v e m be r 7 , 2017 www . jl r . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m raft - like lipid mixtures in liposome binding assays and by surface plasmon resonance . We used standard raft isolation methods in conjunc - tion with lipid - protein overlays , live cell imaging , and fluo - rescence correlation spectroscopy ( FCS ) to describe the characteristics of SBD association with the plasma mem - brane . Lipid - protein overlay experiments ( fat blots ) sug - gest that SBD interacts with particular gangliosides and sphingomyelin , which are generally thought to reside in raft domains . We also demonstrate that SBD interacts pre - dominantly with detergent - insoluble membrane fractions isolated from neuronal cells , similar to other known raft markers . Moreover , its endocytic uptake by neurons is de - pendent on the presence of intact microdomains , which can be disrupted by cholesterol or sphingolipid deple - tion . By FCS , we demonstrate that SBD displays mobility characteristics at the plasma membrane that are consis - tent with partial raft association and shows a distribu - tion of diffusion times strikingly similar to that of CtxB . Pharmacological removal of cholesterol reduced the SBD association with detergent - resistant membranes ( DRMs ) , dependent on cell type . However , in live cell labeling , uptake at the plasma membrane was cholesterol - and sphingolipid - dependent in both neuronal types tested . In summary , we suggest that SBD can serve as a useful tool for the study of cholesterol - dependent sphingolipid mem - brane microdomains and their trafficking . METHODS Cell culture The Drosophila neuronal cell line DL - DMBG2 - c6 ( c6 ; Drosophila Genome Resource Center ) ( 14 ) was grown at 25 j C in Shields and Sang M3 medium ( Gibco ) with 10 % FBS ( Gibco ) , 0 . 125 IU / ml bovine insulin ( Biological Industries ) , and 1 % antibiotic / anti - mycotic solution ( Gibco ) . NIH 3T3 mouse fibroblasts and SH - SY5Y neuroblastoma ( American Type Culture Collection - ATCC ) were grown at 37 j C in DMEM ( Gibco ) supplemented with 10 % FBS and antibiotic . One microgram of plasmid DNA was used along with Lipo - fectamine 2000 ( Invitrogen ) for transfections according to the manufacturer’s instructions . Flotillin - green fluorescent protein ( GFP ) plasmid ( a kind gift from L . Briggs and S . Sweeney ) has the flotillin sequence under the control of the Act5c promoter that is constitutively active in Drosophila cells . For use in neuro - blastomas , flotillin - GFP was cloned into pcDNA 3 . 1 ( Invitrogen ) with cytomegalovirus promoter . For labeling of free cholesterol with filipin , cells were fixed in 4 % paraformaldehyde for 3 min followed by washes in HBSS / HEPES . Cells were incubated with 50 m g / ml filipin ( Sigma ) for 45 min and then washed before imaging . SBD peptide handling and cell labeling SBD peptide linked to an N - terminal cysteine and an inert spacer ( cysteine - amino - ethoxy - ethoxy - acetyl [ AEEAc ] 2 - DAEFRH - DSGYEVHHQELVFFAEDVG ) , thiol - coupled with Oregon green ( OG ) or amine - coupled with tetramethyl rhodamine ( TMR ) di - rectly to the spacer , was synthesized by Bachem . Myc - tagged SBD was synthesized by GenScript Corp . A mutated sequence ( DAEF A - HDSG A EVHHQELVFFAEDVG ) and a scrambled sequence ( FY - HDESEFGHAVEQFGRDVEAVHDL ) were also coupled to myc as controls . To avoid aggregate formation of the peptide , SBD was dissolved in 1 , 1 , 1 , 3 , 3 , 3 - hexafluoro - 2 - propanol ( HFIP ; Merck ) , divided into aliquots , and dried . For larger volumes of peptide , evaporation was done under a supply of inert nitrogen . Lyophilized peptide was stored at 2 20 j C and redissolved in DMSO immediately before use . Peptide was diluted to a final working concentration of 10 m M in HBSS ( Gibco ) , supple - mented with 10 mM HEPES , incubated at 25 j C for 30 min at 10 m M ( for Drosophila cells ) or at 37 j C at 5 m M ( for mammalian cells ) , and then washed three times in HBSS . For lipid overlays / fat blot experiments , the peptide film obtained after HFIP evap - oration was dissolved in DMSO and then in Tris buffer , pH 7 . 4 ( the final concentration of DMSO in buffer did not exceed 1 % ) . Drug treatments For cholesterol depletion , cells were incubated in 10 mM methyl - b - cyclodextrin ( M b CD ; Sigma ) for 30 min ( in serum - free medium for c6 cells or in medium supplemented with 1 % FBS for neuroblastomas ) and washed . The Amplex Red Cholesterol Assay kit ( Invitrogen ) was used to measure cholesterol concen - trations in cell extracts before OptiPrep gradient formation and later on the DRM fractions generated . For sphingolipid depletion , cells were incubated with 10 m M fumonisin B1 ( FB1 ; AG Scientific F1022 ) for 2 h at 37 j C , washed three times with HBSS / HEPES before being labeled with trans - ferrin 594 ( Molecular Probes ) or CtxB 594 ( Molecular Probes ) at 37 j C for 30 min , and then washed three times with HBSS / HEPES before being imaged in phenol red - free DMEM / F12 with FB1 ( 10 m M ) . Isolation of DRM fractions DRMs were isolated as described by Zhai , Chaturvedi , and Cumberledge ( 15 ) . Briefly , cells from a confluent plate were washed with phosphate - buffered saline and then resuspended in 0 . 8 ml of TNET lysis buffer ( 100 mM Tris , pH 7 . 5 , 20 mM EGTA , 150 mM NaCl , 1 % Triton X - 100 , and protease inhibitor cocktail ; Sigma ) . The postnuclear supernatant was diluted 1 : 2 with 60 % OptiPrep ( Accurate Chemicals and Scientific Corp . ) . Cell lysate - OptiPrep solution was overlaid with 7 . 2 ml of 30 % and 2 . 4 ml of 5 % OptiPrep solution in a Beckman SW41 tube and centrifuged at 41 , 000 rpm for 5 h at 4 j C . Twelve fractions of 1 ml were collected from the top of the gradient and sub - jected to routine SDS - PAGE or dot blot analysis . Immunoblotting For the lipid - protein overlay assay , Sphingostrips ( Invitrogen ) were used according to the manufacturers’ instructions and protocol as described ( 16 ) . Additional sphingolipids ( GM1 , galactocerebrosides , sphingomyelin , GD1a , GD1b , GT1b , phos - phoethanolamine ceramide ; Sigma ) were spotted onto Hybond C nitrocellulose strips ( Amersham ) and allowed to dry . These strips were then exposed to 5 – 20 m M peptides . For dot blots , equal volumes of each fraction were blotted onto nitrocellulose mem - brane and exposed to antibodies against various raft and nonraft proteins , or 5 – 10 m M peptide solution in PBST or 1 ng / ml peroxidase - conjugated CtxB ( Invitrogen ) or 1 m g / ml Lysenin ( Peptide Institute ) . The following primary antibodies were used : 8C3 ( anti - syntaxin ; Developmental Studies Hybridoma Bank ) ; 9E10 ( HRP - conjugated , 1 : 200 ; Santa Cruz ) ; anti - caveolin ( 1 : 1 , 000 ; BD Pharmingen ) ; anti - flotillin ( 1 : 1 , 000 ; Transduction Laboratories ) ; anti - Lysenin ( 1 : 1 , 000 ; Peptide Institute ) ; and anti - rac ( 1 : 250 ; BD Pharmingen ) . Primary antibody treatment was followed by 1078 Journal of Lipid Research Volume 49 , 2008 b y gue s t , on N o v e m be r 7 , 2017 www . jl r . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m peroxidase - conjugated secondary antibody exposure , and then blots were developed using standard chemiluminscent detec - tion ( Amersham ) . Intensity quantification from dot blots was carried out using Quantity - One ( Bio - Rad Laboratories ) software . Imaging and FCS For uptake experiments , images were acquired with a Cool - snapHQ charged coupled device camera on a Deltavision ( Applied Precision ) wide - field microscope with a 60 3 / 1 . 42 numerical ap - erture oil lens ( Olympus ) and a standard filter set ( green : excita - tion , 490 / 20 , emission , 528 / 38 ; red : excitation , 555 / 28 , emission 617 / 73 ) ( Chroma ) . Quantification of images was performed using the MetaMorph image - processing program as described previously ( 17 ) . Whole cell fluorescence was determined by drawing borders around individual cells , and noncellular background was sub - tracted . All photomicrographs in a given experiment were exposed and processed identically for a given fluorophore . The FCS instrumental setup used in this study is an Olympus FV300 confocal microscope , with which correlator and Avalanche photo detectors are coupled in house . To excite BODIPY - FL - SM and SBD - OG , a 488 nm argon laser was used , and the emission signal was detected through a 510 AF23 emission filter . Dialkyl - indocarbocyanine ( DiI ) , CtxB - Alexa - 594 , and TMR - SBD were excited with a 543 nm He - Ni laser and were detected through a 595 AF60 emission filter . For all measurements , 100 m W laser power before the microscope objective was used . The measure - ment was carried out as follows : a cell was first imaged in trans - mitted light , using the XY scan of the Fluoview software of the Olympus confocal system , followed by choosing a region of interest by adjusting the proper Z plane and then performing FCS in the fluorescence point scanning mode . The Avalanche photo detector creates an intensity plot of the fluorescence signal from the sample , and the hardware correlator calcu - lates the autocorrelation function , G ( t ) , expressed as { [ y F ( t ) y F ( t 1 t ) ] / [ F ( t ) ] 2 } , where F ( t ) is the fluorescence fluctuation caused by a particle at time t and F ( t 1 t ) is for the same particle at time point ( t 1 t ) ( 18 , 19 ) . Igor Pro software ( version 4 ) was used to fit the data to the FCS curve - fitting model . The equations for the G ( t ) fitting models used are as follows : 2D1P1t : G ( t ) 5 1 N 3 1 ( 1 1 t / t D ) (cid:2) (cid:3) 1 1 F trip ( 1 2 F trip ) 3 e 2 ~ t / t trip ! (cid:2) (cid:3) (cid:4) (cid:5) 1 1 2D2P1t : G ( t ) 5 1 N ( 1 2 F 2 ) ( 1 1 t / t D ) (cid:2) (cid:3) F 2 ( 1 1 t / t D 2 ) (cid:2) (cid:3) (cid:4) 3 1 1 F trip ( 1 2 F trip ) 3 e 2 ð t / t trip ! (cid:2) (cid:3)(cid:5) 1 1 3D1P1t : G ( t ) 5 1 N (cid:4)(cid:2) ( 1 1 t / t D ) 2 1 ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ 1 1 ( t / t D ) K 2 2 p (cid:3) 3 1 1 F trip ( 1 2 F trip Þ 3 e 2 ~ t / t trip ! (cid:2) (cid:3)(cid:5) 1 1 3D2P1t : G ( t ) 5 1 N (cid:4)(cid:2) ( 1 2 F 2 ) ( 1 1 t / t D ) 2 1 ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ 1 1 ( t / t D ) K 2 2 p (cid:3)(cid:2) F 2 3 ( 1 1 t / t D 2 ) 2 1 ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ 1 1 ( t / t D 2 p ) K 2 2 (cid:3) 3 (cid:2) 1 1 F trip ( 1 2 F trip ) 3 e 2 ð t / t trip Þ (cid:3)(cid:5) 1 1 RESULTS SBD binds to isolated detergent - insoluble fractions of insect and human neuronal cells Association with DRM fractions has been used as a method to detect raft association ( 20 ) . Although DRM binding by itself is insufficient to prove raft association , it is generally considered a necessary criterion . Therefore , we used SBD conjugated to a myc tag to analyze binding to DRMs isolated from different cell types that are spotted onto membranes . Because our goal is to characterize SBD for the study of lipid trafficking in Drosophila and other cellular neuro - degeneration models , we carried out experiments on Dro - sophila neuronal cells and mammalian neurons . It has been established that DRMs can be isolated from Dro - sophila embryonic membranes and cell lines and have sim - ilar properties to those isolated from mammalian cells ( 15 , 21 , 22 ) . We validate the use of SBD as a raft / sphingolipid tracer by comparing its behavior in the fly neuronal cell line c6 versus SH - SY5Y neuroblastomas , which are suscep - tible to A b toxicity ( 23 ) . Drosophila c6 neurons and SH - SY5Y neuroblastomas were solubilized with cold 1 % Triton X - 100 and fraction - ated by high - speed centrifugation into detergent - resistant / insoluble ( DRM ) and nonresistant / soluble ( non - DRM ) membrane fractions over an OptiPrep density gradient ( see Methods ) . These fractions were spotted onto mem - branes and then incubated with SBD - myc . To verify DRM isolation from c6 cells , fractions were assayed for associ - ation with a transfected known raft protein , flotillin - GFP , and an endogenous nonraft protein , rac , by Western and dot blots . In c6 cells , flotillin is broadly distributed over DRM fractions ; it is present in fraction 3 and somewhat more enriched in fractions 4 and 5 ( Fig . 1A ) . In contrast , the nonraft protein rac ( 15 ) is excluded from fractions 3 and 4 and is found primarily in the more soluble bot - tom fractions 9 and 10 ( Fig . 1A ) . We also used the bind - ing of another raft marker , GM1 , to bind CtxB to isolated fractions as an additional criterion for rafts . CtxB binds most prominently to fraction 3 and to a lesser extent to fractions 1 and 2 ( Fig . 1B ) . Therefore , based on the above four criteria ( detergent resistance on a density gradient , presence of flotillin , binding of CtxB , and the exclusion of rac ) , we define fraction 3 as diagnostic for DRM / raft association in our assay ( Fig . 1 ) . By the same dot blot assay , SBD was seen to bind strongly to raft fraction 3 , to a lesser extent to fractions 2 and 4 , and also to the more soluble fractions 10 and 11 ( Fig . 1B ) . In the neuroblastomas , the raft protein flotillin par - titioned preferentially into fractions 3 and 4 and to the more soluble fractions 11 and 12 ( Fig . 1C ) . This dual distribution was even more pronounced on the dot blots ( Fig . 1D ) . The other raft marker , CtxB , also displayed interactions with fractions 1 – 4 from the top of the gra - dient and with the more soluble fractions 10 and 11 ( Fig . 1D ) . That CtxB profiles are different for the two cell types may be attributable to CtxB binding to differ - ent target lipids in fly versus human neurons . Flies do not Fluorescent probe SBD interacts with sphingolipids and raft domains 1079 b y gue s t , on N o v e m be r 7 , 2017 www . jl r . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m make GM1 , the target of CtxB in mammalian cells ( 24 ) , but they do have terminal galactose - bearing glycolipids that could interact weakly with CtxB . From flotillin dis - tribution patterns and CtxB binding , we conclude that there has been a separation of DRMs in fractions 3 and 4 . Using the dot blot assay , SBD was seen to bind strongly to DRM fractions 3 and 4 ( Fig . 1D ) in addition to its bind - ing to fractions 5 – 8 . We note that sphingomyelin binding Lysenin ( 11 , 25 ) , which was used as an additional stan - dard because sphingomyelin is expected to be at least partially raft - localized ( 26 , 27 ) , bound to non - DRM frac - tions of neuroblastomas ( Fig . 1D ) . This does not , however , contradict published data on Lysenin , because its associ - ation with DRMs per se has not been reported . The DRM association of SBD is abrogated by cholesterol depletion in a cell type - dependent manner Next , we examined whether SBD interacts with do - mains on intact cells that can later be isolated into DRM fractions ( Fig . 2 ) . Cells were incubated with SBD - myc , and subsequently , DRM fractions were isolated and ex - amined for the presence of known raft markers and SBD . Enrichment of cholesterol ( Fig . 2A ) , the distribu - tion of raft markers such as flotillin ( Fig . 2B ) and caveolin ( Fig . 2E ) , binding to CtxB ( Fig . 2C ) , and the distribution of the nonraft protein rac indicate successful isolation of DRMs . Based on these criteria , we define fractions 2 – 4 in c6 cells and fractions 1 – 4 in neuroblastomas to include DRMs . In both Drosophila c6 cells and neuroblastomas , SBD is taken up in DRM fractions in addition to being taken up in more soluble fractions ( Fig . 2D ) . Its association with non - DRM fractions is not unusual among bona fide raft mark - ers ( e . g . , syntaxin in Drosophila membranes , which also follows a broad distribution along the density gradient ) ( 15 ) . In contrast to the neuronal cell types , SBD did not show a strong preference for uptake via DRM fractions of mammalian NIH 3T3 fibroblasts , segregating roughly equally between the caveolin - positive “raft” fractions ( 4 – 6 ) and the rac - positive “nonraft” fractions ( 7 – 12 ) ( Fig . 2E ) . Treatments that inhibit cholesterol synthesis or that re - move cholesterol from membranes are known to disrupt lipid rafts . Therefore , we used M b CD to deplete c6 and Fig . 1 . Detergent - resistant membranes ( DRMs ) isolated from Drosophila cell line DL - DMBG2 - c6 ( c6 ) neu - rons interact with sphingolipid binding domain ( SBD ) and other raft markers . A : DRM fractions [ DRMs 1 ( top ; detergent - insoluble ) to 12 ( bottom ; detergent - soluble ) ] from Drosophila c6 neuronal cells [ transfected with the raft marker flotillin - green fluorescent protein ( GFP ) ] were isolated on OptiPrep density gradients . Fractions were characterized for the presence of flotillin and the nonraft marker rac using SDS - PAGE and Western blotting . B : Fractions were blotted onto a nitrocellulose membrane and exposed to SBD conjugated to myc ( SBD - myc ) and cholera toxin B ( CtxB ) . SBD binds to the detergent - resistant fractions 2 – 4 ( C ) isolated from c6 cells . It also binds to less dense fractions ( 10 and 11 ) . CtxB binds to fractions 2 and 3 . C : DRM fractions from human neuroblastomas , SH - SY5Y , were isolated as described above . As a control , fractions were assayed for the presence of a raft marker , flotillin , using SDS - PAGE and Western blotting . D : The same fractions used above were blotted onto a nitrocellulose membrane and incubated with SBD - myc , antibody to flotillin , GM1 binding CtxB , and Lysenin . In a profile similar to that of CtxB but in contrast to that of Lysenin , SBD binds primarily to more buoyant , detergent - resistant fractions ( 3 and 4 ) but also to intermediate density fractions ( 5 – 8 ) . 1080 Journal of Lipid Research Volume 49 , 2008 b y gue s t , on N o v e m be r 7 , 2017 www . jl r . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m Fig . 2 . SBD associates with cholesterol - containing domains of neuronal cells that can be isolated in DRMs . c6 cells ( left panels ) , SH - SY5Y neuroblastomas ( right panels ) , and NIH 3T3 fibroblasts ( E ) were incubated with SBD - myc for 30 min and then detergent - resistant fractions [ fractions 1 ( top ) to 12 ( bottom ) ] were isolated . Fractions 1 – 12 were examined for their sterol content ( A ) and for the distribution of the raft marker flotillin , caveolin ( for fibroblasts ) , and the nonraft marker rac ( Western blots ; B , E ) . Fractions 1 – 12 were blotted onto a membrane and examined for interaction with CtxB ( C ) and myc immunoreactivity to detect SBD ( D ) . SH - SY5Y and c6 cells were also treated with 10 mM methyl - b - cyclodextrin ( M b CD ) to deplete cells of cholesterol . In the graphs , dashed lines represent cells treated with M b CD and solid lines represent untreated ( control ) cells . Line profiles in A depict relative sterol levels measured as fluorescence levels normalized to protein content . Line profiles in C and D depict the relative abundance of SBD - myc ( D ) and the binding of CtxB ( C ) in isolated fractions , both measured as intensity of dot blots and combined for successive fractions . In nontreated controls of both neuronal cell types , there is an enrichment of sterols in detergent - insoluble fractions ( 1 – 3 for neuroblastomas and 1 – 6 for c6 cells ) . Treated cell fractions ( dashed ) show substantial cholesterol reduction at the top of the gradient compared with the bottom of the gradient . Cholesterol depletion reduced CtxB’s interaction with detergent - insoluble fractions in SH - SY5Y neuroblastomas ( fractions 1 and 2 ) and in c6 cells ( fractions 1 and 2 ) . In c6 cells ( D ) , fractionation of SBD - myc in DRM fractions 2 and 4 is reduced upon cholesterol depletion . In neuroblastomas , SBD uptake into detergent - resistant fraction 4 appears to be reduced . Detergent - resistant fractions of NIH 3T3 fibroblasts ( E ) are enriched for lipid raft markers such as caveolin ( fractions 3 – 7 ) but not for nonraft markers such as rac . SBD is not preferentially taken up into detergent - insoluble fractions of fibroblasts . FU , fluorescence units . Fluorescent probe SBD interacts with sphingolipids and raft domains 1081 b y gue s t , on N o v e m be r 7 , 2017 www . jl r . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m neuroblastoma cells of cholesterol and related sterols ( see Methods ) and looked at the effect on SBD inter - nalization . First , we tested the effectiveness of the M b CD treatment by measuring total cholesterol levels using the Amplex Red Cholesterol Assay method ( Invitrogen ) . On c6 cells , cholesterol was reduced by 46 . 7 6 7 . 8 % ( aver - age of two experiments ) after 30 min , and in the neu - roblastomas , we observed a reduction of 51 . 8 6 8 . 4 % ( average of two experiments ) . We also examined the ste - rol levels across the fractions obtained by density centri - fugation ( Fig . 2A , line profiles ) . In both cell types used , M b CD treatment causes the distribution of the remain - ing cholesterol to become more uniform across the den - sity gradient ( Fig . 2A ) . Also , M b CD treatment results in a larger depletion of cholesterol from the top half than from the bottom half of the gradient . In conjunction with this , the distribution of both raft markers and nonraft markers is altered . Flotillin ( Fig . 2B ) appears to be ex - cluded in c6 cells ( fraction 2 ) or reduced in neuroblas - tomas ( fractions 3 and 4 ) from certain DRM fractions relative to other fractions . CtxB’s affinity for isolated DRM fractions ( Fig . 2C ) also appears to be affected by cholesterol depletion ; in the neuroblastomas , CtxB shows diminished interaction with DRM fractions 1 and 2 upon M b CD treatment . Likewise in c6 cells , M b CD treatment causes CtxB’s interaction with DRMs ( fractions 1 and 2 ) to be weakened . In addition to the decreased association with DRM fractions 1 and 2 in c6 cells , the raft markers flotillin and CtxB both appear to concentrate in frac - tion 4 upon cholesterol depletion . Conversely , the nonraft marker rac ( Fig . 2B ) , which is normally excluded from DRM fractions , appears to now distribute in these frac - tions ( 2 , 3 ) , suggesting that cholesterol depletion has in - deed affected the partitioning of both raft and nonraft proteins in the membrane of c6 cells . SBD uptake into DRMs is also affected by M b CD treat - ment . Cholesterol depletion by M b CD caused a reduced uptake of SBD in some of the DRM fractions of c6 cells ( fractions 2 and 4 ) and of neuroblastomas ( fraction 4 ) ( Fig . 2D ) . Together , these results suggest that the DRM as - sociation for SBD is more dependent on cholesterol in some cell types than in others and that some SBD also asso - ciates with fractions that do not fulfill the criteria for DRM fractions . SBD’s only partial cholesterol dependence for raft association is not unique ; another raft marker , flotillin , is also reported to be resistant to cholesterol depletion ( 28 ) . The effect of cholesterol depletion on SBD uptake within 30 min is less dramatic on neuroblastomas than in c6 cells ( Fig . 2D ) . In light of our observations that SBD is continuously taken up by neuroblastomas , we wondered whether SBD uptake over prolonged time periods is more susceptible to cholesterol depletion in these cells . Our results ( see supplementary Fig . I ) indicate that there is no obvious difference in the cholesterol dependence of SBD uptake at 30 or 60 min . The above data support the conclusion that SBD’s membrane association is in general influenced by choles - terol , but depletion of cholesterol does not inhibit its as - sociation with DRM - isolatable microdomains equally in all cells . However , the trend of flattening of the cholesterol levels and change in SBD distributions across fractions , upon cholesterol depletion , was observed consistently ( see supplementary Fig . II ) . Cholesterol depletion inhibits SBD uptake Having determined that cholesterol depletion altered the association of SBD with DRMs , we wanted to find out whether the distribution and uptake of SBD in live cells was detectably altered by cholesterol inhibition . To do this , we imaged SBD - TMR ( SBD - TMR ) uptake by c6 and SH - SY5Y neurons upon M b CD treatment . Normally , c6 cells internalize SBD within minutes ( S . Steinert and E . Lee , unpublished data ) ( Fig . 3 ) , leaving little signal at the plasma membrane . In contrast , SBD uptake in M b CD - treated c6 cells was strongly inhibited ( Fig . 3A – C ) , as in - dicated by a substantial reduction in the number of internalized SBD - positive spots after cholesterol deple - tion and more fluorescence at the plasma membrane . Cholesterol depletion was monitored by the assays shown in Fig . 2 and by filipin staining of treated , fixed cells ( Fig . 3B , C ) . SBD uptake at the plasma membrane of cholesterol - depleted SH - SY5Y neuroblastomas was also strongly disrupted ; this is reflected in the lag in uptake ( Fig . 3D ) and in the strongly reduced number of cells containing SBD - positive vesicles after 1 h ( Fig . 3D – F ) . In the same cells , CtxB - Alexa - 594 ( Invitrogen ) also showed a reduced rate of uptake , with a smaller number of in - ternal vesicles , but only after 2 h of cholesterol depletion ( data not shown ) . These results demonstrate that effi - cient SBD vesicular uptake requires cholesterol ( or other sterols ) in both Drosophila and mammalian neurons . FCS analysis of SBD shows plasma membrane mobility characteristic of raft markers To compare the mobility of SBD on the plasma mem - brane with that of other raft - and nonraft - associated mark - ers , we carried out FCS measurements on the diffusion rate of SBD - TMR at the plasma membrane of SH - SY5Y neuroblastoma cells . FCS records fluorescence autocorre - lation functions , G ( t ) , from a diffraction - limited confocal volume centered on the upper plasma membrane of the cell . Depending on the number of different fluorescent particle species passing through the confocal volume and their location with respect to the plasma membrane , dif - ferent models may be used to fit G ( t ) , incorporating one or more particles with different mobilities in two or three dimensions ( i . e . , one particle vs . two particles and two dimensions vs . three dimensions ) . The diffusion time , t D , is derived from the autocorrelation curve G ( t ) and gives the time taken by the fluorescent probe to cross the sta - tionary confocal volume . A multiple particle fit will result in a number of diffusion times , which are inversely pro - portional to the diffusion coefficients . The t D is charac - teristic of the viscosity in which the membrane probe resides and thus can be used to predict the membrane domain localization of the probe ( 29 ) . Measurements were taken for SBD - TMR , SBD - OG , the raft marker CtxB - Alexa - 594 , and the nonraft mark - 1082 Journal of Lipid Research Volume 49 , 2008 b y gue s t , on N o v e m be r 7 , 2017 www . jl r . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m ers DiI - C18 and BODIPY - FL - SM ( 30 , 31 ) ( Fig . 4 ) . The G ( t ) functions obtained for these measurements were fitted with a model taking into account the two - dimensional diffusion of two distinct particles and possibly a third particle representing free three - dimensional diffusion of unbound labels . The two two - dimensional diffusing spe - cies are interpreted as a faster moving , nonraft - associated population of SBD label in the plasma membrane in ad - dition to a less mobile , raft - associated component . As a control for contributions to G ( t ) from free label in the medium ( outside the cell ) or autofluorescence ( inside the cell ) , additional measurements were made outside and inside the cell , with resulting diffusion times of 94 6 2 m s and 2 . 2 6 0 . 2 ms , respectively . Values outside the cell are fitted to a three - dimensional , one - particle model , and values inside the cell are fitted to a three - dimensional , two - particle model , as a result of contributions from au - tofluorescence . Because the correlation time for mem - brane - associated markers is not expected to be smaller than the millisecond range ( the t D for DiI , a typical non - raft membrane probe , was 10 6 0 . 4 ms ) and that for the free label in solution is observed to be in the ? 100 m s range , those readings that are dominated by this com - ponent were removed from the calculation of average t D . In agreement with the findings of Schwille and col - leagues ( 29 ) , measurements of the raft marker CtxB - Alexa - 594 were influenced by bleaching effects , presumably as a result of the low mobility of the protein in raft domains ( Fig . 4 ) . The distributions of t D of SBD - TMR and SBD - OG were found to be mainly in the . 30 ms category ( SBD - TMR , ? 70 ms ; SBD - OG , ? 60 ms on average ) , with a slightly greater contribution from slow - moving particles than CtxB ( ? 25 ms ) ( Fig . 5B ) . We found that SBD - TMR and SBD - OG measurements , similar to CtxB , were strongly influenced by bleaching . To separate these effects , which artificially bias the t D toward faster moving particles , we expressed the t D frequencies as histograms . In contrast to the longer t D ( slower diffusion ) of the raft markers , the t D of DiI - C18 , a nonspecific lipophilic dye , and BODIPY - FL - SM , a nonraft - localizing sphingolipid analog ( 32 ) , were distributed to a large extent between 1 and 20 ms ( Fig . 5A ) , with the main contribution being 1 – 10 ms ( 10 6 0 . 4 ms for DiI - C18 , 10 6 2 ms for BODIPY - FL - SM on average ; Fig . 5E ) . The histograms also reveal a biphasic Fig . 3 . SBD uptake at the plasma membrane is cholesterol - dependent . A : Average number of SBD - tetramethyl rhodamine ( TMR ) - positive vesicles per cell in live c6 neurons untreated ( black bars ) or treated ( redbars ) with 10 mM M b CD . Cholesterol depletion significantly decreases the uptake of SBD over the indicated time course ( see Fig . 2 for the quantitation of cholesterol levels ) . B , C : Fixed c6 neurons showing filipin stainingof cholesterol ( blue ) andSBD ( red ) after30min of SBD incubation . Incholesterol - depletedneurons ( C ) , SBDremainspredominantly at the plasma membrane . D : Average percentages of live cells with internalized SBD in SH - SY5Y cells untreated ( black bars ) or treated with 10 mM M b CD ( red bars ) . In contrast to the gradual increase of SBD uptake in controls , cholesterol depletion prevents SBD uptake . E , F : Live SH - SY5Y cells showing reduced incorporation and uptake at the plasma membrane of SBD , as measured by the presence or absence of internalized SBD - positive vesicles within the cell , at 60 min after incubation with 10 m M M b CD . Bars 5 2 m m . Error bars represent 6 SEM . Fluorescent probe SBD interacts with sphingolipids and raft domains 1083 b y gue s t , on N o v e m be r 7 , 2017 www . jl r . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m distribution that is strikingly similar for CtxB and SBD - OG , with a slow population diffusing at . 30 ms and a slightly larger fast population diffusing mainly between 1 and 10 ms . This is less pronounced for SBD - TMR . To look at the effects of raft disruption on the mobility of SBD , we measured the t D of SBD as well as the control markers on cells treated with 10 mM M b CD for 30 min . It was found that the diffusion times of DiI and BODIPY - FL - SM under cholesterol depletion remained almost un - changed at 10 . 7 6 0 . 6 and 11 . 5 6 2 . 9 ms , respectively ( Fig . 5E , F ) , whereas t D s of SBD were greatly reduced to 5 . 3 6 0 . 9 and 2 . 1 6 0 . 2 ms for SBD - TMR and SBD - OG , respectively ( Fig . 5F ) . The average diffusion time of CtxB was also reduced to 11 . 6 6 0 . 8 ms , consistent with its raft localization being dependent on cholesterol ( Fig . 5F ) . These changes are also reflected in the distributions of t D s represented as histograms ( Fig . 5C , D ) . From the FCS data , we conclude that SBD’s diffusion behavior at the plasma membrane is consistent with a substantial fraction being localized in raft domains of low mobility relative to the surrounding membrane . Sphingolipid depletion inhibits SBD uptake The SBD motif was postulated to interact with galactose - terminal glycosphingolipids and sphingomyelin ( 33 ) , and A b interactions with gangliosides have been documented extensively ( 34 , 35 ) . Therefore , we examined with live cell imaging whether the vesicular uptake of SBD re - quires sphingolipid production in neuroblastomas . Sphin - golipid metabolism is disrupted by the mycotoxin FB1 , an inhibitor of ceramide synthase ( 36 ) , a key enzyme in de novo ceramide synthesis . Because glycosphingolipids are synthesized from ceramide , a reduction in ceramide levels should also lead to decreased levels of glycosphingolip - ids , and inhibition of cellular ganglioside synthesis has indeed been reported upon treatment with FB1 ( 37 , 38 ) . After treatment with FB1 , neuroblastoma cells endo - cytosed SBD less efficiently and showed fewer internal SBD - positive vesicles ( Fig . 6D ; quantitated in Fig . 6C ) as well as a decrease in total intracellular SBD intensity ( quantification shown in supplementary Fig . III ) , suggest - ing that the vesicular uptake of SBD is dependent on sphingolipids or glycosphingolipids . By comparison , the distribution of the positive control CtxB , which recognizes ganglioside GM1 ( 39 ) , is also al - tered , but apparently uptake is not affected . Instead , CtxB appears to be diverted from its usual Golgi localization ( Fig . 6E ) . Both of these observations are consistent with the conclusions of Shogomori and Futerman ( 7 ) , who found that CtxB is raft - localized but that uptake can be Fig . 4 . Correlation curves of SBD ( SBD - TMR ; D ) versus raft ( CtxB ; C ) and nonraft markers ( DiI - C18 ; A ; and BODIPY - FL - SM ; B ) in SH - SY5Y cells . Normalized correlation curves G ( t ) are shown over 100 ms time intervals obtained from different fluorescent labels on SH - SY5Y neuroblastoma cells . Functions gave the best fits to two - dimensional , two - particle models . SBD and CtxB contain a strong bleaching component , indicating the lower mobility of the structures in which they reside , whereas dialkyl - indocarbocyanine ( DiI ) - C18 and BODIPY - FL - SM were not influenced by bleaching . 1084 Journal of Lipid Research Volume 49 , 2008 b y gue s t , on N o v e m be r 7 , 2017 www . jl r . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m raft - independent . In contrast , transferrin - Alexa - 594 up - take ( Fig . 6A , B ) remains unaltered after FB1 treatment . Transferrin was measured on the same cells as a negative control for the FB1 treatment , because transferrin is taken up by clathrin - mediated endocytosis and therefore is not expected to be sphingolipid - dependent ( 40 , 41 ) . We also examined SBD uptake in a melanoma strain , GM95 ( 42 ) , which is devoid of glycosphingolipids . How - ever , uptake of SBD was extremely inefficient in both the parental / control melanoma cell line , B16 , and the mutant GM95 strain ( data not shown ) , such that no conclusions could be drawn about the dependence of SBD uptake on glycosphingolipids in this cell type . SBD binds to purified glycosphingolipids Previous in vitro binding studies on SBDs contained in HIV - GP120 and Prp ( prion - protein ) , and A b ( 1 - 40 ) ( 13 , 33 ) suggested that the association of these proteins with cell membranes could be mediated by interactions between the SBD and glycosphingolipids at the outer plasma mem - brane , in particular those containing terminal galactose . For this reason , we were interested in testing whether our myc - tagged SBD could bind to isolated glycosphingolipids . Interaction of SBD with lipids was assayed by lipid - protein overlays ( 16 ) in which SBD - myc was incubated with purified lipids immobilized on nitrocellulose membranes . With relatively low amounts of lipid ( 100 pmoles ) , SBD Fig . 5 . The distribution of diffusion times for SBD and raft markers but not nonraft markers shifts under cholesterol depletion . Histograms A – D show percentages of 20 s cumulative average readings that gave t D in the indicated millisecond time ranges . A shows the nonraft - localizing markers DiI and BODIPY - FL - SM , which give most of the readings in the faster mobility ranges 1 – 10 and 10 – 20 ms . In contrast , in B , CtxB - 594 , SBD - TMR , and SBD - Oregon green ( OG ) give substantial fractions of readings in the low - mobility . 30 ms range , typical for raft markers , in addition to a higher proportion of readings for SBD in the faster 1 – 20 ms range . Note that all readings . 30 ms are pooled into one group in the histograms , because of possible artifactual lengthening of the t D at . 30 ms as a result of photobleaching effects . C : Distribution of nonraft markers after cholesterol depletion is not altered significantly ( compare with A ) . D : Distribution of raft markers after cholesterol depletion is shifted strongly toward faster diffusion times ( , 1 – 10 ms ) . E , F : Average diffusion times for all markers before and after cholesterol depletion . Error bars reflect SEM . For all experiments , n . 50 measurements . Fluorescent probe SBD interacts with sphingolipids and raft domains 1085 b y gue s t , on N o v e m be r 7 , 2017 www . jl r . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m recognized GM1 but not a variety of other glycosphingo - lipids , glycerophospholipids , or cholesterol ( Fig . 7A ) . Intact SBD and SBD with a scrambled sequence showed signal for GM1 , but much lower than the signal of Lysenin for sphingomyelin ( Fig . 7A ) or of CtxB on its receptor GM1 ( data not shown ) . However when higher amounts of lipids were used ( between 1 , 000 and 2 , 000 pmoles ) , SBD dis - played an interaction with galactocerebrosides and gan - gliosides GD1a and GD1b and , to a much lesser extent , with sphingomyelin ( Fig . 7B ) . No other lipids or sphingo - lipids displayed an interaction with SBD , including choles - terol , sulfatide , disialoganglioside , and trisialoganglioside ( GM3 ) ( Fig . 7A , B ) . Notably , although SBD interacted strongly with bovine galactocerebrosides ( consisting of a mixture of both hydroxylated and nonhydroxylated fatty acids ) ( Fig . 7B ) , it showed no affinity for synthetic galac - tosyl ceramide , which has an essentially identical structure but contains only nonhydroxylated fatty acids . This is not completely unexpected , because another SBD - containing glycoprotein , the HIV - 1 surface protein gp120 , also dis - plays preferential interaction with synthetic galactosyl cer - amide containing hydroxylated fatty acid ( 43 ) . We also examined the interaction of the scrambled ver - sion of the peptide and a double mutant version in which amino acids key to the interaction with sphingolipids pos - tulated by Fantini and colleagues ( 33 ) were mutated ( Fig . 7B ) . Surprisingly , the scrambled version of the pep - tide interacted approximately as well with GD1a , GD1b , and SM as native SBD . This is consistent with the reported binding affinity for target lipids of reverse - sequence A b 40 - 1 Fig . 6 . SBD uptake is dependent on sphingolipid levels . SH - SY5Y cells were treated with 10 m M fumonisin B1 ( FB1 ) for 2 h and then incubated with transferrin - Alexa - 594 ( Tfn ) , SBD - TMR , or Alexa Fluor - 594 CtxB and subsequently imaged in medium containing 10 m M FB1 . A : FB1 treatment does not significantly alter the uptake of Tfn . The graph shows the intensity measurement after Tfn uptake at specific time points in treated ( red bars ) and untreated ( black bars ) cells . B : Representative cells used for the analysis of Tfn uptake , with the cell boundary outlined . The intensity of spots within the cell was measured and compared between treated and control cells . C : SBD uptake is reduced as indicated by spot count analysis . The graph indicates the percentage of SBD - positive spots in FB1 - treated ( red bars ) and control cells ( black bars ) . Spot count was used as a direct measurement of uptake instead of intensity because of the relatively lower uptake of SBD into SH - SY5Y cells compared with that of SBD into c6 cells ( see supplementary Fig . II ) . D : Representative SH - SY5Y cells before and after FB1 treatment incubated with SBD - TMR . Fewer internal vesicles , carrying internalized SBD , are seen in the treated cells , where SBD remains at the plasma membrane . E : Control and FB1 - treated cells show differences in CtxB trafficking . CtxB is ordinarily trafficked to the Golgi body , seen near the center of neuroblastoma cells , but in FB1 - treated cells , this is altered to a vesicular distribution throughout the cell . Bars 5 2 m m . 1086 Journal of Lipid Research Volume 49 , 2008 b y gue s t , on N o v e m be r 7 , 2017 www . jl r . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m being comparable to , or even exceeding that of , A b 1 - 40 in SPR measurements ( 34 ) . However , in contrast to live cell labeling with native SBD , nearly nouptake was observed with the scrambled SBD peptide ( see supplementary Fig . IV ) . Our interpretation of these seemingly contradictory results is that SBD may bind weakly to individual gangliosides but more strongly to a specific combination of gangliosides or lipids that we have not yet been able to reproduce on dot blots . SBD may also interact with an unknown protein in the membrane to confer sequence - specific binding . In contrast , the double mutated version ( R5A , Y10A ) in - teracted only with GD1b very weakly and with galactoce - rebrosides . At higher concentrations , the mutated peptide bound very weakly to GD1a but not to SM . We conclude from this that the interaction between SBD and gangliosides or SM may indeed be mediated at least in part by these two amino acids , as postulated by Fantini and colleagues ( 33 ) . DISCUSSION We have presented biochemical and pharmacological evidence that a novel fluorescent probe derived from the amyloid peptide A b , the SBD , associates with plasma mem - brane microdomains . SBD is taken up by two different neuronal cell types in a cholesterol - and sphingolipid - dependent manner . We show that SBD is associated with microdomains of both fly neuronal cells and mammalian neuroblastomas , but not fibroblasts , and we also observe that its associa - tion with DRMs is partly cholesterol dependent in both cell types , with fly neurons being more sensitive to cholesterol depletion . In light of this , it is interesting that sphingolipids in flies are structurally different from their mammalian counterparts ( 24 ) . Although flies do not produce sphingo - myelin or gangliosides such as GM1 , they have other ter - minal galactose - containing glycolipids ( 44 ) and an analog of sphingomyelin , phosphoethanolamine ceramide , that could also be cleaved by sphingomyelinases ( 22 ; Julie Saba , personal communication ) . These fly sphingolipids could be involved in cholesterol dependent SBD uptake . We also analyzed the biophysical characteristics of SBD’s association with the plasma membrane by examining its diffusion dynamics with FCS in human neuroblastomas . In this study , the t D s of the nonraft markers ( DiI and BODIPY - FL - SM ) were distributed within a comparatively narrow range , unlike the raft markers , which were dis - tributed in a very wide range of t D values . However , the clustering of the histogram of SBD t D values around . 30 ms and ? 1 – 10 ms is consistent with the estimates of Fig . 7 . SBD interacts with purified glycosphingolipids . A : Lipid - protein overlay assay using Sphingostrips ( Invitrogen ) prespotted with lipids and exposed to SBD - myc , SBD with a scrambled sequence ( SBD - scr ) - myc , and Lysenin . SBD - myc and SBD - scr - myc interact with monosialoganglioside ( GM1 ) . Lysenin recognizes its known target , sphingomyelin ( SM ) . GD3 , disialoganglioside ; Sf , sulfatide ; Sgal , sphingosylgalactoside ; Ch , cholesterol ; LPC , lysophoshatidylcholine ; PC , phosphatidylcholine ; BL , blank ; Sph , sphingosine ; S1P , sphingosine - 1 - phosphate ; PSp , phytosphingosine ; Cer , ceramide ; SPC , sphingosylphosphocholine ; LPA , lysophosphatidic acid ; M , myriocin . B : Lipid - protein overlay assay using membrane strips spotted with additional sphingolipid standards and then exposed to SBD - myc ( 5 and 20 m M ) , SBD mutated ( SBD * * ) - myc , and SBD - scr - myc . SBD - myc and SBD - scr - myc bind to GD1a , GD1b , and galactocerebrosides . SBD - myc weakly interacts with SM at higher concentrations ( 20 m M ) . Double mutated ( R5A , Y10A ) SBD * * - myc fails to show any interaction with GD1a and SM at 5 m M . At higher concentrations ( 20 m M ) , it fails to show any interaction with SM and only weakly interacts with GD1a , GD1b , and GT1b . GD1a , disialoganglioside 1a ; GD1b , disialoganglioside 1b ; GT1b , trisialoganglioside GT1b ; GalCer , galactosyl ceramide ; PE - Cer , phosphoethanolamine ceramide ; CB , galactosylcerebroside . Fluorescent probe SBD interacts with sphingolipids and raft domains 1087 b y gue s t , on N o v e m be r 7 , 2017 www . jl r . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m Sharma et al . ( 45 ) that 60 – 80 % of a raft - associated gly - cosylphosphatidylinositol - linked protein is actually pres - ent in the nonraft fraction . The very similar biphasic distribution of diffusion times for SBD ( in particular SBD - OG ) and CtxB may reflect the existence of two distinct populations at the plasma membrane , one of which is associated with the liquid - ordered phase and the other not . Indeed , from our fractionation experiments , we observe that SBD is also taken up by membrane com - ponents that do not fit within the operative definition for rafts , namely , detergent insolubility . This mixed dis - tribution is observed by us and other authors for a num - ber of presumed raft - associated proteins ( 46 ) . It is interesting that although the clustered histogram distribution of t D values of CtxB was very similar to those of SBD , especially SBD - OG , the average t D for this estab - lished raft marker was shorter on average than those of SBD ( Fig . 5B ) . This may indicate that CtxB and SBD are both at least partially raft - associated but that the dy - namic nature of their resident domains is different . Raft - associated markers are expected to be bleached , because they are less mobile than the surrounding nonraft mem - brane and thus are unable to leave the focus ( 47 , 48 ) . Accordingly , we see a major bleaching component in our measurements of SBD and CtxB . The extremely slow mobile fraction observed for SBD and CtxB compared with DiI , therefore , suggests their association to raft - like structures or cross - linked raft assemblies . Drugs that remove cholesterol from the plasma mem - brane are known to inhibit the trafficking of lipid raft markers and have been used extensively as tools to differ - entiate between raft - and nonraft - mediated processes ( 47 , 49 ) . Both biochemical and cell - labeling studies indicate a cholesterol - dependent uptake of SBD . However , this difference is more obvious in the c6 cells than in the neuroblastomas . Using FCS on neuroblastomas , under cholesterol depletion , the influence of bleaching on the autocorrelation function is in fact removed , and we find a large change in t D value for SBD . The shift is toward nonraft - like fast diffusion times . This is similar to the effect on the raft marker CtxB , whereas the nonraft markers did not show any significant change ( 29 ) . Taking into con - sideration both the DRM isolation data and the FCS results , we conclude that SBD is still able to associate to some extent with the more buoyant membrane fractions , even in the absence of cholesterol and diffusing at nonraft speeds . In a separate study , we showed that SBD interacts with ganglioside - containing liposomes of raft - like compo - sition ( S . Steinert and E . Lee , unpublished data ) . Here , we used a more sensitive ( 50 ) lipid - protein overlay ( fat blot ) assay to assess SBD’s ability to bind specific lipids . Among the sphingolipids we tested by lipid - protein over - lay , SBD bound to galactocerebrosides and to GD1a , GD1b , and GM1 but not to other sphingolipids . SBD’s affinity for glycosphingolipids , but not cholesterol , glycer - ophospholipids , or sphingoid bases , is consistent with the original model of Fantini and coworkers ( 33 ) that SBD binds to rafts primarily via an interaction with raft - borne glycosphingolipid head groups . SBD also displayed a weak interaction with sphingomy - elin . Interestingly , a double mutation ( in which arginine 5 and tyrosine 10 are both switched to alanine ) eliminated the interaction with sphingomyelin . This supports the prediction ( 13 ) that secondary electrostatic interactions involving basic charged residues such as lysine and ar - ginine with the negatively charged phosphate group of sphingomyelin are also possible . The same double mutant also affected SBD’s ability to bind gangliosides , again sup - porting the model of Fantini and coworkers ( 33 ) , in which aromatic amino acids in the V3 loop engage in p - bonding with galactose found in galactose - containing head groups . In addition , all three peptides interact with brain - derived galactocerebrosides but not galactosyl ceramide . In light of our liposome - capture experiments ( S . Steinert and E . Lee , unpublished data ) , however , in which SBD did not bind galactocerebrosides , it seems likely that this in - teraction is not physiological and may occur only when the lipids are not presented in a bilayer . In a separate study ( S . Steinert and E . Lee , unpublished data ) using quantitative time - lapse imaging , we character - ized the intracellular trafficking pathway of SBD and showed that it could interact with a number of different cell types and certain glycolipids in liposome - capture experiments . The current studies used three approaches to describe SBD’s behavior at the plasma membrane . First , we used lipid - protein interaction assays with DRM fractions and fat blots to determine SBD’s affinity for raft - type lipids . Second , pharmacological inhibitor studies were used to test the cholesterol and glycosphingolipid dependence of SBD uptake at the membrane . Finally , we used FCS to show that SBD displays a low mobility at the membrane , characteristic of raft - associated markers . These studies , along with the intracellular trafficking charac - erization , establish SBD as a novel fluorescent tracer for cholesterol - dependent , glycosphingolipid - containing mi - crodomains in living cells . The authors thank Sean Sweeney and Laura Briggs for flotillin - GFP plasmid . Funding for this project was provided by the Institute of Bioengineering and Nanotechnology ( Biomedical Research Council , Agency for Science , Technology , and Re - search , Singapore ) and the Singapore Bioimaging Consortium ( Grant 003 / 2005 ) . M . M . was supported by a National University of Singapore graduate scholarship . REFERENCES 1 . Simons , K . , and E . Ikonen . 1997 . Functional rafts in cell mem - branes . Nature . 387 : 569 – 572 . 2 . Brown , D . A . , and E . London . 1998 . Functions of lipid rafts in biological membranes . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 14 : 111 – 136 . 3 . Simons , K . , and R . Ehehalt . 2002 . Cholesterol , lipid rafts , and disease . J . Clin . Invest . 110 : 597 – 603 . 4 . Glebov , O . O . , N . A . Bright , and B . J . Nichols . 2006 . Flotillin - 1 defines a clathrin - independent endocytic pathway in mammalian cells . Nat . Cell Biol . 8 : 46 – 54 . 5 . Lencer , W . I . , and D . Saslowsky . 2005 . Raft trafficking of AB5 subunit bacterial toxins . Biochim . Biophys . Acta . 1746 : 314 – 321 . 6 . Sabharanjak , S . , P . Sharma , R . G . Parton , and S . Mayor . 2002 . GPI - anchored proteins are delivered to recycling endosomes via a 1088 Journal of Lipid Research Volume 49 , 2008 b y gue s t , on N o v e m be r 7 , 2017 www . jl r . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m distinct cdc42 - regulated , clathrin - independent pinocytic pathway . Dev . Cell . 2 : 411 – 423 . 7 . Shogomori , H . , and A . H . Futerman . 2001 . Cholesterol depletion by methyl - beta - cyclodextrin blocks cholera toxin transport from endosomes to the Golgi apparatus in hippocampal neurons . J . Neurochem . 78 : 991 – 999 . 8 . Torgersen , M . L . , G . Skretting , B . van Deurs , and K . Sandvig . 2001 . Internalization of cholera toxin by different endocytic mecha - nisms . J . Cell Sci . 114 : 3737 – 3747 . 9 . Drobnik , W . , H . Borsukova , A . Bottcher , A . Pfeiffer , G . Liebisch , G . J . Schutz , H . Schindler , and G . Schmitz . 2002 . Apo AI / ABCA1 - dependent and HDL3 - mediated lipid efflux from compositionally distinct cholesterol - based microdomains . Traffic . 3 : 268 – 278 . 10 . Gomez - Mouton , C . , J . L . Abad , E . Mira , R . A . Lacalle , E . Gallardo , S . Jimenez - Baranda , I . Illa , A . Bernad , S . Manes , and A . C . Martinez . 2001 . Segregation of leading - edge and uropod components into specific lipid rafts during T cell polarization . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 98 : 9642 – 9647 . 11 . Ishitsuka , R . , and T . Kobayashi . 2004 . Lysenin : a new tool for in - vestigating membranelipid organization . Anat . Sci . Int . 79 : 184 – 190 . 12 . Schade , A . E . , and A . D . Levine . 2002 . Lipid raft heterogeneity in human peripheral blood T lymphoblasts : a mechanism for reg - ulating the initiation of TCR signal transduction . J . Immunol . 168 : 2233 – 2239 . 13 . Fantini , J . 2003 . How sphingolipids bind and shape proteins : mo - lecular basis of lipid - protein interactions in lipid shells , rafts and related biomembrane domains . Cell . Mol . Life Sci . 60 : 1027 – 1032 . 14 . Ui , K . , S . Nishihara , M . Sakuma , S . Togashi , R . Ueda , Y . Miyata , and T . Miyake . 1994 . Newly established cell lines from Drosophila larval CNS express neural specific characteristics . In Vitro Cell . Dev . Biol . Anim . 30A : 209 – 216 . 15 . Zhai , L . , D . Chaturvedi , and S . Cumberledge . 2004 . Drosophilawnt - 1 undergoes a hydrophobic modification and is targeted to lipid rafts , a process that requires porcupine . J . Biol . Chem . 279 : 33220 – 33227 . 16 . Dowler , S . , G . Kular , and D . R . Alessi . 2002 . Protein lipid overlay assay . Sci . STKE . 2002 : PL6 . 17 . Sharma , D . K . , J . C . Brown , Z . Cheng , E . L . Holicky , D . L . Marks , and R . Pagano . 2005 . The glycosphingolipid , lactosylceramide , regulates B1 - integrin clustering and endocytosis . Cancer Res . 65 : 8233 – 8241 . 18 . Bacia , K . , and P . Schwille . 2003 . A dynamic view of cellular pro - cesses by in vivo fluorescence auto - and cross - correlation spectros - copy . Methods . 29 : 74 – 85 . 19 . Haustein , E . , and P . Schwille . 2003 . Ultrasensitive investigations of biological systems by fluorescence correlation spectroscopy . Methods . 29 : 153 – 166 . 20 . Edidin , M . 2003 . The state of lipid rafts : from model membranes to cells . Annu . Rev . Biophys . Biomol . Struct . 32 : 257 – 283 . 21 . Hoehne , M . , H . G . de Couet , C . A . Stuermer , and K . F . Fischbach . 2005 . Loss - and gain - of - function analysis of the lipid raft proteins Reggie / Flotillin in Drosophila : they are posttranslationally regu - lated , and misexpression interferes with wing and eye develop - ment . Mol . Cell . Neurosci . 30 : 326 – 338 . 22 . Rietveld , A . , S . Neutz , K . Simons , and S . Eaton . 1999 . Association of sterol - and glycosylphosphatidylinositol - linked proteins with Dro - sophila raft lipid microdomains . J . Biol . Chem . 274 : 12049 – 12054 . 23 . Li , Y . P . , A . F . Bushnell , C . M . Lee , L . S . Perlmutter , and S . K . Wong . 1996 . Beta - amyloid induces apoptosis in human - derived neurotypic SH - SY5Y cells . Brain Res . 738 : 196 – 204 . 24 . Holthuis , J . C . , T . Pomorski , R . J . Raggers , H . Sprong , and G . Van Meer . 2001 . The organizing potential of sphingolipids in intracel - lular membrane transport . Physiol . Rev . 81 : 1689 – 1723 . 25 . Yamaji , A . , Y . Sekizawa , K . Emoto , H . Sakuraba , K . Inoue , H . Kobayashi , and M . Umeda . 1998 . Lysenin , a novel sphingomyelin - specific binding protein . J . Biol . Chem . 273 : 5300 – 5306 . 26 . Ohanian , J . , and V . Ohanian . 2001 . Sphingolipids in mammalian cell signalling . Cell . Mol . Life Sci . 58 : 2053 – 2068 . 27 . Puri , V . , R . Watanabe , R . D . Singh , M . Dominguez , J . C . Brown , C . L . Wheatley , D . L . Marks , and R . E . Pagano . 2001 . Clathrin - dependent and - independent internalization of plasma membrane sphingolip - ids initiates two Golgi targeting pathways . J . Cell Biol . 154 : 535 – 547 . 28 . Rajendran , L . , M . Masilamani , S . Solomon , R . Tikkanen , C . A . Stuermer , H . Plattner , and H . Illges . 2003 . Asymmetric localiza - tion of flotillins / reggies in preassembled platforms confers in - herent polarity to hematopoietic cells . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 100 : 8241 – 8246 . 29 . Bacia , K . , D . Scherfeld , N . Kahya , and P . Schwille . 2004 . Fluores - cence correlation spectroscopy relates rafts in model and native membranes . Biophys . J . 87 : 1034 – 1043 . 30 . Kahya , N . , D . Scherfeld , K . Bacia , B . Poolman , and P . Schwille . 2003 . Probing lipid mobility of raft - exhibiting model membranes by fluo - rescence correlation spectroscopy . J . Biol . Chem . 278 : 28109 – 28115 . 31 . Burns , A . R . , D . J . Frankel , and T . Buranda . 2005 . Local mobility in lipid domains of supported bilayers characterized by atomic force microscopy and fluorescence correlation spectroscopy . Biophys . J . 89 : 1081 – 1093 . 32 . Hao , M . , S . Mukherjee , and F . R . Maxfield . 2001 . Cholesterol de - pletion induces large scale domain segregation in living cell mem - branes . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 98 : 13072 – 13077 . 33 . Mahfoud , R . , N . Garmy , M . Maresca , N . Yahi , A . Puigserver , and J . Fantini . 2002 . Identification of a common sphingolipid - binding domain in Alzheimer , prion , and HIV - 1 proteins . J . Biol . Chem . 277 : 11292 – 11296 . 34 . Ariga , T . , K . Kobayashi , A . Hasegawa , M . Kiso , H . Ishida , and T . Miyatake . 2001 . Characterization of high - affinity binding between gan - gliosidesandamyloidbeta - protein . Arch . Biochem . Biophys . 388 : 225 – 230 . 35 . Kakio , A . , S . Nishimoto , K . Yanagisawa , Y . Kozutsumi , and K . Matsuzaki . 2002 . Interactions of amyloid beta - protein with vari - ous gangliosides in raft - like membranes : importance of GM1 ganglioside - bound form as an endogenous seed for Alzheimer amyloid . Biochemistry . 41 : 7385 – 7390 . 36 . Merrill , A . H . , Jr . , G . van Echten , E . Wang , and K . Sandhoff . 1993 . Fumonisin B1 inhibits sphingosine ( sphinganine ) N - acyltransferase and de novo sphingolipid biosynthesis in cultured neurons in situ . J . Biol . Chem . 268 : 27299 – 27306 . 37 . Merrill , A . H . , Jr . , E . Wang , T . R . Vales , E . R . Smith , J . J . Schroeder , D . S . Menaldino , C . Alexander , H . M . Crane , J . Xia , D . C . Liotta , et al . 1996 . Fumonisin toxicity and sphingolipid biosynthesis . Adv . Exp . Med . Biol . 392 : 297 – 306 . 38 . Naslavsky , N . , H . Shmeeda , G . Friedlander , A . Yanai , A . H . Futerman , Y . Barenholz , and A . Taraboulos . 1999 . Sphingolipid de - pletion increases formation of the scrapie prion protein in neuro - blastoma cells infected with prions . J . Biol . Chem . 274 : 20763 – 20771 . 39 . Kuziemko , G . M . , M . Stroh , and R . C . Stevens . 1996 . Cholera toxin binding affinity and specificity for gangliosides determined by sur - face plasmon resonance . Biochemistry . 35 : 6375 – 6384 . 40 . Sharma , D . K . , A . Choudhury , R . D . Singh , C . L . Wheatley , D . L . Marks , and R . E . Pagano . 2003 . Glycosphingolipids internalized via caveolar - related endocytosis rapidly merge with the clathrin path - way in early endosomes and form microdomains for recycling . J . Biol . Chem . 278 : 7564 – 7572 . 41 . Yamashiro , D . J . , and F . R . Maxfield . 1984 . Acidification of en - docytic compartments and the intracellular pathways of ligands and receptors . J . Cell . Biochem . 26 : 231 – 246 . 42 . Ichikawa , S . , N . Nakajo , H . Sakiyama , and Y . Hirabayashi . 1994 . A mouse B16 melanoma mutant deficient in glycolipids . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 91 : 2703 – 2707 . 43 . Hammache , D . , G . Pieroni , N . Yahi , O . Delezay , N . Koch , H . Lafont , C . Tamalet , and J . Fantini . 1998 . Specific interaction of HIV - 1 and HIV - 2 surface envelope glycoproteins with monolayers of galacto - sylceramide and ganglioside GM3 . J . Biol . Chem . 273 : 7967 – 7971 . 44 . Seppo , A . , M . Moreland , H . Schweingruber , and M . Tiemeyer . 2000 . Zwitterionic and acidic glycosphingolipids of the Drosophila melanogaster embryo . Eur . J . Biochem . 267 : 3549 – 3558 . 45 . Sharma , P . , R . Varma , R . C . Sarasij , Ira , K . Gousset , G . Krishnamoorthy , M . Rao , and S . Mayor . 2004 . Nanoscale organiza - tion of multiple GPI - anchored proteins in living cell membranes . Cell . 116 : 577 – 589 . 46 . Kusumi , A . , and K . Suzuki . 2005 . Toward understanding the dy - namics of membrane - raft - based molecular interactions . Biochim . Biophys . Acta . 1746 : 234 – 251 . 47 . Orlandi , P . A . , and P . H . Fishman . 1998 . Filipin - dependent in - hibition of cholera toxin : evidence for toxin internalization and ac - tivation through caveolae - like domains . J . Cell Biol . 141 : 905 – 915 . 48 . Widengren , J . , and P . Thyberg . 2005 . FCS cell surface measure - ments—photophysical limitations and consequences on molecular ensembles with heterogenic mobilities . Cytometry A . 68 : 101 – 112 . 49 . Simons , M . , P . Keller , B . De Strooper , K . Beyreuther , C . G . Dotti , and K . Simons . 1998 . Cholesterol depletion inhibits the generation of beta - amyloid in hippocampal neurons . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 95 : 6460 – 6464 . 50 . Narayan , K . , and M . A . Lemmon . 2006 . Determining selectivity of phosphoinositide - binding domains . Methods . 39 : 122 – 133 . Fluorescent probe SBD interacts with sphingolipids and raft domains 1089 b y gue s t , on N o v e m be r 7 , 2017 www . jl r . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m