The Influence of Boundary Objects on Group Collaboration in Construction Project Teams Andreas F . Phelps 1 and Madhu Reddy 2 1 Department of Architectural Engineering , The Pennsylvania State University , USA , andreas . phelps @ gmail . com 2 College of Information Sciences & Technology , The Pennsylvania State University , USA , mreddy @ ist . psu . edu ABSTRACT This note outlines the critical role that boundary objects play in construction project teams . In this domain , boundary objects extend beyond their traditional role as information artifacts used to communicate between teams to serve a more influential role as guides for team collaboration . Categories and Subject Descriptors H . 3 INFORMATION STORAGE AND RETRIEVAL ; H . 3 . 2 Information Storage ' Record classification * * General Terms Design , Documentation , Human Factors Keywords Design , Documentation , Human Factors , Boundary Objects , Construction Teams , Collaboration 1 . INTRODUCTION As projects become increasingly complex , they require greater collaboration between specialized teams [ 1 ] . However , different teams have their own norms , values , time frames , and coding schemes that can make collaboration difficult [ 2 , 3 ] . One perspective on supporting collaboration across team boundaries focuses on the use of boundary objects [ 4 ] . Boundary objects are artifacts that allow information to be exchanged across organizational , team , and other boundaries . Collaboration plays a pivotal role in the architecture , engineering , and construction ( AEC ) industry . In construction projects , dozens of teams are brought together to design and construct complex buildings . These collaborations may last several years , but the movement of teams in and out of the project along with the diversity and ambiguity of the information in the project creates a greater need for boundary objects . Boundary objects such as drawings , specifications , and reports used in construction play important roles in multidisciplinary construction project teams . They provide the organizational memory for the project team and allow for the transfer of large amounts of information from one group to another . Because of their importance , boundary objects also play a central role in project team collaboration . In the absence of clear goals and processes , the widespread use of boundary objects in design and construction creates default goals and processes . As such , the boundary objects used by project teams have a strong influence on the group collaboration . 2 . BACKGROUND The main characteristic of boundary objects is that they contain sufficient detail to be understandable by both parties utilizing the object , although neither party may understand the full context of use by the other [ 5 ] . Their main purpose is to carry information and context that can be used to translate , transfer , and transform knowledge between communities of practice [ 6 ] . CSCW researchers are deeply interested in identify characteristics of boundary objects that highlight how they effectively serve as tools to transfer information between groups and support collaboration [ 7 ] . Effective collaboration in AEC projects is essential for the success of the project [ 8 ] . However , there are many challenges to maintaining effective collaboration in these projects . Specifically , the movement of individuals and teams in and out of the project and a strong legal and cultural focus on individual work makes coordination and collaboration difficult [ 9 ] . Consequently , boundary objects play a crucial role in enabling collaboration because they provide an explicit source of stable information that different groups can use with confidence . 3 . STUDY SETTING AND METHODS This note stems from a three - year ethnographic field study of the AEC project team responsible for the design and construction of a $ 100 Million Cancer Research and Treatment Facility . The field study involved over 1000 hours of on - site observation of individual and collaborative activities , attendance of over 150 coordination meetings , semi - structured interviews with 12 key project team members , collection and review of 3000 + pages of meeting notes , plans , and other written artifacts , and review of web - based project management systems . The data was analyzed through a process of open , axial , and selective coding in order to better understand the characteristics , relationships , and themes present within design and construction team information flows . Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . GROUP’09 , May 10 – 13 , 2009 , Sanibel Island , Florida , USA . Copyright 2009 ACM 978 - 1 - 60558 - 500 - 0 / 09 / 05 . . . $ 5 . 00 . 125 4 . CONSTRUCTION PROJECT TEAMS AND BOUNDARY OBJECTS Design and construction project teams are characterized by the long - term collaboration ( i . e . months to several years ) of individuals and teams in order to deliver a building . The project team includes a diverse spectrum of related but distinctly different teams : architects and other designers , contractors , owner’s representatives , manufacturer’s representatives , user groups , code officials , and various consultants . In many cases , the individuals making up a project team have not worked together in the past , may not work together in the future , and have very little influence in the selection of the other project team members . The “arm’s length” nature of this type of collaboration creates challenges to systematically sharing tacit knowledge because of commitment and trust limitations [ 10 ] . The diversity and impermanent involvement of project team members also creates numerous functional , organizational , temporal , and ideological boundaries that information has to span in order to enable effective collaboration [ 11 ] . For these reasons , boundary - spanning elements are needed to record , transfer , and translate information between these different groups . These elements often take the form of boundary objects [ 5 ] . Because of the volume , complexity , and ambiguity of information in design and construction , a suite of boundary objects are needed to effectively collaborate between these teams . Although most of the information available to a project comes from the experiences and tacit knowledge of the people involved , the value to the project comes when that tacit knowledge from various individuals is shared to facilitate the design and construction of the proposed facility . Boundary objects play a vital role in codifying that tacit information that is communicated to others . Because of the volume , complexity , and ambiguity of the information in construction projects , boundary objects play a much more central role in these teams than in other domains . In the AEC industry , specific boundary objects have been developed to help manage information throughout the project and their use strongly influences the collaboration of the project teams . In environments characterized by ambiguity ( e . g . construction projects ) the explicit nature and relative clarity of boundary objects establishes a default guidelines for collaboration . 5 . BOUNDARY OBJECTS AND GROUP COLLABORATION Similar to the way that a person’s status and personality can influence group collaboration , boundary objects also have characteristics that affect collaboration within the project . The three major characteristics of boundary objects that affect collaboration are : 1 ) familiarity and trust , 2 ) importance , and 3 ) control . Familiarity and Trust : Boundary objects that are familiar to those that are using them tend to play a more significant role within the project . The importance of familiarity ultimately has to do with the trust that individuals have for a particular boundary object . The greater trust that project teams have in an object , the more likely they are to contribute more and better quality information and the more willing they will be to use the information contained in the object . There are certain characteristics that help develop trust in a boundary object . The first is common use . Boundary objects that are commonly used , whether on a given project or throughout the industry , are more trusted than novel objects that are unfamiliar to project team members . Commonly used boundary objects result in greater management of expectations because project teams have a better understanding of what information they are expected to contribute and what information is available . Another characteristic that builds trust is participation . When project team members have an active role in developing either the structure or content of a boundary object , then they tend to have greater trust in the object . When boundary objects are created with a joint understanding of what is important to all users ( i . e . participatory design of systems , negotiation of norms ) they tend to be more successful [ 12 ] . Lastly , when the information in a given objects is respected through regular updates , correction , or use for more than one purpose , then the boundary objects tends to be more trusted by the project team . For example : The meeting minutes from the weekly foreman’s meeting serve as the agenda for the following week’s meeting and as the update to several other weekly meetings . The object has places for input from each of the attendees and is recorded by the superintendent . Therefore the comments of all the foremen at the meeting are incorporated into the minutes . The superintendent also makes sure that the meeting minutes are accurate and correct and informs the foreman of any mistakes that were made in previous weeks . The superintendent’s commitment to making sure that the minutes are useful and valid increase the trust and commitment that the foreman place on the minutes and causes them make sure that they are prepared to contribute accurate and appropriate information to the meeting . As this example illustrates , the consistent use of the same boundary objects helps to manage expectations so that individuals can come prepared to meetings . Since all individuals at the meeting participate in developing the content for the object , they are willing to provide useful information and develop a sense of shared responsibility that also aids coordination in the field . Finally , because the person in charge of the meeting takes the notes , makes sure they are correct , and uses them in several other meetings to update the rest of the project team , there is a strong sense among team members that this information is valuable . Therefore , the foremen make sure that they are providing the best information they have . The trust in a boundary object impacts its ability to affect collaboration in the team . Importance : Importance is another critical factor affecting a boundary object’s influence in group collaboration . There are two factors that affect how important a boundary object 126 is in construction : 1 ) the importance of the boundary object within the context of the project , and 2 ) the importance of the boundary object with respect to legal aspects of the AEC industry . The importance that a given boundary object has within the project depends on the project structure and how closely related one object is to other boundary objects . These relationships can consist of objects that feed information into other objects , serve as the basis for subsequent objects , or are necessary compliments to other objects . In any case , the more relationships that one boundary object has , the more central it becomes to the project . The second aspect of an object’s importance has to do with contractual structures and the legal implications of the information in the given object . Some boundary objects are required by contract , such as completed drawings and specifications , approved shop drawings , and warranties . Other boundary objects can be used to change contracts , such as requests for information ( RFIs ) , addenda , and change orders . Depending on the contractual structure and legal implications of certain boundary objects , project teams will modify their behaviors . A boundary object’s legal implications also affect how cautious team members are about sharing information , the ambiguity of information that is shared by individuals , and the process for modifying that information . For example : After construction had begun , a change had to be made to the mechanical design . The mechanical engineer explicitly stated that he wanted to deal with the change through an informal sketch rather than issue a more formal addendum to the drawings . His rationale was that he didn’t want to give the subcontractors “certain opportunities” ( i . e . legal support to increase their budget ) . By capturing the information in informal sketches , the subcontractors would understand the change , but they would have to go through the process of formally issuing RFIs , waiting for the RFI response , and then issue a change order if they wanted to be compensated for the change . If the change were captured in an addendum to the drawings , the subcontractors would have been asked for the budget implications before the design change was approved . This example highlights both aspects of importance . There were two boundary objects that the mechanical engineer could have used for the design change . He could have captured the change in an addendum , which is linked to several other boundary objects and has legal and contractual implications . Instead , the mechanical engineer chose to capture the change in a sketch that is not directly linked to any other objects and had no immediate contractual implications . By choosing to use the sketch , the mechanical engineer minimized the importance of the design change . As a result , the burden for demonstrating the full importance of the change ( i . e . budget and schedule implications ) is placed on the subcontractors who will need to use several other boundary objects to fully convey the importance . The type of boundary objects used impacts the perceived importance of given information . Control : Boundary objects also affect control ( i . e . power ) within the project team . In the absence of clear goals , boundary objects serve as default determinants of what information is considered valuable . Their structure ‘pulls” or creates the need for certain types of information and ‘pushes” or makes easily available certain information . This has implications for which individuals assume greater importance in the team . Individuals that want to increase or decrease the importance of their own role or the role of others can introduce or mandate the use of boundary objects that push or pull the respective types of information . In terms of information flow , individuals that serve as the managers of boundary objects control how shared information is interpreted and captured within the boundary object and consequently what information is available to the project in the future . For instance , if a discussion is ambiguous but the manager records the information as she interpreted it , then it becomes part of the explicit record and in some cases legally binding . Conversely , information that was discussed but not captured may still be open for debate . There were several contentious details that were the subject of discussion . To put an end to the discussion , the architect said that he would go back to the office and change the details . In the next meeting two weeks later , only one of the details had been changed and it was not in accordance with what had been discussed in the previous meeting . Because the architects were managing the boundary object , they controlled what the current accepted understanding for the design was . If others wanted to change it , they had to raise the issues again , convince others of their merit , and continue being adamant about changing them . First , in this example the discussion focuses on the drawings , which capture information related to design . This elevates the role of designers ( e . g . architects ) above the contractors and other attendees . Second , the architects are the managers of the object so they control what information is captured and how it was interpreted . Finally , because the architects control the object , they also control the status quo . So even though others made arguments regarding why the details needed to change because those changes were not captured , the burden was on those team members to make those cases again . As these findings and examples illustrate , boundary objects can have a significant influence on team collaboration . Therefore , they can extend beyond their traditional role as simple tools to in supporting cross - boundary communication to playing a more influential role in serving as a guide for collaboration 6 . DISCUSSION There have been numerous studies that discuss the role of boundary objects as tools to support collaboration [ 4 , 5 , 6 , 7 ] . However , boundary object do more than just support collaboration . They can also play an influential role that in 127 guiding collaboration and how team members interact with each other , especially in environments characterized by diverse and ambiguous information and roles . In these environments , the explicit nature and relative clarity of information in boundary objects provides a guide for collaboration in otherwise ambiguous situations . For instance , boundary objects guide information search activities by prescribing what team members will search for because team members will often not look beyond the available boundary objects . By establishing the processes for capturing , modifying , or using information , boundary objects also guide the types and timing of collaborative activities and influence what team members should or should not be involved . In addition , the use of boundary objects provides a list of tasks that helps to clarify the roles and responsibilities of the various project team members involved with collaboration . A boundary object’s influence on group collaboration highlights the strategic role that it can play in managing ambiguity and information flow in project teams . Therefore , when designing boundary objects , there are a number of factors that need to be taken into consideration . First , boundary object need to be designed so that they push and pull the right types of information at the right level of detail at the right time for the project . This is important because it guides team discussions so that they involve the appropriate mix of information and level of complexity for effective collaboration . Second , boundary objects can be structured so that they create a more equitable relationship between the project team members involved in collaboration . In situations where adversarial relationships or power struggles exist in project teams , carefully - designed boundary objects often serve as moderators that guide more balanced discussions and value more equally the input of the main entities involved with coordination . Finally , there are design considerations regarding the rigidity of boundary objects . Because of their increased role in guiding collaboration in certain environments , boundary objects need to be adaptable to the specifics of the team . This involves a delicate balance of maintaining certain universal elements that provide the familiarity and trust from project to projects and certain adaptable elements that enable the object to adapt to the specific characteristics of the teams it serves . Strategic use of boundary objects can also influence and inform the overall project organizational structure and contractual structure so that the individuals and teams have greater clarity in terms of their roles and responsibilities and are involved at the appropriate times during the project . CONCLUSION As the complexity and number of people involved with projects increases , project teams will need to more heavily rely on boundary objects to aid in effective collaboration . In addition to the role that these objects can play as communication tools , they can also serve as an integrated system of guides to help manage ambiguity and influence the group collaboration to create an environment that better facilitates information flow . ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS We would like to thank the research participants for their willingness to take part in this study . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Lawrence , P . R . and Lorsch , J . W . ( 1967 ) . Differentiation and Integration in Complex Organizations . Administrative Science Quarterly , Vol . 12 , No . 1 : 1 - 47 [ 2 ] March , J . and Simon , H . ( 1958 ) Organizations . New York : Wiley . [ 3 ] Katz , D . and Kahn , R . ( 1966 ) . The Social Psychology of Organizations . New York : Wiley [ 4 ] Star , Susan L . , and Griesemer , James R . ( 1989 ) “Institutional Ecology , ‘Translations’ and Boundary Objects : Amateurs and Professionals in Berkeley’s Museum of Vertebrate Zoology , 1907 - 39 . ” Social Studies of Science Vol . 19 : 387 - 420 . [ 5 ] Star , S . L . ( 1989 ) . The Structure of Ill - Structured Solutions : Boundary Objects and Heterogeneous Distributed Problem Solving . In L . Gasser & M . Huhns ( Ed . ) , Distributed Artificial Intelligence ( pp . 37 - 54 ) . San Mateo : Morgan Kauffman [ 6 ] Ackerman , M . S . ( 2000 ) The Intellectual Challenge of CSCW : The Gap Between Social Requirements and Technical Feasibility . Human - Computer Interaction . Vol . 15 , No . 2 , 173 - 203 [ 7 ] Lutters , W . and Ackerman , M . ( 2007 ) . Beyond Boundary Objects : Collaborative Reuse in Aircraft Technical Support . Journal of Computer Supported Cooperative Work . Vol 16 ( 3 ) : 341 - 372 . [ 8 ] Egan J . ( 2002 ) Accelerating change . London : Department of the Environment , Transport and the Regions . [ 9 ] Carrillo , P . and Chinowsky , P . S . ( 2006 ) . “Exploiting Knowledge management : The Engineering and Construction Perspective , ” Journal of Management in Engineering , ASCE , 22 ( 1 ) , 2 - 10 . [ 10 ] Polanyi , M . 1966 . The Tacit Dimension . Anchor Day Books , New York . [ 11 ] Tushman , M . L . ( 1977 ) . Special Boundary Roles in the Innovation Process . Administrative Science Quarterly . Vol 22 , p 587 - 605 [ 12 ] Strauss , A . ( 1991 ) Creating Sociological Awareness : Collective Images and Symbolic Representations . Transaction , New Brunswick . 128