Verbal ﬂ uency and creativity : General and speci ﬁ c contributions of broad retrieval ability ( Gr ) factors to divergent thinking ☆ Paul J . Silvia ⁎ , Roger E . Beaty , Emily C . Nusbaum Department of Psychology , University of North Carolina at Greensboro , United States a r t i c l e i n f o a b s t r a c t Article history : Received 1 June 2012 Received in revised form 20 May 2013 Accepted 20 May 2013 Available online 13 June 2013 The Cattell – Horn – Carroll ( CHC ) model of intelligence views creativity as a first - level factor within the second - level factor of broad retrieval ability ( Gr ) , alongside other first - level abilities such as ideational fluency and word fluency . Traditional methods of measuring creativity , however , confound idea quality with idea quantity , which might exaggerate the relationship between creativityscoresandverbalfluencyfactors . Participants ( n = 131adults ) completedtwodivergent thinking tasks ( unusual uses for a rope and a box ) , which were scored using newer methods that effectively separate creativity ( scored via subjective ratings ) and fluency ( scored as number of responses ) . They then completed 16 verbal fluency tasks that assessed six lower - order Gr factors : word fluency , associational fluency , associative flexibility , ideational fluency , letter fluency , and dissociative ability . Viewed singly , many of the lower - order factors significantly predicted creative quality and fluency . General Gr had substantial effects on creative quality ( standardized β = . 443 ) and fluency ( β = . 339 ) in a higher - order model as well as in a bifactor model ( quality β = . 380 , fluency β = . 327 ) . Moreover , general Gr was the only significant predictor in the bifactor model , suggestingthatit , notthespecificfactors , wasmostimportant . Alleffectswereessentiallythesame after controlling for typing speed and vocabulary knowledge . The findings thus support the CHC view of creativity / originality as a lower - order component of Gr , illuminate the relationships between creativity and first - level Gr factors , extend the study of creativity and intelligence beyond fluid intelligence , and further indicate that creativity is more closely tied to cognitive abilities than creativity research has yet recognized . © 2013 Elsevier Inc . All rights reserved . Keywords : Creativity Divergent thinking Verbal fluency Intelligence Broad retrieval ability 1 . Introduction How do people come up with clever and creative ideas , and whyare somepeople better atit thanothers ? Most researchon these questions has used divergent thinking tasks , which prompt people to generate ideas than can be scored , based on a variety of systems , for creativity ( Kaufman , Plucker , & Baer , 2008 ; Plucker & Renzulli , 1999 ) . In the Cattell – Horn – Carroll ( CHC ) model of cognitive abilities ( McGrew , 2005 , 2009 ) , idea generation tasks fall under the second - level factor known as broad retrieval ability , abbreviated as Gr ( Carroll , 1993 ) . But as many researchers have argued , traditional methods for assessing divergent thinking yield only a fluency score — the simple number of valid responses — or yield quality scores that are confounded with quantity ( Hocevar , 1979b ; Michael & Wright , 1989 ; Silvia et al . , 2008 ) . Two problems result : ( 1 ) divergent thinking tasks might resemble verbal fluency tasks too closely , leading to questions of construct validity , and ( 2 ) the weak correlations between creativity and intelligence observed in past work ( Kim , 2005 ) might be due to weak assessment of creativity , not to a genuinely small effect size . The present research thus addresses two issues . First , when newer assessment methods that effectively dissociate creativity and fluency are used , how does creativity fit within Intelligence 41 ( 2013 ) 328 – 340 ☆ We are grateful to Kathryn Aliff , Gabrielle Dailey , Parnia Haj - Mohamadi , Pegah Haj - Mohamadi , Mary Amanda Harmon , Casey Kelly , Jennifer Schenker , Molly Schloss , Tess Warren , and Alireza Zibaie for assisting with data collection and scoring . ⁎ Corresponding author at : Department of Psychology , P . O . Box 26170 , University of North Carolina at Greensboro , Greensboro , NC 27402 - 6170 , United States . E - mail address : p _ silvia @ uncg . edu ( P . J . Silvia ) . 0160 - 2896 / $ – see front matter © 2013 Elsevier Inc . All rights reserved . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . intell . 2013 . 05 . 004 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Intelligence the Gr domain ? The dominance of fluency - based scoring systems available at the time of Carroll ' s ( 1993 ) landmark analysis might have inflated the association of divergent thinking and Gr . Second , how does divergent thinking relate to both the Gr factor and to its first - level factors ? What first - level factors contribute the most to generating creative ideas ? In the present research , people completed two divergent thinking tasks and 16 Gr tasks that mapped on to six lower - order Gr factors : word fluency , associational fluency , associative flexibil - ity , ideational fluency , letter fluency , and dissociative ability . Using structural equation modeling , we estimated the contri - butions of the lower - order factors and the higher - order Gr factor — modeled using higher - order and bifactor models — to both the quality and quantity of responses to the divergent thinking tasks . 2 . The creativity - and - intelligence debate Creativity research has had an ambivalent relationship with the construct of intelligence . Guilford , in a program of work that launched modern creativity research , extensively studied how both convergent and divergent modes of thought fit into his Structure of Intellect Model ( Guilford , 1967 ) , which contained many novel tasks for measuring creativity . Later creativity researchers , however , contended that creativity and intelligence are essentially unrelated ( Getzels & Jackson , 1962 ) . Wallach and Kogan ' s ( 1965 ) work on creativity and intelligence in children , a touchstone in this field , found a correlation of only r = . 09 between measures of divergent thinking and intelligence . Work since then supported their view — a meta - analysis by Kim ( 2005 ) found a weighted average correlation of r = . 17 between intelligence and divergent thinking . For this reason , most reviews conclude that creativity and intelligence are at most weakly related ( Kaufman , 2009 ; Kaufman & Plucker , 2011 ; Kim , Cramond , & VanTassel - Baska , 2010 ; Runco , 2007 ; Weisberg , 2006 ) . In our recent work , we have argued that this debate deserves a new look ( Nusbaum & Silvia , 2011 ; Silvia & Beaty , 2012 ) . Using the Cattell – Horn – Carroll model as a framework , we have proposed that creativity and intelligence are more closely linked than past research has found . Several method - ological factors have caused underestimates of the creativity – intelligence relationship . First , most studies have measured only a few individual tasks and then analyzed the observed scores . Assessing creativity and intelligence as latent variables yields higher effect sizes because task - specific error variance is modeled appropriately ( Kline , 2011 ; Silvia , 2008a ) . In Wallach and Kogan ' s ( 1965 ) classic study , for example , the observed correlation of r = . 09 increased to r = . 20 when the data were reanalyzed with latent variable models ( Silvia , 2008b ) . Second , and most relevant to the present research , tradi - tional methods of measuring divergent thinking have struggled with dissociating fluency ( the number of responses to the divergentthinkingtasks ) from creativequality ( theoriginalityor merit of those responses ) . The best known approaches to divergent thinking assessment use some form of uniqueness scoring : people receive a point for each response they gave that no one else in the sample gave ( Wallach & Kogan , 1965 ) or that doesn ' t appear on a list of common responses ( Torrance , 2008 ) . Since these methods were published , many researchers have criticized them for confounding fluency and creativity : people who give more responses are likely to have more unique responses ( Clark & Mirels , 1970 ; Dixon , 1979 ; Hocevar , 1979a , 1979b ; Hocevar & Michael , 1979 ; Michael & Wright , 1989 ; Plucker , Qian , & Wang , 2011 ; Silvia et al . , 2008 ; Speedie , Asher , & Treffinger , 1971 ) . In fact , the correlation between fluency and creativity is quite high in several gold - standard data sets , including r = . 89 in Wallach and Kogan ' s ( 1965 ) landmark study ( see Silvia , 2008b ) and r = . 88 in the most recent norms for the Torrance Tests of Creative Thinking ( Torrance , 2008 ) . As a result , many researchers use only fluency scores when assessing divergent thinking ( e . g . , Batey , Chamorro - Premuzic , & Furnham , 2009 ; Preckel , Holling , & Wiese , 2006 ; Preckel , Wermer , & Spinath , 2011 ) . 1 3 . Divergent thinking and Gr The confounding of fluency and creativity is interesting for several reasons . For one , it sheds new light on the modest relationships betweendivergentthinkingandintelligence ( Kim , 2005 ; Wallach & Kogan , 1965 ) . Divergent thinking tests are probably the most widely used tools for measuring creativity , and an extensive literature provides evidence for their validity ( Kaufman et al . , 2008 ; Ma , 2009 ; Plucker , 1999 ; Silvia et al . , 2008 ) . Nevertheless , in his review of the originality / creativity ( FO ) factor , Carroll ( 1993 ) noted substantial differences in test administration : researchers “ tend to give insufficient informa - tion as to whether subjects are made aware that they are being tested for originality or creativity , or as to whether subjects are instructed to try to give original or creative responses ” ( p . 429 ) . In fact , researchers commonly don ' t inform participants to be creative ( e . g . , Runco & Acar , 2010 ) . When such tasks are then scored for fluency , it seems hard to claim that the scores measure “ creative ability ” or “ creative potential ” instead of ideational fluency . Much of the evidence supporting the claim that creativity and intelligence are weakly related is thus founded on questionable measures of creativity . Furthermore , if divergent thinking scores have historically been confounded with fluency , then it isn ' t surprising that Carroll ' s ( 1993 ) analysis found that they formed a lower - order factor of Gr alongside factors such as word fluency , ideational fluency , andassociational fluency . Mostmodels ofthe Grdomain include a first - level factor of creativity ( Horn & Blankson , 2005 ; Kaufman , Kaufman , & Lichtenberger , 2011 ; McGrew , 2005 ) , and the most typical measures of creative ability are divergent thinking tasks ( Carroll , 1993 ; Runco , 2007 ) . It is thus possible that conventional methods of assessing divergent thinking exaggerate the relationship between Gr and creativity . As noted earlier , omitting instructions to “ be creative ” and scoring the tasks in ways that confound creativity and fluency yields tasks that resemble ideational fluency tasks . This raises a key question for a CHC approach to creativity : is creativity still strongly 1 The more common method is Wallach and Kogan ' s ( 1965 ) uniqueness scoring : people get a point for each response they gave that no one else gave or that falls under a cut - off ( e . g . , one point for a response that no more than 5 % of the sample gave ) . The confounding of creativity and ﬂ uency is a problem , but the most fatal problem with this method , in our view , is that estimates of creativity are doubly sample - dependent . First , each person ' s level of creativity depends on the other people in the sample . Second , as the sample size increases , creativity scores decline , so the task ' s “ dif ﬁ culty ” increases with the sample size . Both forms of sample dependency are obviously undesirable . 329 P . J . Silvia et al . / Intelligence 41 ( 2013 ) 328 – 340