Focus Take - Aways Overall Applicability Innovation Style Rating ( 10 is best ) Visit our website at www . getAbstract . com to learn about our summaries , personal subscriptions or corporate solutions . or call us at our U . S . ofﬁ ce ( 954 - 359 - 4070 ) or Switzerland ofﬁ ce ( + 41 - 41 - 367 - 5151 ) . getAbstract is an Internet - based knowledge rating service and publisher of book abstracts . getAbstract maintains complete editorial responsibility for all parts of this abstract . The respective copyrights of authors and publishers are acknowledged . All rights reserved . No part of this abstract may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means , electronic , photocopying , or otherwise , without prior written permission of getAbstract Ltd ( Switzerland ) . • The " Long Tail " is a statistical curve showing the edge that digital sellers with infinite goods for niche markets have over retailers with limited goods for mass markets . • Mass - selling goods create a high , thin spike on the sales graph ; niche goods fill a longer , lower bar – the long tail . • Niche products increasingly last longer and do better than short - lived popular hits . • The marketplace has operated like a high school " popularity contest " won by mega - hits , bestsellers and celebrities , but microproducts will change this model . • Virtual inventory and digital merchandise offer the longest market reach and the cheapest product storage . • " Capacity constraint " has already changed entertainment and information ( where anyone can be a producer ) ; and may also alter " mass production " consumer goods . • Healthy long - tail operations offer many products and help buyers fill their wishes . • Word - of - mouth consumer reviews and online buzz build long - tail sales . • To ride the long tail , give your customers flexibility in prices , service and delivery . • React to market trends . Forget the " one - size - fits - all " matrix . The niche has power . 10 9 10 10 The Long Tail Why the Future of Business Is Selling Less of More by Chris Anderson Hyperion © 2006 256 pages Leadership & Mgt . Strategy Sales & Marketing Finance Human Resources IT , Production & Logistics Career Development Small Business Economics & Politics Industries Regions Concepts & Trends ! hhiiss ssuummmmaarryy iiss rreessttrriicctteedd ttoo tthhee ppeerrssoonnaall uussee ooff DDeenniiss SStteerrnnbbeerrgg ((ddeenniiss..sstteerrnnbbeerrgg@@ggeettaabbssttrraacctt..ccoomm)) The Long Tail © Copyright 2006 get A bstract 2 of 5 Relevance What You Will Learn In this Abstract , you will learn : 1 ) What the “Long Tail” is and what it means to your business ; 2 ) How to recognize and use the difference between out - dated , hit - oriented business models and modern long - tail business realities ; 3 ) How to tailor your pricing , product line and marketing pitch to reach niche consumers ; and 4 ) Why your business needs online buzz . Recommendation Does the modern world of online markets make you feel like Rip Van Winkle , who awoke from a 20 - year nap to ﬁ nd a changed society ? Author Chris Anderson has your wake - up call . With hard facts , charts and numbers , plus futuristic insights , Anderson decodes the mysteries of online marketing , Internet - based commerce and other New Age economic realities . His calculations , public feedback and extensive research offer more than just statistics for the sake of proving his point : Online retailing has a long reach into niche markets . This gives its products longevity that stores with ﬁ nite shelf space can’t match , no matter how much steam they get from short - lived , blockbuster products . Anderson credibly explains the decline in box ofﬁ ce sales and the rise of niche companies such as Netﬂ ix and iTunes . Despite a few redundancies ( he believes in thorough explanations ) , keep on reading . You won’t mind ; the text is a pleasure , written with wit , style and expertise . getAbstract recommends it to Luddites , old school business operators , anyone in entertainment or retail , and New Age Internet - based marketers ( although you probably already know just how long this tail can be ) . Abstract Then and Now Consider this time capsule from the 1970s and 1980s . Mega - music hits from Michael Jackson and the Eagles dominated the music scene . Corporate hit machines cranked out a short list of top television shows , movies and performers . The message : Either you’re hot or you’re not . And in the hit - dominated world of the’70s and ’80s , the mega - hits were the gods of proﬁ ts . Not any more . Fast - forward to the Internet era . A broad band of cable , DVD , Web facilities , video games , iPods , personalized soundtracks and blogs has replaced the older , narrow band of network radio and television shows . Welcome to the New Order , where niche products have overrun the former gatekeepers of taste and megabytes are replacing mega - buildings . Heads and Tails The “Long Tail” – the extensive , online , sustained reach of smaller , low - volume specialized products – is now wagging the big dog of blockbuster hits in news , music , literature and ﬁ lm . It is invading and changing many retail markets . Internet - driven retailing technology has fundamentally altered the balance of marketing power . Mega - sized big box retailers are being threatened by the long , cyberspace tail of mini - markets and fragmented niches . The long tail consists of the “hidden majority , ” the vast assortment of books , ﬁ lms , recordings and other items that don’t become popular hits . Some of it is obscure garbage , but long - tail merchandise includes a lot of quality products that “one - size - ﬁ ts - all” gatekeepers bypass “The story of the Long Tail is really about the economics of abundance – what happens when the bottlenecks that stand between supply and demand in our culture start to disappear and everything becomes available to everyone . ” “A few things sell a lot and a lot of things sell a little . ” The Long Tail © Copyright 2006 get A bstract 3 of 5 as they balance expensive inventory and ﬁ nite space . This changes the 80 - 20 rule . Some items will continue to garner better sales than others , but “even if 20 % of the products account for 80 % of the revenue” great proﬁ ts can still be made selling the other 80 % – particularly “in long - tail markets , where the carrying costs of inventory are low . ” In baseball terms , Wal - Mart and other big retailers can carry only the home runs and the grand - slam products . But niche , long - term , online vendors , who make everything available , can proﬁ tably sell bunts , singles and walks . And , when they sell a long string of little hits and bunts , the long - tail proﬁ t score is right out of the ballpark . For example , the typical NetFlix consumer – who can order either popular or obscure ﬁ lms in abundance without leaving home – rents DVDs at a rate triple that of standard video / DVD rental shops . Today , 5 % of U . S . shopping occurs online . Amazon CEO Jeff Bezos predicts it will reach 15 % of all retail . For another demonstration of the power of the long tail , look at the literary shelf life of Touching the Void , British author and mountaineer Joe Simpson’s book about his dangerous , near - fatal mountain climbing adventures in Peru . Published in 1988 , it got favorable reviews but was quickly forgotten . Ten years later , its fortunes dramatically changed when a similar book – Into Thin Air , Jon Krakauer’s dramatic Mt . Everest saga – became a hot seller . When mom - and - pop reviewers compared the two books on Amazon . com , their favorable buzz made Touching the Void into a New York Times bestseller . The extended tail of online consumers’ specialized preferences powerfully revived a book the merchants of bestsellers had long forgotten . This underscores the forceful ability of Amazon and other online retailers to churn proﬁ ts out of niche goods . Blockbuster Hits’ Historic Ups and Downs Culture and consumption were local phenomena in the years prior to the Industrial Revolution . Fragmentation and distance created regional tastes , accents and ﬂ avors . But the century - by - century arrival of urbanization , the printing press , the phonograph and other innovations leading into the 1900s , sparked initial waves of mass culture and societal shifts . In the twentieth century , speciﬁ cally post - WWII , innovation in the broadcast world sparked a “golden age” of television and radio . The majority of Americans watched Walter Cronkite’s nightly news and followed top - rated shows such as Gunsmoke and I Dream of Genie . This golden period sparkled until the 1990s and the early years of the new century . The twenty - ﬁ rst century began well enough for the powers that ruled the traditional entertainment market . Album sales were up 100 % from 1990 through 2000 due to top hits from Britney Spears , the Backstreet Boys , * NSYNC and other popular performers . But when the dot - com bubble burst , bubble gum music popped , too . Record sales fell 2 . 5 % in 2001 and almost 7 % in 2002 . By the end of 2005 , the music industry lost another 7 % in sales . While general record sales dropped by 25 % , the revenues from hit records declined by almost half . The shift from mainstream spike to the extended long tail had begun . The arrival of Napster , home computer CD copying and “peer - to - peer” music trading halted the growth of the traditional music distribution industry . Established players lost more market share as the volume of available music grew . Similar trends emerged in other industries , such as newspapers , movies , network television and magazines . The market’s popularity - driven hits weakened . This shift transformed the market for entertainment and information ; one day , it may do the same for other consumer goods . That trend has already begun . “Popularity no longer has a monopoly on profitability . ” “The Web is the ultimate marketplace of ideas , governed by the laws of big numbers . ” “That’s the root calculus of the Long Tail . The lower the costs of selling , the more you can sell . ” “Successful Long Tail aggregators need to have both hits and niches . They need to span the full range of variety , from the broadest appeal to the narrowest , to be able to make the connections that can illuminate a path down the Long Tail that makes sense for everyone . ” The Long Tail © Copyright 2006 get A bstract 4 of 5 A History Lesson from Sears The long tail began well before eBay or Amazon popped up on your home computer . Ironically , the long tail is actually the offspring of the traditional retail industry . Non - Web based retail innovations such as credit cards , overnight delivery and modern inventory standards helped nurture the new order long before the Internet came home . Even industry giants such as Sears and Wal - Mart helped set the stage for the long - tail takeover . By dramatically changing how people shop , the two retail chains pioneered the path that online vendors eventually seized . Sears , for example , published its “wish book , ” a mail - order catalogue that cut the local ties between the store and its customers . Sears then created superstores , designing a template that Wal - Mart would use and polish . This model featured an extensive supply of merchandise , low prices and self - service . Extensive , but not inﬁ nite . The Triple Force The high school kid duplicating CDs at home is only one example of the dissolving difference between professional producers and “amateur artists . ” Three forces are melting that border : • “Democratization” of production tools – Due to PCs , inexpensive production equipment , digital photography and online selling , everyone can become a published author , talent scout or recording artist . The Internet has “lowered the barrier to market entry , ” as seen in the blog community’s many citizen publishers and reporters . • Reduced distribution costs – The Web makes it cheaper to deliver merchandise to readers , listeners and viewers . • Supply - demand pipeline – Customers’ product reviews , Google rankings and Web site recommendations let consumers tap into new products and services . These “ﬁ lters” make it easier for audiences to sample niche products . Online merchandising also has democratized distribution , as shown by “aggregators , ” online companies that collect and distribute products , digitized data ( such as music ) , services and advertising . Social sites like MySpace are aggregators , as is Wikipedia , an online , contributor - based encyclopedia . As a collector and distributor of information , Wikipedia draws from many so - called “amateurs” who often – but not always – show greater breadth , responsiveness and self - correcting accuracy than traditional knowledge and production channels . The Expanding Library The publishing industry also demonstrates the long tail’s power . Consider the math : About 200 , 000 books are printed annually in English . The standard library superstore will stock “around 100 , 000 titles , ” and many of those will not sell . A typical book sells only 500 copies in America , which means that roughly 98 % of published manuscripts remain noncommercial . But online booksellers , self - publishing companies and print - on - demand services have built a lucrative market for low - volume books . As music business expert Kevin Laws said , “The biggest money is in the smallest sales . ” Unconventional sellers ﬁ nd proﬁ ts in obscure titles . The “Nine Basic Rules of Long - Tail Success” 1 . “Move inventory way in…or way out” – The old mail - order businesses created a new path with huge , centrally located warehouses . In the modern era , the Internet sales sites of traditional “big box” stores ( Target , Wal - Mart , Best Buy ) let them centralize “The traditional line between producers and consumers has blurred . ” “The tools of creativity are now cheap and talent is more widely distributed than we know . ” “Increasingly , the winning strategy is to separate content into its component parts ( ‘microchunks’ ) , so that people can consume it the way they want , as well as remix it with other content to create something new . ” “Niches are different . One person’s noise is another’s signal . ” The Long Tail © Copyright 2006 get A bstract 5 of 5 their stock of merchandise . This tactic allows the big boxes to offer a greater variety of products online than they can display in their traditional stores . Online stores such as iTunes and Amazon have reduced their inventory costs to nothing through creative inventory techniques . Amazon , for example , has an extensive “virtual” or “distributed inventory ; ” 40 % of its products are stocked and shipped by third - party vendors . “Amazon gets closer and closer to breaking the tyranny of the shelf entirely . ” iTunes , a virtual jukebox , stores its musical stock in megabits . 2 . “Let the customers do the work” – Google , eBay and Craigslist rely heavily on their customers’ labor . Self - service is the key . Customers handle shipping , inventory and tracking . Forget about outsourcing ; this trend is “crowdsourcing . ” 3 . “One distribution method doesn’t ﬁ t all” – Some of your clients will enjoy shopping online ; others will prefer a store . Some like to conduct extensive online searches before shopping in a traditional mall . Remain ﬂ exible . Maintain a variety of “distribution channels” so you can cater to different segments of the market . 4 . “One product doesn’t ﬁ t all” – This is the era of specialization or “microchunking . ” Different consumers will request , utilize and evaluate your product from a variety of perspectives . Some will want standard CDs ; others will seek out distinctive cellular phone ringtones or short samples of music . Be prepared to produce and package your product for different niches . 5 . “One price doesn’t ﬁ t all” – Rubber - band pricing is the new rule . That’s the eBay model , wherein most products are priced through auctions . iTunes charges 99 cents for each recorded track , but the price drops if you buy an entire album . Likewise , Rhapsody – another online music vendor – peddles its tunes for 49 to 79 cents . This moveable pricing plan has helped it boost sales by 300 % . 6 . “Share information” – Customers value information that standard retail chains often guard tightly . Peer reviews , buying patterns and detailed product speciﬁ cations help consumers and build trust . 7 . “Think ‘and’ not ‘or’” – Learn to use the word “and . ” Due to low inventory costs , unlimited supply and inexpensive distribution networks , online retailers can abandon the either / or choices that limit traditional vendors and distributors . Retailers see that giving consumers a broad choice of goods yields higher proﬁ ts in the long tail . 8 . “Trust the market to do your job” – Limited shelf space and high operating costs forced traditional players to make difﬁ cult predictions about customer tastes , shopping patterns and trends . In the long tail , those choices are unnecessary . The market will ﬁ lter , select and ﬁ nd the right goods . The group mind is your friend . 9 . “Understand the power of free” – Many top online sellers offer free services and products , including e - mail accounts and subscriptions . Once consumers are lured in by a free introduction , many of them ultimately upgrade to a fee - based menu . Additionally , free samples of video games and music build a loyal customer base . In the future , as costs drop and inventories expand , anything could be possible in the virtual shopping world . Consumers will face one ultimate question : What do you want ? About The Author Chris Anderson is the editor of Wired magazine , which he has led to ﬁ ve National Magazine Award nominations . In 2005 , he was named Advertising Age’s editor of the year . He previously worked at The Economist , Nature and Science magazines . “For a generation of customers used to doing their buying research via search engine , a company’s brand is not what the company says it is , but what Google says it is . ” “The collective now controls the message . ” “The new tastemakers are us . ”