Volume 27 November 7 , 2016 3405 MBoC | ARTICLE Dual mechanisms regulate the recruitment of spindle assembly checkpoint proteins to the budding yeast kinetochore ABSTRACT Recruitment of spindle assembly checkpoint ( SAC ) proteins by an unattached ki - netochore leads to SAC activation . This recruitment is licensed by the Mps1 kinase , which phosphorylates the kinetochore protein Spc105 at one or more of its six MELT repeats . Spc105 then recruits the Bub3 - Bub1 and Mad1 - Mad2 complexes , which produce the inhibitory signal that arrests cell division . The strength of this signal depends , in part , on the number of Bub3 - Bub1 and Mad1 - Mad2 molecules that Spc105 recruits . Therefore regulation of this recruit - ment will influence SAC signaling . To understand this regulation , we established the physio - logical binding curves that describe the binding of Bub3 - Bub1 and Mad1 - Mad2 to the budding yeast kinetochore . We find that the binding of both follows the mass action law . Mps1 likely phosphorylates all six MELT repeats of Spc105 . However , two mechanisms prevent Spc105 from recruiting six Bub3 - Bub1 molecules : low Bub1 abundance and hindrance in the binding of more than one Bub3 - Bub1 molecule to the same Spc105 . Surprisingly , the kinetochore re - cruits two Mad1 - Mad2 heterotetramers for every Bub3 - Bub1 molecule . Finally , at least three MELT repeats per Spc105 are needed for accurate chromosome segregation . These data re - veal that kinetochore - intrinsic and - extrinsic mechanisms influence the physiological operation of SAC signaling , potentially to maximize chromosome segregation accuracy . INTRODUCTION Proteins involved in spindle assembly checkpoint ( SAC ) signaling recognize and bind to unattached kinetochores in a dividing cell . This allows the SAC proteins to interact with one another and generate the mitotic checkpoint complex to delay cell division ( Musacchio , 2015 ) . Duration of the delay generated in this man - ner depends on the number of SAC proteins recruited by the ki - netochore ( Collin et al . , 2013 ; Dick and Gerlich , 2013 ; Heinrich et al . , 2013 ) . In fact , to strengthen SAC signaling , unattached ki - netochores can expand their physical capacity and recruit larger quantities of SAC proteins ( Wynne and Funabiki , 2015 ) . There - fore , to understand how the eukaryotic cell regulates the strength of the SAC , we must first define the intrinsic capacity of the ki - netochore to bind SAC proteins , that is , its signaling capacity , and then identify any physiological factors that regulate the use of this capacity . The biochemical interactions that recruit SAC proteins to the kinetochore are well understood ( Figure 1A ) . An unattached ki - netochore permits the Mps1 kinase to phosphorylate the kineto - chore protein Spc105 / KNL - 1 to initiate the SAC signaling cascade ( London et al . , 2012 ; Aravamudhan et al . , 2015 ) . Phosphorylation of Spc105 occurs at one or more of the six sites in its phosphodomain , which are commonly referred to as the MELT repeats because of their Met - Glu - Leu - Thr consensus sequence . Each phosphorylated MELT repeat , which is referred to as MELpT here , can bind one molecule of the Bub3 - Bub1 complex ( Primorac et al . , 2013 ) . The kinetochore - bound Bub1 is also phosphorylated by Mps1 , which enables it to bind the heterotetrameric Mad1 - Mad2 complex ( Chen et al . , 1999 ; London and Biggins , 2014 ; Moyle et al . , 2014 ) . The ki - netochore - localized Mad1 - Mad2 then catalyzes a conformational transition in Mad2 and paves the way for the assembly of the mitotic checkpoint complex . Monitoring Editor Rong Li Johns Hopkins University Received : Jan 6 , 2016 Revised : May 2 , 2016 Accepted : May 3 , 2016 This article was published online ahead of print in MBoC in Press ( http : / / www . molbiolcell . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1091 / mbc . E16 - 01 - 0007 ) on May 11 , 2016 . The authors have no financial interests to declare . * Address correspondence to : Ajit P . Joglekar ( ajitj @ umich . edu ) . © 2016 Aravamudhan et al . This article is distributed by The American Society for Cell Biology under license from the author ( s ) . Two months after publication it is avail - able to the public under an Attribution – Noncommercial – Share Alike 3 . 0 Unported Creative Commons License ( http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by - nc - sa / 3 . 0 ) . “ASCB ® , ” “The American Society for Cell Biology ® , ” and “Molecular Biology of the Cell ® ” are registered trademarks of The American Society for Cell Biology . Abbreviations used : GFP , green fluorescent protein ; SAC , spindle assembly checkpoint . Pavithra Aravamudhan , Renjie Chen , Babhrubahan Roy , Janice Sim , and Ajit P . Joglekar * Cell and Developmental Biology , University of Michigan Medical School , Ann Arbor , MI 48109 http : / / www . molbiolcell . org / content / suppl / 2016 / 05 / 09 / mbc . E16 - 01 - 0007v1 . DC1 . html Supplemental Material can be found at : 3406 | P . Aravamudhan et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell FIGURE 1 : Steady - state binding of SAC proteins to the kinetochore scales inversely with the number of signaling kinetochores . ( A ) Schematic of the biochemical reactions that recruit SAC proteins to an unattached kinetochore and generate the mitotic checkpoint complex . Cdc20 and Mad3 / BubR1 are not shown . ( B ) Cartoon , one unattached sister kinetochore pair created using a galactose - repressible centromere as described previously ( Tanaka et al . , 2010 ) . In these cells , the 15 bioriented kinetochores appear as two puncta ∼ 800 nm apart , whereas the unattached kinetochore pair appears as a diffraction - limited focus situated away from the bioriented kinetochores ( asterisk in the micrograph ; scale bar , ∼ 0 . 53 μm ) . This unattached sister kinetochore pair recruits Bub1 and Mad1 . Middle , expected numbers of kinetochores : 15 in the puncta corresponding to the bioriented kinetochores and 2 in the focus corresponding to the unattached sister kinetochore pair , confirmed by quantifying the fluorescence of mCherry - labeled Ndc80 complex subunits . Right , quantification of Bub1 and Mad1 molecules recruited per kinetochore ( mean ± 95 % confidence interval ) . ( C ) Cartoon , spindle depolymerization by the microtubule poison nocodazole creates two or more kinetochore clusters in mitotic yeast cells . Kinetochores in larger cluster , which is situated proximal to the spindle pole , do not recruit any SAC proteins . Kinetochores in the smaller cluster recruit SAC proteins ( micrographs ) . ( D ) Forced localization of Mps1 to the kinetochore using rapamycin - induced dimerization induces SAC signaling from all 32 kinetochores ( Aravamudhan et al . , 2015 ) . Scale bar , ∼ 0 . 96 μm ( C , D ) . ( E ) Number of Mad1 dimers and Bub1 molecules recruited as a function of the number of signaling kinetochores in the cell . Solid lines display model fit for a bimolecular reaction limited by the abundance of soluble proteins ( mean ± SD ) . ( F ) Scaling between the number of Bub1 molecules and the number of Mad1 dimers recruited by signaling kinetochores in each of the three foregoing experiments ( mean ± SEM ) . Volume 27 November 7 , 2016 Kinetochore - based SAC signaling | 3407 G1 - synchronized cells that transition to and then arrest in meta - phase . The inactivated centromere was reactivated after all other chromosomes established stable bipolar attachments ( see Materials and Methods ) . On reactivation , this centromere rapidly assembles kinetochore components and recruits SAC proteins , enabling the quantitation of SAC protein recruitment by a single pair of unat - tached kinetochores ( Krefman et al . , 2015 ) . To quantify the Bub1 and Mad1 molecules recruited , we labeled the respective proteins at their C - terminus with a variant of the green fluorescent protein , GFP ( S65T ; hereafter referred to as GFP ) . We verified that the fluorescent tag did not compromise protein function ( Supplemental Figure S1A ) . We found that when the cell contained exactly one unattached sister kinetochore pair , each ki - netochore bound 9 . 1 ± 3 . 4 Bub1 molecules on average , using only 33 % of its maximal capacity for binding Bub3 - Bub1 ( Figure 1B ; also see Materials and Methods for a detailed description of the meth - odology used to deduce protein numbers from the measured fluo - rescence signal ) . We expected that the number of Bub3 molecules recruited would be the same as that of Bub1 because Bub1 binds to the MELpT motifs as part of the Bub3 - Bub1 complex ( Supplemental Figure S1 , C and D ; London et al . , 2012 ) . Next we quantified the number of Mad1 - GFP recruited by the unattached sister kineto - chore pair . Because Mad1 is recruited by Bub1 , we expected that the number of Mad1 - Mad2 heterotetramers would also be similar to the number of Bub3 - Bub1 molecules ( London and Biggins , 2014 ) . However , each kinetochore bound 37 . 4 ± 8 Mad1 - GFP molecules , or , equivalently , 18 . 7 ± 5 . 7 Mad1 - Mad2 heterotetramers . Thus the number of Mad1 - Mad2 heterotetramers is twice the number of Bub3 - Bub1 molecules recruited by the kinetochores ( Figure 1B ) . Because the number of unattached kinetochores is close to its lowest possible value in the foregoing experiment , the availability of SAC proteins was not expected to limit their recruitment ( protein abundance values are tabulated in Supplemental Table S1 ) . How - ever , the foregoing data show that the two unattached kinetochores recruit a surprisingly low copy number of SAC proteins under a con - dition that should favor maximal recruitment . The low recruitment is likely sufficient to delay the cell cycle ( Spencer and Hieter , 1992 ; Kerscher et al . , 2003 ) . Note that we quantified Mad1 in a strain lack - ing the gene NUP60 , in which Mad1 cannot localize to the nuclear envelope ( Scott et al . , 2005 ; Yuen et al . , 2007 ) . Consequently , the availability of Mad1 increases , enabling the signaling kinetochores to recruit more Mad1 molecules than the number in wild - type cells ( Supplemental Figure S1E ) . Although this will likely influence the cell biological outcome of the strength of SAC signaling , it is unlikely to affect kinetochore - intrinsic regulation of Mad1 recruitment , which is the focus of this study . We next investigated whether and how the use of the signaling capacity of the kinetochore changes when a dividing cell contains more signaling kinetochores . We used two methods to generate well - defined numbers of signaling kinetochores . First , we treated yeast cells with nocodazole to depolymerize spindle microtubules ( see Materials and Methods ) . This treatment creates a cluster of 8 – 10 ± 2 unattached and SAC - active kinetochores identified as a fluorescent puncta situated distal to the collapsed spindle pole bod - ies ( Figure 1C ; quantification of kinetochore counts in Supplemental Figure S1C ; Gillett et al . , 2004 ) . To create even more SAC - active ki - netochores , we forced Mps1 - Frb to dimerize with Fkbp12 domains fused with a kinetochore subunit ( Aravamudhan et al . , 2015 ) . This method forces approximately one or two Mps1 molecules to local - ize to each kinetochore . As a result , all 32 kinetochores become SAC active even after they are stably attached to spindle microtu - bules ( Figure 1D ; also see Supplemental Figure S1F ) . These details indicate that the nominal signaling capacity of a kinetochore is determined by the number of MELT repeats per Spc105 and the number of Spc105 molecules per kinetochore . If these two numbers are known , then the nominal value of the maxi - mal signaling capacity can be calculated . However , it is reasonable to expect that this maximal signaling capacity may not be opera - tional in vivo because of a number of physiological factors : the phosphoregulation of Spc105 , cellular abundance of SAC proteins , variations in the affinity of MELT repeats for the Bub3 - Bub1 com - plex , and so on ( Primorac et al . , 2013 ; Krenn et al . , 2014 ; Zhang et al . , 2014 ; Overlack et al . , 2015 ; Vleugel et al . , 2015 ) . To under - stand whether and how these factors regulate SAC protein recruit - ment , it is necessary to quantify the recruitment of SAC proteins by unattached kinetochores under physiological conditions . However , very few quantitative data are available that define how physiologi - cal factors regulate the in vivo operation of kinetochore - based SAC signaling ( Howell et al . , 2004 ; Vleugel et al . , 2015 ) . To define quantitatively the physiological operation of the kinet - ochore - based SAC signaling reactions , we systematically studied the biochemistry underlying Bub3 - Bub1 and Mad1 - Mad2 recruit - ment by the kinetochore in the budding yeast Saccharomyces cere - visiae . Budding yeast offers unparalleled experimental advantages for this study . The cellular concentrations of the reactants—Spc105 , Bub3 , Bub1 , and Mad1—are all known ( Ghaemmaghami et al . , 2003 ; Kulak et al . , 2014 ; Wang et al . , 2015 ) . The steady - state copy numbers of the reaction products—the number of SAC proteins bound to the kinetochore—can be accurately measured using fluo - rescence microscopy ( Joglekar et al . , 2006 ; Aravamudhan et al . , 2013 ) . Finally , the measurements reported here will demonstrate that budding yeast kinetochores recruit SAC proteins via defined biochemical interactions ; they do not expand or form a corona con - taining SAC proteins like metazoan kinetochores ( Cooke et al . , 1997 ; Hoffman et al . , 2001 ; Wynne and Funabiki , 2015 ) . Therefore quantitation of SAC protein recruitment directly reveals the opera - tion of the underlying biochemical interactions . We exploited these advantages to identify novel mechanisms that strongly modulate the recruitment of SAC proteins by the kinetochore and thus poten - tially control the strength of SAC signaling . RESULTS The nominal value of the maximum SAC protein binding capacity of one yeast kinetochore can be easily calculated . The yeast kinetochore contains five Spc105 molecules ( Joglekar et al . , 2006 ; Aravamudhan et al . , 2013 ) , each Spc105 molecule contains six MELT repeats ( London et al . , 2012 ) , and each phosphorylated MELT repeat , that is , MELpT , can bind one Bub3 - Bub1 ( Primorac et al . , 2013 ) . Therefore the yeast kinetochore is equipped to bind 30 Bub3 - Bub1 molecules and at least an equal number of Mad1 - Mad2 heterotetramers . To study how this binding capacity is used in vivo , we quantified the recruitment of Bub1 and Mad1 in yeast cells containing exactly one pair of unattached sister kinetochores . To generate exactly one pair of unattached kinetochores , we conditionally inactivated and then reactivated the centromere on chromosome III using the method developed by the Tanaka lab ( Tanaka et al . , 2010 ) . Briefly , we inserted the strong galactose - inducible promoter pGal1 up - stream from the point centromere on chromosome III so that the activity of this centromere is controlled by pGal1 . In glucose - containing media , pGal1 is strongly repressed . This allows the downstream centromere to function normally . However , when in galactose - containing media , pGal1 is strongly induced , and the centromere is inactivated ( Hill and Bloom , 1987 ) . This carbon source – dependent inactivation of one centromere was exploited in 3408 | P . Aravamudhan et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell reached saturation ( Figure 1E ) . The average numbers of Bub1 and Mad1 molecules per kinetochore decreased correspondingly ( Supplemental Figure S2A ) . Of interest , the kinetochores continued to recruit twice as many Mad1 dimers as Bub1 molecules ( Figure 1E ) . This strict stoichiometry be - tween the two proteins suggests that the recruitment of the excess Mad1 dimers is not due to adventitious binding ; it results from a specific interaction ( Figure 1F ) . Either each Bub3 - Bub1 molecule binds two Mad1 - Mad2 heterotetramers or the kinetochore contains an additional , but Bub3 - Bub1 de - pendent , Mad1 - binding site ( Scott et al . , 2005 ) . These data further confirm that the yeast kinetochore uses a small fraction of its maxi - mal signaling capacity during mitosis . The rapid saturation of the cumulative number of Bub3 - Bub1 molecules recruited with in - creasing number of signaling kinetochores suggests that the abundance of SAC pro - teins , a kinetochore - extrinsic factor , plays a significant role in limiting their recruitment by the kinetochore . At the same time , the surprisingly modest recruitment of SAC pro - teins even when there is only one unat - tached chromosome in the cell indicates that factors intrinsic to the kinetochore also modulate recruitment . To identify and char - acterize these kinetochore - intrinsic and - ex - trinsic factors , we studied the operation of biochemical reactions that recruit Bub3 - Bub1 and Mad1 - Mad2 to unattached kinet - ochores individually . The phosphorylation of MELT repeats in Spc105 is the first step in the SAC signaling cascade ( Figure 1A ) . However , it is not possible to quantify the phosphoregulation of Spc105 using live - cell fluorescence microscopy . The binding of Bub3 - Bub1 to Spc105 , which comes next , can be directly quantified . Therefore we first established the physiological binding curve for the Bub3 - Bub1 - Spc105 interaction , treating Spc105 as the substrate . This quan - tification indirectly informs on the phos - phorylation state of Spc105 because Bub3 - Bub1 binds exclusively to MELpT in a 1 : 1 stoichiometry . To study the Bub3 - Bub1 - Spc105 interac - tion , we systematically reduced Spc105 copy number per kinetochore and then quantified how this affected Bub1 recruit - ment . To reduce Spc105 copy number per kinetochore , we first replaced SPC105 with SPC105 - GFP and then controlled its expres - sion with pGalL , a weak , galactose - inducible promoter ( Janke et al . , 2004 ) . In this strain , the steady - state concen - tration , and hence the copy number of Spc105 - GFP per kinetochore , depends on the concentration of galactose in the growth medium ( Figure 2A ) . We found that even after a significant reduction in Quantification of the number of Bub1 - GFP and Mad1 - GFP mole - cules recruited by the kinetochores under these conditions revealed that as the number of signaling kinetochores in a cell increased , the cumulative number of SAC proteins recruited by these kinetochores FIGURE 2 : Spc105 molecules within one kinetochore recruit Bub3 - Bub1 independently . ( A ) Top , representative micrographs of cells expressing different levels of Spc105 - GFP ( from the galactose - responsive pGalL promoter ; galactose concentration in the medium is noted at the top of each micrograph , scale bar , ∼ 0 . 96 μm ) . Bottom , change in the number of Spc105 molecules per kinetochore in metaphase with the concentration of galactose in growth medium ( mean ± SD ) . Solid line represents saturation binding fit to the data . ( B ) Top , representative micrographs display the Ndc80 - mCherry fluorescence from kinetochore clusters containing different amounts of Spc105 - GFP ( scale bar , ∼ 0 . 96 μm ) . Scatter plot , each black circle represents the binned average number of Ndc80 - mCherry molecules plotted against the average number of Spc105 - GFP molecules per kinetochore in metaphase . Solid line represents linear regression of the data . ( C ) Change in Bub1 recruitment due to reduced numbers of Spc105 molecules per kinetochore . Gray circles represent the number of Bub1 molecules recruited by the cluster of unattached kinetochores containing the indicated number of Spc105 molecules in nocodazole - treated cells . Pale green squares represent averages calculated from binned data ( mean ± SD ) . Black squares indicate change in the number of Bub1 molecules recruited when the number of signaling kinetochores is changed in wild - type cells ( from Figure 1E ) . The y - axis on the right - hand side displays the concentration of the kinetochore - bound Bub1 molecules ( nM ) assuming that the yeast nucleus is 2 μm in diameter . Solid curve represents the model fit to the entire data set as a bimolecular reaction with the ligand depletion model ( B max is the maximal binding and K D is the nanomolar dissociation constant predicted by the fit ) . ( D ) Schematic showing that the cumulative number of Spc105 molecules that participate in SAC signaling , and not their spatial distribution , determines the steady - state number of Bub3 - Bub1 molecules recruited . Volume 27 November 7 , 2016 Kinetochore - based SAC signaling | 3409 We next assessed the steady - state phosphoregulation of Spc105 by Mps1 and the PP1 phosphatase Glc7 . The number of MELpT in an unattached kinetochore is determined by the balance of the op - posing activities of Mps1 kinase , which phosphorylates MELT re - peats to enable Bub3 - Bub1 recruitment , and Glc7 phosphatase , which dephosphorylates MELpT to suppress Bub3 - Bub1 recruit - ment ( Pinsky et al . , 2009 ; London et al . , 2012 ; Zhang et al . , 2014 ) . Therefore we reasoned that Glc7 inhibition should enhance Bub3 - Bub1 recruitment up to the limit established by the Spc105 - Bub3 - Bub1 binding curve ( Figure 2C ) . To test this , we inhibited Glc7 phos - phatase activity using calyculin A , a cell - permeable inhibitor of PP1 phosphatases ( Hoon et al . , 2008 ) . To assess the potency of calyculin A , we assayed the phosphorylation of the Snf1 kinase , a well - charac - terized target of Glc7 . Glc7 maintains Snf1 predominantly in the de - phosphorylated state . Therefore the inhibition of Glc7 by calyculin A increases the abundance of phosphorylated Snf1 ( Orlova et al . , 2008 ) . Using a phosphospecific antibody against Snf1 , we con - firmed that calyculin A treatment significantly reduced the cellular activity of Glc7 ( Supplemental Figure S2E ) . In spite of the reduction in Glc7 activity , Bub1 recruitment by unattached kinetochores did not increase ( Figure 3A ) . Therefore Glc7 likely has little effect on the steady - state number of MELpT in the unattached yeast kinetochore , even though its abundance exceeds that of Mps1 by approximately two orders of magnitude ( Supplemental Figure S2F and Supple - mental Table S1 ) . The data so far show that each Spc105 recruits at most two Bub3 - Bub1 complexes despite possessing the capacity to recruit six ( Supplemental Figure S2C ) . Furthermore , this recruitment is not suppressed by Glc7 ( Figure 3A ) . Following published observations , we reasoned that one or more of the following factors might modu - late Bub3 - Bub1 recruitment : 1 ) the cellular abundance of Bub3 - Bub1 is low , 2 ) Mps1 phosphorylates only two or three of the six MELT repeats on average , 3 ) Spc105 is fully phosphorylated , but some of the MELpT are ineffective in recruiting Bub3 - Bub1 ( Primorac et al . , 2013 ; Vleugel et al . , 2013 ) , and 4 ) steric hindrance disfavors the binding of more than two Bub3 - Bub1 complexes to the same Spc105 molecule . We first assessed the role of the cellular abundance of the Bub3 - Bub1 complex in limiting Bub3 - Bub1 recruitment . The intracellular concentration of this complex is determined by the concentrations of Bub3 and Bub1 and the dissociation constant of the Bub3 - Bub1 complex ( Larsen et al . , 2007 ) . Because the abundance of Bub1 is much lower than that of Bub3 ( Supplemental Table S1 ) , we reasoned that Bub1 overexpression should increase Bub3 - Bub1 concentra - tion . We used two different galactose - inducible promoters , pGalL and pGal1 , to achieve different degrees of Bub1 - GFP overexpres - sion ( Figure 3B ) . We grew these cells in predetermined galactose concentrations for ∼ 20 h , treated them with nocodazole to create unattached kinetochores , and then quantified Bub1 - GFP recruited by the unattached kinetochores . We found that moderate overex - pression of Bub1 - GFP significantly increased its recruitment : on av - erage , each Spc105 recruited ∼ 2 Bub1 - GFP molecules ( Figure 3C ) . When Bub1 - GFP was strongly overexpressed , > > 25 - fold higher than the endogenous concentration ( Figure 3B , bottom ) , each Spc105 recruited 5 . 6 ± 0 . 2 Bub1 - GFP molecules on average ( 28 ± 0 . 8 Bub1 - GFP molecules per kinetochore ; Figure 3C ) . Thus , when Bub1 is highly abundant in the cell , nearly every MELT repeat in each Spc105 molecule binds one Bub3 - Bub1 complex . It is possible that experimental artifacts such as the weak dimer - ization of GFP contributed to increased kinetochore recruitment of Bub1 - GFP upon its overexpression . To test this , we examined whether the observed localization of Bub1 required the MELpT Spc105 copy number , kinetochore biorientation appeared to be un - affected ( Supplemental Figure S2B ) . Reduced Spc105 copy number may decrease the recruitment of Mps1 to the kinetochore by affect - ing the Mps1 - recruitment site in the kinetochore : the Ndc80 com - plex ( Kemmler et al . , 2009 ; Aravamudhan et al . , 2015 ; Hiruma et al . , 2015 ; Ji et al . , 2015 ) . However , we found that even a fourfold reduc - tion in the Spc105 copy number did not significantly reduce the number of Ndc80 complexes per kinetochore ( Figure 2B ) . Further - more , kinetochore - bound Mps1 is substoichiometric to Ndc80 in budding yeast ( Aravamudhan et al . , 2015 ) . Therefore we assumed that the activity of Mps1 kinase in SAC signaling was not significantly affected in the following experiment . To study the effect of lowered copy number of Spc105 on Bub1 recruitment , we grew yeast cells expressing Spc105 - GFP from pGalL in medium containing predefined galactose concentration for ∼ 20 h and then treated them with nocodazole . We used green fluorescent protein ( GFP ) fluorescence to calculate the number of Spc105 mol - ecules that recruited Bub1 in each cell and used mCherry fluores - cence to deduce the corresponding number of Bub1 - mCherry mol - ecules . These measurements revealed that the cumulative number of Bub1 molecules recruited by unattached kinetochores decreased proportionately with the decrease in the cumulative number of Spc105 molecules within those kinetochores ( Figure 2C ) . The num - ber of Bub1 molecules per Spc105 increased modestly ( Supplemen - tal Figure S2C ) , likely because of an increase in the concentration of Bub3 - Bub1 relative to that of Spc105 . Mad1 recruitment was not significantly reduced , probably because of the combined effect of the relatively modest reduction in the total number of kinetochore - bound Bub1 and the 2 : 1 Mad1 - dimer : Bub1 stoichiometry ( Supple - mental Figure S2D ) . The proportionate decrease in the number of Bub1 molecules with the decrease in the number of Spc105 mole - cules is noteworthy . This trend suggests that the clustering of Spc105 molecules in the kinetochore , which could lead to cooperative bind - ing , does not detectably enhance the steady - state recruitment of Bub1 and Mad1 . It is informative to compare the number of Bub1 molecules per Spc105 measured in this experiment with the same number measured in the experiment in Figure 1E , in which the num - ber of Spc105 molecules per kinetochore was unchanged but the number of signaling kinetochores was varied . This comparison re - veals that Bub1 recruitment depends on the total number of Spc105 molecules involved in signaling but not on their distribution . Whether five Spc105 molecules are located in one kinetochore or distributed in three different kinetochores , they recruit the same total number of Bub3 - Bub1 molecules ( Figure 2D ) . In other words , Spc105 molecules in each kinetochore appear to recruit Bub3 - Bub1 independently . The independent recruitment of the Bub3 - Bub1 complex by the five Spc105 molecules within each kinetochore suggests that the Bub3 - Bub1 - Spc105 interaction can be modeled as a bimolecular reaction that follows the mass action law and that its operation is limited by intracellular concentration of the Bub3 - Bub1 complex ( Figures 1E and 2C ) . To fit these values with the foregoing model , we converted protein copy numbers into concentrations by assum - ing that the yeast nucleus is a sphere of 2 μm diameter ( see the Fitting equilibrium binding models section in Materials and Methods ) . This exercise yielded a satisfactory fit and established the physiological binding curve for the Bub3 - Bub1 - Spc105 interac - tion . This curve estimates the apparent dissociation constant for the Bub3 - Bub1 - Spc105 complex and the maximal steady - state concentration of this complex that can form at the physiological concentration of Bub3 - Bub1 . As discussed later , both parameters are essential for predicting the effects of experimental perturba - tions on Bub3 - Bub1 recruitment . 3410 | P . Aravamudhan et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell sites . We overexpressed Bub1 - GFP in a strain that expresses Spc105 - 5A ( 172T ) , an allele of Spc105 in which five of the six MELT motifs are nonphosphorylatable and hence incapable of binding Bub3 - Bub1 . Despite significant Bub1 overexpression , each Spc105 - 5A molecule recruited only one Bub1 molecule ( Figure 3D ) . Thus the ob - served Bub1 - GFP recruitment is mediated by MELT repeats . Any contribution from GFP dimerization is undetectable . This is consistent with the extremely low affinity of GFP dimers ( dissociation constant , ∼ 110 μM ; Zacharias et al . , 2002 ) , which is two to three orders of magnitude smaller than the affinity of the MELpT for Bub3 - Bub1 ( disso - ciation constant , ∼ 0 . 2 – 1 μM ; Primorac et al . , 2013 ) . We also examined whether the kineto - chore contains a Bub1 - binding site other than the MELT repeat . Structure of the ter - nary complex consisting of the Bub3 - bind - ing domain of Bub1 , Bub3 , and a peptide containing one phosphorylated MELT mo - tif indicates that Bub1 depends on Bub3 for binding to MELpT but also enhances the affinity of the Bub3 - MELpT interaction ( Primorac et al . , 2013 ) . Therefore , if MELpT is the only binding site mediating the ob - served recruitment , then any increase in Bub1 binding should be accompanied by a corresponding increase in Bub3 recruit - ment . Consistent with this prediction , the number of kinetochore - bound Bub3 FIGURE 3 : The abundance of Bub1 limits the steady - state recruitment of Bub3 - Bub1 and Mad1 - Mad2 to the yeast kinetochore . ( A ) Bub1 recruitment by unattached kinetochores in nocodazole - treated cells in the absence or presence of the PP1 phosphatase inhibitor calyculin A ( Caly ) . ( B ) Estimation of the number of Bub1 molecules per cell using quantitative immunoblotting . Top , immunoblot of Bub1 - GFP expressed from indicated promoters using monoclonal anti - GFP antibodies ( cells grown in medium containing 1 . 5 % galactose ) . * Unknown protein recognized by the anti - GFP antibody that comigrates with Bub1 - GFP . To quantify the Bub1 - GFP band intensity , we subtracted the intensity of this nonspecific band from that of the Bub1 - GFP band . The abundance of Ndc80 - GFP was similarly quantified using a strain that expressed Ndc80 - GFP from the endogenous NDC80 promoter . Bottom : To calculate the average number of molecules per cell , we assumed that there are 1160 molecules of Ndc80 per cell as reported by Ghaemmaghami et al . ( 2003 ) . The ratio of Bub1 - GFP to Ndc80 - GFP band intensities was multiplied by this number to obtain the average number of Bub1 molecules per cell . Black circles represent the numbers deduced from each experimental repeat . The horizontal lines indicate the average value . ( C ) The average number of Bub1 - GFP molecules per unattached kinetochore as a function of the degree of Bub1 - GFP overexpression in nocodazole - treated cells ( mean ± 95 % confidence intervals ) . Data from experiments involving the weaker pGalL promoter were fitted with a one - site specific binding model . The dissociation constant obtained from this fit was then used to constrain the fit for the data obtained with the pGAL1 promoter ( also see Supplemental Figure S3A ) . ( D ) Recruitment of Bub1 by the unattached kinetochores requires phosphorylatable MELT repeats . Scatter plot displays the average number of Bub1 - GFP molecules per Spc105 molecule in cells treated with nocodazole ( mean ± 95 % confidence intervals ) when Bub1 - GFP is overexpressed . The allele of Spc105 is indicated at the bottom . ( E ) The cumulative number of Bub3 - mCherry molecules recruited by the cluster of unattached kinetochores in nocodazole - treated cells is tightly correlated with the number of Bub1 - GFP molecules recruited by the same cluster ( blue boxes indicate means calculated from binned data ; error bars represent SD ) . Blue line displays linear regression constrained to pass through the origin . Gray lines indicate the Bub3 and Bub1 numbers measured in nocodazole - treated wild - type cells . ( F ) Change in the recruitment of Mad1 - mCherry by unattached kinetochore clusters as a function of the number of Bub1 - GFP molecules recruited by the respective clusters in nocodazole - treated cells that also overexpress Bub1 - GFP ( green circles indicate means calculated from pooled data ; error bars represent SD ) . The curve represents one - site saturation binding fit to the data . Gray lines demarcate the average Mad1 and Bub1 numbers measured in nocodazole - treated wild - type cells . Volume 27 November 7 , 2016 Kinetochore - based SAC signaling | 3411 2 : 1 between Mad1 dimers and Bub1 molecules in both cases ( Figure 4B ) . The recruitment of approximately one Bub1 by each Spc105 - 5A molecule is surprisingly large compared with the wild - type Spc105 containing six MELT repeats . This discrepancy is best understood by considering Bub1 recruitment by the Spc105 - 5A alleles in the con - text of the physiological binding curve between Spc105 and Bub3 - Bub1 . Because the Spc105 - 5A allele contains only one MELT motif , it is informative to first convert the x - axis of the binding curve from the concentration of Spc105 to that of MELpT repeats . Noting that 1 ) Bub3 - Bub1 recruitment by Spc105 is additive ( Figure 2C ) , 2 ) ev - ery MELT repeat is phosphorylated ( Figure 3 , A – D , and Supplemen - tal Figure S3A ) , and 3 ) every MELT repeat can bind one Bub3 - Bub1 complex ( Figures 3C and 4A ) , we see that the concentration of Spc105 can be converted into that of MELpT ( pale green squares in Figure 4C ) . This curve predicts the number of Bub3 - Bub1 molecules that a given number of MELpT should recruit under physiological conditions . When the numbers of Bub3 - Bub1 molecules recruited by the two spc105 - 5A alleles are graphed on the same plot ( red squares in Figure 4C ) , it becomes clear that they are significantly higher than expected . To understand quantitatively the implications of this finding , we examined the dissociation constant and maximal recruitment pre - dicted by the MELpT - Bub3 - Bub1 binding curve . The bimolecular interaction with ligand depletion model fitted to these data predicts an average dissociation constant K D ≈ 70 nM for the MELpT - Bub3 - Bub1 complex ( Figure 4C , pale green line ) . This value is approxi - mately threefold to fourfold lower than the value measured in vitro , which was obtained from the binding of a partial fragment of Bub1 in complex with Bub3 to a peptide containing a phosphorylated MELT motif ( Primorac et al . , 2013 ) . The fit also predicts the maximal recruitment of Bub3 - Bub1 under physiological conditions , B max ≈ 29 nM . This value must be less than or equal to the endogenous Bub3 - Bub1 concentration . Available data ( Ghaemmaghami et al . , 2003 ; Larsen et al . , 2007 ) and our measurement of the number of Bub1 molecules in the nucleus validate this expectation ( Supple - mental Figure S3C ) . In contrast to the dissociation constant de - duced from Bub1 recruitment by the wild - type Spc105 , data for Bub1 recruitment by the two Spc105 - 5A alleles ( red squares in Figure 4C ) suggest a significantly lower dissociation constant : ∼ 1 nM . Thus the two binding curves predict distinctly different inter - action affinities even though they pertain to the same biochemical . To understand how the physiological recruitment of Bub3 - Bub1 transitions from one binding affinity to the other , we created an allele of Spc105—Spc105 - 4A ( 172T , 313T ) —that contains two phosphory - latable MELT motifs . The two binding affinities discussed earlier make distinct predictions regarding how Bub3 - Bub1 recruitment should increase as a function of the number of MELpT . If the MELpT repeats in Spc105 - 4A behave like the MELpT in Spc105 - 5A , then there will be ∼ 76 % increase in the number of Bub3 - Bub1 molecules recruited by unattached kinetochores in nocodazole - treated cells ( gray open circle in Figure 4C ) . On the other hand , if Spc105 - 4A behaves like the wild - type Spc105 , then there will not be a signifi - cant increase in Bub3 - Bub1 recruitment under the same conditions ( pale green open circle in Figure 4C ) . To test this , we quantified Bub1 recruitment by unattached kinetochore clusters by subjecting Spc105 - 4A – expressing cells to nocodazole ( Figure 4D ) . Despite con - taining two MELT repeats , spc105 - 4A ( 172T , 313T ) recruited the same number of Bub1 molecules in nocodazole - treated cells as spc105 - 5A ( 172T ) ( or ∼ 0 . 8 ± 0 . 4 Bub1 per Spc105 ) . Thus spc105 - 4A ( 172T , 313T ) behaves like the wild - type protein rather than the spc105 - 5A alleles . These observations may be explained by invoking molecules maintained a 0 . 8 : 1 stoichiometry with kinetochore - bound Bub1 in cells that overexpressed Bub1 ( Figure 3E ) . This ex - periment demonstrates that Bub1 overexpression is sufficient to increase the steady - state binding of the Bub3 - Bub1 complex to unattached yeast kinetochores . Furthermore , Spc105 molecules in unattached yeast kinetochores are capable of recruiting up to six Bub3 - Bub1 molecules , which shows that Spc105 is maximally phosphorylated under these conditions . Furthermore , these ex - periments show that each of the six MELT repeats in Spc105 is capable of binding one Bub3 - Bub1 complex . We used the enhanced recruitment of Bub3 - Bub1 upon Bub1 overexpression to further confirm that Glc7 does not suppress Bub3 - Bub1 recruitment by unattached kinetochores . We reasoned that the increased abundance of the Bub3 - Bub1 under Bub1 over - expression conditions would more effectively reveal even a small increase in the number of MELpT motifs due to Glc7 inhibition . We inhibited Glc7 with calyculin A as before in cells that moderately overexpressed Bub1 and then quantified the recruitment of Bub1 - GFP by unattached kinetochores . Bub1 recruitment did not increase in the presence of calyculin A compared with the levels measured under Bub1 overexpression conditions without the inhibitor ( Sup - plemental Figure S3A ) . This result confirms that Glc7 activity does not influence the phosphorylation state of Spc105 in nocodazole - treated cells and further supports our finding that Spc105 is maxi - mally phosphorylated in unattached kinetochores . Thus Bub1 abun - dance in the cell is the primary factor that limits Bub3 - Bub1recruitment by Spc105 . We next examined whether the low - abundance Bub1 also sup - presses the recruitment of Mad1 - Mad2 by the kinetochores ( Sup - plemental Table S1 ) . If this is the case , then Bub1 overexpression should be sufficient to increase the recruitment of Mad1 to unat - tached kinetochores . Consistent with this expectation , we found that unattached kinetochores recruited significantly more Mad1 di - mers in cells that overexpressed Bub1 ( Figure 3F ) . At the highest Bub1 expression levels , the number of kinetochore - bound Mad1 dimers was threefold higher than for the wild type . The stoichiom - etry between Mad1 dimers and Bub1 decreased gradually from 2 : 1 at lower Bub1 concentrations to 1 : 1 at the highest concentration ( Supplemental Figure S3B ) . The saturation in Mad1 level may be due to either incomplete phosphorylation of Bub1 by Mps1 or lim - ited availability of soluble Mad1 . As noted before , the nup60 Δ strains used for these measurements increases the Mad1 recruit - ment relative to wild - type levels . Thus the availability of Mad1 also plays a significant role in dampening Mad1 - Mad2 recruitment by unattached kinetochores in wild - type cells . In conclusion , although the yeast kinetochore is equipped and primed to recruit a large number of SAC proteins , vegetatively growing yeast cells use only a small fraction of this signaling capacity by expressing Bub1 at low levels and limiting the availability of free Mad1 . Our studies so far investigated the recruitment of Bub3 - Bub1 mediated by Spc105 molecules that contain six MELT repeats within their phosphodomains ( defined here as residues 1 – 329 ) . It is possible that the spatial proximity of these repeats enhances Bub3 - Bub1 recruitment . To test this , we measured the recruitment of Bub3 - Bub1 by two Spc105 alleles containing only one phos - phorylatable MELT motif , Spc105 - 5A ( 172T ) or Spc105 - 5A ( 313T ) ( the phosphorylatable threonine is indicated by the number in pa - rentheses ; also see Figure 4A , bottom ) . We found that both al - leles recruited Bub1 highly effectively such that every Spc105 - 5A molecule recruited one Bub1 molecule ( 1 ± 0 . 6 and 0 . 9 ± 0 . 5 for every spc105 - 5A ( 172T ) or spc105 - 5A ( 313T ) ; respectively ; Figure 4A ) . Mad1 recruitment reflected the expected stoichiometry of 3412 | P . Aravamudhan et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell anchor Spc105 phosphodomains each con - taining one phosphorylatable MELT motif to the kinetochore in cells expressing Spc105 - 5A ( Figure 4D , top ) . In the absence of rapamycin , unattached kinetochores in nocodazole - treated cells recruited the ex - pected number of Bub1 molecules ( Figure 4D ) . However , when we anchored an addi - tional phosphodomain to these kineto - chores by adding rapamycin , they recruited ∼ 33 % more Bub1 molecules ( Figure 4D ) . Although the observed increase is less than the expected 76 % increase , it shows that kinetochores containing twice as many phosphodomains with one MELT motif re - cruit significantly more Bub3 - Bub1 than those containing the wild - type number of phosphodomains with two or more MELT repeats . Therefore we conclude that the presence of multiple MELT repeats in the same phosphodomain suppresses Bub3 - Bub1 recruitment at physiological concen - tration of Bub3 - Bub1 . Our observations bring into question why Spc105 contains six MELT repeats . The cumulative recruitment of Bub3 - Bub1and Mad1 - Mad2 by unattached kinetochores in nocodazole - treated cells is the same whether the phosphodomain of Spc105 contains one MELT motif or six . The number of signaling kinetochores is a key parameter here . Nocodazole treatment creates a rela - tively large number of unattached kineto - chores that all contribute to SAC signaling . Even if individual kinetochores are partially defective in signaling , the cumulative signal generated by a large number of such kinet - ochores might be sufficient to arrest the cell cycle . Can a small number of kineto - chores that are partially defective in signal - ing also arrest cell division ? To answer this question , we assessed the growth of strains expressing different alleles of Spc105 - 5A on media containing low doses of the microtu - bule - destabilizing drug benomyl ( Figure 5 ) . Because of the decreased stability of spin - dle microtubules , the kinetochores are ex - pected to require more time to form stable , bipolar attachments . Therefore a dividing cell is likely to contain a small number of un - attached kinetochores , and these kineto - chores must activate and sustain the SAC robustly to arrest cell divi - sion . Consistent with this expectation , the spc105 - 6A strain , which is SAC - null , cannot grow on media containing benomyl . We found that the three Spc105 - 5A alleles that we tested also did not grow in medium containing low doses of benomyl ( Figure 5A ) . This is sur - prising because when we generated unattached kinetochores in the same strains using nocodazole treatment , the kinetochores recruited the same cumulative number of SAC proteins as wild - type strains ( Figure 4 , A and B ) . We next sought to determine the minimum number of MELT repeats that confers benomyl resistance to vegeta - tively growing yeast cells . We found that the cited Spc105 - 4A allele steric hindrance : the binding of the first Bub3 - Bub1 molecule to the Spc105 phosphodomain may disfavor the binding of the second molecule , even though additional binding sites are available within the phosphodomain . To validate this behavior further , we sought to circumvent the apparent steric hindrance by creating kinetochores that contain twice as many phosphodomains each containing one MELT motif . Because each phosphodomain contains only one MELT motif , each should now be capable of recruiting one Bub3 - Bub1 complex . To create kinetochores with twice the number of Spc105 phosphodo - mains , we used rapamycin - induced dimerization to conditionally FIGURE 4 : Binding of more than one Bub3 - Bub1 molecule to an Spc105 phosphodomain is strongly disfavored . ( A ) Comparison of the number of Bub1 - GFP molecules recruited per kinetochore in nocodazole - treated cells expressing wild - type Spc105 with those expressing Spc105 - 5A ( 172T ) or Spc105 - 5A ( 313T ) ( mean ± 95 % confidence intervals ) . Differences in mean values are not statistically significant . The sequences of the MELT repeats are noted at the bottom for comparison . ( B ) Comparison of the recruitment of Mad1 - GFP under the same conditions as in A . Differences in mean values are not statistically significant . ( C ) Binding curves for MELpT and Bub3 - Bub1 suggested by wild - type Spc105 ( pale green ) and the Spc105 - 5A alleles ( dashed gray ) . Data from Figure 2C were replotted by converting the total number of Spc105 molecules in the cluster of unattached kinetochores into the number of MELpT repeats . The dashed curve displays the binding of Bub1 predicted by the affinity of spc105 - 5A molecules and the B max from Figure 2C . The open circles highlight the expected recruitment of Bub3 - Bub1 as a function of the number of MELT repeats predicted by the two models . ( D ) Top , the two experimental schemes used to double the total number of MELT repeats in the kinetochore . Left , each Spc105 molecule contains two phosphorylatable MELT repeats . Right , in a strain expressing Spc105 - 5A ( 172T ) , rapamycin - induced dimerization of GFP - Spc105 120 : 329 - 5A ( 313T ) - Frb with Ndc80 - 2xFkbp12 is used to create kinetochores that contain twice as many phosphodomains as a wild - type cell . Because each phosphodomain contains one MELT motif , the number of MELT motifs per kinetochore is also doubled . Bottom , comparison of Bub1 recruitment by the indicated Spc105 alleles ( mean ± 95 % confidence intervals ) . Volume 27 November 7 , 2016 Kinetochore - based SAC signaling | 3413 MELpT . Under physiological conditions , Spc105 recruits Bub3 - Bub1 modestly in spite of its capacity to bind six Bub3 - Bub1 molecules , for two reasons . First , the binding of multiple Bub3 - Bub1 molecules to the same Spc105 phosphodomain is disfavored . The mechanistic ba - sis of this effect is unknown . We speculate that the reduced binding results from conformational changes in the unstructured domain of Spc105 brought about by the binding of large protein complexes . This effect may serve a biological function by ensuring that the lim - ited supply of Bub3 - Bub1 molecules is equally distributed among all Spc105 molecules . Further studies are needed to elucidate the mechanistic basis of this apparent negative cooperativity and test whether it is functionally significant . In addition to this effect , the low abundance of the Bub3 - Bub1 complex also limits its own recruitment and that of Mad1 - Mad2 . This modulation is likely necessary to en - sure that the generation of the wait - anaphase signal does not scale linearly with the number of unattached kinetochores ( Collin et al . , 2013 ; Krefman et al . , 2015 ) . Given that one or only a few unattached kinetochores can delay cell division , concurrent signaling from all un - attached kinetochores at maximal capacity is unnecessary and may likely lead to the accumulation of excess inhibitory signal that unnec - essarily delays cell division even after attachments are made ( Doncic et al . , 2005 ; Sear and Howard , 2006 ) . Finally , we also show that the yeast kinetochore is capable of recruiting two Mad1 - Mad2 heterotet - ramers for every Bub3 - Bub1 . The molecular mechanism underlying this observation is unknown . However , doubling the Mad1 - Mad2 recruitment can be expected to double the steady - state signaling from the kinetochore and thus make the signal more robust . The difference in the effectiveness of SAC signaling in strains expressing Spc105 - 5A as measured by two different assays is nota - ble . In nocodazole - treated cells containing a relatively large number of unattached kinetochores that activate the SAC , Spc105 - 5A alleles containing only one phosphorylatable MELT motif appear to be ca - pable of recruiting SAC proteins and arresting cell division . How - ever , for cells to proliferate in medium containing low doses of benomyl , at least three MELT repeats per Spc105 are essential . Un - der this condition , the number of unattached kinetochores in the cell is likely to be small . With only a small number of SAC active ki - netochores , Spc105 molecules with three or more MELT repeats are necessary to recruit SAC proteins rapidly and in sufficient steady - state numbers that the SAC is robustly activated . Note that we ex - amined the benomyl sensitivity of only one allele each of Spc105 - 4A ( of the 15 possible alleles ) and Spc105 - 3A ( of the 20 possible al - leles ) . Because each MELT motif has a unique position , as well as Bub3 - Bub1 binding affinity , each Spc105 - 4A or Spc105 - 3A allele may differ in its ability to promote cell growth under this condition . It is also noteworthy that whereas a minimum of three MELT repeats are necessary for survival on benomyl - containing medium , the re - cruitment of two Bub3 - Bub1 molecules per Spc105 when the cell contains only two unattached kinetochores suggests that two MELT motifs should be sufficient ( Figure 1B ) . To address this potential dis - crepancy , it will be necessary to undertake a detailed analysis of the influence of individual characteristics of each of the six MELT motifs , as well as of the sequence of chromosome attachment to the spin - dle , in cells subjected to low doses of benomyl . Because the biochemical reactions of SAC signaling studied here are highly conserved , similar mechanisms likely operate in the hu - man kinetochore . It has been shown that human KNL - 1 containing only one MELT motif flanked by additional Bub1 binding sites ( known as the KI motifs ) arrest cell division when the cells are treated with nocodazole ( Krenn et al . , 2014 ) . However , our data indicate that it will be necessary to test whether this KNL - 1 allele arrests cell division when the dividing cell contains only one or a few unattached fared marginally better than the Spc105 - 5A alleles , but it did not grow as well as the wild - type strain . In contrast , an allele of Spc105 containing three phosphorylatable MELT repeats grew just as well as wild - type cells , showing that a minimum of three MELT repeats are likely to be essential for growth in medium containing low doses of benomyl ( Figure 5B ) . DISCUSSION The systematic analysis of the SAC protein recruitment by unat - tached kinetochores presented here defines the steady - state opera - tion of the respective biochemical reactions . It uncovers the kineto - chore - intrinsic and - extrinsic mechanisms that modulate protein recruitment in budding yeast . Note that there are additional key quantities that we did not measure : the kinetics of SAC protein re - cruitment and the steady - state rate of turnover of the kinetochore - bound molecules . Because of the low abundance of SAC proteins , accurate measurement of these parameters , especially protein turn - over , will require specialized analysis methods . We also did not quantify the physiological outcomes of the experimental perturba - tions : the mitotic delay induced and chromosome segregation ac - curacy . These outcomes depend on the operation of the kineto - chore - based reactions reported here , as well as on the concentrations and diffusivity of additional proteins—Mad2 , Mad3 / BubR1 , and Cdc20—that make up the mitotic checkpoint complex . Further ex - perimentation is necessary to obtain these data and complete the quantitative understanding of SAC signaling in budding yeast . Nonetheless , our work provides novel insights into the regulation of the kinetochore - based reactions of the SAC . Our data define the biochemical properties of key kinetochore - based signaling reactions . They show that Mps1 likely phosphory - lates Spc105 completely in unattached yeast kinetochores and primes it to recruit the maximum number of Bub3 - Bub1 molecules . We also find that each Spc105 is capable of binding six Bub3 - Bub1 molecules . This is in contrast to the human KNL - 1 , in which a large fraction of MELT repeats appear to be degenerate because of their very weak affinity for Bub3 - Bub1 ( Vleugel et al . , 2015 ) . We find that Glc7 does not appreciably affect Bub3 - Bub1 recruitment in unat - tached kinetochores . However , it is also possible that Bub3 - Bub1 binding to the MELpT itself hinders Glc7 from dephosphorylating FIGURE 5 : Benomyl sensitivity of cells expressing Spc105 alleles containing reduced numbers of MELT repeats . ( A ) Benomyl sensitivity of strains expressing three different Spc105 alleles , each containing only one phosphorylatable MELT motif . ( B ) Spc105 alleles containing two MELT repeats show a marginal improvement in benomyl resistance , whereas the Spc105 allele containing three MELT repeats imparts a wild - type level of benomyl resistance . 3414 | P . Aravamudhan et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell chores was performed manually using ImageJ . In this case , the inte - grated intensity of a 6 × 6 nuclear region adjacent to the kineto - chore cluster was used in background subtraction . Deduction of the number of protein molecules from fluorescence intensity measurements Copy number of Spc105 per kinetochore . In metaphase , each budding yeast kinetochore contains an invariable copy number of molecules of core kinetochore subunits : approximately eight copies of Ndc80 and Spc25 molecules and five molecules of Spc105 - GFP ( Joglekar et al . , 2006 ; Aravamudhan et al . , 2015 ) . However , we discovered that the fluorescent protein tag may reduce the number of Spc105 - GFP molecules per kinetochore . The kinetochore incorporates five copies of Spc105 when GFP is at or proximal to Spc105 C - terminus and eight copies of Spc105 when GFP is at or proximal to Spc105 N - terminus ( Supplemental Figure S1B ) . The maximal number is the same as the number of Ndc80 complex molecules ( Aravamudhan et al . , 2013 ) . However , to express GFP - Spc105 , the fusion gene was integrated at an ectopic locus , which may result in protein overexpression . Therefore , in this study , we assume that the yeast kinetochore contains five Spc105 molecules . Note that even if this number turns out to be higher , it will only affect the stoichiometry between Spc105 and SAC proteins . The absolute number of SAC proteins will remain unchanged . Calculation of the brightness of GFP and mCherry under the imaging conditions . To deduce the number of SAC proteins from the measured fluorescence signal , we first calculated the brightness of GFP and mCherry molecules . The brightness values were obtained from the known number of Ndc80 complex molecules in the yeast kinetochore and the measured fluorescence signal of metaphase kinetochore clusters in a strain expressing Ndc80 - GFP and Spc25 - mCherry ( AJY939 ) . AJY939 was grown under same imaging conditions as the experimental strain , and the calibration data were acquired throughout the duration of this study . This calibration accounted for changes in the microscope setup over time . Rationale behind the use of GFP and mCherry tags as reporters of protein copy number . Intensities of GFP - tagged SAC proteins recruited by the kinetochore were reproducible between multiple strains with different genotypes ( e . g . , Figure 4 , A and B ) . Thus the expression levels of SAC proteins are not strain specific , and GFP signal intensity is a robust reporter of protein numbers . Therefore , whenever possible , we used the GFP tag for quantification of SAC proteins . The use of mCherry as a reporter of protein numbers can be problematic because the maturation efficiency of mCherry varies significantly from strain to strain and produces variable mCherry fluorescence , even though the copy number of the protein tagged with mCherry itself is not expected to change ( Joglekar et al . , 2013 ) . Therefore we mostly used mCherry to either visualize a cellular structure or estimate the number of kinetochores by tagging a kinetochore subunit with mCherry . In the latter case , the known number of kinetochores in the metaphase cluster enables us to obtain a strain - specific calibration for the mCherry signal corresponding to a single kinetochore . This calibration was used to deduce the number of unattached kinetochores in nocodazole - treated cells ( Supplemental Figure S1C ) . In a subset of the experiments , we examined how the number of an mCherry - tagged SAC protein recruited by a cluster of unattached kinetochores varies as a function of another GFP - tagged SAC protein recruited by the same cluster in nocodazole - treated cells ( Figure 3 , E and F ) . In these cases , we reasoned that the number of kinetochores ( Vleugel et al . , 2013 ) . Aberrant expression of SAC genes is very common in cancer cells ( Kops et al . , 2005 ) . Our data suggest that underexpression may reduce the effectiveness of SAC signaling specifically in situations in which only one or a few unat - tached kinetochores are required to stall cell division . A systematic study of the regulation of SAC protein recruitment by the human ki - netochore will illuminate such mechanistic connections between SAC protein concentrations and high chromosomal instability com - monly found in cancer cells . MATERIALS AND METHODS Plasmid and strain construction Strains and plasmids used in this study are listed in Supplemental Tables S2 and S3 , respectively . Plasmids encoding mutations in Spc105 phosphodomain ( pAJ335 , pAJ407 , pAJ554 ) were con - structed from pSB1878 through quick - change mutagenesis ( London et al . , 2012 ) . pAJ548 containing the anchorable minimal phosphodomain of Spc105 was constructed from pAJ349 using quick change mutagenesis ( Aravamudhan et al . , 2015 ) . GFP ( S65T ) and mCherry tagged to proteins were used to localize kineto - chores and quantify either the number of kinetochores or the copy numbers of SAC proteins . The tags were introduced at the endog - enous locus through homologous recombination of PCR - amplified fragments ( Bahler et al . , 1998 ) . A seven – amino acid linker ( sequence RIPGLIN ) separates the fluorescent protein from the C - terminus of the tagged protein . To drive gene expression using a galactose promoter , either the pGal1 or the pGalL promoter was inserted upstream from the start codon of the open reading frame of the selected gene via homologous recombination ( Janke et al . , 2004 ) . Rapamycin - induced dimerization of Fkbp12 and Frb was used to conditionally localize Mps1 - Frb at the C - terminus of either Ndc80 - 2xFkbp21 or Mtw1 - 2xFkbp12 as described previously ( Haruki et al . , 2008 ; Aravamudhan et al . , 2015 ) . Strains expressing Spc105 alleles were constructed by plasmid shuffling . Briefly , the wild - type SPC105 was deleted in a strain sup - plemented with the wild - type SPC105 gene expressed from a cen - tromeric plasmid ( yCP50 ) containing the auxotrophic marker URA3 . Plasmids encoding Spc105 alleles ( pAJ335 : spc105 - 5A ( 172T ) or pAJ407 : spc105 - 5A ( 313T ) ) were linearized with Bst EII and inte - grated at the Leu - 2 locus . Strains encoding only the Spc105 mutant alleles were generated by counterselecting for yCP50 on 5 - FOA . All strains were grown at 32°C in the yeast extract and peptone ( YP ) supplemented with 2 % glucose ( YPD ) or galactose and raffi - nose in different ratios ( adding up to 2 % ) or synthetic medium sup - plemented with essential amino acids and 2 % glucose as needed . Yeast cells were imaged at room temperature for < 30 min after sample preparation . Microscope setup and fluorescence intensity measurement Fluorescence microscopy was performed on a Nikon Ti - E inverted microscope with a 1 . 4 numerical aperture , 100 × oil - immersion ob - jective . Experiments involving one pair of unattached kinetochores were conducted with the 1 . 5 × Optovar lens . Ten - plane image stacks were acquired using a piezostage to focus at different planes along the depth of the cell , with 200 - nm separation between the planes . Total fluorescence of kinetochore clusters ( 16 kinetochores in metaphase and ∼ 10 in nocodazole ) was quantified by integrating intensities over a 6 × 6 – pixel region centered on the maximum - in - tensity pixel . The median intensity of pixels immediately surround - ing the 6 × 6 – pixel area was used to correct for background fluores - cence . Analysis was performed using a Matlab program as described previously ( Aravamudhan et al . , 2014 ) . Analysis of single - kineto - Volume 27 November 7 , 2016 Kinetochore - based SAC signaling | 3415 induced dimerization of Fkbp12 and Frb domains ( Aravamudhan et al . , 2015 ) . Briefly , Mps1 was tagged with Frb , and the kinetochore subunit—either Ndc80 or Mtw1—was tagged with 2xFkbp12 . When rapamycin is added to the growth medium ( 1 μg / ml ) , Mps1 - Frb dimerizes with the Fkbp12 - tagged protein . To quantify Bub1 - GFP and Mad1 - GFP recruited to the kinetochores , we treated log - phase cultures with rapamycin for 1 h before microscopy . To quantify the Bub1 molecules in the cell in Supplemental Figure S3D , we expressed Bub1 - Frb - GFP from the BUB1 locus using the endogenous Bub1 promoter . These cells also expressed a se - lected kinetochore subunit with the 2xFkbp12 fused at its C - termi - nus . These cells were treated with rapamycin for 45 min . This allows most of the Bub1 - Frb - GFP in the nucleus to dimerize with the Fkbp12 domains and thus localize to the kinetochores . Cells were then prepared for microscopy . Fitting equilibrium binding models In fitting equilibrium binding models , we assume that the observed recruitment of SAC proteins by unattached kinetochores represents equilibrium binding between a soluble SAC protein and its receptor in the kinetochore . For the recruitment of Bub3 - Bub1 complex , the receptor in the kinetochore is the phosphorylated MELT repeat in Spc105 . For the recruitment of the Mad1 - Mad2 heterotetramer , the receptor is the phosphorylated Bub3 - Bub1 complex . We used two simple models to fit the experimental data . In these experiments , either the number of receptors ( as in Figures 2C , 3F , and 4C ) or the concentration of the soluble SAC protein was varied ( as in Figure 3 , C and E ) . The first model is based on saturation binding ( Figures 2A and 3C ) : [ ] [ ] [ ] [ ] = + R L R L L K . D where [ R ] and [ L ] are the concentrations of the receptor and SAC protein , respectively , [ R . L ] is the concentration of the receptor – SAC protein complex , and K D is the dissociation constant for the recep - tor – SAC protein complex . In cases in which we expected the limited abundance of SAC proteins to limit steady - state binding , we modeled the interaction as a bimolecular interaction governed by ligand depletion ( Figures 1E , 2C , and 4C ) . In this case , the concentration of the ligand – recep - tor complex is given by ( ) ( ) [ ] [ ] [ ] [ ] [ ] [ ] [ ] [ ] [ ] = + + + + + − R L R L K R L K R L . 4 2 D D 2 All data fits were performed using GraphPad Prism software . Calyculin A treatment for inhibiting Glc7 G1 - arrested cells were released into the cell cycle by washing out the α - factor . These cells were treated with nocodazole for ∼ 1 h to activate the SAC and additionally with 2 . 5 μM calyculin A ( 208851 ; EMD Millipore , Billerica , MA ) for 1 h to inhibit Glc7 . Then samples were drawn for immunoblotting to verify Glc7 inhibition and also for live - cell imaging to quantify Bub1 recruitment by the unattached kinetochores . Immunoblotting and quantification To detect Snf1 phosphorylation , samples were prepared as de - scribed previously ( Orlova et al . , 2008 ) . Briefly , 2 OD ( at λ 600 ) of cells were lysed in a boiling water bath for 5 min before extraction of proteins with alkaline treatment . The sample was suspended in a final volume of 100 μl of SDS – PAGE sample buffer . The proteins an SAC protein recruited by a fixed number of unattached kineto - chores would be the same irrespective of the fluorescent protein tag on that protein . This reasoning implicitly assumes that the expres - sion level of the SAC protein is insensitive to the fluorescent protein tag . Therefore the measured GFP and mCherry fluorescence for a given SAC protein ( measured in two different strains ) should corre - spond to the same number of molecules . Identifying unattached kinetochores in strains in which additional Spc105 phosphodomains were anchored to the kinetochore In this experiment ( Figure 4D ) , Bub1 was mCherry labeled , but the kinetochore did not contain any fluorescently labeled subunits . Therefore we could not directly determine the number of unat - tached kinetochores in the absence of rapamycin . However , after the cells were treated with rapamycin , spc105 120 : 329 - 5A - Frb - GFP molecules dimerized with the Fkbp12 - tagged Ndc80 complex sub - unit . We assumed that the Bub1 - recruiting clusters in cells treated with nocodazole contained the same number of unattached kineto - chores in the presence and absence of rapamycin . In the latter case , we identified the unattached kinetochore cluster as the one that recruited high levels of Bub1 . Generating a single pair of unattached kinetochores To generate experimentally a single pair of unattached kineto - chores , we used the centromere reactivation system described by Tanaka et al . ( 2005 ) . Briefly , we constructed strains containing a ga - lactose - inducible promoter proximal to the CEN3 locus and a me - thionine - repressible promoter controlling CDC20 expression . The strains were grown to mid log phase in synthetic medium containing 2 % raffinose and lacking methionine and then synchronized in α - factor for 2 h . The G1 - synchronized cells were then transferred for 2 h to YP supplemented with 2 % raffinose , 200 mM methionine to repress CDC20 and arrest the cells in metaphase , and 2 % galactose to activate CEN3 and prevent kinetochore assembly . The cells thus synchronized in metaphase were transferred quickly to 2 % glucose to activate the CEN3 , which then assembles a kinetochore . We im - aged SAC proteins recruited by these kinetochores within the next 15 min . A majority of the kinetochores achieved bipolar attachments by the end of the experiment . Nocodazole treatment to depolymerize the mitotic spindle Log - phase cultures were synchronized in G1 by treatment with α - factor for 2 h and then released into nocodazole ( 15 μg / ml ) for 2 h to depolymerize the spindle and generate unattached kinetochores . We and others previously reported that this treatment generates two classes of kinetochore clusters in the cell : one or two smaller clusters consisting of ∼ 10 kinetochores and a larger kinetochore cluster that localizes proximal to the spindle pole bodies ( Gillett et al . , 2004 ; Aravamudhan et al . , 2015 ) . Only the smaller cluster con - tains completely unattached kinetochores that recruit Bub1 and Mad1 . Kinetochores in the larger cluster recruit very little Bub1 and undetectable levels of Mad1 , potentially because these kineto - chores retain residual microtubule attachment . The number of SAC proteins localizing to kinetochores reported in this work corresponds to the number of molecules recruited by the smaller , SAC - active ki - netochore cluster . Anchoring Mps1 and Bub1 to the kinetochore using rapamycin - induced dimerization To conditionally force Mps1 to localize to the kinetochores , we used previously described methodology involving the rapamycin - 3416 | P . Aravamudhan et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell Aravamudhan P , Goldfarb AA , Joglekar AP ( 2015 ) . The kinetochore encodes a mechanical switch to disrupt spindle assembly checkpoint signalling . Nat Cell Biol 17 , 868 – 879 . Bahler J , Wu JQ , Longtine MS , Shah NG , McKenzie A 3rd , Steever AB , Wach A , Philippsen P , Pringle JR ( 1998 ) . Heterologous modules for ef - ficient and versatile PCR - based gene targeting in Schizosaccharomyces pombe . Yeast 14 , 943 – 951 . Chen R - H , Brady DM , Smith D , Murray AW , Hardwick KG ( 1999 ) . The spin - dle checkpoint of budding yeast depends on a tight complex between the Mad1 and Mad2 proteins . Mol Biol Cell 10 , 2607 – 2618 . Collin P , Nashchekina O , Walker R , Pines J ( 2013 ) . The spindle assembly checkpoint works like a rheostat rather than a toggle switch . Nat Cell Biol 15 , 1378 – 1385 . Cooke CA , Schaar B , Yen TJ , Earnshaw WC ( 1997 ) . Localization of CENP - E in the fibrous corona and outer plate of mammalian kinetochores from prometaphase through anaphase . Chromosoma 106 , 446 – 455 . Dick AE , Gerlich DW ( 2013 ) . Kinetic framework of spindle assembly check - point signalling . Nat Cell Biol 15 , 1370 – 1377 . Doncic A , Ben - Jacob E , Barkai N ( 2005 ) . Evaluating putative mecha - nisms of the mitotic spindle checkpoint . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 102 , 6332 – 6337 . Ghaemmaghami S , Huh WK , Bower K , Howson RW , Belle A , Dephoure N , O’Shea EK , Weissman JS ( 2003 ) . Global analysis of protein expression in yeast . Nature 425 , 737 – 741 . Gillett ES , Espelin CW , Sorger PK ( 2004 ) . Spindle checkpoint proteins and chromosome - microtubule attachment in budding yeast . J Cell Biol 164 , 535 – 546 . Haruki H , Nishikawa J , Laemmli UK ( 2008 ) . The anchor - away technique : rapid , conditional establishment of yeast mutant phenotypes . Mol Cell 31 , 925 – 932 . Heinrich S , Geissen EM , Kamenz J , Trautmann S , Widmer C , Drewe P , Knop M , Radde N , Hasenauer J , Hauf S ( 2013 ) . Determinants of robustness in spindle assembly checkpoint signalling . Nat Cell Biol 15 , 1328 – 1339 . Hill A , Bloom K ( 1987 ) . Genetic manipulation of centromere function . Mol Cell Biol 7 , 2397 – 2405 . Hiruma Y , Sacristan C , Pachis ST , Adamopoulos A , Kuijt T , Ubbink M , von Castelmur E , Perrakis A , Kops GJ ( 2015 ) . Competition between MPS1 and microtubules at kinetochores regulates spindle checkpoint signal - ing . Science 348 , 1264 – 1267 . Hoffman DB , Pearson CG , Yen TJ , Howell BJ , Salmon ED ( 2001 ) . Micro - tubule - dependent changes in assembly of microtubule motor proteins and mitotic spindle checkpoint proteins at PtK1 kinetochores . Mol Biol Cell 12 , 1995 – 2009 . Hoon S , Smith AM , Wallace IM , Suresh S , Miranda M , Fung E , Proctor M , Shokat KM , Zhang C , Davis RW , et al . ( 2008 ) . An integrated platform of genomic assays reveals small - molecule bioactivities . Nat Chem Biol 4 , 498 – 506 . Howell BJ , Moree B , Farrar EM , Stewart S , Fang G , Salmon ED ( 2004 ) . Spindle checkpoint protein dynamics at kinetochores in living cells . Curr Biol 14 , 953 – 964 . Janke C , Magiera MM , Rathfelder N , Taxis C , Reber S , Maekawa H , Moreno - Borchart A , Doenges G , Schwob E , Schiebel E , et al . ( 2004 ) . A versatile toolbox for PCR - based tagging of yeast genes : new fluorescent proteins , more markers and promoter substitution cassettes . Yeast 21 , 947 – 962 . Ji Z , Gao H , Yu H ( 2015 ) . Kinetochore attachment sensed by competitive Mps1 and microtubule binding to Ndc80C . Science 348 , 1260 – 1264 . Joglekar AP , Bouck DC , Molk JN , Bloom KS , Salmon ED ( 2006 ) . Molecular architecture of a kinetochore - microtubule attachment site . Nat Cell Biol 8 , 581 – 585 . Joglekar A , Chen R , Lawrimore J ( 2013 ) . A sensitized emission based cali - bration of FRET efficiency for probing the architecture of macromolecu - lar machines . Cell Mol Bioeng 6 , 369 – 382 . Kemmler S , Stach M , Knapp M , Ortiz J , Pfannstiel J , Ruppert T , Lechner J ( 2009 ) . Mimicking Ndc80 phosphorylation triggers spindle assembly checkpoint signalling . EMBO J 28 , 1099 – 1110 . Kerscher O , Crotti LB , Basrai MA ( 2003 ) . Recognizing chromosomes in trouble : association of the spindle checkpoint protein Bub3p with altered kinetochores and a unique defective centromere . Mol Cell Biol 23 , 6406 – 6418 . Kops GJ , Weaver BA , Cleveland DW ( 2005 ) . On the road to cancer : aneu - ploidy and the mitotic checkpoint . Nat Rev Cancer 5 , 773 – 785 . Krefman NI , Drubin DG , Barnes G ( 2015 ) . Control of the spindle checkpoint by lateral kinetochore attachment and limited Mad1 recruitment . Mol Biol Cell 26 , 2620 – 2639 . in the extract were resolved on 8 % SDS - polyacrylamide gels and transferred to nitrocellulose . The blot was then blocked with 5 % bo - vine serum albumin and probed with the phosphospecific antibody rabbit α - AMPk ( 172T ) ( L4188 ; Cell Signaling , Danvers , MA ) over - night at a 1 : 1000 dilution in Tris - buffered saline / Tween 20 ( TBST ) at 4°C . The blots were washed and treated with goat α - rabbit peroxi - dase - conjugated antibody at a 1 : 10 , 000 dilution in TBST for 1 h before treatment with enhanced chemiluminescence reagent for visualization of phosphorylated Snf1 . To detect total protein , the samples were probed on another blot in parallel using α - histidine antibody ( Sigma - Aldrich , St . Louis , MO ) at a 1 : 2000 dilution for 1 . 5 h in 2 % milk to detect the polyhistidine stretch in Snf1 . For the quantification of Bub1 abundance , whole lysates were prepared from cells expressing either Bub1 - GFP or Ndc80 - GFP from their respective endogenous promoters as described previ - ously ( Aravamudhan et al . , 2014 ) . Three OD ( at λ 600 ) of log - phase culture was lysed into sample buffer by repeated vortexing with glass beads and intermittent boiling . The proteins were separated on 8 % SDS - polyacrylamide gels and transferred to polyvinylidene fluoride membrane . The blots were probed with a 1 : 1000 dilution of the mouse α - GFP antibody ( GFP ( B - 2 ) : sc - 9996 ; Santa Cruz Biotech - nology , Dallas , TX ) . Peroxidase - conjugated α - mouse immunoglobu - lin G ( 1 : 5000 ; A - 4416 ; Sigma - Aldrich ) treated with ECL was used to visualize the protein . The bands corresponding to GFP - tagged pro - teins ( Bub1 or Ndc80 ) were quantified in ImageJ by manually inte - grating pixel intensities over equal areas covering each band of in - terest , and background was subtracted using intensities from an equal area immediately above or below the band of interest in each lane . The intensities were normalized relative to Ndc80 - GFP , and protein abundance was estimated assuming 1160 molecules of Ndc80 per cell ( Ghaemmaghami et al . , 2003 ) . Bub1 - GFP in wild - type cells was not detectable ( even when twofold more sample was loaded ) , even though fourfold less Ndc80 - GFP could be detected under the same conditions ( unpublished data ) . Therefore we esti - mate the abundance of bub1 to be < 145 molecules / cell . Note that Bub1 - GFP was expressed in these cells and could be readily de - tected by fluorescence microscopy at unattached kinetochores when the cells were treated with nocodazole ( Figure 1 C ) . Benomyl sensitivity testing Tenfold serial dilutions of log - phase cultures were replica - spotted on YPD or plates containing 30 μg / ml benomyl . Plates were incu - bated at 32°C and photographed after 2 d . Spindle length Spindle length in metaphase with various degrees of Spc105 deple - tion was measured as described previously ( Aravamudhan et al . , 2014 ) . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank Sue Biggins for sharing plasmids , Diane Fingar for sharing the pAMPK antibody , and Nate Krefman for helpful discussions . We also thank Mara Duncan and Edward Salmon for comments on the manuscript . This work was supported by National Institute of General Medical Sciences R01 - GM - 105948 . REFERENCES Aravamudhan P , Felzer - Kim I , Gurunathan K , Joglekar AP ( 2014 ) . Assem - bling the protein architecture of the budding yeast kinetochore - microtu - bule attachment using FRET . Curr Biol 24 , 1437 – 1446 . Aravamudhan P , Felzer - Kim I , Joglekar AP ( 2013 ) . The budding yeast point centromere associates with two Cse4 molecules during mitosis . Curr Biol 23 , 770 – 774 . Volume 27 November 7 , 2016 Kinetochore - based SAC signaling | 3417 Scott RJ , Lusk CP , Dilworth DJ , Aitchison JD , Wozniak RW ( 2005 ) . Interac - tions between Mad1p and the nuclear transport machinery in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Mol Biol Cell 16 , 4362 – 4374 . Sear RP , Howard M ( 2006 ) . Modeling dual pathways for the metazoan spin - dle assembly checkpoint . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 103 , 16758 – 16763 . Spencer F , Hieter P ( 1992 ) . Centromere DNA mutations induce a mitotic de - lay in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 89 , 8908 – 8912 . Tanaka K , Kitamura E , Tanaka TU ( 2010 ) . Live - cell analysis of kinetochore - microtubule interaction in budding yeast . Methods 51 , 206 – 213 . Tanaka K , Mukae N , Dewar H , van Breugel M , James EK , Prescott AR , Antony C , Tanaka TU ( 2005 ) . Molecular mechanisms of kinetochore capture by spindle microtubules . Nature 434 , 987 – 994 . Vleugel M , Omerzu M , Groenewold V , Hadders MA , Lens SM , Kops GJ ( 2015 ) . Sequential multisite phospho - regulation of KNL1 - BUB3 inter - faces at mitotic kinetochores . Mol Cell 57 , 824 – 835 . Vleugel M , Tromer E , Omerzu M , Groenewold V , Nijenhuis W , Snel B , Kops GJ ( 2013 ) . Arrayed BUB recruitment modules in the kinetochore scaffold KNL1 promote accurate chromosome segregation . J Cell Biol 203 , 943 – 955 . Wang M , Herrmann CJ , Simonovic M , Szklarczyk D , von Mering C ( 2015 ) . Version 4 . 0 of PaxDb : protein abundance data , integrated across model organisms , tissues , and cell - lines . Proteomics 15 , 3163 – 3168 . Wynne DJ , Funabiki H ( 2015 ) . Kinetochore function is controlled by a phospho - dependent coexpansion of inner and outer components . J Cell Biol 210 , 899 – 916 . Yuen KW , Warren CD , Chen O , Kwok T , Hieter P , Spencer FA ( 2007 ) . Sys - tematic genome instability screens in yeast and their potential relevance to cancer . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 104 , 3925 – 3930 . Zacharias DA , Violin JD , Newton AC , Tsien RY ( 2002 ) . Partitioning of lipid - modified monomeric GFPs into membrane microdomains of live cells . Science 296 , 913 – 916 . Zhang G , Lischetti T , Nilsson J ( 2014 ) . A minimal number of MELT repeats supports all the functions of KNL1 in chromosome segregation . J Cell Sci 127 , 871 – 884 . Krenn V , Overlack K , Primorac I , van Gerwen S , Musacchio A ( 2014 ) . KI motifs of human Knl1 enhance assembly of comprehensive spindle checkpoint complexes around MELT repeats . Curr Biol 24 , 29 – 39 . Kulak NA , Pichler G , Paron I , Nagaraj N , Mann M ( 2014 ) . Minimal , encapsu - lated proteomic - sample processing applied to copy - number estimation in eukaryotic cells . Nat Methods 11 , 319 – 324 . Larsen NA , Al - Bassam J , Wei RR , Harrison SC ( 2007 ) . Structural analysis of Bub3 interactions in the mitotic spindle checkpoint . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 104 , 1201 – 1206 . London N , Biggins S ( 2014 ) . Mad1 kinetochore recruitment by Mps1 - me - diated phosphorylation of Bub1 signals the spindle checkpoint . Genes Dev 28 , 140 – 152 . London N , Ceto S , Ranish JA , Biggins S ( 2012 ) . Phosphoregulation of Spc105 by Mps1 and PP1 regulates Bub1 localization to kinetochores . Curr Biol 22 , 900 – 906 . Moyle MW , Kim T , Hattersley N , Espeut J , Cheerambathur DK , Oegema K , Desai A ( 2014 ) . A Bub1 - Mad1 interaction targets the Mad1 - Mad2 complex to unattached kinetochores to initiate the spindle checkpoint . J Cell Biol 204 , 647 – 657 . Musacchio A ( 2015 ) . The molecular biology of spindle assembly checkpoint signaling dynamics . Curr Biol 25 , R1002 – R1018 . Orlova M , Barrett L , Kuchin S ( 2008 ) . Detection of endogenous Snf1 and its activation state : application to Saccharomyces and Candida species . Yeast 25 , 745 – 754 . Overlack K , Primorac I , Vleugel M , Krenn V , Maffini S , Hoffmann I , Kops GJ , Musacchio A ( 2015 ) . A molecular basis for the differential roles of Bub1 and BubR1 in the spindle assembly checkpoint . Elife 4 , e05269 . Pinsky BA , Nelson CR , Biggins S ( 2009 ) . Protein phosphatase 1 regu - lates exit from the spindle checkpoint in budding yeast . Curr Biol 19 , 1182 – 1187 . Primorac I , Weir JR , Chiroli E , Gross F , Hoffmann I , van Gerwen S , Ciliberto A , Musacchio A ( 2013 ) . Bub3 reads phosphorylated MELT repeats to promote spindle assembly checkpoint signaling . Elife 2 , e01030 .