A case study of open - ended creative practice based research Yukari Nagai Japan Advanced Institute of Science and Technology 1 - 1 Asahidai , Nomi , Ishikawa 923 - 1292 Japan Fax . / Tel : + 81 - ( 0 ) 761 - 511706 ynagai @ jaist . ac . jp Georgi V . Georgiev Japan Advanced Institute of Science and Technology 1 - 1 Asahidai , Nomi , Ishikawa 923 - 1292 Japan Fax . / Tel : + 81 - ( 0 ) 761 - 511706 georgiev @ jaist . ac . jp Ian Gwilt The Art and Design Research Centre , Sheffield Hallam University Furnival Building , Sheffield S1 2NU , United Kingdom Fax . / Tel : + 44 - ( 0 ) 114 - 2256740 iangwilt @ bigpond . com Abstract : This paper concerns the nature of creativity in the case of open - ended design process . In contrary to the goal - oriented design , the open - ended design process involves formation of design image and decisions of the direction , performed by the design team members . In order to understand how the design images are formed , we conducted and observed a small - scale case study . The case study resulted in design process and exhibition of two prototypical design works , aiming at exploring users’ perceptions of natural and artificial . The results of the analysis of this case study outline the particular roles of the team members in the forming of design image , and the characteristics of the open - ended design process and its creative features . The findings provide both understanding of the essence in the open - ended design process , and offer a framework to carry out future research . Keywords : human factors in design , roles in design , design creativity , design process 1 Introduction This study investigates design as an open - ended process , rater that the goal - oriented one . In this open - ended process designer forms the goal ( design image ) which is novel design ideas [ 1 ] . This search for design image can be framed as creative practice . To understand Yukari Nagai , Georgi V . Georgiev and Ian Gwilt how the design images are formed , it is needed to observe the processes from the participants’ view [ 2 ] . In this paper , we frame this process as creative practice based research . The creative practice based research is necessary to be investigated involving the participants in the design process . This paper is dedicated to an investigation of case study of a creative practice based research , where the open - ended process of forming the design image has been observed and analyzed by the participants in the process of design . 2 Creative practice The creative activities and practices in design have been in the scope of design research in recent years [ 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 ] . The investigations of creative activities usually are taken from outside view of the design process [ 7 , 8 ] . The literature on creativity [ 4 ] and creative activities [ 3 , 6 ] call attention to the multidimensional characteristics of creative process . Variety of original investigations were undertaken in order to gain knowledge and understanding about these characteristics . These investigations employ diverse methods to analyze and extract such knowledge . Due to size limitations of this paper , it is impossible to make an extensive review of the methods used to analyze the creative process . Researchers of the creative activities from outer view pinpoint general characteristics of creative thinking and activity based on methods such as interview or protocol studies [ 7 ] . Such approaches are successful in finding general features of the creative activities , however are unable to focus on the essential issues regarding how this process works . For this reason , we need inner view to creative activity . Moreover , previous research points out the effects of the social influences on creativity of design teams [ 8 ] and suggests future directions for research in understanding the social creative activity . This outer view to creative activity lacks design process perspective , especially from inner view . The inner view from the perspective of a participant in the design process is critical . The inner perspective on creative activity has various requirements in order to be successful in describing the processes . The participants’ reflection on creative activities is pointed out as critical for understanding of these activities [ 6 ] . Recording and reporting the moments of reflection , included the intended and unintended consequences of actions is making the creative projects accessible to researchers and other participants . However , in order to describe and interpret creative activity , a balance between rigor and action should be achieved . Moreover , the actions should be supported by additional informing and enhancement [ 6 ] . Building upon the outer and inner approaches , the research on creativity points out the importance of both , inner and outer perspectives , on design process for creative activities in designing [ 4 ] . Actually , the match between the inner push of designer and outer pull of the design goal is regarded as critical in case of such creative activities . The outer pull is connected with the problem - solving perspective to design . However , the features of the creative activity in the case where the goal is not defined are not clear . In order to gain understanding of creative activity , we focus on the description of the processes of open - ended direction finding and formation of design image . From the viewpoint of creativity , the processes of synthesis , searching and finding [ 5 , 3 ] of direction are critical for design achievements . Thus , we elaborate on the A case study of open - ended creative practice based research ‘Geneplore model’ by Finke [ 5 ] for the purpose of clarifying these processes ( Figure 1 ) . The model represents the basic processes involved in creative imagery . For example , outstanding designers employ profound understanding of design [ 9 ] . Designer visualizes images of the goal – described as ‘archetypes of the object’ - even before designing . How such goals are found or formed is a very important question . Figure 1 Geneplore model . Source : Finke [ 5 ] . 3 Aim The aim of the study is to explain the features of the creative practice based research , particularly to identify the individual contributions in process of formation of design image and finding direction to design image . To address this aim we conducted a case study . Moreover , from this case study we intend to find a model about the features of the process of creative practice in designing , based on participants view . The model should contribute to the understanding of creative design where the goal is not given and should clarify how the designer or design team forms the design image . 4 Methodology The methodology adopted in this research emphases on the inner ( participants’ ) view to the design process ( Figure 2 ) . To understand the process of creative activity and practice it is needed to observe the processes from the participants’ view [ 2 ] . Figure 2 Methodological framework of research . Yukari Nagai , Georgi V . Georgiev and Ian Gwilt This observation necessarily involves awareness of inner perspective to the design process ; also a considerable amount of reflection of own activities and a thorough examination of how formation design goals come about . It has been shown that self - investigation is particularly difficult [ 2 ] . However , an external observation of the design process can fail to grasp designers’ thoughts since these are stimulated by intrinsic motivation and formed dynamically . It is difficult to observe the creative process from an inner perspective when designers are deeply engaged in their work . The reason behind this is that the designers who are absorbed in their work are assumed to have entered the ‘flow’ state . The means of understanding the creative thinking process are different from other activities . For an observer who is not familiar with how the creative process of design works , it is impossible to focus on the essential issues regarding how this process works . Therefore , we must consider who is most able to access such a perspective [ 2 ] . The methodology involves reflections both an inner perspective and an outer perspective . Reflections are a popular technique for accessing self - consciousness , which was first proposed by Schön [ 10 ] . He found that people who had achieved a high level of creativity often reflected objectively on their own creative processes . We consider this technique here because it has been confirmed as a useful method for examining our understanding of the design process . Thus , in this research , the inner views are analyzed on the basis on design researcher participating as a design team member , and who takes ethnography - like approach to the design process . The researcher tries to maintain a degree of objective detachment to the occurring processes . The design researcher’s inner view is complemented by the other participants’ ( again , inner to the process ) views . The consciousness and reflection on the occurring direction finding processes are aided by systematic collection of all design documents ( notes , sketches , etc . ) and videos of the discussions between team members . 5 Case study project In this section , we will discuss the object of design in the project , the questions and purpose of the case study project , as they were formulated in its course . Further on , the realization in exhibition and its outcomes in the terms of this paper’s aim will be discussed . 5 . 1 Participants , object and purpose To address the aims , short - time project called Natural Fabrications was realized with three participants in April 2010 in Japan Advanced Institute of Science and Technology . This small multi - disciplinary design team consisted of leading designer with multimedia background , expert in design computing and design researcher . The project took off as an open - ended process with open goals , as described in Introduction and Methodology sections . In the open - ended process , the design team formed design images and formulated goals based on evolving design ideas [ 1 ] . As a first step of direction finding , on early stage of the project , the project questions were formulated as : ( 1 ) How to challenge and trigger emotional responses in users of design prototypical works , and ( 2 ) What is the relationship of the users’ responses to technologically facilitated products . A case study of open - ended creative practice based research The formulation of the project’s purpose was as follows : “New designs can be created based on design - for - response approach . Exploring the symbolic representations and genealogical roots leading to users’ responses is the first step in this approach . “ Thus the focused of the case project was put on stimulation of a users’ “conversation” around the nature and technology of the artifact . The natural and technological aspects were considered as initiating the users’ responses to the product . Thus , the aim of the project was exploring users’ responses on prototypical design works . Understanding the users’ responses to designed products is an emerging research challenge . The responses can be triggered with different means and in different situations . Thus , the Natural Fabrications project focused on design works that are open - ended in forms and that utilize new and traditional technologies to initiate users’ responses . The investigation is carried out through production and analysis of a set of prototypical design works . At its end , the Natural Fabrications project resulted in one - day exhibition of the two prototypical design works ( installations ) , which are described in the following sections . We should point out that the word “natural” is often associated with manifestations requiring hardly any or no human intervention . In this paper , this word is used differently - in the sense of results of this manifestation being enhanced by the design work . 5 . 2 The outcome The two prototypical works of Natural Fabrications project are the result of the carried out creative practice based research . As an outcome of the design process , in the Natural Fabrications Project , the described design works borrowed visual traits – folders – from computer technology and the Graphical User Interface ( GUI ) in the formation of design works . The projects utilized hybrid media combinations , such as digital - video projections , combined with sculptural forms , audio and print - based 2 dimensional elements . Hybrid - media constructs of “folders” ( a computer - derived image ) are realized as rapid - prototyping ( 3 dimensional printing ) is an important set of techniques used in the creation ( Figure 3 ) . In upper part of Figure 3 the moments of creation of Folder Garden part – layout in a small space for Japanese garden and differently scaled rapid prototypes of “folders” . In the lower part of Figure 3 the moments of creation of Natural fabrication part are shown – finding contradicting semantic association to the video of natural phenomena and videotaping of printed on flags semantic associations . The first work of the Natural Fabrications Project , named Folder Garden explored the users’ tactile interactions of technological materials ( smart textiles ) in the context of symbolic representation of nature . The representation of nature was in form of Japanese rock garden . The technological materials were placed in a constructs of hybrid - media constructs of ‘folders’ ( a computer - derived image ) are realized as rapid - prototyping , all in the traditional Japanese garden ( Figure 4 ) . The second work , Natural Fabrication , gave the name of the whole project . It explored the users’ responses of the technological materials in connection with visual perception of natural phenomena and in connection with semantic associations . For these explorations , digital - video projections of natural phenomena and semantic association were used ( Figure 4 ) . For example , semantic association of “synthetic” was printed on flag , videotaped and placed together with video of waterfall ( natural phenomena ) . Yukari Nagai , Georgi V . Georgiev and Ian Gwilt Figure 3 Creation of design works Folder Garden ( up ) and Natural Fabrication ( down ) as a part of Natural Fabrications Project . During the exhibitions of the works , users’ ( visitors of the exhibitions ) responses were analyzed . Twenty - six of the visitors answered a questionnaire . Their responses were enhanced and stimulated by the exhibited works . Strong impressions of natural or artificial were indicated by the visitors . 5 . 3 The model of creative practice based research The process of creative explorations in this case study showed diverse goal proposals and reconsiderations of these goals . Design process had features of iterative nature and sequence of expansion of creative ideas . Figure 5 shows the model created as result of creative practice based research of the Natural Fabrications Project . The preliminary model outlines this practice as having main features of exploration , reconsideration and iteration . A case study of open - ended creative practice based research Figure 4 The prototypical design works created at the end of the project In the step of early direction finding ( Figure 5 ) , the project questions were defined along with the purpose of the project . Further , in this step , these questions resulted in diverse goals proposals , exploration and significant amount of reconsiderations . These diverse goals ( however , compared at the beginning in more details ) were discussed between the design team members and led to more focused design image at the end of this early direction finding . The actual two goals ( design images ) were formulated in the result of iterative goal generation , which resulted in the finally formed design image . Figure 5 The model of creative practice based research based on formation of design image and direction finding Yukari Nagai , Georgi V . Georgiev and Ian Gwilt 5 . 4 Identified roles in the design team In order to identify the roles of the participants in the direction finding and formulation of design image , the design researcher took ethnography - like approach to the design process in this case study . The researcher maintained as much as possible degree of objectivity while participating in the occurring processes , and trying to bring explicit the underlying causes , reasons and motivations of the other participants . As a result of this approach , Table 1 outlines the identified roles of the participants in the main stages of design image formation . These main roles related to the individuals’ strategies and intentions towards direction finding . For example , on early direction finding stage , the leading designer employs “Interest pointer” role towards the design image , while the design computing expert employs role of “Systematizer” and “Explainer” , and the design researcher uses “Negotiator” role towards the design image . Table 1 The main roles of three participants in the different stages of the formation of design image Stage Leading designer Design computing exp . Design researcher Early direction finding Interest pointer Systematizer / Explainer Negotiator Generation / formation of design image Challenger / Idea generator Rationalizer / Idea sharer Reason finder Formulation of design image Planner Problem solver Appraiser 6 Discussions The findings provide both understanding of the practice in the open - ended design process , and offer a framework to carry on future research on open - ended design process . The results of the analysis of this case study outline the particular roles of the team members in the forming of design image and the characteristics of the open - ended design process . The roles of “Interest pointer” , “Systematizer” and “Negotiator” were found in the stage of direction finding , while roles like “Challenger” , “Rationalizer” and “Appraiser” were taken in next stages of the design process . The research on creative production points out directions of systematic research on creative collaboration in multi - disciplinary design teams [ 3 ] . However , in this research , we focused on the knowledge we can gain from the process of creative activity rather than the knowledge , which can be gained from the product of this activity . To the knowledge which is refined from the process [ 3 , 6 ] , we added the perspective of open - ended search - for - goal design process . Thus , the results of this research contribute to the knowledge about the formation of design image in design process , particularly the participants’ role in that process . One question can be made here : is the case of open - ended practice based research and developed design based on the interrelationships of social , cultural and technical aspects . It is also argued , that different elements of culture learned and acquired socially are highly integrated and act as packages of meaning and meaningful forms [ 11 ] . For A case study of open - ended creative practice based research example , Hofstede [ 12 ] believes that this integration is largely unconscious and that no mental activities of humans can be culture free . Although that it seems that it is questionable how design researcher can maintain a degree of objective detachment to the occurring processes , we believe that a participating researcher can intentionally keep certain degree of detachments in form of systematic periodic reflections of own activities . This partially addresses the cultural issue . Moreover , such periodic reflections are useful tool for analysis of creativity . For example , it has been already observed that the people who had achieved a high level of creativity often rely on objective reflection on their own creative processes , as argued by Schön [ 12 ] . The discussed case study project – Natural Fabrications – started as open - ended one and design team formed the design images , leading to creative ideas . In result of the applied methodology – observation from inner perspective – the process of creative direction finding in this case study showed diverse goal proposals and reconsiderations of directions . The preliminary model we presented outlines this creative practice based research as having main features of exploration , reconsideration and iteration , in which the direction to the finally decided goal ( formed design image ) was found on early phases . This preliminary model of features of the creative practice based research shows the importance of early creative exploration of design images . The findings about the role taking shed light on the creative activity and practice in the perspective of open - ended design . We should note that most of these roles are taken rather not intentionally . In the perspective of the ‘Geneplore model’ [ 5 ] ( Figure 1 ) , the different participants took these major roles in different phases of Finke’s model . For example , the leading designer had major role in the Generation phase and Preinventive phase , while the computer scientist and design researcher took major roles in Constraints and Preinventive phases . Thus , the roles are connected with the nature and implicit features of creative activity in designing . Moreover , these roles can be used for building a research framework for creative activities , which is based on inner view of participating design researcher . For such researcher , taking a particular role in open - ended creative activity will allow minimal interruption of designers’ creative thinking process . 7 Conclusions Design research is focusing attention on the achievement of design goals . However , the actual expression and formation of new and creative design images is not specifically discussed . This research concerned the nature of creative activities in the case of open - ended design process . The open - ended design process involves direction finding and formation of design image , performed by the design team members , which is different from the goal - oriented design . To understand how the design images are formed , we conducted and observed a small - scale case study . Additionally , we considered the perspective of the inside of the process as methodology for investigation . To analyze the creative activity from the inner view , we challenged to put together practitioner designer , design technologist and design researcher in a team that employed open - ended design process . The case study called Natural Fabrications resulted in design and exhibition of two prototypical design works , with the goal of exploring users’ perceptions of natural and artificial . Yukari Nagai , Georgi V . Georgiev and Ian Gwilt The influences on the content and direction of direction finding are connected with the roles , which participants play in the process . We showed a preliminary model of features of the creative practice based research based on open - ended search for design goal . The results of the analysis of this case study outline the particular strategies in direction finding of the participants . The formation of design image and the features of the open - ended creative activity in designing seem to be related to the participants’ roles . These roles seem to be important for process of creative activity and offer a framework for future research on such activities . Through accumulation of cases in the future , we aim to provide a practical methodology for research on creative design . References 1 Nagai , Y . , Taura , T . and Mukai , F . , “Concept blending and dissimilarity : Factors for creative concept generation process” , Design Studies , Vol . 30 , pp 648 - 675 , 2009 . 2 Sano , K . , Nagai , Y . and Taura , T . , “Poietiques based method for self - investigation of the creative processes in design” , Proceeding of International Association of Societies of Design Research IASDR’09 , Seoul , Korea , 10p , 2009 . 3 Edmonds , E . A . , Weakley , A . , Candy , L . , Fell , M . , Knott , R . and Pauletto S . , “The studio as laboratory : Combining creative practice and digital technology research” , International Journal of Human - Computer Studies , Vol . 63 ( 4 - 5 ) , pp 452 - 481 , 2005 . 4 Taura , T . and Nagai , Y . , “Design creativity : Integration of design insight and design outsight” , " What is “What ' s the Design” ? Special Issue of Japanese Society for the Science of Design , Vol . 16 - 2 ( 62 ) , pp 55 - 60 , 2009 . 5 Finke , R . , “Imagery , Creativity and Emergent Structure , Consciousness and Cognition” , Vol . 5 ( 3 ) , pp 381 - 393 , 1996 . 6 Scrivener , S . , “Reflection in and on action and practice in creative - production doctoral projects in art and design” . Working Papers in Art and Design 1 , 2000 , Retrieved on 14 . 07 . 2010 from URL : http : / / sitem . herts . ac . uk / artdes _ research / papers / wpades / vol1 / scrivener2 . html 7 Cross , N . , “Creative Cognition in Design : Processes of Exceptional Designers” , Proceedings of the 4th conference on Creativity and Cognition , Loughborough , United Kingdom , pp 14 - 19 , 2002 . 8 Warr , A . and O’Neill , E . , “Understanding Design as a Social Creative Process” , Proceedings of the 5th conference on Creativity and Cognition , London , United Kingdom , pp 118 - 127 , 2005 . 9 Fukazawa , N . , “Text and work” , Naoto Fukasawa , London , New York , Phaidon Press , 2007 . 10 Schön , D . A . , “Educating the reflective practitioner” , San Francisco , Jossey - Bass Inc . , 1987 . 11 Hannerz , U . , “Transnational connections : culture , people , places” , Routledge , New York , 1996 . 12 Hofstede , G . , “Culture ' s Consequences : Comparing values , behaviors , institutions , and organizations across nations” , ( 2nd ed . ) , Sage Publication , Thousand Oaks , 2001 .