iScience Review Challenges facing quantitative large - scale optical super - resolution , and some simple solutions Tal M . Dankovich 1 , 2 , * and Silvio O . Rizzoli 1 , 3 SUMMARY Optical super - resolution microscopy ( SRM ) has enabled biologists to visualize cellular structures with near - molecular resolution , giving unprecedented access to details about the amounts , sizes , and spatial distributions of macromolecules in the cell . Precisely quantifying these molecular details requires large datasets of high - quality , reproducible SRM images . In this review , we discuss the unique set of challenges facing quantitative SRM , giving particular attention to the short - comings of conventional specimen preparation techniques and the necessity for optimal labeling of molecular targets . We further discuss the obstacles to scaling SRM methods , such as lengthy image acquisition and complex SRM data analysis . For each of these challenges , we review the recent advances in the ﬁeld that circumvent these pitfalls and provide practical advice to biologists for optimizing SRM experiments . INTRODUCTION Some 300 years ago , light microscopy guided the discovery that all living organisms consist of individ - ual cells , pioneering the entire discipline of cell biology . Microscopy has been one of the most impor - tant and rapidly advancing laboratory techniques , and countless milestones in biology have coincided with the advent of better , more powerful microscopes . Indeed , it is probably not by chance that the image of a researcher looking through the eyepiece of a microscope has become a universal icon for the natural sciences . The introduction of ﬂuorescence microscopy in the early twentieth century marked a major milestone in biology , allowing scientists to visualize previously invisible cellular structures by tagging them with highly speciﬁc ﬂuorescent labels . Nevertheless , as with any optical system , the spatial resolution of ﬂuorescence microscopy is limited by the diffraction ( or bending ) of light as it passes through the circular aperture of the microscope objective . First described by Ernst Abbe in 1873 , the diffraction limit implies that the smallest object that can be resolved by an optical microscope is limited to approximately half the wavelength of the light being used ( Abbe , 1873 ) , amounting typically to R 200 nm , or more than twenty times the size of an average protein . In the last few decades , a number of techniques collectively termed ‘‘super - resolution microscopy’’ ( SRM ) have surpassed this diffraction barrier , extending the capabilities of optical imaging to the nano - scale and yielding unprecedented biological insights ( Balzarotti et al . , 2017 ; Betzig et al . , 2006 ; Chen et al . , 2015 ; Gustafsson , 2000 ; Hell and Wichmann , 1994 ; Hess et al . , 2006 ; Moerner and Kador , 1989 ; Rust et al . , 2006 ; Sharonov and Hochstrasser , 2006 ) . As the ﬁeld progressed , SRM shifted into the realm of quantitative biology , allowing for the accurate measurement of the abundances , distributions , and nanoscale movements of individual molecules . However , amassing such high - preci - sion information requires more than mere access to super - resolution microscopes . Crucially , special care must be taken to prepare biological samples with minimal distortions and to select labels that are well suited to the chosen SRM approach . In addition , a good working knowledge of the applied technique is necessary to account for inherent limitations during acquisition and analysis , and to suc - cessfully scale up experiments to gather large datasets for robust quantiﬁcations . In this review , we will discuss the major obstacles to achieving quantitative SRM , particularly emphasizing the importance of optimal sample preparation and labeling . In addition , we will review the unique challenges facing SRM data analysis and the design of high - throughput SRM experiments . Our aim is to discuss possible solutions to these challenges based on both existing approaches in the ﬁeld , as well as emerging tech - niques from recent years . 1 University Medical Center Go¨ttingen , Institute for Neuro - and Sensory Physiology , Go¨ttingen 37073 , Germany 2 International Max Planck Research School for Neuroscience , Go¨ttingen , Germany 3 Biostructural Imaging of Neurodegeneration ( BIN ) Center & Multiscale Bioimaging Excellence Center , Go¨ttingen 37075 , Germany * Correspondence : tal . dankovich @ med . uni - goettingen . de https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . isci . 2021 . 102134 iScience 24 , 102134 , March 19 , 2021 ª 2021 The Author ( s ) . This is an open access article under the CC BY - NC - ND license ( http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by - nc - nd / 4 . 0 / ) . 1 ll OPEN ACCESS An overview of common SRM techniques The key to achieving super resolution is minimizing the number of ﬂuorophores that can be simulta - neously detected within a diffraction - limited area . Most major SRM approaches achieve this by tampering with the on / off ( bright / dark ) state of the molecules to separate their emission in space , time , or both . These so - called ‘‘functional’’ SRM techniques broadly fall into one of two categories , namely , coordinated - targeted and stochastic , distinguished by their strategy for modulating ﬂuorescent states . Coordinate - targeted SRM techniques use directed , focused lasers to actively push targeted ﬂuo - rophores into a dark state . The best known of these techniques is stimulated emission depletion ( STED ) microscopy , where two superimposed beams are scanned over the sample in tandem : a focused excita - tion beam to switch the ﬂuorophores on , and a powerful STED beam that depletes ﬂuorophores through stimulated emission ( Figure 1 ) . The depletion beam is typically doughnut - shaped , gradually weakening toward its center , where it has ideally zero intensity . As a result , only ﬂuorophores residing at the center of the beam can emit , whereas the rest of the diffraction - limited area remains dark ( Hell and Wichmann , 1994 ) . Although commercial STED setups typically achieve a lateral resolution of (cid:1) 60 nm , resolutions down to (cid:1) 20 nm have been demonstrated in biological samples , and down to single nanometers in ﬂuo - rescent nitrogen vacancies in diamond ( Go¨ttfert et al . , 2013 ; Rittweger et al . , 2009 ; Wegel et al . , 2016 ) . In the axial plane , 3D STED approaches such as isoSTED can achieve a resolution of (cid:1) 30 nm ( Curdt et al . , 2015 ; Hell et al . , 2009 ) . A drawback of STED , however , is the high laser intensities required for efﬁcient depletion of the ﬂuorophores , which limits its applicability to live samples . As alternatives , techniques such as ground state depletion ( GSD ) and reversible saturable / switchable optically linear ( ﬂuorescence ) transitions ( RESOLFT ) can be used , which require appreciably lower laser intensities to deplete the tar - geted ﬂuorophores by transitioning them to additional ‘‘meta - stable’’ dark states ( Bretschneider et al . , 2007 ; Hell and Kroug , 1995 ) . Recent applications of RESOLFT have achieved resolutions comparable to those of STED with reduced excitation power , making them well suited for live - cell and large volume imaging ( Grotjohann et al . , 2011 ; Masullo et al . , 2018 ) . Stochastic SRM techniques , collectively termed ‘‘single molecule localization microscopy’’ ( SMLM ) , do not modulate the ﬂuorophores spatially but rely on the stochastic nature of the on / off state transitions . Upon illuminating the entire sample with a wideﬁeld light source , only a small , random fraction of the ﬂuorophores will switch states , ideally no more than a single ﬂuorophore per diffraction - limited area . By repeatedly switching on random subsets of ﬂuorophores , or passively measuring ‘‘off’’ ﬂuorophores as they spontaneously return to their bright state , a super - resolved image of all ﬂuorophore localizations can be ultimately reconstructed ( Figure 1 ) . Typically , hundreds to thousands of such sequential measure - ments are required in order to reconstruct an entire image , making acquisition times signiﬁcantly longer than in targeted laser - scanning approaches . However , a major advantage of these techniques is that they can largely be realized using conventional wide - ﬁeld setups and cameras , making them relatively simple and cost - effective . To date , numerous SMLM techniques have been devised , but these are mostly deriv - atives of two prototypical approaches : photoactivated localization microscopy ( PALM ) ( Betzig et al . , 2006 ; Hess et al . , 2006 ) , which relies on photoswitchable proteins , and stochastic optical reconstruction microscopy ( STORM ) , which utilizes organic ﬂuorophores ( Rust et al . , 2006 ) . The main difference between the various techniques lies in their strategy for achieving the on / off switching and the types of photo - switchable probes that are used . A more recent approach , point accumulation in nanoscale topography ( PAINT ) , does not utilize light - mediated activation but instead makes use of labels that ﬂuoresce upon binding a target structure . By using dyes that transiently bind and quickly dissociate from their targets , a ‘‘blinking’’ effect can be produced , quite similar to that which is observed with photoswitchable dyes ( Sharonov and Hochstrasser , 2006 ) . Alternatively , the bound ﬂuorophores may be irreversibly switched off through photobleaching ( Burnette et al . , 2011 ; Schoen et al . , 2011 ) . Both PALM / STORM and PAINT can reach resolutions on the order of tens of nanometers , but the actual values largely depend on the properties of the ﬂuorophores being used . With sufﬁciently bright and photostable dyes , resolutions are typically (cid:1) 10 – 50 nm in xy on commercial setups , but can potentially reach single nanometers ( Dai et al . , 2016 ; Vaughan et al . , 2012 ; Wegel et al . , 2016 ) . SMLM frequently utilizes total internal reﬂec - tion ﬂuorescence ( TIRF ) illumination , where the excitation light is shined on the sample at an angle greater than the critical angle and is totally reﬂected at the glass / water interface . The reﬂection creates a thin illumination ﬁeld ( known as an ‘‘evanescent wave’’ ) that penetrates the sample superﬁcially , selectively exciting ﬂuorophores near the interface , up to (cid:1) 100 nm ( Diekmann et al . , 2017 ) . The resolu - tion in z can be further enhanced to (cid:1) 50 – 70 nm with 3D systems such as 3D - STORM or iPALM ( Huang et al . , 2008 ; Lin et al . , 2020 ; Shtengel et al . , 2009 ) . ll OPEN ACCESS 2 iScience 24 , 102134 , March 19 , 2021 iScience Review Recently , a ground - breaking technique named MINFLUX was introduced , combining the strengths of both coordinate - targeted and stochastic SRM approaches . In MINFLUX , the ﬂuorophores undergo both stochastic on / off switching , as in PALM / STORM , and simultaneous illumination with a doughnut - shaped excitation ( rather than depletion ) beam ( Figure 1 ) . The closer the emitting ﬂuorophore to the zero - intensity center of the beam , the smaller the number of photons it will emit , and thus the ﬂuorophore localizations can be deduced from local emission minima . MINFLUX boasts the highest precision of all SRM techniques to date , achieving resolutions of 1 – 3 nm in both the lateral and axial planes ( Balzarotti et al . , 2017 ; Gwosch et al . , 2020 ) . Expansion Resolution xy : 1 - 3 nm Resolution z : 1 - 3 nm Colors : 2 Post - processing : Yes Dyes : Limited ( photoswitchable ) MINFLUX SMLM Resolution xy : 10 - 50 nm Resolution z : ~ 100 nm ( TIRF ) 3D - enhanced z : 3D - STORM / iPALM : 50 - 70 nm Colors : 4 Post - processing : Yes Dyes : STORM / PALM : Limited ( photoswitchable ) SIM Resolution xy : 100 - 130 nm Resolution z : ~ 600 nm 3D - enhanced z : 3D - SIM : 300 - 400 nm STED Resolution xy : 20 - 70 nm Resolution z : ~ 600 nm 3D - enhanced z : isoSTED : 20 - 100 nm Confocal Resolution xy : > 200 nm Resolution z : ~ 600 nm 3D - enhanced z : 4Pi : 100 - 150 nm Colors : > 4 Post - processing : No Dyes : Conventional Colors : 3 Post - processing : No Dyes : Partially limited ( photostable ) Colors : 4 Post - processing : Yes Dyes : Conventional Resolution xy : 25 - 30 nm Resolution z : 50 - 70 nm Colors : > 4 Post - processing : No Dyes : Most conventional A E B C F D Figure 1 . Overview of confocal and major super - resolution microscopy techniques ( A ) Laser scanning confocal microscopy is a diffraction - limited technique , performed by scanning an excitation laser over the sample point - by - point and acquiring the emitted light in the focal plane through a pinhole . ( B ) Like confocal microscopy , STED is a laser - scanning technique acquired in a point - by - point manner . In STED , the excitation beam is overlayed with a doughnut - shaped depletion beam that turns off ﬂuorescence emission at the periphery , resulting in an emission area smaller than the diffraction limit . ( C ) In SIM , the sample is imaged with wideﬁeld illumination overlayed with an interfering grating pattern . Multiple images are acquired by rotating the grating at different angles and then processed to produce the ﬁnal image . ( D ) Single - molecule localization microscopy relies on the stochastic nature of ﬂuorophore emission ( ‘‘blinking’’ ) to ensure that only small , dispersed subsets of ﬂuorophores are emitting at a given time . Blinking can be achieved by photoactivation / switching ( PALM / STORM ) or through transient binding to a target structure ( PAINT ) . The sample is illuminated many times , and the data are processed to determine the spatial coordinates of the individual ﬂuorophores . ( E ) MINFLUX relies on ﬂuorophore ‘‘blinking’’ ( as in SMLM ) , but the sample is excited with a doughnut - shaped excitation ( rather than depletion ) beam . As a result , ﬂuorophores close to the center of excitation will emit fewer photons , and emission minima can be used to determine the localizations . ( F ) Inexpansion microscopy , thesample is embeddedina gel , whichis expanded isometrically to distance theﬂuorophores physically . Theenlarged sample can be imaged using conventional , diffraction - limited microscopy . Notes : resolutions reﬂect the typical values achieved with commercial microscope setups ; colors refer to the use of multiple ﬂuorophores simultaneously . ll OPEN ACCESS iScience 24 , 102134 , March 19 , 2021 3 iScience Review An additional approach , structured illumination microscopy ( SIM ) , does not rely on ﬂuorescence states but instead exploits wave optics to construct a super - resolution image . In SIM , optical gratings are used to illu - minate the sample with patterned light , resulting in the formation of interference patterns , also known as Moire´ fringes . Put simply , these fringes are a mixture between the frequency patterns of light emitted by the sample and the frequency of the illumination pattern , and because the latter is known , the former can be retrieved mathematically . In a SIM measurement , the sample is illuminated multiple times with rotations of the grating pattern at different angles ( Figure 1 ) . In total , (cid:1) 15 rotations are required to reconstruct an image with a lateral resolution of (cid:1) 100 nm ( Gustafsson , 2000 ) . Inthe axial plane , the introduction of an addi - tional patterned illumination allows a typical resolution of (cid:1) 300 – 400 nm ( Schermelleh et al . , 2008 ) . Higher lateral resolutions ( < 50 nm ) can be obtained with the non - linear form of SIM ( NL - SIM ) that relies on satu - ration of the ﬂuorophore excited state with a high intensity light to produce a nonlinear response between the excitation and emission intensities ( Li et al . , 2015 ) . Lastly , expansion microscopy ( ExM ) presents a creative solution for overcoming the diffraction limit without any need for optical ‘‘tricks’’ , by physically expanding the sample itself ( Chen et al . , 2015 ) . In ExM , the ﬂuo - rescently labeled sample is embedded in a swellable polymer gel and the ﬂuorophores are linked to the gel matrix . The sample is digested , and the gel is expanded in all dimensions , physically distancing the ﬂuorescent labels ( Figure 1 ) . As a result , super - resolution images can be acquired with conventional , diffraction - limited microscopes and with most conventional dyes . Most variants of ExM expand samples by a factor of (cid:1) 4 , allowing a lateral resolution of (cid:1) 70 nm , and iterative ExM , which includes a second gel step , allows x10 expansion , achieving a resolution of (cid:1) 25 nm ( Truckenbrodt et al . , 2018 ) . In contrast to the previously mentioned techniques , ExM is limited to ﬁxed samples only . On a cautionary note , it has been demonstrated that the expansion factor within a single cell may vary and should therefore be vali - dated carefully when performing ExM experiments ( Bu¨ttner et al . , 2020 ) . Variations on the techniques described earlier as well as the conception of new technologies are continu - ally emerging . Since it is well beyond the scope of this review to describe these here , we refer the reader to more extensive reviews of SRM techniques ( Sahl and Hell , 2019 ; Vangindertael et al . , 2018 ) . Super - resolution microscopy paves the way for quantitative biological insights Over the recent years , improvements in measurement ﬁdelity and novel analyses have allowed biologists to ask not only where a molecule is located but also how many molecules there are . As per their name , SMLM techniques are particularly well suited to tackle this question , because the number of molecules can , in the - ory , be inferred from the discrete single - molecule localizations . Through careful characterization of different experimental variables such as the labeling efﬁciency of the probes and ﬂuorophore blinking ki - netics ( see Challenge 4 , below ) , it becomes possible to estimate the true molecule amounts and stoichiom - etries . For example , PALM was used to count the number of lipid binding sites on endocytic vesicles in yeast , showing how these vary throughout vesicle maturation ( Puchner et al . , 2013 ) . In a more recent study , quantitative DNA - PAINT was used to determine the stoichiometry between ryanodine receptors ( RyRs ) and the RyR inhibitory protein junctophilin - 1 on the membranes of cardiomyocytes . The authors found that the ratio of expression between the two proteins is highly heterogeneous , implying that other forms of RyR regulation are likely to exist ( Jayasinghe et al . , 2018 ) . Molecule counting can also be achieved by SRM tech - niques that do not compute single - molecule localizations . For example , using STED , the number of inter - nalized transferrin receptors could be accurately counted through analysis of photon emission statistics , relying on the idea that ﬂuorophores can only emit a single photon at a given time , and thus a simultaneous detection of multiple photons should indicate the presence of multiple molecules ( Ta et al . , 2015 ) ( see Challenge 4 , below ) ( Figures 2A - 2C ) . The improved accuracy of SRM also allows more meticulous investigations of spatial organizations of mo - lecular structures . One topic of investigation where this has been particularly instructive is that of receptor clustering at the plasma membrane , which is known to be an important step in the initiation of intracellular signaling events . Studies employing a variety of SRM techniques have exploited clustering analysis to demonstrate , for example , the formation of heterogeneous clusters of T cell receptors ( TCRs ) in response to activation ( PALM ) ( Sherman et al . , 2013 ) ( Figure 2D ) , the induction of arrestin clustering in response to G - protein - coupled receptor stimulation ( STORM ) ( Truan et al . , 2013 ) and the clustering of AMPA - type gluta - mate receptors at the synapse ( combined PALM , STED and PAINT ) ( Nair et al . , 2013 ) ( Figure 2E ) . The use of similar analyses has also revealed previously unknown molecular mechanisms , for example , in the ﬁeld of ll OPEN ACCESS 4 iScience 24 , 102134 , March 19 , 2021 iScience Review A C I n c o m i n g v e s i c l e s PALM : PI3P binding sites PAINT : stoichiometry RyR receptors : JPH2 STED : transferrin receptors ( TfR ) E a r l y en d o s o m e s L a t e en d o s o m e s RyR / JPH2 250 nm B 1 µm P A L M S T E D P A I N T D E F PALM : Clustering of activated T cells AMPA receptor nanodomains in synapses PALM : ESCRT clustering at HIV assembly sites M o l e c u l e c o un t i n g G H 3 color STORM : excitatory synaptic nanocolumns 3D SIM : inhibitory synaptic nanocolumns Multiplex STORM : sequential imaging of synaptic targets I 2 µm 1 µm 1 µm S p a t i a l o r g a n i z a t i o n C o l o c a li z a t i o n 50 nm 200 nm 2 µm 2 µm Figure 2 . Biological insights from quantitative super - resolution microscopy . The scheme shows three types of quantitative SRM analyses and example studies . ( A – C ) Countingmoleculesanddeterminingmolecularstoichiometries . ( A ) PALMimagesofPI3Pbindingsitesonendocyticvesiclescolocalizingwithmarkers of different maturation stages ( top to bottom : clathrin , the GTPase Vps21 , the GTPase Ypt7Scale ) . The images show that increasingly mature vesicles have a higher PI3P content . Scale bar : 100 nm . Adapted with permission from ( Puchner et al . , 2013 ) . ( B ) Left panel : STED and confocal images of internalized TfRs ( axial summation of 0 . 9 m m ) . H is the maximal intensity value ( number of photon counts ) per pixel . Right panel : 3D molecular map generated by photon statistics of STED and confocal recordings . Inset : isosurfaces of the molecular map ( corresponding to the boxed region , encompassing (cid:1) 70 % of these molecules ) . The colors represent the number of molecules in the corresponding region . Scale bars : 1 m m . Adapted from ( Ta et al . , 2015 ) , CC - BY - 4 . 0 . ( C ) Exchange qPAINT image of RyR receptors ( red ) and JPH2 ( green ) co - clusters . The ratio between the number of JPH2 and RyR molecules is determined for each cluster . Scale bar : 250 nm . Adapted from ( Jayasinghe et al . , 2018 ) , CC - BY - 4 . 0 . ( D – F ) Spatial organization / clustering of molecules . ( D ) 2 - color PALM image of TCRs ( red ) co - clustered with the linker for activation of T cells LAT ( green ) . Scale bar : 2 m m . Adapted from ( Sherman et al . , 2013 ) , with permission from John Wiley and Sons . ( E ) Examples of AMPA receptors ( GluA1 / 2 subunits ) clustered in ‘‘nanodomains’’ inside dendritic spines , imaged by PALM , STED , or PAINT ( top to bottom panels , respectively ) . Scale bar : 1 m m . Adapted from ( Nair et al . , 2013 ) , CC BY - NC - SA 3 . 0 . ll OPEN ACCESS iScience 24 , 102134 , March 19 , 2021 5 iScience Review virology and in particular for the replication cycle of human immunodeﬁciency virus 1 ( HIV1 ) . For example , STED imaging of HIV particles demonstrated that during maturation , the viral envelope protein ( Env ) forms clusters that assist the entry of the virus into cells ( Chojnacki et al . , 2017 ) . Another study used 3D PALM to quantify the accumulation of the ESCRT ( Endosomal Sorting Complex Required for Transport ) protein complex at the head of the budding virus , showing its function in releasing the virus from infected cells ( Van Engelenburg et al . , 2014 ) ( Figure 2F ) . In addition to protein structures , SRM has also shed light on meaningful organizations of RNA and DNA ( Boettiger et al . , 2016 ; Mofﬁtt et al . , 2016 ; Ricci et al . , 2015 ) . Finally , advanced multiplexing capabilities , in combination with colocalization analyses , have revealed pre - viously unknown molecular interactions . For example , 3D 3 - color STORM imaging of synapses led to the discovery that clusters of pre - synaptic proteins that mediate synaptic vesicle release localize in apposition to clusters of post - synaptic receptors , forming trans - synaptic ‘‘nanocolumns’’ ( Tang et al . , 2016 ) ( Figure 2G ) . In a recent study , 3D SIM revealed similar nanodomains in inhibitory synapses consisting of post - syn - aptic clusters of and GABA A - type receptors and gephyrin scaffolds in apposition to pre - synaptic clusters of the active - zone protein Rab3 - interacting molecule ( RIM ) ( Crosby et al . , 2019 ) ( Figure 2H ) . Beyond the inter - rogation of a handful of molecular species , sequential SRM techniques can measure a theoretically limitless number of targets by employing repeated steps of labeling and acquisition . For example , a multiplexed implementation of PAINT was used to map the precise distributions of ﬁve receptor tyrosine kinases ( RTKs ) in breast cancer cells , revealing previously unknown ligand - dependent interactions ( Werbin et al . , 2017 ) . More recently , a sequential implementation of STORM reached unprecedented scales through autonomous labeling and acquisition of over a dozen separate synaptic targets , showing that such ap - proaches can reveal previously unknown functional roles ( Klevanski et al . , 2020 ) ( Figure 2I ) . CHALLENGES ( AND SOLUTIONS ) IN ACHIEVING QUANTITATIVE SRM Challenge 1 : preparing optimal samples for SRM Fixation Subtle ﬂaws in biological samples that are invisible to conventional microscopy become readily apparent at nanoscale resolution . One of the biggest sources of imaging artifacts is the ﬁxation of biological samples , which is intended to immobilize or ‘‘ﬁx’’ the molecules in place for subsequent imaging . One approach uses organic solvents , such as methanol , to precipitate proteins . Although this treatment has been widely used in ﬂuorescence microscopy before labeling cytoskeletal components such as microtubules , SRM has since revealed that these structures are poorly preserved at the nanoscale ( Jimenez et al . , 2020 ) . Furthermore , treatment with organic solvents can lead to a loss of membranes and soluble cytosolic proteins . Fixation in immunolabeling experiments is more frequently achieved through the use of aldehydes to cross - link neighboring peptides , primarily by bridging between the side chains of lysine residues . Paraformaldehyde ( PFA ) is generally favored for these applications because it produces a relatively fast and mild reaction , which is less likely to distort cellular epitopes and disrupt their immunogenicity ( Hopwood , 1969 ) . However , SRM has revealed latent artifacts of PFA ﬁxation , such as an apparent clustering of membrane receptors , distortion of the cell cytoskeleton , and inefﬁcient immobilization of membrane proteins ( Brock et al . , 1999 ; Pereira et al . , 2019 ; Stanly et al . , 2016 ) . These effects can be somewhat mitigated by ﬁxing cells with a combination of PFA and glutaraldehyde ( GA ) at varying concentrations , facilitating more extensive cross - linking by virtue of the two aldehyde groups on the GA molecule ( versus the single aldehyde group on PFA ) . This combination was shown to produce signiﬁcantly better preservation of native membrane pro - tein distributions and cytoskeletal structures ( Tanaka et al . , 2010 ; Whelan and Bell , 2015 ) . However , the exhaustive cross - linking can often distort or block epitopes , making GA inapplicable to many Figure 2 . Continued ( F ) Right : PALM images of single clusters of Gag HIV assembly sites ( red ) colocalizing with ESCRT - I subunits Tsg101 ( green ) from axial and lateral views ( top and bottom panels , respectively ) . Scale bar : 50 nm . Left : 3D single - cluster averaging of Gag and Tsg101 demonstratethe presence of ESCRT subunits within the interior of the HIV Gag lattice . Adapted from ( Van Engelenburg et al . , 2014 ) , with permission from AAAS . ( G – I ) Determining molecular interactions through colocalization analyses . ( G ) Top : 3D STORM image of RIM1 / 2 ( red ) and PSD - 95 ( blue ) nanoclusters , with a pixel size of 10 nm , compared with a wideﬁeld composite ( bottom corner ) with a pixel size of 100 nm . Scale bar : 2 m m . Bottom : enlargement of the boxed region in the original and rotated angles ( left and right , respectively ) . Scale bar : 200 nm . Adapted from ( Tang et al . , 2016 ) , with permission from Springer Nature . ( H ) Left : confocal ( top ) and 3D SIM ( bottom ) images of a synapse , labeled for Gephyrin ( green ) , GABA A receptors ( red ) , and the vesicular glutamate transporter VGAT ( blue ) . Scale bars : 1 m m ( top ) and 500 nm ( bottom ) . Right : 3D reconstruction of a single synapse . Scale bar : 500 nm . Adapted from ( Crosby etal . , 2019 ) , withpermissionfromElsevier . ( I ) MultiplexSTORMimagesshowingﬁvedifferentsynaptictargetsimagesinthesamesection ( outof16targetsin total ) . Left , top to bottom : actin marked by phalloidin ; the endosome - associated protein Rab5 ; Golgi marked by GM130 . Right , top to bottom : clathrin marked by CHC17 ; the endosome - associated protein EEA1 ; overlay of all ﬁve channels . Scale bar : 2 m m . Adapted from ( Klevanski et al . , 2020 ) . ll OPEN ACCESS 6 iScience 24 , 102134 , March 19 , 2021 iScience Review immunolabeled samples ( Farr and Nakane , 1981 ) . A worthy alternative is the small dialdehyde glyoxal , which was recently shown to outperform PFA ﬁxation for a wide range of cellular targets in SRM . As part of an extensive study , Richter and colleagues tested the performance of glyoxal with STED microscopy and demonstrated superior preservation of a large variety of cellular targets , including membrane - bound and organelle - resident proteins , as well as nucleic acids ( Richter et al . , 2018 ) . Although glyoxal is not widely applied as of yet , it is likely to become a valuable tool for SRM experiments . As with any approach , however , there is no ‘‘one - size - ﬁts - all’’ reagent , and different cell types and targets are visualized best with different varieties or combinations of ﬁxatives ( Figure 3 ) . It should also be noted that besides the choice of ﬁxative , additional aspects of the ﬁxation reaction , such as the length , temperature , and ﬁxative concentrations , should also be optimized to maximize structural preservation . It is also strongly advised to follow - up the ﬁxation reaction with a treatment of sodium borohydride , glycine , or ammonium chloride solution to ‘‘quench’’ the unreacted aldehydes and avoid morphological distortions due to overﬁxation . Fortunately , several studies have undertaken the task of comparing and optimizing sample preparation procedures for SRM applications ( e . g . ( Black , 2016 ; Halpern et al . , 2015 ; Richter et al . , 2018 ; Whelan and Bell , 2015 ) ) , and where literature is lacking , it is advisable to invest the time in performing such optimizations . As a possible alternative to chemical ﬁxation , samples can also be vitriﬁed by rapid - freezing , which acts to ﬁx the molecules in place , while preventing the formation of ice crystals that might damage the cells . This technique is routinely used for high - resolution imaging methods such as electron and X - ray microscopy because it preserves cellular structures in their native states ( Ve´nien - Bryan et al . , 2017 ) . Recently , a number of groups have implemented specialized low - temperature cryo - stages and cryo - immersion objectives ( Faoro et al . , 2018 ) , which enable ﬂuorescence imaging of vitriﬁed samples ( Hoffman et al . , 2020 ; Tuijtel et al . , 2019 ) . One caveat of this technique , however , is that standard immunolabeling , which necessitates permeabilization of the cell membrane , is no longer a possibility . That being said , intracellular targets can be visualized with genetically encoded ﬂuorescent proteins ( see Challenge 2 , below ) , provided that they are both sufﬁciently small and are reliable at cryogenic temperatures ( Johnson et al . , 2015 ; Tuijtel et al . , 2019 ) . The success of these preliminary experiments , as well as the ongoing development of cryo - compat - ible optics and probes , make cryo - SRM an exciting possibility for the future . Labeling and mounting For subsequent labeling of aldehyde - ﬁxed samples , membrane permeabilization for access to intracellular targets is frequently achieved with detergents such as Triton X - 100 , Tween 20 , digitonin , and saponin . The type and concentration of detergent should be optimized , because harsher treatments can lead to a loss of membrane - bound proteins . When available , small probes such as nanobodies can be used without the need for the permeabilization step , because the ﬁxation process itself creates small ruptures in the mem - brane . When performing immunostainings for SRM it is often beneﬁcial to use a higher - than - normal con - centration of antibody and longer incubation times to achieve a sufﬁcient labeling density . Nevertheless , titrations of antibody amounts should be performed to avoid artifacts due to an overlabeling of the target ( Lau et al . , 2012 ; Whelan and Bell , 2015 ) . Because a higher antibody concentration can potentially increase the amount of unspeciﬁc staining , it is crucial to incubate the cells in a ‘‘blocking’’ buffer prior to the stain - ing , containing serum from the source species of the secondary antibody or proteins such as bovine serum albumin ( BSA ) . Beyond these general recommendations , speciﬁc criteria such as the temperature and length of incubation , as well as the precise concentrations of detergents and blocking agents should be optimized for the desired target and technique . An additional consideration for SRM sample preparation is the uniformity of the light path between the sample and the objective lens , to ensure that a maximal amount of light reaches the objective lens . For ﬁxed samples , it is necessary to use a mounting medium that has a similar refractive index to the glass and the objective and contains an effective anti - fade reagent . A thorough comparison of mounting media for SRM can be found in ( Birk , 2017 ) . It is also strongly advised to use high - performance glass coverslips with a low variance in thickness and to mount specimens as close as possible to the coverslip . Challenge 2 : super - resolution requires super probes Choosing a labeling strategy can be particularly challenging for quantitative applications . It is important to bear in mind that the measured signals do not arise from the target molecules themselves but from ﬂuo - rophores that are positioned a full label’s length away . If the labels are larger than the resolution of the technique , any assertion of molecule locations cannot be entirely accurate . When the labeled molecules are to be counted , the number of ﬂuorophores labeling a target molecule should be known , as well as ll OPEN ACCESS iScience 24 , 102134 , March 19 , 2021 7 iScience Review Mitochondria P F A + G A G A TOM20 ER P F A G l y o x a l No . of organelle like structures Calreticulin B Microtubules PFA Methanol TX + GA Tubulin Actin P F A i n PBS P F A i n PE M Phalloidin P F A i n PE M G A WAVE2 A Membrane receptors PFA 4°C PFA 23°C PFA 37°C C CD4 DNA PFA PFA + TX Glyoxal CENPA D F E 10 µm 10 µm 1 µm 1 µm 1 µm 1 µm 5 µm 1 µm Figure 3 . Importance of optimal sample ﬁxation for super - resolution ( A ) Top : ground state depletion ( GSD ) images of actin marked by phalloidin , following ﬁxation with PFA in PBS or PEM buffer ( cytoskeleton - protective buffer ) . The latter results in more uniform staining . Scale bar : 10 m m and 1 m m for closeups . Bottom : GSD images of the actin - binding protein WAVE2 after ﬁxation with GA or PFA in PEM . The number of localized particles per unit of area is higher for PFA . Scale bar : 1 m m . Adapted from ( Leyton - Puig et al . , 2016 ) . ( B ) STEDimagesoftheERchaperonecalreticulinfollowingﬁxationwith4 % PFAor3 % glyoxal . Asshownintheplot , moreorganelle - likestructuresarevisible with glyoxal ﬁxation . Scale bar : 1 m m . Adapted from ( Richter et al . , 2018 ) . ( C ) STORM images of CD4 receptors following ﬁxation with 4 % PFA in PEM buffer at 4 (cid:3) C , 23 (cid:3) C , or 37 (cid:3) C ( left to right ) . Plot : CD4 cluster density is highest for ﬁxation at 4 (cid:3) C , demonstrating that suboptimal ﬁxation can induce artiﬁcial clustering . Scale bar : 5 m m . Adapted from ( Pereira et al . , 2019 ) . ( D ) STORM images of microtubules following ﬁxation with 4 % PFA , (cid:4) 20 (cid:3) C methanol , or 3 % GA after pre - extraction using 0 . 3 % Triton X - 100 ( left to right ) . White arrowsindicateadiscontinuityintheﬁlaments . Thebluearrowindicatesabnormalcurvatureoftheﬁlaments . Scalebar : 1 m m . Adaptedfrom ( WhelanandBell , 2015 ) . ( E ) STORM images of mitochondria marked by TOM20 . Top : ﬁxation with 4 % GA . Some clustering is observed as well as shrinkage of the overall structure . Bottom : ﬁxationwith3 % PFA and 0 . 5 % GA . Littleclustering is observed , and thestaining distribution appears homogeneous . Scalebar : 1 m m . Adapted from ( Whelan and Bell , 2015 ) . ( F ) Airyscan images of thecentromeremarker CENP - A following ﬁxationwith 3 % glyoxal , 3 . 5 % PFA , or 3 . 5 % PFA with0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 ( leftto right ) . Glyoxal ﬁxationresultsinastrongnon - speciﬁccytoplasmicstaining , whichisalsovisible ( toalesserextent ) withPFAﬁxationalone . FixationwithPFA / Txresultsinthe highest staining speciﬁcity . Scale bar : 10 m m . Adapted from ( Celikkan et al . , 2020 ) , with permission from Springer Nature . ll OPEN ACCESS 8 iScience 24 , 102134 , March 19 , 2021 iScience Review the properties of the ﬂuorescence emission . The researcher should therefore have a good working knowl - edge of the chosen labeling strategy and perform careful calibrations to account for its inherent variables ( Table 1 ) . The direct option—genetically encoded labels Cellular targets can be visualized directly by covalently binding them to ﬂuorescent proteins ( FPs ) through targeted genetic modiﬁcations . Aside from the obvious advantage of enabling live - cell imaging , genetic tagging with FPs is an ideal approach for quantitative applications ( speciﬁcally molecule counting ) because the invariable label - target stoichiometry of 1 : 1 means that there is no risk of molecules being ‘‘over - counted . ’’ That being said , several considerations should be kept in mind when using FPs for quantitative measurements . Firstly , although most FPs are not particularly large ( (cid:1) 25 kDa ) , it should be veriﬁed that their addition does not change the functionality and localization of the target proteins or affect the stoichiom - etry of complex formation ( especially in relation to molecule counting ) ( Weill et al . , 2019 ) . An additional consideration is that the imaged regions are likely to include endogenous , unlabeled proteins that will not be accounted for in ﬂuorescent measurements . Biochemical techniques such as quantitative immuno - blotting can be used to determine the ratio between the labeled and unlabeled proteins to correct the quantiﬁcations derived from the FPs alone ( Wood , 1983 ; Wu , 2005 ) . Alternatively , the need for exogenous protein expression can be eliminated altogether by generating knock - in ﬂuorescent fusion proteins that label the entire endogenous population ( Ratz et al . , 2015 ) . Lastly , any quantiﬁcation should also take into account the ‘‘skipped’’ emissions of FPs due to misfolding or failure to mature , in order to avoid under - counting the number of molecules . Several approaches exist for measuring the maturation and folding ef - ﬁciencies of FPs , and these values have already been reported for a number of proteins under various experimental conditions ( Dunsing et al . , 2018 ; Ko ¨ ker et al . , 2018 ) . Rather than expressing an FP , target pro - teins can be genetically conjugated to a scaffold that binds free ﬂuorescent substrates in solution . The most Table 1 . Comparison of ﬂuorescent proteins and afﬁnity probes for quantitative SRM Fluorescent proteins Protein / peptide tags Afﬁnity probes + organic dyes Selection of labels suitable for SRM Limited selection Large selection Large selection Speciﬁcity High ( genetically encoded ) Variable a Variable b Binding afﬁnity Covalent Covalent Variable Labeling efﬁciency All expressed proteins are labeled ( exogenous for transient expression , endogenous for genome editing with CRISPR / Cas ) Variable c Variable ( higher for smaller probes ) c Label : target stoichiometry Controlled ( 1 : 1 ) d Controlled ( 1 : 1 ) d , e Difﬁcult to control Typical photophysical properties Brightness Dim Bright Bright Photostability Low High High Overcounting S ( labels ) > S ( molecules ) Multiple blinking events f Multiple blinking events f Multiple blinking events f Overlabeling when using secondary antibodies and / or polyclonal antibodies Undercounting S ( labels ) < S ( molecules ) Co - presence of unlabeled endogenous protein g Misfolding h Failure to mature h Co - presence of unlabeled endogenous protein g Incomplete labeling reaction c Incomplete labeling due to low afﬁnity or low accessibility to epitopes c Primary advantage Suitable for quantiﬁcation Suitable for quantiﬁcation , wide choice of dyes Flexible labeling a Fluorescent substrates that are quenched in their non - binding state alleviate signals from non - speciﬁc deposition of substrates ( Hori and Kikuchi , 2013 ) . b Selection of antibodies that have been veriﬁed to not cross - react with other species . c Novel calibration standards ( Cella Zanacchi et al . , 2019 ; Thevathasan et al . , 2019 ) . d Does not account for endogenous unlabeled proteins . e Does not account for incomplete labeling of protein tags . f Calibration experiments to model ﬂuorophore blinking kinetics ( Golfetto et al . , 2018 ) . g Endogenous protein amounts can be assessed with biochemical methods . h Use reported values or measure ( Dunsing et al . , 2018 ; Ko¨ker et al . , 2018 ) . ll OPEN ACCESS iScience 24 , 102134 , March 19 , 2021 9 iScience Review commonly used ‘‘self - labeling’’ proteins are SNAP ( Keppler et al . , 2003 ) and HaLo ( Los et al . , 2008 ) tags , which can be covalently reacted with benzylguanine ( BG ) and chloralkane ( CA ) molecules , respectively . The major advantage is that these substrates are conjugated to organic dyes , which are often brighter , more photostable , and signiﬁcantly more diverse than FPs . Nevertheless , these substrates are often as large as directly encoded FPs ( (cid:1) 20 kDa and (cid:1) 30 kDa for SNAP and HaLo , respectively ) and can similarly inﬂuence protein function or localization . To mitigate this , smaller peptide tags have been developed , such as a short tetracysteine motif that binds to ﬂuorescein arsenical hairpin ( FlAsH ) ( Adams et al . , 2002 ) . Because ﬂuorescein can undergo photoswitching , FlAsH tags can be readily applied to STORM or PALM ( ‘‘FlAsH - PALM’’ ) ( Lelek et al . , 2012 ) . Another approach is the incorporation of non - canonical amino acids ( ncAAs ) with small functional groups such as strained alkenes into a chosen position in the target protein , using amber codon suppression ( Brown et al . , 2018 ) . The ncAAs can be subsequently bound to SRM - compatible ﬂuorophores containing complementary functional groups , such as tetrazines ( Beliu et al . , 2019 ; Kozma et al . , 2017 ) . A major pitfall of this technique is the difﬁculty of targeting multiple proteins , because only the amber codon can be efﬁciently employed in mammalian cells . However , this problem can be circumvented by expressing the target proteins in separate sets of cells , and subsequently fusing these cells , allowing the proteins to intermix ( Saal et al . , 2018 ) . Despite the appeal of this approach , the process of incorporating ncAAs can be technically challenging and depends on a multitude of factors , including the properties of the target protein and the location of the mutation site . Therefore , further im - provements in the efﬁciency of ncAA incorporation are needed in order to make this technique more widely applicable ( Chemla et al . , 2018 ) . An important point to note when using self - labeling tags is that the addi - tion of a second tagging step introduces new variables to be accounted for : an incomplete reaction may result in molecule undercounting , whereas an unspeciﬁc deposition of the substrate may result in over - counting ( Bosch et al . , 2014 ) . The latter is particularly problematic for live imaging applications , because unbound substrate cannot be readily washed out . This can be mitigated to a certain extent by using ﬂuo - rescent substrates that are signiﬁcantly dimmer or quenched in their non - binding state , reducing the amount of unspeciﬁc background emissions ( Carlson et al . , 2013 ; Hori and Kikuchi , 2013 ) . For peptide tags such as FlAsH , a high background would rather indicate an unspeciﬁc binding of the substrate , because by nature of the reaction , non - bound ﬂuorophores are signiﬁcantly dimmer . If this becomes an issue , alternative binding motifs may perform better ( Martin et al . , 2005 ) . In any case , the degree of labeling should be determined under the speciﬁc experimental conditions and accounted for during analyses . Recent work has been done to develop easily applicable calibration methods for quantifying ﬂuorescent substrate labeling efﬁciencies . For example , Zanacchi and colleagues generated a cell - line expressing a DNA origami structure attached to a known number of binding sites , which can be implemented across all imaging and experimental conditions ( Cella Zanacchi et al . , 2019 ) . Alternatively , existing biological structures with known stereotypical arrangements can be exploited to yield accurate reference data ( e . g . , nuclear pores ( Thevathasan et al . , 2019 ) ) . Overall , FPs and protein tags are favorable for quantitative experiments because the level of FP expres - sion and protein labeling can largely be controlled . Nevertheless , this approach is severely limited by the need for laborious genetic modiﬁcation , and many researchers resort to more ﬂexible labeling techniques . The ﬂexible option—afﬁnity probes A ﬂexible approach for ﬂuorescent labeling relies on the use of labels with a high binding afﬁnity for the target molecule . The most commonly used labels are antibodies derived by immunizing animals against a structural motif in the target molecule ( Stadler et al . , 2013 ) . However , additional labels can be derived from synthetic or naturally occurring peptides with a high afﬁnity for speciﬁc proteins , lipids , or nucleic acids . When applying afﬁnity probes to SRM , it is especially important to use validated labels that have been proven not to cross - react with similar molecules in order to minimize unspeciﬁc background signals . Another point to consider is that afﬁnity probes can often be very large , thus limiting the effective resolu - tion in SRM . For example , the most commonly used immunoglobulin ( IgG ) - type antibodies are typically (cid:1) 150 kDa or (cid:1) 12 nm in length . Because most immunolabeling experiments make use of additional ‘‘sec - ondary’’ antibodies to bring the ﬂuorophores near the labeling antibodies , each ﬂuorophore is ultimately distanced (cid:1) 20 nm away from its target molecule , which is already on the order of the attainable resolution . Furthermore , the use of large labels can also cause steric hindrances that diminish the labeling density , potentially resulting in an undercounting of molecules . As a result , SRM experiments often utilize much smaller probes such as antibody fragments ( (cid:1) 50 kDa / (cid:1) 9 nm ) , small recombinant fragments ( (cid:1) 30 kDa / ll OPEN ACCESS 10 iScience 24 , 102134 , March 19 , 2021 iScience Review (cid:1) 6 nm ) , aptamers , and nanobodies ( (cid:1) 15 kDa / 3 nm ) ( Sahl et al . , 2017 ) . Nanobodies are particularly suitable for quantitative measurements because they possess a single antigen - binding site and can be labeled with a known number of ﬂuorophores , allowing a large amount of control over the labeling stoichiometry ( Pleiner et al . , 2018 ) , and have already been thoroughly demonstrated to fulﬁll the needs of most super - res - olution applications ( Ries et al . , 2012 ) . Unfortunately , as of yet nanobodies are only available for a limited number of cellular targets . A good alternative is the use of small non - immuno probes such as RNA ap - tamers or afﬁmers ( peptide aptamers ) . Aptamers are produced rapidly in vitro in identical copies with pre - cise ﬂuorophore stoichiometry , making them ideal for quantitative applications ( Ta et al . , 2015 ) . However , even with a known stoichiometry for the labeled molecules , there is still the inevitable pool of molecules that will remain unlabeled . At the same time , afﬁnity probes do not bind their targets covalently and can have widely varying degrees of labeling efﬁciencies stemming from different labeling afﬁnities and avid - ities , as well as steric hindrance in the case of larger probes such as IgGs . As a result , the portion of unla - beled molecules in an experiment will not always be negligible . In practice , it is not straightforward to es - timate the labeling efﬁciency of a probe , and although values such as the binding afﬁnity and avidity can be determined with various in vitro assays , the results are unlikely to reﬂect the true values in a biological sam - ple . Due to this limitation , many researchers resort to using FPs for quantitative applications . However , ef - forts have been made toward the development of dedicated calibration standards that can be used in conjunction with SRM ( see earlier discussion ) . With the gradual incorporation of such invariant calibration standards , afﬁnity probes are likely to become an increasingly common tool for quantitative measurements . Special considerations for SMLM : ﬂuorophore blinking kinetics SMLM relies on the stochastic blinking of photoswitchable / activatable proteins ( PALM ) or organic dyes ( STORM ) . For quantiﬁcation purposes , it is preferable to use photoactivatable ﬂuorophores whose state transition is irreversible , meaning that each emitter is counted just a single time . Unfortunately , irreversible photoactivation is not always successful , and the ﬂuorophores can often exhibit reversible blinking ( Anni - bale et al . , 2010 ) , which may result in an overcounting of molecules . To mitigate this problem , it is prefer - able to choose ﬂuorophores with a low duty cycle , meaning they spend only a small fraction of their time in the on state ( ideally < 1 % ) , thus reducing the likelihood of multiple emissions . Nevertheless , a variety of sta - tistical analyses and algorithms modeling blinking kinetics can be used to construct blinking - corrected im - ages ( see Challenge 4 , below ) . Alternatively , the blinking can be decoupled from the photophysical prop - erties of the ﬂuorophore altogether by resorting to a quantitative implementation of DNA - PAINT ( qPAINT ) as an imaging approach ( Jungmann et al . , 2016 ) . Here , the apparent blinking of the ﬂuorophores is a func - tion of the probe / target binding kinetics rather than a stochastic photoswitching of ﬂuorophores . By measuring the time between sequential blinks at a given location , the number of molecules can be deduced using prior knowledge of the binding kinetics , without any need to resolve the spatial location of the molecules . An additional requirement for SMLM is a high contrast ratio , or a large difference in brightness be - tween the on and off states of the ﬂuorophore ( ideally (cid:1) 100 times brighter ) , in order to ensure an ac - curate localization among competing background emissions ( Li and Vaughan , 2018 ) . This is particularly important when the labeling density is high , and the chances of nearby ﬂuorophores simultaneously emitting is increased ( van de Linde et al . , 2010 ) . Sufﬁce to say , there are several considerations for se - lecting ﬂuorophores for SMLM experiments , and these become particularly pertinent for quantitative measurements . Because a comparison of suitable ﬂuorophores is beyond the scope here , we encourage the reader to refer to more thorough reviews ( Li and Vaughan , 2018 ; Turkowyd et al . , 2016 ) . Furthermore , it should be noted that even when adequate ﬂuorophores are selected , their behavior is dependent on the imaging conditions . A number of studies have attempted to characterize ﬂuorophore blinking kinetics under different imaging conditions , but these have not been applied sys - tematically to cellular models . It is therefore strongly advised to perform calibration experiments , for example , by carrying out a titration series of the ﬂuorescent labels ( Baumgart et al . , 2016 ; Ehmann et al . , 2014 ) . However , such calibrations require repeated imaging sessions and can therefore be extremely time - consuming . Recently , Golfetto and colleagues developed an assay to precisely deter - mine the photophysical properties of a ﬂuorophore for any given optical setup , without the need for any prior knowledge of the ﬂuorophore blinking kinetics ( Golfetto et al . , 2018 ) . Such systematic solu - tions for characterizing ﬂuorophore photoblinking allow for highly accurate molecular quantiﬁcations with SMLM . ll OPEN ACCESS iScience 24 , 102134 , March 19 , 2021 11 iScience Review Challenge 3 : multiplexing Choosing the right combination of ﬂuorophores Multicolor SRM opens the door to unprecedented investigations of molecular interactions and organizations . However , these experiments pose stringent limitations on the selection of ﬂuorescent labels . In practical terms , itisnecessarytoensurethat ( 1 ) theemission / excitationspectraoftheﬂuorophoresaresufﬁcientlydistinct , ( 2 ) the photophysical requirements for SRM are met ( e . g . bright / photoswitchable / photostable ) , and ( 3 ) the dyes ﬂuo - resce optimally under similar imagingconditions . The latter isparticularly pertinenttoSTORM becausedifferent organicdyesexhibitoptimalblinkingindifferentimagingbuffers ( determinedinlargebythepresenceorabsence of oxygen in solution ) . Many successful dye pairings have already been reported in the literature for STED , STORM , and additional SRM techniques utilizing organic ﬂuorophores ( e . g . ( Dempsey et al . , 2011 ; Kolmakov etal . , 2014 ; Yangand Specht , 2020 ) ) . Generally , dyessuchasrhodamine ( mostAlexaFluordyes ) andcyaninede - rivatives are usually favored because they have narrow emission spectra and are particularly bright ( Dempsey et al . , 2011 ) . Although they often have very different requirements for imaging buffers , palpable differences in their behavior can be mitigated by using novel buffers that are capable of promoting blinking for a wide range of ﬂuorescent dyes ( Nahidiazar et al . , 2016 ) . As an alternative , the blinking efﬁciency of each of the selected dyes can be measured under the speciﬁc experimental conditions and accounted for in post - hoc analyses ( see Challenge 4 , below ) . For methods such as PALM , which utilize FPs , ﬁnding successful ﬂuorophore combinations isanevengreaterchallengebecauseFPsaredimmerandspanasmallerspectralrangeascomparedwithorganic dyes . Nevertheless , successful pairings have been described ( Kozma and Kele , 2019 ) , and new FPs have been introducedtofacilitatemulticolorimaging ( Gunewardeneetal . , 2011 ) . Thatbeingsaid , itisnonethelessimportant toconductappropriatecontrolsandcorrectforbleed - through / cross - talkeffectsinmulticolorexperiments ( Bolte and Cordelieres , 2006 ) , for which various approaches have been described ( Kim et al . , 2013 ; Maddipatla and Tankam , 2020 ) . When an adequate combination of ﬂuorophores cannot be found , as is often the case when im - aging three or more colors , different techniques can be used to separate the overlapping emissions . One com - mon approach is spectral imaging , which relies on the measurement of emission spectra , rather than a narrow bandofwavelengthsateverypixel . Differentﬂuorescentdyeshaveuniquepatternsofemissionatdifferentwave - lengths ( known as spectral ‘‘signatures’’ ) , making it possible to algorithmically decipher which ﬂuorophore ( s ) is present in a given pixel . The most commonly used algorithm is linear unmixing , a method originally developed foranalyzingmultibandsatelliteimages ( Zimmermann , 2005 ) . Morerecentapproachesrelyonmachinelearning - based algorithms to differentiate overlapping spectra , even when the spectral signatures of the dyes are not known in advance ( McRae et al . , 2019 ) . Most major SRM techniques have successfully applied spectral imaging to two or more colors simultaneously ( MINFLUX ( Gwosch et al . , 2020 ) ; STED ( Winter et al . , 2017 ) ; PALM ( Dong et al . , 2016 ) ; STORM ( Zhang et al . , 2019 ) ; SIM ( Liao et al . , 2019 ) ) . Recently , a purely computational approach applied a deep - learning - based algorithm to differentiate multiple colors imaged simultaneously , without the needforanyspectralﬁltersorpriorknowledgeabouttheemitters ( Hershkoetal . , 2019 ) . Asanalternativetocom - plex experiment planning or spectral separating algorithms , expansion microscopy offers an attractive solution forﬁxedsamples ( Choetal . , 2018 ) . Inthiscase , thestandardlimitationsofconventionalmicroscopyapply , afford - ing a signiﬁcantly longer list of possible color combinations . Or ( ideally ) : multiplexing with a single ﬂuorophore As an alternative to multicolor imaging , it is possible to reuse the same probe over and over again for different targets within the same sample . This not only circumvents the need for ﬁnding adequate color combinations but also eliminates the inaccuracies stemming from photophysical differences between dyes , making it particularly favorable for quantitative applications . Because the number of possible targets is theoretically limitless , these techniques are only limited by the patience of the biologist . Single - probe multiplexing has been implemented with several SRM methods , for example , with STORM in combination with irreversible photobleaching of the ﬂuorophores ( Lin et al . , 2018 ; Valley et al . , 2015 ) or elution of anti - bodies ( Yi et al . , 2016 ) . However , these techniques can be very lengthy , because they require not only a sequential removal of the ﬂuorophores but also successive immunostaining steps . An improved technique is a multiplexed implementation of DNA - PAINT , where the targets are pre - labeled with antibodies linked to different DNA docking strands , and the complementary imager strands are sequentially washed into and out of the imaging solution ( exchange - PAINT ) ( Werbin et al . , 2017 ) . As an alternative to successive washing steps , ‘‘quencher’’ strands that prevent the binding of the imager strands to their targets can be added to the solution without any need for repeated ﬂuid exchanges ( Lutz et al . , 2018 ) ( Figure 4 ) . Because several hundreds of non - interacting DNA labeling sequences can be utilized for imager / docking strand binding , the number of targets is only limited by the length of the imaging steps . However , recent improvements in the design of the DNA sequences ( Strauss and Jungmann , 2020 ) and imaging buffer composition ll OPEN ACCESS 12 iScience 24 , 102134 , March 19 , 2021 iScience Review ( Civitci et al . , 2020 ) have improved the acquisition speed up to 100 - fold . Furthermore , improvements on existing DNA - conjugated probes such as the replacement of antibodies with nanobodies ( Sograte - Idrissi et al . , 2019 ) and the use of signal - amplifying DNA concatemers capable of binding multiple imaging strands ( Saka et al . , 2019 ) have signiﬁcantly improved the localization precision . Preventing and correcting registration errors between channels A crucial requirement for multiplexing is the precise alignment of images from different channels / probes . Samples can drift as a result of small instabilities in the microscope stage or experimental manipulations such as buffer changes ( e . g . in the case of exchange - PAINT ) , which can lead to a misalignment of sequential Exchange - PAINT A C D E B Quencher - exchange - PAINT 5 µm 5 µm 1 µm Figure 4 . Single ﬂuorophore multiplexing with Exchange - PAINT . Multiplexing with a single ﬂuorophore is the ideal choice for quantitative applications ( A – C ) Classic Exchange - PAINTimplementation , whichinvolves sequentiallywashing imagerstrands intoand outoftheimaging solution , is demonstratedin ﬁxed BT20 cells . ( A ) Scheme of the experiment . Each target is labeled with an antibody conjugated to a unique docking strand ( a , b , c , d , e ) . Five orthogonal imaging strands labeled with the ﬂuorophore Atto655 ( a * , b * , c * , d * , e * ) are sequentially washed in , imaged , and washed out . ( B ) Exchange - PAINT images from each sequential imaging step . Scale bar : 5 m m . ( C ) Merged image for all targets and enlargements of boxed regions ( inset ) . Scale bars : 5 m m for the full image and 1 m m for the insets . Adapted from ( Werbin et al . , 2017 ) , CC - BY - 4 . 0 . ( D and E ) Quencher - Exchange PAINT implementation , which involves sequentially imaging and then bleaching the imager strands . ( D ) Middle : the blinking event rate is proportional to the concentration of free imager strands . Top : in conventional exchange - PAINT , the concentration is tuned by exchanging the imagingsolution . Bottom : inquencher - exchange , theconcentrationistunedbyaddingcompetitivecomplementarystrands ( ‘‘quenchers’’ ) . ( E ) Topleft : afull Exchange - PAINT cycle using the P1 + imager and quencher for b - tubulin and the P2 + imager for TOM20 in ﬁxed COS - 7 cells . Top right : wideﬁeld and Exchange - PAINTimageofTOM20 ( red ) and b - tubulin ( green ) . Scalebar : 2 m m . Bottom : schemeoftheexperiment . Thesestepscantheoreticallyberepeated with any number of imager – quencher pairs . Adapted from ( Lutz et al . , 2018 ) , CC - BY - 4 . 0 . ll OPEN ACCESS iScience 24 , 102134 , March 19 , 2021 13 iScience Review images . Furthermore , the use of multiple ﬂuorescence ﬁlters and cameras can lead to disparate aberrations for the different color channels , further increasing the difﬁculty of image alignment . Besides stabilizing the microscope setup and maintaining a constant ambient temperature , it is often necessary to correct for drift during and / or after image acquisition . Several approaches have been employed for this , the most straight - forward being to simply secure the sample in place more effectively , for example , by mounting it in a sturdy support ( Holden et al . , 2014 ) . Nevertheless , additional techniques are frequently used to correct for mis - alignments . One common approach is the use of ﬁducial markers such as ﬂuorescent beads , quantum dots , gold nanoparticles , or ﬂuorescent nanodiamonds , which are tracked in all channels throughout the recording ( Betzig et al . , 2006 ; Georgieva et al . , 2016 ; Kukulski et al . , 2012 ; Yi et al . , 2016 ) . For example , the use of ﬂuorescent nanodiamonds as markers achieved an alignment error of only 2 nm in STORM im - aging ( Yi et al . , 2016 ) . An important consideration when using ﬁducials is that their amount should be opti - mized for a given sample , too little , and the efﬁciency of the drift correction will be reduced , too much , and the labeled structures of interest may be masked . Ideally , one should aim to record (cid:1) 2 – 3 beads per ﬁeld of view ( FOV ) ( Yang and Specht , 2020 ) . As an alternative to ﬁducials , it is possible to use the imaged structures themselves as information for drift compensation . This is most applicable to images of well - known , repeating structures such as cytoskeletal components . Image - based drift correction can be implemented with approaches such as image cross - correlation ( Mlodzianoski et al . , 2011 ) or Bayesian inference ( Elmoka - dem and Yu , 2015 ) . Alternatively , some technologies have been developed that eliminate the need for drift correction altogether . For example , by using lifetime - based separation rather than spectral separation , Bu¨ckers and colleagues imaged two ﬂuorescent dyes simultaneously with a single STED beam , rendering the measurement insensitive to drift ( Bu¨ckers et al . , 2011 ) . All things considered , the approach for drift correction depends on the nature of the experiment and the data . For large - scale experiments involving signiﬁcant stage movement , it would be practical to both physically secure the sample in place and , if possible , to perform real - time drift correction ( e . g . ( Grover et al . , 2015 ) ) . Furthermore , in all circumstances , it is strongly advised to perform a posteriori drift correction for increased precision , especially when exam - ining co - localizations , either with content - based correction when the images are highly structured or with ﬁducial markers . Challenge 4 : mining SRM data The new information afforded by SRM calls for novel analysis approaches as well as careful consideration of experimental factors . Most analyses require the spatial coordinates of the emitters as input , rather than a rendered super - resolution image . As the name suggests , molecule localizations are the primary output of SMLM measurements . These are typically computed by Gaussian ﬁtting ( Deschout et al . , 2014 ) , but addi - tional approaches such as wavelet segmentation ( Izeddin et al . , 2012 ) or deep - learning - based localizations ( Nehme et al . , 2020 ) can be used for improved accuracy and / or computation speed . For non - SMLM tech - niques , the spatial localizations should ﬁrst be deduced from the super resolution image with segmenta - tion algorithms . A detailed description of localization and segmentation approaches is beyond the scope here , but a thorough comparison of various localization approaches can be found in the following review ( Sage et al . , 2019 ) . Counting molecules : avoiding over - and undercounting Although molecule counting in SMLM experiments seems conceptually straightforward ( at any given po - sition , S molecules = S localizations ) , several practical matters complicate this symmetry . First , a ﬂuoro - phore may blink multiple times throughout a recording , leading to an overestimation of the number of mol - ecules . Second , incomplete labeling or failure of a ﬂuorophore to blink will lead to an underestimation of the number of molecules . Therefore , knowledge of the ﬂuorophore blinking kinetics under the speciﬁc experimental conditions , as well as prior knowledge of the labeling efﬁciency , is needed to avoid over - or undercounting of the labeled molecules . To account for a possible overcounting of molecules , a calibration experiment should be performed to determine how many times a ﬂuorophore will typically blink within a given time frame ( t cutoff ) ( Figure 5A ) . This should be performed on a sparsely distributed control sample under the same imaging conditions as the experimental sample . During the experiment , all emissions at a given location occurring within a time frame t < t cutoff will be deemed a single localization ( e . g . ( Annibale et al . , 2011 ; Coltharp et al . , 2012 ) ) . Alternatively , this cutoff can also be drawn from pre - existing models of the photoblinking of different ﬂuorophores . A problem arises , however , when the sample is particularly dense , and the blinking of one molecule overlaps in time with the new photoactivation of another . In such cases , t cutoff can also be ll OPEN ACCESS 14 iScience 24 , 102134 , March 19 , 2021 iScience Review adjusted to be a function of the protein density , rather than an absolute value ( Lee et al . , 2012 ) . Statistical analyses can also be used to correct for overcounting , for example , by calculating a pair correlation func - tion , which gives the probability of ﬁnding a certain localization at a given distance from another localiza - tion . First , the PCF is calculated for multiple appearances of the same probe , which can be computed from a control sample in which the probe is randomly distributed . When blinking occurs , it will lead to higher correlations at small distances . This can then be used to correct the PCF of the correlations of the real pro - tein distribution in the experimental data ( Veatch et al . , 2012 ) . To account for molecule undercounting , it is important to determine the label : target stoichiometry when this value is not known ( see Challenge 2 , above ) . Furthermore , undercounting can be caused by failed pho - toactivations of the ﬂuorophores , which can be accounted for by measuring the percentage of successful activation on calibration standards with a known number of ﬂuorophores ( e . g . ( Durisic et al . , 2014 ) ) . Lastly , because the number of activatable ﬂuorophores within a diffraction - limited area decreases throughout the measurement , it is necessary to adapt the laser intensity and decrease it gradually to avoid the simulta - neous emission of two nearby ﬂuorophores and thus incorrectly being classiﬁed as a single localization . An alternative technique that avoids the need to account for stochastic blinking behavior is qPAINT , in which the number of molecules is determined based on the predictable DNA binding kinetics of the imager and docking strands . In this approach , the number of molecules is determined by comparing the time in - terval between sequential blinks with the value expected from the binding kinetics ( Jungmann et al . , 2016 ) ( Figure 5B ) . Besides the localization of blinking events , the number of emitters can be determined by quan - tifying the photon statistics using sensitive detectors . Simply put , because a ﬂuorophore can only emit a single photon during an excitation cycle , the coincident arrival of multiple photons at multiple detectors A B C Figure 5 . Approaches for molecule counting ( A ) In standard SMLM techniques ( PALM / STORM ) , the number of blinking events indicates the number of molecules in a diffraction - limitedarea . Toavoid under - / overcounting , thevalueshouldbecorrectedbythestoichiometryofthelabeling and multiple blinking events ( e . g . , by merging events close in time ) . ( B ) InqPAINT , thenumberofmoleculescanbedeterminedfromthetimeinbetweensequentialblinking events , together with knowledge of the docking / imager strand binding kinetics . ( C ) In STED , the number of molecules can be calculated by photon statistics . Because a molecule can only emit one photon at a given time , detecting multiple photons simultaneously ( coincidence ) indicates that multiple molecules are located in the diffraction - limited area . The number of molecules is determined with a confocal scan , and the spatial locations are assigned using STED imaging . ll OPEN ACCESS iScience 24 , 102134 , March 19 , 2021 15 iScience Review must mean they arise from different ﬂuorophores . Performing this measurement with STED / RESOLFT mi - croscopy and delivering short pulses of excitation can determine the number of ﬂuorophores within a diffraction - limited area ( Keller - Findeisen et al . , 2020 ) ( Figure 5C ) . Spatial organization : clustering analysis Several approaches exist for detecting molecular clusters and analyzing their spatial properties . Perhaps the simplest metric to determine whether a given distribution is clustered is the mean nearest - neighbor distance ( NND ) between molecules , which should be signiﬁcantly lower for clustered versus random distri - butions . Although not very informative for the cluster properties ( particularly when they are heteroge - neous ) , NND was found to be especially accurate for discriminating clustering in electron microscopy ( EM ) images and should be equally applicable to SRM . A more informative approach is the use of Ripley’s K statistic , which calculates the average number of molecules that exist within a given radius r from another molecule . A random distribution would mean that the number of molecules should scale with increasing radii , and a departure from this curve would indicate clustering ( Dixon , 2006 ) . A similar statistic is the PCF ( see above ) , a conceptual derivative of Ripley’s K . Similarly , a deviation from a PCF curve for uniformly distributed molecules would indicate molecular clustering ( Sengupta et al . , 2011 ) . As with molecule count - ing , these calculations should also account for overcounted localizations , which can lead to artiﬁcial clus - tering ( see earlier discussion ) . Furthermore , Ripley’s K and PCF exhibit edge effects when the r exceeds the boundaries of the image , leading to an underestimation of clustering . Therefore , they should not be used for radii large than (cid:1) 1 / 3 of the smallest image dimension , or else edge correction should be applied ( Haase , 1995 ) . Lastly , using these functions is only recommended when the molecular clusters are expected to be homogeneous because clusters with varying properties in a single image can lead to functions that are difﬁcult to interpret ( Kiskowski et al . , 2009 ) . When a homogeneity cannot be assumed , a different approach can be used which ﬁrst segments the image into individual clusters and then performs an analysis on each cluster individually . For example , density - based spatial clustering of applications with noise ( DBSCAN ) ( Khater et al . , 2020 ) segments clusters in the data based on two user - deﬁned parameters : a neighborhood radius and a minimum number of localizations within this radius . As with the Ripley’s and PCF , this also requires some prior knowledge about the properties of the clusters . In cases where the molecules form more complex structures that cannot be easily predicted , parameter - free approaches , such as Bayesian cluster analysis , can be used . For a more detailed explanation of this approach , as well as an extensive list of clustering analyses for SRM data , we refer the reader to the following review ( Khater et al . , 2020 ) . It should be noted that although the majority of these long - standing approaches are successful at analyzing 2D clusters , they are not always sufﬁcient for extracting meaningful information from 3D data . Recently , a deep - learning - based approach achieved unprecedented accuracy in identifying and analyzing 3D clusters in SMLM data ( Khater et al . , 2019 ) , presenting a promising new direction for clustering analysis . Colocalization analysis Standard colocalization analyses for diffraction - limited microscopy largely rely on the physical overlap be - tween ﬂuorescence signals ( Bolte and Cordelieres , 2006 ; Manders et al . , 1993 ) . Although these can success - fully be applied to SRM ( e . g . ( Bielopolski et al . , 2014 ; Zhao et al . , 2013 ) ) , it is often more instructive to assess whether two molecules can be found in the vicinity of each other , rather than truly overlapping ( for resolu - tions approaching the molecular scale , there should be practically no overlap for any given pair of mole - cules ) . Ripley’s K and PCF ( see earlier discussion ) can be used to analyze colocalizations as well as clus - tering . In this case , the value computed is the probability of ﬁnding a given molecule from one species at a certain distance from a molecule of another species ( Lagache et al . , 2015 ) . In the case of colocalization analyses , these measures are not prone to artifacts caused by overcounting , because they do not correlate one type of molecule with itself . This also implies that by labeling one molecular species with two different ﬂuorophores , it is possible to analyze whether this molecule self - clusters . Exploratory analyses Advances in deep learning and larger data volumes allow for more exploratory analyses of SRM images with artiﬁcial neural networks , such as the detection of subtle visual phenotypes associated with genetic or pharmacological manipulations . Such approaches are already widely applied in the ﬁeld of biomedical imaging , for example in the diagnosis and prognosis of tumors , for disease prediction and for drug discov - ery ( Lee et al . , 2017 ) . It is therefore conceivable that the high level of information contained in SRM images could be exploited in a similar manner . Such applications are beginning to be realized with conventional ll OPEN ACCESS 16 iScience 24 , 102134 , March 19 , 2021 iScience Review ﬂuorescence microscopy and only very recently with SRM ( Kraus et al . , 2017 ; Laine et al . , 2018 ; Long et al . , 2020 ; Lu et al . , 2018 ) . In one such study , SIM combined with deep learning to image and classify a large population of viruses . By measuring the morphological features of the various classiﬁcation groups , new connections could be drawn between viral structures and their mechanism of action ( Laine et al . , 2018 ) . In another study , a neural network was trained to differentiate 3D STED images of healthy versus Zika - vi - rus - infected cells , and identiﬁed morphological changes to the ER associated with viral infection ( Long et al . , 2020 ) . Although promising , a major limitation of deep learning applications is that the training of a neural network requires large datasets of high - quality images , which are not always readily available . In the future , efforts to enhance the transferability of pre - trained networks to new and / or different micro - scopy datasets would make such analyses more feasible . Challenge 5 : increasing throughput Acquiring large imaging datasets is essential for averaging out the high variability of noisy biological pro - cesses , and it further allows to conduct unique analyses such as high - throughput screening ( e . g . for drug proﬁling ) ( Beghin et al . , 2017 ) or ‘‘electron - microscopy - like’’ structural reconstructions ( Sigal et al . , 2015 ) . However , the longer acquisition times and larger data volumes inherent to SRM experiments make it partic - ularly challenging to scale up such experiments . Acquire larger areas faster In laser - scanning techniques such as STED and RESOLFT , there is an inherent trade - off between the size of the FOV and the overall acquisition time . Nevertheless , recent improvements in STED optics have , to a certain extent , circumvented this problem . For example , spatial light modulators ( SLMs ) have been applied to correct chromatic aberrations that would otherwise lead to a misalignment of the excitation and deple - tion beams at the periphery of FOV and limit its size , allowing to acquire (cid:1) 100 3 100 m m 2 in only 30 min ( Go¨rlitz et al . , 2018 ; Gould et al . , 2013 ; Lenz et al . , 2014 ) . Further optical improvements accelerate acquisi - tion by increasing the speed at which the laser beam is scanned over the sample . In conventional laser - scanning microscopy , the beam is typically moved using galvanometer - controlled mirrors , whose speed is largely limited by inertia . Several recently implemented alternatives such as fast - oscillating resonant mir - rors ( Wu et al . , 2015 ) , acousto - optic deﬂectors ( AODs ) that deﬂect the beam with sound waves ( Chen et al . , 2011 ) , or electro - optical deﬂectors that deﬂect the beam with electric current ( Schneider et al . , 2015 ) , have signiﬁcantly increased the scanning speed . The latter approach was shown to permit a speed of > 1 , 000 frames per second for standard FOV sizes—a rate so high that the pixel dwell times approach the lifetime of the ﬂuorescent states ( Schneider et al . , 2015 ) . Another approach to decrease the overall acquisition time is the implementation of parallelized scanning to image multiple FOVs simultaneously . This has been real - ized with a variety of methods , including the use of optical lattices ( Yang et al . , 2014 ) , the employment of multiple simultaneous STED beams ( Bingen et al . , 2011 ) , the use of wideﬁeld excitation in combination with a patterned illumination for off - switching created by two interfering beams ( orthogonally and incoherently crossed standing waves ) ( Bergermann et al . , 2015 ) , and the use of electro - optical phase modulators ( Gir - sault and Meller , 2020 ) . One disadvantage of highly parallelized STED , however , is that the number of effec - tive doughnuts is limited by the available laser power . Because RESOLFT requires (cid:1) 10 5 less intensity , it can be parallelized for far greater areas ( > 100 , 000 RESOLFT doughnuts ) , making it possible to acquire > 100 x 100 m m 2 - sized ﬁeld in < 1 s in living cells ( Chmyrov et al . , 2013 ) . Recently , Masullo and colleagues developed this approach even further , allowing for parallelized RESOLFT in three dimensions . Their technique , termed Molecular Nanoscale Live Imaging with Sectioning Ability ( MoNaLISA ) , enables optical sectioning by using different light patterns with optimized shapes and periodicities for on / off switching and for reading out FP emissions . Using this approach , they were able to record entire cell volumes at sub 50 nm resolution , in < 2 min ( Masullo et al . , 2018 ) . In contrast to point - scanning techniques , wideﬁeld microscopy is inherently parallelized because the entire FOV is illuminated simultaneously , meaning that the FOV size is limited solely by the size of the illumination area and the camera readout time . Techniques such as ﬂat - ﬁeld illumination have been developed to sup - ply uniform and high - intensity light to the sample , achieving an FOV of over 200 3 200 m m 2 ( Zhao et al . , 2017 ) . Another approach for illuminating samples is the use of waveguides : silicon chips that are geomet - rically molded in such a way that a focused beam of light that enters will propagate by total internal reﬂec - tion , creating an evanescent wave at the surface of the chip ( as is the case in a TIRF microscope ) . Placing the sample on a waveguide chip , rather than a glass coverslip , allows to implement TIRF - based SRM measure - ments such as STORM / PALM and PAINT , with lower magniﬁcation objectives , which signiﬁcantly increases ll OPEN ACCESS iScience 24 , 102134 , March 19 , 2021 17 iScience Review ll OPEN ACCESS 18 iScience 24 , 102134 , March 19 , 2021 iScience Review the FOV size ( Figures 6A and 6B ) ( Archetti et al . , 2019 ; Helle et al . , 2019 ) . With that being said , an increase in the FOV size is inconsequential without a parallel increase in readout speed . The gold - standard charge - coupled device ( CCD ) cameras used for wideﬁeld microscopy have a relatively slow readout time , meaning that imaging very large FOVs can be a lengthy process . Therefore , for high - throughput applications , it is desirable to use faster scientiﬁc complementary metal - oxide - semiconductor ( sCMOS ) cameras , which can potentially increase the imaged area by (cid:1) 15 - fold ( Almada et al . , 2015 ) . A creative solution for achieving high - throughput SRM without the need for expensive or complex imaging setups is ExM ( Figure 1 ) ( Chang et al . , 2017 ; Cho et al . , 2018 ; Truckenbrodt et al . , 2018 ) . Although the sam - ple is physically larger and thus takes longer to image , it beneﬁts from the speed of conventional diffrac - tion - limited wideﬁeld microscopes ( Tillberg and Chen , 2019 ) . For example , ExM was recently combined with lattice light - sheet microscopy to image both the entire drosophila brain and the full width of the mouse cortex in (cid:1) 2 – 3 days at an effective resolution of 60 3 60 3 90 nm ( Gao et al . , 2019 ) ( Figure 6C ) . As an alternative to improvements in microscope setups , imaging throughput can be increased with computational approaches . One such strategy would be to allow the reconstruction of super - resolution im - ages from sparser , noisier data , which can be acquired in a shorter amount of time . By applying artiﬁcial neural networks to the reconstruction of images from sparse , rapidly acquired PALM measurements ( ANNA - PALM ) , the acquisition time was signiﬁcantly reduced , allowing to image > 1 , 000 cells in (cid:1) 3 h ( Ouyang et al . , 2018 ) . Similarly , deep - learning assisted SIM ( DL - SIM ) allows reconstruction of super - resolu - tion images from a signiﬁcantly lower number of raw images with no visible decrease in resolution ( Jin et al . , 2020 ) . In a conceptually similar manner , deep learning has been used to successfully ‘‘forge’’ super - resolu - tion images out of diffraction - limited equivalents . Using a generative adversarial network ( GAN ) model to train a deep neural network , Wang and colleagues were able to transform confocal images into super - res - olution images matching those acquired with STED ( Wang et al . , 2019 ) . The further possibility of applying such an approach to wideﬁeld images would lead to substantially faster acquisition times . Automating the SRM workﬂow Automatic acquisition : commercial software can often have limited ﬂexibility in terms of experiment plan - ning and real - time updates of imaging parameters . At the same time , it is becoming increasingly common to include a software development kit ( SDK ) for writing custom routines and / or an application program - ming interface ( API ) for communicating with the hardware using common programming languages , such as MATLAB ( Mathworks ) or Python . In addition , several microscope - control interfaces have been devel - oped that are compatible with a wide range of commercial microscopes ( e . g . micromanager ( Edelstein et al . , 2014 ) ) . For high - throughput experiments , it is often desirable to automate the microscope stage movement to acquire a large number of images hand - free . Nowadays , most setups have motorized stages that can easily be programmed through the commercial software ( whereas more elaborate routines can be further tweaked through APIs ) . Unfortunately , a downside of constant stage movement is that the sample Figure 6 . Fast large ﬁeld - of - view super - resolution imaging ( A and B ) Waveguide PAINT . ( A ) With classical objective TIRF , the FOV size ( red ) is limited by the size of the objective lens and the magniﬁcation . In waveguide TIRF , the light undergoes total internal reﬂection at the interface with the solution , which produces an optical sectioning illumination that can reach up to 2000 m m . ( B ) Left : a reconstructed single - FOV image of COS - 7 cells cultured on a waveguide , labeled for a - tubulin . Scale bar : 10 m m . Scale bar for magniﬁcations of boxed regions : 500 nm . Right : intensity proﬁles along the lines in the magniﬁed images show two peaks , indicating that the microtubules are distinguished . Adapted from ( Archetti et al . , 2019 ) , CC - BY - 4 . 0 . ( C ) ExLLSM . Top : maximum intensity projection of the adult Drosophila brain , labeled for pre - synapses with the marker Bruchpilot . The subset of pre - synapses associated with dopaminergic neurons ( DAN ) is shown , color - coded by the local density . Scale bar : 100 m m . Inset , top : all pre - synapses , color - coded by the local density . Scale bar : 100 m m . Inset , middle : local density distributions pre - synapses associated with DAN ( green ) , and those not associated with DAN ( orange ) . Inset , bottom : distribution of nearest neighbor distances between DAN - associated pre - synapses ( magenta ) , DAN - associated pre - synapses and all pre - synapses ( green ) , and non - DAN - associated synapses and all pre - synapses ( orange ) . Bottom : maximum intensity projection of DAN and non - DAN - associated pre - synapses in 13 representative brain regions ( colors indicateregions ) . Scalebar : 100 m m . Insetsshowmagniﬁedviewsoftheprotocerebralbridge ( top ) andtheellipsoidbody . Brain region acronyms : ATL : antler ; CA : calyx ; EB : ellipsoid body ; FB : fan - shaped body ; LAL : lateral accessory lobe ; LH : lateral horn ; LO : lobula ; LOP : lobula plate ; MB : mushroom body ; ME : medulla ; NO : noduli ; OTU : optical tubercle ; PB : protocerebral bridge ; VLPR : ventrolateral protocerebrum ; SP : superior protocerebrum . L / R indicate the left and right hemispheres . Adapted from ( Gao et al . , 2019 ) , with permission from AAAS . ll OPEN ACCESS iScience 24 , 102134 , March 19 , 2021 19 iScience Review can easily be shifted out of focus because the high - N . A . apertures used in SRM have a very limited depth of ﬁeld . The focal drift is further exacerbated by the fact that moving to a new region of a sample often means that the focal plane itself has changed due to small variations in the coverslip glass or uneven mounting ( Bravo - Zanoguera et al . , 1998 ) . For these reasons , it is necessary to use real - time autofocusing systems to re - ﬁnd the focal plane at each sequential image . Many commercial software packages offer inbuilt hard - ware - based autofocus systems that work by measuring the distance from the objective lens to the sample ( e . g . measuring the reﬂection of a laser off the coverslip glass ) ( Nikon’s perfect focus , Zeiss’ deﬁnite focus , Leica’s Adaptive Focus Control , and Olympus’s Z - Drift Compensator ) ( Bathe - Peters et al . , 2018 ; Zhang et al . , 2018 ) . Although these techniques are fast , they can be highly sensitive to small irregularities in the sample , such as varying size or uneven mounting . Therefore , it is also advised to follow - up with soft - ware - based autofocusing , which relies on the acquisition of images at multiple focal planes , and the extrac - tion of quantitative parameters to determine the location of the focal plane ( Firestone et al . , 1991 ) . Many such algorithms exist , and common ones are implemented in most commercial microscopy software pack - ages . The software API or SDK can be used to modify the parameters of these algorithms further or to implement different techniques that are more suited to the experimental conditions ( e . g . , the use of multi - well plates instead of coverslips ( Liron et al . , 2006 ) ) or to the available hardware ( e . g . , the use of additional imaging modalities to assist focusing ( Shen et al . , 2006 ) ) . An important point to consider is that software - based autofocus is signiﬁcantly slower and exposes the sample to large amounts of light and is therefore not recommended for easily bleaching dyes or for live - cell imaging applications . In such cases , it is better to resort to approaches that require a smaller number of images for auto - focusing ( Bra´zdilova´ and Kozubek , 2009 ; Pinkard et al . , 2019 ; Yazdanfar et al . , 2008 ) . An additional consideration for user - free imaging is the automatic ﬁne - tuning of imaging parameters . This is particularly important in SMLM , where the rate of photoswitching is largely dependent on the laser intensity . As themeasurement progresses , more ﬂuorophores are shifted to the ‘‘off’’ state , resulting in a lower emitter density . In order to maintain a ﬁxed density of active emitters , the laser intensity needs to be reduced accordingly . This has been achieved with several approaches , such as fast online localization of emitters ( Kechkar et al . , 2013 ; Mund et al . , 2018 ) , the summation of the ‘‘on’’ time of active emitters in the FOV ( Hold - en et al . , 2014 ) , or the use of machine learning to estimate the density of emitters in the FOV ( (cid:1) Stefko et al . , 2018 ) . For point - scanning techniques , additional parameters such as pixel dwell time and depletion laser intensity must also be optimized . Recently , Durand , and colleagues developed a fully - automated - ma - chine - learning - based system that performs online optimization of imaging parameters for STED , relying on a neural network trained to differentiate between low - and high - quality images ( Durand et al . , 2018 ) . By implementing such approaches , the acquisition can be carried out without any need for user intervention . Lastly , in order to save time and resources when realizing user - free imaging , it can also be beneﬁcial to avoid imaging uninteresting ﬁelds of view that do not contain any cells or structures of interest . This can be done , for example , by acquiring low - quality wideﬁeld / bright - ﬁeld / phase - contrast images followed by an online segmentation to determine if cells or structures of interest are contained within a FOV ( Holden et al . , 2014 ) . Furthermore , capturing an image of the cell can also assist with relating the molecules / struc - tures in the super - resolved image to the rest of the cell in subsequent analyses . Automatic analysis : being that a single SRM image already contains a substantial amount of data , large - scale experiments would be expected to yield datasets that are too large and too complex to be analyzed with conventional ( and largely manual ) methods . ImageJ ( http : / / imagej . nih . gov / ij / ) ( Schneider et al . , 2012 ) , one of the most commonly used packages , is not particularly well suited for handling big data : despite hav - ing a ‘‘batch analysis’’ option , it is geared toward smaller - scale analyses rather than high - throughput pro - jects where hundreds to thousands of images need to be analyzed . There are many alternative open - source options , one of the most noteworthy being Icy , a community - oriented software developed by Institut Pas - teur in Paris ( http : / / icy . bioimageanalysis . org ) ( de Chaumont et al . , 2012 ) . The software allows users to build a custom analysis workﬂow graphically ( code - free ) by selecting preset algorithms and procedures to apply to the image and interconnecting them with arrows . Another platform is Cellproﬁler ( http : / / www . cellproﬁler . org ) ( Carpenter et al . , 2006 ) , a Python - based and highly customizable software developed by the Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT . One attractive aspect of CellProﬁler is that it can be integrated with high - performance computing ( HPC ) cluster environments , allowing signiﬁcantly faster processing of large datasets . Notable commercial software options include Imaris ( Oxford Instruments ) , which is superior at analyzing 3D and time - series data , and KNIME (cid:2) ( http : / / www . knime . org / ) . All of the aforementioned ll OPEN ACCESS 20 iScience 24 , 102134 , March 19 , 2021 iScience Review software packages can perform a multitude of automatic analysis routines and support end - to - end anal - ysis , starting from raw input data and ending with meaningful quantiﬁcations . A typical workﬂow would start by reading the raw image ﬁles , preprocessing the images to correct for artifacts such as noise or uneven illumination , and then segmenting the images to ﬁnd structures of interest or individual localizations ( e . g . ( Soliman , 2015 ) ) . Once the objects or spots are found , their coordinates alongside the raw intensity data can be fed into a variety of algorithms for statistical analysis of quantitative attributes such as morphology , size , clustering , and colocalization ( see Challenge 4 , above ) . In addition , these software pack - ages also have APIs for additional common image analysis software , allowing the user to mix and match analysis modules as per their needs or write their own modules from scratch . A number of recent studies have successfully realized fully automated high - throughput SRM , leading to interesting biological insights . For example , Mund and colleagues implemented a fully automated acqui - sition and data analysis pipeline to perform PALM imaging of 23 endocytic proteins from over 100 , 000 en - docytic sites in yeast and found that their nanoscale organization can spatially control the actin nucleation required for endocytosis ( Mund et al . , 2018 ) . Another group automated not only the acquisition but also a sequential re - staining of a sample by using a pipetting robot to acquire 3D STORM images of 16 samples in neuronal tissue samples ( Figure 2I ) , followed by a virtually user - free analysis . Using this , they systematically investigated the 3D architecture of synaptic active zones , ﬁnding , for example , a potential role of the motor protein myosin Va ( MyoVa ) in synaptic vesicle trafﬁcking ( Klevanski et al . , 2020 ) . A high - throughput appli - cation was also developed to create electron - microscopy - like 3D reconstructions of multiple proteins , us - ing automated STORM imaging of axial stacks followed by a machine - learning - based analysis ( Sieben et al . , 2018 ) . CONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK The precision of super - resolution imaging has reached unprecedented levels , with techniques such as MINFLUX achieving resolutions as small as single nanometers . Accordingly , a shift in attitude toward more quantitative approaches has been observed , and quantitative metrics have been introduced for the majority of SRM techniques . While the optical capabilities of the techniques have proven to be robust , other practical obstacles have now become apparent . One crucial aspect of SRM experiments is that the samples themselves must be preserved near - perfectly . Still , a thorough comparison of different ﬁxation techniques is lacking . It would therefore be beneﬁcial to corroborate ﬁne structural analyses with additional high - resolution techniques such as transmission electron microscopy ( TEM ) or atomic force microscopy ( AFM ) . Nowadays , such comparisons could even be made on the same biological sample with recent ad - vances in correlative SRM technologies ( Cosentino et al . , 2019 ) . Along these same lines , artifacts arising from the use of suboptimal labels should also be avoided , and it is expected that small probes such as nanobodies will become the gold standard for SRM experiments . With regard to measurement quantiﬁcation , one of the major goals of quantitative SRM is counting mole - cule copy numbers . A number of techniques , such as qSMLM , qPAINT , and photon counting statistics , have demonstrated proof of principle , but their application is not straightforward . Although molecule counting experiments should ideally yield absolute copy numbers , most techniques ( with the exception of photon - counting statistics ) require extensive calibration experiments or standards . So far , little effort has been made to standardize such calibrations , and we hope that in the near future , simple and easily integrated approaches will be introduced . The shift toward quantitation has incentivized an increase in the scale of SRM experiments , and efforts are underway to develop fast , autonomous image acquisition and analysis systems . Deep learning is an emerging technology , which has been successfully applied to a wide range of biological image pro - cessing tasks , most commonly ( and very successfully ) to the ﬁeld of biomedical image processing ( Shen et al . , 2017 ) . Although deep learning approaches in SRM are , as of yet , few and far between , ap - plications such as SMLM emitter localization , image denoizing , image reconstruction , and spatial ana - lyses have proven faster and more accurate than standard approaches . In the coming years , we expect that deep learning will also be applied to accelerate and automate image acquisition , as well as guide more exploratory analyses . With that being said , we would like to caution against an over - reliance on sophisticated ( and oftentimes uninterpretable ) methods for processing SRM data , without a good un - derstanding of the underlying assumptions of these approaches , and whether they are applicable to the data in hand . ll OPEN ACCESS iScience 24 , 102134 , March 19 , 2021 21 iScience Review SRM is rapidly being established as a robust and quantitative research tool , which is allowing researchers to tackle increasingly complex biological questions . Although the research possibilities are seemingly endless , it is important to remember that more complexity means more opportunities for artifacts and mis - interpretations . Nevertheless , with a good knowledge of the applied techniques and their limitations , the informed researcher will gain access to a wealth of data that promise new and exciting biological discoveries . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This work was supported by grants from the German Research Foundation ( Deutsche Forschungsgemein - schaft ) to S . O . R . , SFB1190 / P09 and SFB1286 / A03 . Supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft ( DFG , German Research Foundation ) under Germany’s Excellence Strategy - EXC 2067 / 1 – 390729940 . AUTHORS CONTRIBUTION T . M . D . and S . O . R . contributed to the conception of the work . The manuscript was written by T . M . D . and revised by S . O . R . DECLARATION OF INTERESTS The authors declare no competing interests . REFERENCES Abbe , E . ( 1873 ) . Beitra¨ge zur Theorie des Mikroskops und der mikroskopischen Wahrnehmung . Arch . Fu¨rMikroskopischeAnat . 9 , 413 – 468 . Adams , S . R . , Campbell , R . E . , Gross , L . A . , Martin , B . R . , Walkup , G . K . , Yao , Y . , Llopis , J . , and Tsien , R . Y . ( 2002 ) . New biarsenical ligands and tetracysteine motifs for protein labeling in vitro and in vivo : synthesis and biological applications . J . Am . Chem . Soc . 124 , 6063 – 6076 . Almada , P . , Culley , S . , and Henriques , R . ( 2015 ) . PALM and STORM : into large ﬁelds and high - throughput microscopy with sCMOS detectors . Methods 88 , 109 – 121 . Annibale , P . , Scarselli , M . , Kodiyan , A . , and Radenovic , A . ( 2010 ) . Photoactivatable ﬂuorescent protein mEos2 displays repeated photoactivation after a long - lived dark state in the red photoconverted form . J . Phys . Chem . Lett . 1 , 1506 – 1510 . Annibale , P . , Vanni , S . , Scarselli , M . , Rothlisberger , U . , and Radenovic , A . ( 2011 ) . Quantitative photo activated localization microscopy : unraveling the effects of photoblinking . PLoS One 6 , e22678 . Archetti , A . , Glushkov , E . , Sieben , C . , Stroganov , A . , Radenovic , A . , and Manley , S . ( 2019 ) . Waveguide - PAINT offers an open platform for largeﬁeld - of - viewsuper - resolutionimaging . Nat . Commun . 10 , 1267 . Balzarotti , F . , Eilers , Y . , Gwosch , K . C . , Gynna˚ , A . H . , Westphal , V . , Stefani , F . D . , Elf , J . , and Hell , S . W . ( 2017 ) . Nanometer resolution imaging and tracking of ﬂuorescent molecules with minimal photon ﬂuxes . Science 355 , 606 – 612 . Bathe - Peters , M . , Annibale , P . , and Lohse , M . J . ( 2018 ) . All - optical microscope autofocus based on an electrically tunable lens and a totally internallyreﬂectedIRlaser . Opt . Express 26 , 2359 . Baumgart , F . , Arnold , A . M . , Leskovar , K . , Staszek , K . , Fo¨lser , M . , Weghuber , J . , Stockinger , H . , and Schu¨tz , G . J . ( 2016 ) . Varying label density allows artifact - free analysis of membrane - protein nanoclusters . Nat . Methods 13 , 661 – 664 . Beghin , A . , Kechkar , A . , Butler , C . , Levet , F . , Cabillic , M . , Rossier , O . , Giannone , G . , Galland , R . , Choquet , D . , and Sibarita , J . B . ( 2017 ) . Localization - based super - resolution imaging meets high - content screening . Nat . Methods 14 , 1184 – 1190 . Beliu , G . , Kurz , A . J . , Kuhlemann , A . C . , Behringer - Pliess , L . , Meub , M . , Wolf , N . , Seibel , J . , Shi , Z . - D . , Schnermann , M . , Grimm , J . B . , et al . ( 2019 ) . Bioorthogonal labeling with tetrazine - dyes for super - resolution microscopy . Commun . Biol . 2 , 261 . Bergermann , F . , Alber , L . , Sahl , S . J . , Engelhardt , J . , and Hell , S . W . ( 2015 ) . 2000 - fold parallelized dual - color STED ﬂuorescence nanoscopy . Opt . Express 23 , 211 . Betzig , E . , Patterson , G . H . , Sougrat , R . , Lindwasser , O . W . , Olenych , S . , Bonifacino , J . S . , Davidson , M . W . , Lippincott - Schwartz , J . , and Hess , H . F . ( 2006 ) . Imaging intracellular ﬂuorescent proteins at nanometer resolution . Science 313 , 1642 – 1645 . Bielopolski , N . , Lam , A . D . , Bar - On , D . , Sauer , M . , Stuenkel , E . L . , and Ashery , U . ( 2014 ) . Differential interaction of tomosyn with syntaxin and SNAP25 depends on domains in the WD40 b - propeller core and determines its inhibitory activity . J . Biol . Chem . 289 , 17087 – 17099 . Bingen , P . , Reuss , M . , Engelhardt , J . , and Hell , S . W . ( 2011 ) . Parallelized STED ﬂuorescence nanoscopy . Opt . Express 19 , 23716 . Birk , U . J . ( 2017 ) . Super - Resolution Microscopy ( Wiley - VCH Verlag GmbH & Co . KGaA ) . Black , M . M . ( 2016 ) . The Neuronal Cytoskeleton , Motor Proteins , and Organelle Trafﬁcking in the Axon ( Elsevier ) . Boettiger , A . N . , Bintu , B . , Mofﬁtt , J . R . , Wang , S . , Beliveau , B . J . , Fudenberg , G . , Imakaev , M . , Mirny , L . A . , Wu , C . , and Zhuang , X . ( 2016 ) . Super - resolution imaging reveals distinct chromatin folding for different epigenetic states . Nature 529 , 418 – 422 . Bolte , S . , and Cordelieres , F . P . ( 2006 ) . A guided tour into subcellular colocalization analysis in light microscopy . J . Microsc . 224 , 213 – 232 . Bosch , P . J . , Correˆa , I . R . , Sonntag , M . H . , Ibach , J . , Brunsveld , L . , Kanger , J . S . , and Subramaniam , V . ( 2014 ) . Evaluation of ﬂuorophores to label SNAP - tag fused proteins for multicolor single - molecule tracking microscopy in live cells . Biophys . J . 107 , 803 – 814 . Bravo - Zanoguera , M . , Benedikt , V . M . , Kellner , A . L . , and Price , J . H . ( 1998 ) . High - performance autofocus circuit for biological microscopy . Rev . Sci . Instrum . 69 , 3966 – 3977 . Bra ´ zdilova ´ , S . L . , and Kozubek , M . ( 2009 ) . Information content analysis in automated microscopy imaging using an adaptive autofocus algorithm for multimodal functions . J . Microsc . 236 , 194 – 202 . Bretschneider , S . , Eggeling , C . , and Hell , S . W . ( 2007 ) . Breaking the diffraction barrier in ﬂuorescence microscopy by optical shelving . Phys . Rev . Lett . 98 , 218103 . Brock , R . , Hamelers , I . H . L . , and Jovin , T . M . ( 1999 ) . Comparison of ﬁxation protocols for adherent cultured cells applied to a GFP fusion protein of the epidermal growth factor receptor . Cytometry 35 , 353 – 362 . Brown , W . , Liu , J . , and Deiters , A . ( 2018 ) . Genetic code expansion in animals . ACS Chem . Biol . 13 , 2375 – 2386 . Bu¨ckers , J . , Wildanger , D . , Vicidomini , G . , Kastrup , L . , and Hell , S . W . ( 2011 ) . Simultaneous multi - lifetime multi - color STED imaging for colocalization analyses . Opt . Express 19 , 3130 . ll OPEN ACCESS 22 iScience 24 , 102134 , March 19 , 2021 iScience Review Burnette , D . T . , Sengupta , P . , Dai , Y . , Lippincott - Schwartz , J . , and Kachar , B . ( 2011 ) . Bleaching / blinking assisted localization microscopy for superresolution imaging using standard ﬂuorescent molecules . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . 108 , 21081 – 21086 . Bu¨ttner , M . , Lagerholm , C . B . , Waithe , D . , Galiani , S . , Schliebs , W . , Erdmann , R . , Eggeling , C . , and Reglinski , K . ( 2020 ) . Challenges of Using Expansion Microscopy for Super - resolved Imaging of Cellular Organelles ( ChemBioChem cbic ) , p . 202000571 . Carlson , J . C . T . , Meimetis , L . G . , Hilderbrand , S . A . , and Weissleder , R . ( 2013 ) . BODIPY - tetrazine derivatives as superbright bioorthogonal turn - on probes . Angew . Chem . Int . Ed . 52 , 6917 – 6920 . Carpenter , A . E . , Jones , T . R . , Lamprecht , M . R . , et al . ( 2006 ) . CellProﬁler : image analysis software for identifying and quantifying cell phenotypes . Genome Biol . 7 , R100 . Celikkan , F . T . , Mungan , C . , Sucu , M . , Uysal , F . , Kahveci Hayme , S . , Hayme , S . , Kuscu , N . , Ozkavukcu , S . , Celik - Ozenci , C . , and Can , A . ( 2020 ) . PFA is superior to glyoxal in preserving oocyte , embryo , and stem cell proteins evidenced by super - resolution microscopical surveys of epitopes . J . Assist . Reprod . Genet . 37 , 369 – 384 . Cella Zanacchi , F . , Manzo , C . , Magrassi , R . , Derr , N . D . , and Lakadamyali , M . ( 2019 ) . Quantifying protein copy number in super resolution using an imaging - invariant calibration . Biophys . J . 116 , 2195 – 2203 . Chang , J . - B . , Chen , F . , Yoon , Y . - G . , Jung , E . E . , Babcock , H . , Kang , J . S . , Asano , S . , Suk , H . - J . , Pak , N . , Tillberg , P . W . , etal . ( 2017 ) . Iterativeexpansion microscopy . Nat . Methods 14 , 593 – 599 . Chemla , Y . , Ozer , E . , Algov , I . , and Alfonta , L . ( 2018 ) . Contexteffectsofgeneticcodeexpansion by stop codon suppression . Curr . Opin . Chem . Biol . 46 , 146 – 155 . Chen , F . , Tillberg , P . W . , and Boyden , E . S . ( 2015 ) . Expansion microscopy . Science 347 , 543 – 548 . Chen , X . , Leischner , U . , Rochefort , N . L . , Nelken , I . , and Konnerth , A . ( 2011 ) . Functional mapping of single spines in cortical neurons in vivo . Nature 475 , 501 – 505 . Chmyrov , A . , Keller , J . , Grotjohann , T . , Ratz , M . , D’Este , E . , Jakobs , S . , Eggeling , C . , andHell , S . W . ( 2013 ) . Nanoscopy with more than 100 , 000 ‘‘doughnuts . ’’ . Nat . Methods 10 , 737 – 740 . Cho , I . , Seo , J . Y . , and Chang , J . ( 2018 ) . Expansion microscopy . J . Microsc . 271 , 123 – 128 . Chojnacki , J . , Waithe , D . , Carravilla , P . , Huarte , N . , Galiani , S . , Enderlein , J . , and Eggeling , C . ( 2017 ) . Envelope glycoprotein mobility on HIV - 1 particles depends on the virus maturation state . Nat . Commun . 8 , 545 . Civitci , F . , Shangguan , J . , Zheng , T . , Tao , K . , Rames , M . , Kenison , J . , Zhang , Y . , Wu , L . , Phelps , C . , Esener , S . , et al . ( 2020 ) . Fast and multiplexed superresolution imaging with DNA - PAINT - ERS . Nat . Commun . 11 , 4339 . Coltharp , C . , Kessler , R . P . , and Xiao , J . ( 2012 ) . Accurate construction of photoactivated localization microscopy ( PALM ) images for quantitative measurements . PLoS One 7 , e51725 . Cosentino , M . , Canale , C . , Bianchini , P . , and Diaspro , A . ( 2019 ) . AFM - STED correlative nanoscopy reveals a dark side in ﬂuorescence microscopy imaging . Sci . Adv . 5 , 1 – 8 . Crosby , K . C . , Gookin , S . E . , Garcia , J . D . , Hahm , K . M . , Dell’Acqua , M . L . , and Smith , K . R . ( 2019 ) . Nanoscale subsynaptic domains underlie the organization of the inhibitory synapse . Cell Rep . 26 , 3284 – 3297 . e3 . Curdt , F . , Herr , S . J . , Lutz , T . , Schmidt , R . , Engelhardt , J . , Sahl , S . J . , and Hell , S . W . ( 2015 ) . isoSTED nanoscopy with intrinsic beam alignment . Opt . Express 23 , 30891 . Dai , M . , Jungmann , R . , and Yin , P . ( 2016 ) . Optical imaging of individual biomolecules in densely packed clusters . Nat . Nanotechnol . 11 , 798 – 807 . de Chaumont , F . , Dallongeville , S . , Chenouard , N . , Herve´ , N . , Pop , S . , Provoost , T . , Meas - Yedid , V . , Pankajakshan , P . , Lecomte , T . , Le Montagner , Y . , et al . ( 2012 ) . Icy : an open bioimage informatics platform for extended reproducible research . Nat . Methods 9 , 690 – 696 . Dempsey , G . T . , Vaughan , J . C . , Chen , K . H . , Bates , M . , and Zhuang , X . ( 2011 ) . Evaluation of ﬂuorophores for optimal performance in localization - based super - resolution imaging . Nat . Methods 8 , 1027 – 1040 . Deschout , H . , Zanacchi , F . C . , Mlodzianoski , M . , Diaspro , A . , Bewersdorf , J . , Hess , S . T . , and Braeckmans , K . ( 2014 ) . Precisely and accurately localizing single emitters in ﬂuorescence microscopy . Nat . Methods 11 , 253 – 266 . Diekmann , R . , Helle , Ø . I . , Øie , C . I . , McCourt , P . , Huser , T . R . , Schu¨ttpelz , M . , and Ahluwalia , B . S . ( 2017 ) . Chip - based wide ﬁeld - of - view nanoscopy . Nat . Photon . 11 , 322 – 328 . Dixon , P . M . ( 2006 ) . Ripley’s K function . Encyclopedia of Environmetrics ( John Wiley & Sons , Ltd ) ) . Dong , B . , Almassalha , L . , Urban , B . E . , Nguyen , T . - Q . , Khuon , S . , Chew , T . - L . , Backman , V . , Sun , C . , and Zhang , H . F . ( 2016 ) . Super - resolution spectroscopic microscopy via photon localization . Nat . Commun . 7 , 12290 . Dunsing , V . , Luckner , M . , Zu ¨ hlke , B . , Petazzi , R . A . , Herrmann , A . , and Chiantia , S . ( 2018 ) . Optimal ﬂuorescent protein tags for quantifying protein oligomerization in living cells . Sci . Rep . 8 , 10634 . Durand , A . , Wiesner , T . , Gardner , M . - A . , Robitaille , L . - E ´ . , Bilodeau , A . , Gagne´ , C . , De Koninck , P . , and Lavoie - Cardinal , F . ( 2018 ) . A machine learning approach for online automated optimization of super - resolution optical microscopy . Nat . Commun . 9 , 5247 . Durisic , N . , Laparra - Cuervo , L . , Sandoval - A´lvarez , A´ . , Borbely , J . S . , and Lakadamyali , M . ( 2014 ) . Single - moleculeevaluationofﬂuorescentprotein photoactivation efﬁciency using an in vivo nanotemplate . Nat . Methods 11 , 156 – 162 . Edelstein , A . D . , Tsuchida , M . A . , Amodaj , N . , Pinkard , H . , Vale , R . D . , and Stuurman , N . ( 2014 ) . Advanced methods of microscope control using m Manager software . J . Biol . Methods 1 , 10 . Ehmann , N . , van de Linde , S . , Alon , A . , Ljaschenko , D . , Keung , X . Z . , Holm , T . , Rings , A . , DiAntonio , A . , Hallermann , S . , Ashery , U . , et al . ( 2014 ) . Quantitative super - resolution imaging of Bruchpilot distinguishes active zone states . Nat . Commun . 5 , 4650 . Elmokadem , A . , and Yu , J . ( 2015 ) . Optimal drift correction for superresolution localization microscopy with bayesian inference . Biophys . J . 109 , 1772 – 1780 . Van Engelenburg , S . B . , Shtengel , G . , Sengupta , P . , Waki , K . , Jarnik , M . , Ablan , S . D . , Freed , E . O . , Hess , H . F . , and Lippincott - Schwartz , J . ( 2014 ) . Distribution of ESCRT machinery at HIV assembly sites reveals virus scaffolding of ESCRT subunits . Science 343 , 653 – 656 . Faoro , R . , Bassu , M . , Mejia , Y . X . , Stephan , T . , Dudani , N . , Boeker , C . , Jakobs , S . , and Burg , T . P . ( 2018 ) . Aberration - corrected cryoimmersion light microscopy . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . 115 , 1204 – 1209 . Farr , A . G . , and Nakane , P . K . ( 1981 ) . Immunohistochemistry with enzyme labeled antibodies : a brief review . J . Immunol . Methods 47 , 129 – 144 . Firestone , L . , Cook , K . , Culp , K . , Talsania , N . , and Preston , K . ( 1991 ) . Comparison of autofocus methodsforautomatedmicroscopy . Cytometry 12 , 195 – 206 . Gao , R . , Asano , S . M . , Upadhyayula , S . , Pisarev , I . , Milkie , D . E . , Liu , T . - L . , Singh , V . , Graves , A . , Huynh , G . H . , Zhao , Y . , et al . ( 2019 ) . Cortical column and whole - brain imaging with molecular contrast and nanoscale resolution . Science 363 , eaau8302 . Georgieva , M . , Cattoni , D . I . , Fiche , J . - B . , Mutin , T . , Chamousset , D . , and Nollmann , M . ( 2016 ) . Nanometer resolved single - molecule colocalization of nuclear factors by two - color super resolution microscopy imaging . Methods 105 , 44 – 55 . Girsault , A . , and Meller , A . ( 2020 ) . Sub - second , super - resolved imaging of biological systems using parallel EO - STED . Opt . Lett . 45 , 2712 . Golfetto , O . , Wakeﬁeld , D . L . , Cacao , E . E . , Avery , K . N . , Kenyon , V . , Jorand , R . , Tobin , S . J . , Biswas , S . , Gutierrez , J . , Clinton , R . , et al . ( 2018 ) . A platform to enhance quantitative single molecule localization microscopy . J . Am . Chem . Soc . 140 , 12785 – 12797 . Go¨rlitz , F . , Guldbrand , S . , Runcorn , T . H . , Murray , R . T . , Jaso - Tamame , A . L . , Sinclair , H . G . , Martinez - Perez , E . , Taylor , J . R . , Neil , M . A . A . , Dunsby , C . , et al . ( 2018 ) . easySLM - STED : stimulated emission depletion microscopy with aberration correction , extended ﬁeld of view and multiple beam scanning . J . Biophotonics 11 , e201800087 . Go ¨ ttfert , F . , Wurm , C . A . , Mueller , V . , Berning , S . , Cordes , V . C . , Honigmann , A . , and Hell , S . W . ( 2013 ) . Coaligned dual - channel STED nanoscopy and molecular diffusion analysis at 20 nm resolution . Biophys . J . 105 , L01 – L03 . Gould , T . J . , Kromann , E . B . , Burke , D . , Booth , M . J . , and Bewersdorf , J . ( 2013 ) . Auto - aligning stimulated emission depletion microscope using adaptive optics . Opt . Lett . 38 , 1860 . Grotjohann , T . , Testa , I . , Leutenegger , M . , Bock , H . , Urban , N . T . , Lavoie - Cardinal , F . , Willig , K . I . , ll OPEN ACCESS iScience 24 , 102134 , March 19 , 2021 23 iScience Review Eggeling , C . , Jakobs , S . , and Hell , S . W . ( 2011 ) . Diffraction - unlimited all - optical imaging and writing with a photochromic GFP . Nature 478 , 204 – 208 . Grover , G . , Mohrman , W . , and Piestun , R . ( 2015 ) . Real - time adaptive drift correction for super - resolution localization microscopy . Opt . Express 23 , 23887 . Gunewardene , M . S . , Subach , F . V . , Gould , T . J . , Penoncello , G . P . , Gudheti , M . V . , Verkhusha , V . V . , and Hess , S . T . ( 2011 ) . Superresolution imaging of multiple ﬂuorescent proteins with highly overlapping emission spectra in living cells . Biophys . J . 101 , 1522 – 1528 . Gustafsson , M . G . L . ( 2000 ) . Surpassing the lateral resolutionlimitbyafactor oftwousingstructured illumination microscopy . SHORT COMMUNICATION . J . Microsc . 198 , 82 – 87 . Gwosch , K . C . , Pape , J . K . , Balzarotti , F . , Hoess , P . , Ellenberg , J . , Ries , J . , and Hell , S . W . ( 2020 ) . MINFLUX nanoscopy delivers 3D multicolor nanometer resolution in cells . Nat . Methods 17 , 217 – 224 . Haase , P . ( 1995 ) . Spatial pattern analysis in ecology based on Ripley’s K - function : introduction and methods of edge correction . J . Veg . Sci . 6 , 575 – 582 . Halpern , A . R . , Howard , M . D . , and Vaughan , J . C . ( 2015 ) . Point by point : an introductory guide to sample preparation for single - molecule , super - resolutionﬂuorescence microscopy . Curr . Protoc . Chem . Biol . 7 , 103 – 120 . Hell , S . W . , and Kroug , M . ( 1995 ) . Ground - state - depletion ﬂuorscence microscopy : a concept for breaking the diffraction resolution limit . Appl . Phys . B Lasers Opt . 60 , 495 – 497 . Hell , S . W . , and Wichmann , J . ( 1994 ) . Breaking the diffraction resolution limit by stimulated emission : stimulated - emission - depletion ﬂuorescence microscopy . Opt . Lett . 19 , 780 . Hell , S . W . , Schmidt , R . , and Egner , A . ( 2009 ) . Diffraction - unlimited three - dimensional optical nanoscopy with opposing lenses . Nat . Photon . 3 , 381 – 387 . Helle , Ø . I . , Coucheron , D . A . , Tinguely , J . - C . , Øie , C . I . , and Ahluwalia , B . S . ( 2019 ) . Nanoscopy on - a - chip : super - resolution imaging on the millimeter scale . Opt . Express 27 , 6700 . Hershko , E . , Weiss , L . E . , Michaeli , T . , and Shechtman , Y . ( 2019 ) . Multicolor localization microscopy and point - spread - function engineering by deep learning . Opt . Express 27 , 6158 . Hess , S . T . , Girirajan , T . P . K . , and Mason , M . D . ( 2006 ) . Ultra - high resolution imaging by ﬂuorescence photoactivation localization microscopy . Biophys . J . 91 , 4258 – 4272 . Hoffman , D . P . , Shtengel , G . , Xu , C . S . , Campbell , K . R . , Freeman , M . , Wang , L . , Milkie , D . E . , Pasolli , H . A . , Iyer , N . , Bogovic , J . A . , et al . ( 2020 ) . Correlative three - dimensional super - resolution and block - face electron microscopy of whole vitreously frozen cells . Science 367 , eaaz5357 . Holden , S . J . , Pengo , T . , Meibom , K . L . , Fernandez Fernandez , C . , Collier , J . , and Manley , S . ( 2014 ) . High throughput 3D super - resolution microscopy reveals Caulobacter crescentus in vivo Z - ring organization . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . 111 , 4566 – 4571 . Hopwood , D . ( 1969 ) . Fixatives and ﬁxation : a review . Histochem . J . 1 , 323 – 360 . Hori , Y . , and Kikuchi , K . ( 2013 ) . Protein labeling with ﬂuorogenic probes for no - wash live - cell imaging of proteins . Curr . Opin . Chem . Biol . 17 , 644 – 650 . Huang , B . , Jones , S . A . , Brandenburg , B . , and Zhuang , X . ( 2008 ) . Whole - cell 3D STORM reveals interactions between cellular structures with nanometer - scale resolution . Nat . Methods 5 , 1047 – 1052 . Izeddin , I . , Boulanger , J . , Racine , V . , Specht , C . G . , Kechkar , A . , Nair , D . , Triller , A . , Choquet , D . , Dahan , M . , and Sibarita , J . B . ( 2012 ) . Wavelet analysis for single molecule localization microscopy . Opt . Express 20 , 2081 . Jayasinghe , I . , Clowsley , A . H . , Lin , R . , Lutz , T . , Harrison , C . , Green , E . , Baddeley , D . , Di Michele , L . , and Soeller , C . ( 2018 ) . True molecular scale visualization of variable clustering properties of ryanodine receptors . Cell Rep . 22 , 557 – 567 . Jimenez , A . , Friedl , K . , and Leterrier , C . ( 2020 ) . About samples , giving examples : optimized single molecule localization microscopy . Methods 174 , 100 – 114 . Jin , L . , Liu , B . , Zhao , F . , Hahn , S . , Dong , B . , Song , R . , Elston , T . C . , Xu , Y . , and Hahn , K . M . ( 2020 ) . Deep learning enables structured illumination microscopy with low light levels and enhanced speed . Nat . Commun . 11 , 1934 . Johnson , E . , Seiradake , E . , Jones , E . Y . , Davis , I . , Gru¨newald , K . , and Kaufmann , R . ( 2015 ) . Correlative in - resin super - resolution and electron microscopy using standard ﬂuorescent proteins . Sci . Rep . 5 , 9583 . Jungmann , R . , Avendan˜o , M . S . , Dai , M . , Woehrstein , J . B . , Agasti , S . S . , Feiger , Z . , Rodal , A . , and Yin , P . ( 2016 ) . Quantitative super - resolution imaging with qPAINT . Nat . Methods 13 , 439 – 442 . Kechkar , A . , Nair , D . , Heilemann , M . , Choquet , D . , and Sibarita , J . - B . ( 2013 ) . Real - time analysis and visualization for single - molecule based super - resolution microscopy . PLoS One 8 , e62918 . Keller - Findeisen , J . , Sahl , S . J . , and Hell , S . W . ( 2020 ) . Quantifying molecule numbers in STED / RESOLFT ﬂuorescence nanoscopy . In Nanoscale Photonic Imaging , T . Salditt , A . Egner , and D . R . Luke , eds . ( Springer International Publishing ) ) , pp . 205 – 226 . Keppler , A . , Gendreizig , S . , Gronemeyer , T . , Pick , H . , Vogel , H . , and Johnsson , K . ( 2003 ) . A general method for the covalent labeling of fusion proteins with small molecules in vivo . Nat . Biotechnol . 21 , 86 – 89 . Khater , I . M . , Aroca - Ouellette , S . T . , Meng , F . , Nabi , I . R . , and Hamarneh , G . ( 2019 ) . Caveolae and scaffold detection from single molecule localizationmicroscopydatausingdeeplearning . PLoS One 14 , e0211659 . Khater , I . M . , Nabi , I . R . , and Hamarneh , G . ( 2020 ) . A review of super - resolution single - molecule localization microscopy cluster Analysis and quantiﬁcation methods . Patterns 1 , 100038 . Kim , D . , Curthoys , N . M . , Parent , M . T . , and Hess , S . T . ( 2013 ) . Bleed - through correction for rendering and correlation analysis in multi - colour localization microscopy . J . Opt . 15 , 094011 . Kiskowski , M . A . , Hancock , J . F . , and Kenworthy , A . K . ( 2009 ) . On the use of Ripley’s K - function and its derivatives to analyze domain size . Biophys . J . 97 , 1095 – 1103 . Klevanski , M . , Herrmannsdoerfer , F . , Sass , S . , Venkataramani , V . , Heilemann , M . , and Kuner , T . ( 2020 ) . Automated highly multiplexed super - resolution imaging of protein nano - architecture in cells and tissues . Nat . Commun . 11 , 1552 . Ko¨ker , T . , Fernandez , A . , and Pinaud , F . ( 2018 ) . Characterization of split ﬂuorescent protein variants and quantitative analyses of their self - assembly process . Sci . Rep . 8 , 5344 . Kolmakov , K . , Wurm , C . A . , Meineke , D . N . H . , Go¨ttfert , F . , Boyarskiy , V . P . , Belov , V . N . , and Hell , S . W . ( 2014 ) . Polar red - emitting rhodamine dyes with reactive groups : synthesis , photophysical properties , and two - color STED nanoscopy applications . Chem . A . Eur . J . 20 , 146 – 157 . Kozma , E . , and Kele , P . ( 2019 ) . Fluorogenic probes for super - resolution microscopy . Org . Biomol . Chem . 17 , 215 – 233 . Kozma , E . , Demeter , O . , and Kele , P . ( 2017 ) . Bio - orthogonal ﬂuorescent labelling of biopolymers through inverse - electron - demand diels - alder reactions . ChemBioChem 18 , 486 – 501 . Kraus , O . Z . , Grys , B . T . , Ba , J . , Chong , Y . , Frey , B . J . , Boone , C . , and Andrews , B . J . ( 2017 ) . Automated analysis of high - content microscopy data with deep learning . Mol . Syst . Biol . 13 , 924 . Kukulski , W . , Schorb , M . , Welsch , S . , Picco , A . , Kaksonen , M . , and Briggs , J . A . G . ( 2012 ) . Precise , correlated ﬂuorescence microscopy and electron tomographyoflowicrylsectionsusingﬂuorescentﬁducialmarkers . In Methods in Cell Biology , pp . 235 – 257 . Lagache , T . , Sauvonnet , N . , Danglot , L . , and Olivo - Marin , J . - C . ( 2015 ) . Statistical analysis of molecule colocalization in bioimaging . Cytom . A 87 , 568 – 579 . Laine , R . F . , Goodfellow , G . , Young , L . J . , Travers , J . , Carroll , D . , Dibben , O . , Bright , H . , and Kaminski , C . F . ( 2018 ) . Structured illumination microscopy combined with machine learning enables the high throughput analysis and classiﬁcation of virus structure . Elife 7 , 1 – 17 . Lau , L . , Lee , Y . L . , Sahl , S . J . , Stearns , T . , and Moerner , W . E . ( 2012 ) . STED microscopy with optimized labeling density reveals 9 - fold arrangement of a centriole protein . Biophys . J . 102 , 2926 – 2935 . Lee , J . - G . , Jun , S . , Cho , Y . - W . , Lee , H . , Kim , G . B . , Seo , J . B . , and Kim , N . ( 2017 ) . Deep learning in medical imaging : general Overview . Korean J . Radiol . 18 , 570 . Lee , S . - H . , Shin , J . Y . , Lee , A . , and Bustamante , C . ( 2012 ) . Counting single photoactivatable ﬂuorescent molecules by photoactivated ll OPEN ACCESS 24 iScience 24 , 102134 , March 19 , 2021 iScience Review localization microscopy ( PALM ) . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . 109 , 17436 – 17441 . Lelek , M . , Di Nunzio , F . , Henriques , R . , Charneau , P . , Arhel , N . , and Zimmer , C . ( 2012 ) . Superresolution imaging of HIV in infected cells with FlAsH - PALM . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . 109 , 8564 – 8569 . Lenz , M . O . , Sinclair , H . G . , Savell , A . , Clegg , J . H . , Brown , A . C . N . , Davis , D . M . , Dunsby , C . , Neil , M . A . A . , and French , P . M . W . ( 2014 ) . 3 - D stimulated emission depletion microscopy with programmable aberration correction . J . Biophotonics 7 , 29 – 36 . Leyton - Puig , D . , Kedziora , K . M . , Isogai , T . , van den Broek , B . , Jalink , K . , and Innocenti , M . ( 2016 ) . PFA ﬁxation enables artifact - free super - resolution imaging of the actin cytoskeleton and associated proteins . Biol . Open 5 , 1001 – 1009 . Li , H . , and Vaughan , J . C . ( 2018 ) . Switchable ﬂuorophores for single - molecule localization microscopy . Chem . Rev . 118 , 9412 – 9454 . Li , D . , Shao , L . , Chen , B . - C . , Zhang , X . , Zhang , M . , Moses , B . , Milkie , D . E . , Beach , J . R . , Hammer , J . A . , Pasham , M . , et al . ( 2015 ) . Extended - resolution structured illumination imaging of endocytic and cytoskeletal dynamics . Science 349 , aab3500 . Liao , J . , Chen , L . , Xia , X . , Yu , J . , Chen , T . , Li , H . , and Zheng , W . ( 2019 ) . Multicolor re - scan super - resolution imaging of live cells . Quant . Imaging Med . Surg . 9 , 815 – 822 . Lin , D . , Gagnon , L . A . , Howard , M . D . , Halpern , A . R . , and Vaughan , J . C . ( 2018 ) . Extended - depth 3D super - resolution imaging using probe - refresh STORM . Biophys . J . 114 , 1980 – 1987 . Lin , R . , Clowsley , A . H . , Lutz , T . , Baddeley , D . , and Soeller , C . ( 2020 ) . 3D super - resolution microscopy performance and quantitative analysis assessment using DNA - PAINT and DNA origami test samples . Methods 174 , 56 – 71 . van de Linde , S . , Wolter , S . , Heilemann , M . , and Sauer , M . ( 2010 ) . The effect of photoswitching kinetics and labeling densities on super - resolution ﬂuorescenceimaging . J . Biotechnol . 149 , 260 – 266 . Liron , Y . , Paran , Y . , Zatorsky , N . G . , Geiger , B . , and Kam , Z . ( 2006 ) . Laser autofocusing system for high - resolution cell biological imaging . J . Microsc . 221 , 145 – 151 . Long , R . K . M . , Moriarty , K . P . , Cardoen , B . , Gao , G . , Vogl , A . W . , Jean , F . , Hamarneh , G . , and Nabi , I . R . ( 2020 ) . Superresolutionmicroscopyanddeep learning identify Zika virus reorganization of the endoplasmic reticulum . Sci . Rep . 10 , 20937 . Los , G . V . , Encell , L . P . , McDougall , M . G . , Hartzell , D . D . , Karassina , N . , Zimprich , C . , Wood , M . G . , Learish , R . , Ohana , R . F . , Urh , M . , et al . ( 2008 ) . HaloTag : a novel protein labeling technology for cell imaging and protein analysis . ACS Chem . Biol . 3 , 373 – 382 . Lu , A . X . , Chong , Y . T . , Hsu , I . S . , Strome , B . , Handﬁeld , L . - F . , Kraus , O . , Andrews , B . J . , and Moses , A . M . ( 2018 ) . Integrating images from multiple microscopy screens reveals diverse patterns of change in the subcellular localization of proteins . Elife 7 , e31872 . Lutz , T . , Clowsley , A . H . , Lin , R . , Pagliara , S . , Di Michele , L . , and Soeller , C . ( 2018 ) . Versatile multiplexed super - resolution imaging of nanostructures by Quencher - Exchange - PAINT . Nano Res . 11 , 6141 – 6154 . Maddipatla , R . , and Tankam , P . ( 2020 ) . Bleed - through elimination method in a dual - channel ﬂuorescence microscopy system . In Multiphoton Microscopy in the Biomedical Sciences XX , A . Periasamy , P . T . So , and K . Ko¨nig , eds . ( SPIE ) ) , p . 70 . Manders , E . M . M . , Verbeek , F . J . , and Aten , J . A . ( 1993 ) . Measurement of co - localization of objects in dual - colour confocal images . J . Microsc . 169 , 375 – 382 . Martin , B . R . , Giepmans , B . N . G . , Adams , S . R . , and Tsien , R . Y . ( 2005 ) . Mammalian cell – based optimization of the biarsenical - binding tetracysteine motif for improved ﬂuorescence and afﬁnity . Nat . Biotechnol . 23 , 1308 – 1314 . Masullo , L . A . , Bode´n , A . , Pennacchietti , F . , Coceano , G . , Ratz , M . , and Testa , I . ( 2018 ) . Enhanced photon collection enables four dimensional ﬂuorescence nanoscopy of living systems . Nat . Commun . 9 , 3281 . McRae , T . D . , Oleksyn , D . , Miller , J . , andGao , Y . - R . ( 2019 ) . Robust blind spectral unmixing for ﬂuorescence microscopy using unsupervised learning . PLoS One 14 , e0225410 . Mlodzianoski , M . J . , Schreiner , J . M . , Callahan , S . P . , Smolkova´ , K . , Dlaskova´ , A . , (cid:1) Santorova´ , J . , Je (cid:1) zek , P . , and Bewersdorf , J . ( 2011 ) . Sample drift correction in 3D ﬂuorescence photoactivation localization microscopy . Opt . Express 19 , 15009 . Moerner , W . E . , and Kador , L . ( 1989 ) . Optical detection and spectroscopy of single molecules in a solid . Phys . Rev . Lett . 62 , 2535 – 2538 . Mofﬁtt , J . R . , Pandey , S . , Boettiger , A . N . , Wang , S . , and Zhuang , X . ( 2016 ) . Spatial organization shapes the turnover of a bacterial transcriptome . Elife 5 , e13065 . Mund , M . , van der Beek , J . A . , Deschamps , J . , Dmitrieff , S . , Hoess , P . , Monster , J . L . , Picco , A . , Ne´de´lec , F . , Kaksonen , M . , and Ries , J . ( 2018 ) . Systematic nanoscale Analysis of endocytosis links efﬁcient vesicle formation to patterned actin nucleation . Cell 174 , 884 – 896 . e17 . Nahidiazar , L . , Agronskaia , A . V . , Broertjes , J . , van den Broek , B . , and Jalink , K . ( 2016 ) . Optimizing imaging conditions for demanding multi - color super resolution localization microscopy . PLoS One 11 , e0158884 . Nair , D . , Hosy , E . , Petersen , J . D . , Constals , A . , Giannone , G . , Choquet , D . , and Sibarita , J . - B . ( 2013 ) . Super - resolution imaging reveals that AMPA receptors inside synapses are dynamically organized in nanodomains regulated by PSD95 . J . Neurosci . 33 , 13204 – 13224 . Nehme , E . , Freedman , D . , Gordon , R . , Ferdman , B . , Weiss , L . E . , Alalouf , O . , Naor , T . , Orange , R . , Michaeli , T . , and Shechtman , Y . ( 2020 ) . DeepSTORM3D : dense 3D localization microscopy and PSF design by deep learning . Nat . Methods 17 , 734 – 740 . Ouyang , W . , Aristov , A . , Lelek , M . , Hao , X . , and Zimmer , C . ( 2018 ) . Deep learning massively accelerates super - resolution localization microscopy . Nat . Biotechnol . 36 , 460 – 468 . Pereira , P . M . , Albrecht , D . , Culley , S . , Jacobs , C . , Marsh , M . , Mercer , J . , andHenriques , R . ( 2019 ) . Fix your membrane receptor imaging : actin cytoskeleton and CD4 membrane organization disruptionbychemicalﬁxation . Front . Immunol . 10 , 675 . Pinkard , H . , Phillips , Z . , Babakhani , A . , Fletcher , D . A . , and Waller , L . ( 2019 ) . Deep learning for single - shot autofocus microscopy . Optica 6 , 794 . Pleiner , T . , Bates , M . , and Go¨rlich , D . ( 2018 ) . A toolbox of anti – mouse and anti – rabbit IgG secondary nanobodies . J . Cell Biol . 217 , 1143 – 1154 . Puchner , E . M . , Walter , J . M . , Kasper , R . , Huang , B . , andLim , W . A . ( 2013 ) . Countingmoleculesinsingle organelleswith superresolution microscopyallows tracking of the endosome maturation trajectory . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . 110 , 16015 – 16020 . Ratz , M . , Testa , I . , Hell , S . W . , and Jakobs , S . ( 2015 ) . CRISPR / Cas9 - mediated endogenous protein tagging for RESOLFT super - resolution microscopy of living human cells . Sci . Rep . 5 , 9592 . Ricci , M . A . , Manzo , C . , Garcı´a - Parajo , M . F . , Lakadamyali , M . , and Cosma , M . P . ( 2015 ) . Chromatin ﬁbers are formed by heterogeneous groups of nucleosomes in vivo . Cell 160 , 1145 – 1158 . Richter , K . N . , Revelo , N . H . , Seitz , K . J . , Helm , M . S . , Sarkar , D . , Saleeb , R . S . , D’Este , E . , Eberle , J . , Wagner , E . , Vogl , C . , et al . ( 2018 ) . Glyoxal as an alternative ﬁxative to formaldehyde in immunostaining and super - resolution microscopy . EMBO J . 37 , 139 – 159 . Ries , J . , Kaplan , C . , Platonova , E . , Eghlidi , H . , and Ewers , H . ( 2012 ) . A simple , versatile method for GFP - based super - resolution microscopy via nanobodies . Nat . Methods 9 , 582 – 584 . Rittweger , E . , Han , K . Y . , Irvine , S . E . , Eggeling , C . , and Hell , S . W . ( 2009 ) . STED microscopy reveals crystal colour centres with nanometric resolution . Nat . Photon . 3 , 144 – 147 . Rust , M . J . , Bates , M . , and Zhuang , X . W . ( 2006 ) . Sub - diffraction - limit imaging by stochastic optical reconstruction microscopy ( STORM ) . Nat . Methods 3 , 793 – 795 . Saal , K . A . , Richter , F . , Rehling , P . , andRizzoli , S . O . ( 2018 ) . Combined use of unnatural amino acids enables dual - color super - resolution imaging of proteinsviaclickchemistry . ACS Nano 12 , 12247 – 12254 . Sage , D . , Pham , T . - A . , Babcock , H . , Lukes , T . , Pengo , T . , Chao , J . , Velmurugan , R . , Herbert , A . , Agrawal , A . , Colabrese , S . , et al . ( 2019 ) . Super - resolution ﬁght club : assessment of 2D and 3D single - molecule localization microscopy software . Nat . Methods 16 , 387 – 395 . Sahl , S . J . , and Hell , S . W . ( 2019 ) . High Resolution Imaging in Microscopy and Ophthalmology ( Springer International Publishing ) . Sahl , S . J . , Hell , S . W . , and Jakobs , S . ( 2017 ) . Fluorescencenanoscopyincellbiology . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 18 , 685 – 701 . ll OPEN ACCESS iScience 24 , 102134 , March 19 , 2021 25 iScience Review Saka , S . K . , Wang , Y . , Kishi , J . Y . , Zhu , A . , Zeng , Y . , Xie , W . , Kirli , K . , Yapp , C . , Cicconet , M . , Beliveau , B . J . , et al . ( 2019 ) . Immuno - SABER enables highly multiplexed and ampliﬁed protein imaging in tissues . Nat . Biotechnol . 37 , 1080 – 1090 . Schermelleh , L . , Carlton , P . M . , Haase , S . , Shao , L . , Winoto , L . , Kner , P . , Burke , B . , Cardoso , M . C . , Agard , D . A . , Gustafsson , M . G . L . , et al . ( 2008 ) . Subdiffraction multicolor imaging of the nuclear periphery with 3D structured illumination microscopy . Science 320 , 1332 – 1336 . Schneider , C . A . , Rasband , W . S . , and Eliceiri , K . W . ( 2012 ) . NIH Image to ImageJ : 25 years of image analysis . Nat . Methods 9 , 671 – 675 . Schneider , J . , Zahn , J . , Maglione , M . , Sigrist , S . J . , Marquard , J . , Chojnacki , J . , Kra¨usslich , H . - G . , Sahl , S . J . , Engelhardt , J . , andHell , S . W . ( 2015 ) . Ultrafast , temporally stochastic STED nanoscopy of millisecond dynamics . Nat . Methods 12 , 827 – 830 . Schoen , I . , Ries , J . , Klotzsch , E . , Ewers , H . , and Vogel , V . ( 2011 ) . Binding - activated localization microscopy of DNA structures . Nano Lett . 11 , 4008 – 4011 . Sengupta , P . , Jovanovic - Talisman , T . , Skoko , D . , Renz , M . , Veatch , S . L . , andLippincott - Schwartz , J . ( 2011 ) . Probing protein heterogeneity in the plasma membrane using PALM and pair correlation analysis . Nat . Methods 8 , 969 – 975 . Sharonov , A . , and Hochstrasser , R . M . ( 2006 ) . Wide - ﬁeld subdiffraction imaging by accumulated binding of diffusing probes . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . 103 , 18911 – 18916 . Shen , D . , Wu , G . , and Suk , H . - I . ( 2017 ) . Deep learning in medical image analysis . Annu . Rev . Biomed . Eng . 19 , 221 – 248 . Shen , F . , Hodgson , L . , andHahn , K . ( 2006 ) . Digital autofocusmethodsforautomated microscopy . In Methods in Enzymology , pp . 620 – 632 . Sherman , E . , Barr , V . , and Samelson , L . E . ( 2013 ) . Super - resolution characterization of TCR - dependent signaling clusters . Immunol . Rev . 251 , 21 – 35 . Shtengel , G . , Galbraith , J . A . , Galbraith , C . G . , Lippincott - Schwartz , J . , Gillette , J . M . , Manley , S . , Sougrat , R . , Waterman , C . M . , Kanchanawong , P . , Davidson , M . W . , et al . ( 2009 ) . Interferometric ﬂuorescent super - resolution microscopy resolves 3D cellular ultrastructure . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . 106 , 3125 – 3130 . Sieben , C . , Banterle , N . , Douglass , K . M . , Go¨nczy , P . , and Manley , S . ( 2018 ) . Multicolor single - particle reconstruction of protein complexes . Nat . Methods 15 , 777 – 780 . Sigal , Y . M . , Speer , C . M . , Babcock , H . P . , and Zhuang , X . ( 2015 ) . Mapping synaptic input ﬁelds of neurons with super - resolution imaging . Cell 163 , 493 – 505 . Sograte - Idrissi , S . , Oleksiievets , N . , Isbaner , S . , Eggert - Martinez , M . , Enderlein , J . , Tsukanov , R . , and Opazo , F . ( 2019 ) . Nanobody detection of standard ﬂuorescent proteins enables multi - target DNA - PAINT with high resolution and minimal displacement errors . Cells 8 , 48 . Soliman , K . ( 2015 ) . CellProﬁler : novel automated image segmentation procedure for super - resolution microscopy . Biol . Proced . Online 17 , 11 . Stadler , C . , Rexhepaj , E . , Singan , V . R . , Murphy , R . F . , Pepperkok , R . , Uhle´n , M . , Simpson , J . C . , and Lundberg , E . ( 2013 ) . Immunoﬂuorescence and ﬂuorescent - protein tagging show high correlation for protein localization in mammalian cells . Nat . Methods 10 , 315 – 323 . Stanly , T . A . , Fritzsche , M . , Banerji , S . , Garcı´a , E . , Bernardino de la Serna , J . , Jackson , D . G . , and Eggeling , C . ( 2016 ) . Critical importance of appropriateﬁxationconditionsforfaithfulimagingofreceptormicroclusters . Biol . Open 5 , 1343 – 1350 . (cid:1) Stefko , M . , Ottino , B . , Douglass , K . M . , and Manley , S . ( 2018 ) . Autonomous illumination control for localization microscopy . Opt . Express 26 , 30882 . Strauss , S . , and Jungmann , R . ( 2020 ) . Up to 100 - fold speed - up and multiplexing in optimized DNA - PAINT . Nat . Methods 17 , 789 – 791 . Ta , H . , Keller , J . , Haltmeier , M . , Saka , S . K . , Schmied , J . , Opazo , F . , Tinnefeld , P . , Munk , A . , and Hell , S . W . ( 2015 ) . Mapping molecules in scanning far - ﬁeld ﬂuorescence nanoscopy . Nat . Commun . 6 , 7977 . Tanaka , K . A . K . , Suzuki , K . G . N . , Shirai , Y . M . , Shibutani , S . T . , Miyahara , M . S . H . , Tsuboi , H . , Yahara , M . , Yoshimura , A . , Mayor , S . , Fujiwara , T . K . , et al . ( 2010 ) . Membrane molecules mobile even after chemical ﬁxation . Nat . Methods 7 , 865 – 866 . Tang , A . - H . H . , Chen , H . , Li , T . P . , Metzbower , S . R . , MacGillavry , H . D . , and Blanpied , T . A . ( 2016 ) . A trans - synapticnanocolumnalignsneurotransmitter release to receptors . Nature 536 , 210 – 214 . Thevathasan , J . V . , Kahnwald , M . , Cie (cid:3) sli (cid:3) nski , K . , Hoess , P . , Peneti , S . K . , Reitberger , M . , Heid , D . , Kasuba , K . C . , Hoerner , S . J . , Li , Y . , et al . ( 2019 ) . Nuclearporesasversatilereferencestandardsforquantitativesuperresolutionmicroscopy . Nat . Methods 16 , 1045 – 1053 . Tillberg , P . W . , and Chen , F . ( 2019 ) . Expansion microscopy : scalable and convenient super - resolution microscopy . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 35 , 683 – 701 . Truan , Z . , Taranco´n Dı ´ ez , L . , Bo¨nsch , C . , Malkusch , S . , Endesfelder , U . , Munteanu , M . , Hartley , O . , Heilemann , M . , and Fu ¨ rstenberg , A . ( 2013 ) . Quantitative morphological analysis of arrestin2 clustering upon G protein - coupled receptor stimulation by super - resolution microscopy . J . Struct . Biol . 184 , 329 – 334 . Truckenbrodt , S . , Maidorn , M . , Crzan , D . , Wildhagen , H . , Kabatas , S . , and Rizzoli , S . O . ( 2018 ) . X10 expansion microscopy enables 25 - nm resolution on conventional microscopes . EMBO Rep . 19 , e45836 . Tuijtel , M . W . , Koster , A . J . , Jakobs , S . , Faas , F . G . A . , and Sharp , T . H . ( 2019 ) . Correlative cryo super - resolution light and electron microscopy on mammalian cells using ﬂuorescent proteins . Sci . Rep . 9 , 1369 . Turkowyd , B . , Virant , D . , and Endesfelder , U . ( 2016 ) . From single molecules to life : microscopy atthenanoscale . Anal . Bioanal . Chem . 408 , 6885 – 6911 . Valley , C . C . , Liu , S . , Lidke , D . S . , and Lidke , K . A . ( 2015 ) . Sequential superresolution imaging of multiple targets using a single ﬂuorophore . PLoS One 10 , e0123941 . Vangindertael , J . , Camacho , R . , Sempels , W . , Mizuno , H . , Dedecker , P . , and Janssen , K . P . F . F . ( 2018 ) . An introduction to optical super - resolution microscopy for the adventurous biologist . Methods Appl . Fluoresc . 6 , 022003 . Vaughan , J . C . , Jia , S . , and Zhuang , X . ( 2012 ) . Ultrabright photoactivatable ﬂuorophores created by reductive caging . Nat . Methods 9 , 1181 – 1184 . Veatch , S . L . , Machta , B . B . , Shelby , S . A . , Chiang , E . N . , Holowka , D . A . , and Baird , B . A . ( 2012 ) . Correlation functions quantify super - resolution images and estimate apparent clustering due to over - counting . PLoS One 7 , e31457 . Ve´nien - Bryan , C . , Li , Z . , Vuillard , L . , and Boutin , J . A . ( 2017 ) . Cryo - electron microscopy and X - ray crystallography : complementary approaches to structural biology and drug discovery . Acta Crystallogr . Sect . F Struct . Biol . Commun . 73 , 174 – 183 . Wang , H . , Rivenson , Y . , Jin , Y . , Wei , Z . , Gao , R . , Gu¨naydın , H . , Bentolila , L . A . , Kural , C . , and Ozcan , A . ( 2019 ) . Deep learning enables cross - modality super - resolution in ﬂuorescence microscopy . Nat . Methods 16 , 103 – 110 . Wegel , E . , Go¨hler , A . , Lagerholm , B . C . , Wainman , A . , Uphoff , S . , Kaufmann , R . , and Dobbie , I . M . ( 2016 ) . Imaging cellular structures in super - resolution with SIM , STED and Localisation Microscopy : a practical comparison . Sci . Rep . 6 , 1 – 13 . Weill , U . , Krieger , G . , Avihou , Z . , Milo , R . , Schuldiner , M . , and Davidi , D . ( 2019 ) . Assessment of GFP tag position on protein localization and growth ﬁtness in yeast . J . Mol . Biol . 431 , 636 – 641 . Werbin , J . L . , Avendan˜o , M . S . , Becker , V . , Jungmann , R . , Yin , P . , Danuser , G . , and Sorger , P . K . ( 2017 ) . Multiplexed Exchange - PAINT imaging reveals ligand - dependent EGFR and Met interactions in the plasma membrane . Sci . Rep . 7 , 12150 . Whelan , D . R . , and Bell , T . D . M . ( 2015 ) . Image artifacts in Single Molecule Localization Microscopy : why optimization of sample preparation protocols matters . Sci . Rep . 5 , 7924 . Winter , F . R . , Loidolt , M . , Westphal , V . , Butkevich , A . N . , Gregor , C . , Sahl , S . J . , and Hell , S . W . ( 2017 ) . Multicolour nanoscopy of ﬁxed and living cells with a single STED beam and hyperspectral detection . Sci . Rep . 7 , 46492 . Wood , E . ( 1983 ) . Molecular cloning . A . Lab . Man . Biochem . Educ . 11 , 82 . Wu , J . - Q . ( 2005 ) . Counting cytokinesis proteins globally and locally in ﬁssion yeast . Science 310 , 310 – 314 . Wu , Y . , Wu , X . , Toro , L . , and Stefani , E . ( 2015 ) . Resonant - scanning dual - color STED microscopy with ultrafast photon counting : a concise guide . Methods 88 , 48 – 56 . Yang , X . , and Specht , C . G . ( 2020 ) . Practical guidelines for two - color SMLM of synaptic ll OPEN ACCESS 26 iScience 24 , 102134 , March 19 , 2021 iScience Review proteins in cultured neurons . In Neuromethods , pp . 173 – 202 . Yang , B . , Przybilla , F . , Mestre , M . , Trebbia , J . - B . , and Lounis , B . ( 2014 ) . Large parallelization of STED nanoscopy using optical lattices . Opt . Express 22 , 5581 . Yazdanfar , S . , Kenny , K . B . , Tasimi , K . , Corwin , A . D . , Dixon , E . L . , and Filkins , R . J . ( 2008 ) . Simple and robust image - based autofocusing for digital microscopy . Opt . Express 16 , 8670 . Yi , J . , Manna , A . , Barr , V . A . , Hong , J . , Neuman , K . C . , and Samelson , L . E . ( 2016 ) . madSTORM : a superresolution technique for large - scale multiplexing at single - molecule accuracy . Mol . Biol . Cell 27 , 3591 – 3600 . Zhang , X . , Zeng , F . , Li , Y . , and Qiao , Y . ( 2018 ) . Improvement in focusing accuracy of DNA sequencing microscope with multi - position laser differential confocal autofocus method . Opt . Express 26 , 887 . Zhang , Y . , Song , K . - H . , Dong , B . , Davis , J . L . , Shao , G . , Sun , C . , and Zhang , H . F . ( 2019 ) . Multicolor super - resolution imaging using spectroscopic single - molecule localization microscopy with optimal spectral dispersion . Appl . Opt . 58 , 2248 . Zhao , J . , Bruck , S . , Cemerski , S . , Zhang , L . , Butler , B . , Dani , A . , Cooper , J . A . , and Shaw , A . S . ( 2013 ) . CD2AP links cortactin and capping protein at the cell periphery to facilitate formation of lamellipodia . Mol . Cell . Biol . 33 , 38 – 47 . Zhao , Z . , Xin , B . , Li , L . , and Huang , Z . - L . ( 2017 ) . High - power homogeneous illumination for super - resolution localization microscopy with large ﬁeld - of - view . Opt . Express 25 , 13382 . Zimmermann , T . ( 2005 ) . Spectral imaging and linear unmixing in light microscopy . Adv . Biochem . Eng . Biotechnol . 95 , 245 – 265 . ll OPEN ACCESS iScience 24 , 102134 , March 19 , 2021 27 iScience Review