Th e J ou r n a l o f C e ll B i o l o gy  The Rockefeller University Press , 0021 - 9525 / 2003 / 09 / 1079 / 10 $ 8 . 00 The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 162 , Number 6 , September 15 , 2003 1079 – 1088 http : / / www . jcb . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200303023 JCB Article 1079 Molecular requirements for actin - based lamella formation in Drosophila S2 cells Stephen L . Rogers , Ursula Wiedemann , Nico Stuurman , and Ronald D . Vale Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Department of Cellular and Molecular Pharmacology , University of California , San Francisco , San Francisco , CA 94107 ell migration occurs through the protrusion of the actin - enriched lamella . Here , we investigated the effects of RNAi depletion of (cid:2) 90 proteins implicated in actin function on lamella formation in Drosophila S2 cells . Similar to in vitro reconstitution studies of actin - based Listeria movement , we ﬁnd that lamellae formation requires a relatively small set of proteins that participate in actin nucleation ( Arp2 / 3 and SCAR ) , barbed end capping ( capping protein ) , ﬁlament depolymerization ( coﬁlin and Aip1 ) , and actin monomer binding ( proﬁlin and cyclase - C associated protein ) . Lamellae are initiated by parallel and partially redundant signaling pathways involving Rac GTPases and the adaptor protein Nck , which stimulate SCAR , an Arp2 / 3 activator . We also show that RNAi of three proteins ( kette , Abi , and Sra - 1 ) known to copurify with and inhibit SCAR in vitro leads to SCAR degradation , revealing a novel function of this protein complex in SCAR stability . Our results have identiﬁed an essential set of proteins involved in actin dynamics during lamella formation in Drosophila S2 cells . Introduction Cell motility is essential for the precise spatial and temporal orchestration of tissue morphogenesis that gives rise to the elaborate , three - dimensional architecture of an organism . Cellular migration remains crucial throughout the lifetime of higher organisms , enabling processes such as wound healing and chemotactic responses in the immune system . Metastasis demonstrates a more sinister manifestation of cell motility in which transformed cells relocate from a primary tumor and colonize a secondary site . Cell migration can be subdivided into three stages ( Lauffenburger and Horwitz , 1996 ; Mitchison and Cramer , 1996 ) . The first stage is protrusion of the leading edge , the polarized “front” of the cell . During protrusion , the cell fabricates a dense , actin - rich structure called the lamella , which extends the leading edge in the direction of migration ( Small et al . , 2002 ) . The second stage involves adhesion of the advancing leading edge to the substrate . This complex process involves extracellular adhesion receptors forming transmembrane linkages between the extracellular matrix and the actin cytoskeleton . These attachment sites mature to become focal adhesions , structures that allow the cell to exert force upon its surroundings by contraction of its actin cytoskeleton . In the third stage , the trailing edge releases from the extracellular matrix and is retracted toward the front of the cell . This process involves dissolution of adhesion structures and contraction of the cytoskeleton by actomyosin to “pull” the rear of the cell forward . In this study , we focused on the first of these stages : the actin - based protrusive forces that give rise to lamellae . The dynamics of the actin cytoskeleton that underlie the propulsive forces at the leading edge have been extensively investigated , and the information has been synthesized into the dendritic nucleation / treadmilling model ( Pollard et al . , 2000 ; Pollard and Borisy , 2003 ) . According to this model , new actin filaments are nucleated by the Arp2 / 3 complex and grow in a polarized fashion with the fast - growing barbed ends oriented toward the leading edge . The new filaments are nucleated from Arp2 / 3 bound to the sides of preexisting filaments , giving rise to the branched dendritic array of filaments observed by electron microscopy ( Welch and Mullins , 2002 ) . Arp2 / 3 is normally repressed , but can be activated by the WASP and SCAR family of proteins , which in turn are activated though small G proteins ( e . g . , Rac and Cdc42 ) that are integrated into many signaling cascades ( Etienne - Manneville and Hall , 2002 ) . The collective force of individual actin filaments polymerizing at the leading The online version of this article includes supplemental material . Address correspondence to Ron Vale , Department of Cellular and Molecu - lar Pharmacology , University of California , San Francisco , N312 Genentech Hall , 600 16th Street , San Francisco , CA 94107 . Tel . : ( 415 ) 476 - 6380 . Fax : ( 415 ) 476 - 5233 . email : vale @ phy . ucsf . edu Key words : actin ; lamella ; polymerization ; SCAR ; cytokinesis Abbreviations used in this paper : CAP , cyclase - associated protein ; con A , concanavalin A ; VASP , vasodilator - stimulated phosphoprotein . on D e c e m be r 25 , 2017 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200303023 Supplemental material can be found at : Th e J ou r n a l o f C e ll B i o l o gy 1080 The Journal of Cell Biology | Volume 162 , Number 6 , 2003 edge is thought to push the membrane forward ( Mogilner and Oster , 1996 ) . This pushing force is attenuated by block - ing further monomer addition to barbed ends by capping protein ( Cooper and Schafer , 2000 ) and by the rearward “retrograde flow” of the actin filament lattice as a whole ( Cramer , 1997 ) . The activity of capping protein can be antagonized by the enabled / Mena / vasodilator - stimulated phosphoprotein ( VASP ) family , which thereby acts to pro - mote leading edge formation ( Bear et al . , 2002 ) . Toward the rear of the lamella , actin filaments become debranched , sev - ered , and depolymerized by cofilin - like proteins , and the re - leased monomeric actin is recycled into polymer at the lead - ing edge . In addition to lamella , many cells form elongate and narrow actin projections called filopodia ( Small et al . , 2002 ) . Many actin - binding proteins have been described in these structures , but the mechanism of filopodia formation is poorly understood compared with lamella formation . The roles and activities of the actin - interacting proteins described above ( as well as many others ) have been eluci - dated primarily using in vitro assays for actin assembly ( Pol - lard and Borisy , 2003 ) . The yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae also has been a powerful system for investigating the roles of actin - binding proteins in vivo ( Ayscough and Drubin , 1996 ) , although the actin architecture in yeast differs con - siderably from the lamella and filopodia found in higher eu - karyotes . In addition , mutations in many actin - binding pro - teins have been described in Drosophila and Caenorhabditis elegans ( Montell , 1999 ) . However , not all of these are null mutations , and the analyses in the literature have been per - formed on various cell types in embryos or mature animals . Here , we have investigated the in vivo roles of (cid:2) 90 actin - binding proteins in a single cell type , the Drosophila S2 cell line for which we have developed conditions for observing lamella formation and dynamics . Results Drosophila S2 cells spread and form an actin - rich lamella on concanavalin A – coated surfaces Under routine culture conditions , S2 cells display a roughly spherical morphology with a diameter of (cid:2) 10 (cid:2) m ( Fig . 1 , a and b ) . These cells are not motile and exhibit no obvious morphological polarity , but time - lapse microscopy of cells expressing GFP – actin revealed that their surfaces are dy - namic and continuously extend and absorb membrane ruf - fles ( Video 1 , available at http : / / www . jcb . org / cgi / content / full / jcb . 200303023 / DC1 ) . S2 cells may be induced to un - dergo a dramatic change in their morphology when plated on glass coverslips coated with the lectin concanavalin A ( con A ) ( Rogers et al . , 2002 ) . Within 20 to 30 min after plating on this substrate , these cells avidly attach , flatten , and spread to adopt a discoid morphology of approximately double their normal diameter ( 20 (cid:2) m ) . Spread cells resem - ble a “fried egg” with a domed central region containing the nuclei and majority of organelles surrounded by a thin , or - ganelle - free zone ( Fig . 1 , c and d ; Video 2 , available at http : / / www . jcb . org / cgi / content / full / jcb . 200303023 / DC1 ) . To better understand the organization of actin in S2 cells , we fixed con A – adhered S2 cells expressing GFP – actin or stained them with Texas red X - phalloidin , a probe that se - lectively binds to filamentous actin . When examined by fluorescence microscopy , most S2 cells ( 90 % ) exhibited a highly developed , radially symmetrical actin cytoskeleton that could be divided into three zones : a dense peripheral network at the extreme periphery of the cells ( (cid:2) 1 (cid:2) m wide ) , a second central zone ( 4 – 6 (cid:2) m wide ) of lower actin density composed of filaments , and a third circular bundle of fila - ments that surrounded the nucleus ( Fig . 2 , a and b ) . Arp3 , cofilin , and capping protein were enriched in this first actin - dense zone at the leading edge , especially at membrane ruf - fles ( Fig . 2 , a , c , and f ) . Enabled / VASP was further restricted to the extreme edge of the periphery ( (cid:3) 1 (cid:2) m ) ( Fig . 2 e ) . In contrast , immunolocalization of profilin / chickadee revealed puncta that were distributed throughout the cell and partic - ularly abundant in the inner nuclear and organelle - rich do - Figure 1 . Drosophila S2 cells attach , spread , and form lamellae when plated on con A . S2 cells expressing EGFP – actin were plated on polylysine ( a and b ) or con A ( c and d ) and examined by phase contrast ( a and c ) or fluorescence microscopy ( b and d ) . Cells on polylysine retain a spherical morphology but form actin - containing membrane ruffles along their surface . When plated on con A , the majority of S2 cells ( (cid:4) 90 % ) spread to form a radially symmetrical actin - based lamellae ( c and d ) . Bar , 5 (cid:2) m . ( e ) A single frame from a time - lapse movie of an S2 cell expressing GFP – actin and plated on con A . The yellow line represents the region of the movie used to generate the kymograph shown in f . Bar , 1 (cid:2) m . ( f ) This kymograph shows the behavior of actin over time in a lamella . The shark fin shape is indicative of cycles of extension and retraction at the cell margin , while the diagonal lines visualize the retrograde flow of actin at the cell periphery . Bar , 30 s . on D e c e m be r 25 , 2017 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m Th e J ou r n a l o f C e ll B i o l o gy Lamella formation probed using RNAi | Rogers et al . 1081 main ( Fig . 2 d ) . These puncta were not associated with ad - hesion structures , as immunofluorescent staining against phosphotyrosine failed to stain the ventral surface of the cells ( unpublished data ) . The distributions of these well - charac - terized actin - binding proteins are generally similar to those described in other cell types that form actin - rich lamellae . A small proportion ( (cid:3) 10 % ) of cells did not exhibit such well - spread lamella but rather possessed numerous and dy - namic filopodia evenly spaced around their circumference ( Fig . S1 , available at http : / / www . jcb . org / cgi / content / full / jcb . 200303023 / DC1 ) . These short ( 1 – 2 (cid:2) m ) projections exhibited cycles of elongation and retraction ( Video 3 , avail - able at http : / / www . jcb . org / cgi / content / full / jcb . 200303023 / DC1 ) . We have not observed interconversion of the two cell morphologies . We restricted our RNAi studies to the pre - dominant population of cells that spread and form lamella on the con A – coated surfaces . We also directly visualized actin dynamics in the lamellae of living S2 cells expressing GFP – actin after plating on con A . Membrane ruffles formed at the cell periphery , folded back toward the cell center , and ultimately fused with the dorsal surface of the cell ( Video 4 , available at http : / / www . jcb . org / cgi / content / full / jcb . 200303023 / DC1 ) . Such ruffling activity was more or less symmetrically distributed around the cell , and we rarely observed polarized morpholo - gies or cell movement . At sufficiently low levels of protein induction , a speckled pattern of GFP – actin ( Waterman - Storer et al . , 1998 ) was observed , and time - lapse imaging re - vealed a centripetal flow of actin from the periphery toward the center of the cell at a rate of (cid:2) 4 . 0 (cid:5) 0 . 44 (cid:2) m / min ( Fig . 1 , e and f ) , which is somewhat faster than described in other systems , such as migrating fibroblasts or neuronal growth cones ( Cramer , 1997 ) . In summary , our imaging of actin and actin - binding proteins indicates that con A – induced spreading of S2 cells constitutes an attractive model system for understanding the molecular basis of lamella formation . Protein requirements for lamella formation To dissect the molecular basis of lamella formation , we ex - ploited the susceptibility of S2 cells to RNAi to identify pro - teins involved in this process . We compiled a candidate list of (cid:2) 90 proteins implicated in aspects of actin function or in cell motility during neuronal development and dorsal clo - sure during Drosophila embryogenesis ( Table I ) . DNA microarray analysis demonstrated that only five genes in this list are not expressed above background levels in S2 cells ( Table I ; Hollien , J . , and J . Weissman , personal communication ) . As very low expressing genes nevertheless may be important for cell function , we still subjected these genes to RNAi analysis . A 7 - d RNAi treatment was used to deplete proteins before assaying the cells for lamella forma - tion on con A – treated coverslips . Filamentous actin was vi - sualized with rhodamine - phalloidin , and DNA was stained with DAPI to screen for multiple nuclei reflecting cytokine - sis defects . For every treatment , we examined at least 500 cells . We verified the efficacy of our RNAi treatments by im - munoblotting extracts from dsRNA - treated cells using a panel of antibodies to 13 proteins to which we had access ( Fig . 3 i ) . Immunoblotting for those tested revealed that RNAi reduced protein expression by at least 90 % of endoge - nous levels and in many cases was not detectable . This im - munoblot analysis included five proteins for which RNAi did not elicit an obvious phenotype ( Table I ) . In the accom - panying paper ( Goshima and Vale , 2003 ) , we also demon - strate (cid:4) 90 % reduction in the levels of 10 motor proteins subjected to RNAi and have yet to encounter a case where RNAi has failed to reduce protein levels . We , therefore , spec - ulate that dsRNAs against proteins that we could not quanti - tate most likely produced a similar degree of inhibition . Of the (cid:2) 90 genes tested , we found that RNAi produced obvious aberrant morphologies in 19 cases ( Table I ; all RNAi experiments were performed at least twice ) . The ob - served defects can be categorized into seven phenotypic classes that will be described below . Class 1 : p20 subunit of Arp2 / 3 , SCAR , kette , Abi , and Sra - 1 We inactivated the Arp2 / 3 complex by targeting its crucial p20 subunit , which mediates protein – protein interactions within the Arp 2 / 3 complex and , therefore , is essential for stability and actin - nucleating activity ( Gournier et al . , 2001 ) . After p20 RNAi , (cid:4) 90 % of S2 cells exhibited a striking mor - Figure 2 . Immunofluorescence localization of actin regulatory proteins to lamellae of S2 cells . S2 cells were plated on con A for 1 h and then fixed and double stained for actin ( red ) and Arp3 ( a , green ) , SCAR ( b , green ) , cofilin / twinstar ( c , green ) , profilin ( d , green ) , enabled ( e , green ) , or capping protein ( f , green ) . Bar , 5 (cid:2) m . on D e c e m be r 25 , 2017 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m Th e J ou r n a l o f C e ll B i o l o gy 1082 The Journal of Cell Biology | Volume 162 , Number 6 , 2003 phological defect when plated on con A . Instead of the circu - lar , symmetrical shape usually induced on this substrate , p20 - depleted cells adopted a stellate , radially asymmetrical cell morphology ( Fig . 3 a ) . Phalloidin staining revealed that these cells rarely formed lamellae ; instead filamentous actin was enriched in the distal tips of a variable number of ta - pered projections . The presence of actin filaments could be due to residual Arp2 / 3 or to alternative actin - nucleating ac - tivities . In addition , actin filaments were sometimes observed to run radially from the center of the cell body along the lengths of these projections . These processes were also en - riched in microtubules that often extended to their distal re - gions ( unpublished data ) . The frequency of multinucleate cells was approximately the same as control cells , indicating that inhibition of Arp2 / 3 did not affect cytokinesis . Cells contain actin nucleation – promoting factors that activate the Arp2 / 3 complex ( Welch and Mullins , 2002 ) . Genetic analysis in Drosophila has shown that one of these factors , SCAR , is essential for numerous actin - based pro - cesses during development , while WASP , another activa - tor , mediates a subset of Arp2 / 3 functions in neuronal cell fate determination ( Ben - Yaacov et al . , 2001 ; Zallen et al . , 2002 ) . WASP RNAi did not alter cell morphology or ac - tin organization in S2 cells . In contrast , we found that RNAi against SCAR exactly duplicated the morpholog - ical defects observed with RNAi of the p20 subunit of Arp2 / 3 in (cid:4) 80 % of the cells ( unpublished data ) . Interest - ingly , RNAi for three proteins ( kette , Sra - 1 , and Abi ) that were recently identified to copurify with SCAR ( Eden et al . , 2002 ) produced a phenotype indistinguishable from Table I . Morphological classification for RNAi treatments in this study Class 1 : stellate morphology p20 subunit of Arp2 / 3 Sra - 1 SCAR a Abi kette Nck / dreadlocks a Class 2 : failure to spread and filamentous actin accumulation at cortex cofilin / twinstar a Aip1 Class 3 : Failure to spread and filamentous actin throughout cell profilin / chickadee a CAP / act up Class 4 : increased width of lamellae slingshot Class 5 : increased membrane ruffling capping protein (cid:6) a Class 6 : formation of thin processes Cdc42 Class 7 : cytokinesis failure myosin II / zipper citron kinase diaphanous a profilin / chickadee a Rho1 a AcGAP cofilin / twinstar a CAP / act up anillinAip1 No effect on lamellae Abl kinase Adf / cofilin - like basketcappucinociboulotcoraclecoronincortactinCdk5Dab ( disabled ) DahdcarmilDLAR b drebin - like DrkDROKE - cadherin ( shotgun ) enabledfascin a filaminfimbrinforked b formin / DIA - like gelsolinGenghis Kahn hemipterouskelchLgl a Lim kinase merlinmoesinMtl ( Rac - like ) mushroom bodies tiny myoblast city b myosin IA myosin IB myosin V myosin VI a myosin VII myosin VII ( 28B ) myosin XV myosin XVIII ( PDZ ) Nck ( dreadlocks ) a nulloovarian tumor Pak1 kinase protein kinase N POD - 1 / coronin a Pp2Aquail b Rab5Rac1 / 2 RhoBTBRhoLrhophilinsanpodospire b talinTriotropomyosin I tropomyosin II twinfillinVavvillin - like vinculinWASP For complete gene information , see the online supplemental material ( available at http : / / www . jcb . org / cgi / content / full / jcb . 200303023 / DC1 ) . Depletion of myosin II / zipper also caused impaired lamella spreading and actin disorganization . Inhibition of Rac1 / 2 also generated an increase in stellate phenotypes in combination with Nck ( see Fig . 4 ) . a Protein reduction confirmed by immunoblot analysis . b Expression levels of these genes by Affymetrix DNA microarray analysis was not detected above background levels in S2 cells ( Hollien , J . , and J . Weiss - man , personal communication ) . The following genes were not evaluated by microarray analysis : gelsolin , myosin XVIII , nullo , Pp2A , and tropomyosin II . All other genes are expressed in S2 cells . on D e c e m be r 25 , 2017 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m Th e J ou r n a l o f C e ll B i o l o gy Lamella formation probed using RNAi | Rogers et al . 1083 SCAR or p20 . The role of these subunits will be described in more detail in a subsequent section . Thus , we conclude that lamella formation in S2 cells is a SCAR – Arp2 / 3 - dependent process . Class 2 : profilin and cyclase - associated protein The second category of RNAi - induced morphological de - fect was typified by inhibition of profilin , an actin mono - mer – binding protein ( Cooley et al . , 1992 ) . After this treat - ment , (cid:4) 85 % of cells failed to spread on con A and instead retained their spherical shape ( Fig . 3 b ) . Phalloidin stain - ing was diffuse throughout these cells , however , individual filaments could not be resolved . These cells also were de - fective in cytokinesis , as revealed by the high incidence of multiple nuclei ( 39 % , n (cid:7) 846 ) , which is consistent with prior studies ( Verheyen and Cooley , 1994 ) . A similar mor - phology also was generated by RNAi against cyclase - associ - ated protein ( CAP / act up ) , another monomeric actin – binding protein that has been shown to play an important role in actin organization in Drosophila ( Baum et al . , 2000 ; Benlali et al . , 2000 ) . When bound to monomeric actin , profilin acts to restrict actin incorporation to the barbed - end of actin filaments and mediates exchange of ADP for ATP ( Holt and Koffer , 2001 ) . We speculate that the ac - cumulation of f - actin in profilin and CAP RNAi cells , along with the failure to form lamellae , may reflect non - productive polymerization of actin filaments from both the barbed and pointed ends . Class 3 : cofilin and Aip1 The actin - binding protein cofilin / twinstar is essential for actin - based functions in many cell types , and in vitro and in vivo studies indicate a role for cofilin in actin filament severing and turnover ( Gunsalus et al . , 1995 ) . Inhibition of cofilin by RNAi prevented S2 cell spreading on con A in (cid:4) 95 % of treated cells . These cells retained their spherical morphology , and phalloidin staining revealed a dramatic cortical accumulation of filamentous actin as well as a wrinkled “raisin - like” texture to the surface of the cell ( Fig . 3 c ) . The abnormal accumulation of filamentous actin within the cells suggests that actin turnover is inhibited in S2 cells depleted of either of these two proteins . Cofilin - inhibited S2 cells exhibited a high incidence of multinucleate cells , implicating a role in cytokinesis ( 24 . 6 % , n (cid:7) 645 ) , as previously demonstrated ( Gunsalus et al . , 1995 ) . This morphology and actin distribution was mimicked by RNAi inhibition of Aip1 , a protein that acts cooperatively with cofilin in disassembling actin in Xenopus and budding yeast ( Okada et al . , 1999 ; Rodal et al . , 1999 ) . Aip1 also pro - duced a cytokinesis defect ( unpublished data ) . These re - sults indicate that both cofilin and Aip1 are essential for actin remodeling during lamella formation and that , de - spite the similarities in cell morphology produced by RNAi against either of them , these two proteins have distinct roles in actin regulation . Class 4 : slingshot Slingshot is a protein phosphatase that activates the actin - severing activity of cofilin ; loss - of - function experiments in Figure 3 . RNAi - mediated inhibition of actin regulatory proteins disrupts normal cellular morphology in S2 cells on con A . Untreated cells are shown in Fig . 1 ( c and d ) . Cells were treated with dsRNA against the p20 subunit of the Arp2 / 3 complex ( a ) , profilin / chickadee ( b ) , cofilin / twinstar ( c ) , slingshot ( d ) , capping protein (cid:6) ( e ) , Cdc42 ( f ) , Rho1 ( g ) , and myosin II / zipper ( h ) for 7 d and then plated on con A and stained with rhodamine - phalloidin ( red ) and DAPI ( blue ) to visualize filamentous actin and DNA , respectively . ( i ) Immunoblots demonstrating the effectiveness of RNAi on the levels of 13 different proteins : cofilin / twinstar , capping protein (cid:6) ( CPB ) , SCAR , Rho1 , diaphanous ( Dia ) , enabled ( Ena ) , myosin VI ( MVI ) , Nck / dreadlocks ( Dock ) , Pod1 , fascin / singed , lethal giant larvae ( LGL ) , and Trio . Exactly 10 (cid:2) g of total cellular protein was loaded for each lane . Bars , 5 (cid:2) m . on D e c e m be r 25 , 2017 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m Th e J ou r n a l o f C e ll B i o l o gy 1084 The Journal of Cell Biology | Volume 162 , Number 6 , 2003 Drosophila have demonstrated that tissues mutant for sling - shot exhibit abnormal accumulations of f - actin ( Niwa et al . , 2002 ) . S2 cells treated with dsRNA to inhibit slingshot were able to attach and spread efficiently on con A . However , the lamellae in (cid:4) 50 % of these cells exhibited structural abnor - malities as compared with controls . The distribution of f - actin was uniformly dense from the cell periphery to the center of the cell and did not show the typical distal enrich - ment commonly observed in spread S2 cells ( Fig . 1 d ) . Cells exhibiting this morphology typically had prominent radial bundles of actin that spanned the entire width of the lamel - lae . We speculate that this cellular morphology is produced by a partial loss of cofilin activity , leading to inefficient dis - assembly of the dendritic array of actin filaments at the rear of the lamellae and thus producing a lamellipod that is radi - ally wider than normal . Cytokinesis defects were not ob - served in these cells . Class 5 : capping protein Capping protein is an important regulatory factor that binds to the barbed ends of actin filaments to prevent actin monomer addition ( Cooper and Schafer , 2000 ) . Recent studies have suggested that a functional antagonism be - tween capping protein and enabled / VASP regulates the length and polymerization rate of actin filaments in the lamella ( Bear et al . , 2002 ) . This balance controls the rate of lamella protrusion in motile cells . S2 cells treated with dsRNA against capping protein adhered and spread nor - mally , but (cid:2) 80 % had lamellae exhibiting a hyper - ruffled shape ( Fig . 2 f ) . Lamellae in S2 cells lacking capping pro - tein also exhibited an accumulation of filamentous actin at the periphery that extended 2 – 3 (cid:2) m inwards from the cell perimeter , as compared with (cid:2) 1 (cid:2) m in untreated cells ( Fig . 3 e ) . The results of Bear et al . ( 2002 ) suggest an explanation for the abnormal lamella morphology . In the absence of capping protein , enabled / VASP - mediated actin filament elongation favors the formation of abnormally long fila - ments at the cell margin . These filaments push against the membrane , fueling protrusion , until compressive forces ex - ceed the flexural rigidity of long filaments , causing them to buckle and the membrane to retract . This hypothesis ex - plains the hyper - ruffled phenotype as well as the accumula - tion of f - actin at the margin of the cell . We did not observe an accumulation of multinucleated cells , suggesting that capping protein is dispensable for cytokinesis . Class 6 : Cdc42 A sixth category of morphological defect was produced by depletion of Cdc42 by RNAi . Cdc42 , a member of the Rho family of small G proteins , regulates actin organiza - tion and is generally thought to mediate the formation of filopodia during cellular migration ( Etienne - Manneville and Hall , 2002 ) . Inhibition of Cdc42 prevented forma - tion of a normal lamella in (cid:2) 50 % of the cells . Instead , ac - tin was organized into long , thin processes that projected from the entire periphery of the cell ( Fig . 3 f ) . These pro - cesses did not resemble the filopodia that spontaneously form on some S2 cells or that form in response to overex - pression of constitutively active Cdc42V12 ( unpublished data ) , because they were typically (cid:4) 10 (cid:2) m in length and possessed a uniform diameter . This morphology is diffi - cult to reconcile with what is known about Cdc42 func - tions , although a cellular null phenotype for Cdc42 in metazoan cells has not been reported to our knowledge . This phenotype will be investigated more closely in a fur - ther study . Figure 4 . Control of SCAR degradation and activation . Inhibition of SCAR - associated proteins kette , Sra - 1 , or Abi by RNAi causes degradation of SCAR itself . S2 cells were treated with dsRNA corresponding to the coding sequence for Sra - 1 ( a ) for 7 d and then plated on con A and stained with phalloidin to visualize actin ( red ) and DAPI to view DNA ( blue ) . The morphology of these cells closely resembles the defects in lamellae formation produced by Arp2 / 3 and SCAR RNAi ( Fig . 3 , b and c ) . Similar results were observed with RNAi against kette and Abi ( not depicted ) . Bar , 5 (cid:2) m . ( b ) Quantitative immunoblotting of cells treated with dsRNA versus Abi , kette , SCAR , and Sra - 1 with antibodies against SCAR . Depletion of these proteins by RNAi decreases the amount of SCAR present in S2 cells . Equal protein loading was verified by Bradford assay ( not depicted ) . ( c and d ) Cells treated with dsRNAi to simultaneously inhibit Rac1 , Rac2 , Mtl , and Nck show a variety of lamella defects . Among these are a malformed , serrate cell margin ( c ) and the stellate morphology similar to SCAR RNAi ( Fig . 3 , b and c ) . ( e ) Graph showing the quantitation of morphological defects caused by inhibition of Nck , Rac1 / 2 , and Mtl . Bars , 5 (cid:2) m . on D e c e m be r 25 , 2017 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m Th e J ou r n a l o f C e ll B i o l o gy Lamella formation probed using RNAi | Rogers et al . 1085 Class 7 : myosin II , Rho1 , AcGAP , diaphanous , citron kinase , anillin , scraps , and Rho1 A seventh category was failure of cytokinesis without inhibi - tion of cell spreading on con A – coated surfaces ( Fig . 3 g ) . Cells in this category ( (cid:4) 95 % ) possessed multiple nuclei and were much larger in diameter than control cells . Phalloidin staining revealed that , despite their larger size , cells were able to form lamellae with normal architecture . Inhibition of Rho1 and its downstream effectors citron kinase , diapha - nous , AcGAP , and myosin II typified this defect . Many of these molecules were recently identified in a similar S2 - based RNAi screen for genes specifically involved in cytoki - nesis , but Aip1 , CAP , citron kinase , and diaphanous were not tested in this study ( Somma et al . , 2002 ) . In addition to producing cytokinesis defects , however , cells depleted of cytoplasmic myosin II sometimes ( 48 . 6 % , n (cid:7) 768 ) failed to form normal lamellae , in addition to producing cytokinesis defects ( Fig . 3 h ) . These cells con - tained abundant filamentous actin , as judged by phalloi - din staining , but the actin cytoskeleton displayed an over - all lack of organization with filaments criss - crossing the width of the cell in an apparently random manner . These results reveal a role for myosin II in the organization of ac - tin in the lamellae . The SCAR - associated proteins kette , Sra - 1 , and Abi prevent degradation of SCAR The recent biochemical study by Eden et al . ( 2002 ) demon - strated that native SCAR exists in a trans - inhibited state in a complex with the kette , Sra - 1 , and Abi proteins . Given the demonstrated role of these proteins in suppressing SCAR ac - tivity in vitro , we were surprised that RNAi - mediated deple - tion of Sra - 1 ( Fig . 4 a ) , Abi , or kette resulted in a SCAR - like phenotype rather than in excessive actin polymerization . One hypothesis to account for these observations was that SCAR was either not localized at the membrane or degraded in the absence of members of the kette – Sra - 1 – Abi complex . To test these ideas , we stained kette , Abi , or Sra - 1 RNAi – treated cells with anti - SCAR antibodies and observed that the overall staining intensities were reduced or eliminated ( unpublished data ) . We next performed quantitative immunoblotting and found that kette , Sra - 1 , and Abi RNAi treatments caused a considerable reduction of SCAR levels in S2 cells ( Fig . 4 b ) . Depletion of Abi , kette , and Sra - 1 reduced SCAR protein levels to 34 . 3 (cid:5) 18 , 17 . 3 (cid:5) 9 . 5 , and 9 . 6 (cid:5) 2 . 6 % , respec - tively ( n (cid:7) 3 ) . In contrast , cells treated with dsRNA versus diaphanous did not show reduced SCAR levels ( unpublished data ) . From these observations , we conclude that the kette – Sra - 1 – Abi complex is required for SCAR stability . The small G proteins Rac1 / 2 and Mtl and the adaptor protein Nck mediate cell spreading and lamella formation via two independent pathways Activation of SCAR proteins is generally thought to be medi - ated by Rac GTPases ( Welch and Mullins , 2002 ) . However , RNAi of Drosophila Rac 1 , Rac 2 , and the Rac - like protein Mtl ( Hakeda - Suzuki et al . , 2002 ) did not prevent cell spread - ing or lamella formation ( Table II ) . Genetic evidence has demonstrated that these small G proteins are functionally re - dundant in many tissues in the fly ( Hakeda - Suzuki et al . , 2002 ) . Furthermore , in vitro experiments showed that the in - hibitory SCAR complex could be activated either by Rac1 or the SH2 - SH3 adaptor protein Nck ( Eden et al . , 2002 ) . To test whether this was the case in S2 cells , we treated cells with dsRNA designed to simultaneously inhibit Rac1 and Rac2 ( Rac1 / 2 ) and Mtl for 7 d . Unexpectedly , phalloidin staining revealed that these dsRNA - treated cells spread and formed a normal lamella when plated on con A ( unpublished data ) . We then tested the in vitro finding of Eden et al . ( 2002 ) that either Rac or Nck is able to activate SCAR by simulta - neously inhibiting various combinations of Rac1 / 2 , Mtl , and the Drosophila orthologue of Nck ( dreadlocks ) . This treatment produced three different cell morphologies : cells with normal lamellae , cells that spread but exhibited an ab - normal serrated edge ( Fig . 4 c ) , and cells exhibiting the stel - late morphology observed after RNAi of Arp2 / 3 and SCAR ( Fig . 4 d ) . The serrated cell shape likely represents an inter - mediate morphology caused by incomplete inhibition of the signaling pathway . In control RNAi - treated cells , (cid:4) 95 % of the cells formed normal lamellae with (cid:3) 5 % of the cells ex - hibiting a serrated cell margin ( Table II ) . Stellate cells were never observed in control cultures . Inhibition of Nck alone by RNAi caused a reduction in the number of S2 cells with normal lamellae to (cid:2) 65 % and an increase in serrate cells to (cid:2) 30 % and stellate cells to 5 % ( Table II ) . Double RNAi treatments to inhibit Nck and Rac1 / 2 or Nck and Mtl pro - duced moderate increases in the number of serrate cells com - pared with Nck alone . However , simultaneous application of dsRNAs against Nck , Rac1 / 2 , and Mtl induced a dra - matic increase in serrate and stellate cells to (cid:2) 30 and (cid:2) 20 % , respectively . Our observations provide in vivo con - firmation of the findings of Eden et al . ( 2002 ) and also sug - gest that the Rac - like proteins and Nck are partially redun - dant for lamella formation in S2 cells . Discussion We have developed a novel system for the study of actin cy - toskeletal dynamics that is amenable to in vivo imaging and Table II . Effects of Rac1 , Rac2 , Mtl , and Nck RNAi on cell morphologies Morphology Control ( 814 ) Nck ( 550 ) Nck (cid:8) Rac1 / 2 ( 616 ) Nck (cid:8) Mtl ( 580 ) Nck (cid:8) Rac1 / 2 (cid:8) Mtl ( 570 ) % % % % % Normal 95 . 5 67 78 . 2 91 . 8 53 . 6 Serrate 3 . 8 30 15 . 2 7 . 3 26 Stellate 0 . 6 2 . 1 6 . 4 0 . 7 19 . 8 Classifications are represented as percentages of the total number of cells observed ( in parentheses ) . on D e c e m be r 25 , 2017 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m Th e J ou r n a l o f C e ll B i o l o gy 1086 The Journal of Cell Biology | Volume 162 , Number 6 , 2003 targeted inhibition of proteins via RNAi . From a set of 90 proteins implicated in actin dynamics , we have found 13 proteins that contribute to normal lamellae formation and seven proteins that are involved in cytokinesis . However , we cannot rule out the involvement of other proteins from our tested list . As with all RNAi - mediated “knockdown” screens , negative results are not definitively conclusive with - out demonstrating that the actual target protein is depleted . Moreover , it also remains possible that a small amount of re - sidual protein that remains after RNAi treatment is suffi - cient for cellular function . In addition , it is possible that some actin dynamics phenotypes may only become apparent by time - lapse microscopy . For example , perturbation of mammalian enabled / VASP did not cause gross changes in cellular morphology ( Bear et al . , 2002 ) , as we have found for S2 cells , but drastically altered lamellae behavior and mem - brane ruffling . Time - lapse observation is very time consum - ing for the relatively large number of genes investigated in this study , however , we plan more detailed examination of actin dynamics by live cell microscopy for a smaller number of RNAi experiments in the future . In this work , we found that a relatively small number of the proteins tested is essential for lamella protrusion . These proteins include : ( a ) an actin - nucleating factor ( Arp2 / 3 ) and one of its activators ( SCAR ) , ( b ) a factor that caps barbed ends of newly formed actin filaments ( capping protein ) , ( c ) proteins involved in severing and depolymerizing actin fila - ments to allow turnover ( cofilin and Aip1 ) , and ( d ) factors that sequester actin monomers and promote nucleotide ex - change ( profilin and CAP ) . This set of proteins and ob - served RNAi phenotypes are consistent with current models for the cycle of actin dynamics in lamellae ( Pollard et al . , 2000 ; Pollard and Borisy , 2003 ) . Moreover , these proteins are similar to the minimal set needed to reconstitute actin - based propulsion of Listeria in vitro ( Loisel et al . , 1999 ) . Although our results largely agree with the protein require - ments for reconstitution of actin - based motility in vitro as described above , some observations reveal that actin dynam - ics in the cell are more complex . For example , two actin monomer – binding proteins ( profilin and CAP ) are required for normal lamella formation , whereas profilin alone is suffi - cient to facilitate movement in vitro , although the role of CAP has not yet been tested ( Loisel et al . , 1999 ) . Our result indicates that these two proteins play distinct and nonredun - dant roles in cells , although loss of either yields a similar phe - notype consisting of uniformly distributed actin filaments throughout the cytoplasm , as opposed to being confined to the leading edge , and a failure to spread . CAP was shown to bind actin monomers and inhibit polymerization in vitro ( Gieselmann and Mann , 1992 ; Freeman et al . , 1995 ) but has been less well studied biochemically than profilin . A careful side - by - side comparison of the effects of CAP and profilin on actin dynamics and nucleotide exchange may provide in - sight into why the cell needs both proteins to recycle actin for polymerization at the leading edge . In addition , we find that cells require the depolymerizing protein cofilin as well as the cofilin - interacting protein Aip1 to form lamella , whereas cofilin alone suffices in vitro ( Loisel et al . , 1999 ) . Previous biochemical studies have suggested that Aip1 acts synergisti - cally with cofilin to promote actin filament disassembly ( Okada et al . , 1999 ; Rodal et al . , 1999 ) , and this synergy may be essential for cofilin function in vivo . We have also observed a role for slingshot , a cofilin phosphatase , for nor - mal lamellae morphology , further underscoring the role for actin disassembly for S2 cell spreading . A third unanticipated result was the partial defect in lamella organization in cyto - plasmic myosin II RNAi cells . Cytoplasmic myosin II is gen - erally believed to be important for the retraction of the trail - ing end of migrating cells ( Eddy et al . , 2000 ) and in generating the fan - shaped appearance of the lamella in mi - grating keratocytes ( Pollard and Borisy , 2003 ) . Our pheno - type shows that myosin II plays a role in the organization of actin filaments in the lamella of nonmigrating cell types as well , although it is not essential for cell spreading . Figure 5 . Model for the signaling pathway leading to SCAR activation during S2 cell lamella formation . The con A – coated coverslip activates both Rac proteins and Nck by initially cross - linking an unidentified cell surface receptor ( s ) . The Rac proteins and Nck signal through parallel pathways to cause dissociation of trans - inhibited SCAR bound by a complex of kette , Sra - 1 , and Abi . After dissociation , SCAR is able to promote actin nucleation by Arp2 / 3 at the cell membrane . SCAR may then be inactivated either by reassociation with its inhibitory complex or by degradation . on D e c e m be r 25 , 2017 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m Th e J ou r n a l o f C e ll B i o l o gy Lamella formation probed using RNAi | Rogers et al . 1087 Our studies also have provided new insight into the acti - vation of SCAR , which is summarized in the model shown in Fig . 5 . Plasma membrane receptors on S2 cells ( cur - rently unknown ) are activated , perhaps by cross - linking upon contact with con A – treated coverslips . Subsequently , two parallel pathways transduce this stimulus . One is me - diated by small GTPases belonging to the Rac family . Our results show that three Rac GTPases ( Rac1 , Rac2 , and Mtl1 ) participate in the transduction pathway , confirming the functional redundancy of these proteins reported in many fly tissues ( Hakeda - Suzuki et al . , 2002 ) . A second transduction pathway is mediated by the SH2 - SH3 adap - tor protein Nck , which has been shown to activate SCAR in vitro ( Eden et al . , 2002 ) . Our results confirm that this Nck - mediated activation of SCAR is important in vivo as well . The Rac and SCAR pathways probably converge in activating actin polymerization by dissociating SCAR from its trans - inhibited kette – Sra - 1 – Abi - bound complex and allowing it to bind to Arp2 / 3 ( Eden et al . , 2002 ) . Moreover , the finding that simultaneous inhibition of Rac - like proteins and Nck does not completely mimic SCAR RNAi treatment raises the possibility that addi - tional SCAR activators exist . Our work also has uncovered an additional role of the kette – Sra - 1 – Abi complex in protecting SCAR from degra - dation . Unlike the WASP protein , which is autoinhibited ( Pollard and Borisy , 2003 ) , SCAR is constitutively active ( Machesky et al . , 1999 ) . Therefore , long - lived , uncom - plexed SCAR may be detrimental , as it would cause un - controlled actin polymerization . Thus , the degradation of free SCAR would ensure a proper stoichiometry of SCAR to its inhibitory complex . It is also possible that the kinet - ics of SCAR degradation may be regulated under some circumstances to modulate actin cytoskeleton dynamics . Further studies are underway to explore this potential ave - nue of SCAR regulation and understand the mechanism of SCAR degradation . Given the relative ease and effectiveness of RNAi - medi - ated gene inhibition , we foresee that S2 and other Drosophila tissue culture cells can be used to explore other aspects of the actin cytoskeleton , such as filopodia formation . If proper cues are provided to these cells , cell migration and cell polar - ity may be amenable to investigation as well . Moreover , al - though we restricted our studies to known actin - binding proteins , genome - wide screens can be performed to identify novel genes associated with cytoskeletal regulation . Materials and methods Cell culture and double - stranded RNAi Schneider S2 cells were grown and plated on con A as previously de - scribed ( Rogers et al . , 2002 ) . In brief , RNAi was performed on S2 cells cul - tured in six - well tissue culture plates for 7 d according to the methods of Clemens et al . ( 2000 ) using PCR products flanked at their 5 (cid:9) and 3 (cid:9) ends by T7 sequences . Primers for target genes were designed using software written in - house in Perl . Individual primer sequences may be found in the online supplemental material ( available at http : / / www . jcb . org / cgi / content / full / jcb . 200303023 / DC1 ) . dsRNA was produced by in vitro transcription using Megascript kits ( Ambion ) according to the manufacturer’s instruc - tions . At the end of the 7 - d treatment , cells were resuspended and plated on con A – treated coverslips , allowed to spread for (cid:2) 1 h , and then pro - cessed for microscopy . Antibodies The following antibodies were used : goat anti - Arp2 ( yN - 16 ; Santa Cruz Biotechnology , Inc . ) ; guinea pig anti – Drosophila SCAR ( Zallen et al . , 2002 ) ; rabbit anti – Drosophila capping protein (cid:6) subunit and mouse anti – myosin VI ( gifts of K . Miller , Washington University , St . Louis , MO ) ; rabbit anti – Drosophila cofilin / twinstar ( gift of T . Uemura , Kyoto University , Ky - oto , Japan ) ; anti - profilin / chickadee monoclonal ( chi1J ; Developmental Studies Hybridoma Bank ) ( Verheyen and Cooley , 1994 ) ; anti - enabled monoclonal ( 5G2 ; Developmental Studies Hybridoma Bank ) ( Bashaw et al . , 2000 ) ; anti - fascin / singed monoclonal ( sn7C ; Developmental Studies Hybridoma Bank ) ; anti - Rho1 ( P1D9 ; Developmental Studies Hybridoma Bank ) ; rabbit anti - diaphanous ( gift of S . Wasserman , University of Califor - nia , San Diego , CA ) ; rabbit anti - Pod1 ( gift of M . Rothenberg , University of California , San Francisco ) ; rabbit anti - Dock ( gift of C . Worby , University of California , San Diego , San Diego , CA ) ; and rabbit anti - Trio ( gift of B . Dick - son , Research Institute of Molecular Pathology , Vienna , Austria ) . Immunofluorescence microscopy For staining of filamentous actin , S2 cells were rinsed in HL3 buffer ( 70 mM NaCl , 5 mM KCl , 1 . 5 mM CaCl 2 - 2H 2 O , 20 mM MgCl 2 - 6H 2 O , 10 mM NaHCO 3 , 5 mM trehalose , 115 mM sucrose , 5 mM Hepes , pH 7 . 2 ) ( Stew - art et al . , 1994 ) and fixed for 10 min with 10 % paraformaldehyde ( EM Sci - ences ) in HL3 buffer . The cells were then permeabilized with 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 in PBS ( PBST ) and stained with 165 nM Texas red - X phalloidin ( Mo - lecular Probes ) and 0 . 5 (cid:2) g / ml DAPI . For antibody staining , the cells were blocked in 5 % normal goat serum in PBST and treated with primary anti - bodies in the same solution for 1 h . After washing , cells were stained with secondary antibodies ( Cy2 goat anti – rabbit , donkey anti – mouse , or goat anti – guinea pig , all at a dilution of 1 : 300 ) ( Jackson ImmunoResearch Labo - ratories ) . After washing in PBST , the cells were rinsed in distilled water and mounted under 90 % glycerol / 10 % borate , pH 9 . 0 , supplemented with 5 % N - propyl gallate . Images were acquired with an Orca II cooled CCD cam - era ( Hamamatsu ) using a 100X / 1 . 4 N . A objective lens mounted on a Ni - kon TE300 inverted microscope driven by Simple PCI software ( Compix , Inc . ) . Grayscale images were combined and colorized using Adobe Photo - shop ® . Image morphology and quantitation was performed with ImageJ ( http : / / rsb . info . nih . gov / ij / ) . Some images were enhanced using a no - neigh - bor deconvolution algorithm using Huygens Pro software ( Scientific Vol - ume Imaging ) . Online supplemental material The supplemental material ( Videos 1 – 4 and Fig . S1 ; available at http : / / www . jcb . org / cgi / content / full / jcb . 200303023 / DC1 ) shows the behavior of the actin cytoskeleton in Drosophila S2 cells by time - lapse fluorescence microscopy . Culture of these cells on con A – coated glass induces the cells to attach , spread , and elaborate a lamellipodia . Observation of GFP – actin reveals that lamellae thus formed exhibit cycles of extension , retraction , and retrograde flow . We are grateful to Mark Dayel , Dyche Mullins , and Jack Taunton for valu - able discussion during this project . We also thank Dyche Mullins for the use of his microscope and Julie Hollien and Jonathan Weissman for shar - ing their unpublished results . This work was supported by a National Institutes of Health postdoctoral training grant ( 5F32GM064966 - 02 ) . Submitted : 4 March 2003 Accepted : 28 July 2003 References Ayscough , K . R . , and D . G . Drubin . 1996 . ACTIN : general principles from studies in yeast . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 12 : 129 – 160 . Bashaw , G . J . , T . Kidd , D . Murray , T . Pawson , and C . S . Goodman . 2000 . Repul - sive axon guidance : Abelson and Enabled play opposing roles downstream of the Roundabout receptor . Cell . 101 : 703 – 715 . Baum , B . , W . Li , and N . Perrimon . 2000 . A cyclase - associated protein regulates ac - tin and cell polarity during Drosophila oogenesis and in yeast . Curr . Biol . 10 : 964 – 973 . Bear , J . E . , T . M . Svitkina , M . Krause , D . A . Schafer , J . J . Loureiro , G . A . Strasser , I . V . Maly , O . Y . Chaga , J . A . Cooper , G . G . Borisy , and F . B . Gertler . 2002 . Antagonism between Ena / VASP proteins and actin filament capping regu - lates fibroblast motility . Cell . 109 : 509 – 521 . Ben - Yaacov , S . , R . Le Borgne , I . Abramson , F . Schweisguth , and E . D . Schejter . on D e c e m be r 25 , 2017 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m Th e J ou r n a l o f C e ll B i o l o gy 1088 The Journal of Cell Biology | Volume 162 , Number 6 , 2003 2001 . Wasp , the Drosophila Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome gene homologue , is required for cell fate decisions mediated by Notch signaling . J . Cell Biol . 152 : 1 – 13 . Benlali , A . , I . Draskovic , D . J . Hazelett , and J . E . Treisman . 2000 . act up controls actin polymerization to alter cell shape and restrict Hedgehog signaling in the Drosophila eye disc . Cell . 101 : 271 – 281 . Clemens , J . C . , C . A . Worby , N . Simonson - Leff , M . Muda , T . Maehama , B . A . Hemmings , and J . E . Dixon . 2000 . Use of double - stranded RNA interfer - ence in Drosophila cell lines to dissect signal transduction pathways . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 97 : 6499 – 6503 . Cooley , L . , E . Verheyen , and K . Ayers . 1992 . chickadee encodes a profilin required for intercellular cytoplasm transport during Drosophila oogenesis . Cell . 69 : 173 – 184 . Cooper , J . A . , and D . A . Schafer . 2000 . Control of actin assembly and disassembly at filament ends . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 12 : 97 – 103 . Cramer , L . P . 1997 . Molecular mechanism of actin - dependent retograde flow in lamellipodia of motile cells . Front . Biosci . 2 : d260 – d270 . Eddy , R . J . , L . M . Pierini , F . Matsumura , and F . R . Maxfield . 2000 . Ca 2 (cid:8) - dependent myosin II activation is required for uropod retraction during neutrophil mi - gration . J . Cell Sci . 113 : 1287 – 1298 . Eden , S . , R . Rohatgi , A . V . Podtelejnikov , M . Mann , and M . W . Kirschner . 2002 . Mechanism of regulation of WAVE1 - induced actin nucleation by Rac1 and Nck . Nature . 418 : 790 – 793 . Etienne - Manneville , S . , and A . Hall . 2002 . Rho GTPases in cell biology . Nature . 420 : 629 – 635 . Freeman , N . L . , Z . Chen , J . Horenstein , A . Weber , and J . Field . 1995 . An actin monomer binding activity localizes to the carboxyl - terminal half of the Saccha - romyces cerevisiae cyclase - associated protein . J . Biol . Chem . 270 : 5680 – 5685 . Gieselmann , R . , and K . Mann . 1992 . ASP - 56 , a new actin sequestering protein from pig platelets with homology to CAP , an adenylate cyclase - associated protein from yeast . FEBS Lett . 298 : 149 – 153 . Goshima , G . , and R . D . Vale . 2003 . The roles of microtubule - based motor proteins in mitosis : comprehensive RNAi analysis in the Drosophila S2 cell line . J . Cell Biol . 162 : 1003 – 1016 . Gournier , H . , E . D . Goley , H . Niederstrasser , T . Trinh , and M . D . Welch . 2001 . Reconstitution of human Arp2 / 3 complex reveals critical roles of individual subunits in complex structure and activity . Mol . Cell . 8 : 1041 – 1052 . Gunsalus , K . C . , S . Bonaccorsi , E . Williams , F . Verni , M . Gatti , and M . L . Gold - berg . 1995 . Mutations in twinstar , a Drosophila gene encoding a cofilin / ADF homologue , result in defects in centrosome migration and cytokinesis . J . Cell Biol . 131 : 1243 – 1259 . Hakeda - Suzuki , S . , J . Ng , J . Tzu , G . Dietzl , Y . Sun , M . Harms , T . Nardine , L . Luo , and B . J . Dickson . 2002 . Rac function and regulation during Drosophila development . Nature . 416 : 438 – 442 . Holt , M . R . , and A . Koffer . 2001 . Cell motility : proline - rich proteins promote pro - trusions . Trends Cell Biol . 11 : 38 – 46 . Lauffenburger , D . A . , and A . F . Horwitz . 1996 . Cell migration : a physically inte - grated molecular process . Cell . 84 : 359 – 369 . Loisel , T . P . , R . Boujemaa , D . Pantaloni , and M . F . Carlier . 1999 . Reconstitution of actin - based motility of Listeria and Shigella using pure proteins . Nature . 401 : 613 – 616 . Machesky , L . M . , R . D . Mullins , H . N . Higgs , D . A . Kaiser , L . Blanchoin , R . C . May , M . E . Hall , and T . D . Pollard . 1999 . Scar , a WASp - related protein , ac - tivates nucleation of actin filaments by the Arp2 / 3 complex . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 96 : 3739 – 3744 . Mitchison , T . J . , and L . P . Cramer . 1996 . Actin - based cell motility and cell locomo - tion . Cell . 84 : 371 – 379 . Mogilner , A . , and G . Oster . 1996 . Cell motility driven by actin polymerization . Biophys . J . 71 : 3030 – 3045 . Montell , D . J . 1999 . The genetics of cell migration in Drosophila melanogaster and Caenorhabditis elegans development . Development . 126 : 3035 – 3046 . Niwa , R . , K . Nagata - Ohashi , M . Takeichi , K . Mizuno , and T . Uemura . 2002 . Control of actin reorganization by Slingshot , a family of phosphatases that dephosphorylate ADF / cofilin . Cell . 108 : 233 – 246 . Okada , K . , T . Obinata , and H . Abe . 1999 . XAIP1 : a Xenopus homologue of yeast actin interacting protein 1 ( AIP1 ) , which induces disassembly of actin fila - ments cooperatively with ADF / cofilin family proteins . J . Cell Sci . 112 : 1553 – 1565 . Pollard , T . D . , and G . G . Borisy . 2003 . Cellular motility driven by assembly and disassembly of actin filament . Cell . 112 : 453 – 465 . Pollard , T . D . , L . Blanchoin , and R . D . Mullins . 2000 . Molecular mechanisms con - trolling actin filament dynamics in nonmuscle cells . Annu . Rev . Biophys . Bio - mol . Struct . 29 : 545 – 576 . Rodal , A . A . , J . W . Tetreault , P . Lappalainen , D . G . Drubin , and D . C . Amberg . 1999 . Aip1p interacts with cofilin to disassemble actin filaments . J . Cell Biol . 145 : 1251 – 1264 . Rogers , S . L . , G . C . Rogers , D . J . Sharp , and R . D . Vale . 2002 . Drosophila EB1 is im - portant for proper assembly , dynamics , and positioning of the mitotic spin - dle . J . Cell Biol . 158 : 873 – 884 . Small , J . V . , T . Stradal , E . Vignal , and K . Rottner . 2002 . The lamellipodium : where motility begins . Trends Cell Biol . 12 : 112 – 120 . Somma , M . P . , B . Fasulo , G . Cenci , E . Cundari , and M . Gatti . 2002 . Molecular dissection of cytokinesis by RNA interference in Drosophila cultured cells . Mol . Biol . Cell . 13 : 2448 – 2460 . Stewart , B . A . , H . L . Atwood , J . J . Renger , J . Wang , and C . F . Wu . 1994 . Improved stability of Drosophila larval neuromuscular preparations in haemolymph - like physiological solutions . J . Comp . Physiol . 175 : 179 – 191 . Verheyen , E . M . , and L . Cooley . 1994 . Profilin mutations disrupt multiple actin - dependent processes during Drosophila development . Development . 120 : 717 – 728 . Waterman - Storer , C . M . , A . Desai , J . C . Bulinski , and E . D . Salmon . 1998 . Fluores - cent speckle microscopy , a method to visualize the dynamics of protein as - semblies in living cells . Curr . Biol . 8 : 1227 – 1230 . Welch , M . D . , and R . D . Mullins . 2002 . Cellular control of actin nucleation . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 18 : 247 – 288 . Zallen , J . A . , Y . Cohen , A . M . Hudson , L . Cooley , E . Wieschaus , and E . D . Schejter . 2002 . SCAR is a primary regulator of Arp2 / 3 - dependent morphological events in Drosophila . J . Cell Biol . 156 : 689 – 701 . on D e c e m be r 25 , 2017 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m