Research paper Establishment of a triple co - culture in vitro cell models to study intestinal absorption of peptide drugs Filipa Antunes a , Fernanda Andrade a , Francisca Araújo b , Domingos Ferreira a , Bruno Sarmento a , b , c , ⇑ a Department of Pharmaceutical Technology , University of Porto , Portugal b CICS , Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences , Instituto Superior de Ciências da Saúde - Norte , Gandra , Portugal c INEB , Institute of Biomedical Engineering , University of Porto , Portugal a r t i c l e i n f o Article history : Received 29 June 2012 Accepted in revised form 5 October 2012 Available online 16 November 2012 Keywords : In vitro model Caco - 2 cells Co - culture Intestinal absorption Therapeutic proteins Nanoparticles a b s t r a c t In vitro cell culture models for studying oral drug absorption during early stages of drug development have become a useful tool in drug discovery and development , with respect to substance throughput and reproducibility . The aim of this study was to establish an in vitro cellular model based on human colon carcinoma Caco - 2 , mucus - producing HT29 , and Raji B cells in order to design a model that more accurately mimics the small intestinal epithelial layer . Normal oriented model was set up by seeding co - cultures of Caco - 2 and HT29 cells into Transwell ﬁlters and maintained under identical conditions fol - lowing addition of Raji B to the basolateral chamber . Inverted model was set up seeding Caco - 2 and HT29 cells on the basolateral chamber and then transferred in the Transwell device with the epithelial cells fac - ing the basolateral chamber following Raji B addition to the apical compartment . Morphological differ - ences on size and thickness of cell membranes were detected between the models studied by using ﬂuorescence microscopy . On the triple co - culture models , cell membranes were increasing in size and thickness from the Caco - 2 to Caco - 2 / HT29 and Caco - 2 / Raji B . Also , the nuclei seem to be larger than in the other studied models . Insulin permeation was higher on the triple co - culture model when compared to the Caco - 2 / HT29 co - culture model . Also , insulin permeation as mediated by nanoparticles and insulin solution permeation was higher on the normal oriented Caco - 2 / HT29 / Raji B model as compared to the inverted model . Overall , our results suggest that Caco - 2 / HT29 / Raji B triple co - culture normal oriented cellular model may be reliable to obtain a more physiological , functional , and reproducible in vitro model of the intestinal barrier to study protein absorption , both in solution and when delivered by nanocarriers . (cid:2) 2012 Elsevier B . V . All rights reserved . 1 . Introduction Oral administration of therapeutics is the preferred route for drug delivery . Consequently , the transport of drugs across the intestinal epithelium is a major determinant of in vivo bioavailabil - ity . Numerous in vitro methods have been used in the drug selec - tion process for assessing the intestinal absorption potential of drug candidates [ 1 ] . In vitro techniques for the assessment of per - meability are less laborious and less expensive as compared to in vivo animal studies . In addition , the 3R’s policy encourages the development of alternatives to animal use . However , their success - ful application in predicting drug absorption across the intestinal mucosa depends on how closely the in vitro model mimics the characteristics of the in vivo intestinal epithelium [ 2 ] . It is clear that in vitro tools for screening and accurately predicting the potential success of a drug candidate are necessary . Cell culture models are becoming a routine part of drug development within the pharmaceutical industry and proven to be a more cost - effective method for initial permeability screening than in vivo studies [ 3 ] . Although cell cultures are limited models , being unable to predict multifactorial processes such as bioavailability or immune re - sponses , advantages of using in vitro models in the initial stages of oral drug delivery research are obvious regarding the absence of laboratory animals and the ease to study the mechanisms of action [ 4 ] . Therefore , it is important to improve the existing cellu - lar models for drug absorption studies . Various cell monolayer models that mimic the human intestinal epithelial barrier have been developed and currently beneﬁt from widespread popularity . Unlike enterocytes , human immortalized cells grow rapidly into conﬂuent monolayers that exhibit several characteristics of differentiated epithelial cells . Therefore , the cell culture model provides an ideal system for the rapid assessment of the intestinal permeability of drug candidates [ 5 ] . Among the 0939 - 6411 / $ - see front matter (cid:2) 2012 Elsevier B . V . All rights reserved . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ejpb . 2012 . 10 . 003 ⇑ Corresponding author . Department of Pharmaceutical Technology , Faculty of Pharmacy , University of Porto , Portugal . Tel . : + 351 222078949 ; fax : + 351 222073900 . E - mail address : bruno . sarmento @ ineb . up . pt ( B . Sarmento ) . European Journal of Pharmaceutics and Biopharmaceutics 83 ( 2013 ) 427 – 435 Contents lists available at SciVerse ScienceDirect European Journal of Pharmaceutics and Biopharmaceutics journal homepage : www . elsevier . com / locate / ejpb cell culture models , the Caco - 2 cell line is the most widely used and best characterized system . Caco - 2 cells are originated from hu - man colon carcinoma and during in vitro growth form differenti - ated monolayers with microvillous structure , tight junctions , hydrolyzing enzymes and carrier - mediated transport systems for sugars , amino acids , and several drugs [ 6 ] . However , the Caco - 2 monolayer model still lacks important properties that make fur - ther reﬁnement desirable [ 5 , 7 ] . For one , the tightness of the mono - layer resembles more colonic than small intestinal tissue , resulting in poor permeability for hydrophilic compounds via the aqueous paracellular pathway . On the other hand , Caco - 2 model is com - posed of solely absorptive cells , whereas the intestinal epithelium is a conglomerate of absorptive enterocytes and other cells such as goblet cells , endocrine cells , and M cells , with the mucus secreting goblet cells representing the second most frequent cell type [ 7 ] . A third limitation of the pure Caco - 2 cell system is the frequently dis - cussed potential overexpression of P - glycoprotein which may lead to higher secretion rates and consequently lower permeability in the absorptive direction [ 8 ] . Finally , it is well known that perme - ability of compounds that are transported via carrier - mediated absorptive pathways are lower in Caco - 2 cell system as compared to the human small intestine , probably reﬂecting the colonic origin of this cell line [ 7 ] . Also , due to the lack of goblet cells , there is no mucus layer lining the cellular monolayer [ 3 ] . Several modiﬁcations and improvements of Caco - 2 cells need to be investigated to generate a more predictable cell model . Thus , co - culture of Caco - 2 cells with goblet and mucus - secreting cells characteristics such as HT29 cells has been proposed in order to solve this problem [ 3 , 7 , 9 – 12 ] . The co - culture with Raji B lympho - cytes is another interesting strategy for achieving a cell model that more closely reproduce the intestinal epithelium . Caco - 2 cells when cultured with Raji B lymphocytes have the ability to acquire M cell phenotype with the main characteristic of being able of transporting particulate matters [ 13 – 17 ] . Thus far , no investigation has been reported on the use of the three cellular types above men - tioned at the same time . In this paper , we describe for the ﬁrst time the development of cellular model of the intestinal epithelium based on Caco - 2 , HT29 , and Raji B lymphocytes triple co - cultures . The model , proposed in two different growing conditions , was developed based on the individual characteristics of each cell type and the hypothesis that the three types of cell lines together may reproduce more closely the intestinal epithelium . Caco - 2 cells partially reproduce the characteristics of intestinal enterocytes ; mucus - secreting goblet cells ( HT29 ) represent the mucus layer and M - cells ( induced by Raji B ) play an important role in the immune systems and have the unique ability of facilitating antigen uptake from the gut lumen to the gut associated lymphoid tissue and to deliver antigen via transcytosis to antigen presenting cells and lymphocytes located in a pocket - like structure to induce immune response [ 10 , 14 , 18 ] . Another part of the present work relates to the study of nano - particles as enhancers of oral drug permeability . Nanoparticles are under consideration for oral delivery of proteins like insulin by stabilizing , ensuring biological activity during transit through the gastrointestinal tract , and facilitating absorption and delivery to the target site [ 19 ] . Chitosan , a weak cationic polysaccharide produced by deacetylation of the natural polymer chitin , has many useful biological properties , such as biocompatibility , biodegrad - ability , and bioactivity [ 20 ] . Dextran sulfate is a biodegradable and biocompatible polyanion similar to heparin , with a branched carbohydrate backbone and negatively charged sulfate groups . Our group developed dextran sulfate / chitosan nanoparticles pro - duced by polyelectrolyte complexation between dextran sulfate and chitosan and assessed their potential as insulin carriers [ 21 , 22 ] . 2 . Experimental methods 2 . 1 . Materials and cells Low molecular weight ( MW ) chitosan ( (cid:2) 50 kDa ) , degree of acetylation 15 % , was purchased from Sigma ( Sintra , Portugal ) , high MW dextran sulfate ( 500 kDa ) was obtained from PKC ( Copenha - gen , Denmark ) . Dextran sulfate stock solutions were prepared with deionized water ( Milli - Q ) overnight under magnetic stirring , and chitosan was dissolved in 1 % acetic acid solution in deionized water followed by ﬁltration using a Millipore # 2 paper ﬁlter and stored at 4 (cid:3) C . Human crystalline zinc insulin ( Lot RS0325 , 7 . 0 mg lyophilized human biosynthetic insulin per vial ) was a gift from Lilly Portugal . Human colon carcinoma Caco - 2 , mucus producing HT29 , and Human Burkitt’s lymphoma Raji B cell lines were obtained from the American Type Culture Collection ( ATCC ) and used at passages 35 – 64 , 8 – 29 and 1 – 13 , respectively . Dulbecco’s Modiﬁed Eagle Medium ( DMEM ) , fetal bovine serum , L - glutamine , non - essential amino acids , 100 U / mL penicillin and 100 mg / mL streptomycin , trypsin – EDTA , Hank’s Balanced Salt Solution ( HBSS ) , wheat germ agglutinin ( WGA ) , Alexa Fluor 488 conjugate , and DAPI were pur - chased from Gibco ( Invitrogen Corporation , Life Technologies , UK ) . Alcian blue was purchased from Sigma ( Sintra , Portugal ) . Transwell polycarbonate inserts ( 6 wells , pore diameter of 3 l m polycarbonate , 4 . 67 cm 2 ) were purchase from Corning ( Madrid , Spain ) . 2 . 2 . Cell culture Caco - 2 and HT29 cells were grown separately in ﬂasks in DMEM supplemented with 10 % ( v / v ) fetal bovine serum , 1 % ( v / v ) non - essential aminoacids , 1 % ( v / v ) L - glutamine and 1 % ( v / v ) penicillin and streptomycin , at 37 (cid:3) C under a 5 % CO 2 water saturated atmo - sphere . Upon conﬂuence , cells were harvested from ﬂasks with trypsin – EDTA and a predetermined amount of cells of each type were mixed prior to seeding to yield cell ratios of 9 : 1 for Caco - 2 ( 3 (cid:3) 10 5 cells / membrane ) to HT29 cells , respectively . Caco - 2 cells ( 3 (cid:3) 10 5 cells / membrane ) in monolayers were also seeded as con - trol . The physiologically relevant ratio was chosen based on previ - ous published work [ 7 , 10 ] . Raji B cells were cultured in ﬂasks with DMEM supplemented and with the same conditions as described above . 2 . 3 . Normal oriented in vitro model Co - cultures of Caco - 2 and HT29 cells were seeded on the apical chamber of Transwell inserts and maintained under identical con - ditions with medium changes every other day . Raji B cells ( 5 (cid:3) 10 5 ) were added to the basolateral chamber of 14 - day - old Caco - 2 / HT29 co - culture , and the triple cultures were maintained for 4 – 6 days [ 23 ] . Co - cultures of Caco - 2 cells , cultured as above except for the presence of HT29 cells , were used as controls . 2 . 4 . Inverted in vitro model Co - cultures of Caco - 2 and HT29 cells were seeded on the baso - lateral chamber of Transwell inserts , previously inverted and placed in Petri dishes covered with culture medium , and cultured overnight . The ﬁlters were then transferred in the Transwell device with the epithelial cells facing the basolateral chamber of the clus - ter plates . Epithelial cells were cultured until they were fully differ - entiated ( 14 days ) . After 14 days , Raji B cells were added to the apical compartment of Caco - 2 / HT29 co - cultures , and the triple cul - tures were maintained for 4 – 6 days [ 24 ] . Co - cultures of Caco - 2 428 F . Antunes et al . / European Journal of Pharmaceutics and Biopharmaceutics 83 ( 2013 ) 427 – 435 cells , cultured as above except for the presence of HT29 cells , were used as controls . 2 . 5 . Cell monolayer integrity The cell monolayer integrity during permeation experiments , both in co - and triple co - cultures , was controlled by the transepi - thelial electrical resistance ( TEER ) measurement , performed with an EVOM epithelial voltohmmeter equipped with ‘‘chopstick’’ elec - trodes ( World Precision Instruments , Sarasota , FL , USA ) . TEER was also used to check monolayer formation and integrity during the 20 – 21 days before the beginning of permeation experiments . 2 . 6 . Fluorescence microscopy All monolayer models , that is , Caco - 2 , Caco - 2 / HT29 , Caco - 2 / Raji B ( normal and inverted ) Caco - 2 / HT29 / Raji B ( normal and inverted ) , were visualized under ﬂuorescence microscopy . To cover cells adhering to the Transwell membranes , 1 mL of a diluted solution of Alexa Fluor 488 conjugate ( 1 l g / mL ) was applied to label cell membranes . The cells were incubated for 10 min at 37 (cid:3) C to allow labeling and washed twice with HBSS . Further , 300 l L of a 300 nM DAPI solution in HBSS was added to the cell monolayers to label cell nuclei and incubated for 10 min at 37 (cid:3) C . The samples were rinsed twice with HBSS and mounted for visualization on the ﬂuo - rescence microscope with appropriate ﬁlters . 2 . 7 . Alcian blue staining For the cell staining experiment , both co - culture Caco - 2 / Raji B and triple co - culture Caco - 2 / HT29 / Raji B were seeded on Transwell inserts at an initial cell density of 10 5 cells / cm 2 and cultured for 21 days . Mucus was stained using Alcian blue ( 10 mg / mL ) . Brieﬂy , culture media were aspirated and the cells were rinsed once with HBSS [ 9 ] . Mucus associated with HT29 was stained with Alcian blue for 30 min at room temperature . Then , cell monolayers were washed once with HBSS . This experiment was performed to evalu - ate if there was mucus secretion by the co - cultures and to observe if its presence / absence has any inﬂuence on the permeability experiments . 2 . 8 . Preparation of nanoparticles Dextran sulfate / chitosan nanoparticles were prepared as previ - ously described by Sarmento et al . [ 21 , 22 ] . Brieﬂy , nanoparticle complexation between dextran sulfate and chitosan was per - formed by using aqueous solutions of oppositely charged polymers in a ﬁnal volume of 120 mL . Unless otherwise mentioned , com - plexes were obtained after dropwise addition of chitosan solution at pH 5 . 0 to dextran sulfate solution at pH 3 . 2 under magnetic stir - ring followed by additional mixing for 15 min at 600 rpm to ﬁnal concentrations of 0 . 15 % dextran sulfate and 0 . 10 % chitosan ( dextran sulfate / chitosan mass ratio 1 . 5 : 1 ) . For insulin encapsula - tion , the protein was previously dissolved in dextran sulfate solu - tion before chitosan complexation . The amount of insulin associated with the nanoparticles was calculated by determining the difference between the initial and remained insulin in the supernatant after nanoparticle removal by centrifugation , as assayed by a HPLC – UV method previously described [ 25 ] . Nano - particles were characterized regarding size and zeta potential by photon correlation spectroscopy ( PCS ) at 25 (cid:3) C with a detection an - gle of 90 (cid:3) and zeta potential by laser Doppler anemometry ( LDA ) using a ZetaPALS ( Brookhaven , New York , USA ) . Triplicate samples were analyzed , each sample being measured six times , and the arithmetic mean value was adopted . 2 . 9 . Cell viability study The effect of dextran sulfate / chitosan nanoparticles on cell via - bility was measured at selected concentrations using the meth - ylthiazolyldiphenyl - tetrazolium bromide ( MTT ) conversion assay . Caco - 2 and HT29 cells were seeded separately and also in co - cul - ture in a 9 : 1 ratio in 96 - well microplates at 5 (cid:3) 10 4 cells / well in 0 . 3 mL supplemented DMEM and incubated for 24 h at 37 (cid:3) C in 5 % CO 2 environment . Test solution , negative control ( DMEM ) , and positive control ( 1 % ( v / v ) Titron X - 100 ) were added in triplicate to the cell culture . The medium was then changed , and the cells were treated with test samples for 4 and 24 h . Each treatment was tested in six individual wells . The supernatant was removed , and 20 l L of MTT solution ( 5 mg / mL in PBS ) was added to each well and then incubated for 2 h at 37 (cid:3) C to allow the formation of formazan crystal . After that the medium was removed , and blue formazan was eluted from cells using 150 l L of DMSO . Hydrogen peroxide solution ( 8100 l M ) was used as the negative control . The plates were shaken on an orbital shaker for 15 min in order to solubilize the crystals of formazan . The optical density ( OD ) was measured at 550 nm . The effect of dextran sulfate / chitosan nanoparticles on cell membrane integrity was measured by the enzyme lactate dehy - drogenase ( LDH ) release assay . Caco - 2 and HT29 cells were seeded in 96 - well microplates at 5 (cid:3) 10 4 cells / well and incubated for 24 h at 37 (cid:3) C in 5 % CO 2 environment . The cultured cells were washed with 1 (cid:3) PBS ( pre - warmed at 37 (cid:3) C ) . Test solution , negative control ( DMEM ) , and positive control ( 1 % ( v / v ) Titron X - 100 ) were added in triplicate to the cell culture . Cells were incubated with medium at 37 (cid:3) C for 4 and 24 h . After that , 100 l L of samples were with - drawn and centrifuged for 2 min at 5000 rpm to remove detached cells . The LDH - content of 50 l L supernatant was measured at 490 nm with spectrophotometer using a commercial test kit ( Takara , Shiga , Japan ) after incubation for 30 min at room temper - ature in the dark . 2 . 10 . Permeability studies All cell monolayers were used after 14 – 21 days in culture . During this time , the development of the monolayer was moni - tored by TEER measurements . For all permeability studies , the culture medium was removed and the cell monolayers were washed with 1 . 5 mL and 2 . 5 mL of 37 (cid:3) C HBSS in the apical and basolateral side , respectively . Transwell insulin absorption experi - ments were run at 37 (cid:3) C from the apical to the basolateral cham - bers for both insulin solution and insulin encapsulated into nanoparticles , at initial apical concentration of 50 l g / mL . Trans - port experiments were run in HBSS , pH 7 . 0 , at 37 (cid:3) C . At different times , basolateral samples were collected and insulin determined by HPLC – UV [ 25 ] , being possible to quantify concentrations as low as 0 . 72 l g / mL according the Limit of Quantitation . Apparent permeability coefﬁcient ( P app ) was calculated from the measurement of the ﬂow rate of insulin from the donor to the acceptor chambers : P app ð cm = s Þ ¼ dQ = dt ð A (cid:3) C 0 Þ where dQ is the total amount of permeated insulin ( l g ) , A is the dif - fusion area ( cm 2 ) , C 0 is the initial concentration of insulin ( l g / mL ) , and dt is the time of experiment ( s ) . The coefﬁcient dQ / dt represents the steady - state ﬂux of insulin across the monolayer . 2 . 11 . Statistical analysis A one - way analysis of variance ( ANOVA ) was used to evaluate group comparison . If the group by each time interaction was F . Antunes et al . / European Journal of Pharmaceutics and Biopharmaceutics 83 ( 2013 ) 427 – 435 429 signiﬁcantly different ( p < 0 . 05 ) , differences between groups were compared within a post hoc test ( S – N – K ) . All statistical analyses were performed with the SPSS software package ( SPSS for Win - dows 14 . 0 , SPSS , Chicago , IL , USA ) . 3 . Results and discussion 3 . 1 . Morphology of in vitro co - culture models The intestinal epithelium is composed of different cell types with complex absorptive and secretory characteristics . The widely used Caco - 2 cell based model has been established as a tool for in vitro investigations of epithelial transport processes because of its growth characteristics [ 26 ] . However , their characteristics are not similar enough to the human intestinal epithelium , and so there is a need to improve this model in order to achieve one that better represent the in vivo situation . One of the strategies that can be applied is the addition of other cell lines that are present in the intestinal epithelium and try to create the best proportion of these cell lines to create a more accurate model of the intestinal barrier . In this study , we have established a triple co - culture model that consist of Caco - 2 cells to partially reproduce the characteristics of intestinal enterocytes , HT29 mucus - secreting cells and Raji B lymphocytes that after inﬁltration into the polarized Caco - 2 cells in a co - culture model triggers the Caco - 2 to further differentiate into an M - cell phenotype . Previous studies by Kernéis et al . [ 24 ] and Rieux [ 23 ] , estab - lished in vitro double co - culture cell models , developed to ﬁnd the model that mimics as close as possible in vivo conditions , but a more comprehensive triple co - culture models has never been re - ported so far . Fluorescence microscopy of all models evaluated in this study was conducted to understand the morphological differences be - tween Caco - 2 , Caco - 2 / HT29 , Caco - 2 / Raji B lymphocytes , and Caco - 2 / HT29 / Raji B lymphocytes models ( Fig . 1 ) . The cells were la - beled with WGA Alexa Fluor 488 for the cell membranes and DAPI for the nuclei . All the membranes tested were differentiated and presented good integrity and conﬂuence also conﬁrmed by the TEER measurements ( data not shown ) . When comparing the Caco - 2 cell model to the Caco - 2 / HT29 co - culture , there seems to be similarity on the cell membrane morphology and monolayer integrity , but slight enlargement of the cell membrane staining intensity in the co - culture model , probably due to the speciﬁcities of goblet cells presented in the co - culture model . In fact , WGA Alexa Fluor 488 binds to sialic acid and N - acetylglucosaminyl res - idues , which are also present in the carbohydrate content of secre - tory mucins of mucus [ 27 ] , being responsible for the partial green ﬂuorescence observed in co - cultures containing HT29 cells due to the direct staining of the mucus , also conﬁrmed by the Alcian blue staining ( Fig . 2 ) . Comparing the Caco - 2 cell model to the Caco - 2 / Raji B co - culture , a dense nuclei area is observed in the co - culture model , demonstrating the successful differentiation of enterocytes into M cell , without microvilli . Moreover , normal oriented and in - verted Caco - 2 / Raji B lymphocytes co - culture models showed sim - ilar morphology . Looking at the triple co - culture models , it was evident that the cell distribution was different from the Caco - 2 , Caco - 2 / HT29 and Caco - 2 / Raji B lymphocytes , by the presence of increased ﬂuores - cence intensity when HT29 cells were present , as mentioned be - fore . In agreement , there were also no signiﬁcant differences between both normal and inverted triple models . In order to conﬁrm the functionality of HT29 cells , mucus pro - duction was assessed to verify its presence on Caco - 2 / HT29 / Raji B lymphocytes models , compared to Caco - 2 / Raji B model , absent in goblet cells . Fig . 2 conﬁrms the presence of mucin , stained by Al - cian blue and produced by HT29 , lying as a mucus layer randomly dispersed in the monolayers surface , probably close to the areas of HT29 placement . Fig . 1 . Fluorescence microscopy of Caco - 2 , Caco - 2 / HT29 , Caco - 2 / Raji B lymphocytes inverted ( I ) , Caco - 2 / Raji B lymphocytes normal oriented ( N ) , Caco - 2 / HT29 / Raji B lymphocytes inverted ( I ) and Caco - 2 / HT29 / Raji B lymphocytes normal oriented ( N ) models labeled with Alexa Fluor 488 ( green ) and DAPI ( blue ) ( magniﬁcation 200 (cid:3) ) . ( For interpretation of the references to color in this ﬁgure legend , the reader is referred to the web version of this article . ) 430 F . Antunes et al . / European Journal of Pharmaceutics and Biopharmaceutics 83 ( 2013 ) 427 – 435 3 . 2 . Cell viability study In order to evaluate any potential cytotoxicity of insulin - loaded dextran sulfate / chitosan nanoparticles on Caco - 2 and HT29 cells , the cells were treated with different concentrations of insulin - loaded dextran sulfate / chitosan nanoparticles based on insulin content for 4 h and 24 h . The effect of nanoparticles on membrane integrity was measured by LDH release assay , and the effect on cell viability was measured using the MTT conversion assay . In vitro cytotoxicity results are presented in Fig . 3 . Results showed that after 4 h , the cytotoxicity was below 20 % for Caco - 2 cells , for the tested concentration range , and that HT29 cells were less sensible than Caco - 2 cells . After 24 h , cytotoxicity increased for Caco - 2 cells reaching almost 60 % for the 100 l g / mL insulin con - tained nanoparticles , but it was lower than 20 % for lower concen - trations . On the other hand , the HT29 cytotoxicity was insigniﬁcant after 24 h of exposure to the nanoparticles . Results of cell viability for insulin - loaded dextran sulfate / chito - san nanoparticles obtained from the MTT test are shown in Fig . 4 . These were in good correlation with those from the LDH assay . Dextran sulfate / chitosan nanoparticles presented a good proﬁle in terms of cell viability and cell membrane integrity of Caco - 2 and HT29 cells for concentrations up to 50 l g / mL of insulin . The results showed that these nanoparticles were not toxic for the cells at concentrations below 100 l g / mL , thus concentration of 50 l g / mL was selected for permeability experiments . 3 . 3 . Permeability studies After establishment and morphological characterization of dif - ferent co - culture models and determination of cytotoxicity and cell viability effect of nanoparticles , insulin transport studies were con - ducted to examine the differences between the peptide in solution and when associated with dextran sulfate / chitosan nanoparticles and also to compare its transport as assessed by different cellular models . The ﬁrst approach intended to track the transport of insu - lin in solution through the different cell models , following the measurement of insulin transport after encapsulation into dextran sulfate / chitosan nanoparticles . The transport of insulin across Caco - 2 and Caco - 2 / HT29 co - cul - ture monolayers was previously determined [ 28 ] , resulting in a rise of cumulative insulin transport in the co - culture when compared to monoculture model . The increase in insulin permeability in Caco - 2 / HT29 co - culture model was deeply related to the decrease in tight junction stickiness and tracked by the lower TEER values founded for the Caco - 2 / HT29 co - culture during the time of the Fig . 2 . Cells stained with Alcian blue highlight the mucin associated with differentiated absorptive Caco - 2 cells , Raji B lymphocytes , and HT29 goblet cells . ( A ) Caco - 2 / Raji B ; ( B ) Caco - 2 / HT29 / Raji B ( magniﬁcation 200 (cid:3) ) . ( For interpretation of the references to color in this ﬁgure legend , the reader is referred to the web version of this article . ) Fig . 3 . Effect of insulin - loaded dextran sulfate / chitosan nanoparticles on cell membrane integrity in Caco - 2 cells after ( a ) 4 h and ( b ) 24 h of incubation . Effect of insulin - loaded dextran sulfate / chitosan nanoparticles on membrane integrity in HT29 cells after ( c ) 4 h and ( d ) 24 h of incubation . The concentrations are relatively to insulin . ( results are the meanof six replicates , barsrepresent standarddeviation ) . ( (cid:4) ) and ( (cid:4)(cid:4) ) denotes a signiﬁcant difference ( p < 0 . 05 and p < 0 . 01 ) , respectively , when compared with 1 % Triton X100 . F . Antunes et al . / European Journal of Pharmaceutics and Biopharmaceutics 83 ( 2013 ) 427 – 435 431 experiment , promoting the paracellular transport of insulin . An in - crease in TEER values translates into a decrease in overall epithelial permeability ; thus , the Caco - 2 monoculture should demonstrate lower drug permeabilities than the Caco - 2 / HT29 co - culture and the intestinal epithelium [ 29 ] . The comparison between the co - culture models of Caco - 2 / Raji B and triple co - culture was performed in order to understand if the triple co - cultures were more efﬁcient in terms of insulin transport than the co - culture models . The results obtained are presented in the Fig . 5 , where it is possible to observe that both normal oriented and inverted models of the triple co - cultures enhanced the trans - port of insulin solution across membranes compared to Caco - 2 / Raji B model , suggesting that HT29 cells , and probably the mucus pro - duced by these cells , were involved in this increase in the perme - ability of insulin . The diverse secretory and absorptive functions of the intestinal epithelium are conducted by a mixed population of absorptive cells displaying a brush border membrane and mucus - producing goblet cells as the major cell types [ 30 ] . Despite the physical barrier that mucus might offer against the diffusion of insulin [ 31 ] , the static conditions that Transwell monolayers pro - vide , associated with the relative high concentration of insulin , might be enough to disrupt the mucus barrier , leading insulin mol - ecules directly to the paracellular spaces . In addition , it is known that since TEER values decrease as the ratio of Caco - 2 cells de - creased , these cells will form tighter junctions than HT29 cells [ 32 ] . From the comparison of the transport of insulin across Caco - 2 / Raji B normal oriented and inverted models , there were no evident differences between both in terms of permeability and also TEER measurements along time ( Fig . 5A ) . Similarly , the cumulative transport of insulin solution across the normal oriented and in - verted models of triple co - culture composed of Caco - 2 , HT29 , and Raji B lymphocytes was comparable ( Fig . 5B ) . The transport insulin across Caco - 2 / Raji B and Caco - 2 / HT29 / Raji B models described above was then evaluated for insulin - loaded dextran sulfate / chitosan nanoparticles . Insulin - loaded dextran sul - fate / chitosan nanoparticles were prepared as described before in our group [ 21 , 22 ] , presenting a mean size distribution around 550 nm , negative zeta potential around (cid:5) 22 mV , and insulin asso - ciation efﬁciency was 80 % . Moreover , insulin is released in a pH - dependent manner under simulated gastrointestinal conditions , being the release at gastric pH fully avoided , allowing a continuous release at intestinal pH up to 6 h [ 22 ] . The permeability studies are depicted in Fig . 6 . Once more , as observed for insulin solution , the permeability of insulin was higher for triple co - culture model com - pared to Caco - 2 / Raji B model , predicting a positive role of mucus producing cells on the interaction of nanoparticles with intestinal epithelium . Small differences , without statistical signiﬁcance , were founded for insulin permeability through normal and inverted ori - ented models , being the normal oriented model responsible for higher amounts of insulin reaching the basolateral chamber . Simultaneously , TEER values of normally oriented inserts were slightly lower than those of inverted inserts throughout the exper - iment , indicating that the interaction of nanoparticles with epithe - lial cells was stronger and more effective when apical side of cells contact directly with the colloidal carriers , partially disrupting the tightness of cell membrane . It is already known that as the tight junctions open , the TEER values of Caco - 2 cell monolayers are sig - niﬁcantly reduced , due to ion passages through the paracellular route [ 33 ] . Also , the mucoadhesive properties and permeation enhancement effect of chitosan may have contributed signiﬁcantly Fig . 4 . Effect of insulin - loaded dextran sulfate / chitosan nanoparticles on viability of Caco - 2 cells after ( a ) 4 h and ( b ) 24 h of incubation . Effect of insulin contained dextran sulfate / chitosan nanoparticles on viability of HT29 cells after ( c ) 4 h and ( d ) 24 h of incubation . The concentrations are relatively to insulin . ( results are the mean of six replicates , and bars represent standard deviation ) . ( (cid:4) ) and ( (cid:4)(cid:4) ) denotes a signiﬁcant difference ( p < 0 . 05 and p < 0 . 01 ) , respectively , when compared with DMEM positive control . Fig . 5 . ( A ) Cumulative insulin transport in solution and TEER cell monolayer measurements across Caco - 2 / Raji B co - culture normal oriented model and Caco - 2 / Raji B co - culture inverted model seeded in Transwell membranes . ( B ) Cumulative insulin transport in solution and TEER cell monolayer measurements across Caco - 2 / HT29 / Raji B triple co - culture normal oriented model and Caco - 2 / HT29 / Raji B triple co - culture inverted model seeded in Transwell membranes ( results are the mean of six replicates , and bars represent standard deviation ) . 432 F . Antunes et al . / European Journal of Pharmaceutics and Biopharmaceutics 83 ( 2013 ) 427 – 435 to the enhanced insulin permeation [ 28 ] , which was also here observed . This is in agreement with the results of Merwe et al . [ 34 ] and Ward et al . [ 35 ] , where they described that chitosan nanoparticles possess mucoadhesive properties and enhance paracellular perme - ability of proteins by opening the tight junctions between epithe - lial cells . Insulin loading capacity within nanoparticles was 2 . 5 % ( w / w ) , thus , regarding the dextran sulfate / chitosan mass ratio of 1 . 5 : 1 used to prepare nanoparticles , when 50 l g / mL of insulin was added in the apical compartment were also added 1 , 17 mg / mL of dextran sulfate and 0 . 78 mg / mL of chitosan . The present re - sults are also in accordance with the study of Walter et al . [ 30 ] where it was observed that transport rates for poorly absorbed hydrophilic drugs are generally higher in co - cultures of Caco - 2 and HT29 than in pure Caco - 2 monolayers , designating higher paracellular permeability in the co - culture system . For the same co - culture system , it was found that the presence of mucus was propitious to the transport of insulin from both modiﬁed and unmodiﬁed nanoparticles [ 36 ] . The present study demonstrates that the triple normal oriented co - culture cell model was permeated by insulin at a higher rate than its related inverted model , suggesting that this model could be a consistent alternative to the existing models for drug absorp - tion studies . In fact , during the seeding procedure , epithelial cells are placed in the upper side of the Transwell membrane , interact - ing more closely with nanoparticles , without the physical barrier comprised by the support polycarbonate ﬁlter . On the other hand , cells seeded on the basolateral side in the inverted model , after reaching conﬂuence , are located at the distance of 6 l m , the thick - ness of the Transwell membrane . This barrier is practically innoc - uous for insulin in solution due to the small radius of the protein , less than 2 Å [ 37 ] , compared to the 3 l m pore size of the Transwell membrane , but nanoparticles face additional obstacle to interact with tight junction proteins of epithelial cells . The effect of M - like cells is not expected to be inﬂuenced by the procedure of seeding epithelial cells , since the insertion of Raji B cells within epithelial cells and the conversion of Caco - 2 cells to M cells is thought to be independent of the direct contact between the differ - ent cells [ 23 ] . In fact , close contact is not mandatory to obtain a functional model . Kernéis et al . [ 38 ] initially proposed an in vitro model of human follicle - associated epithelium ( FAE ) , which was a co - culture sys - tem of Caco - 2 cells and isolated lymphocytes from mouse Peyer’s patches on inverted culture inserts . Later , Gullberg et al . [ 17 ] sug - gested a more advanced model based on co - culture of Caco - 2 cells and human Raji B lymphocytes on normally oriented inserts , while Rieux et al . [ 23 ] developed an improved in vitro model of human FAE by inverting inserts after Caco - 2 cell seeding to study nanopar - ticle transport by M cells . Although not mentioned in previous experiments , it is believed that the inversion of Caco - 2 cells seeded in Transwell membrane make the Caco - 2 cell monolayer more accessible to Raji B lymphocytes assuring a closer contacts be - tween the two cell types , thus demonstrated the importance of Raji B lymphocytes on Caco - 2 cell conversion . A direct contact of Caco - 2 and Raji B cells , as well as the concentration of Raji B cells at the basolateral side of Caco - 2 cells , seemed to induce a more functional and more reproducible in vitro model [ 23 ] . It was also suggested that soluble factors were required for the conversion of absorptive enterocytes into M cells . However , the present results demon - strated that the inverted model have no advantages relatively to the normal oriented model , both on triple co - culture ( Caco - 2 / HT29 / Raji B ) and co - culture ( Caco - 2 / Raji B ) . It is believed that sol - uble factors may be more important for differentiation of entero - cytes that physical interaction at the same time that the normal oriented triple co - culture model is physiologically more similar to the epithelial layer of the intestine . Nevertheless , triple co - cul - tures were more efﬁcient concerning insulin solution absorption when compared to co - culture ( Fig . 3 a and b ) which suggested that HT29 goblet cells may inﬂuence drug transport across the epithe - lial barrier . The permeability of insulin when encapsulated into dextran sulfate / chitosan nanoparticles was observed to occur in a higher extent in the triple co - culture ( Caco - 2 / HT29 / Raji B ) compared to double co - culture ( Caco - 2 / Raji B ) ( Fig . 4 ) , and in both cases , the permeation rate was higher on normal oriented models . The con - version of Caco - 2 cells into M - like cells suggests a role of these cells in the ability of the intestinal cells to increase their absorption of hydrophilic molecules [ 39 ] and nanoparticles also as observed by the increase in insulin permeability in comparison with the Caco - 2 monoculture . Insulin permeability coefﬁcient ( P app ) was calculated for all samples ( Table 1 ) . The results from P app showed that the triple co - culture normal oriented was the most efﬁcient model in pre - dicting insulin permeability , as compared to P app values obtained from intestinal ex vivo experiments ( Table 2 ) , particularly when the protein model was incorporated into nanoparticles of dextran sulfate / chitosan . It was also founded that a considerable difference between Caco - 2 and Caco - 2 / Raji B compared to triple co - culture models concerning insulin encapsulated into nanoparticles , reveal - ing the permeation enhancement expected from the nanoparticles due to the potential effect of HT29 cells on the production of mucus , retaining nanoparticles closer to the potential sites of Fig . 6 . ( A ) Cumulative insulin transport and TEER cell monolayer measurements from insulin - loaded dextran sulfate / chitosan nanoparticles across Caco - 2 / Raji B co - culture and Caco - 2 / Raji B co - culture inverted model seeded in Transwell mem - branes . ( B ) Cumulative insulin transport and TEER cell monolayer measurements from insulin - loaded dextran sulfate / chitosan nanoparticles across Caco - 2 / HT29 / Raji B triple co - culture normal oriented model and Caco - 2 / HT29 / Raji B triple co - culture inverted model seeded in Transwell membranes ( results are the mean of six replicates , and bars represent standard deviation ) . F . Antunes et al . / European Journal of Pharmaceutics and Biopharmaceutics 83 ( 2013 ) 427 – 435 433 permeation for longer periods of time . Chitosan - based nanoparti - cles work as permeation enhancers that transiently open epithelial tight junctions ( paracellular route ) and consequently increase intestinal permeability , which is a promising approach to over - come poor oral macromolecule permeability . Table 2 summarizes insulin P app through different intestinal models , namely in vitro normal oriented Caco - 2 - based model and previously published results for the ex vivo rat ileum model . The transport of insulin through Caco - 2 / HT29 / Raji B lymphocytes nor - mal oriented model increased by 6 - fold when encapsulated into dextran / sulfate chitosan nanoparticles compared to insulin solu - tion , as shown in Table 2 . The transport of insulin through rat ileum was also increased by 4 – 5 - fold , when delivered by nanopar - ticles . Through the present results , it is clear that insulin perme - ation through the co - culture and the intestinal mucosa facilitated by nanoparticles indicate that triple co - cultures of Caco - 2 cells , HT29 mucus - producing goblet cells , and Raji B lymphocytes pro - vided an in vitro drug permeation model which is more closely re - lated to the rat intestinal mucosa . P app values for nanoencapsulated insulin across the in vitro cellular model correlated well with frac - tions of nanoencapsulated insulin permeating the ex vivo model of rat intestinal mucosa . Consequently , in vitro experimental models can be designed to promote relatively rapid and mechanistic eval - uation of nanoformulations with enhanced absorption properties . Moreover , it is worth to mention that once the triple co - culture system mimics the intestinal barriers for evaluation of the effect of the drug delivery system on insulin permeation , Caco - 2 / HT29 / Raji B lymphocytes monolayers may be selected over rat intestinal mucosa based on the apparent permeability coefﬁcients values . 4 . Conclusions One of the most important factors in deﬁning oral drug absorp - tion should be drug permeability across the intestinal membrane [ 43 ] . Therefore , it is crucial to improve in vitro cell models in order to obtain a better correlation with in vivo data , which will be set in our ongoing research work . In this study , we reported the develop - ment of a new in vitro cell model , normally and inverted seeded , for drug and nanoparticle permeability assessment , based on Caco - 2 , HT29 , and Raji B lymphocytes . Results demonstrate that normal oriented Caco - 2 / HT29 / Raji B lymphocytes triple co - culture model may be used in the future to obtain a simulated intestinal barrier , with mucus - producing properties and M cells of Peyer’s patches to study , in a mechanistic manner and small scale size range , protein absorption , both in solution and associated with nanocarriers . Our results further support the potential utility of dextran / sulfate chitosan nanoparticles for oral delivery of protein drugs , like insu - lin , and also that the triple co - culture model may be a reliable tool for permeability studies . Here , it was designed an improved cell model that could be an alternative to animal experimentation , meeting the requirements of the 3R’s policy . Acknowledgments The authors gratefully acknowledge Fundação para a Ciência e a Tecnologia ( FCT ) , Portugal , for ﬁnancial support ( PTDC / SAU - FCF / 70651 / 2006 and SFRH / BPD / 35996 / 2007 ) . References [ 1 ] F . Antunes , F . Andrade , D . Ferreira , H . M . Nielsen , B . Sarmento , Models to predict intestinal absorption of therapeutic peptides and proteins , Curr . Drug Metab . , in press . [ 2 ] P . V . Balimane , S . Chong , R . A . Morrison , Current methodologies used for evaluation of intestinal permeability and absorption , J . Pharmacol . Toxicol . Methods 44 ( 2000 ) . [ 3 ] K . M . Wood , G . M . Stone , N . A . Peppas , The effect of complexation hydrogels on insulin transport in intestinal epithelial cell models , Acta Biomater . 6 ( 2010 ) 48 – 56 . [ 4 ] I . M . V . D . Lubben , F . A . C . V . Opdorp , M . R . Hengeveld , J . J . M . Onderwater , H . K . Koerten , J . C . Verhoef , G . Borchard , H . E . Junginger , Transport of chitosan microparticles for mucosal vaccine delivery in a human intestinal M - cell model , J . Drug Target . 10 ( 2002 ) 449 – 456 . [ 5 ] P . V . Balimane , S . Chong , Cell culture - based models for intestinal permeability : a critique , Drug Discov . Today 10 ( 2005 ) 335 – 343 . [ 6 ] M . L . Lind , J . Jacobsen , R . Holm , A . Müllertz , Development of simulated intestinal ﬂuids containing nutrients as transport media in the Caco - 2 cell culture model : assessment of cell viability , monolayer integrity and transport of a poorly aqueous soluble drug and a substrate of efﬂux mechanisms , Eur . J . Pharm . Sci . 32 ( 2007 ) 261 – 270 . [ 7 ] C . Hilgendorf , H . Spahn - Langguth , C . G . Regardh , E . Lipka , G . L . Amidon , P . Langguth , Caco - 2 versus Caco - 2 / HT29 - MTX co - cultured cell lines : permeabilities via diffusion , inside - and outside - directed carrier - mediated transport , J . Pharm . Sci . 89 ( 2000 ) 63 – 75 . [ 8 ] P . Anderle , E . Niederer , W . Rubas , C . Hilgendorf , H . Spahn - Langguth , H . Wunderli - Allenspach , H . P . Merkle , P . Langguth , P - glycoprotein ( P - gp ) mediated efﬂux in Caco - 2 cell monolayers : the inﬂuence of culturing conditions and drug exposure on P - gp expression levels , J . Pharm . Sci . 87 ( 1998 ) 757 – 762 . [ 9 ] X . - M . Chen , I . Elisia , D . D . Kitts , Deﬁning conditions for the co - culture of Caco - 2 and HT29 - MTX cells using Taguchi design , J . Pharmacol . Toxicol . Methods ( 2010 ) . [ 10 ] G . J . Mahler , M . L . Shuler , R . P . Glahn , Characterization of Caco - 2 and HT29 - MTX cocultures in an in vitro digestion / cell culture model used to predict iron bioavailability , J . Nutr . Biochem . 20 ( 2009 ) 494 – 502 . [ 11 ] A . Wikman - Larhed , P . Artursson , Co - cultures of human intestinal goblet ( HT29 - H ) and absorptive ( Caco - 2 ) cells for studies of drug and peptide absorption , Eur . J . Pharm . Sci . 3 ( 1995 ) 171 – 183 . [ 12 ] G . Nollevaux , C . Deville , B . El Moualij , W . Zorzi , P . Deloyer , Y . J . Schneider , O . Peulen , G . Dandrifosse , Development of a serum - free co - culture of human intestinal epithelium cell - lines ( Caco - 2 / HT29 - 5M21 ) , BMC Cell Biol . 7 ( 2006 ) 20 . [ 13 ] A . d . Rieux , E . G . Ragnarsson , E . Gullberg , V . Preat , Y . J . Schneider , P . Artursson , Transport of nanoparticles across an in vitro model of the human intestinal follicle associated epithelium , Eur . J . Pharm . Sci . 25 ( 2005 ) 455 – 465 . Table 1 Apparent permeability coefﬁcient ( P app (cid:3) 10 (cid:5) 6 ( cm / s ) * ) of insulin across both triple co - culture and co - culture , normal oriented ( N ) and inverted ( I ) models . Caco - 2 / HT29 / Raji B ( N ) Caco - 2 / HT29 / Raji B ( I ) Caco - 2 / Raji B ( N ) Caco - 2 / Raji B ( I ) Insulin solution 1 . 5 ± 0 . 80 0 . 15 ± 2 . 72 1 . 23 ± 0 . 21 0 . 96 ± 0 . 58 Insulin - loaded dextran sulfate / chitosan nanoparticles 8 . 99 ± 0 . 86 2 . 07 ± 0 . 72 1 . 32 ± 0 . 52 0 . 81 ± 0 . 26 * The P app values are given as the mean of six replicates , ±standard deviation . Table 2 Apparent permeability coefﬁcient ( P app (cid:3) 10 (cid:5) 6 ( cm / s ) * ) of insulin across normal oriented Caco - 2 based models compared to ex vivo intestinal permeability . Caco - 2 / HT29 / Raji B ( N ) Rat Ileum [ 40 ] Rat Ileum [ 41 ] Rat Ileum [ 42 ] Insulin solution 1 . 50 ± 0 . 80 0 . 90 ± 0 . 10 7 . 35 ± 1 . 18 0 . 60 ± 0 . 02 Insulin - loaded nanoparticles 8 . 99 ± 0 . 86 4 . 20 ± 0 . 5 28 . 40 ± 0 . 30 2 . 20 ± 0 . 34 * The P app values are given as the mean of six replicates , ±standard deviation . 434 F . Antunes et al . / European Journal of Pharmaceutics and Biopharmaceutics 83 ( 2013 ) 427 – 435 [ 14 ] I . Kadiyala , Y . Loo , K . Roy , J . Rice , K . W . Leong , Transport of chitosan – DNA nanoparticles in human intestinal M - cell model versus normal intestinal enterocytes , Eur . J . Pharm . Sci . 39 ( 2010 ) 103 – 109 . [ 15 ] Y . H . Lai , M . J . D’Souza , Microparticle transport in the human intestinal M cell model , J . Drug Target . 16 ( 2008 ) 36 – 42 . [ 16 ] I . M . v . d . Lubben , F . A . v . Opdorp , M . R . Hengeveld , J . J . Onderwater , H . K . Koerten , J . C . Verhoef , G . Borchard , H . E . Junginger , Transport of chitosan microparticles for mucosalvaccine delivery ina human intestinal M - cell model , J Drug Target . 10 ( 2002 ) 449 – 456 . [ 17 ] E . Gullberg , M . Leonard , J . Karlsson , A . M . Hopkins , D . Brayden , A . W . Baird , P . Artursson , Expression of speciﬁc markers and particle transport in a new human intestinal M - cell model , Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 279 ( 2000 ) 808 – 813 . [ 18 ] M . - K . Yoo , S . - K . Kang , J . - H . Choi , I . - K . Park , H . - S . Na , H . - C . Lee , E . - B . Kim , N . - K . Lee , J . - W . Nah , Y . - J . Choi , C . - S . Cho , Targeted delivery of chitosan nanoparticles to Peyer’s patch using M cell - homing peptide selected by phage display technique , Biomaterials 31 ( 2010 ) 7738 – 7747 . [ 19 ] T . C . Yih , M . Al - Fandi , Engineered nanoparticles as precise drug delivery systems , J . Cell . Biochem . 97 ( 2006 ) 1184 – 1190 . [ 20 ] S . Shu , C . Sun , X . Zhang , Z . Wu , Z . Wang , C . Li , Hollow and degradable polyelectrolyte nanocapsules for protein drug delivery , Acta Biomater . 6 ( 2010 ) 210 – 217 . [ 21 ] B . Sarmento , A . Ribeiro , F . Veiga , D . Ferreira , Development and characterization of new insulin containing polysaccharide nanoparticles , Colloids Surf . B Biointerf . 53 ( 2006 ) 193 – 202 . [ 22 ] B . Sarmento , A . Ribeiro , F . Veiga , D . Ferreira , R . Neufeld , Oral bioavailability of insulin contained in polysaccharide nanoparticles , Biomacromolecules 8 ( 2007 ) 3054 – 3060 . [ 23 ] A . d . Rieux , V . Fievez , I . Théate , J . Mast , V . Préat , Y . - J . Schneider , An improved in vitro model of human intestinal follicle - associated epithelium to study nanoparticle transport by M cells , Eur . J . Pharm . Sci . 30 ( 2007 ) 380 – 391 . [ 24 ] S . Kernéis , A . Bogdanova , J . - P . Kraehenbuhl , E . Pringault , Conversion by Peyer’s patch lymphocytes of human enterocytes into M cells that transport bacteria , Science 277 ( 1997 ) 949 – 952 . [ 25 ] B . Sarmento , A . Ribeiro , F . Veiga , D . Ferreira , Development and validation of a rapid reversed - phase HPLC method for the determination of insulin from nanoparticulate systems , Biomed Chromatogr 20 ( 2006 ) 898 – 903 . [ 26 ] P . Artursson , K . Palm , K . Luthman , Caco - 2 monolayers in experimental and theoretical predictions of drug transport , Adv . Drug Deliv . Rev . 46 ( 2001 ) 27 – 43 . [ 27 ] R . Bansil , B . S . Turner , Mucin structure , aggregation , physiological functions and biomedical applications , Curr . Opin . Colloid Interf . Sci . 11 ( 2006 ) 164 – 170 . [ 28 ] P . Fonte , T . Nogueira , C . Gehm , D . Ferreira , B . Sarmento , Chitosan - coated solid lipid nanoparticles enhance the oral absorption of insulin , Drug Deliv . Translation . Res . 1 ( 2011 ) 299 – 308 . [ 29 ] D . A . Carr , N . A . Peppas , Assessment of poly ( methacrylic acid - co - N - vinyl pyrrolidone ) as a carrier for the oral delivery of therapeutic proteins using Caco - 2 and HT29 - MTX cell lines , J . Biomed . Mater . Res . Part A 92A ( 2010 ) 504 – 512 . [ 30 ] E . Walter , S . Janich , B . J . Roessler , J . M . Hilﬁnger , G . L . Amidon , HT29 - MTX / Caco - 2 cocultures as an in vitro model for the intestinal epithelium : in vitro – in vivo correlation with permeability data from rats and humans , J . Pharm . Sci . 85 ( 1996 ) 1070 – 1076 . [ 31 ] L . M . Ensign , R . Cone , J . Hanes , Oral drugdelivery with polymeric nanoparticles : the gastrointestinal mucus barriers , Adv . Drug Deliv . Rev . 64 ( 2012 ) 557 – 570 . [ 32 ] X . - M . Chen , I . Elisia , D . Kitts , Deﬁning conditions for the co - culture of Caco - 2 and HT29 - MTX cells using Taguchi design , J . Pharmacol . Toxicol . Methods 61 ( 2010 ) 334 – 342 . [ 33 ] Y . - H . Lin , F . - L . Mi , C . - T . Chen , W . - C . Chang , S . - F . Peng , H . - F . Liang , H . - W . Sung , Preparation and characterization of nanoparticles shelled with chitosan for oral insulin delivery , Biomacromolecules 8 ( 2007 ) 146 – 152 . [ 34 ] S . M . v . d . Merwe , J . C . Verhoef , J . H . M . Verheijden , A . F . Kotzé , H . E . Junginger , Trimethylated chitosan as polymeric absorption enhancer for improved peroral delivery of peptide drugs Eur , J . Pharm . Biopharm . 58 ( 2004 ) 225 – 235 . [ 35 ] P . D . Ward , T . K . Tippin , D . R . Thakker , Enhancing paracellular permeability by modulating epithelial tight junctions , Pharm . Sci . Technol . Today 3 ( 2000 ) 346 – 358 . [ 36 ] Y . Jin , Y . Song , X . Zhu , D . Zhou , C . Chen , Z . Zhang , Y . Huang , Goblet cell - targeting nanoparticles for oral insulin delivery and the inﬂuence of mucus on insulin transport , Biomaterials 33 ( 2012 ) 1573 – 1582 . [ 37 ] V . Zoete , M . Meuwly , M . Karplus , A comparison of the dynamic behavior of monomeric and dimeric insulin shows structural rearrangements in the active monomer , J . Mol . Biol . 342 ( 2004 ) 913 – 929 . [ 38 ] S . Kerneis , A . Bogdanova , J . - P . Kraehenbuhl , E . Pringault , Conversion by Peyer’s patch lymphocytes of human enterocytes into M cells that transport bacteria , Science 277 ( 1997 ) 949 – 952 . [ 39 ] A . Bazes , G . Nollevaux , R . Coco , A . Joly , T . Sergent , Y . - J . Schneider , Development of a triculture based system for improved beneﬁt / risk assessment in pharmacology and human food , BMC Proc . 5 ( 2011 ) P67 . [ 40 ] L . Yin , J . Ding , C . He , L . Cui , C . Tang , C . Yin , Drug permeability and mucoadhesion properties of thiolated trimethyl chitosan nanoparticles in oral insulin delivery , Biomaterials 30 ( 2009 ) 5691 – 5700 . [ 41 ] C . B . Woitiski , B . Sarmento , R . A . Carvalho , R . J . Neufeld , F . Veiga , Facilitated nanoscale delivery of insulin across intestinal membrane models , Int . J . Pharm . 412 ( 2011 ) 123 – 131 . [ 42 ] L . Yin , J . Ding , L . Fei , M . He , F . Cui , C . Tang , C . Yin , Beneﬁcial properties for insulin absorption using superporous hydrogel containing interpenetrating polymer network as oral delivery vehicles , Int . J . Pharm . 350 ( 2008 ) 220 – 229 . [ 43 ] S . Yamashita , Y . Tanaka , Y . Endoh , Y . Taki , T . Sakane , T . Nadai , H . Sezaki , Analysis of drug permeation across Caco - 2 monolayer : implication for predicting in vivo drug absorption , Pharm . Res . 14 ( 1997 ) 486 – 491 . F . Antunes et al . / European Journal of Pharmaceutics and Biopharmaceutics 83 ( 2013 ) 427 – 435 435