E UKARYOTIC C ELL , Oct . 2010 , p . 1504 – 1518 Vol . 9 , No . 10 1535 - 9778 / 10 / $ 12 . 00 doi : 10 . 1128 / EC . 00119 - 10 Copyright © 2010 , American Society for Microbiology . All Rights Reserved . Endocytic Machinery Protein SlaB Is Dispensable for Polarity Establishment but Necessary for Polarity Maintenance in Hyphal Tip Cells of Aspergillus nidulans (cid:1) † Ame´rica Herva´s - Aguilar‡ and Miguel A . Pen˜alva * Centro de Investigaciones Biolo´gicas CSIC , Ramiro de Maeztu 9 , Madrid 28040 , Spain Received 17 May 2010 / Accepted 27 July 2010 The Aspergillus nidulans endocytic internalization protein SlaB is essential , in agreement with the key role in apical extension attributed to endocytosis . We constructed , by gene replacement , a nitrate - inducible , ammo - nium - repressible slaB1 allele for conditional SlaB expression . Video microscopy showed that repressed slaB1 cells are able to establish but unable to maintain a stable polarity axis , arresting growth with budding - yeast - like morphology shortly after initially normal germ tube emergence . Using green ﬂuorescent protein ( GFP ) - tagged secretory v - SNARE SynA , which continuously recycles to the plasma membrane after being efﬁciently endocytosed , we establish that SlaB is crucial for endocytosis , although it is dispensable for the anterograde trafﬁc of SynA and of the t - SNARE Pep12 to the plasma and vacuolar membrane , respectively . By confocal microscopy , repressed slaB1 germlings show deep plasma membrane invaginations . Ammonium - to - nitrate medium shift experiments demonstrated reversibility of the null polarity maintenance phenotype and corre - lation of normal apical extension with resumption of SynA endocytosis . In contrast , SlaB downregulation in hyphae that had progressed far beyond germ tube emergence led to marked polarity maintenance defects correlating with deﬁcient SynA endocytosis . Thus , the strict correlation between abolishment of endocytosis and disability of polarity maintenance that we report here supports the view that hyphal growth requires coupling of secretion and endocytosis . However , downregulated slaB1 cells form F - actin clumps containing the actin - binding protein AbpA , and thus F - actin misregulation cannot be completely disregarded as a possible contributor to defective apical extension . Latrunculin B treatment of SlaB - downregulated tips reduced the formation of AbpA clumps without promoting growth and revealed the formation of cortical “comets” of AbpA . Germinating asexual spores ( conidiospores ) of Aspergillus nidulans transiently undergo isotropic growth ( “swelling” ) be - fore establishing a polarity axis that grows by apical extension , leading to the characteristic tubular morphology of the fungal cell ( 15 , 16 , 33 ) . Stable maintenance of a polarity axis at the high apical extension rates of A . nidulans ( (cid:1) 0 . 5 (cid:2) m / min at 25°C ) ( 23 ) can be attributable , at least in part , to the polariza - tion of the secretory apparatus and the predominant and highly efﬁcient delivery of secretory vesicles to the apex ( 8 , 18 , 40 , 49 ) . In addition , work from several laboratories strongly indicated that hyphal tip growth also involves endocytosis . A key obser - vation supporting this involvement was that despite the fact that endocytosis can occur elsewhere , the endocytic internal - ization machinery predominates in the hyphal tip , forming a subapical collar . The spatial association of this collar with the apical region where secretory materials are delivered would allow removal of excess lipids / proteins reaching the plasma membrane with secretory vesicles ( 1 , 2 , 30 , 49 , 51 , 57 ) , but , most importantly , rapid endocytic recycling ( i . e . , efﬁcient en - docytosis of membrane proteins followed by their redelivery to the plasma membrane ) can generate and maintain polarity , as shown with the v - SNARE and secretory - vesicle - resident SynA , which is a substrate of the subapical endocytic ring ( 1 , 49 , 52 ) . It is plausible that such a mechanism could drive the polariza - tion of one or more proteins acting as positional cues to me - diate polarity maintenance . Genetic evidence strongly supported the conclusion that en - docytosis is required for apical extension . Mutational inactiva - tion of the A . nidulans ﬁmbrin FimA or of the small GTPase ArfB Arf6 ( a regulator of endocytosis from fungi to mammals ) , led to delayed polarity establishment and morphologically ab - errant tips indicative of polarity maintenance defects ( 30 , 51 ) . These mutations , although very severely debilitating , are not lethal . In contrast , heterokaryon rescue showed that SlaB , a key F - actin regulator of the endocytic internalization machin - ery ( 26 ) , is essential in A . nidulans ( 2 ) . slaB (cid:3) cells are able to establish polarity , but they arrest in apical extension during the very early steps of polarity maintenance with a bud - like germ tube ( 2 ) . However , work with Aspergillus oryzae using a thia - mine - repressible promoter to drive A . oryzae End4 ( AoEnd4 ) ( SlaB ) expression showed that although endocytosis was pre - vented and hyphal morphology altered under repressing con - ditions , hyphal tip extension and polarity maintenance were not completely abolished ( 20 ) , perhaps suggesting that the phenotype of the thiamine - repressed conditional allele might not fully resemble the null phenotype . F - actin strongly predominates in the hyphal tips ( 2 , 14 , 17 , 49 , 51 ) . Because endocytic internalization is powered by F - actin ( 27 ) , predominance of endocytic “patches” ( i . e . , sites of * Corresponding author . Mailing address : Department of Molecular and Cellular Medicine , Centro de Investigaciones Biolo´gicas CSIC , Ramiro de Maeztu 9 , Madrid 28040 , Spain . Phone : 3491 8373112 , ext . 4358 . Fax : 3491 5360432 . E - mail : penalva @ cib . csic . es . ‡ Present address : Department of Molecular Biosciences , University of Kansas , Lawrence , KS 66045 . † Supplemental material for this article may be found at http : / / ec . asm . org / . (cid:1) Published ahead of print on 6 August 2010 . 1504 on A p r il 26 , 2016 b y g ue s t h tt p : / / e c . a s m . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m endocytic internalization ) in the tip accounts , at least in part , for F - actin polarization . However , F - actin plays fundamental nonendocytic roles in the tip ; for example , actin cables nucle - ated by the SepA formin localizing to the apical crescent are thought to play a major role in secretion , whereas a network of F - actin microﬁlaments appears to be a major component of the Spitzenko¨rper ( 4 , 21 , 43 , 49 ) . Notably , all genes used to address the role of endocytosis in apical extension share in common their involvement in regulating F - actin . Thus , the Saccharomy - ces cerevisiae ArfB orthologue Arf3p regulates endocytosis but also appears to regulate F - actin at multiple levels ( 12 , 28 , 44 ) . Like their respective S . cerevisiae orthologues Sla2p and Sac6p , SlaB and FimA are key components of endocytic patches , but in budding yeast their orthologues appear to regulate F - actin dynamics beyond endocytosis ( 27 , 35 , 56 ) . To gain insight into the essential role of SlaB in A . nidulans , we designed a conditional expression allele . Time - lapse mi - croscopy under restrictive conditions demonstrated that polar - ity establishment is essentially normal but that these mutant germ tubes arrested in apical extension subsequently undergo swelling , acquiring the characteristic bud - like shape of abortive slaB (cid:3) germlings . Medium shift experiments allowed us to ad - dress the role of SlaB in apical extension beyond these early stages of polarity maintenance . We demonstrate the key role that SlaB plays in endocytosis and polarity maintenance , but we also show that deﬁciency of SlaB affects the actin cytoskel - eton . MATERIALS AND METHODS Aspergillus nidulans techniques . A . nidulans strains , whose genotypes are de - tailed in Table 1 , carried markers in standard use ( 11 ) ( http : / / www . aspgd . org / ) . slaB1 strains were routinely cultured on 1 % ( wt / vol ) glucose synthetic complete ( SC ) medium containing 10 mM nitrate as the sole nitrogen source or , alterna - tively , on Aspergillus complete medium ( MCA ) supplemented with 50 mM ni - trate . SC containing 10 mM ammonium tartrate , which prevents growth of mutant colonies , was used to score the presence of slaB1 in the progeny of meiotic crosses . Plasmid and strain constructions . The niiA promoter used for conditional expression corresponds to the complete intergenic region of the niiA - niaD di - vergent transcriptional unit as oriented with the direction of transcription toward niiA . p1863 was the source of the linear DNA fragment that was used to replace resident slaB by niiA p : : slaB ( slaB1 ) . The plasmid is schematically depicted in Fig . 1A . Brieﬂy , a fragment containing 0 . 72 kbp of the 5 (cid:4) untranslated region ( 5 (cid:4) UTR ) of slaB was PCR ampliﬁed using primers Sla1PROM and AM140 . This fragment was introduced ( as an XhoI - EcoRI fragment ) into a pBS - SK ( (cid:5) ) plas - mid derivative containing ( as an EcoRI - SpeI fragment ) the A . fumigatus pyrG gene , thus yielding plasmid p5 (cid:4) SlaB : : pyrG fum . A chimeric DNA fragment carry - ing niiA p ( considering as such the complete intergenic region of the niiA - niaD divergent transcriptional unit as oriented with the direction of transcription toward niiA ) followed by the coding region ( including introns ) of slaB was assembled by fusion PCR ( with primers AM141 , AM142 , AM143 , and Slao13 ) . This fragment was inserted downstream of pyrG fum as an SpeI - NotI fragment and sequenced to verify the absence of mutations . An XhoI - NotI fragment containing the resulting niiA p : : slaB transgene was used for transformation of strain MAD1739 ( pyrG89 ; pyroA4 (cid:3) nkuA : : bar ) ( Table 1 ) . As slaB is essential , we selected primary transformants on osmotically stabilized minimal medium with - out uracil ( 50 ) and containing 10 mM nitrate ( permissive conditions ) . Ho - mokaryotic clones were puriﬁed from conidiospores of these transformants and tested by replica plating on nitrate and ammonium media . All 25 clones tested showed the phenotype expected for the gene replacement ( normal growth on nitrate and no growth on ammonium ; we used an nkuA (cid:3) strain to prevent nonhomologous recombination [ 37 ] ) . The presence of the expected gene replacement was conﬁrmed by Southern analysis ( not shown ) . As a control to verify that insertion of pyrG fum at the slaB locus does not impair function , we constructed similarly a strain in which slaB was replaced by a slaB : : pyrG fum : : 3 (cid:4) UTR slaB DNA fragment obtained , as an NcoI - SpeI fragment , from plasmid p1850 . Transformants carrying this replacement , which were se - lected on medium without pyrimidine and containing 5 mM ammonium tartrate as the sole nitrogen source , were indistinguishable from the wild type . For TABLE 1 . Strains used in this work Strain Complete genotype MAD1739 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . pyrG89 ; pyroA4 (cid:3) nkuA : : bar MAD1794 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . pyrG89 ; argB2 ; pyroA4 (cid:3) nkuA : : argB ; slaB : : gfp - pyrG fum MAD2384 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . pyrG89 ; pyroA4 (cid:3) nkuA : : bar ; slaB1 MAD2434 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . pyrG89 ? ; a rgB2 : : [ argB * - gfp : : rabA (cid:6) ? ; pyroA4 (cid:3) nkuA ? ; slaB1 ; abpA : : mRFP - pyrG fum MAD2436 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . pyroA4 (cid:3) nkuA ? ; abpA : : mRFP - pyrG fum MAD2556 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . pyrG89 ? pabaA1 yA2 ; synA : : gfp - pyrG fum ; pyroA4 (cid:3) nkuA ? ; slaB1 MAD2674 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . pyrG89 ? pabaA1 yA2 ; pyroA4 (cid:3) nkuA ? ; synA : : gfp - pyrG fum MAD3041 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . pabaA1 yA2 ; pyroA4 : : [ pyroA * - gpdA mini : : gfp : : pep12 (cid:6) ; slaB1 FIG . 1 . Experimental design and characterization of the condi - tional slaB1 allele . ( A ) Schematic representation of the construct and the double - recombination event use to replace the resident slaB gene by slaB1 . ( B ) Cells carrying slaB1 cannot grow on ammonium medium but grow and sporulate normally on nitrate . ( C ) Western blot analysis of slaB (cid:5) and slaB - gfp cells using anti - SlaB antiserum , demonstrating that this antiserum speciﬁcally recognizes SlaB . ( D ) Western blot anal - ysis of whole - cell extracts obtained by alkaline lysis of slaB (cid:5) ( wt ) and slaB1 cells cultured in synthetic complete medium containing 10 mM nitrate or 40 mM ammonium , as indicated . Actin was used as an equivalent loading control . Note that a very faint band of SlaB is seen in slaB1 cells cultured on ammonium when blots were overexposed ( SlaB 1 exp ) . V OL . 9 , 2010 ROLE OF A . NIDULANS SlaB 1505 on A p r il 26 , 2016 b y g ue s t h tt p : / / e c . a s m . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m expression of green ﬂuorescent protein ( GFP ) - Pep12 , we used a plasmid in which the gpdA mini promoter was used to drive expression of A . nidulans Pep12 ( genomic version ) . Details of this plasmid will be given elsewhere . This plasmid was targeted in single copy to the pyroA locus as described previously ( 40 ) . Culture conditions for microscopy of slaB1 cells . Unless otherwise indicated , we routinely used pH 6 . 5 WMM ( 41 ) containing 10 mM nitrate ( permissive conditions ) or 40 mM NH 4 Cl ( restrictive conditions ) as a nitrogen source and 0 . 2 % ( wt / vol ) glucose ( (cid:1) 11 mM ) as a carbon source . However , in medium shift experiments in which hyphae were germinated under permissive conditions be - fore being transferred to restrictive conditions , we used 0 . 1 to 1 mM nitrate for permissive conditions to avoid carryover contamination due to the use of an unnecessarily high concentration of nitrate during germination . Appropriate controls were set to show that the morphological abnormalities observed were speciﬁcally resulting from the shift from nitrate - to ammonium - containing me - dium . For medium shift experiments , appropriately diluted conidiospore suspen - sions were inoculated onto 20 - by 20 - mm coverslips that had been deposited , using sterile tweezers , onto wells of LabTech polystyrene six - well tissue culture plates ( Becton - Dickinson , NJ ) containing 2 . 5 ml of 0 . 1 mM nitrate – WMM . Plates were incubated for 10 to 12 h at 25°C until the average germ tube length of the resulting hyphal cells was at least (cid:1) 25 to 50 (cid:2) m . After this initial period of incubation , coverslips to which hyphae were attached were washed two times with prewarmed ( at 25°C ) 40 mM NH 4 Cl – WMM ( using suction to remove the medium ) before addition of 2 . 5 ml of the same medium and continuation of incubation for a further 12 to 14 h at 25°C . In controls in which cells that were germinated on 0 . 1 mM nitrate medium were transferred to the same medium , the second period of incubation was reduced to 6 to 8 h to avoid excessive growth , as these hyphal tips grew normally . In medium shift experiments in which abnormal cells that were germinated ( for 10 h at 25°C ) on 40 mM NH 4 Cl were shifted to permissive conditions , we used 10 mM nitrate for the second incubation period . In this case , controls were set in which cells germinated on ammonium were shifted to the same ( ammo - nium - containing ) medium . Unlike cells shifted to nitrate , these cells remained arrested in the early stages of polarity maintenance , resembling cells that had been continuously incubated on ammonium medium . In medium shift experiments in which ammonium downregulation was com - bined with latrunculin B ( latB ) treatment , cells were precultured on 0 . 1 mM nitrate for 9 to 10 h before being shifted to 40 mM ammonium or , in the case of controls , 10 mM nitrate medium containing 10 or 25 (cid:2) M latrunculin B ( Calbio - chem ) ( from a 10 mM stock in dimethyl sulfoxide [ DMSO ] ; appropriate controls demonstrated that addition of DMSO alone had no effect ) . After the transfer , cells were incubated for an additional 12 to 14 h before being photographed . These concentrations of latrunculin B permitted germination of slaB1 cells on nitrate and are thus sublethal . Microscopy . Epiﬂuorescence microscopy was carried out essentially as de - scribed previously , using a Nikon Eclipse 80i or Leica DMI6000 microscope for static and time - lapse sequences , respectively , and a Dual - View beam splitter for simultaneous acquisition of GFP and monomeric red ﬂuorescent protein ( mRFP ) channels ( 19 , 40 ) . For confocal microscopy , we used a Leica SP3 or SP5 device with acusto - optical beam splitters , 63 (cid:7) and 1 . 4 - numerical aperture ( NA ) objectives , and laser lines of 488 nm for GFP and 561 nm for mRFP . These images were processed with Leica software and converted to Metamorph stacks and , when needed , to time - lapse movies using ImageJ ( http : / / rsbweb . nih . gov / ij / ) . Anti - SlaB polyclonal antiserum . We used the Escherichia coli vector pOPTH ( 39 ) to drive high - level expression of a peptide consisting of the 205 C - terminal residues of SlaB , which include the complete I / LWEQ domain . This peptide was fused to an N - terminal hexa - His tag . The peptide was puriﬁed by Ni 2 (cid:5) afﬁnity chromatography and used to immunize rabbits . E . coli cells carrying pOPTH - I / LWEQ were induced with 0 . 1 mM IPTG ( isopropyl - (cid:8) - D - thiogalactopyranoside ) for 3 h at37°C ; collected by centrifugation ; resuspended in 20 mM sodium phosphate buffer ( pH 7 . 4 ) containing 0 . 5 M NaCl , 40 mM imidazole , 1 mM Pefabloc ( Roche ) , 1 mM dithiothreitol ( DTT ) , 0 . 05 % ( vol / vol ) Triton X - 100 , and Roche’s protease inhibitors ; and lysed using a French press . The resulting lysate was cleared by centrifugation and loaded onto a 5 - ml HisTrap - FF column . The peptide was eluted using a linear 40 mM to 500 mM imidazole gradient . Appro - priate fractions were pooled , dialyzed against phosphate - buffered saline ( PBS ) , and used to immunize rabbits ( by Davids Biotechnology GmbH , Regensburg , Germany ) . SlaB Western blotting using total protein extracts . The protocol for SlaB Western blotting is a modiﬁcation for A . nidulans of the alkaline lysis extraction procedure used for S . cerevisiae ( 47 ) . Mycelia , cultured under the different growth conditions indicated , were collected by ﬁltration ( or by centrifugation in the case of slaB1 cells cultured on ammonium ) , frozen in dry ice , and lyophilized . Lyophilized cells ( in 2 - ml screw - cap tubes ) were homogenized by using an FP120 Fast Prep cell disruptor and a 0 . 5 - mm ceramic bead , with a 10 - s pulse at a setting of 4 . Carefully weighted aliquots of powdered biomass ( 3 to 5 mg per sample ) were transferred to Eppendorf tubes , and the proteins were solubilized after addition of 1 ml of lysis solution ( 0 . 2 M NaOH and 0 . 2 % [ vol / vol ] (cid:8) - mercapto - ethanol ) per tube . Tubes were vortexed vigorously and maintained on ice for 10 min before proteins were collected by precipitation with 5 % ( vol / vol ) trichloro - acetic acid ( TCA ) followed by centrifugation at 14 , 000 (cid:7) g for 5 min at 4°C . The resulting pellets were resuspended in 1 M Tris base ( 0 . 1 ml ) , mixed with 2 volumes of Laemmli loading buffer , and incubated for 2 min at 100°C . Proteins ( 2 to 5 (cid:2) l of each sample ) were resolved in 10 % SDS - polyacrylamide gels before being electrotransferred to nitrocellulose ﬁlters , which were reacted either with a rabbit polyclonal antibody ( raised against the SlaB 206 C - terminal residues ) ( 1 / 10 , 000 ) or , for loading controls , with mouse antiactin monoclonal antibody ( 1 / 75 , 000 ) ( clone C4 , ICN Biomedicals Inc . ) . Peroxidase - coupled goat anti - rabbit ( Sigma ) antiserum at 1 / 10 , 000 and peroxidase conjugated goat anti - mouse IgG immunoglobulin ( Jackson ) at 1 / 6 , 000 were used as a secondary antibodies , re - spectively . Peroxidase activity was detected with Amersham Biosciences ECL . RESULTS A system to construct conditional mutations of essential genes using the niiA promoter . To manipulate SlaB protein dosage , we chose the well - characterized niiA p ( nitrite reduc - tase ) promoter for several reasons . First , the regulation of this promoter has been thoroughly studied ( 5 – 7 , 36 , 42 ) . The pro - moter is repressible by ammonium , which inactivates the wide - domain positively acting transcription factor AreA , and is in - ducible by nitrate through activation of the pathway - speciﬁc , also positively acting , transcription factor NirA ( 7 , 9 ) . Full expression takes place in the absence of ammonium and the presence of nitrate . Second , both nitrate and ammonium are excellent nitrogen sources for A . nidulans . Third , even in the complete absence of AreA ( possibly a more extreme condition in terms of reducing expression than the complete repression by ammonium ) , expression of niiA p is depressed but still in - ducible ( i . e . , still responds to nitrate ) to a signiﬁcant extent ( 42 ) . However , under repressing and noninducing conditions , niiA p expression is virtually nil ( 42 ) . An niiA p : : slaB cassette containing s laB ﬂanking sequences that was constructed by fusion PCR ( 48 ) , cloned , and entirely sequenced to rule out the presence of mutations was used to replace the resident slaB gene by homologous recombination under expression - permissive conditions ( Fig . 1A ) ( see Materi - als and Methods ) . This slaB allele was denoted slaB1 . On synthetic complete ( SC ) plates , slaB1 strains grew and conidi - ated normally when the medium contained sodium nitrate as an N source , but they were completely unable to grow when ammonium tartrate was used instead ( Fig . 1B ; see also below ) . These data agree with our previous conclusion , based on het - erokaryon rescue , that A . nidulans slaB is essential ( 2 ) . To monitor SlaB levels by Western blotting under different nutrient conditions , we raised a polyclonal antiserum against its 205 - residue C - terminal , actin - interacting I / LWEQ domain ( 32 ) . This antiserum detected SlaB with high speciﬁcity : Fig . 1C shows that in wild - type cells , antibodies react with a protein with the expected M r for SlaB . This band is absent in a strain expressing endogenously tagged SlaB - GFP , where the anti - serum reacts with a lower - mobility band corresponding to the fusion protein . For determining SlaB levels by Western blotting , it is im - portant to note that we used an adaptation for A . nidulans of the alkaline lysis method designed for S . cerevisiae ( 47 ) ( see Materials and Methods ) to obtain total cell extracts . This 1506 HERVA´S - AGUILAR AND PEN˜ALVA E UKARYOT . C ELL on A p r il 26 , 2016 b y g ue s t h tt p : / / e c . a s m . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m method , based on the direct solubilization of the biological material using sodium hydroxide , avoids proteolysis of the an - tigen and does not require removal of cell debris from lysates . Thus , it is ideally suited for accurate estimation of protein levels because it prevents variability due to the loss of a pro - portion of the antigen with insoluble fractions , as happens , for example , with SlaB . In the wild type , using media containing 40 mM ammonium chloride and 10 mM sodium nitrate as fully repressing and inducing conditions for the transgene , respectively , SlaB levels were similar independently of whether the cells had been cul - tured on nitrate or ammonium . In contrast , in the slaB1 mutant SlaB levels were notably higher than in the wild type under inducing conditions and were virtually undetectable under re - pressing conditions ( Fig . 1D ) . These data established the va - lidity of the genetic switch for conditional expression . The terminal phenotype of slaB1 . Microscopic observations conﬁrmed that slaB1 conidia germinated normally on 10 mM nitrate ( Fig . 2A ) . Thus , we determined the terminal pheno - type of slaB1 after germination in medium containing 40 mM NH 4 Cl . Under such conditions , mutant spores broke dormancy , underwent isotropic swelling , and , in most cases , were able to establish polarity , but their germ tubes were abnormally wide and arrested in apical extension shortly after their emergence . Thus , slaB is crucially required at early stages of polarity maintenance . As germinated spores showed an ab - normally large diameter ( the micrographs in Fig . 2A (cid:4) and in Fig . 2B and C are at the same magniﬁcation ) , we concluded that SlaB deﬁciency delays polarity establishment . The most abundant slaB1 morphotype ( see also below ) was a short germ tube resembling a large bud ( Fig . 2C ) , which is remarkably similar to that of slaB (cid:3) germlings originating from conidiospores rescued from heterokaryons ( 2 ) . This and the fact that , as seen with slaB (cid:3) spores , the abnormal slaB1 germ - lings displayed characteristic indentations on their surface ( see also below ) led us to conclude that under restrictive conditions , slaB1 phenotypically resembles the null allele . We conﬁrmed that the “nose - like” structures represent abortive germ tubes and not abnormally swelled conidiospores by using time - lapse microscopy . Frames in Fig . 2D , corre - sponding to Movie S1 in the supplemental material , display the normal pattern of polarity establishment shown by slaB1 conidia germinated on nitrate ( time zero of this sequence corresponds to (cid:1) 4 h of incubation ) . Fig . 2E , corresponding to Movie S2 in the supplemental material ( which should be con - sulted for a better understanding of the phenotype ) , shows several examples of slaB1 conidia that germinated on ammo - nium . The isotropic growth phase is slightly extended ( time zero of this sequence corresponds to (cid:1) 5 h of incubation ) , but , somewhat unexpectedly , the germ tubes that initially emerged were apparently normal . However , after a further 5 h , the growing tips arrested apical extension and grew isotropically . Despite the fact that the basal conidia continued growing iso - tropically for some time , the width of the arrested germ tubes reached the diameter of their corresponding swelled conid - iospores , leading to a characteristic “budding - yeast - like phenotype . ” These experiments additionally revealed that some mutant cells undergo lysis upon prolonged incubation under restrictive conditions ( Fig . 2E , encircled with dotted lines ) , further suggesting that the deﬁciency of SlaB leads to a major morphogenetic defect . Normal apical extension correlates with the degree of slaB function . Even in the complete absence of AreA , niiA p is in - ducible by nitrate ( 42 ) . We predicted that in slaB1 strains , SlaB levels would be detectably higher under repressed and induced conditions ( i . e . , on a mixture of both ammonium and nitrate ) than under repressed conditions ( ammonium only [ AreA is inactive ] ) . Western blotting and microscopy conﬁrmed this prediction . Even in the presence of 10 mM ammonium , addi - tion of 1 or 10 mM nitrate led to substantial synthesis of SlaB ( Fig . 3A , lanes 8 and 9 ) . However , 1 mM nitrate was clearly suboptimal , and 10 mM nitrate did not fully overcome ammo - nium repression ( the latter condition has been described as “depressed” ) ( 42 ) ( Fig . 3A , compare lines 8 and 9 with lane 1 , corresponding to inducing conditions ) . In contrast , nitrate at 1 mM led to full induction when ammonium was replaced by the nonrepressing nitrogen source urea ( Fig . 3A , compare lanes 1 , 4 , 5 , 8 , and 9 ) , conﬁrming the repressing effect of ammonium . Nonrepressing , noninducing conditions , as achieved with 5 mM urea in the absence of nitrate , also led to considerable SlaB synthesis ( Fig . 3A , lane 2 ; compare with fully induced levels shown in lane 1 , 4 , or 5 ) . These data illustrate the versatility of the niiA p driver to achieve different levels of expression . We next exploited the different degrees of induction achiev - able in the presence of ammonium to correlate SlaB levels with normal polarity maintenance . Nearly all slaB1 conidiospores in a sample with n (cid:9) 106 showed wild - type polarity maintenance ( i . e . , led to normal hyphal tips after overnight incubation at 25°C ) when 10 mM ammonium medium was supplemented with 1 mM nitrate ( Fig . 3B ) , conditions under which SlaB synthesis was clearly detectable ( Fig . 3A , lane 8 ) . At below 1 mM nitrate , we could not conﬁdently discriminate relatively minor increments in SlaB levels in our Western blots , but we determined by microscopy that addition of as little as 0 . 1 mM nitrate to ammonium - containing medium sufﬁced for normal polarity maintenance in (cid:10) 60 % of slaB1 nascent tips ( n (cid:9) 44 ) ( Fig . 3B ) . Importantly , the number of typically aberrant cells seen under semirestrictive conditions decreased and the num - ber of normally polarized tips increased as the concentration of nitrate that was mixed with ammonium was increased , strongly indicating that normal polarity maintenance is crucially depen - dent on the availability of a sufﬁcient amount of SlaB . SlaB is required for endocytosis . We next determined that slaB1 cells cultured under restrictive conditions are deﬁcient in endocytosis , using the secretory vesicle SNARE SynA ( 1 , 49 ) as cargo . This integral membrane protein continuously under - goes endocytic recycling ( i . e . , it is secreted to the apical plasma membrane , endocytosed by the subapical endocytic ring , and redelivered from endosomes to the plasma membrane ) , which results in a markedly polarized plasma membrane localiza - tion ( Fig . 4A ) . In the wild type cultured on either ammo - nium or nitrate ( not shown ) and in the slaB1 mutant cul - tured on nitrate , SynA plasma membrane polarization is noticeable shortly after polarity is established ( Fig . 4A and C ) . In contrast , SynA shows no polarization in slaB1 cells cultured on ammonium , despite the fact that the protein localizes ex - clusively to the plasma membrane ( Fig . 4B and D ) , demon - strating that the protein does not undergo normal endocytic V OL . 9 , 2010 ROLE OF A . NIDULANS SlaB 1507 on A p r il 26 , 2016 b y g ue s t h tt p : / / e c . a s m . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m recycling . Because SynA reaches the plasma membrane efﬁ - ciently , the inability of slaB1 cells to maintain polarity cannot be attributed to deﬁcient secretion . SynA is a membrane cargo , and thus its turnover requires endocytosis , sorting into mul - tivesicular endosomes , and delivery from these endosomes to the vacuolar lumen for degradation by vacuolar proteases . In addition to the loss of SynA polarization , mutant cells show markedly elevated levels of plasma membrane ﬂuorescence , FIG . 2 . The terminal phenotype of slaB1 . ( A ) Normal germination of slaB1 spores on 10 mM nitrate medium . The image was taken after overnight incubation at 25°C . ( A (cid:4) ) A magniﬁed region of panel A , where the bar indicates 10 (cid:2) m . ( B ) Abnormal slaB1 germlings observed after overnight incubation on 40 mM NH 4 Cl . The diameter of one abnormally swelled spore that had not established polarity is indicated . Bar , 10 (cid:2) m . ( C ) Example of the “nose - like” morphotype characteristic of cells germinating on ammonium ( at the same magniﬁcation as for panels A (cid:4) and B ) . ( D ) Polarity establishment of slaB1 spores germinating on nitrate . The site of emergence of three germ tubes ( numbered ) is indicated with arrows . Images represent frames of Movie S1 in the supplemental material and are maximal - intensity projections of z - stacks . ( E ) Polarity establishment of slaB1 cells cultured on ammonium . ( This sequence ought to be consulted together with Movie S2 in the supplemental material , from which the different frames were extracted . ) Nascent germ tubes are indicated with black arrows as in panel D . Note that the basal spores continue growing isotropically after establishing polarity and that the relatively normal germ tubes arrest apical extension shortly after their emergence but continue to grow isotropically for some time . However , cells undergo lysis after prolonged incubation . Some examples of cells that undergo lysis are highlighted with white dotted circles , and the time of lysis is indicated by changing their corresponding arrows and numbering from black to white . Images are maximal - intensity projections of z - stacks . Panels D and E are shown at the same magniﬁcation . 1508 HERVA´S - AGUILAR AND PEN˜ALVA E UKARYOT . C ELL on A p r il 26 , 2016 b y g ue s t h tt p : / / e c . a s m . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m indicating that the turnover of SynA also is essentially blocked . Thus , slaB1 prevents both the endocytic recycling and the endocytic downregulation of SynA , as expected from the piv - otal role that SlaB plays in the endocytic internalization step . In contrast , the vacuolar membrane localization of the Pep12 t - SNARE , which does not need endocytosis because it travels to the vacuole from endosomes without reaching the plasma membrane , is unaffected ( Fig . 4F , G , and H ) . Thus , the virtu - ally complete absence of SlaB prevents endocytosis . GFP - SynA labeling revealed that the plasma membrane was utterly deformed in these cells that were almost completely deﬁcient in SlaB , which presented deep irregular invaginations of the plasma membrane that could be better resolved by confocal microscopy ( Fig . 4E shows a single section , but see Movie S3 in the supplemental material , showing tubular struc - tures across the different sections , to appreciate the large size of these invaginations ) . These invaginations almost certainly account for the characteristic fenestrated aspect of the cell surface seen in Nomarski images of cells lacking SlaB ( refer - ence 2 and this work ) . In S . cerevisiae , Sla2p regulates actin polymerization during internalization of the endocytic vesicle , perhaps by preventing excessive Arp2 / 3 - dependent polymer - ization of actin at endocytic sites ( 26 ) . The primary endocytic pits in yeast are tubular invaginations of up to 180 nm in depth ( 24 ) , and thus it is tempting to speculate that the nearly complete deﬁcit of SlaB results in excessive polymer - ization of F - actin , leading to hypertrophy of equivalent A . nidulans endocytic invaginations . It has also been reported that an S . cerevisiae mutant with a myo5 missense mutation leading to defective ﬂuid - phase endocytosis shows a large number of deep invaginations of the plasma membrane ( 25 ) . Major disturbance of F - actin by SlaB deﬁciency . We next addressed the effects of downregulating SlaB on the organiza - tion of F - actin at endocytic sites , using AbpA as a reporter ( AbpA does not label actin cables ) . As in the wild type ( 2 ) , AbpA is seen in cortical patches in slaB1 germlings cultured under inducing conditions ( Fig . 5A ) . In contrast , when slaB1 cells were cultured under repressing conditions , the reporter weakly labeled a peripheral mesh but largely predominated in strongly ﬂuorescent aggregates ( Fig . 5B and D ; see Movie S4 in the supplemental material , showing a three - dimensional [ 3D ] reconstruction ) . Large AbpA clusters often formed rod - like structures ( Fig . 5C ) , somewhat resembling S . cerevisiae “com - ets” seen with Abp1 in sla2 (cid:3) cells ( 26 ) . However , S . cerevisiae comets are very abundant and originate at the cortex , whereas AbpA aggregates are usually one , at most two , per germling and are not associated with the cortex . Confocal imaging re - vealed that in some examples these AbpA aggregates look like fenestrated structures ( Fig . 5E ) . As noted above , Sla2 / HipR proteins coordinate actin polymerization with the endocytic machinery ( 13 , 26 ) . Sla2p possibly inhibits cortical Arp2 / Arp3 - dependent F - actin assembly ( 22 ) . Thus , unrestrained F - actin polymerization plausibly underlies the formation of these large AbpA aggregates . Reversibility of the effects of slaB1 . We carried out medium shift experiments to demonstrate reversibility . slaB1 spores were cultured on ammonium , and the resulting cells arrested in apical extension were shifted to medium containing 10 mM nitrate . If the time of the initial incubation on ammonium was extended beyond 14 h , only a minor proportion of the popu - lation of abnormal germlings gave rise to normal germ tubes after the shift to nitrate . Among 35 randomly photographed examples of these new germ tubes , 34 % showed slight mor - phological abnormalities without marked SynA polarization . These ﬁndings almost certainly reﬂect the fact that abnormal slaB1 cells progressively lose viability upon incubation on am - monium ( see above [ Fig . 2 ] ) . Indeed , if the length of the initial incubation period on ammonium was reduced to 10 h , virtually every abnormal slaB1 germling gave rise to one or more mor - phologically normal polarity axes after 6 to 8 h from the shift to nitrate ( Fig . 6 ) . In each and every case these normal hyphae showed wild - type GFP - SynA polarization ( Fig . 6 ) , indicating that normal apical extension correlates with re - sumption of SynA endocytosis . GFP - SynA ﬂuorescence in the plasma membranes of the normal tips “induced” by nitrate was markedly weaker than that in their “mother” cells that had germinated under restrictive conditions ( data not shown ) , in agreement with the contention that the “emerging” normal tip cells had reassumed the endocytic turnover of the v - SNARE . The “new” normal - polarity axes induced by nitrate were never seen in control cells incubated on ammonium and shifted to ammonium ( data not shown ) , demonstrating that these emerging hyphae reﬂect resumption of normal polarity main - tenance / SynA endocytic recycling when SlaB synthesis is re - stored by nitrate . SlaB is crucially involved in polarity maintenance in hy - phae . The experiments described above demonstrated that SlaB is required for apical extension shortly after polarity es - tablishment and showed that the proportion of tips undergoing FIG . 3 . Correlation between normal polarity maintenance and SlaB levels . ( A ) Western blots of cells cultured on the indicated nitro - gen sources . Actin was used as loading control . ( B ) Proportions of abnormal ( “nose - like” ) germlings and normal hyphal tips derived from spores germinated and cultured overnight at 25°C in WMM containing 10 mM NH 4 (cid:5) and the indicated concentrations of nitrate . Black and gray bars indicate abnormal germlings and normal tips , respectively . V OL . 9 , 2010 ROLE OF A . NIDULANS SlaB 1509 on A p r il 26 , 2016 b y g ue s t h tt p : / / e c . a s m . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m normal apical extension appears to correlate with SlaB levels . These data would be consistent with two possible scenarios : ( i ) SlaB is exclusively required during an “early” stage of polarity maintenance but becomes dispensable after this stage , once the tip growth apparatus is set in place ( see Discussion for more rationale ) , or ( ii ) SlaB is also required for polarity main - tenance in hyphae . To address its involvement in maintaining polarity once germlings progress beyond the emergence of the germ tube , we used nitrate conditions ( 0 . 1 mM nitrate ) per - mitting SlaB synthesis during the ﬁrst 10 to 12 h of slaB1 spore germination and subsequently shut off the promoter by shifting these cells to high - ammonium conditions . The terminal phe - notype of these cells was determined after an additional over - night incubation . We set up controls in which slaB1 cells ger - minated on 0 . 1 mM nitrate were shifted to nitrate medium . These cells gave rise to hyphae with normal ( i . e . , wild - type ) tips and GFP - SynA polarization ( Fig . 7A ) . In contrast , microscopic analysis of the population of cells shifted from nitrate to am - monium led to the following conclusions . First and most im - portant , cells undergoing this regimen grew and maintained polarity far beyond the “bud - like” stage at which control cells that had germinated on ammonium arrested , in agreement with the conclusion that SlaB is required during the early stages of polarity maintenance ( Fig . 7B [ two cells showing the FIG . 4 . Abolishment of SynA endocytic recycling by SlaB downregulation . ( A ) slaB1 hyphae on nitrate , showing normal , polarized plasma membrane localization of SynA . ( B ) A general view of slaB1 cells after overnight incubation on ammonium at 25°C . ( C ) slaB1 germling cultured on nitrate for 9 h , showing that SynA polarization is already conspicuous at this early stage of polarity maintenance . ( D ) slaB1 cell cultured overnight on ammonium . SynA is not polarized , and the SynA - GFP - labeled plasma membrane is rufﬂed . Panels C and D are at the same magniﬁcation . ( E ) Confocal image of SynA - GFP ( inverted contrast ) showing the large cavities that are formed when slaB1 cells are cultured on ammonium . This plane is a frame of Movie S3 in the supplemental material , which should be consulted to fully appreciate the size of these cavities . ( F ) slaB1 germling expressing GFP - Pep12 , cultured on nitrate . GFP - Pep12 localizes to the vacuolar membrane and endosomes . ( G ) slaB1 germling expressing GFP - Pep12 , cultured on ammonium . GFP - Pep12 localizes to the vacuolar membrane as on nitrate , but the abnormal cells show enlarged vacuoles . ( H ) Another example of a slaB1 germling expressing GFP - Pep12 that had been cultured on ammonium . It shows extensive vacuolization . 1510 HERVA´S - AGUILAR AND PEN˜ALVA E UKARYOT . C ELL on A p r il 26 , 2016 b y g ue s t h tt p : / / e c . a s m . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m “early” polarity - arrested phenotype that possibly germinated after shutting off the promoter are circled for comparison ] ) . Figure 7B also shows that the predominating morphotype con - sists of hyperbranched hyphae showing abnormally wide diam - eters . The large majority of the primary and secondary tips in these abnormal hyphae were bulged , and , very frequently , hy - phal tubes had a “rufﬂed” aspect near the tips , with abundant small heaps poking up that appear to represent abortive events of subapical branching ( Fig . 7C ) , such that some tips showed a characteristic “deer antler” shape ( Fig . 7D ) . Thus , these ex - periments strongly support the contention that SlaB is crucially required for polarity maintenance also in hyphae . Abnormal ( shifted - to - ammonium ) hyphae also showed a completely uni - form distribution of GFP - SynA across their whole length ( Fig . 7B to D ) and contained accumulations of GFP - SynA corre - sponding to large invaginations of the plasma membrane re - sembling those seen in cells directly germinated on ammonium ( see above ) . Both the lack of SynA polarization and these accumulations were also seen even in those hyphae that , al - though still showing abnormal subapical branching and a cer - tain degree of tip swelling , were more normal morphologically ( Fig . 7E ) . Thus , we concluded that in cells shifted to ammo - nium SlaB had been downregulated to a level insufﬁcient to support normal endocytosis and thus that deﬁcient apical ex - tension correlates with deﬁcient endocytosis . F - actin phenotype in slaB1 hyphae shifted to repressing conditions . Some of morphological abnormalities described above somewhat resembled the effects of misregulating F - actin at the A . nidulans tip region ( 53 ) . As noted above , abnormal germlings germinated on ammonium ( and therefore almost totally devoid of SlaB ) frequently show “chunks” of actin / AbpA . Thus , we observed by epiﬂuorescence microscopy slaB1 cells expressing AbpA - mRFP that had been subjected to the medium shift ( i . e . , nitrate - to - ammonium ) protocol described above . In control experiments in which slaB1 cells germinated on nitrate were shifted to nitrate , hyphae were morphologically normal and AbpA - mRFP patches were polarized at the tip region ( Fig . 8A ) ( 2 ) . In marked contrast , slaB1 AbpA - mRFP cells germinated for 12 h on nitrate medium and subsequently shifted to ammonium medium closely resembled their slaB1 GFP - SynA counterparts subjected to the same nutritional re - gime in their hyperbranching and in that they also showed abnormally wide germ tubes and swollen tips ( Fig . 8B to E ) . This indicates that these strong morphological phenotypes can - not be attributed to the ﬂuorescent reporters . In some swollen tips , slaB1 AbpA - mRFP patches , although often obscured by strongly ﬂuorescent AbpA clumps ( see below ) , were abnor - mally numerous ( Fig . 8B ) . Abnormally abundant AbpA - mRFP patches are also noticeable in A . oryzae hyphae downregulated for SlaB End4 ( 20 ) . However , the most noticeable aspect of the AbpA - mRFP distribution in these cells is the presence of bright clumps of AbpA - mRFP ( Fig . 8C to E ) . These clumps were often associated with abnormal tips ( Fig . 8D and E ) but could be found elsewhere across the hyphal germ tube and in FIG . 5 . SlaB downregulation results in formation of large AbpA clumps . ( A ) Wide - ﬁeld epiﬂuorescence and differential interference contrast ( DIC ) images of slaB1 germlings cultured on nitrate . ( B ) Wide - ﬁeld images of slaB1 cells cultured on ammonium . ( C ) Confocal images showing a long AbpA - mRFP rod extending from a basal conidiospore into an abnormal germ tube of a slaB1 cell cultured on ammonium . ( D ) Stereopair image extracted from a 3D reconstruction ( see Movie S4 in the supplemental material ) of an mRFP channel confocal z - stack ( inverted contrast ) , displaying a group of slaB1 cells cultured on ammonium . ( E ) Confocal images showing examples of fenestrated structures seen with AbpA - mRFP in slaB1 cells cultured on ammonium . Left , merge of the DIC and mRFP channels . Right , enlarged section of the mRFP image shown in inverted contrast . V OL . 9 , 2010 ROLE OF A . NIDULANS SlaB 1511 on A p r il 26 , 2016 b y g ue s t h tt p : / / e c . a s m . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m the bases of swollen tips of branches ( Fig . 8C ) . These clumps of AbpA have not been observed in A . oryzae , perhaps because our repressed slaB1 allele is able to downregulate protein levels to a greater extent than the thiA promoter - based system used with A . oryzae ( 20 ) . In any case , our data above show that the nearly complete deﬁciency of SlaB leads to an important major disturbance of the actin cytoskeleton . As F - actin is required for apical extension , one possible explanation for the polarity defect of downregulated slaB1 tip cells would be that key F - actin regulators are sequestered in the actin clumps . To gain insight into this possibility , we used latrunculin B ( latB ) , a drug which prevents polymerization of actin monomers ( 34 ) . In previous work we showed that 100 (cid:2) M latB disassembles endocytic patches and prevents apical extension ( 2 , 40 , 49 ) . At 10 to 25 (cid:2) M , latB impairs growth but , under SlaB - sufﬁcient ( nitrate ) conditions , does not preclude the formation of hyphae ( Fig . 9B ) . As expected , these hyphae showed polarity maintenance defects , with bulged and often dichotomous tips ( Fig . 9B ) . They also showed prominent actin patches , demonstrating that actin polymerization is not fully prevented under these conditions , although at 25 (cid:2) M these patches were fully depolarized ( compare Fig . 9A and B ) . No - tably , incubation in the presence of latB led to a marked increase in hyphal tube width , leading to “giant” cells ( Fig . 9A and B are shown at the same magniﬁcation ; panels a2 in Fig . 9A and b2 in Fig . 9B are also equally enlarged ) . We next used latB in slaB1 cells downregulated by ammo - nium . In agreement with the mechanism of latB action , the drug markedly decreased the formation of actin clumps ( Fig . 9D ) such that , at 25 (cid:2) M , these were either absent or markedly less prominent in a major proportion of the tips ( Fig . 9D , panel d1 ) . These SlaB - downregulated and latB - treated cells also showed a very notable increase in the proportion of cortical actin patches , apparently at the expense of actin “clumps” ( compare Fig . 9C and D ) . In this hyperabundance of actin patches , these cells resemble S . cerevisiae sla2 (cid:3) mutants ( 22 ) . SlaB downregulation and latB treatment showed additivity , resulting in an stronger effect on the morphology of the tips than either alone ( Fig . 9D ) . For example , many tips formed large bubbles densely populated by cortical actin patches ( Fig . FIG . 6 . Reversibility of the polarity maintenance - arrested phenotype resulting from SlaB downregulation . ( Top ) Nomarski and epiﬂuorescence image of an abnormal GFP - SynA germling cultured on ammonium medium for 10 h . ( Bottom ) Wide - ﬁeld epiﬂuorescence images of GFP - SynA and the corresponding Nomarski ( DIC ) image of slaB1 cells cultured on ammonium for 10 h and shifted to nitrate conditions for an additional 8 - h period . The image shows several morphologically normal tips emerging from “mother” cells and the inverted contrast epiﬂuorescence images of the indicated areas demonstrating normal GFP - SynA polarization . 1512 HERVA´S - AGUILAR AND PEN˜ALVA E UKARYOT . C ELL on A p r il 26 , 2016 b y g ue s t h tt p : / / e c . a s m . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m FIG . 7 . Medium shift experiments showing that SlaB is required for polarity maintenance and endocytosis in hyphae . ( A ) Nomarski and epiﬂuorescence ( in inverted contrast ) images of a slaB1 hyphal tip cell expressing GFP - SynA , germinated for 10 h on 0 . 1 mM nitrate medium and shifted to the same medium for additional incubation . Note the normal hyphal polarization of GFP - SynA correlating with normal hyphal morphology . ( B ) Large epiﬂuorescence microscopy ﬁeld ( GFP channel , inverted contrast ) of slaB1 cells that had been germinated on nitrate medium before being shifted to ammonium medium . Note the abnormal branching and morphology of the hyphae and the abnormally swollen hyphal tips . The two cells circled in blue represent two spores that appeared to be in an early stage of germination when the culture was shifted to repressing conditions ( note that germination is not synchronous ) . ( C ) Enlarged details of slaB1 tips ( GFP - SynA ﬂuorescence , inverted channel ) corresponding to cells germinated on nitrate medium and shifted to ammonium conditions . Note the abnormally swollen tips , the GFP - SynA accumu - lations , and the “rufﬂed” aspect of the hyphal tubes . ( D ) Enlarged slaB1 tip ( Nomarski and GFP - SynA ﬂuorescence channels ) from a culture germinated on nitrate medium and shifted to ammonium conditions . Note the emergence of subapical , consecutive , and seemingly abortive branch primordia and the plasma membrane invaginations seen with GFP - SynA when endocytosis is deﬁcient . ( E ) A hyphal tip ( Nomarski and GFP - SynA ﬂuorescence channels ) from a culture germinated on nitrate medium and shifted to ammonium conditions . Note the swollen tip , the abnormal occurrence of a branch in a hyphal tip compartment , and the presence of two plasma membrane invaginations near the base of this branch . 1513 on A p r il 26 , 2016 b y g ue s t h tt p : / / e c . a s m . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m 9D , panels d2 and d3 ) . These “bubbles” were never seen in cells treated with latB only or shifted to ammonia only . As expected , tip bubbles do not internalize GFP - SynA ( Fig . 9D , panel d4 ) . Thus , the ﬁnding that latB interferes with the for - mation of actin clumps without reverting the polarity defects resulting from SlaB downregulation would support the view that the endocytic defect itself rather than the sequestering of actin regulators in actin clumps is responsible for the morpho - logical abnormalities . However , these experiments should be interpreted with caution , as the additive effect of the two treat - ments could reﬂect that either alone leads to a deﬁcit of actin monomers which would be worsened by their combination , thereby preventing apical extension . In any case , the ﬁnding that latB prevents the formation of actin clumps in SlaB - deﬁcient cells supports the view that Sla2 / SlaB restrains excessive actin polymerization at endocytic patches ( 26 ) . Unexpectedly , time - lapse imaging of patches in SlaB - deﬁcient tips treated with latB ( Fig . 9D , panel d3 ; see Movie S5 in the supplemental material ) revealed that AbpA forms comet - like structures resembling those observed in S . cerevisiae sla2 (cid:3) mutants ( 26 ) . Like their yeast counterparts , AbpA comet - like structures are attached to the cortex in one end , with the other waving in the cytoplasm ( see Movie S5 in the supplemental material ) . These comet - like structures pre - sumably result from the uncoupling of actin polymerization and vesicle formation at endocytic sites ( 26 ) . It is tempting to FIG . 8 . Disturbance of the actin cytoskeleton in slaB1 hyphae germinated on nitrate and shifted to repressing conditions . ( A ) Nomarski and epiﬂuorescence ( in inverted contrast ) images of a slaB1 hyphal tip cell expressing AbpA - mRFP that had been germinated for 12 h on nitrate medium before being shifted to the same medium for additional incubation . ( B ) A nascent branch showing bright accumulations of AbpA - mRFP ( inverted contrast ) and numerous less ﬂuorescent AbpA - mRFP patches . ( C ) Abnormal branches in a hyphal region distant from the tip . Clumps of AbpA - mRFP ( inverted contrast ) are indicated by arrows . ( D ) Dichotomous tip with a large accretion of AbpA - mRFP . ( E ) Large ﬁeld showing the general disruption of the actin cytoskeleton as seen with AbpA - mRFP . AbpA - mRFP clumps associated with tips are indicated by arrows . 1514 HERVA´S - AGUILAR AND PEN˜ALVA E UKARYOT . C ELL on A p r il 26 , 2016 b y g ue s t h tt p : / / e c . a s m . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m FIG . 9 . Effect of sublethal latrunculin B treatment in cells downregulated for SlaB . ( A ) Nomarski and epiﬂuorescence ( in inverted contrast ) images of a slaB1 hyphal tip cell expressing AbpA - mRFP cultured for 10 h on 10 mM nitrate medium and shifted to the same medium for an additional 13 to 14 h of incubation . The inset in panel a2 was enlarged at double magniﬁcation to show the endocytic internalization collar . ( B ) Examples of slaB1 cells cultured for 10 h on 10 mM nitrate medium and shifted to the same medium containing 25 (cid:2) M latrunculin B . b1 , a V OL . 9 , 2010 ROLE OF A . NIDULANS SlaB 1515 on A p r il 26 , 2016 b y g ue s t h tt p : / / e c . a s m . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m speculate that in latB - untreated cells , actin clumps rather than comets are formed when SlaB is downregulated due to the high local levels of unrestrained actin polymerization associated with the A . nidulans hyphal tip , which is densely populated by endocytic patches . DISCUSSION For A . nidulans and Ustilago maydis , evidence strongly sug - gests that endocytosis is intimately associated with hyphal tip growth ( 2 , 30 , 45 , 46 , 49 , 51 ) . However , the actual contribution of endocytosis to apical extension remains to be clariﬁed . A combination of localized apical delivery coupled to slow diffusion and rapid endocytic recycling sufﬁces to generate polarity ( 31 , 49 , 52 , 54 ) . Thus , one attractive although hypo - thetical possibility is that A . nidulans uses endocytosis to main - tain the dynamic localization of a membrane polarity land - mark ( s ) ( 51 ) . One plausible candidate would be A . nidulans Cdc42 ( 31 ) . Although A . nidulans Cdc42 is dispensable for polarity maintenance because its roles may be partially redun - dant with those of Rac1 ( a Rac1 orthologue is absent in S . cerevisiae ) , Cdc42 misregulation leads to polarity establishment and maintenance defects ( 53 ) . Cells cultured on ammonium and thus deﬁcient for SlaB can establish polarity and arrest shortly after germ tube emer - gence . Although these cells still contain minute levels of SlaB , this phenotype resembles the null phenotype ( 2 ) . It is impor - tant to note that a homozygous null sla2 mutant of the dimor - phic fungus Candida albicans , which can grow as yeast , cannot form hyphae ( 3 ) . Thus , that report and our data strongly indi - cate that slaB / SLA2 is important for apical extension during hyphal morphogenesis . The very strong , depolarized GFP - SynA plasma membrane ﬂuorescence seen in slaB1 cells germinated on ammonium demonstrates that they are fully deﬁcient in endocytosis and , in passing , that SlaB is not required for trafﬁc from the Golgi apparatus to the plasma membrane . It is not required for biosynthetic trafﬁc from the Golgi apparatus to the endosomal system either , as the endosomal t - SNARE Pep12 also reaches its normal locale at the vacuolar membrane under repressing conditions . This is an important control because in mammals Hip1R is involved in the trafﬁc of Golgi - derived vesicles bound to the endosomal system ( 10 ) . Shift - up experiments demon - strated that the endocytic and polarity maintenance pheno - types are fully reversible and that normal hyphal tip morphol - ogy essentially correlates with recovery of SynA turnover . Markedly slower apical extension of germlings compared to hyphae indicates that these two “cell types” differ substantially ( 23 ) . The fact that germlings can establish and maintain po - larity in the absence of microtubules ( MTs ) ( 38 ) suggests that transport of secretory materials to their growing tips is medi - ated by actin microﬁlaments . We thus considered the possibil - ity that the failure of slaB1 germlings to maintain polarity could involve a “general” role of SlaB in F - actin regulation . If secretion coupled to endocytic recycling were required to cre - ate and maintain an apical domain containing , for example , the actin microﬁlament organizer Cdc42 , short germlings could be more crucially dependent on an actin regulatory function of SlaB for maintaining polarity than hyphae , because secretory vesicle transport would be less dependent on the actin cy - toskeleton in the latter , where the MT cytoskeleton has been set in place . However , shift - down experiments showed that this is not the case , as SlaB is required for normal apical extension even when hyphal tips have progressed well beyond germlings . SlaB downregulation in hyphae results in hyperbranching and formation of markedly swelled , abnormal hyphal tips . The complete absence of SynA polarization and the strong labeling of the plasma membrane observed across the whole length of these hyphae is indicative of deﬁcient endocytosis . Therefore , correlation between normal hyphal tip growth and efﬁcient endocytosis appears to indicate strongly that the latter plays an important role in polarity maintenance . However , although this conclusion appears to be ﬁrmly es - tablished , it should be taken with some caution . Thus far , genetic evidence supporting the role of endocytosis in hyphal tip growth is based on the inactivation of endocytic genes with F - actin regulation capabilities . Abnormal germlings that had been cultured on ammonium contain large aggregates of F - actin , visualized with ﬂuorescently tagged AbpA . Similar F - actin accumulations were eventually observed near the hyphal tips and branches of hyphae that showed typical polarity de - fects upon SlaB downregulation . Thus , although this and work with A . oryzae ( 20 ) unequivocally establish that SlaB Sla2 is required for endocytosis , we cannot formally rule out that in addition to endocytosis , F - actin misregulation also contributes to the polarity maintenance defects displayed by slaB1 cells . S . cerevisiae Sla2p ( 26 , 55 ) , which is essential for endocytosis , is thought to inhibit Arp2 / 3 - mediated F - actin polymerization driving actin patch internalization until a signal releases its inhibitory effect ( 26 ) , in agreement with the ﬁnding that the Sla2p mammalian orthologue Hip1R , in complex with cortac - tin , prevents actin ﬁlament “barbed end elongation” ( 29 ) . Thus , unrestrained actin polymerization due to the absence of SlaB may have consequences beyond endocytosis . For exam - ple , S . cerevisiae sla2 mutations suppress the hyperabundance of actin cables resulting from a formin - deregulated mutant , possibly by depleting actin monomers ( 56 ) . Hyphae downregu - lated for SlaB contain numerous septae ( see Fig . S1 in the supplemental material ) , and 38 out of 88 abnormal germlings directly germinated on ammonium presented a basal septum , which argues strongly against actin monomer deﬁciency being large ﬁeld ; b2 , the inset was enlarged at double magniﬁcation to facilitate direct comparison with a2 ; b3 , a branch near the tip ; b4 , a dichotomous tip . ( C ) Examples of slaB1 cells cultured for 10 h on 10 mM nitrate medium and shifted to ammonium medium without latrunculin B . c1 , a hypha which had undergone multiple branching events ; c2 , a hyphal tip cell with characteristic “deer antler” morphology . ( D ) Examples of slaB1 cells cultured for 10 h on 10 mM nitrate medium and shifted to ammonium medium containing 25 (cid:2) M latrunculin B . Cells were expressing either AbpA - mRFP or GFP - SynA , as indicated . d1 , a large cell ; d2 , examples of globular tips ; d3 , middle plane of a globular tip showing cortical comet - like structures of AbpA - mRFP , corresponding to Movie S5 in the supplemental material ; d4 , globular tip showing the plasma membrane localization of SynA . In all panels , scale bars indicate 10 (cid:2) m . 1516 HERVA´S - AGUILAR AND PEN˜ALVA E UKARYOT . C ELL on A p r il 26 , 2016 b y g ue s t h tt p : / / e c . a s m . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m the underlying cause of the defective polarity maintenance ( septation is F - actin dependent ) . However , we cannot rule out the possibility that actin / AbpA clumps titrate a key actin - reg - ulatory factor which is required to organize actin microﬁla - ments elsewhere ( for example , in the Spitzenko¨rper ) . Abortive SlaB - deﬁcient germlings display very large and deep invaginations of the plasma membrane . It is tempting to speculate that the absence of SlaB leads to excessive F - actin polymerization in association with endocytic patches , thus driv - ing these deep invaginations of the plasma membrane . If this is true , these large structures would be ideally suited to gain insight into the ordered pathway leading to endocytic vesicle internalization ( 27 ) , using immunoelectron microscopy ( 24 ) . Finally , our method to generate conditional expression al - leles should be of general applicability to investigate the func - tions of essential A . nidulans genes . Our system has , we believe , signiﬁcant technical advantages over those already in use , in - cluding a very low level of expression under repressing condi - tions , the possibility of ﬁne - tuning the levels of synthesis , and , importantly , the fact that both the physiological inducer and the repressor are favorable nitrogen sources . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This work was supported by grants MCIN BIO2009 - 07281 and Co - munidad de Madrid SAL / 0246 / 2006 to M . A . P . We thank Elena Reoyo for technical assistance , Joseph Strauss for advice on the regulation of the promoter , and Herb Arst for critically reading the manuscript . REFERENCES 1 . Abenza , J . F . , A . Pantazopoulou , J . M . Rodríguez , A . Galindo , and M . A . Pen˜alva . 2009 . Long - distance movement of Aspergillus nidulans early endo - somes on microtubule tracks . Trafﬁc 10 : 57 – 75 . 2 . Araujo - Baza´n , L . , M . A . Pen˜alva , and E . A . Espeso . 2008 . Preferential lo - calization of the endocytic internalization machinery to hyphal tips underlies polarization of the actin cytoskeleton in Aspergillus nidulans . Mol . Microbiol . 67 : 891 – 905 . 3 . Asleson , C . M . , E . S . Bensen , C . A . Gale , A . S . Melms , C . Kurischko , and J . Berman . 2001 . Candida albicans INT1 - induced ﬁlamentation in Saccharomy - ces cerevisiae depends on Sla2p . Mol . Cell . Biol . 21 : 1272 – 1284 . 4 . Berepiki , A . , A . Lichius , J . Y . Shoji , J . Tilsner , and N . D . Read . 2010 . F - actin dynamics in Neurospora crassa . Eukaryot . Cell 9 : 547 – 557 . 5 . Berger , H . , A . Basheer , S . Bock , Y . Reyes - Dominguez , T . Dalik , F . Altmann , and J . Strauss . 2008 . Dissecting individual steps of nitrogen transcription factor cooperation in the Aspergillus nidulans nitrate cluster . Mol . Microbiol . 69 : 1385 – 1398 . 6 . Berger , H . , R . Pachlinger , I . Morozov , S . Goller , F . Narendja , M . Caddick , and J . Strauss . 2006 . The GATA factor AreA regulates localization and in vivo binding site occupancy of the nitrate activator NirA . Mol . Microbiol . 59 : 433 – 446 . 7 . Bernreiter , A . , A . Ramo´n , J . Fernandez - Martinez , H . Berger , L . Araujo - Baza´n , E . A . Espeso , R . Pachlinger , A . Gallmetzer , I . Anderl , C . Scazzocchio , and J . Strauss . 2007 . Nuclear export of the transcription factor NirA is a regulatory checkpoint for nitrate induction in Aspergillus nidulans . Mol . Cell . Biol . 27 : 791 – 802 . 8 . Breakspear , A . , K . J . Langford , M . Momany , and S . J . Assinder . 2007 . CopA : GFP localizes to putative Golgi equivalents in Aspergillus nidulans . FEMS Microbiol . Lett . 277 : 90 – 97 . 9 . Burger , G . , J . Strauss , C . Scazzocchio , and B . F . Lang . 1991 . nirA , the pathway - speciﬁc regulatory gene of nitrate assimilation in Aspergillus nidu - lans , encodes a putative GAL4 - type zinc ﬁnger protein and contains four introns in highly conserved positions . Mol . Cell . Biol . 11 : 5746 – 5755 . 10 . Carreno , S . , A . E . Engqvist - Goldstein , C . X . Zhang , K . L . McDonald , and D . G . Drubin . 2004 . Actin dynamics coupled to clathrin - coated vesicle for - mation at the trans - Golgi network . J . Cell Biol . 165 : 781 – 788 . 11 . Clutterbuck , A . J . 1993 . Aspergillus nidulans , p . 3 . 71 – 3 . 84 . In S . J . O’Brien ( ed . ) , Genetic maps . Locus maps of complex genomes , vol . 3 . Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press , Cold Spring Harbor , NY . 12 . Costa , R . , D . T . Warren , and K . R . Ayscough . 2005 . Lsb5p interacts with actin regulators Sla1p and Las17p , ubiquitin and Arf3p to couple actin dynamics to membrane trafﬁcking processes . Biochem . J . 387 : 649 – 658 . 13 . Engqvist - Goldstein , A . E . , C . X . Zhang , S . Carreno , C . Barroso , J . E . Heuser , and D . G . Drubin . 2004 . RNAi - mediated Hip1R silencing results in stable association between the endocytic machinery and the actin assembly ma - chinery . Mol . Biol . Cell 15 : 1666 – 1679 . 14 . Harispe , L . , C . Portela , C . Scazzocchio , M . A . Pen˜alva , and L . Gorﬁnkiel . 2008 . Ras GAP regulation of actin cytoskeleton and hyphal polarity in Aspergillus nidulans . Eukaryot . Cell 7 : 141 – 153 . 15 . Harris , S . D . 2006 . Cell polarity in ﬁlamentous fungi : shaping the mold . Int . Rev . Cytol . 251 : 41 – 77 . 16 . Harris , S . D . , and M . Momany . 2004 . Polarity in ﬁlamentous fungi : moving beyond the yeast paradigm . Fungal Genet . Biol . 41 : 391 – 400 . 17 . Harris , S . D . , J . L . Morrell , and J . E . Hamer . 1994 . Identiﬁcation and characterization of Aspergillus nidulans mutants defective in cytokinesis . Ge - netics 136 : 517 – 532 . 18 . Harris , S . D . , N . D . Read , R . W . Roberson , B . Shaw , S . Seiler , M . Plamann , and M . Momany . 2005 . Polarisome meets Spitzenkorper : microscopy , genet - ics , and genomics converge . Eukaryot . Cell 4 : 225 – 229 . 19 . Herva´s - Aguilar , A . , O . Rodríguez - Galan , A . Galindo , J . F . Abenza , H . N . Arst , Jr . , and M . A . Pen˜alva . 2010 . Characterization of Aspergillus nidulans DidB Did2 , a non - essential component of the multivesicular body pathway . Fungal Genet . Biol . 47 : 636 – 646 . 20 . Higuchi , Y . , J . Y . Shoji , M . Arioka , and K . Kitamoto . 2009 . Endocytosis is crucial for cell polarity and apical membrane recycling in the ﬁlamentous fungus Aspergillus oryzae . Eukaryot . Cell 8 : 37 – 46 . 21 . Hohmann - Marriott , M . F . , M . Uchida , A . M . van de Meene , M . Garret , B . E . Hjelm , S . Kokoori , and R . W . Roberson . 2006 . Application of electron tomography to fungal ultrastructure studies . New Phytol . 172 : 208 – 220 . 22 . Holtzman , D . A . , S . Yang , and D . G . Drubin . 1993 . Synthetic - lethal interac - tions identify two novel genes , SLA1 and SLA2 , that control membrane cytoskeleton assembly in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . J . Cell Biol . 122 : 635 – 644 . 23 . Horio , T . , and B . R . Oakley . 2005 . The role of microtubules in rapid hyphal tip growth of Aspergillus nidulans . Mol . Biol . Cell 16 : 918 – 926 . 24 . Idrissi , F . Z . , H . Grotsch , I . M . Fernandez - Golbano , C . Presciatto - Baschong , H . Riezman , and M . I . Geli . 2008 . Distinct acto / myosin - I structures associate with endocytic proﬁles at the plasma membrane . J . Cell Biol . 180 : 1219 – 1232 . 25 . Jonsdottir , G . A . , and R . Li . 2004 . Dynamics of yeast myosin I : evidence for a possible role in scission of endocytic vesicles . Curr . Biol . 14 : 1604 – 1609 . 26 . Kaksonen , M . , Y . Sun , and D . G . Drubin . 2003 . A pathway for association of receptors , adaptors , and actin during endocytic internalization . Cell 115 : 475 – 487 . 27 . Kaksonen , M . , C . P . Toret , and D . G . Drubin . 2005 . A modular design for the clathrin - and actin - mediated endocytosis machinery . Cell 123 : 305 – 320 . 28 . Lambert , A . A . , M . P . Perron , E . Lavoie , and D . Pallotta . 2007 . The Saccha - romyces cerevisiae Arf3 protein is involved in actin cable and cortical patch formation . FEMS Yeast Res . 7 : 782 – 795 . 29 . Le Clainche , C . , B . S . Pauly , C . X . Zhang , A . E . Engqvist - Goldstein , K . Cunningham , and D . G . Drubin . 2007 . A Hip1R - cortactin complex nega - tively regulates actin assembly associated with endocytosis . EMBO J . 26 : 1199 – 1210 . 30 . Lee , S . C . , S . N . Schmidtke , L . J . Dangott , and B . D . Shaw . 2008 . Aspergillus nidulans ArfB plays a role in endocytosis and polarized growth . Eukaryot . Cell 7 : 1278 – 1288 . 31 . Marco , E . , R . Wedlich - Soldner , R . Li , S . J . Altschuler , and L . F . Wu . 2007 . Endocytosis optimizes the dynamic localization of membrane proteins that regulate cortical polarity . Cell 129 : 411 – 422 . 32 . McCann , R . O . , and S . W . Craig . 1997 . The I / LWEQ module : a conserved sequence that signiﬁes F - actin binding in functionally diverse proteins from yeast to mammals . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 94 : 5679 – 5684 . 33 . Momany , M . 2002 . Polarity in ﬁlamentous fungi : establishment , maintenance and new axes . Curr . Opin . Microbiol . 5 : 580 – 585 . 34 . Morton , W . M . , K . R . Ayscough , and P . J . McLaughlin . 2000 . Latrunculin alters the actin - monomer subunit interface to prevent polymerization . Nat . Cell Biol . 2 : 376 – 378 . 35 . Moseley , J . B . , and B . L . Goode . 2006 . The yeast actin cytoskeleton : from cellular function to biochemical mechanism . Microbiol . Mol . Biol . Rev . 70 : 605 – 645 . 36 . Muro - Pastor , M . I . , R . Gonzalez , J . Strauss , F . Narendja , and C . Scazzoc - chio . 1999 . The GATA factor AreA is essential for chromatin remodelling in a eukaryotic bidirectional promoter . EMBO J . 18 : 1584 – 1597 . 37 . Nayak , T . , E . Szewczyk , C . E . Oakley , A . Osmani , L . Ukil , S . L . Murray , M . J . Hynes , S . A . Osmani , and B . R . Oakley . 2006 . A versatile and efﬁcient gene targeting system for Aspergillus nidulans . Genetics 172 : 1557 – 1566 . 38 . Oakley , B . R . , and N . R . Morris . 1980 . Nuclear movement is (cid:8) - tubulin - dependent in Aspergillus nidulans . Cell 19 : 255 – 262 . 39 . Obita , T . , S . Saksena , S . Ghazi - Tabatabai , D . J . Gill , O . Perisic , S . D . Emr , and R . L . Williams . 2007 . Structural basis for selective recognition of ESCRT - III by the AAA ATPase Vps4 . Nature 449 : 735 – 739 . 40 . Pantazopoulou , A . , and M . A . Pen˜alva . 2009 . Organization and dynamics of the Aspergillus nidulans Golgi during apical extension and mitosis . Mol . Biol . Cell 20 : 4335 – 4347 . 41 . Pen˜alva , M . A . 2005 . Tracing the endocytic pathway of Aspergillus nidulans with FM4 - 64 . Fungal Genet . Biol . 42 : 963 – 975 . 42 . Punt , P . J . , J . Strauss , R . Smit , J . R . Kinghorn , C . A . M . J . J . van den V OL . 9 , 2010 ROLE OF A . NIDULANS SlaB 1517 on A p r il 26 , 2016 b y g ue s t h tt p : / / e c . a s m . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m Hondel , and C . Scazzocchio . 1995 . The intergenic region between the diver - gently transcribed niiA and niaD genes of Aspergillus nidulans contains mul - tiple NirA binding sites which act bidirectionally . Mol . Cell . Biol . 15 : 5688 – 5699 . 43 . Sharpless , K . E . , and S . D . Harris . 2002 . Functional characterization and localization of the Aspergillus nidulans formin SEPA . Mol . Biol . Cell 13 : 469 – 479 . 44 . Smaczynska - de Rooij , I . I . , R . Costa , and K . R . Ayscough . 2008 . Yeast Arf3p modulates plasma membrane PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P2 levels to facilitate endocytosis . Trafﬁc 9 : 559 – 573 . 45 . Steinberg , G . 2007 . Hyphal growth : a tale of motors , lipids and the Spitzen - korper . Eukaryot . Cell 6 : 351 – 360 . 46 . Steinberg , G . 2007 . On the move : endosomes in fungal growth and patho - genicity . Nat . Rev . Microbiol . 5 : 309 – 316 . 47 . Stimpson , H . E . , M . J . Lewis , and H . R . Pelham . 2006 . Transferrin receptor - like proteins control the degradation of a yeast metal transporter . EMBO J . 25 : 662 – 672 . 48 . Szewczyk , E . , T . Nayak , C . E . Oakley , H . Edgerton , Y . Xiong , N . Taheri - Talesh , S . A . Osmani , and B . R . Oakley . 2006 . Fusion PCR and gene tar - geting in Aspergillus nidulans . Nat . Protoc . 1 : 3111 – 3120 . 49 . Taheri - Talesh , N . , T . Horio , L . Araujo - Baza´n , X . Dou , E . A . Espeso , M . A . Pen˜alva , S . A . Osmani , and B . R . Oakley . 2008 . The tip growth apparatus of Aspergillus nidulans . Mol . Biol . Cell 19 : 1439 – 1449 . 50 . Tilburn , J . , C . Scazzocchio , G . G . Taylor , J . H . Zabicky - Zissman , R . A . Lockington , and R . W . Davies . 1983 . Transformation by integration in As - pergillus nidulans . Gene 26 : 205 – 211 . 51 . Upadhyay , S . , and B . D . Shaw . 2008 . The role of actin , ﬁmbrin and endo - cytosis in growth of hyphae in Aspergillus nidulans . Mol . Microbiol . 68 : 690 – 705 . 52 . Valdez - Taubas , J . , and H . R . Pelham . 2003 . Slow diffusion of proteins in the yeast plasma membrane allows polarity to be maintained by endocytic cy - cling . Curr . Biol . 13 : 1636 – 1640 . 53 . Virag , A . , M . P . Lee , H . Si , and S . D . Harris . 2007 . Regulation of hyphal morphogenesis by cdc42 and rac1 homologues in Aspergillus nidulans . Mol . Microbiol . 66 : 1579 – 1596 . 54 . Wedlich - Soldner , R . , S . Altschuler , L . Wu , and R . Li . 2003 . Spontaneous cell polarization through actomyosin - based delivery of the Cdc42 GTPase . Sci - ence 299 : 1231 – 1235 . 55 . Wesp , A . , L . Hicke , J . Palecek , R . Lombardi , T . Aust , A . L . Munn , and H . Riezman . 1997 . End4p / Sla2p interacts with actin - associated proteins for en - docytosis in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Mol . Biol . Cell 8 : 2291 – 2306 . 56 . Yoshiuchi , S . , T . Yamamoto , H . Sakane , J . Kadota , J . Mochida , M . Asaka , and K . Tanaka . 2006 . Identiﬁcation of novel mutations in ACT1 and SLA2 that suppress the actin - cable - overproducing phenotype caused by overex - pression of a dominant active form of Bni1p in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Genetics 173 : 527 – 539 . 57 . Zekert , N . , and R . Fischer . 2008 . The Aspergillus nidulans kinesin - 3 UncA motor moves vesicles along a subpopulation of microtubules . Mol . Biol . Cell 20 : 673 – 684 . 1518 HERVA´S - AGUILAR AND PEN˜ALVA E UKARYOT . C ELL on A p r il 26 , 2016 b y g ue s t h tt p : / / e c . a s m . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m