10 . 1128 / JVI . 80 . 9 . 4610 - 4622 . 2006 . 2006 , 80 ( 9 ) : 4610 . DOI : J . Virol . Mannová , Jitka Stokrová and Jitka Forstová David Liebl , Francesco Difato , Lenka Horníková , Petra Cargo in Rab11 - Positive Endosomes Productive Infection , and Meets Transferrin Endosomes , Requires Their Acidic pH for Mouse Polyomavirus Enters Early http : / / jvi . asm . org / content / 80 / 9 / 4610 Updated information and services can be found at : These include : REFERENCES http : / / jvi . asm . org / content / 80 / 9 / 4610 # ref - list - 1 at : This article cites 39 articles , 26 of which can be accessed free CONTENT ALERTS more» articles cite this article ) , Receive : RSS Feeds , eTOCs , free email alerts ( when new http : / / journals . asm . org / site / misc / reprints . xhtml Information about commercial reprint orders : http : / / journals . asm . org / site / subscriptions / To subscribe to to another ASM Journal go to : on F eb r ua r y 21 , 2013 b y PE NN S T A T E UN I V h tt p : / / j v i . a s m . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m J OURNAL OF V IROLOGY , May 2006 , p . 4610 – 4622 Vol . 80 , No . 9 0022 - 538X / 06 / $ 08 . 00 (cid:1) 0 doi : 10 . 1128 / JVI . 80 . 9 . 4610 – 4622 . 2006 Copyright © 2006 , American Society for Microbiology . All Rights Reserved . Mouse Polyomavirus Enters Early Endosomes , Requires Their Acidic pH for Productive Infection , and Meets Transferrin Cargo in Rab11 - Positive Endosomes David Liebl , 1 Francesco Difato , 1 Lenka Hornı´kova´ , 1 Petra Mannova´ , 1 † Jitka Sˇtokrova´ , 1 , 2 and Jitka Forstova´ 1 * Department of Genetics and Microbiology , Faculty of Science , Charles University , Prague , Czech Republic , 1 and Institute of Molecular Genetics , Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic , Prague , Czech Republic 2 Received 25 October 2005 / Accepted 8 February 2006 Mouse polyomavirus ( PyV ) virions enter cells by internalization into smooth monopinocytic vesicles , which fuse under the cell membrane with larger endosomes . Caveolin - 1 was detected on monopinocytic vesicles carrying PyV particles in mouse ﬁbroblasts and epithelial cells ( 33 ) . Here , we show that PyV can be efﬁciently internalized by Jurkat cells , which do not express caveolin - 1 and lack caveolae , and that overexpression of a caveolin - 1 dominant - negative mutant in mouse epithelial cells does not prevent their productive infection . Strong colocalization of VP1 with early endosome antigen 1 ( EEA1 ) and of EEA1 with caveolin - 1 in mouse ﬁbroblasts and epithelial cells suggests that the monopinocytic vesicles carrying the virus ( and vesicles containing caveolin - 1 ) fuse with EEA1 - positive early endosomes . In contrast to SV40 , PyV infection is depen - dent on the acidic pH of endosomes . Baﬁlomycin A1 abolished PyV infection , and an increase in endosomal pH by NH 4 Cl markedly reduced its efﬁciency when drugs were applied during virion transport towards the cell nucleus . The block of acidiﬁcation resulted in the retention of a fraction of virions in early endosomes . To monitor further trafﬁcking of PyV , we used ﬂuorescent resonance energy transfer ( FRET ) to determine mutual localization of PyV VP1 with transferrin and Rab11 GTPase at a 2 - to 10 - nm resolution . Positive FRET between PyV VP1 and transferrin cargo and between PyV VP1 and Rab11 suggests that during later times postinfection ( 1 . 5 to 3 h ) , the virus meets up with transferrin in the Rab11 - positive recycling endosome . These results point to a convergence of the virus and the cargo internalized by different pathways in common transitional compartments . Adsorption of mouse polyomavirus ( PyV ) on the host cell surface is mediated by the interaction of its major structural protein , VP1 , with sialic acid . Recently , anionic glycosphingo - lipids GD1a and GT1b , which are heavily glycosylated ganglio - sides carrying sialic acid residues , were identiﬁed as speciﬁc receptors for PyV ( 37 ) . Integrin (cid:2) 4 (cid:3) 1 ( also sialyated ) has been implicated as a possible coreceptor in mouse cells ( 9 ) . For simian virus 40 ( SV40 ) , another member of the Polyomaviri - dae , the major histocompatibility complex class I molecule was described as a receptor ( 8 ) . However , it was later shown that the major histocompatibility complex class I molecule is not endocytosed together with the virus ( 2 ) . Tsai et al . ( 37 ) previ - ously demonstrated that ganglioside GM1 can serve as a func - tional receptor for SV40 . This virus enters cells via caveola invaginations that fuse with larger peripheral organelles ( called caveosomes ) enriched by caveolin - 1 . In the steps that followed , SV40 was detected in tubular , caveolin - free membrane vesicles that move along microtubules and deliver virions to the smooth endoplasmic reticulum ( ER ) ( 29 ) . The import of SV40 into the ER was found to be brefeldin A sensitive and thus mediated by the ER - Golgi - intermediate compartment represented by COPI - coated vesicles ( 25 , 32 ) . The endocytic pathway exploited by PyV is not completely understood and exhibits both similarities to and differences from that of SV40 . PyV is internalized into smooth , monopinocytic vesicles , which fuse with larger peripheral endo - somes , often found to contain caveolin - 1 ( 33 ) . However , expres - sion of a dominant - negative mutant of dynamin - 1 GTPase re - quired for the formation of caveolae ( but also of clathrin - coated vesicles ) did not affect polyomavirus infection in some cell types , suggesting that caveolin - 1 might not be necessary for PyV uptake ( 13 ) . In our previous studies , we observed only rare colocalization of PyV with Rab5 GTPase , which is involved in the regulation of early endosome fusion . At later times postinfection ( p . i . ) , a subpopulation of the virus was found in the perinuclear area of 3T6 ﬁbroblasts colocalizing with Rab11 GTPase and with transferrin , markers of recycling endosomes ( 20 ) . The move - ment of the internalized virus is accompanied by transient disorganization of actin stress ﬁbers ( 15 , 33 ) , and the impor - tance of the microtubule cytoskeleton for virus trafﬁcking has also been demonstrated previously ( 15 , 18 , 33 ) . At later times after adsorption ( approximately 3 h ) , the signal of PyV , simi - larly to SV40 , was detected in ER cisternae , where it colocal - ized with ER - resident protein BiP / GRP78 ( endoplasmic lu - menal chaperone involved in the export of abnormal proteins from the ER to the cytosol ) ( 10 ) . Unlike SV40 , PyV infection of 3T6 ﬁbroblasts was not substantially inhibited by brefeldin A , suggesting that PyV does not exploit COPI vesicles em - * Corresponding author . Mailing address : Department of Genetics and Microbiology , Charles University in Prague , Vinicˇna´ 5 , 128 44 Prague 2 , Czech Republic . Phone : 420 - 2 - 21 951730 . Fax : 420 - 2 - 21 951729 . E - mail : jitkaf @ natur . cuni . cz . † Present address : Public Health Sciences Division , Fred Hutchin - son Cancer Research Center , Seattle , WA 98109 . 4610 on F eb r ua r y 21 , 2013 b y PE NN S T A T E UN I V h tt p : / / j v i . a s m . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m ployed in retrograde transport from the Golgi apparatus to the ER . Moreover , an alternative retrograde transport from the Golgi apparatus to the ER , used by other intracellular patho - gens ( e . g . , Shiga toxin ) , also seems not to be utilized by PyV , as no signiﬁcant colocalization of PyV and Rab6 GTPase ( coordi - nating that retrograde pathway ) has been detected . Because PyV bypasses late endosomes that are positive for Rab7 GTPase , it is apparent that the virus can escape degradation in lysosomes ( 20 ) . In this study , we applied selected inhibitors and confocal and electron microscopy approaches to further trace the endocytic route used by PyV to establish productive infection . MATERIALS AND METHODS Cell line cultivation and virus . Swiss albino mouse cells ( NIH 3T6 ) and normal murine mammary gland ( NMuMG ) epithelial cells were grown at 37°C in a 5 % CO 2 – air humidiﬁed incubator using Dulbecco’s modiﬁed Eagle’s medium ( DMEM ; Sigma ) supplemented with 4 mM L - glutamine and 10 % fetal calf serum ( FCS ) . The culture medium of cells expressing green ﬂuorescent protein ( GFP ) fusion proteins was further supplemented with 0 . 5 mg / ml G418 ( Sigma ) . Jurkat cells ( human leukemic T - lymphoblast cells , clone E6 - 1 , TIB 152 ; kindly provided by V . Honˇejsˇı´ , IMG AS CR , Prague , Czech Republic ) were cultivated in RPMI medium ( Sigma ) supplemented with 4 mM L - glutamine and 10 % FCS . For virus infections , mouse polyomavirus ( strain A3 ) was used at the indicated multiplic - ities of infection ( MOIs ) . GFP constructs and cell lines . A plasmid DNA construct expressing GFP - tagged caveolin - 1 was a gift from Andre Le Bivic ( IBDM , Marseille , France ) . Caveolin - 1 – GFP was produced by the fusion of GFP to the C terminus of caveolin - 1 in the pEGFP - C2 cloning vector ( Clontech ) . pCINeo / IRES - GFP / cav - 1 DN ( bicistronic expression vector for dominant - negative caveolin - 1 [ dele - tion of amino acids 1 to 81 ] ) was a gift of Jan Eggermont ( Katholieke Univer - siteit , Leuven , Belgium ) ( 36 ) . Constructs expressing GFP - fused mutant Eps15 ( DIII (cid:4) 2 , DIII , and E (cid:4) 95 / 295 ) cloned into pEGFP - C2 were gifts from Alexandre Benmerah ( URA - CNRS , Paris Cedex , France ) and were described elsewhere previously ( 5 , 6 ) . For the assay for evaluating the efﬁciency of PyV infection , vector (cid:5) EGFP - N1 ( Clontech ) was used as a positive control . Vectors for expres - sion of GFP - fused wild - type Rab5 and a dominant - negative mutant of Rab5 S34N were kindly provided by P . D . Stahl ( Washington University School of Medicine ) ( 19 ) . All GFP constructs were transfected to mouse 3T6 ﬁbroblasts or NMuMG cell lines by electroporation . Brieﬂy , exponentially grown cells ( 1 day after the passage ) were trypsinized , and the homogenized cell suspension ( 1 (cid:6) 10 7 cells ) was pelleted . Cells were resuspended in 1 ml OPTIMEM - I medium ( Gibco ) with 10 to 20 (cid:7) g DNA . Two hundred microliters of the suspension was electroporated using a Gene Pulser apparatus ( Bio - Rad ) set at 960 (cid:7) F , 1 , 000 (cid:8) , and 300 V with a pulse length of 60 to 70 ms . Transfected cells were diluted 1 : 20 into fresh complete DMEM and grown for 48 h . Stable cell lines expressing GFP - tagged proteins were established by subcloning and maintaining cells upon G418 ( Sigma ) selection antibiotic in DMEM supplemented with 10 % fetal calf serum ( Gibco ) . Virus . Mouse polyomavirus ( A2 strain ) was isolated from infected whole mouse embryo primary culture cells according to the standard protocol and puriﬁed to homogeneity by CsCl and sucrose gradient ultracentrifugation . The quality of preparation was conﬁrmed by Coomassie blue - stained sodium dodecyl sulfate - acrylamide gel electrophoresis and electron microscopy ( EM ) ( negative staining ) . The amount of virus particles was estimated by hemagglutination and by protein concentration analysis . For microscopy of living cells , virions were labeled with the red ﬂuorescent marker Alexa - 594 coupled with an amine - reactive probe ( carboxylic acid succinimidyl ester [ purchased from Molecular Probes ] ) according to the following labeling procedure : puriﬁed virus was dia - lyzed in 0 . 1 M carbonate buffer ( pH 8 . 3 ) , and 1 mg of the virus with 0 . 1 mg of the ﬂuorescent reagent was incubated fo r 1 h atroom temperature and then incu - bated overnight at 4°C . The separation of the conjugate from unreacted labeling reagent was made by extensive dialysis and subsequent puriﬁcation of the virus on a 10 to 40 % sucrose gradient . The virus was aliquoted and stored at (cid:9) 20°C before use . The optimal degree of labeling ( ratio of virus to ﬂuorescent marker ) was assessed and improved to ensure that natural virus infectiveness was not affected . Brieﬂy , Alexa - 594 - prestained virus was used to infect cells , and after ﬁxation , coimmunolabeling with anti - VP1 antibody was performed , followed by green Alexa - 488 secondary antibody staining . Colocalization of red and green signals proved that all viral particles were conjugated with red Alexa - 594 dye , while the VP1 immunoepitope remained available for anti - VP1 antibody binding . Virus tracking . For live microscopy , cells expressing enhanced GFP - caveolin were grown on 40 - mm glass coverslips in phenol red - free DMEM . The cell cycle was synchronized by starving cultured cells in DMEM supplemented with 0 . 5 % serum for 24 h before infection . Coverslips were mounted in an open metal chamber system maintained at 37°C and overlaid with fresh medium . To avoid rapid temperature changes and microtubule depolymerization at 4°C , all proce - dures were performed at 37°C with prewarmed media and solutions . Virus was diluted with serum - free culture medium and added to cells at an MOI of 100 to 1 , 000 particles / cell . Unbound virus was gently washed away after 30 min , and complete culture medium was added . Internalization of the virus by the host cells and cytoplasmic transport were monitored at the indicated times postinfection by time lapse live imaging using confocal microscopy . We used a Leica TCS SP2 AOBS confocal microscope operating with an argon laser ( 458 , 476 , 488 , 496 , and 514 nm ; 10 mW ) and with an HeNe laser ( 543 and 594 nm ; 1 mW ) . Cells were examined with a 1 . 2 - numerical - aperture water immersion objective ( (cid:6) 60 ) . According to the speciﬁc signal - to - noise ratio and GFP level of expression , we applied different sampling frequencies ( (cid:4) T (cid:10) 1 to 6 s ) . Sequential scanning between channels was used to separate ﬂuorescence emission from different ﬂuorochromes and to completely eliminate bleed - through channels . Leica con - focal software was used for live microscopy . Video sequences and images were processed by Image J ( NIH , Bethesda , MD ) and Adobe Photoshop 7 . 0 ( Adobe Systems , San Jose , CA ) , respectively . Relevance of caveolin for virus entry . Jurkat cells were infected with either PyV or SV40 ( MOI of 3 (cid:6) 10 3 virus particles per cell ) or incubated with cholera toxin B subunit ( CTb ) ( ﬂuorescein isothiocyanate labeled and diluted to a ﬁnal concentration of 0 . 5 (cid:7) g / ml ; Sigma ) for 90 min at 37°C and then washed with RPMI - FCS and incubated another 2 h ( PyV or SV40 ) or 1 h ( CTb ) before ﬁxation . Cells were immunostained for PyV VP1 , SV40 VP1 , clathrin light - chain subunit , EEA1 marker of early endosomes , or (cid:2) - tubulin . DNA was stained with DAPI ( 4 (cid:11) , 6 (cid:11) - diamidino - 2 - phenylindole ) . For EM , PyV - infected cells were ﬁxed with 3 % glutaraldehyde in 0 . 1 M cacodylate buffer , pH 7 . 4 , at the appropriate time p . i . , postﬁxed with 1 % osmium tetroxide , dehydrated in graded ethanol solutions , and embedded in epoxy resin AGAR 100 ( Gro¨pl , Tuln , Austria ) as described previously ( 33 ) . Ultrastructural analysis was performed on ultrathin sections stained with uranyl acetate and lead citrate . The samples were examined with a JEOL JEM 1200EX electron microscope . Role of endosomal pH in PyV infection . The cell cycle of 3T6 or NMuMG cells was synchronized by starvation ( 24 - h incubation in DMEM supplemented with 0 . 5 % FCS ) . Cells were then treated with baﬁlomycin A1 ( 0 . 5 (cid:7) M ) or ammonium chloride ( NH 4 Cl ) ( 1 mM or 5 mM ) for a total interval of 4 h , starting 2 h prior virus addition , immediately after adsorption , 2 h postadsorption , or 4 h postad - sorption . Virus adsorption to cells was performed within a 30 - min interval on ice . Nonadsorbed virus was washed out , DMEM ( warmed to 37°C ) with 10 % FCS ( with or without a drug ) was added , and cells were then incubated at 37°C in a 5 % CO 2 – air humidiﬁed incubator . In the case of drug treatment in the interval of (cid:9) 2 to (cid:1) 2 h postinfection , the adsorption of the virus was performed in the presence of drugs , but the time of adsorption was not included in the 4 - h interval . At the end of drug treatment , the cells were washed , incubated for 24 h with freshly added complete DMEM , ﬁxed , and immunostained with antibody against PyV early large T ( LT ) antigen . Numbers of infected cells were scored by immunoﬂuorescence microscopy . Immunoﬂuorescence staining . At the indicated times postinfection ( MOI of 10 2 to 10 3 virus particles per cell ) , cells grown on coverslips were washed three times with phosphate - buffered saline ( PBS ) , ﬁxed with 3 % paraformaldehyde in PBS ( 30 min ) , and permeabilized with 0 . 5 % Triton X - 100 in PBS ( 10 min ) . After washing in PBS , cells were incubated with 0 . 25 % bovine serum albumin and 0 . 25 % porcine skin gelatin in PBS . Immunostaining with primary and secondary antibodies was carried out for 1 h and 30 min , respectively , with extensive washing with PBS after each incubation . The following primary antibodies were used : monoclonal rat anti - PyV LT ( kindly provided by B . E . Grifﬁn , Imperial College of Science , Technology , and Medicine at St . Mary’s , London , United Kingdom ) , polyclonal rabbit anti - PyV VP1 ( prepared in our laboratory ) , rabbit anti - SV40 VP1 ( kindly provided by H . Kasamatsu , University of California—Los Angeles ) , mouse anti - (cid:2) - tubulin ( Exbio ) , mouse anti - transferrin antibody ( Ex - bio ) , goat anti - EEA1 ( Santa Cruz ) , mouse Con - 1 antibody against clathrin light - chain subunit ( 24 ) , rabbit polyclonal anti - caveolin - 1 ( Santa Cruz ) , rabbit anti - Rab11 ( Zymed ) , and rabbit anti - GFP ( Abcam ) . The following secondary antibodies were used : chicken anti - rabbit , goat anti - rabbit , donkey anti - rat , don - key anti - goat , and donkey anti - mouse conjugated with Alexa Fluor - 488 ; goat anti - mouse conjugated with Alexa Fluor - 546 ; and chicken anti - rabbit conjugated with Alexa Fluor - 647 ( all purchased from Molecular Probes ) . For ﬂuorescent reso - V OL . 80 , 2006 MOUSE POLYOMAVIRUS ENTRY AND TRAFFICKING 4611 on F eb r ua r y 21 , 2013 b y PE NN S T A T E UN I V h tt p : / / j v i . a s m . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m nance energy transfer ( FRET ) analysis , Cy3 - conjugated anti - mouse and Cy5 - conju - gated anti - rabbit secondary antibodies ( purchased from Sigma ) were used . Colocalization assessment of confocal dual - color images . The following two requirements had to be satisﬁed to consider a given position as colocalization : ( i ) ﬂuorescent signal - emitting molecules labeled with different ﬂuorochromes should occupy the same pixel in the image , and ( ii ) the intensity of each com - ponent of the image should be within a certain range ( in other words , the ﬂuorochrome pairs with very different signal intensities should not be considered as colocalizing ) . To accommodate these conditions , we studied colocalization on the scatter plots of the signal intensities detected by two separate channels . In these plots , dimmer pixels are located close to the origin , brighter pixels are situated further out , and pure ( red and green ) pixels are clustered close to the axis . If colocalizing pixels are present , they are displayed ( depending on the degree of colocalization ) closer to the middle of the plot . We selected a ﬁeld in the scatter plot that represents pixels in the image where colocalization in both channels occurs . We deﬁned it as a region with its origin in the diagonal of the plot ( maximum colocalization ) and at coordinates that deﬁne the upper limit for the background intensity in the image . In this way , we could mark pixels that colocalize without taking into account pixels with a low intensity value , where the background intensity has high inﬂuence and pixels near the axis of the plot , which can represent bleed - through channels and false colocalization . In conclusion , in this mode , we considered pixels as colocalizing only when they were near the diagonal of the plot , and data pairs with very different signal intensities only in the case that both intensities were indeed high . FRET by acceptor photobleaching method . 3T6 cells grown on coverslips were incubated with PyV ( MOI of 10 2 to 10 3 virus particles per cell ) or with both PyV and transferrin ( 1 ng per 10 5 cells ) for 30 min on ice before a shift back to 37°C . Cells were ﬁxed for 1 . 5 or 3 h after the shift and immunostained with anti - VP1 - and anti - transferrin - or anti - Rab11 - speciﬁc antibodies followed by secondary antibodies conjugated with Cy3 and Cy5 , respectively . FRET efﬁciency ( E f ) was calculated using the following formula : E f (cid:10) ( D post (cid:9) D pre ) (cid:6) 100 / D post , where D post and D pre are the ﬂuorescence intensities of the donor molecule after and before bleaching of the acceptor , respectively ( 4 ) . This formula yields the in - crease in Cy3 ﬂuorescence following Cy5 bleaching normalized by Cy3 ﬂuores - cence after the bleaching . We used a Leica SP2 AOBS confocal microscope operating with an HeNe laser tuned to lines at 543 nm ( 1 . 2 mW ) to excite the Cy3 dye and at 633 nm ( 10 mW ) to excite the Cy5 dye . Cells were examined with a (cid:6) 63 1 . 4 - numerical - aperture oil immersion objective . RESULTS PyV utilizes caveolin - 1 - rich domains for internalization and trafﬁcking . Our previous electron microscopic analysis of poly - omavirus entry revealed ultramorphological similarities be - tween PyV and SV40 uptake . We observed that PyV is not associated with clathrin - coated pits at the cell surface and that virion - loaded endocytic vesicles are devoid of the typical clath - rin coat ( 33 ) . In agreement with those previous ﬁndings , we now demonstrate that PyV does not colocalize with Con - 1 ( marker of clathrin - coated pits ) at 20 min p . i . ( Fig . 1A ) . The time of ﬁxation and screening was chosen on the basis of a kinetic study of PyV internalization by cells ( not shown ) . We further tested the effects of epidermal growth factor receptor pathway substrate receptor clone 15 ( Eps15 ) mutants that inhibit clathrin endocytosis . For this purpose , we prepared cell lines expressing the GFP - fused dominant - negative mu - tants DIII and E (cid:4) 95 / 295 ( 5 , 6 ) , respectively , which compete for binding of the AP - 2 clathrin adaptor with endogenous Eps15 . The efﬁciency of infection in these cell lines was compared with that in control , nontransfected cells ; cells expressing GFP alone ( pEGFP - N1 ) ; or cells transfected with the control Eps15 mutant DIII (cid:4) 2 ( not binding AP - 2 (cid:2) - adapting subunit and therefore not affecting the efﬁciency of clathrin endocytosis ) . The inhibition of clathrin endocytosis in the mutant cell lines was veriﬁed by the analysis of transferrin uptake ( not shown ) . As expected , overexpression of GFP - fused dominant - negative mutant Eps15 - DIII or Eps15 - E (cid:4) 95 / 295 did not reduce the efﬁciency of PyV infection ( Fig . 1B ) . Moreover , the efﬁciency of infection was slightly enhanced in comparison with that assessed in all three control cell lines . A much more signiﬁcant increase ( approximately 100 % ) in the efﬁciency of PyV infec - tion was observed in cells overexpressing the wild - type caveo - lin - 1 – GFP fusion protein ( Fig . 1B ) . To visualize a direct involvement of caveolin - 1 - positive membrane domains in living cells , we established a cell line of mouse epithelial cells expressing GFP - tagged caveolin - 1 . Live imaging of these cells showed that when caveolin was overex - pressed , it still retained its ability to segregate into the surface membrane domains and was also present in intracellular mo - bile vesicles , pausing at the perinuclear area . Time lapse series have proven that the formation of caveolar invaginations and membrane ﬁssion and fusion events were not affected in this cell line ( Fig . 2a ) . We also show here that caveolin - GFP mem - brane domains are highly dynamic . When GFP - caveolin cells were infected with ﬂuorescently la - beled virus , we observed its movements in directions parallel to the cell surface at the peripheral ( apical ) cell confocal section . Virions were seen to bypass immobile plasma membrane - an - chored caveolar domains ( Fig . 2b ) . However , at least a fraction FIG . 1 . Polyomavirus entry and efﬁciency of infection are clathrin independent . ( A ) Virions do not colocalize with the clathrin marker . 3T6 cells were infected with PyV ( MOI of 10 2 PFU / cell ) and ﬁxed 20 min p . i . Immunoﬂuorescence staining of VP1 ( green ) and the clathrin light - chain subunit ( red ) was performed . Four merged confocal sec - tions of an infected cell are shown . ( B ) Efﬁciency of PyV infection in host NMuMG cells is not reduced by overexpression of dominant - negative Eps15 mutants . Cell lines expressing Eps15 mutants strongly inhibiting clathrin endocytosis ( Eps15 - DIII and Eps15 - E (cid:4) 95 / 295 , re - spectively ) are compared with control cells ( NMuMG K (cid:1) , nontrans - fected cells ; pEGFP - N1 , cells expressing GFP alone ; Eps15 - DIII (cid:4) 2 , cells transfected with a control mutant not interfering with clathrin endocytosis ; Cav1 - GFP , cells overexpressing caveolin - 1 – GFP ) . In - fected cells were detected by the antibody against PyV large T antigen . Data represent the average values of 30 optical ﬁelds of infected cells from each of three independent experiments . 4612 LIEBL ET AL . J . V IROL . on F eb r ua r y 21 , 2013 b y PE NN S T A T E UN I V h tt p : / / j v i . a s m . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m of endocytosed virions was internalized through caveolin - rich domains ( Fig . 2d and e ) , and a virion ( s ) captured in the im - mobile caveolin - 1 - positive membrane compartment at the nu - clear periphery was also observed ( Fig . 2c ) . These observations are in agreement with our hypothesis that mouse PyV can follow alternative trafﬁcking pathways in the host cell . Caveolin is not necessary for PyV internalization . The evi - dence for the exploitation of caveolae and / or cavicles ( vesicles derived from caveolae ) for mouse PyV entry and trafﬁcking is still controversial . Previously , Gilbert and Benjamin ( 13 ) did not detect a connection between caveola - mediated endocytosis and polyomavirus uptake in 3T3 ﬁbroblasts and in BMK cells ( baby kidney cells ) . However , later , they showed that when rat glioma C6 cells ( which are deﬁcient for complex gangliosides and thus poorly susceptible to PyV infection ) were supple - mented with GD1a ganglioside , they became infected with PyV with a much higher efﬁciency . Moreover , the virus entry path - way in these cells was dependent on functional caveola endo - cytosis ( 14 ) . In our previous experiments using different cell lines or different infection conditions , the extent of PyV and caveolin colocalization varied . To address the relevance of caveolae for FIG . 2 . Virus tracking in living NMuMG epithelial cells expressing GFP - fused caveolin - 1 . ( a ) Caveolar endocytosis , ﬁssion and fusion events , and internal vesicle membrane dynamics are shown not to be affected in a stable cell line . ( b ) Detail of an infected cell ( in a surface confocal section ) with a virion bypassing a caveolin - rich domain . ( c ) In - depth confocal section with a virion ( s ) captured in a caveolin - rich vesicle at the nuclear periphery . ( d and e ) Uptake of virions through caveolin membrane domains at the cell surface . Mouse NMuMG epithelial cells expressing GFP - tagged caveolin - 1 were infected with Alexa 594 - prestained virus ( MOI of 10 3 virus particles per cell ) and scanned in an open , medium - containing chamber with a (cid:4) T of 6 s . Selected frames are shown in detail ( see CavA1 , CavA2 , caveosome , and CavB - CavE movies at http : / / www . natur . cuni . cz / molbio / virology / suppl . html ) . Bars , 5 (cid:7) m ( a to c ) and 2 (cid:7) m ( d and e ) . V OL . 80 , 2006 MOUSE POLYOMAVIRUS ENTRY AND TRAFFICKING 4613 on F eb r ua r y 21 , 2013 b y PE NN S T A T E UN I V h tt p : / / j v i . a s m . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m FIG . 3 . Virions of PyV enter Jurkat cells . ( A ) Jurkat cells lack caveola essential protein . Westen blot of Jurkat ( JUR ) and 3T6 ( control ) cell lysates immunostained with anti - caveolin - 1 , anti - caveolin - 2 , and ubiquitin ( Ubq ) ( loading control ) is shown . ( B ) ( a ) Uptake of PyV by Jurkat cells . Cells were infected with PyV ( MOI of 3 (cid:6) 10 3 PFU / cell ) and ﬁxed 3 h p . i . Immunoﬂuorescence staining of VP1 ( green ) and tubulin ( white ) was performed . Three sequential merged confocal sections from different cells are shown . ( b ) PyV VP1 , SV40 VP1 , and cholera toxin B fragment ( CT - B ) enter Jurkat cells . Jurkat cells were infected with either PyV or SV40 ( MOI of 3 (cid:6) 10 3 virus PFU / cell ) or incubated with the cholera toxin B subunit ( ﬂuorescein isothiocyanate labeled ) . Cells were immunostained for PyV VP1 ( green ) or SV40 VP1 ( green ) and (cid:2) - tubulin ( red ) . DNA was stained with DAPI . Merged images are shown . ( C ) Electron microscopy of Jurkat cells . ( a ) At early times after infection ( 1 h p . i . ) , virions are 4614 LIEBL ET AL . J . V IROL . on F eb r ua r y 21 , 2013 b y PE NN S T A T E UN I V h tt p : / / j v i . a s m . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m PyV internalization and trafﬁcking , we monitored the uptake of PyV by Jurkat cells , which do not express caveolin - 1 and lack functional caveolae . The absence of caveolin - 1 in Jurkat cells was conﬁrmed by Western blot analysis of cell lysates using anti - caveolin - 1 and anti - caveolin - 2 antibodies ( Fig . 3A ) . As shown on confocal sections of Jurkat cells labeled for tu - bulin and VP1 , PyV virions entered cells , and their signal was found spread in the cytoplasm ( Fig . 3B ) . Electron microscopy of ultrathin cell sections showed that the internalizing invagi - nations and monopinocytic vesicles were morphologically sim - ilar to those found in caveolin - positive ﬁbroblasts or epithelial cell lines ( Fig . 3C ) . In agreement with observations by EM , immunoﬂuorescent staining of Jurkat cells for PyV VP1 and Con - 1 ( clathrin light - chain subunit ) did not detect substantial colocalization of PyV with clathrin ( Fig . 3D , panel a ) . CTb and SV40 ( both with binding afﬁnity to ganglioside GM1 as a re - ceptor ) were internalized by Jurkat cells , but in contrast to PyV , their signal was found concentrated in the perinuclear area colocalizing with microtubule - organizing center ( MTOC ) at the same time postinfection ( Fig . 3B , panel b ) . Our exper - iments demonstrate that PyV , SV40 , and cholera toxin , all exploiting caveolar endocytosis to enter cells and join their own speciﬁc trafﬁcking route , can also be internalized by cells lack - ing caveolin through an alternative ( clathrin coat - independent and caveolin - independent ) endocytic pathway . Transient expression of a dominant - negative mutant of caveolin - 1 in NMuMG cells did not prevent infection by PyV ( Fig . 4 ) . The ratio of infected cells to uninfected cells was not signiﬁcantly diminished for green ( caveolin - 1 mutant - express - ing ) cells in comparison with nontransfected control cells . PyV enters early endosomes . To further investigate the char - acter of compartments through which virions are transported during postendocytic steps , we monitored mutual colocaliza - tion of EEA1 ( early endosome antigen ) , PyV , and caveolin - 1 in 3T6 and NMuMG cells . While previous experiments per - formed with Rab5 GTPase ( 20 ) showed only rare colocaliza - tion with the major PyV capsid protein , VP1 , we now observed a high extent of colocalization of EEA1 and VP1 beneath the cell membrane 30 min p . i . ( Fig . 5A , panel a ) . Because a high proportion of entering PyV virions colocalized with GFP – caveolin - 1 ( Fig . 5A , panel b ) , we were interested in whether both EEA1 and caveolin - 1 overlap , being components of the same early endosome . Figure 5A , panel c , shows a high pro - portion of colocalization of both signals . Thus , we conclude that after internalization of mouse PyV through membrane raft domains rich in caveolin - 1 , monopinocytic vesicles fuse with early endosomes ( deﬁned by the presence of EEA1 ) into a common endocytic compartment . Figure 5B demonstrates not only that the presence of EEA1 and caveolin - 1 on the same compartments is the result of fusions induced by virus invasion but also that the compartments possessing both caveolin - 1 and EEA1 markers occur in noninfected 3T6 ﬁbroblasts . In en - larged details of the merged picture , small endosomes as well as large caveolin - 1 - positive compartments with distinct patches of EEA1 - positive domains ( similar to those observed previ - ously by Pelkmans et al . in HeLa cells ) ( 28 ) can be seen . PyV infection is dependent upon acidic pH of endosomes . In order to determine whether a transient presence of PyV in the acidic endosomes is necessary for productive infection , we ex - amined the effects of ammonium chloride and baﬁlomycin A1 . NH 4 Cl penetrates into endosomes and increases endosomal pH , whereas baﬁlomycin A1 ( a speciﬁc inhibitor of vacuolar H (cid:1) ATPase ) prevents acidiﬁcation of endosomes . Baﬁlomycin A1 ( at a concentration as low as 0 . 5 (cid:7) M ) completely abolished PyV infection of 3T6 and NMuMG cells when applied 2 h prior to infection and left in medium for an additional 2 h after the addition of the virus ( Fig . 6 ) . Treatment by NH 4 Cl ( at a con - centration of 1 mM ) inhibited infection of 3T6 and NMuMG cells by approximately 85 % and 65 % , respectively , compared to untreated controls . Virus infectivity diminished with increas - ing NH 4 Cl concentrations . The inhibition effect of an elevated endosomal pH was also obvious when NH 4 Cl or baﬁlomycin A1 was added to cells immediately after adsorption of the virus . However , no effect on the efﬁciency of PyV infection was observed when cells were exposed to the agent 2 h ( and later ) after virus adsorption , at the time when the virus left early endosomal compartments and was transported further to the nuclear periphery . Furthermore , we tried to determine the particular step in which virus trafﬁcking is affected when acidiﬁcation of endosomes is blocked . Substantial colocalization of virus and EEA1 was ob - served in both treated and nontreated cells 20 min postinfection internalized into membrane vesicles . ( b ) At later times postinfection ( 3 h p . i . ) , vesicles fuse into multivirion compartments ( lower panels ) . ( D ) ( a ) PyV ( red ) does not colocalize with clathrin ( green ) . ( b ) PyV ( red ) colocalizes with the EEA1 marker of early endosomes ( green ) . Jurkat cells , 30 min p . i . PyV was labeled with Alexa Fluor 594 , clathrin and EEA1 are shown in green ( mouse Con - 1 and goat anti - EEA1 followed by goat anti - mouse and donkey anti - goat Alexa - 488 ) , and DAPI is shown in blue . Shown is a three - dimensional rendering from 25 confocal sections with tilt angles of 0˚ , 40˚ , and 80˚ ( from left to right ) . FIG . 4 . Expression of a dominant - negative mutant of caveolin - 1 does not prevent productive PyV infection . NMuMG cells were transfected by pCINeo / IRES - GFP / cav - 1 DN ( bicistronic expression vector for domi - nant - negative caveolin - 1 ) , and 10 days later , cells were infected with PyV . Cells were ﬁxed and immunostained for PyV LT antigen ( red ) 24 h p . i . Transfected cells are shown in green . Bars , 20 (cid:7) m . V OL . 80 , 2006 MOUSE POLYOMAVIRUS ENTRY AND TRAFFICKING 4615 on F eb r ua r y 21 , 2013 b y PE NN S T A T E UN I V h tt p : / / j v i . a s m . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m by confocal microscopy ( Fig . 7A ) . However , 4 h postinfection , when the virus exited early endosomes in control , untreated cells , a substantial colocalization of VP1 and EEA1 was still observed in cells treated with baﬁlomycin A1 or NH 4 Cl ( Fig . 7B ) . These data indicate that the acidic milieu of endosomes is necessary for productive PyV infection of the host cells . When pH is increased ( or acidiﬁcation is blocked ) , the virus is still able to enter early endosomal compartments , but its exit and further trafﬁcking are suppressed . Accordingly , overexpression of the dominant - negative mutant of Rab5 ( Rab5S34N ) re - duced PyV infection markedly , while overexpression of wild - type Rab5 had no inhibition effect ( not shown ) . FIG . 5 . ( A ) Endocytic markers Cav - 1 and EEA1 colocalize with VP1 of incoming PyV virions . Shown are selected confocal sections of immunostained NMuMG cells infected and ﬁxed 30 min p . i . ( a ) Distribution of VP1 ( green ) and EEA1 ( red ) ; ( b ) distribution of caveolin - 1 ( green ) and VP1 ( red ) ; ( c ) distribution of caveolin - 1 ( green ) and EEA1 ( red ) . The third image of each panel represents colocalization signals ( yellow ) corresponding to those selected by scatter plot in the fourth image . ( B ) Caveolin - 1 and EEA1 occur in common endocytic compartments in uninfected NMuMG cells . Shown is a selected confocal section of NMuMG cells immunostained for caveolin - 1 ( green ) and EEA1 ( red ) . Enlarged details of the third , merged image are presented in the fourth panel . 4616 LIEBL ET AL . J . V IROL . on F eb r ua r y 21 , 2013 b y PE NN S T A T E UN I V h tt p : / / j v i . a s m . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m PyV and transferrin meet in Rab11 - positive endosomes . As we have shown previously ( 20 ) , PyV VP1 colocalizes with both transferrin and Rab11 GTPase between 1 and 3 h postadsorp - tion . At the same time , partial colocalization of PyV VP1 with the BiP / GRP78 marker of the ER was demonstrated . Various endosomal compartments , including caveosomes and recycling endosomes , accumulate in the perinuclear space near the MTOC ( 22 , 27 ) . The resolution of a confocal micro - scope ( (cid:1) 200 nm ) is not sufﬁcient to distinguish whether PyV and transferrin are present in the same endosomal compart - ment , particularly in such a crowded area of the cytoplasm . To circumvent this limitation , we used FRET , a method to detect protein colocalization at a 2 - to 10 - nm resolution . The range over which FRET between the donor ( Cy3 ) and acceptor ( Cy5 ) ﬂuorescent molecule occurs is given by the spectral parameter R 0 , i . e . , the distance at which the FRET efﬁciency is 50 % . R 0 for the Cy3 - Cy5 system is 5 nm ( 4 ) . Cells were bleached in the Cy5 channel by scanning a region of interest ( ROI ) using the 633 - nm HeNe laser line at 100 % intensity . We performed FRET in 15 different cells and bleached more then 60 different ROIs . Before and after the bleaching , Cy3 images were col - lected to assess changes in donor ﬂuorescence . Figure 8A , panel a , shows the images of the donor ( transferrin , Cy3 ) and the acceptor ( VP1 PyV , Cy5 ) before and after photobleaching in the ROI marked in the ﬁgure . Fig . 8A , panel b , presents the intensity value in the ROIs marked on Fig . 8A , panel a . As a control , we performed a similar calculation in the same number of nonbleached regions of the specimen to evaluate background FRET signals . We calculated the histogram distri - bution of FRET efﬁciency for the bleached and nonbleached regions . Distribution of FRET efﬁciency for bleached regions is positive - shifted from the pseudo - FRET efﬁciency observed in the nonbleached regions ( histogram in Fig . 8A , panel c ) . The average FRET efﬁciency values between transferrin and PyV were 9 . 3 (cid:12) 6 . 9 for the bleached ROIs , which represent the true FRET , and an average value of 2 . 3 (cid:12) 3 . 2 for the nonbleached ROIs , which represent the background ( or false ) FRET . We were further interested in whether the membrane com - partments carrying both PyV and transferrin are recycling en - dosomes . Therefore , we repeated the experiments with Cy3 - labeled Rab11 and measured the FRET efﬁciency of selected ROIs ( Fig . 8B ) . Fig . 8B , panel b , represents intensity values in the ROIs marked on the images ( Fig . 8B , panel a ) , and the FRET efﬁciency distribution is shown on the histogram ( Fig . 8B , panel c ) . We calculated the FRET efﬁciency in 60 different ROIs from 14 different cells . An average value of 4 . 8 (cid:12) 2 . 8 for the bleached ROIs ( representing the true FRET ) has been assessed . An average value of 2 . 21 (cid:12) 3 . 6 for background FRET , or false FRET ( from the nonbleached ROIs ) , has been obtained . We obtained very similar background FRET ( false FRET ) values for both transferrin and Rab11 under the same sample conditions ( type of cells , virus , ﬂuorescence donor , and acceptor ) and the same acquisition conditions ( objective and laser lines ) . Moreover , in both experiments , we obtained a positive - shifted distribution of FRET efﬁciency in respect to the nonbleached regions and average values of FRET efﬁ - ciency higher than those of background FRET . The conclusion can be made that both Rab11 and transferrin exhibit a true FRET and that PyV and transferrin are in intimate contact in a Rab11 - positive compartment . DISCUSSION Despite intensive studies on the early events of mouse poly - omavirus infection , the mechanism of virus uptake and traf - ﬁcking in the host cell still remains puzzling . Even closely related viruses such as SV40 and human JC virus differ in their modes of entry and subsequent trafﬁcking . JC virus uses the FIG . 6 . Treatment of cells with NH 4 Cl and baﬁlomycin A1 affects PyV infection . 3T6 and NMuMG cells were treated starting 2 h prior to infection , immediately ( 1 min ) after infection , 2 h postinfection , and 4 h postinfection , and the drug was left in the medium for a 4 - h interval . Cells were ﬁxed 24 h p . i . and stained for PyV LT antigen . Positive cells were scored by immunoﬂuorescence microscopy . Control cells were infected with PyV in the absence of the drug ( mock ) . The values in the graphs refer to the percentages of infected cells relative to the control ( mock ) and represent the average values of at least 30 optical ﬁelds of cells from each of two ( NMuMG ) or three ( 3T6 ) independent experiments . V OL . 80 , 2006 MOUSE POLYOMAVIRUS ENTRY AND TRAFFICKING 4617 on F eb r ua r y 21 , 2013 b y PE NN S T A T E UN I V h tt p : / / j v i . a s m . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m classical endocytic pathway via clathrin - coated pits to enter early endosomes ( 30 ) , while SV40 is internalized by caveolae ( 1 ) . Also , another human polyomavirus , BK virus , is dependent on an intact caveolin - 1 scaffolding domain to enter the host cell ( 11 ) . The role of lipid raft microdomains in PyV entry is also unclear . Treatment of cells with cholesterol - depleting agents such as methyl - (cid:3) - cyclodextrin , which disrupts detergent - resis - tant lipid rafts , revealed controversial results , most likely due to the different PyV strains and cell lines used ( 13 , 15 , 33 ) . We have previously shown the presence of caveolin - 1 on monopi - nocytic vesicles carrying PyV virions ( 33 ) . Observations of in - teractions of PyV with caveolin - 1 domains and compartments in living cells revealed that some PyV particles enter cells through caveolin - 1 - rich domains , while others bypass them , and at later times postinfection , the signal of PyV can be seen in large caveolin - 1 - rich compartments in the perinuclear space ( Fig . 2 ; see movies at http : / / www . natur . cuni . cz / molbio / virology / suppl . html ) . Is caveolin - 1 indeed necessary for PyV infection ? Many toxins that are transported from the cell surface to the ER utilize ganglioside receptors similar to those of polyoma - viruses ( 37 ) . CTb exploits the same GM1 type of ganglioside as SV40 ( 16 ) . The CTb enters cells via caveolae but can also be efﬁciently internalized in cells lacking caveolin - 1 by a choles - terol - dependent process ( 26 ) . We show here that in Jurkat cells that do not express caveolin , not only CTb but also SV40 ( Fig . 3Bb ) was efﬁciently endocytosed , and both antigens ex - hibited similar pericentriolar localization . The uptake of PyV occurred as well , but the virus signal remained spread within the cytoplasm . Nevertheless , no colocalization of clathrin with PyV was observed in Jurkat cells , and ultrastructural analysis proved that PyV virions were internalized in smooth , tightly ﬁtting vesicles morphologically similar to those of caveolin - 1 - positive mouse ﬁbroblast or epithelial cells ( 33 ) . Moreover , expression of a dominant - negative mutant of caveolin - 1 in NMuMG epithelial cells did not prevent their productive in - fection by PyV . In mouse ﬁbroblasts or in epithelial cells , virus - loaded monopinocytic vesicles were often shown to fuse with periph - eral endosomes early after internalization ( 33 ) . Therefore , we further examined the characteristics of these compartments . Colocalization of PyV with the early endosome antigen EEA1 has shown that the majority of the virus entered early endo - FIG . 7 . Incoming PyV ( VP1 signal ; green ) is trapped in early endosomes , when acidiﬁcation is blocked by NH 4 Cl or baﬁlomycin A1 . ( A ) At early times postinfection ( 30 min ) , colocalization of VP1 with the EEA1 marker is strong in both control and drug - treated cells . ( B ) At later times postinfection ( 4 h p . i . ) , residual but signiﬁcant colocalization of VP1 and EEA1 was detected only in drug - treated cells . VP1 , green ; EEA1 , red . The third image ( from the top ) of each panel represents colocalization signals ( yellow ) corresponding to those selected by scatter plot in the fourth image . 4618 LIEBL ET AL . J . V IROL . on F eb r ua r y 21 , 2013 b y PE NN S T A T E UN I V h tt p : / / j v i . a s m . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m FIG . 8 . PyV virions and transferrin appear in the same compartment . FRET between ( A ) VP1 ( Cy5 ) and transferrin ( Cy3 ) and between ( B ) VP1 ( Cy5 ) and Rab11 GTPase ( Cy3 ) reveals a tight association of the virus with transferrin and Rab11 , both markers of recycling endosomes at the perinuclear area of infected cells . Mouse 3T6 ﬁbroblasts were ﬁxed at 3 h p . i . ( a ) Indirect immunoﬂuorescence of the donor ( transferrin [ A ] or Rab11 [ B ] stained by Cy3 and visualized in the green channel ) and the acceptor ( VP1 stained by Cy5 and visualized in the red channel ) . ( b ) FRET values measured in selected ROIs delimited in colors shown in panel a . A , acceptor ; D , donor ; pre , prior to bleaching ; post , postbleaching . ( c ) Histogram of FRET efﬁciency ( eff ) distribution ( green columns ) calculated from 60 different ROIs of 14 different cells . As a control ( red columns ) , a calculation of the same number of nonbleached regions of the specimen was performed to evaluate background FRET signals and measurement noises due to bleaching . V OL . 80 , 2006 MOUSE POLYOMAVIRUS ENTRY AND TRAFFICKING 4619 on F eb r ua r y 21 , 2013 b y PE NN S T A T E UN I V h tt p : / / j v i . a s m . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m somes . The uptake of virions was slower than that of trans - ferrin , and both cargos rarely met in early endosomes when added simultaneously to the cells . However , at later times postinfection ( 1 . 5 to 3 h p . i . ) , PyV VP1 colocalized with trans - ferrin and Rab11 mostly in perinuclear areas , suggesting that recycling endosomes can be the compartments where they can encounter each other ( 20 ) . Thus , PyV internalized in caveola - derived vesicles , or perhaps also in other raft - derived vesicles , later enters compartments of the classical clathrin - dependent pathway ( e . g . , early and / or recycling endosomes ) and gets to - gether with a cargo delivered there in a clathrin - dependent manner . Sharma et al . ( 34 ) previously demonstrated that gly - cosphingolipids could be internalized via caveola - related en - docytosis and could then rapidly merge with the clathrin path - way in early endosomes . Glycosphingolipids can form distinct microdomains within the early endosomal membrane , which behave differently with respect to their subsequent intracellular trafﬁcking and might play a role in cargo sorting ( 34 ) . We further examined the effect of the elevation of endoso - mal pH on PyV infection . Baﬁlomycin A1 disrupts the H (cid:1) gradient that exists in vesicles of the vacuolar system ( 7 , 39 ) . We proved that , at least in mouse 3T6 ﬁbroblasts and NMuMG epithelial cells , this agent prevents PyV productive infection . Moreover , exposition of these cells to NH 4 Cl ( which rapidly elevates endosomal pH ) also inhibited infection by PyV when the cells were exposed to the drugs during the initial steps of infection . At later times postinfection , since the virus signal was detected in the perinuclear space , infection became pH insensitive . Remarkably , previous ﬁndings of other groups showed that neither SV40 ( 35 , 38 ) nor PyV ( 13 ) infection was affected by NH 4 Cl treatment . On the other hand , infection by human JC virus , but also BK virus ( internalized by caveolae ) , was found to be sensitive to the elevation of endosomal pH ( 3 , 11 ) . Ashok and Atwood ( 3 ) previously found that JC virus infection is , in contrast to that of SV40 , decreased by approx - imately 70 % by NH 4 Cl , while infection by both SV40 and JC virus can be completely inhibited by baﬁlomycin A1 . The dif - ferent sensitivities of cells to NH 4 Cl treatment and the time of exposition could account for the discrepancy between our ﬁnd - ing and previous ( 13 ) ﬁndings . Since under the conditions described previously by Ashok and Atwood ( 3 ) , our cells died before they could have been analyzed , we shortened the time of NH 4 Cl treatment by half . Although both SV40 and cholera toxin bind the same gan - glioside GM1 receptor , intoxication by CTb , in contrast to SV40 infection , depends on exposure to an acidic milieu ( 17 ) . Recently , Pelkmans et al . ( 28 ) described a Rab5 - dependent pathway in which caveolar vesicles are targeted to early endo - somes , where they form distinct but transient membrane do - mains . When they monitored the SV40 and CTb cargo , the low pH of early endosomes selectively induced a conformational change of CTb ( 21 ) and its lateral diffusion into a surrounding membrane subdomain of the compartment , while SV40 re - mained trapped in the caveolin - positive subdomain from where it was subsequently sorted out into caveosomes . They also found that when caveolin - 1 was down - regulated , virions of SV40 diffused into the lumen of endosomes , but that did not lead to infection . This is in agreement with the previous ob - servations that the pathway through caveosomes and the ER is necessary for productive SV40 infection ( 29 ) . We found out that cells expressing a dominant - negative caveolin - 1 mutant can be productively infected by PyV , and in cells with an elevated endosomal pH , the majority of PyV was retained in early endosomes , similar to the CTb that was found to be restricted in its mobility ( 28 ) . The trafﬁc of PyV is also similar to that of CTb ( and differs from SV40 ) with respect to the dependence on Rab5 function . Enveloped viruses make use of endosomal acidic pH for inducing the fusion of their envelopes with the vesicle mem - brane and for nucleocapsid escape to free cytosol . Some non - enveloped viruses , e . g . , adenoviruses or human rhinovirus se - rotype 2 , also exploit the acidic milieu of early endosomes to trigger conformational changes in their capsids followed by partial disassembly to evade the barrier of the endosomal membrane ( 23 , 31 ) . It became obvious that the majority of PyV virions ( or their FIG . 9 . Scheme of trafﬁcking pathways used by PyV for the move - ment towards the cell nucleus . Virions are internalized through lipid raft domains into smooth , often caveolin - positive , monopinocytic vesicles . These vesicles then fuse with early endosomes , and endosomal acidic pH is ( in contrast to SV40 ) necessary for efﬁcient PyV trafﬁcking . Virus uptake is accompanied with protein tyrosine kinase signaling ( our unpub - lished observation ) and with a transient reorganization of the actin net - work ( 33 ) . Further movement of the virus is directed into the recycling endosomes , as we proved by FRET between PyV VP1 and transferrin or between PyV VP1 and Rab11 GTPase . Signiﬁcant colocalization of VP1 with the BiP marker was observed previously ( 20 ) and suggests that PyV can be transported to the ER . However , in contrast to cholera toxin , or to SV40 , the PyV route into the ER is independent of COPI vesicles ( 20 ) . We also detected direct fusions of virus - carrying monopinocytic vesicles with the ER on ultrathin cell sections ( 33 ) ; therefore , both routes to the ER ( the one from recycling endosomes and the direct one from monopi - nocytic vesicles ) are considered alternative routes . The possibility that “successful” virions escape from early endosomes into the cytosol ( as a result of conformation changes induced by acidic pH ) still cannot be ruled out . The trafﬁcking pathway leading to the ER via recycling endosomes would then represent a cell defense mechanism . We have shown previ - ously ( 20 ) that only a few viral genomes reach the nucleus , while a substantial amount is directed to the ER - associated degradation pathway . It is conceivable that PyV misuses this pathway , like some bacterial toxins ( 10 ) , counting upon an escape of several viral genomes into the nucleus prior to their degradation in the cytoplasm . Black arrows , experimentally proved routes ; dotted arrows , possible alternative routes . NPC , nuclear pore complex . 4620 LIEBL ET AL . J . V IROL . on F eb r ua r y 21 , 2013 b y PE NN S T A T E UN I V h tt p : / / j v i . a s m . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m partially disassembled complexes ) are further transported in membranous compartments to the perinuclear space . Time lapse microscopy ( Fig . 2 ) showed that PyV was internalized in large caveolin - rich compartments located in the perinuclear space . We showed previously ( 20 ) that the signal of major capsid protein VP1 colocalized there with transferrin and Rab11 but also with BiP / GRP78 , a marker of the ER . We suggest that similar to cholera or Shiga toxin , a vast proportion of PyV is carried from early endosomes , via recycling endo - somes , to the ER . In contrast to bacterial toxins , PyV seems to bypass the Golgi compartment ( our unpublished results ) . Re - cycling endosomes are mildly acidic compartments containing components of membrane rafts such as glycosylphosphatidyl - inositol - anchored proteins , sphingomyelin , cholesterol , and caveolin - 1 ( 12 ) . In this regard , they resemble caveosomes uti - lized by SV40 . Moreover , in some cells , both caveosomes and recycling endosomes were found to share an overlapping dis - tribution . Caveosomes immunolabeled with anti - caveolin - 1 an - tibody merged with the transferrin receptor signal ( present in recycling endosome membranes ) in the perinuclear space near the MTOC of CHO cells . We suggest that caveosomes and recycling endosomes are intertwined rather than that they rep - resent an identical membrane system ( 22 ) . Nevertheless , pos - itive FRET between VP1 and transferrin and between VP1 and Rab11 provides strong support for the presence of PyV VP1 and transferrin within the same compartment . Further research is required to deﬁne functional and biochemical dif - ferences between caveosomes and recycling endosomes and to reveal whether both compartments can communicate in a way similar to that of caveola - derived vesicles with early endosomes . The most intricate question , from where and by what mech - anism the PyV genome is delivered into the nucleus , remains unclear and is currently under vigorous investigation . A sum - mary of results obtained by our studies of endocytic pathways exploited by mouse polyomavirus to deliver its genome into the cell nucleus is schematically drawn in Fig . 9 . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This work was generously supported by the Grant Agency of the Czech Republic ( grant 204 / 03 / 0593 ) , by the Centre of Functional Or - ganization of Cells ( LC545 ) , by the Centre for New Antivirals and Antineoplastics ( 1M6138896301 ) , by the programs of the Ministry of Education , Youth , and Sport of the Czech Republic , and by project no . AVOZ50520514 . We are grateful to all researchers ( names are given in Materials and Methods ) who provided Rab5 , Eps15 , and caveolin - A mutants or anti - bodies and to Sˇ . Taka´cˇova´ for assistance in preparation of the manuscript . REFERENCES 1 . Anderson , H . A . , Y . Chen , and L . C . Norkin . 1996 . Bound simian virus 40 translocates to caveolin - enriched membrane domains , and its entry is inhib - ited by drugs that selectively disrupt caveolae . Mol . Biol . Cell 7 : 1825 – 1834 . 2 . Anderson , H . A . , Y . Chen , and L . C . Norkin . 1998 . MHC class I molecules are enriched in caveolae but do not enter with simian virus 40 . J . Gen . Virol . 79 : 1469 – 1477 . 3 . Ashok , A . , and W . J . Atwood . 2003 . Contrasting roles of endosomal pH and the cytoskeleton in infection of human glial cells by JC virus and simian virus 40 . J . Virol . 77 : 1347 – 1356 . 4 . Bastiaens , P . I . H . , and T . M . Jovin . 1998 . Fluorescence resonance energy transfer microscopy , p . 136 – 146 . In J . E . Celis ( ed . ) , Cell biology : a labora - tory handbook , 2nd ed . , vol . 3 . Academic Press , New York , N . Y . 5 . Benmerah , A . , M . Bayrou , N . Cerf - Bensussan , and A . Dautry - Varsat . 1999 . Inhibition of clathrin - coated pit assembly by an Eps15 mutant . J . Cell Sci . 112 : 1303 – 1311 . 6 . Benmarah , A . , C . Lamaze , B . Begue , S . L . Schmid , A . Dautry - Varsat , and N . Cerf - Bensussan . 1998 . AP - 2 / Eps15 interaction is required for receptor - me - diated endocytosis . J . Cell Biol . 140 : 1055 – 1062 . 7 . Bowman , E . J . , A . Siebers , and K . Altendorf . 1988 . Baﬁlomycins : a class of inhibitors of membrane ATPases from microorganisms , animal cells , and plant cells . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 85 : 7972 – 7976 . 8 . Breau , W . C . , W . J . Atwood , and L . C . Norkin . 1992 . Class I major histo - compatibility proteins are an essential component of the simian virus 40 receptor . J . Virol . 66 : 2037 – 2045 . 9 . Caruso , M . , L . Belloni , O . Sthandier , P . Amati , and M . - I . Garcia . 2003 . (cid:2) 4 (cid:3) 1 integrin acts as a cell receptor for murine polyomavirus at the postattach - ment level . J . Virol . 77 : 3913 – 3921 . 10 . Deeks , E . D . , J . P . Cook , P . J . Day , D . C . Smith , L . M . Roberts , and J . M . Lord . 2002 . The low lysine content of ricin A chain reduces the risk of proteolytic degradation after translocation from the endoplasmic reticulum to the cytosol . Biochemistry 41 : 3405 – 3413 . 11 . Eash , S . , W . Querbes , and W . J . Atwood . 2004 . Infection of Vero cells by BK virus is dependent on caveolae . J . Virol . 78 : 11583 – 11590 . 12 . Gagescu , R . , N . Demaurex , R . G . Parton , W . Hunziger , L . A . Huber , and J . Gruenberg . 2000 . The recycling endosome of Madin - Darby canine kidney cells is a mildly acidic compartment rich in raft components . Mol . Biol . Cell 11 : 2775 – 2791 . 13 . Gilbert , J . M . , and T . L . Benjamin . 2000 . Early steps of polyomavirus entry into cells . J . Virol . 74 : 8582 – 8588 . 14 . Gilbert , J . M . , J . Dahl , J . You , C . Vui , R . Holmes , W . Lencer , and T . L . Benjamin . 2005 . Ganglioside GD1a restores infectibility to mouse cells lack - ing functional receptors for polyomavirus . J . Virol . 79 : 615 – 618 . 15 . Gilbert , J . M . , I . G . Goldberg , and T . L . Benjamin . 2003 . Cell penetration and trafﬁcking of polyomavirus . J . Virol . 77 : 2615 – 2622 . 16 . Grifﬁths , S . L . , R . A . Finkelstein , and D . R . Critchley . 1986 . Characterization of the receptor for cholera toxin and Escherichia coli heat - labile toxin in rabbit intestinal brush borders . Biochem . J . 238 : 313 – 322 . 17 . Janicot , M . , F . Fouque , and B . Desbuquois . 1991 . Activation of rat liver adenylate cyclase by cholera toxin requires toxin internalization and process - ing in endosomes . J . Biol . Chem . 266 : 12858 – 12865 . 18 . Krauzewicz , N . , J . Sˇtokrova´ , C . Jenkins , M . Elliott , C . F . Higgins , and B . E . Grifﬁn . 2000 . Virus - like gene transfer into cells mediated by polyoma virus pseudocapsids . Gene Ther . 7 : 2122 – 2131 . 19 . Li , G . , and P . D . Stahl . 1993 . Structure - function relationship of the small GTPase rab5 . J . Biol . Chem . 268 : 24445 – 24480 . 20 . Mannova´ , P . , and J . Forstova´ . 2003 . Mouse polyomavirus utilizes recycling endosomes for a trafﬁc pathway independent of COPI vesicle transport . J . Virol . 77 : 1672 – 1681 . 21 . McCann , J . A . , J . A . Mertz , J . Czworkowski , and W . D . Pickin . 1997 . Con - formational changes in cholera toxin B subunit - ganglioside GM1 complexes are elicited by environmental pH and evoke changes in membrane structure . Biochemistry 36 : 9169 – 9178 . 22 . Mundy , D . I . , T . Machleidt , Y . S . Ying , R . G . Anderson , and G . S . Bloom . 2002 . Dual control of caveolar membrane trafﬁc by microtubules and the actin cytoskeleton . J . Cell Sci . 115 : 4327 – 4339 . 23 . Nakano , M . Y . , K . Boucke , M . Suomalainen , P . Stidwell , and U . G . Grebe . 2000 . The ﬁrst step of adenovirus type 2 disassembly occurs at the cell surface , independently of endocytosis and escape to the cytosol . J . Virol . 74 : 7085 – 7095 . 24 . Nathke , I . S . , J . Heuser , A . Lupas , J . Stock , C . W . Turck , and F . M . Brodsky . 1992 . Folding and trimerization of clathrin subunits at the triskelion hub . Cell 68 : 899 – 910 . 25 . Norkin , L . C . , H . A . Anderson , W . A . Scott , and A . Oppenheim . 2002 . Caveolar endocytosis of simian virus 40 is followed by brefeldin A - sensitive transport to the endoplasmic reticulum , where the virus disassembles . J . Vi - rol . 76 : 5156 – 5166 . 26 . Orlandi , P . A . , and P . H . Fishman . 1998 . Filipin dependent inhibition of cholera toxin : evidence for toxin internalisation and activation through caveolae like domains . J . Cell Biol . 141 : 905 – 915 . 27 . Pasqualato , S . , F . Senic - Matuglia , L . Renault , B . Goud , J . Salamero , and J . Cherﬁls . 2004 . The structural GDP / GTP cycle of Rab11 reveals a novel interface involved in the dynamics of recycling endosomes . J . Biol . Chem . 279 : 11480 – 11488 . 28 . Pelkmans , L . , T . Burli , M . Zerial , and A . Helenius . 2004 . Caveolin - stabilized membrane domains as multifunctional transport and sorting devices in en - docytic membrane trafﬁc . Cell 118 : 767 – 780 . 29 . Pelkmans , L . , J . Kartenbeck , and A . Helenius . 2001 . Caveolar endocytosis of simian virus 40 revealed a new two step vesicular transport pathway to the endoplasmic reticulum . Nat . Cell Biol . 3 : 473 – 483 . 30 . Pho , M . T . , A . Ashok , and W . J . Atwood . 2000 . JC virus enters human glial cells by clathrin - dependent , receptor - mediated endocytosis . J . Virol . 74 : 2288 – 2292 . 31 . Prchla , E . , C . Plank , E . Wagner , D . Blaas , and R . Fuchs . 1995 . Virus - mediated release of endosomal content in vitro : different behavior of adeno - virus and rhinovirus serotype 2 . J . Cell Biol . 131 : 111 – 123 . 32 . Richards , A . A . , E . Stang , R . Pepperkok , and R . G . Parton . 2002 . Inhibitors of COP - mediated transport and cholera toxin action inhibit simian virus 40 infection . Mol . Biol . Cell 13 : 1750 – 1764 . 33 . Richterova´ , Z . , D . Liebl , M . Hora´k , Z . Palkova´ , J . Sˇtokrova´ , P . Hoza´k , J . V OL . 80 , 2006 MOUSE POLYOMAVIRUS ENTRY AND TRAFFICKING 4621 on F eb r ua r y 21 , 2013 b y PE NN S T A T E UN I V h tt p : / / j v i . a s m . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m Korb , and J . Forstova´ . 2001 . Caveolae are involved in the trafﬁcking of mouse polyomavirus virions and artiﬁcial VP1 pseudocapsids toward cell nuclei . J . Virol . 75 : 10880 – 10891 . 34 . Sharma , D . K . , A . Choudhury , R . D . Singh , C . L . Wheatley , D . L . Marks , and R . E . Paganos . 2003 . Glycosphingolipids internalized via caveolar - related endocytosis rapidly merge with the clathrin pathway in early endosomes and form microdomains for recycling . J . Biol . Chem . 278 : 7564 – 7572 . 35 . Shimura , H . , Y . Umeno , and G . Kimura . 1987 . Effects of inhibitors of the cytoplasmic structures and functions on the early phase of infection of cultured cells with simian virus 40 . Virology 158 : 34 – 43 . 36 . Trouet , D . , D . Hermans , G . Droogmans , B . Nilus , and J . Eggermont . 2001 . Inhibitionofvolume - regulatedanionchannelsbydominant - negativecaveolin - 1 . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 284 : 461 – 465 . 37 . Tsai , B . , J . M . Gilbert , S . Stehle , W . Lencer , T . L . Benjamin , and T . A . Rapoport . 2003 . Gangliosides are receptors for murine polyoma virus and SV40 . EMBO J . 22 : 4346 – 4355 . 38 . Upcroft , P . 1987 . Simian virus 40 infection is not mediated by lysosomal activation . J . Gen . Virol . 68 : 2477 – 2480 . 39 . Yochimori , T . , A . Yamamoto , Y . Moriyama , M . Futai , and Y . Tashiro . 1991 . Baﬁlomycin A1 , a speciﬁc inhibitor of vacuolar type H (cid:1) ATPase , inhibits acidiﬁcation and protein degradation in lysosomes of cultured cells . J . Biol . Chem . 266 : 17707 – 17712 . 4622 LIEBL ET AL . J . V IROL . on F eb r ua r y 21 , 2013 b y PE NN S T A T E UN I V h tt p : / / j v i . a s m . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m