Architectural Protein Subclasses Shape 3D Organization of Genomes during Lineage Commitment Jennifer E . Phillips - Cremins , 1 , 6 Michael E . G . Sauria , 1 , 2 Amartya Sanyal , 6 Tatiana I . Gerasimova , 3 Bryan R . Lajoie , 6 Joshua S . K . Bell , 1 Chin - Tong Ong , 1 Tracy A . Hookway , 5 Changying Guo , 3 Yuhua Sun , 4 Michael J . Bland , 1 William Wagstaff , 1 Stephen Dalton , 4 Todd C . McDevitt , 5 Ranjan Sen , 3 Job Dekker , 6 , * James Taylor , 1 , 2 , * and Victor G . Corces 1 , * 1 Department of Biology 2 Department of Mathematics and Computer Science Emory University , Atlanta , GA 30322 , USA 3 Laboratory of Molecular Biology and Immunology , National Institute of Aging , Baltimore , MD 21224 , USA 4 Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology , University of Georgia , Athens , GA 30602 , USA 5 Department of Biomedical Engineering , Georgia Institute of Technology , Atlanta , GA 30332 , USA 6 Program in Systems Biology , University of Massachusetts Medical School , Worcester , MA 01605 , USA * Correspondence : job . dekker @ umassmed . edu ( J . D . ) , james . taylor @ emory . edu ( J . T . ) , vcorces @ emory . edu ( V . G . C . ) http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2013 . 04 . 053 SUMMARY Understanding the topological conﬁgurations of chromatin may reveal valuable insights into how the genome and epigenome act in concert to control cell fate during development . Here , we generate high - resolution architecture maps across seven genomic loci in embryonic stem cells and neural pro - genitor cells . We observe a hierarchy of 3D interac - tions that undergo marked reorganization at the submegabase scale during differentiation . Distinct combinations of CCCTC - binding factor ( CTCF ) , Mediator , and cohesin show widespread enrichment in chromatin interactions at different length scales . CTCF / cohesin anchor long - range constitutive inter - actions that might form the topological basis for invariant subdomains . Conversely , Mediator / cohesin bridge short - range enhancer - promoter interactions within and between larger subdomains . Knockdown of Smc1 or Med12 in embryonic stem cells results in disruption of spatial architecture and downregula - tion of genes found in cohesin - mediated interac - tions . We conclude that cell - type - speciﬁc chromatin organization occurs at the submegabase scale and that architectural proteins shape the genome in hier - archical length scales . INTRODUCTION Genomes are organized at multiple length scales into sophisti - cated higher - order architectures ( Misteli , 2007 ) . Individual chro - mosomes occupy distinct spatial territories with respect to each other in interphase nuclei ( Cremer and Cremer , 2001 ) . Within each territory , at intermediate length scales of (cid:1) 1 – 10 Mb , com - partments of transcriptionally active euchromatin tend to group together , and independent from , compartments of inactive heterochromatin ( Lieberman - Aiden et al . , 2009 ) . At the subcom - partment level , chromatin is further organized into megabase - sized topologically associating domains ( TADs ) that represent spatial neighborhoods of high - frequency chromatin interactions ( Dixon et al . , 2012 ; Hou et al . , 2012 ; Nora et al . , 2012 ; Sexton et al . , 2012 ) . Within TADs , however , the precise features of chromatin folding at the submegabase scale remain poorly understood . Emerging evidence suggests that nuclear architecture is criti - cally important for cellular function . Seminal microscopy studies have linked the spatial positioning of speciﬁc genomic loci to gene expression ( Fraser and Bickmore , 2007 ; Kosak and Grou - dine , 2004 ; Lanctoˆt et al . , 2007 ) , replication ( Gilbert et al . , 2010 ) , X chromosome inactivation ( Erwin and Lee , 2008 ; Nora and Heard , 2010 ) , DNA repair ( Misteli and Soutoglou , 2009 ) , and chromosome translocations ( Roix et al . , 2003 ) . Moreover , molecular methods based on proximity ligation , such as chro - mosome conformation capture ( 3C ) or circularized - 3C ( 4C ) , have been used to detect functional long - range interactions be - tween two speciﬁc genomic loci in a population of cells ( Dekker et al . , 2002 ; Simonis et al . , 2006 ; Zhao et al . , 2006 ) . Principles from these studies have been difﬁcult to generalize , however , because most previous reports focus on interrogation of 3D in - teractions between speciﬁc preselected fragments ( Kurukuti et al . , 2006 ; Noordermeer et al . , 2011 ; Schoenfelder et al . , 2010 ; Vakoc et al . , 2005 ) . More recently , technologies for genome - wide mapping of chromatin architecture have been described , but comprehensive detection comes at the expense of resolution for mammalian genomes ( Hi - C ) ( Dixon et al . , 2012 ; Lieberman - Aiden et al . , 2009 ) or is restricted to only interactions mediated by a preselected protein of interest ( ChIA - PET ) ( Han - doko et al . , 2011 ; Li et al . , 2012 ) . Thus , there is a great need to elucidate principles of genome folding at the submegabase Cell 153 , 1 – 15 , June 6 , 2013 ª 2013 Elsevier Inc . 1 Please cite this article in press as : Phillips - Cremins et al . , Architectural Protein Subclasses Shape 3D Organization of Genomes during Lineage Commitment , Cell ( 2013 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2013 . 04 . 053 Figure 1 . High - Resolution Mapping Reveals a Hierarchy of Architectural Subdomains within Larger Topological Domains ( A – F ) 5C and Hi - C interaction frequencies represented as normalized 2D heat maps . ( A ) , ( B ) , ( D ) , and ( E ) Hi - C data ( adapted from Dixon et al . , 2012 ) displayed for ( A ) and ( D ) 10 Mb and ( B ) and ( E ) 1 Mb regions around ( A ) and ( B ) Sox2 and ( D ) and ( E ) Olig1 - Olig2 for mouse E14 ES cells ( top ) and mouse cortex ( bottom ) . TADs reported in ( Dixon et al . , 2012 ) are represented as tracks for domain calls ( blue bars ) and a directionality index ( downstream bias , green ; upstream bias , red ) . ( C ) ( legend continued on next page ) 2 Cell 153 , 1 – 15 , June 6 , 2013 ª 2013 Elsevier Inc . Please cite this article in press as : Phillips - Cremins et al . , Architectural Protein Subclasses Shape 3D Organization of Genomes during Lineage Commitment , Cell ( 2013 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2013 . 04 . 053 scale by mapping 3D chromatin interactions in an unbiased manner at high resolution . Megabase - scale TADs appear to be constant between mammalian cell types and conserved across species ( Dixon et al . , 2012 ; Nora et al . , 2012 ) . Therefore , we hypothesized that genome organization at the submegabase scale , e . g . , within TADs , plays a critical role in the establishment and / or maintenance of cellular state . To test this hypothesis , we pre - sent an unbiased , large - scale , and high - resolution analysis of 3D chromatin architecture in a continuous developmental sys - tem . We employed chromosome conformation capture carbon copy ( 5C ) ( Dostie et al . , 2006 ) in combination with high - throughput sequencing to map higher - order chromatin organi - zation during differentiation of pluripotent mouse embryonic stem cells ( ES ) cells along the neuroectoderm lineage . An alter - nating 5C primer design was applied to query long - range chro - matin interactions in a massively parallel manner across six 1 – 2 Mb - sized genomic regions around key developmentally regu - lated genes ( Oct4 , Nanog , Nestin , Sox2 , Klf4 , and Olig1 - Olig2 ) . Our analyses reveal that distinct combinations of architectural proteins shape the 3D organization of mammalian genomes at different length scales for unique functional purposes during lineage commitment . RESULTS Generation of High - Resolution Chromatin Interaction Maps To investigate cell - type - speciﬁc patterns of higher - order chro - matin organization , we ﬁrst derived homogeneous populations of multipotent neural progenitor cells ( NPCs ) from mouse ES cells using a well - established , four - stage procedure ( Mikkelsen et al . , 2007 ; Okabe et al . , 1996 ) . qRT - PCR analysis and confocal microscopy coupled with immunoﬂuorescence stain - ing conﬁrmed a > 95 % pure population of Nestin / Sox2 - posti - tive , Oct4 / Nanog - negative cells displaying morphological characteristic of NPCs ( Figure S1 available online ) . We then employed 5C in combination with high - throughput sequencing to generate high - resolution long - range inter - action maps for two biological replicates of ES cells and ES - derived NPCs ( Dostie et al . , 2006 ) . 5C , a high - throughput derivative of 3C , involves the selective ampliﬁcation of chro - matin interactions within speciﬁc genomic loci of interest . By preselecting regions to be queried , we were able to obtain insight into chromatin architecture at the resolution of single interrogated fragments ( (cid:1) 4 kb ) , which is not yet feasible in a cost - effective manner with genome - wide Hi - C technologies in mammalian systems . Forward and reverse 5C primers were designed in an alternating scheme using tools from the publicly available my5C suite ( Lajoie et al . , 2009 ) ( Figure S2E ) . The tiled , alternating design queried (cid:1) 90 , 000 cis and (cid:1) 500 , 000 trans interactions in parallel across seven genomic loci surrounding developmentally regulated genes ( Oct4 , Nanog , Sox2 , Klf4 , Nestin , Olig1 - Olig2 , and gene - desert con - trol ) ( Table S1 ) . We ﬁrst evaluated the quality of our raw 5C data by ( 1 ) as - sessing consistency between biological replicates and ( 2 ) comparing our high - resolution 5C data to Hi - C data recently re - ported at 40 kb resolution for E14 ES cells and primary cells isolated from mouse cortex ( Dixon et al . , 2012 ) . Raw 5C counts were highly correlated between replicates ( ES 1 versus ES 2 , Pearson correlation coefﬁcient : 0 . 91 ; NPC 1 versus NPC 2 , Pearson correlation coefﬁcient : 0 . 89 ) and more correlated than between ES cells and NPCs ( Pearson correlation coefﬁ - cient : 0 . 70 ) when considering the log of counts for all fragment combinations with > 100 reads . Furthermore , heatmaps of raw 5C data showed high similarity between biological replicates at each individual locus ( Figure S2F ) , suggesting that region - speciﬁc primers ampliﬁed each region in a robust and consis - tent manner . Importantly , we also observe a striking similarity between global topological features in 5C and Hi - C data for all regions queried , albeit with marked differences in resolution ( Figure S3 ) . These results indicate that our 5C libraries are high quality , consistent between replicates , and achieve notable similarity to data generated with an independent method ( Hi - C ) in an independent study with similar cellular phenotypes . Unique Hierarchy of Topological Subdomains at Each Genomic Locus We next examined large - scale architectural features by visual - izing heatmaps of 5C counts in ES cells and NPCs ( Figures 1C and 1F ) . Comparison of high - resolution 5C maps to Hi - C maps at each region revealed a complex hierarchy of chromatin orga - nization . TADs are readily detected in both Hi - C and 5C data sets . Importantly , the higher resolution of 5C data revealed that TADs previously deﬁned with Hi - C are further subdivided into smaller subtopologies ( sub - TADs ) . We systematically iden - tiﬁed sub - TADs in 5C data with a Hidden Markov Model - based approach ( Extended Experimental Procedures ) . Using this method , we uncovered numerous distinct subtopologies ar - ranged in a hierarchy within the larger TAD organization . Indeed , > 60 invariant and cell - type - speciﬁc sub - TAD bound - aries were identiﬁed with our 5C data at the submegabase scale , whereas only 7 TAD boundaries were called in our re - gions of interest with a previous Hi - C analysis ( Dixon et al . , 2012 ) ( Figures 1G and 1H ) . Topological features were unique to each region ( Figure S3 ) , suggesting that each genomic locus has an architectural signature that may reﬂect the functional activity of that region . Taken together , these data demonstrate that 5C achieves a marked increase in resolution compared to Hi - C , which enables mapping of ﬁner - scale architectural fea - tures within TADs . and ( F ) 5Cdatadisplayedfor1Mbregionsaround ( C ) Sox2 and ( F ) Olig1 - Olig2 formouseV6 . 5EScells ( top ) andES - derivedNPCs ( bottom ) . Constitutiveandcell - type - speciﬁc subdomains called with a Hidden Markov Model ( see Extended Experimental Procedures ) are represented as black lines overlaid on 5C heatmaps and a directionality index displayed as a hierarchy of black wiggle tracks . ( GandH ) Overlapbetweencelltypesfor ( G ) TADboundariescalledfromHi - Cdatain ( Dixonetal . , 2012 ) and ( H ) subdomainboundariescalledinthepresentwork from 5C data . See also Figures S1 , S2 and S3 . Cell 153 , 1 – 15 , June 6 , 2013 ª 2013 Elsevier Inc . 3 Please cite this article in press as : Phillips - Cremins et al . , Architectural Protein Subclasses Shape 3D Organization of Genomes during Lineage Commitment , Cell ( 2013 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2013 . 04 . 053 Constitutive and Cell - Type - Speciﬁc Features of 3D Chromatin Organization Our observation that submegabase - scale architectural features undergo marked changes between cell types prompted us to systematically identify constitutive and cell - type - speciﬁc loop - ing interactions within and between larger - scale TADs . To ac - count for bias intrinsic to all 3C - based methods , as well as to 5C speciﬁcally , we developed a probabilistic model that simulta - neously captures the distance - dependent background level of nonspeciﬁc chromatin interactions and the nonbiological contri - bution from each primer ( Imakaev et al . , 2012 ; Yaffe and Tanay , 2011 ) ( Extended Experimental Procedures ) . Our model pro - duces an interaction score that is comparable within and between experiments and allows for robust detection of frag - ment - to - fragment looping interactions that are signiﬁcant above the expected background signal ( Figure S4 ) . 3D contacts with interaction scores greater than stringent , pre - established thresholds in both biological replicates were subjected to further analysis ( Figure 2A ) . To rigorously minimize false positives , thresholds were selected so that the large major - ity of cell - type - speciﬁc interactions were lost when randomly permuting data ( Figure 2B ) . By applying these stringent thresh - olds , we identiﬁed 83 ES - cell - speciﬁc interactions that are lost upon differentiation , 260 constitutive interactions that are con - stant between cell types , and 165 NPC - speciﬁc interactions that are absent in ES cells and acquired upon differentiation Figure 2 . Genome Architecture Undergoes Marked Reorganization at the Submegabase Scale upon Differentiation ( A ) Scatterplot comparison of interaction scores between ES cells and NPCs . Thresholds for constitutive and cell - type - speciﬁc looping interactions are rep - resented as colored boxes ( brown , constitutive ; red , ES speciﬁc ; orange , NPC speciﬁc ; gray , background ) . ( B ) Scatterplot comparison of interaction scores after randomly permuting replicates as described in the Extended Experimental Procedures . ( C ) Interactions called signiﬁcant in ES cells and NPCs . ( D – F ) Chromatininteractions andepigeneticmodiﬁcationsatspeciﬁcgenomic loci inEScells and NPCs . ChIP - seqreads are displayed forCTCF , Med12 , Smc1 , Sox2 , Oct4 , Nanog , H3K27Ac , H3K4me1 , and H3K4me3 in ES cells ( above gene track ) and CTCF , Smc1 , H3K27Ac , H3K4me1 , and H3K4me3 in NPCs ( below genetrack ) . 3DinteractionsarerepresentedasmirrorimagearcplotsforEScells ( abovegenetrack ) andNPCs ( belowgenetrack ) , withconstitutiveandcell - type - speciﬁc interactions displayed in black and red , respectively . Black bars represent HindIII restriction fragments queried by the alternating 5C primer design scheme . Forward 5C primers , upper track . Reverse 5C primers , lower track . ( D ) ES - speciﬁc interactions between Sox2 and a putative enhancer . ( E ) ES - speciﬁc interactions between Oct4 and a putative enhancer . ( F ) Constitutive interactions around Nanog and Slc2a3 . See also Figure S4 . 4 Cell 153 , 1 – 15 , June 6 , 2013 ª 2013 Elsevier Inc . Please cite this article in press as : Phillips - Cremins et al . , Architectural Protein Subclasses Shape 3D Organization of Genomes during Lineage Commitment , Cell ( 2013 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2013 . 04 . 053 ( Figure 2C ) . Thus , only cell - type - speciﬁc architectural features corresponding to the top 0 . 096 % and 0 . 190 % of all queried in - teractions in ES and NPC libraries , respectively , were consid - ered for downstream analysis . We next integrated 5C data with other epigenomic data sets . We observed that a signiﬁcant proportion of fragments engaged in 3D interactions were occupied by speciﬁc histone modiﬁca - tions . For example , a series of (cid:1) 80 - to 120 - kb - sized looping in - teractions connect the Sox2 gene with a putative downstream enhancer in ES cells marked by H3K4me1 , H3K27ac , and low levels of H3K4me3 ( Creyghton et al . , 2010 ; Heintzman et al . , 2009 ; Rada - Iglesias et al . , 2011 ) ( Figure 2D ) . Loss of enhancer marks in NPCs occured in parallel with loss of ES - speciﬁc loop - ing interactions , suggesting that this particular chromatin con - formation has important functional signiﬁcance . Similarly , an ES - speciﬁc interaction connects the Pou5f1 / Oct4 gene to a putative enhancer (cid:1) 25 kb upstream marked by H3K4me1 , H3K27ac , and low levels of H3K4me3 ( Figure 2E ) . By contrast , we detected a hierarchy of constitutive interactions ( constant between cell types ) around the pluripotent genes Nanog and Slc2a3 despite changes in gene activity during differentiation ( Figure 2F ) . These examples provide evidence that a notable pro - portion of looping interactions identiﬁed in this study may be involved in genome function . Candidate Architectural Protein Subclasses To gain more insight into organizing principles governing genome folding , we integrated 5C data with genome - wide maps of protein occupancy . We ﬁrst examined factors that have been reported as both essential for cellular functions and correlated with a speciﬁc looping interactions using 3C tech - nology . The top three candidates fulﬁlling these criteria were CCCTC - binding factor ( CTCF ) , cohesin , and Mediator ( Hadjur et al . , 2009 ; Handoko et al . , 2011 ; Kagey et al . , 2010 ; Kurukuti et al . , 2006 ; Splinter et al . , 2006 ) . Genome - wide binding sites for CTCF , mediator subunit Med12 , and cohesin subunit Smc1 have been previously identiﬁed in ES cells by ChIP - seq ( Kagey et al . , 2010 ; Stadler et al . , 2011 ) . We ﬁrst used the ChIP - seq data to quantify unique and overlapping occupied sites in our re - gions of interest . As previously reported , high - conﬁdence Smc1 binding sites signiﬁcantly overlapped high - conﬁdence CTCF and Med12 binding sites ( Kagey et al . , 2010 ) . However , in addi - tion to Med12 + Smc1 and CTCF + Smc1 co - occupied sites , we also found notable subclasses of CTCF alone and Med12 alone both genome wide and in our regions of interest in ES cells ( Fig - ures 3A and 3B ) . Noteworthy , Med12 rarely overlaps CTCF in the absence of cohesin , but a subclass with occupancy of all three proteins ( i . e . , Med12 + Smc1 + CTCF ) does emerge as signiﬁcant . Architectural Proteins Organize the Genome at Different Length Scales We next examined the enrichment of CTCF , Med12 , and Smc1 in 5C looping interactions . Unsupervised cluster analysis demon - strated that > 80 % of signiﬁcant interactions were anchored by some combination of CTCF , Med12 , or Smc1 in ES cells , which is signiﬁcantly higher than the enrichment of these proteins in all queried background interactions ( Figure 3C ) . By contrast , only (cid:1) 40 % of interactions were occupied by some combination of Oct4 , Nanog , and / or Sox2 , which is not signiﬁcant compared to the expected background enrichment of these proteins ( Fig - ure 3D ) . The widespread occupancy of CTCF , Med12 , and Smc1 in 3D interactions led us to hypothesize that these three proteins might have important architectural roles in shaping 3D genome organization . We next explored the speciﬁc role foreach candidate architec - tural protein subclass in genome organization . We observed a striking pattern in which multiple adjacent binding sites for the same architectural protein subclass were often found at the base of signiﬁcant interactions . Indeed , enrichment for a partic - ular architectural subclass in 3D interactions showed a strong correlation with the number of binding sites ( Figure 3E ) . There - fore , to explore only high - conﬁdence interactions , we focused our analysis on only loops anchored by > 2 or > 3 co - occupied sites ( Figure 3F ) . CTCF + Smc1 and CTCF alone subclasses were highly overrepresented at the base of constitutive interac - tionscomparedtobackgroundnonloops ( Figure3F ) . Bycontrast , Med12 + Smc1 and Med12 alone subclasses were predominantly enriched in only ES - speciﬁc looping interactions . Intriguingly , sites co - occupied by Med12 + CTCF + Smc1 showed enrichment in both constitutive and ES - cell - speciﬁc interactions . We also noticed that interactions mediated by each candidate architectural subclass displayed markedly different size distribu - tions ( Figure 4A ) . Med12 + Smc1 co - occupied sites were predominately enriched at the smallest < 100 kb length scale ( Figure 4B ) , whereas Med12 alone sites , independent from cohesin , were enriched at intermediate length scales of 600 – 1 , 000 kb ( Figure 4D ) . The subclass with all three proteins ( Med12 + CTCF + Smc1 ) also displayed a loop size distribution shifted toward small to intermediate ( < 300 kb ) length scales ( Fig - ure 4C ) . By contrast , loops connected by CTCF + Smc1 and CTCF Alone subclasses were signiﬁcantly biased toward inter - actions greater than 1 Mb in size ( Figures 4E and 4F ) . Together , these results support our hypothesis that architectural protein subclasses function at different length scales to fulﬁll distinct roles in genome organization . CTCF and Cohesin Anchor Constitutive Interactions To further explore the molecular mechanisms regulating consti - tutive chromatin interactions , we mapped CTCF and Smc1 oc - cupancy in NPCs using ChIP - seq . Genomic loci co - occupied by CTCF and Smc1 in both ES cells and NPCs represented the largest architectural subclass genome wide and in our regions of interest ( n = 159 ) ( Figures 5A and 5B ) . Moreover , the sites with constant occupancy of CTCF + Smc1 between cell types were highly enriched in constitutive interactions compared to background ( Figure 5C ) . This result is illustrated with a series of loops around Nanog and Slc2a3 ( Figure 2F ) and Olig1 and Olig2 ( Figure 5D ) . At both genomic loci , fragments anchoring the base of constitutive interactions contain CTCF + Smc1 co - occupied sites that remain constant between ES cells and NPCs . Thus , constitutive CTCF occupancy may be a critical mechanism regulating the establishment and / or maintenance of constitutive chromatin architecture . We next used high - resolution 3D ﬂuorescent in situ hybridiza - tion ( FISH ) to assess the importance of CTCF / cohesin in conﬁg - uring chromatin architecture . Two 10 kb probes ( Figure 5D ) Cell 153 , 1 – 15 , June 6 , 2013 ª 2013 Elsevier Inc . 5 Please cite this article in press as : Phillips - Cremins et al . , Architectural Protein Subclasses Shape 3D Organization of Genomes during Lineage Commitment , Cell ( 2013 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2013 . 04 . 053 corresponding to fragments anchoring the base of a predicted constitutive looping interaction around Olig1 - Olig2 produced virtually superimposable FISH signals in the majority of wild - type ES cells ( Figures 5E and 5F ) . Having validated this looping interaction with an independent assay , we then directly tested the role for CTCF and cohesin by knocking down these proteins in V6 . 5 ES cells . CTCF and Smc1 mRNAs were markedly depleted to < 20 % of their wild - type expression levels after trans - duction of ES cells with lentiviral shRNA constructs and subse - quent puromycin selection ( Figure S5 ) . By contrast to observa - tions in wild - type nuclei , FISH probes were no longer colocalized in CTCF - and Smc1 - KD ES cells ( Figures 5E and 5F ) . These data indicate disruption of chromatin organization and provide strong evidence that 3D contacts identiﬁed by 5C represent bona ﬁde chromatin interactions . We conclude that both CTCF and Smc1 are essential for maintaining this particular Figure 3 . Architectural Protein Subclasses Have Distinct Roles in Genome Organization ( A ) Heatmap representation of ChIP - seq signal for distinct architectural protein subclasses genome wide . ( B ) Venn diagram comparing binding patterns for high - conﬁdence ( p < 1 3 10 (cid:3) 8 ) CTCF , Med12 , and Smc1 occupied sites in 5C regions . ( C and D ) Unsupervised hierarchical clustering for signiﬁcant interactions in ES cells enriched for ( C ) CTCF , Med12 , and Smc1 or ( D ) Oct4 , Nanog , and Sox2 . ( E ) Fold enrichment of architectural protein subclasses in looping interactions versus the number of occupied sites per anchoring fragments . ( F ) Fraction of constitutive or ES - speciﬁc looping interactions enriched with architectural protein occupied sites compared to the expected enrichment in background . Fisher’s Exact test , * p % 0 . 05 . 6 Cell 153 , 1 – 15 , June 6 , 2013 ª 2013 Elsevier Inc . Please cite this article in press as : Phillips - Cremins et al . , Architectural Protein Subclasses Shape 3D Organization of Genomes during Lineage Commitment , Cell ( 2013 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2013 . 04 . 053 Figure 4 . Architectural Protein Subclasses Function at Different Length Scales ( A ) Size distributions of chromatin interactions anchored by distinct subclasses of architectural proteins . ( B – F ) Histograms binned by loop size displaying fold enrichment of chromatin interactions con - nected by ( B ) Med12 + Smc1 ( navy ) , ( C ) Med12 + CTCF + Smc1 ( light blue ) , ( D ) Med12 alone ( green ) , ( E ) CTCF + Smc1 ( red ) , or ( F ) CTCF alone ( orange ) compared to background interactions depleted of the occupied sites in ES cells ( gray ) . Fisher’s Exact test , * p % 0 . 05 . Cell 153 , 1 – 15 , June 6 , 2013 ª 2013 Elsevier Inc . 7 Please cite this article in press as : Phillips - Cremins et al . , Architectural Protein Subclasses Shape 3D Organization of Genomes during Lineage Commitment , Cell ( 2013 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2013 . 04 . 053 Figure 5 . Constitutive Looping Interactions Are Anchored by Constitutive Binding of CTCF and Cohesin ( A ) Heatmap representation of distinct subclasses of architectural protein occupancy between cell types genome wide . ( B ) Venn diagram representing unique and overlapping high - conﬁdence ( p < 1 3 10 (cid:3) 8 ) CTCF and Smc1 occupied sites in ES cells and ES - derived NPCs in 5C regions . ( C ) Fractionofconstitutive orcell - type - speciﬁcloopinginteractionsenrichedwithconstitutiveoccupancyofCTCF + Smc1 comparedtotheexpectedenrichment in background noninteractions . Fisher’s Exact test , * p % 0 . 05 . ( D – F ) DNA FISH analysis of chromatin interactions connected by sites constitutively bound by CTCF + Smc1 . ( D ) Arcplot of constitutive interactions anchored by constitutive CTCF + Smc1 occupied sites ( black ) and cell - type - speciﬁc interactions anchored by ES - speciﬁc Smc1 occupied sites ( red ) compared to epigenetic marks around Olig1 and Olig2 genes . Shaded gray vertical bars highlight genomic fragments constitutively bound by dual CTCF + Smc1 sites anchoring the base ofaseriesofconstitutiveloopinginteractions . BlackbarsrepresentHindIIIrestrictionfragmentsqueriedbythealternating5Cprimerdesignscheme . Uppertrack , fragments represented by forward 5C primers were windowed around adjacent fragments represented by reverse 5C primers . Lower track , fragments repre - sented by reverse 5C primers were windowed around adjacent fragments represented by forward 5C primers . ( E ) Probes speciﬁc for fragment A ( green ) and fragment B ( red ) were used to perform DNA FISH in wild - type V6 . 5 ES cells and ES cells treated with lentiviral shRNA for CTCF or Smc1 . Scale bar , 1 m m . ( F ) Quantiﬁcation of spatial distances separating FISH probes ( mean ± SD ) . Wild - type V6 . 5 ES cells ( 0 . 144 ± 0 . 05 m m , n = 126 ) , CTCF knockdown ( 0 . 421 ± 0 . 21 m m , n = 130 ) , and Smc1 knockdown ( 0 . 385 ± 0 . 13 m m , n = 113 ) . See also Figures S5 and S6 . 8 Cell 153 , 1 – 15 , June 6 , 2013 ª 2013 Elsevier Inc . Please cite this article in press as : Phillips - Cremins et al . , Architectural Protein Subclasses Shape 3D Organization of Genomes during Lineage Commitment , Cell ( 2013 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2013 . 04 . 053 constitutive interaction and propose that similar mechanisms will apply to constitutive interactions genome wide . Mediator and Cohesin Bridge Proximal Enhancer - Promoter Interactions To understand the organizing principles regulating cell - type - speciﬁc chromatin architecture , we ﬁrst examined CTCF - independent Smc1 sites that were occupied only in ES cells and then lost upon differentiation ( n = 123 ) ( Figures 5B and 6A ) . Loss of ES - speciﬁc Smc1 in NPCs occurred in parallel with abrogation of ES - speciﬁc interactions ( Figure 6B ) , support - ing the idea that Smc1 can function in a CTCF - independent manner as an architectural protein essential for cell - type - spe - ciﬁc chromatin interactions . We then set out to identify cofactors that partner with cohesin to bridge cell - type - speciﬁc interactions . Genome - wide analysis of CTCF - independent , ES - speciﬁc Smc1 binding sites revealed a strong colocalization with Mediator and pluripotent transcrip - tion factors Oct4 , Sox2 , and Nanog ( OSN ) ( Souﬁ et al . , 2012 ) ( Figure 6A ) . Indeed , > 95 % of all ES - speciﬁc Smc1 binding sites colocalize with Med12 , whereas only (cid:1) 55 % of these sites coloc - alize with OSN in our regions of interest ( Figure 6C ) . Importantly , ES - speciﬁc Smc1 binding sites were enriched in ES - speciﬁc in - teractions in both cases where these sites colocalized with OSN and also in cases where these sites did not colocalize with OSN ( Figure 6D ) . These observations suggest that cohesin does not require OSN transcription factors to serve an architectural role in the establishment and / or maintenance ES - speciﬁc chromatin interactions . We further investigated the mechanistic link between pluripo - tent transcription factors and chromatin architecture by parsing OSN subclasses genome wide and in our regions of interest ( Fig - ures 6E and S6D ) . We noticed a partial overlap between OSN occupied sites genome wide and architectural proteins in ES cells . Indeed , in our regions of interest , (cid:1) 50 % of OSN - binding sites colocalized with Med12 + Smc1 , whereas (cid:1) 25 % did not co - localizewithanyarchitecturalproteinsubclass ( Figure6F ) . Impor - tantly , OSN occupied sites were only enriched in ES - speciﬁc looping interactions in cases where these proteins colocalized with architectural proteins ( Figure 6G ) . Together , these data sug - gest that OSN transcription factors do not have a speciﬁc role in chromatin organization independent from architectural proteins . To validate the roles for Mediator and cohesin in ES - cell - spe - ciﬁc looping interactions , we carried out high - resolution 3D - FISH in wild - type and Med12 - or Smc1 - knockdown V6 . 5 ES cells . For this analysis , we chose an interaction between Olig1 and a puta - tive downstream ES - cell - speciﬁc enhancer ( Figures S6B and S6C ) . Probes generated from these interacting regions ( Fig - ure S6C ) colocalized in WT ES nuclei , but not in Med12 - or Smc1 - KD cells ( Figures 6H and 6I ) . We conclude that Mediator and cohesin are essential for formation of an ES - cell - speciﬁc loop at Olig1 and propose that similar mechanisms will apply to other ES - speciﬁc chromatin interactions . Cohesin - Mediated Interactions Are Functionally Linked to Gene Expression To further test the hypothesis that Med12 + Smc1 - mediated inter - actions have functional signiﬁcance during lineage commitment , we examined the expression of genes anchoring loops con - nected by these proteins . Analysis of microarray data generated in ES cells and NPCs ( Creyghton et al . , 2010 ) demonstrated that ES - speciﬁc , Smc1 - mediated interactions are biased toward connecting genes that are highly expressed in ES cells and turned off in NPCs ( Figure 6J ) . Gene ontology analysis conﬁrmed an overrepresentation of developmentally regulated pluripotent genes ( e . g . , Pou5f1 / Oct4 , Sox2 , and Notch4 ) in ES - speciﬁc in - teractions connected by ES - speciﬁc Smc1 compared to all genes in ES - speciﬁc interactions ( Figure S6E ) . By contrast , the expression distribution of genes colocalized with CTCF + Smc1 in constitutive looping interactions was not signiﬁcantly different from the expression distribution of all genes in constitutive loop - ing interactions ( Figure 6K ) . We then examined the effect of knocking down Med12 and Smc1 on gene expression . After siRNA knockdown of either Smc1 or Med12 in ES cells ( Kagey et al . , 2010 ) , expression of genes anchoring the base of cohesin - mediated interactions was markedly reduced compared to expression of all genes found in ES - speciﬁc interactions ( Figure 6L ) . Noteworthy , the reduction in gene expression after siRNA treatment was more severe for cohesin - colocalized genes anchoring the base of looping interactions versus nonlooping background interactions . These results expand upon previous reports at speciﬁc genomic loci ( Kagey et al . , 2010 ) by suggesting that the architectural roles for Mediator and cohesin might be a widespread mechanism linking gene expression and chromatin organization genome wide . Overall , data are consistent with a model in which Mediator / cohesin connect ES - cell - speciﬁc looping interactions between proximal regulatory elements and promoters of developmentally regulated pluripotent genes . This idea is illustrated at the Sox2 locus , where a series of (cid:1) 80 - to 120 - kb - sized looping interac - tions connect the Sox2 TSS to a putative active enhancer ( Fig - ure 2E ) . OSN transcription factors and the Med12 + Smc1 archi - tectural subclass colocalize at the fragments anchoring these loops . Loss of architectural protein binding and ES - speciﬁc looping interactions in NPCs occurs in parallel with loss of plurip - otent gene expression , suggesting that chromatin structure and function are intricately linked . Architectural Proteins Facilitate Looping of Cell - Type - Speciﬁc Enhancers The involvement of Mediator and cohesin in relatively short - range enhancer - promoter interactions prompted us to look more broadly at the relationship between architectural proteins and distal - cell - type - speciﬁc regulatory elements . Putative ES - speciﬁc enhancers were parsed as genomic loci at least 2 kb distal from TSSs with high - conﬁdence signal for H3K4me1 and H3K27ac in ES cells and loss of these chromatin marks in NPCs ( Figure 7A ) . Similarly , putative NPC - speciﬁc enhancers were parsed as genomic loci at least 2 kb distal from TSSs that do not display H3K27ac signal in ES cells , but acquire high - conﬁdence signal for H3K4me1 and H3K27ac in NPCs ( Fig - ure 7F ) . We noticed that putative ES - speciﬁc and NPC - speciﬁc enhancers could be sorted from high to low intensity of H3K4me3 signal ( Figures 7A and 7F ) . A strong correlation was observed between ES - speciﬁc enhancers displaying H3K4me3 Cell 153 , 1 – 15 , June 6 , 2013 ª 2013 Elsevier Inc . 9 Please cite this article in press as : Phillips - Cremins et al . , Architectural Protein Subclasses Shape 3D Organization of Genomes during Lineage Commitment , Cell ( 2013 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2013 . 04 . 053 ( legend on next page ) 10 Cell 153 , 1 – 15 , June 6 , 2013 ª 2013 Elsevier Inc . Please cite this article in press as : Phillips - Cremins et al . , Architectural Protein Subclasses Shape 3D Organization of Genomes during Lineage Commitment , Cell ( 2013 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2013 . 04 . 053 signal and RNA Pol II occupancy , suggesting that enhancers marked by H3K4me3 might have active transcription of eRNAs ( Kim et al . , 2010 ) ( Figure 7A ) . To further explore the link between enhancers and chromatin architecture , we parsed ES - speciﬁc and NPC - speciﬁc en - hancers in our regions of interest into high , intermediate , and low levels of H3K4me3 ( Figures 7B and 7G ) . Noteworthy , only ES - speciﬁc enhancers with high levels of H3K4me3 were en - riched in ES - speciﬁc looping interactions , whereas ES - speciﬁc enhancers with low levels of H3K4me3 were enriched only in constitutive interactions compared to background ( Figure 7C ) . Similarly , NPC - speciﬁc enhancers with high and intermediate levels of H3K4me3 were enriched in NPC - speciﬁc looping inter - actions , whereas NPC - speciﬁc enhancers with low levels of H3K4me3 were not enriched in chromatin interactions compared to background ( Figure 7H ) . Altogether these observations pro - vide support for the idea that eRNA transcription correlates with enhancer activity and subsequent activity - dependent loop - ing of cell - type - speciﬁc enhancers ( Sanyal et al . , 2012 ) . As a ﬁnal step , we queried the potential colocalization of en - hancers with architectural proteins . We noticed that the majority of ES - speciﬁc enhancers ( (cid:1) 95 % ) colocalized with architectural proteins in ES cells ( Figure 7D ) . Consistent with our previous an - alyses , ES - speciﬁc enhancers that colocalized with Smc1 alone were enriched in ES - speciﬁc looping interactions , whereas ES - speciﬁc enhancers colocalized with CTCF + Smc1 were enriched predominantly in constitutive interactions ( Figure 7E ) . Intrigu - ingly , only (cid:1) 25 % of NPC - speciﬁc enhancers colocalized with architectural proteins ( Figure 7I ) . NPC - speciﬁc enhancers that colocalized with CTCF + Smc1 were enriched in NPC - speciﬁc looping interactions , whereas NPC - speciﬁc enhancers that did not colocalize with architectural proteins were not enriched in looping interactions ( Figure 7J ) . Because the CTCF + Smc1 archi - tectural subclass is markedly enriched in constitutive interac - tions and also displays a slight enrichment in NPC - speciﬁc inter - actions ( Figure 5C ) , we hypothesize that one functional purpose for constitutive subdomains is to premark speciﬁc locations in the genome that will acquire or lose enhancer activity during development . An example of architectural proteins cooperating with en - hancers is shown at the Sox2 locus , where the Sox2 gene is high - ly expressed in both ES cells and NPCs ( Figure 7K ) . Data indicate that this developmentally regulated gene is controlled by different regulatory elements even though expression levels remain high as cells switch fate . In ES cells , the Sox2 TSS is connected to a proximal enhancer through a series of (cid:1) 100 - kb - sized interactions , whereas in NPCs these smaller looping interactions break apart , and a larger ( (cid:1) 450 kb ) subdomain is present between the Sox2 TSS and a more distal NPC enhancer . Mediator / cohesin mark the proximal ES - speciﬁc enhancer , whereas CTCF / cohesin premark the sub - TAD boundary in ES cells that ultimately acquires a distal NPC - speciﬁc enhancer upon differentiation . These results support a prevalent role for architectural proteins in spatially connecting proximal and distal enhancer elements to the genes that they regulate . Although en - hancers and insulators are traditionally thought to serve distinct mechanistic functions in gene regulation , our data suggest that enhancers and architectural proteins may work in collaboration to organize the genome much more than previously realized . DISCUSSION Analyses presented here provide an important step toward un - derstanding the link between higher - order chromatin architec - ture , epigenetic modiﬁcations , and cell - type - speciﬁc gene expression . By analyzing the genome in 3D , we now discover that three proteins thought to play more traditional roles in tran - scriptional activation and insulation might belong to a class of architectural proteins with primarily ‘‘chromatin organizing’’ function . It was originally suggested that vertebrate CTCF is an insulator protein based on transgene studies demonstrating that this protein blocks communication between adjacent regu - latory elements in a position - dependent manner . However , data presented here are more consistent with recent reports Figure 6 . Mediator and Cohesin Bridge ES - Speciﬁc Enhancer - Promoter Interactions ( A ) Heatmap representation of all ES - speciﬁc Smc1 occupied sites compared to Med12 , Oct4 , Sox2 , and Nanog occupied sites genome wide . ( B ) Fraction of constitutive or cell - type - speciﬁc looping interactions enriched with ES - speciﬁc Smc1 occupied sites compared to the expected background enrichment . Fisher’s Exact test , * p % 0 . 05 . ( C ) Fraction of ES - speciﬁc Smc1 occupied sites colocalized with Med12 or Oct4 / Sox2 / Nanog in 5C regions . ( D ) Fraction of constitutive or cell - type - speciﬁc looping interactions enriched with ES - speciﬁc Smc1 occupied siteswithor without Oct4 / Sox2 / Nanog compared to the expected enrichment in background . Fisher’s Exact test , * p % 0 . 05 . ( E ) Heatmap representation of all Oct4 / Sox2 / Nanog subclasses compared to architectural proteins sorted by Med12 occupancy genome wide . ( F ) Pie chart showing percentages of Oct4 / Sox2 / Nanog occupied sites colocalized with architectural proteins in 5C regions ( n = 102 ) . ( G ) Fraction of constitutive or cell - type - speciﬁc looping interactions enriched with Oct / Sox2 / Nanog with or without architectural proteins compared to the ex - pected enrichment in background . Fisher’s Exact test , * p % 0 . 05 . ( H ) Probes speciﬁc for fragmentA ( green ) and fragment B ( red ) anchoring an ES - speciﬁc looping interactionconnected by an ES - speciﬁc cohesin site were used to perform DNA FISH in wild - type V6 . 5 ES cells and ES cells treated with shRNA for Med12 or Smc1 . Scale bar , 1 m m . ( I ) Quantiﬁcation of spatial distances separating FISH probes ( mean ± SD ) . Wild - type V6 . 5 ES cells ( 0 . 139 ± 0 . 04 m m , n = 114 ) , Med12 knockdown ( 0 . 390 ± 0 . 16 m m , n = 123 ) , and Smc1 knockdown ( 0 . 462 ± 0 . 21 m m , n = 123 ) . ( J and K ) Gene expression ratio between ES cells and NPCs for ( J ) genes in ES - speciﬁc interactions colocalized with ES - speciﬁc Smc1 compared to all genes in ES - speciﬁc interactions or ( K ) genes in constitutive interactions colocalized with constitutive CTCF + cohesin compared to all genes in constitutive interactions . Kolmogorov - Smirnov test : * , p % 0 . 05 . ( L ) Gene expression ratio between siRNA treatment for Med12 or Smc1 and wild - type ES cells for genes in ES - speciﬁc interactions colocalized with ES - speciﬁc Smc1 compared to either all genes in ES - speciﬁc interactions or all genes colocalized with Smc1 in background noninteractions . Kolmogorov - Smirnov test , * p % 0 . 05 . See also Figures S5 and S6 . Cell 153 , 1 – 15 , June 6 , 2013 ª 2013 Elsevier Inc . 11 Please cite this article in press as : Phillips - Cremins et al . , Architectural Protein Subclasses Shape 3D Organization of Genomes during Lineage Commitment , Cell ( 2013 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2013 . 04 . 053 Figure 7 . Architectural Proteins Cooperate with Cell - Type - Speciﬁc Enhancers to Form Cell - Type - Speciﬁc Interactions ( A ) Heatmap representation of chromatin modiﬁcations demarcating putative ES - speciﬁc enhancers genome wide . ( B ) Fraction of ES - speciﬁc enhancers colocalized with high , intermediate , or low levels of H3K4me3 in 5C regions . ( C ) Fraction of constitutive or cell - type - speciﬁc looping interactions enriched with ES - speciﬁc enhancers with high , intermediate , or low levels of H3K4me3 compared to the expected background enrichment . Fisher’s Exact test , * p % 0 . 05 . ( D ) Fraction of ES - speciﬁc enhancers colocalized with architectural proteins in 5C regions . ( E ) Fractionofconstitutiveorcell - type - speciﬁcloopinginteractionsenrichedwithES - speciﬁcenhancerscolocalizedwithSmc1AloneorCTCF + Smc1compared to the expected enrichment in background . Fisher’s Exact test , * p % 0 . 05 . ( F ) Heatmap representation of chromatin modiﬁcations demarcating putative NPC - speciﬁc enhancers genome wide . ( G ) Fraction of NPC - speciﬁc enhancers colocalized with high , intermediate , or low levels of H3K4me3 in 5C regions . ( H ) Fraction of constitutive or cell - type - speciﬁc looping interactions enriched with NPC - speciﬁc enhancers colocalized with high , intermediate , or low levels of H3K4me3 compared to the expected background enrichment . Fisher’s Exact test , * p % 0 . 05 . ( I ) Fraction of NPC - speciﬁc enhancers colocalized with architectural proteins in 5C regions . ( legend continued on next page ) 12 Cell 153 , 1 – 15 , June 6 , 2013 ª 2013 Elsevier Inc . Please cite this article in press as : Phillips - Cremins et al . , Architectural Protein Subclasses Shape 3D Organization of Genomes during Lineage Commitment , Cell ( 2013 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2013 . 04 . 053 suggesting that enhancer blocking or barrier insulation may only occur in rare , context - dependent cases as a consequence of CTCF’s primary role in connecting long - range interactions ( Han - doko et al . , 2011 ; Phillips and Corces , 2009 ; Sanyal et al . , 2012 ) . Although traditionally considered an adaptor protein with multi - ple subunits essential for transcriptional activation ( Kornberg , 2005 ; Malik and Roeder , 2000 ) , we suggest that the widespread enrichment in 3D interactions predicts a similar architectural role for Mediator . In the case of cohesin , a protein with a well - known architectural function during mitosis , recent reports have sug - gested a critical mechanistic role in insulation based on the ﬁnding that CTCF and cohesin colocalize across the genome at thousands of loci ( Parelho et al . , 2008 ; Wendt et al . , 2008 ) . Our data predict that cohesin functionally affects gene expres - sion through its architectural role during interphase instead of through classic insulator mechanisms ( Hadjur et al . , 2009 ) . The molecular mechanisms governing chromatin folding at the submegabase scale remain critical unanswered questions in nu - clear biology . CTCF is present at most boundaries between conserved megabase - sized TADs ( Dixon et al . , 2012 ; Nora et al . , 2012 ) . However , this protein cannot be considered the sole determinant of topological organization because the major - ity of CTCF sites are found within TADs . Here , we expand our un - derstanding of chromosome organization at the submegabase scale by combining high - resolution 5C data and a detailed prob - abilistic model to computationally resolve individual fragment - to - fragment looping interactions within TADs . Our analyses reveal that larger , invariant TADs are hierarchically organized into constitutive and cell - type - speciﬁc subtopologies . By inte - grating 5C architecture maps with genome - wide maps of epige - netic modiﬁcations , we observed that a large proportion of sub - domains coincide with speciﬁc looping interactions between architectural proteins and other regulatory sequences . Thus , we favor the idea that architectural protein - binding sites found within larger TADs could be responsible for connecting interac - tions that form the topological basis for subdomains . For example , the megabase - sized region around the Olig1 and Olig2 genes spans a boundary between two larger megabase - sized TADs . Interactions identiﬁed in the present work with 5C reveal a further nested hierarchy of constitutive interactions anchored by CTCF + Smc1 and ES - speciﬁc interactions within and between subdomains connected by Med12 + Smc1 ( Figure S7 ) . We suggest a reﬁned model for genome organization in which architectural protein subclasses function at different length scales to fulﬁll distinct roles in genome organization ( Figure 7L ) . Data presented here predict that megabase - sized TADs are con - stant throughout development and are demarcated by constitu - tive occupancy of CTCF / cohesin at their boundaries . Within TADs , at intermediate length scales of 100 kb – 1 Mb , CTCF / cohesin co - occupied sites create subdomains by anchoring constitutive interactions around developmentally regulated or repressed tissue - speciﬁc genes . One possible functional role for CTCF / cohesin - mediated interactions at this intermediate length scale is to cooperate with distal regulatory elements to connect long - range enhancer - promoter interactions . Finally , at the smallest length scale ( < 100 kb ) , Mediator and cohesin coop - erate to bridge ES - speciﬁc interactions between enhancers and core promoters of developmentally regulated genes . We also note that a small but signiﬁcant proportion of CTCF / Mediator / cohesin binding sites are not involved in chromatin interactions . It is possible that these sites are involved in interactions outside of the 5C regions queried in this study . Moreover , it is also possible that architectural proteins require additional layers of regulation that we do not yet understand , such as posttransla - tional modiﬁcations or additional binding partners that regulate protein - mediated chromatin organization in a spatiotemporal manner ( Phillips and Corces , 2009 ) . Overall , this work provides insights into the organizing princi - ples governing higher - order chromatin architecture and is signif - icant toward understanding how the genome and the epigenome act in concert to regulate the formation of a diverse array of cell types during development . Powerful insights into the link be - tween the hierarchical organization of 3D genomes and cellular function could be realized by future studies combining high - res - olution analyses of chromatin architecture with genetic experi - ments in developmentally relevant model systems . EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES Extended Experimental Procedures are included in the Supplemental Information . ES Cell Expansion and Differentiation Murine V6 . 5 ES cells were expanded on Mitomycin - C - inactivated embryonic ﬁbroblasts under standard pluripotent conditions . After initial expansion , ES cells were passaged 1 – 2 times on tissue culture plates coated with 0 . 1 % gelatin to remove contaminating feeder cells . V6 . 5 ES cells were differentiated into NPCs using established procedures detailed in the Extended Experi - mental Procedures ( Mikkelsen et al . , 2007 ; Okabe et al . , 1996 ) . Generation and Analysis of 5C Libraries 3C templates and 5C libraries were generated for ES cells and ES - derived NPCs according to standard procedures with some modiﬁcations ( Dekker et al . , 2002 ; van Berkum and Dekker , 2009 ) . Regions queried with 5C primers aresummarizedinTableS1 . AlllibrarieswerepreparedforIlluminasequencing asdescribedintheExtendedExperimentalProcedures . Readswerealignedto apseudogenomeconsistingofall5Cprimers ( TablesS2 , andS3 ) usingBowtie version 0 . 12 . 2 ( Langmead et al . , 2009 ) . To account for poor quality reads , se - quences were required to have only one unique alignment and 5 and 3 bases were trimmed from the 5 0 and 3 0 ends of the read , respectively . A summary of sequencing details for each biological replicate is provided in Table S5 . Inter - actions were counted when both paired end reads could be uniquely mapped to the 5C primer pseudogenome . Only interactions between forward - reverse primer pairs were tallied as a true count . Primers showing counts > 100 , 000 or < 100 total reads were deemed outliers and removed from subsequent an - alyses ( Table S4 ) . ( J ) Fraction of constitutive or cell - type - speciﬁc looping interactions enriched withNPC - speciﬁc enhancers colocalized with CTCF + Smc1 or without architectural proteins compared to the expected enrichment in background . Fisher’s Exact test , * p % 0 . 05 . ( K ) 5C interaction frequencies and epigenetic modiﬁcations at the Sox2 locus in ES cells ( above gene track ) and NPCs ( below gene track ) . ( L ) Architectural length - scale model for developmentally regulated chromatin organization . See also Figure S7 . Cell 153 , 1 – 15 , June 6 , 2013 ª 2013 Elsevier Inc . 13 Please cite this article in press as : Phillips - Cremins et al . , Architectural Protein Subclasses Shape 3D Organization of Genomes during Lineage Commitment , Cell ( 2013 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2013 . 04 . 053 5C data were corrected and analyzed with a probabilistic model detailed in the Extended Experimental Procedures . TADs were systematically identiﬁed with a Hidden Markov Model ( HMM ) - based approach also detailed in the Extended Experimental Procedures . Algorithms for the 5C peak - calling pipeline and HMM can be found at : https : / / bitbucket . org / bxlab / phillips - cremins _ cell _ 2013 . Generation and Analysis of ChIP - Seq Libraries ChIP was performed on NPC pellets as previously described with minor mod - iﬁcations ( Kagey et al . , 2010 ) . ChIP - seq libraries for Smc1a and CTCF were generated using Bethyl Laboratories ( A300 - 055A ) and Upstate ( 07 - 729 ) poly - clonal antibodies , respectively . A summary of ChIP - seq libraries analyzed in this study is provided in Table S6 . All ChIP - seq data sets were aligned to build version MM9 of the mouse genome using default parameters ( - v1 - m1 ) in Bowtie version 0 . 12 . 2 ( Lang - mead et al . , 2009 ) . Only sequences that mapped uniquely to the genome wereusedforfurtheranalysis . Themodel - basedAnalysisforChIP - sequencing peak ﬁnding algorithm ( MACS , version 1 . 4 . 1 ) was used to identify regions of ChIP - seq enrichment over background ( Zhang et al . , 2008 ) . Peak - called data were analyzed as detailed in the Extended Experimental Procedures . Lentiviral Transductions LentiviralshRNAplasmidsclonedintothepLKO . 1vectorwerepurchasedfrom Open Biosystems ( Thermo Scientiﬁc ) . Speciﬁc clones were screened for robust knockdown of CTCF , Med12 , and Smc1 ( Figure S5 ) . Lentiviral particles were produced using the TransLenti Viral Packaging Mix ( TLP4615 , Open Bio - systems ) andtheArrest - InTransfectionReagentinH293Tcellsasdescribedin the kit manual . Murine V6 . 5 ES cells were transduced with lentiviral particles and 6 m g / ml hexadimethrine bromide ( polybrene , Sigma ) as detailed in the Extended Experimental Procedures . To select for stable integration of shRNA constructs , cells were treated with 2 – 3 . 5 m g / ml puromycin in ES cell media for 3 – 4 days starting at 48 hr postinfection . DNA FISH Three - color DNA FISH was carried out according to procedures described previously ( Guo et al . , 2011 ) in wild - type V6 . 5 ES cells , ES cells after lentiviral shRNA for CTCF , ES cells after lentiviral shRNA for Med12 , and ES cells after lentiviral shRNA for Smc1 . Position - speciﬁc 10 kb probes were ampliﬁed by long - rangePCR using BAC templates withprimerslisted inTable S7 . Ten kilo - base FISH probes for fragment A and fragment B anchoring the base of a spe - ciﬁc looping interaction were labeled with Alexa Fluor 488 ( green ) and 594 ( red ) , respectively . BACs were used as anchors and labeled with Alexa Fluor 697 ( blue ) . All probes and BACs were hybridized to ES cell slides prepped as described in the Extended Experimental Procedures . Distances between red and green probes were visualized and measured according to procedures also detailed in the Extended Experimental Procedures . ACCESSION NUMBERS The Data have been deposited in GEO under accession number GSE36203 . SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION SupplementalInformationincludesExtendedExperimentalProcedures , seven ﬁgures , and seven tables and can be found with this article online at http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2013 . 04 . 053 . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS Research reported in this publication was supported by the National Institute of General Medical Sciences of the NIH under award number R01GM035463 ( V . G . C ) , the National Human Genome Research Institute of the NIH under award number R01HG003143 ( J . D . ) , the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases of the NIH under award number R01DK065806 ( J . T . ) , a W . M . Keck Foundation Distinguished Young Scholar in Biomedical Research Award ( J . D . ) , and award number RC2HG005542 ( J . T . ) provided by funds from the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act ( ARRA ) . J . E . P . C . was supported by an NIH NRSA postdoctoral fellowship ( 5F32NS065603 ) . Funds from NIH grant PO1GM85354 also contributed to this work ( S . D . ) . T . I . G . , C . G . and R . S . are supported by the Intramural Research Program of the National Institute on Aging ( Baltimore , MD ) . J . E . P . C . and V . G . C . conceived the project . J . E . P . C . and T . C . M . designed stem cell differentiation experiments . J . E . P . C . , A . S . , B . R . L . , and J . D . designed 5C experiments . J . E . P . C . , S . D . , and Y . S . designed lentiviral experiments . J . E . P . C . , T . I . G . , C . G . , V . G . C . , J . D . , and R . S . designed FISH experiments . J . E . P . C . , A . S . , W . W . , J . S . K . B . , M . J . B . , C . T . O . , T . A . H . , T . I . G . , C . G . , and Y . S . performed experiments . M . E . G . S . , J . E . P . C . , and J . T . developed concepts and code for 5C peak calling pipeline and HMM model . J . E . P . C . performed postpeak calling computational analyses and wrote the paper with input from J . D . , M . E . G . S . , J . T . , and V . G . C . Received : June 25 , 2012 Revised : February 17 , 2013 Accepted : April 23 , 2013 Published : May 23 , 2013 REFERENCES Cremer , T . , and Cremer , C . ( 2001 ) . Chromosome territories , nuclear architec - ture and gene regulation in mammalian cells . Nat . Rev . Genet . 2 , 292 – 301 . Creyghton , M . P . , Cheng , A . W . , Welstead , G . G . , Kooistra , T . , Carey , B . W . , Steine , E . J . , Hanna , J . , Lodato , M . A . , Frampton , G . M . , Sharp , P . A . , et al . ( 2010 ) . Histone H3K27ac separates active from poised enhancers and pre - dicts developmental state . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 107 , 21931 – 21936 . Dekker , J . , Rippe , K . , Dekker , M . , and Kleckner , N . ( 2002 ) . Capturing chromo - some conformation . Science 295 , 1306 – 1311 . Dixon , J . R . , Selvaraj , S . , Yue , F . , Kim , A . , Li , Y . , Shen , Y . , Hu , M . , Liu , J . S . , and Ren , B . ( 2012 ) . Topological domains in mammalian genomes identiﬁed by analysis of chromatin interactions . Nature 485 , 376 – 380 . Dostie , J . , Richmond , T . A . , Arnaout , R . A . , Selzer , R . R . , Lee , W . L . , Honan , T . A . , Rubio , E . D . , Krumm , A . , Lamb , J . , Nusbaum , C . , et al . ( 2006 ) . Chromosome Conformation Capture Carbon Copy ( 5C ) : a massively parallel solution for mapping interactions between genomic elements . Genome Res . 16 , 1299 – 1309 . Erwin , J . A . , and Lee , J . T . ( 2008 ) . New twists in X - chromosome inactivation . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 20 , 349 – 355 . Fraser , P . , and Bickmore , W . ( 2007 ) . Nuclear organization of the genome and the potential for gene regulation . Nature 447 , 413 – 417 . Gilbert , D . M . , Takebayashi , S . I . , Ryba , T . , Lu , J . , Pope , B . D . , Wilson , K . A . , and Hiratani , I . ( 2010 ) . Space and time in the nucleus : developmental control of replication timing and chromosome architecture . Cold Spring Harb . Symp . Quant . Biol . 75 , 143 – 153 . Guo , C . , Gerasimova , T . , Hao , H . , Ivanova , I . , Chakraborty , T . , Selimyan , R . , Oltz , E . M . , and Sen , R . ( 2011 ) . Two forms of loops generate the chromatin conformation of the immunoglobulin heavy - chain gene locus . Cell 147 , 332 – 343 . Hadjur , S . , Williams , L . M . , Ryan , N . K . , Cobb , B . S . , Sexton , T . , Fraser , P . , Fisher , A . G . , and Merkenschlager , M . ( 2009 ) . Cohesins form chromosomal cis - interactions at the developmentally regulated IFNG locus . Nature 460 , 410 – 413 . Handoko , L . , Xu , H . , Li , G . , Ngan , C . Y . , Chew , E . , Schnapp , M . , Lee , C . W . , Ye , C . , Ping , J . L . , Mulawadi , F . , etal . ( 2011 ) . CTCF - mediated functional chromatin interactome in pluripotent cells . Nat . Genet . 43 , 630 – 638 . Heintzman , N . D . , Hon , G . C . , Hawkins , R . D . , Kheradpour , P . , Stark , A . , Harp , L . F . , Ye , Z . , Lee , L . K . , Stuart , R . K . , Ching , C . W . , et al . ( 2009 ) . Histone modiﬁ - cations at human enhancers reﬂect global cell - type - speciﬁc gene expression . Nature 459 , 108 – 112 . Hou , C . , Li , L . , Qin , Z . S . , and Corces , V . G . ( 2012 ) . Gene density , transcription , and insulators contribute to the partition of the Drosophila genome into phys - ical domains . Mol . Cell 48 , 471 – 484 . 14 Cell 153 , 1 – 15 , June 6 , 2013 ª 2013 Elsevier Inc . Please cite this article in press as : Phillips - Cremins et al . , Architectural Protein Subclasses Shape 3D Organization of Genomes during Lineage Commitment , Cell ( 2013 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2013 . 04 . 053 Imakaev , M . , Fudenberg , G . , McCord , R . P . , Naumova , N . , Goloborodko , A . , Lajoie , B . R . , Dekker , J . , and Mirny , L . A . ( 2012 ) . Iterative correction of Hi - C data reveals hallmarks of chromosome organization . Nat . Methods 9 , 999 – 1003 . Kagey , M . H . , Newman , J . J . , Bilodeau , S . , Zhan , Y . , Orlando , D . A . , van Ber - kum , N . L . , Ebmeier , C . C . , Goossens , J . , Rahl , P . B . , Levine , S . S . , et al . ( 2010 ) . Mediator and cohesin connect gene expression and chromatin archi - tecture . Nature 467 , 430 – 435 . Kim , T . K . , Hemberg , M . , Gray , J . M . , Costa , A . M . , Bear , D . M . , Wu , J . , Harmin , D . A . , Laptewicz , M . , Barbara - Haley , K . , Kuersten , S . , etal . ( 2010 ) . Widespread transcription at neuronal activity - regulated enhancers . Nature 465 , 182 – 187 . Kornberg , R . D . ( 2005 ) . Mediator and the mechanism of transcriptional activa - tion . Trends Biochem . Sci . 30 , 235 – 239 . Kosak , S . T . , and Groudine , M . ( 2004 ) . Form follows function : The genomic or - ganization of cellular differentiation . Genes Dev . 18 , 1371 – 1384 . Kurukuti , S . , Tiwari , V . K . , Tavoosidana , G . , Pugacheva , E . , Murrell , A . , Zhao , Z . , Lobanenkov , V . , Reik , W . , and Ohlsson , R . ( 2006 ) . CTCF binding at the H19imprintingcontrolregionmediatesmaternallyinheritedhigher - orderchro - matin conformation to restrict enhancer access to Igf2 . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 103 , 10684 – 10689 . Lajoie , B . R . , van Berkum , N . L . , Sanyal , A . , and Dekker , J . ( 2009 ) . My5C : web tools for chromosome conformation capture studies . Nat . Methods 6 , 690 – 691 . Lanctoˆt , C . , Cheutin , T . , Cremer , M . , Cavalli , G . , and Cremer , T . ( 2007 ) . Dy - namic genome architecture in the nuclear space : regulation of gene expres - sion in three dimensions . Nat . Rev . Genet . 8 , 104 – 115 . Langmead , B . , Trapnell , C . , Pop , M . , and Salzberg , S . L . ( 2009 ) . Ultrafast and memory - efﬁcient alignment of short DNA sequences to the human genome . Genome Biol . 10 , R25 . Li , G . , Ruan , X . , Auerbach , R . K . , Sandhu , K . S . , Zheng , M . , Wang , P . , Poh , H . M . , Goh , Y . , Lim , J . , Zhang , J . , et al . ( 2012 ) . Extensive promoter - centered chromatin interactions provide a topological basis for transcription regulation . Cell 148 , 84 – 98 . Lieberman - Aiden , E . , van Berkum , N . L . , Williams , L . , Imakaev , M . , Ragoczy , T . , Telling , A . , Amit , I . , Lajoie , B . R . , Sabo , P . J . , Dorschner , M . O . , et al . ( 2009 ) . Comprehensive mapping of long - range interactions reveals folding principles of the human genome . Science 326 , 289 – 293 . Malik , S . , and Roeder , R . G . ( 2000 ) . Transcriptional regulation through Medi - ator - like coactivators in yeast and metazoan cells . Trends Biochem . Sci . 25 , 277 – 283 . Mikkelsen , T . S . , Ku , M . , Jaffe , D . B . , Issac , B . , Lieberman , E . , Giannoukos , G . , Alvarez , P . , Brockman , W . , Kim , T . K . , Koche , R . P . , et al . ( 2007 ) . Genome - wide maps of chromatin state in pluripotent and lineage - committed cells . Nature 448 , 553 – 560 . Misteli , T . ( 2007 ) . Beyond the sequence : cellular organization of genome func - tion . Cell 128 , 787 – 800 . Misteli , T . , and Soutoglou , E . ( 2009 ) . The emerging role of nuclear architecture inDNArepair andgenomemaintenance . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 10 , 243 – 254 . Noordermeer , D . , Leleu , M . , Splinter , E . , Rougemont , J . , De Laat , W . , and Du - boule , D . ( 2011 ) . The dynamic architecture of Hox gene clusters . Science 334 , 222 – 225 . Nora , E . P . , andHeard , E . ( 2010 ) . Chromatinstructureandnuclearorganization dynamicsduringX - chromosomeinactivation . ColdSpringHarb . Symp . Quant . Biol . 75 , 333 – 344 . Nora , E . P . , Lajoie , B . R . , Schulz , E . G . , Giorgetti , L . , Okamoto , I . , Servant , N . , Piolot , T . , vanBerkum , N . L . , Meisig , J . , Sedat , J . , etal . ( 2012 ) . Spatialpartition - ing of the regulatory landscape of the X - inactivation centre . Nature 485 , 381 – 385 . Okabe , S . , Forsberg - Nilsson , K . , Spiro , A . C . , Segal , M . , and McKay , R . D . ( 1996 ) . Development of neuronal precursor cells and functional postmitotic neurons from embryonic stem cells in vitro . Mech . Dev . 59 , 89 – 102 . Parelho , V . , Hadjur , S . , Spivakov , M . , Leleu , M . , Sauer , S . , Gregson , H . C . , Jar - muz , A . , Canzonetta , C . , Webster , Z . , Nesterova , T . , et al . ( 2008 ) . Cohesins functionally associate with CTCF on mammalian chromosome arms . Cell 132 , 422 – 433 . Phillips , J . E . , and Corces , V . G . ( 2009 ) . CTCF : master weaver of the genome . Cell 137 , 1194 – 1211 . Rada - Iglesias , A . , Bajpai , R . , Swigut , T . , Brugmann , S . A . , Flynn , R . A . , and Wy - socka , J . ( 2011 ) . A unique chromatin signature uncovers early developmental enhancers in humans . Nature 470 , 279 – 283 . Roix , J . J . , McQueen , P . G . , Munson , P . J . , Parada , L . A . , and Misteli , T . ( 2003 ) . Spatial proximity of translocation - prone gene loci in human lymphomas . Nat . Genet . 34 , 287 – 291 . Sanyal , A . , Lajoie , B . R . , Jain , G . , and Dekker , J . ( 2012 ) . The long - range inter - action landscape of gene promoters . Nature 489 , 109 – 113 . Schoenfelder , S . , Sexton , T . , Chakalova , L . , Cope , N . F . , Horton , A . , Andrews , S . , Kurukuti , S . , Mitchell , J . A . , Umlauf , D . , Dimitrova , D . S . , et al . ( 2010 ) . Prefer - ential associations between co - regulated genes reveal a transcriptional inter - actome in erythroid cells . Nat . Genet . 42 , 53 – 61 . Sexton , T . , Yaffe , E . , Kenigsberg , E . , Bantignies , F . , Leblanc , B . , Hoichman , M . , Parrinello , H . , Tanay , A . , and Cavalli , G . ( 2012 ) . Three - dimensional folding and functional organization principles of the Drosophila genome . Cell 148 , 458 – 472 . Simonis , M . , Klous , P . , Splinter , E . , Moshkin , Y . , Willemsen , R . , de Wit , E . , van Steensel , B . , and de Laat , W . ( 2006 ) . Nuclear organization of active and inac - tivechromatindomainsuncoveredbychromosomeconformationcapture - on - chip ( 4C ) . Nat . Genet . 38 , 1348 – 1354 . Souﬁ , A . , Donahue , G . , and Zaret , K . S . ( 2012 ) . Facilitators and impediments of the pluripotency reprogramming factors’ initial engagement with the genome . Cell 151 , 994 – 1004 . Splinter , E . , Heath , H . , Kooren , J . , Palstra , R . J . , Klous , P . , Grosveld , F . , Galjart , N . , and de Laat , W . ( 2006 ) . CTCF mediates long - range chromatin looping and localhistonemodiﬁcationinthebeta - globinlocus . GenesDev . 20 , 2349 – 2354 . Stadler , M . B . , Murr , R . , Burger , L . , Ivanek , R . , Lienert , F . , Scho¨ler , A . , vanNim - wegen , E . , Wirbelauer , C . , Oakeley , E . J . , Gaidatzis , D . , etal . ( 2011 ) . DNA - bind - ing factors shape the mouse methylome at distal regulatory regions . Nature 480 , 490 – 495 . Vakoc , C . R . , Letting , D . L . , Gheldof , N . , Sawado , T . , Bender , M . A . , Groudine , M . , Weiss , M . J . , Dekker , J . , and Blobel , G . A . ( 2005 ) . Proximity among distant regulatoryelementsatthebeta - globinlocusrequiresGATA - 1andFOG - 1 . Mol . Cell 17 , 453 – 462 . van Berkum , N . L . , and Dekker , J . ( 2009 ) . Determining spatial chromatin orga - nization of large genomic regions using 5C technology . Methods Mol . Biol . 567 , 189 – 213 . Wendt , K . S . , Yoshida , K . , Itoh , T . , Bando , M . , Koch , B . , Schirghuber , E . , Tsut - sumi , S . , Nagae , G . , Ishihara , K . , Mishiro , T . , et al . ( 2008 ) . Cohesin mediates transcriptional insulation by CCCTC - binding factor . Nature 451 , 796 – 801 . Yaffe , E . , and Tanay , A . ( 2011 ) . Probabilistic modeling of Hi - C contact maps eliminates systematic biases to characterize global chromosomal architec - ture . Nat . Genet . 43 , 1059 – 1065 . Zhang , Y . , Liu , T . , Meyer , C . A . , Eeckhoute , J . , Johnson , D . S . , Bernstein , B . E . , Nusbaum , C . , Myers , R . M . , Brown , M . , Li , W . , and Liu , X . S . ( 2008 ) . Model - based analysis of ChIP - Seq ( MACS ) . Genome Biol . 9 , R137 . Zhao , Z . , Tavoosidana , G . , Sjo¨linder , M . , Go¨ndo¨r , A . , Mariano , P . , Wang , S . , Kanduri , C . , Lezcano , M . , Sandhu , K . S . , Singh , U . , et al . ( 2006 ) . Circular chro - mosome conformationcapture ( 4C ) uncovers extensivenetworksof epigenet - ically regulated intra - and interchromosomal interactions . Nat . Genet . 38 , 1341 – 1347 . Cell 153 , 1 – 15 , June 6 , 2013 ª 2013 Elsevier Inc . 15 Please cite this article in press as : Phillips - Cremins et al . , Architectural Protein Subclasses Shape 3D Organization of Genomes during Lineage Commitment , Cell ( 2013 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2013 . 04 . 053