JCB  The Rockefeller University Press , 0021 - 9525 / 2001 / 10 / 193 / 8 $ 5 . 00 The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 155 , Number 2 , October 15 , 2001 193 – 200 http : / / www . jcb . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200107075 193 Report Generation of high curvature membranes mediated by direct endophilin bilayer interactions Khashayar Farsad , Niels Ringstad , Kohji Takei , Scott R . Floyd , Kristin Rose , and Pietro De Camilli Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Department of Cell Biology , Yale University School of Medicine , New Haven , CT 06511 ndophilin 1 is a presynaptically enriched protein which binds the GTPase dynamin and the polyphos - phoinositide phosphatase synptojanin . Perturbation of endophilin function in cell - free systems and in a living synapse has implicated endophilin in endocytic vesicle budding ( Ringstad , N . , H . Gad , P . Low , G . Di Paolo , L . Brodin , O . Shupliakov , and P . De Camilli . 1999 . Neuron . 24 : 143 – 154 ; Schmidt , A . , M . Wolde , C . Thiele , W . Fest , H . Kratzin , A . V . Podtelejnikov , W . Witke , W . B . Huttner , and H . D . Soling . 1999 . Nature . 401 : 133 – 141 ; Gad , H . , N . Ringstad , P . Low , O . Kjaerulff , J . Gustafsson , M . Wenk , G . Di Paolo , Y . Nemoto , J . Crun , M . H . Ellisman , et al . 2000 . Neuron . 27 : 301 – 312 ) . Here , we show that puriﬁed endophilin can directly bind and evaginate lipid bilayers into narrow tubules similar in diameter to the neck of a clathrin - coated bud , providing new insight into the E mechanisms through which endophilin may participate in membrane deformation and vesicle budding . This property of endophilin is independent of its putative lysophosphatydic acid acyl transferase activity , is mediated by its NH 2 - terminal region , and requires an amino acid stretch homologous to a corresponding region in amphiphysin , a protein previously shown to have similar effects on lipid bilayers ( Takei , K . , V . I . Slepnev , V . Haucke , and P . De Camilli . 1999 . Nat . Cell Biol . 1 : 33 – 39 ) . Endophilin cooligomerizes with dynamin rings on lipid tubules and inhibits dynamin ' s GTP - dependent vesiculating activity . Endophilin B , a protein with homology to endophilin 1 , partially localizes to the Golgi complex and also deforms lipid bilayers into tubules , underscoring a potential role of endophilin family members in diverse tubulovesicular membrane - trafﬁcking events in the cell . Introduction A major pathway of synaptic vesicle retrieval after exocytosis is clathrin - mediated endocytosis ( Heuser and Reese , 1973 ) . This specialized version of a general endocytic pathway is necessary for the maintenance of the synaptic vesicle pool , and perturbation of this process results in rapid depletion of synaptic vesicles ( Koenig and Ikeda , 1989 ; Shupliakov et al . , 1997 ; Gad et al . , 2000 ) . The 100 - kD GTPase , dynamin , has been implicated in the “fission” stage of clathrin - mediated endocytosis ( Koenig and Ikeda , 1989 ) , and disruption of dynamin function results in an accumulation of electron - dense “collars” at the tubular neck of deeply invaginated clathrin - coated buds ( Koenig and Ikeda , 1989 ; Takei et al . , 1995 ) . These collars are enriched with dynamin , as well as two of the major SH3 domain – containing dynamin binding partners at the synapse : endophilin 1 ( endophilin ) and amphiphysin 1 ( amphiphysin ) ( David et al . , 1996 ; de Heuvel et al . , 1997 ; Ringstad et al . , 1997 ) . Recombinant dynamin 1 and amphiphysin have been shown to deform artificial lipid bilayers into narrow tubules , both independently as well as cooperatively in a complex , likely reflecting a role for these proteins in membrane binding and deformation at the neck of clathrin - coated pits ( Takei et al . , 1998 , 1999 ) . Endophilin has been implicated in many stages of clathrin - mediated synaptic vesicle endocytosis , from early events gen - erating membrane curvature , to later stages such as vesicle fission and uncoating ( Ringstad et al . , 1999 ; Gad et al . , 2000 ) . Selective depletion of endophilin from rat brain cyto - sol inhibited the generation of synaptic - like microvesicles ( SLMVs ) * in broken PC12 cells , and markedly reduced the formation of dynamin - coated tubules on synaptic mem - branes in the presence of ATP / GTP (cid:2) S ( Ringstad et al . , 1999 ; Schmidt et al . , 1999 ) . Therefore , we tested whether endophilin plays a direct role in the generation of membrane Address correspondence to Dr . Pietro De Camilli , Department of Cell Biology , Howard Hughes Medical Institute , Boyer Center for Molecular Medicine , Yale University School of Medicine , 295 Congress Ave . , New Haven , CT 06510 . Tel . : ( 203 ) 737 - 4465 . Fax : ( 203 ) 737 - 4436 . E - mail : pietro . decamilli @ yale . edu Dr . Takei’s present address is Department of Neuroscience , University of Okayama School of Medicine , Okayama 1700 - 8558 , Japan . Key words : SH3P4 ; dynamin ; endocytosis ; RICH ; endophilin B1 * Abbreviations used in this paper : AT , acyl transferase ; GST , glutathione S - transferase ; LPA , lysophosphatidic acid ; PH , pleckstrin homology ; SMLV , synaptic - like microvesicle . on A p r il 13 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published October 15 , 2001 194 The Journal of Cell Biology | Volume 155 , Number 2 , 2001 Figure 1 . Endophilin directly binds and deforms lipid bilayers . ( A ) Negative stain EM of liposomes composed of a brain lipid extract after addition of recombinant endophilin 1 or of the PH domain of PLC (cid:3) ( GST - tagged ) as a control , respectively . Liposomes were incubated for 15 min at 37 (cid:4) C with the purified proteins . Endophilin deformed the spherical liposomes into long tubules with 20 – 100 - nm diameters . Inset shows a comparison of the protein coats observed on the tubules generated by endophilin ( left ) , amphiphysin ( center ) , and dynamin ( right ) . ( B ) Saturable binding of endophilin to liposomes with increasing concentrations of endophilin . ( C ) Salt sensitivity of endophilin binding to liposomes with increasing [ KCl ] . ( D ) The NH 2 - terminal region of endophilin is necessary and sufficient for lipid binding and tubulation . Dele - tion constructs were incubated with or without liposomes as shown , and cosedimentation with liposomes was determined . In the absence of liposomes , full length endophilin remains in the supernatant . The grey area in the domain cartoon of endophilin represents the portion of the protein most highly conserved amongst endophilin isoforms . Amino acids 1 – 125 within this region bind and tubulate liposomes . ( E ) The NH 2 - terminal 125 amino acid fragment was incubated with or without liposomes as shown , with increasing concentrations of the chemical cross - linker BS 3 for 20 min at 37 (cid:4) C . Samples were then prepared for SDS - PAGE analysis on a 4 – 12 % gradient gel . In the absence of lipo - somes , the endophilin construct crosslinks into a dimer , while in the presence of liposomes higher molecular weight products are formed suggestive of oligomerization ( see arrowheads ) . ( F ) The lipid tubulation activity of endophilin does not require LPA - AT activity . Endophilin was incubated with synthetic liposomes lacking both LPA and arachidonoyl coA , the two substrates for its reported LPA - AT activity . The inset shows a liposome composed of brain lipids after incubation with endophilin for 20 min at 4 (cid:4) C . ( G ) Clathrin - coated buds are observed on endophilin tubules when liposomes are incubated with a mixture of purified clathrin - coat proteins and recombinant endophilin 1 . Bars : ( A ) 100 nm ; 70 nm for inset ; ( F ) 100 nm ; ( G ) 200 nm . on A p r il 13 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published October 15 , 2001 Endophilin is a membrane - binding deforming protein | Farsad et al . 195 curvature in a similar fashion to dynamin and amphiphysin . Furthermore , we tested whether this property was shared by other proteins with homology to endophilin . Results and discussion Endophilin directly binds and deforms lipid bilayers Using a liposome - based assay previously shown to support generation of coated intermediates of clathrin - mediated en - docytosis ( Takei et al . , 1998 , 1999 ) , purified recombinant endophilin efficiently and robustly deformed lipid bilayers into tubules with outer diameters ranging between 20 – 100 nm ( Fig . 1 A ) . The tubule surfaces were decorated by tightly packed thin transverse striations , reminiscent of the coat ob - served on tubules generated by recombinant amphiphysin ( Fig . 1 A , see inset for a comparison of the endophilin , am - phiphysin , and dynamin coats on tubules ) ( Takei et al . , 1999 ) . The recombinant pleckstrin homology ( PH ) domain of PLC (cid:3) , a known phospholipid binding domain , did not deform the lipid bilayers into tubes , thereby distinguishing this activity from nonspecific changes due to protein mem - brane interactions ( Fig . 1 A ) . Endophilin binding to lipo - somes appeared to saturate at a molar ratio of under 1 : 200 ( protein to lipid ) in a liposome sedimentation assay ( Fig . 1 B ) , and displayed a nonlinear loss of binding with increasing salt ( Fig . 1 C ) . The NH 2 terminus of endophilin is necessary and sufficient for tubulation and lipid binding Deletion constructs of endophilin defined amino acids 1 – 125 as both necessary and sufficient for tubulation ( Fig . 1 D ) . Correspondingly , this 125 – amino acid fragment was also seen to cosediment with liposomes , whereas a construct that lacked this fragment stayed in the supernatant ( Fig . 1 D ) . In the presence of a chemical cross - linker , bis ( sulfosuccini - midyl ) suberate ( BS 3 ) , the endophilin NH 2 - terminal frag - ment cross - linked into higher order oligomers in a liposome - stimulated manner , whereas in the absence of liposomes , the fragment cross - linked only to a dimer ( Fig . 1 E ) . Similar re - sults were obtained using a second cross - linker , EDC , and with the full length protein ( unpublished data ) . The pres - ence of coated striations on the tubules and the cross - linking data together suggest that endophilin generates bilayer curva - ture by oligomerizing on the surface of liposomes . Membrane tubulation by endophilin is independent from LPA - AT activity The property of endophilin to deform the lipid bilayer is in - dependent from its reported lysophosphatidic acid ( LPA ) – acyl transferase ( AT ) activity ( Schmidt et al . , 1999 ) . Endo - philin tubulated synthetic liposomes devoid of the putative substrates for the LPA - AT reaction , arachidonoyl - CoA and LPA ( Schmidt et al . , 1999 ) ( Fig . 1 F ) . Furthermore , endo - philin tubulated liposomes in a reaction incubated on ice , minimizing any potential enzymatic contribution ( Fig . 1 F , inset ) . Thus , bilayer deformation may represent a thermody - namically favorable transition mediated by endophilin poly - merization at the liposome surface , rather than by the active enzymatic generation of specific membrane microdomains . Incubation of liposomes , purified clathrin coat proteins , and endophilin - generated tubules associated with clathrin - coated buds , consistent with a potential role for this protein in generating tubular membrane curvature at the neck of the nascent clathrin - coated pit ( Fig . 1 G ) . Similar observations were made for amphiphysin ( Takei et al . , 1999 ) . Of note , amphiphysin has binding sites for clathrin and the endocytic clathrin adaptor , AP2 ( Slepnev et al . , 2000 ) , but we have not observed binding to clathrin or to clathrin adaptors by endophilin . Endophilin and dynamin form a protein complex on bilayer tubules Since endophilin , like amphiphysin , interacts with dynamin via its SH3 domain , we investigated whether dynamin and endophilin could form a complex on liposomes , similar to what has been described for dynamin and amphiphysin ( Takei et al . , 1999 ) . The coat generated by affinity - purified dynamin 1 on bilayer tubules was represented by rings with an average spacing of 132 (cid:5) 5 Å ( Fig . 2 A ) , in agreement Figure 2 . Complex of endophilin with dynamin along membrane tubules . ( A and B ) The tubular coat produced by dynamin is modi - fied by the presence of endophilin . Liposomes were incubated for 15 min at 37 (cid:4) C with affinity - purified dynamin ( A ) or with dynamin plus recombinant endophilin ( B ) . The top inset of ( B ) shows the immunogold localization of endophilin on dynamin - coated tubules formed by incubating synaptic membranes with brain cytosol , ATP , and GTP (cid:2) S . See also Ringstad et al . ( 1999 ) . The bottom inset of ( B ) shows a comparison of the tubules generated on liposomes by brain cytosol , ATP , and GTP (cid:2) S ( left , thin section ) , with those generated by purified dynamin ( center , negative stain ) and dynamin plus recom - binant endophilin ( right , negative stain ) . Note the similarity of the electron - dense rings produced by brain cytosol with those formed by the dynamin – endophilin complex . ( C ) Both the NH 2 - terminal lipid binding region and the SH3 domain of endophilin ( which binds dynamin ) are required to form a complex of endophilin and dynamin on the lipid bilayer . Bars : ( A ) 200 nm ; ( B ) 50 nm . on A p r il 13 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published October 15 , 2001 196 The Journal of Cell Biology | Volume 155 , Number 2 , 2001 with the previously reported ring spacing determined by electron diffraction ( Sweitzer and Hinshaw , 1998 ) . Lipo - somes incubated with both recombinant endophilin and pu - rified dynamin created a different ring morphology ( Fig . 2 B , and lower inset ) . The rings were thicker , and had an aver - age spacing of 202 (cid:5) 15 Å , a difference of (cid:6) 50 % compared with the rings formed by dynamin alone ( Fig . 2 , A and B ) . This is similar to the ring morphology generated by the dy - namin – amphiphysin complex ( Takei et al . , 1999 ) and by brain cytosol with ATP / GTP (cid:2) S ( Takei et al . , 1995 , 1998 ) . Such a finding supports the presence of a multiprotein com - plex in the thick electron - dense rings observed at the neck of clathrin - coated pits on synaptic membranes , and explains the colocalization of endophilin with dynamin on coated tu - bules formed by incubating synaptic membranes with brain cytosol and ATP / GTP (cid:2) S ( Fig . 2 B , upper inset ) ( Ringstad et al . , 1997 , 1999 ) . Both the NH 2 - terminal lipid binding domain of endophilin and its COOH - terminal dynamin - binding SH3 domain were necessary for the formation of the complex with dynamin on the membranes , since neither domain alone could reproduce the phenomenon ( Fig . 2 C ) . Lipid binding and tubulation by endophilin requires an amphipathic stretch homologous to a corresponding region in amphiphysin We were intrigued by the similarities in the membrane de - formation properties of endophilin and amphiphysin ( Fig . 3 D ) , and in the tubular coats which they form ( Fig . 1 A , in - set ) . The two proteins have an overall similar domain struc - ture , each with a phylogenetically highly conserved NH 2 - ter - minal region comprising predicted (cid:7) - helices and coiled - coils , and a COOH - terminal SH3 domain which binds dynamin and synaptojanin ( Fig . 3 B ) . Furthermore , the membrane - tubulating properties of both proteins map to their respective NH 2 - termini ( Takei et al . , 1999 ; and this study ) . We ex - plored whether endophilin and amphiphysin share any pri - mary sequence similarity within this region . A BLAST align - ment of full - length endophilin 1 and amphiphysin 1 ( both rat ) identified the highest scoring region to be a 29 amino acid stretch ( 41 % identity and 75 % similarity ) within the first 35 amino acids of endophilin and the first 41 amino ac - ids of amphiphysin ( Fig . 3 A ) . Deleting most of this region of homology abolished binding to liposomes ( Fig . 3 C ) and tubulation ( unpublished data ) for both endophilin and am - phiphysin . Secondary structure algorithms ( nnpredict and PSIPRED ) for this 29 amino acid stretch predict (cid:7) - helices and random coils . When plotted on a helical wheel , a similar amphipathic pattern emerged for both proteins , with a hy - drophobic patch and an opposite hydrophilic face consisting of several basic residues ( Fig . 3 A ) . This feature may allow this domain to interact with phospholipid headgroups via the hydrophilic face , and then to partially embed into the bi - layer via the hydrophobic patch in a manner which favors membrane deformation . A point mutation of a conserved hydrophobic residue to an acidic residue ( phenylalanine to glutamate ) within this putative hydrophobic patch in endo - philin abolished both lipid binding and tubulation , whereas a conservative hydrophobic to hydrophobic point mutation ( phenylalanine to tryptophan ) of the same residue preserved both lipid binding and tubulation ( Fig . 3 , E and F ) . Endophilin and amphiphysin have different effects on dynamin vesiculation of bilayer tubules Given the similar morphology of amphiphysin - and endophi - lin - coated tubules both in the presence and absence of dy - namin , we compared their individual effects on dynamin - medi - Figure 3 . An endophilin amino acid stretch homologous to a cor - responding region in amphiphysin is required for lipid binding and tubulation . ( A ) BLAST alignment of rat endophilin 1 and amphiphysin 1 reveals a region of homology within the NH 2 terminus of both proteins . Plotting this region , which is predicted to form (cid:7) - helices and random coils , along a helical wheel reveals a similar amphip - athic pattern . Hydrophobic residues are highlighted in grey . Asterisk indicates phenylalanine targeted for point mutations . ( B ) Domain structure of endophilin and amphiphysin . The grey area corresponds to a conserved region of predicted (cid:7) - helices and coiled - coils in each protein , respectively , along the NH 2 terminus . The hatched region corresponds to the stretch of homology between endophilin and amphiphysin within their NH 2 - terminal domains . ( C ) Endophilin and amphiphysin deletion constructs missing most of this region of homology no longer cosediment with liposomes ( S , supernatant ; P , pellet ) , and also fail to tubulate liposomes ( unpublished data ) . ( D ) Incubation of liposomes with endophilin or amphiphysin generates membrane tubules with similar morphology . ( E and F ) A point muta - tion ( F10E ) in endophilin of a hydrophobic residue to an acidic residue within the putative hydrophobic patch in the endophilin – amphiphysin homology region prevents liposome binding and tubulation , whereas a conservative hydrophobic to hydrophobic mutation ( F10W ) preserves liposome binding and tubulation ( WT , wild - type ; F10E and F10W , mutant endophilins . Bar , 100 nm . on A p r il 13 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published October 15 , 2001 Endophilin is a membrane - binding deforming protein | Farsad et al . 197 ated membrane fragmentation . Dynamin - coated membrane tubules readily fragment into small vesicles in the presence of GTP ( Sweitzer and Hinshaw , 1998 ; Takei et al . , 1999 ) . As re - ported previously , amphiphysin supports this fragmentation ( Takei et al . , 1999 ) . Accordingly , after an incubation of lipo - somes with dynamin - GTP , or dynamin with amphiphysin - GTP , a large number of small vesicles were seen as evidenced by electron microscopy ( Fig . 4 , A and B ) . Any tubules which re - mained were generally much shorter . In contrast , when lipo - somes were incubated with dynamin and endophilin - GTP , fragmentation was inhibited , with a large number of long tu - bules persisting ( Fig . 4 , A and B ) . This result suggests that the presence of endophilin stabilizes the lipid tubule against the structural changes in dynamin which lead to vesiculation in the presence of GTP . Both endophilin and amphiphysin inhib - ited phosphate release by dynamin - GTP in the presence and ab - sence of liposomes ( Fig . 4 C ) . These results may reflect unique dynamics of dynamin oligomers in coassembly with endophilin versus amphiphysin : one which allows for a mechanochemical transduction productive for vesiculation , and another which hinders this . Therefore , despite important similarities , the dy - namin – endophilin interaction is qualitatively different from the dynamin – amphiphysin interaction on lipid bilayers . This differ - ence may have significant ramifications for the in vivo dynamics of these complexes at the neck of clathrin - coated pits . An endophilin - like protein localizes to the Golgi complex and also tubulates lipid bilayers We searched the database for other proteins which have se - quence homology to the NH 2 terminus of endophilin 1 to de - termine whether they also deform lipid bilayers . The search revealed the recently named endophilin B family of proteins ( Huttner and Schmidt , 2000 ) . This protein family shares a common domain structure with endophilin , including a COOH - terminal SH3 domain ( EMBL / GenBank / DDBJ ac - cession nos . AF263364 and AF263293 ) ( Fig . 5 A ) . Antibod - ies were raised against the recombinant endophilin B1 pro - tein . By Western blot analysis , this antibody recognized a 41 - kD band mainly in heart , brain , spleen , and lung , with lower expression in liver and testis ( Fig . 5 C ) . Additional higher molecular weight bands were also detected , specifically in brain , possibly representing other splice isoforms or post - translational modifications ( EMBL / GenBank / DDBJ acces - sion no . AF263364 ) ( Fig . 5 C ) . By immunofluorescence of brainstem frozen sections , endophilin B was detected in a syn - aptic - like pattern as shown by colocalization with synaptic markers such as amphiphysin ( which also shows diffuse cytoso - lic staining ) ( Fig . 5 D ) . In addition , endophilin B staining was detected on intracellular membranes in the perikaryon - den - dritic region of neurons ( Fig . 5 D ) . Further analysis of this staining showed partial colocalization with the Golgi complex marker GM - 130 ( Fig . 5 E ) . In CHO cells , endophilin B local - ized to a perinuclear compartment strongly positive for the Golgi complex marker GM - 130 , in addition to a more diffuse reticular staining pattern throughout the cell ( Fig . 5 F ) . Brefel - din A caused dispersion of the perinuclear staining by endophi - lin B , consistent with localization to the Golgi complex ( un - published data ) . There was no colocalization to endosomal compartments labeled with transferrin ( unpublished data ) . The purified recombinant human endophilin B1 protein tubulated liposomes in a manner morphologically indistin - guishable from endophilin A1 and amphiphysin ( Fig . 5 G ) . The amphipathic region of homology between endophilin ( now referred to as endophilin A1 ) and amphiphysin is also conserved in endophilin B1 , and deletion of this region in endophilin B1 also blocks tubulation ( unpublished data ) . Thus , endophilin B1 may be involved in tubulovesicular dy - namics of the Golgi complex and potentially of other intra - cellular membrane compartments , underscoring a diverse role for proteins which share this membrane tubulating property . A lipid - interacting / deforming domain for tubulovesicular dynamics in membrane trafficking ? Collectively , our results provide evidence that endophilin di - rectly binds and deforms lipid bilayers into narrow tubules within the size range of the tubular neck of clathrin - coated pits . This activity of endophilin is a protein - mediated phe - nomenon which likely occurs by oligomerization at the sur - face of the bilayer . Endophilin tubulates membranes at 4 (cid:4) C , and also tubulates synthetic bilayers devoid of the putative substrates of its reported LPA - AT activity , showing that for - mation of high curvature membranes by endophilin can be independent of lipid - modifying enzymatic activity . We did observe that endophilin binds and tubulates liposomes made from a brain lipid extract more efficiently than synthetic li - posomes , thus indicating some role for the composition of the bilayer ( unpublished data ) . However , elucidation of this finding requires further experimentation . We hypothesize that the tubulating activity of endophilin reflects one possi - ble function for this protein in clathrin - mediated endocyto - Figure 4 . Different effects of endophilin and amphiphysin on dynamin properties in vitro . ( A ) Liposomes incubated with buffer , GTP , and either purified dynamin ( center ) , or dynamin – amphiphysin ( left ) vesiculate liposomes . In contrast , addition of endophilin to dynamin ( right ) inhibits this phenomenon . ( B ) Morphometric analy - sis of the reactions shown in A . ( C ) Phosphate release from (cid:2) 32 P - labeled GTP incubated with dynamin and dynamin interactors , or GST as a control , in the absence ( hatched bars ) or presence ( solid bars ) of liposomes . Note the decrease in phosphate release by dynamin in the presence of endophilin and amphiphysin . Bar , 100 nm . on A p r il 13 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published October 15 , 2001 198 The Journal of Cell Biology | Volume 155 , Number 2 , 2001 Figure 5 . The endophilin B class of proteins is found on intracellular membrane compartments and also tubulates liposomes . ( A ) Cross - species sequence alignment ( Clustal method ) of the endophilin A1 and endophilin B1 proteins showing broad homology . h , human ; m , mouse ; lf , lamprey ( L . fluviatilis ) ; dm , D . melanogaster ; ce , C . elegans . ( B ) Phylogenetic tree of the endophilin A1 and endophilin B1 proteins . ( C ) Multiple tissue Western blot using a polyclonal rabbit antibody raised against recombinant endophilin B1 showing expression primarily in heart , brain , spleen , and lung , with lower expression evident in liver and testis . Note the presence of brain - specific higher molecular weight bands . ( D ) Immunofluorescence of a rat brainstem frozen section using antibodies against either endophilin B1 ( top ) or amphiphysin 1 ( bottom ) . Note the localization of endophilin B in a synaptic - like pattern at the cell periphery similar to the localization of amphiphysin . In addition to this synaptic staining , endophilin B localizes to intracellular particles , while amphiphysin shows a diffuse cytosolic staining pattern . ( E ) Endophilin B ( top ) partially colocalizes with a Golgi - specific marker , GM - 130 ( bottom ) , in a large brainstem neuron . ( F ) Endophilin B ( top ) partially colocalizes with a Golgi - specific marker , GM - 130 ( bottom ) , in CHO cells . ( G ) Purified recombinant endophilin B1 deforms liposomes into tubules similar to those seen with endophilin and amphiphysin . Bar , ( D – F ) 10 (cid:8) m ; ( G ) 100 nm . on A p r il 13 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published October 15 , 2001 Endophilin is a membrane - binding deforming protein | Farsad et al . 199 sis . Along with dynamin and amphiphysin , endophilin may be part of a protein complex governing aspects of membrane deformation and fission . Our findings provide a rationale for the observed require - ment for endophilin in the tubulation of synaptic mem - branes by brain cytosol in the presence of GTP (cid:2) S ( Ringstad et al . , 1999 ) . These observations may also partially explain the arrest of clathrin - mediated synaptic vesicle retrieval at shallow stages of invagination upon perturbation of endo - philin function in lamprey ( Ringstad et al . , 1999 ) . Endophi - lin membrane binding and protein – protein interactions may serve to localize and functionally orient the protein at the clathrin - coated pit . Amphiphysin and endophilin tubulate lipid bilayers both independently and as a complex with dy - namin ; however , their distinct effects on dynamin in vitro suggest a potential differential modulatory role on dynamin function in vivo which needs to be explored further . We find that endophilin B1 , a member of a newly discov - ered family of proteins , localizes to both synaptic and Golgi / intracellular membrane compartments , and displays a mem - brane tubulating activity similar to that of endophilin A1 and amphiphysin . All three proteins share a short NH 2 - ter - minal amphipathic region which we show to be required for membrane tubulation . This may have implications for a shared function for this motif in tubulo - vesicular dynamics in cellular trafficking events . Recently , RICH ( RhoGAP in - teracting with CIP4 homologues ) , a novel RhoGAP con - taining protein , was found in a yeast two - hybrid screen for CIP 4 ( CDC - 42 – interacting protein 4 ) interacting proteins ( Richnau and Aspenstrom , 2001 ) . RICH has an NH 2 - ter - minal domain with homology to endophilin A1 , and the amphipathic motif of endophilin A1 is also conserved . A splice isoform of RICH which only contains the endophilin homology domain ( RICH 1B ) localizes to intracellular punctate compartments ( Richnau and Aspenstrom , 2001 ) . It will be interesting to see whether RICH also has a mem - brane - interacting / tubulating function , further expanding the diversity of proteins with this motif in membrane dy - namics . Materials and methods Liposomes Liposomes composed of brain lipid extract ( type 1 , Folch fraction 1 ; Sigma - Aldrich ) were made as described ( Takei et al . , 1999 ) . Synthetic lipo - somes were made using HPLC - purified DOPC ( 40 % ) , DOPS ( 40 % ) , and DOPE ( 20 % ) from Avanti Polar Lipids , Inc . Purified proteins Dynamin was affinity purified from rat brain cytosol using amphiphysin 1 – SH3 domain as described ( Owen et al . , 1998 ) . This material , as assessed by SDS - PAGE , yielded (cid:2) 90 – 95 % dynamin , and 5 – 10 % synaptojanin . All data shown use this material . Synaptojanin was immunodepleted from this affinity - purified material using a monoclonal antibody to yield a more highly purified dynamin preparation , and similar results were obtained . Recombinant rat endophilin A1 , human amphiphysin 1 , human endo - philin B1 , and PLC (cid:3) - PH were cloned in pGEX ( Amersham Pharmacia Bio - tech ) , and purified as glutathione S - transferase ( GST ) fusion proteins according to standard methods ( Amersham Pharmacia Biotech ) . For endo - philin , amphiphysin , and endophilin B1 , the GST tag was subsequently cleaved by PreScission Protease ( Amersham Pharmacia Biotech ) . Endophilin deletion constructs were prepared by PCR to yield the fol - lowing fragments : amino acids 1 – 125 , 1 – 261 , 126 – 352 , and 34 – 352 . The constructs were subcloned and purified as above . Point mutants were gen - erated using mutant primers and plasmid extension by PCR . Clathrin - coat fraction was purified from bovine calf brain as described ( Takei et al . , 1999 ) . Electron microscopy Liposomes ( 0 . 1 mg / ml final ) were incubated at 37 (cid:4) C for 10 – 20 min in buffer A ( 25 mM Hepes - KOH , pH 7 . 4 , 25 mM KCl , 2 . 5 mM Mg 2 (cid:9) acetate , 150 mM K - glutamate ) with various proteins and nucleotides at the follow - ing final concentrations : dynamin 0 . 1 mg / ml , amphiphsyin 0 . 1 mg / ml , en - dophilin 0 . 1 mg / ml , endophilin deletion constructs 0 . 1 – 0 . 2 mg / ml , coat proteins 0 . 5 mg / ml , PLC (cid:3) - PH 0 . 1 mg / ml , GTP 1 mM , and GTP (cid:2) S 0 . 5 mM ( Takei et al . , 1999 ) . At the end of the incubation , aliquots were adsorbed onto 200 – 400 (cid:8) M formvar - and carbon - coated copper EM grids for 3 – 5 min at room temperature , washed in 0 . 1 M Hepes , pH 7 . 4 , stained in 1 – 2 % uranyl acetate , blotted , and then allowed to air dry . For incubations at 4 (cid:4) C , all of the above was performed on ice . Average ring spacing was determined by counting the number of rings in 10 350 - nm tubules , and then dividing by the tubule length . To quantify the number of tubules seen under various conditions , 6 13 - (cid:8) m 2 areas of the grid were scored . Each independent tubule and each branch of a tu - bule was counted as a tubule . Liposome binding Liposome sedimentation was performed using 100 (cid:8) g sucrose - loaded lipo - somes incubated with 5 – 10 (cid:8) g protein ( 1 – 25 (cid:8) g for saturable binding ) in 400 – 500 (cid:8) l buffer A or in Hepes - KCl , pH 7 . 4 ( to determine salt sensitivity ) for 10 – 20 min at 37 (cid:4) C . Liposomes were sedimented at 100 , 000 g in a Beckman Coulter TLA 100 . 3 rotor for 20 min , the supernatant was thor - oughly removed , and sedimented liposomes were solubilized in 2 % SDS . To monitor recovery , liposomes were labeled with 0 . 5 % NBD – phosphati - dyl choline and absorbance was measured at 460 nm . In some cases , pro - teins in the pellet and supernatant were concentrated by chloroform pre - cipitation and methanol extraction . Samples were subjected to SDS - PAGE and analyzed by either Coomassie staining or by slot blot analysis using af - finity - purified polyclonal endophilin antibodies and 125 I . Band intensities were quantified by optic densitometry or phosphorimaging . For the crosslinking assay , 4 (cid:8) g of the endophilin 125 amino acid frag - ment ( with or without 8 (cid:8) g liposomes ) was preincubated in Hepes , pH 7 . 4 , 100 mM KCl for 20 min at 37 (cid:4) C , then an equal volume of 2 (cid:10) buffer with the heterobifunctional chemical cross - linker bis ( sulfosuccinimidyl ) suberate ( BS 3 ) was added to achieve final concentrations of 0 , 1 , 5 , and 10 mM cross - linker . The mixture was incubated for an additional 30 min at 37 (cid:4) C , and the samples were then prepared for SDS - PAGE analysis . Miscellaneous procedures Immunogold labeling of endophilin was performed by standard agarose - embedding / labeling protocols as described ( Ringstad et al . , 1999 ) followed by thin sectioning . The GTPase activity of dynamin was determined by phosphate release as described ( Takei et al . , 1999 ) . Western blotting and immunofluorescence was performed using standard procedures as de - scribed ( Ringstad et al . , 1997 ) . We are most grateful to Drs . Graham Warren and Vinzenz Unger for many helpful discussions and critical reading of the manuscript . We also wish to thank Drs . Gilbert Di Paolo , Lorenzo Pellegrini , Markus Wenk , Vladimir Slepnev , and Gianluca Cestra for technical advice and helpful discussions . This work was supported in part by National Institutes of Health grants NS36251 and CA46128 to P . De Camilli . K . Farsad and S . R . Floyd are sup - ported in part by an Medical Scientist Training Program fellowship from the National Institutes of Health . N . Ringstad was supported in part by a predoctoral training grant ( T32GM07527 ) from the National Institutes of Health to the Department of Cellular and Molecular Physiology , Yale Uni - versity School of Medicine . Submitted : 23 July 2001 Revised : 10 September 2001 Accepted : 13 September 2001 References David , C . , P . S . McPherson , O . Mundigl , and P . De Camilli . 1996 . A role of am - phiphysin in synaptic vesicle endocytosis suggested by its binding to dy - namin in nerve terminals . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 93 : 331 – 335 . de Heuvel , E . , A . W . Bell , A . R . Ramjaun , K . Wong , W . S . Sossin , and P . S . McPher - son . 1997 . Identification of the major synaptojanin - binding proteins in brain . J . Biol . Chem . 272 : 8710 – 8716 . on A p r il 13 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published October 15 , 2001 200 The Journal of Cell Biology | Volume 155 , Number 2 , 2001 Gad , H . , N . Ringstad , P . Low , O . Kjaerulff , J . Gustafsson , M . Wenk , G . Di Paolo , Y . Nemoto , J . Crun , M . H . Ellisman , P . De Camilli , O . Shupliakov , and L . Brodin . 2000 . Fission and uncoating of synaptic clathrin - coated vesicles are perturbed by disruption of interactions with the SH3 domain of endophilin . Neuron . 27 : 301 – 312 . Heuser , J . E . , and T . S . Reese . 1973 . Evidence for recycling of synaptic vesicle mem - brane during transmitter release at the frog neuromuscular junction . J . Cell Biol . 57 : 315 – 344 . Huttner , W . B . , and A . Schmidt . 2000 . Lipids , lipid modification and lipid - protein interaction in membrane budding and fission - insights from the roles of en - dophilin A1 and synaptophysin in synaptic vesicle endocytosis . Curr . Opin . Neurobiol . 10 : 543 – 551 . Koenig , J . H . , and K . Ikeda . 1989 . Disappearance and reformation of synaptic vesi - cle membrane upon transmitter release observed under reversible blockage of membrane retrieval . J . Neurosci . 9 : 3844 – 3860 . Owen , D . J . , P . Wigge , Y . Vallis , J . D . Moore , P . R . Evans , and H . T . McMahon . 1998 . Crystal structure of the amphiphysin - 2 SH3 domain and its role in the prevention of dynamin ring formation . EMBO J . 17 : 5273 – 5285 . Richnau , N . , and P . Aspenstrom . 2001 . RICH - a RhoGAP domain - containing pro - tein involved in signalling by Cdc42 and Rac1 . J . Biol . Chem . 28 : 28 . Ringstad , N . , H . Gad , P . Low , G . Di Paolo , L . Brodin , O . Shupliakov , and P . De Camilli . 1999 . Endophilin / SH3p4 is required for the transition from early to late stages in clathrin - mediated synaptic vesicle endocytosis . Neuron . 24 : 143 – 154 . Ringstad , N . , Y . Nemoto , and P . De Camilli . 1997 . The SH3p4 / Sh3p8 / SH3p13 protein family : binding partners for synaptojanin and dynamin via a Grb2 - like Src homology 3 domain . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 94 : 8569 – 8574 . Schmidt , A . , M . Wolde , C . Thiele , W . Fest , H . Kratzin , A . V . Podtelejnikov , W . Witke , W . B . Huttner , and H . D . Soling . 1999 . Endophilin I mediates syn - aptic vesicle formation by transfer of arachidonate to lysophosphatidic acid . Nature . 401 : 133 – 141 . Shupliakov , O . , P . Low , D . Grabs , H . Gad , H . Chen , C . David , K . Takei , P . De Camilli , and L . Brodin . 1997 . Synaptic vesicle endocytosis impaired by dis - ruption of dynamin - SH3 domain interactions . Science . 276 : 259 – 263 . Slepnev , V . I . , G . C . Ochoa , M . H . Butler , and P . De Camilli . 2000 . Tandem ar - rangement of the clathrin and AP - 2 binding domains in amphiphysin 1 , and disruption of clathrin coat function mediated by amphiphysin fragments comprising these sites . J . Biol . Chem . 275 : 17583 – 17589 . Sweitzer , S . M . , and J . E . Hinshaw . 1998 . Dynamin undergoes a GTP - dependent conformational change causing vesiculation . Cell . 93 : 1021 – 1029 . Takei , K . , V . Haucke , V . Slepnev , K . Farsad , M . Salazar , H . Chen , and P . De Camilli . 1998 . Generation of coated intermediates of clathrin - mediated en - docytosis on protein - free liposomes . Cell . 94 : 131 – 141 . Takei , K . , P . S . McPherson , S . L . Schmid , and P . De Camilli . 1995 . Tubular mem - brane invaginations coated by dynamin rings are induced by GTP (cid:2) S in nerve terminals . Nature . 374 : 186 – 190 . Takei , K . , V . I . Slepnev , V . Haucke , and P . De Camilli . 1999 . Functional partner - ship between amphiphysin and dynamin in clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Nat . Cell Biol . 1 : 33 – 39 . on A p r il 13 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published October 15 , 2001