# 2008 The Authors Journal compilation # 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1600 - 0854 . 2008 . 00708 . x Traffic 2008 ; 9 : 559 – 573 Blackwell Munksgaard Yeast Arf3p Modulates Plasma Membrane PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P2 Levels to Facilitate Endocytosis Iwona I . Smaczynska - de Rooij , Rosaria Costa and Kathryn R . Ayscough * Department of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology , University of Sheffield , Firth Court , Western Bank , Sheffield S10 2TN , UK * Corresponding author : Kathryn R . Ayscough , k . ayscough @ sheffield . ac . uk Phosphatidylinositol - ( 4 , 5 ) - bisphosphate [ PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P2 ] is a key regulator of endocytosis . PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P2 genera - tion at the plasma membrane in yeast is mediated by the kinase Mss4p , but the mechanism underlying the tempo - ral and spatial activation of Mss4p to increase formation of PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P2 at appropriate sites is not known . Here , we show that ADP ribosylation factor ( Arf ) 3p , the yeast homologue of mammalian Arf6 , is necessary for wild - type levels of PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P2 at the plasma membrane . Arf3p localizes to dynamic spots at the membrane , and the behaviour of these is consistent with it functioning in concert with endocytic machinery . Localization of Arf3p is disrupted by deletion of genes encoding an ArfGAP homology protein Gts1p and a guanine nucleotide exchange factor Yel1p . Significantly , deletion of arf3 causes a reduction in PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P2 at the plasma mem - brane , while increased levels of active Arf3p , caused by deletion of the GTPase - activating protein Gts1 , increase PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P2 levels . Furthermore , elevated Arf3p corre - lates with an increase in the number of endocytic sites . Our data provide evidence for a mechanism in yeast to positively regulate plasma membrane production of PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P2 levels and that these changes impact on endocytosis . Key words : actin , Arf3 , Arf6 , ArfGAP , Saccharomyces cerevisiae , synaptojanin Received 3 July 2007 , revised and accepted for publica - tion 13 January 2008 , uncorrected manuscript published online 15 January 2008 , published online 20 February 2008 The ADP ribosylation factor ( Arf ) proteins of mammalian cells have been extensively studied and have been shown to play a number of roles in membrane - trafficking path - ways ( reviewed in 1 ) . As with other members of the Ras - related GTP - binding protein family , the Arf proteins cycle between their active ( GTP - bound ) and their inactive ( GDP - bound ) forms . Hydrolysis of GTP to GDP is mediated by GTPase - activating proteins ( GAPs ) , and the exchange of GDP for GTP is performed by guanine nucleotide exchange factors ( GEFs ) . There are six mammalian Arfs , although it is Arf6 that is postulated to play the primary role in endocytosis ( 1 ) . Evidence to date indicates that active Arf6 plays an important role in modulation of phospholipid metabolism and in particular , activation of phosphatidyl - inositol kinases , which leads to increased production of plasma membrane phosphatidylinositol - ( 4 , 5 ) - bisphosphate [ PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P2 ] ( 2 , 3 ) . It is well established in mammalian cells and in yeast that PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P2 plays a key role in endocytosis ( 4 – 7 ) and a number of proteins involved in endocytosis contain domains ( e . g . ENTH ) , which are able to interact with the lipid head group of PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P2 . In yeast , the sole phosphatidylinositol 4 - phosphate 5 - kinase Mss4p is essential to generate PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P2 ( 8 ) . Interest - ingly , genetic interactions have been observed between an Mss4 temperature - sensitive allele and a number of genes encoding actin regulatory proteins ( cap1 , cap2 and myo5 ) as well as with deletions in genes for several membrane - trafficking proteins ( 9 ) . These interactions high - light the importance of PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P2 for actin filament assembly and endocytosis . The role of the yeast homologue of Arf6 , called Arf3p , has been less extensively analyzed . While it is found at the plasma membrane , earlier reports suggested that Arf3p was not involved in endocytosis ( 10 ) . This conclusion was based largely on the fact that deletion of arf3 was not accompanied by an apparent reduction in uptake of the fluid - phase marker Lucifer yellow . However , it was noted that overexpression of the active mutant form of Arf3 ( Arf3Q71L ) did cause defects in cortical actin and that the budding pattern of these expressing mutants was also defective ( 10 ) . Because cortical actin patches are now known to be sites of endocytosis , mutations that affect these structures seem likely to also affect endocytosis . However , the recognized level of redundancy among endocytic proteins could easily explain why deletion of a single gene might not affect the endosomal uptake process . In addition , the Lucifer yellow fluid - phase assay cannot detect subtle changes in the endocytic process . Support for an endocytic role for Arf3p was shown in our laboratory when we identified an interaction of Arf3p with a protein Lsb5p , which itself has a role in yeast endo - cytosis ( 11 , 12 ) . Lsb5p shows homology with the Golgi - localized , gamma ear homology domain ( GGA ) family of proteins having an N - terminal Vps27 , Hrs and STAM ( VHS ) domain and a central GGA and Tom1 ( GAT ) domain . VHS domains are protein – protein interaction domains at the N - terminus of many membrane - trafficking molecules , while GAT domains bind to Arf and also to ubiquitin . Unlike the Gga proteins that function in membrane - trafficking events through the Golgi and endosomes , the C - terminal half of Lsb5p does not contain a detectable clathrin - binding motif nor a C - terminal gamma adaptin domain . Instead , at its www . traffic . dk 559 extreme C - terminus , Lsb5p contains an NPFXD motif that interacts with the endocytic adaptor protein Sla1p ( 11 – 13 ) . Lsb5 also interacts with Las17 , the major actin - nucleating activity for endocytosis ( 11 , 14 ) . The interaction of Arf3p with proteins having roles in endocytosis gave strong circumstantial evidence for a function of Arf3p within the endocytic process . A recent study ( 15 ) has provided further evidence for effects of Arf3 on the actin cytoske - leton , although the effect of Arf3 on endocytosis was not reported . Significant effects on key actin regulatory pro - teins involved in endocytosis were observed . Most nota - bly , that overexpression of Arf3p alleviated cortical patch defects caused by deletion of the yeast Wiskott Aldrich syndrome protein ( WASP ) and WASP interacting protein ( WIP ) homologues Las17 and Vrp1 , respectively . These data strongly indicate that yeast Arf3p may interact with or regulate proteins important for endocytosis in yeast . In this study , we aimed to take advantage of more sensitive assays for functions in endocytosis using live cell imaging . This approach has demonstrated roles for actin - binding proteins in endocytosis where previous ap - proaches had suggested no apparent role ( 16 , 17 ) . We reasoned that use of this approach , in combination with the generation of various mutant strains , should be able to determine whether such a function of Arf3p exists and also whether there are GAP and GEF proteins that function to modulate it . As well as demonstrating that increased Arf3 levels correlate with an increase in plasma membrane PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P2 levels , we show colocalization of Arf3 with GAP and GEF homology proteins . The GAP homology protein Gts1 shows clear colocalization and interactions with a number of components of the endocytic machinery . The increased levels of PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) phosphate appear to enhance the number of endocytic events . Furthermore , loss of Arf3 leads to reduced plasma membrane PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P2 levels and an inability of the GEF homology protein Yel1p to localize to the plasma membrane . Results Arf3p localizes to foci at the plasma membrane , which represent sites of endocytosis While previous studies have revealed Arf3p localizing to the bud and neck region of cells ( 10 , 11 ) , we wanted to address whether the relatively uniform distribution of the protein in these regions was partially because of the use of lower - resolution microscope systems . We visualized Arf3 protein tagged with green fluorescent protein ( GFP ) at the 3 0 end using the DeltaVision deconvolution microscope system . Functionality of the tagged protein was verified as described in Materials and Methods . Using this approach , we could see that in addition to Arf3p throughout the membrane of the bud and neck region , we could detect very dynamic foci of brighter fluorescence . These patches formed and disappeared within the plane of the membrane ( Figure 1A and Movie S1 ) . We postulated that these foci could represent sites of endocytosis and so , using dual - colour imaging , we determined whether any of these spots also colocalized with known endocytic proteins . We generated yeast strains carrying Arf3 – GFP and co - expressing Sac6p – monomeric red fluorescent protein ( mRFP ) , clathrin ( Chc1 ) – mRFP , Las17p – mRFP or Sla1p – mRFP . As shown in Figure 1B , many , but not all , of the Arf3 spots colocalize with known endocytic proteins . In particular , we see a high level of colocalization with the adaptor protein Sla1p , indicating that this might represent the stage of the process during which Arf3p plays its role . We do not however observe Arf3 moving inwards with the vesicle , consistent with the behaviour of Arf6 in mamma - lian cells . Colocalization with Sac6p is relatively low , suggesting that this might be the stage at which Arf3p is leaving the site of endocytosis . In addition , Sac6p appears to be on the cytosolic side of Arf3p further demonstrating that Arf3p does not leave the plane of the membrane and enter into formed vesicles . Thus , Arf3 does localize at appropriate sites to be involved in endocytosis . It has also been shown that addition of latrunculin - A ( LAT - A ) to cells results in a disassembled actin cytoskeleton and an abrogation of endocytosis ( 18 ) . Disruptionof Arf3p behav - iour by LAT - A addition would further support an endocytic role for Arf3p . LAT - A was added to Arf3 – GFP - expressing cells for 5 – 30 min . This treatment was seen to cause a shift in Arf3p localization over the time – course from the bud cortex to the neck and membrane of the mother cell , and for about 25 % of cells , localization was observed in the proximity of the vacuole membrane ( Figure 1C ) . However , the Arf3 - GFP spots remain dynamic in the presence of the drug . Deletion of SLA1 encoding an endocytic adaptor protein also causes a shift in Arf3p localization away from the bud to give an even mother – bud distribution ( 71 % of cells show even mother – bud Arf3 distribution ) ( Figure 1C ) . These results suggest that Arf3p requires endocytosis to maintain its polarized localization . The behaviour of Arf3 patches indicates that it may not form part of the main endocytic complex that invaginates with the forming vesicle . Gts1p , a putative ArfGAP for Arf3p , interacts with known endocytic proteins As Arf3p partially colocalizes with sites of endocytosis , we reasoned that there may be regulatory GAPs and GEFs for the protein , also associated with the plasma membrane . We identified Gts1p through a database search for proteins that show partial colocalization with actin in the GFP localization database ( 19 ) . A recent publication also reports Gts1 in cortical patches as well as in the nucleus – although in this study , Gts1 was expressed from a plasmid and not from its own promoter ( 20 ) . Gts1p has also over the years been ascribed a number of functions from nutritional - sensing oscillator for ultradian rhythm to a transcriptional activator ( 21 , 22 ) . As well as containing an ArfGAP homology domain at its N - terminus , Gts1p also contains a ubiquitin associated 560 Traffic 2008 ; 9 : 559 – 573 Smaczynska - de Rooij et al . ( UBA ) domain and a glutamine - rich region potentially able to form a coiled coil at its C - terminus ( Figure 2A ) . A region just upstream of this has been shown to be important for homodimerization ( 22 ) . Within the UBA region is a sequence that has homology to the central region of human ArfGAP1 protein ( Figure 2A and Figure S1 ) , which folds into a motif that acts as ArfGAP1 lipid - packing sensor ( ALPS ) . The ALPS motif forms an amphipathic helix on highly curved membranes and is necessary for coupling ArfGAP1 activity with the membrane curvature ( 23 ) . To investigate interactions between Gts1p and the endo - cytic machinery , we initially used a two - hybrid approach using a Gts1 bait and a number of prey plasmids in which different endocytic proteins were fused to Gal4 - activation domain . Interactions were detected with several well - characterized endocytic proteins including the endocytic adaptor Sla1p , clathrin light chain Clc1p , a synaptojanin - interacting protein Bsp1p , the essential protein Pan1p , the actin - associated protein Ysc84 , Yap1802 ( member of the YAP180 family of endocytic proteins ) and a region of the yeast homologue of the Huntingtin - interacting protein - 1R Sla2p ( Table 1 ) . Interestingly , a particular region of Sla2p lying between residues 206 and 310 was found to be particularly important for the interaction . This region con - tains part of the ANTH domain of Sla2p . We attempted to purify Gts1p to confirm these interactions , but the protein was very insoluble and prone to precipitation , making direct binding studies difficult to interpret . Other genetic and live cell imaging approaches were therefore used to further our studies on the endocytic role of Gts1p . Cells expressing Gts1 – GFP were observed , and localiza - tion of the protein was examined . As shown in Figure 2B and Movie S1 , Gts1 – GFP localizes in dynamic punctate structures at the plasma membrane and has an average lifetime in these patches of 24 seconds . During the initial stages of localization , the protein is relatively non - motile . Figure 1 : Localization and behav - iour of Arf3p protein at the plasma membrane . A ) Fluorescence of Arf3p – GFP in a wild - type cell . Arf3p localizes to the plasma membrane in patch - like structures , and its localiza - tion is polarized mainly to bud and neck of the cell . This image is taken from Movie S1 . B ) Arf3p colocal - ization study – insets shown are taken from the merged images . Arf3p shows partial colocalization with endocytic proteins Las17p , Sac6p and Sla1p . Colocalization with clathrin heavy chain was not de - tected . Arrows mark the spots that colocalize , and arrowheads mark the spots that do not colocalize . C ) Arf3p loses its bud - polarized localization in the presence of LAT - A and in cells lacking sla1 expression . Both wild - type cells expressing Arf3p – GFP were treated with the actin - disrupting drug LAT - A ( 200 m M for 5 – 30 min ) , and D sla1 cells expressing Arf3pGFP were visualized by DeltaVision micro - scope . Bar , 2 m m . Traffic 2008 ; 9 : 559 – 573 561 Arf3p in Yeast Endocytosis The end of its lifetime is marked by a short inward movement with an average distance of 0 . 27 m m ( Movie S1 ) . In this respect , the behaviour of Gts1p is most similar to that of the proteins such as Sla1p , although its total lifetime is shorter ( 16 , 24 ) . We also generated strains that coexpressed both Gts1p – GFP and Sla1 – mRFP , Las17 – mRFP , Chc1 – RFP or Sac6 – RFP . As shown in Figure 2C , there is substantial colocalization of Sla1p – mRFP and Figure 2 : Structure and localization of the Gts1 protein . A ) Domain structure of Gts1p . Identifiable domains and their positions are depicted . B ) Gts1p localization at the membrane . Visualization of GFP - tagged Gts1 and kymograph show an average 24 - second lifetime on the membrane . Colocalization is shown with Sla1 – mRFP . C ) Gts1p colocalization with endocytic proteins . Gts1 – GFP was coexpressed with Las17p – mRFP , Sac6p – RFP , Chc1p – RFP and Sla1p – mRFP . Colocalization of Gts1p with all of these proteins was observed , although the highest colocalization rate is clearly visible for Gts1p and Sla1p proteins . Box is magnified three times . Arrows mark the spots that colocalize , and arrowheads mark the spots that do not colocalize . Bar , 2 m m . D ) Bar graph showing average patch lifetime of Gts1p – GFP in wild - type ( WT ) , D rvs167 , D sla1 and D arf3 and after treatment with 200 m M LAT - A for 30 min . Lifetimes of Gts1 mutants Gts1 I224S and Gts1 C50S , C53S are also shown . All lifetimes are significantly different from WT Gts1GFP lifetimes ( p < 0 . 0001 ) , and the mutants Gts1 I224S and Gts1 C50S , C53S are significantly different from cells transformed with wild - type GTS1 ( p < 0 . 0001 ) . Error bars show standard errors of the mean ( n > 35 patches ) . 562 Traffic 2008 ; 9 : 559 – 573 Smaczynska - de Rooij et al . Gts1p – GFP . However , the presence of spots that do not colocalize and the fact that Sla1p lifetime on the mem - brane is about 34 seconds ( about 10 seconds longer than that of Gts1p ) suggest that these proteins are not recruited to and / or released from the membrane at the same time . Kymographs comparing Gts1 and Sla1 appearance in and disassembly from spots are shown in Figure 2B . We also observed colocalization of Gts1p with an early actin filament organiser Las17p and actin - bundling protein Sac6p . Again , as in the case of Sla1p , there were spots present that do not colocalize . In the case of clathrin heavy chain ( Chc1 – RFP ) , we were able to see some colocaliza - tion with Gts1 – GFP after magnification ( (cid:1) 3 ) of the region of plasma membrane , which reduced noise from clathrin that localizes to the Golgi membranes . These colocaliza - tion data demonstrate that Gts1 is clearly in the forming endocytic patches and within these localizes most closely with Sla1p . We also determined the effect of LAT - A and deletion of SLA1 and RVS167 genes on the appearance and dynamics of Gts1p at the cortex . Time - lapse movies revealed that Gts1p – GFP localizes to the cell cortex in an actin - independent manner and does not require the presence of Sla1p or Rvs167p to achieve this ( data not shown ) . However , deletion of amphiphysin Rvs167p or the adaptor protein Sla1p and inhibition of actin polymerization all increase lifetime of Gts1 at the membrane . Rvs167 deletion increases lifetime of Gts1p on the membrane from 24 to 39 seconds . In the case of LAT - A treatment ( 5 – 30 min ) and sla1 deletion , the changes in Gts1p lifetime are more dramatic , with an average time of 79 and 117 seconds , respectively ( in both cases , we observed some spots with lifetime longer than 3 min ) . Using this approach , we also analyzed the effect of arf3 deletion on Gts1GFP lifetime . Significantly , we observed a reduction in lifetime at the plasma membrane by over 25 % ( 23 . 9 (cid:2) 0 . 36 seconds to 17 . 7 (cid:2) 0 . 4 seconds ) . Overall , this data strongly support a role for Gts1 in endocytosis as the behaviour of Gts1 in the patches reflects that of other well - characterized proteins . To address the importance of domains within Gts1 , we generated two mutants – I224S that disrupts the ALPS motif ( Figure S1 ) and C50S , C53S that disrupts function of the GAP domain . Gts1 I224S – GFP localizes in cortical spots just as the wild - type protein . However , its lifetime at the membrane is reduced to 17 . 1 seconds ( (cid:2) 0 . 45 sec - onds ) . Thus , the ALPS motif appears to play a role in sta - bilizing Gts1 at the plasma membrane . The Gts1C50S , C53S – GFP protein was also still able to localize to punctate spots at the plasma membrane ( data not shown ) , and its lifetime within these spots was slightly reduced to 20 . 81 (cid:2) 0 . 36 seconds ( Figure 2D ) , demonstrating that the GAP domain does not need to be active for Gts1p to localize . Genetic interactions with gts1 were also investigated with crosses being made to mutants harbouring deletions in several genes for proteins involved in actin organization and endocytosis including D abp1 , D lsb5 , D clc1 , D sla1 and D apl3 ( encoding a - adaptin , large subunit of the clathrin - associated protein complex ) . Only in the case of D gts1 D sla1 was a marked genetic effect observed . As single mutations , D gts1 was able to grow at 37 8 C and D sla1 at 34 8 C . The double mutant D gts1 D sla1 displayed slow growth at 30 8 C and no growth at 37 8 C both on rich and on synthetic medium . Notably , this strain was not able to grow on rich medium at 34 8 C , although we still observed slower growth on synthetic medium ( data not shown ) . Single deletions did not show any differences that were dependent on the growth medium . Yel1p contains Sec7 and PH domains and localizes to the plasma membrane in an Arf3 - dependent manner In yeast , there are five proteins that contain the Sec7 homology domain that is characteristic of GEF proteins . Function is ascribed to four of these : Sec7p , Gea1p and Gea2p are GEFs functioning in endoplasmic reticulum – Golgi and intra - Golgi membrane trafficking ( 25 , 26 ) . Syt1 is an ArfGEF homology protein that was identified as a sup - pressor of Ypt31 / 32 mutations , which themselves function within the Golgi apparatus ( 27 ) . The remaining protein that like Syt1p contains both a Sec7 domain and a PH domain is encoded by the gene YBL060w ( Figure 3A ) . From the GFP localization database , this protein showed weak localiza - tion to the bud neck . As we observed this to be a site of significant levels of Arf3p , we determined that this might be a GEF that could be in the appropriate place to activate the Arf3 protein . As Ybl060w - p shows significant homology Table 1 : Interactions of Gts1p by two - hybrid analysis Binding domain Activation domain Strength of interaction a Gts1 Empty (cid:3) Empty Gts1 (cid:3) Empty Empty (cid:3) Gts1 Ysc84 þ Gts1 Lsb3 þ Gts1 Sla1 þþ Gts1 Clc1 þ Gts1 Sla2 ( aa 310 – 769 ) þ Gts1 Sla2 ( aa 206 – 769 ) þþþ Gts1 Bsp1 þþþ Gts1 Pan1 þþþ Gts1 Yap1801 þþ Gts1 Yap1802 þþ Gts1 Ark1 þ a Strength of interaction : (cid:3) , no growth on any interaction plates ; þ , weak growth only on plates lacking leucine , tryptophan , histidine and adenine ; þþ , moderate / strong growth on plates lacking leucine , tryptophan , histidine and adenine and no or very poor growth on plates with 3 - aminotriazole ; þþþ , strong growth on plates lacking leucine , tryptophan , histidine and adenine and with 3 - aminotriazole . In all cases , negative controls with empty binding domain plasmids were carried out to check for self - activation . Traffic 2008 ; 9 : 559 – 573 563 Arf3p in Yeast Endocytosis Figure 3 : Domain structure and localization of Yel1p . A ) Five proteins in Saccharomyces cerevisiae contain the Sec7 domain ( Sec7p , Gea1p , Gea2p , Syt1p and Ybl060w / Yel1p ) . Of these , Syt1p and Yel1p also contain a PH domain . E denotes a region of homology ( 607 – 685 ) with the EFA - 6 protein . B ) Yel1p localizes mainly to the neck and bud membrane . Cells expressing GFP - tagged Yel1p were visualized using a DeltaVision microscope as described . C ) Deletion of D arf3 causes delocalization of the Yel1p GEF . The ARF3 gene was deleted in cells expressing Yel1 – GFP , and cells were analyzed as described . Yel1p was no longer observed at the plasma membrane , although some localization on internal membranes is seen . D ) Overexpression of the active Arf3 mutant Arf3Q71L causes an increased level of Yel1GFp at the plasma membrane , and the protein becomes localized in punctate foci . Bar , 2 m m . E ) The PH domain of Yel1 fused to GFP localizes mostly to the nucleus , although some cortical spots can be observed – indicated by arrows . F ) Yel1 ( 1 – 411 ) lacking the PH and EFA6 homology region fused to GFP . G ) Yel1 ( 1 – 560 ) lacking the EFA6 homology region fused to GFP . In all images , bar , 2 m m . 564 Traffic 2008 ; 9 : 559 – 573 Smaczynska - de Rooij et al . to other GEFs and because of the effects described below , we and others have suggested that the protein be named Yel1pfor y east E FA - l ike protein 1 . This name also reflects the observation that Yel1 has regions of homology with the EFA6 protein ( Figure 3A ) . Most recently , Yel1p has been shown to be a bona fide and specific GEF for Arf3p ( 28 ) . We visualized Yel1p – GFP using the DeltaVision micro - scope system and were able to see clear localization of fluorescence spots mainly to the bud and neck region ( Figure 3B ) . Based on time - lapse movies , the lifetime was relatively short and we estimated the lifetime of Yel1p - containing spots to be about 9 seconds ( Movie S1 ) . The effect of arf3 deletion on Yel1p was extremely marked . In the absence of arf3 , instead of localizing to the mother – bud neck , localization of Yel1p to the plasma membrane was lost , demonstrating that this GEF hom - ology protein requires Arf3 for its localization ( Figure 3C ) . There did appear to be some redistribution of the protein to internal membranes , suggesting that Yel1p can localize to other membranes , possibly mitochondria , in the absence of a suitable plasma membrane environment . Conversely , overexpression of active Arf3 ( Q71L ) caused a dramatic increase of Yel1p at the membrane and caused it to become localized in punctate foci ( Figure 3D ) . A recent paper ( 28 ) showed that an N - terminal truncation of Yel1 including its Sec7 domain abrogates Yel1p local - ization . The importance of the other domains was not reported . As PH domains are known to interact with specific membranes , we first cloned the Yel1PH domain and fused it to GFP . This fusion protein localizes mostly to the nucleus . However , in a significant number of cells , spots at the plasma membrane were observed , although only one to four spots were observed in a single cell . These data indicate that Yel1 – PH does not confer normal plasma membrane localization for the full - length protein . However , some interaction with specific proteins or regions of lipids may still occur . We also generated truncated forms of Yel1p lacking the sequence C - terminal region that contains homology to the EFA - 6 protein ( Yel1 1 – 560 ) or lacking both the PH domain and the C - terminal region ( Yel1 1 – 411 ) . In both cases , localization to the plasma membrane was markedly reduced , and exposure times had to be increased to visualize some faint spots close to the plasma membrane ( Figure 3E , F ) . As the localizations were essentially the same , this indicates that the C - terminal region is of primary importance in this effect . We conclude that in addition to the Sec7 domain – the EFA - 6 homology region at the C - terminus is also important for Yel1 localization . Gts1p and Yel1p colocalize with Arf3p , and their deletion affects Arf3p localization Using GFP and RFP tags , we were able to coexpress Arf3p and its potential regulatory proteins and determine their spatial and temporal interactions . As shown in Figure 4A , both the GAP Gts1p and the GEF Yel1p show some localization that coincide with the Arf3p foci , indicating that the proteins are in a position to regulate Arf3p function . Analysis of spots in multiple cells indicated that Arf3p and Yel1p localize within the same plane as each other , while the Gts1 protein mostly localizes on the cytosolic side of Arf3p with a region of colocalization between ( arrows ) . Neither deletion of rvs167 or sla1 nor treatment with LAT - A abolished the observed Arf3p and Gts1p colocalization ( data not shown ) . Two - hybrid analysis was also carried out , and interactions could be detected between Gts1p and Arf3 and also between Yel1p and Arf3p ( Figure 4B ) . By analogy with the GAP and GEF regulators of mamma - lian Arf6 , one would predict that deletion of a GAP protein should increase the level of active Arf at the membrane and that deletion of a GEF may decrease its level at the plasma membrane . To test whether this analogy holds for Arf3p and the proposed regulators , we generated strains expressing Arf3 – GFP but lacking either gts1 or yel1 . Multiple images were recorded for each strain , and the distribution of Arf3p in the cells was analyzed . In each of 10 cells , a line was drawn along the mother – bud axis also intersecting the neck region ( see Figure 4C for represen - tative examples ) . Data for a larger population of cells are shown graphically in Figure 4D . The fluorescence inten - sity in the cells and along this axis was then assessed ( lower panels ) . In wild - type cells as described above , the main fluorescence is at the plasma membrane in the neck region and in the bud . This can be seen as two sharp peaks in the intensity profile graph . Thus , if Gts1p is acting as a GAP protein and inactivating Arf3p , its absence would be expected to lead to an increase in Arf3p at the membrane . As shown in Figure 4C , the outcome in the gts1 deletion strain is as hypothesized , and there is an elevated level of Arf3p at the membrane . The elevation in Arf3 is not confined to the bud , but increased levels are now seen over the entire mother cell cortex . Conversely , in the absence of Yel1p that would activate Arf3p , there is a decrease in plasma membrane fluorescence but an increased cytosolic fluorescence that is absent from the vacuole but often appears to be at a detectable level on the vacuolar membrane . The distri - bution between mother and daughter plasma membrane is even . This indicates that Yel1p is behaving as one would predict for an Arf3 GEF and plays a role in localizing active Arf3p to the plasma membrane of the bud . In addition to determining the effects of yel1 deletion on Arf3p localization , we analyzed whether deletion of another ArfGEF gea2 also affected Arf3p localization as a genetic interaction between D arf3 and D gea2 has been reported ( 15 ) . While the relocalization of Arf3p observed in the gts1 and yel1 mutants shown in Figure 4C is found consistently in the population of cells studied ( Figure 4D ) , the effect of gea2 deletion was similar to wild - type cells with the majority of cells ( > 60 % ) showing Arf3p in the Traffic 2008 ; 9 : 559 – 573 565 Arf3p in Yeast Endocytosis bud and neck regions ( data not shown ) . No D gea2 cells showed the D yel1 phenotype with a shift of Arf3 – GFP away from the plasma membrane . Having shown that D gts1 caused redistribution of Arf3p , we then wanted to address whether the GAP domain of Gts1p is responsible for this activity . We generated Figure 4 : Gts1p and Yel1p interact and colocalize with Arf3p . A ) Upper panels – localization of Arf3GFP and Gts1 – mRFP in wild - type cells . Both proteins localize to the plasma membrane , and spots of colocalization can be seen ( arrowhead ) , although more often the spots appear to partially overlap with Gts1p on the cytosolic side and Arf3p within the plane of the membrane ( arrows ) . Further examples are shown with three merged figures at the right . Lower panels – localization of Yel1 – GFP and Arf3 – mRFP and Arf3p in wild - type cells . Spots of colocalization can be observed ( arrowheads ) . Bar , 2 m m . B ) Two - hybrid assays were performed as described in Materials and Methods to investigate possible interactions between Arf3 , Gts1 and Yel1 . Adjacent spots are 10 - fold dilutions of strains . AD , activation domain fusion ; BD , binding domain fusion . C ) Deletion of either yel1 or gts1 or expression of the Gts1 C50S , 53S mutant affects Arf3p localization consistent with their activity . Fluorescence image , graph of Arf3p – GFP intensity and cell profile are shown for wild - type ( WT ) , D yel1 , D gts1 and gts1C50 , 53S strains . Profiles display a plot of intensity values along a line marked on every cell . In wild - type strains , Arf3p localization is polarized mainly to the bud and neck of the cell . Deletion of GTS1 causes increase of fluorescence intensity in the mother cell plasma membrane . Deletion of YEL1 causes a shift of fluorescence to the mother cell plasma membrane , the cytosol and the vacuolar membrane . Cells expressing Gts1 C50S , C53S have a similar profile to the D gts1 strain . Bar , 2 m m . D ) Quantification of Arf3 – GFP localization in the mutant strains . More than 100 cells counted for each mutant . 566 Traffic 2008 ; 9 : 559 – 573 Smaczynska - de Rooij et al . a mutant Gts1 C50S , C53S , which is mutated in the key cysteines of the GAP domain . Cells lacking gts1 were transformed with either a wild - type copy of GTS1 or the Cys mutant . While GTS1 rescued the Arf3 - GFP localization defect such that Arf3p was primarily localized to the bud and neck region of cells , the Cys mutant was unable to do this and behaved as a D gts1 strain ( Figure 4C , D ) . This demonstrates that the GAP homology domain of Gts1 is critical for its function towards Arf3 . Changes in Arf3 levels correlate with plasma membrane levels of PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P2 Studies in mammalian cells have demonstrated the im - portance of Arf6 in stimulating levels of PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P2 by activation of phosphatidylinositol 4 - phosphate 5 - kinases . While it seems likely that the Mss4 kinase in yeast can produce PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P2 in the absence of Arf3p , as the kinase but not Arf3 is essential , we considered that Arf3p might serve a valuable function if it was able to increase levels at specific sites , for example , to facilitate higher levels of endocytosis in growing buds . In order to determine the effect of Arf3p on levels of PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P2 , cells ( wild type , D arf3 , D yel1 and D gts1 ) were transformed with a GFP reporter construct PH - ( PLC d 1 ) GFP carrying a PH domain that specifically inter - acts with PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P2 ( 29 ) . Each mutant strain was compared directly alongside wild - type cells for compari - son . In order to distinguish the wild - type and mutant cells , the mutant cells were also treated with the vacuolar dye 3 - triethylammoniumpropyl - 4 - p - diethylaminophenylhexatrienyl pyridinium dibromide ( FM4 - 64 ) . As shown in Figure 5 , decreasing levels of active Arf3 at the plasma membrane ( in D arf3 and D yel1 ) resulted in reduced levels of the PH domain at the plasma membrane compared with wild - type cells . Conversely , an increase in active Arf3 levels ( D gts1 ) caused a very significant increase in the level of the GFP – PH reporter that was bound at the plasma membrane . The experiment was repeated with the wild - type strains being stained with the marker dye . Colabelling in this way did not alter the observed changes ( Figure S2 ) . As this approach has not been reported widely in yeast before , we sought to validate it as a useful method to allow PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) levels to be assessed . First , we generated the synaptojanin mutant D inp51 D inp52 ( D sjl1 D sjl2 ) . Deletion of synaptojanins has in previous studies been shown to cause elevated PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P2 ( 30 ) . We transformed this strain with the PH reporter . As shown in Figure 5A , these cells , like the D gts1 strain , have clearly elevated levels of plasma membrane GFP localization , indicating raised PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P2 . Flow cytometry was also used to measure PH – GFP fluorescence in the cells ( Figure 5B and Figure S3 ) . Reflecting the visual assay , deletion of gts1 Gts1 or D inp51 D inp52 ( D sjl1 D sjl2 ) caused an increase in PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P2 , while there was a slight reduction in the measurement of fluorescence in the absence of arf3 and yel1 . This decrease appears smaller than that in the visualized cells because it takes into account the total cell fluorescence , and in these mutants , there is a higher cytoplasmic fluorescence that would be included in the flow cytometry measurements . Overall , our data demonstrate a role for Arf3p , Gts1p and Yel1p in modulating plasma membrane PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P2 levels at the plasma membrane , and the comparison with D inp51 D inp52 ( D sjl1 D sjl2 ) cells indicates that this is a valid and useful approach for assessing changes in PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P2 . A representative flow cytometry data set is shown in Figure S3 . This assay then allowed us to test whether the marked increase in the D gts1 mutant is mediated through Arf3p . This would provide strong evidence that the role of Gts1 is to activate Arf3 and to regulate its function . To address this , we generated a mutant D gts1 D arf3 . As shown in Figure 5A , B , deletion of arf3 abolishes the increase in PH – GFP binding observed in the single D gts1 mutant . Therefore , the effect of Gts1 on PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P2 is mediated through its activity towards Arf3p . Increased levels of Arf3 correlate with an increase in endocytic events While none of the mutants analyzed ( D arf3 , D gts1 and D yel1 ) shows defects in uptake of the fluid - phase marker Lucifer yellow or of the lipophilic dye FM4 - 64 , the data presented strongly indicate that these proteins function during the endocytic process . Indeed , several other pro - teins that are acknowledged to play important roles in actin organization during endocytosis ( Cap1 / 2 and Abp1 ) show no defects in these assays ( 17 ) , and it appears that uptake is observed even if the process functions inefficiently . Importantly , a role for PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P2 at specific stages of endocytosis has recently been reported ( 31 ) . Having demonstrated that levels of Arf3p are able to modulate PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P2 levels at the plasma membrane , we then aimed to consider the consequences of this to the endo - cytic process . Of particular interest to us is the observation that the kinase Mss4 is localized all over the plasma membrane , while Arf3p is largely polarized to the bud and neck regions ( Figure 6A ) . Observations by many laboratories over the past 20 years have also revealed that the density of cortical patches , which we now believe represent endocytic events , is greater in the bud than in the mother cell . We postulated that Arf3p may act to modulate PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P2 levels to facilitate endocytosis in the bud and neck regions of cells , while levels of PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P2 within the mother cell generated by Mss4p alone may be sufficient for the lower levels of endocytosis that occur here . We therefore aimed to determine the effect of increased Arf3 levels ( caused by overexpression of active Arf3 or by deletion of gts1 ) on the number of endocytic events in mother cells . Because of the high Traffic 2008 ; 9 : 559 – 573 567 Arf3p in Yeast Endocytosis density of patches in buds , it is difficult to resolve these events sufficiently accurately within the buds themselves . However , as shown in Figure 6A , B , using Sla1GFP as a marker of endocytic events , increased levels of Arf3 at the plasma membrane have a clear impact on the number of events that can be recorded per minute within mother cells with the number of events increasing from 9 per minute in wild - type cells to 16 per minute in the D gts1 cells and 14 per minute in cells overexpressing the constitu - tively active Arf3Q71L . While accurate counting of individual endocytic events is difficult in buds of wild - type cells , certain mutants have been characterized by a number of laboratories to contain fewer , cortical patches , making it possible to detect all events within the bud relatively clearly . One of these mutants is D sla1 ( 32 , 33 ) . We postulated that if we could distinguish individual cortical patches in this mutant , then we could determine whether the additional deletion of arf3 had any further consequences . As shown in Figure 6C , in the absence of sla1 , there are clearly definable patches Figure 5 : Changes in levels of Arf3 modulate PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P2 levels at the plasma membrane . A ) Cells [ wild type ( WT ) , D arf3 , D yel1 , D gts1 , inp51 D inp52 and D gts1 D arf3 ] were transformed with a reporter construct expressing a PH domain ( PLC d 1 ) fused to GFP . To allow direct comparison with wild - type cells for intensity levels of the PH localization , each mutant was coincubated with FM4 - 64 so that it could be distinguished ( see Materials and Methods ) . Loss of arf3 or yel1 causes a reduction in PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P2 compared with wild - type cells , while D gts1 and D inp51 D inp52 cells have increased PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P2 . Deletion of D arf3 in D gts1 cells reduces PH – GFP at the membrane , indicating that the effect of Gts1 is mediated through Arf3 . Bar , 2 m m . B ) Cells expressing the PH reporter construct were also analyzed by flow cytometry as described in Materials and Methods . The data depicted represent more than five independently performed experiments for each strain . The graph shows the median fluorescence intensity for each strain . Error bars are standard error of the mean . 568 Traffic 2008 ; 9 : 559 – 573 Smaczynska - de Rooij et al . in the bud containing Abp1 – GFP . The deletion of arf3 in this mutant to generate the D sla1 D arf3 double strain has markedly fewer patches , indicating that Arf3p has a role in facilitating the generation of endocytic sites . Counting of cortical patches from cells ( n > 25 ) revealed average patch number in D sla1 cells of 13 . 68 (cid:2) 0 . 7 and in D sla1 D arf3 cells of 6 . 93 (cid:2) 0 . 7 . The t tests indicate p value of less than 0 . 0001 . Furthermore , the patches appear morphologically aberrant often being elongated or tubular , suggesting that the perturbation in lipids has effects on the Figure 6 : Arf3 and Mss4 show some colocalization in the bud and neck regions . A ) Arf3mRFP and Mss4GFP were expressed in cells and localized as described . As shown , Arf3 localizes primarily to the bud and neck regions , while Mss4 is on both the mother and the bud membranes . Arrowheads indicate spots of colocalization . Bar , 2 m m . B ) Levels of Arf3p correlate with numbers of endocytic events . Sla1GFP was expressed in wild - type cells or in cells containing elevated active Arf3p ( D gts1 and cells transformed with a Arf3Q71L plasmid ) . Patch movement was tracked during 90 - second time - lapse movies . Note the increased number of spots from sites within the mother in cells with elevated Arf3 activity . C ) The number of endocytic patches in 10 mother cells was counted over the 90 - second period and expressed graphically as number of patches in mother cells observed per minute for each strain . Bars , 2 m m . Error is standard error of the mean . D ) Deletion of arf3 can reduce observed patch number in cells . D sla1 cells have fewer patches than wild - type cells and so were used as a starting point to determine whether there was any added effect of arf3 deletion . As shown , deletion of arf3 in an sla1 deletion background does causes a reduction in the number of patches observed . Average patch number in D sla1 cells is 13 . 68 (cid:2) 0 . 7 and in D sla1 D arf3 cells is 6 . 93 (cid:2) 0 . 7 . The t tests indicate p value of less than 0 . 0001 . Bar , 2 m m . Traffic 2008 ; 9 : 559 – 573 569 Arf3p in Yeast Endocytosis actual ability of cells to form the appropriate vesicle structure . Discussion Budding yeast has been used extensively to further our understanding of a number of stages in membrane - trafficking pathways both in endocytosis and in exocytosis . Key to the endocytic process is the generation of an appropriate lipid environment necessary to allow the curvature and invagination process to occur . PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P2 has been proposed to play a central role in facilitating binding of proteins , which in turn promotes endocytosis . The kinase responsible for PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P2 production at the plasma membrane has been proposed to be Mss4p , while a number of phosphatases , the synaptojanins ( Inp51 / sjl1 , Inp52 / sjl2 and Inp53 / sjl3 ) , are required for turn - over of PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P2 , a key event later in endocytosis . In this study , we have demonstrated that Arf3p does indeed function in the endocytic process and that altered levels of Arf3 affect plasma membrane PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P2 levels and correlate with changes in numbers of endocytic events . We have also identified an ArfGAP homology protein Gts1p and a GEF , Yel1p , that appear to affect Arf3p localization in a manner consistent with their predicted functions . Based on our data , we propose that Arf3p functions to regulate levels of PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P2 production within the inner leaflet of the plasma membrane . Arf3p on the plasma membrane is activated by its GEF Yel1p . When it is active , Arf3p is able to bind to certain components of the endo - cytic coat complex such as the Gga - related protein Lsb5p ( 11 ) . At these sites , Arf3p most likely acts to increase Mss4p kinase activity to direct PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P2 production . Phospholipid asymmetries , caused by local changes in PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P2 composition , facilitate endocytosis by inter - acting with and activating a number of endocytic and actin regulatory proteins . The interactions of these proteins with the phospholipid bilayer and between each other cause physical deformation of the membrane and may initiate invagination ( 34 ) . Cargo binding may then facilitate changes in conformation of proteins within the endocytic coat that allows Gts1p to trigger Arf3 inactivation . In this regard , cargo is known to bind to the adaptor protein Sla1p , which in turn interacts with both Gts1 and actin polymerization machinery [ Table 1 ; ( 32 ) ] . Gts1p remains with the coat during invagination , most likely until release of the coat immediately following vesicle scission . This model explains our data revealing that Arf3 levels modulate PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P2 levels at endocytic sites on the plasma membrane and why colocalization is not required between the kinase Mss4p and the endocytic machinery . It also fits with our observa - tion that there is some colocalization between Arf3 and both Gts1p and the endocytic component Sla1p but that localization with the actin polymerization machinery is very limited . Another significant result from our data is that the activity of Arf3p affects localization of its proposed GEF protein Yel1p . In the absence of arf3 , we observe no plasma membrane localization of Yel1p , indicating that Arf3 pro - vides a feedback mechanism to control localization of its own GEF and thereby its own activation . Furthermore , overexpression of active Arf3Q71L leads to an increase in Yel1p levels at the membrane substantiating the link between Arf3 and Yel1p localizations . The Sec7 domain of Yel1 has been shown to be important for localization ( 27 ) . Here , we show that deletion of the C - terminal EFA6 homology region also reduces localization to the plasma membrane . Rather , we see labelling of internal bright spots that appear similar to Golgi or endo - somes . At these sites , Yel1 may be interacting with other Arfs and suggests that this C - terminal region may be important for the specificity of binding to Arf3 and that Sec7 domain confers more general Arf binding . Localiza - tion of the PH domain of Yel1 was mostly to the nucleus ( Figure 4E ) . As mentioned in the Introduction , overexpression of Arf3p can rescue patch defects caused by deletion of the yeast WASP and WIP homologues Las17p and Vrp1 , respect - ively ( 15 ) . We believe that these results may partly be explained by our data demonstrating the effects of Arf3 on PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P2 levels . A regulatory interaction between profilin and PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P2 is well documented ( 35 , 36 ) , and profilin has also been suggested to bind to Vrp1 , which in turn regulates Las17p ( 37 ) . Other actin - binding proteins in yeast involved in endocytosis such as capping protein and twinfilin also appear to be regulated by PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P2 in the membrane ( 38 – 40 ) . Thus , a large increase in PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P2 in cells overexpressing Arf3 may be expected to have substantial effects on factors regulating and organizing actin , which could result in the effects reported by Lambert et al . ( 15 ) . Another finding from our studies is a role in endocytosis for the ArfGAP homology protein Gts1p . We demonstrate the importance of the Gts1 GAP homology domain for its effects on Arf3p localization ( Figure 4 ) . We also show that the effects of gts1 deletion on PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P2 levels are mediated through arf3 . Mutation of the I224 residue in the putative ALPS motif reduces the lifetime of Gts1 at the plasma membrane , indicating that this residue may form part of an amphipathic helix with a role in stabilizing Gts1 localization at the membrane . Gts1 has previously been studied as a regulator of yeast ultradian rhythm ( 22 ) . This is the oscillatory mechanism that couples fermentation with redox state in addition to the transcriptome and cell division cycle progression . Ultradian rhythm has been postulated to be a basic universal necessity for maintaining intracellular coherence ( 41 ) . Our research suggests the possibility that Gts1p may serve to link the process of endocytosis to the metabolic oscillator and growth machinery . Future studies will aim to investigate this possible link further . 570 Traffic 2008 ; 9 : 559 – 573 Smaczynska - de Rooij et al . Finally , our data suggest that this Arf module comprising Arf3p , Gts1p and Yel1p is of particular importance on the plasma membrane of the bud and neck regions rather than in the mother . This could be because the kinase Mss4p is able to generate sufficient PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P2 itself in the mother to support the level of endocytosis that is required there . However , to facilitate the higher level of endocytosis that normally occurs within the bud , additional PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P2 is required . Arf3p may function to acti - vate Mss4p further to produce an increased level of PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P2 in this region . Our data in which we deter - mined the number of endocytic events per minute in cells expressing wild - type and elevated levels of active Arf3 indicate that increased Arf3p levels correlate with increased numbers of endocytic events ( Figure 6 ) . This also suggests that Arf3p functions as part of a mechanism to generate the polarity in endocytosis observed in mother and bud regions of yeast cells . Materials and Methods Yeast strains and cell growth Yeast strains carrying complete gene deletions and expressing GFP - or mRFP - tagged proteins with the exception of KAY752 were constructed by polymerase chain reaction ( PCR ) - based integrative transformations as described by Longtine et al . ( 42 ) . KAY752 was derived by transformation of KAY725 ( Gts1GFP ) with a linearized pKA57 to delete sla1 . Functionality fortagged proteinswas verified . ForGts1GFP , wedemonstratedthatwhen combined with the sla1 deletion , the strain grew similar to the sla1 delete alone and better than in the combined D gts1 D sla1 mutant . Because Yel1GFP is able to localize in the presence or absence of tagged Arf3 but not in the absence of arf3 , we reasoned that tagged Arf3 was also functional . Sla1GFP was functional by the same criteria as described for Gts1GFP above . Strains used in this study are listed in Table S1 . Plasmids and oligonucleotides used to generate PCR products for direct deletions and epitope tagging are given in Tables S2 and S3 , respectively . All integrants were verified by colony PCR amplification to confirm the replacement occurredat the expected locus . Plasmids were also generated to express Gts1 mutations . Gts1 and its promoter region were cloned into a YCplac vector and expressed either alone or fused to GFP . Mutations I224S and C50S , C53S were introduced using oligos listed and using Quick Change mutagenesis ( Stratagene ) . Cells were grown with rotary shaking at 30 8 C in liquid YPD medium ( 1 % yeast extract , 2 % Bacto - peptone and 2 % glucose supplemented with 40 m g / mL adenine ) or in synthetic medium ( 0 . 67 % yeast nitrogen base and 2 % glucose ) with appropriate supplements . Zygote isolation and tetrad dissection were performed using a Singer Instruments MSM manual micromanipulator . Transformations were performed using lithium acetate as previously described ( 43 ) . Yeast two - hybrid assays The yeast two - hybrid screen used bait and activation plasmids and a yeast strain pJ69 - 4A designed and constructed by James ( 44 ) . Mat a strains carrying the binding domain constructs and MATa strains carrying the activation domain constructs were crossed , and diploids were selected on selective synthetic media ( lacking either uracil and leucine or tryptophan and leucine depending on plasmids used ) . Diploid strains were grown overnight in selective liquid culture and plated as serial ( (cid:1) 10 ) dilutions onto plates lacking leucine , tryptophan ( or uracil ) , adenine and histidine to allow combinations that trigger activation of reporter genes to be detected . Further stringency was made by adding 4 m M 3 - aminotriazole to the plates . Growth was scored after plating as spots on plates lacking leucine , tryptophan , histidine and adenine and with / without 3 - aminotriazole . In all cases , negative controls with empty binding domain plasmids were carried out to check for self - activation . Strains carrying the Gal4 activation domain fusion plasmids ( Yel1AD , Arf3AD , Sla1AD , Ysc84AD , Lsb3AD , Bsp1AD , Pan1AD , Yap1801AD , Yap1802AD , Ark1AD and Clc1AD ) were a gift from P . Piper ( University of Sheffield , Sheffield , UK ) . The Sla2AD plasmids were a gift from David Drubin ( University of Berkeley , Berkeley , CA , USA ) . The Arf3BD plasmid was a kind gift from Sean Munro [ Laboratory of Molecular Biology , Cambridge , UK ] . Gts1 - binding domain plasmid was made using the pBDC plasmid ( a gift from P . Piper , University of Sheffield ) and oligonucleotides oKA390 and oKA391 and the method as described ( 45 ) . Flow cytometry Cells expressing PH ( PLC d 1 ) GFP were grown overnight and then reinocu - lated into fresh medium for 3 – 4 h to an optical density 600 of about 0 . 5 . Fluorescencewas analyzed using aDakoCyan flow cytometer ( Dako ) . Flow cytometry parameters were set at excitation and emission settings of 304 and 551 nm ( filter FL - 1 ) , respectively . Each strain gave a single peak , and the median of the range was plotted . Ten thousand cells were analyzed in each case , and each strain was analyzed through at least five independent experiments . Microscopy Fluorescence microscopy was performed with a DeltaVision RT Restora - tion Microscopy System running SOFTWORX (cid:1) image analysis and model - building application ( Applied Precision Instruments ) . For live cell imaging , cells expressing tagged proteins were visualized after growing to early log phase in synthetic medium with appropriate supplements . When the effect of actin depolarization was examined , cells were treated for 5 – 30 min with 200 m M LAT - A by the addition of a 50 m M stock in dimethyl sulphoxide to the medium as described before ( 18 ) . FM4 - 64 labelling of cells was carried out in co - staining experiments with cells carrying the GFP – PH reporter construct in synthetic media lacking uracil . Cells were grown to log phase , 1 mL of cells was harvested and cells were incubated with 16 n M FM4 - 64 for 15 min , followed by a chase without the dye for 1 h . Cells were then viewed . Z - stack images were collected with step sizes of 0 . 2 m m . Except where noted otherwise , time - lapse live cell imaging of GFP - tagged proteins was performed with 1 - second time - lapse . All image data sets were deconvolved , the distance of moving fluorescence spots were measured and the arbitrary profile of intensity values , image co - ordinates and tracking of patch movements were established using the SOFTWORX application . Where enlargement is shown , the image was depixelated using the interpolated zoom facility . Images were exported as TIFF files and image size were adjusted to 300 dpi and assembled using ADOBE PHOTOSHOP CS2 . Movies were assembled using IMAGEJ software . Acknowledgments We would like to thank Alison Motley and Alastair Robertson for critical reading of this manuscript , Oliver Thompson for assistance with movies andSoheilAghamohammadzadehforhelpwithkymographs . Wealsothank Peter Piper ( University of Sheffield , Sheffield , UK ) and David Drubin and Chris Toret ( University of California , Berkeley , CA , USA ) for yeast strains ; Sean Munro ( LMB Cambridge , Cambridge , UK ) for an Arf3BD plasmid ; Tim Levine ( University College London , London , UK ) for the PH reporter – PH PLC d – GFP ; Fang - Jen Lee ( NationalUniversity of Taiwan , Taipei , Taiwan ) for the Arf3Q71L plasmid ; Phil Crews ( University of California , Santa Cruz , CA , USA ) for LAT - A and Roger Tsien ( University of California , San Diego , CA , USA ) for use of mRFP . Funding for this research was from an MRC Senior non - clinical fellowship to K . R . A . ( G117 / 394 ) and BBSRC grant BB / C510091 / 1 to K . R . A . ( I . I . S . and R . C . ) and for the light microscopy imaging centre at the University of Sheffield , a grant from the Wellcome Trust ( GR077544AIA ) . Traffic 2008 ; 9 : 559 – 573 571 Arf3p in Yeast Endocytosis Supplementary Materials Figure S1 : Further information about the Gts1 protein . A ) ClustalW sequence alignment of the central region of human ArfGAP1 orthologues including Gts1p . Abbreviations of alignment : Hs – Homo sapiens , Rn – Rattus norvegicus , Xl – Xenopus laevis , Ce – Caenorhabditis elegans and Sc – Saccharomyces cerevisiae . B ) Helical wheel representation of the 216 – 233 sequence of Gts1p . The amino acids are grouped into three classes based on the Kyte – Doolittle hydropathy scale ( 46 ) . The colour code is white – hydrophilic amino acids , light grey – neutral amino acids and dark grey – hydrophobic amino acids . Generated using web resource site http : / / www . site . uottawa . ca (cid:4) turcotte / resources / HelixWheel / . The I224 that was mutated is marked . Figure S2 : Changes in levels of Arf3 modulate PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P2 levels at the plasma membrane . This is a control for Figure 5 to show that colabelling with the FM4 - 64 dye does not itself affect levels of PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P2 . Cells ( wild type , D arf3 , D yel1 , D gt1s , D inp51 D inp52 and D gts1 D arf3 ) were transformed with a reporter construct expressing a PH domain ( PLC d 1 ) fused to GFP . To allow direct comparison with wild - type cells for intensity levels of the PH localization , wild - type cells were coincubatedwithFM4 - 64sothattheycouldbedistinguished ( see Materials and Methods ) . Loss of arf3 or yel1 causes a reduction in PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P2 compared with wild - type cells , while D gts1 and D inp51 D inp52 cells have increased PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P2 . Deletion of D arf3 in the D gts1 cells caused a reduction in PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P2 levels , indicating that the effect of Gts1 is mediated through Arf3p . Bar , 2 m m . Figure S3 : Flow cytometry of strains expressing PH ( PLC d 1 ) GFP . Strains were grown overnight and reinoculated into fresh medium for 3 – 4 h to enter log phase . Ten thousand cells were counted as described in Materials and Methods for each sample . Each strain was counted on at least five separate occasions . Shown is the profile for one set of data . Movie S1 : The movie shows a composite image of Arf3GFP , Gts1GFP and Yel1GFP . The imaging of Arf3p – GFP and Gts1GFP proteins was performed with 0 . 5 - second exposure and 1 - second time - lapse . In the movie , time - lapse is at 7 frames per second . Yel1 – GFP was imaged with 1 - second exposure and 1 . 5 - second time - lapse . Bar , 2 m m . Table S1 : Yeast strains used in this study Table S2 : Plasmids used in this study Table S3 : Oligonucleotides used in this study Supplemental materials are available as part of the online article at http : / / www . blackwell - synergy . com References 1 . D’Souza - SchoreyC , ChavrierP . ARFproteins : rolesinmembranetraffic and beyond . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2006 ; 7 : 347 – 358 . 2 . Aikawa Y , Martin TF . ADP - ribosylation factor 6 regulation of phospha - tidylinositol - 4 , 5 - bisphosphate synthesis , endocytosis , and exocytosis . Methods Enzymol 2005 ; 404 : 422 – 431 . 3 . Klein S , Franco M , Chardin P , Luton F . Role of the Arf6 GDP / GTP cycle and Arf6 GTPase - activating proteins in actin remodeling and intracel - lular transport . J Biol Chem 2006 ; 281 : 12352 – 12361 . 4 . Itoh T , Takenawa T . Regulation of endocytosis by phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate and ENTH proteins . Curr Top Microbiol Immunol 2004 ; 282 : 31 – 47 . 5 . Santarius M , Lee CH , AndersonRA . Supervised membrane swimming : small G - protein lifeguards regulate PIPK signalling and monitor intra - cellular PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P2 pools . Biochem J 2006 ; 398 : 1 – 13 . 6 . Stefan CJ , Padilla SM , Audhya A , Emr SD . The phosphoinositide phosphatase Sjl2 is recruited to cortical actin patches in the control of vesicle formation and fission during endocytosis . Mol Cell Biol 2005 ; 25 : 2910 – 2923 . 7 . Sun Y , Kaksonen M , Madden DT , Schekman R , Drubin DG . Interaction of Sla2p’s ANTH domain with PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P - 2 is important for actin - dependent endocytic internalization . Mol Biol Cell 2005 ; 16 : 717 – 730 . 8 . Audhya A , Emr SD . Regulation of PI4 , 5P ( 2 ) synthesis by nuclear - cytoplasmic shuttling of the Mss4 lipid kinase . EMBO J 2003 ; 22 : 4223 – 4236 . 9 . Audhya A , Loewith R , Parson AB , Gao L , Tabuchi M , Zhou HL , Boone C , Hall MN , Emr SD . Genome - wide lethality screen identifies new PI4 , 5P2 effectors that regulate the actin cytoskeleton . EMBO J 2004 ; 23 : 3747 – 3757 . 10 . Huang CF , Liu YW , Tung L , Lin CH , Lee FJS . Role for Arf3p in development of polarity , but not endocytosis , in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Mol Biol Cell 2003 ; 14 : 3834 – 3847 . 11 . CostaR , WarrenDT , AyscoughKR . Lsb5pinteractswithactinregulators Sla1p and Las17p , ubiquitin and Arf3p to couple actin dynamics to membrane trafficking processes . Biochem J 2005 ; 387 : 649 – 658 . 12 . DewarH , WarrenDT , GardinerFC , GourlayCG , SatishN , RichardsonMR , Andrews PD , Ayscough KR . Novelproteinslinking theactincytoskeleton to the endocytic machinery in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Mol Biol Cell 2002 ; 13 : 3646 – 3661 . 13 . Howard JP , Hutton JL , Olson JM , Payne GS . Sla1p serves as the targeting signal recognition factor for NPFX ( 1 , 2 ) D - mediated endocyto - sis . J Cell Biol 2002 ; 157 : 315 – 326 . 14 . Madania A , Dumoulin P , Grava S , Kitamoto H , Scharer - Brodbeck C , Soulard A , Moreau V , Winsor B . The Saccharomyces cerevisiae homologue of human Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein Las17p inter - acts with the Arp2 / 3 complex . Mol Biol Cell 1999 ; 10 : 3521 – 3538 . 15 . Lambert AA , Perron MP , Lavoie E , Pallotta D . The Saccharomyces cerevisiae Arf3 protein is involved in actin cable and cortical patch formation . FEMS Yeast Res 2007 ; 7 : 782 – 795 . 16 . Kaksonen M , Sun Y , Drubin DG . A pathway for association of recep - tors , adaptors , andactinduringendocyticinternalization . Cell2003 ; 115 : 475 – 487 . 17 . Kaksonen M , Toret CP , Drubin DG . A modular design for the clathrin - and actin - mediated endocytosis machinery . Cell 2005 ; 123 : 305 – 320 . 18 . Ayscough KR , Stryker J , Pokala N , Sanders M , Crews P , Drubin DG . High rates of actin filament turnover inbudding yeast and roles for actin in establishment and maintenance of cell polarity revealed using the actin inhibitor latrunculin - A . J Cell Biol 1997 ; 137 : 399 – 416 . 19 . Huh WK , Falvo JV , Gerke LC , Carroll AS , Howson RW , Weissman JS , O’Shea EK . Global analysis of protein localization in budding yeast . Nature 2003 ; 425 : 686 – 691 . 20 . Yaguchi S , Shen H , Tsurugi K . Localization of Gts1p in cortical actin patches of yeast and its possible role in endocytosis . Eur J Cell Biol 2007 ; 86 : 275 – 285 . 21 . AdamsCA , KuriyamaH , LloydD , MurrayDB . TheGtsIproteinstabilizes the autonomous oscillator in yeast . Yeast 2003 ; 20 : 463 – 470 . 22 . Mitsui K , Yaguchi SI , Tsurugi K . The Gts1 gene , which contains a Gly - Thr repeat , affects the timing of budding and cell - size of the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Mol Cell Biol 1994 ; 14 : 5569 – 5578 . 23 . Bigay J , Casella JF , Drin G , Mesmin B , Antonny B . ArfGAP1 responds to membrane curvature through the folding of a lipid packing sensor motif . EMBO J 2005 ; 24 : 2244 – 2253 . 24 . Warren DT , Andrews PD , Gourlay CW , Ayscough KR . Sla1p couples the yeast endocytic machinery to proteins regulating actin dynamics . J Cell Sci 2002 ; 115 : 1703 – 1715 . 572 Traffic 2008 ; 9 : 559 – 573 Smaczynska - de Rooij et al . 25 . Achstetter T , Franzusoff A , Field C , Schekman R . Sec7 encodes an unusual , high molecular weight protein required for membrane traffic from the yeast Golgi apparatus . J Biol Chem 1988 ; 263 : 11711 – 11717 . 26 . Zakrzewska E , Perron M , Laroche A , Pallotta D . A role for GEA1 and GEA2 in the organization of the actin cytoskeleton in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Genetics 2003 ; 165 : 985 – 995 . 27 . Gillingham AK , Munro S . Identification of a guanine nucleotide exchange factor for Arf3 the yeast orthologue of mammalian Arf6 . PLoS ONE 2007 ; 2 : e842 . 28 . Jones S , Jedd G , Kahn RA , Franzusoff A , Bartolini F , Segev N . Genetic interactions in yeast between Ypt GTPases and Arf guanine nucleotide exchangers . Genetics 1999 ; 52 : 1543 – 1556 . 29 . Levine TP , Munro S . Targeting of Golgi - specific pleckstrin homology domains involves both PtdIns 4 - kinase - dependent and - independent components . Curr Biol 2002 ; 12 : 695 – 704 . 30 . Stefan CJ , Audhya A , Emr SD . The yeast synaptojanin - like proteins control the cellular distribution of phosphatidylinositol ( 4 , 5 ) bisphos - phate . Mol Biol Cell 2002 ; 13 : 542 – 557 . 31 . Sun Y , Carroll S , Kaksonen M , Toshima JY , Drubin DG . PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P2 turnover is required for multiple stages during clathrin - and actin - dependent endocytic internalization . J Cell Biol 2007 ; 177 : 355 – 367 . 32 . Ayscough KR , Eby JJ , Lila T , Dewar H , Kozminski KG , Drubin DG . Sla1p is a functionally modular component of the yeast cortical actin cytoskel - eton required for correct localization of both Rho1p - GTPase and Sla2p , a protein with talin homology . Mol Biol Cell 1999 ; 10 : 1061 – 1075 . 33 . Holtzman DA , Yang S , Drubin DG . Synthetic - lethal interactions identify two novel genes , SLA1 and SLA2 , that control membrane cytoskeleton assembly in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . J Cell Biol 1993 ; 122 : 635 – 644 . 34 . McMahon HT , Gallop JL . Membrane curvature and mechanisms of dynamic cell membrane remodelling . Nature 2005 ; 438 : 590 – 596 . 35 . Goldschmidt - Clermont P , Machesky LM , Doberstein SK , Pollard TD . Mechanism of the interaction of human platelet profilin with actin . J Cell Biol 1991 ; 113 : 1081 – 1089 . 36 . Lassing I , Lindberg U . Specific interaction between phosphatidyli - nositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate and profilactin . Nature 1985 ; 314 : 472 – 474 . 37 . VaduvaG , Martinez - QuilesN , AntonIM , MartinNC , GehaRS , HopperAK , Ramesh N . The human WASP - interacting protein , WIP , activates the cell polarity pathway in yeast . J Biol Chem 1999 ; 274 : 17103 – 17108 . 38 . Heiss S , Cooper J . Regulation of CapZ , an actin capping protein of chicken muscle , by anionic phospholipids . Biochemistry 1991 ; 30 : 8753 – 8758 . 39 . Kim K , McCully ME , Bhattacharya N , Butler B , Sept D , Cooper JA . Structure / function analysis of the interaction of phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate with actin - capping protein : implications for how capping protein binds the actin filament . J Biol Chem 2007 ; 282 : 5871 – 5879 . 40 . Moseley JB , Okada K , Balcer HI , Kovar DR , Pollard TD , Goode BL . Twinfilin is an actin - filament - severing protein and promotes rapid turnover of actin structures in vivo . J Cell Sci 2006 ; 119 : 1547 – 1557 . 41 . Lloyd D , Murray DB . Ultradian metronome : timekeeper for orchestra - tion of cellular coherence . Trends Biochem Sci 2005 ; 30 : 373 – 377 . 42 . Longtine MS , McKenzie A , Demarini DJ , Shah NG , Wach A , Brachat A , Philippsen P , Pringle JR . Additional modules for versatile and econo - mical PCR - based gene deletion and modification in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Yeast 1998 ; 14 : 953 – 961 . 43 . Kaiser C , Michaelis S , Mitchell A . Methods in Yeast Genetics : A Laboratory Course Manual . Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press New York ; 1994 . 44 . James P , Halladay J , Craig EA . Genomic libraries and a host strain designed for highly efficient two - hybrid selection in yeast . Genetics 1996 ; 144 : 1425 – 1436 . 45 . Millson SH , Truman AW , Piper PW . Vectors for N - or C - terminal positioning of the yeast Gal4p DNA binding or activator domains . Biotechniques 2003 ; 35 : 60 – 64 . 46 . Kyte J , Doolittle RF . A simple method for displaying the hydropathic character of a protein . J Mol Biol 1982 ; 157 : 105 – 132 . Traffic 2008 ; 9 : 559 – 573 573 Arf3p in Yeast Endocytosis