Coimbra , Portugal September 3 – 7 , 2007 International Conference on Engineering Education – ICEE 2007 Distributed Expertise and Authenticity in the Development of Design Expertise Vanessa Svihla The University of Texas at Austin , USA vsvihla @ hotmail . com Anthony Petrosino The University of Texas at Austin , USA ajpetrosino @ mail . utexas . edu Kenneth Diller The University of Texas at Austin , USA kdiller @ mail . utexas . edu Abstract – Community is a vital part of the design process , yet most studies of design occur in isolation , such that the role of community has not been much studied and a sequestered view of the design expertise has emerged . Design commonly occurs in a distributed expertise system , with various members transferring into the problem space with different expectations , knowledge , and interests . This study takes as its unit of study teams of students learning to design in a year - long senior capstone bioengineering design course at The University of Texas at Austin . The experience of working on a design team has great potential to provoke new learning and to place students on trajectories towards adaptive expertise . This research , which is a part of the NSF - funded Vanderbilt - Northwestern - Texas - Harvard - MIT , Engineering Research Center , is grounded in the principles of How People Learn and considers adaptive expertise to be critical for those in rapidly changing fields . Two years of the design course are contrasted with implications for authentic design experiences highlighted . Pre - mid - and post - tests were completed along with surveys about learning environment , design , and community . Additionally , specific groups were followed to provide moments in design , and to examine what led to functional groups . Key Words - Adaptive Expertise , Design , Distributed Expertise B ACKGROUND This study is part of the research and educational activities ongoing in the Vanderbilt - Northwestern - Texas - Harvard - MIT ( VaNTH ) Engineering Research Center for Bioengineering Educational Technologies . As such , it is grounded in the How People Learn framework [ 1 ] , which provides lenses of learner - centeredness , assessment - centeredness , knowledge - centeredness , and community - centeredness ( For examples see Petrosino et al . [ 2 ] ) . This research focuses on community , as students negotiate their roles as designers in design teams , and on knowledge - learner interactions , as the students become responsible for their own learning of content related to their projects . E NGINEERING D ESIGN I . Expertise in Engineering Design Design has been characterized as being different from other expertise , as it is not a standard case of problem solving . Design problems have been called “wicked” because the problem space is far less constrained compared to problems in science , and termed ill - structured because they have multiple possible solutions with multiple paths and require preferences dictated by the designer [ 3 ] . Commonly , design involves solving highly complex and dynamic problems [ 4 ] . Goel and Pirolli [ 5 ] introduce a framework for discriminating design and non - design problems , and for considering how design problems differ . The framework consists of the task environment , which includes the external environment in which the problem is solved and the problem space , which is the interaction of the problem solver and the environment , and which contains invariant features . Some of the qualities that differentiate design task environments from other science problem solving task environments are problem complexity , constraints , how specified the problem is , and how interconnected the sub - problems are . These qualities situate a problem as belonging to design . The design problem space includes problem scoping , design phases , incremental and iterative decomposable steps , and individually constructed preferences and endpoints . The designer negotiates the problem space , first through a broadening process of problem scoping and then by a narrowing process of becoming solution focused . This is a difficult process to learn , and how the designer negotiates this may correlate with level of experience and level of skill . Studies of engineering design have focused primarily on contrasting novice with intermediate and / or expert designers or on categorizing design skills of experts . In most cases , these studies have occurred in isolation of other people , though resources have been available during tasks [ 3 ] . Coimbra , Portugal September 3 – 7 , 2007 International Conference on Engineering Education – ICEE 2007 Von der Weth and Frankenberger [ 6 ] developed a model to differentiate design skill based upon performance of designers of different levels as they solved a task . In their experiment , the designers had access to various resources and took as much time as was desired , though none took more than 15 hours . The actions of the designers were categorized , and from this , the authors found that domain general heuristics were not good predictors of successful design , and domain knowledge is insufficient to explain the differences , but that style accounts for some differences . They define style as “individual characteristics , marking not only the ways of proceeding in design , but also in other complex situations . ” This raises a question about what characteristics allow for the more successful designs . Another study considers design from a cognitive stance : the dissociable nature of design expertise means that it can be partitioned into the declarative and procedural . While it is easy to teach the declarative aspects , which are readily verbalizable , it is difficult to teach the procedural . Further , far less attention is paid to procedural . Declarative aspects are insufficient for good design and this may be a major difference between levels of expertise . The author concludes with a plea for the importance of students having realistic and authentic experiences [ 7 ] . Studies of design expertise have shown that with increasing experience and skill , designers pay better attention to the Voice of the Customer , logistics , and constraints [ 8 ] , are less likely to employ trial and error [ 9 ] , gather more data , consider alternatives , and are more flexible in employing strategies [ 10 ] . Experts tend to rely on the procedural , using a breadth - first approach while novices use declarative knowledge and a depth - first approach [ 11 ] . While the ability to draw on experience may offer a clear advantage to the expert , the use of strategies that go beyond trial and error offer significant affordances not available to novice designers [ 9 ] . Good design is considered to be the result of good problem scoping ( “identifying need , problem definition , and gathering information” [ 10 ] ) , being solution focused , and employing frequent cognitive switching , but not due to having considered broad alternatives [ 3 ] . A lack of flexibility can result in fixation , and novices in design are commonly described as suffering from fixation . Exposure to a flawed solution can also provoke fixation , such that designers will incorporate many aspects of the flawed solution in their designs [ 12 ] . This is problematic when one considers that much of what designers do involves redesign . In one study looking for elements common to expert design , the authors assert that expert design is systematic , and that the designers start from first principles [ 13 ] ( “fundamental physical principles” [ 14 ] ) . Engineers tend to take a broad approach that is informed by personal preference , then explore the problem space in a principled manner , and populate the design process with dynamic , temporary goals [ 15 ] . Strategies for solving problems may be local or global , as experts decompose an ill - structured problem into well structured sub - problems . These sub - problems may then be solved by designers within a design team . II . Distributed Cognition In a study of how experts view diagrammatic presentations of the design process as presented in textbooks , researchers found that experts generally did not disagree with the diagrams , but found them insufficient . Missing was a focus on tasks associated with the lens of community : communication and multidisciplinarity [ 16 ] . Few designs fit neatly into one small area , and even those that seem to may benefit from different perspectives . The idea that the expertise required to accomplish a goal may exist within several individuals , and that one individual , even an expert , could not accomplish the goal equally , is distributed cognition [ 17 , 18 ] . Although other designers are one of the most important resources an engineer has during the design process , few studies have considered the design team as a unit of analysis . Studies of groups in engineering have focused primarily on promoting effective team skills or on exploring the ways in which groups interact . For example , Bossert [ 19 ] provides an overview of various types of groups ( such as jigsaw groups ) and Smith [ 20 ] provides guidelines for how to use groups , with descriptions of different types of groups and ways to evaluate teams . According to Smith , functional groups have Positive Interdependence , meaning that all group members cooperate to complete the task , as well as Individual and Group Accountability , meaning that each group member is accountable for the grade . In a fairly comprehensive overview of options for teaching design , Dym et . al . [ 21 ] provide a review of how teams engage in design thinking , highlighting the relevance of ABET criteria . ABET included criteria that address the social nature of design , in that students are expected to possess the following : • 3 ( d ) an ability to function on multi - disciplinary teams • 3 ( g ) an ability to communicate effectively • 3 ( h ) the broad education necessary to understand the impact of engineering solutions in a global , economic , environmental , and societal context It has been argued that “design education should be refocused on teaching designers to better function in group situations” [ 22 ] . Designers greatly benefit from participating in the argumentation aspects of design and the social process of negotiation [ 23 ] . Because each team member has different technical skills and values , the resultant “design is an intersection—not a simple summation - of the participants’ products” [ 21 ] . I . Adaptive Expertise in Engineering Design Research has shown that experts’ knowledge is organized by core principles of the expert’s discipline [ 24 - 26 ] and cannot be reduced to a set of isolated facts because it is deeply connected and conditionalized with respect to context [ 24 ] . The organization of expert knowledge into conceptual schema means that it is readily accessible [ 27 , 28 ] . Expertise both allows the expert to recognize things that novices may miss and blinds them to aspects of problems that have previously proven to be unproductive [ 1 , 26 , 29 ] . This pairing is vital to developing efficient expertise when routine problem solving is called for . Additionally , expertise may involve the ability to apply knowledge to solving problems in contexts slightly , or even greatly outside those in which Coimbra , Portugal September 3 – 7 , 2007 International Conference on Engineering Education – ICEE 2007 the expert possesses routine efficiency . This is accomplished through the recognition of underlying similarities in concepts or principles that govern situations and this ability is termed transfer [ 1 ] . Not all experts , even within the same discipline , solve problems in the same way . Just as novices may be discriminated from experts based on how they solve problems , so too may experts be discriminated based on two end - member types of behavior : routine and adaptive expertise [ 30 ] . While routine experts may be efficient and technically skillful , they may not be able to flexibly adapt to solve novel problems [ 31 ] . In a time when many people may expect to change fields , and when the fields themselves are changeable , this flexibility is critical . While adaptive experts possess the ability to efficiently solve routine problems , they are also able to adapt to new situations , are metacognitive , and are especially solicitous of new learning opportunities [ 1 , 32 , 33 ] . Adaptive experts not only have knowledge that is well organized , but also display the ability to transfer their knowledge , skills , beliefs , and attitudes to new situations . While understanding initial and goal states is useful , it is not sufficient ; current research must focus on the less well understood trajectories towards expertise [ 34 ] . Within this lie many questions about how to promote the development of the characteristics possessed by adaptive experts . Design problems , because they are ill - defined and contain opportunities for innovation , provide an excellent opportunity for the study of these learning trajectories . Fixation may also be a useful discriminant when considering differences between designers ; while a design may satisfy the requirements , another may address them in an innovative way [ 12 ] . P ARTICIPANTS AND C OURSE D ESIGN The participants of this study are senior bioengineering students enrolled in the capstone , year - long ( fall 2005 through spring 2006 and fall 2006 through spring 2007 ) design class at The University of Texas at Austin . This represents the first two times this course has been taught , as the bioengineering major is a new major . Design teams were composed of 3 or 4 students who were selected by the course instructors . The instructors made sure that non - native English speakers were distributed across groups . In accordance with common practice , the instructors also used a version of the Myers - Briggs Temperament Indicator ( MBTI ) to form groups [ 35 ] . Students completed the delta design game [ 36 ] , which places team members into roles with conflicting goals ; teams then negotiate to produce a final design . Both cohorts of design classes completed a preliminary project prior to beginning their sponsored project ( See figure 1 ) . FIGURE 1 C OURSE FORMAT AND COMPARISON OF PRELIMINARY PROJECTS For cohort one , this entailed the mini design project , in which all teams designed digital stethoscopes with the constraint that they functionally incorporate a specific material . For cohort two , the preliminary projects included a redesign project , in which teams selected biomedical devices , such as nicotine patches , inhalers , and pregnancy tests and redesigned some aspect of the device . After completion of the smaller projects , the teams were selected by sponsors to design a biomedical device or protocol . The projects came from hospitals , industry , NASA , and universities , and were tremendously varied in terms of difficulty . Teams completed various tasks for their designs , including ideation , Gantt Charts , Pugh Charts , final reports and presentations . The class is taught in two consecutive semesters by two different professors . The four teaching assistants ( who vary from semester to semester ) played a large role in facilitating the students’ learning ; the TA’s had approximately 100 contact hours with the teams and helped with assessment of students work . Additionally , teams had faculty advisors and meetings with their sponsors . The students typically do very little group work prior to the design class . Therefore , the intense teamwork the students experience in this course has the potential to provoke new learning of “soft skills” such as interaction , communication , and team work [ 37 ] . The lens of community - centeredness [ 1 ] is an important one for understanding how the students learn in this course . Additionally , we will consider how these students negotiate their roles as they enter their communities of practice [ 38 , 39 ] . M EASURES AND PRELIMINARY RESULTS I . Initial Steps in Design A pre - test , given in the first week of class , included a challenging design question in which the students are told that we do not expect them to complete it , but that we are interested in how they begin solving such a problem . This question is used to examine how student thinking changes with experience in design , and involves designing a device for treating hypothermia in war conditions , given several constraints . A mid - test using the same question was given following completion of the mini or redesign project , and a post - test , also using the same question , was given after the sponsored project was completed . A coding scheme based on expert performance and evaluation of student performance was developed . Coding of student work on the tests revealed a trend of students orienting to more of a design focus , meaning that over the year , their designs included more information about how the design would be constructed , increased use of and higher quality schematic views , and more attention to the Voice of the Customer . A typical response on the pretest , for example , addressed the scientific aspects related to the heat - transfer inherent in the problem . A typical response from the posttest was more likely to address concrete issues of design , including insulation , size Coimbra , Portugal September 3 – 7 , 2007 International Conference on Engineering Education – ICEE 2007 requirements , temperature monitoring , or how blood could be warmed without damage . This reorientation in focus is indicative of an increased sensitivity to design . Particularly , it shows that over the course of the semester , the students learned to focus their attentions on the real - world interactions with their design product . These data , though incomplete ( as cohort two students are still in the design process at the time of writing ) , are useful for contrasting the mini - project with the redesign project . While the overall trend for the cohort one students shows an increase by the post - test , there is a sharp and troubling decrease in Voice of the Customer at the mid - test ( Figure 2 ) . This trend is not seen in at the end of the redesign project with the cohort two students ; rather , there is an increase in Voice of the Customer . Both groups show an increase in Diagram , but with year two students , there is a stronger increase . FIGURE 2 T EST AVERAGES FOR C OHORT 1 AND 2 FOR V OICE OF THE C USTOMER AND D IAGRAM II . Adaptive Expertise The project definitions and final projects were sorted along the adaptive expertise dimensions of efficiency and innovation by the spring course instructor , who was familiar with these constructs ( Figure 3 ) . FIGURE 3 C ORRELATIONS OF I NNOVATION AND E FFICIENCY ACROSS P ROJECT D EFINITION AND F INAL P ROJECT S CORES Project Definition Scores for Innovation are positively correlated with Final Project Scores for Efficiency and to a lesser degree , Final Project Scores for Innovation . Final Project Scores for Efficiency are strongly and positively correlated to Final Project Scores for Innovation . This supports the idea that a great deal of content knowledge is prerequisite to innovation . While there is a correlation between the Project Definition Scores for Innovation and the Final Project Scores for Innovation , the lack of strength of this relationship indicates that there are many things that impact this relationship . This finding is compelling because it indicates that early innovation may not yield innovative results , but that efficient understanding of the problem may allow for more innovative solutions . III . Constructivist Learning Environment Survey The Constructivist Learning Environment Survey ( CLES ) [ 40 ] , which is composed of questions that address personal relevance , shared control , critical voice , and student negotiation , provides a picture of the practices as they exist in the classroom . The survey is a 5 - point Likert scale ( 1 = Almost Never ; 2 = Seldom ; 3 = Sometimes ; 4 = Often ; 5 = Almost Always ) . Six questions cover each category . This survey was administered during the Spring semester for the year one students ( when the students were well into their sponsored projects ) and was administered as a pre - test for year two students addressing prior coursework . At the end of this year , the year two students will complete the survey an additional time . An exploratory factor analysis indicated that the grouping of the questions was satisfactory for all but one of the questions . This question , part of the personal relevance scale , read : “In this class what I learn has nothing to do with life beyond my classroom setting” and is perhaps worded too strongly . Previous research with the CLES has not reported such findings , but that research was conducted with a more general audience ; it is possible that using a more restricted sample composed of engineers led to slightly different findings . Because this question does not group with the others , it is not considered in the analysis ( Figure 4 ) . Coimbra , Portugal September 3 – 7 , 2007 International Conference on Engineering Education – ICEE 2007 FIGURE 4 S TUDENT REPORTED RESULTS ON THE CLES Keeping in mind that these are two different groups of students , and that they are not snapshots taken from the most maximally separated time points ( pre and post ) , it is still interesting to note the difference between year one’s mid project scores and year two’s prior coursework scores , especially on Shared Control . While all the year one mid - project scores are higher , there is a sizable difference on Shared Control , possibly indicating that the nature of the design course gives the students greater control over their learning than their other coursework tends to . These data are extrapolations , but as the rest of the year two data comes in , we will have a clearer picture of changes over time . III . Community Multiple measures are needed for examining the role of community in learning how to design . Peer reviews and surveys were collected , instructors were interviewed , and observations were collected . As the peer reviews were used by the professor for grading , they have proven relatively unreliable for research purposes ; students tended to give their team mates high grades , even when other indicators suggested that some team members were not contributing . This has led to the collection of peer reviews for strictly research purposes for the cohort two , and these are in the process of being administered . The relationship between individual and team grades was explored for cohort one teams . The correlation for this relationship is significant and positive ( r = . 435 , p = . 01 ) , yet it is insufficient for predicting the team grade . From team observations and interviews with the instructors , there seemed to be qualitative differences in how groups interacted . Some groups could be categorized as “divide and conquer” while other groups could be described as “everyone does everything . ” A closer look within these two categories revealed that these superficial categories could be more effectively broken up further to account for differences ( Figure 5 ) . Some “divide and conquer” groups over - divided , meaning that early on they chose tasks and worked in isolation , meeting only when required . Members of “over - divide and conquer” groups had few opportunities to understand what their teammates had done and rarely negotiated their design . Other “divide and conquer” groups managed their tasks , dividing only during sub - problems . During their meetings , the “divide - enough and conquer” group members made sure that every group member understood the basics of what they had done , and they met frequently enough that if changes needed to be negotiated , there was still time . This model successfully takes advantage of distributed expertise and incorporates negotiation . In the “everyone does everything” groups , some functioned as small school rooms in which every member independently accomplishes every goal . This leads to a redundancy that does not support distributed expertise , and that uses time inefficiently . For these groups , there is little advantage to being in a team . Other “everyone participates” groups identified a team member who could best accomplish a task , and could lead the rest of the team through the task , with members engaging as they were able . The leader would vary with the task , but all members participated enough to understand the impact on the design and why it might be important during negotiation . It is not yet clear what provoked the different categories described here , or how common they are , but our on - going research will address this . FIGURE 5 E XPLANATION OF GROUP TYPES AND THE AFFORDANCES THEY LEVERAGE , SUCH AS NEGOTIATION AND D ISTRIBUTED E XPERTISE C ONCLUSIONS One question brought up by research on teaching engineering design , is “How authentic should [ project based learning ] experiences be compared to industry design experiences ? ” [ 21 ] . Because the students did not feel authentically invested in the mini project , they did not effectively learn to value the Voice of the Customer . The authenticity of the sponsored project helped the students value the Voice of the Customer . More authentic experiences help the students to effectively engage with the design process . The ability to place students on a trajectory towards adaptive expertise in design may depend on more than initial success at innovation . Deep content knowledge is required , but is also insufficient . Experience with redesign , which may Coimbra , Portugal September 3 – 7 , 2007 International Conference on Engineering Education – ICEE 2007 give students experience breaking through moments of fixation , has the potential to provide students with critical experience for thinking adaptively . The social nature of design has implications for the development of adaptive expertise in engineering ; without strong communication and negotiation skills , a learner will not effectively interact with a design group . Community is a complicated lens to study in design , yet , to understand the design process , it is vital . The success of group design is dependant on how the group interacts . There may be more than one successful way to accomplish this interaction , but without taking advantage of the group’s distributed expertise and without negotiation , success will be limited . In fact , the affordances that working in a group offers may be eliminated altogether . As data continue to come in from this on - going study , we will continue to analyze data for this research , and to refine our methods for understanding the role of community in the development of adaptive expertise in engineering design . A CKNOWLEDGMENT This work was undertaken with funding from the NSF ( grant number EEC - 9876363 ) . We would also like acknowledge Laura Suggs for her help , and the TA’s for the design course , for their assistance in helping us to understand design . R EFERENCES [ 1 ] Bransford , J . D . , Brown , A . L . , and Cocking , R . R . , How People Learn : Brain , Mind , Experience , and School . Expanded Edition , 2000 . [ 2 ] Petrosino , A . , Martin , T . and Svihla , V , " Developing Student Expertise and Community : Lessons from How People Learn , " in Special Issue of New Directions in Teaching and Learning , vol . 108 . San Francisco : Jossey - Bass , 2007 , pp . 118 . [ 3 ] Cross , N . , " Design cognition : Results from protocol and other empirical studies of design activity , " Chapter , vol . 5 , 2004 , pp . 79 - 103 . [ 4 ] Jonassen , D . H . , " Toward a design theory of problem solving , " Educational Technology Research and Development , vol . 48 , 2000 , pp . 63 - 85 . [ 5 ] Goel , V . and Pirolli , P . , " The Structure of Design Problem Spaces , " Cognitive Science , vol . 16 , 1992 , pp . 395 - 429 . [ 6 ] Von Der Weth , R . and Frankenberger , E . , " Strategies , competence and style - - problem solving in engineering design , " Learning and Instruction , vol . 5 , 1995 , pp . 357 - 383 . [ 7 ] Goel , V . , " Dissociation of Design Knowledge , " in Knowing and learning to design : Cognitive perspectives in design education , Eastman , C . and Newstetter , W . C . , Eds . : Elsevier , 2000 . [ 8 ] Bogusch , L . L . , Turns , J . , and Atman , C . J . , " Engineering design factors : how broadly do students defineproblems ? , " Frontiers in Education Conference , 2000 . FIE 2000 . 30th Annual , vol . 2 , 2000 . [ 9 ] Ahmed , S . , Wallace , K . M . , and Blessing , L . T . , " Understanding the differences between how novice and experienced designers approach design tasks , " Research in Engineering Design , vol . 14 , 2003 , pp . 1 - 11 . [ 10 ] Atman , C . J . , Chimka , J . R . , Bursic , K . M . , and Nachtmann , H . L . , " A comparison of freshman and senior engineering design processes , " Design Studies , vol . 20 , 1999 , pp . 131 - 152 . [ 11 ] Ho , C . H . , " Some phenomena of problem decomposition strategy for design thinking : differences between novices and experts , " Design Studies , vol . 22 , 2001 , pp . 27 - 45 . [ 12 ] Purcell , A . T . and Gero , J . S . , " Design and other types of fixation , " Design Studies , vol . 17 , 1996 , pp . 363 - 383 . [ 13 ] Cross , N . and Cross , A . C . , " Expertise in engineering design , " Research in Engineering Design , vol . 10 , 1998 , pp . 141 - 149 . [ 14 ] Cross , N . and Cross , A . C . , " Winning by design : the methods of Gordon Murray , racing car designer , " Design Studies , vol . 17 , 1996 , pp . 91 - 107 . [ 15 ] Cross , N . , " Creative cognition in design : processes of exceptional designers , " Proceedings of the fourth conference on Creativity & cognition , 2002 , pp . 14 - 19 . [ 16 ] Mosborg , S . , Adams , R . , Kim , R . , Atman , C . J . , Turns , J . , and Cardella , M . , " Conceptions of the Engineering Design Process : An Expert Study of Advanced Practicing Professionals , " 2005 ASEE Annual Conference & Exposition : The Changing Landscape of Engineering and Technology Education in a Global World , 2005 , pp . 2005 . [ 17 ] Hutchins , E . , Cognition in the Wild : Cambridge , MA . : MIT Press , 1995 . [ 18 ] Salomon , G . , Distributed Cognitions : psychological and educational considerations : Cambridge University Press , 1993 . [ 19 ] Bossert , S . T . , " Cooperative Activities in the Classroom , " Review of Research in Education , vol . 15 , 1988 , pp . 225 - 250 . [ 20 ] Smith , K . A . , " Cooperative learning : effective teamwork for engineering classrooms , " PROC FRONT EDUC CONF , vol . 1 , 1995 , pp . 208 - 213 . [ 21 ] Dym , C . L . , Agogino , A . M . , Eris , O . , Frey , D . D . , and Leifer , L . J . , " Engineering Design Thinking , Teaching , and Learning , " Journal of Engineering Education , vol . 94 , 2005 , pp . 103 - 120 . Coimbra , Portugal September 3 – 7 , 2007 International Conference on Engineering Education – ICEE 2007 [ 22 ] Minneman , S . , " The Social Construction of a Technical Reality . " Stanford , California : < / ref - type > < contrib , 1991 . [ 23 ] Bucciarelli , L . L . , Designing Engineers . Cambridge , Mass : MIT Press , 1994 . [ 24 ] Blumenfeld , P . C . , Soloway , E . , Marx , R . W . , Krajcik , J . S . , Guzdial , M . , and Palincsar , A . , " Motivating project - based learning : Sustaining the doing , supporting the learning , " Educational Psychologist , vol . 26 , 1991 , pp . 369 - 398 . [ 25 ] Bruer , J . T . , Schools for Thought : A Science of Learning in the Classroom : Bradford Book , 1994 . [ 26 ] Chi , M . T . H . , Feltovich , P . J . , and Glaser , R . , " Categorization and Representation Physics Problems by Experts and Novices , " Cognitive Science , vol . 5 , 1981 , pp . 121 - 152 . [ 27 ] Driver , R . , The Pupil as Scientist ? New York , NY : Taylor and Francis , 1983 . [ 28 ] Driver , R . , Asoko , H . , Leach , J . , Mortimer , E . , and Scott , P . , " Constructing Scientific Knowledge in the Classroom , " Educational Researcher , vol . 23 , 1994 , pp . 5 - 12 . [ 29 ] Nathan , M . J . and Petrosino , A . , " Expert blind spot among preservice teachers , " American educational research journal , vol . 40 , 2003 , pp . 905 - 928 . [ 30 ] Hatano , G . and Inagaki , K . , " Two courses of expertise , " Child development and education in Japan , 1986 , pp . 262 – 272 . [ 31 ] Hatano , G . and Oura , Y . , " Commentary : Reconceptualizing school learning using insight from expertise research , " Educational Researcher , vol . 32 , 2003 , pp . 26 – 29 . [ 32 ] Fisher , F . T . and Peterson , P . L . , " A Tool to Measure Adaptive Expertise in Biomedical Engineering Students , " Proceedings of the 2001 American Society for Engineering Education Annual Conference , Albuquerque , NM , 2001 . [ 33 ] Hatano , G . and Greeno , J . G . , " Commentary : Alternative Perspectives on Transfer and Transfer Studies , " International Journal of Educational Research , vol . 31 , 1999 , pp . 645 - 54 . [ 34 ] Lajoie , S . P . , " Transitions and trajectories for studies of expertise , " Educational Researcher , vol . 32 , 2003 , pp . 21 – 25 . [ 35 ] Wilde , D . , " Design Team Formation Using Jungian Typology , " Proceedings , National Collegiate Inventors and Innovators Alliance , 2000 . [ 36 ] Bucciarelli , L . L . , " Delta Design , " Cambridge , Mass . : Massachusetts Institute of Technology , vol . 10 , 1997 . [ 37 ] Seat , E . and Lord , S . M . , " Enabling effective engineering teams : a program for teaching interaction skills , " Frontiers in Education Conference , 1998 . FIE ' 98 . 28th Annual , vol . 1 , 1998 . [ 38 ] Lave , J . and Wenger , E . , Situated Learning : Legitimate Peripheral Participation : Cambridge University Press , 1991 . [ 39 ] Brown , J . S . , Collins , A . , and Duguid , P . , " Situated Cognition and the Culture of Learning , " Educational Researcher , vol . 18 , 1989 , pp . 32 - 42 . [ 40 ] Taylor , P . C . S . , Fraser , B . J . , and White , L . , " CLES : An instrument for monitoring the development of constructivist learning environments , " annual meeting of the American Educational Research Association , New Orleans , LA , 1994 .