REVIEW Margaret Buckingham Æ Lola Bajard Philippe Daubas Æ Milan Esner Æ Mounia Lagha Fre´de´ric Relaix Æ Didier Rocancourt Myogenic progenitor cells in the mouse embryo are marked by the expression of Pax3 / 7genes that regulate their survival and myogenic potential Accepted : 18 August 2006 / Published online : 13 October 2006 (cid:1) Springer - Verlag 2006 Abstract The transcription factors Pax3 and Pax7 are important regulators of myogenic cell fate , as demon - strated by genetic manipulations in the mouse embryo . Pax3 lies genetically upstream of MyoD and has also been shown recently to directly control Myf5 tran - scription in derivatives of the hypaxial somite , where it also plays an important role in ensuring cell survival . Both Pax3 and Pax7 are expressed in myogenic pro - genitor cells derived from the central dermomyotome that make a major contribution to skeletal muscle growth . In Pax3 / Pax7 double mutants , the myogenic determination genes , Myf5 and MyoD , are not activated in these cells which become incorporated into other tis - sues or die . This again demonstrates the dual function of Pax factors in regulating the entry of progenitor cells into the myogenic programme and in ensuring their survival . Pax3 expression marks cells in the dermo - myotome that either become myogenic or downregulate Pax3 and assume another cell fate . The latter include the smooth muscle cells of the dorsal aorta that share a common clonal origin with the skeletal muscle of the myotome , thus illustrating the initial multipotency of Pax3 expressing cells . Keywords Myogenesis Æ Myogenic regulatory genes Æ Pax3 and Pax7 genes Æ Cell survival Introduction Skeletal myogenesis depends on the myogenic regulatory proteins , a family of basic - helix - loop - helix transcription factors that control both the determination and diﬀer - entiation of cells that will form skeletal muscle . Gene knock - out experiments in the mouse have established that Myf5 , MyoD , and also Mrf4 at the onset of myo - genesis in the embryo ( Kassar - Duchossoy et al . 2004 ) , act as myogenic determination factors , whereas MyoD , myogenin and Mrf4 control the activation of skeletal muscle genes that leads to the formation of diﬀerentiated muscle ( Fig . 1a ) ( see Tajbakhsh and Buckingham 2000 ) . Pax transcription factors also play a regulatory role in myogenesis . Members of this family control diﬀerent aspects of organogenesis and tissue speciﬁcation during embryogenesis ( see Tremblay and Gruss 1994 ) ; Pax6 for example is essential for the formation of the eye , whereas Pax5 is necessary for the emergence of the B lymphocyte lineage during haematopoiesis . In the case of skeletal muscle , Pax3 is known to play a role in the survival and migration of myogenic progenitor cells present in the hypaxial somite ( see Tajbakhsh and Buckingham 2000 ) . However it is now evident that Pax3 , and its paralogue Pax7 , control the entry of cells into the myogenic pro - gramme . The ﬁrst indication of this came from genetic experiments which showed that in the absence of Pax3 and Myf5 / Mrf4 , MyoD , which is expressed in the ab - sence of Myf5 and Mrf4 , is not activated in the somite and skeletal muscle does not form ( Fig . 1b ) ( Tajbakhsh et al . 1997 ) . These loss of function experiments in the mouse were complemented by gain of function experi - ments in the chick embryo showing that manipulation of Pax3 expression can lead to the activation of both MyoD and Myf5 ( Maroto et al . 1997 ) . We now show , again by genetic manipulation in the mouse embryo , that Pax3 or Pax3 and Pax7 , depending on the developmental con - text , regulate Myf5 and / or MyoD in key populations of myogenic progenitor cells derived from diﬀerent do - mains of the dermomyotome . Hypaxial myogenesis In the Pax3 mutant ( see Tajbakhsh and Buckingham 2000 ) , the hypaxial part of the dermomyotome is lost M . Buckingham ( & ) Æ L . Bajard Æ P . Daubas Æ M . Esner M . Lagha Æ F . Relaix Æ D . Rocancourt Department of Developmental Biology , CNRS URA2578 , Pasteur Institute , 25 rue du Dr . Roux , 75015 Paris , France E - mail : margab @ pasteur . fr Anat Embryol ( 2006 ) 211 ( Suppl . 1 ) : S51 – S56 DOI 10 . 1007 / s00429 - 006 - 0122 - 0 due to cell death and therefore it is not possible to conclude about the relation between Pax3 and the myogenic regulatory genes in progenitor cells derived from this part of the somite . These cells normally form part of the trunk musculature as well as all skeletal muscles in the limbs . In order to try to circumvent this problem , we have developed a dominant negative allele of Pax3 , which in combination with a normal Pax3 allele gives rise to a hypomorph - like phenotype ( Bajard et al . 2006 ) . The interest of this approach is that it can potentially sep - arate diﬀerent Pax3 functions which will be more or less aﬀected by the mutant allele . In this case the cell survival function of Pax3 was less aﬀected than its role in myogenesis , thus allowing us to analyse the latter . We had previously shown genetically that Pax3 mainly acts as a transcriptional activator in the myogenic context ( Relaix et al . 2003 ) . By fusing the sequence encoding the Pax3 DNA binding domain to the En - grailed transcriptional repression domain , we created a dominant negative version of Pax3 . The Pax3 - En fu - sion protein negatively aﬀects myogenesis in cultured muscle satellite cells ( Relaix et al . 2006 ) . This sequence , followed by an IRES - nlacZ reporter , was targeted to one allele of Pax3 . Pax3 Pax3 - En - IRESnlacZ / + embryos were found to retain much more of the hypaxial dermomyotome than Pax3 mutants . In this situation Myf5 expression is severely reduced in the hypaxial domain , whereas it is expressed in the epaxial domain , adjacent to the neural tube . In contrast , MyoD tran - scription is less aﬀected , conﬁrming that myogenic cells are still present ( Fig . 2 ) . The migration of myogenic progenitor cells to the limbs is compromised in the presence of Pax3 - En , however some myogenic cells migrate into the hind limb buds . In these cells , Myf5 expression is aﬀected such that 37 % of Pax3 positive cells are Pax3 / Myf5 positive compared with 69 % in normal embryos . These results therefore suggest that Pax3 acts genetically upstream of Myf5 . Direct evidence for Pax3 activation of Myf5 , comes from the analysis of a regulatory element which lies 5 ¢ to the Myf5 gene . We had previously shown that a region located between (cid:1) 58 and (cid:1) 48 kb from Myf5 contains many of the regulatory elements necessary for its expression in the embryo ( Hadchouel et al . 2000 , 2003 ) . This includes the activation of Myf5 in myogenic progenitor cells in the limbs , in the hypoglossal cord and in the more mature hypaxial somite ( Hadchouel et al . 2003 ; see also Buchberger et al . 2003 ) . A sub - region of 145 bp is suﬃcient to direct expression to these myogenic locations in transgenic embryos . Within this sequence there is a Pax3 binding site which band shift analysis with puriﬁed protein and chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments with embryonic ex - tracts , show speciﬁcally binds this transcription factor . Mutation of the site in the context of a 1 kb fragment , with either Myf5 or thymidine kinase promoter ele - ments , demonstrates that it is essential for transgene expression ( Fig . 3 ) . We therefore conclude that Pax3 acts directly upstream of Myf5 in myogenic cells in sub - domains of the somite and its hypaxial derivatives , including the hypoglossal cord and limb buds ( Bajard et al . 2006 ) . Pax3 / Pax7 positive myogenic progenitor cells At the onset of myogenesis in the somite , cells delam - inate from the edges of the dermomyotome to form the myotome , or migrate from the hypaxial dermomyo - tome to form muscle masses such as those of the limbs ( see Tajbakhsh and Buckingham 2000 ) . At this stage , in the mouse embryo , only Pax3 is expressed in these cells whereas the central region of the dermomyotome is positive for both Pax3 and Pax7 ( Fig . 4a ) . By about E10 . 5 , this epithelium begins to disintegrate and Pax3 / Pax7 positive cells are now found within the muscle mass of the myotome ( Fig . 4b ) ( Kassar - Duchossoy et al . 2005 ; Relaix et al . 2005 ) . These cells are prolif - erating and do not express myogenic factors . However a Pax3 GFP / + allele permitted us to demonstrate that the Pax3 / Pax7 positive population contributes to skel - etal muscle , since the stability of the GFP reporter led to GFP positive myogenic cells expressing Myf5 and MyoD and to GFP positive diﬀerentiated muscle ﬁbres . Fig . 1 a Mutation of genes encoding the myogenic regulatory factors in the mouse has led to this schema for the role of this family of basic - helix - loop - helix transcription factors in the deter - mination and diﬀerentiation of cells in the skeletal muscle programme . MyoD and Myf5 are essential myogenic determina - tion factors ( Rudnicki et al . 1993 ) and Mrf4 also plays this role at the onset of myogenesis in the embryo ( Kassar - Duchossoy et al . 2004 ) . b Pax3 , Myf5 / Mrf4 mutant embryos , revealed a role for Pax3 in the myogenic hierarchy , where it is required for MyoD activation and subsequent myogenesis in the absence of Myf5 and Mrf4 ( Tajbakhsh et al . 1997 ; Kassar - Duchossoy et al . 2004 ) S52 The Pax3 / Pax7 positive cells constitute a reserve of myogenic progenitors present not just in the mature myotome , but also in all developing muscle masses . In the absence of both Pax3 and Pax7 this cell population is partly lost due to apoptosis . Remaining cells , labelled by reporter gene expression , fail to activate Myf5 or Fig . 2 a – f In the presence of Pax3 - En , Myf5 activation in the hypaxial somite ( d ) is compromised . X - gal staining , showing Pax3 transcription in these Pax3 Pax3 - En - IRESnlacZ / + embryos ( b ) and MyoD expression ( f ) , visualised , like Myf5 , by whole mount in situ hybridisation , are detectable , showing that cells are present in the hypaxial dermomyotome . g – i This is also shown on sections in the trunk region where the dermomyotome , marked by X - gal staining , is maintained in the presence of one allele encoding Pax3 - En ( Pax3 Pax3 - En - IRESnlacZ / + ) ( i ) whereas in the Pax3 mutant ( Pax3 nlacZ / nlacZ ) all the hypaxial dermomyotome is lost by E10 . 5 ( h ) . Myf5 expression , detected by immunohistochemistry is however absent hypaxially ( i ) compared to the control heterozygote ( Pax3 nlac2 / + ) embryo ( g ) Fig . 3 Transgenic embryos are shown in which the nlacZ reporter is controlled by the (cid:1) 58 / (cid:1) 57 kb regulatory sequence upstream of the Myf5 gene , either placed 5 ¢ of the baMyf5 promoter ( a ) or 5 ¢ of the non - myogenic thymidine kinase promoter ( c ) . When the Pax3 binding site , present in the 145 bp sequence within the longer 58 / 57 kb fragment , is mutated all transgene expression in the somites and limb buds is lost ( b , d ) ; only anterior labelling due to the ba element , which serves as a positive control , is retained ( b ) . ba branchial arch , ﬂ forelimb bud , hl hindlimb bud , hc hypoglossal cord S53 MyoD , do not enter the myogenic programme and become integrated into other tissues , such as cartilage . In the double mutant , there is a major muscle deﬁcit by early fœtal stages ; only skeletal muscle derived from the early myotome is present ( Relaix et al . 2005 ) . A similar population has been observed in the chick embryo ( Gros et al . 2005 ; Ben - Yair and Kalcheim 2005 ) , where cell labelling and chick / quail grafting experiments demonstrate that Pax3 / Pax7 positive cells in developing skeletal muscle masses are derived from the central domain of the dermomyotome . Furthermore , satellite cells , the progenitor cells of post - natal muscle , are also shown to come from this population ( Gros et al . 2005 ) . Pax3 and Pax7 therefore deﬁne a source of somite derived cells that are major contributors to skeletal muscle growth and regeneration . These regulatory factors assure the survival of these cells and control their entry into the myogenic programme , with expression of the myogenic determination genes , Myf5 and MyoD . Smooth muscle cells derived from Pax3expressing paraxial mesoderm Classic experiments in the chick embryo have not only established that the somite gives rise to skeletal muscle and derm , but also to endothelial cells ( Brand - Saberi and Christ 2000 ) . Furthermore it was suggested that it may also give rise to smooth muscle cells . The somitic origin of smooth as well as endothelial cells in the dorsal aorta was recently demonstrated in the chick embryo ( Pouget et al . 2006 ) . Using a retrospective clonal analysis in the mouse embryo , based on the rare intragenic recombination of a LaacZ sequence to give a functional LacZ reporter , we have shown that the smooth muscle of the dorsal aorta has a common clonal origin with the skeletal muscle of the myotome ( Esner et al . 2006 ) . Small clones , resulting from a re - cent recombination event , suggest that the common progenitor cell is still present in the somite . Further - more the distribution of b - galactosidase positive cells in such clones suggests that the common progenitor was in the hypaxial dermomyotome . This analysis is com - plemented by examination of Pax3 GFP / + embryos where all the smooth muscle cells of the dorsal aorta are GFP positive ( Fig . 5 ) . These cells do not express the Pax3 protein , and this observation therefore indi - cates that they are derived from Pax3 expressing cells of the paraxial mesoderm / somites . Bipotent cells in the dermomyotome have been shown to give rise to skeletal muscle and derm ( Ben - Yair and Kalcheim 2005 ) . Similarly a common progenitor in the hypaxial dermomyotome can give rise to myogenic and endothelial cells of the limb ( Kardon et al . 2002 ) . We would now propose that Pax3 expressing cells in the ( hypaxial ) dermomyotome have the potential to form either skeletal or smooth muscle . Pax3 is not an essential regulator of this latter process , since it occurs in the Pax3 mutant . Multipotent Pax positive cells in the dermomyotome no doubt depend on appropriate signals to assume their cell fate ; their major contribution to skeletal myogenesis is dependent on the role of Pax3 and Pax7 in the activation of the myogenic determination genes . This short text of a presentation given at the meeting in Freiburg in honour of Bodo Christ , permits me to repeat what I said then about his major contribution to our understanding of the embryology of myogenesis . This classic work with the avian embryo provides the basis for interpretation of phenotypes obtained by mutating potential regulatory genes in the mouse , such as those of the Pax genes discussed here . Fig . 4 In these schematic representations Pax3 ( dark shaded ) and Pax7 ( slashed ) positive cells are shown in the dermomyotome of a mouse somite in the thoracic region , at E9 . 5 ( a ) and E10 . 5 ( b ) . At the onset of myogenesis , cells that express the myogenic regulatory factors , Myf5 and Mrf4 , delaminate from the edges of the dermomyotome to form the myotome ( light shaded ) or Pax3 positive cells that have not yet activated the myogenic determina - tion genes ( Tajbakhsh and Buckingham 1994 ) migrate away from the somite into the limb bud to form the muscle masses of the limb ( arrows ) . At E10 . 5 ( b ) , the epithelial structure of the dermomyo - tome begins to disintegrate centrally and Pax3 / Pax7 positive cells , that constitute a reserve of myogenic progenitor cells , enter the skeletal muscle mass of the myotome as shown by arrows ( see Relaix et al . 2005 ) S54 Acknowledgments The work on skeletal myogenesis in the embryo in M . B . ’s laboratory is supported by the Pasteur Institute , the CNRS , the AFM and the E . U . Networks of Excellence ‘‘Cells into Organs’’ and ‘‘MYORES’’ , within the 6th framework programme . We are grateful to Ahmed Mansouri ( Go¨ttingen ) for the Pax7 mutant mouse line . References Bajard L , Relaix F , Lagha M , Rocancourt D , Daubas P , Buck - ingham ME ( 2006 ) A distinct genetic hierarchy controls hyp - axial myogenesis : Pax3 directly activates Myf5 in muscle progenitor cells in the limb . Genes Dev 20 : 2450 – 2464 Ben - Yair R , Kalcheim C ( 2005 ) Lineage analysis of the avian dermomyotome sheet reveals the existence of single cells with both dermal and muscle progenitor fates . Development 132 : 689 – 701 Brand - Saberi B , Christ B ( 2000 ) Evolution and development of distinct cell lineages derived from somites . Curr Top Dev Biol 48 : 1 – 42 Buchberger A , Nomokonova N , Arnold HH ( 2003 ) Myf5 expres - sion in somites and limb buds of mouse embryos is controlled by two distinct distal enhancer activities . Development 130 : 3297 – 3307 Esner M , Meilhac SM , Relaix F , Nicolas JF , Cossu G , Bucking - ham ME ( 2006 ) Smooth muscle of the dorsal aorta shares a common clonal origin with skeletal muscle of the myotome : a model for precursor cell migration from the somite . Develop - ment 133 : 737 – 749 Gros J , Manceau M , Thome´ V , Marcelle C ( 2005 ) A common somitic origin for embryonic muscle progenitors and satellite cells . Nature 435 : 954 – 958 Hadchouel J , Tajbakhsh S , Primig M , Chang THT , Daubas P , Rocancourt D , Buckingham M ( 2000 ) Modular long - range regulation of Myf5 reveals unexpected heterogeneity between skeletal muscles in the mouse embryo . Development 127 : 4455 – 4467 Hadchouel J , Carvajal JJ , Daubas P , Bajard L , Chang T , Rocan - court D , Cox D , Summerbell D , Tajbakhsh S , Rigby PWJ , Buckingham M ( 2003 ) Analysis of a key regulatory region upstream of the Myf5 gene reveals multiple phases of myo - genesis , orchestrated at each site by a combination of elements dispersed throughout the locus . Development 130 : 3415 – 3426 Kardon G , Campbell JK , Tabin CJ ( 2002 ) Local extrinsic signals determine muscle and endothelial cell fate and patterning in the vertebrate limb . Dev Cell 3 : 533 – 545 Kassar - Duchossoy L , Gayraud - Morel B , Gome ` s D , Rocancourt D , Buckingham M , Shinin V , Tajbakhsh S ( 2004 ) Mrf4 directs skeletal muscle indentity in Myf5 : MyoD double mutant mice . Nature 431 : 466 – 471 Kassar - Duchossoy L , Giacone E , Gayraud - Morel B , Jory A , Gome ` s D , Tajbakhsh S ( 2005 ) Pax3 / Pax7 mark a novel popu - lation of primitive myogenic cells during development . Genes Dev 19 : 1426 – 1431 Maroto M , Reshef R , Munsterberg AE , Koester S , Goulding M Lassar AB ( 1997 ) Ectopic Pax3 activates MyoD and Myf5 expression in embryonic mesoderm and neural tissue . Cell 89 : 139 – 148 Pouget C , Gautier R , Teillet MA , Jaﬀredo T ( 2006 ) Somite - derived cells replace ventral aortic hemangioblasts and provide aortic smooth muscle cells of the trunk . Development 133 : 1013 – 1022 Fig . 5 Sections of a Pax3 GFP / + mouse embryo at E10 . 5 show the hypaxial region of the dermomyotome , at hindlimb level , strongly labelled with a GFP antibody after immunocytochemistry ( a ) . Strongly positive cells are seen ( arrowheads ) migrating towards the limb bud from the dermomyotome ( DM ) . Neural crest cells in the dorsal root ganglia ( DRG ) are also positive . Pax3 , detected with an antibody to the protein , is expressed in the dermomyotome and in myogenic progenitor cells migrating to the limb bud ( arrowheads ) ( d ) . In b and e enlargements of the region of the dorsal aorta ( DA ) are shown with GFP ( b , e ) and with smooth muscle actin ( e ) labelling by corresponding antibodies showing co - localisation in the wall of the aorta . GFP positive neural crest cells are present in the adjacent sympathetic ganglia ( SG ) . In c and f similar images are shown for a Pax3 GFP / GFP embryo which , in the absence of Pax3 , lacks the neural crest cell contribution , thus distinguishing it from the labelled smooth muscle cells of the aorta and adjacent GFP positive cells derived from paraxial mesoderm . Consistent with a contribution of the hypaxial somite , which is lost in the Pax3 mutant , the smooth muscle of the aorta is reduced ( f ) S55 Relaix F , Polimeni M , Rocancourt D , Ponzetto C , Scha¨fer BW , Buckingham M ( 2003 ) The transcriptional activator PAX3 - FKHR rescues the Pax3 mutant phenotype and induces a gain of function phenotype with ligand - independent activation of Met signaling . Genes Dev 17 : 2950 – 2965 Relaix F , Rocancourt D , Mansouri A , Buckingham MA ( 2005 ) A Pax3 / Pax7 - dependent population of skeletal muscle progenitor cells . Nature 435 : 948 – 953 Relaix F , Montarras D , Zaﬀran S , Gayraud - Morel B , Rocancourt D , Tajbakhsh S , Mansouri A , Cumano A , Buckingham M ( 2006 ) Pax3 and Pax7 have distinct and overlapping functions in adult muscle progenitor cells . J Cell Biol 172 : 91 – 102 Rudnicki MA , Schnegelsberg PN , Stead RH , Braun T , Arnold HH , Jaenisch R ( 1993 ) Myod or Myf - 5 is required for the formation of skeletal muscle . Cell 75 : 1351 – 1359 Tajbakhsh S , Buckingham ME ( 1994 ) Mouse limb muscle is determined in the absence of the earliest myogenic factor myf (cid:1) 5 . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 91 : 747 – 751 Tajbakhsh S , Buckingham M ( 2000 ) The birth of muscle progenitor cells in the mouse : spatiotemporal considerations . In : Ordahl CP ( ed ) Current topics in developmental biology : somitogene - sis , vol 47 . Academic Press , San Diego , pp 225 – 268 Tajbakhsh S , Rocancourt D , Cossu G , Buckingham M ( 1997 ) Redeﬁning the genetic hierarchies controling skeletal myogen - esis : Pax3 and Myf (cid:1) 5 act upstream of MyoD . Cell 89 : 127 – 138 Tremblay P , Gruss P ( 1994 ) Pax : genes for mice and men . Phar - macol Ther 61 : 205 – 226 S56