313 Douglas J . Taatjes and Jürgen Roth ( eds . ) , Cell Imaging Techniques : Methods and Protocols , Methods in Molecular Biology , vol . 931 , DOI 10 . 1007 / 978 - 1 - 62703 - 056 - 4 _ 15 , © Springer Science + Business Media , LLC 2013 Chapter 15 Measuring the Elastic Properties of Living Cells with Atomic Force Microscopy Indentation Joanna L . MacKay and Sanjay Kumar Abstract Atomic force microscopy ( AFM ) is a powerful and versatile tool for probing the mechanical properties of biological samples . This chapter describes the procedures for using AFM indentation to measure the elastic moduli of living cells . We include step - by - step instructions for cantilever calibration and data acquisition using a combined AFM / optical microscope system , as well as a detailed protocol for data analysis . Our protocol is written speci ﬁ cally for the BioScope™ Catalyst™ AFM system ( Bruker AXS Inc . ) ; however , most of the general concepts can be readily translated to other commercial systems . Key words : Scanning probe microscope , Nanoindentation , Force spectroscopy , Mechanobiology , Cell mechanics , Young’s modulus , Stiffness , Elasticity The mechanical properties of cells in ﬂ uence their ability to change shape , exert force ( 1 ) , migrate ( 2 , 3 ) , and sense physical stimuli in their microenvironment ( 4 – 6 ) , such as matrix stiffness and shear stress . Studies have also shown that changes in the mechanical properties of cells can serve as a biomarker for various diseases , including anemia ( 7 ) , muscular dystrophy ( 8 ) , pulmonary and car - diac diseases ( 9 ) , and several types of cancer ( 8 , 10 – 13 ) . A number of tools have therefore been developed to measure the mechanical properties of living cells , including atomic force microscopy ( AFM ) indentation ( 14 ) , micropipette aspiration ( 15 , 16 ) , particle track - ing microrheology ( 17 ) , and magnetic twisting cytometry ( 18 ) . Of these , AFM is arguably the most widely used and versatile tech - nique . In addition to measuring cellular mechanical properties , AFM can also be used to image cells through a variety of contrast mechanisms ( 19 , 20 ) , apply tensile forces to cells ( 21 ) , and measure cellular contractile forces ( 22 ) . 1 . Introduction 314 J . L . MacKay and S . Kumar In AFM , piezoelectric actuators are typically used to control the x , y , and z position of a probe , which consists of a ﬂ exible can - tilever with a micron - sized tip attached to a rectangular substrate ( chip ) . When the probe is near a surface , attractive and repulsive forces between the tip and the sample cause de ﬂ ection of the can - tilever , which is tracked by a laser re ﬂ ected off the back of the cantilever onto a position - sensitive photodiode detector . To mea - sure the elastic modulus of a sample , the sample is indented by the probe , and the cantilever de ﬂ ection is measured as a function of the probe’s z position ( Fig . 1 ) . The cantilever de ﬂ ection is used to calculate the indentation force of the probe based on Hooke’s law , F = k × d where d is the cantilever de ﬂ ection and k is the cantilever spring constant . The resulting force - vs . - indentation curve is then typically ﬁ t to the Hertz model , which was originally developed to describe the indentation of two elastic spheres ( 23 ) and has since been modi ﬁ ed to describe the indentation of an elastic in ﬁ nite half - space by a small , rigid tip of de ﬁ ned geometry ( 24 – 26 ) . From this ﬁ tted curve , the elastic modulus of the sample can be extracted . These force curves can be conducted in liquid and at ambient tem - peratures , which permits direct measurement of living cells and tissues . To locate cells and position the probe over speci ﬁ c subcel - lular locations , the AFM system is often integrated with an optical microscope , which can also be used to monitor cellular structure and function during the experiment . In this chapter , we provide a detailed protocol for measuring the elastic moduli of living cells , which includes calibration of the cantilever spring constant , acquisition of force curves on cells , and data analysis . Throughout the chapter , we include advice and trou - bleshooting tips based on our own experiences with these mea - surements . In Chapter 17 of the ﬁ rst edition of Cell Imaging Techniques : Methods and Protocols ( 27 ) , Costa outlined methods for performing force measurements on cells using the original La s e r Probe Photodetector Objective Fig . 1 . Schematic of an AFM indentation experiment depicting a probe with a pyramidal tip indenting a cell . 315 15 Measuring the Elastic Properties of Living Cells … BioScope™ AFM system from Veeco Instruments ( now known as Bruker AXS Inc . ) . Here , we focus on the more recently developed BioScope™ Catalyst™ AFM system ( Bruker AXS Inc . ) and provide more speci ﬁ c , step - by - step instructions for acquiring single force curves on cells with the goal of calculating the average elastic mod - ulus of a population of cells . Note that throughout this chapter we have indicated software commands by quotation marks ( e . g . , “initialize the stage” ) . The BioScope™ Catalyst™ AFM system is fully integrated with an inverted optical microscope to enable simultaneous force measure - ments and optical imaging . The open design of the AFM head permits a direct light path from the condenser to the optical objec - tive for optimal phase contrast and differential interference contrast ( DIC ) imaging . The open design also facilitates the use of cell culture dishes and easy access to the sample . The following components are supplied with the AFM system : 1 . BioScope™ Catalyst™ head . 2 . Nanoscope V controller . 3 . BioScope™ Catalyst™ Electronics Interface Box ( “E - box” ) . 4 . BioScope™ Catalyst™ baseplate with large NA sample holder plate . 5 . EasyAlign™ for infrared laser alignment . 6 . Joystick for controlling x , y , z motors . 7 . Nanoscope software ( version 8 . 10 ) . 8 . Probe holder for submersion in liquid . 9 . Probe stand for securing probe holder while loading and unloading probes . 10 . Magnetic sample substrate clamps . 11 . Heater stage and controller ( optional , see Note 1 ) . 12 . Petri dish perfusion cell ( optional , see Note 1 ) . 1 . Nikon Eclipse Ti - E inverted light microscope ( Nikon Instruments Inc . , Melville , NY ) with ×20 or ×40 Ph2 objective for phase imaging ( see Note 2 ) . 2 . Controller for microscope shutters ( e . g . , Lambda 10 - 3 , Sutter Instrument Company , Novato , CA ) . 3 . Vibration isolation table . 2 . Materials 2 . 1 . AFM System 2 . 2 . Additional Microscope Components 316 J . L . MacKay and S . Kumar 4 . Two computers : one with the Nanoscope software and AFM drivers installed and the other with the optical microscope soft - ware and drivers installed . 5 . Digital camera ( optional ) . 6 . Fluorescence lamp ( optional ) . 1 . AFM probes appropriate for contact mode in ﬂ uid with spring constants around 0 . 01 – 0 . 2 N / m and a re ﬂ ective coating on the back side of the cantilever ( see Note 3 ) . 2 . Tweezers with non - scratching synthetic tips ( e . g . , Carbo ﬁ b tweezers , Aven , Inc . , Ann Arbor , MI ) to avoid damaging the glass window on the liquid probe holder . 3 . Standard 25 mm × 75 mm microscope slides . 4 . Hydrophobic solution ( OMS Opto Chemicals ) to treat micro - scope slides ( see Note 4 ) . 5 . Standard cell culture reagents . 6 . Standard cell culture dishes ( 35 mm , 60 mm ) or glass cover - slips ( see Note 5 ) . 7 . 50 mm glass - bottom Petri dishes ( WillCo Wells ) . 8 . Pipette . 9 . Kimwipes ® for cleanup . 1 . Seed cells in cell culture dishes or on glass coverslips ( see Note 5 ) . We recommend seeding at a cell density that is sub - con ﬂ uent but greater than 5 , 000 cells / cm 2 to make locating cells easier and to reduce travel time between cells . 2 . Allow cells to adhere and spread ( 2 – 24 h ) prior to force measurements . The actual spring constant of a cantilever can vary signi ﬁ cantly from the nominal spring constant estimated by the manufacturer , and it is important to measure this value before each experiment . Various methods for measuring cantilever spring constants have been reviewed elsewhere ( 28 , 29 ) . We use the Thermal Tune method built into the Nanoscope software , which measures the thermal ﬂ uctuations of the cantilever as a function of time , calcu - lates the power spectrum of the ﬂ uctuations , ﬁ ts the chosen peak to a Lorentzian curve , and integrates under the curve to calculate the cantilever spring constant . This measurement should be conducted in air with a clean , dry cantilever , and it ﬁ rst requires 2 . 3 . Additional Supplies 3 . Methods 3 . 1 . Sample Preparation 3 . 2 . Cantilever Spring Constant Calibration 317 15 Measuring the Elastic Properties of Living Cells … measurement of the “de ﬂ ection sensitivity” ( i . e . , the conversion factor between cantilever de ﬂ ection and photodetector voltage ) on a material that is very stiff compared to the cantilever , such as glass or tissue culture plastic . 1 . First turn on the computers and then turn on the Nanoscope V controller and the E - box . The optical microscope compo - nents should also be turned on . 2 . Open the Nanoscope software , and under experiment type choose “contact mode in ﬂ uid . ” This will turn the infrared laser on . Do not initialize the stage yet because the laser ﬁ rst needs to be aligned on the AFM probe . 3 . Slide the probe holder for submersion in liquid onto the probe stand . Using tweezers with non - scratching synthetic tips ( to protect the glass window on the probe holder ) , carefully pick up an AFM probe substrate by the sides ( see Note 6 ) and place it on the probe holder with the tip facing up and with the can - tilever of interest above the glass window . Push down on the probe stand to raise the spring - loaded clamp and slide the probe under the clamp so that the cantilever is in the center of the glass window . If there are additional cantilevers on the other end of the probe ( under the clamp ) , they will likely be damaged and should not be used . 4 . Stand the AFM head up vertically on the EasyAlign and slide the probe holder onto the z scanner . Lower the AFM head horizontally onto the EasyAlign ( without liquid in the dish holder ) so that the three legs on the head ﬁ t into the three dents in the EasyAlign . Turn the EasyAlign on and adjust the AFM head so that the cantilever is in view , adjusting the focus and brightness knobs as necessary . 5 . Use the beam positioning knobs on the AFM head to move the laser spot onto the end of the cantilever ( where the tip is located ) . Use the horizontal detector positioning knob ( −H + ) on the AFM head to set the horizontal de ﬂ ection to 0 and the vertical detector positioning knob ( −V + ) to set the vertical de ﬂ ection to a negative number ( between −2 and −6 V ) . The laser sum should be a positive number greater than 2 and should be greatest when the laser is positioned on the cantile - ver ( see Note 7 ) . 6 . With the AFM head still resting on the EasyAlign , follow the prompts in the Nanoscope software to “initialize the stage” and “wake up” the scanners . 7 . Place a clean , dry microscope slide onto the sample holder plate on the microscope stage and secure the slide with the appropriate sample clamp . 8 . Use the Navigation Menu in the Nanoscope software to ensure that the AFM head is near its highest position and then place 318 J . L . MacKay and S . Kumar the head on the stage so that the three legs on the head ﬁ t into the three dents on the baseplate . 9 . Use the optical microscope to focus on the top surface of the microscope slide . Using either the joystick or the Navigation Menu in the software , carefully lower the AFM head closer to the glass slide but still far enough away to be out of focus . If the z position of the AFM head is unclear , it is best to stay far away from the glass surface to avoid crashing the probe and z scanner ; note that the greater the initial probe - sample separa - tion distance , the more time will be needed to engage . 10 . In the Scan Menu , set the scan size to zero and the de ﬂ ection setpoint to around 1 . 5 V . Then in the Engage Menu , use the “slow engage” function to automatically bring the AFM head down to the surface . During this process , the scanner is set to scan mode and the AFM head is lowered to the surface until the vertical cantilever de ﬂ ection reaches the speci ﬁ ed de ﬂ ection setpoint ( see Note 8 ) . Once the de ﬂ ection setpoint is reached , the tip will start scanning the surface . The default engage set - tings can be used ( “SPM engage step size” = 1 μ m , “SPM with - draw step size” = 100 μ m ) , or alternatively , we prefer to use an “SPM engage step size” of 5 μ m to speed up the engagement process . 11 . Once the probe is engaged at the surface , switch to the Ramp Menu and raise the AFM head 10 μ m by going to “Microscope” in the menu bar and choosing “step motor” or by clicking the “step motor” icon in the RealTime Status Window . Be sure to check the box : “allow stage motion while engaged” . 12 . Look through the optical microscope and check that the can - tilever is in view . If necessary , temporarily raise the AFM head another 10 – 20 μ m and adjust the stage using the baseplate positioning knobs ( see Note 9 ) . 13 . In the Ramp Menu under the expanded view , choose the following settings : “ramp output” = Z , “ramp size” = 12 μ m , “forward and reverse velocities” = 10 μ m / s ( which corresponds to 0 . 42 Hz ) , “number of samples” = 2 , 048 , “Z - closed loop” = ON ( see Note 10 ) , “trigger mode” = relative , “data type” = de ﬂ ection error , “trigger threshold” = 1 – 2 V ( or about 50 – 100 nm ) , “start mode” = motor step , and “end mode” = retracted . Adjust the vertical de ﬂ ection to be around −2 V ( see Note 11 ) , and then click the “single ramp” button in the toolbar to acquire a force curve on the glass slide ( see Note 12 ) . 14 . In the graph , set channel 1 to “de ﬂ ection error , ” which plots the data as vertical de ﬂ ection vs . z position . The extension part of the curve should have a ﬂ at baseline followed by a sharp , positive slope denoting de ﬂ ection of the cantilever by the glass surface . The slope of this line gives the “de ﬂ ection sensitivity” 319 15 Measuring the Elastic Properties of Living Cells … in nm / V , which enables the vertical de ﬂ ection value to be con - verted from volts to nanometers . Zoom into the sloped region of the curve by holding “Ctrl” and using the mouse to draw a box around the curve . Then click to the left or right of the graph to drag two red , dashed lines onto the graph and use these lines to mark the boundaries of the sloped region to be ﬁ t with a straight line ( Fig . 2 ) . Click the “update sensitivity” button in the toolbar to calculate the slope of the line and save this value . Click the magnifying glass button in the bottom left corner of the graph to zoom back out . 15 . Bring the AFM head up at least 200 μ m by clicking the “with - draw” button several times . Set both the vertical and horizontal de ﬂ ections to 0 by adjusting the detector positioning knobs on the AFM head and click the “Thermal Tune” button in the toolbar . Do not change the laser beam position ( see Note 13 ) . 16 . In the Thermal Tune Menu , check the box for “Lorentzian ( Air ) , ” choose the “thermal tune range” of 5 – 2 , 000 kHz , enter 1 . 144 for “de ﬂ ection sensitivity correction” for v - shaped cantilevers or 1 . 106 for rectangular cantilevers , and then click the “acquire data” button . Zoom into the largest peak ( which should be within the frequency range estimated by the probe manufacturer ) and drag red lines onto either side of it to de ﬁ ne the boundaries for ﬁ tting . Click “ ﬁ t data” and “calculate spring constant” and then save this value . Since the force measurements on cells will be conducted in liquid , the de ﬂ ection sensitivity must ﬁ rst be recalibrated on a glass slide in water . 3 . 3 . De ﬂ ection Sensitivity Calibration in Water Fig . 2 . Screenshot from the Nanoscope software showing a magni ﬁ ed view of a force curve taken on a glass slide . The extension portion of the curve between the vertical dashed lines is used to calculate the “de ﬂ ection sensitivity . ” For clarity , the extension and retraction curves are labeled , and the font size for the axes has been enlarged . 320 J . L . MacKay and S . Kumar 1 . Place a 50 mm Petri dish in the dish holder of the EasyAlign and ﬁ ll it with about 2 – 3 mL of deionized water . 2 . Stand the AFM head up vertically on the EasyAlign and use a pipette to carefully place one or two drops of deionized water onto the probe . Carefully lay the AFM head down horizontally so that the tip holder is in contact with the water , but only partially submerged . Do not allow liquid to reach the electrical connections between the probe holder and the z scanner . 3 . Turn the EasyAlign on and realign the laser onto the end of the cantilever if necessary . Set the horizontal de ﬂ ection to 0 and the vertical de ﬂ ection to around −6 V . 4 . Add a few drops of water to the microscope slide ( see Note 4 ) and place the AFM head onto the stage so that the probe con - tacts the water and forms a meniscus . 5 . Wait a few minutes for the vertical de ﬂ ection to stabilize ( see Note 14 ) , reset it to −6 V , and then perform a “slow engage” as in step 10 of Subheading 3 . 2 . Switch to the Ramp Menu and raise the AFM head 10 μ m using the step motor . 6 . Follow steps 13 and 14 of Subheading 3 . 2 to update the “de ﬂ ection sensitivity” in water and save this value . 7 . Withdraw the AFM head at least 300 μ m and place it horizon - tally on the EasyAlign so that the probe is in contact with the water in the dish ( see Note 15 ) . Since physically indenting a cell can stimulate rearrangements of the cytoskeleton and possibly alter cellular mechanical properties ( 30 , 31 ) , we recommend indenting each cell only once and assaying a large number of cells to account for both spatial het - erogeneity within a cell as well as cell to cell heterogeneity across the population . 1 . Place the cell culture sample on the microscope stage and secure it with the appropriate magnetic sample clamp . If the sample is on a coverslip , remove the coverslip from the cell culture medium , wick excess medium from the bottom of the coverslip with a Kimwipe ® , place it on a microscope slide ( preferably hydrophobic ) , and add a few drops of medium to the top of the coverslip . Do not add too much medium or it will run underneath the coverslip and cause it to ﬂ oat . 2 . Carefully place the AFM head on the microscope stage so that the probe contacts the cell culture medium and forms a menis - cus . If the sample is thick , ﬁ rst raise the AFM head further using the joystick or the Navigation Menu to avoid crashing the probe . 3 . Repeat step 5 of Subheading 3 . 3 to engage on the surface and then use the joystick to position a cell under the AFM cantilever . 3 . 4 . Force Measurements on Cells 321 15 Measuring the Elastic Properties of Living Cells … When measuring the elastic modulus of a cell , the tip should be near the center of the cell but not above the nucleus . 4 . In the Ramp Menu , change the “forward and reverse veloci - ties” to 5 μ m / s ( which corresponds to 0 . 21 Hz ) , make sure the “Z - closed loop” is on , set the “trigger threshold” to about 100 nm , and click the “continuous save” button to save the data in a designated folder . 5 . Click the “single approach” button to acquire a force curve ( see Note 12 ) . The curve should have a ﬂ at baseline with a smooth indentation ( Fig . 3 ) , and in the RealTime Status Window , the colored bar indicating how far the tip was extended should be green ( see Note 16 ) . 6 . Use the joystick to move another cell under the AFM tip and continue taking force curves ( see Note 17 ) . Throughout the experiment , use the step motor to move the AFM head up and down as appropriate and adjust the vertical de ﬂ ection to always be between −2 and −6 V . Be sure to raise the AFM head before moving to a different part of the sample in case the sample surface is not ﬂ at . If the cells are rounded or vary signi ﬁ cantly in height , raise the AFM head between measurements to avoid scraping cells off the substrate and onto the AFM cantilever ( see Note 18 ) . If the probe has multiple cantilevers and one of the unused cantilevers hangs lower than the cantilever being used , that unused tip will drag along the surface . In this case , move along the sample in a zig - zag pattern to avoid indenting Fig . 3 . Screenshot from the Nanoscope software showing a force curve taken on a living cell plotted as the vertical de ﬂ ection ( nm ) vs . the z position of the probe ( μ m ) . The initial position of the probe is near Z = 0 , and Z increases as the probe is lowered down to the cell during extension . Once the cantilever de ﬂ ection reaches the de ﬂ ection setpoint , the cantilever is retracted back to the initial z position . For clarity , the extension and retraction curves are labeled , and the font size for the axes has been enlarged . 322 J . L . MacKay and S . Kumar cells that have already been touched by the low hanging tip . Alternatively , the longer cantilevers can be carefully sheared off with a tweezer prior to mounting the probe . 7 . When ready to switch samples , withdraw the AFM head at least 300 μ m and place it horizontally on the EasyAlign so that the probe is in contact with the water in the dish and repeat step 1 through step 6 . 8 . When ﬁ nished for the day , stand the AFM head up vertically on the EasyAlign box and wick away excess liquid from the bot - tom of the probe holder with a Kimwipe ® . Slide the probe holder off of the scanner and place it on the probe stand . 9 . Use the tweezers with synthetic tips to carefully remove the probe from the probe holder and dip it in deionized water . Wick away excess water from the probe by touching the bot - tom of it to a Kimwipe ® and then place it back in the probe container . We reuse probes several times until they appear dirty or their spring constants change signi ﬁ cantly . 10 . Clean the probe holder with water , dry it with a Kimwipe ® , and place it back in its container . To decontaminate the probe holder , a 15 % bleach solution can be used . 11 . After exporting data ( see Subheading 3 . 5 ) , close the Nanoscope software and turn off the Nanoscope controller . The E - box can stay on . Turn off the microscope and its accessories , including the camera , light source , and shutter controller . We now outline the strategy for analyzing a single force curve in which we ﬁ rst plot the data , de ﬁ ne the baseline and normalize the curve , calculate the contact point , and ﬁ t the data to a Hertz model for a pyramidal tip to calculate the elastic modulus ( see Note 19 ) . We use MATLAB ® to analyze our data , but other programs capable of nonlinear least squares ﬁ tting should also work . 1 . To export the data from the Nanoscope software , right - click on the ﬁ les and choose to export as ASCII ﬁ les . Choose “de ﬂ ection error” for data type , “native” for units , and check the boxes for “extend” and “ramp” under the force curve options . The software will export each force curve as a separate text ﬁ le with the ﬁ rst column containing the z position of the probe in nanometers ( which starts at 0 and increases as the probe is lowered to the sample ) and the second column containing the vertical de ﬂ ection of the cantilever during probe extension in volts ( see Note 20 ) . 2 . Import the data into MATLAB ® as a 2 column matrix and multiply the second column by the “de ﬂ ection sensitivity” ( nm / V ) measured in water to convert the vertical de ﬂ ection from volts to nanometers . 3 . 5 . Data Analysis 323 15 Measuring the Elastic Properties of Living Cells … 3 . Plot the z position data on the x - axis and the vertical de ﬂ ection data on the y - axis . De ﬁ ne the baseline of the curve by choosing two points along the ﬂ at part of the curve , at least 2 μ m apart , and calculate the slope of the line between these two points . Multiply the slope by the z position data and subtract these values from the vertical de ﬂ ection data to straighten the curve so that the baseline is perfectly horizontal . 4 . Calculate the average de ﬂ ection along the baseline and sub - tract this value from the vertical de ﬂ ection data to normalize the curve so that it starts at zero de ﬂ ection . 5 . Several methods have been developed to calculate the contact point , which is the z position of the probe when it ﬁ rst indents the cell ( 32 ) . We use a formula from Domke and Radmacher ( 33 , 34 ) in which two points of de ﬂ ection are used to ﬁ t the indentation portion of the curve and to extrapolate back to where the de ﬂ ection is near zero : 2 2 1 1 2 1 2 1 ( ) ( ) ( / ) cp 1 ( / ) n n z d z d d d d d − − − = − where cp is the z position at the contact point , d 1 and z 1 refer to the vertical de ﬂ ection and z position of the ﬁ rst data point to be ﬁ t , d 2 and z 2 refer to the vertical de ﬂ ection and z position of the second data point to be ﬁ t , and n = 0 . 5 for a pyramidal / conical tip ( or n = 2 / 3 for a spherical tip ) . We have found that choosing vertical de ﬂ ections around 5 – 15 nm for the ﬁ rst point and 100 nm for the second point ( or the maximum de ﬂ ection ) gives good results . Overlay the contact point on a plot of the vertical de ﬂ ection vs . the z position data to con ﬁ rm that the point lies just before where the curve starts to slope upwards . 6 . For each data point after the contact point , calculate the inden - tation force , F = k × d , and the indentation depth , δ = z − d , where k is the cantilever spring constant ( N / m ) , d is the verti - cal de ﬂ ection ( nm ) , and z is the z position of the probe ( nm ) . 7 . Calculate the elastic modulus ( E ) of the cell by using a nonlinear least squares ﬁ tting method ( e . g . , lsqcurve ﬁ t ) to ﬁ t the indenta - tion force ( F ) to the Hertz model for a pyramidal tip ( 25 ) : 2 2 3 tan ( ) 4 ( 1 ) E F α δ = × − ν where δ is the indentation depth ( nm ) , α is the tip half angle in radians ( estimated by the probe manufacturer ) , and ν is the Poisson’s ratio of the cell , which is frequently assumed to be 0 . 5 but has been measured for some cell types to be around 0 . 37 ( 35 , 36 ) . Fit the data up to 1 – 2 μ m of indentation into the cell and plot the ﬁ t against the experimental data to con ﬁ rm that the ﬁ t is appropriate ( see Note 21 ) . 324 J . L . MacKay and S . Kumar 1 . The BioScope Catalyst system has an optional heated stage that replaces the sample holder plate in the baseplate and a perfusion cell that enables circulation of both liquid and gas through the cell culture sample . While these features permit long - term culturing of cells during AFM experiments , both the heating and ﬂ uid circulation can introduce noise in the cantilever de ﬂ ection . Therefore , for short experiments , we typ - ically do not use these features and instead take measurements for no more than 30 min after the cells are removed from the incubator . For longer experiments , CO 2 - independent media can also be used . 2 . When the Bioscope Catalyst head is placed on the microscope stage , the optical light path is partially blocked by the scanner . This can result in poor phase contrast , especially for the Ph1 phase rings that are typically used in ×10 and ×20 objectives . We have found that Ph2 phase ring objectives give good phase contrast , and we prefer to use a ×20 Ph2 objective ( CFI Plan Apochromat DM20x , Nikon Instruments Inc . , Melville , NY ) . Note that the phase ring should be aligned while the AFM head is engaged on a sample in liquid . 3 . When choosing an AFM probe , it is important to consider the geometry of the tip because sharp tips can puncture the cell and thereby underestimate the elastic modulus . ( On a force curve , a puncture event appears as an abrupt , sawtooth - like decrease in force during indentation . ) Spherical tips , usually colloidal probes , are ideal for indenting cells ( 37 ) , but are expensive if purchased commercially and can be dif ﬁ cult to assemble in the lab with consistent geometric and mechanical properties . We prefer to use the TR400PSA ( OTR4 ) silicon nitride probes ( Olympus ) , which have cantilevers with spring constants of 0 . 02 and 0 . 08 N / m and tetrahedral pyramidal tips with a 35° half angle . These tips are sharpened for imag - ing , but we do not usually experience cell puncture events . In the past , we preferred the DNP and MLCT silicon nitride probes ( Veeco Instruments , now known as Bruker AXS Inc . ) , which were unsharpened with the same pyramidal tip shape , but the recent versions of these probes have sharper aspect ratios with pyramid half angles of 15 – 25° . 4 . We have found that treating microscope slides with hydropho - bic solution makes cantilever calibration in water easier by pre - venting the water from wetting the surface . Also , when cells are cultured on a coverslip that is then placed on top of a microscope slide , making the slide hydrophobic prevents liquid from running underneath the coverslip . 4 . Notes 325 15 Measuring the Elastic Properties of Living Cells … 5 . The Bioscope Catalyst has sample clamps that hold 35 and 60 mm cell culture dishes , 50 mm Petri dishes , and standard microscope slides . We do not recommend using 35 mm cul - ture dishes , however , because the probe holder can collide with the walls of a small dish . For most experiments , we prefer to seed cells on 18 or 25 mm circular glass coverslips , which are placed on top of a microscope slide with a few droplets of medium before force measurements . For cells that are not well adhered to the substrate , we prefer to use 50 mm glass - bottom Petri dishes since transferring the coverslips and adding medium can dislodge the cells . Note that the surface area available for probing is limited by the range of XY stage movement to a square of 14 mm × 14 mm . 6 . AFM cantilevers are fragile and will break if handled roughly . Grasp the probe substrate from the sides near the center and be careful not to ﬂ ip or drop it . Visually inspect the probe before use to ensure that the cantilevers are clean and intact . 7 . If the laser sum is low despite the laser being correctly posi - tioned on the end of the cantilever , the mirrors that direct the laser onto the photodiode detector may be completely mis - aligned . Try turning both the horizontal and vertical detector positioning knobs from one extreme to the other until the laser sum increases and the vertical de ﬂ ection can be set to a nega - tive number between −2 and −6 . 8 . If the vertical de ﬂ ection equals the de ﬂ ection setpoint before the probe reaches the surface ( which can happen due to noise ﬂ uctuations or drift ) , the software will assume that the surface has been reached and false engage . If this happens , set the vertical de ﬂ ection to a more negative value and initiate “slow engage” again . 9 . If the cantilever is still not in the ﬁ eld of view , raise the AFM head by clicking the “withdraw” button and place the head on the EasyAlign . Check to see that the baseplate is centered on the microscope and / or try repositioning the probe in the center of the glass window on the probe holder . 10 . The “Z - closed loop” corrects for drift in the movement of the z piezo and should be on for all calibration steps and force measurements . While most of the ramp settings are saved after withdrawing and reengaging , the “Z - closed loop setting” is not and needs to be reset each time the probe is engaged . To check whether the “Z - closed loop” was on for previous mea - surements , check the “height sensor” data . If the “Z - closed loop” was on , the extension and retraction “height sensor” curves will be straight lines and overlapping . 11 . The vertical de ﬂ ection values range from −12 to + 12 V , and it is important to stay within these boundaries for accurate results . 326 J . L . MacKay and S . Kumar Since the vertical de ﬂ ection becomes increasingly positive during a force measurement , the vertical de ﬂ ection should be set to a negative number between −2 and −6 V . When the “de ﬂ ection sensitivity” is ﬁ rst calculated in air , however , the vertical de ﬂ ection should be set to −1 or −2 V to be near the value used when calculating the cantilever spring constant . 12 . During a “single ramp , ” the probe is lowered to the surface , raised up by the “ramp size , ” and then lowered again until the “trigger threshold” is reached . This double tapping ensures that the probe always reaches the surface . In contrast , for a “single approach” the probe is lowered only once until the “trigger threshold” is reached or until the z scanner is fully extended . We use “single ramp” for cantilever calibration because it always produces an ideal force curve , but we prefer to use “single approach” for cell measurements to avoid con - tacting the cell more than once . 13 . Each time the laser position is moved during the experiment , the “de ﬂ ection sensitivity” must be recalibrated because the laser will be re ﬂ ected onto the photodiode detector at a differ - ent angle . 14 . When the probe is lowered onto a sample in liquid , the canti - lever may maximally de ﬂ ect and then rapidly relax back down . The vertical de ﬂ ection often levels out after a few minutes , but it can continue to drift for 10 – 20 min . We usually wait only a few minutes before acquiring data and adjust the vertical de ﬂ ection between measurements to account for drift if necessary . 15 . Once the AFM probe is wet , always hold the AFM head hori - zontally to keep the probe wet and to prevent water from drip - ping near the electrical connections between the probe holder and the AFM head . Do not let the probe dry while sitting in the probe holder . When the water starts to evaporate , the sur - face tension generated between the probe and the probe holder may permanently bend the cantilevers . 16 . The colored bar in the RealTime Status Window indicates how far the z scanner was extended when the tip contacted the sur - face . Green is ideal and means that the z scanner was in the middle of its range of extension when the tip contacted the surface , red means that the tip was either too close or too far from the surface ( and these data should not be used ) , and yel - low is in between . The positions of the two black horizontal lines on the colored bar indicate whether the AFM head should be moved up or down before the next measurement . If the lines are near the top of the bar , the tip is too close to the 327 15 Measuring the Elastic Properties of Living Cells … surface and the AFM head should be moved up using the step motor . If the lines are near the bottom of the bar , the tip is too far from the surface and the AFM head should be moved down . If the colored bar is red and raising / lowering the AFM head does not help , check that the vertical de ﬂ ection is between −2 and −6 V . 17 . To work quickly , we view the sample through the microscope eyepiece ( because this viewing window is larger than through the camera port ) and control the Nanoscope software from that position using a wireless mouse . By doing this and by moving the sample to the next cell as early as possible ( while the probe is still retracting from the previous force curve ) , we are able to attain 100 – 150 force curves in 30 min . 18 . When cell debris accumulates on the AFM cantilever , it can interfere with the force measurements . When cell debris is vis - ible , perform a force curve on glass to determine if it interferes with the measurement . To remove cell debris , gently lift the AFM head out of the liquid and then place it back down , repeating if necessary . 19 . The Hertz model includes assumptions that the material being indented is isotropic , linearly elastic , and in ﬁ nitely deep , none of which are strictly valid for a cell . Several modi ﬁ cations to the Hertz model have been developed to try to account for these limitations ( 38 – 41 ) , but most researchers still use variations of the Hertz equations ( ( 25 , 26 ) for a pyramidal tip , ( 24 ) for a conical tip , ( 24 ) for a spherical tip ) . In addition , since calculat - ing the contact point for soft samples can be dif ﬁ cult , at least one group has developed a strategy for analyzing force curves without needing to de ﬁ ne a contact point ( 42 ) . 20 . While the data can be exported in “display units” to show the vertical de ﬂ ection in nanometers instead of volts , we prefer to export the data as “native units” and to use the “de ﬂ ection sensitivity” to convert the values ourselves . This is particularly important if the probe was changed during the experiment or if the “de ﬂ ection sensitivity” was recalibrated . 21 . We ﬁ t the data multiple times using a series of increasing inden - tation depths ( e . g . , 0 . 5 , 1 , 1 . 5 , 2 , 2 . 5 μ m , etc . ) and con ﬁ rm that the elastic modulus for each of the ﬁ ts is similar . Occasionally , the elastic modulus increases signi ﬁ cantly with increasing indentation depth , which can indicate that the cell was too thin in that region and that the mechanical properties of the underlying substrate were detected . Alternatively , this has also been proposed to re ﬂ ect nonlinear elastic behavior of the cell ( 27 ) . 328 J . L . MacKay and S . Kumar Acknowledgment This work was supported by grants to S . K . from the NSF ( CMMI 0727420 ) and the NIH ( 1DP2OD004213 , Director’s New Innovator Award , part of the NIH Roadmap for Medical Research ; 1U54CA143836 , Physical Sciences Oncology Center Grant ) . J . L . M . was supported in part by a Graduate Research Supplement ( GRS ) to Broaden Participation , in association with NSF CMMI 0727420 . References 1 . Wang N et al ( 2002 ) Cell prestress . I . Stiffness and prestress are closely associated in adherent contractile cells . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 282 : C606 – C616 2 . Nagayama M , Haga H , Kawabata K ( 2001 ) Drastic change of local stiffness distribution correlating to cell migration in living ﬁ broblasts . Cell Motil Cytoskeleton 50 : 173 – 179 3 . Park S et al ( 2005 ) Cell motility and local vis - coelasticity of ﬁ broblasts . Biophys J 89 : 4330 – 4342 4 . Chowdhury F et al ( 2010 ) Material properties of the cell dictate stress - induced spreading and differentiation in embryonic stem cells . Nat Mater 9 : 82 – 88 5 . Janmey PA , McCulloch CA ( 2007 ) Cell mechan - ics : integrating cell responses to mechanical stimuli . Annu Rev Biomed Eng 9 : 1 – 34 6 . Solon J et al ( 2007 ) Fibroblast adaptation and stiffness matching to soft elastic substrates . Biophys J 93 : 4453 – 4461 7 . Dulinska I et al ( 2006 ) Stiffness of normal and pathological erythrocytes studied by means of atomic force microscopy . J Biochem Biophys Methods 66 : 1 – 11 8 . Jaalouk DE , Lammerding J ( 2009 ) Mechanotransduction gone awry . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 10 : 63 – 73 9 . Ingber DE ( 2003 ) Mechanobiology and dis - eases of mechanotransduction . Ann Med 35 : 564 – 577 10 . Lekka M et al ( 1999 ) Elasticity of normal and can - cerous human bladder cells studied by scanning force microscopy . Eur Biophys J 28 : 312 – 316 11 . Cross SE et al ( 2007 ) Nanomechanical analysis of cells from cancer patients . Nat Nanotechnol 2 : 780 – 783 12 . Ochalek T et al ( 1988 ) Correlation between cell deformability and metastatic potential in B16 - F1 melanoma cell variants . Cancer Res 48 : 5124 – 5128 13 . Suresh S ( 2007 ) Biomechanics and biophysics of cancer cells . Acta Biomater 3 : 413 – 438 14 . Tao NJ , Lindsay SM , Lees S ( 1992 ) Measuring the microelastic properties of biological mate - rial . Biophys J 63 : 1165 – 1169 15 . Hochmuth RM , Evans EA ( 1982 ) Extensional ﬂ ow of erythrocyte membrane from cell body to elastic tether . I . Analysis . Biophys J 39 : 71 – 81 16 . Evans E , Yeung A ( 1989 ) Apparent viscosity and cortical tension of blood granulocytes determined by micropipette aspiration . Biophys J 56 : 151 – 160 17 . Yamada S , Wirtz D , Kuo SC ( 2000 ) Mechanics of living cells measured by laser tracking micror - heology . Biophys J 78 : 1736 – 1747 18 . Wang N , Butler J , Ingber D ( 1993 ) Mechanotransduction across the cell surface and through the cytoskeleton . Science 260 : 1124 – 1127 19 . Radmacher M et al ( 1992 ) From molecules to cells : imaging soft samples with the atomic force microscope . Science 257 : 1900 – 1905 20 . Radmacher M ( 2007 ) Studying the mechanics of cellular processes by atomic force micros - copy . Methods Cell Biol 83 : 347 – 372 21 . Benoit M et al ( 2000 ) Discrete interactions in cell adhesion measured by single - molecule force spectroscopy . Nat Cell Biol 2 : 313 – 317 22 . Chaudhuri O et al ( 2009 ) Combined atomic force microscopy and side - view optical imaging for mechanical studies of cells . Nat Methods 6 : 383 – 387 23 . Hertz H , Angew JR ( 1881 ) Ueber die Berührung fester elastischer Körper . J Reine Angew Math 92 : 156 – 171 24 . Sneddon IN ( 1965 ) The relation between load and penetration in the axisymmetric boussinesq problem for a punch of arbitrary pro ﬁ le . Int J Engng Sci 3 : 47 – 57 25 . Bilodeau GG ( 1992 ) Regular pyramid punch problem . J Appl Mech 59 : 519 – 523 329 15 Measuring the Elastic Properties of Living Cells … 26 . Rico F et al ( 2005 ) Probing mechanical proper - ties of living cells by atomic force microscopy with blunted pyramidal cantilever tips . Phys Rev E Stat Nonlin Soft Matter Phys 72 : 021914 27 . Costa KD ( 2006 ) Imaging and probing cell mechanical properties with the atomic force microscope . Methods Mol Biol 319 : 331 – 361 28 . Hutter JL , Bechhoefer J ( 1993 ) Calibration of atomic - force microscope tips . Rev Sci Instrum 64 : 1868 – 1873 29 . Burnham NA et al ( 2003 ) Comparison of cali - bration methods for atomic - force microscopy cantilevers . Nanotechnology 14 : 1 30 . Charras GT , Lehenkari PP , Horton MA ( 2001 ) Atomic force microscopy can be used to mechanically stimulate osteoblasts and evaluate cellular strain distributions . Ultramicroscopy 86 : 85 – 95 31 . Charras GT , Horton MA ( 2002 ) Single cell mechanotransduction and its modulation ana - lyzed by atomic force microscope indentation . Biophys J 82 : 2970 – 2981 32 . Lin DC , Dimitriadis EK , Horkay F ( 2007 ) Robust strategies for automated AFM force curve analysis – - I . Non - adhesive indentation of soft , inhomogeneous materials . J Biomech Eng 129 : 430 – 440 33 . Radmacher M , Domke J ( 1998 ) Measuring the elastic properties of thin polymer ﬁ lms with the atomic force microscope . Langmuir 14 : 3320 – 3325 34 . Schneider SW et al ( 2004 ) Shape and volume of living aldosterone - sensitive cells imaged with the atomic force microscope . Methods Mol Biol 242 : 255 – 279 35 . Shin D , Athanasiou K ( 1999 ) Cytoindentation for obtaining cell biomechanical properties . J Orthop Res 17 : 880 – 890 36 . Trickey WR et al ( 2006 ) Determination of the Poisson’s ratio of the cell : recovery properties of chondrocytes after release from complete micropipette aspiration . J Biomech 39 : 78 – 87 37 . Mahaffy RE et al ( 2000 ) Scanning probe - based frequency - dependent microrheology of poly - mer gels and biological cells . Phys Rev Lett 85 : 880 38 . Matthewson MJ ( 1981 ) Axi - symmetric contact on thin compliant coatings . J Mech Phys Solids 29 : 89 – 113 39 . Dimitriadis EK et al ( 2002 ) Determination of elastic moduli of thin layers of soft material using the atomic force microscope . Biophys J 82 : 2798 – 2810 40 . Mahaffy RE et al ( 2004 ) Quantitative analysis of the viscoelastic properties of thin regions of ﬁ broblasts using atomic force microscopy . Biophys J 86 : 1777 – 1793 41 . Costa KD , Sim AJ , Yin FCP ( 2006 ) Non - Hertzian approach to analyzing mechanical properties of endothelial cells probed by atomic force microscopy . J Biomech Eng 128 : 176 – 184 42 . Carl P , Schillers H ( 2008 ) Elasticity measure - ment of living cells with an atomic force micro - scope : data acquisition and processing . P ﬂ ugers Arch 457 : 551 – 559