Vol . 23 no . 21 2007 , pages 2947 – 2948 BIOINFORMATICS APPLICATIONS NOTE doi : 10 . 1093 / bioinformatics / btm404 Sequence analysis Clustal W and Clustal X version 2 . 0 M . A . Larkin 1 , G . Blackshields 1 , N . P . Brown 3 , R . Chenna 3 , P . A . McGettigan 1 , H . McWilliam 4 , F . Valentin 4 , I . M . Wallace 1 , A . Wilm 1 , R . Lopez 4 , J . D . Thompson 2 , T . J . Gibson 3 and D . G . Higgins 1 , * 1 The Conway Institute of Biomolecular and Biomedical Research , University College Dublin , Belfield , Dublin 4 , Ireland , 2 Laboratoire de Biologie et Genomique Structurales , Institut de Ge´ne´tique et de Biologie Mole´culaire et Cellulaire , Illkirch , France , 3 European Molecular Biology Laboratory , Meyerhofstrasse 1 , 69117 Heidelberg , Germany and 4 EMBL Outstation - European Bioinformatics Institute , Wellcome Trust Genome Campus Hinxton , Cambridge , CB10 1SD , UK Received on June 27 , 2007 ; revised on August 3 , 2007 ; accepted on August 3 , 2007 Advance Access publication September 10 , 2007 Associate Editor : Alex Bateman ABSTRACT Summary : The Clustal W and Clustal X multiple sequence alignment programs have been completely rewritten in C þþ . This will facilitate the further development of the alignment algorithms in the future and has allowed proper porting of the programs to the latest versions of Linux , Macintosh and Windows operating systems . Availability : The programs can be run on - line from the EBI web server : http : / / www . ebi . ac . uk / tools / clustalw2 . The source code and executables for Windows , Linux and Macintosh computers are available from the EBI ftp site ftp : / / ftp . ebi . ac . uk / pub / software / clustalw2 / Contact : clustalw @ ucd . ie 1 INTRODUCTION Multiple sequence alignments are now one of the most widely used bioinformatics analyses . They are needed routinely as parts of more complicated analyses or analysis pipelines and there are several very widely used packages , e . g . Clustal W ( Thompson et al . , 1994 ) , Clustal X ( Thompson et al . , 1997 ) , T - Coffee ( Notredame et al . , 2000 ) , MAFFT ( Katoh et al . , 2002 ) and MUSCLE ( Edgar , 2004 ) . Clustal is also the oldest of the currently most widely used programs having been first distributed by post on floppy disks in the late 1980s . It was initially written in Microsoft Fortran for MS - DOS and originally ran on IBM compatible personal computers as four separate executable programs , Clustal1 – Clustal4 ( Higgins and Sharp , 1988 , 1989 ) . These were later rewritten in C and merged into a single program , Clustal V ( Higgins et al . , 1992 ) , that was distributed for VAX / VMS , Unix , Apple Macintosh and IBM compatible PCs . These programs were distributed from the EMBL File server ( Stoehr and Omond , 1989 ) , an e - mail and FTP server , based at the EMBL in Heidelberg , Germany . The current Clustal programs all derive from Clustal W ( Thompson et al . , 1994 ) , which incorporated a novel position - specific scoring scheme and a weighting scheme for down weighting over - represented sequence groups . The ‘W’ stands for ‘weights’ . These programs have been amended and added to many times since 1994 in order to increase functionality and to increase sensitivity . The user - friendliness has also been greatly enhanced by the addition , in 1997 , of a full graphical user interface ( Thompson et al . , 1997 ) . This has made the code complicated to maintain and develop , as the graphical interface must be constantly modified and recompiled for new operating systems and desktop environments ( Windows , Macintosh , VMS , Unix and Linux ) . By the late 1990s , Clustal W and Clustal X were the most widely used multiple alignment programs . They were able to align medium - sized data sets very quickly and were easy to use . The alignments were of sufficient quality not to require manual editing or adjustment very often . This situation changed greatly with the appearance of the first custom made benchmark test set for multiple alignment programs , BAliBASE ( Thompson et al . , 1999 ) . This was followed by the appearance of T - Coffee which was able to make very accurate alignments of very divergent proteins but only for small sets of sequences , given its high computational cost . With the increase in processing speed of desktop computers , and subsequent optimisation of the T - Coffee code , the latter is now practical for routine use on moderately sized alignment problems . More recently , MAFFT and MUSCLE appeared ; which were , initially , at least as accurate as Clustal , in terms of alignment accuracy , but which were also extremely fast ; and able to align many thousands of sequences . Over the past 4 or 5 years , these programs have also gradually become more and more accurate with difficult alignments . Nonetheless , Clustal W and Clustal X continue to be very widely used , increasingly on websites . The EBI Clustal site , gets literally millions of multiple alignment jobs per year . It is in this context that we developed Clustal W 2 . 0 and Clustal X 2 . 0 . These programs were rewritten in C þþ with a simple object model in order to make it easier to maintain the code and more importantly , to make it easier to modify or even replace some of the alignment algorithms . We have produced two new programs which are very similar in look and feel to the older version 1 . 83 programs but which can now be managed more easily . We have also made some minor adjustments to the * To whom correspondence should be addressed . (cid:1) The Author 2007 . Published by Oxford University Press . All rights reserved . For Permissions , please email : journals . permissions @ oxfordjournals . org 2947 alignment algorithms . We have included new code for UPGMA guide trees as an alternative to the usual Neighbor - Joining guide trees . This helps speed up the alignment of extremely large data sets of tens of thousands of sequences . We have also included an iterative alignment facility to increase alignment accuracy . Clustal X 2 . 0 is the new version of the Clustal X graphical alignment tool . The original Clustal X was developed using NCBI’s vibrant toolbox . The vibrant toolbox is no longer supported which led to problems compiling Clustal X on newer versions of operating systems . The graphical interface sections of Clustal X 2 . 0 have been completely rewritten using the Qt GUI toolbox . Qt is an easy - to - use , multi - platform C þþ GUI toolkit . The code need only be compiled once on each of the platforms . The Qt toolbox provides a native look and feel on Windows , Linux and Mac platforms . Clustal X 2 . 0 has the same functionality as Clustal X . 2 NEW FEATURES Two new options have been included in Clustal W 2 . 0 , to allow faster alignment of very large data sets and to increase alignment accuracy . The default options of Clustal W And Clustal X 2 . 0 are the same as Clustal W 1 . 83 , and will give the same alignment results . The guide trees in Clustal have been calculated using the Neighbor - Joining ( NJ ) method , for the past 10 years or so . In the earliest versions of the program UPGMA was used . UPGMA is faster than NJ but prone to cluster long branches together when evolutionary rates are very unequal in different lineages . Both algorithms have complexity of O ( N 2 ) but UPGMA is faster for a given data set and the difference becomes pronounced with very large N . On a standard desktop PC , it is possible to cluster 10 000 sequences in less than a minute using UPGMA , while NJ would take over an hour . We have reimplemented a very efficient algorithm for UPGMA which can be called by using the command line option ‘ - clustering ¼ UPGMA’ . It is marginally less accurate on the Balibase benchmark , but on large alignments ( e . g . 10000 globin sequences ) this is offset by the savings in processing time ( 2h versus 12h ) . Iteration is a quick and effective method of refining alignments . A ‘remove first’ iteration scheme , which optimizes the Weighted Sum of Pairs ( WSP ) score , has been included in this version of Clustal . During each iteration step , each sequence is removed from the alignment in turn and realigned . If the WSP score is reduced then the resulting alignment is retained . The iteration scheme can be used to either refine the final alignment or at each step in the progressive alignment . Iterating during the progressive alignment tends to be more accurate but also much more time consuming as there are 2N - 3 nodes in the guide tree . The command line option ‘ - Iteration ¼ Alignment’ refines the final alignment , while the option ‘ - Iteration ¼ Tree’ incorporates the scheme into the progressive alignment . The number of iteration cycles is set via the command line option ‘ - numiters’ ( default is 3 ) . ACKNOWLEDGEMENT This work was mainly funded by Science Foundation Ireland . Conflict of Interest : none declared . REFERENCES Edgar , R . C . ( 2004 ) MUSCLE : multiple sequence alignment with high accuracy and high throughput . Nucleic Acids Res . , 32 , 1792 – 1797 . Higgins , D . G . and Sharp , P . M . ( 1988 ) CLUSTAL : a package for performing multiple sequence alignment on a microcomputer . Gene , 73 , 237 – 244 . Higgins , D . G . and Sharp , P . M . ( 1989 ) Fast and sensitive multiple sequence alignments on a microcomputer . Comput . Appl . Biosci . , 5 , 151 – 153 . Higgins , D . G . et al . ( 1992 ) CLUSTAL V : improved software for multiple sequence alignment . Comput . Appl . Biosci . , 8 , 189 – 191 . Katoh , K . et al . ( 2002 ) MAFFT : a novel method for rapid multiple sequence alignment based on fast Fourier transform . Nucleic Acids Res . , 30 , 3059 – 3066 . Notredame , C . et al . ( 2000 ) T - coffee : a novel method for fast and accurate multiple sequence alignment . J . Mol . Biol . , 302 , 205 – 217 . Stoehr , P . J . and Omond , R . A . ( 1989 ) The EMBL Network File Server . Nucleic Acids Res . , 17 , 6763 – 6764 . Thompson , J . D . et al . ( 1994 ) CLUSTAL W : improving the sensitivity of progressive multiple sequence alignment through sequence weighting , posi - tion - specific gap penalties and weight matrix choice . Nucleic Acids Res . , 22 , 4673 – 4680 . Thompson , J . D . et al . ( 1997 ) The CLUSTAL _ X windows interface : flexible strategies for multiple sequence alignment aided by quality analysis tools . Nucleic Acids Res . , 25 , 4876 – 4882 . Thompson , J . D . et al . ( 1999 ) BAliBASE : a benchmark alignment database for the evaluation of multiple alignment programs . Bioinformatics , 15 , 87 – 88 . Fig . 1 . ClustalX 2 . 0 Screenshot on Mac OS X . M . A . Larkin et al . 2948