ISSN 1998 - 0124 CN 11 - 5974 / O4 2021 , 14 ( 11 ) : 4163 – 4172 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s12274 - 021 - 3357 - 4 R e s ea r c h A r t i c l e Quantifying 3D cell – matrix interactions during mitosis and the effect of anticancer drugs on the interactions Yongman Liu 1 , § , Jianye Wang 2 , 3 , § , Yong Su 1 , Xiaohai Xu 1 , Hong Liu 4 , Kainan Mei 1 , Shihai Lan 1 , Shubo Zhang 1 , Xiaoping Wu 1 , Yunxia Cao 2 , 3 (  ) , Qingchuan Zhang 1 (  ) , and Shangquan Wu 1 (  ) 1 CAS Key Laboratory of Mechanical Behavior and Design of Material , Department of Modern Mechanics , CAS Center for Excellence in Complex System Mechanics , University of Science and Technology of China , Hefei 230027 , China 2 Reproductive Medicine Center , Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology , The First Affiliated Hospital of Anhui Medical University , Hefei 230022 , China 3 Anhui Province Key Laboratory of Reproductive Health and Genetics , Anhui Medical University , Hefei 230022 , China 4 Department of Chemical Physics , University of Science and Technology of China , Hefei 230026 , China § Yongman Liu and Jianye Wang contributed equally to this work . © Tsinghua University Press and Springer - Verlag GmbH Germany , part of Springer Nature 2021 Received : 5 November 2020 / Revised : 20 January 2021 / Accepted : 21 January 2021 ABSTRACT The mechanical force between cells and the extracellular microenvironment is crucial to many physiological processes such as cancer metastasis and stem cell differentiation . Mitosis plays an essential role in all these processes and thus an in - depth understanding of forces during mitosis gains insight into disease diagnosis and disease treatment . Here , we develop a traction force microscope method based on monolayer fluorescent beads for measuring the weak traction force ( tens of Pa ) of mitotic cells in three dimensions . We quantify traction forces of human ovarian granulosa ( KGN ) cells exerted on the extracellular matrix throughout the entire cell cycle in three dimensions . Our measurements reveal how forces vary during the cell cycle , especially during cell division . Furthermore , we study the effect of paclitaxel ( PTX ) and nocodazole ( NDZ ) on mitotic KGN cells through the measurement of traction forces . Our results show that mitotic cells with high concentrations of PTX exert a larger force than those with high concentrations of NDZ , which proved to be caused by changes in the structure and number of microtubules . These findings reveal the key functions of microtubule in generating traction forces during cell mitosis and explain how dividing cells regulate themselves in response to anti - mitosis drugs . This work provides a powerful tool for investigating cell – matrix interactions during mitosis and may offer a potential way to new therapies for cancer . KEYWORDS cell division , traction force , paclitaxel , nocodazole 1 Introduction Cancer has a high mortality rate because of cancer cell’s uncontrolled and relentless division and has become a leading cause of death worldwide . An increase in mitosis increases cancer risk , especially for endometrium and ovary cancer [ 1 ] . To find more effective treatments for cancer , studying cancer cell division is clearly of great importance . The mechanical forces between cells and their surroundings play a vital role in controlling cell structure and functions [ 2 – 6 ] . Cancer formation , cell proliferation , and stem cell differentiation are regulated by mechanical forces [ 5 , 6 ] . Mitosis is involved and plays a significant role in all the processes above . Therefore , a more comprehensive understanding of the force of the mitotic cell potentially yields insights into mechanical mechanisms during cell division , as well as informs the development of new anticancer drugs to disrupt cancer cell’s mitosis . Anticancer drugs , such as paclitaxel ( PTX ) and nocodazole ( NDZ ) , are potent inhibitors of cell proliferation and are commonly used in clinical cancer treatment . However , the mechanical mechanism how mitotic cells interact with the extracellular microenvironment ( ECM ) when they are treated with anticancer drugs remains unclear . Various methods have been developed to study cell forces : deformable substrates [ 7 ] , laser tweezers [ 8 ] , atomic force microscopy [ 9 ] , and pillar devices [ 10 ] . Traction force microscopy ( TFM ) [ 11 ] , one of the most common methods , is widely used in fields of cell mechanics and biology [ 12 – 15 ] . Typical TFM uses flexible biocompatible substrate with fluorescent beads to track deformations generated by cells . Traction forces of migrating cells , both in two dimensions and three dimensions , have been well studied [ 4 – 8 , 10 – 16 ] . However , studies on traction forces of the mitotic cell remain rare and the three - dimensional ( 3D ) mitotic cell force remain unclear . Several works have measured two - dimensional ( 2D ) traction forces during interphase [ 17 – 19 ] . Some researchers measured 2D traction forces of the dividing Dictyostelium cells [ 20 , 21 ] . While these studies provide insight into cell division , they remain inherently limited to two dimensions . Using typical 3D TFM by embedding cells and beads in fibrous matrices , Lesman et al . measured one moment of mitotic cell force rather than the whole cell division process [ 22 ] . However , the detailed Address correspondence to Shangquan Wu , wushq @ ustc . edu . cn ; Qingchuan Zhang , zhangqc @ ustc . edu . cn ; Yunxia Cao , caoyunxia6 @ 126 . com Nano Res . 2021 , 14 ( 11 ) : 4163 – 4172 | www . editorialmanager . com / nare / default . asp 4164 traction forces in three dimensions for the whole mitosis process with high spatiotemporal resolution is still unclear , and how mitotic cells interact with the ECM in three dimensions remains unknown . As mapping 3D traction forces for mitotic cells has been challenging , current studies on cell division are restricted to 2D interactions of cells and the ECM . However , cells exert forces in three dimensions in a native environment and the out - of - plane ( normal ) force plays an important role in investigations on cell behavior and mechanotransduction [ 23 , 24 ] . Thus , a convenient and sensitive method for investigation on 3D traction forces during mitosis is highly sought . Here , we develop a method to study traction forces of the mitotic cell . We use monolayer fluorescent beads to track the deformation of the substrate and develop an IC - GN 2 ( the inverse compositional Gauss – Newton algorithm combined with second - order shape function ) algorithm for high - resolution deformation fields . The method is capable of acquiring 3D stacks rapidly and enables us to calculate the weak force exerted by dividing cells . Herein , we investigate the 3D traction stress map during a single cancer cell division and study the effect of two anti - mitosis drugs , PTX , and NDZ , on cancer cell mitosis , which may inspire strategies for cancer treatment . Our results reveal the mechanism of force generation during mitosis . 2 Experimental 2 . 1 Materials and reagents 3 - Aminopropyltrimethoxysilane ( APTES ) and N - hydroxysuc - cinimide ( NHS ) were purchased from Sigma - Aldrich ( St . Louis , MO , USA ) . Glass - bottom culture dishes were from Nest Biotechnology Co . Ltd . ( Wuxi , China ) . Phosphate - buffered saline ( PBS ; 0 . 1 M phosphate buffer containing 0 . 9 % sodium chloride , pH 7 . 5 ) and N - ( 3 - dimethylaminopropyl ) - N’ - ethylcarbodiimide hydrochloride ( EDC ) were provided by Sangon Biotech Co . Ltd . ( Shanghai , China ) . Carboxylate - modified green fluorescent beads ( 0 . 49  m in diameter , 505 / 515 nm , F - 8813 , Molecular Probe ) were obtained from Life Technologies ( USA ) . Rat - tail tendon collagen type I was purchased from Shanghai Canspec Scientific Instruments Co . Ltd . ( Shanghai , China ) . Sulfosuccinimidyl 6 - ( 4 - azido - 2 - nitrophenyl - amino ) hexanoate and Hoechst 33258 were obtained from Thermo Fisher Scientific ( sulfo - SANPAH , Waltham , MA , USA ) . Paclitaxel and nocodazole were purchased from ApexBio ( Houston , USA ) . SiR - Tubulin was purchased from Cytoskeleton ( USA ) . All other chemicals were from Beijing Chemical Reagents Co . Ltd . ( Beijing , China ) . The circular quartz plate ( 12 mm diameter ) was acquired from www . taobao . com . 2 . 2 Substrate fabrication The glass - bottom culture dish was pretreated with 2 mL of 4 % ( v / v ) APTES solution in deionized water for 15 min . The Petri dish was washed 3 times with ethanol before it was immersed in 2 mL of 0 . 5 % glutaraldehyde solution in PBS for 30 min . Finally , the Petri dish was washed thoroughly with a stream of deionized water and dried in the air . The polyacrylamide ( PAA ) hydrogel was prepared using a protocol according to previous reports [ 25 , 26 ] . Solutions of 5 % ( w / v ) acrylamide , 0 . 1 % ( w / v ) N , N - methylene - bis - acrylamide , 0 . 5 % N , N , N ' , N ' - tetramethylethylenediamine , and 0 . 05 % ammonium persulfate were mixed to form the pre - gel solution . The pre - gel solution was spread onto the surface of a pre - cleaned circular quartz plate . Subsequently , the activated Petri dish was slowly inverted onto the top of the droplet from one side of the quartz plate . The acrylamide droplet between the Petri dish and the quartz plate became flat under gravity and polymerized for 60 min at room temperature . After removal of the Petri dish , the PAA gel was immersed in deionized water to remove the non - polymerized solution . The PAA gel , which was about 60 – 80  m in thickness , was linked to the Petri dish along the bottom surface . The Young’s modulus of the PAA gel is 3 . 8 KPa [ 27 ] . Next , 22  L of green fluorescent beads ( 2 % ( w / v ) , carboxylate - modified ) together with 200  L of deionized water was added to the modified PAA films for 40 min . To activate the carboxylic acid groups , a mixture of 0 . 5 % NHS and 2 % EDC in water was added to the Petri dish . The solution was left undisturbed in the dark light for 2 . 5 h . The beads were uniformly distributed on the surface of the substrate at a density of ~ 1 . 5 beads /  m 2 , as shown in the illustration in Fig . 1 ( a ) . To promote cell adhesion on the gel surface , type I collagen was conjugated to the PAA film using the hetero - bifunctional cross - linker sulfo - SANPAH . 1 mg / mL solution of sulfo - SANPAH in water ( 200  L ) was pipetted onto the gel surface to activate PAA . The Petri dish was irradiated with ultraviolet ( UV ) light ( 10 W ) for 10 min before it was covered with 200  L of 0 . 6 % ( v / v ) solution of collagen I in 6 mM aqueous acetic acid and incubated overnight at 4 °C . 2 . 3 Cell culture Human ovarian granulosa ( KGN ) cells ( Life Technologies , USA ) were cultured in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle medium ( DMEM ) ( Hyclone , Logan City , USA ) supplemented with 10 % fetal bovine serum ( Gibco , Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc . , UK ) , 100 U / mL penicillin G ( Life Technologies , USA ) , and 100  g / mL streptomycin ( Life Technologies , USA ) . They were incubated at 37 °C in a humidified 5 % CO 2 atmosphere . Cells were detached from culture flasks by the addition of 0 . 25 % trypsin solution ( Gibco , USA ) containing ethylenediamine - tetraacetic acid ( EDTA ) . The cells were centrifuged at 100 g for 5 min and resuspended in the culture medium . We then plated cells onto the gel substrate and incubated them for 4 h before imaging . For cells treated with drugs , drugs were added to Petri dishes before imaging . 2 . 4 Time - lapse acquisition of images All confocal images were collected with a Zeiss 100× , NA 1 . 40 ( numerical aperture ) oil objective ( Plan - Apochromat 100× Zeiss DIC M27 ) in an inverted Zeiss LSM 800 confocal microscope equipped with a Zeiss CCD camera . An argon laser ( 488 nm ) was used to image the green fluorescent beads . 3D image stacks were acquired every 5 min for 20 h at a resolution of 512 × 512 × 8 voxels , which corresponds to voxel dimensions of 0 . 4  m × 0 . 4  m × 0 . 3  m in both horizontal planes and the axial plane . The time for volumetric image acquisition was 4 s , and stacks for our digital volume correlation ( DVC ) required 8 layers . After the acquisition of the time - lapse images , trypsin was used to remove cells from the substrate . And then the volumetric images of the beads were taken at the same place as un - deformed images . Cells were maintained in an incubation chamber ( Tokai Hit , Shizuoka , Japan ) at 37 °C with 5 % CO 2 . Cells stained were imaged using a 40× , NA 0 . 95 objective at excitation wavelengths of 577 nm for microtubules ( MTs ) and 348 nm for nuclei . 2 . 5 Calculations for displacements , stress , and forces Much work has been done in improving the efficiency and precision of digital image correlation ( DIC ) in our previous study . For example , the IC - GN 2 algorithm was induced to DIC for local deformation with a high strain gradient [ 28 ] . In addition , we have studied the quality assessment of the speckle Nano Res . 2021 , 14 ( 11 ) : 4163 – 4172 www . theNanoResearch . com ∣ www . Springer . com / journal / 12274 | Nano Research 4165 pattern for DIC [ 29 ] . Also , we have assessed systematic errors and the effect of shape functions and subset size on local deformation using DIC [ 30 , 31 ] . In this work , we proposed the IC - GN 2 for DVC based on our previous studies to calculate the displacements from the 3D images . The detailed process is available in the Electronic Supplementary Material ( ESM ) ( Section “The proposed IC - GN 2 algorithm for DVC” ) . The newly developed algorithm enables us to obtain displacements with a resolution of 0 . 02  m ( see Section “Simulation analysis of the accuracy of IC - GN 2 algorithm for DVC” in the ESM ) . The forces are reconstructed from the displacements and the constitution relation of the substrate on the basis of elastic mechanics theory in ABAQUS software . The resolution of force in our method reaches tens of Pa ( see Section “Simulation of resolution of stress” in the ESM ) . The force in Figs . 5 ( b ) and 5 ( c ) represents the average force of cells and is obtained from the 3D stress map . 3 Results and discussion Since dividing cells were sensitive to laser intensity and duration , cells were unable to divide under long time laser scanning during volumetric image acquisition [ 22 ] . It’s difficult for traditional methods to measure traction forces exerted by cells during mitosis . Therefore , we proposed a method to quantify mitotic cell traction forces by using monolayer beads to track 3D tractions information . Instead of embedding numerous beads inside the hydrogel substrate , we scattered fluorescent beads on the surface of the substrate in Fig . 1 and thus shortened our sampling time ( 4 s ) to 1 / 50 of traditional methods which take about 3 – 7 min [ 23 , 32 ] . Using monolayer fluorescent beads , we managed to track traction forces in three dimensions during cell mitosis by shortening the sampling time of stacks and reducing phototoxicity . The PAA hydrogel was linked to the surface of the glass of the Petri dish in Fig . 1 ( a ) , serving as the substrate . Cells were cultured on the substrate with collagen I covering its surface for 4 h before imaging . The beads were conjugated onto the surface of the substrate and the reliability of this bond has been confirmed by previous work [ 26 ] . The beads were used to track the deformations of the substrate during the migration of cells , and their movement was recorded in volumetric images ( Fig . 1 ( a ) ) by laser scan confocal microscope ( LSCM ) . We chose a cell without additional cells around it . In the experiment , image stacks of the beads were taken every 5 min for 20 h , which were treated as speckle images in the calculation . The time - lapse volumetric images were converted to displacements through DVC . Since the deformation gradient exerted by the cells was large ( see Fig . S5 in the ESM ) , we proposed the IC - GN 2 algorithm for DVC to improve the calculation precision ( a detailed method was available in the ESM ) . The region of interest ( ROI ) was 512 × 512 pixels , and the grid step size was 3 × 3 × 1 . The IC - GN 2 algorithm with subvolume size of 29 × 29 × 7 voxels was used in DVC to calculate the 3D dis - placement field ( Fig . 3 ( b ) ) . According to the elastic theory [ 33 ] , traction forces were reconstructed from the displacements and constitutive relation of the substrate in ABAQUS software . The detailed process of calculation of displacements and stresses are discussed in the ESM . 3 . 1 3D traction forces of a single migrating cell We quantitatively mapped the 3D traction force field induced by a migrating KGN cell . Figure 2 presents 3 images of the motile KGN cells on the PAA substrate captured for 40 min ( complete data were supplied in Movie S1 in the ESM ) . The location and morphology of the motile cell were shown in Fig . 2 ( a ) , followed by a series of high - resolution 3D displacement and Figure 1 Traction force microscope platform and confocal images . ( a ) Schematic of the traction force microscope platform . Motile cells induced deformations of the substrate with a single layer of fluorescent beads ( green , 0 . 5  m in diameter ) . Typical 3D confocal image stacks of the single layer of fluorescent microspheres along the z - axis were acquired every 5 min at a resolution of 512 × 512 × 8 voxels . Scale bar , 10  m . ( b ) Schematic of cell division and the resulted 3D traction forces . Nano Res . 2021 , 14 ( 11 ) : 4163 – 4172 | www . editorialmanager . com / nare / default . asp 4166 force maps in Figs . 2 ( b ) and 2 ( c ) . Comparison of the series of images affords insight into the migration directions of the motile cell ( Movie S1 in the ESM ) . Cells undergo cycles of extending protrusions , assembling and disassembling adhesions and contraction during migration [ 34 , 35 ] . In accordance with previous reports [ 34 , 35 ] , the direction of the migration kept changing over time in this work , which suggested that cells migrated in a natural state in this experiment . In Fig . 2 , the colored contours showed the normal deformations at the cell – gel interface and the vectors demonstrated tangential deformations . Both the magnitude and direction of the displacement ( Fig . 2 ( b ) ) matched well with the shape of the moving cell obtained from a series of differential interference contrast images ( Fig . 2 ( a ) ) . For example , at the 20th min , the cell extended pseudopodia and moved toward the left . The maximum in - plane ( tangential ) displacement was about 1 . 8  m for this cell . Notable forces were presented over large areas beneath the cell in Fig . 2 ( c ) , indicating that the areas of interaction between cells and the substrate were large . In addition , the tractions were unevenly distributed on the substrate and changed along with the motion of the cell . The time - lapse analysis clearly showed how the magnitude and direction of the traction forces changed with the movement of the cell . Prior studies indicated that the traction of a single migrating cell was about 600 Pa [ 36 ] . In line with previous studies , the maximum normal cellular traction detected in the migrating cell was 500 Pa , and the maximum in - plane traction was 1 , 000 Pa . Also , the analysis of in - plane deformations showed that large forces were generated at the edge of the cell ( Fig . 2 ( a ) ) , which was consistent with previous reports [ 36 , 37 ] . Additionally , we conducted numerical simulation ( in the ESM ) to verify the accuracy of our algorithm . Simulation results showed that the resolution of displacement reached 0 . 05 pixels . Therefore , both the numerical simulation results ( in the ESM ) and experimental results ( Fig . 2 ) showed the proposed method used to investigate cellular tractions was reliable . Time - lapse forces maps may explain the migration mechanism in which the cell’s leading edge is anchored on the substrate , providing the required fixed friction , and also may explain the mechanism in which parts of the cells are sloughed off from the substrate during migration [ 34 ] . 3 . 2 3D traction forces during the cell cycle Humans suffer from cancer for the uncontrolled cancer cell migration and proliferation . Studies on cancer cell mitosis flourish because it is involved in many vital physiological process . However , traction forces of mitotic cells in three dimensions are barely investigated . Prior study shows that the forces generated by the cytoskeleton proteins have a dominant influence on many intracellular activities involved in cell division , such as the generation of the spindle and the contractile ring , chromosome motility , and cytokinesis during the mitosis process [ 38 – 40 ] . The mechanical forces between cells and the ECM play a vital role in regulating cell behaviors and cell functions . For example , the change of extracellular mechanical environment affects stem cell differentiation [ 6 ] . Also , mechanical force may be used as an indicator of disease according to the force difference between the diseased cells and normal cells . A more in - depth understanding of cellular tractions during cell mitosis might offer better ways toward cancer treatment , disease detection as well as stem cell differentiation . Additionally , quantifying the forces during cell mitosis might provide a better tool for studying cell mitosis mechanics . Cells transmit mechanical forces exerted by acto - myosin cytoskeleton onto the substrate through integrin and the Figure 2 3D stress maps of a KGN cell during its migration . ( a ) A series of confocal images captured for 40 min under differential interference contrast mode . The images were captured every 5 min for a total of 90 min . ( b ) Successive 3D displacement contours exerted by the motile cell in ( a ) . The arrows represented the tangential component of the displacement , and the color bar represented the magnitude of the normal component of the displacement . Scale bar , 1  m ; color bar ,  m . ( c ) 3D traction force field obtained from displacements in ( b ) . The arrows represented the tangential components of force , and the color represented the normal components of force . Scale bar , 1 , 000 Pa ; color bar , Pa . Nano Res . 2021 , 14 ( 11 ) : 4163 – 4172 www . theNanoResearch . com ∣ www . Springer . com / journal / 12274 | Nano Research 4167 adhesion complexes . Although most of the cell – matrix adhesions disassemble before entering the M phase , recent research points that cell – matrix adhesions remain existing throughout the mitosis and guide the re - spreading of the daughter cells [ 41 ] . Another research also points out that peripheral adhesions are found in G1 , S , G2 , and M phases [ 42 ] . Since the traction forces are intensely related to the adhesion , the adhesions support the existence of forces . Therefore , the mechanical interactions between cells and matrix exist in the whole cell cycle including mitosis and regulate many intracellular activities involved in mitosis . We quantified the traction stress generated by a mitotic cell and analyzed the stress variations during the cell cycle in three dimensions ( Figs . 3 – 5 , Movie S2 in the ESM ) . These measurements unveil the mechanical interactions between a single mitotic cell and the matrix during cell mitosis . To measure the forces generated by mitotic cells , 3D images of fluorescent beads ( 4 s for 8 layers ) were taken every 5 min for 20 h . A series of 4 representative images of KGN cells during the cell cycle were shown in Fig . 3 ( a ) , and the resulting 3D displacement maps and 3D stress maps were shown in Figs . 3 ( b ) and 3 ( c ) , respectively ( complete data were supplied in Movie S2 in the ESM ) . The detailed traction forces during the whole mitosis process for PTX - treated cells and the control group were shown in Fig . 4 . Variations of traction forces of cells under different anti - cancer drugs during the cell cycle were shown in Fig . 5 . Mean traction forces during the cell cycle Figure 3 Four consecutive displacement and force contours during the cell cycle . ( a ) A series of four representative images of a single mitotic KGN cell were captured every 5 min for 20 h under differential interference contrast mode . ( b ) Successive 3D displacement contours exerted by the mitotic cell in ( a ) . The arrows represent the tangential component of the displacement , and the color represents the magnitude of the normal component of the displacement . Scale bar , 1  m ; color bar ,  m . ( c ) 3D stress maps calculated from displacements in ( b ) The arrows represent the tangential components of force , and the color represents the normal components of force . Scale bar , 500 Pa ; color bar , Pa . Figure 4 Traction forces of a single KGN cell treated with PTX during mitosis . Control : 3D stress maps of a KGN cell without drug treatment during mitosis . 10 nM PTX : 3D stress maps of a KGN cell with 10 nM PTX treatment during mitosis . Scale bar , left : 500 Pa ; right : 800 Pa . The interval between each frame is 5 min . ( Fig . 5 ) were obtained by the algebraic average of the total force . For in - plane mean traction forces , 2 2 1 ( ) ( ) n x y i F i F i F S n = + = å ( 1 ) where F is the average in - plane force of the cell , x F and y F denote traction stress in plane , and S is the area of the cell . For out - of - plane traction forces , 1 ( ) n z i z F i F S n = = å ( 2 ) where z F is the average out - of - plane force of the cell , and z F is traction stress out of plane . Traction forces varied during the cell cycle , especially before and after mitosis ( cell division : 50 – 85 min of the control group in Fig . 5 or Movie S2 in the ESM ) . Through analysis of variations of tractions , we found that the in - plane and normal traction forces manifested the same variation trend . At first , the cell exerted large forces on the matrix as large areas of the cell adhered on the substrate ( Fig . 3 : 25 min , control group in Fig . 5 : 0 – 30 min ) . Before entering mitosis , cells began with the Nano Res . 2021 , 14 ( 11 ) : 4163 – 4172 | www . editorialmanager . com / nare / default . asp 4168 de - adhesion process during which cells detached from the substrate in preparation for cell division [ 42 ] . Both in - plane and normal traction forces exhibited a decrease in this process ( the control group in Fig . 5 and Movie S2 : 30 – 45 min in the ESM ) . After de - adhesion , cells rounded up ( Fig . 3 : 50 min ) under the contractile force exerted by acto - myosin , supplying the space for the mitotic spindle and allowing correct spindle positioning [ 43 ] . The forces sharply decreased to tens of Pa at 50 min ( Fig . 3 : 50 min ) , followed by maintaining a low value ( Fig . 4 , Movie S2 : 50 – 80 min in the ESM ) until the mitotic cell divided into two nascent daughter cells ( Fig . 3 : 85 min ) . Finally , tractions increased gradually as two daughter cells re - spread on the substrate and migrated toward the opposite direction ( Fig . 3 : 110 min ) . In addition , cells exerted larger in - plane forces than those out of plane during the cell cycle except for the M phase where in - plane forces were almost as small as normal forces ( the control group in Fig . 5 ) . As for traction forces during the M phase ( Fig . 4 : control ) , the cell center generated downward forces while the peripheral region of the cell exerted upward forces . Both normal and in - plane forces of M - phase cells were small and had only a little change , which means cells exerted a stable and small force on the matrix during the M phase . The maximum traction force in plane was about 470 Pa and located at the leading and trailing edge of the two daughter cells ( Fig . 3 : 110 min ) . The normal traction forces during mitosis are investigated for the first time . The magnitude of the forces during mitosis is tens of Pa out of plane , which is comparable to the in - plane force and should not be ignored . Some studies focus on 2D forces during the cell cycle without mitosis [ 17 – 19 ] . A few researchers measure 2D traction stress of dividing Dictyostelium cells [ 20 , 21 ] . Common 3D TFM embed fluorescent beads inside elastic substrate to track deformations induced by cells cultured on the substrate surface [ 12 , 23 ] or embedded in the substrate [ 32 ] . These methods take a few minutes ( about 3 – 7 min ) to acquire volumetric images of the beads in the entire substrate ( from dozens of microns [ 23 ] to hundreds of microns [ 32 ] ) . Cell morphology is continuously changing during the process of image stack acquisition . As the scanning processes are long in duration , the top and bottom layers of the stacks may be not at the same moment . What’s more , since dividing cells are sensitive to laser intensity and duration [ 22 ] , a long time of image acquisition causes strong phototoxicity which may prevent cell division . Thus , traditional 3D TFM is not appropriate for investigation on cell division . Besides common 3D TFM , confocal reference free TFM ( cTFM ) based on quantum dots can also measure the 3D traction field for cell migration . But they require complicated quantum dots printing technique because the precision of the un - deformed images highly depends on the accuracy print of each quantum dot on the substrate , which increases experiment cost and requirement of the experimental technique [ 44 ] . What’s more , since the optimal precision of force measurement in this method is hundreds of Pa [ 44 ] , the cTFM may be not suitable for the weak force during mitosis . Hence , traditional methods are incapable of investigating 3D traction forces during cell division . Some researchers use traditional 3D TFM to measure the 3D displacements of mitosis [ 22 ] . To reduce the phototoxicity brought by laser scanning during 3D stacks acquisition ( required 276 layers for 100  m in their experiment ) , they prolong the intervals of image acquisition to 30 min to ensure the undisruption of cell division . Since the M phase lasts about 1 h or shorter , their method could only capture one moment of mitosis but is not capable of revealing 3D traction forces during the whole mitosis process . Furthermore , since mitotic cells change their morphology fast during mitosis , the top and bottom layers of the stacks ( 276 layers ) may be not at the same moment in their experiment . In the present study , by using monolayer beads and digital volume correlation algorithm , which was easier and had a high spatiotemporal resolution , we reduced experiment difficulty and improved precision to tens of Pa to make the method capable of calculating forces of mitotic cells in three dimensions . 3 . 3 Detection of the effects of anticancer drugs on cell mitosis Ovarian cancer and breast cancer occupy one - third of all cancers in females and the former is the most lethal cancer among women [ 45 ] . Since studying traction forces generated by drug - treated cells may offer better ways toward inhibition of cancer cell proliferation , we investigated traction forces exerted by cancer cells with drug treatment . PTX is chosen as the drug because it is a potent inhibitor of cell proliferation and is commonly used as a standard and effective chemotherapy drug in treating cancers , especially ovarian cancer and mammary cancer . In addition , we investigated the effect of another anticancer drug NDZ , which blocks mitosis in a different way , on traction forces of mitotic cells . To investigate the influence of PTX on cancer cell mitosis , we quantified the 3D traction forces during the cell cycle for control cells and for cells treated with different concentrations of PTX . According to previous studies , PTX inhibits 70 % – 80 % of cell proliferation at a concentration of 10 nM [ 46 ] . And our experiment showed that cells treated with 10 nM PTX lost their ability to divide . We therefore chose 1 , 5 , and 10 nM PTX to study their effects on mitosis . Cells were cultured for about 4 h before imaged and then they were taken to the confocal microscope for imaging after treated with PTX . After sampling , cells were treated with trypsin to acquire the reference images . 3D stress maps of cells treated with 0 , 10 nM PTX during mitosis were shown in Fig . 4 ( cells treated with 0 , 1 , 5 , and 10 nM PTX were available in Fig . S2 in the ESM ) . Since the start of mitosis is marked by cell rounding , we chose the moment that cells rounded up as the starting point of the comparison of cells treated with drugs and those in the control group . From the moment of cell rounding , we compared the force exerted by cells treated with drugs and those in the control group every 5 min , as shown in Figs . 4 and 5 . Results showed that cells treated with PTX lower than 10 nM ( Fig . S2 in the ESM ) exerted little or no traction force changes during M phase in this experiment . The reason for this phenomenon may be that cells transmit force on the matrix through adhesions and only a few focal adhesions that anchor cells to the substrate are left in M phase because most focal adhesions disassemble in G2 preparing for cell rounding [ 47 ] . Thus , mitotic traction forces were small and exerted little changes . In addition , cells with 0 , 1 , and 5 nM PTX exerted small normal and in - plane forces . However , cells with 10 nM PTX treatment exerted large downward normal force and center - orientated in - plane force on the substrate during mitosis ( Fig . 4 ) . To further study how PTX affects traction forces during the cell cycle , we presented mean traction forces exerted by KGN cells treated with different concentrations of PTX during the cell cycle ( Figs . 5 ( a ) – 5 ( d ) ) . Results showed that cell mitosis completed at low concentrations of paclitaxel ( below 10 nM ) and failed at high concentrations ( Fig . S2 in the ESM ) . The in - plane forces ( Fig . 5 ( a ) ) and normal forces ( Fig . 5 ( d ) ) of cells treated with PTX below 10 nM exhibited the same changing trend as the control group . At the beginning , cells exerted large in - plane and normal forces ( hundreds of nN ) before entering Nano Res . 2021 , 14 ( 11 ) : 4163 – 4172 www . theNanoResearch . com ∣ www . Springer . com / journal / 12274 | Nano Research 4169 mitosis . Then , the mean force reduced rapidly as the cell rounded up to prepare for cell division . The time for cell rounding elongated with the increasing concentrations of PTX ( 0 nM : 15 min ; 1 nM : 20 min ; 5 nM : 25 min ) , indicating that longer time was required for cells to change their shape when treated with high - dose PTX . After cell rounding , cells entered mitosis and exerted forces of dozens of Pa during mitosis ( Movie S2 in the ESM ) when treated with 0 , 1 , and 5 nM PTX . Finally , forces gradually increased as two daughter cells re - spread on the substrate and then fluctuated in a range as two daughter cells migrate . For cells treated with 10 nM PTX , mean forces continued to decrease after cell rounding until cells gradually detached from the substrate . Compared with cells without PTX treatment , the mitotic time was prolonged for cells treated with 1 and 5 nM PTX . In particular , cells were unable to divide at 10 nM PTX ( Movie S3 in the ESM ) or higher concentration PTX . The results also showed that cells exhibited forces of dozens of Pa during mitosis with PTX below 10 nM ( Fig . S2 in the ESM ) . No explicit difference of traction forces was detected at different concentrations of PTX in this experiment , which may attribute to the reduction of adhesion areas between cells and substrate during mitosis and the fact that adhesions played a leading role in transmitting forces to substrate . While the normal forces were smaller than those in plane during interphase , the normal force was comparable to the in - plane force during mitosis . Thus , to investigate traction forces during mitosis comprehensively , the normal force should be con - sidered . Compared with cells treated with PTX below 10 nM , 10 nM PTX - treated cells exhibited a different and interesting phenomenon that cells were unable to divide and exerted large forces after cell rounding ( Figs . 5 ( a ) and 5 ( d ) ) . Then we investigated the effect of another anticancer drug NDZ , which prevents mitosis by affecting the dynamics of MTs and depolymerizing MTs , on mitotic traction forces . NDZ was added to cells before moving the culture dish onto the microscope platform . Figures 5 ( b ) and 5 ( e ) showed mean traction forces of KGN cells treated with different concentrations of NDZ ( 33 , 60 , and 120 nM ) during the cell cycle . Concentrations of NDZ were chosen according to tests in Fig . S4 in the ESM . At 120 nM , cell division was significantly inhibited . Like paclitaxel - treated cells , cells treated with low concentration of NDZ ( below 120 nM ) still have the ability to complete mitosis , but cells with high concentration of NDZ ( 120 nM ) lose their ability to divide . As shown in Fig . S4 in the ESM , for KGN cells with 10 nM PTX and 120 nM NDZ , mitotic cells accounted for 32 % and 23 % of total cells , and cytokinesis failure cells accounted for 84 % and 86 % of total mitotic cells , respectively , which suggested that the two drugs exhibited similar inhibitory effects on cell division . Therefore , the normalized concentrations for the study of the effect of these two drugs on mitotic cell tractions were 10 nM ( PTX ) and 120 nM ( NDZ ) , respectively . For cells treated with 33 and 60 nM NDZ , cells enable complete mitosis and the variation of traction forces exhibited a similar trend as those in the control group . Additionally , with the Figure 5 Effect of PTX and NDZ on 3D traction forces of mitotic cells . ( a ) – ( c ) Mean in - plane traction forces of mitotic KGN cells ( n = 3 ) treated with PTX of 0 , 1 , 5 , and 10 nM and with NDZ of 33 , 60 , and 120 nM . ( d ) – ( f ) Mean out - of - plane traction forces of cells in ( a ) – ( c ) . ( g ) MTs and nuclei of KGN cells . KGN cells MTs ( SiR - Tubulin ) and nuclei ( Hoechst 33258 ) were shown in red and blue color . Scale bar : 10  m . Nano Res . 2021 , 14 ( 11 ) : 4163 – 4172 | www . editorialmanager . com / nare / default . asp 4170 increase of the concentration of NDZ , while the in - plane traction forces decreased during interphase ( 0 – 40 min in Fig . 5 ( b ) ) , both the in - plane and normal traction forces exhibited no explicit difference during mitosis ( 50 – 80 min in Figs . 5 ( b ) and 5 ( e ) ) . This phenomenon may result from the situation that only a few adhesions are left during mitosis and the mitotic force is too small to distinguish , as discussed in Section “3D traction forces during the cell cycle” . NDZ induces abnormal spindle and depolymerizes MT . The proportion of abnormal cells and the organization of MTs and chromosomes depend on the concentration of the NDZ . At 33 and 60 nM NDZ , only a few MT depolymerizations are detected and many blocked spindles are similar to the normal metaphase spindles [ 48 ] . This phenomenon may be another possible reason for the results that cells with 33 and 60 nM NDZ complete mitosis and generate indistinguishable force compared to those in control . As for 120 nM NDZ , cells were arrested in metaphase ( Fig . 5 ( g ) ) , and mitosis was inhibited . The traction forces decreased to a value near zero and then fluctuated in a small range as cells enter mitosis . Mitotic cells treated with high concentration of NDZ showed the same morphological characteristics as those with high concentration of PTX : cells were unable to complete mitosis . However , their traction forces were very different ( Figs . 5 ( c ) and 5 ( f ) ) . Both in - plane and normal traction forces of cells treated with 10 nM PTX were significantly higher than those with 120 nM NDZ during the cell cycle . PTX and NDZ affect MTs in different ways though both drugs block mitosis . The number and structure of MTs in cells treated with two different drugs were different ( Fig . 5 ( g ) ) . While PTX stabilizes MTs , NDZ depolymerizes MTs and induces abnormal spindle . Therefore , more MTs are left inside cells treated with PTX and fewer MTs are left inside cells with NDZ . The significant difference in forces of cells treated with PTX and NDZ suggests that the structure of MTs may have an important effect on the mitotic force . In addition , our results showed that there is a significant difference in force magnitude between cells retaining their ability to divide and those whose mitosis is inhibited . Therefore , the efficacy of new anti - cancer drugs on cancer cell division could be assessed by measuring the traction forces . Figure 5 ( g ) showed MTs and nuclei of KGN cells without drug treatment . Cells treated with high concentration of PTX ( 10 nM ) exerted bundles of MTs accumulating around nuclei . Prior work states that 100 nM NDZ induces 90 % metaphase accumulation and depolymerize about 30 % MTs . And cells treated with NDZ change their spindles and chromosomes to an abnormal type [ 48 ] . In accordance with previous reports , cells treated with high concentration of NDZ ( 120 nM ) exhibited metaphase accumulation and showed abnormal MTs and chromosomes ( Fig . 5 ( g ) ) . Our study presented insight into how traction forces exerted by a single cell varied during mitosis in three dimensions , and how traction forces changed when anticancer drugs interact with mitotic cancer cells . We found that mitotic cells treated with high concentrations of PTX failed to complete mitosis and exerted large normal forces after cell rounding . Although both PTX and NDZ enable block mitosis , cells with PTX exerted larger forces than those with NDZ during the cell cycle . 4 The mechanism of force generation during mitosis To illustrate the normal force during mitosis and elucidate the large force upon 10 nM PTX after cell rounding , we proposed a possible mechanism ( Figs . 6 ( a ) and 6 ( d ) ) . As shown in Figs . 6 ( b ) , 6 ( e ) , and 6 ( h ) , previous studies show the distribution of MTs in mitotic cells without drugs [ 49 ] , with PTX [ 49 ] and with NDZ treatment [ 48 ] . Figures 6 ( c ) , 6 ( f ) , and 6 ( i ) showed the 3D traction force map of cells without drugs , with PTX and with NDZ treatment , respectively . Figure 6 ( g ) was the schematic illustration of the explanation of the force in Fig . 6 ( f ) , showing the generation and distribution of forces on the substrate . For mitotic cells without drugs , bipolar interpolar MTs exert sliding forces ( F 1 and F 2 in Fig . 6 ( a ) ) resulting from MT - MT sliding and elongation . The sliding forces have component forces that are perpendicular to the substrate ( F y and F y  in Figure 6 Mechanism of traction forces during mitosis for KGN cells . Mechanism ( a ) , MT polymer distribution in the mitotic spindle ( b ) [ 49 ] and 3D traction forces ( c ) for a mitotic cell without drugs . Mechanism ( d ) , MT polymer distribution in the mitotic spindle ( e ) [ 49 ] and 3D traction forces ( f ) for a mitotic cell treated with PTX . Schematic of the normal force ( red ) and the in - plane force ( blue ) on the substrate generated by cytoskeleton during mitosis ( g ) . MT polymer distribution in the mitotic spindle ( h ) [ 48 ] and 3D traction forces ( i ) for a mitotic cell treated with NDZ . Scale bar 10  m . ( b ) and ( e ) Reproduced with permission from Ref . [ 49 ] , © American Society for Cell Biology 2009 . ( h ) Reproduced with permission from Ref . [ 48 ] , © Company of Biologists 1992 . Nano Res . 2021 , 14 ( 11 ) : 4163 – 4172 www . theNanoResearch . com ∣ www . Springer . com / journal / 12274 | Nano Research 4171 Fig . 6 ( a ) ) . The downward forces ( blue arrow 3 in Fig . 6 ( a ) ) are transmitted onto the substrate , which may explain the large downward forces detected in the cell center during mitosis ( Figs . 4 and 6 ( c ) ) . Since cells adhere on the substrate and the cell center exerts pushing force , parts of the substrate that linked with cells are pulled up ( black arrows 1 , 2 in Fig . 6 ( a ) ) . The small in - plane force ( Fig . 6 ( c ) ) may be due to the fact : tangential force ( F x and F x  in Fig . 6 ( a ) ) generated by interpolar MTs canceled out and those generated by astral MTs is small due to the small number of astral MTs inside cells in this stage ( Fig . 6 ( b ) ) [ 49 ] . For cells treated with 10 nM PTX , larger forces are detected ( Figs . 4 and 6 ( f ) ) than those with lower concentrations of PTX ( 0 , 1 , and 5 nM ) . Compared with cells without PTX , the distribution and number of the MTs change for PTX - treated cells : with the increase of concentrations of PTX , more astral MTs accumulate in the red box ( Fig . 6 ( d ) ) and spindle length reduces [ 49 ] . The forces on the substrate mainly attribute to the increase of astral MTs . Also , a few polar MTs exert small forces on the substrate . The astral MTs in the red box exert pushing forces ( F and F  in Fig . 6 ( d ) ) on the substrates . The pushing forces produce downward normal component forces ( F y and F y  in Fig . 6 ( d ) ) and exert tangential component forces toward the center of the cell ( F x and F x  in Fig . 6 ( d ) ) , corresponding to the normal force and in - plane force in Fig . 6 ( f ) , respectively . Since PTX inhibits cell mitosis by preventing MTs depolymerization , more MTs are left in cells with the increase of the PTX concentration , which means producing larger forces . Therefore , cells with high concentrations of PTX treatment exert larger forces ( both in - plane and normal ) on the substrate during mitosis . Additionally , the periphery region of cell – substrate adhesion is pulled up ( black arrows 1 , 2 in Fig . 6 ( d ) ) owing to the tension produced by the cell . Since cell membrane tension ( about tens of Pa ) [ 50 ] is not sufficient to provide such a large force ( the maximum of force is about 150 Pa ) during cell mitosis , the tension attributes to cytoskeletal tension rather than cell membrane tension . Cytoskeletal tension is caused by the downward pressure of the cells and adhesion to the substrate . To verify the proposed mechanism above , we study the effect of NDZ on cell traction forces during mitosis . Results show high concentration of NDZ inhibits mitosis and low concentration of NDZ treatment couldn’t block mitosis . Interestingly , we find that , although two drugs block mitosis at high concentration , traction forces of cells with NDZ treatment are remarkably lower than those with PTX during mitosis . In other words , when the number of MTs increases due to the treatment of high concentration of PTX , the mitotic force becomes large . When MTs are depolymerized or disrupted by the high concentration of NDZ , the mitotic force becomes small . Therefore , mitotic traction forces are closely related to the MTs . NDZ inhibits cell division without increasing traction forces at high concentration , suggesting that the increase of traction forces in cells with high concentration of PTX is indeed caused by the specific effect of PTX on MTs . Thus , the increase of force exerted by cells with high concentration of PTX results from the change of MTs . Additionally , traction forces of cells with 10 nM PTX are obviously larger than those with 120 nM NDZ prior to mitosis onset ( Figs . 5 ( c ) and 5 ( f ) ) , which may also attribute to the effect of drugs on MTs . 5 Conclusions In summary , we track mitosis with high sample acquisition frequency for a long time ( every 5 min for 20 h ) and investigate the relatively small tractions ( tens of Pa ) during mitosis in three dimensions . We quantify the 3D traction forces exerted by a cancer cell during the cell cycle and our investigations unveil how 3D forces vary during the cell cycle : decrease dramatically ( entering mitosis ) , and then maintain a low value ( from rounding to divide ) for 30 – 40 min and finally increase progressively ( two daughter cells re - spread ) followed by fluctuation around a constant value ( two daughter cells migrate ) . Our results suggest that the normal forces exerted by cells are as large as those in plane during mitosis . Different from cell migration where traction forces reduce with the increase of PTX concentration [ 51 ] , we find that although low concentrations of PTX have no explicit effect on traction forces during cell mitosis , cells treated with high concentrations of PTX fail to complete mitosis and exert large forces during mitosis . The large force caused by PTX is explained by the MT stabilizing behavior of PTX . In addition , our results show that high concentrations of MT destabilizing drug NDZ can also block mitosis and produce smaller force than high concentrations of PTX , which agrees well with our explanation . The mechanical difference between cells completing mitosis and those undergoing mitotic failure may serve as a criterion for speculating whether cancer cells are able to divide during drug therapy . Our study may provide further insight into the mechanical mechanism of drug – cell interaction during mitosis . Furthermore , our work highlights its potential applications in biology , as well as disease diagnosis and disease treatment . Acknowledgements The authors gratefully acknowledge financial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China ( Nos . 11872355 , 11627803 , 12072339 , and 11872354 ) and the Strategic Priority Research Program of the Chinese Academy of Science ( No . XDB22040502 ) . Electronic Supplementary Material : Supplementary material ( complete data of 3D forces of cells during cell cycle ; complete data of 3D stress maps exerted by mitotic cells treated with different concentrations of PTX ; the proposed IC - GN 2 algorithm and the traction reconstruction method ; simulation analysis of the accuracy of the IC - GN 2 algorithm for DVC ; simulation analysis of the resolution of stress ) is available in the online version of this article at https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s12274 - 021 - 3357 - 4 . References [ 1 ] Preston - Martin , S . ; Pike , M . C . ; Ross , R . K . ; Jones , P . A . ; Henderson , B . E . Increased cell division as a cause of human cancer . Cancer Res . 1990 , 50 , 7415 – 7421 . [ 2 ] Bonnans , C . ; Chou , J . ; Werb , Z . Remodelling the extracellular matrix in development and disease . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 2014 , 15 , 786 – 801 . [ 3 ] Papalazarou , V . ; Zhang , T . ; Paul , N . R . ; Juin , A . ; Cantini , M . ; Maddocks , O . D . K . ; Salmeron - Sanchez , M . ; Machesky , L . M . The creatine – phosphagen system is mechanoresponsive in pancreatic adenocarcinoma and fuels invasion and metastasis . Nat . Metab . 2020 , 2 , 62 – 80 . [ 4 ] Baker , B . M . ; Chen , C . S . Deconstructing the third dimension – how 3D culture microenvironments alter cellular cues . J . Cell Sci . 2012 , 125 , 3015 – 3024 . [ 5 ] Huang , S . ; Ingber , D . E . Cell tension , matrix mechanics , and cancer development . Cancer Cell 2005 , 8 , 175 – 176 . [ 6 ] Huebsch , N . ; Arany , P . R . ; Mao , A . S . ; Shvartsman , D . ; Ali , O . A . ; Bencherif , S . A . ; Rivera - Feliciano , J . ; Mooney , D . J . Harnessing traction - mediated manipulation of the cell / matrix interface to control stem - cell fate . Nat . Mater . 2010 , 9 , 518 – 526 . Nano Res . 2021 , 14 ( 11 ) : 4163 – 4172 | www . editorialmanager . com / nare / default . asp 4172 [ 7 ] Munevar , S . ; Wang , Y . L . ; Dembo , M . Traction force microscopy of migrating normal and H - ras transformed 3T3 fibroblasts . Biophys . J . 2001 , 80 , 1744 – 1757 . [ 8 ] Jiang , G . Y . ; Giannone , G . ; Critchley , D . R . ; Fukumoto , E . ; Sheetz , M . P . Two - piconewton slip bond between fibronectin and the cytoskeleton depends on talin . Nature 2003 , 424 , 334 – 337 . [ 9 ] Li , M . ; Xi , N . ; Wang , Y . C . ; Liu , L . Q . Advances in atomic force microscopy for single - cell analysis . Nano Res . 2019 , 12 , 703 – 718 . [ 10 ] Tan , J . L . ; Tien , J . ; Pirone , D . M . ; Gray , D . S . ; Bhadriraju , K . ; Chen , C . S . Cells lying on a bed of microneedles : An approach to isolate mechanical force . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 2003 , 100 , 1484 – 1489 . [ 11 ] Harris , A . K . ; Wild , P . ; Stopak , D . Silicone rubber substrata : A new wrinkle in the study of cell locomotion . Science 1980 , 208 , 177 – 179 . [ 12 ] Legant , W . R . ; Choi , C . K . ; Miller , J . S . ; Shao , L . ; Gao , L . ; Betzig , E . ; Chen , C . S . Multidimensional traction force microscopy reveals out - of - plane rotational moments about focal adhesions . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 2013 , 110 , 881 – 886 . [ 13 ] Style , R . W . ; Boltyanskiy , R . ; German , G . K . ; Hyland , C . ; MacMinn , C . W . ; Mertz , A . F . ; Wilen , L . A . ; Xu , Y . ; Dufresne , E . R . Traction force microscopy in physics and biology . Soft Matter 2014 , 10 , 4047 – 4055 . [ 14 ] Dembo , M . ; Wang , Y . L . Stresses at the cell - to - substrate interface during locomotion of fibroblasts . Biophys . J . 1999 , 76 , 2307 – 2316 . [ 15 ] Huang , J . Y . ; Wang , L . L . ; Xiong , C . Y . ; Yuan , F . Elastic hydrogel as a sensor for detection of mechanical stress generated by single cells grown in three - dimensional environment . Biomaterials 2016 , 98 , 103 – 112 . [ 16 ] Provenzano , P . P . ; Keely , P . J . Mechanical signaling through the cytoskeleton regulates cell proliferation by coordinated focal adhesion and Rho GTPase signaling . J . Cell Sci . 2011 , 124 , 1195 – 1205 . [ 17 ] Vianay , B . ; Senger , F . ; Alamos , S . ; Anjur - Dietrich , M . ; Bearce , E . ; Cheeseman , B . ; Lee , L . ; Théry , M . Variation in traction forces during cell cycle progression . Biol . Cell 2018 , 110 , 91 – 96 . [ 18 ] Panagiotakopoulou , M . ; Lendenmann , T . ; Pramotton , F . M . ; Giampietro , C . ; Stefopoulos , G . ; Poulikakos , D . ; Ferrari , A . Cell cycle - dependent force transmission in cancer cells . Mol . Biol . Cell 2018 , 29 , 2528 – 2539 . [ 19 ] Nam , S . ; Chaudhuri , O . Mitotic cells generate protrusive extracellular forces to divide in three - dimensional microenvironments . Nat . Phys . 2018 , 14 , 621 – 628 . [ 20 ] Jahan , G . S . ; Yumura , S . Traction force and its regulation during cytokinesis in Dictyostelium cells . Eur . J . Cell Biol . 2017 , 96 , 515 – 528 . [ 21 ] Tanimoto , H . ; Sano , M . Dynamics of traction stress field during cell division . Phys . Rev . Lett . 2012 , 109 , 248110 . [ 22 ] Lesman , A . ; Notbohm , J . ; Tirrell , D . A . ; Ravichandran , G . Contractile forces regulate cell division in three - dimensional environments . J . Cell Biol . 2014 , 205 , 155 – 162 . [ 23 ] Maskarinec , S . A . ; Franck , C . ; Tirrell , D . A . ; Ravichandran , G . Quantifying cellular traction forces in three dimensions . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 2009 , 106 , 22108 – 22113 . [ 24 ] Hur , S . S . ; Zhao , Y . H . ; Li , Y . S . ; Botvinick , E . ; Chien , S . Live cells exert 3 - dimensional traction forces on their substrata . Cell . Mol . Bioeng . 2009 , 2 , 425 – 436 . [ 25 ] Pelham , R . J . Jr . ; Wang , Y . L . Cell locomotion and focal adhesions are regulated by substrate flexibility . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 1997 , 94 , 13661 – 13665 . [ 26 ] Marinkovi ć , A . ; Mih , J . D . ; Park , J . A . ; Liu , F . ; Tschumperlin , D . J . Improved throughput traction microscopy reveals pivotal role for matrix stiffness in fibroblast contractility and TGF - β responsiveness . Am . J . Physiol . Lung Cell Mol . Physiol . 2012 , 303 , L169 – L180 . [ 27 ] Denisin , A . K . ; Pruitt , B . L . Tuning the range of polyacrylamide gel stiffness for Mechanobiology applications . ACS Appl . Mater . Interfaces 2016 , 8 , 21893 – 21902 . [ 28 ] Gao , Y . ; Cheng , T . ; Su , Y . ; Xu , X . H . ; Zhang , Y . ; Zhang , Q . C . High - efficiency and high - accuracy digital image correlation for three - dimensional measurement . Opt . Lasers Eng . 2015 , 65 , 73 – 80 . [ 29 ] Su , Y . ; Zhang , Q . C . ; Xu , X . H . ; Gao , Z . R . Quality assessment of speckle patterns for DIC by consideration of both systematic errors and random errors . Opt . Lasers Eng . 2016 , 86 , 132 – 142 . [ 30 ] Xu , X . H . ; Su , Y . ; Cai , Y . L . ; Cheng , T . ; Zhang , Q . C . Effects of various shape functions and subset size in local deformation measurements using DIC . Exp . Mech . 2015 , 55 , 1575 – 1590 . [ 31 ] Xu , X . Study on local deformation measurement accuracy and com - pensation methods in digital image correlation . Ph . D . Dissertation , University of Science and Technology of China , 2015 . [ 32 ] Steinwachs , J . ; Metzner , C . ; Skodzek , K . ; Lang , N . ; Thievessen , I . ; Mark , C . ; Münster , S . ; Aifantis , K . E . ; Fabry , B . Three - dimensional force microscopy of cells in biopolymer networks . Nat . Methods 2016 , 13 , 171 – 176 . [ 33 ] Landau , L . D . ; Lifshitz , E . M . Theory of Elasticity ; Pergamon : New York , 1986 . [ 34 ] Lauffenburger , D . A . ; Horwitz , A . F . Cell migration : A physically integrated molecular process . Cell 1996 , 84 , 359 – 369 . [ 35 ] Ridley , A . J . ; Schwartz , M . A . ; Burridge , K . ; Firtel , R . A . ; Ginsberg M . H . ; Borisy , G . ; Parsons , J . T . ; Horwitz , A . R . Cell migration : Integrating signals from front to back . Science 2003 , 302 , 1704 – 1709 . [ 36 ] du Roure , O . ; Saez , A . ; Buguin , A . ; Austin , R . H . ; Chavrier , P . ; Siberzan , P . ; Ladoux , B . Force mapping in epithelial cell migration . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 2005 , 102 , 2390 – 2395 . [ 37 ] Beningo , K . A . ; Dembo , M . ; Kaverina , I . ; Small , J . V . ; Wang , Y . L . Nascent focal adhesions are responsible for the generation of strong propulsive forces in migrating fibroblasts . J . Cell Biol . 2001 , 153 , 881 – 888 . [ 38 ] Sharp , D . J . ; Brown , H . M . ; Kwon , M . ; Rogers , G . C . ; Holland , G . ; Scholey , J . M . Functional coordination of three mitotic motors in Drosophila embryos . Mol . Biol . Cell 2000 , 11 , 241 – 253 . [ 39 ] Karsenti , E . ; Vernos , I . The mitotic spindle : A self - made machine . Science 2001 , 294 , 543 – 547 . [ 40 ] McIntosh , J . R . ; Grishchuk , E . L . ; West , R . R . Chromosome - microtubule interactions during mitosis . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 2002 , 18 , 193 – 219 . [ 41 ] Dix , C . L . ; Matthews , H . K . ; Uroz , M . ; McLaren , S . ; Wolf , L . ; Heatley , N . ; Win , Z . ; Almada , P . ; Henriques , R . ; Boutros , M . et al . The role of mitotic cell - substrate adhesion re - modeling in animal cell division . Dev . Cell 2018 , 45 , 132 – 145 . e3 . [ 42 ] Jones , M . C . ; Askari , J . A . ; Humphries , J . D . ; Humphries , M . J . Cell adhesion is regulated by CDK1 during the cell cycle . J . Cell Biol . 2018 , 217 , 3203 – 3218 . [ 43 ] Kunda , P . ; Pelling , A . E . ; Liu , T . ; Baum , B . Moesin controls cortical rigidity , cell rounding , and spindle morphogenesis during mitosis . Curr . Biol . 2008 , 18 , 91 – 101 . [ 44 ] Bergert , M . ; Lendenmann , T . ; Zündel , M . ; Ehret , A . E . ; Panozzo , D . ; Richner , P . ; Kim , D . K . ; Kress , S . J . P . ; Norris , D . J . ; Sorkine - Hornung , O . et al . Confocal reference free traction force microscopy . Nat . Commun . 2016 , 7 , 12814 . [ 45 ] Siegel , R . L . ; Miller , K . D . ; Jemal , A . Cancer statistics , 2016 . CA Cancer J . Clin . 2016 , 66 , 7 – 30 . [ 46 ] Jordan , M . A . ; Toso , R . J . ; Thrower , D . ; Wilson , L . Mechanism of mitotic block and inhibition of cell proliferation by taxol at low concentrations . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 1993 , 90 , 9552 – 9556 . [ 47 ] Lock , J . G . ; Jones , M . C . ; Askari , J . A . ; Gong , X . W . ; Oddone , A . ; Olofsson , H . ; Göransson , S . ; Lakadamyali , M . ; Humphries , M . J . ; Strömblad , S . Reticular adhesions are a distinct class of cell - matrix adhesions that mediate attachment during mitosis . Nat . Cell Biol . 2018 , 20 , 1290 – 1302 . [ 48 ] Jordan , M . A . ; Thrower , D . ; Wilson , L . Effects of vinblastine , podophyllotoxin and nocodazole on mitotic spindles . Implications for the role of microtubule dynamics in mitosis . J . Cell Sci . 1992 , 102 , 401 – 416 . [ 49 ] Rizk , R . S . ; Bohannon , K . P . ; Wetzel , L . A . ; Powers , J . ; Shaw , S . L . ; Walczak , C . E . MCAK and paclitaxel have differential effects on spindle microtubule organization and dynamics . Mol . Biol . Cell 2009 , 20 , 1639 – 1651 . [ 50 ] Murrell , M . P . ; Voituriez , R . ; Joanny , J . F . ; Nassoy , P . ; Sykes , C . ; Gardel , M . L . Liposome adhesion generates traction stress . Nat . Phys . 2014 , 10 , 163 – 169 . [ 51 ] Wu , Y . L . ; Engl , W . ; Hu , B . H . ; Cai , P . Q . ; Leow , W . R . ; Tan , N . S . ; Lim , C . T . ; Chen , X . D . Nanomechanically visualizing drug – cell interaction at the early stage of chemotherapy . ACS Nano 2017 , 11 , 6996 – 7005 .