The Knowledge Engineering Review , Vol . 8 : 4 , 1993 , 281 - 284 Introducing expert critiquing systems STURE HAGGLUND Department of Computer and Information Science , Linkoping University , S - 581 83 Linkoping , Sweden ( Email : StuHA @ ida . liu . se ) Expert critiquing systems present an interesting and important complement to conventional expert systems . The basic idea is to emphasize the support for the user ' s own decision making rather than to let the system independently suggest a solution to a given problem . Thus it is assumed that the user initially proposes a decision or course of action . The system then reviews this suggestion relative to known circumstance , tries to evaluate the proposed solution , provides suggestions for improvements , draws attention to possible risks , indicates alternatives , and evaluates their merits , etc . A critiquing system is characterized both by its approach to problem solving and by its style of interaction with the user , as will be detailed below . The work by Perry Miller ( 1986 ) in the area of medical applications , as summarized in his book Expert Critiquing Systems introduced the concept of expert critiquing to a wider audience . Related issues were also independently investigated by others , for instance in the context of the MYCIN tradition , where the need for resolving conflicts between an advice - giving program and the preferences expressed by a reasonably competent user were recognized ( Clancey , 1977 ; Longlotz & Shortliffe , 1983 ) . An interesting variant , albeit not conceived of explicitly as critiquing , was employed in the HELP system , where medical treatment decisions were supervised and alerts generated whenever contraindications were detected ( Pryor , 1983 ) . The feasibility of automating critique generation relying solely on medical records has been demonstrated in a series of studies showing that existing documentation of patient data was sufficient for generating useful critique ( Van der Lei , 1991 ) . Early studies of similar ideas were also performed in the area of engineering design . This is an example of a domain where it is very difficult to automate or even mechanize decision making , due to the complexity of a typical design space . An example of early work in this domain is the CRITTER system ( Kelly , 1984 ) , which evaluates and comments upon digital circuit designs . Important contributions in the area of design critiquing have also been made by Fischer and colleagues , starting with the Lisp critic ( Fischer , 1987 ) and leading up to general work on human - computer collaborative design support , as exemplified also by their paper in this special issue ( Fischer , 1993 ) . A theory of expert errors and critiquing forms the basis for work by Silverman , resulting in the COPE system which can be viewed as a generic critic shell ( Silverman , 1987 ) . An extensive presentation of methodological and practical issues in critic engineering is given in Silverman ( 1992b ) . Aspects of usability in connection with expert critiquing have also been discussed in , for instance , Hagglund and Rankin ( 1988 ) . Numerous applications are developed today using the expert critiquing approach . For a recent overview of the area , see Silverman ( 1992a ) . The first international workshop dedicated to the topic of expert critiquing systems was held in conjunction with the AAAI - 93 conference in Washington D . C . in July 1993 . This workshop demonstrated the broad range of applicability for the expert critiquing approach , but also a large number of topics for further scientific studies in the area . STURE HAGGLUND 282 Several different types of motivations can be identified for the emerging interest in the expert critiquing approach to giving knowledge - based consultative advice , mediated by a computer system . The papers in this special issue illustrate and illuminate some major directions of research in the area . The paper by Fischer et al . ( 1993 ) is focusing on the collaborative support for problem solving in areas where it is not interesting or realistic to aim for a complete expert system capable of solving problems in the given domain on its own . In this case , critiquing provide a means for creating systems in ill - defined domains with partial and evolving problem specifications , such as , for instance , typical design applications . The paper describes how the advisory system can be embedded in a domain - oriented design environment , providing generic , specific and interpretative critics which complement each other as mechanisms for obtaining a truly creative collaborative design support environment for the users . Their approach is illustrated with a presentation of the HYDRA architecture for design environments . Silverman ' s paper ( Silverman , 1993 ) illuminates another important aspect of the expert critiquing approach , namely the issue of handling expert bias and human error in decision making situations . Thus , Silverman presents a methodology for critic engineering that is useful in supporting knowledge acquisition and representation , with a special emphasis on decreasing the degree of biased judgement in the elicitated knowledge . The critic - based approach is useful both during the knowledge engineering process and when using the resulting system for giving consultative advise to a user . The paper describes the methodology , and reviews a number of applications to which it has been applied . Rankin , in his paper on text generation for expert critiquing ( Rankin , 1993 ) , covers still another area , namely the formulation of the argumentative support needed for the negotiation that typically takes place between the system and the user in a critiquing context . His paper reviews techniques for text generation , although most existing expert critiquing systems are still using simple canned - text techniques . Rankin , however , demonstrates that the real challenge is the deep generation of a critique , i . e . , deciding upon what information to include , which argumentative structure to apply , and how to adapt the presentation to a particular user . He shows how the dominant tradition in current text generation research , Rhetorical Structure Theory , can be applied , but also which limitations it has . The paper explains how argumentation theory can be used as a framework for critiquing and justificatory texts , and also extends the discussion to dialogue situations by introducing a language game metaphor for critiquing . In general , expert critiquing exhibits certain characteristic aspects , which are interesting to reflect upon . Thus such a system : • can be based upon heuristic domain expertise or upon formal decision theories . This is the same kind of distinction that applies to expert systems in general . Most practical experience indicates that the heuristic approach provides a more convenient foundation for development of working systems , and the critiquing paradigm extends the applicability of heuristic methods for this purpose ; • can be primarily knowledge - based or algoritmic . It should thus be interesting to distinguish between knowledge - based approaches to critiquing , or expert critiquing , and algoritmic critics such as spell checkers ; • might employ either an analytical or a differential approach to critiquing . Taking the analytical approach means that aspects of the user ' s proposal for a decision are evaluated and commented upon , while the differential approach is based on a comparison of the proposed solution against some " correct " or standard solution . Depending upon the application , one or the other of these solutions are preferred or more easily adopted ; • may focus upon the generation of a critique of the user ' s preferred solution , but also upon a justification of the system ' s own proposals . In general , we ought to think of expert critiquing systems rather as systems capable of engaging in an argumentative discussion with the user ; Introducing expert critiquing systems . 283 • may use ad hoc or linguistically sound approaches to text generation . Especially important is the deep generation of a critique , and the rhetorical structures used for the discourse . When considering the deliberations we have to undertake in the process of making a decision of whether to employ a critiquing or a conventional approach in a knowledge engineering project , the following observations may be helpful : • It is typically a more complicated task to build an expert critiquing system than a conventional one for a specific application , since not only should we equip the system with enough knowledge to derive a preferred solution , but also , we need to give it the power to critique a broad variety of alternative approaches to handling a given problem . • The scope of applications we can handle may be broader with a critiquing approach , since we can build useful systems even for applications where it - is not possible to give comments to various proposals suggested by the user . That is , the system may not be proficient enough to generate complete solutions on its own . • In cases where the system is capable of producing solutions that are expected to , provide the " right " answer to a given problem , a critiquing approach may still be preferred for the purpose of better prospects for user acceptance . . . . • • A critiquing system can conveniently handle conflicting expertise in a domain . Since the system doesn ' t have to come up with one specific recommended solution , it can maintain a knowledge base with alternative approaches for handling a given problem . If the analytical approach to critiquing is employed , a proposed solution can be easily evaluated with respect to these different approaches . • A critiquing system is also useful with partial knowledge in the given domain of application . When only certain aspects of a problem can be handled by the system , or when the knowledge of a given situation lacks depth , the system can inform the user about the quality and reliability of the comments and critique generated . • The expert critiquing approach offers transition support for developing a proficient expert system from a critiquing system with a limited knowledge base . Thus a conventional expert system cannot be used in practice before the knowledge base is reasonably complete and validated . Here the critiquing approach offers a possibility to get practical experience from using the system already with a partial knowledge base . Once the knowledge base is complete enough , it can be used as a problem - solving aid in the style of traditional expert systems , at least given that a differential approach to critiquing was supported . In our view , one might also distinguish between the following different use of critics and critiquing : • Critics used as a mechanism for reasoning and problem solving . In this case , the main use of critiquing is as a way of organizing the knowledge and inferencing needed to come up with a proposal for handling a given problem . The knowledge base is typically organized as a set of critics that apply in different situations , and these critics may , for instance , be used in a generate - and - test approach to problem solving . An example of a possible application is for critiquing software specifications ( Fickas , 1988 ) . • Critiquing used as a way of providing non - intrusive advice to a computer user . In this case , the main purpose of the critiquing approach is to ensure that the user is in control of the decision making , and the system restricts itself to commenting upon the user ' s suggestions , even if it were possible for the system to come up with a preferred solution of its own . The main focus is on the process of interaction between the system and user , as exemplified , for instance , by Fischer ( 1993 ) . • Critiquing viewed as the basis for presenting arguments and explanations in an understandable and effective way to a given user . In this case , the main focus is on the contents of a critique , its extension , components and rhetorical structure . Work on text generation relates to this aspect of critiquing ( Rankin , 1993 ) . STURE HAGGLUND 284 The current developments in the area of applying the expert critiquing paradigm for building truly collaborative , user - friendly knowledge - based systems presents an interesting and exciting chal - lenge . It is our hope that the papers in this special issue of The Knowledge Engineering Review should contribute to this development . References Clancey , WJ , 1977 . " An antibiotic therapy advisor which provides for explanations " In : Proceedings of the 5th International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence p 858 , Cambridge , MA . Fickas , S and Nagrajan , P , 1988 . " Critiquing software specifications " IEEE Software 5 ( 6 ) 37 - 47 . Fischer , G , 1987 . " A Critic for LISP " In : Proceedings of the 10th International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence pp 177 - 184 , Milan , Italy . Fischer , G , Nakakoji , K , Ostwald , J , Stahl , G and Summer , T , 1993 . " Embedding critics in integrated design environments " The Knowl . Eng . Rev . 8 ( 4 ) . Hagglund , S and Rankin , I , 1988 . " Investigating the usability of expert critiquing in knowledge - based consultation systems " In : Proceedings of the ECAI ' 88 Conference pp 152 - 154 , Munich , Germany . Kelly , VE , 1984 . " The CRITTER system : Automated critiquing of digital circuits design " In : Proceedings of the 21st Design Automation Conference pp 419 - 425 . Langlotz , CP and Shortliffe , EH , 1983 . " Adapting a consultation system to critique user plans " Int . J . Man - Machine Studies 19 479 ^ 96 . Miller , P , 1986 . Expert Critiquing Systems , Springer - Verlag . Pryor , TA , Gardner , RM , Clayton , PD and Warner , HR , 1983 . " The HELP system " J . MedicalSyst . 7 ( 2 ) 87 - 102 . Rankin , 1 , 1983 . " Natural language generation in critiquing " The Knowl . Eng . Rev . 8 ( 4 ) . Silverman , BG et al . , 1987 . " COPE : A Case Oriented Processing Environment " In : Proceedings of the European Computing Conference , Avignon , France . Silverman , BG , 1992a . " Survey of expert critiquing systems : Practical and theoretical frontiers " Comm . ACM 35 ( 4 ) 106 - 127 . Silverman , BG , 1992b . Critiquing Human Error . A Knowledge Based Human - Computer Approach , Academic Press . Silverman , BG , 1993 . " Engineering expert critics for cooperative systems " The Knowl . Eng . Rev . 8 ( 4 ) . Van der Lei , J , 1991 . Critiquing based on computer - stored medical records , PhD dissertation , Erasmus University , Rotterdam .