DISCUSSION PAPER SERIES IZA DP No . 14844 Ingo E . Isphording Marc Diederichs Reyn van Ewijk Nico Pestel Schools under Mandatory Testing Can Mitigate the Spread of SARS - CoV - 2 NOVEMBER 2021 Any opinions expressed in this paper are those of the author ( s ) and not those of IZA . Research published in this series may include views on policy , but IZA takes no institutional policy positions . The IZA research network is committed to the IZA Guiding Principles of Research Integrity . The IZA Institute of Labor Economics is an independent economic research institute that conducts research in labor economics and offers evidence - based policy advice on labor market issues . Supported by the Deutsche Post Foundation , IZA runs the world’s largest network of economists , whose research aims to provide answers to the global labor market challenges of our time . Our key objective is to build bridges between academic research , policymakers and society . IZA Discussion Papers often represent preliminary work and are circulated to encourage discussion . Citation of such a paper should account for its provisional character . A revised version may be available directly from the author . Schaumburg - Lippe - Straße 5 – 9 53113 Bonn , Germany Phone : + 49 - 228 - 3894 - 0 Email : publications @ iza . org www . iza . org IZA – Institute of Labor Economics DISCUSSION PAPER SERIES IZA DP No . 14844 Schools under Mandatory Testing Can Mitigate the Spread of SARS - CoV - 2 NOVEMBER 2021 Ingo E . Isphording IZA and CESifo Marc Diederichs Johannes Gutenberg University Mainz Reyn van Ewijk Johannes Gutenberg University Mainz Nico Pestel Maastricht University and IZA ABSTRACT IZA DP No . 14844 NOVEMBER 2021 Schools under Mandatory Testing Can Mitigate the Spread of SARS - CoV - 2 * We use event - study models based on staggered summer vacations in Germany to estimate the effect of school re - openings after the summer of 2021 on the spread of SARS - CoV - 2 . Estimations are based on daily counts of confirmed coronavirus infections across all 401 German counties . Our results are consistent with mandatory testing contributing to containment of cases by uncovering otherwise undetected ( asymptomatic ) cases . Case numbers in school - aged children spike in the first week after the summer breaks but then turn not significantly different from zero . Case numbers in prime - aged age groups gradually decrease after school re - openings , arguably as a result of detected clusters through the school testing . The age group 60 + remains unaffected by the school re - openings . We conclude that the combination of mandatory testing and compulsory school attendance can provide an unbiased and near - complete surveillance of the pandemic . Thus , under certain conditions open schools can play a role in containing the spread of the virus . The trade - off between reducing contacts and losing an important monitoring device has to be taken seriously when re - considering school closures as a nonpharmaceutical intervention under the current circumstances . JEL Classification : I12 , I18 , I28 Keywords : COVID - 19 , schooling , education , Germany Corresponding author : Ingo Isphording Institute of Labor Economics ( IZA ) Schaumburg - Lippe - Str . 5 - 9 53113 Bonn Germany E - mail : isphording @ iza . org * The authors declare no competing interest . We are grateful to Pooja Singh and Khalid Imran who provided excellent research assistance . 1 Introduction The SARS - CoV - 2 pandemic is far from over yet . More than one and a half years after its global onset in early 2020 , the spread of the novel coronavirus continues to cause large numbers of new infections , hospitalizations and deaths worldwide . At the same time , the pandemic situation has substantially changed over the last months due to several major “game changers” : about half of the world’s population has been vaccinated against the disease , yet with vaccination rates being much higher in rich compared to poor countries , and vaccines being unapproved for children until very recently . 1 Further , more contagious variants of SARS - CoV - 2 ( “Delta” strain ) have appeared , lowering the e ﬀ ectiveness of vaccines ( Tang et al . , 2021 ) . Finally , new technologies , especially large - scale rapid testing , provide new measures to help contain the spread of the virus . Taken together , these factors once more bring schools to the center of the public debate : vaccination rates among adolescents lag behind those of adults , as population - wide vaccination campaigns among this age group only started recently . Meanwhile , vaccination remains mostly unavailable to those younger than 12 years of age . This leaves children vulnerable to infection and through spillovers may increase infection rates among their families and populations at large . As a result , on 31 October 2021 , schools in 64 countries worldwide remained fully or partially closed due to pandemic concerns . 2 Up until now , there is no consensus about the role of schools in transmitting the virus . Correlational studies relying on before / after comparisons indicate zero to large e ﬀ ects on case numbers after school openings . Yet , these studies lack a valid identiﬁcation of the causal e ﬀ ect of open schools . Studies employing plausible quasi - experimental designs provide a more consistent picture . Under strict hygiene rules as well as testing and quarantining regimes , open schools contribute nothing or only little to rising case numbers . Yet , it is questionable whether the existing evidence stemming from settings before the spread of new variants , and with low or zero vaccination rates among adults , extrapolates well to the current situation . 3 Against this background , we provide the ﬁrst causal evidence on the impact of opening schools in a situation with the dominant “Delta” strain and substantial vaccination rates . We do so by replicating the empirical approach by Isphording et al . ( 2021 ) with the most recent data on o ﬃ cial daily case counts by age group across all 401 German counties ( Kreise ) . To identify a causal e ﬀ ect of school openings , we exploit the staggered timing of summer breaks across German federal states with schools closing in June / July and re - opening in August / September 2021 after having been fully closed for about six weeks . We implement an event study design in which we compare changes in newly conﬁrmed cases in re - opening states relative to the end of summer breaks . We keep mobility patterns measured by Google Mobility Reports statistically constant between treatment and control group . This approach implies that we compare against the counterfactual situation of summer breaks ending , but without students returning to in - class teaching , i . e . , adopting distance learning arrangements . Our results show that schools did not contribute to the overall growth in case numbers . Further , our results are consistent with the hypothesis that the combination of mandatory 1 See : https : / / ourworldindata . org / covid - vaccinations ( last accessed : 11 November 2021 ) . 2 https : / / en . unesco . org / covid19 / educationresponse , last accessed on 12 November , 2021 . 3 We summarize the existing literature in Section 2 . 1 . 1 testing in schools and compulsory school attendance contributed to a containment of cases after the summer breaks . Compared to control states , we observe an initial spike in detected cases in the ﬁrst two school days among school - aged students , displaying the detection of clusters that remained undetected during the summer breaks . Prime - aged population groups experience a gradual decrease after school re - openings relative to control states , arguably due to spillovers from the early detection and quarantining . Vulnerable age groups aged 60 and above are entirely una ﬀ ected by the school re - openings . Our results have important implications for the design of future non - pharmaceutical interventions to mitigate the spread of SARS - CoV - 2 , but also comparable future diseases . School closures were one of the most widely used non - pharmaceutical interventions during the ﬁrst waves of the pandemic , with more than 1 . 6 billion students globally being a ﬀ ected at peak . School closures produced substantial direct and indirect costs in learning losses ( Engzell et al . , 2021 ) , children’s health and mental well - being ( Viner et al . , 2021 ) , parental labor market outcomes ( Heggeness , 2020 ) and domestic violence ( Leslie and Wilson , 2020 ) . Moreover , these costs are borne primarily by low socio - economic status households , increasing inequality ( Jang and Yum , 2020 ) . Yet , empirical evidence on their e ﬀ ectiveness is sparse , ambiguous , and based on data before the aforementioned “game - changers” . Our results imply that schools under a set of hygiene rules and mandatory testing remain a safe place . These hygiene rules include regular airing or the use of air ﬁlters and mandatory mask - wearing . Mask mandates were a crucial feature of hygiene concepts in place during the weeks after the summer break , but were relaxed or abandoned some weeks later by some federal states . Further , the combination of compulsory school attendance and mandatory rapid testing provides an important , unbiased surveillance of the scope of the pandemic which is crucial for the early detection and quarantining of clusters . The argument of a crucial role of rapid mandatory testing has been made before by complementary simulation studies by Mohring et al . ( 2021 ) and Gabler et al . ( 2021 ) . Taken together , our results therefore strongly suggest not to consider school closures as a preferred non - pharmaceutical intervention under the current circumstances . 2 Background 2 . 1 Schools and SARS - CoV - 2 School closures have been an e ﬀ ective strategy against earlier pandemics through the mechan - ical reductions in social contacts ( e . g . , inﬂuenza , see Cauchemez et al . , 2009 ; Bin Naﬁsah , 2018 ) , yet they come with substantial costs in learning , future wages , physical and mental health , as well as substantial spillovers to parental labor supply and well - being . Werner and Woessmann ( 2021 ) provide a comprehensive review of this “legacy” of Covid - 19 on education . These costs have to be carefully weighed against the positive e ﬀ ects of school closures in mit - igating the spread of the virus ( Adda , 2016 ) . Whether or not school closures are an e ﬀ ective non - pharmaceutical intervention in the case of SARS - CoV - 2 is debated heatedly . Early evidence tracing speciﬁc outbreaks to school environments drew public attention to the role of schools ( Stein - Zamir et al . , 2020 ) . Contact - tracing studies in school environments conﬁrmed that children are not exempted from transmitting the virus ( Heavey et al . , 2020 ; 2 Fontanet et al . , 2020 ; Macartney et al . , 2020 ) . First systematic evidence was mainly relying on time - series data and simple overtime comparisons . A systematic review by Walsh et al . ( 2021 ) describes a large heterogeneity in results , with half of the studies documenting signiﬁcantly reduced community transmission , while the remaining studies report no association . A similar heterogeneity is displayed in prospective modelling and simulation studies . Again , results range from school closures being e ﬀ ective mitigating policies ( Panovska - Gri ﬃ ths et al . , 2020 ) to null results ( Chang et al . , 2020 ; Davies et al . , 2020 ) . Some simulation studies highlight the role of distancing measures , e . g . , small group teaching , in containing outbreaks in schools ( Lee et al . , 2020 ) . A potential caveat of most of the association and simulation studies is that the underlying over - time variation does not allow for a causal identiﬁcation of the e ﬀ ect of schools . In most cases , underlying empirical approaches boil down to before / after comparisons , with the main short - coming that other simultaneous factors are not controlled for . Yet , proper quasi - experimental approaches are di ﬃ cult to come by , with the Covid - 19 crisis having a near - universal and world - wide inﬂuence on every aspect of life . 4 A number of notable exceptions apply valid identiﬁca - tion strategies to estimate the causal e ﬀ ect of school closures and re - openings . Several studies apply panel regressions based on longitudinal variation across U . S . counties . Chernozhukov et al . ( 2021 ) estimate that cases and deaths in counties with in - person or hybrid teaching substantially increased . The e ﬀ ect was found to be stronger for counties without any mask mandate for sta ﬀ . Goldhaber et al . ( 2021 ) ﬁnd modest positive e ﬀ ects of school re - openings on case numbers in the U . S . states of Washington and Michigan , primarily when pre - existing case numbers are high . Harris et al . ( 2021 ) ﬁnd no e ﬀ ect for school re - openings when case numbers are low . Results for higher levels of case numbers are inconclusive . Di ﬀ erently from these papers , Courtemanche et al . ( 2021 ) focus on the state of Texas , where schools re - opened under hardly any precautionary measures and under high levels of community spread . Their estimates indicate a strong positive e ﬀ ect on case numbers and fatalities in the weeks after the school re - openings . In accordance with these very di ﬀ erent e ﬀ ect patterns , Ertem et al . ( 2021 ) employ event - study designs and ﬁnd no e ﬀ ect of re - opening schools in the North of the U . S . , but signiﬁcant and sustained e ﬀ ects in the South , indicating a role of behavioral di ﬀ erences . For countries beyond the U . S . Vlachos et al . ( 2021 ) compare students of upper secondary schools in Sweden during the ﬁrst wave who moved to online instruction with students of lower secondary schools which remained open . Parents of in - school students experience a small increase in conﬁrmed infections . Stronger e ﬀ ects are found for directly exposed teachers . For Japan , Fukumoto et al . ( 2021 ) ﬁnd no evidence for higher case numbers after school re - openings based on a matching approach on the municipality level . Two studies apply quasi - experimental approaches for Italy . Alfano et al . ( 2020 ) compare early re - opening schools in Bolzano with a synthetic control group of comparable Italian provinces , ﬁnding substantially higher case numbers after school re - openings , yet o ﬀ ering no discussion of the circumstances of school re - openings . Amodio et al . ( 2021 ) use locally delayed re - openings of single schools on georeferenced cases in Sicily to identify a modest increase of cases by 2 % two weeks after the school opening . 4 See also the discussion on why Covid - 19 is a poor natural experiment by Bacher - Hicks and Goodman ( 2021 ) . 3 Finally , and similar to the present study , Isphording et al . ( 2021 ) and von Bismarck - Osten et al . ( 2021 ) apply event - study designs to the staggered summer breaks in Germany to compare re - opening states with states that are still in their summer breaks . They do not ﬁnd evidence for increased case numbers after summer breaks . Estimates by Isphording et al . ( 2021 ) rather point to slight and insigniﬁcant reductions in case numbers , potentially attributed to strict hygiene measures and changes in parental behavior . Taking stock of the quasi - experimental evidence , we conclude that the e ﬀ ect of school re - openings is very context - speciﬁc . Yet , while far from being unambiguous , the overwhelming part of the literature suggests that schools could be re - opened safely in 2020 when conditions such like hygiene rules , distance measures , mask - wearing and testing were in place . Such strategies have been comprehensively described and discussed by scientists and practitioners alike , among others in Willyard ( 2021 ) and Buntin and Gavulic ( 2020 ) . Yet , several factors have changed since 2020 . Critics object that new and more aggressive variants of the virus may change the picture . Early media reports on the new “Delta” variant suggested that children may be particularly vulnerable to this new strain . 5 More comprehensive evidence was less conclusive about the particular impact on children ( Brookman et al . , 2021 ) . At the same time , other factors have changed , too . Vaccination rates in many Western countries are now substantial , also among older school - aged children . Scientiﬁc evidence on the virus’ transmission has led to more targeted mitigation measures , such as the application of air ﬁlters in classrooms . Given these changes , it appears important to re - analyze the e ﬀ ect of school re - openings under the new contextual setting . 2 . 2 Testing , school hygiene measures and vaccinations During our observation period , while in general having autonomy about school policy , German states implemented similar and comparable measures against the spread of SARS - CoV - 2 in schools . These measures comprised of regular testing , quarantining of positive cases and suspects for infection , as well as general hygiene measures . From the end of summer breaks in 2021 on , both students and teachers were tested regularly ( two or three times per week ) using rapid antigen tests . In the weeks immediately after the re - opening of schools after the summer break , testing was more frequent , up to daily depending on the state . Testing was mandatory , and opt - out was not an option except for those who had been vaccinated or infected earlier . 6 Individuals with positive test results were isolated and had to undergo a PCR test in order to conﬁrm whether the rapid antigen test was a true positive . In some states , namely North Rhine - Westphalia and later Bavaria , pooled PCR tests were used to jointly test entire classes and to identify single positive cases only after . States further decided on a common set of quarantine rules . Positive tests led to immediate quarantining of the positively tested student . Peers , class members or seat neighbors , who are 5 See , e . g . , https : / / au . news . yahoo . com / covid - wards - full - of - children - as - uk - pandemic - explodes - 053207113 . html or https : / / www . dailymail . co . uk / news / article - 9106509 / Coronavirus - London - childrens - hospital - consultant - says - html ( last accessed : 11 November 2021 ) . 6 Only in Thuringia , mandatory testing was abandoned after a few weeks ; testing regimes were coupled to county incidence rates . 4 suspect to having potentially been infected , too , go into a quarantine which could be shortened with a negative test after ﬁve days . Besides testing , a number of additional measures were kept in place . All states required that classrooms were aired frequently by opening windows , or by means of mobile or ﬁxed air ﬁlters . Mask - wearing remained mandatory in the period immediately after the summer break , with mask regulations becoming heterogeneous between federal states , often tied to incidence numbers . During the observation period , schools remained open in all federal states . Full or partial school closures were planned for case numbers reaching pre - deﬁned thresholds , which did not happen during the observation period . Population - wide vaccination rates in Germany increased over the observation period to 65 % being fully vaccinated ( with an additional 3 % having received a ﬁrst dose ) , which reﬂects a lower bound due to imperfect registration systems . 7 Among children , vaccination rates remained markedly lower . An o ﬃ cial advice by the German Standing Vaccination Committee ( STIKO ) to vaccinate those aged 12 – 17 was given on 16 August 2021 . By the ﬁrst week of October , the rate of fully vaccinated among this group remained at around 35 % . Vaccinations among younger children played no role during the observation period . 2 . 3 Summer breaks in Germany In Germany , the timing of the six - week - long summer breaks vary across states since the 1950s . This varying schedule is supposed to avoid tra ﬃ c congestion as well as excess demand for holiday accommodation in tourist regions if the entire German population went on holidays at the same time . The staggered timing of summer vacation periods follows a long - term scheduling ( currently up to 2024 ) and is decided by the Standing Conference of the Ministers of Education and Cultural A ﬀ airs ( Kultusministerkonferenz , KMK ) , a consortium of state ministers responsible for education and schooling . 8 Importantly , throughout the SARS - CoV - 2 pandemic , the long - term scheduled summer break schedules in 2020 and 2021 remained una ﬀ ected by regional di ﬀ erences in case numbers . Figure 1 shows the school starting dates after the summer breaks in 2021 across German states ranging from early - August to mid - September 2021 . Only on two days at the end of July 2021 , schools across all German states were closed simultaneously due to summer breaks . Therefore , we can exploit the exogeneity in the staggered timing of school re - openings after summer vacations across German states for causal identiﬁcation of their impact on conﬁrmed case numbers . 7 See www . rki . de / DE / Content / InfAZ / N / Neuartiges _ Coronavirus / Daten / Impfquoten - Tab . html ( last ac - cessed : 11 November 2021 ) . 8 See https : / / www . kmk . org / service / ferien . html for details ( last accessed : 11 November 2021 ) . 5 Figure 1 : School Opening Dates after Summer Vacation 2021 in Germany Note : This graph shows a map of German counties and highlights counties in states by the date of school opening after summer vacation 2021 . Counties ( states ) highlighted in dark gray start the new school year on the respective date , while light gray indicates that they are still on summer vacation and medium gray indicates that they had already re - opened schools at an earlier date . School re - opening dates are as follows , 2 August : Mecklenburg - Vorpommern , Schleswig - Holstein , 5 August : Hamburg , 9 August : Berlin , Brandenburg , 18 August : North Rhine Westphalia , 30 August : Hessia , Rhineland - Palatinate , and Saarland , 2 September : Lower Saxony , Bremen , and Saxony - Anhalt , 6 September : Saxony and Thuringia , 13 September : Baden - Wuerttemberg , 14 September : Bavaria . Source : KMK . 3 Data and empirical strategy 3 . 1 Data and descriptives Conﬁrmed cases of SARS - CoV - 2 infections . Estimations are based on daily new con - ﬁrmed SARS - CoV - 2 cases by age group ( 5 – 14 , 15 – 34 , 35 – 59 , 60 + ) by all 401 German coun - ties , recorded on the date the local public health authorities became aware of a case . Case numbers are normalized by 100K population by county and age group . Data on the observation window from 27 July to 4 October was collected from the publicly available database of the Robert - Koch - Institut ( RKI ) . Mobility patterns . To account for changes in individual mobility that might contribute to changes in infection patterns , we keep mobility constant by controlling for state - level mobility information from the Google Mobility Reports . The data contain relative stay durations in groceries , parks , home , retail and recreation , transit stations and workplaces . Figure A . 1 displays the gradual return of workers to workplaces , retail markets and transit stations and the reduced stay durations in residential areas after the end of summer breaks . 6 Table 1 : Summary Statistics - conﬁrmed cases of SARS - CoV - 2 ( by county and day ) Full Before During After Period Summer Break Summer Break Summer Break Mean SD Mean SD Mean SD Mean SD Age Group 5 - 14 12 . 0 22 . 3 1 . 7 5 . 5 8 . 0 15 . 3 27 . 0 30 . 6 15 - 34 8 . 7 12 . 0 1 . 9 3 . 6 9 . 2 11 . 7 14 . 6 14 . 0 35 - 59 4 . 7 6 . 9 0 . 9 1 . 8 4 . 4 6 . 4 8 . 7 8 . 4 60 + 2 . 7 5 . 6 0 . 6 1 . 9 2 . 2 4 . 9 5 . 3 7 . 4 All Ages 6 . 1 8 . 3 1 . 2 1 . 8 5 . 7 7 . 1 11 . 5 10 . 1 Observations 45 , 600 17 , 100 22 , 375 22 , 375 Note : This table summarizes means and standard deviations of conﬁrmed cases of SARS - CoV - 2 normalized by 100K population by county and age group . The full observation period covers 13 June 2021 – 04 October 2021 . Source : RKI and Statistical O ﬃ ce . 3 . 2 Sample Description Table 1 summarizes case numbers over the period of observation by age group and separately for periods before , during and after the summer breaks . Two features are apparent that highlight the di ﬀ erence in the situation of 2021 compared to the situation one year earlier as analyzed in Isphording et al . ( 2021 ) . While in 2020 case numbers were concentrated in older and vulnerable age groups , now in all periods conﬁrmed cases peak in the youngest age group of 5 – 14 years . This reﬂects the impact of increasing vaccination rates . Second , case numbers are on average ﬁve times higher than in the same period surrounding the end of summer breaks in 2020 . The descriptive data also display the strong dynamics over the summer breaks . While average cases per 100K are at just 1 . 2 cases per day before the summer breaks , they increase to 11 . 5 cases per 100K after the summer breaks . This increase is similar in relative terms over all age groups . 9 Figure 2 depicts this dynamic development over the summer breaks . During the after - math of the third wave in spring , schools were only partially open and case numbers decreased strongly . Yet , coinciding with the beginning of summer breaks , they slowly started to rise again , peaking shortly after the ﬁrst states had re - opened their schools , and then falling back again . While several reasons may be brought up for this particular development , we will see in the following analysis that school openings with their accompanying regular and mandatory testing seem to have contributed to this pattern . 9 Note that these are daily average cases , di ﬀ erent from the “incidence” as a 7 - days cumulative sum of cases . 7 Figure 2 : Timeline of COVID - 19 Pandemic and School Closures and Openings in Germany Note : This graph shows the evolution of the number of new conﬁrmed cases per seven days of SARS - CoV - 2 infections per 100 , 000 inhabitants for Germany as a whole ( solid line ) and by states with summer breaks ending up until 18 August 2021 ( early re - opening states ) and states with summer breaks ending thereafter ( late re - opening states ) . The shaded areas describe the di ﬀ erent phases of school closures and re - openings in Germany . Source : RKI , own presentation . 3 . 3 Empirical Strategy Following closely earlier estimations by Isphording et al . ( 2021 ) , we estimate the causal e ﬀ ect of the end of summer breaks and the associated school re - openings on the spread of the pandemic by exploiting the staggered summer break schedule across federal states . We apply an event - study approach that intuitively compares changes in case numbers in re - opening states to changes in case numbers in states that will only re - open in the future . To interpret this di ﬀ erence as the causal e ﬀ ect of school re - openings , we assume that case numbers in re - opening states would have changed similarly to those in the control states in the unobservable counterfactual situation of schools not being re - opened after summer breaks . While we cannot directly test this assumption , insigniﬁcant di ﬀ erences between groups of states indicate a parallel development of case numbers before school re - openings , which strongly supports the causal interpretation of our estimates . Our empirical model reads : CoV it = α i + µ t + 42 ! τ = − 15 , τ " = 0 β τ SchoolsOpen s ( i ) , t − τ + X # it γ + ε it . ( 1 ) 8 The outcome CoV it describes new conﬁrmed SARS - CoV - 2 infections by county i and date t , normalized per 100K of population . In a robustness check we estimate the same model using the natural logarithm of this number instead . The model is estimated separately by age group . The indicator SchoolsOpen s ( i ) , t − τ describes the time lag of day t to the end of summer breaks in county i in state s . We consider an e ﬀ ect window of two weeks before and six weeks after the summer breaks . 10 All observations before and after the respective state - speciﬁc event window are aggregated into bins at the endpoints ( Schmidheiny and Siegloch , 2019 ) . We consider τ = 0 , the last day before the end of summer breaks , as our comparison period . 11 County - speciﬁc time - invariant confounders such as population structure are captured by county ﬁxed e ﬀ ects α i . Time - variant confounders such as the global state of the pandemic and federal restrictions are captured by date - ﬁxed e ﬀ ects µ t . Time - varying variables X it include mobility patterns by Google Mobility Reports , the county’s vaccination rate 14 days ago , and cumulative case numbers over the past 14 days . Standard errors in all estimations are clustered at the federal state level . 4 Event Study Results Figure 3 displays the event study results based on Equation ( 1 ) separately by age group . The black solid line connects coe ﬃ cients that display the di ﬀ erence between re - opening and control states relative to the last day of summer breaks ( t = 0 ) . 12 For all age groups , we observe a ﬂat pre - trend with coe ﬃ cients insigniﬁcant and close to zero . This ﬂat trend rules out concerns about several sources of potential confounders . First , the ﬂat trends speak against any time - variant inﬂuences spuriously correlated with the timing of summer breaks and the pandemic course . Second , ﬂat trends speak against early and late openers being at di ﬀ erent stages at the pandemic producing spurious e ﬀ ects of school re - openings . This argument is further supported by the descriptive evidence in Figure 2 which shows that early and late opening states display parallel developments which are set apart by about the average distance in summer break schedules . Third , the ﬂat trends speak against a strong role of travel returnees in producing our result patterns , mechanically increasing case numbers right before the end of summer breaks , which should result in diverging trends right before t = 0 . Taken together , the ﬂat trends suggest that the identiﬁcation assumption of parallel trends in the absence of school re - openings is plausible . After schools re - open , we observe for the youngest age group of 5 – 14 years a signiﬁcant spike in case numbers . This age group comprises entirely of ( pre - ) school - aged children , which were rarely tested during summer breaks , and who are now exposed to regular testing during school . 13 Accordingly , asymptomatic cases among children were detected and quarantined . 10 We do not prolongue the e ﬀ ect window further to avoid confounding by the then starting autumn holidays . 11 Here we di ﬀ er from ( Isphording et al . , 2021 ) where the ﬁrst school day was used as comparison group . 12 Figure A . 2 shows the results when using the natural logarithm of the infection numbers . Qualitative patterns are comparable , yet peaks after school re - openings are less pronounced in the logarithmic speciﬁcation . 13 Mandatory schooling in Germany starts in the year a child turns six . The last year of kindergarten / pre - school is free of charge and almost universally attended . 9 The increased number of cases decreases gradually thereafter , being statistically indistinguish - able from the counterfactual after two weeks . A similar , yet less pronounced spike is also observed for the age group 15 – 34 , which includes both older high - school students as well as young parents . 14 After the initial spike , we again observe a gradual decrease in case numbers , accumulating to a signiﬁcant long - term reduction of up to almost nine cases per 100K population . For the age group 35 – 59 , the initial spike does not materialize . Still , case numbers gradually decrease after school openings , with a long - term decrease of about seven cases per 100K population . Finally , for the age group of the most vulnerable of 60 years and older , we still observe a slight reduction after school closures , which remains statistically insigniﬁcant . Taken together , the di ﬀ ering patterns across age groups are in line with schools under mandatory testing being an important measure to screen the population . While participation in indoor activities was largely restricted to vaccinated , formerly infected or tested persons , the demand for rapid testing was declining rapidly over the summer of 2021 as more and more people got vaccinated . 15 In this situation , the transition from the summer break setting to an environment with comprehensive and compulsory testing led to the sudden and sustaining detection of asymptomatic infections among school - aged children that would otherwise have remained undetected . Detected cases as well as direct contacts ( deﬁned either as seat neighbors or whole classes ) were sent into quarantine . Beside testing and quarantining , strict hygiene rules of mask - wearing and venting were in place ( see Section 2 . 2 ) . 14 Unfortunately , age bins are provided by the RKI and do not allow for a sharp distinction between students and older population groups . 15 Figure A . 3 highlights this decrease in demand by Google searches for publicly provided rapid speed testing , the so called “B¨urgertests” . 10 Figure 3 : The E ﬀ ect of the End of Summer Breaks on Conﬁrmed Cases by Age Groups Note : This graph plots the point estimates ( ˆ β τ , τ ∈ [ − 15 , 42 ] ) and corresponding 95 % percent conﬁdence intervals of the event study model as deﬁned in Equation ( 1 ) , separately estimated for cases by age groups 5 – 14 , 15 – 34 , 35 – 59 and 60 + . The dependent variable is always the daily count of conﬁrmed cases per 100K population per county and age group . The vertical line at τ = 0 indicates the day before school re - opening . The regressions include ﬁxed e ﬀ ects on the county and day level , as well as time - varying controls for mobility , cumulative case numbers and local vaccination rates . Standard errors are clustered at the federal state level . 5 Conclusion In this study , we apply the methodology of Isphording et al . ( 2021 ) to recent data on conﬁrmed cases of SARS - CoV - 2 in German counties surrounding the end of summer breaks . Applying an event study model , we provide causal evidence of the isolated role of schools in transmitting the virus . After summer breaks , schools re - opened under strict hygiene measures and implemented a mandatory rapid testing and quarantining system . Our results conﬁrm the success of this pol - icy . Our estimations suggest that testing and quarantining in schools substantially contributed to uncovering asymptomatic cases that would have remained unobserved during a summer break . The testing led to a pronounced spike in observed cases during the ﬁrst week after re - opening . Observed cases decreased gradually during the following weeks , being statistically indistinguishable after two weeks . We further observe in prime - aged age groups , comprising of older students and parents , that case numbers steadily decrease below the counterfactual levels that would have prevailed if schools were kept closed . This suggests that early detection of infections by testing school - aged children reduces infections among their parents as well . Case numbers among the most vulnerable age group of ages 60 + remain una ﬀ ected . 11 Our results are in line with simulation - based evidence by Mohring et al . ( 2021 ) and Gabler et al . ( 2021 ) highlighting the important role of population - wide rapid testing . As Mohring et al . ( 2021 ) states , only the combination of compulsory schooling and mandatory testing allows for an unﬁltered and unbiased look into the state of the pandemic . Our results suggest that increased infections through in - school contacts are more than o ﬀ set by this surveillance e ﬀ ect of mandatory testing , spilling over into lower case numbers in prime - aged age groups . We conclude that the trade - o ﬀ between reducing contacts and losing an important surveillance device has to be taken seriously when re - considering school closures as a non - pharmaceutical intervention under the current circumstances . This is especially true consider - ing the drastic immediate and short - term costs for children and their parents associated with school closures . 12 References Adda , J . ( 2016 ) . Economic activity and the spread of viral diseases : Evidence from high frequency data . The Quarterly Journal of Economics 131 ( 2 ) , 891 – 941 . Alfano , V . , S . Ercolano , and L . Cicatiello ( 2020 ) . A synthetic control method analysis of schools opening and covid - 19 outbreak in italy . Amodio , E . , M . Battisti , A . Kourtellos , G . Maggio , and C . M . Maida ( 2021 ) . Schools opening and covid - 19 di ﬀ usion : Evidence from geolocalized microdata . Covid Economics 65 , 47 – 77 . Bacher - Hicks , A . and J . Goodman ( 2021 ) . The covid - 19 pandemic is a lousy natural experiment for studying the e ﬀ ects of online learning . EducationNext 21 ( 4 ) . Bin Naﬁsah , S . ( 2018 ) . School closure during novel inﬂuenza : a systematic review . Journal of Infection and Public Health , 657 – 61 . Brookman , S . , J . Cook , M . Zucherman , S . Broughton , K . Harman , and A . Gupta ( 2021 ) . E ﬀ ect of the new sars - cov - 2 variant b . 1 . 1 . 7 on children and young people . The Lancet Child & Adolescent Health 5 ( 4 ) , e9 – e10 . Buntin , M . B . and K . A . Gavulic ( 2020 ) . Safely reopening schools - learning amid a pandemic . In JAMA Health Forum , Volume 1 , pp . e201054 – e201054 . American Medical Association . Cauchemez , S . , N . M . Ferguson , C . Wachtel , A . Tegnell , G . Saour , B . Duncan , and A . Nicoll ( 2009 , August ) . Closure of schools during an inﬂuenza pandemic . 9 ( 8 ) , 473 – 481 . Chang , S . L . , N . Harding , C . Zachreson , O . M . Cli ﬀ , and M . Prokopenko ( 2020 , November ) . Modelling transmission and control of the COVID - 19 pandemic in Australia . 11 ( 1 ) . Chernozhukov , V . , H . Kasahara , and P . Schrimpf ( 2021 , February ) . The association of opening k - 12 schools with the spread of covid - 19 in the united states : County - level panel data analysis . Courtemanche , C . J . , A . H . Le , A . Yelowitz , and R . Zimmer ( 2021 ) . School Reopenings , Mobility , and COVID - 19 Spread : Evidence from Texas . Technical report , National Bureau of Economic Research . Davies , N . G . , A . J . Kucharski , R . M . Eggo , A . Gimma , W . J . Edmunds , T . Jombart , K . O Reilly , A . Endo , J . Hellewell , E . S . Nightingale , B . J . Quilty , C . I . Jarvis , T . W . Russell , P . Klepac , N . I . Bosse , S . Funk , S . Abbott , G . F . Medley , H . Gibbs , C . A . B . Pearson , S . Flasche , M . Jit , S . Cli ﬀ ord , K . Prem , C . Diamond , J . Emery , A . K . Deol , S . R . Procter , K . van Zandvoort , Y . F . Sun , J . D . Munday , A . Rosello , M . Auzenbergs , G . Knight , R . M . G . J . Houben , and Y . Liu ( 2020 , July ) . E ﬀ ects of non - pharmaceutical interventions on COVID - 19 cases , deaths , and demand for hospital services in the UK : a modelling study . 5 ( 7 ) , e375 – e385 . Engzell , P . , A . Frey , and M . D . Verhagen ( 2021 , April ) . Learning loss due to school closures during the COVID - 19 pandemic . 118 ( 17 ) , e2022376118 . Ertem , Z . , E . M . Schechter - Perkins , E . Oster , P . van den Berg , I . Epshtein , N . Chaiyakunapruk , F . A . Wilson , E . Perencevich , W . B . Pettey , W . Branch - Elliman , et al . ( 2021 ) . The impact of school opening model on sars - cov - 2 community incidence and mortality . Nature Medicine , 1 – 7 . 13 Fontanet , A . , R . Grant , L . Tondeur , Y . Madec , L . Grzelak , I . Cailleau , M . - N . Ungeheuer , C . Renaudat , S . F . Pellerin , L . Kuhmel , et al . ( 2020 ) . Sars - cov - 2 infection in primary schools in northern france : A retrospective cohort study in an area of high transmission . MedRxiv . Fukumoto , K . , C . T . McClean , and K . Nakagawa ( 2021 ) . No causal e ﬀ ect of school closures in japan on the spread of covid - 19 in spring 2020 . Nature Medicine , 1 – 9 . Gabler , J . , T . Raabe , K . R¨ohrl , and H . - M . von Gaudecker ( 2021 ) . The e ﬀ ectiveness of strategies to contain sars - cov - 2 : Testing , vaccinations , and npis . arXiv preprint arXiv : 2106 . 11129 . Goldhaber , D . , S . A . Imberman , K . O . Strunk , B . Hopkins , N . Brown , E . Harbatkin , and T . Kilbride ( 2021 ) . To what extent does in - person schooling contribute to the spread of COVID - 19 ? Evidence from Michigan and Washington . Technical report , National Bureau of Economic Research . Harris , D . N . , E . Ziedan , and S . Hassig ( 2021 ) . The e ﬀ ects of school reopenings on COVID - 19 hospitalizations . National Center for Research on Education Access and Choice . Heavey , L . , G . Casey , C . Kelly , D . Kelly , and G . McDarby ( 2020 ) . No evidence of secondary transmission of covid - 19 from children attending school in ireland , 2020 . Eurosurveillance 25 ( 21 ) , 2000903 . Heggeness , M . L . ( 2020 ) . Estimating the immediate impact of the covid - 19 shock on parental attachment to the labor market and the double bind of mothers . Review of Economics of the Household 18 ( 4 ) , 1053 – 1078 . Isphording , I . E . , M . Lipfert , and N . Pestel ( 2021 ) . Does re - opening schools contribute to the spread of SARS - CoV - 2 ? Evidence from staggered summer breaks in Germany . Journal of Public Economics 198 , 104426 . Jang , Y . and M . Yum ( 2020 ) . Aggregate and Intergenerational Implications of School Closures : A Quantitative Assessment . Lee , B . , J . P . Hanley , S . Nowak , J . H . Bates , and L . H´ebert - Dufresne ( 2020 ) . Modeling the impact of school reopening on SARS - CoV - 2 transmission using contact structure data from Shanghai . BMC Public Health 20 ( 1 ) , 1 – 9 . Leslie , E . and R . Wilson ( 2020 ) . Sheltering in place and domestic violence : Evidence from calls for service during covid - 19 . Journal of Public Economics 189 , 104241 . Macartney , K . , H . E . Quinn , A . J . Pillsbury , A . Koirala , L . Deng , N . Winkler , A . L . Katelaris , M . V . O’Sullivan , C . Dalton , N . Wood , et al . ( 2020 ) . Transmission of sars - cov - 2 in aus - tralian educational settings : a prospective cohort study . The Lancet Child & Adolescent Health 4 ( 11 ) , 807 – 816 . Mohring , J . , M . Burger , R . F . ßler , J . Fiedler , N . Leith¨auser , J . Schneider , M . Speckert , and J . Wlazlo ( 2021 ) . Starker e ﬀ ekt von schnelltests . eine analyse mit hilfe der epidemse - software . Technical report , Fraunhofer Institut f˜A r Techno - und Wirtschaftsmathemathik ITWM . Panovska - Gri ﬃ ths , J . , C . C . Kerr , R . M . Stuart , D . Mistry , D . J . Klein , R . M . Viner , and C . Bonell ( 2020 , November ) . Determining the optimal strategy for reopening schools , the impact of test and trace interventions , and the risk of occurrence of a second COVID - 19 epidemic wave in the UK : a modelling study . 4 ( 11 ) , 817 – 827 . 14 Schmidheiny , K . and S . Siegloch ( 2019 ) . On event study designs and distributed - lag models : Equivalence , generalization and practical implications . Stein - Zamir , C . , N . Abramson , H . Shoob , E . Libal , M . Bitan , T . Cardash , R . Cayam , and I . Miskin ( 2020 ) . A large COVID - 19 outbreak in a high school 10 days after schools’ reopening , Israel , May 2020 . Eurosurveillance 25 ( 29 ) , 2001352 . Tang , P . , M . Hasan , H . Chemaitelly , and et al . ( 2021 ) . BNT162b2 and mRNA - 1273 COVID - 19 vaccine e ﬀ ectiveness against the SARS - CoV - 2 Delta variant in Qatar . Nature Medicine . Viner , R . M . , S . Russell , R . Saulle , H . Croker , C . Stansﬁeld , J . Packer , D . Nicholls , A . - L . Goddings , C . Bonell , L . Hudson , et al . ( 2021 ) . Impacts of school closures on physical and mental health of children and young people : a systematic review . MedRxiv . Vlachos , J . , E . Herteg˚ard , and H . B . Svaleryd ( 2021 ) . The e ﬀ ects of school closures on SARS - CoV - 2 among parents and teachers . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 118 ( 9 ) . von Bismarck - Osten , C . , K . Borusyak , and U . Sch¨onberg ( 2021 ) . The role of schools in transmission of the sars - cov - 2 virus : Quasi - experimental evidence from germany . Technical report , cemmap working paper . Walsh , S . , A . Chowdhury , V . Braithwaite , S . Russell , J . M . Birch , J . L . Ward , C . Waddington , C . Brayne , C . Bonell , R . M . Viner , and O . T . Mytton ( 2021 , August ) . Do school closures and school reopenings a ﬀ ect community transmission of COVID - 19 ? a systematic review of observational studies . 11 ( 8 ) , e053371 . Werner , K . and L . Woessmann ( 2021 ) . The legacy of covid - 19 in education . IZA Discussion Paper No . 14796 . Willyard , C . ( 2021 ) . Covid and schools : the evidence for reopening safely . Nature 595 ( 7866 ) , 164 – 167 . 15 A Appendix Figures and Tables Figure A . 1 : The E ﬀ ect of the End of Summer Breaks on Mobility Patterns Note : This graph plots the point estimates ( ˆ β τ , τ ∈ [ − 15 , 42 ] ) and corresponding 95 % percent conﬁdence intervals of the event study model as deﬁned in Equation ( 1 ) . The dependent variables is the percentage change in mobility compared to a baseline period . Mobility measures are based on Google Mobility Reports . The vertical line at τ = 0 indicates the day before school re - opening . The regressions include ﬁxed e ﬀ ects on the state by day - of - the - week and day level . Standard errors are clustered at the federal state level . 16 Figure A . 2 : The E ﬀ ect of the End of Summer Breaks on Conﬁrmed Cases by Age Groups , logarithmic speciﬁcation Note : This graph plots the point estimates ( ˆ β τ , τ ∈ [ − 15 , 42 ] ) and corresponding 95 % percent conﬁdence intervals of the event study model as deﬁned in Equation ( 1 ) , with separately estimated by age groups 5 – 14 , 15 – 34 , 35 – 59 and 60 + . The dependent variable is always the logarithm of the daily count of conﬁrmed cases per 100K population per county and age group . The vertical line at τ = 0 indicates the day before school re - opening . The regressions include ﬁxed e ﬀ ects on the county and day level , as well as time - varying controls for mobility , cumulative case numbers and local vaccination rates . Standard errors are clustered at the federal state level . 17 Figure A . 3 : Search intensity for publicly provided Corona tests ( “B¨urgertests” ) Note : This graph plots relative search intensity for for publicly provided Corona tests ( “B¨urgertests” ) based on data collected from Google Trends . All numbers are interpreted relatively to the peak search intensity in late May . 18