Journal of Documentation New service system as an information - seeking context : Investigation of an unfamiliar Discovery Service Guihua Li , Longlong Wu , Article information : To cite this document : Guihua Li , Longlong Wu , ( 2017 ) " New service system as an information - seeking context : Investigation of an unfamiliar Discovery Service " , Journal of Documentation , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1108 / JD - 08 - 2016 - 0102 Permanent link to this document : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1108 / JD - 08 - 2016 - 0102 Downloaded on : 06 October 2017 , At : 01 : 57 ( PT ) References : this document contains references to 30 other documents . To copy this document : permissions @ emeraldinsight . com The fulltext of this document has been downloaded 8 times since 2017 * Access to this document was granted through an Emerald subscription provided by emerald - srm : 401304 [ ] For Authors If you would like to write for this , or any other Emerald publication , then please use our Emerald for Authors service information about how to choose which publication to write for and submission guidelines are available for all . Please visit www . emeraldinsight . com / authors for more information . About Emerald www . emeraldinsight . com Emerald is a global publisher linking research and practice to the benefit of society . The company manages a portfolio of more than 290 journals and over 2 , 350 books and book series volumes , as well as providing an extensive range of online products and additional customer resources and services . Emerald is both COUNTER 4 and TRANSFER compliant . The organization is a partner of the Committee on Publication Ethics ( COPE ) and also works with Portico and the LOCKSS initiative for digital archive preservation . * Related content and download information correct at time of download . D o w n l o a d e d by A u s t r a li a n C a t ho li c U n i v e r s it y A t 01 : 57 06 O c t ob e r 2017 ( P T ) New service system as an information - seeking context Investigation of an unfamiliar Discovery Service Guihua Li School of Public Administration , Sichuan Universtiy , Chengdu , China , and Longlong Wu Taobao ( China ) Software Co . Ltd , Chengdu , China Abstract Purpose – The purposes of this paper are to understand the user information seeking ( IS ) process under a new service system , to explore how users construct strategies and to identify the influences of the new service system on the IS process and behaviour . Design / methodology / approach – A quality research study design that included questionnaires survey , observation , thinking - aloud and interviews was employed . In all , 20 participants from 12 social science disciplines at Sichuan University , Chengdu , China were observed using the proposed Discovery Service system . The user IS process characteristics and taxonomy were analysed , and the stages matrix of IS under new system was built . Findings – Users ’ IS processes under the new system proved to be very complex . The features of three process stages , i . e . searching , scanning and verifying stages , and four different behaviour patterns were identified . Moreover , characteristics of IS behaviour under the new service system were described . Originality / value – User IS behaviour was addressed in a new service system context in this study , as has seldom been done in previous IS research . A comprehensive and user - centred understanding of users ’ exploratory practices in a new service system context was obtained , which will inform the development of information services for digital libraries . In addition , it indicated that the uncertainty of the IS process should be addressed by considering the relationships among IS , information retrieval and user - computer interaction . Keywords Information retrieval , Usability , Digital library , User study , Discovery Service , Information - seeking , New information service , Social science Paper type Research paper Introduction New internet - based information services and applications are increasing in number and variety . Understanding the information - seeking ( IS ) process and developing systems and strategies to support it are central goals of information science . A new information service system could influence user IS behaviour significantly ; however , such a system has seldom been considered in IS research despite the current rhetoric that more human - centric systems and research are required . In this study , this gap was addressed by investigating users ’ IS behaviours relative to a new information service , such as a Discovery Service system . A quality research study design that included questionnaire survey , observation , thinking aloud and interviews was employed , and content analysis was conducted to understand and classify the users ’ IS behaviours . Background The objective of most IS studies is to discover useful information about the habits and preferences of individuals or groups in order to design appropriate systems and services that can facilitate IS behaviours ( Belkin et al . , 1982a , b ; Ellis , 1989 , 1993 ; Kuhlthau , 1993 ) . Previous Journal of Documentation ©EmeraldPublishingLimited0022 - 0418 DOI10 . 1108 / JD - 08 - 2016 - 0102 Received 15 August 2016 Revised 2 June 2017 Accepted 3 June 2017 The current issue and full text archive of this journal is available on Emerald Insight at : www . emeraldinsight . com / 0022 - 0418 . htm The authors are thanks the support of the financial support of the Humanities and Social Sciences Research Foundation , Ministry of Education of China under Grant No . 13XJA870001 , and the Central Higher Education Institution Fund from Sichuan University under Grant No . skqy201508 . New servicesystem D o w n l o a d e d by A u s t r a li a n C a t ho li c U n i v e r s it y A t 01 : 57 06 O c t ob e r 2017 ( P T ) researchers have developed models related to IS behaviour ; especially , the models proposed by Wilson ( 1981 ) , Ellis ( 1989 ) and Kuhlthau ( 1993 ) have received significant attention . Wilson ’ s ( 1981 ) model of information behaviour includes stress / coping , risk reward and social learning theories as activating mechanisms that motivate an individual to search for information . Ellis ’ ( 1989 ) behavioural model is presumably the earliest model to consider IS as a type of cognitive process . Ellis ’ model focussed on six cognitive stages , i . e . starting , chaining , browsing , differentiating , monitoring and extracting . Kuhlthau ’ s ( 1988 , 1991 , 1993 ) information search process model is a six - stage model that includes affective , cognitive and physical domains . Although these models were primarily constructed prior to the development of the World Wide Web , later researchers accepted the core concepts of these models , i . e . that information seeking ( IS ) is a cognitive , affective and situational behaviour . For example , Saracevic ( 1996 , 1997 ) applied these concepts to user - computer interaction ( UCI ) research and argued that a user would engage in three levels of activity when interacting with a computer , i . e . cognitive , affective and situational levels . His theory was considered to be a typical integration of traditional IS theory and HCI theory , and he demonstrated that an IS perspective , as a type of micro - perspective , will benefit UCI research . In fact , the technology system context will influence IS behaviour in many ways , from feeling and cognition to activity . Conklin ’ s ( 1987 ) report of hypertext systems argued that users became disoriented by non - linear documents . Nahl ( 2001 ) defined feelings of uncertainty or hesitance and doubt , frustration and anxiety and resistance to new information as affective behaviours , while confused thoughts were identified as cognitive behaviours . Nahl indicated that affective problems might also be present in people who are highly motivated and conversant with new technologies . Hider ( 2006 ) observed that users might change the search goal consciously or unconsciously when interacting with such systems . Järvelin and Ingwersen ( 2004 ) believe that information retrieval ( IR ) is an element of searcher IS context and is only one way to gain access to the required information . They presented a nested IR model whose layers ( from the core to the surface ) are as follows : intra - object structures ; inter - object contexts ; interaction context ; social , systemic , media , work task , conceptual and emotional contexts ; economic , techno - physical and societal contexts and historic context . With the increasing number of new information services available in libraries , one specific system context , i . e . a new service system , was considered in the present study . Thong and Tam ( 2002 ) utilised the technology acceptance model to explain user acceptance of digital libraries . They identified three system interface characteristics , three organisational context variables and three individual differences as critical external variables that influence adoption intention relative to perceived usefulness and ease of use of the digital library . Williams and Foster ( 2011 ) found that users were satisfied and could adapt to the new system quickly but did not take full advantage of the rich feature set . However , IS behaviour has rarely been examined in the context of a new information service . Discovery Service , which can be regarded as constructive information service that improve access to academic information , particularly for users who are not familiar with the reference database , are becoming increasingly common in libraries . A Discovery Service provides a “ single search box ” to access a central index of pre - indexed metadata and / or full - text ( Vaughan , 2011 ) . Studies on the usability of discovery systems have been conducted . Comeaux ( 2012 ) assessed the usability of the Primo discovery system at the Tulane University and identified several usability challenges , particularly for inexperienced users . Chapman et al . ’ s ( 2012 ) study showed a high rate of satisfaction with a new article Discovery Service and , as a result , users were more likely to continue to use online library resources . After implementation of the Summon Discovery Service in 2009 , Way ’ s ( 2010 ) analysis of usage statistics revealed increased use of full - text downloads and link resolver software but decreased use of core subject databases . According to these studies , Discovery Service is a promising fit for the complex information environment that characterises academic libraries . These studies also JD D o w n l o a d e d by A u s t r a li a n C a t ho li c U n i v e r s it y A t 01 : 57 06 O c t ob e r 2017 ( P T ) recognise that users do not fully exploit these systems ; however , because they do not observe users ’ complete interaction processes , these studies do not explain why this lack of full utilisation occurs . More work is required because till date , research on user behaviours relative to a new information service has focussed on users ’ adoption behaviours rather than observing users ’ IS processes on new service systems . To fill the existing research gap , this study attempted to answer the following questions . What are the activities , strategies and behaviours used and perceived by users under the new service system . Moreover , how does the new system compare to existing IS models ? What are the relationships among the core processes , contexts and behaviours relative to information seekers under the new service system ? What implications do these processes , contexts and behaviours hold for enhanced information service and system design ? To answer these questions , we conducted an investigation based on the Discovery Service used by the university library at Sichuan University , Chengdu , China . Sichuan University Library implemented the Ex Libris Primo discovery and delivery system on November 18 , 2013 . To the best of our knowledge , this search channel was not known or used by most students at Sichuan University . Methodology To gain a thorough understanding of IS behaviours , an in - depth study that complements survey methods is required ( Gable , 1994 ) . Therefore , a mixed - method approach that includes interviews , user observations , thinking aloud and survey was employed in this study . In this study , users ’ IS behaviours under an unfamiliar Discovery Service were investigated qualitatively in a laboratory context . In total , 20 participants of Sichuan University were recruited through purposive sampling . Sichuan University is located in Western China and has more than 3 , 900 teachers and more than 60 , 000 students and offers a comprehensive range of disciplines from 30 colleges . The criteria applied to identify participants were as follows : students representing many social science disciplines ; students currently completing their graduation theses or other academic projects and students who did not use Minyuan Search ( the library ’ s Discovery Service ) frequently . Participation was restricted to social science students because it was assumed that IS behaviour differs between social sciences and physical sciences ( Ellis et al . , 1993 ) . To ensure a user - centric research approach and gain an in - depth understanding of IS behaviours with a new service system , a four - phase study was designed : (cid:129) Phase 1 : a researcher introduced the investigation content , programme and the purpose of the research , and described the use of the screen capture tool and the requirement that participants think aloud . (cid:129) Phase 2 : a pre - survey questionnaire was administered and participants were interviewed . Questionnaire A ( Appendix 1 ) was intended to gather information about participants ’ backgrounds , including their academic disciplines , grades , current academic tasks , library instruction sessions attended and self - evaluations of their information search skills . Then , based on questionnaire results , a researcher conducted a 5 - 10 min interview to investigate the participants ’ knowledge structures and their task perceptions . (cid:129) Phase 3 : participants were observed performing a self - defined task . Participants used the Minyuan System to perform the task identified in the questionnaire . To eliminate pressure and maintain a free and relaxed atmosphere , participants were not required to achieve the task goal . This task took participants about 15 min . While the participants conducted the task , a researcher monitored their search operations step New servicesystem D o w n l o a d e d by A u s t r a li a n C a t ho li c U n i v e r s it y A t 01 : 57 06 O c t ob e r 2017 ( P T ) by step using a computer networked to the participants ’ computers , and also took notes on what the participants said . Simultaneously , the screen capture tool recorded all of the participants ’ screen activities . Rather than designing a task for the participants , participants were asked to identify a task related to their current academic project because it was expected that a self - identified task would lead to a more natural search process . (cid:129) Phase 4 : a post - survey questionnaire ( Appendix 2 ) was administered and interviews were conducted . The second questionnaire was intended to examine participant perception and assessment of the Discovery Service , including its functional effect , interface design , information resources and so on . In a 5 - 10 min interview , participants were asked to describe their usage experiences and to provide suggestions to optimise the Discovery Service . In addition , participants were asked to explain their special activities or emotions expressed during their IS process . Findings Process of IS under unfamiliar Discovery Service IR can be regarded as an IS process ; thus , the latter may include one or more IR activities ( Ingwersen and Järvelin , 2005 ; Vakkari et al . , 2003 ; Wilson , 1999 ) . In this study , user search behaviour was observed for a limited time . Consequently , it should be regarded as a series of IR rather than a complete IS process . Therefore , the observation model proposed by Karlssona et al . was adopted in this study because Karlssona et al . observed similar participants in similar circumstances . Karlsson et al . ( 2012 ) identified ten activities involved in a scientific IS process using a virtual university library , i . e . searches for the database or tries to use the interface with no results , searches for search terms outside the database and its thesaurus , builds or rebuilds the search query , executes the search , no search results or thousands of results , limits the search results , searches for search terms in the results , browses through search results , reads or browses through abstracts , changes the database . In this study , user IS behaviour was observed using a discovery system rather than a special database system , as was the case for Karlssona et al . Therefore , there could be differences between our user behaviour process and their ones . After all of the participants ’ IS activity records were reviewed , nine common activities were extracted as core behaviour features : choosing ( or changing ) the search portal , constructing ( or reconstructing ) the search strategy , searching , browsing the search results , filtering the search results , selecting a specific item , reading the summary information of the selected item , accessing the text of the selected item and browsing the text . To compare the IS process under the new system with conventional IS and IR models and extract common features of the aforementioned activities , it is necessary to further classify the activities . Kuhlthau ’ s ( 1988 ) information search process model proposed a six - stage mode comprising task initiation , topic selection , pre - focus exploration , focus formulation , information collection and search closure . We found both consistencies and differences between our observation results and that of Kuhlthau . First , this investigation primarily involved users conducting a certain project ; thus , the task initiation process did not clearly emerge in our data . Second , activities Nos 1 - 3 were highly consistent with the topic selection of Kuhlthau ’ s model , and searching was found to be a core process of this stage . Thus , we grouped these three activities as the first stage of the IS process , which we refer to as the searching stage ( activities Nos 1 - 3 ) . Third , we did not observe a clear boundary between prefocus exploration and focus formulation , as was observed with Kuhlthau ’ s model ; however , activities No . 4 and No . 5 showed a certain consistency with these two features . Therefore , we grouped activity No . 4 and No . 5 as the second stage . Considering that the scanning was the main process of these activities , we refer to this stage JD D o w n l o a d e d by A u s t r a li a n C a t ho li c U n i v e r s it y A t 01 : 57 06 O c t ob e r 2017 ( P T ) as the scanning stage ( activities Nos 4 - 5 ) . Fourth , activity Nos 6 - 9 were obviously consistent with the information collection stage of Kuhlthau ’ s model . Moreover , verification of the information value was a characteristic of these activities ; thus , we identified them as the third stage of the user IS process , which we refer to as the verifying stage ( activities Nos 6 - 9 ) . Fifth , our investigation stopped when users stopped seeking using the Discovery Service ; thus , according to our data , there was no independent search closure stage ( Figure 1 ) . After obtaining more detailed information about the participants ’ IS behaviours , particular characteristics of the basic stages could be identified . In the searching stage , understanding the function button of the search box and reconstructing the logic of all functions are critical activities prior to constructing a search strategy . Most users spent some time observing the discovery tool ’ s function buttons ; however , for the most part , participants relied on previous experience rather than considering the current context . For example , Minyuan Search ’ s basic menu presents five options : articles , books , journal , dissertation and advance search . Most participants who selected journal input keywords for an article rather than a journal title because they were familiar with that procedure based on their use of CNKI and other databases . When they did not obtain satisfactory results , they appeared to be frustrated . In addition , users often forgot there should be consistent logic among the functions of the advance search . For example , even though they selected English as their language , they would actually input a Chinese word as search term . In fact , multiple function buttons and options might confuse users ; therefore , reconstruction logic among these items is a difficult task for users of the Discovery Service . The scanning stage involves a transition from summary information to detailed information , which appeared to be a difficult transition for most participants . Because most users expected that would be able to determine the value of an item based some critical information , such as abstract , journal , keywords and so on , they needed to manage access to such information . In fact , in Minyuan Search , a direct path , i . e . “ detailed information ” , linked to the critical information ; however , fewer than half of the participants noticed this option . Most participants took three unnecessary steps to obtain detailed information . They would use the location information button to access another database , such as CNKI , and then search for relevant documents , find them among the new search results , and select and open the desired document . It was also found that , compared to participants who did not find the “ detailed information ” button , those who did rated Minyuan Search more highly . Start 1 1 2 2 3 3 4 4 4 4 4 4 6 5 6 6 6 6 7 7 7 7 7 8 End Searching Stage Scanning Stage Verifying Stage Figure 1 . Segmentation of user search activity ( e . g . participant No . 13 ) New servicesystem D o w n l o a d e d by A u s t r a li a n C a t ho li c U n i v e r s it y A t 01 : 57 06 O c t ob e r 2017 ( P T ) In other words , the transition between searching and scanning stages will require significant time and will influence their overall perception of the Discovery Service . In the verifying stage , a user will verify the value of the selected item and the value of the Discovery Service ’ s special function . When a participant could find a valuable article using a previously unfamiliar Minyuan Search function , he or she tended to use that function again to find additional resources . However , even if a participant found valuable information , they did not rate Minyuan Search highly because the search process was more difficult than other more familiar processes . According to this appearance , satisfaction was related to both search results and the search process . Taxonomy of user IS According to the nine activities , which were derived from the users ’ IS processes , we coded each participant ’ s records as new data . Through brainstorming with four experts , two dimensions were identified as the basic factors representing the differences among the participants ’ IS processes , i . e . their search strategies and search outcomes . To represent these dimensions , we counted the activity frequency of each stage and the total activity frequency of all stages . We used the ratio of the searching stage ’ s activity quantity to the total activity quantity to represent each user ’ s search strategy and employed the activity quantity of the verifying stage to indicate the user ’ s search outcome process ( Table I ) . Considering that the units are incompatible , the values were converted into new standard values ( Table II ) . The new sets of values were treated as the coordinates of points in a plane . A distribution diagram of user IS behaviour was constructed ( Figure 2 ) . As can be seen , the 20 samples are distributed into four quadrants and can be placed into four groups accordingly ( Figure 2 ) . The different behaviour modes suggest personality differences among the users . Combined with their interview data and background information , more knowledge was obtained from these behaviour records . Group 1 : the users in the first quadrant tended to take more time to construct and reconstruct their search strategies , and they downloaded more search outcomes than the average level . We refer to this search mode as “ Group - harvest mode ” . Users employing this mode include participant No . 10 , 12 and 14 . Stage Searching Scanning Verifying Total Ratio ( searching activity frequency / total activity frequency ) Activityfrequency 3 5 5 13 0 . 23 Table I . Searching strategy representation ( participant No . 13 ) Sample Original coordinates New coordinates ( transformed ) Sample Original coordinates New coordinates ( transformed ) 1 0 . 24 , 8 0 . 17 , 1 11 0 . 25 , 4 0 . 2 , 0 . 43 2 0 . 32 , 5 0 . 37 , 0 . 57 12 0 . 50 , 6 0 . 8 , 0 . 71 3 0 . 45 , 3 0 . 68 , 0 . 29 13 0 . 23 , 5 0 . 15 , 0 . 57 4 0 . 54 , 4 0 . 9 , 0 . 43 14 0 . 41 , 6 0 . 83 , 0 . 71 5 0 . 43 , 4 0 . 63 , 0 . 43 15 0 . 29 , 3 0 . 29 , 0 . 29 6 0 . 17 , 7 0 , 0 . 86 16 0 . 48 , 4 0 . 76 , 0 . 43 7 0 . 58 , 1 1 , 0 17 0 . 44 , 2 0 . 66 , 0 . 14 8 0 . 56 , 3 0 . 95 , 0 . 29 18 0 . 36 , 4 0 . 46 , 0 . 43 9 0 . 36 , 7 0 . 46 , 0 . 86 19 0 . 42 , 3 0 . 61 , 0 . 29 10 0 . 45 , 6 0 . 68 , 0 . 71 20 0 . 33 , 3 0 . 39 , 0 . 29 Table II . Users information - seeking behaviour coordinates JD D o w n l o a d e d by A u s t r a li a n C a t ho li c U n i v e r s it y A t 01 : 57 06 O c t ob e r 2017 ( P T ) The group - harvest mode users had strong exploring spirits . They noticed each new function button and tended to find new search words from search results and the reference bibliography of these search results ( six search words on an average ) . As a result , they changed their search strategies repeatedly ( Figure 3 ) . They found new and efficient functions ; consequently , they always returned to Minyuan Search after downloading the text of valuable items from other databases . However , their experiences with the output results of Minyuan Search were negative because they were highly capable of identifying a critical defect , i . e . that Minyuan Search only integrates a small number of databases . Group 2 : the users in the second quadrant take more time to browse and review their search feedback . They downloaded more outcomes than the average level . This search mode is named “ Scan - harvest mode ” . Users employing this mode include participant No . 1 , 2 , 6 , 9 and 13 . The scan - harvest - mode users had confidence in their ability to find valuable information . They tended to use certain fixed search words ( average : 2 . 4 words ) or simply to make small changes ( Figure 4 ) . They also always neglected the new function button in Minyuan Search , causing a detour between the searching stage and the scanning stage . However , they could still obtain some valuable information because they had explicit search goals and selected the correct word . In fact , they were not involved in the Discovery Service ; they employed their established search habits . As a result , they would give a worse comment to Minyuan Search . Group 3 : the users in the third quadrant just tried few search strategy during their IS process . They took more time to browse the search results , in which they found less useful results than the average level . This search mode is named “ Scan - pick mode ” . Users employing this mode include participant No . 11 , 15 , 18 and 20 . The scan - pick - mode users had less experience with academic IR ; thus , they spent more time understanding the functions of Minyuan Search . Despite spending more time , they could misunderstand the meanings and the relational logic of these function buttons . As a result , they often obtained zero feedback after using deliberate search strategies ( Figure 5 ) . However , ultimately , they could construct some knowledge about this service and obtain some interesting results . Therefore , using the Discovery Service was a good learning experience . As a result , they gave unexpectedly high evaluation to Minyuan Search . Group 4 : the users in the fourth quadrant tended to take more time to construct and reconstruct their search strategies . However , they obtained less relevant results than the average level . This search mode is called “ Group - pick mode ” . Users employing this mode includes participant No . 3 , 4 , 5 , 7 , 8 , 16 , 17 and 19 . More group - pick mode users thought it was difficult to conduct IS . They noticed the new function buttons in Minyuan Search and reconstructed their search strategies repeatedly . 1 . 2 1 . 2 1 1 0 . 8 0 . 8 0 . 6 0 . 6 0 . 4 0 . 4 0 . 2 0 . 2 0 0 6 1 13 9 5 3 4 8 7 2 12 14 10 18 15 19 17 16 20 11 Figure 2 . User seeking behaviour mode New servicesystem D o w n l o a d e d by A u s t r a li a n C a t ho li c U n i v e r s it y A t 01 : 57 06 O c t ob e r 2017 ( P T ) However , they rarely changed their search words . The wrong search words yielded many uncorrelated results . As a result , efficiency in the selecting stage was very low because they rarely picked information just like gems among dross ( Figure 6 ) . Discussion Characteristics of IS behaviour under new service system We have identified nine activities in the IS process under the unfamiliar Discovery Service and grouped them into three stages : searching , scanning and verifying . However , these activities were described using an action unit . In fact , it is more important to understand users ’ behavioural objectives and identify their behaviour feature from an IS perspective , and then compare it to other conventional IS & R models . Thus , we observed the three process stages based on user objectives and activities . Unlike the abovementioned process characteristic observation , we attempted to extract behaviour features that provide a more universal understanding of the IS behaviour under the new system . By reviewing the interview transcripts and activity records of all four user varieties , we found that the reasons the user IS programme in the new system differed from other IS systems was that users had to handle three objects simultaneously , i . e . , system , strategy and information . It also complicated the users ’ emotions because they often took a different attitude towards these three objects . In turn , their interaction with these objects could Searching Start 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 Scanning Verifying End Notes : Action transform route ; target document found . 1 : choosing ( or changing ) search portal ; 2 : constructing ( or reconstructing ) search strategy ; 3 : searching ; 4 : browsing search results ; 5 : filtering search results ; 6 : selecting certain item ; 7 : reading item information ( not main body ) ; 8 : accessing item text ; 9 : browsing text Figure 3 . Group - harvest mode user information - seeking route ( e . g . participant No . 10 ) JD D o w n l o a d e d by A u s t r a li a n C a t ho li c U n i v e r s it y A t 01 : 57 06 O c t ob e r 2017 ( P T ) produce different emotions ( Table III ) . In fact , user activities and emotions towards these three objects would inevitably influence each other . In the searching stage , users worked on identifying their problem , finding the match point between their information needs and the system functions , and exploring ways to achieve an effective probe . First , they would be curious about the novelty of the service system and question its fitness for their task . Then , they would observe the system and understand its main function , particularly unknown functions , and then attempt to find the correct use method . Second , they had to determine a trial search strategy , which could be a more difficult experience than with a familiar system . Third , they would browse search outcomes and justify their relevance to their topic . In addition , they find and correct problems with their search strategy . In the scanning stage , users worked on developing a correct search path and building a knowledge profile of the target topic based on this path . Once they found some prospective search outcomes , they would attempt to access its detailed introduction webpage , read the abstract and keywords , and often conduct more exploration after obtaining this information . This scanning progress helps users quickly construct a knowledge profile Searching 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 Scanning Verifying Start End Notes : Action transform route ; target document found . 1 : choosing ( or changing ) search portal ; 2 : constructing ( or reconstructing ) search strategy ; 3 : searching ; 4 : browsing search results ; 5 : filtering search results ; 6 : selecting certain item ; 7 : reading item information ( not main body ) ; 8 : accessing item text ; 9 : browsing text Figure 4 . Scan - harvest mode user information - seeking route ( e . g . participant No . 6 ) New servicesystem D o w n l o a d e d by A u s t r a li a n C a t ho li c U n i v e r s it y A t 01 : 57 06 O c t ob e r 2017 ( P T ) for the given topic . Simultaneously , they would perfect their search strategy according to new knowledge about the service system and target topic until a satisfactory search strategy was determined . Users would experience more polarising emotions during this stage . With an appropriate search strategy , users would be surprised by the effect of the new system , which would increase the user ’ s confidence relative to finishing the search task . This would indicate that users have adjusted to the new system context . Users who struggled to find an effective search strategy experienced anxiety and became disappointed , which may motivate them to use a familiar service system or search another topic . This phenomenon is similar to culture shock , which is defined as anxiety resulting from losing the familiar signs and symbols of social intercourse , and their substitution by other unfamiliar cues ( Oberg , 1960 ) . We refer to this as context shock . In the verifying stage , users worked to verify the value of the prospective literature and collect various answers from the literature to solve their research problem . In fact , they would develop a final evaluation about the service system , search strategy , and information . To achieve this , the users would read the full text of the literature , select valuable content , or download literature for further reading . They also reviewed their search strategy in this programme . For users that considered that the search outcome was sufficient , they would achieve a higher sense of self - efficacy for their right strategic decision and would also confirm the value of the new system . Users that were unsatisfied could blame system error and may reject the system if they were searching a topic that they are familiar with , or they Verifying Start 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 Searching Scanning Notes : Action transform route ; target document found . 1 : choosing ( or changing ) search portal ; 2 : constructing ( or reconstructing ) search strategy ; 3 : searching ; 4 : browsing search results ; 5 : filtering search results ; 6 : selecting certain item ; 7 : reading item information ( not main body ) ; 8 : accessing item text ; 9 : browsing text End Figure 5 . Scan - group mode user information - seeking route ( e . g . participant No . 15 ) JD D o w n l o a d e d by A u s t r a li a n C a t ho li c U n i v e r s it y A t 01 : 57 06 O c t ob e r 2017 ( P T ) Searching Scanning Verifying End Start 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 Notes : Action transform route ; target document found . 1 : choosing ( or changing ) search portal ; 2 : constructing ( or reconstructing ) search strategy ; 3 : searching ; 4 : browsing search results ; 5 : filtering search results ; 6 : selecting certain item ; 7 : reading item information ( not main body ) ; 8 : accessing item text ; 9 : browsing text Figure 6 . Group - pick mode user information - seeking route ( e . g . participant No . 07 ) Searching stage Scanning stage Verifying stage Objectives Identify problem , explore possibility Develop search path , build topic knowledge Verify information , gather answer ActivitiesSystem Observation , understanding Finding , chaining Confirmation Strategy Construction , trial and error Construction Review , verifying Information Browse , identification Scan , access , tracking Collection , selection , download Emotions System Curious , doubt Surprised , disappointed Trust , deny , deserted Strategy Troubled Hopeful , struggle Self - efficacy , frustrated Information Hopeful Anxiety , disappointed , affirmative Satisfaction , dissatisfaction Table III . Stages Matrix of Information seeking under new System New servicesystem D o w n l o a d e d by A u s t r a li a n C a t ho li c U n i v e r s it y A t 01 : 57 06 O c t ob e r 2017 ( P T ) could blame their own search strategy , if they are unfamiliar with the given topic . For users who were seriously dissatisfied with the literature , they could become frustrated and deny their own learning ability , or they would evaluate the service system as poor and not consider the system in future if other choices were available . In general , the IS behaviour under the new system differs from normal IS in at least three ways . First , three factors , i . e . , system , strategy and information , are interrelated and jointly influence user activity and the emotions related to IS with the new system . Second , user objectives relative to the system and strategy will become core objectives in the early stage of the IS process in a new system , and this leads to some special activities that seldom emerge in a normal IS context . Third , it is the user ’ s task to solve a problem by using an unfamiliar system and strategy , and user affection is likely to be more polarised . In other words , context shock and context adjustment have a strong impact on user confidence in the IS process and subsequent use of a new system . Implication for the development of service system Studying IS with a new service system is of great importance because contemporary users must deal with an increasing number of new service systems . The results of this study contribute to improving understanding of the characteristics of user IS processes with new service systems , such as Discovery Service . In addition , this paper argues the process of IS under an unfamiliar Discovery Service , and presents a taxonomy of user IS behaviours . Such results are essential to the development of successful Discovery Service and the advancement of IS studies , as well as information service development for digital libraries . The analytical results reveal the following . First , since IS is a dynamic interactive process , considering IS , IR and human - computer interaction ( HCI ) will enable the design of internet - based information service systems that can satisfy user information needs more effectively than systems designed only considering interface usability . Similar to previous studies , the results of this investigation indicate that there are common IS activities and problems that influence the usability of new service systems , and further found when facing similar challenges , user perceptions and IS processes differ . Therefore , efforts should be made to understand such uncertainties through observations of IS behaviours combined with IR and HCI . Second , user IS is a fluid and situation - dependent activity . Strategy selection is influenced by context and is a learning activity whereby users can gain thorough understanding of new service systems . Therefore , system support must be integrated into both service tools and service processes , especially for new service systems . Our results demonstrate that users may highly evaluate a Discovery Service even if they obtain few useful search outcomes , which indicates that positive evaluation of a service depends on user discretion and their learning performance . This result suggests that people require real - time help with new systems to determine effective search routes , so user learning performance improvement should be considered by new service suppliers . Third , as Nahl ( 2001 ) suggested , user IS behaviour is affected by internal and external contexts ; therefore , information system designs need to capture more context information and to contextualise and personalise interactions with the service system . To enable holistic portrayal of IS behaviour in a new service context , both internal contexts ( early user experiences , service perceptions , knowledge and skill levels , tasks , etc . ) and external contexts ( discovery tools and other related services ) , as well as individual activities , were explored in this study . It was found that , in a Discovery Service context , various IS paths exist among user groups with different personality characteristics and levels of search experience . Thus , understanding these patterns and the user characteristics behind them and constructing timely interaction with them is indispensable . JD D o w n l o a d e d by A u s t r a li a n C a t ho li c U n i v e r s it y A t 01 : 57 06 O c t ob e r 2017 ( P T ) Limitations and future research This research represents an initial examination of IS behaviours with a new service system . Although a more holistic and user - centric understanding of users ’ exploratory practices was achieved , there are still some limitations . The most obvious limitation is that this study was conducted in a laboratory setting . The time constraints limited the search strategies available to participants . To reduce the negative effects of the laboratory setting , the participants were permitted to select their search tasks . Consequently , search complexity could not be controlled . In the future , a longitudinal study could be useful because user efficiency should evolve with use experience , and the interaction between IS and service system features could be determined . Another limitation is the small number of participants . This study provided limited qualitative insights regarding related questions . Thus , further empirical research and trial implementation should be conducted . A similar investigation with a larger sample and a quantitative analysis method would be useful to identify whether IS patterns were similar to the results obtained in this investigation . In addition , this study suggested that some user factors , such as learning style and cognitive ability , could play critical roles in relation to user IS patterns with a new service system . Further research is also required to determine their effect path on the new service system context . References Belkin , N . , Noddy , R . and Mbrooks , H . ( 1982a ) , “ ASK for information retrieval : part I . Background and theory ” , Journal of Documentation , Vol . 38 No . 2 , pp . 61 - 71 . Belkin , N . , Noddy , R . and Mbrooks , H . ( 1982b ) , “ ASK for information retrieval : part II . Results of a design study ” , Journal of Documentation , Vol . 38 No . 3 , pp . 145 - 164 . Chapman , S . , Dennis , S . , Folger , K . and Vamum , K . J . ( 2012 ) , “ Developing a user - centered article discovery environment ” in Popp , M . P . and Dallis , D . ( Eds ) , Planning and Implementing Resource Discovery Tools in Academic Libraries , Information Science Reference , pp . 194 - 224 . Comeaux , D . J . ( 2012 ) , “ Usability testing of a web - scale discovery system at an academic library ” , College & Undergraduate Libraries , Vol . 19 Nos 2 - 4 , pp . 189 - 206 . Conklin ( 1987 ) , “ Hypertext : an introduction and survey ” , IEEE Computer , Vol . 20 No . 9 , pp . 17 - 41 . Ellis , D . ( 1989 ) , “ A behavioral approach to information retrieval system design ” , Journal of Documentation , Vol . 45 No . 2 , pp . 171 - 212 . Ellis , D . ( 1993 ) , “ Modeling the information - seeking patterns of academic researchers : a grounded theory approach ” , The Library Quarterly , Vol . 63 No . 4 , pp . 469 - 486 . Ellis , D . , Cox , D . and Hall , K . ( 1993 ) , “ A comparison of the information seeking patterns of researchers in the physical and social sciences ” , Journal of Documentation , Vol . 49 No . 4 , pp . 356 - 369 . Gable , G . ( 1994 ) , “ Integrating case study and survey research methods : an example in information systems ” , European Journal of Information Systems , Vol . 3 No . 2 , pp . 112 - 126 . Hider , P . ( 2006 ) , “ Search goal revision in models of information retrieval ” , Journal of Information Science , Vol . 32 No . 4 , pp . 352 - 361 . Ingwersen , P . and Järvelin , K . ( 2005 ) , “ Information retrieval in context : IRiX ” , ACM Sigir Forum , Vol . 39 No . 2 , pp . 31 - 39 . Järvelin , K . and Ingwersen , P . ( 2004 ) , “ Extending information seeking and retrieval research toward context ” , paper presented at the 27th Annual International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval , 25 - 29 July , Sheffield , available at : http : / / ir . dcs . gla . ac . uk / context / IRinContext _ WorkshopNotes _ SIGIR2004 . pdf ( accessed 26 July 2016 ) . New servicesystem D o w n l o a d e d by A u s t r a li a n C a t ho li c U n i v e r s it y A t 01 : 57 06 O c t ob e r 2017 ( P T ) Karlsson , L . , Koivula , L . , Ruokonen , I . , Kajaani , P . , Antikainen , L . and Ruis mäki , H . ( 2012 ) , “ From novice to expert : information seeking processes of university students and researchers ” , Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences , Vol . 45 , January , pp . 577 - 587 . Kuhlthau , C . C . ( 1988 ) , “ Longitudinal case studies of the information search process of users in libraries ” , Library & Information Science Research , Vol . 10 No . 3 , pp . 257 - 304 . Kuhlthau , C . C . ( 1991 ) , “ Inside the search process : information seeking from the user ’ s perspective ” , Journal of the Association for Information Science & Technology , Vol . 42 No . 5 , pp . 361 - 371 . Kuhlthau , C . C . ( 1993 ) , Seeking Meaning : A Process Approach to Library and Information Services , Ablex , Norwood , NJ . Nahl , D . ( 2001 ) , “ A conceptual framework for explaining information behavior ” , Simile : Studies in Media & Information Literacy Education , Vol . 1 No . 2 , pp . 1 - 16 . Oberg , K . ( 1960 ) , “ Cultural shock : adjustment to new cultural environments ” , Practical Anthropology , Vol . 7 No . 2 , pp . 177 - 182 . Saracevic , T . ( 1996 ) , “ Modeling interaction in information retrieval ( IR ) : a review and proposal ” , Proceedings of the American Society of Information Science , Vol . 33 No . 1 , pp . 3 - 9 . Saracevic , T . ( 1997 ) , “ The stratified model of information retrieval interaction : extension and applications ” , Proceedings of the American Society for Information Science , Vol . 34 No . 3 , pp . 313 - 327 . Thong , Y . L . and Tam , K . Y . ( 2002 ) , “ Understanding user acceptance of digital libraries : what are the roles of interface characteristics , organizational context , and individual differences ? ” , International Journal of Human - computer Studies , Vol . 57 No . 3 , pp . 215 - 242 . Vakkari , P . , Pennanen , M . and Serola , S . ( 2003 ) , “ Changes of search terms and tactics while writing a research proposal a longitudinal case study ” , Information Processing and Management , Vol . 39 No . 3 , pp . 445 - 463 . Vaughan , J . ( 2011 ) , Web Scale Discovery Services , American Library Association , Chicago , IL . Way , D . ( 2010 ) , “ The impact of web - scale discovery on the use of a library collection ” , Serials Review , Vol . 36 No . 4 , pp . 214 - 220 . Williams , S . C . and Foster , A . K . ( 2011 ) , “ Promise fulfilled ? An EBSCO discovery service usability study ” , Journal of Web Librarianship , Vol . 5 No . 3 , pp . 179 - 198 . Wilson , T . D . ( 1981 ) , “ On user studies and information needs ” , Journal of Documentation , Vol . 37 No . 1 , pp . 3 - 15 . Wilson , T . D . ( 1999 ) , “ Models in information behavior research ” , Journal of Documentation , Vol . 55 No . 2 , pp . 249 - 270 . Further reading Kuhlthau , C . C . ( 1989 ) , “ Information search process : a summary of research and implications for school library media programs ” , School Library Media Quarterly , Vol . 18 No . 1 , pp . 19 - 25 . Patton , M . ( 1990 ) , Qualitative Evaluation and Research Methods , 2nd ed . , Sage , Newbury Park , CA . Sonnenwald , D . H . and Iivonen , M . ( 1999 ) , “ An integrated human information behaviour research framework for information studies ” , Library & Information Science Research , Vol . 21 No . 4 , pp . 429 - 457 . JD D o w n l o a d e d by A u s t r a li a n C a t ho li c U n i v e r s it y A t 01 : 57 06 O c t ob e r 2017 ( P T ) Appendix 1 . Questionnaire 1 New servicesystem D o w n l o a d e d by A u s t r a li a n C a t ho li c U n i v e r s it y A t 01 : 57 06 O c t ob e r 2017 ( P T ) JD D o w n l o a d e d by A u s t r a li a n C a t ho li c U n i v e r s it y A t 01 : 57 06 O c t ob e r 2017 ( P T ) Appendix 2 . Questionnaire 2 Corresponding author Guihua Li can be contacted at : liguihua @ scu . edu . cn For instructions on how to order reprints of this article , please visit our website : www . emeraldgrouppublishing . com / licensing / reprints . htm Or contact us for further details : permissions @ emeraldinsight . com New servicesystem D o w n l o a d e d by A u s t r a li a n C a t ho li c U n i v e r s it y A t 01 : 57 06 O c t ob e r 2017 ( P T )