SHORT REPORTS The actin remodeling protein cofilin is crucial for thymic αβ but not γδ T - cell development Isabel Seeland 1 , Ying Xiong 1 , Christian Orlik 1 , Daniel Deibel 1 , Sandra Prokosch 1 , Gu¨nter Ku¨blbeck 2 ¤ a , Beate Jahraus 1 , Daniela De Stefano 1 ¤ b , Sonja Moos 3 , Florian C . Kurschus 3 , Bernd Arnold 2 , Yvonne Samstag 1 * 1 Institute of Immunology , Universityof Heidelberg , Heidelberg , Germany , 2 Former Divisionof Molecular Immunology , German Cancer ResearchCenter , Heidelberg , Germany , 3 Institute of MolecularMedicine , UniversityMedicalCenter of the JohannesGutenberg - University Mainz , Mainz , Germany ¤ a Current address : Divisionof CellularImmunology , German Cancer ResearchCenter , Heidelberg , Germany ¤ b Current address : EuropeanInstitute for Researchin Cystic Fibrosis , Divisionof Genetics and Cell Biology , San RaffaeleScientific Institute , Milan , Italy * yvonne . samstag @ urz . uni - heidelberg . de Abstract Cofilin is an essential actin remodeling protein promoting depolymerization and severing of actin filaments . To address the relevance of cofilin for the development and function of T cells in vivo , we generated knock - in mice in which T - cell – specific nonfunctional ( nf ) cofilin was expressed instead of wild - type ( WT ) cofilin . Nf cofilin mice lacked peripheral αβ T cells and showed a severe thymus atrophy . This was caused by an early developmental arrest of thymocytes at the double negative ( DN ) stage . Importantly , even though DN thymocytes expressed the TCR β chain intracellularly , they completely lacked TCR β surface expression . In contrast , nf cofilin mice possessed normal numbers of γδ T cells . Their functionality was confirmed in the γδ T - cell – driven , imiquimod ( IMQ ) - induced , psoriasis - like murine model . Overall , this study not only highlights the importance of cofilin for early αβ T - cell develop - ment but also shows for the first time that an actin - binding protein is differentially involved in αβ versus γδ T - cell development . Author summary T cells are produced in the thymus and are critical to fighting infections and combating cancer . To move through the body and to fulfill their specific functions , T cells need to dynamically reshape their cell body . This requires remodeling the actin cytoskeleton using a plethora of actin - binding proteins , including cofilin . Whereas the majority of T cells use one type of cell membrane protein called αβ T cell receptor ( TCR ) to recognize their tar - get , a minor population of T cells use a different type of receptors that are called γδ TCR . The decision on whether thymocytes , the precursors of T cells , develop into αβ TCR or γδ TCR - bearing T cells takes place within the thymus . By replacing the cofilin gene with a nf copy , we identified an important role for cofilin in T - cell development . These mutant mice exhibited a severe thymus atrophy . Importantly , αβ T - cell development was severely PLOS Biology | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 2005380 July 9 , 2018 1 / 21 a1111111111a1111111111a1111111111a1111111111a1111111111 OPEN ACCESS Citation : SeelandI , Xiong Y , Orlik C , Deibel D , ProkoschS , Ku¨blbeck G , et al . ( 2018 ) The actin remodelingprotein cofilin is crucial for thymic αβ but not γδ T - cell development . PLoSBiol 16 ( 7 ) : e2005380 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 2005380 AcademicEditor : AvinashBhandoola , National Cancer Institute , United Statesof America Received : January 9 , 2018 Accepted : June 22 , 2018 Published : July 9 , 2018 Copyright : © 2018 Seelandet al . This is an open access article distributedunder the terms of the Creative CommonsAttribution License , which permits unrestricted use , distribution , and reproductionin any medium , provided the original authorand source are credited . Data Availability Statement : All relevantdata are withinthe paper and its Supporting Information files . The underlyingdata of Figs 1B , 1D , 2A – 2D , 3A – 3C , 3E , 3F , 4A – 4E , S2A – S2C , S2E , S4A and S4B Figs can be found in S1 Data . Funding : GermanResearch Foundationhttp : / / www . dfg . de / gefoerderte _ projekte / programme _ und _ projekte / listen / projektdetails / index . jsp ? id = 246807620 ( grant number TRR156 - B4 ) . Received by YS . The funder had norole in study design , data collection and analysis , decisionto publish , or affected , but the γδ T cells were unaffected in number and functional , as they were capable of responding to activation signal both in culture and inside the body . Overall , our study reveals the importance of cofilin in early αβ T - cell development and shows for the first time that an actin - binding protein is differentially involved in αβ versus γδ T - cell development . Introduction One requirement for T - cell – mediated immune surveillance is the permanent reshaping of the cell body . Here , a functional remodeling of the actin cytoskeleton is important for changes of the cell shape during migration or immune synapse ( IS ) formation with antigen presenting cells ( APCs ) or target cells [ 1 – 5 ] . One protein that drives these actin dynamics is cofilin . Cofi - lin is a 19 - kDa actin - binding protein that belongs to the actin depolymerizing factor ( ADF ) / cofilin family . In humans and mice , three different highly conserved isoforms are expressed [ 6 , 7 ] : nonmuscle cofilin ( n - cofilin or cofilin - 1 [ Cfl1 ] ) [ 8 ] , muscle cofilin ( m - cofilin or cofilin - 2 ) [ 9 ] , and destrin or ADF [ 10 ] . This study focused on Cfl1 , which is highly expressed in T cells [ 11 ] . Cofilin has a dual function for actin dynamics , as it is both depolymerizing and sev - ering actin filaments [ 12 ] . In resting human peripheral blood T cells ( PBTs ) , cytoplasmic cofi - lin is constitutively phosphorylated at its serine 3 residue and thus inactive . Cofilin phosphorylation ( inactivation ) is mediated by LIM or testis - specific kinases ( reviewed by Mizuno and colleagues [ 13 ] ) . Upon costimulation of resting T cells but not by TCR triggering alone , cofilin is dephosphorylated and thereby transmitted to its active state [ 11 , 14 , 15 ] . Once active , cofilin exerts its actin remodeling function which is crucial for proper IS formation and T - cell activation [ 16 , 17 ] . Dephosphorylated cofilin can also translocate to the nucleus where it may have anti - apoptotic functions and may enhance transcription [ 11 , 18 ] . It can furthermore serve as nuclear shuttle for actin [ 11 , 19 ] , which is also involved in different nuclear mecha - nisms ( reviewed by Falahzadeh and colleagues [ 20 ] ) . Besides T - cell costimulation , chemokine receptor triggering ( e . g . , by SDF - 1 α ) can also lead to the dephosphorylation of cofilin [ 21 ] . In this regard , it was also shown that an active mitogen - activated protein kinase kinase ( MEK ) cofilin module is needed for T - cell movement [ 21 ] , known to be driven by constant actin flow , i . e . migration in 3D environments [ 22 – 25 ] . The activity of cofilin is not only inhibited by phos - phorylation but also by binding to phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate ( PIP 2 ) near the plasma membrane and by a pro - oxidative microenvironment . Cofilin is inactivated by oxida - tion provoking T - cell hyporesponsiveness or in a long - term perspective necrotic - like pro - grammed cell death [ 26 , 27 ] . In a reducing environment , however , even PIP 2 - bound cofilin becomes active , leading to enhanced actin dynamics in the vicinity of the plasma membrane [ 28 ] . Even though the essential role of cofilin for T - cell activation and migration was proven in in vitro studies of human PBTs , there is nothing known about the importance of cofilin for T - cell development in vivo . Thus , we created a mouse line in which T - cell – specific a nf form of cofilin was expressed instead of endogenous cofilin . The decision to use a cofilin knock - in rather than a knock - out mouse was due to the observation that knocking out a protein can result in an elevated expression of other proteins , which could in turn compensate for the lack of the protein of interest [ 29 , 30 ] . With the generated mice , we could show that cofilin is crucial for early αβ but not γδ T - cell development . Cofilinis crucial for thymic αβ T - cell development PLOS Biology | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 2005380 July 9 , 2018 2 / 21 preparationof the manuscript . German Research Foundationhttp : / / gepris . dfg . de / gepris / projekt / 178696424 ( grant number SFB 938 - M ) . Received by YS . The funder had norole in study design , data collection and analysis , decisionto publish , or preparationof the manuscript . German Research Foundationhttp : / / www . dfg . de / gefoerderte _ projekte / programme _ und _ projekte / listen / projektdetails / index . jsp ? id = 246807620 ( grant number TRR156 - C1 ) . Receivedby FCK . The funder had no role in studydesign , data collection and analysis , decision to publish , or preparation of the manuscript . Competinginterests : The authorshave declared that no competinginterestsexist . Abbreviations : ADF , actin depolymerizing factor ; APC , antigen presenting cell ; BM , bone marrow ; Cfl1 , cofilin - 1 ; CLP , common lymphoid progenitor cells ; CMJ , corticomedullary junction ; CMV , cytomegalovirus ; cytoD , cytochalasin ; DC , dendritic ; DN , double negative ; DP , double positive ; eGFP , enhancedgreen fluorescent protein ; GAPDH , glyceraldehyde - 3 - phosphate dehydrogenase ; ic , intracellular ; IMQ , imiquimod ; IS , immune synapse ; Lck , lymphocyte - specific protein - tyrosine kinase ; LN , lymph node ; loxP , locusof X ( cross ) - over in P1 ; MEK , mitogen - activated protein kinase kinase ; MFI , mean fluorescenceintensity ; nf , nonfunctional ; NK , natural killer ; ns , not significant ; PASI , psoriasisarea severity index ; PBMC , peripheralblood mononuclear cell ; PBT , peripheral blood Tcell ; PIP 2 , phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate ; SP , single positive ; TCR , T cell receptor ; WASP , Wiskott – Aldrich Syndrome protein ; WT , wild - type . Results Generation of a nf cofilin variant by addition of proline to the N - terminus To overcome potential disadvantages of fusion proteins such as alterations of protein activity or subcellular localization , coexpression of fluorescent dyes together with the protein of inter - est is widely used to monitor protein expression and / or promoter activities . With the help of the viral 2A consensus motif , two proteins can be coexpressed from a single mRNA by a mech - anism called “ribosome skipping” [ 31 – 33 ] . Upon cotranslational cleavage , most of the 2A sequence remains attached to the C - terminus of the upstream protein , whereas only a single proline stays attached to the N - terminus of the downstream protein . Cofilin is reported to undergo cotranslational processing at its N - terminus and its activity is post - translationally reg - ulated by ( de ) phosphorylation at its serine 3 residue . We wondered whether or not addition of proline to cofilin’s N - terminus would lead to its inactivation . Therefore , we created a plasmid in which an enhanced green fluorescent protein ( eGFP ) - 2A - Cfl1 expression cassette was cloned under a cytomegalovirus ( CMV ) promoter . To test expression and functionality of cofi - lin derived from the eGFP - 2A - Cfl1 expression cassette , the plasmid was transfected into Jurkat leukemia cells in which the endogenous cofilin was knocked down via siRNA . A vector in which the C - terminus of cofilin was fused to eGFP served as positive control . Transfection effi - ciency and successful expression of the eGFP - 2A - Cfl1 cassette was visible by eGFP analysis ( Fig 1A ) . Cofilin protein expression was further confirmed by western blot analysis of total Jur - kat cell lysates ( Fig 1B ) . We first examined whether the addition of proline to cofilin’s N - terminus influences cofilin phosphorylation . Comparing phosphorylation of endogenous cofilin ( Fig 1C , lane 1 , pCfl1 ) and the cofilin from the eGFP - 2A - Cfl1 cassette ( Fig 1C , lane 5 , pCfl1 ) revealed much less phos - phorylation of the latter . Note that cofilin expressed from the positive control vector ( Fig 1C , lane 4 , pCfl1 - eGFP ) showed no alteration in the phosphorylation state . To test the functionality of nonphosphorylated cofilin encoded by eGFP - 2A - Cfl1 , the F - actin content of transfected Jurkat cells was determined by analysis of phalloidin binding via flow cytometry ( Fig 1D ) . As expected , Jurkat cells with a successful cofilin knock - down showed an increase in total F - actin . Cotransfection with a positive control vector , which expressed eGFP - tagged WT cofilin , rescued F - actin depolymerization . However , Jurkat cells with cofilin knock - down that expressed eGFP - 2A - Cfl1 harbored a similar high F - actin content as cells transfected with siRNA only . Thus , even though cofilin from the eGFP - 2A - Cfl1 plas - mid was expressed and less phosphorylated , it was not functional pointing towards defective regulation by phosphorylation . Overall , cofilin expressed from the eGFP - 2A - Cfl1 vector showed a defect in both phosphor - ylatability and actin remodeling function . Generation of T - cell – specific nf cofilin knock - in mice Having observed the functional inactivity of cofilin obtained from the eGFP - 2A - Cfl1 expres - sion cassette in vitro , we wondered about the consequences of cofilin dysfunction in T cells in vivo . Therefore , we generated mice expressing an eGFP - 2A - Cfl1 expression cassette instead of endogenous cofilin specifically in T cells . Thus , the nf form of cofilin should be expressed only in T cells . The targeting strategy used for generation of knock - in mice is shown in S1A Fig . In short , an eGFP - 2A - Cfl1 expression cassette was inserted into the intronic region between exon 1 and 2 of the mouse cofilin gene . To prevent transcription of the cassette , a floxed stop cas - sette was included in front . Another locus of X ( cross ) - over in P1 ( loxP ) site was cloned into the noncoding region of exon 1 . T - cell – specific knock - out of endogenous cofilin and knock - in Cofilinis crucial for thymic αβ T - cell development PLOS Biology | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 2005380 July 9 , 2018 3 / 21 Fig 1 . Cofilin expressed from an eGFP - 2A - Cfl1 cassette is not functional in T - cells . Jurkat T cells were either transfected with no siRNA ( mock ) , a nontargeting control siRNA or a cofilin - specific siRNA ( binding to the 3 0 UTR ) , in order to downregulate endogenous cofilin . Some of the cells that received cofilin siRNA were cotransfected with Cfl1 - eGFP control vector or a vector carrying the eGFP - 2A - Cfl1 sequence under the control of the CMV promoter . Cells were harvested and analyzed 48 h after transfection . ( A ) Exemplary flow cytometric analysis of eGFP expression of transfected Jurkat cells ( n = 4 independent experiments ) . ( B ) Western blot analysis of total cell lysates by staining for total cofilin and GAPDH . All samples were normalized to cells Cofilinis crucial for thymic αβ T - cell development PLOS Biology | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 2005380 July 9 , 2018 4 / 21 of the eGFP - 2A - Cfl1 expression cassette was achieved by crossing mice carrying the construct with lymphocyte - specific protein - tyrosine kinase ( Lck ) - Cre mice that express Cre recombi - nase under the proximal p56 lck ( Lck ) promoter [ 34 ] . WT mice ( Cfl1 + / + ) could be discrimi - nated from heterozygous ( Cfl1 + / nf ) and homozygous knock - in mice ( Cfl1 nf / nf ) by PCR ( S1B Fig ) . All mice were born with an expected Mendelian ratio and developed without apparent signs of abnormality . Rarely , Cfl1 nf / nf mice showed inflamed cheeks or intestinal prolapses . Successful T - cell – specific knock - in of the expression cassette was confirmed by flow cytometry ( via eGFP expression ; S1C Fig ) . Please note that eGFP positive cells were already detected in heterozygous DN1 thymocytes ( S1D Fig ) but not in common lymphoid progenitors in the bone marrow . This is also in line with earlier studies investigating the activity of the Lck proxi - mal promoter [ 35 ] . Characterization of the nf cofilin mutant To further characterize the nf cofilin mutant , cofilin obtained from T cells of Cfl1 + / nf mice ( expressing both WT and nf cofilin ) and control B6 mice was subjected to mass spectrometry ( S1E Fig ) . Besides its post - translational regulation by phosphorylation , cofilin was reported to undergo N - terminal excision of the initiator methionine followed by acetylation of alanine ( Uniprot ; P18760 ) . Accordingly , mass spectrometry analysis of cofilin from B6 T cells revealed the presence of peptides starting with acetylated alanine ( S1E Fig ) . Thereby , peptides were either phosphorylated at serine 3 ( Ac + Ph ) or dephosphorylated ( Ac ) ( S1E Fig , left ) . These two peptide species ( Ac and Ac + Ph ) were also identified in MS / MS analysis of cofilin obtained from T cells of Cfl1 + / nf mice , which express both wt and nf cofilin ( S1E Fig , right ) . Addition - ally , a N - terminal cofilin peptide starting with proline , followed by methionine and alanine was found only in Cfl1 + / nf mice . In this peptide , no serine phosphorylation and , due to the N - terminal proline - methionine , also no alanine acetylation could be detected . Thus , in the gener - ated knock - in mice , the single remaining proline residue hinders co - and post - translational processing of cofilin in T cells . Loss of cofilin function leads to a massive decrease of peripheral T - cells Having established homozygous mice expressing nf cofilin in T - cells , we next characterized their immune cells . Nf cofilin knock - in mice ( Cfl1 nf / nf ) had similar numbers of total spleno - cytes as wt B6 animals ( S2A Fig ) . However , their lymph node ( LN ) cell numbers were signifi - cantly diminished ( S2B Fig ) . Further analysis of leukocyte cell populations revealed that Cfl1 nf / nf mice show a massive decrease in T - cell populations both in percentage and numbers in spleen ( Fig 2A , S2A Fig ) . The almost complete lack of T cells in the periphery was accompanied by an absolute increase in other leukocyte cell populations such as splenic B - cells , natural killer ( NK ) cells , and dendritic cells ( DCs ) as well as eosinophils and neutrophils ( S2C Fig ) . This finding explains why total cell numbers in the spleen were normal despite the nearly complete loss of T cells in Cfl1 nf / nf mice . Note that mice carrying the nf cofilin construct homozygously without Cre - mediated knock - in and also mice carrying the nf cofilin construct heterozygously with Cre - mediated knock - in had similar T - cell populations as B6 mice ( S2D Fig ) . transfected with cofilin siRNA , which was set as 1 . Data is represented as mean ± SEM ( n = 4 independent experiments ) . ( C ) Exemplary western blot showing pCfl1 , total Cfl1 , and control GAPDH staining . Endogenous cofilin has a size of 19 kDa ( lanes 1 – 3 and 5 ) , whereas cofilin derived from the Cfl1 - eGFP control vector is expressed as eGFP fusion protein ( size : 46 kDa , lane 4 ) . ( D ) Total cellular F - actin content was analyzed by flow cytometric measurement of phalloidin binding . All samples were normalized to cells transfected with cofilin siRNA . Data is represented as mean ± SEM ( n = 3 independent experiments ) . Significances were calculated against Jurkat cells transfected with siRNA only . (cid:3)(cid:3) p < 0 . 01 ; (cid:3) p < 0 . 05 . Underlying data can be found in S1 Data . Cfl1 , cofilin - 1 ; CMV , cytomegalovirus ; GAPDH , glyceraldehyde - 3 - phosphate dehydrogenase ; ns , not significant . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 2005380 . g001 Cofilinis crucial for thymic αβ T - cell development PLOS Biology | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 2005380 July 9 , 2018 5 / 21 Fig 2 . Mice expressing nf cofilin show a severe thymus atrophy and a developmental arrest at the DN3 stage . ( A ) Total T - cell number in spleen of B6 mice and nf cofilin knock - in mice ( n = 6 independent experiments with a total of (cid:21) 8 mice per group ) . ( B ) Thymus was isolated and weighed , and the total cell number was determined from 4 – 5 - weeks - old B6 or nf cofilin knock - in mice ( n = 6 independent experiments with a total of (cid:21) 10 mice per group ) . ( C ) Flow cytometric analysis of thymocyte differentiation by CD4 , CD8 , CD25 , and CD44 staining ( n (cid:21) 8 mice per group ) . Exemplary dot blots from representative mice are shown on the left , whereas the statistical Cofilinis crucial for thymic αβ T - cell development PLOS Biology | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 2005380 July 9 , 2018 6 / 21 Cofilin is essential for early T - cell development in the thymus In regard to the small T - cell numbers in the periphery , we next investigated the thymic devel - opment of nf cofilin knock - in mice . Here , Cfl1 nf / nf mice showed a severe thymus atrophy , which was characterized by a decrease in the thymic cell number of more than 99 % ( Fig 2B ) . Flow cytometric characterization demonstrated that thymocytes were almost exclusively found within the CD4 - CD8 - double negative ( DN ) stage , suggesting a very early block in T - cell development ( Fig 2C , left bar chart ) . The DN stage can be further discriminated into 4 developmental steps by differential expression of surface CD25 and CD44 [ 36 ] . Within the DN stage , thymocytes were mainly detected in the DN2 ( CD44 + CD25 + ) and DN3 ( CD44 - CD25 + ) stage , with most cells accumulating at the DN3 stage . Furthermore , a loss of cells in the DN4 stage ( CD44 - CD25 - ) was observed ( Fig 2C , right bar chart ) . T - cell development is not determined solely by T - cell progenitors themselves but is also influenced by the thymic stroma . To test whether the reason for impaired thymocyte develop - ment is T - cell intrinsic , mixed bone marrow chimeras were created ( Fig 2D ) . To this end , irra - diated B6 mice were injected with a 1 : 1 ratio of bone marrow ( BM ) tester cells ( derived from Cfl1 nf / nf knock - in mice ; CD45 . 2 + ) and control competitor cells ( B6 ; CD45 . 1 + ) . Once successful reconstitution was verified in peripheral blood of the recipient mice , their thymus was taken out and cells were analyzed by flow cytometry . Thymocytes that originated from BM of Cfl1 nf / nf accumulated in the DN stage ( mainly in DN3 ) , whereas control competitor cells derived from B6 mice developed completely normally . B - cells that originated from BM of Cfl1 nf / nf mice developed to a normal extent ( S2E Fig ) . This indicates that the disturbed T - cell develop - ment in nf cofilin knock - in mice is caused by T - cell intrinsic factors . Further , the number of CD45 . 2 + cells which were found in the thymi of reconstituted B6 mice was much smaller than the one of CD45 . 1 + control cells ( 3 % versus 95 % ) , implying not only a developmental but also a proliferative disadvantage of cells which originated from BM of homozygous knock - in mice . Overall , the severe thymus atrophy seems to be caused by a lack of DN thymocyte expansion . Importance of cofilin for αβ but not γδ T - cell development Despite the enormous thymus atrophy and reduction in peripheral T - cell numbers , there were few CD3 + cells detected in secondary lymphoid organs of Cfl1 nf / nf mice . Hence , we wondered if the remaining peripheral T - cells are of a specific subtype . Analysis of CD4 and CD8 expres - sion in T - cells from the spleen revealed a strong accumulation of CD4 - CD8 - cells in nf cofilin knock - in mice ( S3A Fig ) . We next checked splenic T - cells for TCR β and TCR γδ surface expression . In B6 mice > 95 % of T - cells are of the αβ subtype and only a minor fraction of γδ T - cells are found ( ~ 2 % ) ( Fig 3A ) . In contrast , Cfl1 nf / nf mice do not harbor substantial amounts of αβ T - cells but possess normal absolute numbers of γδ T - cells ( Fig 3A , bars on the right ) . Note that also the distinct CD4 - CD8 + population of splenic T - cells isolated from Cfl1 nf / nf mice expressed exclusively TCR γδ but not TCR β ( S3B Fig ) . γδ T cells’ survival is not due to a missing Lck - Cre mediated knock - in of nf cofilin , as γδ T - cells do express Lck [ 37 ] . Moreover , successful recombination of the nf cofilin construct was evaluation of summary data is shown in the middle ( for DN , DP , and SP stages ) and on the right ( for DN cell stages ) . ( D ) Creation of mixed bone marrow chimera . Lethally irradiated B6 mice were reconstituted with equal numbers of CD3 + cell – depleted BM cells from CD45 . 2 + tester ( Cfl1 nf / nf ) and CD45 . 1 + competitor ( B6 ) mice . Total chimerism was measured and CD4 versus CD8 plots show the developmental stage of thymocytes derived from CD45 . 1 + or CD45 . 2 + BM cells . Plots are representative of six mixed chimeras per group . Bar graphs show the average abundance of each major thymocyte population within the chimera from both tester ( CD45 . 2 + ) and competitor ( CD45 . 1 + ) donor cells . Data is represented as mean ± SEM . (cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3) = p < 0 . 0001 ; (cid:3)(cid:3) = p < 0 . 01 . Underlying Data can be found in S1 Data . BM , bone marrow ; DN , double negative ; DP , double positive ; SP , single positive . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 2005380 . g002 Cofilinis crucial for thymic αβ T - cell development PLOS Biology | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 2005380 July 9 , 2018 7 / 21 Fig 3 . DN thymocytes of Cfl1 nf / nf mice show a dramatically enhanced F - actin content and impaired migratory capacity as well as a lack of TCR β surface expression . ( A ) CD3 + splenocytes were analyzed for expression of TCR β and TCR γδ . Shown are representative dot blots ( left panels ) and calculated absolute cell numbers ( right panel ) of TCR β and TCR γδ expressing cells . Data is represented as mean ± SEM and summarizes 3 independent experiments with a total of 6 mice per group . ( B ) Total F - actin amount of DN thymocytes or γδ thymocytes was determined by SiR - actin staining ( n = 3 independent experiments with a total (cid:21) 6 mice per group ) . ( C ) Migratory capacity of DN cells or γδ Cofilinis crucial for thymic αβ T - cell development PLOS Biology | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 2005380 July 9 , 2018 8 / 21 confirmed by PCR and the expression of the cofilin protein in γδ T - cells was confirmed by flow cytometry ( S3C and S3D Fig ) . Thus , cofilin appears to be essential only for αβ but not γδ T - cells . In early thymocytes , lack of cofilin function leads to an accumulation of F - actin , a defective migration , and impaired TCRß but normal TCR γδ surface expression As shown above , mice with a T - cell – specific knock - in of nf cofilin almost completely lacked peripheral αβ T - cells and showed a severe thymus atrophy . Residual thymocytes , which were found , accumulated in the DN stage . Thus , we next addressed why thymocytes arrested partic - ularly at this stage of T - cell development and why expression of nf cofilin is critical for αβ but not γδ T - cell development . In regard to the actin depolymerizing function of cofilin , we first checked the cellular F - actin content of DN thymocytes as well as of thymic γδ T - cells . The F - actin content in DN thymocytes was highly increased in cells obtained from Cfl1 nf / nf mice in comparison to those derived from B6 mice ( Fig 3B , left bar chart ) . Interestingly , also thymic γδ T cells from Cfl1 nf / nf mice accumulated more F - actin than control γδ T cells ( Fig 3B , right bar chart ) . Besides cofilin , destrin is another actin depolymerizing factor that can be expressed in mammalian cells . Flow cytometric studies revealed that destrin is expressed in DN and γδ thy - mocytes and its expression is not impaired in Cfl1 nf / nf mice ( S4A Fig ) . Thus , the presence of destrin could not compensate the effects of nf cofilin . One important process during early T - cell development , which may be influenced by altered actin dynamics , is the outward migration of DN thymocytes from the entry site at the corticomedullary junction ( CMJ ) to the outer cortex . To determine the migratory capacity of DN thymocytes and γδ T cells that express nf cofilin , we employed a transwell assay , in which SDF - 1 α , the natural ligand of CXCR4 , was used as chemotactic stimulus . DN thymocytes from Cfl1 nf / nf mice showed both a decreased random migration ( Fig 3C , left bar chart ; none ) and a diminished directed migration ( Fig 3C , left bar chart ; + SDF - 1 α ) . A similar reduction in the migratory potential was observed for thymic γδ T cells ( Fig 3C , right bar chart ) . Note that the decreased migratory capacity of nf cofilin – expressing cells was not due to a lack of CXCR4 , which was expressed intracellularly and extracellularly to a similar extent as in control cells ( S4B Fig ) . A second process during T - cell development , which requires actin dynamics , is the redistri - bution of receptors to the cell surface , as e . g . the TCR . While normal surface expression of TCR γδ was observed in DN thymocytes of Cfl1 nf / nf mice , they completely lacked TCR β surface expression ( Fig 3D , upper panel ) . However , TCR β was detected inside nf cofilin expressing DN thymocytes ( Fig 3D , lower panel ) . Although the number of icTCR β + DN thymocytes was decreased in Cfl1 nf / nf compared to B6 mice , the mean fluorescence intensity ( MFI ) of TCR β in icTCR + cells was similar between Cfl1 nf / nf and B6 mice ( Fig 3E ) . thymocytes was determined in a transwell assay ( pore size 5 μm ) in which SDF - 1 α ( 200 ng / ml ) was used as chemotactic stimulus . Migration was carried out for 3 h ( n = 3 independent experiments with (cid:21) 4 mice per group ) . ( D ) TCR β surface ( surface TCR β ) and intracellular ( ic TCR β ) expression was analyzed in DN cells by flow cytometry . Representative dot plots from TCR β versus TCR γδ staining on B6 and Cfl1 nf / nf DN cells are shown ( n = 4 independent experiments with a total of (cid:21) 7 mice per group ) . ( E ) Analysis of surface and ic expression of TCR β in DN cells of B6 ( grey bar ) and Cfl1 nf / nf mice ( black bar ) ( left bar chart ) . Analysis of MFI of TCR β of icTCR β + DN cells of B6 ( grey bar ) and Cfl1 nf / nf mice ( black bar ) ( right bar chart ) . ( F ) Analysis of surface expression of TCR β in DN thymocytes of B6 and Cfl1 nf / nf mice before ( - cytoD ) and after cytochalasin D treatment ( + cytoD ) . Data is represented as mean ± SEM . (cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3) p < 0 . 0001 ; (cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3) p < 0 . 001 ; (cid:3)(cid:3) p < 0 . 01 ; (cid:3) p < 0 . 05 ; Underlying data can be found in S1 Data . cytoD , cytochalasin D ; ic , intracellular ; MFI , mean fluorescence intensity nf , nonfunctional ; ns , not significant . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 2005380 . g003 Cofilinis crucial for thymic αβ T - cell development PLOS Biology | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 2005380 July 9 , 2018 9 / 21 To test whether the surface expression of TCR β in Cfl1 nf / nf mice can be rescued by the dis - ruption of actin filaments ( e . g . , cortical actin ) , we treated DN thymocytes with cytochalasin D ( cytoD ) . Although TCR β surface expression on thymocytes of B6 mice was slightly but not sig - nificantly enhanced after cytoD treatment , thymocytes of Cfl1 nf / nf mice showed still no TCR β on their surface ( Fig 3F ) . Our data demonstrate that DN thymocytes as well as thymic γδ T - cells from Cfl1 nf / nf mice showed a strong accumulation of F - actin and a decreased migration capacity . However , only TCR β but not TCR γδ surface expression was abolished in thymocytes of nf cofilin knock - in mice . Expression of nf cofilin does not interfere with the development of different subsets of γδ T cells Since the heterogeneous γδ T - cell compartment consists of different subpopulations , the influ - ence of nf cofilin on specific γδ T - cell populations was tested . First , the surface expression of V γ 1 , V γ 2 , and V γ 3 chains was analyzed on thymic or peripheral ( skin , lung , spleen ) γδ T cells ( Fig 4A ) . As expected , these V γ chains were tissue specifically expressed . However , comparing the tissue specific V γ chain expression of γδ T - cells from B6 and Cfl1 nf / nf revealed no differ - ences at all . In line with these results , distinct γδ T - cell populations , which are characterized by the expression of different surface markers on γδ thymocytes ( CD24 , CD27 , and CD44 ) , were similar in Cfl1 nf / nf and B6 mice ( Fig 4B ) . γδ T cells of Cfl1 nf / nf mice remain functionally active Since knock - in mice had no αβ T cells but normal numbers of γδ T cells in the periphery , we wondered whether γδ T cells are still functional . To evaluate their functionality , purified splenic γδ T cells were in vitro stimulated by anti - CD3 and anti - CD28 antibodies for 24 h . Stimulated γδ T cells of both control and Cfl1 nf / nf mice showed increased expression of T - cell activation markers ( CD25 , CD69 ) compared to unstimulated cells ( Fig 4C ) . To further investigate the functionality of γδ T cells in Cfl1 nf / nf mice under in vivo condi - tions , we chose the IMQ - induced psoriasis - like murine model . In this , the loss of γδ T cells was already linked to diminished psoriasis - like symptoms [ 38 ] . By applying IMQ containing Aldara crème topically on the shaved back skin of either WT ( Cfl + / + ) or Cfl1 nf / nf knock - in mice for 6 days , the psoriasis - like phenotype was assessed ( Fig 4D ) . After 3 days , both groups started to show signs of scaling , skin thickening , and erythema . Cfl1 nf / nf mice exhibited slightly decreased erythema at day 4 and day 5 and diminished scaling and skin thickening at day 6 compared to WT mice . Also , the cumulative psoriasis area severity index ( PASI ) score was par - tially reduced in Cfl1 nf / nf mice at day 5 and 6 . Nevertheless , Cfl1 nf / nf mice developed strong psoriasis - like symptoms over the course of the experiment and also the severity of inflamma - tion increased up to the end of the experiment . IL - 17A – producing and ROR γ t - positive γδ T cells are crucial for proper development of psoriasis [ 39 , 40 ] . Therefore , we tested the IL - 17A production and ROR γ t expression in skin - draining LN γδ T cells . Ex vivo restimulation of LN cells from control vehicle crème ( Sham ) or IMQ - treated mice revealed a slightly but nonsignificantly reduced percentage of IL - 17A , pro - ducing as well as ROR γ t - expressing γδ T cells in Cfl1 nf / nf mice compared to WT mice . None - theless , both groups showed significantly increased percentages of these cells after IMQ application compared to the mice treated with control crème only ( Fig 4E ) . Together , these experiments demonstrated that γδ T cells of Cfl1 nf / nf mice are functional and able to induce a psoriasis - like skin inflammation in the absence of αβ T cells . Cofilinis crucial for thymic αβ T - cell development PLOS Biology | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 2005380 July 9 , 2018 10 / 21 Fig 4 . Cfl1 nf / nf mice show normal γδ T - cell subsets which remain functional . ( A ) Analysis of the surface expression of V γ 1 , V γ 2 , and V γ 3 of γδ T - cells isolated from the spleen , skin , lung , and thymus of B6 ( grey bar ) or Cfl1 nf / nf mice ( black bar ) ( n = 4 independent experiments with (cid:21) 4 mice per group ) . ( B ) Analysis of the surface expression of CD24 , CD27 , and CD44 of γδ thymocytes of B6 ( grey bar ) or Cfl1 nf / nf mice ( black bar ) ( n = 4 independent experiments with (cid:21) 4 mice per group ) . ( C ) In vitro activation of splenic γδ T cells of Cfl1 nf / nf ( black bar ) and control mice ( grey bar ) by plate - bound CD3 and CD28 antibodies for 24 h . Determination of the T - cell Cofilinis crucial for thymic αβ T - cell development PLOS Biology | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 2005380 July 9 , 2018 11 / 21 Discussion Using knock - in mice in which T - cell - specific nf cofilin was expressed instead of endogenous cofilin , we demonstrate that cofilin is essential for αβ but not γδ T - cell development . Cfl1 nf / nf mice lacked peripheral αβ T cells and showed a severe thymus atrophy , which was caused by an early developmental arrest at the DN stage . DN thymocytes exhibited impaired actin dynamics , a defective migratory capacity , and a lack of TCR β surface expression ( Fig 3 ) . Even though γδ thymocytes were also impaired in actin dynamics and cell motility , nf cofilin knock - in mice harbored normal γδ T - cell numbers in the periphery . Those γδ T cells showed normal expression of V γ chains and also the different subpopulations ( discriminated via CD24 , CD27 , and CD44 ) were similar to those of γδ T cells from B6 mice . Thus , nf cofilin does not interfere with the development of different subsets of γδ T cells . The functionality of peripheral γδ T cells from nf cofilin knock - in mice was proven in in vitro and in vivo experiments . First , in vitro CD3 / CD28 stimulation confirmed the ability of splenic γδ T cells to be activated , although nf cofilin is expressed instead of WT cofilin . Second , we analyzed these mice via the γδ T cell – driven , IMQ - induced psoriasis - like murine model . Even though the cumulative PASI score was decreased in IMQ - treated Cfl1 nf / nf mice com - pared to control mice , they developed clear psoriasis - like symptoms , and also , the severity of psoriasis - like skin inflammation increased within the course of the experiment . In line with this , nf cofilin knock - in mice exhibited a strong induction of IL - 17A + ROR γ t + γδ T cells in skin - draining LNs of IMQ - treated animals . In this study , we avoided knocking out cofilin completely and rather expressed a nf cofilin mutant . This was accomplished solely by the addition of a single proline to cofilin’s N - termi - nus by making use of the viral 2A sequence . The additional proline inhibits removal of the ini - tiator methionine and as a consequence also N - terminal alanine acetylation . Moreover , no phosphorylation on serine 3 was detected . In the nf cofilin mutant , the lack of cofilin phos - phorylation is most likely due to impaired cotranslational processing , which could render cofi - lin less accessible for kinases . Thereby , less phosphorylation does not automatically mean more activity . Similar findings were obtained with oxidized cofilin , which is a poor target for LIM kinase and was found to be less phosphorylated than untreated cofilin even though it is not able to remodel the actin cytoskeleton [ 27 ] . One consequence of the expression of nf cofilin was the drastically increased F - actin con - tent of DN thymocytes . Functionally , a massive accumulation of actin filaments could cause a stiffening of the respective cells and could render them less dynamic . Indeed , early thymocytes of nf cofilin knock - in mice showed a decreased migratory capacity towards SDF - 1 α . Also , their spontaneous undirected migration in the absence of chemokines was diminished . In the postnatal thymus , DN1 cells are mainly found in the inner cortex ( close to the CMJ ) before they start an outward migration during their transition to DN2 and DN3 stage [ 41 ] . Thymo - cytes that are not able to migrate outward from the CMJ to the cortex due to deficiency of CXCR4 , the chemokine receptor of SDF - 1 α , are not developing beyond the DN stage [ 42 ] . Another independent study of thymocytes derived from CXCR4 - deficient progenitor cells also revealed that their development is already drastically altered before they develop into DP activation markers CD25 ( left bar chart ) and CD69 ( right bar chart ) by flow cytometry . ( D ) Age - and sex - matched Cfl1 nf / nf ( red line ) and Cfl1 + / + ( black line ) mice at 7 weeks of age were used for an IMQ - induced psoriasis - like model . Over 6 days , prior to topical application of IMQ , scores of individual parameters such as scaling , back skin thickness , and erythema formation were measured and the accumulated PASI was calculated . ( E ) Flow cytometric analysis of IL - 17A and ROR γ t expression in γδ T cells of skin - draining LNs . Cytokine production was assessed after 6 days of topical application of IMQ containing Aldara crème ( Sham ) or control crème ( Aldara ) ( experiment with (cid:21) 4 mice per group ) . Data are represented as mean ± SEM . (cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3) p < 0 . 0001 ; (cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3) p < 0 . 001 ; (cid:3)(cid:3) p < 0 . 01 ; (cid:3) p < 0 . 05 ; Underlying data can be found in S1 Data . Cfl1 , cofilin - 1 ; IMQ , imiquimod ; ns , not significant ; PASI , psoriasis area severity index . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 2005380 . g004 Cofilinis crucial for thymic αβ T - cell development PLOS Biology | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 2005380 July 9 , 2018 12 / 21 thymocytes [ 43 ] . Thus , the diminished migratory capacity of early thymocytes of nf cofilin knock - in mice—possibly due to stiffening of the actin cytoskeleton—may at least in part play a role for their developmental arrest . Moreover , in human PBTs , cofilin was shown to be dephosphorylated and thereby activated in lamellipodia upon triggering of cells with SDF - 1 α [ 21 ] . Thus , it is likely that also during thymocyte development , cofilin is one of the effector molecules , which get activated by chemokines secreted by thymic epithelial cells and are involved in the directed migration of DN cells to the outer cortex . Although normal numbers of γδ T cells were found in nf cofilin knock - in mice , γδ thymocytes also showed an accumula - tion of F - actin as well as a defective migratory capacity as observed for DN thymocytes . These findings imply that cofilin function and high cell motility are more crucial for αβ than for γδ T - cell development . Besides the essential role of actin dynamics for cell movement , the dynamic rearrangement of the actin cytoskeleton is also important for clustering and ( re ) distribution of surface recep - tors , e . g . , during immune synapse formation [ 44 – 46 ] . In our study , knock - in of a dysfunc - tional cofilin had detrimental effects on TCR β but not on TCR γδ surface expression of DN thymocytes . Even though the TCR β chain is rearranged and expressed intracellularly , it is not detectable on the the cell surface . Interestingly , the surface translocation of other proteins , e . g . CD25 , CD44 , or CXCR4 , was not influenced , indicating a selective effect of nf cofilin on TCR β surface translocation rather than an interference with the general surface transport of mem - brane proteins . Alternatively to altered TCR β transport to the cell surface , the diminished TCR β expression among DN thymocytes could theoretically also be due to the lack of NKT cells , since the Lck promoter is also active in these cells [ 35 ] . However , NKT cells were still present in nf cofilin mice . Interestingly , these NK1 . 1 + DN thymocytes did also not express TCR β on their surface , emphasizing the importance of cofilin for TCR β translocation . TCR β surface expression is essential for pre - TCR signaling and the transition through the so - called β - checkpoint . Interestingly , thymocytes of nf cofilin knock - in mice accumulated in the DN3 stage , a phenotype which is indeed characteristic for impaired pre - TCR signaling ( e . g . , caused by knocking out components of the pre - TCR [ 47 , 48 ] ) . Whereas functional pre - TCR signaling and passage through the β - checkpoint induces extensive proliferation of DN thymocytes and development into DP thymocytes , those cells which are not able to express a functional pre - TCR get eradicated by apoptosis [ 49 , 50 ] . This proliferative burst is one of the key functions of pre - TCR signaling , and thus the dramatic thymic atrophy in nf cofilin knock - in mice is at least in part due to the lack of proliferation and / or induction of apoptosis . How - ever , to finally conclude that nf cofilin is interfering with preTCR signaling , a comparison between TCRa - / - and Cfl1 nf / nf mice would be necessary . In the thymus , Tcrb , Tcrg , and Tcrd are all rearranged at the DN2 / 3 stage of development . It is at the DN3 stage in which final fate determination of αβ and γδ lineages takes place . If cells have rearranged the TCR β chain , the β - selection process starts . In contrast to the αβ lineage cells , those DN3 cells that have rearranged functional γ and δ chains undergo γδ selection remain negative for both T - cell co - receptors and develop into γδ T cells ( for details about the αβ versus γδ lineage decision , see the publication of Zarin and colleagues [ 51 ] ) . As αβ and γδ T cells undergo different developmental processes , they may also have varying requirements , e . g . , in regard to up - regulation of receptors . This study shows that cofilin - driven cellular pro - cesses are essential for cell surface expression of TCR β but appear to be less important for γδ TCR up - regulation . One possible explanation for this could be that other actin - remodeling proteins can partially compensate for the lack of cofilin function in γδ T cells . We investigated destrin , another closely related actin - depolymerizing factor . It was equally expressed in DN and γδ thymocytes of Cfl1 nf / nf mice . This shows first that destrin could not compensate the Cofilinis crucial for thymic αβ T - cell development PLOS Biology | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 2005380 July 9 , 2018 13 / 21 effects of nf cofilin ( massive increase of the F - actin amount in nf cofilin knock - in cells ) and second that normal developmental and function of γδ thymocytes was not due to a higher expression of destrin . So far , we have no information about the expression and function of other actin - depolymerizing proteins . Furthermore , we did not find any information in the lit - erature about the role of actin remodeling proteins in γδ T - cells . Additionally , there is no other study—at least to our knowledge—reporting about a differential role of an actin remodeling protein for αβ versus γδ T - cell development . Previous studies in which cytoskeletal proteins were targeted in mice revealed that they are of major importance for the emigration of mature SP thymocytes from the thymus to second - ary lymphoid organs . However , these proteins play only a minor role for early thymocyte development . This holds true for mice deficient in mDia ( actin - nucleating - polymerizing pro - tein ) [ 52 ] as well as for L - plastin ( actin bundling protein ) [ 53 ] and Coronin1A ( inhibits nucle - ation - promoting Arp2 / 3 complex ) [ 54 , 55 ] . Closest to the phenotype observed for nf cofilin knock - in mice—albeit being more modest—was the phenotype of mice with a knock - out of WASP ( Wiskott – Aldrich Syndrome protein ) . These mice exhibited a reduction of thymic cel - lularity and a relative increase in DN3 cells among the DN cell compartment [ 56 ] . However , in another study in which WASP was targeted , there was no effect on thymocyte development [ 57 ] . A study of Zhang and colleagues , in which T cells expressed WASP with a deleted VCA domain on the WASP knock - out background confirmed the importance of WASP for T - cell development [ 58 ] . DN cells from those mice do express pre - TCR α and TCR β . However , in contrast to nf cofilin knock - in mice , they develop DP cells . Yet DP cells also do not express TCR β on the cell surface and show a surface phenotype resembling the one of immature thy - mocytes from the DN population . Thus , even though WASP seems to be important for pre - TCR signaling and thymocyte development , it most likely plays only a partial role in this pro - cess , as there are still thymocytes which develop beyond the DN stage in WASP knock - out mice , and also , mature T - cells are present in their periphery . Together , our data demonstrate the unique role of cofilin activity for proper development of αβ but not γδ T cells . Probably , cofilin and related signaling cascades are valuable starting points to decipher differences in developmental checkpoints for αβ versus γδ T - cell lineage decision . Besides this , usage of the Cre / lox system also allows us to knock - in the functionally inactive cofilin in other cell types . Our strategy not only allows the expression of a nf form of cofilin but also the coexpression of eGFP , which further enables to monitor knock - in cells and cofilin promoter activity . This makes the generated mice to a valuable tool for studying the rel - evance of cofilin in different cell types . Methods Ethics statement All mouse experiments were carried out in accordance with the relevant guidelines and regula - tions by the federal state Baden - Wuerttemberg and Rhineland - Palatinate , Germany . Psoriasis experiments were approved by Landesuntersuchungsamt Rheinland - Pfalz ( TVA # G13 - 1 - 099 ) . To dissect lymphoid organs ( e . g . , LNs , spleen , or thymus ) , mice were euthanized by cer - vical dislocation or lethal dose of CO 2 . Mice Strain details as well as procedure to generate nf cofilin knock - in mice are provided in S1 Text . All mice were bred and maintained at the central animal facility of the University of Heidel - berg under specific pathogen - free conditions . Mice used in experiments were sex - and age - matched and were generally 6 – 12 weeks ( or , for thymic experiments , 4 – 5 weeks ) old . Cofilinis crucial for thymic αβ T - cell development PLOS Biology | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 2005380 July 9 , 2018 14 / 21 Transfection of Jurkat cells For knock - down of endogenous cofilin in Jurkat cells and expression of eGFP - 2A - Cfl1 , Jurkat cells were transfected with the Bio - Rad GenePulser II . To this end , each 10 Mio of cells were mixed with 2 μg cofilin siRNA ( CFL1 ON - TARGETplus siRNA ; Dharmacon ) and / or 15 μg plasmid DNA and electroporated at 230 V and 950 mF . Cells were cultured in RPMI1640 medium containing 10 % FCS at 37 ˚C and 5 % CO 2 . Transfection efficacy as well as successful down - modulation of endogenous cofilin was examined by western blot ( see S1 Text ) . F - actin content For determination of the cellular F - actin content of Jurkat cells , 1 Mio of cells were fixed with 1 . 5 % PFA in PBS for 10 min at 37 ˚C . Afterwards , cells were permeabilized in FACS buffer ( PBS with 0 . 5 % BSA ) containing 0 . 1 % saponine for 10 min at RT . Cells were stained in the same buffer containing Phalloidin - AF647 ( Life technologies ) for 20 min at RT . For determina - tion of the F - actin content of DN thymocytes or γδ thymocytes , cells were stained with 500 nM SiR - actin ( Cytoskeleton , Inc . ) for 3 h at 37 ˚C . The higher the MFI of Phalloidin - AF647 or SiR - actin , the more filamentous actin is present inside the cell . Migration assay Chemotaxis of thymocytes was tested with 5 - μm pore size Transwell plates ( Corning ) . To this end , 50 , 000 cells in medium were plated in the upper compartment of the transwell insert and medium + / − 200 ng / ml SDF - 1 α ( Peprotech ) was added into the lower compartment . Migra - tion was carried out for 3 h at 37 ˚C . The number of transmigrated thymocytes was determined via flow cytometry by making use of an internal bead standard ( BD Biosciences ) . CytoD treatment To disrupt the cortical actin of thymocytes , 2 Mio cells were treated with 20 μM cytochalasin D ( Sigma Aldrich ) for 1 h at 37 ˚C . After cytoD treatment , cells were stained for TCR β and sur - face expression was analyzed by flow cytometry . In vitro T - cell stimulation Splenic γδ T cells were MACS isolated using “TCRg / d T - cell isolation kit , mouse” ( Miltenyi Biotec ) . Cells numbering 300 , 000 were stimulated by plate - bound α nti - CD3 ( 10 μ g / mL , BD Bioscience ) and anti - CD28 antibodies ( 2 μg / mL , BD Bioscience ) for 24 h at 37 ˚C . After stimu - lation , cells were stained for surface markers and analyzed by flow cytometry . In vivo IMQ - induced psoriasis - like model Age - and sex - matched Cfl1 nf / nf and Cfl1 + / + mice at 7 weeks of age were used for IMQ - induced psoriasis - like model . Mice received a daily topical dose of 50 mg of IMQ crème ( 5 % ) ( Aldara , Meda Pharma ) or 50 mg of a control vehicle crème ( Sham crème , University medicine Mainz ) over 6 days . Prior to topical application scores of individual parameters such as back skin thickness , scaling , and erythema formation were measured and the accumulated PASI was calculated as described previously [ 59 ] . At day 6 , mice were killed humanely and LN cells were isolated for intracellu - lar cytokine staining . Cofilinis crucial for thymic αβ T - cell development PLOS Biology | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 2005380 July 9 , 2018 15 / 21 PMA / Ionomycin ex vivo stimulation of isolated LNs To induce cytokine production , single cell suspensions of isolated LNs were stimulated with 50 ng / ml phorbol 12 - myristate 13 - acetate ( PMA , Sigma Aldrich ) and 500 ng / ml ionomycin ( Sigma Aldrich ) in the presence of 1 μg / ml Brefeldin A for 4 h at 37 ˚C . After stimulation , cells were stained for surface markers and intracellular cytokines and analyzed by flow cytometry . Statistical analysis Statistical analysis was performed with Prism 6 software . Values are expressed as mean ± SEM . Unpaired two - tailed Student t test was used to test significant numerical differences between groups . Differences of p (cid:20) 0 . 05 were considered to be statistically significant ( (cid:3) p (cid:20) 0 . 05 ; (cid:3)(cid:3) p (cid:20) 0 . 01 ; (cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3) p (cid:20) 0 . 001 ; (cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3) p < 0 . 0001 ) . Supporting information S1 Fig . Generation of T - cell – specific nf cofilin knock - in mice . ( A ) Strategy used to create T - cell – specific nf cofilin knock - in mice . The first line shows the exon - intron organization of the mouse cofilin gene . It lies on chromosome 19 and consists of 4 exons ( filled yellow boxes ) . In the targeted allele ( second line ) a floxed stop cassette , an eGFP - 2A - Cfl1 sequence and a FRT - flanked neomycin ( neo ) cassette were inserted into the intronic region between exon 1 and 2 of the cofilin gene . Another loxP site was introduced into the noncoding sequence of exon 1 . Mice carrying the construct in their germline were mated with Flp deleter mice in order to remove the neomycin cassette ( third line ) . Afterwards , T - cell – specific knock - out of endogenous cofilin by deletion of exon 1 and at the same time knock - in of the eGFP - 2A - Cfl1 expression cassette was achieved by crossing mice carrying the Flp recombined construct with Lck - Cre mice . ( B ) Mouse genotyping was performed by PCR of tail DNA . The allele carrying the construct could be discriminated from the WT allele by the additional loxP site . Cfl1 + / + : wt mice ; Cfl1 + / nf : het - erozygous mice ; Cfl1 nf / nf : homozygous mice . ( C ) Flow cytometric analysis of eGFP expression in T cells and non - T cells of purified peripheral blood mononuclear cells PBMCs from Cfl1 + / nf mice . ( D ) Flow cytometric analysis of eGFP expression in common lymphoid progenitor cells CLPs from the bone marrow and thymocytes ( DN1 , DP and SP stage ) from thymi of Cfl1 + / nf mice . For analysis of eGFP expression in CLPs , lineage negative cells were isolated from BM of mice by MACS . CLPs were then identified by their expression of IL7R α , c - kit and Sca - 1 [ 60 ] . ( E ) LC - MS / MS analysis of cofilin peptides resulting from tryptic digestion of cofilin isolated from splenic T cells of B6 and Cfl1 + / nf mice . Shown are the extracted ion chromatograms of the depicted peptides . “Ac” represents N - terminus of cofilin starts with acetylated alanine and ser - ine is not phosphorylated ; “Ac + Ph” represents N - terminus of cofilin starts with acetylated ala - nine and serine is phosphorylated ; “PMAS” represents N - terminus of cofilin starts with proline , followed by methionine , alanine and non - phosphorylated serine . CLP , common lym - phoid progenitor cells ; PBMC , peripheral blood mononuclear cell ; WT , wild - type . ( TIF ) S2 Fig . T - cell – specific expression of nf cofilin leads to a massive reduction of peripheral T cells . ( A ) Total spleen cell number and percentage of T cells in spleen of B6 mice and Cfl1 nf / nf mice . ( B ) Total thymic cell number and percentage of T cells in LNs of B6 mice and Cfl1 nf / nf mice . ( C ) Splenic cells were analyzed for B - cell , NK cell , DC , neutrophil , and eosinophil popu - lations . Shown are the percentage of total splenocytes . Each data point represents an individual mouse . ( D ) Flow cytometric analysis of B - and T - cell populations in lymphocytes derived from LNs of control B6 mice , Cfl1 + / + mice ( homozygous for construct but no Cre - mediated knock - in ) , Cfl1 nf / wt ( heterozygous for construct with Cre - mediated knock - in ) and Cfl1 nf / nf Cofilinis crucial for thymic αβ T - cell development PLOS Biology | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 2005380 July 9 , 2018 16 / 21 mice ( homozygous for construct with Cre - mediated knock - in ) . One representative result out of 3 independent experiments with a total of 6 mice per group is shown . ( E ) Analysis of the percentage of splenic B - cells within the chimera ( see Fig 2D ) from both tester ( CD45 . 2 + ) and competitor ( CD45 . 1 + ) donor cells . Data is represented as mean ± SEM and summarizes 4 inde - pendent experiments with a total of (cid:21) 6 mice per group . (cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3) p < 0 . 0001 ; (cid:3)(cid:3) p < 0 . 01 ; (cid:3) p < 0 . 05 . Underlying data can be found in S1 Data . ns , not significant . ( TIF ) S3 Fig . Remaining peripheral T cells are of γδ T - cell subset type expressing nf cofilin . ( A ) Flow cytometric analysis of T - cell co - receptors CD4 and CD8 on splenic T cells of B6 and Cfl1 nf / nf mice . ( B ) Flow cytometric analysis of T - cell populations in lymphocytes derived from spleen of control B6 mice ( left panel ) and Cfl1 nf / nf mice ( right panel ) . CD8 + T - cell population in spleen of B6 mice express either highly TCR β or low amounts of TCR γδ . Splenic CD8 + T cells of Cfl1 nf / nf mice express solely TCR γδ . ( C ) γδ T cells were isolated from splenocytes of Cfl1 nf / nf mice via FACS sort and were analyzed for Cre recombination by PCR of cell lysates . Lysates of thymocytes were used as a positive control , whereas mouse tail DNA ( from Cfl1 nf / nf mice ) and H 2 O served as negative controls . ( D ) Cofilin expression analysis of splenic γδ T cells of B6 mice ( upper panel ) and Cfl1 nf / nf mice ( lower panel ) . Cells were pre - gated on CD3 + γδ T cells . nf , nonfunctional . ( TIF ) S4 Fig . Cfl1 nf / nf mice show normal destrin as well as CXCR4 expression . ( A ) Analysis of des - trin expression in DN and γδ thymocytes of B6 and Cfl1 nf / nf mice . ( B ) Analysis of ic and sur - face expression of CXCR4 . Data is represented as mean ± SEM and summarizes 4 independent experiments with a total of (cid:21) 6 mice per group . (cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3) p < 0 . 0001 ; (cid:3)(cid:3) p < 0 . 01 ; (cid:3) p < 0 . 05 . Under - lying data can be found in S1 Data . ic , intracellular ; ns , not significant . ( TIF ) S1 Text . Supplemental experimental procedures . ( DOCX ) S1 Data . Underlying data . Data for Figs 1B , 1D , 2A – 2D , 3A – 3C , 3E , 3F and 4A – 4E , S2A – S2C , S2E , S4A and S4B Figs . ( XLSX ) Acknowledgments We thank the “ZMBH Core facility for mass spectrometry and proteomics” ( especially Thomas Ruppert ) for MS measurements . Furthermore , we thank the Transgenic Service ( Frank van der Hoeven ) of the German Cancer Research Center Heidelberg for help in ES cell targeting . We acknowledge Frank Zimmerman and Sascha Dlugosz from the IBF , Biotechnologielabor , Heidelberg University for injection of ES cells into mouse blastocysts . We thank Hans Chris - tian Probst ( Institute of Immunology , University Medical Center of the Johannes Gutenberg - University Mainz ) for providing the protocol for singe - cell isolation of skin tissue . Finally , we thank Bruno Kyewski and Fabian Brunk ( German Cancer Research Center Heidelberg ) for valuable discussions regarding thymocyte development . We thank Sven Ru¨ffer for assistance in cell sorting . Author Contributions Conceptualization : Isabel Seeland , Bernd Arnold , Yvonne Samstag . Cofilinis crucial for thymic αβ T - cell development PLOS Biology | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 2005380 July 9 , 2018 17 / 21 Funding acquisition : Florian C . Kurschus , Bernd Arnold , Yvonne Samstag . Investigation : Isabel Seeland , Ying Xiong , Daniel Deibel , Sandra Prokosch , Gu¨nter Ku¨blbeck , Beate Jahraus , Daniela De Stefano , Sonja Moos . Methodology : Isabel Seeland , Christian Orlik , Daniel Deibel , Gu¨nter Ku¨blbeck . Resources : Bernd Arnold , Yvonne Samstag . Supervision : Florian C . Kurschus , Bernd Arnold , Yvonne Samstag . Writing – original draft : Isabel Seeland , Christian Orlik , Yvonne Samstag . Writing – review & editing : Christian Orlik , Yvonne Samstag . References 1 . Burkhardt JK , CarrizosaE , Shaffer MH . The actin cytoskeleton in T cell activation . Annu Rev Immunol . 2008 ; 26 : 233 – 59 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1146 / annurev . immunol . 26 . 021607 . 090347 PMID : 18304005 2 . Angus KL , Griffiths GM . Cell polarisationand the immunological synapse . Curr Opin Cell Biol . 2013 ; 25 ( 1 ) : 85 – 91 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ceb . 2012 . 08 . 013PMID : 22990072 3 . Piragyte I , Jun CD . Actin enginein immunological synapse . Immune Netw . 2012 ; 12 ( 3 ) : 71 – 83 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 4110 / in . 2012 . 12 . 3 . 71 PMID : 22916042 4 . Samstag Y , Eibert SM , Klemke M , Wabnitz GH . Actin cytoskeletal dynamics in T lymphocyte activation and migration . J Leukoc Biol . 2003 ; 73 ( 1 ) : 30 – 48 . PMID : 12525560 5 . Kumari S , CuradoS , Mayya V , Dustin ML . T cell antigenreceptor activationand actin cytoskeleton remodeling . Biochim BiophysActa . 2014 ; 1838 ( 2 ) : 546 – 56 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bbamem . 2013 . 05 . 004 PMID : 23680625 6 . Bernstein BW , Bamburg JR . ADF / cofilin : a functionalnode in cell biology . Trends Cell Biol . 2010 ; 20 ( 4 ) : 187 – 95 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . tcb . 2010 . 01 . 001 PMID : 20133134 7 . VartiainenMK , Mustonen T , Mattila PK , Ojala PJ , Thesleff I , PartanenJ , et al . The three mouse actin - depolymerizing factor / cofilins evolved to fulfill cell - type - specific requirements for actin dynamics . Mol Biol Cell . 2002 ; 13 ( 1 ) : 183 – 94 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1091 / mbc . 01 - 07 - 0331PMID : 11809832 8 . NishidaE , Maekawa S , Sakai H . Cofilin , a protein in porcinebrain that binds to actin filaments and inhib - its their interactions with myosin and tropomyosin . Biochemistry . 1984 ; 23 ( 22 ) : 5307 – 13 . PMID : 6509022 9 . Abe H , Ohshima S , Obinata T . A cofilin - likeprotein is involvedin the regulationof actin assemblyin developing skeletal muscle . J Biochem . 1989 ; 106 ( 4 ) : 696 – 702 . PMID : 2691511 10 . Moriyama K , NishidaE , Yonezawa N , Sakai H , Matsumoto S , Iida K , et al . Destrin , a mammalian actin - depolymerizing protein , is closely related to cofilin . Cloningand expressionof porcine brain destrin cDNA . J Biol Chem . 1990 ; 265 ( 10 ) : 5768 – 73 . PMID : 2156828 11 . Samstag Y , Eckerskorn C , Wesselborg S , HenningS , Wallich R , Meuer SC . Costimulatory signalsfor humanT - cell activationinduce nucleartranslocation of pp19 / cofilin . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A . 1994 ; 91 ( 10 ) : 4494 – 8 . PMID : 8183936 12 . Condeelis J . How is actin polymerization nucleatedin vivo ? Trends Cell Biol . 2001 ; 11 ( 7 ) : 288 – 93 . PMID : 11413039 13 . Mizuno K . Signalingmechanisms and functionalroles of cofilin phosphorylation and dephosphorylation . Cell Signal . 2013 ; 25 ( 2 ) : 457 – 69 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cellsig . 2012 . 11 . 001 PMID : 23153585 14 . Samstag Y , Bader A , Meuer SC . A serine phosphatase is involvedin CD2 - mediated activationof humanT lymphocytes and natural killer cells . J Immunol . 1991 ; 147 ( 3 ) : 788 – 94 . PMID : 1677669 15 . Samstag Y , HenningSW , Bader A , Meuer SC . Dephosphorylationof pp19 : a common second signalfor humanT cell activationmediatedthrough different accessory molecules . Int Immunol . 1992 ; 4 ( 11 ) : 1255 – 62 . PMID : 1472477 16 . Eibert SM , Lee KH , Pipkorn R , Sester U , Wabnitz GH , Giese T , et al . Cofilinpeptidehomologs interfere with immunological synapse formation and T cell activation . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A . 2004 ; 101 ( 7 ) : 1957 – 62 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0308282100PMID : 14762171 17 . Lee KH , Meuer SC , Samstag Y . Cofilin : a missing link betweenT cell co - stimulation and rearrangement of the actin cytoskeleton . Eur J Immunol . 2000 ; 30 ( 3 ) : 892 – 9 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / 1521 - 4141 ( 200003 ) 30 : 3 < 892 : : AID - IMMU892 > 3 . 0 . CO ; 2 - UPMID : 10741406 Cofilinis crucial for thymic αβ T - cell development PLOS Biology | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 2005380 July 9 , 2018 18 / 21 18 . Samstag Y , John I , Wabnitz GH . Cofilin : a redox sensitive mediatorof actin dynamics duringT - cell acti - vation and migration . Immunol Rev . 2013 ; 256 ( 1 ) : 30 – 47 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / imr . 12115 PMID : 24117811 19 . PendletonA , Pope B , Weeds A , Koffer A . Latrunculin B or ATP depletioninducescofilin - dependent translocation of actin into nuclei of mast cells . J Biol Chem . 2003 ; 278 ( 16 ) : 14394 – 400 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1074 / jbc . M206393200 PMID : 12566455 20 . Falahzadeh K , Banaei - Esfahani A , Shahhoseini M . The potentialroles of actin in the nucleus . Cell J . 2015 ; 17 ( 1 ) : 7 – 14 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 22074 / cellj . 2015 . 507PMID : 25870830 21 . Klemke M , Kramer E , Konstandin MH , Wabnitz GH , Samstag Y . An MEK - cofilin signalling module con - trols migration of human T cells in 3D but not 2D environments . EMBO J . 2010 ; 29 ( 17 ) : 2915 – 29 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / emboj . 2010 . 153PMID : 20676060 22 . Friedl P , Entschladen F , ConradC , NiggemannB , Zanker KS . CD4 + T lymphocytes migratingin three - dimensional collagenlattices lack focal adhesions and utilize beta1 integrin - independentstrategies for polarization , interaction with collagenfibers and locomotion . Eur J Immunol . 1998 ; 28 ( 8 ) : 2331 – 43 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / ( SICI ) 1521 - 4141 ( 199808 ) 28 : 08 < 2331 : : AID - IMMU2331 > 3 . 0 . CO ; 2 - C PMID : 9710211 23 . Wolf K , MullerR , Borgmann S , Brocker EB , Friedl P . Amoeboid shape changeand contact guidance : T - lymphocyte crawlingthrough fibrillar collagenis independentof matrix remodeling by MMPs and other proteases . Blood . 2003 ; 102 ( 9 ) : 3262 – 9 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1182 / blood - 2002 - 12 - 3791PMID : 12855577 24 . Woolf E , Grigorova I , Sagiv A , Grabovsky V , FeigelsonSW , Shulman Z , et al . Lymph node chemokines promote sustainedT lymphocyte motility without triggering stable integrinadhesiveness in the absence of shear forces . Nat Immunol . 2007 ; 8 ( 10 ) : 1076 – 85 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ni1499PMID : 17721537 25 . LammermannT , Bader BL , Monkley SJ , Worbs T , Wedlich - SoldnerR , Hirsch K , et al . Rapid leukocyte migrationby integrin - independentflowingand squeezing . Nature . 2008 ; 453 ( 7191 ) : 51 – 5 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nature06887PMID : 18451854 26 . Wabnitz GH , Goursot C , JahrausB , Kirchgessner H , HellwigA , Klemke M , et al . Mitochondrial translo - cation of oxidizedcofilin inducescaspase - independentnecrotic - like programmed cell death of T cells . Cell Death Dis . 2010 ; 1 : e58 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / cddis . 2010 . 36 PMID : 21364663 27 . Klemke M , Wabnitz GH , Funke F , Funk B , Kirchgessner H , Samstag Y . Oxidation of cofilin mediatesT cell hyporesponsivenessunder oxidative stress conditions . Immunity . 2008 ; 29 ( 3 ) : 404 – 13 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . immuni . 2008 . 06 . 016PMID : 18771940 28 . Schulte B , John I , Simon B , BrockmannC , Oelmeier SA , Jahraus B , et al . A reducing milieu renders cofilin insensitive to phosphatidylinositol4 , 5 - bisphosphate ( PIP2 ) inhibition . J Biol Chem . 2013 ; 288 ( 41 ) : 29430 – 9 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1074 / jbc . M113 . 479766 PMID : 24003227 29 . De Souza AT , Dai X , Spencer AG , ReppenT , Menzie A , Roesch PL , et al . Transcriptional and pheno - typic comparisons of Ppara knockout and siRNA knockdown mice . Nucleic Acids Res . 2006 ; 34 ( 16 ) : 4486 – 94 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1093 / nar / gkl609 PMID : 16945951 30 . Rossi A , Kontarakis Z , Gerri C , Nolte H , Holper S , Kruger M , et al . Genetic compensation inducedby deleteriousmutationsbut not gene knockdowns . Nature . 2015 ; 524 ( 7564 ) : 230 – 3 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nature14580PMID : 26168398 31 . Ryan MD , King AM , Thomas GP . Cleavageof foot - and - mouth diseasevirus polyprotein is mediatedby residueslocated within a 19 amino acid sequence . Journal of GeneralVirology . 1991 ; 72 ( Pt 11 ) : 2727 – 32 . 32 . Ryan MD , DonnellyM , Lewis A , Mehrotra AP , Wilkie J , Gani D . A model for nonstoichiometric , cotran - slationalprotein scissionin eukaryoticribosomes . Bioorganic Chemistry . 1999 ; 27 ( 1 ) : 55 – 79 . 33 . DonnellyMLL , Luke G , Mehrotra A , Li XJ , HughesLE , Gani D , et al . Analysis of the aphthovirus 2A / 2B polyprotein’cleavage’ mechanismindicatesnot a proteolytic reaction , but a novel translational effect : a putative ribosomal ’skip’ . Journal of General Virology . 2001 ; 82 : 1013 – 25 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1099 / 0022 - 1317 - 82 - 5 - 1013 PMID : 11297676 34 . Orban PC , Chui D , Marth JD . Tissue - and site - specificDNA recombination in transgenicmice . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A . 1992 ; 89 ( 15 ) : 6861 – 5 . PMID : 1495975 35 . ShimizuC , KawamotoH , YamashitaM , Kimura M , KondouE , KanekoY , et al . Progressionof T cellline - age restriction in the earliest subpopulation of murine adult thymus visualizedby the expressionof lck proximalpromoter activity . Int Immunol . 2001 ; 13 ( 1 ) : 105 – 17 . PMID : 11133839 36 . Godfrey DI , KennedyJ , Suda T , Zlotnik A . A developmental pathway involvingfour phenotypically and functionally distinct subsets of CD3 - CD4 - CD8 - triple - negative adult mouse thymocytes definedby CD44 and CD25expression . J Immunol . 1993 ; 150 ( 10 ) : 4244 – 52 . PMID : 8387091 37 . LairdRM , Hayes SM . Roles of the Src tyrosinekinases Lck and Fyn in regulatinggammadeltaTCRsignal strength . PLoS One . 2010 ; 5 ( 1 ) : e8899 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0008899 PMID : 20126650 Cofilinis crucial for thymic αβ T - cell development PLOS Biology | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 2005380 July 9 , 2018 19 / 21 38 . Cai Y , Shen X , Ding C , Qi C , Li K , Li X , et al . Pivotal role of dermal IL - 17 - producing gammadelta T cells in skin inflammation . Immunity . 2011 ; 35 ( 4 ) : 596 – 610 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . immuni . 2011 . 08 . 001 PMID : 21982596 39 . Becher B , Pantelyushin S . Hidingunder the skin : Interleukin - 17 - producinggammadelta T cells go under the skin ? Nat Med . 2012 ; 18 ( 12 ) : 1748 – 50 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nm . 3016PMID : 23223063 40 . Pantelyushin S , Haak S , Ingold B , Kulig P , HeppnerFL , NavariniAA , et al . Rorgammat + innatelympho - cytes and gammadelta T cells initiatepsoriasiformplaqueformation in mice . J Clin Invest . 2012 ; 122 ( 6 ) : 2252 – 6 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1172 / JCI61862 PMID : 22546855 41 . Lind EF , Prockop SE , Porritt HE , Petrie HT . Mappingprecursor movement through the postnatalthy - mus reveals specific microenvironments supportingdefinedstages of early lymphoiddevelopment . J Exp Med . 2001 ; 194 ( 2 ) : 127 – 34 . PMID : 11457887 42 . Plotkin J , Prockop SE , Lepique A , Petrie HT . Critical role for CXCR4 signalingin progenitorlocalization and T cell differentiationin the postnatalthymus . J Immunol . 2003 ; 171 ( 9 ) : 4521 – 7 . PMID : 14568925 43 . Ara T , Itoi M , KawabataK , Egawa T , TokoyodaK , SugiyamaT , et al . A role of CXC chemokine ligand 12 / stromal cell - derivedfactor - 1 / pre - B cell growth stimulating factor and its receptor CXCR4 in fetal and adult T cell development in vivo . J Immunol . 2003 ; 170 ( 9 ) : 4649 – 55 . PMID : 12707343 44 . BilladeauDD , Nolz JC , Gomez TS . Regulation of T - cell activationby the cytoskeleton . Nat Rev Immu - nol . 2007 ; 7 ( 2 ) : 131 – 43 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nri2021PMID : 17259969 45 . Ritter AT , Angus KL , Griffiths GM . The role of the cytoskeleton at the immunological synapse . Immunol Rev . 2013 ; 256 ( 1 ) : 107 – 17 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / imr . 12117 PMID : 24117816 46 . ThaulandTJ , Hu KH , Bruce MA , Butte MJ . Cytoskeletal adaptivityregulatesT cell receptorsignaling . Sci Signal . 2017 ; 10 ( 469 ) . 47 . Fehling HJ , Krotkova A , Saint - Ruf C , von Boehmer H . Crucialrole of the pre - T - cell receptor alpha gene in development of alpha beta but not gamma delta T cells . Nature . 1995 ; 375 ( 6534 ) : 795 – 8 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / 375795a0PMID : 7596413 48 . MalissenM , Gillet A , Ardouin L , Bouvier G , Trucy J , Ferrier P , et al . Altered T cell development in mice with a targeted mutation of the CD3 - epsilon gene . EMBO J . 1995 ; 14 ( 19 ) : 4641 – 53 . PMID : 7588594 49 . vonBoehmer H . Control of T - cell development by the Pre - T and alpha beta T - cell . ReceptorActivation by Antigens , Cytokines , Hormones , and Growth Factors . 1995 ; 766 : 52 – 61 . 50 . Aifantis I , Mandal M , Sawai K , Ferrando A , Vilimas T . Regulationof T - cell progenitorsurvival and cell - cycle entry by the pre - T - cell receptor . Immunol Rev . 2006 ; 209 : 159 – 69 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 0105 - 2896 . 2006 . 00343 . x PMID : 16448541 51 . Zarin P , Chen EL , In TS , Anderson MK , Zuniga - Pflucker JC . Gamma delta T - cell differentiation and effector function programming , TCR signal strength , when and how much ? Cell Immunol . 2015 ; 296 ( 1 ) : 70 – 5 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cellimm . 2015 . 03 . 007PMID : 25866401 52 . Sakata D , Taniguchi H , Yasuda S , Adachi - Morishima A , Hamazaki Y , Nakayama R , et al . ImpairedT lymphocyte trafficking in mice deficientin an actin - nucleating protein , mDia1 . J Exp Med . 2007 ; 204 ( 9 ) : 2031 – 8 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1084 / jem . 20062647 PMID : 17682067 53 . Morley SC , Wang C , Lo WL , Lio CW , Zinselmeyer BH , Miller MJ , et al . The actin - bundling protein L - plastin dissociates CCR7 proximalsignalingfrom CCR7 - inducedmotility . J Immunol . 2010 ; 184 ( 7 ) : 3628 – 38 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 4049 / jimmunol . 0903851PMID : 20194718 54 . Foger N , RangellL , DanilenkoDM , Chan AC . Requirement for coronin1 in T lymphocyte trafficking and cellularhomeostasis . Science . 2006 ; 313 ( 5788 ) : 839 – 42 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1126 / science . 1130563 PMID : 16902139 55 . Shiow LR , RoadcapDW , Paris K , Watson SR , GrigorovaIL , Lebet T , et al . The actin regulatorcoronin 1A is mutant in a thymic egress - deficient mouse strain and in a patient with severe combinedimmuno - deficiency . Nat Immunol . 2008 ; 9 ( 11 ) : 1307 – 15 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ni . 1662PMID : 18836449 56 . Zhang J , Shehabeldin A , da Cruz LAG , Butler J , SomaniAK , McGavin M , et al . Antigen receptor - inducedactivation and cytoskeletal rearrangement are impairedin Wiskott - Aldrich syndromeprotein - deficientlymphocytes . Journal of Experimental Medicine . 1999 ; 190 ( 9 ) : 1329 – 41 . PMID : 10544204 57 . SnapperSB , Rosen FS , Mizoguchi E , Cohen P , Khan W , Liu CH , et al . Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome pro - tein - deficient mice reveala role for WASP in T but not B cell activation . Immunity . 1998 ; 9 ( 1 ) : 81 – 91 . PMID : 9697838 58 . ZhangJY , Shi FB , BadourK , DengYP , McGavinMKH , SiminovitchKA . WASp verprolinhomology , cofi - lin homology , and acidic regiondomain - mediatedactin polymerization is requiredfor T cell develop - ment . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A . 2002 ; 99 ( 4 ) : 2240 – 5 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 042686099 PMID : 11842211 Cofilinis crucial for thymic αβ T - cell development PLOS Biology | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 2005380 July 9 , 2018 20 / 21 59 . El Malki K , Karbach SH , HuppertJ , Zayoud M , ReissigS , SchulerR , et al . An alternativepathway of imi - quimod - induced psoriasis - like skin inflammation in the absenceof interleukin - 17 receptora signaling . J Invest Dermatol . 2013 ; 133 ( 2 ) : 441 – 51 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / jid . 2012 . 318PMID : 22951726 60 . Kondo M , Weissman IL , Akashi K . Identification of clonogenic common lymphoidprogenitors in mouse bone marrow . Cell . 1997 ; 91 ( 5 ) : 661 – 72 . PMID : 9393859 Cofilinis crucial for thymic αβ T - cell development PLOS Biology | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 2005380 July 9 , 2018 21 / 21