Capturing and Supporting Contexts for Scientific Data Sharing via the Biological Sciences Collaboratory George Chin Jr . and Carina S . Lansing Pacific Northwest National Laboratory Computational Sciences and Mathematics Division P . O . Box 999 , Richland , WA 99352 USA + 1 509 375 - 2663 { George . Chin , Carina . Lansing } @ pnl . gov ABSTRACT Scientific collaboration is largely focused on the sharing and joint analysis of scientific data and results . Today , a movement is afoot within the scientific computing community to shift “collaboratory” development from traditional tool - centric approaches to more data - centric ones . Yet , to effectively support data sharing means more than providing a common repository for storing and retrieving shared data sets . In order to reasonably comprehend and apply another researcher’s data set , the scientist must grasp the various contexts of the data as it relates to the overall data space , applications , experiments , projects , and the scientific community . Under development at the Pacific Northwest National Laboratory , the Biological Sciences Collaboratory ( BSC ) enables the sharing of biological data and analyses through diverse capabilities such as metadata capture , electronic laboratory notebooks , data organization views , data provenance tracking , analysis notes , task management , and scientific workflow management . Overall , BSC strives to identify and capture the various social and scientific contexts in which data sharing collaborations in biology take place and to provide collaboration tools and capabilities that can effectively support and facilitate these important data sharing contexts . Categories and Subject Descriptors J . 3 [ Computer Applications ] : Life and Medical Sciences – biology and genetics . General Terms Design , Human Factors . Keywords Collaboratory , data sharing , data sharing contexts , data - centric collaboration , tool - centric collaboration , metadata , data provenance , scientific workflow . 1 . INTRODUCTION As defined by Wulf [ 29 ] , a “collaboratory is a ‘center without walls , ’ in which the nation’s researchers can perform their research without regard to geographical location . ” A diversity of such scientific collaboratories has been developed for various biological communities . For instance , the Biological Collaborative Research Environment ( BioCoRE ) [ 4 ] was developed by the University of Illinois at Urbana - Champaign as a Web - based collection of collaborative tools for structural biologists . BioCoRE provides a suite of collaborative visualization programs , Web - based forms and interfaces for submitting and monitoring networked supercomputing jobs , electronic notebooks for collecting data and notes , asynchronous and real - time communication tools for discussions , and collaborative writing tools for generating reports and publications . The Molecular Interactive Collaborative Environment ( MICE ) [ 6 ] , developed at the San Diego Supercomputer Center , provides collaborative access and manipulation of complex , three - dimensional molecular models as captured in various scientific visualization programs . Likewise , the Molecular Modeling Collaboratory ( MMC ) at the University of California , San Francisco [ 24 ] , also allows remote biologists to share and interactively manipulate three - dimensional molecular models in applications such as drug design and protein engineering . To date , collaboratory research and development efforts such as those described above have generally followed a tool - centric approach with the goal of providing shared access to and manipulation of specific software systems or scientific instruments . Such an emphasis on tools was necessary in the early development years of scientific collaboratories as computational scientists were required to develop basic collaboration tools such as text chat , synchronous audio , video conferencing , and electronic whiteboards to support rudimentary levels of communications and interactions . Now that these basic tools have flourished and become commercially available in software packages such as Microsoft NetMeeting [ 17 ] , IBM Lotus Sametime [ 10 ] , and MBone Videoconferencing [ 13 ] , computational scientists may move beyond developing general communication mechanisms to evaluating and supporting the very nature of collaboration in the scientific context . One distinguishing characteristic of scientific collaboration is that it focuses heavily on data collection and analysis [ 5 , 15 , 28 ] . Within the scientific computing and computer - supported cooperative work ( CSCW ) communities , interest has been building to apply collaborative technologies to support data sharing as opposed to tool sharing . A scientific panel of computational scientists and biomedical researchers that had been evaluating the use of collaboratories for the biomedical community noted , “Collaboration is driven both by the need to share data and to share knowledge about the data . ” The panel This paper is authored by an employee ( s ) of the United States Government and is in the public domain . CSCW’04 , November 6 - 10 , 2004 , Chicago , Illinois , USA . ACM 1 - 58113 - 810 - 5 / 04 / 0011 . also noted that biologists require “network - based tools for quickly and transparently locating and accessing data as well as applications for manipulating data” [ 3 ] . In implementing a data - centric approach , the emphasis shifts from “how to share” to “what is shared” with respect to the scientific artifacts that are produced and passed among collaborating researchers . The sharing of data is common practice in scientific research , where scientists share data to verify and to build upon one another’s findings and results [ 11 ] . Shared data , however , is only useful if sufficient context is provided about the data such that collaborators may comprehend and effectively apply it . Typically , data context is passed among collaborating scientists via one - to - one discussion ( e . g . , face - to - face interactions , over the telephone , and through email ) . More recently , data sharing environments are deploying metadata capabilities that allow scientists to store and associate contextual information with the scientific data [ 22 , 23 ] . In early participatory analysis and design sessions , we presented biologists with a Web - based collaboratory prototype that allowed users to place and retrieve data files into a common repository . The prototype was analogous to a distributed file system with a graphical user interface . Referring to the prototype , we then asked the biologists to describe the different ways they might use the scientific data in the repository and the kinds of additional information and computational capabilities they would require in applying the data . The biologists developed various mini - scenarios of shared data use . Through the mini - scenarios , we learned of a variety of both scientific and social contexts in which data is created , interpreted , and applied . These contexts describe how data sets relate to aspects of the overall data space , applications , experiments , projects , and the scientific community – identifying the critical features or properties of scientific data that need to be represented , elucidated , and made accessible to biologists in support of their data sharing efforts . Among the most prominent data features and properties include : • General data set properties – Basic data set properties such as owner , creation date , size , format , etc . • Experimental properties – Conditions and properties of the scientific experiment that generated or is to be applied to the data • Data provenance – Relationship of data to previous versions and other data sources • Integration – Relationship of data subsets within a full data set • Analysis and interpretation – Notes , experiences , interpretations , and knowledge generated from analysis of data • Physical organization – Mapping of data sets to physical storage structure such as a file system , database , or some other data repository • Project organization – Mapping of data sets to project hierarchy or organization • Scientific organization – Mapping of data sets to some scientific classification , hierarchy , or organization • Task – Research task ( s ) that generated or applies data set • Experimental process – Relationship of data and tasks to overall experimental process • User community – Application of data sets to different organizations of users At Pacific Northwest National Laboratory ( PNNL ) , the Biological Sciences Collaboratory ( BSC ) is being developed to support the above contexts for shared data use . The contexts imply specific representations and technical capabilities that are being developed as data sharing tools that are part of BSC . This paper presents BSC’s data sharing tools , while illuminating the data sharing contexts that the tools were designed to support . 2 . BASIC DATA SHARING BSC provides distributed access to data that are produced , applied , and / or shared in collaborative biology research . As shown in Figure 1 , data is made available through an Internet portal , and thus , may be accessed through standard Web browsers . The data browsing tool is called the “data explorer . ” Shared data may include both raw and processed data that are generated from specific technologies or experimental techniques such as DNA microarray analysis , real - time PCR , western blot , and immunohistochemistry . Analysis results may also be stored and accessed from BSC as well as linked to the raw or processed data from which they emerged . BSC supports various forms of data including instrument data , images , text , tables , spreadsheets , and publications as well as support standard data formats such as JPEG ( Joint Photographic Experts Group ) , PDF ( Portable Document Format ) , and CSV ( Comma - Separated Values ) . Furthermore , BSC also supports standard formats for the various schemas , ontologies , and protocols established or emerging in biological sciences research . Since microarray data is of particular importance to the biology community , BSC supports data standards emerging from the Microarray Gene Expression Data Society ( MGED ) [ 16 ] group such as the minimum information about a microarray experiment ( MIAME ) [ 7 ] specification . Through the compliance of MGED standards , BSC seeks to be interoperable with other MGED - compliant microarray data archives such as the Gene Expression Omnibus ( GEO ) [ 9 ] , ArrayExpress [ 8 ] , and GeneX [ 14 ] . Thus , BSC is able to access , interact , and exchange data and information with these other data sources . Data translation capabilities and tools are also provided in BSC to allow researchers to semi - automatically apply and exchange data in both common and user - specified data formats . BSC maintains an expanding repository of translation routines and utilities that have been developed at PNNL or provided by the broader biological research community . The translation services allow researchers to easily import and export data in the various formats that have been registered with BSC . In a more intelligent mode , BSC may also identify translation paths between known data formats , and then either present the translation paths back to the biologist or automatically apply the translation paths across selected data sets . Capabilities for accessing and applying external databases such as GenBank , The Institute for Genomic Research ( TIGR ) databases , Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes ( KEGG ) , PubMed , and the Stanford Microarray Database will also be made available through BSC . In addition , BSC provides database connection tools ( see Figure 2 ) that allow researchers to link directly to the tables and fields of external bases . In such cases , a shared data set represents live queries to one or more external databases . When activated , a data query is executed and data are transferred from databases back to a local copy in BSC . Biologists may then treat the retrieved data set as an isolated version or maintain its links back to the external databases such that changes to the local copy update the corresponding data in associated databases . In addition , notification capabilities have been developed to notify biologists when linked data in the databases are modified , or to automatically update linked , local versions of data sets when changes in the associated external databases occur . BSC also provides subscription capabilities that allow biologists to securely place and retrieve data into and out of the data portal . Biologists publishing to BSC will have the capability to limit access to their data to particular individuals or groups , or open the data to the entire research community . Software security mechanisms in BSC verify the identity of collaboratory users , manage permissions and privileges to the data , and provide encryption capabilities to ensure secure data transmission . Furthermore , BSC provide biologists the capability to define and delineate separate workspaces from which to organize different teams and conduct different research activities . As shown in Figure 1 , the various workspaces are accessed through tabs near the top of the window . Workspaces allow biologists to gather and manage specific sets of data , applications , and team members . Figure 1 . Data explorer provides access to shared data sets in the right panel and displays metadata to the left . Figure 2 . External database tool allows biologists to connect directly to specific tables and fields of external databases . 3 . METADATA Scientific data has both a physical and scientific context that may be captured and conveyed by associating metadata to the data . BSC allows researchers to attach user - defined metadata such as owner , creation date , project , experiment , and conditions to a data set ( shown in left window of Figure 1 ) . Biologists generally like to attach different kinds of metadata to different kinds of data sets . For example , a data set generated from a query to an external database would likely have different metadata properties than a data set generated from an experiment using an instrument . The metadata properties captured may vary based on a variety of factors including the biological domain or field , data source , type and line of investigation , individual preferences , project or organizational standards , and state of the current research . To accommodate metadata variations , BSC allows individuals , projects , and organizations to define standard templates of properties to be associated with scientific data . Templates may be further customized and / or extended to support specific collaborators’ needs . 4 . DATA ORGANIZATION BSC supports collaborative access and manipulation of shared data sets—regardless of whether those data sets reside in file systems , databases , or other kinds of data repositories . In fact , in most cases , biologists operate on working data sets that are based upon or driven by data and results from different sources . As such , BSC provides a scientific data viewer tool that allows biologists to maintain active links from their working data sets back to their original sources ( see Figure 3 ) . The data viewer may also be used to partition working data sets along other criteria and kinds of organizations . For example , the color - coding of Figure 3 may identify different sub - theories or the different tasks or responsibilities of team members rather than external data sources . Where the data viewer allows biologists to be cognizant of and able to operate upon the internal organization of a data set , BSC provides other data viewing tools that allow biologists to examine how a data set fits within the larger , overall data space . For instance , scientific data sets are often presented as documents in folders that exist within a larger file system . The file system provides a convenient organizing metaphor familiar to most any computer user . For biologists , however , other organizational views that reflect aspects of the project or the science may provide more applicable context to the data sets . Figure 4 shows three different data organization views supported by BSC . The topmost window presents the traditional file system view consisting of a hierarchical set of folders or directories . The middle window presents a project view that partitions data sets based on the divisions of the overall project . As shown , a project may be partitioned by collaborating institutions , areas of science Figure 3 . Shared data viewer allows biologists to partition and link their data by various attributes such as data sources , experiments , and tasks . being conducted , kinds of experiments , and kinds of instruments . The divisions of a project represent a logical organization of tasks and data as defined by project participants . The bottommost window of Figure 4 conveys the scientific organization of a data space . In this particular view , the scientific data organization identifies the taxonomy or phylogeny of the organism under study . Other scientific data organizations may also provide useful contexts such as molecular function , cellular location , and organism structure . The three data organization views present the data space at different scales and resolutions . In general , the file system view provides data context for a handful of scientists , the project view supports larger groups , and the science view supports entire scientific fields or domains . Attributes may also be attached to the views to convey additional contextual information . For example , in Figure 4 , data collections are color - coded to identify the owners or creators of the data , whether they are individuals , institutions , or consortia . Other attributes may also be mapped such as the age , size , or level of verification of data collections or sets . The data organization viewers are synchronized with the task list ( described later ) and the data explorer such that a selection of a collection in an organization view will highlight associated tasks in the task list and associated data sets in the data explorer . 5 . DATA PROVENANCE Biologists evolve and iterate data sets over the course of experimentation . The ability to manage large , complex data sets becomes more difficult over time as more experiments and runs take place . For these reasons , a tool for managing historical versions of data sets would provide a valuable service . As shown in Figure 5 , BSC provides a data provenance tool with data set versioning capabilities . The data provenance tool provides a hierarchical tree depicting the “pedigree” or the historical lineage of a data set . Each branch in the tree represents a particular path of evolution for the data set . From the tree view , the biologist may select a particular node to access a specific version of the data set . Alternatively , the biologist may select an entire branch and apply various comparison functions to evaluate how a data set may have changed over time . Overall , the data provenance tool allows researchers to trace data back to its sources through its evolutionary paths as well as make judgments on the credibility and reliability of the data . 6 . COLLABORATIVE ANALYSIS Collaborative analysis is an interactive process of brainstorming where researchers share their individual interpretations , understanding , and insights , which build upon one another to form cogent findings and conclusions . In supporting collaborative analysis , BSC facilitates the brainstorming process by providing shared access to data , analysis tools , and experiments . During the analysis process , BSC captures and collects analysis data not only in the final forms of analysis results and findings but also in intermediate , more transient forms of working ideas , interpretations , and knowledge . To illustrate , BSC provides capabilities to attach notes and comments to a data set as a way to capture descriptions , critiques , interpretations , experiences , and general knowledge . Through electronic note tools ( see Figure 6 ) , biologists are able to attach details such as elaborate descriptions of a data set , instructions on how the data set may be applied , identification of errors or anomalies in the data , and results of analyses using the data . Notes may be inputted textually using a keyboard or verbally using a microphone . Additional capabilities allow the biologist to mark up or draw on images and data tables in a free - form manner and save these drawings as overlays . Different overlays may then Figure 4 . Data organization views showing file system , project structure , and organism phylogeny . Figure 5 . Through data provenance , data sets may be traced back to their original sources . map onto an image or data table to show different interpretations and analyses . BSC also provides a more natural , free - from way to capture analysis results by providing an electronic laboratory notebook , which allows biologists to capture and share different kinds of free - form and structured data . As shown in Figure 7 , the electronic laboratory notebook may be applied as a knowledge capture tool much like a physical laboratory notebook . The biologist may store theoretical and procedural information in a laboratory notebook during the course of a project . The amount and level of detail of the information stored is under the control of the researcher . The electronic version of the laboratory notebook has additional features that allow the biologist to better manage , locate , and share scientific information . It allows researchers to capture information in various forms ( e . g . , text , drawings , tables , images , audio files , video files ) , share content by allowing biologists to access the same notebook from multiple machines , utilize standard security and authentication mechanisms to ensure valid access , and employ indexing and searching mechanisms that allow researchers to easily and quickly locate specific information . Beyond data sharing , BSC also supports collaborative analysis by allowing distributed biologists to share analysis results and tools . Analysis results may be stored , shared , and recalled in BSC just like any other data set . A window sharing application has been integrated into BSC to allow distributed biologists to share in the real - time operation of analysis tools . Application - sharing capabilities may be extended to support remote and collaborative control of laboratory instruments and equipment through their computer - based graphical user interfaces . BSC provides facilities to share microarray data in the context of collaborative experimentation and analysis . Through real - time collaboration tools such as audio / video conferencing , text chat , electronic whiteboards , and application sharing tools , remote researchers may spontaneously collaborate on the application and analysis of data . Real - time collaboration tools are provided by linking to standard commercial teleconferencing packages such as Microsoft NetMeeting , IBM Lotus Sametime , or MBone videoconferencing . Alternatively , through asynchronous mechanisms such as bulletin boards , researchers may collaborate on data over extended periods of time , involve larger numbers of researchers , and maintain a running record of the collaboration and analysis . BSC brings a variety of both scientific and collaboration tools into a common user environment . PNNL biologists are developing a variety of analysis tools that will enable multivariate analysis such as cluster analysis , principal component analysis , multidimensional scaling , 2 - D and 3 - D scientific visualization , and sophisticated data mining . To support the collaborative use of these analysis tools , BSC provides collaborative access to a library of key analysis tools defined by PNNL biology projects . Furthermore , BSC provides a flexible integration framework that allows researchers to easily bring in and share their preferred commercial and public domain analysis and visualization tools . The expanded set of tools may then be made available to a specific researcher , group of researchers , project , or the broader research community . 7 . TASK MANAGEMENT As shown in Figure 8 , BSC also allows biologists to define and track tasks related to a specific experiment or project . Tasks are assigned to specific individuals and given certain deadlines and levels of priority . Biologists update and convey the statuses of their tasks through the task list as they carry out their research . Project managers and other collaborators may query the task list in different ways such as viewing all the tasks of one particular researcher , viewing dependencies of different tasks , examining tasks with upcoming deadlines , and identifying tasks that are running behind . Most experimental tasks produce data sets that are to be shared amongst collaborators or project members . BSC Figure 6 . Biologists may attach notes in textual or audio form to a data set as well as draw on top of images . Notes and drawings are saved as individual interpretations or analyses . Figure 7 . Electronic laboratory notebook supports the free - form collection of data . Biologists may store contextual information along with their data using different multimedia such as text , images , drawings , and HTML code . links the task list to the data explorer such that a selected task in the task list will highlight the data sets in the data explorer that were generated as result of the task . BSC also provides scientific workflow management capabilities to capture , manage , and supply standard paths of analyses . As shown in Figure 9 , scientific workflows may be viewed as process templates that captures and semi - automates the steps of an analysis process and its encompassing data sets and tools . Workflow templates may serve as “workflows - by - example , ” provided to convey and share analysis processes with other biologists . Like the data organization viewers , the scientific workflow tool is synchronized with the task list and the data explorer such that a selection of a workflow step will highlight associated tasks in the task list and associated data sets in the data explorer . Through the scientific workflow tool , biologists are able to work with and link combinations of analysis and visualization tools in useful and novel ways . For instance , a biologist might link a clustering algorithm to a specific high - level user interface and to other bioinformatics and visualization tools , and then repetitively apply this configuration of tools in a particular analysis or experiment . Furthermore , the integration environment may semi - automatically employ data transformation tools to facilitate the importation and exportation of data into and out of various analysis software systems . Linked to the scientific workflow tool , the execution history tool allows biologists to highlight and re - instantiate particular paths of past workflow executions . As shown in Figure 10 , the tool’s graphical tree - based depiction presents a hierarchical view of past executions with nodes identifying points of iteration in the Figure 8 . Task list allows biologists to define and track experimental tasks . Figure 9 . Scientific workflow tool will allow researchers to define and track scientific data in relation to the experiment process . experiment . When a particular path branches out into multiple paths , the multiple paths indicate that several experimental runs were carried out from a common point in the experiment . The biologist may select an extended thread of the history tree to reproduce that experimental run . Additionally , the biologist may retrieve input and output data sets generated at any point within the execution history . 8 . PROJECT COLLABORATION BSC supports project - level collaboration by providing basic project team management capabilities that allow biologists to define and manage the members of their groups . Security and authentication mechanisms are applied to limit access to project data and applications only to project members . Monitoring capabilities allow biologists to identify whether other project members are online at a particular time and working on the project . Activity logs document the activities of project members over time as they access and manipulate data sets and apply applications . On an individual basis , biologists may review the activity log to determine the current status of the research or project . Furthermore , electronic laboratory notebooks are available to support chronological , project - level documentation . Using an electronic laboratory notebook , biologists may organize and document key ideas , data sets , and results much like they do using a physical laboratory notebook . However , the electronic version of the notebook further facilitates collaborative access and editing among project team members since it is easily replicable across computers and researchers . Biologists often work across personal and project spaces . BSC supports various authorization levels that allow biologists to maintain both personal and project sets of data , applications , electronic laboratory notebooks , and other computational resources . BSC also provide mechanisms to migrate personal data to projects and larger scientific communities . Conversely , BSC will allow biologists to copy shared or published data sets into their individual work spaces . 9 . COMMUNITY COLLABORATION Biologists may publish their data sets to the larger scientific community through the data portal . External biologists may also generate notes and overlays , thereby providing a mechanism that will enable the community to share in the analyses of data sets . Others may view the collected notes and overlays to calibrate the usefulness and value of a data set . Notification mechanisms are again employed to allow biologists to register their interests in a particular data set . When that data set is modified , registered biologists will receive email notification . In addition , general bulletin board facilities allow biologists to register their interests , skills , and needs . Other biologists may peruse the bulletin board to identify potential collaborators with complementary skills and interests . Together , data provenance and annotation features provide researchers some initial capacity to assess the quality of collected data . Such assessments in a community space may lead to the development and establishment of quality metrics that are accepted by a broad base of biology researchers . Quality assessment is important to researchers in gaining accuracy and confidence in their research results . The BSC project will explore , test , and deploy various quality measures based on properties such as the number of and correlations between repeated experiments , analyses of variance , t - tests , and other statistical measures . 10 . IMPLEMENTATION BSC is built upon base technologies provided by the Collaboratory for Multi - scale Chemical Sciences ( CMCS ) project [ 19 ] . BSC has migrated much of the CMCS portal , content management , and security capabilities and technologies to specifically support biology - based data sharing with regard to file formats , data types , and associated metadata . BSC , as is CMCS , is implemented in Java using Apache Jetspeed [ 1 ] as an underlying portal infrastructure and leveraging the University of Michigan’s CompreHensive collaborativE Framework ( CHEF ) [ 25 ] to provide collaboration and project management tools such as chat , discussion groups , announcements , and scheduling . For content management , BSC leverages the Scientific Annotation Middleware ( SAM ) [ 20 ] , which is based on an open - source Java implementation of the WebDAV protocol [ 27 ] called Jakarta Slide [ 2 ] . SAM enhances Slide by adding a rich set of metadata capabilities including translators , metadata extractors , and provenance graph generation . BSC offers secured access to both portal tools and data resources through the use of X . 509 certificates that protect user authentication information during login and prevent unauthorized access to data and tools . 11 . DEPLOYMENT AND EVALUATION BSC has been deployed to support a number of internal PNNL biology and bioinformatics projects . It is also being used as a testbed repository by a select group of PNNL and external biologists from the Shewanella Federation [ 18 ] , which is a multi - investigator and cross - institutional consortium formed to characterize and model the biology of the metabolically versatile bacterium Shewanella oneidensis MR - 1 . The Shewanella Federation consists of a number of academic and government agencies and organizations including PNNL , U . S . Department of Energy , Oak Ridge National Laboratory , Figure 10 . Execution history viewer shows versioned data linked to past execution paths . Biologists may reproduce previous experimental runs and data sets through the execution history viewer . Argonne National Laboratory , Marine Biological Laboratory , Michigan State University , and University of Southern California . Over time , we hope to increase the use and adoption of BSC among the many members and participants of the Shewanella Federation . Although a number of collaboratories have been developed over the past decade , a very limited amount of research has been devoted towards the evaluation of such systems [ 21 , 26 ] . The evaluation of BSC is being conducted mainly through participant observations , user interviews , and artifact analysis [ 12 ] , where we not only examine the features of the developed tools , but also the products of scientific collaboration such as shared data sets , database queries , data organization views , data provenance trees , analysis notes , research tasks , scientific workflows , execution histories , and electronic laboratory notebook pages . In our evaluation , we wish to assess whether biologists are effective in applying the individual tools and capabilities , and how well the individual tools support and satisfy their intended purposes . One early finding from our evaluation is that biologists need an organizing context when working with shared data sets . Data sets are grouped together into shared folders for a reason ; they may relate to the same experiment , serve as input or output to a specific simulation , supply pieces of evidence to a particular hypothesis or theory , or provide alternative views of a particular result , interaction , or phenomenon . Biologists need to see and understand the relationships among data sets before they may effectively share and apply them . To support this , we are providing biologists the capability to attach free - form text or HTML - based context pages to data set collections , where they may be used to describe the general relationships and overall organization of the data sets . 12 . SUMMARY As shown in Figure 11 , BSC integrates a set of diverse collaboration capabilities . BSC strives to provide an open research environment in which biologists from the same or different fields may collaborate on advanced research using the most recent discoveries , up - to - date data , and leading - edge instruments and analysis tools—all while reducing the physical , organizational , and political boundaries that traditionally separate researchers . BSC accomplished this by providing a set of novel , collaborative capabilities that allow biologists to share and apply data in various analytical and scientific contexts . 13 . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The research described in this paper was conducted under the Laboratory - Directed Research and Development ( LDRD ) Program at the Pacific Northwest National Laboratory , a multiprogram national laboratory operated by Battelle for the U . S . Department of Energy under Contract DE - AC06 - 76RL01830 . Figure 11 . BSC provides an integrated set of tools – allowing researchers to share data , applications , and communications . 14 . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Apache Software Foundation . Jetspeed . http : / / jakarta . apache . org / jetspeed / site / index . html . [ 2 ] Apache Software Foundation . The Jakarta Slide Project . http : / / jakarta . apache . org / slide . [ 3 ] Arzberger , P . , and Finhold , T . A . 2002 . “ Data and Collaboratories in the Biomedical Community . ” National Biomedical Computation Resource at the University of California , San Diego ( NIH award RR08605 ) . [ 4 ] Bhandarkar , M . , Budescu , G . , Humphrey , W . F . , Izaguirre , J . A . , Izrailev , S . , Kalé , L . V . , Kosztin , D . , Molnar , F . , Phillips , J . C . , and Schulten , K . 1999 . “BioCoRE : A Collaboratory for Structural Biology . ” Proceedings of the SCS International Conference on Web - Based Modeling and Simulation , San Francisco , CA , pp . 242 - 251 . [ 5 ] Birnholtz , J . P . and Bietz , M . J . 2003 . “Data at Work : Supporting Sharing in Science and Engineering . ” Proceedings of the 2003 International ACM SIGGROUP Conference on Supporting Group Work , Sanibel Island , FL , pp . 339 - 348 . [ 6 ] Bourne , P . E . , Gribskov , M . , Johnson , G . , Moreland , J . , and Weissig , H . 1998 . “A Prototype Molecular Interactive Collaborative Environment ( MICE ) . ” Proceeding of the 1998 Pacific Symposium on Biocomputing , Kapalua , HI , pp . 118 - 129 . [ 7 ] Brazma , A . , Hingamp , P . , Quackenbush , J . , Sherlock , G . , Spellman , P . , Stoeckert , C . , Aach , J . , Ansorge , W . , Ball , C . A . , Causton , H . C . , Gaasterland , T . , Glenisson , P . , Holstege , F . C . , Kim , I . F . , Markowitz , V . , Matese , J . C . , Parkinson , H . , Robinson , A . , Sarkans , U . , Schulze - Kremer , S . , Stewart , J . , Taylor , R . , Vilo , J . , and Vingron , M . 2001 . “Minimum Information About a Microarray Experiment ( MIAME ) - Toward Standards for Microarray Data . ” Natural Genetics , 29 ( 4 ) , pp . 365 - 371 . [ 8 ] Brazma , A . , Parkinson , H . , Sarkans , U . , Shojatalab , M . , Vilo , J . , Abeygunawardena , N . , Holloway , E . , Kapushesky , M . , Kemmeren , P . , Lara , G . G . , Oezcimen , A . , Rocca - Serra , P . , and Sansone , S . A . 2003 . “ArrayExpress - - A Public Repository for Microarray Gene Expression Data at the EBI . ” Nucleic Acids Research , 31 ( 1 ) , pp . 68 - 71 . [ 9 ] Edgar , R . , Domrachev , M . , and Lash , A . E . 2002 . “Gene Expression Omnibus : NCBI Gene Expression and Hybridization Array Data Repository . ” Nucleic Acids Research , 30 ( 1 ) , pp . 207 - 210 . [ 10 ] IBM . Lotus Instant Messaging ( Sametime ) . http : / / www . lotus . com / products / lotussametime . nsf / wdocs / ho mepage . [ 11 ] Louis , K . S . , Jones , L . M . , and Campbell , E . G . 2002 . “Sharing in Science . ” American Scientist , 90 ( 4 ) : pp . 304 - 307 . [ 12 ] Kellogg , W . A . 1990 . “Qualitative Artifact Analysis . ” Proceedings of INTERACT 90 , Amsterdam , The Netherlands , pp . 193 - 198 . [ 13 ] Macedonia , M . R . and Brutzman , D . P . , " MBone Provides Audio and Video Across the Internet . ” IEEE Computer , 27 ( 4 ) , pp . 30 - 36 . [ 14 ] Mangalam , H . , Stewart , J . , Zhou , J . , Schlauch , K . , Waugh , M . , Chen , G . , Farmer , A . D . , Colello , G . , and Weller , J . W . 2001 . “GeneX : An Open Source Gene Expression Database and Integrated Tool Set . ” IBM Systems Journal , 40 ( 2 ) , pp . 552 - 569 . [ 15 ] Merton , R . K . 1968 . Social Theory and Social Structure . Free Press , New York . [ 16 ] Microarray Gene Expression Data Society . MGED – International Meetings on Microarray Gene Expression Databases Group . http : / / www . mged . org / index . html . [ 17 ] Microsoft Corporation . NetMeeting . http : / / www . microsoft . com / windows / netmeeting / default . asp . [ 18 ] Michigan State University . Shewanella Federation . http : / / www . shewanella . org / home . sjsp . [ 19 ] Myers , J . D . , Allison , T . C . , Bittner , S . , Didier , B . , Frenklach , M . , Green , W . H . , Ho , Y . , Hewson , J . , Koegler , W . , Lansing , C . , Leahy , D . , Lee , M . , McCoy , R . , Minkoff , M . , Nijsure , S . , von Laszewski , G . , Montoya , D . , Pancerella , C . , Pinzon , R . , Pitz , W . , Rahn , L . A . , Ruscic , B . , Schuchardt , K . , Stephan , E . , Wagner , A . , Windus , T . , and Yang , C . 2004 . “A Collaborative Informatics Infrastructure for Multi - scale Science . ” Proceedings of the Challenges of Large Applications in Distributed Environments ( CLADE ) Workshop , Honolulu , HI . [ 20 ] Myers , J . D . , Chappell , A . R . , Elder , M . , Geist , A . , and Schwidder , J . 2003 . “Re - Integrating the Research Record . ” Computing in Science and Engineering , May / June , pp 44 - 50 . [ 21 ] Olson , G . M . , Finholt , T . A . , and Teasley , S . D . 2000 . “Behavioral Aspects of Collaboratories . ” In Koslow , S . H . and Huerta , M . F . ( eds . ) , Electronic Collaboration in Science , Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , Mahwah , NJ . [ 22 ] Peltier , S . T . and Ellisman , M . H . 2003 . “The Biomedical Informatics Research Network . ” In Foster , I . and Kesselman , C . ( eds . ) , The Grid 2 , Morgan Kaufmann , San Francisco . [ 23 ] Shortliffe , E . H . , Barnett , O . , Cimino , J . J . , Greenes , R . A . , and Patel , V . L . 1996 . “ InterMed : An Internet - Based Medical Collaboratory . ” Proceedings of INET ' 96 , the Annual Meeting of the Internet Society , Montreal , Canada . [ 24 ] University of California , San Francisco . Molecular Modeling “Collaboratory . ” http : / / www . cgl . ucsf . edu / Research / collaboratory . [ 25 ] University of Michigan . CHEF Information Site . http : / / chefproject . org / portal . [ 26 ] University of Michigan . Science of Collaboratories . http : / / www . scienceofcollaboratories . org . [ 27 ] Whitehead , E . J . and M . Wiggins . 1998 . “WebDAV : IETF standard for collaborative authoring on the Web . ” IEEE Internet Computing , 2 ( 5 ) : pp . 34 - 40 . [ 28 ] Wouters , P . and Schröder , P . ( eds . ) . 2003 . Promise and Practice in Data Sharing . Book series : Wouters , P . and Schröder , P . ( eds . ) , The Public Domain of Digital Research Data , NIWI - KNAW , Amsterdam . [ 29 ] Wulf , W . 1993 . “The Collaboratory Opportunity . ” Science 261 , ( 13 Aug 1993 ) , pp . 854 - 855 .