Individual differences in spontaneous analogical transfer James R . Kubricht 1 & Hongjing Lu 1 & Keith J . Holyoak 1 Published online : 30 December 2016 # Psychonomic Society , Inc . 2016 Abstract Research on analogical problem solving has shown that people often fail to spontaneously notice the relevance of a semantically remote source analog when solving a target prob - lem , although they are able to form mappings and derive infer - ences when given a hint to recall the source . Relatively little work has investigated possible individual differences that pre - dict spontaneous transfer , or how such differences may interact with interventions that facilitate transfer . In this study , fluid in - telligence was measured for participants in an analogical problem - solving task , using an abridged version of the Raven ’ s Progressive Matrices ( RPM ) test . In two experiments , we systematically compared the effect of augmenting verbal descriptions of the source with animations or static diagrams . Solution rates to Duncker ’ s radiation problem were measured across varying source presentation conditions , and participants ’ understanding of the relevant source material was assessed . The pattern of transfer was best fit by a moderated mediation model : the positive impact of fluid intelligence on spontaneous transfer was mediated by its influence on source comprehension ; how - ever , this path was in turn modulated by provision of a supple - mental animation via its influence on comprehension of the source . Animated source depictions were most beneficial in facilitating spontaneous transfer for those participants with low scores on the fluid intelligence measure . Keywords Analogy . Fluid intelligence . Animation . Multimedia learning . Transfer Analogical inference — the application of knowledge about a familiar source system to a novel but structurally similar target system — is critical in scientific discovery ( Dunbar & Klahr , 2012 ) and many other types of creative human activity ( Gentner , 2010 ; Holyoak , 2012 ; Holyoak & Thagard , 1995 ) . The human capacity for abstract thinking , which is exempli - fied by analogical reasoning , exceeds that of any other species and plays a significant role in formulating ideas that transcend immediate perception ( Penn , Holyoak , & Povinelli , 2008 ) . It is generally recognized that analogical reasoning involves several subprocesses , most notably retrieval of a related source analog , mapping , inference , and subsequent generalization ( e . g . , Holyoak , Novick , & Melz , 1994 ) . A number of computational models of these subprocesses have been proposed , including the Structure Mapping Engine ( SME ; Falkenhainer , Forbus & Gentner , 1989 ) , the Incremental Analogy Machine ( IAM ; Keane & Brayshaw , 1988 ; Keane , Ledgeway , & Duff , 1994 ) , the Structured Tensor Analogical Reasoning model ( STAR ; Halford , Wilson , & Phillips , 1998 ) , and Learning and Inference with Schemas and Analogies ( LISA ; Hummel & Holyoak , 1997 , 2003 ) . A basic empirical finding is that when a source and target are drawn from different knowledge domains and encountered in different contexts , a potentially useful source analog often remains unnoticed . The gap between noticing and actual use of a source analog has been explored most extensive - ly in experiments using Duncker ’ s ( 1945 ) radiation problem as the target analog . In this problem , a doctor must find a way to use a radiation ray of varying intensity to destroy an inoperable stomach tumor in a patient . The essence of the problem is that high - intensity rays will destroy healthy tissue when they pass through it on their way to the tumor . Although low - intensity rays do not harm healthy tissue , they are also ineffective in damaging or destroying the tumor . The convergence solution is to apply multiple low - intensity rays to the tumor simulta - neously from multiple locations surrounding the target . * James R . Kubricht kubricht @ ucla . edu 1 Department of Psychology , University of California , 405 Hilgard Ave . , Los Angeles , CA 90095 , USA Mem Cogn ( 2017 ) 45 : 576 – 588 DOI 10 . 3758 / s13421 - 016 - 0687 - 7 Spontaneous analogical transfer Gick and Holyoak ( 1980 , 1983 ) found that in the absence of a related source analog , only about 10 % of the participants were able to generate the convergence solution to the radiation problem . When a verbal story highly dissimilar to the radia - tion problem ( a story about a general using converging troops to capture a fortress ) was presented to participants prior to the target problem , the rate of spontaneously generating conver - gence solutions increased to about 30 % . After receiving an explicit hint to recall the source analog , an approximately 50 % additional participants gave the convergence solution , for a total solution rate of roughly 80 % . Thus , people often failed to spontaneously notice the relevance of the source in solving the target problem , though they could successfully form mappings and derive inferences when prompted to do so . The difficulty of spontaneously noticing the relevance of distant analogs remains even when more naturalistic materials are employed ( Trench & Minervino , 2015 ) . Subsequent research has established that spontaneous trans - fer can be facilitated in a number of ways , including choosing a source analog that is relatively similar to the target ( Keane , 1987 ) , or one that permits a clear , isomorphic mapping to the target problem ( Holyoak & Koh , 1987 ) . In addition , close com - parison of multiple source analogs appears to aid in abstracting a more general schema for a class of problems , which in turn fosters later spontaneous transfer ( Catrambone & Holyoak , 1989 ; Gick & Holyoak , 1983 ; Loewenstein , Thompson , & Gentner , 2003 ) . Direct instructions to search for remote analogs ( without specifying any specific domain ) can also be effective ( Trench , Olguín , & Minervino , 2016 ) . In general , manipulations that encourage attention to shared relations tend to foster transfer of learning ( for a review , see Goldwater & Schalk , 2016 ) . Less work has been done to address the possibility that people systematically differ in their ability to spontaneously notice and use remote analogies . Evidence shows that mea - sures of fluid intelligence , notably Raven ’ s Progressive Matrices ( Raven , 1938 ) , predict performance on standardized analogy tests ( Snow , Kyllonen , & Marshalek , 1984 ) as well as analogical mapping in experimental tasks ( Vendetti , Wu , & Holyoak , 2014 ) . Fluid intelligence is closely linked to working - memory capacity ( see Ackerman , Beier , & Boyle , 2005 ; Engle , 2002 ) , which has been linked to analogical rea - soning in some computational models ( e . g . , Halford et al . , 1998 ; Hummel & Holyoak , 2003 ) . However , most tests of analogical reasoning present the source and target together ( typically in A : B : : C : D format ) , so that the need for sponta - neous retrieval of the source is eliminated . Relatively few studies have examined individual differences in more com - plex analogical problem solving ( e . g . , Antonietti & Gioletta , 1995 ) . There is some evidence that verbal ability predicts spontaneous transfer rates when the source analog is relatively unfamiliar ( Corkill & Fager , 1995 ) , and that a measure of math expertise ( math SATscore ) predicts spontaneous transfer to a math generalization problem after exposure to multiple target analogs ( Novick & Holyoak , 1991 ) . This study is ( to our knowledge ) the first to investigate whether fluid intelligence scores predict spontaneous analog - ical transfer . As noted , computational models of analogical reasoning that operate within working - memory constraints imply that the mapping process will be sensitive to working - memory capacity . However , mapping necessarily follows the process of accessing a source analog in memory ( since by definition mapping must consider the source and target ana - logs together ) . It is therefore less clear on theoretical grounds whether working - memory capacity , or the closely related con - cept of fluid intelligence , will have an impact on retrieval of the source analog , and hence on spontaneous transfer . We further aimed to determine whether the impact of fluid intelligence on spontaneous transfer is mediated by variations in comprehension of the source analog . In addition , we sought to determine whether the influence of fluid intelligence is modulated by an important factor that may facilitate analogi - cal transfer : providing animations to support comprehension of the source analog . Visuospatial displays and analogical transfer Research on diagrammatic reasoning has shown that visuo - spatial representations of solution strategies for mechanical problems can enhance people ’ s ability to infer the principles of operation for physical systems ( Hegarty & Stull , 2012 ) , suggesting the importance of display format in acquisition of abstract knowledge . A few studies have shown that static , visual diagrams can be used as source analogs for verbal target problems ( Gick , 1985 ; Gick & Holyoak , 1983 ) . While uninterpreted diagrams generally result in low rates of spon - taneous transfer , they can serve as effective analogs following a hint to recall and apply them to a novel target problem ( Gick & Holyoak , 1980 ) . In contrast to the weak effects of static diagrams , there is some evidence that animated displays can facilitate spontane - ous transfer ( Beveridge & Parkins , 1987 ; Pedone , Hummel , & Holyoak , 2001 ) . The radiation problem is temporally dynam - ic , in that the key concepts involve the summation of forces over space and time . The use of physical motion in an animat - ed display may help the learner to focus attention on dynamic relationships ( Tversky & Morrison , 2002 ) , which may in turn provide additional retrieval pathways when the target problem is encountered . Day and Goldstone ( 2011 ) found that present - ing a force - based physical system can prime dynamic mental models , which in turn facilitates spontaneous transfer when solving social problems based on superficially dissimilar dy - namic systems . Mem Cogn ( 2017 ) 45 : 576 – 588 577 The potential effectiveness of animation in promoting trans - fer is consistent with work in fields such as math education , where it has been advocated that students should be encouraged to ground formalisms in concrete situation models — that is , ap - proximate perceptual and dynamic representations of how events described by a problem text occur in the real world ( e . g . , Koedinger , Anderson , Hadley , & Mark , 1997 ; Nathan , 1998 ; Nathan , Kintsch , & Young , 1992 ; Reed , 2006 ) . Simulations based on situation models have proved effective in promoting better comprehension of relatively simple texts ( e . g . , Glenberg , Gutierrez , Levin , Japuntich , & Kaschak , 2004 ) . An important finding is that far transfer is often best promoted by using relatively idealized representations ( e . g . , simplified rather than detailed perceptual displays ; for a review , see Fyfe , McNeil , Son , & Goldstone , 2014 ) . This study aimed to systematically compare the effectiveness of animations and static diagrams ( combined with verbal de - scriptions ) in facilitating spontaneous analogical transfer to the radiation problem . In a previous investigation of the impact of animation on analogical transfer , Pedone et al . ( 2001 ) presented animations and diagrams without any verbal cover story and did not measure participants ’ understanding of the source analogs . Evidence shows that the combination of animations and spoken narration is especially effective in increasing understanding of a mechanical system ( Mayer , 2009 ; Mayer & Anderson , 1991 ) . Thus , animations may provide deeper insight into the causal structure of a dynamic system than does a verbal description alone . To assess this possibility , our study included measures of participants ’ understanding of the source analog . We hypoth - esized that animations would improve initial understanding of the source and facilitate subsequent spontaneous analogical transfer . The animations we tested were relatively simple , aiming to focus attention on key relations while grounding ver - bal problem descriptions in a dynamic perceptual representation . By measuring individual differences , we also sought to deter - mine whether the impact of animation on spontaneous transfer differs for people at varying levels of fluid intelligence . Experiment 1 Method Participants A total of 126 ( 92 female ; N = 42 per condition ) participants were recruited from the Department of Psychology subject pool at the University of California , Los Angeles ( UCLA ) . They were compensated with course credit for their participa - tion and were naïve to the purpose of the experiment . Three participants with less - than - chance performance on the fluid intelligence measure ( Raven ’ s score < 2 ) were removed from the analysis . Source analog stimuli Animated stimuli were generated using Psychophysics Toolbox Version 3 ( Brainard , 1997 ; Kleiner , Brainard , & Pelli , 2007 ) in MATLAB , and presented on a CRT monitor at a viewing distance of70cm . Ineachanimation , eitheroneoreightcannonsfiredsmall or large cannonballs radially inward toward an enemy octagon surrounded by a friendly barrier . The octagon was colored red and hadaninitialangularwidthof0 . 89° . Inthesingle - cannonscenarios , the octagon ’ s angular width was reduced by 0° and 0 . 007° after each small - and large - cannonball volley , respectively . In the multiple - cannon scenarios , its width was reduced by 0 . 040 and 0 . 056° after each volley . The small and large cannonballs were coloredwhiteandhadangularwidthsof0 . 10and0 . 20° , respective - ly . Each cannon was also colored white and had an angular length and width of 1 . 13 and 0 . 57° , respectively . The barrier was colored green and had a radial width that subtended 0 . 25° of visual angle . Upon impact of each large cannonball , the outer radius of the barrier wasreducedby aGaussian function with maximum mag - nitude at the point of impact and decreasing magnitude with azi - muthal distance . The outer radius was reduced until the barrier was breached , which occurred after 10 large - cannonball volleys . The minimal radial distance to the barrier and each cannon subtended 1 . 19 and 4 . 15° of visual angle , respectively . Following each scenario , a message box appeared , indicating whether the cannon ( s ) succeeded or failed to meet their objective ( i . e . , whethertheenemyoctagonwasdefeated ) . Elementsineach animation were displayed over a black background . Figure 1 il - lustrates representative diagrams for each scenario , which were chosen from intermediate frames from their respective anima - tions . The number of cannons and the size of the cannonballs in each scenario , along with the level of damage inflicted to the key elements in each display , are indicated in Table 1 . The depicted frames were chosen such that the amount of damage inflicted to the barrier and octagon are visually apparent . Videos of the ani - mated scenarios , along with their accompanying spoken mono - logues , areincluded in online Supplemental Materials ( http : / / cvl . psych . ucla . edu / moviedemo . html ) . Both animations and diagrams were accompanied by spo - ken monologues recorded on a Blue Yeti USB microphone with a 48 kHz ( 16 bit ) recording sample rate . In each spoken monologue , the number of cannons and the size of the can - nonballs were specified in addition to the amount of damage inflicted to the friendly barrier and enemy octagon by the cannon ( s ) . There were four possible levels of damage ( none , minor , moderate , and major ) , which varied across scenarios . The same source analog stimuli were employed in both Experiments 1 and 2 of this study . Procedure and design Participants were randomly assigned into one of three condi - tions ( Verbal , Diagram + Verbal , and Animation + Verbal ) 578 Mem Cogn ( 2017 ) 45 : 576 – 588 reflecting the presentation method for the source analog . In all conditions , an initial instruction page provided pictorial depic - tions of the general elements in the source analog , which was comprised of four scenarios presented in sequential order . Participants in each condition received an auditory - verbal ( spoken monologue ) description of each scenario . Those in the Verbal condition were presented with the spoken mono - logue alone , whereas participants in the Diagram + Verbal and Animation + Verbal conditions received a supplemental dia - gram or animation , respectively . The goal of the cannon ( s ) in each of the four scenarios is to defeat the enemy octagon without inflicting critical damage to any local region of the barrier . The successful scenario is anal - ogous to the convergence solution to Duncker ’ s radiation problem , in which multiple radiation sources are fired at low intensity from multiple locations surrounding the patient ’ s stomach , successfully destroying the tumor without inflicting critical damage to any local region of the surrounding healthy tissue . The relational structure of the cannonball scenario is thus isomorphic to the key relations in the potential solution to the radiation problem . Questions related to each scenario were presented sequen - tially following the presentation of all four scenarios . Participants answered two multiple - choice questions per sce - nario , which assessed their understanding of the level of dam - age inflicted to the barrier and octagon in each system ( e . g . , B What level of damage did the cannonballs cause to the friendly barrier in Scenario 1 ? ^ ) . Damage level was directly stated in the spoken monologue for each scenario . After com - pleting the multiple - choice questions , participants were asked to explain why the cannon ( s ) failed or succeeded in meeting the objective in each scenario ( one free - response question per scenario ) . The question materials are provided in the Appendix . Both multiple - choice and free - response questions were administered using Qualtrics , an online survey environ - ment intended for research and experimental purposes . Next , each subject completed an abridged , 12 - item version of the Raven ’ s Progressive Matrices test ( RPM ; Arthur , Tubré Paul , & Sanchez - Ku , 1999 ) . In this task , participants viewed a series of 3 × 3 matrices with textured shapes displayed in each cell . The shapes exhibited systematic patterns across the rows and columns of each matrix , and participants were instructed to identify the missing element that completed the pattern without violating the underlying relational rules . The test pro - vides a nonverbal measure of fluid intelligence , allowing us to assess potential individual differences in transfer performance . Fig . 1 Illustration of scenario diagrams used in the Diagram + Verbal condition . Participants were presented with the scenarios in sequential order , accompanied by an auditory - verbal explanation of key concepts . a In Scenario 1 , a single cannon fires small cannonballs and inflicts no damage to either the barrier or octagon . b In Scenario 2 , a single cannon fires large cannonballs and inflicts minor damage to the octagon and major damage to the barrier . c In Scenario 3 , multiple cannons fire large cannonballs simultaneously , this time inflicting major damage to both the octagon and barrier . d In Scenario 4 , multiple cannons fire small cannonballs simultaneously . The converging cannonballs inflict no damage to the barrier and moderate damage to the octagon Table 1 Number of cannons , size of cannonballs , and level of damage inflicted to key elements in each scenario Scenarionumber Number of cannons Cannonballsize Barrierdamage level Octagondamagelevel 1 1 Small None None 2 1 Large Major Minor 3 8 Large Major Major 4 8 Small None Moderate Mem Cogn ( 2017 ) 45 : 576 – 588 579 The abridged RPM test also served as a filler task to create a total delay ( approximately 15 minutes ) between presentation of the source and target analogs . Participants required approx - imately 11 minutes to complete the RPM test . Finally , transfer rates to the radiation problem ( Duncker , 1945 ; included in the Supplemental Materials ) were measured across varying conditions of source training . Participants were asked to solve Duncker ’ s radiation problem in a two - pass fashion ( cf . Gick & Holyoak , 1980 ) . On the first pass , partic - ipants received no indication that the previously presented scenarios were related to the target problem . Spontaneous transfer was defined by successful generation of the conver - gence solution on the first pass without any hint . After partic - ipants submitted their answers , the radiation problem was pre - sented again , but this time with an explicit hint prompting participants to recall the cannon scenarios and any solution to the radiation problem they might suggest . Hence , hinted transfer was defined by successful generation of the conver - gence solution on the second pass , after the explicit hint . Results Analogical transfer rates A set of criteria ( adapted from previous research ; Gick & Holyoak , 1980 ) were used to determine whether participants successfully solved the radiation problem either before or after the hint . Solutions were scored according to whether partici - pants conveyed at least two of the three critical ideas underly - ing the convergence principle ( i . e . , multiple radiation sources are needed , radiation sources should fire low - intensity rays , and radiation sources should be positioned in different loca - tions surrounding the patient ’ s stomach tumor ) . Participants were scored as having either ( 1 ) solved the radiation problem spontaneously ( i . e . , without the hint ) , ( 2 ) solved the radiation problem with the hint , or ( 3 ) failed to solve the radiation prob - lem . Two undergraduate research assistants naïve to the ex - perimental hypothesis and test conditions independently scored each participant ’ s responses , with an agreement rate of 95 % ( Cohen ’ s κ = . 87 ) . A third researcher broke the tie if the first two researchers disagreed with one another . Spontaneous transfer rate corresponds to the percentage of participants who produced the convergence solution to the radiation problem before a hint was given to recall the source analog . This measure assesses participants ’ ability to sponta - neously retrieve the source analog and apply their knowledge to a novel target problem following a time delay . Total transfer rate corresponds to the percentage of participants able to solve the radiation problem either before or after a hint was given . Figure 2 depicts percentage of spontaneous transfer before a hint , and total transfer percentage after a hint , for each condi - tion ( 42 participants per condition ) . Spontaneous transfer rates were 55 % , 50 % , and 83 % for the Verbal , Diagram + Verbal , and Animation + Verbal con - ditions , respectively . The spontaneous transfer rate in the Animation + Verbal condition was reliably greater than that obtained in the Diagram + Verbal , χ 2 ( 1 ) = 10 . 50 , φ = . 35 , p < . 01 , and Verbal conditions , χ 2 ( 1 ) = 8 . 02 , φ = . 31 , p < . 01 , indicating that animated source instruction facilitated sponta - neous analogical inference . Spontaneous transfer rate did not differ significantly between the Verbal and Diagram + Verbal conditions , χ 2 ( 1 ) < 1 , φ = . 05 , suggesting that the addition of a static pictorial display was not effective in priming the tempo - rally dynamic convergence principle . Total transfer rates after the hint were 83 % , 69 % , and 88 % for the Verbal , Diagram + Verbal , and Animation + Verbal conditions , respectively . This level of overall performance is consistent with previous findings showing that roughly 80 % of college students are able to solve the radiation problem following a hint to think back to a relevant source analog ( Gick & Holyoak , 1980 , 1983 ) . The total transfer rate in the Animation + Verbal condition exceeded that obtained in the Diagram + Verbal condition , χ 2 ( 1 ) = 4 . 53 , φ = . 23 , p = . 03 , but did not differ from that obtained in the Verbal condition . χ 2 ( 1 ) < 1 , φ = . 07 . The total transfer rate in the Diagram + Verbal condition was not statistically different from that in the Verbal condition , χ 2 ( 1 ) = 2 . 36 , φ = . 17 , p = . 12 . Comprehension of source analog To assess whether the advantage of the animated source de - piction in supporting spontaneous transfer was linked to deeper understanding of the source analog , we evaluated par - ticipants ’ responses to multiple - choice ( MC ) and free - response ( FR ) source - understanding questions . The eight MC questions aimed to measure participants ’ understanding of how the small and large cannonballs interact with the Fig . 2 Spontaneous and total transfer rate ( % ) for the Verbal , Diagram + Verbal , and Animation + Verbal conditions ( Experiment 1 ) 580 Mem Cogn ( 2017 ) 45 : 576 – 588 various elements in the system , and how their forces sum together across scenarios . Each MC question was scored as either correct or incorrect , according to whether the participant selected the correct amount of damage inflicted to the speci - fied element by the cannon ( s ) . The maximum score for MC questions was thus 8 points . The FR questions assessed participants ’ understanding of why the cannon ( s ) failed or succeeded in each scenario . For FR responses , three key principles were chosen for each sce - nario ( see Supplemental Materials ) . Participants received one point for each correctly conveyed principle and had one point deducted for each incorrect idea they stated . For each ques - tion , participants receiving 2 or more points were given a score of 2 , participants with one point were given a score of 1 , and participants with zero points or less were given a score of 0 . The maximum score on the four FR questions was thus 8 points ( the same as for MC questions ) . The FR responses in each scenario were scored by two researchers . If two of the three scorers agreed , their score was used . A third scorer was employed for those responses where the first two disagreed . If the three scorers disagreed , the response was jointly discussed until two researchers agreed on a score . The agreement rate for the first two scorers was 80 % ( Cohen ’ s κ = . 62 ) . The agree - ment rate for three scorers ( i . e . , cases where two of the three scorers agreed ) was 95 % . FR and MC scores were correlated across participants ( r = . 47 , p < . 001 ) . For FR scores , participants in the Animation + Verbal condition scored highest , t ( 82 ) = 2 . 27 , d = . 50 , p = . 03 , Animation versus Diagram , followed by the Diagram + Verbal condition , t ( 82 ) = 2 . 23 , d = . 49 , p = . 03 , Diagram versus Verbal , and the Verbal condition scored the lowest . For MC scores , participants in the Animation + Verbal condition again scored higher than those in either the Diagram + Verbal , t ( 82 ) = 2 . 76 , d = . 60 , p < . 01 , or Verbal conditions , t ( 82 ) = 3 . 07 , d = . 67 , p < . 01 , whereas there was no significant score difference between Diagram + Verbal and Verbal participants , t ( 82 ) < 1 , d = . 11 . The consistent superiority of the animation condition in both FR and MC responses indicates that presence of a supplemental animation promoted deeper understanding of the source analog , relative to other presentation methods ( see Fig . 3 ) . Individual differences in fluid intelligence in relation to spontaneous analogical transfer To determine whether fluid intelligence influences spontaneous analogical transfer and its interaction with presentation format of the source analog , we performed a median split on participants according to their Raven ’ s score , classifying them as either low ( Raven ’ s score < 8 ) or high ( Raven ’ s score > 8 ) on the RPM test . Forty - five participants were classified as low RPM ( N = 15 , 12 , and 18 for the Verbal , Diagram + Verbal , and Animation + Verbal conditions , respectively ) , and 57 participants were clas - sified as high RPM ( N = 19 for each condition ) . The other 24 participants , who had median Raven ’ s scores of 8 , were dropped from the individual differences analysis as they could not be reasonably classified as either high or low . Data from those participants with median Raven ’ s scores were , however , used in a subsequent moderated mediation analysis , which aggregat - ed data from Experiments 1 and 2 ( see Moderated Mediation Analysis section ) . We first compared free - response ( FR ) and multiple - choice ( MC ) source - understanding scores between the low - and high - RPM groups . Both FR and MC scores in the high - RPM group exceeded those in the low - RPM group , t ( 100 ) = 3 . 66 , d = . 73 , p < . 001 for FR scores ; t ( 100 ) = 3 . 83 , d = . 76 , p < . 001 for MC scores , indicating superior source understand - ing for participants scoring relatively high on our fluid intel - ligence measure . We then compared FR and MC scores be - tween conditions for the low - and high - RPM groups ( see Fig . 4 ) . For low - RPM participants , both FR and MC scores in the Animation + Verbal condition exceeded those in the Diagram + Verbal , t ( 28 ) = 3 . 79 , d = 1 . 41 , p < . 001 for FR scores ; t ( 28 ) = 2 . 09 , d = . 78 , p < . 05 for MC scores , and Verbal condition , t ( 31 ) = 3 . 92 , d = 1 . 37 , p < . 001 for FR scores ; t ( 31 ) = 4 . 37 , d = 1 . 53 , p < . 001 for MC scores , indicating enhanced source understanding for low - RPM participants when the source analog included an animation . For high - RPM partici - pants , MC scores did not differ reliably across the three con - ditions . However , FR scores in the Animation + Verbal con - dition exceeded those in the Verbal condition , t ( 36 ) = 2 . 25 , d = . 73 , p = . 03 , although no difference was observed between FR scores in the Animation + Verbal and Diagram + Verbal con - ditions , t ( 36 ) < 1 , d = . 12 . FR scores in the Diagram + Verbal condition also exceeded those obtained in the Verbal condi - tion , t ( 36 ) = 2 . 03 , d = . 66 , p < . 05 , indicating that static dia - grams were sufficient to facilitate source understanding ( mea - sured by the FR metric ) for high - RPM participants . Fig . 3 Free - response ( FR ) and multiple - choice ( MC ) source - understanding scores for participants in the Verbal , Diagram + Verbal , and Animation + Verbal conditions ( Experiment 1 ) . Error bars indicate ± 1 standard error of the mean ( SEM ) Mem Cogn ( 2017 ) 45 : 576 – 588 581 Spontaneous transfer rates were then compared across RPM groups , revealing superior performance for those partic - ipants scoring high on the fluid intelligence measure , χ 2 ( 1 ) = 4 . 47 , φ = . 21 , p = . 03 . ( Because total transfer rates after a hint approached the effective ceiling level , analyses of individual differences were not performed for that measure . ) Next , spon - taneous transfer rates were compared across conditions for the low - and high - RPM groups ( see Fig . 5 ) . For low - RPM partic - ipants , the spontaneous transfer rate for the radiation problem in the Animation + Verbal condition exceeded that obtained in the Diagram + Verbal , χ 2 ( 1 ) = 7 . 75 , φ = . 51 , p < . 01 , and Verbal , χ 2 ( 1 ) = 6 . 64 , φ = . 45 , p = . 03 , conditions . No differ - ence was observed in transfer performance between the Diagram + Verbal and Verbal conditions , χ 2 1 ) < 1 , φ = . 07 . For high - RPM participants , the spontaneous transfer rate in the Animation + Verbal condition was marginally greater than that in the Diagram + Verbal condition , χ 2 1 ) = 3 . 64 , φ = . 31 , p = . 06 , but did not differ from that in the Verbal condition , χ 2 ( 1 ) = 1 . 58 , φ = . 20 , p = . 21 . The spontaneous transfer rate in the Diagram + Verbal condition also did not differ from that in the Verbal condition , χ 2 1 ) < 1 , φ = . 11 . In summary , animated source depictions were most bene - ficial in fostering comprehension of the source analog and spontaneous analogical transfer for those participants with low scores on the fluid intelligence measure . After describing Experiment 2 , we will report mediation analyses that further gauge the relationships among animation , source understand - ing , and spontaneous transfer in analogical discovery . Experiment 2 The results of Experiment 1 indicate that the advantage of an animated source analog in supporting spontaneous transfer was linked to greater understanding of the source scenarios , measured by our MC and FR questions . One issue that re - mains open is what , if any , impact the answering of questions about the source may have itself had on spontaneous transfer . The questions provided a measure of source understanding that proved to be predictive of spontaneous transfer . However , to establish a baseline for comparing transfer rates in our studies to those in related studies that did not administer such questions , Experiment 2 explicitly varied whether or not participants answered questions about the source analog . It is unclear whether answering such questions itself facil - itates or impedes transfer , compared to previous studies in which participants ’ understanding of source analogs was not measured prior to presentation of the radiation problem ( e . g . , Gick & Holyoak , 1980 , 1983 ; Pedone et al . , 2001 ) . On the one hand , responding to questions about the cannon scenarios Fig . 4 Free - response ( FR ) and multiple - choice ( MC ) source - understanding scores for low - RPM ( left ) and high - RPM ( right ) participants across experimental conditions ( Experiment 1 ) . Error bars indicate ± 1 SEM Fig . 5 Spontaneous transfer rate ( percentage of convergence solutions generated before hint ) for low - RPM ( left ) and high - RPM ( right ) participants across experimental conditions ( Experiment 1 ) 582 Mem Cogn ( 2017 ) 45 : 576 – 588 could have helped participants attend to the abstract principle as instantiated in the source analog , thereby strengthening potential retrieval cues for subsequent recall and transfer to the radiation problem . On the other hand , the questions probed domain - specific details about the source analog ( unlike questions that elicit comparisons of multiple analogs to one another ; cf . Gick & Holyoak , 1983 ) . Although performance on the scenario - understanding questions predicted abstract un - derstanding of the underlying principle , it is possible that an - swering these questions may have strengthened memory for scenario - specific details at a featural level that would not be useful for solving the radiation problem . Thus , the aim of Experiment 2 was to determine what effect , if any , adminis - tering source - understanding questions has on analogical trans - fer to the radiation problem . In addition , we wanted to increase the overall power of the basic design to obtain enough data to perform a mediation analysis . Method Participants A total of 240 participants ( 159 female ; N = 60 per condition ) were recruited from the Department of Psychology subject pool at UCLA . They were compensated with course credit for their participation and were naïve to the purpose of the experiment . One participant with less - than - chance performance on the fluid intelligence measure ( Raven ’ s score < 2 ) was removed from the analysis . Procedure and design The Diagram + Verbal condition was dropped in Experiment 2 , leaving two levels for the between - subjects factor of source presentation format ( Verbal and Animation + Verbal ) . Participants were randomly assigned into two conditions of a second between - subjects factor ( Questions and No Questions ) , reflecting whether or not source - understanding questions were asked following presentation of the source scenarios . We recognized that eliminating the questions would decrease the time delay between presentation of the source scenarios and the radiation problem . Since participants in Experiment 1 spent approximately 218 seconds answering source - understanding questions , a delay of 18 seconds was introduced following each RPM item for participants in the No Questions condition ( yielding a total delay of approxi - mately 15 minutes ) . The time required for participants to com - plete the experiment did not differ between the Questions and No - Questions groups , t ( 238 ) = . 48 , d = . 06 , p = . 64 , nor did participants ’ Raven ’ s scores , t ( 238 ) = 1 . 27 , d = . 16 , p = . 21 . In all other respects the procedure and design were identical to those of Experiment 1 . Results Analogical transfer rates The criteria for scoring participants ’ responses to the radiation problem were the same as in Experiment 1 . The agreement rate between the two researchers was 88 % ( Cohen ’ s κ = . 77 ) , and a third researcher again broke the tie if the first two re - searchers ’ scores disagreed with one another . Because the in - teraction between source presentation format and presence of questions was not significant in a binary logistic regression model predicting spontaneous and total transfer , we proceeded to interpret the main effects of source presentation format and asking source - understanding questions . Replicating the major finding of Experiment 1 , both spon - taneous and total transfer rates in the Animation + Verbal condition exceeded those in the Verbal condition , 83 % versus 58 % , χ 2 ( 1 ) = 18 . 15 , φ = . 28 , p < . 001 , for spontaneous trans - fer ; 90 % versus 73 % , χ 2 ( 1 ) = 12 . 06 , φ = . 22 , p < . 001 , for total transfer . Spontaneous transfer rates were 63 % in the Questions condition and 79 % in the No - Questions condition , indicating that the presence of source - understanding questions appeared to impede spontaneous transfer performance , χ 2 ( 1 ) = 8 . 07 , φ = . 18 , p < . 01 . Total transfer rates did not differ significantly between the No - Questions and Questions condi - tions , 85 % versus 78 % , χ 2 ( 1 ) = 2 . 22 , φ = . 10 , p = . 14 . These findings suggest that answering questions about the source scenarios may strengthen memory for source - specific information that is not helpful for spontaneously transferring abstract knowledge between the source analog and the radia - tion problem . Such source - specific information would in - crease the semantic distance between the source and target , increasing the difficulty of subsequent transfer . Consequently , the net effect of asking questions was to impair spontaneous retrieval of the source . Moderated mediation analysis To assess the impact of individual differences in fluid intelli - gence on spontaneous transfer , directly and via an influence on source comprehension — and how animation modulates these relationships — we conducted mediation and moderation analyses on combined data from Experiment 1 and the Questions condition of Experiment 2 . Hence , the analysis was based on observations from a total of 204 participants . These analyses treated fluid intelligence , as measured by RPM score , as a continuous variable , thereby avoiding the pitfalls associated with creating a binary dichotomous variable ( i . e . , classifying participants as either low or high RPM ) . A single source - understanding score was calculated for each partici - pant by summing together FR and MC scores , and a dummy coded variable was created to indicate presence of animation ( 1 if animations were present , 0 if absent ) . Both RPM and Mem Cogn ( 2017 ) 45 : 576 – 588 583 summed source - understanding scores were standardized prior to the mediation analysis . As shown in Fig . 6a , the relationship between fluid intelli - gence and spontaneous analogical transfer was mediated by source understanding . Moreover , the indirect effect of fluid intelligence on spontaneous transfer through source under - standing was moderated by provision of a supplemental ani - mation with the source analog . We compared this moderated mediation model to a baseline mediation model including an indirect effect of presence of animation on spontaneous trans - fer through source understanding , but omitting the influence of individual differences in fluid intelligence ( see Fig . 6b ) . Log likelihoods were calculated using predicted source - understanding scores , and a likelihood ratio test was conduct - ed to compare the goodness of fit for each model . Results revealed a superior goodness of fit for the moderated media - tion model that included the individual difference variable , χ 2 ( 2 ) = 14 . 84 , Cramer ’ s V ( 1 ) = . 35 , p < . 001 . We tested the significance of links in the baseline and mod - erated mediation models using bootstrapping procedures . Standardized indirect effects were computed for each of 50 , 000 bootstrapped samples , and the 95 % confidence inter - val was computed by determining the indirect effects at the 2 . 5th and 97 . 5th percentiles . If the bootstrapped confidence interval does not include zero , the corresponding effect is sig - nificant at p = . 05 . For the baseline mediation model , the bootstrapped standardized indirect effect was statistically sig - nificant ( ab = . 80 , CI 95 = [ . 45 , 1 . 28 ] ) , as was the relationship between source understanding and spontaneous transfer ( b = 1 . 00 , CI 95 = [ . 59 , 1 . 40 ] ) . The relationship between presence of animation and source understanding was also statistically sig - nificant ( a = . 81 CI 95 = [ . 55 , 1 . 06 ] ) , whereas the direct effect of presence of animation on spontaneous transfer was not ( c ′ = . 54 , CI 95 = [ - . 15 , 1 . 23 ] ) . For the moderated mediation model , the bootstrapped stan - dardized indirect effects in the presence and absence of ani - mation were statistically significant ( ab = . 20 , CI 95 = [ . 06 , . 39 ] and ab = . 61 , CI 95 = [ . 31 , 1 . 00 ] , respectively ) . The relationship between source understanding and spontaneous transfer rate was also significant ( b = 1 . 01 , CI 95 = [ . 61 , 1 . 41 ] ) . However , the direct effect of Raven ’ s score on spontaneous transfer was not reliable ( c ′ = . 29 , CI 95 = [ - . 06 , . 64 ] ) . To test whether pres - ence of animation significantly moderated this mediation ef - fect , we calculated the 95 % confidence interval of the stan - dardized index of moderated mediation ( i . e . , the difference between the indirect effects in the presence and absence of a b Moderated me Ba d seline medi iation mode ation model l : LL = - 116 : LL = - 124 . . 95 37 Fig . 6 Standardized regression coefficients for a the indirect effect of Raven ’ s score on spontaneous transfer through source understanding moderated by presence of animation and b the indirect effect of presence of animation on spontaneous transfer through source understanding . The log likelihood ( LL ) value indicates the goodness of fit for each model ; values closer to zero correspond to higher likelihoods 584 Mem Cogn ( 2017 ) 45 : 576 – 588 animation ) . We found that the standardized index of moderat - ed mediation was statistically significant ( Δ ab = . 40 , CI 95 = [ . 12 , . 79 ] ) , indicating that the indirect effect of fluid intelli - gence on spontaneous transfer through source understanding was moderated by the presence of animation . In Experiment 1 , we found that supplemental animations were most beneficial for those participants scoring low on the fluid intelligence measure , suggesting a stronger relationship between Raven ’ s score and source understanding in the ab - sence of animation . Results from the moderated mediation analysis indicate that both presence of animation and Raven ’ s score had a significantly positive impact on source understanding ( a Animation = . 74 , CI 95 = [ . 52 , . 97 ] and a Ravens = . 60 , CI 95 = [ . 43 , . 77 ] ) . However , the impact of Raven ’ s score on source understanding was attenuated by the presence of animation , as demonstrated by the significant interaction term between the two variables ( a Animation * Ravens = - . 40 , CI 95 = [ - . 63 , - . 18 ] ) . Since source understanding predicts spontaneous transfer , we would expect the indirect effect of Raven ’ s score through source understanding to be greatest in the absence of animation , which is supported by the significant index of moderated mediation . These results provide converging evi - dence that provision of supplemental animations facilitates spontaneous transfer by increasing comprehension of source materials , and that this benefit is greatest for participants scoring relatively low on the measure of fluid intelligence . General discussion In two experiments , we found that animated source analogs yielded greater spontaneous transfer than either diagrammatic or purely verbal source analogs . These findings are consistent with those of Beveridge and Parkins ( 1987 ) and Pedone et al . ( 2001 ) . This study went beyond prior work by measuring the impact of both individual differences in fluid intelligence , and varying presentation conditions , on source understanding . We found that providing a supplemental animation of the source analog led to superior source understanding as well as greater spontaneous analogical transfer . In addition , the presence of animation was especially beneficial for participants who scored lower on a measure of fluid intelligence . To the best of our knowledge , this is the first demonstration that fluid intelligence is a predictor of spontaneous analogical transfer ( as opposed to prompted analogical mapping ; see Vendetti et al . , 2014 ) . Animationmayaidtransferinatleasttwoways . First , animat - ed displays serve to ground a verbal problem in a dynamic per - ceptualexperience , creatingthebenefitsassociatedwithmultime - diainstruction ( e . g . , Reed , 2006 ) . Second , iftheanimateddisplay isrelativelysparsewithrespecttovisualdetails , thenitmayfocus attentionselectivelyontherelationalaspectsof thesourceanalog ( see Goldwater & Schalk , 2016 ) . In the latter respect , the benefit ofanimationinpromotinganabstractunderstandingofthesource may be similar to the benefit of comparing multiple source analogs , which appears to foster induction of a more abstract schema ( Gick & Holyoak , 1983 ; Novick & Holyoak , 1991 ) . Viewing supplemental animated displays — like comparison of multiple source analogs — may foster richer relational encodings ( Pedone et al . , 2001 ) . The dynamic nature of animation may be especially effective in inducing a schema for problems involving theapplicationofforcesovertimeandspace . Itispossiblethat an animated source induces internal scan patterns across a mental image of the target problem , which in turn facilitates transfer ( analogous to benefits conveyed by certain patterns of over eye movements across a diagram of the radiation problem ; Grant & Spivey , 2003 ; Thomas & Lleras , 2007 ) . Of course , we have only explored the impact of one animated display . Future work should systematically vary the visual rich - ness of such displays to assess whether sparse displays are es - pecially effective in promoting transfer ( cf . Fyfe et al . , 2014 ) . It is also of interest that the overall rate of spontaneous transfer was substantially higher for the source used in the present study ( even in the Verbal - only condition ) than in studies using the military source analog ( Gick & Holyoak , 1980 , 1993 ) . Although there are many differences between the two source analogs , one that may be especially important is that relative to the military story , the B cannonball ^ scenario used here is less rich in details irrelevant to the convergence solution . Future research could fruitfully examine the general role of degree of specific detail as a factor that influences analogical transfer . A moderated mediation analysis revealed that fluid intelli - gence influences spontaneous transfer indirectly , by increasing source comprehension . A possible mechanism is that partici - pants with higher Raven ’ s scores tend to focus more attention on the underlying relations in the source scenario , essentially adopting a B relational set ^ ( Vendetti et al . , 2014 ) . The result is a deeper understanding of the source , based on relational con - cepts that provide potential retrieval paths once the target prob - lem is encountered . This explanation of how fluid intelligence may facilitate spontaneous analogical transfer is consistent with recent evidence that fluid intelligence as measured by the Raven ’ s Matrices test yields benefits that are largely mediated by the use of effective cognitive strategies ( Gonthier & Thomassin , 2015 ; see also Dunlosky & Kane , 2007 ) . Animation reduces the impact of fluid intelligence on source comprehension , as it enables those with lower fluid intelligence scores to B catch up ^ in their source understanding . Our findings suggest that dynamic displays may be especially useful in teaching relational concepts to students at lower ability levels . Providing these students with more robust representations of a novel source analog may reduce work - ing - memory demands and encourage a relational set , thereby fostering analogical transfer . Future theoretical work should focus on how dynamic schemas can be learned from animations , perhaps by extend - ing current theories of relation learning ( e . g . , Lu , Chen & Holyoak , 2012 ) to analogical transfer . In addition , across a Mem Cogn ( 2017 ) 45 : 576 – 588 585 broad range of topics , the potential value of animations as a teaching tool that can be effectively coupled with analogical examples deserves to be explored further . Acknowledgments This research was funded by a Graduate Research Fellowship from the National Science Foundation , a University Fellowship , and a Dean ’ s Scholar Award from the UCLA Graduate Division ( JRK ) , and by NSF grant BCS - 135331 ( HL ) . Correspondence may be directed to James R . Kubricht , Department of Psychology , UCLA , 405 Hilgard Ave . , Los Angeles , CA 90095 - 1563 ( kubricht @ ucla . edu ) . Appendix Source - understanding questions ( multiple choice ) 1 . What level of damage did the cannon balls cause to the friendly barrier in Scenario # [ 1 – 4 ] 2 . What level of damage did the cannon ball ( s ) cause to the enemy octagon in Scenario # [ 1 – 4 ] Source - understanding questions ( free response ) 1 . Why was the cannon [ were the cannons ] unable to defeat the enemy octagon in Scenario # [ 1 – 3 ] ? 2 . Why were the cannons able to defeat the enemy octagon in Scenario # [ 4 ] ? Radiation problem ( story ) Suppose you are a doctor faced with a patient who has a malignant tumor in his stomach . It is impossible to operate on the patient , but unless the tumor is destroyed , the patient will die . There is a kind of ray that can be used to destroy the tumor . If the rays reach the tumor all at once at a sufficiently high intensity , the tumor will be destroyed . Unfortunately , at this intensity the healthy tissue that the rays pass through on the way to the tumor will also be destroyed . At lower intensi - ties , the rays are harmless to healthy tissue , but they will not affect the tumor either . What type of procedure might be used to destroy the tumor with the rays , and at the same time avoid destroying the healthy tissue ? Radiation problem ( question before hint ) Please write down as many possible solutions you can think of , without worrying about whether solutions would really work . No medical expertise is required . Radiation problem ( question after hint ) Think back to the scenarios you observed earlier and write down any solution to the radiation problem they may suggest . It ’ s okay to repeat a solution you gave earlier . Scoring criteria ( key principles ) Scenario 1 : – The small cannonballs inflicted no damage to the octagon . – There was only one cannon firing cannonballs at the en - emy octagon as opposed to multiple cannons . – The small cannonballs inflicted no damage to the friendly barrier . Scenario 2 : – The large cannonballs inflicted minor / some damage to the octagon . – There was only one cannon firing cannonballs at the en - emy octagon as opposed to multiple cannons . – The large cannonballs inflicted major / substantial damage to the friendly barrier . Scenario 3 : – The multiple large cannonballs inflicted substantial / major damage to the octagon ( by converging onto their target simultaneously ) . – There were multiple cannons firing cannonballs at the enemy octagon as opposed to a single cannon . – The large cannonballs inflicted substantial / major damage to the friendly barrier . Scenario 4 : – The multiple small cannonballs inflicted some / moderate damage to the octagon ( by converging onto their target simultaneously ) . – There were multiple cannons firing cannonballs at the enemy octagon as opposed to a single cannon . – The small cannonballs inflicted no damage to the friendly barrier . References Ackerman , P . L . , Beier , M . E . , & Boyle , M . O . ( 2005 ) . Working memory and intelligence : The same or different constructs ? Psychological Bulletin , 131 , 30 – 60 . 586 Mem Cogn ( 2017 ) 45 : 576 – 588 Antonietti , A . , & Gioletta , M . A . ( 1995 ) . Individual differences in ana - logical problem solving . Personality and Individual Differences , 18 , 611 – 619 . Arthur , W . , Tubré , T . , Paul , D . S . , & Sanchez - Ku , M . L . ( 1999 ) . College - sample psychometric and normative data on a short form of the Raven ’ s Advanced Progressive Matrices test . Journal of Psychoeducational Assessment , 17 , 354 – 361 . Beveridge , M . , & Parkins , E . ( 1987 ) . Visual representation in analogical problem solving . Memory and Cognition , 15 ( 3 ) , 230 – 237 . Brainard , D . H . ( 1997 ) . The psychophysics toolbox . Spatial Vision , 10 , 433 – 436 . Catrambone , R . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 1989 ) . Overcoming contextual limi - tations on problem - solving transfer . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 15 , 1147 – 1156 . Day , S . B . , & Goldstone , R . L . ( 2011 ) . Analogical transfer from a simu - lated physical system . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 37 , 551 – 567 . Dunbar , K . N . , & Klahr , D . ( 2012 ) . Scientific thinking and reasoning . In K . J . Holyoak & R . G . Morrison ( Eds . ) , Oxford handbook of think - ing and reasoning ( pp . 701 – 718 ) . New York : Oxford University Press . Duncker , K . ( 1945 ) . On problem solving . Psychological Monographs , 58 ( Whole No . 270 ) . Dunlosky , J . , & Kane , M . J . ( 2007 ) . The contributions of strategies to working memory span : A comparison of strategy assessment methods . Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology , 60 , 1227 – 1245 . Engle , R . W . ( 2002 ) . Working memory capacity as executive attention . Current Directions in Psychological Science , 11 , 19 – 23 . Falkenhainer , B . , Forbus , K . D . , & Gentner , D . ( 1989 ) . The structure - mapping engine : Algorithm and examples . Artificial Intelligence , 41 , 1 – 63 . Fyfe , E . R . , McNeil , N . M . , Son , J . Y . , & Goldstone , R . L . ( 2014 ) . Concreteness fading in mathematics and science instructions : A sys - tematic review . Educational Psychology Review , 26 , 9 – 25 . Gentner , D . ( 2010 ) . Bootstrapping the mind : Analogical processes and symbol systems . Cognitive Science , 34 ( 5 ) , 752 – 775 . Gick , M . L . ( 1985 ) . The effect of a diagram retrieval cue on spontaneous analogical transfer . Canadian Journal of Psychology , 39 ( 3 ) , 460 – 466 . Gick , M . L . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 1980 ) . Analogical problem solving . Cognitive Psychology , 12 ( 3 ) , 306 – 355 . Gick , M . L . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 1983 ) . Schema induction and analogical transfer . Cognitive Psychology , 15 ( 1 ) , 1 – 38 . Glenberg , A . M . , Gutierrez , T . , Levin , J . R . , Japuntich , S . , & Kaschak , M . P . ( 2004 ) . Activity and imagined activity can enhance young chil - dren ’ s reading comprehension . Journal of Educational Psychology , 96 , 424 – 436 . Goldwater , M . B . , & Schalk , L . ( 2016 ) . Relational categories as a bridge between cognitive and educational research . Psychological Bulletin , 142 , 729 – 757 . Gonthier , C . , & Thomassin , N . ( 2015 ) . Strategy use fully mediates the relationship between working memory capacity and performance on Raven ’ s matrices . Journal of Experimental Psychology : General , 144 , 916 – 924 . Grant , E . R . , & Spivey , M . J . ( 2003 ) . Eye movements and problem solv - ing : Guiding attention guides thought . Psychological Science , 14 , 462 – 466 . Halford , G . S . , Wilson , W . H . , & Phillips , W . ( 1998 ) . Processing capacity defined by relational complexity : Implications for comparative , de - velopmental and cognitive psychology . Behavioral Brain Sciences , 21 , 803 – 831 . Hegarty , M . , & Stull , A . T . ( 2012 ) . Visuospatial thinking . In K . J . Holyoak & R . G . Morrison ( Eds . ) , Oxford handbook of thinking and reasoning ( pp . 606 – 630 ) . New York : Oxford University Press . Holyoak , K . J . ( 2012 ) . Analogyand relationalreasoning . InK . J . Holyoak & R . G . Morrison ( Eds . ) , Oxford handbook of thinking and reasoning ( pp . 234 – 259 ) . New York : Oxford University Press . Holyoak , K . J . , & Koh , K . ( 1987 ) . Surface and structural similarity in analogical transfer . Memory and Cognition , 15 ( 4 ) , 332 – 340 . Holyoak , K . J . , Novick , L . R . , & Melz , E . R . ( 1994 ) . Component pro - cesses in analogical transfer : Mapping , pattern completion , and ad - aptation . In K . J . Holyoak & J . A . Barnden ( Eds . ) , Advances in connectionist and neural computation theory , vol . 2 : Analogical connections . Norwood : Ablex . Holyoak , K . J . , & Thagard , P . ( 1995 ) . Mental leaps : Analogy in creative thought . Cambridge : MIT Press . Hummel , J . E . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 1997 ) . Distributed representations of structure : A theory of analogical access and mapping . Psychological Review , 104 , 427 – 466 . Hummel , J . E . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 2003 ) . A symbolic - connectionisttheory of relational inference and generalization . Psychological Review , 110 , 220 – 264 . Keane , M . T . ( 1987 ) . On retrieving analogues when solving problems . Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology , 39A , 29 – 41 . Keane , M . T . , & Brayshaw , M . ( 1988 ) . Theincrementalanalogy machine : A computational model of analogy . In D . Sleeman ( Ed . ) , Third European working session on learning ( pp . 53 – 62 ) . London , UK : Pitman . Keane , M . T . , Ledgeway , T . , & Duff , S . ( 1994 ) . Constraints on analogical mapping : A comparison of three models . Cognitive Science , 18 , 287 – 334 . Kleiner , M . , Brainard , D . , & Pelli , D . ( 2007 ) . What ’ s n ew in Psychtoolbox - 3 ? Tutorial session presented at the 30th European Conference on Visual Perception , Arezzo , Italy . Koedinger , K . R . , Anderson , J . R . , Hadley , W . H . , & Mark , M . A . ( 1997 ) . Intelligent tutoring goes to school in the big city . International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education , 8 , 30 – 43 . Loewenstein , J . , Thompson , L . , & Gentner , D . ( 2003 ) . Analogical learn - ing in negotiation teams : Comparing cases promotes learning and transfer . Academy of Management Learning and Education , 2 , 119 – 127 . Mayer , R . E . ( 2009 ) . Multimedia learning . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . Mayer , R . E . , & Anderson , R . B . ( 1991 ) . Animations need narrations : An experimental test of a dual - coding hypothesis . Journal of Educational Psychology , 83 , 484 – 490 . Nathan , M . J . ( 1998 ) . Knowledge and situational feedback in a learning environmentfor algebra story problem solving . Interactive Learning Environments , 5 , 135 – 160 . Nathan , M . J . , Kintsch , W . , & Young , E . ( 1992 ) . A theory ofalgebra word problem comprehension and its implications for the design of com - puter learning environments . Cognition and Instruction , 9 ( 4 ) , 329 – 389 . Novick , L . R . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 1991 ) . Mathematical problem solving by analogy . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 17 , 510 – 520 . Pedone , R . , Hummel , J . E . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 2001 ) . The use of diagrams in analogical problem solving . Memory and Cognition , 29 ( 2 ) , 213 – 221 . Penn , D . C . , Holyoak , K . J . , & Povinelli , D . J . ( 2008 ) . Darwin ’ s mistake : Explaining the discontinuity between human and nonhuman minds . Behavioral and Brain Sciences , 31 , 109 – 130 . Raven , J . C . ( 1938 ) . Progressive matrices : A perceptual test of intelli - gence , individual form . London : Lewis . Reed , S . K . ( 2006 ) . Cognitive architectures for multimedia learning . Educational Psychologist , 41 , 87 – 98 . Snow , R . E . , Kyllonen , P . C . , & Marshalek , B . ( 1984 ) . In R . J . Sternberg ( Ed . ) , Advances in the psychology of human intelligence , vol . 2 . Hillsdale : Erlbaum . Mem Cogn ( 2017 ) 45 : 576 – 588 587 Thomas , L . E . , & Lleras , A . ( 2007 ) . Moving eyes and moving thought : On the spatial compatibility between eye movements and cognition . Psychonomic Bulletin and Review , 14 , 663 – 668 . Trench , M . , & Minervino , R . ( 2015 ) . The role of surface similarity in analogical retrieval : Bridging the gap between the naturalistic and experimental traditions . Cognitive Science , 39 , 1292 – 1319 . Trench , M . , Olguín , V . , & Minervino , R . ( 2016 ) . Seek , and ye shall find : Differences between spontaneous and voluntary analogical retrieval . Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology , 69 , 698 – 712 . Tversky , B . , & Morrison , J . B . ( 2002 ) . Animation : Can it facilitate ? International Journal of Human - Computer Studies , 57 , 247 – 262 . Vendetti , M . , Wu , A . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 2014 ) . Far out thinking : Generating solutions to distant analogies promotes relational think - ing . Psychological Science , 25 , 928 – 933 . 588 Mem Cogn ( 2017 ) 45 : 576 – 588