A Sensemaking - Supporting Information Gathering System Yan Qu School of Information , University of Michigan Ann Arbor , MI 48109 yqu @ umich . edu ABSTRACT This paper introduces a sensemaking - supporting information gathering system ( SSIGS ) , which provides a workspace with features that not only facilitate information search but also the representation search and representation shift which are crucial for sensemaking tasks . Keywords Sensemaking , information gathering , representation shift , information seeking INTRODUCTION People are always facing tasks that require understanding unfamiliar things – a process which has been called sensemaking [ 3 ] [ 4 ] . Sensemaking is a complicated , iterative procedure . In everyday life it happens when a doctoral student faces an unfamiliar research field , a person wants to buy a digital camera but with little idea of the current products in the market , or a family searches for vacation places . All these activities need gathering information from an unfamiliar field and making sense of that information . People often use external representations when the things they are making sense of have rich structure , becoming difficult to handle using only internal , mental representations . Russell et al . [ 4 ] argue that representation plays a central role in sensemaking activities . The sensemaker goes through the cyclic processes of searching for representations that reduce of the cost of task operations . Representations shift when the cost of residue ( mismatch of people’s current representation and the task ) exceeds the expected cost of searching for a better representation . Workspaces should support this activity . Previous explorations of workspaces to support sensemaking include Baldonado and Winograd’s SenseMaker [ 5 ] which gave views of search results with different organizing dimensions and provided various operations on returned results to accommodate the evolution of users’ information need . The gIBIS system [ 2 ] helped collaborative articulation and sensemaking of key issues in design problems by using a hypertext network to present relations among design issues , positions of an issue and the arguments to support a position . The argumentation tool , also called SenseMaker , in the Knowledge Integration Environment ( KIE ) [ 1 ] , tried to promote a more integrated understanding of complex science concepts and processes with spatial and categorical representations . Our system differs from these works in that , 1 ) we take as central to our approach the work of Russell , et al with emphasis on the role of external representation in sensemaking ; 2 ) the system is designed to provide a workspace with integrated support of information search , representation search , and representation shift ; 3 ) machine learning techniques are used to provide automatic features in information search , information organization and presentation structure manipulation . SSIGS FRAMEWORK The SSIGS system provides an integrated workspace for information gathering and sensemaking . Tree structures are chosen for the basic representation . A user with a sensemaking task in his mind searches information on the Web and organizes the information gathered into a hierarchical tree structure . Each folder in the tree corresponds to a topic or sub - topic that the user is interested in . Different tools are provided to help the user search the Web , and construct , refine and re - construct the tree representation . Figure 1 . Interface of SSIGS The interface of the system is shown in Figure 1 . The right area is the web page browser . The upper - left area shows the user’s information tree . There are three different sub - trees : 1 ) User’s evolving tree of gathered information , which is the structure whose organization represents the “sense” that the user has made of things so far . 2 ) User’s query tree , which stores useful queries that might be used later . A query can have structure in it . For example , a query searching for world news could have sub - queries on political issue , economic issue , etc . We call it Structured Set of Queries ( SSQ ) . Copyright is held by the author / owner ( s ) . CHI 2003 , April 5 – 10 , 2003 , Ft . Lauderdale , Florida , USA . ACM 1 - 58113 - 630 - 7 / 03 / 0004 . 3 ) Temporary result tree , which shows the structured result of the latest search . The bottom - left area shows five different tools that support information searching and tree representation manipulation : 1 ) Basic search tool . The query could be formed by simple keywords or sample documents . Alternately , the user could use an existing query in his query tree . The query is submitted to the Vivisimo® 1 Clustering Search Engine . The search results can be shown in Vivisimo clusters , or clustered using the system’s clustering engine where users can assign the number of clusters , or classified according to an existing structure in the tree of gathered information . 2 ) Structured Set of Queries ( SSQ ) search tool . The system can submit not only a single query , but also a Structured Set of Queries ( SSQ ) . A SSQ can be constructed manually or generated automatically from a sub - tree of user’s information tree . The searching result of the SSQ will be classified according to the structure of SSQ . This tool allows information gathering for a complex tree structure be accomplished in one single operation . 3 ) Basic tree editing tools . A user can easily add , edit , or delete nodes in the tree , and move or copy a set of nodes by drag and drop interaction . 4 ) Clustering / Classification tools . A user can choose a set of documents , then cluster them . A new document can also be classified given a sample tree structure . The system even provides a semi - supervised classification tool which take consideration of both the internal semantic structure of the data and the pre - defined tree structure given by the user . 5 ) Tree Structure comparison tool . A user may organize a set of documents in different ways , looking at them from different perspectives . The system provides a comparison tool to see the correlations between two different category schemes on the same set of documents . The user could choose two sub - trees , and see the distributed of articles of one sub - tree under another sub - tree . REPRESENTATION SEARCH AND SHIFT Using the tools mentioned above , we can help the representation evolution in the following ways : 1 ) Give suggestions about how to organize the collected Information . At the very beginning , when user does not have enough information and clear ideas about the appropriate representation , the system can suggest candidate structures by searching the web and clustering the search result according to the internal structure of the results returned by search engine . By looking at these automatically generated structures , a user may get some useful idea of how to organize the information . When user has some tentative representation , we can classify the collected information using semi - supervised classification . Finally , when the user representation is well constructed , a supervised classification algorithm can assign searching results to different nodes in the tree . 2 ) Show different facets of the information . In order to get a rich understanding of the collected information , users 1 www . vivisimo . com often need to look at the data from different perspectives . The classification tool could be used to generate a new tree structure . This might for example recategorize sports news by geography instead of sport type . The comparison tool then could be used to visualize the correlation of the two different views . The correlation may reveal some hidden fact in the data . For example , the user may find out that skiing is popular in the US but not in Asia , while badminton is popular in Asia but not the US . DISCUSSION Informal user tests suggest that the SSIGS system are particularly helpful when user try to get comprehensive understanding of a field with rich structure . More user test will be conducted to help refining the system design and give valuable data of user’s sensemaking behavior . As a user gets more information and better understanding of the information , he might find the current representation does not fit the task or situation very well ( representation residue ) . More work will be done on residue detection in the representation evolution . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS I thank George Furnas for the invaluable help in guiding the work described in this paper . REFERENCES 1 . Bell , P . ( 1997 ) . " Using argument representation to make thinking visible for individuals and groups . " The Second International Conference on Computer Support for Collaborative Learning , Toronto , University of Toronto Press . 2 . Conklin , J . , Begeman , M . , ( 1998 ) " gIBIS : A hypertext tool for exploratory policy discussion " , Proc . of the Conference on CSCW , Portland , Oregon . 3 . Dervin , B . ( 1983 , May ) . An overview of Sense - Making research : Concepts , methods and results . Paper presented at the meeting of the International Communication Association , Dallas , TX . 4 . Russell , D . , Stefik , M . , Pirolli , P . , & Card , S . ( 1993 ) . The cost structure of sensemaking . Proceedings of ACM CHI ' 93 ( 269 - 276 ) . New York : ACM . 5 . Baldonado , MQW , and Winograd , T . ( 1997 ) SenseMaker : An Information - Exploration Interface Supporting the Contextual Evolution of a User ' s Interests . In Proceedings of the Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pp . 11 - - 18 . ACM Press , New York , Atlanta , Ga . March .