Functions of Sketching in Design Idea Generation Meetings Remko van der Lugt Delft University of Technology School of Industrial Design Engineering Landbergstraat 15 , 2628 CE , Delft The Netherlands + 31 - 15 - 2783537 r . vanderlugt @ io . tudelft . nl ABSTRACT This study consists of four experimental meetings , which explore whether functions of sketching in design activity are also valid for idea generation meetings in design . The relevant functions of sketching found in theory are : 1 ) supporting a re - interpretive cycle in the individual thinking process , 2 ) supporting re - interpretation of each other’s ideas in group activity , and 3 ) enhancing the access to earlier ideas . The results provide some support for the first and the third function . No support was found for the second function . Categories & Subject Descriptors H . 1 . 2 : Human information processing ( see http : / / www . acm . org / class / 1998 / ) General Terms Design , Human factors , Theory . Keywords Sketching , Design , Creative problem solving , Idea generation techniques , External memory , Linkography . INTRODUCTION Idea generation techniques , like brainstorming , are commonly applied by designers for generating ideas . In the existing body of idea generation techniques , the primary mode of expressing ideas is in written language . Usually , during idea generation meetings , brief descriptions of ideas are listed on a flipchart . In contrast , when involved in unstructured design meetings , designers tend to make extensive use of sketching when generating design ideas . Researchers have often connected this activity of sketching to creativity in design . As both sketching and idea generation techniques are regarded to be tools for stimulating creativity in design , perhaps combining them can provide an even better tool . The objective of this paper is to explore whether the functions of sketching as proposed in design research can also be identified in design idea generation meetings . FUNCTIONS OF SKETCHING IN DESIGN From the design research literature , e . g . [ 16 ] , and literature in adjacent relevant fields of research , e . g . [ 7 ] , various functions of sketching in design group activity can be identified . If we acknowledge that both informal design group meetings and design brainstorming meetings are problem solving group meetings , then the functions of sketching as found for the design groups can also be applicable for brainstorming meetings in product design . This leads to the following potential functions that sketching may have in design brainstorming meetings : Sketching Stimulates a Re - interpretive Cycle in the Individual Designer’s Idea Generation Process The roles of sketching for individual problem solving are still present for the individual designers in a group context . In a review of the research on drawing and design , Purcell & Gero [ 16 ] focus on the role of sketching in design cognition . This research is mainly concerned with investigating the ways in which the activity of sketching stimulates creativity in design cognition . They point out underlying themes regarding the role of sketching in design . The principal theme deals with the positive role that sketching plays in re - interpretation . A second theme is that re - interpretation provides new knowledge and that this new knowledge leads towards further re - interpretation . Various researchers propose such cyclical models of re - interpretation , each with a slightly different connotation , ranging from a dialectic type of argumentation between seeing - as and seeing - that [ 3 ] , interactive ‘conversations’ with the paper on which the designer draws [ 17 ] , and movement from description to depiction [ 2 ] . In order to provide a broad understanding of this re - interpretative process , the various perspectives will be described briefly . Goldschmidt [ 3 ] observes that architectural designers produce unclear , ambiguous sketches . She suggests that this is a substantial component of creativity in the design process . Designers often use sketches as metaphors for the objects to be Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . C & C’02 , October 14 – 16 , 2002 , Loughborough , Leic , UK . Copyright 2002 ACM 1 - 58113 - 465 - 7 / 02 / 0010… $ 5 . 00 . designed . She calls this ‘interactive imagery’ , which she defines as : “The simultaneous or almost simultaneous production of a display and the generation of an image that it triggers . Sketching , then , is not merely an act of representation of a preformulated image ; in the context we deal with , it is , more often than not , a search for such an image” ( p . 131 ) . She proposes a dialectic type of argumentation in design . Based on protocol studies Goldschmidt points out that , while making idea sketches , architects use two types of reasoning in rapid oscillation . One type is based on analogical or metaphorical thought , dealing with extracting new meaning from the sketch . She describes this kind of reasoning as ‘seeing as’ . The other type , ‘seeing that’ , deals with the design consequences of this newly acquired meaning of the sketch . For instance , Goldschmidt provides the following example from her protocol study of a library design task . When observing her sketches over the footprint of the design location , one of the designers sees the surface area as a casbah ( see figure 1 ) : “For example , I can imagine this as a casbah…” Then , she extracts knowledge from this analogy , which Goldschmidt refers to as ‘seeing that’ : “… where you have territories , confined territories” . Figure 1 : Early architectural design sketch [ 3 ] . Schön and Wiggins [ 17 ] observe that designers develop their products by engaging in an interactive conversation with the paper on which they draw . They describe design as a cyclical process of sketching , interpreting and taking the sketches further . According to them : “Working in some visual medium - drawing , in our examples - the designer sees what is ‘there’ in some representation of a site , draws in relation to it , and sees what has been drawn , thereby informing further designing . In all this ‘seeing’ , the designer not only visually registers information , but also constructs its meaning – identifies patterns and gives them meaning beyond themselves” . ( p . 135 ) Another function of sketching identified by Fish & Scrivener [ 2 ] is that sketching facilitates the transition from general descriptive knowledge into specific depiction . According to Fish & Scrivener the primary reason for designers to sketch is : “…the need to foresee the results of the synthesis or manipulation of objects without actually executing such operations” ( p . 117 ) . In order to explain the functioning of sketching within design , the authors present a spectrum of visual representations , ranging from purely descriptive symbol systems to purely depictive symbol systems . Descriptive symbol systems can represent whole classes of information : they are abstract and categorical . An example of a descriptive symbol system is natural language . For instance , the word ‘chair’ may represent many different types of seats ; sofas , office chairs , TV chairs , rocking chairs , and garden chairs are all covered under the label ‘chair’ . The information in such a descriptive symbol system is extrinsic , meaning that the object described by the symbol system is associated with the descriptive system solely by means of external definitions . The word ’chair’ does not contain any of the qualities of the represented objects , neither in structure , color , nor in form . On the other side of the spectrum are depictive symbol systems , which carry all information about the represented objects within themselves , and do not depend on rules for extracting the information from the representation . These symbol systems are concrete and spatially specific , meaning that there is a direct relationship between the spatial position in the medium and the spatial position in the object represented . For instance , a picture of a rocking chair contains the topological information of that object . Depictive representations refer to specific objects , rather than classes of information . According to Fish & Scrivener , sketches have a special set of attributes that help the human mind in translating descriptive propositional information into depictive information . They theorize that in a creative design process this depictive information is then scanned , which leads to new descriptive propositional information , which in turn may be translated into depiction , and so on : “We posit that sketches have the important function of assisting the mind to translate descriptive propositional information into depiction . This depictive information may then be scanned by attentional processes to extract new and perhaps original descriptive information , which in turn can lead to new depiction” . ( p . 118 ) The role of facilitating movement from general descriptions towards specific depictions of ideas is more relevant for the later phases of an idea generation process , in which a higher level of resolution is desired . The role of stimulating a re - interpretive cycle could be especially relevant for idea generation meetings , as the general goal of such meetings is to provide a variety of novel ideas . Sketching Stimulates the Designers to Re - interpret Each Other’s Ideas In addition to the individual , cognitive functions of sketching , typical group functions can be identified . The literature on the typical group aspects of sketching is sparse and consists mostly of reports of exploratory investigations . The main efforts for understanding group design are related to design communication , predominantly connected to furthering the field of Computer Supported Collaborative Work ( CSCW ) and human - computer interaction . The principal interest of this field of research is to allow designers to work together from different locations , by means of computer support . As computers constrict the communication lines available , most research approaches focus on understanding the workspace activity of design groups , e . g . [ 21 ] [ 22 ] and experiments which involve limiting the communication lines available , e . g . [ 1 ] [ 18 ] . The recognized importance of interaction through sketching and gesturing activity has lead to preliminary CSCW solutions , which show , for instance , the hand of the person drawing , e . g . [ 1 ] , in addition to the drawing . One of the topics of interest within the research field of human - computer interaction , is the role of the ‘shared visual context’ in communication , e . g . [ 9 ] . In a design discussion , the shared visual context can be used to make relative references , for instance : ‘let’s combine this with that’ , rather than to describe the whole idea when referring to it . This way , relative references provide a more efficient communication process . In CSCW design communication , the use of quickly - drawn sketches in support of group discussions could provide for a more efficient design process by providing a shared visual context . In addition to providing a shared visual context , Scrivener & Clark [ 18 ] suggest a second role for sketching in collaborative design . In relation to the way in which sketching supports creative group discussion they observe : “The fact that drawings are usually accompanied by verbalizations ( in the case of the individual designer this would just be unspoken thought ) supports the idea that sketches only partially represent ideas in mind . In general , a drawing act in sketching is not an attempt to represent a solution as such , rather it is a notational device that helps its creator to reason with complex and labile mental structures” . ( p . 114 ) According to Scrivener & Clark , sketching provides representations of design solutions that allow for a range of interpretations of elements . By sketching , temporal decisions are made which allow for evaluation and interpretation of a design solution , without excluding alternatives . Finally , besides having the function of communicating and discussing ideas through sketches , the act of sketching itself is regarded important in team design activity . Tang [ 21 ] points out the distinction between the information contained in the artifacts that result from design sketching activity and the information within the activity itself . Relating to his observations from protocol analysis of eight experimental design team meetings , he concludes : “The process of creating and using drawings conveys information not found in the resulting drawings” ( p . 150 ) . According to Tang , the act of sketching is a means of communication and attracting attention , as well as it provides a medium for storing information . As with the individual functions of sketching , the function of inviting re - interpretation is especially relevant for the idea generation process , as re - interpretation leads to novel directions for generating ideas . Sketching Stimulates the Use of Earlier Ideas by Enhancing Their Accessibility . Sketching may also facilitate archiving and retrieval of design information . According to McKim [ 10 ] building and maintaining a - what he calls - ‘collective graphic memory’ fosters the group’s creative process by providing an easily accessible database of design information , which stimulates building on earlier design ideas . In the design research literature little relevant information can be found concerning this funtion of sketching . However , in the field of visual cognition , differences in recognition of words and pictures have been subject of investigation . This research is relevant for our search , if we consider a sketch to be a type of picture . There is proof that pictures of objects can be categorized more rapidly than words that describe these objects [ 15 ] . But , if the objects from the different categories share many physical characteristics , this advantage of pictures over words may be lost . In that case , categorization for pictures may even be slower than for the word condition [ 19 ] . This relates to the depictive qualities of sketches . By sharing actual attributes of the ( imaginary or real ) object they refer to , sketches provide stronger distinctive features than words . Humphreys & Bruce [ 7 ] hypothesize : “Words representing a particular class of objects will generally bear no greater resemblance to one another than words representing objects from different classes . This is not true for most objects ( though there may be exceptions , such as faces ) . Objects from many natural classes resemble one another more closely than objects from other classes ( e . g . many animals resemble one another , as do birds , insects , etc . ) . It may be that visual processing capitalizes on these family resemblances to optimize cognition” . ( p . 285 ) Other than a few exceptions , words do not share attributes with the actual object that they represent , which means that words lack distinctive features . By having more distinctive features , sketches are more easily recognized among other sketches , which means that sketches facilitate the designers’ access to earlier ideas . Easier access to earlier design ideas is likely to stimulate increased use of these earlier design ideas . So , sketches may enhance the use of information in previously generated design ideas by facilitating the access to these design ideas generated earlier in the process . EXPERIMENT DESIGN A technique called ‘brainsketching’ [ 26 ] was used as a representative of idea generation techniques that use sketching . During brainsketching , participants sketch ideas individually in short rounds . After each round they briefly share their ideas and switch papers . In the next round they use the ideas already present on the worksheet as a source of inspiration . The brainsketching technique was compared to brainstorming with post - its [ 8 ] , which was selected as a representative of idea generation techniques that use writing as the primary working medium . In each of four experimental meetings both brainsketching and the brainstorming were applied which allowed us to perform a paired comparison analysis of the results for each participant ( n = 20 ) . Each meeting consisted of five advanced product design students who were involved in a course in facilitating creative problem solving meetings . Each meeting was moderated by an experienced professional creative problem solving facilitator . The participants were asked to generate ideas for products to make traveling by car fun for children . The assignment involved generating ideas for a particular multi - functional family car . METHOD OF ANALYSIS The main reason for organizing a group meeting is for the group members to interact in their problem solving efforts . This makes the ‘building on each other’s ideas’ guideline for divergent thinking [ 13 ] especially relevant to this research project . Investigating the ways in which the participants build on each other’s ideas provides direct process clues regarding the functioning of the techniques applied . Linkography [ 4 ] [ 5 ] is a research approach , which specifically addresses the ways in which designers build on each other’s input . We have adapted this method for application in our research of creative problem solving meetings . In this paper we cannot go into detail regarding the linkography approach . For a more elaborate description we refer to earlier work [ 23 ] [ 24 ] . Here we will limit ourselves to a brief description of the general approach , followed by a more in - depth description of the categorizations of links made in the current study . For each idea , direct connections or ‘links’ with all earlier ideas are determined by gathering and evaluating evidence of connections . Evidence can be found within the content of the ideas . Such evidence relates similarities in subject matter found . But evidence can also be found within the context in which the ideas are generated . Such context indicators can consist of among others : gestures or remarks made by the designers when they explain their ideas ; physical action when conceiving of the idea ; or connecting symbols on the flipcharts . We believe that making explicit use of context indicators while constructing link systems enhances the reliability of linkography as a research method [ 25 ] . For each of the four brainsketching segments and the four brainstorming segments , linking was performed twice by the same person with a time interval of at least one week . The discrepancies between these two link systems were then re - evaluated , which provided the final link system . For verification purposes , an independent judge was asked to fill out a link system for two of the segments . Inter - rater agreement was determined using Cohen’s Kappa . Good levels of agreement were found ( K = 0 . 73 and K = 0 . 63 ) between the link systems of the two raters . Links as Interactions With ‘External Memory’ Once the link systems were finalized , the links were categorized to reflect structurally different interactions that the designers can have with their earlier ideas . First , a subdivision was made between links that the designers made with their own ideas , which we called ‘individual links’ , and links made with each other’s ideas , which we called ‘shared links’ . The second subdivision we based on an extension of Newell & Simon’s [ 12 ] dichotomy of external memory into short - term and remote parts . According to Newell & Simon , there is a distinction between directly available notations , which need to be regarded as an extension of the short - term memory , and notations that need to be searched for . These sub - divisions lead to the following model of a group’s external memory ( figure 2 . ) : Figure 2 : Model of the various parts of external memory available to a group member . Arrows refer to the ways in which information can move between the various areas . This model provided us with a categorization of four link types that reflect the different interactions of a design group with their notations in ‘external memory’ : individual - direct ; individual - remote ; shared - direct ; and , shared - remote . Within a link system , link densities ( l . d . ) can be determined for these various parts of the group’s external memory , which provide an indicator for the extent to which brainstorming and brainsketching make use of these different parts . The link density consists of the number of links made within one area of external memory , divided by the number of ideas generated . The distinction between the individual and the group aspects of the external memory can easily be identified in a link system . An ‘individual’ link is marked when an idea has a connection with an earlier idea of the same designer . A ‘shared’ link is marked when an idea has a connection with an earlier idea generated by another designer . An operationalization for the distinction between the direct and the remote aspects still needs to be made . Newell & Simon’s working definition of the external part of the short - term memory is “the part of the visual display that is in the subjects foveal view” ( p . 801 ) . But on the same page , they doubt their assumption : “…it is not clear whether only the instantaneous foveal region can be merged with STM or whether a somewhat larger region , connected by adequately indexed saccades , might be available” ( p . 801 ) . In any case , direct interactions with external memory can be assumed to take place with ideas that do not have to be searched for . These are the ideas that are present within the focus of attention . For the brainsketching segments , the immediate linking area can be considered to contain the ideas that were explained just before the current round of generating ideas started , plus the ideas that the designer is generating him - or herself during the present round of sketching ideas . See figure 3 for the resulting representation of the link system , which we refer to as a ‘link matrix’ . 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 1415 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 2627 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 3738 39 40 41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48 4950 51 Meeting 1 brainsketching A A B C C D D D E E E E E E A A B C C D D D D D D E E E A A A B C C C D D E E A A B B C D D D D E A A Round 1chart I 1 A Smurf slime 1 EA DA 1 I 2 A Group chairs differently , play train 2 CA BA 2 II 3 B Interactive display provides information about where you are 3 AB EB BBCB 3 III 4 C Winch with remote control suspended from roof 4 CC 4 III 5 C Racetrack upside down on roof 5 AC BC CC DDDC 5 IV 6 D Scenic firetruck 6 AD 6 IV 7 D TV screen for TV , computer , etc . 7 ED DD 7 IV 8 D Drag - race track 8 DD 8 V 9 E Child surrounded by own car cockpit 9 EE DEDE 9 V 10 E Communicate and track other kids in cars 10 EE 10 Round 2 chart I 11 E Playing table 11 EE EE 11 I 12 E Buttons make things appear from roof in front of other child 12 12 I 13 E Game computer 13 BE 13 I 14 E Pistol with smurf slime 14 DEDE CE 14 II 15 A Playing checkers on the roof 15 DADA BA CA AA 15 II 16 A Information about surroundings on the window 16 EA 16 III 17 B Miniature train track around back seats 17 17 IV 18 C Merry - go - round for four children 18 BC 18 IV 19 C Pass - along racetrack 19 19 V 20 D Playing hospital 20DD 20 V 21 D Real mini office 21 CD BD 21 V 22 D Formula 1 cockpit with display of road ahead 22 AD 22 Round 3 chart I 23 D Wide - screen television on roof 23DD 23 I 24 D Playing games with the wide - screen and guns 24 CD 24 I 25 D Smurf slime bath 25 DD 25 II 26 E Game in which the surroundings can be modified 26EE CE 26 II 27 E 3D helmet for virtual city tours 27EE DE 27 II 28 E 3D helmet with communication , virtual walking through city together 28 28 III 29 A Driving computer game with camera behind car . . . own car on screen in front of you 29 29 III 30 A Pass - along rewritable memo - board 30 30 III 31 A Twister between and over seats 31 31 IV 32 B Chairs opposite each other gives opportunity to play board games 32 EBAB 32 V 33 C Mini - kitchen allows kids to make sandwiches 33 33 V 34 C Four - in - a - row game between seats 34 34 Round 4 chart I 35 C Virtually shooting other road users 35 DC 35 II 36 D Air cushioned playhouse 36DD 36 II 37 D Virtual fighting with little brother 37 EDAD 37 III 38 E Fold - out screen for games etc . = selflink 38EE 38 III 39 E Turn chairs away from mommy and daddy , so that they can’t see what the kids are doing 39 39 IV 40 A Armrest with games = interpersonal link 40AA AA 40 IV 41 A Velcro on roof with printing , to play games on and stick cuddly toys on . 41 41 V 42 B Fold - out tables with screens and keyboards in front seats . 42BB 42 Round 5 chart I 43 B Touch screen with games 43 43 II 44 C Seat rises into see - through turret 44DC 44 III 45 D Gun turret 45 45 III 46 D Looping race track 46 46 III 47 D Race 47DD 47 III 48 D ( Racetrack for planes on ceiling ) . . planes hang on strings so that they glide in turns 48 48 IV 49 E 3D helmet with glove so that you can actually hit your siblings 49 49 V 50 A 3D helmet with boxing glove 50 50 V 51 A Armrest with games shaped like Scenic 51 51 Figure 3 : Link matrix for a brainsketching segment . Links in the shaded areas represent interaction with the direct part of external memory . Black squares refer to interpersonal links and crosses refer to self - links . Whitened areas refer to unlikely link locations . During brainsketching , the designers generate ideas in parallel . Therefore , it is not likely that there are direct links between ideas generated by different designers within the same round of generating ideas . The designers may sometimes take a peak at the flipcharts of their neighbors , but this was found to occur rarely . In the brainsketching link matrices the areas where linking is highly unlikely to occur are whitened . Of course , within each round of generating ideas , designers can build on their own recently generated ideas , as represented by the single links , or small triangular groups of potential link locations at the diagonal of the link matrix . For brainstorming with post - its the generation of ideas is a continuous group process , which makes it more complicated to provide an operationalization for the direct linking areas in the link matrix . As for brainsketching , the direct linking area ought to cover the link locations with ideas that are still present in the focus of attention . This number needs to be more than seven , because that is supposed to be the average amount of ideas or chunks that the internal short - term memory can contain [ 11 ] . The external notations are supposed to provide an extension to the short - term memory and therefore should contain more than these seven ideas . It cannot be much more than seven ideas , however , because the human attentional focus can only cover a limited number of items , e . g . [ 14 ] . We made the assumption that the direct linking area for the brainstorming segments contains the link locations with the ten previous ideas . The actual direct area may contain a few ideas more or a few ideas less , but the results do not change dramatically when the bandwidth is made a few link locations narrower or wider ( see figure 4 ) . K L I L I M I M L K K I L M M I K L M I K M L K M I I K M I L M I L I I L K I I M L M K L I K I M L Linkograph 16 - 12 - 98 - 1 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1011121314151617181920212223242526272829303132333435363738394041424344454647484950 1 / K Newspaper tray on ground 1 Mg Sg 1 2 / L Double trays for paper and general waste 2 Mg Mg 2 3 / I Pedal for opening gives access to Central waste container 3 Tg Tg Tg 3 4 / L ( Central waste container ) … can be emptied from outside 4 Mg 4 5 / I … and cleaned with a hose … and separate paper holder 5 5 6 / M Separating garbage 6 6 7 / I Shredder 7 Tg 7 8 / M Mailbox for paper 8 MgMg 8 9 / L Mailbox under seats 9 Mg 9 10 / K Mailbox in fold - away table 10 10 11 / K Mailbox in table over bench length 11 11 12 / I Robot picks up garbage when needed 12 Tg 12 13 / L Enlarged railtender 13 13 14 / M Pounder to reduce volume 14 Tg 14 15 / M Pounder operated by pedal if tray is full 15 15 16 / I Conveyor in isle 16 Tg Tg 16 17 / K Higher location for trays 17 Tg 17 18 / L Throwing basket 18 18 19 / M Throwing outside through hole in floor 19 Tg Tg Tg 19 20 / I Continuous cable - lift with trays 20 Mg 20 21 / K Tracks - cleaning train 21 21 22 / M Conveyor with trays below 22 Tg 22 23 / L Chute to garbage wagon 23 Tg Tg 23 24 / K Big trays on platform , none in train 24 24 25 / M Suction 25 Sg Sg 25 26 / I Vacuum 26 26 27 / I Vacuum makes trash flat 27 27 28 / K Big bins in doorway 28 28 29 / M Passengers hand garbage over towards trays 29 29 30 / I Plastic bags from armrests 30 30 31 / L Throwing everything on ground 31 Tg Tg 31 32 / M Dogs 32 Tg 32 33 / I Rats eat everything 33 Tg 33 34 / L Grate in floor 34 Mg 34 35 / I ( grate in floor ) and one big hole for bigger trash 35 35 36 / I Garbage floats to central place on air cushion 36 Mg 36 37 / L Sliding floor towards corners 37 37 38 / K Track cleaning wagon in back of train 38 Mg 38 39 / I ( Track cleaning wagon ) with suction arm 39 39 40 / I Squid on top of train puts arms through windows 40 40 41 / M Cleaning with water 41 Tg 41 42 / L Flushing bins like toilet 42 Sg Tg Mg 42 43 / M Showerhead 43 43 44 / K Flush if full = selflink 44 44 45 / L Old - fashioned toilet flushing system 45 Mg 45 46 / I Cart for emptying bins , bottoms of bins open automatically = interpersonal link 46 Sg 46 47 / K Flushing and compressing , like garbage truck 47 47 48 / I Spinning ash - tray 48 Tg 48 49 / M Water flowing in trash bins 49 49 50 / L Worm wheel 5050 Figure 4 : Link matrix for a brainstorming segment For each of these four categories of links , the link - type indices ( LTI ) were determined . The link - type indices ( Supplementary , Modification , and Tangential ) provide the distribution of different types of connections that are made within the external memory area , based on a categorization of the nature of ideas provided by Gryskiewicz [ 6 ] . Tangential links indicate wild leaps into a different direction , modification links indicate direct variations and supplementary links indicate small alterations . RESULTS The basic results are shown in table 1 . For the individual remote area , too little data entries were found to determine reliable link type indices . Table 1 : Results Brainsketching Brainstorming Individual Direct l . d . LTI T ( SD ) ( SD ) 0 . 26 ( 0 . 13 ) 0 . 50 ( 0 . 04 ) 0 . 12 ( 0 . 10 ) 0 . 46 ( 0 . 20 ) Individual Remote l . d . LTI T ( SD ) ( SD ) 0 . 13 ( 0 . 12 ) - 0 . 09 ( 0 . 09 ) - Shared Direct l . d . LTI T ( SD ) ( SD ) 0 . 53 ( 0 . 22 ) 0 . 29 ( 0 . 06 ) 0 . 43 ( 0 . 17 ) 0 . 41 ( 0 . 04 ) Shared Remote l . d . LTI T ( SD ) ( SD ) 0 . 35 ( 0 . 22 ) 0 . 25 ( 0 . 05 ) 0 . 20 ( 0 . 18 ) 0 . 12 ( 0 . 14 ) Functions of Sketching in Idea Generation Meetings With these results , we can evaluate the three basic functions of sketching in design activity that could have a role in idea generation meetings . In figure 5 these basic functions are located in the designer’s interactions with information in the group’s external memory . Figure 5 : Theoretical functions of sketching located in the model of the design group’s interactions with external memory . Function 1 : Sketching Supports an Individual Re - interpretive Cycle . Individual idea generation has a substantial role in the brainsketching process . Compared to brainstorming , ideas had significantly ( p < 0 . 005 , paired sample t - test ) more connections with ideas in the individual - direct area of the external memory ( link density for brainsketching , l . d . = 0 . 26 , SD = 0 . 13 ; for brainstorming , l . d . = 0 . 12 , SD = 0 . 10 ) . The purported function of sketching in idea generation groups is that the re - interpretation taking place in an idea sketching cycle is said to be conducive to creativity . Purcell & Gero [ 16 ] describe such re - interpretation as : “the emergence of new ways of seeing the perceptual ( drawn ) representation of a potential design” ( p . 396 ) . Suwa & Tversky [ 20 ] relate re - interpretation to “ … acts of shifting the focus of attention” ( p . 394 ) . For idea generation meetings , such ‘new ways of seeing’ or ‘focus shifts’ , can contribute to the creative process by opening up new directions for further exploration . The level of tangential linking can be seen as an indicator for such creative re - interpretation taking place . Tangential links indicate possible focus shifts , which may be further explored through direct association , identified by modification - type linking , and steps of incremental development , identified by supplementary - type linking . So , a relatively high ratio of tangential links can be seen as a basic indicator that the working medium used supports creativity through re - interpretation . A comparison of the link type indices in the individual - direct area between the brainsketching and brainstorming condition does not show a substantial difference in tangential - type links . For the brainsketching segments , the tangential link type index was only slightly higher ( LTI T = 0 . 50 , SD = 0 . 0 . 04 ) than for brainstorming ( LTI T = 0 . 46 , SD = 0 . 20 ) . However , by comparing the link type indices for the area of external memory at hand - the individual direct area - with the overall link type indices , we can evaluate the relative contribution to the creative process of the proposed individual re - interpretive cycle . The link type indices for the links with ideas in the individual - direct area provide a rough indication for the nature of this part of the process . In the individual direct area of the brainsketching segments , a relatively high ratio of tangential linking takes place ( LTI T = 0 . 50 , SD = 0 . 04 ) , compared to the overall tangential link type index ( LTI T = 0 . 32 , SD = 0 . 15 ) . This indicates that in the individual - direct area of external memory a high ratio of wild leap - type connections is made with earlier ideas , which means that the linking in the individual - direct area stimulates creativity by opening novel directions . Function 2 : Sketching Invites Re - interpretation of Each Other’s Ideas . Similarly to the previous individual direct function of sketching , the link type indices for the shared - direct area provide some insight into the nature of the connections made with the recently generated ideas of other designers . For both brainstorming and brainsketching the shared - direct area is an important source for making connections ( link density for brainsketching l . d . = 0 . 53 , SD = 0 . 22 ; for brainstorming l . d . = 0 . 43 , SD = 0 . 17 ) . As in the previously mentioned function of sketches for the individual design process , if sketches stimulate creativity through inviting re - interpretation of each other’s sketches , this should show by a relatively high ratio of tangential links for the brainsketching condition in this area . However , the tangential link type index is substantially lower for brainsketching ( LTI T = 0 . 29 , SD = 0 . 06 ) compared to brainstorming ( LTI T = 0 . 41 , SD = 0 . 04 ) . This is not in line with what one would expect if the creative process were influenced by the proposed function of the designers re - interpreting each other’s idea sketches . Function 3 : Sketching Enhances the Accessibility of Earlier Ideas . Because sketches may be easier to identify in the external memory , the designers are more likely to make use of the ideas in the remote area of external memory , which consists of the individual - remote area and the shared - remote area . Comparing the link densities in these areas of external memory for the graphic and for the sentential condition provides a basic indication of whether this function of sketching is relevant for idea generation meetings . The designers made few connections with ideas in the individual remote area of external memory in both conditions . And , there is no substantial difference between the link densities for the individual - remote area ( for the graphic condition : l . d . = 0 . 13 , SD = 0 . 12 ; for the sentential condition : l . d . = 0 . 09 , SD = 0 . 09 ) . Many more connections are made with the shared - remote area . Here , there is a substantial difference between the link densities . The mean link density in the shared - remote area for the graphic condition ( l . d . = 0 . 35 ; SD = 0 . 22 ) is significantly ( p < 0 . 05 ) higher in comparison to the sentential condition ( l . d . = 0 . 20 , SD = 0 . 18 ) . Thus , in the sketching condition , ideas have many more connections with ideas in the shared - remote part of external memory , which supports the notion that brainsketching enhances the creative group process by improving the accessibility of each other’s earlier ideas . CONCLUSION Of the three proposed functions of sketching in design groups , no evidence was found in support of the second one , which states that sketches stimulate creativity , by inviting re - interpretation of each other’s idea sketches . It appears that sketches stimulate creativity in idea generation groups , especially in the immediate individual idea generation process by providing new directions for idea generation in an individual generate - interpret cycle . And , sketches may provide a more integrated group process , by providing better access to the earlier ideas , especially in the shared parts of external memory ( see figure 6 ) . Figure 6 : Sketching may support the idea generation process by enhancing the individual interpretive cycle and by improving accessibility to earlier ideas . FINAL REMARKS The two techniques applied in the experimental meetings were quite different in nature . Brainsketching involved an idea generation process in rounds , whereas brainstorming involved a continuous idea generation process . This means that no generalizations can be made about the functioning of sketching in idea generation meetings . The implications are limited to the differences found between the two techniques . Because of the results of an earlier study [ 23 ] we could not use an experimental design in which only the working medium was altered . This earlier study showed a break - down of the idea - generation process , if sketching was included in brainstorming , without making structural changes to the technique . The individual function of sketching particularly accounts for why the so - called ‘visual brainstorming’ technique failed in this earlier study . Visual brainstorming was a direct variation to brainstorming with post - its . Designers were asked to sketch ideas on individual sheets of paper and , when done with a sketch , immediately share the idea with the group , whereupon the facilitator pasted the sheet with the idea sketch onto the flipchart . This technique did not allow for the individual idea generation cycle , in which new search directions can be found . Indeed , the technique not only lacked quantity of ideas ( only 17 ideas were generated , compared to 46 for the control condition , in which regular brainstorming was applied ) , but the tangential link index was also especially low for visual brainstorming ( LTI T = 0 . 21 , compared to LTI T = 0 . 46 for regular brainstorming ) , indicating few new connections that could open up novel directions for generating ideas . Apparently , even when involved in an idea generation meeting , participants need to be allowed - or even stimulated - to engage in individual cycles of re - interpretation . The brainsketching technique applied in this study makes sure of this by means of formal rounds of individual idea generation . Perhaps other ways are possible in which the participants can make more informal shifts between the re - interpretive cycle of their individual sketching process , and making connections in the group process . REFERENCES 1 . Bly , S . A . ( 1988 ) . A use of drawing surfaces in different collaborative settings . In . Greif , I . ( Ed . ) , Second Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work ( pp . 250 - 256 ) . New York : association for Computing Machinery . 2 . Fish , J . & Scrivener , S . ( 1990 ) . Amplifying the mind’s eye : Sketching and visual cognition . Leonardo , 23 ( 1 ) , 117 - 126 3 . Goldschmidt , G . ( 1991 ) The dialectics of sketching . Creativity Research Journal , 4 ( 2 ) , 123 - 143 . 4 . Goldschmidt , G . ( 1996 ) . The designer as a team of one . In Cross , N . , Christiaans , H . , and Dorst , K . ( Eds . ) , Analysing design activity ( pp . 65 - 91 ) . Chichester , U . K . : Wiley . 5 . Goldschmidt , G . And Weil , M . ( 1998 ) . Contents and structure in design reasoning . Design Issues , 14 ( 3 ) , 85 - 100 . 6 . Gryskiewicz , S . S . ( 1980 ) . A study of creative problem solving techniques in group settings . Unpublished doctoral dissertation , University of London . 7 . Humphreys , G . W . & Bruce , V . ( Eds . ) ( 1989 ) . Visual cognition , computational , experimental and neuropsychological perspectives . Hove , U . K . : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates Ltd . 8 . Isaksen , S . G . , Dorval , K . B . , & Treffinger , D . J . ( 1994 ) . Creative approaches to problem solving . Dubuque , IA : Kendall & Hunt . 9 . Karsenty , L . ( 1999 ) . Cooperative work and shared visual context : An empirical study of comprehension problems in side - by - side and remote help dialogues . Human - Computer Interaction ( 14 ) , 283 - 315 . 10 . McKim , R . H . ( 1980 ) . Experiences in visual thinking ( second edition ) . Boston , MA : Wadsworth 11 . Miller , G . A . ( 1956 ) . The magical number seven , plus or minus two . Psychological review , 63 , 81 - 97 . 12 . Newell , A . & Simon , H . A . ( 1972 ) . Human problem solving . Englewood Cliffs , NJ : Prentice - Hall . 13 . Osborn , A . F . ( 1953 ) . Applied imagination . New York : Scribner’s . 14 . Pashler , H . ( 1995 ) . Attention and visual perception : Analyzing divided attention . In . Kosslyn , S . M . & Oshershon , D . N . ( Eds . ) Visual cognition : Volume 2 . ( pp . 71 - 100 ) Boston , MA : MIT Press . 15 . Potter , M . C . & Faulconer , B . A . ( 1975 ) . Time to understand pictures and words . Nature , 253 , 437 - 438 . 16 . Purcell , T . & Gero , J . S . ( 1998 ) Drawings and the design process . Design Studies , 19 ( 4 ) , 389 - 430 . 17 . Schön , D . A . & Wiggins , G . ( 1992 ) . Kinds of seeing and their functions in designing . Design Studies , 13 ( 2 ) , 135 - 156 . 18 . Scrivener , S . A . R . & Clark , S . M . ( 1994 ) . Sketching in collaborative design . In . MacDonald , L . & Vince , J . ( Eds . ) , Interacting with Virtual Environments . Chichester , U . K : Wiley . 19 . Snodgrass , J . G . & McCullough , B . ( 1986 ) . The role of visual similarity in picture categorization . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory and Cognition , 7 , 339 - 345 . 20 . Suwa , M . & Tversky , B . ( 1997 ) . What do architects and students perceive in their sketches ? A protocol analysis . Design Studies , 18 , 385 - 403 . 21 . Tang , J . C . ( 1991 ) . Findings from observational studies of collaborative work . International Journal of Man - Machine Studies , 34 . 143 - 160 . 22 . Tang , J . C . & Leifer , L . J . ( 1988 ) . A framework for understanding the workspace activity of design teams . In . Greif , I . ( Ed . ) Second Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work ( pp . 244 - 249 ) . New York : association for Computing Machinery . 23 . Van der Lugt , R . ( 2000 ) . Developing a graphic tool for creative problem solving in design groups . Design Studies , 21 ( 5 ) , 505 - 522 . 24 . Van der Lugt , R . ( 2001 ) . Sketching in design idea generation meetings . Doctoral dissertation , Delft University of Technology . 25 . Van der Lugt , R . , & Van der Graaf ( 2002 ) . Context indicators for determining links between design ideas . Manuscript submitted for publication . 26 . VanGundy , A . B . ( 1988 ) . Techniques of structured problem solving ( second edition ) . New York : Van Nostrand Reinhold .