Analyzing opportunities for using interactive augmented prototyping in design practice JOUKE VERLINDEN AND IMRE HORVA´TH Faculty of Industrial Design Engineering , Delft University of Technology , Delft , The Netherlands ( R ECEIVED May 1 , 2008 ; A CCEPTED January 13 , 2009 ) Abstract The use of tangible objects is paramount in industrial design . Throughout the design process physical prototypes are used to enable exploration , simulation , communication , and specification of designs . Although much is known about prototyping skills and technologies , the reasons why and how such models are employed in design practice are poorly understood . Ad - vanced techniques and design media such as virtual and augmented prototyping are being introduced without insight as to their benefits . We believe that an augmented prototyping system , that is , employing augmented reality technology to combine physical and digital representations , could positively influence the design process . However , we lack knowledge on why and how itmight facilitate design . Thispaper reportsoncase studiesperformed indifferent domains of industrial design . At eachof three Dutch design offices , a project was followed with particular attention to physical prototyping and group activities . The projects encompassed information appliance design , automotive design , and interior design . Although the studies vary in many aspects ( product domain , stakeholders , duration ) , the findings can be applied in conceptualizing advanced prototyping systems to support industrial design . Furthermore , the data reveal that the roles of a prototype in current practice are not nec - essarily utilitarian ; for example , the prototype may serve as a conversation piece or as seducer . Based on so - called “hints , ” bottlenecks and best practices concerning concept articulation are linked to usage scenarios for augmented tangible prototyp - ing . The results point to modeling and communication scenarios . Detailed study of the cases indicates that communication activities , especially design reviews , would benefit most from interactive augmented prototyping . Keywords : Augmented Reality ; Case Study ; Design Process ; Prototyping ; Tangible User Interfaces 1 . INTRODUCTION Tangible prototypes and scale models play an important role in the design of physical artifacts . In industrial design , ergo - nomic , aesthetic , mechanical , and manufacturing aspects all need consideration ; physical models are often used for exploration , verification , communication , and specification . Two technologies , interactive augmented prototyping ( IAP ) — the combination of physical and virtual artifact models through augmented reality—and rapid prototyping ( RP ) of - fer new opportunities . These technologies could improve the outcome of the design process , the creativity of the de - signer , and the innovativeness of the product . However , little is known about the actual application and usability of such techniques . Most evaluations are performed in educational settings , limiting the scope to product usability experiments or heuristic evaluations ( Verlinden et al . , 2006 ) . Even tradi - tional approaches of model making and the roles that tangible models play in industrial design engineering have received little attention in the literature . We performed empirical studies at design studios in var - ious domains of industrial design engineering . By observing and analyzing design processes , and in particular the use of design representations , we aim to identify potential applica - tions of IAP and also to determine their impact on the overall design process . This article reports on three case studies per - formed in different areas of industrial design , namely , the de - sign of information appliances , automotive design , and inter - ior design . After reviewing some background on IAP and prototyping objectives from the literature , we present our study method . Then , each design project is described and characterized . Based on our findings we then present “hints” for future de - sign support solutions . We conclude with a discussion of tan - gible design support by IAP and related technologies . Reprint requests to : Jouke Verlinden , Faculty of Industrial Design Engi - neering , Industrieel Ontwerpen , Room 3A - 28 , Landbergstraat 15 , Delft Uni - versity of Technology , Delft 2628CE , The Netherlands . E - mail : j . c . verlin den @ tudelft . nl Artificial Intelligence for Engineering Design , Analysis and Manufacturing ( 2009 ) , 23 , 289 – 303 . Printed in the USA . Copyright # 2009 Cambridge University Press 0890 - 0604 / 09 $ 25 . 00 doi : 10 . 1017 / S0890060409000250 289 2 . BACKGROUND 2 . 1 . IAP IAP employs augmented ( mixed ) reality technologies to com - bine virtual and physical prototypes . The underlying enabling technologies include means of display , position sensing , in - teraction techniques , and physical model manufacturing . In particular , the display technology for augmentation ranges from video mixing and see - through displays to spatial aug - mented reality in which video projectors cast computer ima - gery directly on physical objects ( Bimber & Raskar , 2005 ) . IAP has two principal characteristics : it enriches a physical model with digital information , and it enables interaction with these augmented prototypes . IAP systems have been devised to support design activities in geometric modeling , interactive painting , layout design , in - formation appliances , automotive design , and augmented en - gineering ( Verlinden et al . , 2006 ) . For example , Figure 1 shows two IAP systems to enrich a physical mockup of a mo - bile phone with a graphical screen : one using a head - mounted display and one using a projector . Underkoffler and Ishii’s ( 1999 ) URP system presented an early example of this technique in an urban planning scenario . Physical wire frames represented buildings that could be placed arbitrarily on a plane . Real - time simulations including reflections , shadows , and wind turbulence were projected on the table . The main advantage of such techniques lies in their ability to provide natural haptic / tactile feedback blended with the simulated environment . They constitute an embodied in - terface , allowing natural spatial reasoning while supporting social interaction in a collaborative setting ( Dourish , 2001 ) . Compared to traditional physical prototyping , this enrich - ment can display new information types ( e . g . , wind simula - tion in the example above ) , increase the intensity of particular types of information ( e . g . , material expression including tex - ture maps ) , and increase the sense of engagement , which is influenced by the combination of information and its dy - namic , interactive behavior . Finally , RP technologies such as CNC milling and stereolithography can be employed to fabricate the physical prototypes . 2 . 1 . 1 . IAP limitations Although it is rapidly emerging , IAP also has limitations as a tangible design medium . Constraints in physical scale and resolution of the available augmented reality displays are of key importance . At present , projector - based systems seem preferable for model inspection ( Nam & Lee , 2003 ) and pro - vide more object - presence than virtual reality - based tech - niques such as the virtual workbench ( Stevens , 2002 ) . How - ever , hollow or sparsely filled structures as well as occlusion by users present unsolved challenges for augmented proto - typing . We consider IAP as a generic , yet immature , technology that enriches physical objects in the design process . We aim to propose improvements in the design process that IAP can make possible . Future confirming studies will be required to measure the effectiveness of IAP technologies in support - ing design . 2 . 2 . The design means of physical prototyping Surveys such as those by Engelbrektsson and Soderman ( 2004 ) and Broek et al . ( 2000 ) show trends toward advanced prototyping technologies in industry , but they do not shed light on the significance of physical prototyping in design . Empirical work on the employment of physical models is mainly found in the domain of mechanical engineering . For example , Brereton and McGarry ( 2000 ) extensively analyzed mechanical engineering students’ behavior and their reflec - tions on physical modeling . They found nine physical proto - typing roles , ranging from “hardware as starting point” to “hardware as a medium for integration . ” Although these roles illustrate the use of tangible prototypes , they do not link par - ticular design activities to possible applications or require - ments . This line of work , extended by McGarry ( 2005 ) , employs contextual enquiry and observational techniques to create an extensive account of all design representations used at an engineering office . Unfortunately , the process studied by McGarry does not include physical prototypes . In a similar analysis , Yang ( 2004 ) compared the effectiveness of the end result and the effort and resources spent on proto - typing and found no direct correspondence . Although the findings of these empirical studies are important , their appli - cation to industrial design practice is unclear . With its empha - sis on shape and ergonomics , industrial design has a different prototyping tradition than engineering . Also , the complexity of real ( as opposed to student ) projects will influence the pro - totyping objectives and significance . As a generic starting point to physical prototyping , we ad - here to Geurer’s ( 1996 ) framework for prototyping , which identifies four main modeling intentions : 1 . exploration : presenting a ( modifiable ) spatial geometry andsupportingtheformgivingprocess ( concerningglobal shape , specific features , and material characteristics ) ; 2 . communication : sharing the artifact’s shape with other stakeholders in the design process to support decision making ; 3 . verification : checking whether the product design meets the design criteria and other relevant requirements ; 4 . downstream process specification : integrating and pro - pagating specifications to downstream activities in the design process . A typical example can be found in the automotive industry , in which full - scale clay models act as a unified information carrier for the shape in the detailing stage . Often , physical models serve multiple purposes ; this cate - gorization is merely meant to present the dominant drivers to employ physical models . In the following sections , we will extend this view . Discussions with design professionals and J . Verlinden and I . Horva´th 290 personal experience , indicated that they employ prototypes and other design representations for more diffuse and organi - zational purposes outside the direct scope of the product at hand , for example , to express the brand identity of a design firm , or to impress other stakeholders . 3 . CASE STUDY DETAILS : PHYSICAL PROTOTYPING IN PRACTICE The research questions and the empirical basis formulated in the introduction are stated as “how” and “why , ” suggesting investigations of an exploratory , descriptive , or explanatory nature . We chose to follow the case study method . As de - scribed by Yin ( 1988 ) , a crucial aspect of case study is combining of multiple sources of evidence ( triangulation ) . Observations , artifact models , documentation , interviews are all consulted to establish causal relationships ( see Table 1 ) . Each case study protocol contained analysis structures , regu - lations , and an introductory section to explain the objectives of the project to company representatives . The case studies served as a starting point to compile char - acteristics and specific events ( “process highlights” ) that in - fluenced the design process . This body of findings was then used to identify bottlenecks or challenges that the designers faced while articulating and communicating concepts ( see Section 4 ) . In each case study , to verify the findings , the data and interpretations were presented to the main partici - pants in a debriefing interview . These interviews were a means to triangulate the case study data . For each investiga - tion , a case study report was made , which was again checked and approved by the designers . 3 . 1 . Case details The method of multiple case studies was chosen to produce a deep and accurate account of all prototyping and modeling activities ( Verlinden & Horvath , 2006 ) . These cases represent a range of industrial design engineering domains . Our criteria for case selection were the following : 1 . The domain should be identifiable with industrial de - sign engineering products and processes . 2 . The domains can be accessed by the researcher in terms of time , resources , and openness . Fig . 1 . Two augmented prototyping scenarios : ( top ) head - mounted display and ( bottom ) projector - based display ( Nam & Lee , 2003 ) . [ A color version of this figure can be viewed online at journals . cambridge . org / aie ] Using interactive augmented prototyping in design practice 291 3 . The selection of cases should cover a diverse range of products . Table 2 summarizes the case study coverage . Each case study is introduced in the following format ( Sections 3 . 2 – 3 . 4 ) : case context : the stakeholders and the assignment ; time line : tabular specification of the design process ; design elements : the main focus of the design , and given and crucial elements of the artifact . Details on prototyping can be found in Section 3 . 5 and the following . 3 . 2 . Automotive design : Tractor The first case study was performed at a Dutch automotive de - sign company , which employs four industrial designers with di - verse backgrounds . Their projects range from passenger buses ( both interior and exterior ) , specialized transportation concepts and consumer products . The company has proficiency in com - puter - aided design ( CAD ) and virtual prototyping , all per - formed on mobile workstations , often on - site at clients’ loca - tions . The project monitored was the redesign of the body of an imported tractor , summarized in Table 3 . It covered aspects of branding , automotive styling , detailing , and preparation for manufacturing . Two senior designers shared the work between May 2006 and June 2007 . The stakeholderswere internationally dispersed : the client was a tractor dealer at another European country who first contacted a Dutch peer to adjust the vehicle to comply with European traffic regulations . Thiscompany con - tracted a manufacturer for the body shells , who subsequently hired the design studio . Most communication was by e - mail , al - though some meetings occurred when a milestone was reached . In this assignment , the motor compartment cover ( the body ) and related aspects such as the dashboard and paneling around the seating was most important . The design focuses on the body , in particular , the shape , construction , and material properties concerning aesthetics . As the tractor is a slow agri - cultural vehicle , traffic safety issues were of less importance . 3 . 2 . 1 . Design elements Figure 2 shows the design elements in the tractor design case study . The design is constrained by the given elements : the chassis and the engineering package . These define shape boundaries ; the body also must accommodate the movement envelope of the engineering package and related components ( wheels and related parts ) . The crucial design elements are those elements that are obligatory parts but variable in shape and behavior . Air inlets are necessary to cool the motor , but their area and placement on the hood depend on the over - all shape and performance . Headlights are obligatory for Eu - ropean rules , whereas the dials and steering are defined by the original ( Chinese ) design but can be adapted in styling . 3 . 3 . Information appliance : Hand - held oscilloscope Finding a representative information appliances case proved difficult , as most developing products are shielded from com - petitors and external observers are not allowed . Therefore , we performed a retrospective analysis of a handheld digital oscilloscope . Table 1 . Case study analysis structure Case Study Question Result Data CollectionMethods When in the design process are concepts articulated and used ? Timeline with design representations Observations , interviews , pictures What are the characteristics of these concept articulations ? List of characteristics Collection Pictures ( observations ) , structured interviews of stakeholders Which product modeling aspects play a role in these articulations ? List of aspects Dependencyspecification between aspects Observations , interviews What topics are dealt with as group activities ? Who is involved ? Addition to the timeline of topics : product modeling aspects and who is involved Interviews What problems occur during the creation and use of concept articulations ? Description of bottlenecks , added to the timeline to pinpoint their relevance Possibly related to decisions and insight Interviews How could IAP be applied in the original design process ? Collection of hints pointing at IAP functions All data Table 2 . Case study coverage Design Case Study Period Interviews During Design Process Recorded Design Reviews ( Presentations / min ) Additional Evidence From To Tractor July 27 , 2006 April 4 , 2007 20 7 Models , intermediate drawings Oscilloscope Dec . 14 , 2006 April 3 , 2007 10 — Models , design documentation Museum interior Aug . 22 , 2006 April 24 , 2007 8 5 Models J . Verlinden and I . Horva´th 292 The project involved developing new technologies for fast analog – digital conversion , an updated form factor for the brand , and a good fit with market and use ( Table 4 ) . This sec - ond case study was performed at a Dutch design office of an international electronics design and manufacturing company . Product development occurred between 1996 and 1999 , so we adapted our case study for an historic analysis . The development team represented various disciplines , in - cluding industrial design , user interface design , product plan - ning ( product marketing ) , core technology research and devel - opment , sales , mechanical engineering , software engineering , electrical engineering , factory engineering , and packaging . Most stakeholders were employees . The resulting product is re - garded as one of the best in the market : it won several design prizes ( IF Design award 2000 ) and subsequent diagnostics pro - ducts for the brand still use an identical form factor . 3 . 3 . 1 . Design elements Figure 3 shows the design elements for the oscilloscope de - sign . The oscilloscope body can be viewed as the element that bridges all design and engineering aspects . The design focus of the body corresponds with industrial and interaction de - sign , reflected in shape , behavior and material properties con - cerning aesthetics , ergonomics ( both physical and cognitive ) , and production . Although the electronics parts ( engineering package ) also received a great deal of attention during devel - opment , for this investigation we viewed the engineering package as given , as the electronics parts do not directly influ - ence the product manifestation . Three design elements ( probes , display , buttons ) required extensive exploration and influenced the design of the body . We considered these crucial design elements . † Probes : Touching contacts and picking up electric sig - nals is of crucial importance . Thus , the user should be able to shift between various tips and clamps . The de - vice can monitor two signals simultaneously and two electrical contacts are necessary for each . Over 20 differ - ent probes with different tips and voltage ranges are shipped with the final product . † Display : When this product was developed ( 1996 – 1999 ) , one could not simply select liquid crystal display screens from a catalog . This not only influenced product cost and development effort for electrical engineering but also the visual characteristics of the screen ( field of view , contrast , resolution , colorcapabilities ) aswellasthesizeandweight . Later versions were shipped with a 320 (cid:2) 240 pixel display . † Button layout : Selection , placement , and size of the keys were of primary concern . The final design has 35 but - tons , some with fixed and others with flexible functions . 3 . 4 . Interior design : Museum The third case study was carried out at an office of a well - known Dutch furniture designer , which employs approxi - mately eight people from a fine arts background . The head designer emphasizes innovative approaches to furniture de - sign . The project monitored was the interior design and spe - cialized furniture of a municipal museum in The Netherlands ( Table 5 ) . Three designers shared the work from October 2006 until the museum opened in 2008 . We followed the process until May 2008 , when the detailing phase was com - pleted . There were many external stakeholders of the projects , including its director , curators , local government , and restau - rant keeper . The director is the key decision maker who controls the budget and manages practical issues . The curators have most Table 3 . Tractor design time line Product Planning Concept Phase Detailing Production Preparation Start date May 15 , 2006 May 22 , 2006 June 26 , 2006 Nov . 3 , 2006 Forms of representation Pictures ( Internet search ) 3 - D impression of engineering package ( Catia ) 3 - D renderings ( Catia ) 2 - D sketches ( Photoshop , based on Catia renderings ) Pictures ( visits ) , 3 - D models ( Catia ) , 2 - D sketches ( Photoshop and Alias sketchbook ) 3 - D models ( Catia ) , construction principles ( Adobe Illustrator ) Group activities ( design reviews ) May 22 , 2006 June 5 , 2006 June 26 , 2006 Aug . 1 , 2006 Oct . 13 , 2006 Nov . 3 , 2006 Dec . 20 , 2006 Bottlenecks / challenges in particular phase Reverse engineering of existing product Expressiveness of styling in 3 - D models ( too sterile ) Lighting component Headlight unit selection Fit of headlight in body Dashboard and fuel cap Fit of skirts ( oil filter ) Blinkers Fig . 2 . The design elements of the tractor design case study . Using interactive augmented prototyping in design practice 293 influence on the interior , as they are in charge of launching ex - hibits that attract the public . The local government officer is re - sponsible for funding and building regulations ; the restaurant keeper has a limited role , concerned with the logistics of serving food and drinks . These stakeholders have little experience in de - sign projects as they happen infrequently . 3 . 4 . 1 . Design elements The assignment was to design the museum’s interior , in particular , the layout of the space and furniture to host par - ticular functions , for example , counter , restaurant , and mu - seum shop . The given element is the building : the constructed walls , a centrally located staircase and the fac¸ade . Although the landscape surrounding the building is not owned by the museum and could be considered as given , the design studio took it as part of the design assignment ( Fig . 4 ) . The museum interior must be flexible and should easily adapt to different exhibits and special events ( the original proposal was titled “art parking” ) . The events proposed were : child’s atelier , exhibit , architecture cafe´ , lecture , dancing , auc - tion , and workshop . Crucial design elements that might move or transform were artwork ( pieces on show , paintings , sculp - ture , etc . ) , the wardrobe , counter , and shop . The main design focus was the distribution of spatial func - tions in the museum . This differentiation of zones relates , on the one hand , to events at the museum ( ticket sales , recep - tions , child’s visits , etc . ) . In contrast , spatial functions corre - spond to one or more physical zones in the building , which might change or move when necessary . Among the most prominent items is an “accordion space , ” which grows or shrinks with one moveable wall . Of course , the constituents of the design focus and crucial design elements are not static : some functions were adapted ( office space as a mobile ele - ment or a fixed zone ) , whereas others were introduced during the process ( notably the garden and mobile kiosk ) . 3 . 5 . Prototypes All three projects used physical models for several purposes ( summarized in Table 6 ) . In addition to prototype characteriza - tions , we determined the number of prototypes made , the lead , lifetime , and the impact on the overall design project as reported by the chief designer . ( Appendix A lists all of the physical pro - totypes . ) Prototypes made for exploration and verification were used internally mainly to support group discussions and brain - storming sessions , except C1 . 2 , which was employed by only one individual . Tangible prototypes for communication were mainly available during design review meetings , and in both casesthey remained in close proximityof the project lead during other activities . This promoted awareness of the project and its progress to internal and external collaborators . The tractor design project employed few physical proto - types ( Fig . 5 ) , characterized in Appendix A as C1 . 1 to C1 . 3 . As the design studio is committed to using the CATIA digital modeling application , there was no prototyping bud - get . The CAD application allows considerable freedom in fine - tuning the shape and in meeting all fitting constraints that were prevalent in this project . Furthermore , the digital model was thought to act as an ideal interface between design and manufacturing ( CNC milling ) . However , in one inter - view , the designer claims that including more scale or full - size mockups could have helped determine and communicate the physical manifestation of the product . The oscilloscope design project can be characterized as a typical human - centered design project . It featured usability engineering techniques such as concept testing in focus Table 4 . Oscilloscope design time line Product Planning Concept Phase Detailing Production Preparation Start date March 1996 July 1997 March 1998 April 1999 Forms of representation Sketches , mockups ( foam ) , interface sketch ( paper ) Mockups ( foam ) , 3 - D renderings ( Alias Wavefront ) , UI design ( paper ) Mockup ( wood , CNC ) , 3 - D surface model ( Wavefront ) , interaction simulation ( PC - visual basic ) , navigation ( state transition diagrams ) Shell model ( stereo lithography , FOOT / SOOT ) working engineering package ( alpha release ) Group activities ( design reviews ) Monthly presentations Bottlenecks / challenges in particular phase Team building Key technologies research Obtaining user focus GUI modeling Team communication Accessories ( bag , packaging , probes ) Color version Screen resolution Power on - button Fig . 3 . The design elements of the hand - held oscilloscope case study . J . Verlinden and I . Horva´th 294 groups , paper prototyping , and virtual prototyping evaluation on PCs with physical mockups attached ( Verlinden et al . , 2007 ) . A main weakness of a sketch prototype ( C2 . 1 foam mockups ) is that it does not support exploration of the graphi - cal user interface and interactive behavior ; the user interac - tion prototype ( C2 . 2 ) had an extremely long lead time and was not easily adapted . In the museum interior design project , four models were made ( C3 . 1 – C3 . 4 ) , all with paper and foamboard using prints of scale drawings made in VectorWorks . From the start , the studio’s proposals also dealt with the building exterior . Al - though this is not formally part of the museum , solutions were proposed to expand the atmosphere of the interior . In the final model not all walls were physically modeled , only those parts that contributed to understanding the concep - tualized functional spaces . At such reduced scales , it is chal - lenging to get a correct impression of space . Furthermore , all models were monochrome , to focus attention on the concep - tual solution and not on materials , colors , or the like . In the words of the head designer , the colored human scale dum - mies shown in Figure 6 “radiate their color and vividness to the remainder of the design . ” 3 . 6 . The impact of prototypes According to the designers , the impact of the prototypes var - ied . In the tractor case the physical prototypes had a minimal impact , whereas in the oscilloscope and museum interior cases they had a substantial impact on the project . The opinions and reflections of the designers when pre - sented with the case study results reveal factors that support the inclusion of physical prototypes in practice : prototyping tradition , ease of physical reproduction of a product , the need to evaluate the design with end users , skills and attitudes of stakeholders , and leadership in decision making . Some studios relied on physical prototyping ; others adopted digital tools ( e . g . , in the tractor case ) . This also shapes the facil - ities that the studio hosts for prototyping activities . In addition , some products are difficult to model physically , a function of shape and intended scale . In the tractor design case we expected the use of small - scale models as is common in the automotive industry for exploration and communication ( Tovey , 1997 ) . However , this did not happen . The other two design projects more or less resemble common practice in their respective do - mains of hand - held information appliances and interior design . The human - centered approach of the oscilloscope case implied the need to evaluate with end users , whereas the other two had different stakeholders and concerns to address . In addition , in both the oscilloscope and museum interiorcases , physical mod - els addressed limitations in the spatial reasoning skills and dif - fering attitudes of the stakeholders in the design process . Fi - nally , strong decision - making leadership implies the need for multiple , tangible design alternativesthat can be put on the table during and between discussions . Only for the oscilloscope de - sign was a substantial budget reserved for prototyping . The complete dependencies of physical prototyping inclusion are depicted in Figure 7 . 4 . HINTS FOR IAP The previous section reflected on current design practice to address the why and how questions specified in Table 2 . However , this characterization does not necessarily point at Table 5 . Museum interior design time line Product Planning Concept Phase Detailing ProductionPreparation Start date Spring 2005 September 2006 April 2007 September 2007 Forms of representation Sketches ( Illustrator ) Sketches ( Illustrator ) , 2 - D ( and some 3 - D ) CAD ( Vectorworks ) , scale models ( foamboard and paper ) — — Group activities ( design reviews ) Pitch ( presentation þ book ) Monthly presentations Bottlenecks / challenges in particular phase CompetitionPersuadingother stakeholders Fixing design specifications ( requirements ) Curtains Office space GardenMobile kiosk — — Fig . 4 . The design elements of the museum interior design case study . Using interactive augmented prototyping in design practice 295 Fig . 5 . The tractor physical models : ( left ) an elongated tractor chassis that was reverse engineered and ( right ) a wooden impression of a hood to select and place car headlights in the new geometry . [ A color version of this figure can be viewed online at journals . cambridge . org / aie ] Fig . 6 . Scale model detail , showing a colored man dummy in monochrome design . [ A color version of this figure can be viewed online at journals . cambridge . org / aie ] Table 6 . Physical prototyping objectives among the three cases Case 1 : Tractor Case 2 : Handheld Oscilloscope Case 3 : Museum Interior Exploration Selecting headlights for tractor body ( C1 . 2 ) Initial form studies , button layout alternatives , etc . ( C2 . 1 ) Several furniture pieces in different physical media ( C3 . 3 ) Verification Fitting headlights in body þ engineering package ( C1 . 1 , C . 1 . 2 ) Usability testing ( C2 . 1 – C2 . 3 ) , fit of engineering package ( C2 . 4 ) , durability ( C2 . 5 ) — Communication — User studies , design reviews , acquisition ( all models ) Three large scale models for design reviews ( C3 . 2 – C3 . 4 ) Specification Null series ( C1 . 3 ) Concept ( C2 . 1 ) , first out of tool ( C2 . 5 ) Original design context ( C3 . 1 ) The numbers in parentheses refer to the indices in Appendix A . J . Verlinden and I . Horva´th 296 new means of design support . We examined the case studies to identify problems that IAP could have eased and by iden - tifying best practices that such solutions support . 4 . 1 . Hints The problem of devising IAP solutions to support the investi - gated cases is twofold . First , IAP is a developing approach that is not yet committed to specific functions or representation types . Second , the nondeterministic nature of the design pro - cess makes it difficult to apply traditional methods of distilling functional requirements from observations . Therefore , we de - vised an alternative to a standard requirement called a “hint” ( see Table 7 ) . A hint is a situated solution that an IAP solution can provide . It embodies pointers to particular design support scenarios that could relieve bottlenecks or that implement a best - case solution . Hints are grounded by specific findings in the case study database . Therefore , the hint is speculative and the underlying evidence determines its qualities : it resonates with the didactical concept of “hints” harboring both partiality and imprecision ( Horacek , 2003 ) . Kolhas et al . ( 1993 ) provide a probabilistic backdrop to reason with varying degrees of sup - port in the theory of hints . The description of a hint points at an IAP usage scenario , which can be supported by a collection of implementations . We do not want to constrain discovery of hints by the proto - typing objectives and roles that we found in the literature . In - deed , IAP might be better equipped to solve problems that areunrelated tothe prototypingobjectivesandroles . The bottle - necks mentioned in Tables 4 and 6 indicate how the collabora - tive aspect of design introduces multiple interpretations and value systems of “performance” or “bottlenecks . ” 4 . 2 . Procedure We derived bottlenecks and best practices using the explana - tion building technique , to “stipulate causal links of a phe - nomenon” ( Yin , 1988 , p . 113 ) . As indicated in Table 2 , the main sources of evidence for the bottlenecks are interviews and observations . This procedure for hint discovery resem - bles the closed coding strategy of grounded theory ( Glaser & Strauss , 1967 ) . The first author annotated the interview Fig . 7 . The influences to include physical prototypes in design processes based on the cases . Table 7 . Hint density : Number of relevant process highlights per case Hint Tractor Oscilloscope Museum A1 2 3 A2 1 A3 1 A4 2 A5 1 B1 2 2 B2 2 B3 1 B4 1 C1 3 D1 1 3 D2 3 1 D3 1 1 D4 1 1 E1 2 E2 1 1 F1 1 1 F2 1 Using interactive augmented prototyping in design practice 297 transcripts of all cases using the ATLAS . ti ( www . atlasti . com ) tool . Per case , these process highlights were aggregated to re - sult in collections of unique bottlenecks or best cases . Then the resulting highlights were collected in one database . The second step devised ways to translate the resulting high - lights to IAP scenarios . Sometimes , the case study participants suggested IAP functions that were then added to the hints . New scenarios were generated by scanning all highlights while con - sidering the possible benefits of IAPas specified in Section 2 . 2 . Finally , the hints were grouped and formulated as scenarios . 4 . 3 . Results This section presents the resulting hints , spanning six groups ( A – F ) . Table 7 indicates the density , or number of occurren - ces in the case study materials , of process highlights that suggested each hint . Hint category A : Enrich the product with information that is difficult to achieve in other ways Hints in this group indicate enhancements of a design rep - resentation by means of IAP . These appeared in each of the design processes , as described below . Hint A1 . Inspire and promote lateral thinking by using unex - pected , random information . In the tractor design case there were issues in conveying the style variation among the con - cepts . Alternative designs were rendered as three - dimensional ( 3 - D ) images without context ( approximatelysix slides percon - cept ) . This issue was later addressed with sketchy renderings that emphasized principal styling curves and differentiating as - pects of the designs ( see Fig . 8 ) . The second version embedded these in a presentation that included archetypes of specific de - signs ( e . g . , the title “Edgy” and images from BMW sports cars ) . Providing one or more scale model prototypes with pro - jections of styling and contextual information ( text , images ) nearby would have been useful . A single 3 - D printed model could be augmented by each of the three alternatives . In the oscilloscope case , a wide range of competing and ar - chetypical electronics measurement products was considered . These could be put into an image database and projected on foam mockups to visualize them . Hint A2 . Simulate shape and GUI navigation . In the oscil - loscope case it was difficult to combine the physical product design and the interaction design ( i . e . , navigation , graphics , and button operation ) . Despite attempts to combine them , these design activities were too separated and the interaction design was suboptimal and required tuning after the null - ser - ies products were manufactured . By combining the digital graphical user interface ( i . e . , screens ) with physical shapes , the navigation structure and button operation closely resem - bled the behavior of the final design . Hint A3 . Explore color and material . In the museum case , there was some confusion regarding the use of curtains . An animated representation of the curtains could have expressed the designer’s intentions in using reflections and transparency and possibly basic colors projected in the floor plan . Hint A4 . Simulate shape and behavior at same time ( auto - matic , i . e . , pedestrian flows ) . In the interior design case , the usage scenarios were difficult to express ; interactive pedes - trian flows would have helped in exploring layouts and pre - senting ideas . Applications such as URP ( see Section 2 . 1 ) and Mousehaus Table ( Huang et al . , 2003 ) have demonstrated simulations combined with tangible models . Fig . 8 . ( Top ) First and ( bottom ) second concepts of tractor design . [ A color version of this figure can be viewed online at journals . cambridge . org / aie ] J . Verlinden and I . Horva´th 298 Hint A5 . Overcome the threshold to work with one medium only ( richness in media , tangibility ) . The design studio that worked on the museum had a tradition of employing a wide range of materials to make prototypes , enrich the design pro - cess , and get inspiration from the media ( see also Fig . 9 ) . This could also be applied to IAP . Hint category B : Enable fitting ( functional ) components or so - called engineering packages in freeform global shapes In both the tractor and oscilloscope cases , designers had to deal with the relationship between external shell and internal parts or engineering packages , while at the outer surface lo - cating components for interaction with users or the environ - ment . During the detailed development of the tractor design , a big challenge was selecting and fitting headlights . As the body width was slim , two regular car headlights could barely be placed inside , especially because the engineering package in - side extended in all directions and left space only for air inlet / cooling . After selecting a small , not too expensive car head - light , the geometry had to be recreated in the CAD system . For a final check , a set of wooden section views was made . The freeform shape also had to be changed significantly to fix discontinuities . A similar concern arose during the design of the oscillo - scope . Trade - offs between the outside housing and the buttons required constant attention , and the envelope of the embedded electronics also changed several times , which influenced but - ton and screen placement . In the interior design case , the global shape was flat ; yet as certain building elements were given ( supporting walls , stairs , windows ) , the designers faced a sim - ilar challenge . Improvised scale furniture was made in different materials and placed in the floor plan . These activities could benefit from IAP according to hints B1 – B4 . Hint B1 . Search for components that fit in ( geometric ) de - sign . Existing component databases on headlights or buttons could be imported to the CAD system or transferred to a phys - ical model . Hint B2 . Reverse engineering of shape . For the headlight selection , outsourced reverse engineering services were retained to convert a physical shape to a digital model . Using a projector – camera system , an IAP system could convert the physical shape to its geometrical data ( Kim et al . , 2005 ) . Hint B3 . Fit fixed components in freeform shapes and en - gineering package . Using a mixture of physical and digital components , the designer can interact with the most deter - mining elements by hand as secondary elements are dis - played . Hint B4 . Correct tactile sensation of look and feel of phys - ical interaction . In a graphical user interface ( GUI ) interac - tion modeling environment , it should be possible to use sev - eral buttons , switches , and so forth to tune the look and feel of the interaction behavior . Hint category C : Ease global shape creation and layout studies The physical models of the hand - held oscilloscope enabled fast creation of product variants . These were used to deter - mine overall dimensions , grip , screen size , and button layout . Hint C1 . Start with manual physical shape creation . The os - cilloscope models were made by hand . IAP technology might have helped speed the manufacturing of these models by pre - senting building / cutting / measure guides and simultaneously creating a digital record of the resulting shapes . Hint category D : Design review In all three processes , design review meetings were of key importance , as they set the stage for discussions with all stakeholders and for decision making . The design review meetings had a similar structure : a presentation of progress by members of the design team was followed by a discussion of concerns and issues . Then other experts from marketing and manufacturing gave progress reports ; finally , documents were approved or amended and an action list was revisited . In the tractor design case , unstructured design reviews and long communication delays often hampered communication . The oscilloscope design project frequently organized intermediate Fig . 9 . Furniture - scale models made from different materials in the museum case . [ A color version of this figure can be viewed online at journals . cambridge . org / aie ] Using interactive augmented prototyping in design practice 299 design review meetings in which updates were discussed . A prominent item was the shape design and presentations of cli - ent visits to address key functions , concerns , and so forth . In the museum interior case , design review meetings were scheduled monthly . As Table 8 reveals , most models were in - deed created to support design review sessions , and several hints emerged to support these by IAP . Hint D1 . Provide better insight of a shape for an untrained client . As mentioned in discussing hint A1 , during tractor de - sign meetings the manufacturer and client had difficulties un - derstanding the shape and intended style . No physical models were made and , although the presentation material was sent to all stakeholders , these digital files were not always suffi - ciently expressive . Using IAP , inexpensive physical models can be manufactured rapidly that represent the shape only globally , whereas the digital model expresses detail . Second , the physical - only scale model of the museum interior makes it difficult to experience space . This could be addressed by con - necting a virtual walk - through of the model as a tangible in - terface , as demonstrated by the BUILD - IT system ( Rauter - berg et al . , 1998 ) . Hint D2 . Align ideas and concerns concerning design alter - natives . Unlike flat pictures or descriptions of design pro - posals , physical models allow spatial reasoning and interac - tion by all stakeholders . Pointing and drawing directly on the object’s surface establishes fluent interaction , as demon - strated by the Dynamic Shader Lamps system ( Bandyopad - hyay et al . , 2001 ) . Elaborate pen - based annotation facilities ( Tsang et al . , 2002 ) could also enhance this activity . Hint D3 . Improve recording and accessing design reviews . Minutes of review meetings did not always capture all con - cerns or positions of the stakeholders regarding controversial design alternatives . In the tractor design case , the client men - tioned the issue of headlight selection at the initial session , yet it took considerable time before the other stakeholders under - stood this position . In the museum interior design case , other stakeholders did not discuss decisions concerning the use of space , whereas these were of primary interest for the design studio . IAP could facilitate this recording and recollecting in sev - eral ways , for example , by capturing interaction with the pro - totype and logging the participants’ discussion . The spatial activity could index navigation through decisions . Such facil - ities could be easily extended by annotation tools , and record - ing other activities of a design review such as presentations . A formal design review recording method as developed in Huet et al . ( 2007 ) can support this . Hint D4 . Steer away from preoccupations of stakeholders and focus on aspects of key importance . In the museum inter - ior design project , stakeholders were sometimes preoccupied with the detailed shape and aesthetics and overlooked func - tion . Likewise , in the tractor design case , much effort was made to vary construction principles , whereas the client was focused only on creating a new style . In the museum in - terior case , this issue was addressed by equipping physical models with only partial details , omitting most walls , and in - cluding sketchy versions of certain furniture items . Some components were fixed to the floor plan , and others could be rearranged . This common solution highlights a property of physical representations that is often overlooked , namely , the restrictions and the emancipatory power it offers as a so - cial interface . IAP could assist in selecting what details to prototype , and to keep certain aspects fuzzy while rendering others crisply . Animations , related texts , and other representations could help in achieving an appropriate level of fidelity . Hint category E : Create better insight of the product and process to other stakeholders ( not necessarily during meetings ) The persistence of physical objects creates an awareness of the project beyond formal meetings , allowing peers and exter - nal participants to track the latest developments and the project’s history . Hint E1 . Create insight in project progress . The oscillo - scope project used a table to display all the physical models and drawings from the involved disciplines . This enabled stakeholders to stay informed about changes and also estab - lished an attractive exhibit for future clients . Physical models were made of several materials , which provided richness . This notion could be extended to IAP - based tables as shown in the Virtual Showcases ( Bimber , 2002 ) , allowing more elaborate display of the design process , possibly while limit - ing outsiders’ access to sensitive information . Hint E2 . Attempt to broaden the assignment to peripheral design tasks . Similar to hint D4 , elements can be included in the prototype that are not part of the official design brief , for example , the landscape design of the museum garden and transportation facilities . This resulted in several discussions of the surrounding area with regional authorities and also in the design of a mobile exterior unit . The physical prototypes were the main vehicles to address these issues to external stakeholders . The initial mockups of the handheld oscilloscope included proposals for the GUI design , as invented by the Table 8 . Definitions of the case study variables Definition 0 : Process highlight The process highlight is a segment of the case study database that represents a bottleneck or a best practice in the act of concept articulation . Each highlight has an intended objective ( exploration , simulation , communication , specification ) , a value for impact on the overall design process , and a certainty factor . Definition 1 : Hint A hint is a speculative usage scenario of a future system that supports a specific activity in the design process . It is inspired by , and linked to , process highlights . Definition 2 : Hint density The density of a hint is determined by the number of corroborating process highlights . J . Verlinden and I . Horva´th 300 industrial designers ( not the interaction designers ) . IAP could offer similar facilities as in hint D4 to support such activities . Hint category F : Use ( r ) studies In only one case ( the oscilloscope ) were user studies and usage evaluation experiments carried out . In the museum inter - ior , there was no awareness . In the tractor design , the use of the product was not evaluated other than heuristically reviewing the design requirements . In contrast , the oscilloscope design in - cluded over 150 user visitsto evaluate early products and to ob - tain user profiles , task analyses , and market characteristics . Hint F1 . Executing and presenting results of user studies . During the oscilloscope design development , a PC - based mockup was made to test and elaborate parts of the graphical user interface ( C2 . 2 , Appendix A ) . This took a sub - stantial amount of time , and did not represent the full shape / weight of the design . Hint A2 covered the facilitation to make such a working physical model , which can simulate GUI in - teraction and capture user performance . Hint F2 . To access prospective users ( conversation piece ) . As one participant in the oscilloscope project noticed , proto - types functioned as an easy entre´e to users who otherwise might question their incentives in collaborating in the product development process . 4 . 4 . Hint summary Our investigation focused on a range of industrial design pro - jects that could illustrate prototyping objectives and deepen ex - isting knowledge about the facilitation of these physical repre - sentations of the design process . The objective was to align the technology affordances of IAP with these processes and to identify possible design support scenarios . Several tasks or ac - tions in the design process can be facilitated , both in modeling and communication . Table 9 gives an overview . 5 . DISCUSSION 5 . 1 . Findings The hints represent interesting directions for supporting de - sign with IAP . However , several concerns about IAP capabil - ities and limitations should be addressed : coding protocol , in - formation sources , and the coverage of three different design domains . 5 . 1 . 1 . Coding protocol The coding protocol used an associative reasoning model to identify hints . However , this activity is prone to subjectivity and implicit knowledge of IAP . We tried to minimize this effect by formalizing the procedure for highlighting and hint creation ; it was not feasible tovalidate hint finding by multiple coders , as the interview transcripts totals over 700 paragraphs . Several issues surfaced that could not be linked to the IAP support scenarios . These include the following : † Organizational issues : unclear project structure , part - time involvement , infrequent meetings , budgeting , and design requirement setting † Decision - making issues : the dominance of the client , the designer not being taken seriously by the manufac - turer , the client not being taken seriously by the de - signer , a slow decision making pace † Team functioning issues : lack of leadership in the design project , initial hesitation from engineers to work in inter - disciplinary teams 5 . 1 . 2 . Information sources The main source of information was the interview data . As discussed before , the interviews served to triangulate the ob - servations and interpretations from other data sources such as the design representations ( sketches , models ) and documen - tation ( design review meeting minutes , planning ) . In addi - tion , most interviews were carried out with designers , not other stakeholders , because we consider the designers as the prime users and potential beneficiaries of IAP . 5 . 1 . 3 . Coverage of three design domains In the debriefing interviews , designers were asked whether the project was representative of their design domain . All an - swered affirmatively , although the tractor design project was considered different both in its manufacturing process of agricultural vehicles and by having a client abroad with indi - rect communication . By nature , all are different , but the Table 9 . Aggregated IAP hints as found in the case studies Case 1 : Tractor Case 2 : HandheldOscilloscope Case 3 : MuseumInterior Total Modeling Enrich the product with information that is difficult to achieve in other ways 2 4 4 10 Enable fitting of ( functional ) components or so - called engineering packages in freeform global shapes 5 3 0 8 Ease global shape creation and layout studies 0 3 0 3 Communication Design review 6 0 6 12 Create better insight of product and process to other stakeholders ( not necessarily during meetings ) 0 3 1 3 Use ( r ) studies 0 2 1 3 Using interactive augmented prototyping in design practice 301 process highlights overlap in terms of bottlenecks and best practices . Furthermore , by identifying the design elements for each case , all projects have a design focus , given con - straints , and crucial design elements that can be mapped to IAP systems . 5 . 1 . 4 . Measuring the design means of a tool The impact of the physical design means is difficult to deter - mine in a single characteristic . Apart from utilitarian purposes , physical design supports shared understanding or insight . In searching for a reasoning model to support our early findings , we found the extensive work on Critical Systems Thinking by Jackson ( 2000 ) , which to our knowledge , has not been applied in the field of engineering design . The only similar work we found focuses on interior architecture of public spaces ( Mo - bach , 2007 ) . We propose that this framework expands tradi - tional reasoning on prototyping to a platform for judging the impact of advanced tangible prototypes on the design process . 6 . CONCLUSIONS In industrial design , physical prototypes can be used for ex - ploration , simulation , communication , and specification ( see Table 8 ) . To obtain insight into current prototyping prac - tice , we carried out three case studies in different design do - mains ( interior , automotive , information appliances ) . Our case studies demonstrate various instantiations of tangible models , which as physical entities are not used solely to pro - vide insight but also to influence decision making and to se - duce other stakeholders in the design process . Based on our aggregated findings , the inclusion of physical models in cur - rent practice depends on studio ( prototyping tradition and availability of facilities ) , product ( scale , shape , need to evalu - ate with end users ) , and stakeholders ( skills and attitudes of stakeholders , leadership in decision making ) . When considering the inclusion of tangible computing and augmented reality as means of design support , the case stud - ies suggest specific activities and situations covering both modeling and communication . In modeling , these include en - rich the product with information that is difficult to achieve in other ways , enable fitting of ( functional ) components or so - called engineering packages in freeform global shapes , and ease global shape creation and layout studies . In communica - tion , the hints include design review , create better insight of product and process to other stakeholders ( not necessarily during meetings ) , and use ( r ) studies . Finally , the assessment of the impact of new prototyping technologies should consider multiple paradigms , as the de - sign process inevitably bears multiple perspectives . Our inter - est has been drawn to the critical systems thinking approach of Jackson ( 2000 ) , which originates from the field of organiza - tional sciences and considers functionalist , interpretive , eman - cipatory , and postmodern stances . This approach could be successfully applied to highlight and compare bottlenecks and best practices concerning concept articulation in the three case studies . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The authors express their gratitude to Guest Editors Ellen Yi - Luen Do and Mark D . Gross for their continuous assistance and support . Part of the material in this article was presented in 2007 at the 3rd International Conference on Advanced Research in Virtual and Rapid Prototyping . REFERENCES Bandyopadhyay , D . , Raskar , R . , & Fuchs , H . ( 2001 ) . Dynamic Shader Lamps . Proc . PaintingonMovableObjectsInt . Symp . AugmentedReality ( ISMAR ) , pp . 207 – 216 . Bimber , O . ( 2002 ) . Interactive rendering for projection - based augmented reality displays . PhD Dissertation . Darmstadt University of Technology . Bimber , O . , & Raskar , R . ( 2005 ) . Spatial Augmented Reality : Merging Real and Virtual Worlds . Wellesley , MA : A . K . Peters , Ltd . Brereton , M . , & McGarry , B . ( 2000 ) . An observational study of how objects support engineering design thinking and communication : implications for the design of tangible media . Proc . CHI ’00 , pp . 217 – 224 . Broek , J . J . , Sleijffers , W . , Horva´th , I . , & Lennings , A . F . ( 2000 ) . Using phys - ical models in design . Proc . CAID / CD ’00 , pp . 155 – 163 . Dourish , P . ( 2001 ) . Where the Action Is : The Foundations of Embodied Interaction . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Engelbrektsson , P . , & So¨derman , M . P . ( 2004 ) . The use and perception of methods and product representations in product development : a survey of Swedish industry . Journal of Engineering Design 15 ( 2 ) , 141 – 154 . Geuer , A . ( 1996 ) . Einsatzpotential des Rapid Prototyping in der Produktent - wickelung . Berlin : Springer – Verlag . Glaser , B . , & Strauss , A . ( 1967 ) . The Discovery of Grounded Theory . Chi - cago : Aldine . Huang , C . - J , Do , E . Y . - L . , & Gross , M . D . ( 2003 ) . MouseHaus Table , a phys - ical interface for urban design . Adjunct Proc . UIST ’03 , pp . 41 – 42 . Horacek , H . ( 2003 ) . From arguments to hints—a didactic perspective on deductive reasoning . Proc . 3rd Workshop on Computational Models of Natural Argument . Huet , G . , Culley , S . J . , McMahon , C . A . , & Fortin , C . ( 2007 ) . Making senseof engineering design review activities . Artificial Intelligence for Engineer - ing Design , Analysis and Manufacturing 21 ( 3 ) , 243 – 266 . Jackson , M . ( 2000 ) . Systems Approaches to Management . New York : Kluwer / Plenum . Kim , C . , Park , J . , Yi , J . , & Turk , M . ( 2005 ) . Structured light based depth edge detection for object shape recovery . Proc . Workshop on Projector – Camera Systems . Kohlas , J . , Monney , P . A . , Haenni , R . , & Lehmann , N . ( 1995 ) . Model - based diagnostics using hints . Lecture Notes in Computer Science , Vol . 946 , pp . 259 – 266 . London : Springer . McGarry , B . ( 2005 ) . Things to think with : understanding interactions with artefacts in engineering design . PhD Thesis . University of Queensland , School of Information Technology and Electrical Engineering . Mobach , M . P . A . ( 2007 ) . Critical systems perspective on the design of orga - nizational space systems . Research and Behavioural Science 24 , 69 – 90 . Nam , T . - J . , & Lee , W . ( 2003 ) . Integrating hardware and software : augmented reality based prototyping method for digital products . Proc . CHI ’03 , pp . 956 – 957 . Rauterberg , M . , Fjeld , M . , Krueger , H . , Bichsel , M . , Leonhardt , U . , & Meier , M . ( 1998 ) . BUILD - IT : a planning tool for construction and design [ video ] . Proc . CHI ’98 , pp . 177 – 178 . Stevens , B . ( 2002 ) . Physicallyaugmentingreality : human – computerinterac - tion with projection - augmented models . PhD Thesis . Universityof Ports - mouth . Tovey , M . ( 1997 ) . Styling and design : intuition and analysis in industrial de - sign . Design Studies 18 , 5 – 31 . Tsang , M . , Fitzmaurice , G . F . , Kurtenbach , G . , Khan , A . , & Buxton , B . ( 2002 ) . Boomchameleon : simultaneouscaptureof3Dviewpoint , voiceandgesture annotations on a spatially - aware display . Proc . UIST ’02 , pp . 111 – 120 . Underkoffler , J . , & Ishii , H . ( 1999 ) . Urp : a luminous - tangible workbench for urban planning and design . Proc . CHI ’99 , pp . 386 – 393 . Verlinden , J . , & Horvath , I . ( 2006 ) . Framework for testing and validating in - teractive augmented prototyping as a design means in industrial practice . In Research in Interactive Design ( Fischer , X . , & Coutellier , D . , Eds . ) , Vol . 2 . Berlin : Springer . J . Verlinden and I . Horva´th 302 Verlinden , J . , & Horvath , I . ( 2007 ) . A critical systems position on augmented prototyping systems for industrial design . Proc . ASME - CIE ’07 , Paper No . DETC2007 - 35642 . Verlinden , J . , Horvath , I . , & Edelenbos , E . ( 2006 ) . Treatise of technologies for interactive augmented prototyping . Proc . Tools and Methods of Competitive Engineering 2006 , pp . 523 – 536 . Verlinden , J . , Suurmeijer , C . , & Horvath , I . ( 2007 ) . Which prototype to augment ? A retrospective case study on industrial and user interface de - sign . Proc . HCI Int . , Lecture Notes in Computer Science , Vol . 4563 , pp . 574 – 583 . Berlin : Springer – Verlag . Yang , M . Y . ( 2004 ) . An examination of prototyping and design outcome . Proc . DETC ’04 , Paper No . DETC2004 - 57552 . Yin , R . ( 1988 ) . Case Study Research : Design and Methods . London : Sage . Jouke Verlinden has been an Assistant Professor in the De - partment of Computer Aided Design Engineering at Delft University of Technology since 2000 . He received his MS in computer science in 1993 and has a background in interac - tive computer graphics and virtual reality . He worked in in - dustry as an Interaction Designer and Project Manager for 7 years before returning to academia . He is currently working on a project entitled “Augmented Prototyping as a Design Means for Industrial Design Engineering , ” which encompas - ses both empirical research and system development . The am - bition is to develop new , accessible design media for indus - trial designers that respect current practice . Imre Horva´th has been a Professor of computer - aided design engineering at Delft University of Technology since 1997 . He held various positions in industry and academia between 1985 and 1997 . He received an MS in mechanical engineering in 1978 and an MS in engineering education in 1980 from Buda - pest University of Technology . He also earned a DrUniv in 1987 , a CDScin1993 , and a PhD in1994 . Dr . Horva´thinitiated the International TMCE Symposia and is Co - Editor in Chief of Journal of Computer Aided Design and Associate Editor of Journal of Engineering Design . His primary research interests are in methodology of design research , advanced computer support of conceptual design , and tangible virtuality . APPENDIX A Exhaustive list of physical prototypes of case studies Prototype Description Primary Objective No . Duration ( Lead þ Lifetime ) Impact on Project C1 . 1 Reverse engineering of existing tractor Specification of engineering package and shape constraints 1 1 week Large C1 . 2 Wooden section of body front Verification and exploration of headlight fit 1 1 day Little C1 . 3 Null series Specification of shape , verification of fit and construction 1 1 month Little C2 . 1 Sketch prototype ( foam ) Exploration of dimensions and overall shape 10 1 month Large C2 . 2 User interaction prototype ( PC - based simulation with physical keys on mockup ) Verification and specification of user interface 1 2 months Little C2 . 3 User experience prototype ( CNC milled ) Specification and communication of shape details and surface tuning 1 2 months Little C2 . 4 Mechanical prototype ( stereolithography ) Exploration of inside construction 3 3 months Medium C2 . 5 FOOT / SOOT ( first and second out of tool molds ) Verification in tolerancing and material finish ( “feel” ) 2 4 months Little C2 . 6 Null series ( molded ) Verification of software and manufacturing 50 4 months Large C3 . 1 Initial scale model ( provided by museum ) Exploration of space , specification of interior – exterior interface 1 Few weeks Large C3 . 2 Draft layout ( Nov . 2006 ) Exploration of different usage scenarios , communication during design review 1 Few days Large C3 . 3 Adaptations ( different furniture in previous scale model , Dec . 2006 ) Further exploration of furniture and communication during design review 1 Few days Large C3 . 4 Preliminary design freeze ( April 2007 ) Specification of final design 3 Few days Large Using interactive augmented prototyping in design practice 303