Ambiguity as a Resource for Design William W Gaver 1 Jake Beaver 1 Steve Benford 2 1 Interaction Design Research Studio 2 The Mixed Reality Laboratory The Royal College of Art University of Nottingham London , SW7 2EU , UK Nottingham , NG8 1BB , UK w . gaver / j . beaver @ rca . ac . uk mbl @ cs . nott . ac . uk ABSTRACT Ambiguity is usually considered anathema in Human Computer Interaction . We argue , in contrast , that it is a resource for design that can be used to encourage close personal engagement with systems . We illustrate this with examples from contemporary arts and design practice , and distinguish three broad classes of ambiguity according to where they are located in the interpretative relationship linking person and artefact . Ambiguity of information finds its source in the artefact itself , ambiguity of context in the sociocultural discourses that are used to interpret it , and ambiguity of relationship in the interpretative and evaluative stance of the individual . For each of these categories , we describe tactics for emphasising ambiguity that may help designers and other practitioners understand and craft its use . Keywords Interaction design , Emotion and Affective UI , Design , Theory , Design Tips and Tricks , Heuristics , Interpretation INTRODUCTION Ambiguity is seldom embraced within traditional Human Computer Interaction . If “usefulness and usability are the twin goals of HCI research and development” [ 14 ] , then ambiguity would seem their nemesis . It is difficult to see how an interface can be usable if the information it conveys is unclear , or useful if its very purpose is uncertain . Instead of regarding ambiguity as a problem , however , in this paper we suggest that it can be seen as an opportunity . Ambiguity can be frustrating , to be sure . But it can also be intriguing , mysterious , and delightful . By impelling people to interpret situations for themselves , it encourages them to start grappling conceptually with systems and their contexts , and thus to establish deeper and more personal relations with the meanings offered by those systems . The ability for ambiguity to evoke personal relationships with technologies is particularly relevant as digital technologies are designed to support activities outside of work . Traditional concerns for clarity and precision are superseded in such systems by the need to provide rich resources for experience that can be appropriated by users . Ambiguity should not , of course , be allowed interfere with the accomplishment of well - defined tasks , particularly in safety - critical environments . But in the many emerging applications for everyday life , we argue that ambiguity is a resource that designers should neither ignore nor repress . After all , the everyday world itself is inherently ambiguous : most things in it have multiple possible meanings . Allowing this ambiguity to be reflected in design has several advantages . Most importantly , it allows designers to engage users with issues without constraining how they respond . In addition , it allows the designer’s point of view to be expressed while enabling users of different sociocultural backgrounds to find their own interpretations . Finally , ambiguity can make a virtue out of technical limitations by providing the grounds for peoples’ interpretations to supplement them . The rich aesthetic and conceptual potentials of ambiguity have long been exploited in the arts , and we review several examples of contemporary art in considering how ambiguity works . But we are particularly concerned with examining how ambiguity can be used to good effect in design . To orient our discussion , we start by describing four examples of ambiguity in interaction design , which illustrate the appeal of ambiguity and some of its attributes . We then discuss an account of ambiguity that centres on its locus in the relationship between user and system , and show how this can help us understand ambiguity in a variety of situations . Finally , we return to the original four examples , as well as other designs , to illustrate a number of tactics for producing ambiguity . Our purpose throughout is to reveal some of the tricks that interactions designers use in creating compelling designs , and to enable other designers and practitioners to think more precisely – whether critically or constructively – about ambiguity . Four Systems that Use Ambiguity Although ambiguity is usually avoided in Human Computer Interaction , there are a growing number of interactive designs that use it to good effect . In this section we describe four in order to provide concrete examples of how ambiguity can appear in technological systems , before moving to a more analytical account of how it operates . CHI 2003 submission Projected Realities Projected Realities [ 8 , 9 ] is a system intended to help increase the presence of older people in a large Dutch housing estate called the Bijlmer . Designed to reflect both concerns that older people felt about the area ( which has a bad reputation in the Netherlands ) and their pride for this complex physical and cultural environment , the system provided a means for them to spread their opinions within and to the outskirts of the district . The most visible elements of the completed system were three Sloganbenches set in local walkways , and an Imagebank designed to sit near a traffic signal adjacent to the area ( Figure 1 ) . Sloganbenches served as public furniture , but also contained electronically - controlled fabric scrolls inset into their backs which displayed handwritten slogans written by older people from the area . The Imagebank comprised five monitors set into a wood - veneer casing . It showed slices of images collected by the older people to represent their lives . The pieces were connected wirelessly , with slogans appearing on the Sloganbench determining images that displayed on the Imagebank . Projected Realities used ambiguity in a number of ways . The slogans and images were presented with little context ( even the fact that they originated from older people was spread by word of mouth ) so that viewers had to interpret the attitudes they reflected . The mapping between slogans and images was not easily perceived , and occasionally contradictory images were juxtaposed on the Imagebank . Most notably , the objects themselves were unusual – the Imagebank looked like an extended TV , and the benches created a tension between sitting and viewing ( since sitting on the bench was likely to hide the slogan ) . They balanced the familiar with the strange , and as local people encountered the pieces during a week - long trial in the area , they were attracted by their ambiguity to engage with the system . Desert Rain Desert Rain is a mixed reality performance that has toured internationally since 1999 [ 12 ] . Six players ( the audience ) are sent on a mission into a virtual world to find six targets ( the performers ) . They explore motels , deserts and underground bunkers , communicating with each other through a live audio link . Once in the virtual world , they have twenty minutes to find their allocated targets , complete the mission , and get to the final room , where the identities of the targets – six people who have quite different perspectives on the Gulf war – are revealed . The virtual world is projected onto six rain curtains , screens made of water through which performers and players physically pass ( Figure 2 ) . In turn , the rain curtains are embedded within a larger physical set , some of which reproduces elements of the virtual world . The central artistic concern of Desert Rain is virtual warfare and the blurring of the boundaries between real and virtual events , especially with regard to the portrayal of warfare on television news , in Hollywood ' s films and in computer games . Both the content and the form of Desert Rain are designed to provoke participants to re - evaluate the boundaries between reality and fiction , and between the real and the virtual . This is achieved by making these boundaries deliberately ambiguous . Desert Rain mixes elements of theatre , installation and computer game to create an ambiguous structure . At the same time , its content mixes 3D game - like graphics with video clips describing people ' s real experiences of the Gulf War . It also seeks to disorientate participants to some extent by providing them with deliberately distorted and ambiguous information , most notably through the use of the rain curtain which provides a continually shifting and blurred view of the virtual world . The Pillow The Pillow , a concept prototype by Tony Dunne [ 8 ] , employs ambiguity at several levels . An LCD screen embedded in a plastic brick is enclosed by a transparent plastic pillow , so that the simple geometric shapes it Figure 2 : Desert Rain ( projections on water ) Figure 1 : Sloganbench ( top ) and Imagebank ( bottom ) displays are blurred as they permeate the form ( Figure 3 ) . These shapes join with processed sounds to indicate passing electromagnetic information from mobile phones , taxis , commercial radio and television , making the Pillow into an unusual sort of radio – one that , moreover , casts the viewer into a voyeuristic relationship with the otherwise invisible information that surrounds us . The Pillow displays electronic information in an impressionistic , ambiguous way . One can perceive the intensity of electromagnetic flow and capture snatches of intelligible sound , but the information is distorted and fragmented to produce an intriguing rather than informative experience . In addition , the Pillow exists at the cusp of several discourses : it is a radio , but also an aesthetic meditation – and perhaps also an artistic one . Finally , the Pillow produces yet another layer of ambiguity : by placing the user in a voyeuristic role it creates an ambivalent relationship with the purpose of the piece itself . The ability to eavesdrop on the electromagnetic spectrum is enticing yet uncomfortable , prompting questions about the ethics of technologies . Home Health Monitor The Home Health Monitor is a design for a system that gives feedback about the home’s emotional , social and spiritual health on a daily basis [ 2 ] . Light , temperature , and door sensors , for example , are used to monitor peoples’ activities in various parts of the home . Other sensors measure the stroke rate of a hairbrush , condensation on kitchen windows , or the state of the toilet seat to provide more idiosyncratic clues . Sensor readings and trends are mapped in state space to a collection of sentences drawn from a large number of published horoscopes to generate a bespoke horoscope for the particular household on a given day ( Figure 4 ) . By using ubiquitous sensing as an indication of the well - being of the home , the system ( sometimes known as ‘the Superstitious Home’ ) offers an alternative to traditionally task - oriented forms of ubiquitous computing . It achieves its effect by allowing horoscopes to provide an ambiguous reflection of the state of sensors , which themselves have an ambiguous relationship to the realities of home life . This ambiguity ranges from the limited ability of sensors to monitor home activities to the relationship between measurable variables and emotional ones , and from the vague language used by most horoscopes to the juxtaposition of electronic technology with culturally suspect ‘fortune - telling . ’ The end result is to provide people with a systematic but inconclusive foundation from which to reflect on the emotional state of their home . Clarifying Ambiguity These examples illustrate the wide variety of systems that may benefit from ambiguity . They include products , systems and events , and their intended settings include homes , performance spaces , and public areas . Insofar as they are similar to one another , this is because their use of ambiguity makes them evocative rather than didactic and mysterious rather than obvious . They embody a style of interaction that , while relatively new to HCI , is potentially as encompassing as the more traditional style of clear practicality . This style hinges , in part , on their use of ambiguity , and they illustrate several of its features that are useful for its understanding . Most importantly , they highlight the fact that ambiguity is a property of the interpretative relationship between people and artefacts . This distinguishes ambiguity from related concepts such as fuzziness or inconsistency : these are attributes of things , whereas ambiguity is an attribute of our interpretation of them . Things themselves are not inherently ambiguous . They may give rise to multiple interpretations depending on their precision , consistency , and accuracy on the one hand , and the identity , motivations , and expectations of an interpreter on the other . This interpretative relationship is the source of ambiguity’s appeal : by thwarting easy interpretation , ambiguous situations require people to participate in making meaning . This can involve the integration of previously disconnected discourses , the projection of meaning onto an unspecified situation , or the resolution of an ethical dilemma . In each case , the artefact or situation sets the scene for meaning - making , but doesn’t prescribe the result . Instead , the work of making an ambiguous situation comprehensible belongs to the person , and this can be both inherently pleasurable and lead to a deep conceptual appropriation of the artefact . Figure 3 : The Pillow Figure 4 : Home Health Monitor Remind yourself that although you must fulfil routine obligations , you also need time to enjoy more romantic affairs . If you’re too overwhelmed by duty , boredom sets in . The last thing you want is to make someone think it’s their fault . No one’s to blame . So make space for love ; it won’t work in a vacuum . TYPES OF AMBIGUITY Despite the fact that ambiguity is a property of the an interpretative relationship , the likelihood of an ambiguous interpretation can be affected either by attributes of artefacts or by people’s attitudes alone . For example , interfaces that are imprecise or contradictory are more likely to lead to multiple interpretations than ones that are clear and consistent ; people who expect clarity and consistency are more likely to perceive ambiguity than those who do not . In this paper , we focus on the first half of this interpretative relationship to consider how products and systems can be designed to elicit different kinds of ambiguity . In particular , we distinguish three principal kinds of ambiguity : ambiguity of information , of context , and of relationship . Ambiguity of Information Let ' s start by looking at an old master : Leonardo da Vinci ' s Mona Lisa ( c . 1503 - 07 ) . This is a straightforward figurative painting . Why is it so famous ? As Charles Nicolls wrote : We don ' t know precisely when it was painted , we don ' t know for certain who she is , and as we stare at her puzzling features for the umpteenth time we are inclined to ask ourselves : ‘what is it about her ? ’ [ 15 ] All this ambiguity is centred on her smile . In Leonardo ' s notes on painting , he says that light and shade should blend ' without lines or borders , in the the manner of smoke ' . [ 13 ] This technique is called sfumato , and it accounts for the mystery of Mona Lisa ' s smile . By reducing the definition ( or focus ) around her lips , Leonardo makes her whole expression indeterminate , and thus a ' terrain for infinite variations ' [ 17 ] . With insufficient information to go on , the viewer has to bring that smile into focus in their mind . Now consider an equally famous , modernist painting . Picasso ' s Guernica ( 1936 ) seems to work in the opposite way , by increasing the definition . The painting is full of strong ' lines and borders ' , rather like the figures in a cartoon strip . Yet this heightening of contrasts also results in loss of information , which produces a different kind of ambiguity . Are we to take these figures as portraits of unique individuals and animals , or as representations of generic types - that is to say , of ideas ? And if each represents an idea , who ' s to say exactly which idea ? The more one simplifies an image , the more iconic it becomes , and the more open to interpretation . As Read [ 16 ] points out , ' Does the bull represent the concept of violence , or the dictator Franco ? ' Again , the viewer has to decide . In order to make the image coherent , the viewer has to find a conceptual focus , as it were , which harmonises all the elements . In both these examples , ambiguity arises in the way that information is presented . Now consider the more complex example of an interactive system : Bystander is a prototype mixed reality game designed by one of the authors in collaboration with Blast Theory , a London performance arts group . In the game , two players , one online and the other equipped with mobile technologies , follow somebody moving through the city . Both have access to limited and different kinds of information . In particular , the mobile player’s location is tracked using GPS data , which is of low spatial and temporal resolution and also prone to errors . Thus the issue is not ‘What does this display mean ? ’ but ‘Do I trust it ? ’ – that is , how does the display correspond with reality ? The traditional response to ambiguity of information in interactive systems like Bystander is to improve the technology , use statistical methods to set certainty thresholds , or ignore it and hope for the best . Bystander , in contrast , passes the ambiguity directly to players in the form of fuzzy avatars that hint at locations without specifying them . Rather than seeing uncertain GPS information ( in this instance ) as a flaw , Bystander treats this ambiguous information as a challenge to users , forcing them to join their knowledge of people and cities to the clues offered by the system to play the game . Ambiguity of Context Ambiguity sometimes arises not because things are themselves unclear , but because they may be understood in different contexts , each suggesting different meanings . One of the most notorious examples of this is Duchamp’s Fountain , rejected from a 1917 exhibition ( despite the organiser’s guarantee to show two pieces for the fee of $ 6 ) because it was a urinal turned on its side [ 11 ] . The Fountain is deeply controversial because it lends itself to several interpretations simultaneously . On the one hand , it is art : the work of one of the 20th century’s most celebrated artists , sold recently for more than one million dollars [ 3 ] , and shown in internationally respected museums . On the other hand , it is a just a commodity : a mass manufactured ‘ready made , ’ not created by Duchamp at all , and , to add insult to injury , a toilet . To view the Fountain – or just to think about it – is to enter into this deeply ambiguous situation . Seen as a sculpture , the Fountain’s graceful lines and intimate enclosure can be aesthetically pleasing . But it is , almost insistently , a urinal . Not only can it be perceived in different ways , but for many people these interpretations are incompatible . Attempts to resolve this tension can be absurd or violent , as when in 1993 a painter first urinated in the Fountain and then hit it several times with a hammer [ 3 ] . But this ambiguity and the tensions it evokes are the point of the piece : the source of its power and the conceptual pleasure it has to offer . It is not unusual to find artworks designed to be ambiguous . It is more difficult , in contrast , to find examples of commercial products that are ambiguous in terms of their preferred context of interpretation . Product designers work to eliminate ambiguity : their main effort goes into balancing clarity of use ( making it intuitive ) with richness of semiotic suggestion ( making you like what it stands for ) . Both aspects of the design attempt to control the user ' s interpretation of the product – that is , to reduce ambiguity . However , now that technology is no longer used solely by specialists , with specialist requirements , its users are becoming ever more varied and its uses ever more flexible . Despite the best efforts of product designers , products and services are increasingly treated as if they were open to interpretation . Users will even go against the ( semiotic ) grain in order to reinterpret a product . Sometimes these reinterpretations will go beyond new applications of an understood product to redefine the very purpose of the thing itself , creating a contextual ambiguity around it . For example , the abundance of different ring tones on mobile phones is used by advertisers as an incentive to the youth market . But some mothers have now started playing with ring tones - not to be cool , but to soothe their babies . The mother sets the phone ringing and hands it to the wailing infant . Note that this does not simply involve an unexpected use of the phone to communicate . Instead , much as Duchamp transmuted a base urinal into a celebrated piece of art , so the phone has been transformed into a new kind of baby rattle . This reveals the ability to interpret mobile phones in terms of discourses alien to those of their designers – a possibility that designers can recognise and encourage . Beyond noting and encouraging novel reconceptualisations of existing technologies , however , designers can deliberately set out to create products that implicate several interpretations at once . When successful , this mingling of discourses disrupts easy interpretation of the design , and obliges users to work out ways to make sense of the new situation . Ambiguity of Relationship As an example of a third type of ambiguity , consider Van Lieshout’s Bais - ô - Drôme [ 1 ] . This is a ‘love caravan’ consisting of two molded polyester enclosures that are fitted together like an extended trailer . The nondescript and even foreboding exterior hides an interior that might be described as ‘functionally decadent . ’ Liquor bottles are hung on the walls for easy access from a large , cushioned settee , while in the background a sheepskin - covered platform seems simultaneously clinical and sleazy . The whole is a well - constructed and integrated design that manages to leave viewers admiring but uncomfortable . There is nothing particularly unclear about the presentation of this piece . In addition , though it extends and merges known product genres in interesting ways , these seem to coexist without tension ( though the Duchampian move of claiming a living space as art may trouble some viewers ) . The ambiguity , instead , arises from viewer’s personal relationship with the piece . It is admirably well - crafted – but would you want to inhabit it ? Under what circumstances ? And should so much effort and care be devoted to such a strange mixture of utility and debauchery ? Gaver and Martin [ 10 ] developed design proposals intended to produce a similar sort of self - examination . The Prayer Device , for example , transmits users’ voices straight up to the skies , allowing people to send their thoughts or supplications to whomever or whatever they think might listen . The Telegotchi is an electronic pet with no buttons , relying on psionic powers for influence . Both these designs work within understood contexts – of spirituality on the one hand , and telepathy on the other – and invite users to share the experience of believers . Designs like these do not simply engender ambivalence , or contradictory emotion . They push us to imagine how we might personally use such products , and what our lives would be like in consequence . As a result of this speculation , we form intellectual , aesthetic , emotional , and moral judgements that can become available for self - reflection . The result of this process can be experiences that are uniquely personal : delightful , disturbing , or both . In summary , the three kinds of ambiguity raise different sorts of problem and ask for different sorts of interpretation . Ambiguity of information asks us to project our expectations into an interpretation of incomplete information . Ambiguity of context requires an integration of seemingly incompatible meanings . Ambiguity of relationship , finally , evokes a projection of our subjective experience at many levels . TACTICS FOR USING AMBIGUITY We chose the examples in the section above both to illustrate how ambiguity is used in the arts and design , and because they are relatively clear illustrations of the three primary loci of ambiguity . In this section , we discuss each kind of ambiguity in more detail , describing specific heuristics for achieving them with reference to our original design examples as well as new ones . Note that our intention here is not to present an exhaustive or exclusive analysis ( indeed we question whether such an analysis would be practical or desirable ) . Instead , we articulate these tactics to help designers recognise , understand and use ambiguity . Enhancing Ambiguity of Information A number of tactics may be used to enhance ambiguity of information . These focus on creating or reflecting uncertainties about information that are noticeable to people . The purpose of this may be merely to make the system seem mysterious or impressionistic , but more importantly it can also compel people to join in the work of making sense of a system and its context . Use imprecise representations to emphasise uncertainty . Perhaps the most prevalent way to introduce ambiguity of information is to display information that is physically or conceptually blurred . For instance , Desert Rain exploits ambiguity of information through the use of the rain curtain to create blurred and shifting images of the virtual world . This treatment is similar to Dunne’s use of a translucent plastic brick and pillow to obscure the graphics on an LCD display . In both cases , a kind of digital sfumato is achieved by blurring the usually precise quality of digital displays . The use of deliberate imprecision can extend to tangible and textual displays as well . For instance , Jeremijenko’s LiveWire [ 18 ] used a spinning cable to indicate ethernet traffic , while Ishii [ 5 ] used pinwheels to indicate network load . The Home Health Monitor appropriates the tendency of horoscopes to use diectic wordings that make vague statements seem definite ( e . g . “work to maintain the creative areas that are personally rewarding and cut your losses elsewhere” ) . The Sloganbenches used short , decontextualised phrases to create a similar air of indefiniteness ( e . g . “I used to be restless because of negative thoughts” ) . Imprecise displays such as these are often described as ‘ambient’ , but they are ambiguous as well . This ambiguity , we believe , is crucial for understanding their appeal : they may be perceptually undemanding , but they require users to fill in the gaps in information that is purposefully imprecise . When successful , such interfaces are not only aesthetically attractive , but conceptually appealing as well . Over - interpret data to encourage speculation . The converse of using blurred representations of information is to over - interpret them ( in much the same way that Guernica’s heightened definition contrasts with the indistinct features of the Mona Lisa ) . For instance , the Home Health Monitor uses over - interpretation in making statements about the emotional state of the home based on the input from physical sensors . The apparent overconfidence of the system raises questions about the degree to which such interpretations might be justified , seducing users into considering the well - being of their home through their scepticism about the truth of the system’s suggestions . Over - interpretations should not be clear nonsense , however . An earlier proposal for a Tweet - to - Text system using voice recognition to give pets the chance to speak [ 2 ] is questionable in this regard : it is difficult to suspend disbelief and entertain the notion that the results might be sensible . The design equivalent of gross exaggeration ( e . g . “I’ve been working on this paper for a million years” ) , over - interpretation is best used to draw attention to possible truths rather than simple untruths . Expose inconsistencies to create a space of interpretation . Inconsistent information from interfaces can also encourage interpretative engagement . For example , the Imagebank used in the Projected Realities system sometimes showed multiple , inconsistent images ( e . g . a quiet family scene next to a protest march ) to reflect inconsistent slogans appearing on the Sloganbenches . This had the effect of opening a space of possible interpretations – the juxtaposed images could be read as indicating the range of Bijlmer realities , or as a mutual rebuke , or as a narrative . However it was interpreted , the point is that it was interpreted , that the juxtaposition of incompatible elements required viewers to build their own meanings from the display . Exposing inconsistency between sources of information ( e . g . external sensors ) can also be a powerful alternative to trying to resolve or hide it . For instance , just as the uncertainties of GPS tracking in Bystander are shown to participants , so are inconsistencies revealed between GPS and spoken information . By crafting the inherent limitations of the technology into the user experience , they become a means to heighten narrative intrigue by opening a space of possibilities that participants must navigate . Cast doubt on sources to provoke independent assessment . Over - interpretation and inconsistency are special cases of increasing ambiguity by casting doubt on sources of information . For instance , not only are the Home Health ‘horoscopes’ imprecise , but they are produced by an unseen mapping from a pattern of sensor readings which themselves have questionable relation to the statements being made . The result is to force users to decide for themselves the credence to put on the predictions , either by tracing back the chain of cause and effect in the system or more simply by gauging whether the statements match their experiences . Similarly , because the slogans displayed by the Sloganbenches were not contextualised it was difficult on first viewing to recognise that they were produced by older people ( this information spread by word of mouth as the system was used ) . Instead , they appeared simply as statements to be believed or disbelieved . In this they are similar to the artist Jenny Holzer’s Truisms ( 1977 - 9 ) , electronic displays that show a series of bald assertions ( e . g . , ‘money creates taste’ ) that viewers can accept or question . The statements shown by the Sloganbenches , however , could be traced back to the older people , and this tension between abstraction and individuality allowed people to gauge the statements per se or as expressions of older people . Creating Ambiguity of Context Blocking the interpretation of a product or system in terms of an established discourse can create ambiguity of context . This is useful in spurring people to approach a particular system with an open mind , and more generally to question the assumptions they have about technological genres . Implicate incompatible contexts to disrupt preconceptions . Though none of our introductory design examples implicate incompatible contexts as powerfully as Duchamp’s Fountain , all use this tactic to some degree in interrupting an easy interpretation . The Sloganbenches are not quite public furniture or public displays , and treating them simply as one or the other is problematic ( sitting on them blocks the displays ; viewing the displays blocks sitting ) . The Pillow is simultaneously a radio and an aesthetic object . Desert Rain juxtaposes the established media forms of theatre , interactive installation and computer games , and moreover plays like a computer game despite being an anti - war piece . In each case , bringing together disparate contexts creates a tension that must be resolved . To engage with the design , participants must rethink their basic assumptions about genre , and either privilege one discourse over the others or expand their understandings of the discourses to build bridges among them . In doing so , they are encouraged to face the system – and perhaps even technological genres in general – from a fresh perspective . Add incongruous functions to breach existing genres . Adding new functions to designs can sometimes move them out of their ‘home’ genres . From this perspective , the conceptual origin of the Sloganbenches as public furniture is apparent , but they become something different through the addition of the scrolling displays . Accommodating this augmentation to the notion of public furniture is possible , but requires a redefinition that is fundamental enough to be uncomfortable . Similarly , products can split from their original genres when their functionality is used in radically new contexts , as for instance in our example mobile phones being used as baby rattles . For instance , The Sailor’s Return is a design proposal for a man who splits his time between an apartment and a two - masted sailing ship [ 2 ] . It suggests that his coffee cup could be linked wirelessly to a neon sign ( picturing a coffee cup , of course ) outside his apartment window . Returning from the ship and having a cup of coffee would cause the sign to light up , signalling to his friends and neighbours that he is home from the sea . Apart from casting the coffee cup as an activity monitor ( a mixing of genres that is common in ubiquitous computing research ) , this proposal transforms a public sign into a private code , allowing us to rethink the potential of public displays in new ways . Block expected functionality to comment on familiar products . Taking away functionality can also separate designs from their native genres . This is yet another way to understand the effect of being able to obscure the Sloganbench displays by sitting on them . Another example of this tactic is a design proposal called Democratic Advertising [ 10 ] , in which people could use handheld devices to capture and redistribute advertisements shown on public displays . This can be seen as a political device , allowing people unprecedented influence over the visual appearance of public spaces . Yet according to this proposal , people can only move existing advertisements , they cannot alter them or create their own imagery . This can seem frustrating , but it adds an intriguing contextual ambiguity . The system is not a straightforward tool for advertising , nor is it just a simple utopian proposal for legal graffiti ; instead it finds a more delicate balance between the two . Perhaps the purest example of blocking functionality to achieve ambiguity of context is Sarah Pennington’s design of a mobile phone cover that has no ‘call’ or ‘receive’ buttons . The phone is transmuted into a device that can only signal when somebody is trying to call : the owner can’t pick up or make calls . Through this simple modification , Pennington disrupts our reading of the phone as a communications device , creating instead a rather plaintive reminder of separation . But the result doesn’t escape its origin as a phone : it is simultaneously phone and not - phone , and this ambiguity is central to its effect . Provoking Ambiguity of Relationship Ambiguity of relationship creates the condition for a deeply personal projection of imagination and values onto a design . This can allow products and systems to become psychological mirrors for people , allowing them to try on new identities or to question their values and activities . Offer unaccustomed roles to encourage imagination . By their aesthetics and the functionality they offer , products and systems imply a ‘narrative of use’ [ 6 ] and suggest the sorts of people for whom they are appropriate . Designers traditionally strive to craft the semiotics of their products so that a majority of people will relate or aspire to the identities they imply . Reflecting more idiosyncratic roles and activities , however , can give rise to products that create an ambiguity of relationship , spurring people to question their own values . Dunne’s Pillow [ 7 ] is a seminal example of applying ambiguity of relationship to electronic products . Culling electromagnetic information from sources that might include mobile phone calls or baby monitors , it entices people to take a voyeuristic role to the airwaves . Similarly , the Prayer Device and Telegotchi also encourage people to adopt potentially unfamiliar perspectives and activities . Described by Dunne [ 6 ] as ‘value fictions , ’ these sorts of design use possible technologies to explore implausible values . They act as props for a drama played in everyday life , allowing people to engage in a first - person narrative as a kind of experiment in living . Point out things without explaining why . Offering new roles to people emphasises issues of personal identity . Another form of ambiguity of relationship , however , encourages people to consider the personal significance of things , behaviours , or events in their environment . Much as fine art photography has shifted from capturing images of important scenes to making scenes important by capturing their image , so design can draw attention to overlooked aspects of the environment to encourage reflection on their significance . For example , the rationale for tracking certain physical events for the Home Health Monitor is non - obvious , but the mere fact of their being tracked may arouse curiosity among participants . The flip side of asking whether open doors and frequently - used hairbrushes really reflect well - being is to ask what these things do mean . In a similar way , the History Tablecloth [ 2 ] uses load sensors and electroluminescent film printed on fabric to highlight locations of objects that have been left on household surfaces for days or weeks . Based in part on ethnographic observations of how people use household surfaces [ 4 ] , the cloth encourages people to reflect on the different histories of objects in their environment . But their interpretation is left open : the Tablecloth purposefully allows the meaning of its display to remain ambiguous to its users . In doing so , it encourages them to reflect on the meaning of this aspect of their environment , aesthetically , culturally , and – especially – personally . Introduce disturbing side effects to question responsibility . Reflection about the balance of desire and ethics can be provoked by designs that seem immediately appealing but which have disquieting implications . The Pillow works this way in providing an aesthetic experience that only slowly reveals itself to depend on eavesdropping : it seduces people into a voyeuristic role that may be uncomfortable . As another example , the Dawn Chorus is a proposal for an artificially - intelligent feeder that uses operant conditioning principles to teach local birds new songs [ 10 ] . This whimsical design may be appealing , but on reflection it raises disturbing issues about the ecological effects of interfering with birds’ natural behaviour , not to mention the ability to broadcast one’s tastes ( what if my neighbour is a Britney Spears fan ? ) . Designs such as these reflect and amplify the difficult choices posed by many current technologies . Mobile phones , for instance , allow us to communicate freely , but at the cost of intruding on others and of losing our solitude . Reactive environments may offer convenience at the cost of privacy . Portable computers interfere with the separation of work and home . Such tradeoffs are endemic to new technologies ; proposals such as the Pillow and Dawn Chorus provoke us to reflect on these tradeoffs both in the particular and more generally . CONCLUSION : AMBIGUITY AS A VIRTUE Ambiguity is not a virtue for its own sake , nor should it be used as an excuse for poor design . Many ambiguous systems are merely confusing , frustrating , or meaningless . Nonetheless , as we hope to have shown in this paper it can be an important factor in crafting interactive designs that are engaging and thought - provoking . Moreover , it has the added advantage ( which we have purposefully avoided stressing in this paper ) of enabling designers to go beyond the limits of their technologies . From this point of view , ambiguity provides a context that allows the use of inaccurate sensors , inexact mappings , and low - resolution displays because it encourages users to supplement them with their own interpretations and beliefs . The most important benefit of ambiguity , however , is the ability it gives designers to suggest issues and perspectives for consideration without imposing solutions . Ambiguity of information impels people to question for themselves the truth of a situation . Contextual ambiguity can question the discourses surrounding technological genres , allowing people to expand , bridge , or reject them as we see fit . Relational ambiguity , finally , can lead people to consider new beliefs and values , and ultimately their own attitudes . In each of these cases , ambiguity frees users to react to designs with scepticism or belief , appropriating systems into their own lives through their interpretations . In the process of reacting to the system either positively or negatively , however , users engage with issues that the designer suggests . Thus ambiguity is a powerful tool for designers to raise topics or ask questions while renouncing the possibility of dictating their answers . By supporting this balance , ambiguity not only represents a useful resource , but a powerful sign of respect for users as well . REFERENCES 1 . Atelier van Lieshout . A manual . Kölnischer Kunstverein and Museum Boijmans van Beuningen , Cologne , 1997 . 2 . Boucher , A . , Gaver , W . , Pennington , S . , and Walker , B . Equator workbook one : Ideas , scenarios and proposals for the home . Royal College of Art , 2001 . 3 . BBC online . Available at : http : / / news . bbc . co . uk / 1 / hi / entertainment / arts / 1987109 . stm 4 . Crabtree , A . , Hemmings , T . , and Rodden , T . Pattern - based support for interactive design in domestic settings . Proc . DIS2002 ( London 2002 ) . ACM Press , pp . 265 – 275 . 5 . Dahley , A . , Wisneski , C . , and Ishii , H . Water Lamp and Pinwheels : Ambient projection of digital information into architectural space . Proc . CHI ' 98 Companion ( 1998 ) , ACM Press , pp . 269 - 270 6 . Dunne , A . Hertzian tales : Electronic products , aesthetic experience and critical design . London , RCACRD Research Publications , 1999 . 7 . Dunne , A . , and Gaver , W . The Pillow : Artist - designers in the digital age . Proc . of CHI’97 Companion ( Atlanta , 1997 ) , ACM Press . 8 . Gaver , W . , and Dunne , A . ( 1999 ) . Projected Realities : Conceptual design for cultural effect . Proc . of CHI ' 99 ( 1999 ) , ACM Press . 9 . Gaver , W . , and Hooker , B . The Presence Project . London , RCACRD Research Publications , 2001 . 10 . Gaver , W . , and Martin , H . Alternatives : Exploring information appliances through conceptual design proposals . Proc . of CHI ' 00 ( Den Haag ) . New York , ACM Press . 11 . Godfrey , T . Conceptual Art . London , Phaidon , 1998 . 12 . Koleva , B . , Taylor , I . , Benford , S . , Fraser , M . , Greenhalgh , C . , Schndelbach , H . , vom Lehn , D . , Heath , C . , Row - Farr , J . & Adams , M . Orchestrating a Mixed Reality Performance . Proc . CHI’01 , ( Seattle , 2001 ) , ACM Press . 13 . Murray , P . , and Murray , L . The Penguin Dictionary of Art and Artists . London : Penguin Books , 1983 . 14 . Nickerson , R . & Landauer , T . Human - computer interaction : Background and issues . In Helander , M . G . , Landauer , T . K . and Prabhu , P . ( eds . ) , Handbook of Human - Computer Interaction , 2nd edition . Amsterdam , The Netherlands : Elsevier Science . 15 . Nicolls , C . The Mona Lisa , London Review of Books , 4 April 2002 . 16 . Read , H . A Concise History of Painting . London , Thames & Hudson , 1959 . 17 . Sassoon , D . Mona Lisa : The History of the World ' s Most Famous Painting . London , HarperCollins , 2001 18 . Weiser , M . and Brown J . S . Designing calm technology . PowerGrid Journal , v . 1 . 01 , July 1996 .