Meta - Design : Expanding Boundaries and Redistributing Control in Design Gerhard Fischer Center for Lifelong Learning and Design University of Colorado , Boulder http : / / l3d . cs . colorado . edu / ~ gerhard / Abstract . Meta - design is an emerging conceptual framework aimed at defining and creating socio - technical environments as living entities . It extends existing design methodologies focused on the development of a system at design time by allowing users to become co - designers at use time . Meta - design is grounded in the basic assumption that future uses and problems cannot be completely anticipated at design time , when a system is developed . Users , at use time , will discover mismatches between their needs and the support that an existing system can provide for them . Meta - design extends boundaries by supporting users as active contributors who can transcend the functionality and content of existing systems . By facilitating these possibilities , control is distributed among all stakeholders in the design process . This paper characterizes different design methodologies and identifies the unique challenges and opportunities for meta - design . It illustrates this approach with two examples : ( a ) Web2Gether ( enriching the organizational practices and community building of assistive technology teachers ) , and ( b ) the Memory Aiding Prompting System ( MAPS ) ( addressing the needs of people with cognitive disabilities and their caregivers ) . Assessments of our developments are used to identify some future implications and challenges for meta - design and its role in socially responsible design . Keywords : design , design methodologies , meta - design , socio - technical environments , boundaries , control , seeding / evolutionary growth / reseeding model , Web2Gether , Memory Aiding Prompting System ( MAPS ) , application areas for meta - design , socially responsible design 1 Introduction In past decades , the primary goal of most software systems has been to achieve better productivity and usability , and software design and human - computer interface ( HCI ) research have achieved considerable expertise for these objectives . However , we have entered a new phase of system development in exploring new application areas ( including the two examples discussed in this paper ) with a focus on transcending existing boundaries and redistributing control among stakeholders [ National - Research - Council , 2003 ] . Prominent success examples of this approach include developments such as ( 1 ) open source software [ Raymond & Young , 2001 ] ; ( 2 ) collaborative developed encyclopedias such as Wikipedia [ Wikipedia , 2006 ] ; and ( 3 ) digital libraries such as DLESE [ Wright et al . , 2002 ] . In these developments people are not only using software but they also are becoming involved in developing software to varying degrees [ Scaffidi et al . , 2005 ] . Existing design methodologies are insufficient to cope with the emergence of situated and unintended requirements [ Suchman , 1987 ; Winograd & Flores , 1986 ] . What is needed are socio - technical environments for which the design does not end at the time of deployment and whose success hinges on continued user participation . This paper addresses the overall theme of Interact’2007 , Socially Responsible Interaction , by articulating meta - design as a new conceptual framework and by relating and contrasting it to existing design methodologies . The framework is instantiated and illustrated by a brief description of socio - technical environments in two different domains : • enriching the organizational practices of assistive technology teachers with Web2Gether [ dePaula , 2004 ] ; and • addressing the needs of new user populations , namely people with cognitive disabilities and their caregivers with the Memory Aiding Prompting System ( MAPS ) [ Carmien , 2006 ] . 2 Meta - Design : A Conceptual Framework and Design Methodology for Socio - technical Environments Meta - design [ Fischer & Giaccardi , 2006 ; Fischer et al . , 2004 ; Giaccardi , 2004 ] is an emerging conceptual framework aimed at defining and creating social and technical infrastructures in which new forms of collaborative design can take place . It extends the traditional notion of system design beyond the original development of a system by allowing users to become co - designers . Meta - design is grounded in the basic assumption that future uses and problems cannot be completely anticipated at design time , when a system is developed . Users , at use time , will discover mismatches between their needs and the support that an existing system can provide for them . These mismatches will lead to breakdowns that serve as potential sources of new insights , new knowledge , and new understanding . 2 . 1 Socio - Technical Environments as Living Entities Socio - technical environments [ Mumford , 1987 ; Trist , 1981 ] are living entities [ Terveen , 1995 ] that are capable of integrating computing infrastructures and participation processes supporting collaboration not only about design artifacts but also about the goals of the design activity . By allowing users to be designers , socio - technical environments offer the possibility to achieve the best fit between systems and their ever - changing context of use , problems , domains , users , and communities of users . They empower users , as owners of a problem , to engage actively and collaboratively in the continual development of systems capable of sustaining personally meaningful activities and coping with their emergent needs . Socio - technical environments evolve as a result of a flexible and collaborative development process , which in turn modifies the terms of participation itself in the production of software . The rationale for socio - technical environments as living entities expanding boundaries and redistributing control in design comes from many sources , including the following prescriptive objectives and empirical observations : • “The experience of having participated in a problem makes a difference to those who are affected by the solution . People are more likely to like a solution if they have been involved in its generation ; even though it might not make sense otherwise” [ Rittel , 1984 ] . • “I believe passionately in the idea that people should design buildings for themselves . In other words , not only that they should be involved in the buildings that are for them but that they should actually help design them” [ Alexander , 1984 ] . • “We have only scratched the surface of what would be possible if end users could freely program their own applications . As has been shown time and again , no matter how much designers and programmers try to anticipate and provide for what users will need , the effort always falls short because it is impossible to know in advance what may be needed . End users should have the ability to create customizations , extensions , and applications” [ Nardi , 1993 ] . • “The hacker culture and its successes pose by example some fundamental questions about human motivation , the organization of work , the future of professionalism , and the shape of the firm” [ Raymond & Young , 2001 ] . • “Users that innovate can develop exactly what they want , rather than relying on manufacturers to act as their ( often very imperfect ) agents” [ von Hippel , 2005 ] . • “In the digital world , many of the distinctions between designers and users are becoming blurred . We are all , to some extent , designers now” [ Brown & Duguid , 2000a ] . • “The networked environment makes possible a new modality of organizing production : radically decentralized , collaborative , and nonproprietary” [ Benkler , 2006 ] . • “The opportunity to generate vibrant customer ecosystems where users help advance , implement , and even market new product features represents a largely untapped frontier for farsighted companies to exploit” [ Tapscott & Williams , 2006 ] . The technological foundations to make these objectives a reality are provided by a powerful infrastructure for collaborative efforts ( the Internet allows people to share their efforts ) and by the increased digital fluency [ National - Research - Council , 1999 ] of the population in general , which will make owners of problems independent of “high - tech scribes’ in personally meaningful tasks [ Fischer , 2002 ] . Emerging success models , such as open source software and Wikipedia , have provided evidence of the great potential of socio - technical environments in which users can be active contributors . 2 . 2 Design Time and Use Time In all design processes two basic stages can be differentiated : design time and use time ( see Figure 1 ) . At design time , system developers ( with or without user participation ) create environments and tools for the world as imagined by them to anticipate users’ needs and objectives . At use time , users can use the system , but because their needs , objectives , and situational contexts can only be anticipated at design time , the system often requires modification to fit the users’ needs [ Henderson & Kyng , 1991 ] . end user system developer user ( representative ) key designtime usetime time world - as - imagined world - as - experienced prediction reality planning situated action Figure 1 : Design Time and Use Time To accommodate unexpected issues at use time , systems need to be underdesigned at design time . Underdesign [ Brand , 1995 ] in this context does not mean less work and fewer demands for the design team , but it is fundamentally different from creating complete systems . The primary challenge of underdesign is to develop not solutions but environments that allow the “owners of problems” [ Fischer , 2002 ] to create the solutions themselves at use time . This can be done by providing a context and a background against which situated cases , coming up during use time , can be interpreted . Underdesign is a defining activity for meta - design aimed at creating design spaces for others . It assumes that the meaning , functionality , and content of a system are not fully defined by designers and user - representatives alone at design time , but are socially constructed throughout the entire design , deployment , and use cycles of the system . Meta - Design . By focusing equally on design and use - time activities , meta - design is different from other design methodologies such as user - centered design and participatory design . It contributes to the invention and design of cultures in which humans can express themselves and engage in personally meaningful activities . The conceptual frameworks that we have developed around meta - design explore fundamental challenges associated with design for change [ Fischer & Giaccardi , 2006 ] : • How can we support skilled domain workers who are neither novices nor naive users , but who are interested in their work and who see the computer as a device to achieve their goals ? • How can we create co - adaptive environments , in which users change because they learn , and in which systems change because users become co - developers and active contributors ? • How can we provide users with opportunities , tools , and social reward structures to extend systems to fit their needs ? Meta - design has shifted some control from designers to users and empowered users to create and contribute their own visions and objectives . Meta - design is a useful perspective for projects for which “designing the design process” is a first - class activity . This means that creating the technical and social conditions for broad participation in design activities is as important as creating the artifact itself [ Wright et al . , 2002 ] . Participatory Design for Meta - Design . Meta - design creates new demands for participatory design processes at design time by requiring : ( 1 ) the creation of systems that do not consist of a set of predetermined possibilities and functions but are designed for evolution that is being carried out by their users ; and ( 2 ) a shift of focus from designing a complete system to designing a seed and mechanism for evolutionary growth and reseeding by providing content and a context for transcending the initial content . The goal of making systems modifiable and evolvable by users does not imply transferring the responsibility of good system design to the user . Users ( often being domain experts who see software development as a means to an end ) will design tools and create contents of a different quality than professional software designers ( for whom software is both a means and an end ) . Domain experts are not concerned with the tool per se , but in doing their work . However , if the tool created by the developers does not satisfy their needs or tastes , they should be able to adapt the system without always requiring the assistance of the developers . This leads to a new distribution of control for socio - technical environments . Who Are Meta - Designers and What Do They Do ? Meta - designers use their own creativity to create socio - technical environments in which other people can be creative . They must create the social conditions for broad participation in design activities which is as important as creating the artifact itself . They must encourage and facilitate the objective to develop maximum participation by activating as much knowledge as possible . The main activity of meta - designers shifts from determining the meaning , functionality , and content of a system to encouraging and supporting users to engage in these activities . Meta - designers must be willing to share control of how systems will be used , which content will be contained , and which functionality will be supported . A Process Model in Support of Meta - Design : Seeding , Evolutionary Growth , Reseeding . The seeding , evolutionary growth , and reseeding ( SER ) model [ Fischer & Ostwald , 2002 ] is an emerging descriptive and prescriptive model for creating software systems that best fit an emerging and evolving context . In the past , large and complex software systems were built as complete artifacts through the large efforts of a small number of people . Instead of attempting to build complete systems , the SER model advocates building seeds that can evolve over time through the small contributions of a large number of people . It postulates that systems that evolve over a sustained time span must continually alternate between periods of planned activity and unplanned evolution , and periods of deliberate ( re ) structuring and enhancement . A seed is something that has the potential to change and grow . In socio - technical environments , seeds need to be designed and created for the technical as well as the social component of the environment . 3 Examples of Socio - Technical Environments Framed by Meta - Design This section illustrates with two specific examples ( Web2Gether and MAPS ) how meta - design expands boundaries and redistributes control in design . 3 . 1 Web2Gether : Supporting a Community of Assistive Technology Teachers Web2Gether [ dePaula , 2004 ] is a socio - technical environment embedded in the larger research project of understanding and providing social and technical means to support the use of technologies in special education [ Carmien et al . , 2005 ] . Our research activities first identified the lack of social support as one of the major barriers to the adequate use of technologies in this environment . This led to a shift in our approach from a simple technical solution toward a socio - technical approach that offered means for participants to reach each other , to create and develop social networks , and to share their experiences . Web2Gether transcends an access model of technology and supports a meta - design approach in which participants can act as active contributors . It allows users to share stories and personal experiences regarding unique cases for which they came up with effective solutions to address specific needs [ dePaula & Fischer , 2005 ] . The success of meta - design approaches hinges on the participation of the users , requiring a deep understanding of the dynamic and transformative process of appropriation . In Web2Gether , the social and technical context were constantly negotiated and shaped by the various social groups participating at design , deployment , and use times . Figure 2 illustrates the complex environment in which Web2Gether operated as a socio - technical environment , including ( 1 ) technical components ( in the lowest layer , labeled “Design Arena” ) ; ( 2 ) work environments ( with different stakeholders ) ; and ( 3 ) the influences of institutional and national concerns , rules , and regulations . At any point of time , a change in any of these layers would require that the system be modified . Most of these changes will be experienced by the users ( the community of assistive technology teachers ) , who need the means and knowledge to adapt and evolve the system accordingly . Our experience with Web2Gether demonstrates that the common assumption that technology’s meaning , functionality , and content was set by the designers is misleading : the system was shaped by the consequences of a process of negotiation among designers , users , and other institutions . Work Arena Design Arena Institutional Arena National Arena Web2gether Researchers Subject - Matter Experts HIPAA NCLB IDEA Special Education Director Parent Liaison Coordinators Parent Organizations & Advocates Teacher Union School Board Agreements Lawyers Freedom Initiative ADA Assistive Technologies Educational Technologies AT specialists Special Education Teachers Related Service Providers Parents Students IEP SAP Educational Resources WorkshopParticipants Figure 2 : Web2Gether as a Socio - Technical Environment [ dePaula , 2004 ] . ( The abbreviations used in this diagram represent the following concepts : ( 1 ) ADA : Americans with Disabilities Act ; ( 2 ) NCLB : No Child Left Behind Act ; ( 3 ) IDEA : Individuals With Disabilities Education Act ; ( 4 ) HIPAA : Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act ; ( 5 ) IEP : Individualized Education Plan ; ( 6 ) SAP : Student Disability Services ; and ( 7 ) AT : Assistive Technologies ) Web2Gether was originally designed with a rudimentary understanding of a meta - design framework . It has substantially expanded our evolving framework about meta - design in the following ways [ dePaula & Fischer , 2005 ] : • Participatory design : Web2Gether was socially constructed by different social groups who participated throughout this research . • Design through cycles of closure and opening : Web2Gether went through various stages at which its concept was defined followed by changes due to new interactions between the context and social groups . • Co - evolution of design and context : Web2Gether was shaped to fit the needs of the context , and at the same time the context was reevaluated . • The seeding process : This was a scaffolding process not restricted to creating initial content , but supporting structured activities , the technology , and the envisioned use community . • Important factors : Incentive structures , integration of innovations into the practices of users , and the merging of new with existing organizational structures were critically important . Web2Gether is a socio - technical environment in which “various possible meanings of the usefulness of a technology coexist and are constantly being negotiated and co - constructed by the groups involved in the design , implementation , deployment , and use of a technology” [ dePaula , 2004 ] . These meanings cannot be defined once and for all at design time ( see Figure 1 ) but require a meta - design approach in which all stakeholders can renegotiate how use contexts and technologies constitute one another and need to be open for co - evolution . 3 . 2 Memory Aiding Prompting System ( MAPS ) : An End - User Development Environment When users’ needs are heterogeneous and their specific and exact nature is known only at use time , the strategy of “one size fits all” will not work . In our research with people with cognitive disabilities [ CLever , 2005 ] , the user populations can be characterized as a “universe of one” [ Carmien , 2006 ] in the sense that each user’s abilities are unique . To match the user’s unique needs with systems , a meta - design approach is not an option—it is a necessity . An additional requirement in this application is that the users who need to act as designers to match systems to capabilities are the caregivers ( e . g . , parents and teachers ) , who generally are not computer scientists and have no interest in computers per se . The specific problem addressed by MAPS [ Carmien , 2006 ; Carmien et al . , 2005 ] is how to create external scripts for a variety of tasks ( including how to use public transportation systems , shopping lists , and recipes for cooking ) . The MAPS approach focuses on finding new ways to support distributed intelligence by complementing internal scripts ( which people have in their head and which may be severely limited for people with cognitive disabilities ) with external scripts supporting specific users in specific tasks . An essential component of MAPS is an end - user development environment [ Lieberman et al . , 2006 ] supporting the creation of external scripts . Scripts consist of memory prompts with task - specific visual and auditory stimuli and feedback . In MAPS , scripts are organized as finite state sequences with state changes triggered by each unique user’s actions or external events in the user’s environment . One key design parameter in a scripting sequence is the granularity and specificity of a particular prompt and feedback sequence . Figure 3 : An End - User Development Environment for Creating External Scripts The scripts needed to effectively support users are specific for particular tasks , creating the requirement that the people who know about these tasks ( i . e . : the local caregivers rather than technologists far removed from the action ) must be able to develop scripts . In general , caregivers have no specific professional technology training , nor are they interested in becoming computer programmers . This creates the need for design environments with extensive end - user support to allow caregivers to create , store , and share scripts . Figure 3 shows the prototype of a caregiver configuration environment ( embedded in MAPS ) for creating complex , location - aware , multi - modal prompting sequences to support people with cognitive disabilities in using public transportation . The environment allows caregivers to assemble sound and pictures by using a filmstrip - like scripting metaphor . 4 Assessment and Implications The goal of making systems modifiable and evolvable by users does not imply transferring the responsibility of good system design to the user . Socio - technical environments redistribute control in design by sharing it between developers and users . Expanding Boundaries . The research described in this paper has expanded a number of different boundaries . It facilitated the collaboration of stakeholders with differing background knowledge , including software engineers , HCI designers , caregivers , and people with cognitive disabilities . It broke down the sharp distinction between designers and users , and allowed users to become co - designers . It eliminated the limitations associated with closed systems by designing socio - technical environments as living entities . It allowed all stakeholders to contribute and make their voices heard . The process was supported by the seeding , evolutionary growth , and reseeding ( SER ) model . It explored HCI issues by exploring and addressing the unique challenges associated with universal usability and design - for - all [ Newell & Gregor , 1997 ] . Meta - design plays a significant role in several stages of design , including initial concept development , system configuration , integration with the use context , and specifically supporting design - in - use . Redistributing Control . In meta - design , developers must accept a role in which they create mechanisms allowing users to act as designers and modify systems , thereby providing them with new levels of personal control . One of the major findings in our research activities was that users do not always accept and exercise these opportunities . This control is desired by users only in the case of personally meaningful problems [ Fischer , 2002 ] . One of the pitfalls of a “do - it - yourself” society is that it can put a big burden on users ( e . g . , companies offloading work to customers ) who may lack the experience , support , daily exposure , and interest in accomplishing these tasks . The trade - offs associated with introducing new divisions of labor [ Levy & Murnane , 2004 ] have to be carefully evaluated . Our experiences gathered in the context of the design , development , and assessment of the two systems described in the previous sections indicate that meta - design methodologies do not work when users are brought into the process late , thereby denying them ownership , nor when users are “misused” to fix problems and to address weaknesses of systems that the developers did not fix themselves . It does work when users are part of the participatory design effort in establishing a meta - design framework , including support for intrinsic and extrinsic motivation , user toolkits for reducing the effort to make contributions , and the seeding of use communities in which individuals can share their contributions [ Dawe , 2007 ] . Contributions to Socially Responsible Design . Meta - design and socio - technical environments designed as living entities contribute to socially responsible design [ CPSR , 2007 ] in the following dimensions : • Improving the quality of life [ Carmien et al . , 2005 ; Newell & Gregor , 1997 ] : The two socio - technical environments ( Web2Gether and MAPS ) briefly described in this paper as part of our CLever project are developments that make an attempt to improve the quality of life for people with cognitive disabilities . • Democratizing innovation [ von Hippel , 2005 ] : meta - design allows owners of problems to engage in activities as a process of creating new possibilities and new artifacts , eliminating the constraint that users are restricted to what is given to them . • Making all voices heard [ Fischer & Giaccardi , 2006 ] : Complex design problems seldom fall within the boundaries of one specific domain ; they require the participation and contributions of different stakeholders with various backgrounds . • Changing professional practice [ Illich , 1973 ] : Meta - design contributes to the creation of convivial tools which “give each person who uses them the greatest opportunity to enrich the environment with the fruits of his or her vision . ” • Revolutionizing the creation of systems [ Raymond & Young , 2001 ; Wikipedia , 2006 ] : Open source software systems and collaborative content creation harness the possibilities of Web 2 . 0 architectures [ O ' Reilly , 2006 ] , which allow that social intelligence becomes alive . Rather than relying on major contributions by a small number of people , Web 2 . 0 architectures derive their value from a large number of people making small contributions . • Establishing new paradigms in learning and teaching [ dePaula et al . , 2001 ] : The impact of meta - design on teaching and learning challenges one of the most impoverished paradigms of education in which “a single , all - knowing teacher tells or shows presumably unknowing learners something they presumably know nothing about” [ Bruner , 1996 ] . Courses - as - seeds [ dePaula et al . , 2001 ] is an educational model that explores meta - design in the context of university courses by creating a culture of informed participation [ Brown & Duguid , 2000b ] by supporting community - based learning theories [ Rogoff et al . , 1998 ] with innovative collaborative technologies . 5 Conclusion Meta - design expands boundaries and redistributes control in design by inventing , designing , and supporting a culture in which all stakeholders in socio - technical environments can express themselves and engage in personally meaningful activities . Meta - design requires a new mindset of all participants . Specifically , developers must give up some control at design time and users must be willing to act as active contributors and not just passive consumers at use time . Meta - design raises many issues and research problems of fundamental importance , including new design methodologies ; new understandings of cognition , collaboration , and motivation ; and the design of new media and new technologies . Acknowledgements . The author thanks the members of the Center for LifeLong Learning & Design at the University of Colorado , who have made major contributions to ideas described in this paper . The PhD research of Stefan Carmien , Rogerio dePaula , and Melissa Dawe has specifically influenced our research about socially responsible interaction . The research was supported by grants from ( 1 ) the National Science Foundation , ( a ) REC - 0106976 “Social Creativity and Meta - Design in Lifelong Learning Communities” , ( b ) IIS - 0613638 “A Meta - Design Framework for Participative Software Systems” , ( c ) IIS - 0709304 “A New Generation Wiki for Supporting a Research Community in Creativity and IT” ; ( 2 ) SRA Key Technology Laboratory , Inc . , Tokyo , Japan ; and ( 3 ) the Coleman Institute , Boulder , CO . References 1 . Alexander , C . ( 1984 ) " The State of the Art in Design Methods . " In N . Cross ( Ed . ) , Developments in Design Methodology , John Wiley & Sons , New York , pp . 309 - 316 . 2 . Benkler , Y . ( 2006 ) The Wealth of Networks : How Social Production Transforms Markets and Freedom , Yale University Press , New Haven . 3 . Brand , S . ( 1995 ) How Buildings Learn : What Happens After They ' re Built , Penguin Books , New York . 4 . Brown , J . S . , & Duguid , P . ( 2000a ) " Re - education . " In J . S . Brown , & P . Duguid ( Eds . ) , The Social Life of Information , Harvard Business School Press , Boston , MA , pp . 207 - 241 . 5 . Brown , J . S . , & Duguid , P . ( 2000b ) The Social Life of Information , Harvard Business School Press , Boston , MA . 6 . Bruner , J . ( 1996 ) The Culture of Education , Harvard University Press , Cambridge , MA . 7 . Carmien , S . ( 2006 ) Socio - Technical Environments Supporting Distributed Cognition for Persons with Cognitive Disabilities , Ph . D . Dissertation , University of Colorado at Boulder ( Available at : http : / / l3d . cs . colorado . edu / ~ carmien / ) . 8 . Carmien , S . , Dawe , M . , Fischer , G . , Gorman , A . , Kintsch , A . , & Sullivan , J . F . ( 2005 ) " Socio - Technical Environments Supporting People with Cognitive Disabilities Using Public Transportation , " Transactions on Human - Computer Interaction ( ToCHI ) , 12 ( 2 ) , pp . 233 - 262 . 9 . CLever ( 2005 ) CLever : Cognitive Levers - - Helping People Help Themselves , Available 10 . CPSR ( 2007 ) Computer Professionals for Social Responsibility , Available at http : / / www . cpsr . org / . 11 . Dawe , M . ( 2007 ) Reflective Design - In - Use : Co - Designing an Assistive Remote Communication System with Individuals with Cognitive Disabilities and their Families , Ph . D . Dissertation , University of Colorado at Boulder , Available at http : / / l3d . cs . colorado . edu / ~ meliss / diss / . 12 . dePaula , R . ( 2004 ) The Construction of Usefulness : How Users and Context Create Meaning with a Social Networking System , Ph . D . Dissertation , University of Colorado at Boulder . 13 . dePaula , R . , & Fischer , G . ( 2005 ) " Knowledge Management : Why Learning from the Past is not Enough ! " In J . Davis , E . Subrahmanian , & A . Westerberg ( Eds . ) , Knowledge Management : Organizational and Technological Dimensions , Physica Verlag , Heidelberg , pp . 21 - 54 . 14 . dePaula , R . , Fischer , G . , & Ostwald , J . ( 2001 ) " Courses as Seeds : Expectations and Realities . " In P . Dillenbourg , A . Eurelings , & K . Hakkarainen ( Eds . ) , Proceedings of The European Conference on Computer - Supported Collaborative Learning , Maastricht , Netherlands , pp . 494 - 501 . 15 . Fischer , G . ( 2002 ) Beyond ' Couch Potatoes ' : From Consumers to Designers and Active Contributors , in FirstMonday ( Peer - Reviewed Journal on the Internet ) , Available at http : / / firstmonday . org / issues / issue7 _ 12 / fischer / . 16 . Fischer , G . , & Giaccardi , E . ( 2006 ) " Meta - Design : A Framework for the Future of End User Development . " In H . Lieberman , F . Paternò , & V . Wulf ( Eds . ) , End User Development : Empowering People to Flexibly Employ Advanced Information and Communication Technology , Kluwer Academic Publishers , Dordrecht , The Netherlands , pp . 427 - 457 . 17 . Fischer , G . , Giaccardi , E . , Ye , Y . , Sutcliffe , A . G . , & Mehandjiev , N . ( 2004 ) " Meta - Design : A Manifesto for End - User Development , " Communication of the ACM , 47 ( 9 ) , pp . 33 - 37 . 18 . Fischer , G . , & Ostwald , J . ( 2002 ) " Seeding , Evolutionary Growth , and Reseeding : Enriching Participatory Design with Informed Participation , " Malmö University , Sweden , pp . 135 - 143 . 19 . Giaccardi , E . ( 2004 ) Principles of Metadesign : Processes and Levels of Co - Creation in the New Design Space ; Ph . D . Dissertation , CAiiA - STAR , School of Computing , Plymouth , UK . 20 . Henderson , A . , & Kyng , M . ( 1991 ) " There ' s No Place Like Home : Continuing Design in Use . " In J . Greenbaum , & M . Kyng ( Eds . ) , Design at Work : Cooperative Design of Computer Systems , Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , Inc . , Hillsdale , NJ , pp . 219 - 240 . 21 . Illich , I . ( 1973 ) Tools for Conviviality , Harper and Row , New York . 22 . Levy , F . , & Murnane , R . J . ( 2004 ) The New Division of Labor : How Computers are Creating the Next Job Market , Princeton University Press , Princeton . 23 . Lieberman , H . , Paterno , F . , & Wulf , V . ( Eds . ) ( 2006 ) End User Development - Empowering people to flexibly employ advanced information and communication technology , Kluwer Publishers , Dordrecht , The Netherlands . 24 . Mumford , E . ( 1987 ) " Sociotechnical Systems Design : Evolving Theory and Practice . " In G . Bjerknes , P . Ehn , & M . Kyng ( Eds . ) , Computers and Democracy , Avebury , Aldershot , UK , pp . 59 - 76 . 25 . Nardi , B . A . ( 1993 ) A Small Matter of Programming , The MIT Press , Cambridge , MA . 26 . National - Research - Council ( 1999 ) Being Fluent with Information Technology , National Academy Press , Washington , DC . 27 . National - Research - Council ( 2003 ) Beyond Productivity : Information Technology , Innovation , and Creativity , National Academy Press , Washington , DC . 28 . Newell , A . F . , & Gregor , P . ( 1997 ) " Human Computer Interfaces for People with Disabilities . " In M . G . Helander , T . K . Landauer , & P . V . Prabhu ( Eds . ) , Handbook of Human - Computer Interaction , Volume 1 , Elsevier Science B . V . , Amsterdam , pp . 813 - 824 . 29 . O ' Reilly , T . ( 2006 ) What Is Web 2 . 0 - Design Patterns and Business Models for the Next Generation of Software , Available at http : / / www . oreillynet . com / pub / a / oreilly / tim / news / 2005 / 09 / 30 / what - is - web - 20 . html . 30 . Raymond , E . S . , & Young , B . ( 2001 ) The Cathedral and the Bazaar : Musings on Linux and Open Source by an Accidental Revolutionary , O ' Reilly & Associates , Sebastopol , CA . 31 . Rittel , H . ( 1984 ) " Second - Generation Design Methods . " In N . Cross ( Ed . ) , Developments in Design Methodology , John Wiley & Sons , New York , pp . 317 - 327 . 32 . Rogoff , B . , Matsuov , E . , & White , C . ( 1998 ) " Models of Teaching and Learning : Participation in a Community of Learners . " In D . R . Olsen , & N . Torrance ( Eds . ) , The Handbook of Education and Human Development : New Models of Learning , Teaching and Schooling , Blackwell , Oxford , pp . 388 - 414 . 33 . Scaffidi , C . , Shaw , M . , & Myers , B . ( 2005 ) " Estimating the Numbers of End Users and End User Programmers . " In Proceedings of 2005 IEEE Symposium on Visual Languages and Human - Centric Computing ( VL / HCC ' 05 ) , Dallas , Texas , September , pp . 207 - 214 . 34 . Suchman , L . ( 1987 ) Plans and Situated Actions : The Problem of Human - Machine Communication , Cambridge University Press , Cambridge , England . 35 . Tapscott , D . , & Williams , A . D . ( 2006 ) Wikinomics : How Mass Collaboration Changes Everything , Portofolio , Penguin Group , New York , NY . 36 . Terveen , L . G . ( 1995 ) " An Overview of Human - Computer Collaboration , " Knowledge - Based Systems Journal , Special Issue on Human - Computer Collaboration , 8 ( 2 - 3 ) , pp . 67 - 81 . 37 . Trist , E . L . ( 1981 ) " The Sociotechnical Perspective : The Evolution of Sociotechnical Systems as a Conceptual Framework and as an Action Research Program . " In A . H . VanDeVen , & W . F . Joyce ( Eds . ) , Perspectives on Organization Design and Behavior , Wiley , New York , NY , pp . 19 - 75 . 38 . von Hippel , E . ( 2005 ) Democratizing Innovation , MIT Press , Cambridge , MA . 39 . Wikipedia ( 2006 ) The Free Encyclopedia , Available at http : / / wikipedia . org / . 40 . Winograd , T . , & Flores , F . ( 1986 ) Understanding Computers and Cognition : A New Foundation for Design , Ablex Publishing Corporation , Norwood , NJ . 41 . Wright , M . , Marlino , M . , & Sumner , T . ( 2002 ) Meta - Design of a Community Digital Library , D - Lib Magazine , Volume 8 , Number 5 , Available at http : / / www . dlib . org / dlib / may02 / wright / 05wright . html .