Copyright © 2007 Strategic Management Society Strategic Entrepreneurship Journal Strat . Entrepreneurship J . , 1 : 11 – 26 ( 2007 ) Published online 16 November 2007 in Wiley InterScience ( www . interscience . wiley . com ) . DOI : 10 . 1002 / sej . 4 DISCOVERY AND CREATION : ALTERNATIVE THEORIES OF ENTREPRENEURIAL ACTION SHARON A . ALVAREZ * and JAY B . BARNEY Fisher College of Business , Ohio State University , Columbus , Ohio , U . S . A . Do entrepreneurial opportunities exist , independent of the perceptions of entrepreneurs , just waiting to be discovered ? Or , are these opportunities created by the actions of entrepreneurs ? Two internally consistent theories of how entrepreneurial opportunities are formed – discov - ery theory and creation theory – are described . While it will always be possible to describe the formation of a particular opportunity as an example of a discovery or creation process , these two theories do have important implications for the effectiveness of a wide variety of entrepreneurial actions in different contexts . The implications of these theories for seven of these actions are described , along with a discussion of some of the broader theoretical impli - cations of these two theories for the ﬁ elds of entrepreneurship and strategic management . Copyright © 2007 Strategic Management Society . When asked why he climbed Mount Everest , world renowned mountain climber George Mallory is alleged to have responded , ‘Because it is there . ’ Many entrepreneurship scholars have adopted a similar metaphor when talking about why entrepre - neurs exploit competitive opportunities – because they are there . Because these opportunities exist , and because some people are more insightful or clever in recognizing and exploiting opportunities than others , exploiting these opportunities can be a source of economic proﬁ ts and , in some cases , fame and fortune . Assuming that opportunities – like mountains – exist as objective phenomena just waiting to be discovered and exploited has important implications for entrepreneurial actions . For example , if opportu - nities exist as objective phenomena , then the task of ambitious entrepreneurs is to discover these oppor - tunities – using whatever data collection techniques exist – and then exploit them – using whatever strategies are required – all as quickly as possible , before another entrepreneur discovers and exploits the opportunity . Just as few remember the second person to conquer Mount Everest , entrepreneurs that are late in discovering and exploiting an opportunity will generally not experience the same success as the ﬁ rst entrepreneurs to successfully discover and exploit an opportunity . But , what if entrepreneurial opportunities were not like mountains , just waiting to be discovered and exploited . Suppose , instead , that these competi - tive imperfections in markets were created by the actions of entrepreneurs . In this case , the right meta - phor for entrepreneurship is not ‘mountain climbing’ but , rather , ‘mountain building . ’ And , assuming that opportunities are created rather than discovered may also have very important implications for entrepre - neurial action . For example , rather then searching for a clear opportunity to be exploited , entrepreneurs creating opportunities might engage in an iterative Keywords : entrepreneurship theory ; opportunity creation ; opportunity discovery ; uncertainty ; exploitation ; entrepre - neurial processes * Correspondence to : Sharon A . Alvarez , Fisher College of Business , Ohio State University , 2100 Neil Avenue , 850 , Columbus , OH 43210 , U . S . A . E - mail : alvarez _ 42 @ cob . osu . edu 12 S . A . Alvarez and J . B . Barney Copyright © 2007 Strategic Management Society Strat . Entrepreneurship J . , 1 : 11 – 26 ( 2007 ) DOI : 10 . 1002 / sej learning process that ultimately could lead to the formation of an opportunity . In the former case , entrepreneurs would spend a great deal of time and energy developing a single , comprehensive and complete , business plan . In the latter case , entre - preneurs may ﬁ nd that business plans can only be written after an opportunity has been created , and that rigorous planning too early in this process can be , at best , a waste of resources , and at worst , fun - damentally misleading – to both entrepreneurs and those that invest in them . The purposes of this paper are , ﬁ rst , to describe the theories of entrepreneurship that underlie these two metaphors – mountain climbing and mountain building – and second , to understand the implica - tions for the actions of entrepreneurs associated with these theories . The paper begins by examin - ing the kinds of assumptions that all teleological theories of human action , including teleological theories of entrepreneurial action , must make . These assumptions are then used as a basis for describ - ing a ‘discovery’ mountain climbing approach to entrepreneurship , and then describe the ‘creation’ of mountain building approach to entrepreneurship . Each of these theories , it will be shown , are inter - nally consistent . Also , it will always be possible after an opportunity is formed to describe the actions of a particular entrepreneur in both ‘discovery’ and ‘creation’ terms . Thus , debates about whether an opportunity is a ‘discovery’ or ‘creation’ opportu - nity , by themselves , are without empirical content . However , these theories do have empirical content when entrepreneurs act based on one theory or the other . Thus , after describing these two theories , much of the paper focuses on the implications that they each have for the effectiveness of a variety of entrepreneurial actions in different settings . TELEOLOGICAL THEORIES OF ENTREPRENEURIAL ACTION Teleological theories of human action explain human behavior in terms of the impact of that behavior on the ability of individuals to accomplish their pur - poses . In general , these theories assert that behavior that facilitates the accomplishment of one’s pur - poses is more likely to occur than behavior that does not facilitate the accomplishment of one’s purposes ( Parsons and Shils , 1962 ) . Examples of teleological theories in the social sciences include motivation theory in psychology ( Herzberg , 1976 ; Maslow , 1943 ) , functional theory in anthropology ( Lesser , 1935 ) , and institutional theory in sociology ( DiMag - gio and Powell , 1983 ; Scott , 2001 ) . As a matter of logic , all teleological theories of human action must make three critical assumptions : ( 1 ) assumptions about the nature of human objec - tives , ( 2 ) assumptions about the nature of individu - als , and ( 3 ) assumptions about the nature of the decision making context within which individuals operate ( Bergmann , 1957 ; Nagal , 1961 ; Parsons , 1951 ; Parsons and Shils , 1962 ) . When different teleological theories generate different predictions about the same human actions , these different pre - dictions usually turn on one or more differences in these three critical assumptions ( Parsons and Shils , 1962 ) . For this reason , these three assumptions are an effective basis upon which to compare and contrast different teleological theories of human action . Both of the theories identiﬁ ed in this paper – discovery theory and creation theory – are exam - ples of teleological theory and thus have much in common . 1 For example , they both seek to explain the same dependent variable – actions that entre - preneurs take to form and exploit opportunities . In this context , entrepreneurial action is deﬁ ned as any activity entrepreneurs might take to form and exploit opportunities ( Shane , 2003 : 4 ; Shane and Venkata - raman , 2000 : 211 ) . Moreover , as teleological theo - ries , both discovery and creation seek to explain these entrepreneurial actions in terms of their impact on the ability of entrepreneurs to form and exploit opportunities . However , while discovery and creation theory have much in common , they often generate differ - ent predictions about when speciﬁ c entrepreneurial actions will be more or less effective in enabling entrepreneurs to form opportunities . As was sug - gested earlier , when different teleological theories generate different predictions about the same human actions – in this case , entrepreneurial actions – these different predictions usually turn on one or more differences in the three critical assumptions that all teleological theories must make . Thus , these three assumptions are used as a basis for comparing and 1 While discovery and creation theory are both teleological theories , not all theories of entrepreneurial action must be teleo - logical . For example , an evolutionary theory of entrepreneurial action could be developed that does not depend on entrepreneurs engaging in actions in an effort to produce new products or ser - vices . Examples of these kinds of models can be found in Nelson and Winter ( 1982 ) and Hannan and Freeman ( 1977 ) . Discovery and Creation 13 Copyright © 2007 Strategic Management Society Strat . Entrepreneurship J . , 1 : 11 – 26 ( 2007 ) DOI : 10 . 1002 / sej contrasting discovery and creation theory in the remainder of this paper . DISCOVERY THEORY Of the two theories discussed in this paper , dis - covery theory has received much more attention in the literature ( Gaglio and Katz , 2001 ; Shane , 2003 ; Venkataraman , 2003 ) . The three critical assumptions of discovery theory as presented in this literature are summarized in Table 1 . Discovery objectives As suggested earlier , both discovery theory and cre - ation theory assume that the goal of entrepreneurs is to form and exploit opportunities ( Shane and Ven - katraman , 2000 : 211 ; Shane , 2003 : 4 ) . Both theories also recognize that opportunities exist when com - petitive imperfections exist in a market or industry . However , these two theories differ in their analysis of the origin of these competitive imperfections . In discovery theory , competitive imperfections are assumed to arise exogenously , from changes in technology , consumer preferences , or some other attributes of the context within which an industry or market exists ( Kirzner , 1973 : 10 ) . 2 In his review of this literature , Shane ( 2003 : 23 ) cites technological changes , political and regulatory changes , and social and demographic changes as examples of the kinds of events that can disrupt the competitive equilib - rium that exists in a market or industry , thereby forming opportunities . This emphasis on exogenous shocks forming opportunities has several important implications for discovery theory . For example , this emphasis suggests that discovery theory is based on realist assumptions in the philosophy of science – that opportunities , like mountains , exist as real and objective phenomena , independent of the actions or perceptions of entrepreneurs , just waiting to be discovered and exploited ( McKelvey , 1999 ) . Just as Mount Everest existed before George Mallory climbed it , that discovery opportunities are yet to be observed does not deny the reality of their existence . However , it is entrepreneurs who bring ‘agency to opportunity’ ( Shane , 2003 : 7 ) by exploiting them . Also , this emphasis on exogenous shocks form - ing opportunities suggests that discovery theory is predominantly about search – systematically scan - ning the environment to discover opportunities to produce new products or services . In this search process , entrepreneurs must consider both its direc - tion and duration , and must also guard against con - fusing local search – where modest opportunities to produce new products or services exist – with more global search – where much more substantial opportunities exist ( Levinthal , 1997 ) . Discovery entrepreneurs The assumption made by discovery theory concern - ing the nature of entrepreneurs follows directly from its assumption about the nature of opportunities . Since opportunities are created by exogenous shocks to an industry or market and since these opportu - nities are objective and thus , in principle , observ - able , then everyone associated with that industry or market should be aware of the opportunities a shock Table 1 . Central assumptions of discovery and creation theories of entrepreneurial action Discovery Theory Creation Theory Nature of Opportunities Opportunities exist , independent of entrepreneurs . Applies a realist philosophy . Opportunities do not exist independent of entrepreneurs . Applies an evolutionary realist philosophy . Nature of Entrepreneurs Differ in some important ways from nonentrepreneurs , ex ante . May or may not differ from nonentrepreneurs , ex ante . Differences may emerge , ex post . Nature of Decision Making Context Risky Uncertain 2 There is another type of opportunity called opportunity recog - nition that is not discussed in this paper . According to Miller ( this issue ) , opportunity recognition can be thought of as a form of arbitrage where an entrepreneur recognizes an existing unmet demand and matches it with a known product . 14 S . A . Alvarez and J . B . Barney Copyright © 2007 Strategic Management Society Strat . Entrepreneurship J . , 1 : 11 – 26 ( 2007 ) DOI : 10 . 1002 / sej has created . Of course , if everyone associated with an industry or market knew about the opportunities created by a shock , and were all sufﬁ ciently skilled to exploit these opportunities , then they could all try to exploit them . In a setting where everyone could potentially become aware of and exploit an opportunity , it would be difﬁ cult for anyone to generate sufﬁ cient proﬁ ts from actually producing new products or services ( Barney , 1986 ; Schumpeter , 1939 ) . Thus , in order to explain why entrepreneurs associated with an industry or market are willing and able to exploit opportunities while nonentrepreneurs are not , discovery theory must necessarily assume that entrepreneurs who discover opportunities are signif - icantly different from others in their ability to either see opportunities or , once they are seen , to exploit these opportunities ( Kirzner , 1973 ; Shane , 2003 ) . Kirzner ( 1973 : 67 ) summarizes the differences between entrepreneurs and nonentrepreneurs with the concept of ‘alertness . ’ Many potential compo - nents of alertness have been identiﬁ ed in the litera - ture , including information asymmetries , different risk preferences , and cognitive differences , among others ( Shane , 2003 ) . Any of these attributes , or any combination of these attributes , might lead some entrepreneurs associated with an industry or market to become aware of opportunities created by exog - enous shocks , while others associated with that same industry or market may remain ignorant of these opportunities . While empirical research on systematic differ - ences between entrepreneurs and nonentrepreneurs has continued for well over two decades , the results of this work have been mixed , overall ( Low and MacMillan , 1988 ; McClelland , 1961 ) . In their exten - sive review of this literature , Busenitz and Barney ( 1997 ) conclude that the evidence about whether or not entrepreneurs are systematically different than nonentrepreneurs is not compelling with the excep - tion of work on cognition . And even this cognitive work does not yet show whether cognitive differ - ences exist before the entrepreneurs begin engag - ing in entrepreneurial actions or if these differences emerge as a result of the experiences of entrepre - neurs while forming opportunities . Discovery decision making context Finally , the decision making context within which entrepreneurs choose to exploit an opportunity is assumed , by discovery theory , to be risky , rather than uncertain . Currently , these terms are often used interchangeably in the entrepreneurship ( Shane , 2003 : 7 ) and strategic management ( Balakrishnan and Wernerfelt , 1986 ; Wernerfelt and Karnani , 1987 ) literatures . However , for purposes of distinguishing between the assumptions of discovery theory and creation theory , these terms have distinct meanings ( Knight , 1921 ) . 3 A decision making context is risky if , at the time a decision is being made , decision makers can collect enough information about a decision to anticipate possible outcomes associated with that decision , and the probability of each of those possible outcomes . A decision making context is uncertain if , at the time a decision is being made , decision makers cannot collect the information needed to anticipate either the possible outcomes associated with a decision nor the probability of those outcomes . 4 The decision making context in discovery theory is risky because it assumes that opportunities are objective in nature . As objective phenomena , entre - preneurs can use a variety of data collection and analysis techniques to understand the possible out - comes associated with an opportunity , along with the probability of those outcomes . It may take some time and effort to complete these analyses , but , in principle , they can be done when an opportunity is objective in nature . It took many decades to dis - cover the existence of Mount Everest , and still many additional decades to measure its height . But despite these challenges , there was never a question about whether or not , in principle , information about this mountain was collectable . CREATION THEORY Creation theory is a logical theoretical alternative to discovery theory for explaining the actions that entrepreneurs take to form and exploit opportunities ( Aldrich and Kenworthy , 1999 ; Aldrich and Ruef , 2006 ; Gartner , 1985 ; Venkataraman , 2003 ) . Aspects 3 The decision making settings deﬁ ned refer to objective prop - erties of a particular decision making context , not to an entre - preneurs’ beliefs about those contexts ( Alvarez and Barney , 2005 ) . 4 A third decision making context – ambiguity – can also be identiﬁ ed ( Dequech , 2003 ) . This exists when the outcomes associated with a decision can be known at the time a deci - sion is made , but the probability of these outcomes cannot be known . To simplify this discussion , ambiguity is treated as a special case of uncertainty in this paper . Discovery and Creation 15 Copyright © 2007 Strategic Management Society Strat . Entrepreneurship J . , 1 : 11 – 26 ( 2007 ) DOI : 10 . 1002 / sej of creation theory have been described by a variety of authors ( Alvarez and Barney , 2005 ; Baker and Nelson , 2005 ; Casson , 1982 ; Gartner , 1985 ; Lan - glois and Cosgel , 1993 ; Loasby , 2002 ; Sarasvathy , 2001 ; Schumpeter , 1934 ) . However , unlike discov - ery theory , creation theory has yet to be articulated as a single coherent theory in the literature . The central organizing assumptions of this theory are also summarized in Table 1 . Creation objectives In creation theory , opportunities are not assumed to be objective phenomena formed by exogenous shocks to an industry or market . Rather , they are created , endogenously , by the actions , reactions , and enactment of entrepreneurs exploring ways to produce new products or services ( Baker and Nelson , 2005 ; Gartner , 1985 ; Sarasvathy , 2001 ; Weick , 1979 ) . This endogenous view of opportunities has a variety of implications for creation theory . In creation theory , opportunities do not necessar - ily evolve out of pre - existing industries or markets ( Dosi , 1984 , 1988 ; Etzioni , 1963 ) . The term ‘search’ has little or no meaning in creation theory . ‘Search’ implies entrepreneurs attempting to discover oppor - tunities – like mountains – that already exist . In creation theory , entrepreneurs do not search – for there are no mountains to ﬁ nd – they act , and observe how consumers and markets respond to their actions . While , ex post , after an opportunity has been exploited , it will always be possible to show how that opportunity evolved out of a prior industry or market , creation theory suggests that , ex ante , before an opportunity is created , its links with prior industries or markets are unknown . That is , creation theory suggests that the ‘seeds’ of opportunities to produce new products or services do not necessarily lie in previously existing industries or markets . In creation theory , ‘bringing agency to opportuni - ties’ is without meaning since opportunities do not exist independently of the actions taken by entre - preneurs to create them ( Weick , 1979 ) . In this view instead of being passive with respect to the forma - tion of new opportunities , creation theory assumes that entrepreneur’s actions are the essential source of these opportunities – they build the mountains . In this model , entrepreneurs do not wait for exoge - nous shocks to form opportunities and then provide agency to those opportunities , they act ( Baker and Nelson , 2005 ; Bhide , 1999 ; Sarasvathy , 2001 ) . And in acting , they form opportunities that could not have been known without the actions taken by these entrepreneurs . Creation opportunities are social constructions that do not exist independent of entrepreneur’s per - ceptions ( Aldrich and Kenworthy , 1999 ; Berger and Luckmann , 1967 ) . However when entrepreneurs act to exploit these socially constructed opportunities , they interact with an environment – the market – that tests the veracity of their perceptions . Of course , the market is , itself , a social construction , formed out of the perceptions and beliefs of numerous other individuals . This form of analysis suggests that cre - ation theory is grounded in what has come to be known as the evolutionary realist perspective in the philosophy of science ( Azevedo , 2002 ; Campbell , 1960 ; McKelvey , 1999 ) . This enactment process is consistent with evolu - tionary theories of entrepreneurial action ( Aldrich and Ruef , 2006 ; Campbell , 1960 ; Weick , 1979 ) . In both evolutionary theory and creation theory , a blind - variation – an action that emerges without any self - conscious planning or foresight – can begin a process of action and reaction that leads to the for - mation of opportunities ( Aldrich and Kenworthy , 1999 ) . Of course , in creation theory , actions need not be ‘completely blind . ’ They may be deliberate or intelligent or even a random variation that starts the process . However , variations are likely to be quite myopic . The notion of blind - variation emphasizes changes in unforeseen and perhaps even unwanted ways ( Campbell , 1960 ) . Rarely will entrepreneurs be able to see ‘the end from the beginning . ’ In this view there is no ‘end’ until the creation process has unfolded , i . e . , opportunities cannot be understood until they exist , and they only exist after they are enacted in an iterative process of action and reaction ( Berger and Luckmann , 1967 ; Weick , 1979 ) . Blind or myopic variations in creation theory are the raw materials from which selection processes cull those that are most suitable ( Aldrich and Ruef , 2006 ) . As they begin to take action to form opportuni - ties , entrepreneur’s beliefs , formed on the path the variations have taken them on , can become social constructs that guide subsequent actions of these entrepreneurs and others associated with an industry or market – including customers and suppliers ( Berger and Luckmann , 1967 ; Weick , 1979 ) . As entrepre - neurs act upon their initial beliefs about opportunities and then observe the market responses , beliefs are transformed reﬂ ecting the acquisition and creation of knowledge and information ( Arrow , 1974 ) . Most fre - quently , entrepreneurs learn that their original beliefs 16 S . A . Alvarez and J . B . Barney Copyright © 2007 Strategic Management Society Strat . Entrepreneurship J . , 1 : 11 – 26 ( 2007 ) DOI : 10 . 1002 / sej about the nature and scope of what they thought were opportunities are not justiﬁ ed . These entrepreneurs are then forced to develop new beliefs about opportunities that build on what they learned ( Choi , 1993 ) . Often , entrepreneurs learn that these additional beliefs about an opportunity are also not justiﬁ able , and are forced to rethink their beliefs . Indeed , after several iterative actions , evaluations , and reactions , entrepreneurs may even decide that they misinterpreted the results of pre - vious actions and go back several sequences and start again or even abandon the entire process altogether ( Cyert and March , 1963 ; March and Simon , 1958 ; Mosakowski , 1997 ) . This creation process is clearly path dependent , in that small differences in initial decisions and choices made by entrepreneurs can lead to large differences over time ( Arthur , 1989 ) . Path dependent processes also play an important role in other social science theories , including resource - based theory in strate - gic management ( Barney , 1991 ; Dierickx and Cool , 1989 ) . In a sense , these theories emphasize the impor - tance of information and knowledge generated from the process of enacting an opportunity . As that process evolves differently for different entrepreneurs , the opportunities that result may be heterogeneous in costly - to - copy , and costly - to - reverse ways . Creation entrepreneurs A central assumption of discovery theory is that entrepreneurs who form and exploit opportunities are signiﬁ cantly different than those entrepreneurs who do not form and exploit opportunities . This assumption is necessary in order to explain why everyone associated with an industry or market is not aware of and / or unable to exploit opportun - ities in this industry or market . Differences between entrepreneurs and nonentrepreneurs play a very dif - ferent role in creation theory . First , creation theory suggests that , ex ante , before entrepreneurs create opportunities , they may or may not be signiﬁ cantly different than those who do not create opportunities . If signiﬁ cant differences – of the type assumed in discovery theory – exist , these differences can explain why some entrepreneurs form opportunities and others do not . Alternatively , creation theory acknowledges that even very small differences between entrepreneurs and nonentrepreneurs , ex ante , could lead some to form opportunities and others not to form opportun - ities . For example , two individuals may be indistin - guishable with respect to their attributes , but small variations in their local environment – e . g . , differ - ences in location – might lead one of them to form and exploit an opportunity . Luck ( Barney , 1986 ) can play a signiﬁ cant role in this highly path dependent process ( Arthur , 1989 ) . However , while creation theory is agnostic about the signiﬁ cance of ex ante differences between these entrepreneurs and nonentrepreneurs , this theory does acknowledge that the process of creating opportuni - ties can exacerbate what were initially small differ - ences and make them large differences . Consider , for example , the cognitive attributes of entrepre - neurs documented by Busenitz and Barney ( 1997 ) . Creation theory suggests that individuals may be virtually indistinguishable , in terms of their cog - nitive characteristics , before the creation process begins . However , those that take a more entrepre - neurial path over time may ﬁ nd that certain cognitive attributes – including a systematic overconﬁ dence and a willingness to generalize from small samples – are more positively reinforced than other cognitive attributes . This process can create signiﬁ cant differ - ences , ex post , between individuals who form and exploit opportunities and individuals who do not . In this sense , differences between these groups may be the result of the entrepreneurial path taken , not just a cause of entrepreneurship ( Hayward , Shepherd and Grifﬁ n , 2006 ; Sarasvathy , 2001 ) . Creation decision making context The decision making context in creation theory is uncertain . This is because , according to this theory , opportunities do not exist until they are created . At the point a decision about whether or not to try to form an opportunity is made , the information required to know the possible outcomes associated with this decision , and their probability , does not yet exist . In principle , no matter how hard an entre - preneur works , all the information needed to turn this decision making setting into a risky one cannot be collected . The inability to estimate the prob - ability distributions associated with making deci - sions , under creation theory , does not depend on the limited time that potential entrepreneurs have had to collect information about a new opportunity , nor on the ability of potential entrepreneurs to analyze the information they have collected – as is assumed in discovery theory . Rather , under uncertainty , even entrepreneurs with a great deal of time , or with unusual analytical abilities , will not be able to esti - mate the relevant probability distributions ( Dunning , Discovery and Creation 17 Copyright © 2007 Strategic Management Society Strat . Entrepreneurship J . , 1 : 11 – 26 ( 2007 ) DOI : 10 . 1002 / sej Heath and Suls , 2004 ; Miller , 2007 ) . The informa - tion required to estimate these distributions , ex ante , simply has not been created yet . Put differently , it is not possible to measure the height of a mountain that has not yet been created . Of course , this does not mean that entrepreneurs operating in creation settings will be unable to collect at least some information , ex ante , about certain courses of action . That is , in the midst of forming creation opportunities , entrepreneurs may be able to collect and analyze information about discovery opportunities . However , for those opportunities that are being formed by the actions of entrepreneurs , such information does not yet exist , and therefore , it cannot be collected or analyzed . DISCOVERY AND CREATION IMPLICATIONS FOR EFFECTIVE ENTREPRENEURIAL ACTIONS As suggested in Table 1 , the assumptions underly - ing discovery and creation theory are both internally consistent , though largely contradictory . However , debates about which of these sets of assumptions , per se , most accurately represents reality are not likely to be resolvable ex post since , in principle , it will always be possible to interpret the formation of a particular opportunity as either a discovery or cre - ation process . Rather , these sets of assumptions only have empirical implications when they are linked with speciﬁ c entrepreneurial actions : discovery theory suggests that certain actions are more likely to be effective then creation theory , and vice versa . In this sense , the actions that entrepreneurs actu - ally take can be thought of as a manifestation of the assumptions they make about the nature of the context within which they are operating – is it a dis - covery context or a creation context . If their hypoth - esis about the nature of this context is correct , and the theory they are applying is correct in its implica - tions , then that activity will be relatively effective in the formation and exploitation of an opportunity . If their hypothesis about the nature of their context is incorrect , and they end up applying the wrong theory , then that activity will be relatively ineffective in the formation and exploitation of an opportunity . For these reasons , understanding the implications of these two sets of assumptions for the effectiveness of a wide variety of entrepreneurial actions is impor - tant . The implications of discovery and creation assumptions for seven of these actions are discussed here and summarized in Table 2 . These seven were chosen because they are generally cited as important considerations for all types of entrepreneurs seeking to form and exploit opportunities , whether operating in a discovery or creation context . Table 2 . Effective entrepreneurial actions in discovery and creation contexts Discovery Context Creation Context Leadership Based on expertise and ( perhaps ) experience Based on charisma Decision Making Risk - based data collection tools ; Risk - based decision making tools ; Importance of opportunity costs Iterative , inductive , incremental decision making ; Use of biases and heuristics ; importance of affordable loss Human Resource Practices Recruitment : Speciﬁ c human capital recruited broadly Recruitment : General and ﬂ exible human capital recruited from pre - existing social networks Strategy Relatively complete and unchanging Emergent and changing Finance External capital sources : Banks and venture capital ﬁ rms ‘Bootstrapping’ and ‘friends , families , and fools’ Marketing Changes in marketing mix may be how new opportunities manifest themselves Marketing mix may fundamentally change as a result of new opportunities that emerge Sustaining Competitive Advantages Speed , secrecy , and erecting barriers to entry may sustain advantages Tacit learning in path dependent process may sustain advantages 18 S . A . Alvarez and J . B . Barney Copyright © 2007 Strategic Management Society Strat . Entrepreneurship J . , 1 : 11 – 26 ( 2007 ) DOI : 10 . 1002 / sej Leadership While a variety of leadership skills may be impor - tant no matter what type of opportunity is being exploited , others may vary in importance , depending on whether the opportunity that is being exploited is discovered or created . For example , expert leadership is likely to be important in exploiting discovery opportunities . Since discovery opportunities often have their seeds in pre - existing industries , the exploitation of discov - ery opportunities often relies on the individual’s prior knowledge about markets and products . Thus , when exploiting a discovery opportunity it is important that the leader have speciﬁ c knowledge and informa - tion associated with the opportunity ( Shane , 2000 ) . Indeed , the leader exploiting a discovery opportu - nity will often have superior knowledge about a particular market or industry , knowledge about how that industry was disrupted by an exogenous shock , and knowledge about how to exploit the resulting opportunities ( Kirzner , 1997 ) . Expert leaders are also likely to have professional links within the market or industry where a discovery opportunity is being exploited ( Shane , 2000 ) . Expert leaders will often have gained much of their knowl - edge and information from being embedded within the market or industry in which the opportunity was discovered . However , the expert leader in this setting will have a dual challenge ; to make sure that there is a distinctiveness about the new opportunity , but also to understand how to efﬁ ciently navigate the exploitation process through the environment in which it is embedded ( Romanelli , 1991 ) . Of course , it is unlikely that the type of sub - stantive expertise about an industry or market that is available to those seeking to exploit discovery opportunities will be a basis of leadership for those who are cooperating to exploit creation opportun - ities . This is because the nature of the substantive expertise required to exploit a creation opportunity is typically only known after that opportunity has emerged from the enactment process . However , it will often be the case that those seeking to exploit a creation opportunity will need the cooperation of others well before the speciﬁ c expertise that exploit - ing an opportunity requires is known . In this setting , leadership is likely to emerge , not on the basis of the leader’s substantive exper - tise , but instead based on the leader’s experience in managing the enactment process , the ability that a leader has to inspire creativity and dedication under uncertain conditions , the extent to which followers believe they can trust a leader , and so forth . These are the attributes of a charismatic leader , rather than an expert leader ( Weber , 1903 ) . Charismatic leaders are more likely to be successful than expert leaders when cooperation is needed to exploit a creation opportunity ( Alvarez and Barney , 2005 ) . None of this suggests that charismatic leadership will be irrelevant in discovery settings . Rather , it suggests that while charisma and expertise may both be important in discovery settings , that expert leadership is less likely to be important in creation settings . Decision making Discovery theory assumes that entrepreneurs operate under conditions of risk . In this setting , entrepre - neurs can , and should , apply a variety of risk - based data collection and analysis techniques , all of which are designed to collect the information required to estimate the risks associated with making a par - ticular decision . Examples of such risk - based data collection techniques include the use of customer focus groups , customer surveys , the collection of information from government agencies , the collec - tion of information from trade associations , and so forth . Armed with this information , entrepreneurs can apply traditional risk - based decision - making tools , including discounted present value techniques ( Brealey and Myers , 1988 ) , real options analysis ( Kogut , 1991 ) and scenario analysis ( Schoemaker , 1995 ) to make decisions about whether or not to exploit an opportunity . These tools all assume that entrepreneurs understand their opportunity costs , i . e . , the value of the opportunities they forgo by exploiting one opportunity over another ( Casson , 2003 ; Milgrom and Roberts , 1992 ) . Clearly , traditional risk - based data collection and analysis cannot be effectively applied in the uncertain setting assumed to exist in creation theory . Instead , entrepreneurs make decisions in other ways . For example , they may make decisions based on decision making heuristics or biases ( Busenitz and Barney , 1997 ; Shepherd , McMullen and Jennings , 2007 ) . Or , they may make decisions using an induc - tive , iterative , and incremental process such as effec - tuation ( Sarasvathy , 2001 ) or bricolage ( Baker and Nelson , 2005 ) . In a creation setting , it is also not possible for entrepreneurs to effectively calculate the oppor - tunity costs associated with their actions . Instead Discovery and Creation 19 Copyright © 2007 Strategic Management Society Strat . Entrepreneurship J . , 1 : 11 – 26 ( 2007 ) DOI : 10 . 1002 / sej of opportunity costs , creation theory suggests that entrepreneurs use the concept of ‘acceptable losses’ to judge the downside associated with engaging in entrepreneurial actions ( Sarasvathy , 2001 ) . An acceptable loss is simply that value , both economic and personal , that potential entrepreneurs are willing to forgo if the actions they engage in happen to not lead to actual opportunities to produce new prod - ucts or services . In this context , an entrepreneur engages in entrepreneurial actions when the total losses that can be created by such activities are not too large . According to creation theory , the potential gains from these activities – gains that cannot be anticipated even probabilistically – do not play a major role in deciding whether or not to engage in entrepreneurial actions . Overall , when entrepreneurs make decisions using context appropriate tools , they will more effectively form and exploit opportunities than when they use context inappropriate tools to make decisions . Risk - based decision tools are more appropriate in dis - covery settings ; inductive , iterative and incremental decision making , biases and heuristics , and accept - able loss are more appropriate in creation settings . Human resource practices A wide variety of human resource practices may vary in their effectiveness , depending on whether the context within which an entrepreneur is operating is discovery or creation . Only one of these practices – recruitment – will be discussed here . In a discovery context , entrepreneurs will gener - ally be able to anticipate the speciﬁ c kinds of skills they need to exploit an opportunity . This suggests that they will be able to effectively hire people with highly specialized human capital . Also , because entrepreneurs will be able to explain the nature of the opportunity they are exploiting to their potential employees , entrepreneurs will be able to effectively recruit widely , including outside of their current social networks . In a creation context , entrepreneurs will not be able to anticipate the speciﬁ c kinds of skills they will ultimately need to exploit the opportunity they form . Thus , it will not be possible to effectively hire new employees based on their speciﬁ c expertise . Rather , in this context , entrepreneurs will ﬁ nd it to be more effective to hire individuals with broad human capital and individuals with a great deal of ﬂ exibil - ity . Also , because it will be difﬁ cult to explain the nature of the opportunity that is being exploited to a potential employee , entrepreneurs in this setting will ﬁ nd recruitment among their current social networks more effective than recruiting more broadly . Similar differences in the effectiveness of other human resource practices in discovery and creation contexts , besides recruitment , can also be identi - ﬁ ed and deserve additional attention . However , in general , when entrepreneurs manage their human resources in a context appropriate way , they will more effectively form and exploit opportunities than when they manage their human resources in context inappropriate ways . Recruiting speciﬁ c human capital expertise , recruited broadly is more appropriate in discovery settings ; recruiting ﬂ exible general human capital from pre - existing social net - works is more appropriate in creation settings . Strategy Most entrepreneurs develop strategies ( Brett , 2004 ; Delmar and Shane , 2003 ; Kuratko , 1991 ; Shane and Delmar , 2004 ) . However , the effectiveness of these strategies , and the strategy making process , can vary signiﬁ cantly depending on the context within which an entrepreneur is operating , be it discovery or creation . In a discovery context , there is usually sufﬁ cient ex ante information so that critical assumptions in a strategy can be evaluated , the ﬁ nancial and other implications of these assumptions anticipated , speciﬁ c timelines for executing the strategy can be speciﬁ ed , the size of the market and the potential return can be estimated , and so forth . Of course , over time , some of these elements of the strategy may be modiﬁ ed . However , these modiﬁ cations should seldom involve redeﬁ ning the fundamental purposes or objectives of a business . Once in place , it will usually not be necessary for entrepreneurs to fun - damentally alter the assumptions of their strategies since enough information can be collected to make reasonably accurate predictions about the nature of an opportunity and how it can be exploited ( Delmar and Shane , 2004 ) . However , in creation contexts , strategy plays a very different role since current and historical infor - mation are not available or not useful in describing the nature of an opportunity . Indeed , entrepreneurs in this setting may ﬁ nd traditional forms of strategic planning to be harmful and perhaps even misleading . In creation theory , the task facing entrepreneurs is not so much combining pre - existing information and knowledge , but , rather , asking the right questions , 20 S . A . Alvarez and J . B . Barney Copyright © 2007 Strategic Management Society Strat . Entrepreneurship J . , 1 : 11 – 26 ( 2007 ) DOI : 10 . 1002 / sej designing new experiments , remaining ﬂ exible , and learning ( Mintzberg , 1994 ) . Indeed , too rigorous strategic planning under conditions of uncertainty can short circuit the opportunity enactment process ( March , 1991 ; Weick , 1979 ) . Only as this enactment process reaches its conclusion – that is , when the level of uncertainty facing an entrepreneur shifts from uncertain to risky – are more traditional forms of strategic planning likely to be helpful to these entrepreneurs . Rather than elaborate strategy documents that include sophisticated ﬁ nancial projections and cus - tomer segmentation analyses , creation theory sug - gests that strategic plans developed in uncertain settings will be simpler guides to entrepreneurial behavior . In this perspective , optimization and sharply deﬁ ned goals are replaced with an approach that acknowledges that each point along the way of enacting an opportunity may be unique . Strategies in this setting may suggest the general direction entre - preneurs think they are likely to be heading , but are subject to numerous fundamental changes . When entrepreneurs develop strategies in a context appropriate way , they will more effectively form and exploit opportunities than when they develop strategies in context inappropriate ways . Detailed , relatively unchanging strategies are more appropri - ate in discovery settings ; less detailed , more ﬂ exible strategies are more appropriate in creation settings . Finance Entrepreneurs must also obtain ﬁ nancing to realize their opportunities ( Baeyens and Manigart , 2003 ) . The effectiveness of ﬁ nancing options are likely to vary signiﬁ cantly depending upon whether or not an entrepreneur is operating under conditions of discov - ery theory or under conditions of creation theory . Entrepreneurs operating under discovery condi - tions will often be able to obtain ﬁ nancing from external sources – including banks and venture capital ﬁ rms . In this context , information asymme - tries between an entrepreneur and its external capital sources should be either low or relatively easy to overcome . Entrepreneurs in this context will be able to explain to outside sources of capital the nature of the opportunities they are planning to exploit , the ﬁ nancial implications of exploiting these opportun - ities , and the riskiness of exploiting these opportun - ities ( Sapienza and Gupta , 1994 ) . This means that the external capital market for entrepreneurs operat - ing under discovery conditions should be a relatively low cost source of capital ( Admati and Pﬂ eiderer , 1994 ) . However , in creation settings traditional external sources of capital – including banks and venture capital ﬁ rms – are unlikely to provide ﬁ nancing for entrepreneurs ( Bhide , 1992 ; Christensen , Anthony and Roth , 2004 ) . In these conditions , the problem facing sources of capital is not information asymme - tries ; it is simply the lack of information . Entrepre - neurs cannot explain to outside capital sources the nature of the opportunities they are going to exploit because they do not know this nature themselves . ‘Bootstrapping’ is likely to be a much more common way to ﬁ nance activities taking place under creation conditions . In ‘bootstrapping , ’ entre - preneurs ﬁ nance activities from their own wealth , or from the wealth of those closely associated with them – the triumvirate of ‘friends , family , and fools’ ( Bhide , 1992 ) . These sources of capital invest in the entrepreneur – his or her character , ability to learn , ﬂ exibility , and creativity – not in a particular busi - ness opportunity an entrepreneur plans to exploit . Indeed , Bhide ( 1992 ) argues that entrepreneurs operating in a creation context may actually damage their ability to grow and prosper if they obtain exter - nal funding . This is because external funding tends to force these entrepreneurs to exploit an identiﬁ ed opportunity , even if it turns out that that opportu - nity is not as valuable as anticipated , and even if it should have been abandoned in favor of an alterna - tive opportunity . When entrepreneurs ﬁ nance their businesses in a context appropriate way , they will more effec - tively form and exploit opportunities than when they ﬁ nance their businesses in context inappropri - ate ways . External bank or venture capital funding is more appropriate in discovery settings ; bootstrap - ping is more appropriate in creation settings . Marketing Marketing is an important activity for those seeking to exploit both discovery and creation opportuni - ties . However , these marketing efforts may vary sig - niﬁ cantly in their effectiveness , depending on the context within which an entrepreneur is operating . For example , entrepreneurs operating in a dis - covery context can effectively specify the product , price , distribution channel , promotion strategy , and customer service strategies they are likely to pursue . Indeed , exogenous shocks to an industry or market may have created opportunities precisely Discovery and Creation 21 Copyright © 2007 Strategic Management Society Strat . Entrepreneurship J . , 1 : 11 – 26 ( 2007 ) DOI : 10 . 1002 / sej in these marketing areas . For example , technologi - cal changes may have made it possible to change product attributes in a signiﬁ cant way ; changes in demand or production technology may have enabled an entrepreneur to lower ( or increase ) the price of the products or services it sells ; political and techno - logical changes may create new distribution oppor - tunities for an entrepreneur ; and so forth . In a creation context , these exogenous shocks to an industry or market have not occurred . Here , instead of examining how exogenous changes in an industry or market may have created opportunities in product , price , distribution , promotion , and customer service , an entrepreneur may use these attributes of the marketing mix to explore possible opportun - ities to create . For example , an entrepreneur in the creation process might alter the distribution model similar to what happened with the introduction of the internet . While not the only source of hypotheses about how to create opportunities , attributes of a marketing mix may be an important tool for generat - ing such hypotheses . Sustaining competitive advantages Finally , the effectiveness of the strategies that entre - preneurs pursue in order to sustain any competi - tive advantages they gain from their entrepreneurial activities are likely to vary signiﬁ cantly , depending on the context within which an entrepreneur oper - ates . For example , in a discovery context , informa - tion about an opportunity and how to exploit it is likely to become publicly available soon after the ﬁ rst entrepreneur is able to describe and exploit it . This will typically lead to rapid competitive imitation ( Barney , 1991 ) . Thus , if entrepreneurs are unable to erect barriers to entry into an industry ( Porter , 1980 ) , it is likely to be very difﬁ cult for entrepreneurs to sustain any competitive advantages they may have from exploiting an opportunity . This also suggests that once an entrepreneur in this setting becomes aware of an opportunity , that both the speed with which this opportunity is exploited , and the secrecy with which it is exploited , can have a signiﬁ cant impact on the proﬁ ts it generates . The erection of barriers to entry , secrecy , and speed of execution are likely to be much less com - petitively important to entrepreneurs operating in a creation context . The uncertainty in this context makes it unlikely that any potential competing entrepreneurs will know more about an opportu - nity , or will be able to collect information more effectively about an opportunity , then a particular entrepreneur . Moreover , the path dependent nature of the process of creating an opportunity is likely to generate tacit learning that entrepreneurs who have not gone through the creation process may not know ( Arthur , 1989 ; Dierickx and Cool , 1989 ) . In this sense , the very act of creating an opportunity may give an entrepreneur an advantage in sustain - ing any competitive advantages associated with that opportunity . This will be the case regardless of any barriers to entry entrepreneurs do or do not erect to protect their competitive advantages . Since such barriers are costly to create , it is unlikely that entre - preneurs operating in a creation setting will need to erect them . When entrepreneurs act to sustain their competi - tive advantages in a context appropriate way , they will more effectively form and exploit opportunities than when they sustain their competitive advantages in context inappropriate ways . Barriers to entry , speed , and secrecy are more appropriate tools for sustaining competitive advantages in discovery set - tings ; relying on path dependent tacit knowledge is a more appropriate tool in creation settings . DISCUSSION This description of discovery and creation theory has a variety of important implications . Some of these implications are discussed here . Discovery , creation and the ﬁ eld of entrepreneurship Recently , some management disciplines have been criticized for having too many theories , and not enough theoretical and empirical integration ( Hambrick , 2005 ; Pfeffer , 2005 ) . This paper sug - gests the opposite for the ﬁ eld of entrepreneur - ship . This is a ﬁ eld where only one opportunity formation and exploitation process has been sys - tematically described in the literature – discovery theory . By more fully developing a second theoreti - cal perspective – creation theory – the assumptions of both theories are made more explicit . This is likely to encourage a broader debate in the ﬁ eld of entrepreneurship . For example , discovery theory - based research has asked a variety of important empirical ques - tions about the formation and exploitation of oppor - tunities , including : ‘How do changes in an industry 22 S . A . Alvarez and J . B . Barney Copyright © 2007 Strategic Management Society Strat . Entrepreneurship J . , 1 : 11 – 26 ( 2007 ) DOI : 10 . 1002 / sej create new opportunities ? ’ ‘Are entrepreneurs that form and exploit opportunities really different than individuals who do not ? ’ and ‘How do entrepreneurs estimate the riskiness of their decisions ? ’ However , efforts to answer these discovery - inspired questions have left other questions – questions more consis - tent with creation theory – not just unanswered , but often not even asked . These questions include : ‘How does action by entrepreneurs create opportuni - ties ? ’ ‘Are differences between entrepreneurs who form and exploit opportunities and those that do not the cause , or effect , of entrepreneurial action ? ’ and ‘How can entrepreneurs use incremental , itera - tive , and inductive processes to make decisions ? ’ Early empirical efforts designed to answer some of these creation theory questions suggest signiﬁ cant potential in pursuing this line of work ( e . g . Baker and Nelson , 2005 ) . Of course , suggesting that creation theory is a logical alternative to discovery theory does not imply that discovery theory should be abandoned in favor of creation theory . Rather , future research in entrepreneurship will need to carefully examine the context under which entrepreneurs are operating . When entrepreneurs operate in a discovery context , a variety of speciﬁ c entrepreneurial actions are likely to be most effective ; when they operate in a creation context , a different set of entrepreneurial actions are likely to be most effective . By acknowledging the importance of both theories , it will be possible to begin to articulate a truly general theory of entre - preneurship ( Osigweh , 1989 ) . Creation and evolutionary theories of entrepreneurship The enactment process that is central to a creation theory of opportunity formation and exploitation can be understood as a micro - level process that underlies a broader evolutionary theory of entrepreneurship ( Nelson and Winter , 1982 ) . Indeed , in his discussion of the social psychology of enactment , Weick ( 1979 ) observes that enactment at the micro level can lead to evolutionary processes at the macro - level . Also , in their discussion of evolutionary theories of entre - preneurship , Aldrich and Ruef ( 2006 ) observe that macro organization - level evolution assumes some sort of enactment process at the micro level , of the type described by Weick ( 1979 ) . Obviously , the link between enactment , creation theory , and an evolutionary theory of entrepre - neurship is underdeveloped in the current paper . However , it does seem at least possible that cre - ation theory may ultimately provide a link between micro - level processes of enactment and macro - level processes of variation , selection , and retention . This link may be built on the informational characteristics of the settings within which entrepreneurs operate , and the impact of these settings on the relationship between entrepreneurial actions and the formation and exploitation of opportunities . Creation and resource - based theory In a similar vein , creation theory may also address another important issue in resource - based theory in the ﬁ eld of strategic management . This theory exam - ines the conditions under which heterogeneously dis - tributed and costly to copy resources and capabilities can be sources of sustained competitive advantage for ﬁ rms ( Barney , 1986 ) . While this theoretical per - spective is beginning to receive signiﬁ cant empiri - cal support ( Barney and Arikan , 2001 ) an important question in resource - based theory remains unan - swered – where do heterogeneous resources come from ( Barney , 2001 ) ? Creation theory provides one answer to this ques - tion . Under conditions of uncertainty , the enactment process can have the effect of exacerbating what were originally very small differences in the initial stages of opportunity formation to create quite sub - stantial differences over time . This may be true of the kinds of resources and capabilities an entrepre - neur and an entrepreneurial ﬁ rm accumulate over the opportunity enactment process . In this sense , enactment can create heterogeneity in resources and capabilities which , in turn , can enable some ﬁ rms to conceive of and implement strategies that other ﬁ rms can neither conceive of nor implement . Put differently , opportunity enactment may create valu - able , rare , and costly to imitate resources and capa - bilities that can then be used to implement strategies that generate sustained competitive advantage . This link between creation theory and resource - based theory points to the central role of path dependence ( Arthur , 1989 ) , in creation theory , resource - based theory , and by implication , in evo - lutionary theory and theories of the social psycho - logical enactment processes . In a sense , all these theories emphasize the importance of informa - tion and knowledge generated from the process of enacting an opportunity . As that process evolves differently for different individuals , teams , ﬁ rms , and organizations these individuals or groups may Discovery and Creation 23 Copyright © 2007 Strategic Management Society Strat . Entrepreneurship J . , 1 : 11 – 26 ( 2007 ) DOI : 10 . 1002 / sej become heterogeneous in costly to copy , and costly to reverse ways . Of course , discovery theory also includes a notion of path dependence in its analysis of the formation and exploitation of entrepreneurial opportunities . In particular , discovery theory suggests that an individ - ual’s prior knowledge and experience with an indus - try or market can enable that individual to combine information in new ways to discover opportunities that could not have been discovered by individuals without this prior knowledge or experience . While path dependence is important in both dis - covery theory and creation theory , there are impor - tant differences between these concepts as they are applied in these two theories . Path dependence in discovery theory might be thought of as ﬁ rst order path dependence : that the opportunities that are identiﬁ ed by the entrepreneur are linked to knowl - edge and information of an already existing path which inﬂ uences the actions of the entrepreneur . In this view entrepreneurs continue along an already established path . This type of ﬁ rst order path dependence also exists in creation theory . However , creation theory suggests the possibility of another type of path dependence . In this second type of path dependence , entrepre - neurial action is not only affected by an existing path through time , it can create that path ( Arthur , 1989 ) . That is , creation theory suggests that entrepreneurial action can be both dependent variable – the thing affected by the path an entrepreneur takes over time – and independent variable – the actions taken by an entrepreneur that create this path in the ﬁ rst place ( Dosi , 1984 ) . This second type of path dependence links cre - ation theory to scholars that emphasize the role of founding conditions as a blueprint that determines a ﬁ rm’s initial form and subsequent evolution ( Hannan and Freeman , 1977 ; Nelson and Winter , 1982 ) . In this sense , creation theory suggests that a ﬁ rm’s founding conditions may themselves be the result of actions that entrepreneurs take to form and exploit an opportunity . Indeed , it may be in these early actions of the entrepreneur that the seeds of an organization’s future form are sown . Creation and the theory of the ﬁ rm While much of this paper assumes the individual as the unit of analysis , certainly the business pro - cesses identiﬁ ed can be scaled to the group , ﬁ rm , or organization . In this sense the identiﬁ cation of creation theory may ultimately have implications for research on the theory of the ﬁ rm ( Alvarez and Barney , 2005 ) . Currently popular theories of the ﬁ rm – including transactions cost economics ( Wil - liamson , 1975 , 1985 ) and incomplete contract theory ( Hart and Moore , 1988 ) adopt the assumption that at the time a ﬁ rm is created , parties to this exchange can either estimate the relative value of transaction speciﬁ c investments they must make to complete an exchange ( for transactions cost theory ) or esti - mate who has the most to gain from that exchange ( for incomplete contract theory ) . Of course , in the uncertainty conditions described in creation theory , it is unlikely that those contemplating the found - ing of an entrepreneurial ﬁ rm will be able to know this information , especially early in the opportunity enactment process . In such settings , is it necessary to found entre - preneurial ﬁ rms ? And if the answer to this question is yes , then how is this done – when the value of speciﬁ c investments and who has the most to gain from an exchange cannot be known . It may be nec - essary to identify different bases for creating ﬁ rms when entrepreneurs seek to create ﬁ rms in a creation context . ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS The athors would like to thank Howard Aldrich , David Audretsch , Jean Bartunek , Joe Mahoney , Stuart Hart , Harry Sapienza , Mark Shanley , and the Max Planck Institute for comments on this paper . We would also like to thank our colleagues at the Fisher College of Business who listened to discussions about Discovery and Creation at every lunch , particularly David Green - berger , Steve Mangum , and Michael Leiblein . Special thanks go to Ph . D . student Janice Molloy who is a life - saver . Finally , we would like to thank Dan Schendel for his insights into the paper and his conﬁ dence in us as authors , and Mike Hitt , who has always encouraged both of us to pursue interesting questions . REFERENCES Admati AR , Pﬂ eiderer P . 1994 . Robust ﬁ nancial contracting and the role of venture capitalists . Journal of Finance 49 ( 2 ) : 371 – 402 . Aldrich HE , Kenworthy AL . 1999 . The accidental entrepre - neur : Campbellian antinomies and organizational found - ings . In Variations in Organization Science : In Honor of Donald T . Campbell , Baum JAC , McKelvey B ( eds ) . Sage : Thousand Oaks , CA ; 19 – 33 . 24 S . A . Alvarez and J . B . Barney Copyright © 2007 Strategic Management Society Strat . Entrepreneurship J . , 1 : 11 – 26 ( 2007 ) DOI : 10 . 1002 / sej Aldrich HE , Ruef M . 2006 . Organizations Evolving ( 2nd edn ) . Sage : Thousand Oaks , CA . Alvarez SA , Barney J . 2005 . How entrepreneurs organize ﬁ rms under conditions of uncertainty . Journal of Man - agement 31 ( 5 ) : 776 – 793 . Arrow KJ . 1974 . The Limits of Organization . W . W . Norton : New York . Arthur WB . 1989 . Competing technologies , increasing returns , and lock - in by historical events . Economic Journal 99 ( 394 ) : 116 – 131 . Azevedo J . 2002 . Updating organizational epistemology . In Companion to Organizations , Baum JAC ( ed ) . Blackwell Publishers Ltd : Oxford ; 715 – 732 . Baeyens K , Manigart S . 2003 . Dynamic ﬁ nancing strate - gies : the role of venture capital . Journal of Private Equity 7 ( 1 ) : 50 – 58 . Baker T , Nelson R . 2005 . Creating something from nothing : resource construction through entrepreneurial bricolage . Administrative Science Quarterly 50 : 329 – 366 . Balakrishnan S , Wernerfelt B . 1986 . Technical change , competition and vertical integration . Strategic Manage - ment Journal 7 ( 4 ) : 347 – 360 . Barney J . 1991 . Firm resources and sustained competitive advantage . Journal of Management 17 ( 1 ) : 99 – 120 . Barney JB . 1986 . Strategic factor markets : expectations , luck , and business strategy . Management Science 32 ( 10 ) : 1231 – 1241 . Barney JB . 2001 . Is the resource - based ‘view’ a useful perspective for strategic management research ? Yes . Academy of Management Review 26 ( 1 ) : 41 – 56 . Barney JB , Arikan A . 2001 . The resource - based view : origins and implications . In The Blackwell Handbook of Strate - gic Managment , Hitt M , Freeman RE , Harrison J ( eds ) . Blackwell Publishers : Malden , MA ; 124 – 188 . Berger PL , Luckmann T . 1967 . The Social Construction of Reality . A Treatise in the Sociology of Knowledge . Anchor Books Doubleday : Garden City , NY . Bergmann G . 1957 . Philosophy of Science . University of Wisconsin Press : Madison , WI . Bhide A . 1992 . Bootstrap ﬁ nance : the art of start - ups . Harvard Business Review 70 ( 6 ) : 109 – 117 . Bhide A . 1999 . How Entrepreneurs Craft Strategies That Work . Harvard Business School Press : Boston , MA Brealey R , Myers S . 1988 . Principles of Corporate Finance . McGraw - Hill : New York . Brett MP . 2004 . If you fail to plan , do you plan to fail ? Academy of Management Executive 18 ( 4 ) : 156 – 157 . Busenitz LW , Barney JB . 1997 . Differences between entrepreneurs and managers in large organizations : biases and heuristics in strategic decision making . Journal of Business Venturing 12 ( 1 ) : 9 – 30 . Campbell DT . 1960 . Blind variation and selective reten - tion in creative thought as in other knowledge processes . Psychological Review 67 ( 6 ) : 380 – 400 . Casson M . 1982 . The Entrepreneur : An Economic Theory ( 2nd edn ) . Edward Elgar : Oxford . Casson M . 2003 . Entrepreneurship , business culture and the theory of the ﬁ rm . In Handbook of Entrepreneurship Research : An Interdisciplinary Survey and Introduction , Acs ZJ , Audretsch DB ( eds ) . Kluwer Academic Publish - ers : Dordrecht , Netherlands ; 223 – 246 . Choi YB . 1993 . Paradigms and Conventions : Uncertainty , Decision Making and Entrepreneurship . University of Michigan Press : Ann Arbor , MI . Christensen CM , Anthony SD , Roth EA . 2004 . Seeing What’s Next . Harvard Business School Press : Boston , MA . Cyert RM , March JG . 1963 . A Behavioral Theory of the Firm . Prentice Hall : Englewood Cliffs , NJ . Delmar F , Shane S . 2003 . Does business planning facilitate the development of new ventures ? Strategic Management Journal 24 ( 12 ) : 1165 – 1185 . Delmar F , Shane S . 2004 . Legitimating ﬁ rst : organizing activities and the survival of new ventures . Journal of Business Venturing 19 : 385 – 410 . Dequech D . 2003 . Uncertainty and economic sociology . American Journal of Economics & Sociology 62 ( 3 ) : 509 . Dierickx I , Cool K . 1989 . Asset stock accumulation and sustainability of competitive advantage . Management Science 35 : 1504 – 1511 . DiMaggio P , Powell W . 1983 . The iron cage revisited : institutional isomorphism and collective rationality in organizational ﬁ elds . American Sociological Review 48 : 147 – 160 . Dosi G . 1984 . Technical Change and Industrial Transfor - mation . St . Martins Press : New York . Dosi G . 1988 . Sources , procedures , and microeconomic effects of innovation . Journal of Economic Literature 26 ( 4 ) : 1120 – 1171 . Dunning D , Heath C , Suls JM . 2004 . Flawed self - assessment . Psychological Sciences in the Public Interest 5 ( 3 ) : 69 – 106 . Etzioni A . 1963 . The epigenesis of political communities at the international level . American Journal of Sociology 68 ( 4 ) : 407 – 421 . Gaglio CM , Katz JA . 2001 . The psychological basis of opportunity identiﬁ cation : entrepreneurial alertness . Small Business Economics 16 ( 2 ) : 95 – 111 . Gartner WB . 1985 . A conceptual framework for describing the phenomenon of new venture creation . Academy of Management Review 10 : 696 – 706 . Hambrick DC . 2005 . Just how bad are our theories ? A response to Ghoshal . Academy of Management Learning & Education 4 ( 1 ) : 104 . Hannan MT , Freeman J . 1977 . The population ecology of oganizations . American Journal of Sociology 82 : 50 – 73 . Hart O , Moore J . 1988 . Incomplete contracts and renegotia - tion . Econometrica 56 ( 4 ) : 755 – 786 . Hayward M , Shepherd DA , Grifﬁ n D . 2006 . A hubris theory of entrepreneurship . Management Science 52 ( 1 ) : 160 – 172 . Discovery and Creation 25 Copyright © 2007 Strategic Management Society Strat . Entrepreneurship J . , 1 : 11 – 26 ( 2007 ) DOI : 10 . 1002 / sej Herzberg F . 1976 . The Managerial Choice : To be Efﬁ - cient and to be Human . Dow - Jones - Irwin : Homewood , IL . Kirzner I . 1973 . Competition and Entrepeneurship . University of Chicago Press : Chicago , IL , and London . Kirzner IM . 1997 . Entrepreneurial discovery and the com - petitive market process : an Austrian approach . Journal of Economic Literature 35 ( 1 ) : 60 – 85 . Knight FH . 1921 . Risk , Uncertainty and Proﬁ t . Houghton Mifﬂ in : New York . Kogut B . 1991 . Joint ventures and the option to expand and acquire . Management Science 37 : 19 – 33 . Kuratko DF . 1991 . Demystifying the business plan process : an introductory guide . Small Business Forum , Winter ( 3 ) : 33 – 40 . Langlois RN , Cosgel MM . 1993 . Frank Knight on risk , uncertainty , and the ﬁ rm : a new interpretation . Economic Inquiry 31 ( 3 ) : 456 – 465 . Lesser A . 1935 . Functionalism in social anthropology . American Anthropologist 37 : 386 – 393 . Levinthal D . 1997 . Adaptation on rugged landscapes . Man - agement Science 43 ( 7 ) : 934 – 950 . Loasby BJ . 2002 . The organizational basis of cognition and the cognitive basis of organization . In The Economics of Choice , Change and Organization , Essays in Memory of Richard M . Cyert , Augier M , March JG ( eds ) . Edward Elgar : Cheltenham , UK ; 147 – 167 . Low MB , MacMillan IC . 1988 . Entrepreneurship : past research and future challenges . Journal of Management 14 ( 2 ) : 139 – 161 . March JG . 1991 . Exploration and exploitation in organizational learning . Organization Science 2 ( 1 ) : 71 – 87 . March JG , Simon HA . 1958 . Organizations . John Wiley : New York . Maslow A . 1943 . A theory of human motivation . Psycho - logical Review 50 : 370 – 396 . McClelland D . 1961 . The Achieving Society . Van Nostrand : Princeton , NJ . McKelvey B . 1999 . Toward a Campbellian realist organization science . In Variations in Organization Science : In Honor of Donald T . Campbell , Baum J , McKewey B ( eds ) . Sage : Thousand Oaks , CA ; 383 – 411 . Milgrom P , Roberts J . 1992 . Economics , Organization & Management . Prentice Hall : Englewood Cliffs , NJ . Miller KD . 2007 . Risk and rationality in entrepreneur - ial processes . Strategic Entrepreneurship Journal 1 ( 1 – 2 ) . Mintzberg H . 1994 . The Rise and Fall of Strategic Planning . Free Press : Boston , MA . Mosakowski E . 1997 . Strategy making under causal ambiguity : conceptual issues and empirical evidence . Organization Science 8 ( 4 ) : 414 – 442 . Nagal E . 1961 . The Structure of Science . Harcourt , Brace & World . : New York . Nelson R , Winter S . 1982 . An Evolutionary Theory of Economic Change . Belknap Press : Cambridge , MA . Osigweh CA . 1989 . Concept falibility in organizational science . Academy of Management Review 14 ( 4 ) : 579 – 594 . Parsons T . 1951 . The Social System . Free Press : New York . Parsons T , Shils E . 1962 . Toward a General Theory of Action . Harvard University Press : Cambridge , MA . Pfeffer J . 2005 . Why do bad management theories persist ? A comment on Ghoshal . Academy of Management Learn - ing & Education 4 ( 1 ) : 96 – 100 . Porter ME . 1980 . Competitive Strategy . Free Press : New York . Romanelli E . 1991 . The evolution of new organiza - tional forms . American Review of Sociology 17 : 79 – 103 . Sapienza HJ , Gupta AK . 1994 . Impact of agency risks and task uncertainty on venture capitalist - CEO interac - tion . Academy of Management Journal 37 ( 6 ) : 1618 – 1632 . Sarasvathy SD . 2001 . Causation and effectuation : toward a theoretical shift from economic inevitability to entrepre - neurial contingency . Academy of Management Review 26 ( 2 ) : 243 – 263 . Schoemaker PJH . 1995 . Scenario planning : a tool for strategic thinking . Sloan Management Review 36 ( 2 ) : 25 – 40 . Schumpeter JA . 1934 . Theory of Economic Development : An Inquiry into Proﬁ ts , Capital , Credit , Interest and the Business Cycle . Harvard University Press : Cambridge , MA . Schumpeter JA . 1939 . Business Cycles . A Theoretical , His - torical , and Statistical Analysis of the Capitalist Process . McGraw - Hill : New York . Scott WR . 2001 . Institutions and Organizations . ( 2nd edn ) . Sage : Thousand Oaks , CA . Shane S . 2000 . Prior knowledge and the discovery of entrepreneurial opportunities . Organization Science 11 ( 4 ) : 448 – 470 . Shane S . 2003 . A General Theory of Entrepreneurship . The Individual - opportunity Nexus . Edward Elgar : Northampton , MA . Shane S , Delmar F . 2004 . Planning for the market : busi - ness planning before marketing and the continuation of organizing efforts . Journal of Business Venturing 19 ( 6 ) : 767 – 785 . Shane S , Venkataraman S . 2000 . The promise of entrepre - neurship as a ﬁ eld of research . Academy of Management Review 25 ( 1 ) : 217 . Shepherd DA , McMullen JS , Jennings PD . 2007 . The for - mation of opportunity beliefs : overcoming ignorance and reducing doubt . Strategic Entrepreneurship Journal 1 ( 1 – 2 ) . 26 S . A . Alvarez and J . B . Barney Copyright © 2007 Strategic Management Society Strat . Entrepreneurship J . , 1 : 11 – 26 ( 2007 ) DOI : 10 . 1002 / sej Venkataraman S . 2003 . Foreword . In A General Theory of Entrepreneurship . The Individual - Opportunity Nexus , Shane S ( ed ) . Edward Elgar : Northampton , MA ; xi – xii . Weber M . 1903 . The Methodology of the Social Sciences . Free Press : New York . Weick KE . 1979 . The Social Psychology of Organizing . Addison - Wesley : Reading , MA . Wernerfelt B , Karnani A . 1987 . Competitive strategy under uncertainty . Strategic Management Journal 8 ( 2 ) : 187 – 194 . Williamson OE . 1975 . Markets and Hierarchies : Analysis and Antitrust Implications . Free Press : New York . Williamson OE . 1985 . The Economic Institutions of Capi - talism . Free Press : New York .