Supplementary Information for Kinetic schemes for post ‐ synchronized single molecule dynamics Chunlai Chen , Michael J . Greenberg , Joseph M . Laakso , E . Michael Ostap , Yale E . Goldman , and Henry Shuman We provide a program to simulate post ‐ synchronized ensemble averages as described in our accompanying paper . Our intention is to provide readers with ( a ) an interactive tool to simulate the specific biological examples provided in the paper , and ( b ) a simple program that is useful for modeling post ‐ synchronized averages for their unique experimental systems . The program is designed to run in MATLAB version 7 . 5 . 0 or later . Two files are required to run the program ( * . m and * . fig ) , and we provide two versions of each file that implement the program with rate constants and amplitudes for simulation of the data provided in Figures 1 and 2 . The detailed schemes used for the simulations can be found in Fig . S2 . Installing and running the program : 1 . Place both postsynch _ XXX . fig and postsynch _ XXX . m in the same directory ( XXX is either ribosome or myosin , depending on which case you want to simulate ) . 2 . Open MATLAB . 3 . Open postsynch _ XXX . m . Press the green run button ( or F5 ) to initialize the program . Simulating synchronized ensemble averages : 1 . To simulate the synchronized ensemble averages for a given kinetic scheme , enter the transition rate constants into the transition matrix . For example , in the reaction c → d , the rate of transition would be entered in the box in column 3 , row 4 . * * * For the purposes of this simulation , each enzymatic cycle is assumed to be isolated from previous or subsequent cycles . Each such cycle in an experimental trace is denoted “an event” . Isolation of events is accomplished by requiring reactions to terminate in a “Separator State” . To properly isolate single molecule events , the transition rates out of the Separator State must be made much slower than the slowest non ‐ zero transition rate . This restriction for the MATLAB program does not apply to the procedure and equations in the main text . * * * Note , this program requires all 5 programmed states to be populated in the simulation . If you wish to simulate a model that requires fewer than 5 states , you will need to create “virtual” states that : a . have amplitudes equal to the final state in your model , b . have exit transition rates that are much faster than the fastest real transition rate in the cycle , c . have exit ( or backwards ) rates from each virtual state that are irreversible . Fulfilling these three criteria will ensure that these virtual states will not contribute appreciably to the final solution , but will enable the program to run without changing the internal code . 2 . To set the amplitude of each state ( i . e . , the fluorescence level or the step size ) , enter the amplitude of each state in the boxes labeled State a , State b , etc . 3 . Select the transitions to be used for synchronization of the time ‐ forward and time ‐ reversed averages . For example , in the case of myosin , the time ‐ forward averages would be synchronized by the transition into AM . ADP ( State a ) and the time ‐ reversed averages would be synchronized by the ( forward ) transition out of AM ( State b , c or d [ the latter two being virtual states ] ) . 4 . In the " Value for Extensions of Time ‐ Forward Averages , " set the value of the extensions used to compute the ensemble time ‐ forward averages ( i . e . , the ensemble averages that are synchronized at the event beginnings ) . This is usually the amplitude of the final state before the Separator State . For example , when the synchronized time ‐ forward averages for myosin ( Fig . S2 ) are synchronized on the transition into the AM . ADP state , the extensions would be equal to the amplitude of the AM state ( State c ) . In special cases , the extension does not need to be equal to the final event state . Similar guidelines apply for picking the value for extensions of the time ‐ reversed averages . If the events are synchronized on the ( forward ) transition from AM to M . ATP , the extensions would have the amplitude of the AM . ADP state ( State a ) . For reactions containing an equilibrium between states with different amplitudes ( such as in case of the ribosome ( Fig . S2 ) ) , the amplitude of the extension is given by the weighted average of the amplitudes of the equilibrated states . 5 . Select the total amount of time plotted . 6 . Press simulate . The ensemble averages , as well as the mole fractions of the intermediate states will appear . * * * Check the eigenvalues of the system . If the eigenvalues are degenerate ( i . e . , 2 or more eigenvalues have the same value ) or imaginary , then the linear algebraic solution used in this simulation is not well defined . In this case , the user might need to use a differential equation solver . 7 . To save the output ( i . e . , the time ‐ forward averages , time ‐ reversed averages , and reaction intermediates ) , enter the full destination path , followed by the file name and the extension . xls ( e . g . C : \ Synchronized files \ output . xls will generate a file named output . xls in the Synchronized files folder ) . The file is readable in Excel with text headings for each column . * * * Note , you must press simulate before you can save the output . Troubleshooting and Tips : General tip : If the program does not run , check the main MATLAB console to see if an error occurred . 1 . The ensemble averages look incorrect .  Ensure that the transition rates out of the Separator State are much slower than the slowest non ‐ zero transition rate .  Ensure that there is at least one finite entry and exit transition ‐ rate into and out of each state .  Check the eigenvalues . If the eigenvalues are imaginary or degenerate , then the linear algebraic solution used in this simulation is not well defined .  Check that the extensions are chosen as described above . 2 . Simulation files are not saved .  Check the path name . Ensure that the path is complete and that the file name ends with the extension “ . xls” .  Make sure that you press simulate before pressing save .  Users have reported difficulty saving files using networked versions of MATLAB . The cause of this problem is unknown and a solution is not currently available . Use a single ‐ user version . 3 . If you want to probe substeps before the final transition in the event :  Set the amplitudes of all states after the desired transition and the extension to the same value as the state after the probed transition 4 . If you want to model more or fewer states .  To probe more states , the user will need to expand the program .  To probe fewer states , create virtual states with amplitudes equal to the final state . If the transition rates from these states are much faster than the fastest transition rate in the reaction cycle ( and irreversible ) , they will not be significantly populated in the solution . Figure S2 : Schemes used in computer simulations for the ribosome and myosin . The state names are shown in parentheses and the transition rates are listed above the arrows . Note that the simulation of myosin required the creation of two virtual states , as described in the supplemental text above .