Use of a Quantitative Research Ontology in e - Science Hajo Rijgersberg 1 , Jan Top 12 , Marcel Meinders 13 1 Agrotechnology & Food Sciences Group , Wageningen University and Research Centre , P . O . Box 17 , NL - 6700 AA Wageningen , The Netherlands { Hajo . Rijgersberg , Jan . Top , Marcel . Meinders } @ wur . nl 2 Department of Computer Science , Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam , De Boelelaan 1081A , NL - 1081 HV Amsterdam , The Netherlands 3 Top Institute Food and Nutrition , P . O . Box 557 , NL - 6700 AN Wageningen , The Netherlands Abstract This paper makes initial steps towards an ontology of quantitative research , in support of computer - aided scientific research . It identifies some key elements of the quantitative research process , outlines an ideal workflow , identifies further requirements and discusses how some of these aspects can be implemented for e - science . An implementation is sketched in which objects are related to the ontology and in which processes in the ontology can be initiated on objects . In addition , we report the application of an ontology of units of measure and related concepts , constituting a part of the concepts required in an ontology of quantitative research , in a unit and dimension consistency checking service , an example of a quantitative research service . Introduction Quantitative research is the scientific investigation of phenomena and their properties and relationships using quantitative concepts such as numbers , measurement scales , units of measure , mathematical operations , tables , graphs , etc . The objective of quantitative research is to develop and employ mathematical models , theories , and hypotheses about real - life phenomena . Quantitative research is widely used in many scientific disciplines , such as physics , biology , sociology , and psychology . The process of measurement is central to quantitative research as it provides the connection between empirical observation and mathematical expression of the quantitative relationships . Information technology is intensively used in quantitative research , for making calculations , i . e . , numerical operations on quantitative information , and storing quantitative information . In a world of ever - increasing scientific knowledge , the development of advanced services to scientific research is getting more and more important . A special field within computer science engages this subject : e - science . Copyright © 2008 , Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence ( www . aaai . org ) . All rights reserved . One of the huge problems in quantitative research is the difficulty of reusing quantitative information . Generally , this kind of information ( experimental data , mathematical equations , programming code , data files , graphs , etc . ) is difficult to find , interpret , and execute ( Top 2003 ) . For example , the desired information can not be found because the quantities that are searched for are not mentioned as such in the sources , it is not clear which units of measure belong to the numbers , or a model can not be executed because it is not in a suitable format . An important underlying problem is the lack of suitable quantitative vocabulary in information systems ( Top 2003 ) . It has been argued that conventional computer languages are not suitable for specifying scientific knowledge ( Krishnamurthy and Smith 1994 ) . Models are usually expressed using programming code , which represents an impoverished version of the scientific information ( Keller and Dungan 1999 ) . Data are specified in text files and spreadsheets , in relatively free formats , or in databases , in rigid formats . Describing information generally remains at the level of informal comments or journal papers which are only loosely coupled with the quantitative information , requiring due consideration by authors and readers of these models and data . As far as we are aware , no extensive research has been done into requirements to quantitative research vocabulary . In this paper , we investigate these requirements and make initial steps towards an ontology which realizes this vocabulary . We identify some key elements of the quantitative research process , outline an ideal workflow and discuss how some of these aspects can be implemented for e - science . An implementation is sketched in which objects are related to the ontology and in which processes in the ontology can be initiated on objects . In addition , we report on the application of an ontology of units of measure and related concepts , such as quantities and dimensions , in a unit and dimension consistency checking service . Units of measure and related concepts constitute a part of the concepts that are required in an ontology of quantitative research . We illustrate our argument with a study of creaminess of mayonnaises and custards . Concerns about obesity has led to increased interest in reducing fat or oil contents of foods . This is difficult as oil contents plays an important role in the perceived creaminess of many products ( De Wijk and Prinz 2007 ) . Therefore , the aim of this study was to better control the creaminess in such products . To this end , first creaminess had to be understood , on the basis of panel research , and subsequently relations with material properties and parameters that affect creaminess , such as rheological / mechanical properties under deformation such as viscosity and stress / shear moduli , had to be found , determined by instrumental measurements . Overall Structure of the Quantitative Research Process Quantitative research is generally approached using scientific methods and is considered to follow a structural , often iterative process whereby evidence is evaluated , theories and hypotheses are refined , technical advances are made , and so on . Figure 1 shows an overall structure of quantitative research , based on e . g . Gauch ( 2003 ) and Langley ( 2000 ) . First ( 1 ) , a research question is formulated , based on existing knowledge reported in text and . A research question is usually an open statement , which will be further specified by hypotheses . The research question in our research example was “Which factors control sensory creaminess of mayonnaise ? ” . In ( 2 ) , qualitative concepts are defined , such as mayonnaise , different kinds of mayonnaises , e . g . , commercial mayonnaises and specially prepared mayonnaises , and ingredients like oil and egg yolk . ( 3 ) Quantitative concepts are defined in order to be able to measure the studied phenomena and to quantify the relations between them . Examples of quantitative concepts are oil content , creaminess , and viscosity . Next ( 4 ) , the hypotheses are formulated . One hypothesis in our research example was : “Fat controls sensory creaminess” . ( 5 ) The studied phenomena are modeled and available data and models are collected from literature . The aim of any research project is to support or reject a hypothesis . This is generally done by deriving a hypothetical “fact” from the hypothesis ( 6 ) , such as in our research example : “Fat controls the sensory creaminess of these six mayonnaise samples” . Subsequently such a fact is compared with available or newly obtained data or models . For this purpose , often experiments are performed ( 7 ) . The studied phenomenon is carefully realized , often using a laboratory ( 8 ) . In our research example , different mayonnaise samples were prepared , with differences in oil content . Subsequently , the phenomena of interest are observed or measured ( 9 ) . The creaminess of the mayonnaise samples was tested using a trained sensory panel . Next ( 10 ) , the obtained data are processed , using statistical methods or model simulations . Creaminess was related to oil content using principal component analysis , a mathematical method that transforms a number of possibly correlated variables into a ( smaller ) number of uncorrelated variables . Finally , the processed data or models are compared with the hypothesis , which is subsequently considered to be supported , rejected , or revised ( 11 ) . In our research example , the hypothesis was considered to be supported based on the result that oil content explained more than 98 % of the variance of creaminess . ( 12 ) The obtained new knowledge is generalized ( the relation also applies to other foods ) , ( 13 ) described in text , and ( 14 ) reproduced by others . Not only phenomena from the real world can be subject to research , but also aspects of research itself . One such aspect is peer review . Peer review processes relate to performed research steps which are evaluated . Another aspect is method evaluation . New methods are evaluated by checking whether they have successfully led to valid Figure 1 . Overall structure of the quantitative research process . Ellipses indicate research steps , rectangles real - world phenomena and knowledge statements , and arrows input / output relations . knowledge statements or by comparison with ( results obtained by ) existing methods . This framework is not the only way to categorize scientific activity , but it appears to have general applicability in discussing the current computer support of quantitative research processes and can be used as a basis for a sketch of quantitative e - science infrastructure , as we will show below . In daily practice , research steps will be omitted , repeated , performed in different orders , etc . The ultimate model of scientific research is still subject of debate in the disciplines epistemology and philosophy of science . Computer Support of the Quantitative Research Process So Far In this section we briefly discuss the computer support of quantitative research processes so far . Existing computer systems for the support of ( quantitative ) research processes or the storage of quantitative information include : • Problem Solving Environments ( PSE ) • Decision Support Systems ( DSS ) • Data and Information Systems ( DIS ) • Laboratory Information Management Systems ( LIMS ) and Laboratory Information Systems ( LIS ) A PSE is a specialized computer system for solving special classes of problems . A DSS aids the process of decision making , where a decision is a choice between alternatives based on estimates of the values of those alternatives ( Alter 1980 , Finlay 1994 ) . DISs are advanced computer systems that contain large amounts of data and calculation methods . In LIMSs and LISs , samples , instruments , laboratory users and functions such as invoicing , plate management and workflow automation are supported . The list above is not exhaustive , but characterizes the diversity in computer support of research processes . The various systems cover different parts of the quantitative research process as shown in Figure 1 . Since computer systems usually have their own vocabulary , restricted to their own scope , quantitative research is not specified in an integrated way . For example , it is not possible to indicate how a certain piece of knowledge was obtained , e . g . , by measurement , analysis , or hypothesis formulation . This is considered to be a problem for the transparency of research in general and interpreting the validity of knowledge statements in particular . The Semantic Web ( W3C 2006 ) offers the possibility to define vocabulary externally from the computer systems that intend to use the vocabulary . This is accomplished by using languages such as XML , RDF and OWL ( W3C 2007 , W3C 2004 ) . The use of standard formats and vocabulary is an important prerequisite for sharing vocabulary across multiple computer systems and platforms and , therefore , for reusing quantitative information . Outline of a Quantitative e - Science Infrastructure The previous section discussed that integrated support and vocabulary of quantitative research is currently lacking . In this section , we make initial steps towards an ontology of quantitative research , which realizes the desired Figure 2 . Sketch of a quantitative e - science implementation . A real - world phenomenon , “Ma - series mayonnaise” , is selected . vocabulary , based on the framework shown in Figure 1 . We sketch an implementation for e - science in which objects are related to the ontology and processes in the ontology can be initiated on objects . Figure 2 shows a screenshot of the implementation . In the left pane , ( an excerpt of ) a quantitative research taxonomy is shown . The root classes “Real - world phenomenon” , “Statement” , and “Scientific reasoning” can be identified . “Real - world phenomenon” defines the studied phenomena ( qualitative concepts such as mayonnaises and ingredients ) and quantitative , metrological aspects of these phenomena ( e . g . , oil content and viscosity ) . The samples that are used in the lab experiments are defined as instances of leaf classes of “Real - world phenomenon” such as “Ma - series mayonnaise” and “Mb - series mayonnaise” . Examples of such instances are “Ma03 mayonnaise” and “Ma04 mayonnaise” . The right pane shows details of the concept that is selected . For instance , for the class “Ma - series mayonnaise” the name , description and a table of ingredients that are used in preparing the samples are shown . The first two details are implemented as triples , the latter ( the table of ingredients ) is an instance of “Statement” which refers to the selected concept or subclasses or instances of the selected concept . Knowledge statements , typically , are data in the form of tables and models in the form of ( lists of ) equations . These equations contain all kinds of mathematical operations , such as multiplications , exponentiations , etc . In Figure 1 , examples of statements are hypotheses , models , assumptions , and data , shown in the rectangles . The class “Scientific reasoning” , Figure 3 , defines methods and operations that are performed on the real - world phenomena and statements . Some research steps in Figure 1 represent such scientific reasoning steps , such as “4 . Formulate hypothesis” , “9 . Perform measurements” , and “10 . Process / simulate” . Figure 3 depicts an instance of a mean calculation method , “Mean per over” . The input properties of the method are restricted such that the operation can be performed ( i . e . , the calculation routine can be executed ) . The properties “Input table” , “Per” and “Over” are specified to , respectively , a table of measurements , the class “Model mayonnaise” , and some objects that we wish to calculate the mean over , namely “Replicate” , “Judge” , and “Presentation position” . Pushing on the “Evaluate” button generates a new output table . This new table is automatically stored – or rather defined – as a new statement in the ontology . As subclasses of “Scientific reasoning” classes like “Measurement” , “Hypothesis formulation” , “Assumption formulation” , “Generalization” , “Induction” , “Deduction” , “Literature reference” and “Peer review” are defined in the ontology . To be able to rate quantitative statements originated from calculations , it is sometimes important to know which calculation routine of which software package was used . Therefore , an ontology of quantitative research should contain knowledge about systems , functions , services , etc . Usually , calculation methods in the ontology will be wrappers around external calculation algorithms . In addition , calculation algorithms can be represented in the ontology itself , as the ontology contains a mathematical branch . Figure 3 . A scientific reasoning operation , “Mean per Ma - series or Mb - series mayonnaise over replicate , judge and presentation position” , is selected . Application of an Ontology of Units of Measure and Related Concepts in a Unit and Dimension Consistency Checking Service Units of measure and related concepts , such as quantities and dimensions , constitute a part of the concepts required in an ontology of quantitative research concepts . In earlier work ( Rijgersberg and Top 2008 ) , we constructed an ontology of units of measure and related concepts ( OUM 1 ) . Unit and dimension consistency checking is an example of a quantitative research service . In our mayonnaise study for example , it is important to check the units of models that express relations between , for instance , viscosity and oil contents . Especially contents quantities can be expressed by various units of measure , such as percentages , g / ml , mol / m 3 , etc . Korotkiy and Top ( 2007 ) applied OUM in a unit and dimension consistency checking service . The concepts unit of measure , quantity , and dimension – among others defined in the ontology – were used for this purpose . In 1 Ontology of Units of Measure and related concepts . The ontology can be freely downloaded from : http : / / www . atoapps . nl / foodinformatics , Sec . “News” . OUM , each quantity has a dimension and one or more units of measure , by means of which it can be expressed . The user specifies a mathematical expression and for each variable assigns a unit of measure from the ontology . Subsequently , the service collects the quantities that are related to these units of measure from the ontology and , from these quantities , the related dimensions . Then , the service evaluates the expression according its unit and dimension consistency . The service appears to work well . Korotkiy and Top reported that the only problem they faced during their initial attempts , was the difficulty to access domain knowledge expressed using class restrictions in OWL . The relations between quantities and units of measure are expressed this way in the ontology . Conclusion In this paper , we made initial steps towards an ontology of quantitative research , in support of e - science . We identified some key elements of the quantitative research process , outlined a workflow , identified further requirements and discussed how some of these aspects can be implemented in e - science infrastructure . An implementation was sketched in which objects are related to the ontology and in which processes in the ontology can Figure 4 . Unit and dimension consistency checking service . be initiated on objects . In addition , we reported the application of an ontology of units of measure and related concepts , constituting a part of the concepts that are required in an ontology of quantitative research , in a unit and dimension consistency checking service , an example of a quantitative research service . We concluded that integrated vocabulary of quantitative research processes is currently lacking in information systems . Such vocabulary is required for the advanced computer support of quantitative research . An ontology of quantitative research is a possible realization of this vocabulary . We showed that quantitative e - science can be structured around an ontology of quantitative research . The required vocabulary should include real - world phenomena , statements , and scientific reasoning . Especially the latter is important for the transparency of research in general and interpreting the validity of scientific knowledge statements in particular . A quantitative e - science infrastructure should be an intermediate between existing systems , functions and services . To this end , a quantitative research ontology should contain knowledge about systems , functions and services . In such an ontology , operations should be regarded as instances of methods , with their input properties restricted such that they can be carried out ( e . g . , calculation methods be executed ) . Future work should focus on the implementation of quantitative vocabulary in an ontology and the application of such an ontology in advanced services which have to be developed . We are only beginning to design , implement and use ontologies of science in e - science . As more developers realize the need for collective and independent vocabulary and its use in research supporting systems , we will see a huge increase in advanced support of research processes . Acknowledgements This work was carried out within the context of the Virtual Laboratory for e - Science ( VL - e ) project ( www . vl - e . nl ) , subprogram Food Informatics . This project is supported by a BSIK grant from the Dutch Ministry of Education , Culture and Science ( OCW ) and is part of the ICT innovation program of the Ministry of Economic Affairs ( EZ ) . Additional funding was obtained from the Dutch Ministry of Agriculture ( LNV ) . We would like to thank Jeen Broekstra , Roelfina Idema , Maksym Korotkiy , Suzan van Wezel and the anonymous reviewer gratefully for their valuable comments and reflections . References Alter , S . L . 1980 . Decision Support Systems : Current Practice and Continuing Challenges . Reading , Mass . : Addison - Wesley Pub . De Wijk , R . A . , and Prinz , J . F . 2007 . Fatty versus creamy sensations for custard desserts , white sauces , and mayonnaises . Food Quality and Preference 18 : 641 - 650 . Finlay , P . N . 1994 . Introducing Decision Support Systems . Oxford , UK : NCC Blackwell ; Cambridge , Mass . : Blackwell Publishers . Gauch , H . G . 2003 . Scientific Method in Practice . Cambridge University Press . Hey , T . , and Trefethen , A . 2005 . Cyberinfrastructure for e - Science . Science 308 : 817 - 821 , doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 1110410 . Keller , R . M . , and Dungan , J . L . 1999 . Meta - Modeling : a Knowledge - Based Approach to Facilitating Process Model Construction and Reuse . Ecological Modelling 119 : 89 - 116 . Korotkiy , M . , and Top , J . L . 2007 . Blackboard - style Service Composition with Onto (cid:219) SOA . In IADIS International Conference WWW / Internet 2007 . Villa Real , Portugal . Krishnamurthy , M . V . , and Smith , F . J . 1994 . Integration of Scientific Data and Formulae in an Object - Oriented Knowledge - Based System . Knowledge - Based Systems 7 ( 2 ) . Langley , P . 2000 . The computational support of scientific discovery . Int . J . Human - Computer Studies 53 : 393 - 410 . Rijgersberg , H . , and Top , J . L . 2008 . Ontologies of units of measure . Forthcoming . Stevens , S . S . 1946 . On the Theory of Scales of Measurement . Science 103 . Top , J . L . 2003 . Food Informatics . Kokkerellen met modellen . Amsterdam : VU Boekhandel / Uitgeverij . W3C . 2007 . Resource Description Framework ( RDF ) . World Wide Web Consortium ( W3C ) . Available at : http : / / www . w3 . org / RDF ( accessed December 11 , 2007 ) . W3C . 2006 . Semantic Web . World Wide Web Consortium ( W3C ) . Available at : http : / / www . w3 . org / 2001 / SW . W3C . 2005 . W3C World Wide Web Consortium . Leading the Web to Its Full Potential… World Wide Web Consortium ( W3C ) . Available at : http : / / www . w3 . org . W3C . 2004 . Web Ontology Language ( OWL ) . World Wide Web Consortium ( W3C ) . Available at : http : / / www . w3 . org / 2004 / OWL .