http : / / hhs . sagepub . com History of the Human Sciences DOI : 10 . 1177 / 09526959922120388 1999 ; 12 ; 139 History of the Human Sciences Roger Smith The uncertain sciences http : / / hhs . sagepub . com / cgi / content / abstract / 12 / 3 / 139 The online version of this article can be found at : Published by : http : / / www . sagepublications . com can be found at : History of the Human Sciences Additional services and information for http : / / hhs . sagepub . com / cgi / alerts Email Alerts : http : / / hhs . sagepub . com / subscriptions Subscriptions : http : / / www . sagepub . com / journalsReprints . nav Reprints : http : / / www . sagepub . com / journalsPermissions . nav Permissions : © 1999 SAGE Publications . All rights reserved . Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution . at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on April 11 , 2008 http : / / hhs . sagepub . com Downloaded from The uncertain sciences ROGER SMITH Bruce Mazlish , The Uncertain Sciences . New Haven , CT and London : Yale University Press , 1998 . 328 pp . There is poignancy in books that have taken time , in which the author reﬂects on the reading and thoughts of many years , and attempts to see whether they can all add up and sustain hope . In a way , Bruce Mazlish began this book when he cooperated with Jacob Bronowski on The Western Intellectual Tra - dition ( 1960 ) ( poignant for me as it was the book in which I discovered there might be such a thing as an intellectual tradition ) . He went on to publish wide - ranging books , which are inappropriately assessed by narrow academic criteria . He has speculated on shifts in consciousness in The Fourth Discon - tinuity ( 1993 ) , about the information technology revolution , and – most recently – on globalization . In The Uncertain Sciences he gathers his thoughts under the rubric of the human sciences in order to shape a picture , and propose a future , for the knowledge that we have of ourselves . This future , he argues , lies with a shift in human consciousness towards the situation in which the human sciences become the knowledge of a self - recreating human community . With this he wants to face the pessimism of the late 20th century . The human sciences can develop only by humans becoming conscious of the ongoing achievements of the human sciences . By becoming con - scious , I mean not only possessing ourselves of the existing state of knowledge but being willing to act on , and live in terms of , that know - ledge . In short , we must become a community of human scientists . ( 175 ) HISTORY OF THE HUMAN SCIENCES Vol . 12 No . 3 © 1999 SAGE Publications ( London , Thousand Oaks , CA and New Delhi ) pp . 139 – 148 [ 0952 - 6951 ( 199908 ) 12 : 3 ; 139 – 148 ; 009917 ] 08 Smith ( cr / k ) 23 / 6 / 99 11 : 36 am Page 139 © 1999 SAGE Publications . All rights reserved . Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution . at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on April 11 , 2008 http : / / hhs . sagepub . com Downloaded from This book , then , is synthetic , short on detail and analytic precision but big on signiﬁcant themes ; as Mazlish avers : ‘The originality , I hope , lies in the whole’ ( 3 ) . It is a book to reﬂect on , to argue with and – if one can – to move beyond . It is written accessibly for a wide audience , but with extensive notes and a critical bibliography , which opens up a huge literature . At his best , Mazlish pitches his writing just at the right level to carry a general theme and at the same time include sufﬁcient historical sense to give this theme a grounding in a concrete world . He tries to orient himself and his readers in relation to the turbulent controversies of academic life , especially the conﬂict between the humanities and natural sciences absurdly hyped as the culture wars . His style is open to argument , and indeed this openness is intrinsic to the nature of the enterprise he thinks the human sciences must be . He places great weight on the scientiﬁc method as the basis for unity in the sciences ; but , I suggest , in practice this method turns out to be the kind of civil con - versation to which a book like this one contributes . Mazlish would like to see institutional support for the development of a ﬁeld called the human sciences , linking the natural and social sciences , and drawing on and informing much of the humanities . While he does not envis - age this as a possibility in the short term , this book is in its way an attempt to construct the blueprint of such a ﬁeld . The ambition is ‘to link the human and the natural sciences . . . [ and to ] explore the possibilities of drawing the humanities within the orbit of the human sciences and , reciprocally , bringing the human sciences more securely into the circle of the more philosophical humanities’ ( 6 ) . His cause is the universality of scientiﬁc method as the means to realize objective knowledge , directed to the subject - matter of the human - ities ( which includes the qualitative riches of the world as subjectively experi - enced ) as well as to the material biological and social dimensions . Where Mazlish does suppose that the human sciences differ from the natural sciences is in relation to the reﬂexive quality of human life . The development of knowledge changes the human subject , and knowledge is not ﬁxed but emerges ‘in response to different circumstances’ ( 3 ) . Thus , advocacy of the human sciences is also advocacy of a way of life . This gives to the book a concluding crescendo , which ends with the argument that the development of the human sciences is bound in a reﬂexive circle with the development of a new human consciousness . Uniquely among the different sciences , the future of the human sciences requires the expansion of humanity as a whole into a community of scientists – human scientists . ‘The human sciences need humanity as their community . But they don’t have it’ ( 201 ) . He believes that the human sciences will ﬂourish only when people at large share the values of the scientiﬁc method . Even if some areas of the natural sciences have advanced under severe political control ( as Loren Graham has argued was the case in the Soviet Union ) , because human science knowledge is reﬂexive it can ﬂourish only in an open society , and , conversely , an open society can HISTORY OF THE HUMAN SCIENCES 12 ( 3 ) 140 08 Smith ( cr / k ) 23 / 6 / 99 11 : 36 am Page 140 © 1999 SAGE Publications . All rights reserved . Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution . at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on April 11 , 2008 http : / / hhs . sagepub . com Downloaded from ﬂourish only with the support of the human sciences . This argument con - tains a utopian vision , but it is one that Mazlish uses , with belief in the phenomenon of globalization in mind , to suggest the direction in which a rational rather than despairing approach to the future lies . On my reading , the book is a gentle reassertion of the Enlightenment project , a declaration of faith in a way of life even when faced by all the critical deconstruction , let alone violent destruction , of the late 20th century . The very broad theme is supported by a number of steps . Mazlish ﬁrst examines the human sciences ( effectively sociology , anthropology , econ - omics , political theory and history ; nothing is said about psychology or lin - guistics ) in order to assert that , however qualiﬁed or ‘uncertain’ their results , they , as much as the natural sciences , deploy ‘the scientiﬁc method’ and achieve objective knowledge . ‘The unity of science does exist . . . . The scien - tiﬁc method can be deﬁned , at a minimum , as being based on the willingness of witnesses to accept public forms of veriﬁed experience , acceptable means of logical thinking , and a code by which theory and data can be related and played back against one another’ ( 65 ) . This reference to ‘the scientiﬁc method’ is initially puzzling , since few natural scientists themselves seem to believe any longer in the scientiﬁc method , which could be formally speci - ﬁed , and even philosophers of science , in response to Feyerabend’s onslaught and the work of historians and sociologists of science , have shifted to other terms with which to discuss the rationality and objectivity of science . But this book is searching for a way in which to assert the unity of objective know - ledge , and to argue that the human sciences are ‘sciences’ even though their subject - matter includes the emergent , non - reducible properties of humans as symbolizing beings – history , culture and the arts . Whether or not there are agreed ‘public forms of veriﬁed experience’ , the ‘acceptable’ means of reasoning , and the ‘codes’ linking theory and obser - vation , would seem to be the points at issue in recent controversies about science as uniquely rational activity . In asserting that there are such realities , Mazlish is trying to escape from the judgement that the subject - matter of any human science or humanities discipline requires a distinction between sci - ences and non - sciences . He rejects claims that the disciplines are divided by subject - matter because , more importantly , they are united by method . The implication is that the current opposition of ‘the sciences’ and ‘the humani - ties’ is false and bridged by the human sciences . Whatever the difﬁculties , I take Mazlish to be equating ‘scientiﬁc method’ with ‘rationality’ , understood as the integration of individual reason in a community open to free and criti - cal evaluation of evidence and coherence . References to Habermas’s idea of a truth community , the formation of scientiﬁc communities around gentle - manly conduct in the 17th century , and the perspective gained from travel and encounter with the other , point to the character of such an integration . This is the way , I think , to make sense of the claim that ‘there is only one way REVIEW ARTICLE 141 08 Smith ( cr / k ) 23 / 6 / 99 11 : 36 am Page 141 © 1999 SAGE Publications . All rights reserved . Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution . at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on April 11 , 2008 http : / / hhs . sagepub . com Downloaded from of thinking scientiﬁcally , whatever the ﬁeld’ ( 13 ) , and that it is the application of this way of thinking ( ‘scientiﬁc method’ ) that makes knowledge cumu - lative and progress real . Indeed , while he tries to be polite , Mazlish is appalled by the perpetuation of superstition ( belief in extra - terrestrials is a pressing American case ) in the modern world , and he imagines a human science com - munity as a model for a more enlightened society . Similarly , he sees no place for any religion that advances truth - claims about the world . To deal with debates about whether ‘the uncertain sciences’ are sciences , and to undermine barriers between the natural sciences , the social sciences and the humanities , Mazlish includes two long chapters under the headings of ‘positivism’ and ‘hermeneutics’ . These chapters deploy historical material to support the argument , not to be systematically historical . Once again , the purpose is to demonstrate the unity of objective methods , though I think here he collapses past debates about the separation of the Naturwissenschaften and Geisteswissenschaften on grounds of distinction of methods and grounds of distinction of subject - matter and hence forms of knowing . But certainly the human sciences need knowledge of the material dimensions that ‘positivism’ provides , and it is easy to show how widely the natural sciences use ‘hermeneutic’ methods . There is a special sympathy for Francis Bacon and J . S . Mill , both of whom sought in common methods the unity of the natural and moral sciences . Signiﬁcantly reﬂecting current intellectual pressure , above all in Cam - bridge , MA , the home of the sociobiologist E . O . Wilson and the biological reductionists of Mazlish’s own institution of MIT , a chapter on ‘the human species’ is sandwiched between those on positivism and hermeneutics . As a humanist , the author feels that he must make it clear that he too believes that the starting - point for knowledge in the human sciences is the reality of our animal nature . In consequence , however , the argument comes close to deﬁn - ing the human sciences as sciences by content – by their foundation on evol - ution theory – not method . As I argue in a moment , the book does not take account of the possibility of different forms of knowledge for different ends . I was unclear what this chapter achieved . But an anecdote may illuminate the social context in which the chapter seems to have been written . At MIT , I heard a lecture by a highly successful software entrepreneur , predicting future innovations . Asked a question about how this might beneﬁt the majority of the world’s peoples , he dismissed ethical discourse as an ephemeral feature of media interest . The majority of the world’s peoples are losers , of no interest , not where the action is . The action is the next stage of engineering for proﬁt . A chapter , directed at sceptics , is included to show that there is some , if limited , cumulative knowledge in the human sciences . The approach is very broad - brush , citing , for example , the spread of belief in an evolutionary ancestry , and Adam Smith’s provision of concepts appropriate for the analy - sis of commercial society . This may ignore the small but signiﬁcant ways in HISTORY OF THE HUMAN SCIENCES 12 ( 3 ) 142 08 Smith ( cr / k ) 23 / 6 / 99 11 : 36 am Page 142 © 1999 SAGE Publications . All rights reserved . Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution . at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on April 11 , 2008 http : / / hhs . sagepub . com Downloaded from which the social sciences , though certainly failing to make predictions , still succeed in circumscribing the range of what are thought to be reasonable responses to small - scale questions and changes , often in the area of policy and administration . It is , after all , not in question that the psychological and social sciences have made ‘progress’ in the sense that , in the 20th century , they have in liberal democracies become constitutive of large areas of government and ( reﬂexively ) self - government . Further , the belief that the application of objec - tive methods makes possible the accumulation of knowledge suggests that it is indeed possible to identify ‘science’ with a body of knowledge , the know - ledge that the method is supposed to have made possible ( of evolution , of the market ) . If this is so , to claim the unity of the sciences is to claim something of substance ( ‘truth’ ) as well as to claim unity of method . The conclusion of the book is devoted to the future of the human sciences , and this is where the argument envisaging humanity as the necessary com - munity for human science comes in . He would like to have hope for the evol - ution and spread of a new human consciousness , analogous to the new consciousness described by Hans Blumenberg as the accompaniment of the Copernican revolution . The author knows well how speculative this will all seem to some . But what , he asks , is the alternative – postmodern nihilism , superstition , unfettered markets ? This is the Enlightenment voice : let us con - verse , let us take courage from what has been done , let us ﬁnd the way so that new knowledge can make us new people , let us enact a community open to truth . What is there to say in response , if we do not fall back on discipline - bound repudiation of such ambitions ( and , as Mazlish rightly observes , ‘although lip service is often given to . . . [ interdisciplinary ] procedure , in practice there is much resistance’ [ 5 ] ) ? Much of the argument is open to criticisms long lev - elled at both the Enlightenment project and the politics of liberal individual - ism of which it is often thought to be the ideology . There is , for example , a remarkably curt footnote dismissing ‘power’ as an analytic category ; but whatever the difﬁculties of conceptualizing power , the category is precisely one of the ways that the human sciences have shifted our consciousness of what politics , both in theory and in practice , is about . This is surely a reason for the recurrent political unpopularity of the human sciences , not least in academic circles that think they can ﬁnd a vantage point outside of the politi - cal process . Similarly , however liberal and open the author’s own attitude to non - western belief systems , the logic of his position appears to require the understanding of those belief systems by the western human sciences . And if the argument is anti - relativist about knowledge , it is anti - relativist about forms of life . Whether an envisaged community can hold together common rationality but diverse ways of life is open to question . I should like to focus on one question , on which Mazlish constantly touches but which he does not confront at length . This is the question of REVIEW ARTICLE 143 08 Smith ( cr / k ) 23 / 6 / 99 11 : 36 am Page 143 © 1999 SAGE Publications . All rights reserved . Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution . at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on April 11 , 2008 http : / / hhs . sagepub . com Downloaded from values . It is only by understanding reference to the scientiﬁc method as advo - cacy for an ethic of a particular way of life that I can grasp it as an impera - tive . This ethic has many of the liberal virtues articulated by J . S . Mill , and Mill , of course , believed that ethical judgements could be grounded on utili - tarian principles . But Mazlish , however sympathetic he may be to the use of such principles in practical decisions , does not ultimately take this route . The virtue of the members of his utopian community of human scientists lies with their openness to reason , and by implication openness to the truth , rather than solely in beneﬁts to happiness and order . He values the humanities because they enable us ‘to go beyond positivism by studying the experience that all humans have of what it is to be human’ ( 66 ) , and in that ‘experience’ he includes qualitative values like ‘depth’ . This is a strongly non - utilitarian value . His view of the human sciences as a search for ‘the experience that all humans have’ exposes a rich vein of humanism and an assumption that pro - gress can indeed be measured against the spread of a humanistic conscious - ness . In the two chapters that compare the natural and human sciences through the history of ‘positivism’ and ‘hermeneutics’ , the stress is on methods ; but the substantive debate has historically been about what is thought essential to the distinction of subject - matter , even ontology . It was the presumed status of Man as an intrinsic value which underlay the arguments of philosophers like Dilthey , Windelband and Rickert who distinguished the methods of Natur - and Geisteswissenschaften . The existence of values in the human sphere led them to consider the conditions for different forms of knowledge ; only secondarily did they consider the methods appropriate to these forms of knowledge . In the words of Gadamer : ‘The difference that confronts us is not in the method but in the objectives of knowledge’ ( Gadamer , 1998 : xxix ) . Re - expressed in a less idealist idiom , the point is to consider whether the appropriateness of a method must be judged by the purpose for which know - ledge is sought . We must ﬁrst agree that there are universal values , giving an essential purpose to all ways of life , if we are to believe that all knowledge can be sought by a common method , and hence that the sciences can be uniﬁed . Rhetorically , such universal values are ‘truth’ and ‘human rights’ . But we are all too well aware that there are many local contexts , even in the sci - ences , where these values simply are not those that guide the purposes for which knowledge is sought ; or we are aware that these values are too vague or manifold for there to be agreement as to what they mean in practice . There seems to be no escaping some kind of theory that links individual and col - lective purposes , power and knowledge – the kind of theory that was once discussed with reference to the concept of ideology . I take one much discussed but obviously central example : representation of Freud’s theory of psychoanalysis . Sometimes there is interest in psycho - analysis as a contribution to natural science – the English translators who HISTORY OF THE HUMAN SCIENCES 12 ( 3 ) 144 08 Smith ( cr / k ) 23 / 6 / 99 11 : 36 am Page 144 © 1999 SAGE Publications . All rights reserved . Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution . at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on April 11 , 2008 http : / / hhs . sagepub . com Downloaded from worked on the Standard Edition of Freud’s writings wanted integration with psychiatry , some psychologists wanted to test the theory experimentally , and Frank Sulloway wanted to demonstrate its roots in evolutionary theory . In other settings , there is interest in psychoanalysis as a discourse in the human - ities , as narration that creates both self - representations and therapeutic avenues for clients . There are , clearly , ‘positivist’ and ‘hermeneutic’ possi - bilities in Freud . No claim about the authority of one approach can stand independently of a claim about the purposes , or values , implicit in one form of knowledge rather than another . The Freud case is exceptional only to the extent to which the values instantiated in different readings are visible , however much the rhetoric of justiﬁcation stresses the empirical facts . As a side point , but one not without force , I observe that it is often im - polite , even aggressive , to point out values , as this points to the particular cir - cumstances of social groups or individual scholars . If it is apparent at present in the human sciences that ‘there is neither a sufﬁciently agreed - upon scien - tiﬁc method nor a scientiﬁc community committed to its clear procedures’ ( 99 ) , this is because interests and purposes differ . By what political means , except under authoritarian diktat ( perhaps diktat of ‘the market’ ) will our purposes coincide and hence make possible the uniﬁcation of our sciences ? Mazlish’s hope is that we will ﬁnd a common commitment in our common humanity . A similar point about values can be made in a different way . Mazlish writes : ‘The starting point for the human sciences must be Homo sapiens as an animal’ ( 68 ) , and elsewhere he refers to the subject - matter of the human sci - ences as ‘the human species’ . This has the appearance of simple common sense , though it perhaps also represents the effort by a scholar in the human - ities to distance himself from wild postmodernists whom his biologist col - leagues believe reduce even death to discourse . Once , however , he writes about ‘a human being’ ( 137 ) . This apparently trivial difference in usage appears to symbolize a confusion of purpose . It is not clear that ‘animal nature’ rather than ‘being’ must be the basic presupposition of the human sci - ences ; indeed , the judgement would appear to preclude activity in the human sciences devoted to understanding the representation of Man as ‘animal’ or ‘being’ . But for Mazlish , this representation of Man as animal is a factual achievement , and as such it must be the base on which to build future research . Here , however , he agrees with the ‘positivism’ which elsewhere he is keen to enrich with the purposes of the humanities . The same concession to ‘positivism’ is apparent in his claim that the human sciences create one part , and we may dream one day the whole , of humanity as a new ‘species’ . The slip into biological metaphor is gratuitous ( presumably human scientists and everybody else will still form an interbreeding population with fertile off - spring ! ) as a way to describe a shift , however large , in historical conscious - ness . REVIEW ARTICLE 145 08 Smith ( cr / k ) 23 / 6 / 99 11 : 36 am Page 145 © 1999 SAGE Publications . All rights reserved . Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution . at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on April 11 , 2008 http : / / hhs . sagepub . com Downloaded from My argument is that , however much one may share the world in which animal ancestry is a fact , there remain purposes , fully rational , for which we may choose another starting - point – the structure of language , perhaps , or an ontology of ‘being’ . It is biological reductionists who claim that there is only one rational purpose given to us by an animal nature , and hence only one form of knowing , ﬁt for this purpose . Such reductionism is not at all this book’s aim . Mazlish places a lot of emphasis on emergence – of conscious - ness , and hence symbolization , as an emergent property of the brain , and of the human sciences themselves as an emergent property of speciﬁc historical conditions ( with the implication that different conditions will produce differ - ent human sciences ) . He is no reductionist : ‘As circumstances change in ways we cannot predict , new and different forms of human science can be expected to make their appearance’ ( 4 ) . And in this way , this book too accepts a start - ing - point in history rather than biology . This leads to ‘depth’ as a criterion of the value of knowledge . Mazlish argues for a constructive place for the humanities in the human sciences pre - cisely because of the latter’s supposed access to ‘deep’ aspects of human exist - ence in a way which the forms of knowledge of the natural and social sciences cannot achieve . But what is ‘depth’ ? If ( though this is not part of Mazlish’s argument ) , the Enlightenment project to ground ethics in utilitarian prin - ciples is as bankrupt as McIntyre has inﬂuentially claimed , then values are left free - ﬂoating in this depiction of the human sciences . Biological reductionists take the route of claiming that values are also facts , factual properties of the evolutionary process . Apparently , it is even claimed that ‘depth’ is a bio - logical universal , embedded in the way the mind works ; that is , we are pro - grammed to experience certain things as ‘deep’ . By contrast , many others would think of ‘depth’ as a quality of , for example , the writings of Dos - toevsky or Nietzsche , when the former sought ‘against reason’ to renew Christian faith and the latter to grasp fully the impossibility of such faith . To understand the ‘depth’ of their thought as in some sense a biological prop - erty is not to understand the meaning of the word , to use a form of under - standing of which the word is not part , to deny the meaningfulness of what such writers wrote . A thoroughly postmodern approach would claim that reference to ‘depth’ has no meaning and represents no value outside a local context of use ( and in such ways cultural studies arouse the ire of those who defend some version of ‘the great tradition’ ) . A historical account might illuminate much of the context and reception of ‘depth’ , and be vastly richer in knowledge than any biological speculation , but still not provide reasons to transcend context and state why modern human scientists should think ‘depth’ deep . If , as I imagine Dostoevsky or Nietzsche claiming , there is still a freedom and an individuality , a quality , left out in all these approaches , then for knowledge of ‘depth’ is it necessary to return to the experience itself , or at least some representation of it in its own terms ? This is why Mazlish and HISTORY OF THE HUMAN SCIENCES 12 ( 3 ) 146 08 Smith ( cr / k ) 23 / 6 / 99 11 : 36 am Page 146 © 1999 SAGE Publications . All rights reserved . Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution . at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on April 11 , 2008 http : / / hhs . sagepub . com Downloaded from others value the humanities , though much more the arts themselves , because they provide a rhetoric of ‘depth’ . But it does not seem to me that they do so as part of any science . Mazlish’s project for the human sciences can assert but it cannot articulate the grounds for values . In this he might be thought to be in good , and if not in good , in plentiful company . How then can the human sciences , envisaged as an enlightened community , represent ‘depth’ or values ? It is perhaps telling that Mazlish’s clearest illus - tration of ‘depth’ is a personal one of being moved by music . But what are our collective values and on what grounds are they to be argued for ? Perhaps ‘truth’ itself ? Much is implicit in the discussion , and perhaps this is the only way forward . Humanity shares a historical consciousness from which , with increased self - consciousness , it draws its values . On this basis , humankind seeks to understand itself . Understanding interacts with unintended conse - quences and forms the phenomena that the human sciences attempt to comprehend . In this strange , uncertain , and unexpected manner , humanity begins to resemble a scientiﬁc community adequate to the demands placed upon it by the nature of the human sciences . ( 228 ) Mazlish suggests that our accumulated knowledge of history ‘deepens know - ledge . It incorporates a way of seeing scientiﬁc connections among phenom - ena that would otherwise appear chaotic . It assuages our sense of what Adam Smith called wonder’ ( 180 ) . And in conclusion , he returns with hope to an enlightened humanism . But we are still left with the point , made painfully by Dostoevsky , Nietzsche , Max Weber and others , that such a humanism , here embedded in a plea for the human sciences , does not have the possibility of providing a foundation for its own values . Dostoevsky’s answer is not open to Mazlish because he ultimately equates religious commitment and ignor - ance ( here he is ‘positivist’ ) ; Nietzsche’s answer is not open to him because he fears an intolerable relativism ( here he would seem to accept the possi - bility of a transcendent ‘hermeneutics’ ) ; and Weber had no answer beyond integrity . This book’s answer is to recommend a way of life , and , most chal - lengingly , to propose that this way of life is emergent in history and thus known to the human sciences , sciences which – reﬂexively – vivify the way of life . REFERENCES Blumenberg , H . ( 1987 ) The Genesis of the Copernican World , trans . Robert M . Wallace . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Bronowski , J . and Mazlish , B . ( 1960 ) The Western Intellectual Tradition : From Leonardo to Hegel . New York : Harper . REVIEW ARTICLE 147 08 Smith ( cr / k ) 23 / 6 / 99 11 : 36 am Page 147 © 1999 SAGE Publications . All rights reserved . Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution . at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on April 11 , 2008 http : / / hhs . sagepub . com Downloaded from Gadamer , H . - G . ( 1998 ) Truth and Method , 2nd English edn , trans . revised Joel Wein - sheimer and Donald G . Marshall . New York : Continuum Press . Graham , L . R . ( 1998 ) What Have We Learned about Science and Technology from the Russian Experience ? Stanford , CA : Stanford University Press . MacIntyre , A . ( 1981 ) After Virtue : A Study in Moral Theory . London : Duckworth . Mazlish , B . ( 1993 ) The Fourth Discontinuity : The Co - Evolution of Humans and Machines . New Haven , CT : Yale University Press . Mazlish , B . and Buultjens , R . , eds ( 1993 ) Conceptualizing Global History . Boulder , Colo . : Westview Press . BIOGRAPHICAL NOTE ROGER SMITH , following early retirement , is Reader Emeritus in History of Science , Lancaster University . He published The Fontana History of the Human Sciences ( London : Fontana , 1997 ) ; The Norton History of the Human Sciences ( New York : W . W . Norton , 1997 ) . Address : c / o 89 Pembury Avenue , Worcester Park , Surrey KT4 8BX , UK . [ email : roger . smith @ lancaster . ac . uk ] HISTORY OF THE HUMAN SCIENCES 12 ( 3 ) 148 08 Smith ( cr / k ) 23 / 6 / 99 11 : 36 am Page 148 © 1999 SAGE Publications . All rights reserved . Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution . at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on April 11 , 2008 http : / / hhs . sagepub . com Downloaded from