Knowledge Media Institute Representing Scholarly Claims in Internet Digital Libraries : A Knowledge Modelling Approach Simon Buckingham Shum , Enrico Motta and John Domingue KMI - TR - 80 July , 1999 Proceedings of ECDL’99 : Third European Conference on Research and Advanced Technology for Digital Libraries , Paris , France , September 22 - 24 , 1999 < www - rocq . inria . fr / EuroDL99 > . Springer - Verlag Lecture Notes in Computer Science ( Eds . ) Serge Abiteboul and Anne - Marie Vercoustre . Buckingham Shum , Motta & Domingue 2 Proceedings of ECDL’99 : Third European Conference on Research and Advanced Technology for Digital Libraries , Paris , France , September 22 - 24 , 1999 < www - rocq . inria . fr / EuroDL99 > . Springer - Verlag Lecture Notes in Computer Science ( Eds . ) Serge Abiteboul and Anne - Marie Vercoustre . Representing Scholarly Claims in Internet Digital Libraries : A Knowledge Modelling Approach Simon Buckingham Shum , Enrico Motta and John Domingue Knowledge Media Institute , The Open University , Milton Keynes , MK7 6AA , U . K . { S . Buckingham . Shum , E . Motta , J . B . Domingue } @ open . ac . uk http : / / kmi . open . ac . uk / projects / scholonto / Abstract . This paper is concerned with tracking and interpreting scholarly documents in distributed research communities . We argue that current approaches to document description , and current technological infrastructures particularly over the World Wide Web , provide poor support for these tasks . We describe the design of a digital library server which will enable authors to submit a summary of the contributions they claim their documents makes , and its relations to the literature . We describe a knowledge - based Web environment to support the emergence of such a community - constructed semantic hypertext , and the services it could provide to assist the interpretation of an idea or document in the context of its literature . The discussion considers in detail how the approach addresses usability issues associated with knowledge structuring environments . 1 Introduction The mere publication of information does not constitute a body of knowledge ; nor does simply obtaining information constitute understanding . Obtaining documents is just the first step ; meaning and significance arise through their interpretation , which results in an understanding of the perspective adopted . In this paper we describe a representation scheme implemented in a Web server architecture to assist scholars in articulating , interpreting and contesting perspectives . Specifically , these perspectives take the form of networks of claims about ideas and documents . We propose that researchers enrich their texts with nodes and links which they add to a semantic network . The paper begins by considering tasks that face scholars in analysing a document or literature . We argue that current approaches to document description , and current technological infrastructures , particularly over the World Wide Web , provide poor support for these interpretive tasks . We describe an approach to modelling the perspective in which documents are embedded , based on researchers’ claims about their own work , and those of others . We detail how such a model is being implemented in a Web environment , and consider the services it could provide to a scholarly community . These include the creation , visualization and interpretation of conceptual structures reflecting the relations between different research efforts , scholarly perspectives and debates , which we exemplify with a worked example . We then discuss related work , key issues that this work raises , and the next steps in our research programme . Buckingham Shum , Motta & Domingue 3 2 The scholarly work of interpretation Contextualising ideas in relation to the literature is a fundamental task for authors and readers—are they new , significant , and trustworthy ? Scholars usually start by bringing to bear their own knowledge of the field . This often leads to commentary and discourse of various kinds , which reflect the extent to which peers regard an author’s work as authoritative , ranging from private annotation of a document , to formal peer review of conference / journal submissions , to published reviews of literatures and books . In the context of annotation and peer review , we have described elsewhere a publishing toolkit [ 25 ] that converts a scholarly document into a structured discussion website , and an electronic journal [ 13 ] which uses this to support an innovative peer review model . We can think of conventional scholarly publication and debate as a document - centred , text - based process . Text is a rich medium in which to publish and discuss ideas in detail and with subtle nuances , but the corresponding disadvantage is that it takes a long time to read , and is hard to analyse computationally . We have demonstrated in previous work that a document - centric use of the Web can transform peer review in important ways [ 9 ] , [ 39 ] . The complementary approach described in this paper , with different goals , focuses on the conceptual models implicit in textual documents and discourse . The goal is to provide a summary representation of ideas and their interconnections , in order to assist literature - wide analysis . We propose that this has advantages over textual media for tracing the intellectual lineage of a document’s ideas , and for assessing the subsequent impact of those ideas , that is , how they have been challenged , supported and appropriated by others . In addition , the availability of explicit conceptual models opens possibilities for automatic assistance in analysing a community’s ( published ) collective understanding of ideas . We begin with the idea that an author’s goal is to persuade the reader to accept his / her perspective , which constitutes a set of claims about the world . Usually , the author has some new ideas that s / he is contributing , and asserts particular relationships between these and existing ideas already published in order to demonstrate both the reliability of the conceptual foundation on which s / he is building , and the innovation and significance of the new ideas . The reader’s task is to understand which ideas are being claimed as new , and assess their significance and reliability . Moving to the task of literature search and analysis , in this case , the scholar has some ideas and relationships in mind that s / he is trying to locate in the literature—has anyone written about them , or perhaps these ideas exist but not yet in a single document ? The interpretive task includes formulating the ideas of interest in a variety of ways that may uncover relevant documents , reading the documents and then interpreting them to characterise any patterns that appear to emerge . This is a similar scenario to that of a newcomer to a scholarly community ( e . g . a student ; librarian ; lecturer or researcher from another discipline ) who wants to know , for instance , what the seminal papers are , or if there are distinctive perspectives on problems or classes of technique that define that community . Scholars are poorly supported in these tasks by conventional library environments , physical or digital . Consider the document interpretation task . In the non - digital world , there is currently no way beyond following citations ( only those provided by the author ) , or using citation indices ( to find others citing him for some reason ) , to ask questions such as : ¥ Has anyone built on the ideas in this paper , and in what way ? ¥ Has anyone challenged this paper ? ¥ Has anyone proposed a similar solution but from a different theoretical perspective ? Considering the literature analysis task , there is currently no way for a scholar to query a digital library with analytical / interpretive questions of the following sorts : ¥ Are there any documents building on theory T , but which contradict each other’s predictions ? ¥ Are there any documents applying method M to domains D and E ? ¥ Is there any Web - based software which tackles problem P ? ¥ What impact did Theory T have ? Buckingham Shum , Motta & Domingue 4 ¥ Are there distinctive theoretical perspectives on problem P ? These are the kinds of phenomena of most interest to scholars when they write papers , engage in debate or search the literature . These are also the kinds of questions asked by researchers unfamiliar with a literature , including students . Our approach seeks to provide better support for identifying significant conceptual structures that a research community considers important . 3 Evolving the Web beyond simple linking The World Wide Web is the first global hypertext system to emerge , providing a rudimentary infrastructure for publishing interlinked documents and discourses . This level of representational sophistication is already extremely useful for enhancing , even transforming , scholarly publication and discourse , as we have doumented elsewhere [ 9 ] , [ 39 ] . However , the Web provides little support for structuring , searching or analysing scholarly concepts , documents or discourses . Early , pre - Web hypertext systems have already demonstrated ( on a small scale ) the power of features such as semantically typed nodes and links , bidirectional links , composite nodes which represent more complex structures , and structural searching . It is increasingly recognised that the Web would benefit from such features ( see for instance an analysis of ‘fourth generation’ Web functionality [ 4 ] ) . Information retrieval using statistical and text analysis techniques include techniques for clustering and mapping documents based on semantic similarity [ 11 ] , [ 12 ] , and for inferring certain types of inter - document relationships ( e . g . “cites” , or “summarises” ) [ 1 ] . Automatic techniques clearly have the advantage that they can be applied to large text corpora with little human effort once the texts are in a suitable format for processing . From the perspective of scholarly interpretation , the key weakness of such techniques is that it is extremely hard , if not impossible , to automatically identify more complex kinds of scholarly relationships between documents such as those given above . Human - encoded document descriptions are required to express such scholarly claims and structures . We propose that when a new article is ready for dissemination , authors describe the document’s main contributions and relationships to the literature using a controlled vocabulary analogous to a metadata scheme ( but implemented using a formal ontology ) , and submit the description to a networked repository . We describe in the next section the concept of an ontology , and the representational scheme underpinning our approach . 4 Representing scholarly claims 4 . 1 Ontologies An ontology in philosophy refers to a model of what exists in the world [ 10 ] . The artificial intelligence community has appropriated the term to mean the construction of knowledge models [ 18 ] , [ 32 ] which specify concepts or objects , their attributes , and inter - relationships . A knowledge model is a specification of a domain , or problem solving behavior , which abstracts from implementation - centered considerations and focuses instead on the concepts , relations and reasoning steps characterizing the phenomenon under investigation . Our application of knowledge modelling in this project is to implement a semantic network which expresses important aspects of the web of ideas and perspectives implicit in the documents and minds of a scholarly community . 4 . 2 An ontology for representing scholarly claims An ontology reflects a ( typically community - wide ) viewpoint on how best to conceptualise a particular domain or phenomenon . Hence , its main role is to support knowledge sharing and reuse . It might appear paradoxical , therefore , to propose the use of ontologies to support scholarly communities in Buckingham Shum , Motta & Domingue 5 managing their knowledge , since conflicting worldviews , evidence and frames of reference lie at the heart of research and debate . The key issue is in what is represented . Our approach builds on a relatively stable dimension of what are otherwise constantly evolving research fields , by representing scholars’ claims about the significance of ideas and concepts—a focus on discourse and argumentation ( how scholars support and contest claims ) , and on context ( the conceptual network in which an idea is embedded ) . In other words , it is hard to envisage when researchers will no longer need to make claims about , or contest , the nature of a document’s contributions ( e . g . “this is a new theory , model , notation , software , evidence” ) , or its relationships to other documents ( e . g . “it applies , modifies , predicts , refutes…” ) . Moreover , separating the representation of concepts from claims about them will be critical to supporting multiple perspectives . We are adopting a philosophy of ‘minimal ontological commitment’ [ 19 ] and incremental formalisation [ 37 ] , which reflects an emphasis on making explicit just enough structure to be usefully expressive and enable the provision of valuable computational services , but leaving the document texts to express the details and nuances of an author’s argument ( as opposed to trying to formalise it ) . This minimises the effort required to submit a document description ; if there is evidence that authors wish to link ontological concepts to specific paragraphs within a document ( e . g . as proposed by [ 23 ] ) , then we can provide a way to do so , but we will begin at the document level . The kind of core scheme we are moving towards , suitable for a wide range of disciplines , is proposed in Figure 1 , but it is both generalisable and tailorable to other fields ( e . g . a more experimental field might specialise Idea into Hypothesis ; another might not need Software ) . Fig . 1 . Representational elements for summarising the key contributions of a publication , and their relationships to other concepts . We hypothesise that a research community should be able to agree on a relatively small set of uncontroversial conceptual and relational types which can adequately express the majority of claims made . The goal is to design an ontology which is simple enough to understand without being simplistic , yet expressive enough that most researchers can represent the key claims made in most documents . More elaborate argumentation schemes have been proposed for computer - supported argumentation ( e . g . [ 26 ] , [ 34 ] , [ 38 ] , [ 40 ] ) , but our analysis of this literature shows little evidence of successful uptake ( see discussion ) . The ScholOnto scheme therefore supports argumentation in relatively simple terms ( supports , raises issues with , and refutes ) to make it as easy as possible to add an argumentation link to a concept or document ; more elaborate schemes can be introduced when there is the demand from a Buckingham Shum , Motta & Domingue 6 community . Moreover , whilst rigorous and carefully maintained argumentation networks make many kinds of useful analysis possible ( the main motivation for increasing a schema’s expressiveness ) , such tools make assumptions about users’ expertise and consistency of representation that are unlikely to hold in the context of an open , internet community . The details of an author’s reasoning are therefore left to the document’s text , and are not made explicit in the knowledge base . To summarise , we propose that this represents a novel approach to the persistent problem facing any ontology development effort , namely , that the world being described is typically dynamic , necessitating resource intensive updating and restructuring . Shifting the representational focus to the way in which researchers make new contributions to the literature avoids the problem of committing to a domain ontology that quickly becomes outdated . The domain ontology is only constructed in the context of authors’ claims about their work , and can be contested by others . 5 Implementation 5 . 1 Knowledge modelling infrastructure Our approach relies on a suite of robust knowledge modelling technologies developed and tested in other domains . The OCML modelling language [ 30 ] supports the construction of knowledge models by means of several types of construct . It allows the specification and operationalization of functions , relations , classes , instances and rules . It also includes mechanisms for defining ontologies and problem solving methods [ 3 ] , the main technologies developed in the knowledge modelling area . Problem solving methods are specifications of reusable problem solving behaviours . OCML has been used in several projects , in domains such as medicine , geology , engineering design and organizational learning . As a result the language is now associated with a large library of reusable models , providing a useful resource for the knowledge modelling community . In our scenario , OCML provides the formalism for defining our ontology for scholarly debate and interpretation , henceforth referred to as ScholOnto . WebOnto [ 14 ] enables knowledge engineers to collaboratively browse and edit knowledge models over the Web . The architecture is composed of a central server and a Java applet . WebOnto’s central server is built on top of a customised web server LispWeb [ 33 ] and uses OCML as the underlying modelling language . In addition to implementing the standard HTTP protocol , the LispWeb server offers a library of high - level Lisp functions to dynamically generate HTML pages , a facility for dynamically creating image maps , and a server - to - server communication method . The WebOnto Java applet provides multiple visualizations of OCML knowledge models , a direct manipulation and forms interface for creating new knowledge structures , and a groupware facility which supports both synchronous and asynchronous model building by teams of knowledge engineers ( illustrated in Figures 2 and 9 ) . Applied to the problem of managing scholarly knowledge concepts and documents in online research communities , these technologies provide the building blocks for a scaleable Web infrastructure . Further details on these tools and our approach to enriching documents with ontologies can be found in [ 31 ] . 5 . 2 Ontology design Figure 2 shows the top level structure of the ontology , as specified in OCML . Both nodes and links in the semantic network created by scholars’ submissions are SCHOLARLY - KNOWLEDGE - CONCEPTs . Nodes are SCHOLARLY - CONTRIBUTION - ELEMENTs , and links SCHOLARLY - RELATIONSHIPs , which are subdivided into ARGUMENTATION - LINKs and NON - ARGUMENTATION - LINKs . Buckingham Shum , Motta & Domingue 7 Fig . 2 . Class structure of the ScholOnto ontology , represented in the WebOnto system . Figure 3 shows the class definitions for the scholarly concepts of SOFTWARE , METHODOLOGY and LANGUAGE . SOFTWARE is defined as a SCHOLARLY - CONTRIBUTION - ELEMENT , which ADDRESSES PROBLEMS , USES / APPLIES any other kind of SCHOLARLY - CONTRIBUTION - ELEMENT ( e . g . a METHOD or LANGUAGE ) , and MODIFIES / EXTENDS other kinds of SOFTWARE . METHODOLOGY and LANGUAGE are similarly defined . ( def - class SOFTWARE ( scholarly - contribution - element ) ( ( addresses : type problem ) ( uses - applies : type scholarly - contribution - element ) ( modifies - extends : type software ) ) ) ( def - class METHODOLOGY ( scholarly - contribution - element ) ( ( addresses : type problem ) ( modifies - extends : type methodology ) ( uses - applies : type scholarly - contribution - element ) ) ) ( def - class LANGUAGE ( scholarly - contribution - element ) ( ( addresses : type problem ) ( uses - applies : type language : type theory - model ) ( modifies - extends : type language ) ) ) Fig . 3 . OCML definitions of SOFTWARE , METHODOLOGY and LANGUAGE . The ontology is designed to support scholars in making claims by asserting relationships between concepts . Other scholars may support , raise - issues - with , or refute these claims . Figure 4 shows schematically the structure of a scholarly “claim” in the ontology . The OCML specification associated with the structure in Figure 4 is shown in Figure 5 . Buckingham Shum , Motta & Domingue 8 Fig . 4 . The structure of a scholarly “claim” in the ontology . A claim is formally defined as a relation between a set of authors , who make a legal - scholarly - assertion , with some justification . A legal - scholarly - assertion is a statement instantiating a scholarly - relationship ( e . g . addresses , predicts , refutes ) between two elements ( e . g . methodology X addresses problem Y ) . The justification is free text supporting a claim . An author will not be expected to enter this since the justification for their claim is already to be found in the document they are describing . But if another scholar , for example , supports , raises - issues - with , or refutes another’s claim ( see scheme in Figure 1 ) , without publishing an associated document , then some form of textual justification is expected . This could in turn point to a more rigorous justification in another document ( ideally , directly accessible ) . ( def - relation claims ( ? X ? Y ? Z ) : constraint ( and ( set ? X ) ( every ? x author ) ( legal - scholarly - assertion ? Y ) ( justification ? Z ) ) ) ( def - class legal - scholarly - assertion ( assertion ) ? x : iff - def ( and ( assertion ? x ) ( = = ? x ( ? a ? b ? c ) ) ( scholarly - relationship ? a ) ) ) ( def - class justification ( string ) ) Fig . 5 . Separating claims from scholarly relationships ; there can be many different ( possibly contradictory ) claims by different authors . To both support and refute a particular claim is usually a sign of inconsistency , or perhaps , of a position that has changed from an earlier paper . OCML’s envionrment makes it easy to construct rules that could , for instance , check for instances where an author is a member of two sets of authors who have made conflicting assertions ( Figure 6 ) . ( def - relation inconsistent - position ( ? auth ? assertion ) : constraint ( and ( author ? auth ) ( legal - scholarly - assertion ? assertion ) ) ) : sufficient ( and ( member ? auth ? x ) ( supports ? x ? y ? z ) ( member ? auth ? x2 ) ( refutes ? x2 ? y ? z2 ) ) ) Fig . 6 . An OCML rule for an agent to check for positions that both support and refute a particular claim . This might reflect an inconsistent - position or at least , claims meriting closer examination . Encapsulating such rules in agents that researchers could select from a library and tailor is a scenario that the ScholOnto architecture aims to support . Buckingham Shum , Motta & Domingue 9 6 A Worked Example We now return to our opening examples of literature and document interpretation , and use a worked example to clarify how our tools could support scholarly work . Within the hypertext research literature , one of the landmark articles is the summary of the Dexter Hypertext Reference Model by Halasz and Schwartz [ 22 ] , which specifies both semiformally , and formally ( using the Z notation ) , abstract properties of hypertext systems , enabling comparison of existing systems , and specification of theoretically possible future systems . WebOnto already generates forms with contextual menus for adding new instances to an ontology ( see [ 31 ] ) , but needs to be extended to generate forms that non - knowledge engineers can use . Figure 7 shows a prototype user interface for submitting the article’s description to the repository . The user interface will guide users through the schema using dynamic menus , and enables them to browse and search for existing concepts to assist their reuse . Some domain concepts are simple to reference ( e . g . the name of a specific software system , framework or methodology ) , whilst others are less concrete and could benefit from information retrieval support , e . g . finding the name ( s ) used to describe a domain problem ( “user disorientation” ) , an idea ( “a global hypertext system” ) , or an empirical phenomenon such as a piece of evidence ( “low ability students benefit most from physics simulations” ) . This form would generate an OCML entry in the ontology , as shown in Figure 8 . ( def - instance dexter - htxt - ref - model - article article ( ( describes - scholarly - contribution - element dexter - ht - ref - model ( concerns - domain hypertext - hypermedia ) ( has - author halasz - f schwartz - m ) ( has - title “The Dexter Hypertext Reference Model” ) ( publication - details “Communications of the ACM , 37 ( 2 ) , 30 - 39” ) ( has - url “www . acm . org / pubs / articles / journals / cacm / 1994 - 37 - 2 / p30 - halasz / ” ) ( acm - ccs “I . 7 . 2” “H . 1 . 1” “H2 . 1” “H3 . 2” “H5 . 1” ) ) ) ( def - instance dexter - ht - ref - model theory - model ( ( addresses absence - of - standards ( analyses notecards augment concordia hypercard hyperties intermedia kms - zog neptune - ham ) ( envisages theoretically - possible - dexter - compliant - systems ) ( uses - applies Z ) ) ) Fig . 8 . The OCML entry for the Dexter article , declaring its contributions to the literature ( dexter - ht - ref - model , which is a theory - model , and predicts theoretically possible systems ) , and its relationship to other concepts ( analyses several existing systems , and uses - applies the Z notation ) . The article is now added to the ScholOnto knowledge base , enabling users to ask questions such as , “What motivated the Dexter Hypertext Reference Model , and what impact has it had ? ” A forms - based interface , generated automatically from the ScholOnto ontology by WebOnto , enables users to ask such questions through simple menu selection ( Figure 9 ) . Buckingham Shum , Motta & Domingue 10 Fig . 7 . Prototype user interface for submitting claims about a document’s contributions . Buckingham Shum , Motta & Domingue 11 Fig . 9 . A forms - based interface generated automatically from the ScholOnto ontology by WebOnto enables users to query the model via menu selection . The screenshot shows several possible queries to analyse the motivation behind , and impact of , the Dexter Hypertext Model ( we have combined them to save space ; in reality one would most likely submit these as separate queries ) . The queries specify , respectively , ( 1 ) interest in the theory - model : dexter - hypertxt - ref - model , ( 2 ) what problems does it analyse ? , ( 3 ) are there any theory - models which modify - extend it ? , and ( 4 ) is there any software which uses - applies it ? The knowledge base could generate filtered visualizations of the literature ( e . g . based on the semantic network model in Figure 10 ) showing the Dexter Model’s motivation and conceptual roots ( links to the left ) , and the nature of the work which has built on it since by the respective authors , or other researchers ( links to the right ) . This is an illustration of the kind of concept map that could be generated by a ScholOnto search . 7 Discussion In this section we discuss some of the issues raised and possibilities opened up by the design we have presented , and contextualise our approach to related research . 7 . 1 Intelligent services A knowledge model enables inference - based searching and alerting . It will be possible to ask the system questions such as “What impact did Theory T have ? ” , since “impact” can be defined , for example , in terms of the number of subsequent documents using or modifying it , the number of different domains in which it has been applied , the number of problems addressed which drew on the theory , and so forth . Our knowledge modelling environment makes it simple for us ( as system maintainers ) to write heuristics that could assist in finding relevant documents , e . g . “if Method Y Buckingham Shum , Motta & Domingue 12 extends Method X , and Method X is challenged , then Method Y may be challenged” . We will also assist scholars in composing their own rule - based interest profiles , e . g . “If 3 or more documents support Language L and challenge Language M ( or any Languages based on them ) , and 3 or more documents support Language M and challenge Language L , then send me a concept map showing their interconnections”—since this may be evidence of two schools of thought . Another important advantage of our approach is that the existence of a formally represented knowledge model makes it possible to envisage additional reasoning services on top of the ‘basic’ search support . For instance , it will be possible to develop specialized agents whose goal is to identify emerging perspectives , using heuristic knowledge and machine learning techniques . For instance , an agent could discover a ‘European perspective’ on a particular issue , by analyzing the geographic spread of the relevant positions . The complex notion of a ‘school of thought’ or theoretical perspective has representational form within ScholOnto . A perspective can be recognised by the common THEORY / MODELS to which a group of researchers appeals , the associated METHODS and LANGUAGES which they deploy , and the body of EVIDENCE that they mutually support . Conversely , the set of THEORY / MODELS , METHODS , LANGUAGES and EVIDENCE that they collectively RAISE - ISSUES - WITH may represent a different perspective . Tools to enable researchers to define such conceptual structures open intruiging new possibilities for literature tracking and analysis . The ‘impact’ or ‘authority’ of a piece of work can also be represented in a variety of ways in ScholOnto , depending on author preference . Beyond quantitative counts of how many documents cite a document or reuse a concept ( directly , or through more complex inheritance ) , one could also declare an interest in a particular methodology or theoretical perspective ( see above ) as carrying more weight , and filter the literature on this basis . Fig . 10 . A semantic network model provides the basis for generating visualizations of the literature . In this example , an author has described the relationships ( links to the left ) that motivate and situate an article’s key contribution ( a Reference Model , marked by the central node ) within its literature . Subsequent researchers ( links to the right ) have modified / extended the model , and implemented software systems based on their extended models ( e . g . the “DeVise” system , lower right ) . Buckingham Shum , Motta & Domingue 13 7 . 2 Usability of knowledge structuring tools We are acutely aware that many schemes for registering shared resources and providing structured descriptions founder on the crucial ‘capture bottleneck’ – the envisaged beneficiaries of the system simply do not have the motivation or time to invest in sharing resources to reach a critical mass of useful material . We drew sobering lessons on this theme from an analysis of the computer - supported argumentation literature [ 7 ] , corroborated by evidence relating to groupware [ 20 ] , design rationale support [ 8 ] , organizational memory systems [ 6 ] , [ 35 ] , and indeed , for many CSCW systems that require users to formalize information [ 36 ] . Specifically , we need to address issues raised by the usage patterns of hypertext systems such as Textnet [ 41 ] for scholarly annotation and linking , and descendants such as NoteCards [ 21 ] and Aquanet [ 28 ] . These provided rich schemas of semantic node - link types , but the limited adoption of these features led Trigg and others to conclude , correctly in our view , that rich taxonomies of node and link types ( e . g . about 40 in Textnet ) overwhelm users . However , before eradicating all human - encoded semantic hypertext links from our systems , we argue that effective use of such systems may depend on finding the right mix of target domain , context of use and user community . Why should this proposal work where others have failed ? Our target community , domain and use context have unique characteristics lacking in many other domains in which group memory , knowledge structuring and argumentation have not fitted well . ¥ Research - oriented publishing . Academic and other research publishing , in contrast to other genres , emphasises the kind of careful argumentation and analysis of domain structure required , and possibly fostered , by this approach . ( In addition , for teaching purposes , students can be required by a course to analyse the conceptual networks for a given literature , and perhaps construct their own concept maps as part of an assignment . ) ¥ Strong motivation to disseminate work . Making an impact through publications is a primary activity for academics . Having completed a new document , the author will want to maximise its ‘digital presence’ on the net by carefully encoding its contributions and connections to the existing literature . ¥ Opportunity to reflect on how to represent ideas . In contrast to the synchronous group working context in which many argumentation systems have been tested , scholars will be describing their documents in an individual setting , with time to reflect on how best to construct a network description . ¥ A simple semantic schema complementing text . We hypothesise that most researchers will have no trouble in understanding node and link types such as those in – they are the concepts of everyday research discourse . Nor are we requiring an author to make explicit a document’s thesis at a fine granularity ; the structural representation is a summary to assist the document’s discovery , not a substitute . ¥ Benefits deriving from Web scalability . Previous research with pre - Web groupware and group memory systems has always focused on individual or small scale collaborative use . In a small team who already know each others’ work , it is often hard to justify the overheads of information structuring in order to track documents and debates . This is in sharp contrast to the challenge of tracking and analysing developments in an international , evolving digital library . Using the Web as our collaboration and delivery medium has a second advantage : the size of a Web - based research community increases the chances of quickly building a critical mass of users , which will in turn improve the value of the services provided . 7 . 3 Researchers are not librarians Internet - based digital libraries of the sort that concern this project will change the roles of librarian and scholarly researcher established by paper - based , geographically - based libraries . For an internet - based library to scale realistically , with potentially tens of submissions arriving every day , the only people who can be expected to initially describe new articles are the people with most motivation to maximise Buckingham Shum , Motta & Domingue 14 the visibility and impact of the work—the authors . However , authors are not librarians or knowledge engineers who traditionally have possessed the skills to do information classification . This raises two issues : whether scholars are able to describe their documents sufficiently well to enable the system to make use of their descriptions , and how to make the underlying description technologies accessible and understandable . We follow initiatives to develop metadata schemes for the Web ( see next section ) in assuming that given intuitive representation schemes and user interfaces , domain experts will be able to submit useful descriptions of their own work . These are , however , empirical questions that will be addressed through lab - based studies studying detailed interaction with the system , followed by broader field trials once the system is deployed in different research communities . 7 . 4 Emergent work practices If a significant proportion of a research community adopted a digital library infrastructure of the sort proposed , such that it became a de facto standard to register new documents on the server , it is likely that it would effect a shift in working practices . In a more speculative mood , we briefly consider what forms these might take . The public face of an authors’ work would expand from his or her publications , to include the corresponding concept maps that others would see . Formulating the contributions of an article such that this map was succinct and to the point might in fact improve the authoring process . A research project or lab would most likely evolve a ' library ' of conceptual elements and structures which they reused in different documents , and which represented their ' official ' statement of how they wished their work to be linked to and reused by others . A research field has a small number of recognisable ‘genres’ of article which an active member of that field can usually recognise very quickly . Indeed , these are formally recognised by some conferences and journals in order to guide reviewers on appropriate review criteria for different kinds of submission ( systems paper , theory paper , empirical paper , etc . ) . We can envisage the possibility of a journal establishing a set of templates for submitting and reviewing submissions in different categories , that is , “a paper of type - X should reasonably demonstrate in its conceptual network representation its relationships to A , B and C , and we expect arguments of the form P , Q and R…” . If the digital library is worth anything , it will of course assist reviewers in locating related work and debates that the author has omitted . 7 . 5 Relationships to other research We have already addressed earlier hypertext and argumentation work ; here , we situate our approach in relation to other relevant research and Web developments . Our technologies can be seen as a conceptual and technical development from current efforts to develop metadata description schemes for the Web . Metadata in the context of digital libraries refers to ways to encode information about resources in machine - interpretable formats , typically by completing a standard set of descriptive fields . Well known examples include USMARC [ 27 ] for library resources , Dublin Core [ 15 ] to provide a simple high level scheme for web resources , and IMS [ 24 ] for educational resources . Our scheme for representing multiple claims about the status of content extends typical metadata schemes which normally focus on encoding uncontroversial content attributes . From a representational and technical perspective , our approach differs from metadata in that ontologies support more sophisticated modelling , for example , specifying sufficient and necessary conditions for relations , and providing metalevel modelling support which makes it possible to reason about the ontology itself . OCML in particular also provides powerful inference support making it possible to directly operationalise the ontology and its instantiation as a knowledge base . The W3C’s proposed Resource Description Framework [ 42 ] for interrelating multiple metadata schemes employs semantic network modelling similar to the knowledge modelling concepts presented here , and could provide a future route to interoperability with other systems and metadata schemes . The ( KA ) 2 initiative ( Knowledge Annotation for Knowledge Acquisition ) [ 2 ] aims to support the knowledge acquisition community in building a knowledge base of its own research by populating a shared ontology . The knowledge base is constructed by authors annotating their web pages ( e . g . Buckingham Shum , Motta & Domingue 15 publications ; personal and project pages ) with tags ( analogous to HTML META tags ) , which can be read by a specialised search engine called Ontobroker [ 17 ] . The key architectural difference to our approach is that ( KA ) 2 semantic tags are embedded in the physical content , whereas our approach decouples content from claims about its status . This architectural difference reflects the different aims of the two enterprises . The aim of ( KA ) 2 is to capture the contents of web pages in a formalism which can be reasoned about by Ontobroker . In our scenario we do not aim to represent directly the domain - specific content of a paper , but the debate about the scholarly status of that content . Moreover , we are concerned that authors will not be prepared to invest the required effort to encode models of document content , and as argued earlier , we cannot assume a stable ontology to describe an active research field . Ontologies are beginning to be used in the context of digital libraries , although for different purposes to those set out here . Ontologies can assist the extraction of concepts from unstructured textual documents [ 16 ] , by serving as a source of knowledge about the particular topic . Ontologies can also assist in managing document descriptions in large digital libraries [ 43 ] , [ 44 ] . Finally , our proposal builds on the use of automated pre - print servers for the submission and dissemination of documents ( e . g . the Los Alamos server for physics and computer science < xxx . lanl . gov > , or the CogPrints server for cognitive science < cogprints . soton . ac . uk > ) . Hierarchical taxonomies and keywords assist search and e - mail alerting . A ScholOnto knowledge based server as proposed here extends this infrastructure by adding a semantically enriched layer of document encoding , with associated services , as discussed . One strategy for migrating from a conventional pre - print server to a ScholOnto server would be to import an existing pre - print server database , and enable authors to annotate their documents’ entries to give them a presence in the semantic network . 8 Summary and Future Work The Web has established itself as a medium for research document dissemination . However , its support for many of the interpretive tasks that scholars perform is weak , despite the fact that semantic hypertext systems ( as the Web was originally envisaged by Berners - Lee ) are well suited to tasks such as structural searching , pattern analysis , and heuristic filtering . Our aim is to support scholarly analysis and discourse through the creation of author - centred and community - wide perspectives by researchers or software agents . We are developing a representational and technical infrastructure to complement libraries of archived documents with a ‘living’ semantic network of concepts . Adopted by a research community , this network could reflect the evolving understanding and recontextualisation of ideas over time ( lost with archived documents ) , making possible new forms of literature analysis . The proposed ontology expresses scholarly claims about domain concepts , not the domain concepts themselves ; existing metadata and knowledge modelling efforts focus on describing the content of resources , rather than discourse about content . We focus on the conceptual models implicit in textual documents and discourse in order to provide a summary representation of ideas and their interconnections . This has advantages over textual media for tracing the intellectual lineage of a document’s ideas , and for assessing the subsequent impact of those ideas . In addition , the availability of explicit conceptual models opens possibilities for automatic analysis of a community’s collective knowledge . We are currently finalising the core ontology to assist interoperability across a wide range of research domains , and seeding some test literatures to evaluate WebOnto’s usability and automated services . We will then seek ‘early adopter’ communities interested in testing the ScholOnto server as a means of managing their own research knowledge . Buckingham Shum , Motta & Domingue 16 References 1 . Allan , J . Automatic Hypertext Link Typing . In Proc . Hypertext ' 96 , 1996 , ACM Press : NY , pp . 42 - 52 2 . Benjamins , V . R . and Fensel , D . Community is Knowledge in ( KA ) 2 . In Proc . KAW ' 98 : 11th Banff Knowledge Acquisition Workshop , Banff , Canada , 1998 , Dept . Computer Science , University of Calgary , CA < http : / / www . aifb . uni - karlsruhe . de / WBS / broker / KA2 . html > 3 . Benjamins , V . R . and Fensel , D . Special Issue on Problem Solving Methods ( Eds . ) . International Journal of Human - Computer Studies , 49 , 4 , 1998 4 . Bieber , M . , Vitali , F . , Ashman , H . , Balasubramanian , V . and Oinas - Kukkonen , H . Fourth Generation Hypermedia : Some Missing Links for the World Wide Web . Int . J . Human - Computer Studies , World Wide Web Usability Special Issue , ( Eds . ) S . Buckingham Shum & C . McKnight , 47 , 1 , 1997 , pp . 31 - 65 5 . Buckingham Shum , S . Design Argumentation as Design Rationale . The Encyclopedia of Computer Science and Technology ( Marcel Dekker Inc : NY ) , 35 , 20 , 1996 , pp . 95 - 128 6 . Buckingham Shum , S . Negotiating the Construction and Reconstruction of Organisational Memories . Journal of Universal Computer Science ( Special Issue on Information Technology for Knowledge Management ) , 3 , 8 , 1997 , pp . 899 - 928 < http : / / www . iicm . edu / jucs _ 3 _ 8 / > 7 . Buckingham Shum , S . and Hammond , N . Argumentation - Based Design Rationale : What Use at What Cost ? International Journal of Human - Computer Studies , 40 , 4 , 1994 , pp . 603 - 652 8 . Buckingham Shum , S . , MacLean , A . , Bellotti , V . and Hammond , N . Graphical Argumentation and Design Cognition . Human - Computer Interaction , 12 , 3 , 1997 , pp . 267 - 300 9 . Buckingham Shum , S . and Sumner , T . New Scenarios in Scholarly Publishing and Debate . In The Knowledge Web : Learning and Collaborating on the Net , Eisenstadt , M . and Vincent , T . , ( Ed . ) , Kogan Page : London , 1998 , pp . 135 - 151 < http : / / kmi . open . ac . uk / knowledgeweb > 10 . Bunge , M . A . Treatise on Basic Philosophy , Vol . 3 . Ontology I : The Furniture of the World . Reidel : Boston , 1977 11 . Chen , C . and Carr , L . Trailblazing the Literature of Hypertext : Author Co - Citation Analysis ( 1989 - 1998 ) . In Proceedings of Hypertext ' 99 : 10th ACM Conference on Hypertext , Darmstadt ( 21 - 25 Feb . ) , 1999 , ACM Press : New York , pp . 51 - 60 < http : / / www . brunel . ac . uk / ~ cssrccc2 / papers / ht99 . pdf > 12 . Chen , C . and Czerwinski , M . From Latent Semantics to Spatial Hypermedia : An Integrated Approach . In Proceedings of Hypertext ' 98 : 9th ACM Conference on Hypertext , Pittsburgh , 1998 , ACM Press : New York 13 . D3E : Digital Document Discourse Environment ( D3E ) . Knowledge Media Institute , Open University < d3e . open . ac . uk > 14 . Domingue , J . Tadzebao and WebOnto : Discussing , Browsing , and Editing Ontologies on the Web . In Proc . KAW ' 98 : 11th Banff Knowledge Acquisition Workshop , Banff , Canada , 1998 , Dept . Computer Science , University of Calgary , CA < http : / / kmi . open . ac . uk / ~ john / banff98 - paper / domingue . html > 15 . Dublin Core : Metadata Element Set ( 1995 ) 16 . Embley , D . W . , Campbell , D . M . , Smith , R . D . and Liddle , S . W . Ontology - Based Extraction and Structuring of Information from Data - Rich Unstructured Documents . In Proc . CIKM ' 98 : Conference on Information and Knowledge Management , Bethesda , MD , USA , 1998 , ACM Press : New York , pp . 52 - 59 17 . Fensel , D . , Decker , S . , Erdmann , M . and Studer , R . Ontobroker : The Very High Idea . In Proc . FLAIRS - 98 : 11th Annual Florida Artificial Intelligence Research Symposium , Florida , 1998 Buckingham Shum , Motta & Domingue 17 18 . Gruber , T . R . A Translation Approach to Portable Ontology Specifications . Knowledge Acquisition , 5 , 2 , 1993 , pp . 199 - 220 19 . Gruber , T . R . Toward Principles for the Design of Ontologies Used for Knowledge Sharing . International Journal of Human - Computer Studies , 43 , 5 / 6 , 1995 , pp . 907 - 928 20 . Grudin , J . Groupware and Social Dynamics : Eight Challenges for Developers . Communications of the ACM , 37 , 1 , 1994 , pp . 92 - 105 21 . Halasz , F . G . Reflections on Notecards : Seven Issues for the Next Generation of Hypermedia Systems . Communications of the ACM , 31 , 1988 , pp . 836 - 852 22 . Halasz , F . G . and Schwartz , M . The Dexter Hypertext Reference Model . Comm . of the ACM , 37 , 2 , 1994 , pp . 30 - 39 23 . Heflin , J . , Hendler , J . and Luke , S . Reading Between the Lines : Using SHOE to Discover Implicit Knowledge from the Web . In AAAI - 98 Workshop on Artificial Intelligence and Information Integration , Stanford , CA < http : / / www . cs . umd . edu / projects / plus / SHOE / shoe - aaai98 . ps > 24 . IMS The Instructional Management System ( IMS ) Project . 1994 < www . imsproject . org > 25 . JIME : Journal of Interactive Media in Education . Knowledge Media Institute , Open University < www - jime . open . ac . uk > 26 . Lee , J . SIBYL : A Qualitative Decision Management System . In Artificial intelligence at MIT : Expanding Frontiers , Winston , P . and Shellard , S . , ( Ed . ) , MIT Press : Cambridge , Massachusetts , 1990 , pp . 105 - 133 27 . LoC USMARC Format for Bibliographic Data , Including Guidelines for Content Designation . Network Development and MARC Standards Office , Library of Congress , Cataloging Distribution Service , Washington DC , 1994 28 . Marshall , C . C . and Rogers , R . A . Two Years before the Mist : Experiences with Aquanet . In Proceedings of the Fourth ACM Conference on Hypertext , 1992 , pp . 53 - 62 29 . Marshall , C . C . and Shipman , F . M . Spatial Hypertext : Designing for Change . Communications of the ACM , 38 , 8 , 1995 , pp . 88 - 97 < http : / / irss . njit . edu : 5080 / cgi - bin / bin / option . csh ? mar - ship / marshall . html > 30 . Motta , E . An Overview of the OCML Modelling Language . In Proceedings KEML ' 98 : 8th Workshop on Knowledge Engineering Methods & Languages , Karlsruhe , Germany , Jan . 21 - 22 , 1998 , 1998 31 . Motta , E . , Buckingham Shum , S . and Domingue , J . Case Studies in Ontology - Driven Document Enrichment . In Proc . KAW ' 99 : 12th Banff Knowledge Acquisition Workshop , Banff , Canada , 1999 , Dept . Computer Science , University of Calgary , CA < http : / / sern . ucalgary . ca / KSI / KAW / KAW99 / papers / Motta1 / motta . pdf > 32 . Newell , A . The Knowledge Level . Artificial Intelligence , 18 , 1 , 1982 , pp . 87 - 127 33 . Riva , A . and Ramoni , M . LispWeb : a Specialized HTTP Server for Distributed AI Applications . Computer Networks and ISDN Systems ( Proc . WWW96 Conference ) , 28 , 7 - 11 , 1996 , pp . 953 - 961 < http : / / kmi . open . ac . uk / ~ marco / papers / www96 / www96 . html > 34 . Schuler , W . and Smith , J . Author’s Argumentation Assistant ( AAA ) : A Hypertext - Based Authoring Tool for Argumentative Texts . In Proc . ECHT ' 90 : European Conference on Hypertext : Argumentation , Design & Knowledge Acquisition , Cambridge , 1990 , Cambridge University Press , pp . 137 - 151 35 . Selvin , A . Supporting Collaborative Analysis and Design with Hypertext Functionality . Journal of Digital Information , 1 , 4 , 1999 < http : / / jodi . ecs . soton . ac . uk / Articles / v01 / i04 / Selvin / > 36 . Shipman , F . M . and Marshall , C . C . Formality Considered Harmful : Experiences , Emerging Themes , and Directions on the Use of Formal Representations in Interactive Systems . Computer Supported Cooperative Work , in press , 1999 Buckingham Shum , Motta & Domingue 18 37 . Shipman , F . M . and McCall , R . Supporting Knowledge - Base Evolution with Incremental Formalization . In Proc . ACM CHI ' 94 : Human Factors in Computing Systems , Boston , Mass . , 1994 , ACM Press : New York , pp . 285 - 291 38 . Smolensky , P . , Fox , B . , King , R . and Lewis , C . Computer - Aided Reasoned Discourse Or , How to Argue with a Computer . In Cognitive Science and its Application to Human - Computer Interaction , Guindon , R . , ( Ed . ) , Ablex : Norwood , New Jersey , 1988 , pp . 109 - 162 39 . Sumner , T . and Buckingham Shum , S . From Documents to Discourse : Shifting Conceptions of Scholarly Publishing . In Proc . CHI 98 : Human Factors in Computing Systems , Los Angeles , CA , 1998 , ACM Press : NY , pp . 95 - 102 < http : / / d3e . open . ac . uk / general / d3e - chi98 / > 40 . Toulmin , S . The Uses of Argument . Cambridge University Press : Cambridge , 1958 41 . Trigg , R . and Weiser , M . TEXTNET : A Network - Based Approach to Text Handling . ACM Transactions on Office Information Systems , 4 , 1 , 1983 42 . W3C Resource Description Framework ( RDF ) . World Wide Web Consortium , 1997 < http : / / www . w3 . org / Metadata / RDF / Overview . html > 43 . Weinstein , P . Ontology - Based Metadata . In Proceedings of the Third ACM Digital Library Conference , Pittsburgh , PA ( June ) , 1998 44 . Weinstein , P . and Alloway , G . Seed Ontologies : Growing Digital Libraries as Distributed , Intelligent Systems . In Proceedings of the Second ACM Digital Library Conference , Philadelphia , PA , USA ( July ) , 1997 , ACM Press