Memory & Cognition 1986 , 14 ( 5 ) , 442 - 449 Context - dependent effects on analogical transfer R . MASON SPENCER and ROBERT W . WEISBERG Temple University , Philadelphia , Pennsylvania The role of context in facilitating analogical transfer was investigated in two experiments . In both experiments , subjects first read two stories that were analogous to Duncker ' s ( 1945 ) radia - tion problem . Later , subjects attempted to solve the radiation problem . In Experiment 1 , the radi - ation problem was presented in a different context than that of the stories , and followed them by 6 min . Transfer was observed in subjects who were prompted to use the earlier stories in solv - ing the problem . However , the solution frequency of subjects not given such prompts did not differ from control levels . In Experiment 2 , the radiation problem was presented in the same context as the earlier stories to some subjects , and in a different context to others . The timing of the radiation problem also was varied . When a 6 - min interval separated the stories from the radia - tion problem , transfer was a function of context , with weak transfer being observed in the same - context condition , and no transfer being observed in the different - context condition . At a 45 - sec delay , transfer was again observed in the same - context condition , and a nonsignificant trend toward transfer was observed in the different - context condition . The results were interpreted as indicat - ing that context facilitates the retrieval of relevant problem - solving schemas , and as suggesting that the possession of relevant schemas is not sufficient to produce analogical transfer . The cognitive processes involved in creative produc - tions are of interest to workers in a variety of fields . Many researchers have emphasized the importance of processes involving analogy ( e . g . , Dreistadt , 1968 ; Gentner & Gent - ner , 1983 ; Gordon , 1961 ; Hoffman , 1980 ; Koestler , 1964 ; Oppenheimer , 1956 ) . For example , Koestler ( 1964 ) , in analyzing the first - hand reports about ' numer - ous scientific discoveries and inventions , argued that most resulted because scientists noticed novel connections be - tween distant content domains ( i . e . , " the discovery of hid - den similarities , " p . 27 ) . Although these first - hand ac - counts are suggestive , they are often incomplete and susceptible to the inaccuracies associated with ail retrospective reports ( Ericsson & Simon , 1980 ; Nisbett & Wilson , 1977 ) . Thus , a definitive statement concern - ing the role of novel , remote analogies in scientific dis - covery is unlikely to be based solely on discoverers ' ac - counts . Experimental studies that come closest to addressing this issue have employed transfer designs . In these studies , subjects typically are given some experience ( usually another problem ) that is analogous to , and potentially help - ful in solving , an outwardly dissimilar target problem . Using essentially this procedure , Gick and Holyoak ( 1980 , 1983 ) and Luger and Bauer ( 1978 ) found unprompted transfer during problem solving . Gick and Holyoak ( 1983 , Experiment 4 ) observed that transfer was significantly en - hanced in subjects who were exposed to two analogs prior to solving a target problem . They argued that the advan - tage of multiple analogs over a single analog was due to their subjects ' induction of a schema from their experience with the two analogous stories . Gick and Holyoak view The authors ' mailing address is : Department of Psychology , Temple University , Philadelphia , PA 19122 . these schemas as abstract categories , in which the domain - specific differences between story analogs are deleted , but the commonalities , based on their analogical relationship , are preserved . Consequently , schemas induced by multi - ple stories are more similar to the target problem than is any specific analog and are , therefore , more likely to be activated by the problem . Gick and Holyoak ' s ( 1983 ) schema - based model sug - gests that analogy may serve a nondirected retrieval func - tion during problem solving . That is , individuals , in at - tempting to solve a current problem , may be reminded of analogous knowledge on the basis of relatively abstract similarities . We refer to this as the direct analogical - transfer view . In Gick and Holyoak ' s ( 1983 ) procedure , the story anal - ysis and problem - solving phases were administered by the same individual within a single , relatively distinctive , con - text : a psychological experiment . The Luger and Bauer ( 1978 ) study was similarly administered . Contextual similarity has been found to facilitate recall in a variety of memory studies ( e . g . , Godden & Baddeley , 1975 ; Smith , 1979 ; Smith , Glenberg , & Bjork , 1978 ) . Perhaps contextual similarity , rather than analogy , served as the Basis for retrieval of the past problem in the Gick and Holyoak ( 1980 , 1983 ) and Luger and Bauer ( 1978 ) studies . If so , then these studies may provide less sup - port for a direct analogical - transfer view than previously thought . The present studies examine the role of context on analogical transfer . EXPERIMENT 1 In Experiment 1 , a systematic replication of Gick and Holyoak ' s Experiment 4 ( 1983 ) was carried out , with the addition that the analogs and the target problem were Copyright 1986 Psychonomic Society , Inc . 442 presented in different contexts . This was accomplished by presenting the analogs as part of a pilot experiment , and the target problem as a class demonstration . We felt that this manipulation would reduce the possibility of context - dependent retrieval , and thus would provide a more stringent test of the direct analogical - transfer view . Method Subjects and Design At the beginning of their class , students attending a large section of introductory psychology at Temple University were asked to par - ticipate in an experiment . Two hundred forty students ( over 95 % of those attending ) participated . The experiment consisted of two phases . In the first phase ( story analysis ) , all subjects read and answered questions about two brief stories . In the second phase ( problem solving ) , subjects attempted to solve Duncker ' s radiation problem ( 1929 , 1945 ) . Two variables were manipulated between subjects : the number of stories that were analogous to the radiation problem ( zero , one , or two ) , and whether or not subjects were informed , upon receiving the radiation problem , that the stories might help them solve the problem ( hint - aided or nonhint ) . Thus , there were six conditions . Roughly equal numbers of subjects were randomly assigned to each of the treatment condi - tions , the smallest and largest groups having 33 and 46 members , respectively . Materials Story analysis . Booklets were constructed for use in the story - analysis phase . The first page contained instructions for reading the first story . Subjects were informed that after reading the story , they would be asked some questions regarding its comprehensibil - ity , and then would be asked to briefly summarize the story . The first story appeared on the second page . On the third page , sub - jects were instructed to answer four yes - no questions regarding the story ' s clarity and readability . The fourth page instructed subjects to briefly summarize the story . These instructions discouraged ver - batim recall , but encouraged the inclusion of all details necessary to understand the main point of the story . The next four pages used the same format to present the second story . Following the second story materials , subjects were instructed to rate the similarity of the two stories on a 7 - point scale . Finally , on the last page of the CONTEXT - DEPENDENT TRANSFER 443 booklet , subjects were instructed to describe in writing any way or ways in which the stories were similar . The booklets differed among treatment conditions only in the sto - ries that they contained . Stories were selected from a pool of four stories developed by Gick and Holyoak ( 1980 , 1983 ) . Subjects in the two - analog conditions read " The General " and " Red Adair . " The analogical relationships between these stories and the radia - tion problem are summarized in Table 1 . Subjects in the zero - analog conditions read two nonanalogous stories , and subjects in the one - analog conditions read either " The General " or " Red Adair " and one of the nonanalogous stories . The order of story presentation was counterbalanced in both the two - analog and zero - analog con - ditions . In the one - analog conditions , the four possible story pair - ings were equally represented across subjects ; however , the analo - gous story was always presented last . This practice was adopted so that subjects in the one - and two - analog conditions would differ in the number of analogous stories to which they were exposed , but not in the recency of that exposure . Radiation problem . In the second phase of the experiment , sub - jects received either the hint - aided or the nonhint version of the radiation problem . These two versions differed only in that the hint - aided version contained a sentence at the end of the instructions to the radiation problem , stating that one or both of the stories the subjects had read earlier might help them to solve the problem . In order to eliminate the possibility that some physical similarity be - tween the radiation problem and the earlier booklet materials might lead a subject to suspect that Phase 2 was related to Phase 1 , the radiation problem was typed using a typeface and ink different from that of the story - analysis materials . Procedure During the story - analysis phase , subjects were told that the ex - periment was being conducted in order to gather pilot data on several stories . The story - analysis phase was divided into three timed seg - ments : 10 min in which subjects read , answered questions about , and summarized the first story ; another 10 min in which subjects performed these same tasks with the second story ; and finally , 7 min in which subjects first rated the similarity of the stories , and then described in writing the ways in which the stories were similar . Approximately 6 min elapsed between experimental phases . Dur - ing this interval , the experimenter collected the story - analysis book - lets , thanked the subjects for their participation , and left the class - room . The class instructor then made several announcements Table 1 Description of Analogous Relations between the Stories and the Radiation Problem Goal Constraint Convergence Solution Abstract Level A large force must be delivered to a central location A direct approach , using a single path , cannot be used . Simultaneously de - liver smaller forces to the central loca - tion such that the combined effect will equal the large force . The General The general ' s army must reach the fortress . Any large body of men traveling on one of the roads will detonate the mines . Split the army up into small groups . Have each group converge on the fortress , simultaneously . Red Adair A large quantity of fire - retardant foam must reach the base of the oil well . There is no hose large enough to carry the quantity of foam needed to extinguish the fire . Using many small hoses at the same time , pump a large quantity of foam on the base of the well . Radiation Problem High - intensity rays must reach the tumor . High intensity rays will kill the healthy tissue that they pass through . Aim several ray - emitting devices at the tumor . Reduce the intensity of each device so that the healthy tissue will not be harmed , but deliver enough inten - sity , from these multiple sources , to destroy the tumor . 444 SPENCER AND WEISBERG regarding the course before administering the radiation problem . The instructor introduced the radiation problem as a class demon - stration , saying that it would be discussed in a subsequent lecture on problem solving . He instructed students to write down any and all solutions they thought of . Copies of the problem were then dis - tributed , and students were allowed 10 min to solve it . Results The effectiveness of analogy in promoting transfer was assessed by probing the degree to which convergence so - lution frequency was dependent upon the number of analo - gous stories that the subjects had read . The two - analog subjects ' similarity descriptions were then classified ac - cording to how well they captured the critical analogical relationships between stories . Finally , using these clas - sifications , the relationship between subjects ' similarity descriptions and transfer was explored . Convergence Solutions Each solution was evaluated by two scorers who were blind as to the subject ' s treatment condition . In order to be counted as a convergence solution , a subject ' s solu - tion to the radiation problem must have explicitly men - tioned the use of more than one low - intensity ray . It was also necessary that it be apparent that the subject intended for these rays to simultaneously converge on the tumor . A few solutions were initially evaluated differently by the scorers . In these cases , the solutions were reevaluated jointly by both scorers . This practice led to complete agreement regarding the classification of all solutions . Hint - aided conditions . The present hint - aided results were very similar to those obtained by Gick and Holyoak ( 1983 ) . As can be seen in the first row of Table 2 , a rela - tionship was found between the number of analogous pre - stories and the production of convergence solutions . The overall effect of the number of analogous prestories on the frequency of convergence solutions was significant [ X 2 ( 2 ) = 19 . 02 , ; ? < . 01 ] . The comparisons between in - dividual treatment conditions were also significant . More two - analog than one - analog subjects produced conver - gence solutions ( p < . 035 ) , and more one - analog than zero - analog subjects produced convergence solutions ( p < . 008 ) . ' Nonhint conditions . As can be seen in the second row of Table 2 , few convergence solutions were produced by nonhint subjects , and convergence solution frequency was independent of the number of analogous stories that these Table 2 Percentage of Non - Hint and Hint - Aided Convergence Solutions in Experiment 1 , as a Function of the Number of Analogous Stories Read Number of Analogous Stories Condition Hint - Aided Non - Hint Total 0 10 ( 4 / 40 ) 4 ( 2 / 46 ) 7 ( 6 / 86 ) 1 34 ( 15 / 44 ) 12 ( 4 / 33 ) 25 ( 19 / 77 ) 2 57 ( 21 / 37 ) 5 ( 2 / 40 ) 30 ( 23 / 77 ) Total 33 ( 40 / 121 ) 7 ( 8 / 119 ) 20 ( 48 / 240 ) Note—Frequencies are given in parentheses . subjects had read [ ^ ( 2 ) = 2 . 14 , p > . 10 ] . Thus , present - ing the story analogs and the radiation problem in differ - ent contexts appears to have eliminated the unprompted analogical transfer observed by Gick and Holyoak ( 1983 , Experiment 4 ) . Quality of Similarity Descriptions Gick and Holyoak ( 1983 , p . 22 ) stated that their similarity - description procedure may have been a crucial determinant of analogical transfer in their study . Except for the similarity rating task , nowhere were their subjects ( or those in the present study ) explicitly asked to com - pare the prestories . Thus , the similarity description task is the main vehicle through which some subjects may have developed " convergence problem " schemas . In the present experiment , similarity descriptions were classified into three categories , using a method devised by Gick and Holyoak ( 1983 ) . This method differentiates subjects ' similarity descriptions based upon how well they captured the analogical relations between stories , as out - lined in Table 1 . In order for a description to qualify as a " good " schema , the basic idea of having forces con - verge from different directions had to be present , either explicitly or as an inference . In addition , at least one other major aspect of the analogy had to be expressed : either the use of multiple small forces or a description of other parallels in the initial problem situations ( e . g . , centrally located targets ) . An actual example of a " good " similar - ity description is : " They each accomplished this by divid - ing their resources in order to place the resources at the objective simultaneously . " An " intermediate " schema contained only one of these major features ( e . g . , " In both cases something prevented them from using the large force . Therefore , they had to break it down into smaller groups " ) . " Poor " similarity descriptions contained none of the critical analogical relationships . As might be expected , the similarity descriptions of sub - jects who did not receive two analogous stories were uni - formly rated as ' ' poor . ' ' Thus , all analyses to be reported are restricted to the two - analog conditions . A strong relationship was observed between the qual - ity of hint - aided subjects ' similarity descriptions and their production of convergence solutions . As can be seen in the first line of Table 3 , hint - aided subjects who wrote poor similarity descriptions were less likely to produce a convergence solution than were hint - aided subjects who produced either an intermediate or a good similarity description ( / ? < . 001 ) . 2 This finding replicates Gick and Holyoak ' s ( 1983 ) finding . Although there were too few convergence solutions to warrant a similar analysis of the nonhint condition , as can be seen in the second line of Table 3 , no trend toward a relationship between quality of similarity descriptions and the production of conver - gence solutions was observed in these subjects . This find - ing , however , must be interpreted in light of the fact that no good similarity descriptions were produced in this con - dition . CONTEXT - DEPENDENT TRANSFER 445 Table 3 Percentage of Convergence Solutions in Experiment 1 , and in Gick and Holyoak ' s Experiment 4 , as a Function of the Quality of Subjects ' Similarity Descriptions Quality of Similarity Description Condition Experiment 1 Hint - Aided Non - Hint Poor 38 ( 8 / 21 ) 4 ( 1 / 27 ) Intermediate 75 ( 9 / 12 ) 8 ( 1 / 13 ) Good 100 ( 4 / 4 ) ( 0 / 0 ) Total 57 ( 21 / 37 ) 5 ( 2 / 40 ) Gick and Holyoak Hint - Aided 70 ( 21 / 30 ) 90 ( 9 / 10 ) 100 ( 11 / 11 ) 80 ( 41 / 51 ) Non - Hint 30 ( 9 / 30 ) 40 ( 4 / 10 ) 91 ( 10 / 11 ) 45 ( 23 / 51 ) Note—In parentheses , the frequencies of solvers is presented as a frac - tion of the total number of subjects , within a treatment condition , who produced a similarity description of a given quality . Non - hint versus hint - aided was manipulated within subjects in Gick and Holyoak ' s ( 1983 ) Experiment 4 . Discussion In the present experiment , transfer of analogous prior experience to the radiation problem was limited to sub - jects who were explicitly directed to use this prior ex - perience ( i . e . , hint - aided subjects ) . In addition , factors that were found to facilitate hint - aided transfer ( i . e . , preexposure to more than one analog , and the quality of subjects ' similarity descriptions ) had no effect on nonhint transfer . The present hint - aided findings replicate those of Gick and Holyoak ( 1983 ) . However , Gick and Holyoak found this same pattern of results in nonhint subjects , whereas we did not . Although the present study primar - ily differs from Gick and Holyoak ' s ( 1983 ) study in that the experimental phases were presented in different con - texts , several other differences may have contributed to our contrasting findings . First , in Gick and Holyoak ' s ( 1983 ) study , the problem - solving phase directly followed the story - analysis phase , whereas in our study 6 min elapsed between experimen - tal phases . In light of the level of transfer observed in our hint - aided subjects , we are confident that the earlier sto - ries were potentially available to our nonhint subjects as they solved the radiation problem . Nevertheless , it is pos - sible that a brief interevent interval is necessary for spon - taneous retrieval based on analogy to occur . Another factor that may have influenced our contras - tive findings concerns the absence of good similarity descriptions in the two - analog , nonhint condition . Although only 20 % of Gick and Holyoak ' s ( 1983 ) sub - jects wrote good similarity descriptions , 90 % of those sub - jects went on to produce the convergence solution . Thus , it is possible that unprompted transfer in the present study would have been observed if more of our subjects had written good similarity descriptions . It should be noted , however , that although none of our nonhint subjects wrote a good similarity description , the quality of their descrip - tions did not differ significantly from that of the hint - aided subjects , many of whom produced the convergence solu - tion . Thus , the present study indicates , as have others ( Perfetto , Bransford , & Franks , 1983 ; Reed , Ernst , & Banerji , 1974 ; Schoenfeld , 1979b ; Weisberg , DiCamillo , & Phillips , 1978 ) , that there is often a wide gap between the availability and the access of relevant knowledge dur - ing problem solving . In summary , the main finding of the present study was the absence of unprompted transfer when the stories and radiation problem were presented in different contexts . The present study , however , did not directly address the question of whether similar encoding contexts would have brought about transfer . Both this issue and the sensitivity of transfer to the temporal separation of analogous events were investigated in Experiment 2 . EXPERIMENT 2 In this experiment , we directly examined whether con - textual similarity would facilitate transfer , and whether relatively minor changes in the temporal interval between story analysis and problem solving would influence trans - fer . For these purposes , two levels of context ( same and different ) and two levels of the timing of the radiation problem ( immediate and delay ) were manipulated in a fac - torial design . Method Subjects Ninety - two students in introductory psychology at Temple Univer - sity served as subjects during class time . Although participation was voluntary , students received course credit for participating , and all students chose to participate . Instead of conducting the experi - ment in a single large lecture setting , as was done in Experiment 1 , students were tested in seven smaller recitation sections . The num - ber of students in each section varied from 6 to 23 . Recitation sec - tions were randomly assigned to one of the four treatment condi - tions , with the restriction that approximately equai numbers of subjects would ultimately be tested in each condition . The num - bers of subjects within the four conditions ranged from 22 to 25 . Materials Except for the similarity description instructions , the story - analysis booklets and radiation problem were identical to those used in the nonhint , two - analog condition of Experiment 1 . The instructions for the similarity description task were modified , in an attempt to produce more " good " similarity descriptions . All subjects were asked to describe any way in which the situations faced by the sto - ries ' main characters were similar , and also to describe any way in which these characters ' responses were similar . We hoped that these instructions would make it more likely that subjects would base their similarity descriptions on those aspects of the stories that were analogous , and that this , in turn , would provide a stronger basis from which transfer could occur during problem solving . Procedure All subjects were told that the purpose of the experiment was to collect pilot data on materials to be used in a future study . The story - analysis procedure was identical in all respects to Experi - ment 1 . All subjects saw two analogous prestories , and no subject received a hint . In the same - context conditions , a single experimenter administered both the story - analysis and problem - solving phases . In the different - context conditions , the experimenter left the classroom after story analysis , on the pretext of retrieving additional materials , and the recitation leader administered the radiation problem as a class demonstration , during the experimenter ' s absence . 446 SPENCER AND WEISBERG In the immediate conditions , a 45 - sec interval between story anal - ysis and problem solving was used to collect the story - analysis book - lets and to introduce the radiation problem . In the delay conditions , story - analysis booklets were first collected , and then the recitation leader resumed a normal class routine , by answering questions , tak - ing roll , or lecturing for 5 min , 15 sec . This resulted in a 6 - min delay . Then , either the recitation leader administered the radiation problem as a class demonstration ( different - context - delay condi - tion ) , or the experimenter returned and administered the radiation problem as the second part of a pilot study ( same - context - delay condition ) . The instructions for the radiation problem and the time allowed to solve it ( i . e . , 10 min ) were the same as in Experiment 1 . Results Convergence Solutions Table 4 presents the percentage of convergence solu - tions in each treatment condition , as a function of the qual - ity of subjects ' similarity descriptions . As can be seen in the fifth row of Table 4 , none of the 25 different - context - delay subjects produced a convergence solution . This replicates the lack of transfer observed from the nearly identical nonhint , two - analog condition of Experi - ment 1 . The proportion of different - context - delay con - vergence solutions is not significantly different from that observed of subjects in Experiment 1 who read two ir - relevant prestories ( p > . 22 1 ) . 3 The solution frequency in the different - context - delay condition may , therefore , be used as a baseline in judging whether subjects in the other treatment conditions benefited from their exposure to the two story analogs . Although generally accepted nonparametric techniques for detecting an interaction in nominal data have not been developed , an inspection of the total convergence solu - tion frequencies in the last column of Table 4 strongly suggests that an interaction exists between the timing of the radiation problem and the contextual similarity of the two experimental phases . Thus , the finding that context ( collapsed across timing ) was found to have a significant effect on the production of convergence solutions ( p < . 029 ) whereas timing ( collapsed across context ) did Table 4 Percentage of Convergence Solutions in Experiment 2 as a Function of Treatment Condition and Quality of Similarity Description ' Quality of Similarity Description Condition Poor Intermediate Good Total Same - Context - ImmediateDelayCollapsed • 12 ( 2 / 17 ) 0 ( 0 / 10 ) 7 ( 2 / 27 ) 40 ( 2 / 5 ) 25 ( 2 / 8 ) 31 ( 4 / 13 ) ( 0 / 0 ) 80 ( 4 / 5 ) 80 ( 4 / 5 ) 18 ( 4 / 22 ) 26 ( 6 / 23 ) 22 ( 10 / 45 ) Different - Context - Immediate 14 ( 2 / 14 ) 17 ( 1 / 6 ) 0 ( 0 / 2 ) 14 ( 3 / 22 ) Delay 0 ( 0 / 17 ) 0 ( 0 / 6 ) 0 ( 0 / 2 ) 0 ( 0 / 25 ) Collapsed 6 ( 2 / 31 ) 8 ( 1 / 12 ) 0 ( 0 / 4 ) 6 ( 3 / 47 ) Note—In parentheses , the frequency of solvers is expressed as a frac - tion of the total number of subjects who produced a similarity descrip - tion of a given quality . not ( p > . 432 ) is not an accurate description of the present results . Significantly more convergence solutions were produced in the same - context - immediate and same - context - delay conditions than in the different - context - delay condition ( ps < . 042 and . 009 , respec - tively ) . In addition , there was a nonsignificant trend toward more convergence solutions in the different - context - immediate condition than in the different - context - delay condition ( p < . 095 ) . All other compari - sons between treatment conditions were also not signifi - cant ( allps > . 252 ) . Thus , after a delay , context was a crucial variable in determining transfer , with similar con - texts facilitating transfer , and no transfer being observed in the different - context condition . At the more immedi - ate test , transfer was again observed in the same - context condition . However , in the immediate conditions , trans - fer was not context - dependent . Quality of Similarity Descriptions The overall quality of subjects ' similarity descriptions was comparable to that found in Experiment 1 . The per - centages of subjects producing good , intermediate , and poor descriptions were 10 % , 27 % , and 63 % , respectively . Thus , despite our expectations , the revision of the similar - ity description instructions did not improve the quality of these descriptions . As can be seen in Table 4 , a strong relationship between convergence solution frequency and the quality of similar - ity descriptions was found in the same - context conditions . The more a same - context subject ' s similarity description captured the analogical relationships between stories , the more likely it was that the subject would produce a con - vergence solution . This result parallels that for the hint - aided two - analog subjects in Experiment 1 . The differ - ence in the frequency of convergence solutions between subjects who produced poor versus intermediate or good similarity descriptions was significant ( p < . 006 ) . This finding replicates that of Gick and Holyoak ( 1984 , Ex - periment 4 ) . Considerably different findings , however , were observed in the different - context conditions . As can be seen from Table 4 , the production of good and inter - mediate similarity descriptions by these subjects did not facilitate the production of convergence solutions . If the quality of subjects ' similarity descriptions is related to the likelihood of producing a convergence so - lution , it is conceivable that the observed differences in the frequency of convergence solutions among treatment conditions might be the result of differences in the qual - ity of the similarity descriptions among these treatment conditions . The similarity descriptions of the two same - context conditions differed reliably fx 2 ( 2 ) = 7 . 466 , p < . 025 ] . This difference seems to be due to the lower quality of the similarity descriptions produced in the same - context - immediate condition . No other comparison ap - proached significance ( all ps > . 10 ) . Thus , the lack of CONTEXT - DEPENDENT TRANSFER 447 transfer observed in the different - context - delay condition is not the product of abnormally deficient similarity descriptions . Discussion The results of the present experiment may be summa - rized as follows . No evidence of transfer was observed in the different - context - delay condition , replicating the findings of Experiment 1 . Using these subjects ' perfor - mance as a no - transfer control , a nonsignificant trend toward transfer was observed in the different - context - immediate condition , and reliable , although in - frequent , transfer was observed in both same - context con - ditions . Finally , the quality of subjects ' similarity descrip - tions was highly predictive of the production of convergence solutions in the same - context but not in the different - context conditions . Given the small numbers of subjects who produced con - vergence solutions in our experiments , one may question whether this measure was too insensitive to accurately measure the effects of context and timing on analogical transfer . The radiation problem was indeed a difficult problem for subjects , independent of their treatment con - dition . However , the performance of the hint - aided , two - analog subjects of Experiment 1 ( 57 % of whom produced convergence solutions ) suggests that more than half of the subjects in Experiment 2 would have produced conver - gence solutions if they had attempted to apply their knowledge of the earlier stories in solving the radiation problem . In view of this latent potential for producing con - vergence solutions , the fact that so few of our subjects did so is one of the most interesting aspects of the present study . This relative infrequency of convergence solutions was especially surprising in the same - context - immediate con - dition . Although we replicated Gick and Holyoak ' s ( 1983 ) results , with respect to the presence of transfer in this con - dition , we observed considerably less transfer ( 18 % con - vergence solutions ) than Gick and Holyoak did ( 45 % con - vergence solutions ) . There are several factors that we feel are responsible for this difference in convergence solu - tion frequency . First , as noted earlier , the similarity descriptions of our same - context - immediate subjects were deficient , at least when compared to those of the same - context - delay subjects . In Gick and Holyoak ' s study , nearly half of all convergence solutions came from sub - jects who produced good similarity descriptions . In our same - context - immediate condition , no good similarity descriptions were produced . Insofar as similarity descrip - tion quality is highly related to the production of conver - gence solutions in same - context conditions , one would not expect many convergence solutions from a condition in which similarity descriptions were deficient . A second possible reason why considerably fewer con - vergence solutions were produced by our same - context - immediate subjects than by Gick and Holyoak ' s subjects concerns the physical similarity of the story - analysis booklets and the radiation problem . As in Ex - periment 1 , the story - analysis and problem - solving materials used in the present study differed with respect to the typeface and color of ink used . Since Gick and Holyoak ( 1983 ) do not report taking any special measures to reduce the physical similarity of these materials , we assume that they did not . Although it is unlikely that this physical similarity would , by itself , have an effect on transfer , it may be a determining factor , for some in - dividuals , when paired with other contextual similarities , as it was in Gick and Holyoak ' s study ( 1983 ) . Despite the overall infrequency with which the conver - gence solution was produced , context and timing were found to have an interactive effect on transfer . A defini - tive answer as to why the context effect was limited to the delay conditions is beyond the reach of our data , and the inequality of similarity description quality across treat - ments makes any interpretation unduly speculative . However , whatever interpretation one takes with respect to the present study , it will have to accommodate the find - ing that intercontext transfer of past experience to a super - ficially dissimilar , but analogous , current event did not occur over interevent intervals as short as 6 min . GENERAL DISCUSSION In the present studies , a similar encoding context was a necessary factor involved in unprompted analogical transfer . It is important to note , however , that similar en - coding contexts did not produce transfer in subjects who wrote poor similarity descriptions . Similar results were recently reported by Catrambone and Holyoak ( 1985 ) , who varied context by informing one group of subjects that they would be in a series of separate experiments , and not giving a second group any information to induce them to separate story analysis from the radiation problem . From our perspective , it is somewhat difficult to inter - pret their results , because no zero - analog control subjects were included , and because the same experimenter con - ducted all phases of the study . These issues notwithstand - ing , Catrambone and Holyoak found that changing con - text essentially eliminated any effect of schema quality on transfer . As we found , all the subjects in the different - context conditions in the Catrambone and Holyoak study performed at the level of subjects producing poor quality schemas . Assuming our context effect is real , two related ques - tions arise . First , how does context influence transfer , and second , is possession of a relevant schema sufficient to produce transfer ? Concerning the role of context , it is possible that simi - lar encoding contexts aided the retrieval of subjects ' con - vergence schemas . This possibility is supported by the finding that only subjects who wrote intermediate or good similarity descriptions benefited from similar encoding contexts . Gick and Holyoak ' s model of analogical trans - fer assumes that relational commonalities are represented in schemas induced from multiple analogs . It is unclear as to whether their model would assume a common con - 448 SPENCER AND WEISBERG text to be represented within such schemas as well . If so , then itjs possible that encoding context , in addition to the radiation problem itself , may serve to retrieve schemas . However , if the radiation problem were a suffi - cient cue for the retrieval of convergence schemas , one may ask why no transfer was observed in our different - context conditions . This leads us to the question of whether possession of a relevant schema is sufficient to produce transfer . Although Gick and Holyoak ' s schema - based model may easily accommodate a facilitative effect of similar encod - ing contexts on transfer , it does not view analogical trans - fer as being dependent upon such concrete similarities . Rather , it assumes that a schema at an appropriate level of abstraction may automatically be retrieved by a cur - rent analog . Thus , the complete absence of transfer in our different - context conditions would present difficulties for Gick and Holyoak ' s model , if " convergence schemas " were available to our subjects as they solved the radia - tion problem . However , since so few of our subjects produced good similarity descriptions , it must be assumed that few convergence schemas were induced during the story - analysis phase . Thus , although the present results raise the question of whether analogical transfer is , in ac - tuality , dependent upon , rather than simply facilitated by , concrete similarities , an answer to this question must await studies in which subjects ' knowledge is more certain . One such study is presently available . In a study investigating the induction and efficacy of mathematical problem - v solving heuristics , Schoenfeld ( 1979b ) found that students t rarely derived heuristics from multiple - problem exem - plars , without explicit instruction . This finding is consis - tent with the infrequency with which good similarity descriptions were written in the present study . More im - portantly , however , Schoenfeld found that the induction of a heuristic provided no guarantee that subjects would use it in solving a later related problem . It should be noted that Schoenfeld ' s heuristics and Gick and Holyoak ' s schemas are quite similar , operationally . Of course , a strong statement concerning the possible context - dependent nature of analogical transfer cannot be made until other studies , involving different materials , proce - dures , and subject populations , investigate this issue . In this connection , it would be interesting to see whether findings similar to the present results are obtained with experts as subjects . Previous research has found that ex - perts are able to get at " the heart " of problems within their fields of expertise ( Larkin , McDermott , D . P . Si - mon , & H . A . Simon , 1980 ; Schoenfeld , 1979a ; Schoen - feld & Herrmann , 1982 ) . Based on experts ' extensive ex - perience in solving certain types of problems , one might expect that they would possess problem - solving schemas that would facilitate analogical transfer to distant content domains . Thus , future research , conducted on experts , might provide a more sensitive test of the direct analogical - transfer view than did the present studies . As mentioned earlier , many investigators of creativity have asserted that creative discovery is often promoted by noticing an analogy in a remote domain ( e . g . , Gor - don , 1961 ; Koestler , 1964 ) . However , even if one as - sumes that this view is correct ( see Weisberg , 1986 ) , the question of how these creative discoverers initially no - ticed their analogies remains open . REFERENCES CATRAMBONE , R . , & HOLYOAK , K . ( 1985 , August ) . The role of schemas in analogical problem solving . Paper presented at the 93rd Annual Meeting of the American Psychological Association , Los Angeles . DREISTADT , R . ( 1968 ) . An analysis of the use of analogies and metaphors in science . The Journal of Psychology , 68 , 97 - 116 . DUNCKER , K . ( 1929 ) . A qualitative ( experimental and theoretical ) study of productive thinking ( solving of comprehensible problems ) . Jour - nal of Genetic Psychology , 33 , 642 - 708 . DUNCKER , K . ( 1945 ) . On problem solving . Psychological Monographs , 58 ( Whole No . 270 ) . ERICSSON , K . A . , & SIMON , H . A . ( 1980 ) . Verbal reports as data . Psy - chological Review , 87 , 215 - 251 . FtSHER . R . A . ( 1950 ) . Statistical methods for research workers . New York : Hafner . GENTNER , D . , & GENTNER , D . R . ( 1983 ) . Flowing waters or teeming crowds : Mental models of electricity . In D . Gentner & A . Stevens ( Eds . ) , Menial models . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . GICK , M . L . , & HOLYOAK , K . J . ( 1980 ) . Analogical problem solving . Cognitive Psychology , 12 , 306 - 355 . GICK , M . L . , & HOLYOAK , K . J . ( 1983 ) . Schema induction and analogi - cal transfer . Cognitive Psychology , 15 , 1 - 38 . GODDEN , D . R . , & BADDELEY . A . D . ( 1975 ) . Context - dependent memory in two natural environments : On land and underwater . British Jour - nal of Psychology , 66 , 325 - 331 . GORDON , W . 1 . ] . ( 1961 ) . Synectics . New York : Harper & Row . HOFTMAN , R . R . ( 1980 ) . Metaphor in science . In R . P . Hoffman & R . R . Honeck ( Eds . ) , Cognition and figurative language . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . KOESTLER , A . ( 1964 ) . The act of creation . London : Hutchinson . LARKIN , J . , MCDERMOTT , J . , SIMON , D . P . , & SIMON , H . A . ( 1980 ) . Expert and novice performance in solving physics problems . Science , 208 . 1335 - 1342 . " LUGER , G . F . , & BAUER , M . A . ( 1978 ) . Transfer effects in isomorphic problem situations . Ada Psychologica , 42 , 121 - 131 . - NISBETT , R . E . , 4 WILSON , T . D . ( 1977 ) . Telling more than we can know : Verbal reports on mental processes . Psychological Review , 84 , 231 - 259 . OPPENHEIMER , R . ( 1956 ) . Analogy in science . American Psychologist , 11 , 127 - 135 . PERFETTO , G . A . , BRANSFORD , J . D . , & FRANKS , J . J . ( 1983 ) . Con - straints on access in a problem solving context . Memory & Cogni - tion , 11 , 24 - 31 . REED . S . , ERNST , G . . & BANERJI , R . ( 1974 ) . The role of analogy in transfer between similar problem states . Cognitive Psychology , 6 , 436 - 450 . SCHOENFELD , A . ( 1979a ) . Can heuristics be taught ? In J . Lochhead & J . Clement ( Eds . ) , Cognitive process instruction . Philadelphia : Frank - lin Institute Press . SCHOENFELD , A . ( 1979b ) . Explicit heuristic training as a variable in problem solving performance . Journal for Research in Mathematics Education , 10 , " l73 - 187 . SCHOENFELD , A . , & HERRMANN , D . ( 1982 ) . Problem perception and knowledge structure in expert and novice mathematical problem solvers . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , & Cognition , 8 , 484 - 494 . CONTEXT - DEPENDENT TRANSFER 449 SMITH , S . M . ( 1979 ) . Remembering in and out of context . Journal of 2 . Since two cells in a 2 x3 chi - square analysis had expected values Experimental Psychology : Human Learning & Memory , 5 , 460 - 471 . of less than five , the intermediate and good similarity descriptions were SMITH , S . M . , GLENBERG , A . , & BJORK , R . A . ( 1978 ) . Environmental combined and a Fisher exact probability was calculated . However , the context and human memory . Memory & Cognition , 6 , 342 - 353 . result is significant by either method . WEISBERG , R . W . ( 1986 ) . Creativity : Genius and other myths . New 3 . The data from the 0 - analog , hint - aided condition was combined York : Freeman . with that of the 0 - analog , non - hint condition in this analysis . WEISBERG , R . W . , DICAMILLO , M . , & PHILLIPS , D . ( 1978 ) . Transfer - ring old associations to new problems : A non - automatic process . Jour - nal of Verbal Learning & Verbal Behavior , 17 , 219 - 228 . NOTES 1 . The probabilities for all 2x2 analyses were computed using Fisher ' s ( Manuscript received August 26 , 1985 ; ( 1950 ) exact method . revision accepted for publication March 11 , 1986 . )