161 Co - Design in the Wild : A Case Study on Meme Creation Tools Monica Maceli Pratt Institute School of Information 144 West 14th Street New York , NY USA mmaceli @ pratt . edu ABSTRACT The internet meme has become a vital form of self - expression in social communities throughout the Internet . The tools facilitating meme - creation , specifically image macros , have been little - studied but endow non - technical users with the ability to create the multi - layered graphics typical to such memes . The use of these creativity tools provides a unique setting in which to explore the concept of co - design , wherein tools are shaped in response to emergent user needs . Users and designers of meme - creation tools have evolved ways of collaborating and communicating over time , in a fully naturalistic setting . This study explores these processes through survey and interviews of tool designer / developers and an analysis of users ' design ideas generated over time . The study finds that , while co - design may be commonly practiced today , these activities raise numerous challenges to participatory design , including : creating trust between designers and users , managing unwieldy system growth , and supporting features specific to aspiring end - user crafters . CCS Concepts ● Human - centered computing ● Collaborative and social computing → Collaborative and social computing design and evaluation methods Keywords Co - design ; participatory design ; social technologies ; Internet memes ; image macros . 1 . INTRODUCTION Within social media communities online , the Internet meme has served as a popular means of expression for many years , attracting a great deal of research interest and wide involvement from end - users as both content creators and consumers . Based on theory greatly pre - dating the Internet , [ 10 ] the concept of meme refers to a cultural unit that spreads easily from one mind to another . One highly popular form of Internet meme is the image macro – a background image upon which text captions are super - imposed by content creators [ 40 ] . While much research has addressed the social and viral aspects of Internet memes [ e . g . 3 , 8 , 27 ] little work directly explores the tools supporting users in meme creation and the developers choosing to participate in such projects , often on a volunteer basis and without formal training in user - centered and participatory design processes . Meme - creation tools empower users with the ability to create , host , and share the layered graphics typical to an image macro , without requiring technical knowledge or skills . Such tools require design , development , and maintenance over time and , in the competitive landscape , direct consideration of end - user needs , ranging from the technologically unskilled user to supporting other developers through code sharing or creation of tools to further build derivative works ( e . g . through application programming interfaces ) . These largely volunteer - run tools have been shaped by the needs of their users in use and users and designers have evolved ways of soliciting feedback and implementing design changes and suggestions over time , largely outside of a formalized design process . Formalized design methodologies can be considered the tools and techniques core to intentional user - centered and participatory design practices commonly applied by trained design professionals , e . g . interviews , personas , user testing , etc . Much research work in user - centered and participatory design has explored application of these methods and processes ; however , technology tools are increasingly designed and developed in an informal ( and often ad hoc ) manner . This creates an increasing blurriness between design time and use time , wherein design and use activities may occur continuously and simultaneously . This fundamentally new relationship between design time and use time activities has been anticipated by participatory design researchers for years [ e . g . 11 , 23 ] becoming feasible in the present with the possibilities opened up by social technologies [ e . g . 22 ] . This process of co - design supports emergent collaborations between designer / developers and end users , extending throughout the life of the system [ e . g . 35 ] . This yields an interesting landscape in which to explore questions relating to co - design and the relationship between designers and users in a fully naturalistic setting . This research study takes a retrospective approach in exploring the co - design processes of meme - creation tools over time , focusing on the techniques applied and challenges faced by the tools ' designer / developers . As the focus of this study is on the design activities of the meme tool creators ( as opposed to their implementation work as tool developers ) the tools ' designer / developers will simply be referred to as designers in the following sections . 1 . 1 The Evolution of Meme - Creation Tools The image macro has become one of the most popular forms of internet memes , thriving within online communities for over a decade [ 7 ] . In more recent times , events within key online communities have driven a new wave of development of novel meme - creation tools . A highly - popular subreddit ( a subset of the Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author ( s ) must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from Permissions @ acm . org . PDC ' 16 , August 15 - 19 , 2016 , Aarhus , Denmark Copyright is held by the owner / author ( s ) . Publication rights licensed to ACM . ACM 978 - 1 - 4503 - 4046 - 5 / 16 / 08 $ 15 . 00 DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2940299 . 2940300 162 Figure 1 . Example of web - based meme - creation tool [ 32 ] wildly - popular online community website Reddit ) created in December of 2010 is dedicated to " AdviceAnimals " [ 1 ] – image macros that feature animals or humans overlaid with captioned text , typically at the top and bottom of the image . Each image macro has a particular meaning or character trait dictating appropriate contextual usage , e . g . “Insanity Wolf” , " Success Kid " , and “Socially Awkward Penguin” . Sites such as Knowyourmeme . com attempt to keep pace with new meme creation and document the function and meaning of the many AdviceAnimals , originating both on Reddit as well as other social sites and spaces throughout the Internet . The social sites themselves , however , typically do not provide the functionality to create memes ; rather users create them using independent sites ( e . g . Figure 1 above ) and post the hosted image macro to various online communities , public and private . The AdviceAnimals moderators maintain a sidebar on the subreddit listing meme creation tools . Although users were historically free to use whatever tool they prefer , these links drive traffic to the suggested meme - creation sites . This particular list of meme - making tools is curated by the AdviceAnimal moderators and in recent years has changed significantly as a major meme - creation site – Quickmeme – was banned by the Reddit community . Quickmeme had reigned as the most popular meme - creation site for many years ; in 2013 it was revealed that a moderator of AdviceAnimals ( who is also an owner of Quickmeme ) was removing posts from competing meme - creation sites to drive more traffic to Quickmeme [ 34 ] . The ban of Quickmeme opened up a vacuum in which many new meme - creation tools were created and began to vie for traffic . In addition to public websites for general meme - creation , the popularity of memes drove the development of new tools that would be better suited to meme creation in specific contexts , such as posting to an internal company chat forum or distributing directly to groups of friends or colleagues . The technologies employed in the development of such tools expanded beyond the boundaries of traditional web development techniques , e . g . developing plugins that would integrate with group chat software such as Campfire or command - line tools for the tech - savvy . Many such tools and websites were made open source by their creators , with code and development processes publicly shared for collaboration in web - based version control repositories such as Github [ 21 ] . From a research perspective , this has created an interesting landscape in which designer / developers were motivated to create new meme - making tools and tailor them to their users ' current needs and environment , while also attempting to distinguish their tools with unique features to win traffic from their competitors . 2 . MOTIVATION The meme - creation tools themselves are little - studied but provide a unique perspective into emergent design requirements facilitated over time by designers and users working in collaboration . The following study design is directed towards exploring the following research questions : (cid:120) How do meme - tool designers collaborate with their end users over time , outside of a formalized design process ? (cid:120) What types of features do end users request in use ? (cid:120) What are the implications of these findings for co - design theory and practice ? 3 . RELATED WORK 3 . 1 The Challenge of Design - in - Use Early researchers in participatory design [ e . g . 13 , 20 ] , working within the Scandinavian traditions of cooperative system design , identified the key challenges of design as arising from the differences between the setting of design and the ultimate setting of use [ 23 ] . The concept and practice of design - in - use [ e . g . 19 , 23 ] advocated for users contributing to system design and modification over the life of the system . This presented a logical , but technologically and socially challenging , solution to bridge the divide between design time and use time . Later research highlighted the important issues this mindset raises for the study and practice of participatory design . Dittrich et al . [ 11 ] suggest that a move towards design that is continuous and ongoing raises a need to reconsider our formal design processes and they emphasize the issues raised by a movement towards complex , distributed design of systems : organizational circumstances , the malleability of software , and fundamentally reframing activities as designing - for - change . Complementary needs were identified by Fischer and Hermann [ 15 ] who suggested the following key principles for the " meta - designers " of systems that are intended to evolve and change in use : provide building blocks , under - design for emergent behavior , establish cultures of participation , share control , promote mutual learning and the support of knowledge exchange , and structure communication to support reflection on practice . More generally , researchers emphasized that realizing the vision of design - in - use necessitates a change in “how we design , what we design , and who designs” [ 35 ] . As design research and practice moved towards co - design , in which designers and user collaboratively shape the system over time , numerous challenges emerged . Although participatory design methods and practices have existed for decades and their contributions have been thoughtfully and critically assessed over time [ e . g . 37 ] , practical co - design techniques that can be applied continuously throughout the life of the system have required a great deal of continuing exploration . Early participatory design researchers engaged with users in the traditional workplace environment [ 13 , 20 ] and these practices persist in many projects . The practice of co - design has become commonplace in participatory design practices wherein users and designers work together to envision future environments of use , in a variety of contexts ( e . g . designing for children , people with disabilities , workers in companies , etc . [ 32 ] ) . However , participatory design researchers have more recently emphasized a need to move participatory design research to the public sphere , outside formal organizations , necessitating the creation of innovative participatory - design - focused research groups , e . g . Malmö Living Labs [ 4 ] . Social media technologies , such as the meme - creation tools explored in this study , have provided unique opportunities for users to engage with tools that have a low technological barrier to entry in naturalistic settings , with little need for intervention from professional designers [ 22 ] . 163 New approaches to the environment of design , such as living labs [ e . g . 4 , 5 , 18 , 38 ] , provide spaces for co - design to take place in naturalistic settings over time , in response to the failures of traditionally " closed " research settings to foster innovation . In such a landscape , social technologies have begun to provide a valuable means of furthering research exploring co - design in real contexts with real users and real designers , facilitating projects that move closer to true design in the " wild " [ 20 ] . 3 . 2 Designing Collaborative Media This broad shift towards co - design has drawn research attention from the perspectives of both participatory design and media studies , with the latter domain exploring the possibilities and challenges introduced when users move from consumers of media to media producers . Much as design researchers identified the challenges posed by moving towards a world in which everyone design [ e . g . 11 , 35 ] , collaborative media research began to address the increasingly commonplace scenario in which production , consumption , and design activities were intertwined over time , citing a similar need to rethink design processes and the roles of designer and user [ 28 ] . These inherently collaborative media creation processes and technologies disrupt the traditional consumer - producer model of media creation , giving end users the ability to create , modify and distribute media [ 26 ] . In addition to media creation , collaborative media empowers users to take part in the design of the infrastructure , throughout the life of the system ; designers ( or more accurately termed – meta - designers [ 14 ] ) purposefully design systems for future customization in the hands of their users [ 28 ] . These activities , roles , and relationships have become so deeply embedded in media creation that influential collaborative media researchers Løwgren and Reimer suggested that such work should come to the forefront of design - focused research [ 29 ] . 3 . 3 Co - Design in Meme - Creation The current environment of Internet meme creation demonstrates many of the co - design behaviors ( and challenges ) noted by participatory design and collaborative media researchers . Internet memes have become a commonplace means of expression and contribution to online communities in recent years , each with their own humor , language , and meaning [ 8 ] . Such systems allow for intensive media creation by users and , as is the focus of this study , user participation in the design of the infrastructure . The viral and socio - cultural nature of memes themselves has captured researchers ' interest [ e . g . 6 , 7 , 40 ] ; in particular the spread [ e . g . 27 ] and success or failure of memes [ e . g . 3 , 8 ] . However , little research directly addresses the tools facilitating the creation of such content and media from the perspective of co - design , though meme researchers [ e . g . 9 ] emphasize the vital role such tools play in making image macros thrive online , by removing technological barriers to end - user content production . These tools have facilitated memes and other user - generated types of online content as new forms of cultural production [ 38 ] , and opened venues for expressive creativity to all , regardless of technological skill . Tool such as these have realized Ivan Illich ' s [ 25 ] decades - old vision of convivial technologies that support creative , autonomous , design actions by individuals . 4 . METHODS The research study methodology explores the natural co - design processes that serve to shape the meme - creation tools , in a multi - phased approach . The first phase of the research study consisted of a short survey distributed to the public contact of the various meme - making tools , followed by interviews of meme - tool developer / designers , both taking place in summer of 2015 . The second phase of the research study consisted of an analysis of end user design ideas and suggestions posted to a public forum for a meme - making website , dating from 2013 through 2015 . The intention of the following research study methodology is to understand the contributions of users over time in a naturalistic setting and what techniques developers employ in order to solicit and incorporate user feedback and requests into ongoing design activities . In pursuit of the previously stated research questions , this approach builds our understanding of how co - design activities emerge over time and the techniques designers use to collaborate with end users . The study design focused primarily on the perspective of the designers ( as the primary drivers of design processes ) , taking a retrospective approach in order to gather data from a larger number of projects over a long period of time . This approach served to minimize the difficulties inherent in studying transient and emergent volunteer - run projects , while preserving the naturalistic setting . This also provided the advantage of allowing exploration of several meme - creation tools and use of a wider set of participants . 4 . 1 Survey and Interviews The survey questions explored the creator ( s ) motivations in creating the tool , what features were initially provided , what features were added over time , and the role that users played in this process of change . The survey was targeted towards websites linked from the AdviceAnimals subreddit [ 1 ] ( and therefore highly suggested by the Reddit community ) , as well as generally popular meme - making sites and Github repositories identified by web searching . An initial list of 59 meme - making tools and websites , with publicly available contact information , was compiled from these sources and contacted via email for an initial online survey . Twenty - five responses were received ( a 42 % response rate ) and survey participants were asked to participate in subsequent phone interviews . The interviews were semi - structured , allowing for both further explorations of the survey questions , as well as permitting participants to share their unique experiences in creating and running a meme - making tool . Interviews were conducted concurrent with data analysis until a point of theoretical saturation was identified ; 11 survey participants were interviewed in total by the researcher . The final survey and interview data were then qualitatively coded and analyzed for themes of interest to the research questions . 4 . 2 Design Idea Analysis Lastly , user design ideas were analyzed to build a sense of the changes over time , requested by users during use . The second phase of the research study analyzed a public forum for a meme - making site that was created to provide a venue for users to give design suggestions and feedback to the site ' s creator . All design ideas and suggestions posted to the forum were anonymously collected for research purposes , for a total of 117 design ideas dated from June 2013 through February 2015 . The ideas were then explored in more depth , using inductive qualitative analysis to code text and identify themes from the idea data . 5 . RESULTS 5 . 1 Survey Results The survey questions posted to the meme - site creators explored the initial features they provided , the changes made over time , and the role users played in this process . Not surprisingly , the initial features provided were closely aligned with the basic requirements for meme creation – namely the use of templates ( as background images ) and the adding and formatting of text . 164 As the survey results indicated [ Table 1 , below ] the majority of sites provides one or more of these basic functions upon launch , with a variety of additional features noted – from permitting users to create accounts to varying methods of meme creation ( e . g . directly from a URL or on the command line ) . Table 1 . Most common ( top 5 ) initial features provided in meme - creation tool , per survey of designers ( N = 25 ) What features did you initially provide ? # Overlay their own text in captions 12 Use their own images 8 Create memes from provided templates 7 Adjust font characteristics ( e . g . size , color ) 6 Download the meme , e . g . save as PNG 4 Much more diversity was observed in the features added over time , as each site attempted to carve out its own unique niche in the meme - generation realm with a wealth of new functions created . The most common feature added across tools was new templates , to keep the tools current with new memes as they evolve on the Web . Also common was the addition of features allowing : users to customize their creations to a greater extent ( e . g . add more captions , change background colors , upload multiple background images , etc . ) , integration with other tools ( e . g . posting to social sites , implementations for various programming languages , API creation , chat room plugins , etc . ) , and improvements to organization and retrieval of memes ( e . g . quick search , pagination ) . In contrast to the numerous changes applied by the majority of the designers over time , 7 of the respondents stated that no new features had been added to their meme - creation tool since its launch . Finally , the survey questioned the designers ' motivations for adding or removing features . The results of this survey question indicated an equal drive to fulfill user requests [ N = 8 ] and also to respond to the creator ' s own needs , ideas , and interests [ N = 8 ] . Several designers reported responding to emerging trends on the web and the drive to create unique , new features within their tool , as particularly motivating . Three designers did not add or change features over time . 5 . 2 Interview Results As mentioned earlier , the semi - structured interviews following the survey allowed participants [ N = 11 ] to share more details of their experiences developing a meme - making tool . First , participants were asked to share the name and purpose / form of their tool and the role ( s ) they played in the project . The interview questions then focused on their motivations in participating in such work and their experiences running the meme - making tool , with an emphasis on their collaborations with end users . Finally , the questions addressed their hopes and expectations for the tool in the future . During the process of interviewing , a coding scheme was iteratively developed from the interview transcripts and then mapped to higher - level themes of relevance to this study , presented in summary form below , with illustrative participant quotes . The initial demographic questions found that eight of the interviewees ' tools are available for use publicly , with three intended to be restricted to intra - office hosting and use . Nine are web - based tools , one is a command line tool , and one is a plugin to a continuous integration tool , used in the software development process . All interviewees are the primary , sole designer / developer of their tool ( with the exception of brief help from a paid consultant in the case of one website ) . 5 . 2 . 1 Designers ' Motivations The first interview question explored the designers ' initial motivations in creating such a tool ; findings were quite varied , spanning from the personal and social to professional [ Table 2 below ] . The most common motivators included the desire to improve on the perceived failures of existing meme - making tools , e . g I knew I could do a lot better than what was out there . [ P2 ] …at the time Quickmeme was the most popular tool for making memes online . A nd it just wasn’t a very good user experience , the page took a long time to load , and then actually getting in to the application to make your meme was again , even slower , it just something that was simple enough that it should be really fast and easy to do . [ P3 ] Many participants expressed a strong interest in the desire to take on a fun , casual development project , e . g . : I call it a hobby that turned into a lot of work . [ P2 ] I made it as a bit of fun and don ' t consider it to be a serious tool . [ P6 ] An interest in facilitating group communication was often cited as a motivating factor ; in particular , creating a space for users to share and express humor unique to the group . Although most participants created and maintained their tools on a volunteer basis or within the context of their existing paid employment , several cited building social prestige and respect as rewarding factors ( in the absence of monetary compensation ) , e . g . …showing this to them [ other developers ] I immediately got some big eyes and some wows and you know a lot of pats on the back for just doing something for people to use that was easy for them to use…getting it on Reddit was probably a highlight of the entire project . Getting on Adviceanimals was a good day [ P3 ] Designers expressed a motivating desire to allow non - technical end users to participate in image editing activities via the use of their tools . End users may be lacking in skills , knowledge , or access to traditional image - editing software and meme - tools can assist in filling this gap , e . g . : It ' s really a replacement for image editing tools , like Photoshop or anything you would install on your computer . Because a lot of my friends don’t have access to those and they ' re like – " oh I would love to put a quick caption on this but I ' m on my phone or I don’t have that on my computer and it ' s really annoying " . [ P2 ] Empowering end - users to participate in image - editing activities also aided in shifting the workload between members of the organization . This simultaneously empowered end users to manipulate images while also allowing more skilled team - members to move on to more challenging work . As one participant stated : We had designers spending time building out these images for social and for articles and I wanted to free them up so they could work on bigger things . And I looked at what they were doing and I thought that a lot of it was reproducible by a tool , that allowed editors better control over their own stories…we kind of spread it out over work , and the reporters are now free to go work on things , and the designers were working on things for reporters and so the designers were able to go and build other tools and it also helped with storytelling so we can all kind of share that perspective , you know build things for each other . We ' re all kind of doing things for each other and finding ways to support each other . And storytelling across multiple people and creating a culture of support and trying to build them tools that help them . [ P7 ] Table 2 . Motivation for creating meme - making tool 165 Initial Motivation ( s ) Participant # Interest in Memes Collaborative editing experiment P9 Expressiveness of memes P8 Quickmeme replacement P1 Personal Experiences as user / meme creator P3 Failures of existing tools P3 , 4 , 5 , 9 , 11 Fun , casual side project P2 , P3 , P4 , P6 , P8 , P9 Satisfaction of building tool P3 Tackle an unknown challenge P7 Professional Earn respect of developer peers P3 Expanding professional portfolio P2 Experience of running high - traffic website P2 Experience of running user generated content website P1 Improve company workflow P7 Replace image editing tools P2 , P7 Research proof - of - concept P9 Shift technological burden off designers P7 Share proprietary information P10 Social Create space for shared humor P2 , P6 , P11 Empower co - worker end users P7 Facilitate group communication P2 , P5 , P6 , P10 , P11 Finally , designers often spoke of the social importance of the ability to express oneself through visual format , such as memes , as something that drew them to work in this area . Particularly in the context of a small company or other formal organization , memes allowed users to create and express ideas expressive of their particular shared culture , e . g . : It seems like it ' s a pretty big part of the culture of these companies , they hang out in the [ chat ] room and memes are important to them and their culture [ P4 ] It was an office of about 25 people and we had a common chat . So people submitted these things , the goal is to make the whole group laugh . And then people would riff on it . So certain memes in our organizations emerged… Memes and other visual cues , like emojii kind of substitute better for someone making it in words . [ P11 ] 5 . 2 . 2 Content Moderation Designers spoke at length as to the challenges they faced in running their meme - creation tool over time . A common theme was that of content moderation responsibilities and choices ; designers were often put in a position of deciding , for themselves , what their stance on content moderation and user privacy should be . Most designers fell on the side of allowing users free creative rein ; however , this was not without its challenges , e . g . I decided to be completely open and not censor anything that people post… . but you get some weird and crazy things written on them after a while… . but I really decided that user privacy is more important than compromising free speech on the internet . [ P1 ] I could put censors that try to filter out and try to catch it but people will be clever with how they try to craft their messages . It ' s a losing battle , in my opinion . Anything on the internet you have to take the good with the bad . [ P3 ] 5 . 2 . 3 Understanding Emergent User Needs Many of the designers continuously solicited change requests and feedback from users . The designers that expressed the strongest communication ties with their end users were those that shared the same physical space , e . g . co - workers , or who had pre - existing person ties . They [ close friends ] are not technical users so they were making a lot of demands about – " oh , it should work like this " , or " when I type in I want the font smaller " or " it should all be online " . So a lot of it actually came from my close friends who were demanding features and because we were just friends they could ask me directly . [ P2 ] …most of my users are the people that I work with who happen to be either 1 ) in the same chatroom I was in or 2 ) in the same office I was in . So they were basically saying – " hey it would be really cool to do X " . And sometimes I ' d say yes and sometimes I ' d say no . [ P5 ] I sit directly in the newsroom and I just kind of listened to people ' s feedback and thoughts and a bunch of them use the tool and so that was one of the ways that I was able to gain feedback…we ' re able to hear complaints and chatter and drop ideas that they have . And sometimes we have our own idea and we can include it . [ P7 ] In addition to the requests and feedback derived directly from users , many designers used indirect methods of observation to infer their users ' needs , particularly analysis of website traffic logs : I try and observer user behavior… when you ' re on a page it will record some of the basic user actions that you are doing in real time back to Google Analytics…it helps me understand my users without actually asking them any questions so I sometimes just use an observer pattern . I let them generate traffic and I just see if there are any experiences that can lead to dead ends or bad experiences and things like that . [ P2 ] Despite gathering information from end users through both direct and indirect means , designers often expressed surprise at the eventual preferences and use patterns their users engaged in over time , e . g . : For the images that I put up on the site , the available templates , these are the really popular ones on sites like Reddit . com . These I thought would be for sure the highest usage on the site , that people would be using , and then making more memes , if you will , and putting that on Reddit and continuing the whole cycle . And then I paid attention to my user data and in fact that ' s not the primary usage of my site . There are more people that come to my site to upload their own photo to use their own photos , to caption their own photos and then save them back . [ P2 ] The site was used in a way that I did not expect . Users were creating stories , writing about current events , current projects , mocking each other by changing the meme while someone else was editing it . . . [ P9 ] Working with end users , even on a volunteer basis , was often a thankless task for a few designers who cited suspicion and lack of trust from their users as complicating factors in running their tool and soliciting feedback : I honestly get a lot of people that say – " oh you just made this site to capitalize on traffic and you just want to make money through advertisements " …So every now and then I ' ll get a comment – " Why are you talking to users ? Why do you comment on posts to your site ? You ' re just here to make money " and it ' s like – " No ! I ' m here to hear what you guys have to say , it ' s a community tool . " [ P1 ] 166 …one of the guys that I worked with that was one of the heavier users of it said " I would use it more but I know that you can see w hat I ' m making…I know you can see what I ' m making based on the logs " . [ P5 ] 5 . 2 . 4 Designing for Developers Many of the designers intentionally designed their tool to include features targeted towards other developers , in the form of various APIs ( application programming interfaces ) that allowed others to build on their meme tool . The eventual use and popularity of such features was often a surprise to the creators themselves . I wanted [ the API ] to be a service . So I didn’t want to focus on creating an interface similar to Quickmeme . I wanted something that could work over the URL . So what other developers could do is they could create an interface that would use my service to create a meme [ P3 ] I ' ve been noticing a lot of API users . So that ' s a component of the site , there ' s a web component and an API . And there ' s been a lot more API traffic lately…It was one of the original features , it was just re - written a few months ago – better design , more scalable . And I guess that ' s when I found out that people had been using it a lot because I kind of broke the API . I didn ' t realize that there were a lot of bots and things using it and people got upset about it . [ P4 ] [ My tool ] is very much a developer tool and very much to scratch an itch , never intended for the lay user . [ P11 ] In addition to providing services , such as APIs , to the surrounding developer community , most projects were open - sourced , allowing full , public access to the source code . Designers spoke of the responsibility to give back to the community , particularly given their perceived personal gains from using others ' code in the past : It was kind of like something that I could provide to the internet in some capacity…I ' ve benefited a lot from other people ' s open source work , so I just wanted to give something ba ck , in a small way… I received a few pull requests . [ P3 ] I had gained the hard part of the code , which is putting the text on the images , from other stuff on Github so I figured might as well put my stuff on Github as well . [ P5 ] One designer had made the decision to not open source his code at this point in time , but had found many instances of others re - appropriating the code without permission : I found at least two other sites that have copied my Javascript code and done a fairly poor job at getting it to work on their site… because it ' s mostly browser based , it is steal - able . And it ' s a chicken and egg situation ; it ' s hard to stop it without compromising the features and creating a lot of headache for myself . At some point you just let it happen and hope you ' re doing a better job with it . [ P2 ] 5 . 2 . 5 The Future and Lessons Learned Finally , designers were asked to consider the future of their meme - making tool . Given the initial fun and casual nature of the project , many did not expect to continue to maintain or extend the project in the future . However , several had identified a particular aspect of their meme - tool with value to a certain user base and intended to take their project further in that direction , e . g . : I didn’t want to try to please everyone with everything… . I don’t want to start adding a whole pile of features , I think I ' ve kind of found a small niche here where people are using private photos and it remains private . I think that ' s an interesting turn of events and I might just go more towards that , gear more towards that crowd . [ P2 ] In consideration of the future , several designers reflected on lessons learned ; a common theme was regret around the lack of attention to early marketing of their tool to drive up the number of users , e . g . : I probably should have marketed it more , because I think a lot of people would get value out of it . Because as far as I could tell , the current state of meme creation isn ' t much better than it was two years ago when the site was initially created . [ P5 ] 5 . 3 Forum Analysis Results A total of 117 design ideas were collected from a meme - making website ' s forum and coded using inductive qualitative analysis . Of the total design ideas collected from the forum , 75 ideas originated directly from users , 10 ideas were proposed for feedback by the creator , and 32 ideas were creator updates as to new features that had been added . All ideas were coded to identify common themes , with a focus on the ideas arising directly from users and the outcome of these ideas ( i . e . if there was evidence that they were ultimately implemented by the creator ) . A total of 42 unique codes were identified in the design ideas generated by users , which were grouped into parent themes [ Table 3 , below ] . Of the 75 ideas generated by users , 22 ( 29 % ) were clearly addressed and implemented by the creator over time . These included : adding a back button , numerous bug fixes , ability to change font characteristics , meme deletion , limiting number of submissions ( to avoid spam ) and the ability to submit directly to Reddit . There were also a number of general comments from the users to the creator , often giving thanks or praise . Table 3 . Codes and frequencies of design ideas observed in user - generated suggestions , grouped by theme Organization & Retrieval ( 9 ideas ) Meme Creation ( 12 ideas ) Technical ( 31 ideas ) Location tagging memes ( 1 ) Add additional graphics layer ( 1 ) Bug fix request ( 10 ) Meme statistics ( 1 ) Add back button ( 2 ) Conduct load testing ( 1 ) Site organization improvements ( 2 ) Allow trusted users to upload images ( 2 ) Enable iframe support ( 1 ) Tagging memes ( 3 ) Anonymous memes ( 1 ) Help offer ( 5 ) Text search ( 1 ) Change font size ( 2 ) Open source code request ( 6 ) Upvote / downvote memes ( 1 ) Create mobile app version ( 1 ) Performance improvement ( 4 ) Delete meme ( 2 ) Permission to redirect ( 1 ) Managing Site Content – 7 ideas Display meme names ( 1 ) Preserve thumbnail aspect ratio ( 1 ) Add recaptcha to prevent meme spam ( 1 ) Provide API for bots ( 1 ) Limit number of submissions per user ( 1 ) Personalization – 7 ideas Provide CDN ( 1 ) Remove duplicate memes ( 1 ) Browse - able user accounts ( 1 ) Report objectionable content ( 1 ) Change username visibility ( 1 ) Interact With Designer ( 12 ideas ) Tagging for objectionable content ( 3 ) Connect account to Reddit , Facebook ( 1 ) Add ability to donate ( 3 ) Copy memes between accounts ( 1 ) General comment ( 8 ) 167 Social – 5 ideas Public or private user accounts ( 1 ) General question ( 1 ) Add social share buttons ( 1 ) User account albums ( 1 ) Submit to Reddit directly function ( 4 ) User account memes ( 1 ) It was also observed that in several cases the ideas or suggestions themselves were communicated via meme ( instead of a more typical text post ) , by both the creator and users . 6 . DISCUSSION Participatory design research historically entailed design researchers teaming up directly with end users to engage in design activities , largely in the workplace context . As the field evolved , many studies , such as the one presented here , have moved away from directly involving a researcher as leader of design processes , adding to the diversity in methodology [ e . g . 11 ] . The following section will explore the results in more depth , in relation to the research questions posed earlier . These findings have relevance to the study of participatory design in the novel , naturalistic settings introduced with the increase in social technology use . 6 . 1 Designer and User Collaboration over Time The first research question explored how meme - tool designers collaborate with their end users over time , outside of a formalized design process . Designers were found to commonly collaborate with users both directly ( e . g . soliciting user feedback either in person or using online means ; overhearing user complaints or ideas ) and indirectly , by analyzing log data and attempting to infer user behavior and shape the tool in the perceived desirable direction . None of the designers interviewed professed to have training in any formal design techniques . However , their design activities were very similar to established user - centered and participatory design techniques , with the notable difference of placement within the design process . Although participatory design processes emphasis early and often involvement of users , none of the designer studied directly consulted users in the initial system design and development ( e . g . “ it was going to be a fun weekend project , so I just decided to do it ” [ P3 ] , “ [ I ] created a minimal feature set based on my own ideas ” [ P10 ] ) . Not surprisingly , the designers that reported the most focus on user wants and needs in design were those that were physically and / or socially close to their users , either within the workplace or as part of a personal social group . Even so , several designers expressed surprise at the emergent uses of their tool diverging from their original intentions ; these unanticipated uses were observed in projects with both strong and weak ties between users and designers . These findings are of interest across several dimensions ; first , they indicate that untrained designers may gravitate towards similar methodologies as trained designers given today ' s technological landscape ( e . g . web log analysis , informal interviews , etc . ) . Second , systems are thrown into the " wild " for design - in - use , much earlier in the development process , so much so that users were not even consulted directly in the initial design ( although users ' needs may have sparked the creator ' s original vision for the project ) . These approaches mirror earlier suggestions in research literature oriented towards designing for change , particularly the need to " under - design for emergent behavior " [ 15 ] . Challenges unique to the development and maintenance of user - generated content were widely observed , namely the struggles in choosing ( and sticking with ) a content moderation strategy and preventing abuse of the system , e . g . through excessive posting . Though the majority of projects were casual and perceived to be a " fun " undertaking , the responsibilities that emerged in content moderation often exceeded the designers ' expectations . Earlier research in the participatory design of evolving systems , such as Fischer ' s " seeding , evolutionary growth and reseeding " ( SER ) model [ 16 ] cautioned that systems designed - in - use often become unwieldy over time , requiring a regular process of re - organization and formalization . These challenges were highly evident in the data obtained from all phases of the study ( e . g . failure of users to name meme leading to impaired site organization and retrieval [ P4 ] , rampant duplication of meme content [ P3 ] , a number of user - requested features to handle excessive submissions [ Table 3 ] . Meeting these requests creates a significant workload , particularly in the context of a small project with few developers ; many participants reported no longer maintaining their tool due to waning interest and / or time . This indicates a serious and troubling barrier to long term success in co - designed systems without strong ( or willing ) ownership of the re - organization process . Although many designers reported that their systems were able to form an interested and involved user base over time , particularly through open - sourcing their projects , in several cases this created a scenario wherein the project splintered into many niche sub - projects . Although the SER model [ 16 ] accurately explained the need for the " re - seeding phase " , the lowered barrier to design activities facilitated by social technologies may have made this problem even worse in allowing the system to quickly grow in an unwieldy manner . As the participants emphasized , this can become overwhelming for informal projects with no clear owner or driver of design activities . This remains an open issue for co - design that extends throughout the life of the system and one that has been observed in formal collaborative design projects , when the " official " researcher involvement necessarily ends at the conclusion of a project [ e . g . 28 , 30 ] . Another aspect of user - designer collaboration that posed challenging was the protection of user privacy and free speech , which is particularly relevant in the context of user - generated content . Despite the fact that many designers had encountered situations where site content made them uneasy ( e . g . memes created with violent messages or background images used without the owner ' s permission ) , designers generally reported ultimately taking a hands - off approach but feeling conflicted in this regard . Several designers mentioned their users were aware of the potential power the designers had in this regard ( not only in censorship of content but also the ability to simply observe all their creations ) , which led to feeling stifled in their creative activities . This has implications for the co - design of social systems , as this may create difficulties in building the necessary trust in the designer - user relationship , particularly outside of a formal design process where motives may not be clear and where participants may be in different physical locations . For such co - designed systems to be successful there must be trust and transparency between users and designers ; this presents a particular challenge in growing systems with fluctuating and transient participants . From the beginnings of participatory design , researchers have acknowledged that power , in particular the inequalities of power between different workplace roles , had a direct impact on design activities [ e . g . 20 ] . However , this focused largely on the different user stakeholder groups ; with designers exploring organizational power dynamics and attempting to incorporate user participation in an equitable manner [ 4 ] . Moving towards the present , participatory design research has addressed techniques to build user - designer trust [ e . g . 4 ] , but these efforts 168 were still largely placed in the context of formal organizations . Further research has begun to explore these challenges to modern collaboration , e . g . trust in the context of groups of developers that are distributed globally [ 2 ] or more generally exploring the challenges introduced in working across distance [ 33 ] . However , the user - designer trust necessary in collaborative media systems , such as the meme - making tools studied here , must exist outside of formal organizations and largely consists of transient relationships , neither of which is well - studied in the current literature . Many empirical findings , not surprisingly , indicate that trust is built over time [ e . g . 2 ] and participatory design work will often intentionally dedicate time to such purposes . The findings in this study suggest further work is necessary in this area to explore ways of building user - designer trust outside of formal organizations and in the context of brief interactions , where traditional trust - building techniques are not easily applied . 6 . 2 Design Features Requested By Users Table 3 , above , represents the codes and categories evident in the design ideas requested by users over time , in use . The most common ideas centered on adding new options and functionality to the meme creation process , which is to be expected . Also well - represented were ideas oriented towards improving the structure and organization of site content , personalization features allowing users to connect and post to various online accounts ( including social networking sites ) , and general comments or questions directed at the designer . As mentioned in the results section above , several of these interactions were expressed in meme form . In these cases , designers and users employ the constructs and language of the memes themselves to facilitate communication and understanding between parties . For example , one user expressed a desire for iframe support in the context of the " That would be great " image macro template , featuring Bill Lumbergh from the comedy film Office Space ( a passive - aggressive corporate boss stereotype ) . The shared language of memes may provide a comfortable communication channel between designers and users , who are effectively strangers ; this may assist in overcoming some of the trust barriers discussed in the previous section . Lastly , the most common features requested by users fell into the broadly - named technical category – including request for bug fixes , as well as numerous offers of help or technical suggestions . Today ' s social technologies facilitate easy open - sourcing and sharing of the entire codebase , in a manner of minutes , and that ease appeared instrumental in the transition from user to designer . The user request ideas included many direct requests to open source the code ( e . g . through Github ) or more general offers of help or support in solving particular technical challenges . The desire to take on increased design responsibility was therefore evident from the user request ideas generated and the experiences of the developers interviewed , who also benefited from others ' openly available code . It is worth noting that while most developers responded to such requests , others felt it was not appropriate for their project at this time ( and in the case of proprietary information or intellectual property restrictions it may be completely unfeasible ) . Others chose to provide functionality , such as APIs , that were intentionally designed for their technically - skilled users to build their own derivative works . 6 . 3 Implications for Co - Design This study reaffirms that the technological landscape has become increasingly amenable to design - in - use , particularly in web - based tools . This is evident even if a designing - for - change philosophy is not intentionally followed early in the project . None of the designers initially approached their projects with a goal other than simply providing the initial set of features they felt was important at the time or technically challenging / intriguing to them personally . One designer expressed this approach to design best in saying – " for now , I ' m just sort of winging it . " [ P3 ] Emergent use forced most designers to reevaluate their system , making changes themselves , or opening up their code publically to allow users to shape future iterations . These findings suggest that designers may become meta - designers as needed over time , but do not directly consider the need for future flexibility up front ( or even engaging users in initial design processes as advocated in traditional participatory design processes [ e . g . 13 , 20 ] ) . Much research , from both the participatory design and collaborative media fronts , emphasizes the need for fundamental shifts in design techniques and roles [ e . g . 11 , 29 , 35 ] . The relatively malleable web - based technologies employed offer the means for designers to share control with end - user designers , creating an environment where the system rigidity that earlier research struggled with [ e . g . 16 ] is perhaps less of an issue . Though many participatory success stories exist from living labs to design interventions [ e . g . 4 , 5 , 28 ] the " official " designers eventually step away . This leaves " lead users " to spark projects in the current landscape in which technology tools facilitate democratization of innovation [ 39 ] . These findings emphasize how far technology has evolved from the early projects that sparked an interest in design - in - use as a solution to engaging users in emergent design processes . The fixed , inflexible software products early researchers struggled with posed a myriad of problems to the solution of design - in - use . But as this study illustrates , a world in which everyone designs has its own challenges ; instead of a focus on facilitating this activity itself , we now turn towards addressing the many problems that emerge from design - in - use . The challenges faced by the designers in this study represent larger challenges to the study of co - design , such as : when ( and how ) must designers step in to correct unwieldy system growth ? How do users and designers build trust and transparency over time to facilitate communication , particularly outside of formal design processes ? And from the users ' perspective , though many of the user requests made were specific to meme - creation tools , a great deal were oriented towards categories that have relevance to a number of types of systems . Notably , users requested enhanced customization , connections to social communities elsewhere online , and ( for more technologically skilled users ) the ability to directly craft their own solutions through the open - sourcing of code and / or APIs . Though this study explores data collected from design activities outside of the traditional view of the participatory design researcher , struggles common to formal design work were observed – supporting unanticipated and emergent uses , difficulty in interpreting users ' needs , and the tendency of systems , however small , to take on a rich life of their own in use . 6 . 4 Limitations This research takes a case study approach to delve deeply into those involved directly with meme - creation tools ; while this is a common approach in participatory design research [ e . g . 12 ] and can provide useful findings to the research of co - design , findings from studies of this type may be less generalizable . Additionally , the largely volunteer , often anonymous and temporary nature of meme - tool work creates a tendency for such meme tools to frequently be abandoned by developers and / or users , making data collection over long periods of time difficult . A retrospective approach was taken in order to collect data from a long period of time and to mitigate these difficulties in studying transitory projects . This provides the advantage of allowing exploration of several meme - creation tools and use of 169 a wider set of participants . A disadvantage of this approach is the likely inability of those involved in design to precisely remember their past choices and actions . The analysis of end - user design ideas over time was used to attempt to lessen this limitation by exploring the tangible changes that had been requested over time , albeit by the most motivated users . 7 . CONCLUSION & FUTURE WORK An increasingly strong emphasis on moving design closer to the setting and time of use [ e . g . 11 , 24 ] drives a need to understand real - world emergent relationships between designer and user , particularly in a longitudinal manner that would span far greater than the bounds of much existing research experimentation . Users are increasingly involved in not just design activities , but also implementation [ 17 ] and maintenance activities [ 30 ] over the life of the system . With a need to employ new methods oriented towards design - for - change [ e . g . 11 ] outside of formal design processes , naturalistic studies such as these can assist in informing researchers as to emerging processes of design that work in today ' s world . This study presents several challenges to co - design , with implications for designers and researchers of such systems , yielding new research questions and concerns . Future work in this area is needed in exploring : how to build trust between designers and users in co - designed systems , the motivations for user participation in design activities , and the need for new research techniques to effectively learn from these volunteer - run , highly transitory , and emergent systems . 8 . REFERENCES [ 1 ] AdviceAnimals . 2015 . Retrieved July 6 , 2015 from https : / / www . reddit . com / r / AdviceAnimals / [ 2 ] Al - Ani , B . , Bietz , M . , Wang , Y . , Trainer , E . , Koehne , B . , Marczak , S . , Redmiles , D . , and Prikladnicki , R . 2013 . Globally Distributed System Developers : Their Trust Expectations and Processes . In Proceedings of the 2013 conference on Computer supported cooperative work ( CSCW ' 13 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 563 - 574 . DOI = http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2441776 . 2441840 [ 3 ] Bauckhage , C . 2011 . Insights into Internet Memes . In Proceedings of the Fifth International AAAI Conference on Weblogs and Social Media ( ICWSM - 11 ) , 42 - 49 . [ 4 ] Björgvinsson , E . , Ehn , P . , and Hillgren , P . 2010 . Participatory design and " democratizing innovation " . In Proceedings of the 11th Biennial Participatory Design Conference ( PDC ' 10 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 41 - 50 . DOI = http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1900441 . 1900448 [ 5 ] Björgvinsson , E . and Hillgren , P . - A . 2002 . Readymade design at an intensive care unit . In Proceedings of the Participatory Design Conference ( PDC ʻ02 ) , 221 – 225 . [ 6 ] Blackmore , S . 1999 . The Meme Machine . Oxford University Press . [ 7 ] Börzsei , L . K . 2013 . Makes a Meme Instead : A Concise History of Internet Memes . New Media Studies Magazine . 7 . [ 8 ] Coscia , M . 2013 . Competition and success in the meme pool : a case study on quickmeme . com . In Proceedings of the Seventh International AAAI Conference on Weblogs and Social Media ( ICWSM - 13 ) , 100 - 109 . [ 9 ] Davison , P . 2012 . The language of internet memes . In The social media reader , M . Mandiberg ( ed . ) . New York University Press , New York , NY , USA , 120 – 136 . [ 10 ] Dawkins , R . 1976 . The Selfish Gene . Oxford University Press . [ 11 ] Dittrich , Y . , Eriksén , S . , and Hansson , C . 2002 . PD in the Wild ; Evolving Practices of Design in Use . In Proceedings of the Participatory Design Conference ( PDC 2002 ) , 124 - 134 . [ 12 ] Dittrich , Y . , Eriksén , S . , and Wessels , B . 2014 . Learning Through Situated Innovation : Why the specific is crucial for participatory design research . Scandinavian Journal of Information Systems . 26 , 1 , 29 – 56 . [ 13 ] Ehn , P . 1989 . Work - Oriented Design of Computer Artifacts . Lawrence Erlbaum , Hillsdale , NJ . [ 14 ] Fischer , G . and Giaccardi , E . 2006 . Meta - Design : A Framework for the Future of End User Development . In H . Lieberman , F . Paternò , & V . Wulf ( Eds . ) , End User Development , Kluwer Academic Publishers , Dordrecht , The Netherlands , 427 - 457 . [ 15 ] Fischer , G . and Hermann , T . 2011 . Socio - Technical Systems - A Meta - Design Perspective . International Journal for Sociotechnology and Knowledge Development . 3 , 1 , 1 - 33 . [ 16 ] Fischer , G . , McCall , R . , Ostwald , J . , Reeves , B . and Shipman , F . 1994 . Seeding , evolutionary growth and reseeding : supporting the incremental development of design environments . In Proceedings of ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ' 94 ) . ACM , New York , NY , 292 - 298 . [ 17 ] Fleron , B . , Rasmussen , R . , Simonsen , J . and Hertzum , M . 2012 . User Participation in Implementation . In Proceedings of the 12th Participatory Design Conference ( PDC ' 12 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 61 - 64 . DOI = http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2348144 . 2348164 [ 18 ] Følstad , A . 2008 . Living Labs for Innovation and Development of Information and Communication Technology : A Literature Review . Electronic Journal for Virtual Organizations and Networks . 10 , 7 , 99 – 131 . [ 19 ] Gantt , M . and Nardi , B . A . 1992 . Gardeners and gurus : patterns of cooperation among CAD users . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ' 92 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 107 - 117 . DOI = http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 142750 . 142767 [ 20 ] Greenbaum , J . and Kyng , M . , eds . 1991 . Design at Work : Cooperative Design of Computer Systems . Lawrence Erlbaum , Hillsdale , NJ . [ 21 ] GitHub , Inc . About Github . 2015 . Retrieved July 23 , 2015 from https : / / github . com / about [ 22 ] Hagen , P . and Robertson , T . 2010 . Social technologies : challenges and opportunities for participation . In Proceedings of the 11th Biennial Participatory Design Conference ( PDC ' 10 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 31 - 40 . DOI = http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1900441 . 1900447 [ 23 ] Henderson , A . and Kyng , M . 1992 . There ' s no place like home : continuing design in use . In J . Greenbaum and M . Kyng ( eds . ) , Design at work , . L . Erlbaum Associates Inc . , Hillsdale , NJ , USA , 219 - 240 . [ 24 ] Hess , J . , Randall , D . , Pipek , V . , and Wulf , V . 2013 . Involving users in the wild – Participatory product development in and with online communities . Int . J . Hum . - Comput . Stud . 71 , 5 , 570 - 589 . [ 25 ] Illich , I . 1973 . Tools for Conviviality . Harper & Row Publishers . [ 26 ] Jenkins , H . 2006 . Convergence Culture : Where Old and New Media Collide . University Press , New York , NY . [ 27 ] Leskovec , J . , Backstrom , L . , and Kleinberg , J . 2009 . Meme - tracking and the dynamics of the news cycle . In Proceedings of the 15th ACM SIGKDD international 170 conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining ( KDD ' 09 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 497 - 506 . DOI = http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1557019 . 1557077 [ 28 ] Löwgren , J . , & Reimer , B . 2013 . Collaborative media : production , consumption , and design interventions . MIT Press , Cambridge , MA . [ 29 ] Löwgren , J . , & Reimer , B . 2012 . Designing collaborative media : a challenge for CHI ? In CHI ' 12 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI EA ' 12 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 31 - 40 . DOI = http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2212776 . 2212781 [ 30 ] Marcolin , M . , D ' Andrea , V . and Hakken , D . 2012 . Participatory maintenance - in - use : users ' role in keeping systems alive . In Proceedings of the 12th Participatory Design Conferenc ( PDC ' 12 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 57 - 60 . DOI = http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2348144 . 2348162 [ 31 ] Meme Dad . Socially Awkward Penguin . 2015 . Retrieved September 2 , 2015 from http : / / memedad . com / generate / 118 [ 32 ] Muller , M . J . 2002 . Participatory design : the third space in HCI . In J . A . Jacko and A . Sears ( eds . ) , The human - computer interaction handbook , L . Erlbaum Associates Inc . , Hillsdale , NJ , USA , 1051 - 1068 . [ 33 ] Olson , G . M . and Olson , J . S . 2000 . Distance matters . Hum . - Comput . Interact . 15 , 2 ( September 2000 ) , 139 - 178 . [ 34 ] Robertson , G . Quickmeme banned from Reddit for alleged vote manipulation . 2013 . Retrieved August 1 , 2015 from http : / / www . dailydot . com / news / reddit - bans - quickmeme - vote - manipulation / [ 35 ] Sanders , E . and Stappers , P . J . 2008 . Co - creation and the new landscapes of design . CoDesign . 4 , 1 , 5 - 18 . [ 36 ] Shirky , C . 2010 . Cognitive Surplus : Creativity and Generosity in a Connected Age . The Penguin Press . [ 37 ] Spinuzzi , C . 2005 . The Methodology of Participatory Design . Tech . Commun . 52 , 2 , 163 - 174 . [ 38 ] Stålbröst , A . 2008 . Forming future IT : the living lab way of user involvement . Ph . D Dissertation . Luleå University of Technology , Luleå , Sweden . [ 39 ] von Hippel , E . 2005 . The Democratization of Innovation . MIT Press , Cambridge , MA . [ 40 ] Wiggins , B . E . and Bowers , G . B . 2014 . Memes as genre : A structurational analysis of the memescape . New Media Soc . 17 , 11 , 1886 - 1906 . DOI = http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 1461444814535194