Article A Molecular Grammar Governing the Driving Forces for Phase Separation of Prion - like RNA Binding Proteins Graphical Abstract Highlights d Phase separation of FUS requires both the N - terminal PLD and the C - terminal RBD d Tyrosine and arginine govern the saturation concentration of phase separation d Glycine maintains liquidity , whereas glutamine and serine promote hardening d An associative polymer model predicts the phase behavior of FUS family proteins Authors Jie Wang , Jeong - Mo Choi , Alex S . Holehouse , . . . , Rohit V . Pappu , Simon Alberti , Anthony A . Hyman Correspondence alberti @ mpi - cbg . de ( S . A . ) , hyman @ mpi - cbg . de ( A . A . H . ) In Brief The phase - separation behavior of FUS family proteins can be predicted by the prevalence and position of speciﬁc amino acids . Wang et al . , 2018 , Cell 174 , 688 – 699 July 26 , 2018 ª 2018 Elsevier Inc . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2018 . 06 . 006 Article A Molecular Grammar Governing the Driving Forces for Phase Separation of Prion - like RNA Binding Proteins Jie Wang , 1 Jeong - Mo Choi , 2 Alex S . Holehouse , 2 Hyun O . Lee , 1 Xiaojie Zhang , 1 Marcus Jahnel , 1 Shovamayee Maharana , 1 Re´gis Lemaitre , 1 Andrei Pozniakovsky , 1 David Drechsel , 3 Ina Poser , 1 Rohit V . Pappu , 2 Simon Alberti , 1 , * and Anthony A . Hyman 1 , 4 , * 1 Max Planck Institute of Molecular Cell Biology and Genetics , 01307 Dresden , Germany 2 Department of Biomedical Engineering and Center for Biological Systems Engineering , Washington University in St . Louis , St . Louis , MO 63130 , USA 3 Research Institute of Molecular Pathology , Campus - Vienna - Biocenter 1 , 1030 Vienna , Austria 4 Lead Contact * Correspondence : alberti @ mpi - cbg . de ( S . A . ) , hyman @ mpi - cbg . de ( A . A . H . ) https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2018 . 06 . 006 SUMMARY Proteins such as FUS phase separate to form liquid - like condensates that can harden into less dynamic structures . However , how these properties emerge from the collective interactions of many amino acids remains largely unknown . Here , we use extensive mutagenesis to identify a sequence - encoded molec - ular grammar underlying the driving forces of phase separation of proteins in the FUS family and test aspects of this grammar in cells . Phase separation is primarily governed by multivalent interactions among tyrosine residues from prion - like domains and arginine residues from RNA - binding domains , which are modulated by negatively charged resi - dues . Glycine residues enhance the ﬂuidity , whereas glutamine and serine residues promote hardening . We develop a model to show that the measured saturation concentrations of phase separation are inversely proportional to the product of the numbers of arginine and tyrosine residues . These results suggest it is possible to predict phase - separation properties based on amino acid sequences . INTRODUCTION The cellular environment includes numerous membraneless compartments that form and dissolve in response to a wide range of cellular signals ( Banani et al . , 2017 ; Hyman and Brang - wynne , 2011 ; Shin and Brangwynne , 2017 ) . Many of these compartments appear to form via intracellular phase transition ( Bergeron - Sandoval et al . , 2016 ; Brangwynne et al . , 2009 ; Feric et al . , 2016 ; Hyman et al . , 2014 ) . These membraneless compart - ments have been termed biomolecular condensates , because their material properties resemble those of liquids , gels , or solids ( Banani et al . , 2017 ; Shin and Brangwynne , 2017 ) . The protein components of condensates have been classiﬁed as either scaffolds , which have been deﬁned as the proteins that drive reversible condensate formation , or clients , which are deﬁned as proteins that preferentially partition into condensates ( Banani et al . , 2016 , 2017 ) . The macromolecular composition of condensates is speciﬁc . This implies that a cell can trigger phase separation of speciﬁc proteins and that only certain clients partition into these conden - sates , whereas others are kept out ( Banani et al . , 2016 ; Feric et al . , 2016 ; Zhang et al . , 2015 ) . Furthermore , for certain conden - sates , the material properties can change after phase separa - tion , and distinct material properties have been linked to distinct functions and pathologies ( Franzmann et al . , 2018 ; Kwon et al . , 2013 ; Molliex et al . , 2015 ; Patel et al . , 2015 ; Riback et al . , 2017 ; Woodruff et al . , 2017 ) . However , we do not fully under - stand which amino acids govern the threshold concentration of phase separation , the material properties of the formed conden - sates , or the partitioning of client proteins into condensates . This limits our ability to make targeted mutations that perturb speciﬁc aspects of protein phase separation . For this reason , it has been difﬁcult to link the speciﬁc properties of condensates to their biological function . Here , we investigate the phase separation properties of a class of intrinsically disordered scaffold proteins that we refer to as ‘‘FUS family proteins , ’’ because they share similar domain structures , and the ﬁrst described member of this family was Fused in Sarcoma , or FUS ( Crozat et al . , 1993 ; King et al . , 2012 ) . There are about 30 FUS family proteins in the human genome ( King et al . , 2012 ) . These include FET proteins ( FUS and the related proteins EWSR1 and TAF15 ) , TDP - 43 , and hnRNPA1 ( Burke et al . , 2015 ; Molliex et al . , 2015 ; Patel et al . , 2015 ) . Aberrant phase transitions of many FUS family proteins have been associated with the onset of age - related neurodegen - erative diseases ( Lin et al . , 2015 ; Molliex et al . , 2015 ; Patel et al . , 2015 ) . The amino acid sequences of FUS family proteins can be divided into two modules : a low sequence complexity domain also known as a prion - like domain ( PLD ) , because of its associa - tion with the formation of prions in yeast ( King et al . , 2012 ) , and a domain that binds RNA ( RNA - binding domain , or RBD ) . The PLDs of FUS family proteins are intrinsically disordered and have low complexity ( Malinovska et al . , 2013 ) . Low complexity means 688 Cell 174 , 688 – 699 , July 26 , 2018 ª 2018 Elsevier Inc . thattheycontainasmallsubsetofaminoacidsincludingpolarres - idues , such as glycine , glutamine , and serine , as well as aromatic residues , generally tyrosine ( Alberti et al . , 2009 ; Kato et al . , 2012 ; Malinovska et al . , 2015 ) . The RBDs comprise one or more folded RNA recognition modules ( RNA recognition motif , RRM ) , but they alsocarry regions of signiﬁcant intrinsic disorder . The intrinsi - cally disordered regions in RBDs are typically enriched in glycine and positively charged residues , such as arginine . In vitro , some PLDs will drive condensate formation as autonomousunits ( Burke etal . , 2015 ; Hanetal . , 2012 ; Linetal . , 2015 ; Molliexetal . , 2015 ) . As a result , there has been a focus onPLDs as the maindeterminants of phase transitions in cells . Despite the fact that FUS family pro - teins contain PLDs and RBDs , we do not understand the synergy between these different domains in driving phase separation . More generally , we do not fully understand the sequence - intrinsic features that drive phase separation or control material properties of condensates of FUS family proteins . RESULTS We successfully cloned and expressed 22 members of the FUS family ( Figures 1A and 1B ) ( see Table S1 and Table S6 for all 76 proteins expressed as part of this study ) and performed phase A C B D Figure 1 . The Saturation Concentration of FUS Family Proteins Can Span Orders of Magnitude ( A ) Domain structures of FUS family proteins . PLD , prion - like domain ; RRM , RNA recognition motif ; ZnF , zinc ﬁnger ; CC , coiled coil ; and NTD , N - ter - minal domain . The intrinsically disordered regions are colored in gray . ( B ) SDS - PAGE of the 22 FUS family proteins tag - ged with His - MBP and GFP . These proteins were only used in the assays in Figure S1A . The His - MBP tag was cleaved off before the phase sepa - ration experiments . ( C ) Phase separation of FUS family proteins at the physiological salt concentration . Unless specif - ically mentioned , all the proteins used in this study were tagged with GFP or SNAP alone . Phase separation was induced by reducing the salt con - centration from 500 to 150 mM through dilution . Scale bar , 5 m m . ( D ) Phase separation quantiﬁed by the relative amount of condensed protein versus the protein concentration . For the deﬁnition of the relative amount of condensed protein , see the STAR Methods . Images from ( C ) were used for the quantiﬁcation . The saturation concentration is indicated by a red arrow . All data are expressed as the mean ± SD . See also Figure S1 and Tables S1 , S2 , and S6 . separation assays at physiological salt conditions at a protein concentration of 5 m M . In most cases , this concentration lies above the physiological concentra - tion in HeLa cells ( Hein et al . , 2015 ; Patel et al . , 2015 ) of these proteins ( Table S2 ) . We were able to drive phase separation of most FUS family proteins either by increasing protein concen - tration ( Figures 1C and 1D ) or by adding dextran , which is a molecular crowding agent ( Figure S1A ) . However , only FUS , EWSR1 , and TAF15 , which constitute the FET family ( Schwartz et al . , 2015 ) , showed robust phase separation in the absence of crowding agents at a protein concentration of 5 m M ( Fig - ure S1A ) . These data suggest that although the majority of the FUS family of proteins can phase separate , only the FET proteins possess the requisite sequence features to drive phase separa - tion at low protein concentrations and physiologically relevant salt concentrations . Interactions among the PLD and the RBD of FUS Drive Phase Separation To understand the role of the PLD in driving phase separation of the FET proteins , we compared phase separation of the full - length protein to that of the PLD alone , using FUS as a model ( Figures 2A and S2A ) . We used three different methods to obtain a saturation concentration of phase separation , which is deﬁned as the threshold protein concentration that must be crossed to trigger phase separation ( Figures S1B – S1F ) . In the ﬁrst method , we used microscopy to measure the ﬂuorescence intensity and determine the total protein amount inside and outside the Cell 174 , 688 – 699 , July 26 , 2018 689 droplets . In the second method , we measured the turbidity of the solution at two different wavelengths . In the third method , we used centrifugation to spin down the droplets and measure the concentration in the clariﬁed supernatant using a spectro - photometer ( for details , see the STAR Methods ) . All assays produced comparable results . For simplicity and speed of experimental design we settled on measuring the amount of condensed protein by ﬂuorescence microscopy ( assay 1 ) . We also tested whether tagging with SNAP or GFP affects the satu - ration concentration . For full - length proteins , the effects of tags were minimal on the inferred saturation concentrations ( Figures S1G – S1I ) . However , for some mutants , we observed up to a 2 - fold difference between tagged and non - tagged proteins , although equivalent trends were preserved within tagged versus untagged proteins ( Table S4 ) . Because of the difﬁculty of work - ing with non - tagged proteins , we report results from experi - ments with tagged proteins . The measured saturation concentration of full - length FUS is (cid:1) 2 m M in 75 mM KCl ( Figure 2B ) . Surprisingly , the FUS PLD , ex - F G C D H E A B Figure 2 . Saturation Concentration of FUS Is Governed by the Collective Interactions among Tyrosine Residues in the PLD and Arginine Residues in the RBD ( A ) Domain structures of FUS and EWSR1 . RBD , RNA - binding domain . ( B ) RBD deletion signiﬁcantly increases the satura - tion concentration . Unless speciﬁcally mentioned , all the phase separation assays in Figure 2 were conducted at 75 mM KCl . In the mixing assays , the PLD and the RBD were mixed at a ratio of 1 : 1 . All data are expressed as the mean ± SD . ( C ) Whole - genome analysis for tyrosine and argi - nine numbers within the disordered regions of human proteins . Shown is a two - dimensional his - togram quantifying the frequencies of the disor - dered regions with the speciﬁc number of tyrosine and arginine residues . ( D ) Tyrosine to serine substitution in the PLD or arginine to glycine substitution in the disordered regions of RBD increases the saturation concen - tration of the full - length FUS . ( E ) RBDs with distinct arginine number modulate the saturation concentration differently . ( F ) A cartoon summarizing the phase behavior of the prion - like domain and the full - length FUS . ( G and H ) Recruitment of clients by scaffold droplets appears to scale with the tyrosine and arginine numbers . The images ( G ) and the relative quantiﬁcation ( H ) were shown . Scale bar , 5 m m . To show the weak recruitment of some clients , we increased the signal from the clients by the same degree , and this caused the apparent layering of FUS and the clients in the merged channel . The clients are actually well mixed with FUS in the droplets . See also Figures S2 and S3 . pressed and puriﬁed from insect cells , does not drive phase separation as an in - dependent module even for protein con - centrations that are as high as 120 m M ( Figures 2B , 2F , and S2C ) . In accord with results from previous studies ( Burke et al . , 2015 ; Murray et al . , 2017 ) , crowding agents ( Figure S2D ) or PLD concentrations above 120 m M were necessary to drive phase separation . Therefore , the saturation concentration for the PLD is almost two orders of magnitude higher than the satu - ration concentration for the full - length protein . The RBD alone did not phase separate . However , when the FUS PLD was mixed with the FUS RBD at a ratio of 1 : 1 , the PLD phase separated at concentrations as low as 15 m M ( Figures 2B , S2B , and S2G ) . We obtained similar results for EWSR1 ( Figure S2E ) . This sug - gests that interactions among PLDs and RBDs are required in vitro to drive phase separation at physiologically relevant protein concentrations . Tyrosine and Arginine Residues Govern the Saturation Concentration of Phase Separation A characteristic hallmark of the FET proteins is that the PLDs are tyrosine - rich and the RBDs are arginine - rich ( Figure 2A ) . We 690 Cell 174 , 688 – 699 , July 26 , 2018 performed a proteome - wide analysis to assess the frequencies of proteins with long disordered regions that also have high tyro - sine and arginine contents . Theresults , summarized inFigure 2C , show that proteins with PLD - RBD architectures , especially the FET proteins , stand out because of their high tyrosine and argi - nine contents in the disordered regions ( 69 , 80 , and 109 tyrosine and arginine residues for FUS , EWSR1 , and TAF15 , respectively ) ( Table S3 ) . Importantly , the saturation concentrations appear to scale inversely with the number of tyrosine and arginine residues within a protein ( Figure 2C ) . This suggests that collective interac - tions among tyrosine - and arginine - rich motifs might contribute directly to the driving forces for phase separation of FUS family proteins . To test the role of tyrosine and arginine residues , we designed two different constructs . In one construct , we replaced all the tyrosine residues in the FUS PLD with serine residues ( FUS ( PLD Y / S ) ) ( Kato et al . , 2012 ; Lin et al . , 2017 ) . In the other construct , we replaced most arginine residues in the disordered region of FUS RBD with glycine residues ( FUS ( RBD R / G ) ) . Both substitutions abrogated observable phase separation up to concentrations as high as 30 m M ( Figures 2D , S2F , and S2H ) . We further investigated this relationship by quantifying the phase behavior of chimeric constructs made between different FUS family members ( Figures 2E and S2I ) . The RBD of hnRNPA1a has a low arginine content , whereas the RBD of EWSR1 has a high arginine content . As expected , the chimeric construct of the FUS PLD and EWSR1 RBD drives robust phase separation while the chimeric construct of the FUS PLD and the RBD from hnRNPA1a does not . Additional support for the impor - tance of tyrosine - arginine interactions comes from data for the phase separation of TAF15 , where we could vary the saturation concentration by varying the number of tyrosine residues ( Fig - ures S3A – S3G ) . Taken together , the results in Figure 2 suggest that for FET family proteins , the number of tyrosine and arginine and the complementarity of tyrosine - arginine interactions among the PLD and RBD contribute to the saturation concentrations . FUS , EWSR1 , and TAF15 are the only FUS family proteins that phase separate at near physiological concentrations ( Figure 1 ) . However , the majority of FUS family proteins are able to partition into preformed FUS droplets as clients even in the absence of crowding agents ( Figure 2G ) . The partition coefﬁcients show a positive correlation with the numbers of tyrosine and arginine residues in these proteins ( Figure 2H ) . This suggests that the speciﬁcity of client partitioning is driven in part by the presence of tyrosine - and arginine - rich motifs . The Number of Tyrosine and Arginine Residues Governs the Saturation Concentration of FUS in Cells To further test the idea that the number of tyrosine and arginine residues governs the saturation concentration of FUS family pro - teins , we designed gain - of - function mutants that enriched the FUS PLD with arginine residues ( Figure 3A ) . As expected , the substitution of 27 polar residues for arginine ( FUS ( 27R ) ) lowered the saturation concentration by an order of magnitude ( Figures 3B – 3D and S4A – S4D ) . Similarly , hnRNPA1a , the short isoform of hnRNPA1 , normally phase separates at roughly 100 m M ( Fig - ure 1D ) , but by substituting 10 polar residues for arginine and converting 12 phenylalanine residues to tyrosine we reduced the saturation concentration to 15 m M ( Figure 3F ) . This is similar to the physiological concentration ( (cid:1) 8 m M ) of hnRNPA1a ( Ta - ble S2 ) . We then sought to test how tyrosine - arginine interactions govern the saturation concentration of FUS family proteins by studying the behavior of FUS ( 27R ) in cells . Usually , FUS resides in the nucleus . Upon stress , it exits through the nuclear pores and forms stress granules in the cytoplasm , dependent on the protein G3BP1 . However , even in unstressed cells , FUS ( 27R ) formed constitutive condensates that do not associate with the stress granule marker G3BP1 ( Figure 3E ) . This does not appear to engender a concomitant loss of function because in the pres - ence of stress , the FUS ( 27R ) variant colocalized with the stress granule marker G3BP1 ( Figures S4E – S4G ) . Taken together , these results suggest that lowering the saturation concentration of FUS bypasses the requirement for G3BP1 to form FUS con - densates . We did not test the effects of increasing tyrosine valence on phase separation because increasing tyrosine number in the PLD causes the oligomerization of FUS in vitro ( data not shown ) . A Code of Aromatic and Positively Charged Amino Acids Can Govern Saturation Concentrations Interactions among aromatic amino acids , such as tyrosine , and basic residues , such as arginine , can be classiﬁed as cation - p interactions ( Burley and Petsko , 1988 ; Dougherty , 1996 , 2013 ; Gallivan and Dougherty , 1999 ; Nott et al . , 2015 ) . To distinguish between generic cation - p interactions and spe - ciﬁc contributions from tyrosine and arginine , we made three distinct variants of FUS : a tyrosine to phenylalanine variant ( FUS ( PLD Y / F ) ) , an arginine to lysine variant ( FUS ( PLD R / K ) ) , and a construct with both tyrosine to phenylalanine and arginine to lysine mutations ( FUS ( PLD Y / F RBD R / K ) ) ( Table S6 ) . The driving forces for phase separation , quantiﬁed in terms of measured saturation concentrations , follow the or - der : tyrosine - arginine > tyrosine - lysine z phenylalanine - argi - nine > phenylalanine - lysine ( Figures 4A and 4B ) . This shows that the selective preference for tyrosine - arginine interactions cannot be solely due to generic cation - p interactions . Instead , the speciﬁc chemical structures of the tyrosine and the arginine side chains appear to be important determinants of the complementarity of tyrosine - arginine interactions ( see the Discussion ) . To test whether a similar grammar applies in vivo , we studied the assembly of FUS compartments at DNA damage sites . Pre - vious data suggested that generation of double strand breaks using laser micro - irradiation leads to phase separation of FUS at sites of DNA damage ( Aleksandrov et al . , 2018 ; Altmeyer et al . , 2015 ; Patel et al . , 2015 ) . We used plasmids to express FUS ( PLD Y / F ) and FUS ( PLD Y / S ) variants in a FUS knockout line . In a complementary set of experiments , we mutated most arginine residues in the RBD , excepting those in the NLS , to lysine or glycine residues ( Table S6 ) . In all cases , the recruitment of FUS to DNA damage sites followed the same trend as seen in vitro . The Y / F and the R / K variants showed signiﬁcantly less recruitment than the wild - type ( WT ) protein ( Figures 4C – 4F ) . Cell 174 , 688 – 699 , July 26 , 2018 691 Phase Separation of the PLD Alone Is Likely Driven by Tyrosine - Tyrosine Interactions The PLDs of the FET proteins contain very few arginine residues . This raises an important question : what are the amino acid motifs that drive phase separation of the PLD alone ? The FUS PLD contains a large number of tyrosine residues , and a FUS PLD mutant lacking tyrosine residues could no longer phase separate ( Figure 5A ) , conﬁrming previ - ous data ( Lin et al . , 2017 ) . Therefore , the tyrosine residues in the PLD are likely involved in two types of interactions : they can either mediate networks of interactions among PLDs ( Kato et al . , 2012 ) , or networks of interactions with argi - nine residues from RBDs . However , the saturation concentra - tion necessary to drive phase separation based on tyrosine - based interactions alone is at least an order of magnitude higher than the saturation concentrations that are obtainable via networks of arginine - tyrosine based interactions ( Figures 2F and S2D ) . Electrostatic Interactions Tune the Protein Phase Behavior Next , we tested the roles of electrostatic interactions in phase separation by introducing 16 aspartates in FUS PLD . Unlike the wild - type PLD of FUS , which can be forced to phase separate in the presence of dextran , dextran could not drive phase separation of the variant with high negative charges ( Figures 5A and S5A ) . However , in the presence of 30 m M RBD , the PLD with high negative charges showed robust phase separation for PLD : RBD ratios as low as 1 : 15 ( Figures S5C and S5D ) . TAF15 PLD variants showed similar behaviors ( Figures S5E – S5G ) . Therefore , while increasing the negative charges in the PLD reduces the phase separation of PLDs alone , it en - hances phase separation mediated by interactions among the PLDs and the RBDs . To test these ideas in vivo , we studied the recruitment of a variant containing 6 additional aspartates in the PLD . Remark - ably , the recruitment of this variant to DNA damage sites was increased , suggesting that enhancing the interaction between the PLD and the RBD through additional electrostatic interac - tions also increases phase separation of FUS in living cells ( Fig - ures 5B , 5C , and S5B ) . The effect on phase separation caused by addition of negative charges in the PLD supports regulation of FUS phase behavior by phosphorylation of serine residues in the PLD ( Monahan et al . , 2017 ) . Taken together , our combined in vitro and in vivo results show that at least two levels of interactions govern phase E A C B F D Figure 3 . Manipulating Arginine Number Bypasses the Need for G3BP1 in Formation of FUS Granules In Vivo ( A ) Distribution of the newly added arginine resi - duesinFUS ( 27R ) mutant . NLS , nuclearlocalization signal . The mutant was designed according to the distribution of tyrosine and arginine residues in TAF15RBD ( FigureS3A ) , whichhasarelativelylow saturation concentration . ( B ) Addition of arginine residues in FUS lowers the saturation concentration of FUS in vitro . Phase separationassayswereconductedat150mMKCl . All data are expressed as the mean ± SD . ( C and D ) Granule formation by FUS variants in the absence of stress . The images ( C ) and the relative quantiﬁcation ( D ) were shown . ( C ) The HeLa cells weretransfectedwithGFP - taggedFUSWT ( D NLS ) or 27R ( D NLS ) , in which the NLS was deleted . We used the D NLS variants , because , unlike the full - length WT , which dominantly localizes in the nu - clear , full - length 27R mainly localizes in the cyto - plasm . Scale bar , 5 m m . ( D ) Quantiﬁcation of the granule number versus cyto mean intensity ( mean intensity of the cytoplasm ) of FUS variant . 189 and 134 cells were used to quantify the number of the preformedgranulesinthecellstransfectedwithWT ( D NLS ) and 27R ( D NLS ) , respectively . ( E ) The stress granule nucleator G3BP1 is absent from the 27R ( D NLS ) granules in the absence of stress . A stable HeLa cell line expressing C - ter - minal mCherry - tagged human G3BP1 was trans - fected with the plasmid expressing the GFP - tag - ged 27R ( D NLS ) . Scale bar , 5 m m . ( F ) Addition of arginine residues andsubstitution of phenylalanine with tyrosine residues in hnRNPA1a PLD lower the saturation concentration . Phase separation assays were conducted at 150 mM KCl . The positions of tyrosine and arginine residues for each construct are indicated by green and red lines , respectively . All data are expressed as the mean ± SD . See also Figure S4 . 692 Cell 174 , 688 – 699 , July 26 , 2018 separation of full - length FET proteins . First , interactions among networks of aromatic ( mainly tyrosine ) and positively charged ( mainly arginine ) residues govern the saturation concentration . Second , electrostatic repulsions inhibit non - productive self - interactions of PLDs , whereas electrostatic attractions further enhance productive interactions among aromatic residues in the PLD and positively charged amino acids in the RBD ( Fig - ures 5D and 5E ) . Our ﬁndings are consistent with results demonstrating a role for both complementary electrostatics and tyrosine - arginine interaction in complex coacervation of a high - complexity disordered protein ( Lin et al . , 2016 ; Pak et al . , 2016 ) . A Sequence Code Modulates the Material Properties of Condensates BecauseFUSmainlyconsistsofdisorderedregions , thetheoryof associative polymers ( Rubinstein and Dobrynin , 1997 ; Semenov andRubinstein , 1998 ) isofparticularrelevanceforunderstanding the phase behavior of FUS . This theory predicts the phase behavior of polymers that interact through associative motifs called stickers . The stickers are separated from one another by spacers , which impart polymer ﬂexibility and may weakly modu - late the saturation concentration , but , unlike the stickers , the spacers are not major determinants of the driving forces for phase separation ( Semenov and Rubinstein , 1998 ) . In the case A B D F C E Figure 4 . Distinct Saturation Concentration Is Governed by a Code of Associating Aromatic and Basic Amino Acids ( A ) Representative interactions among aromatic and basic amino acids in FUS family proteins . ( B ) Tuning the driving forces of phase separation by different combinations of aromatic and basic amino acids . The in vitro phase separation assays in Figure 4 were conducted at 75 mM KCl . Scale bar , 5 m m . ( C ) Phase separation of FUS tyrosine mutantsquantiﬁed by therelative amount of condensedprotein versus the protein concentration . All data are expressed as the mean ± SD . ( D ) Foci formation by FUS tyrosine mutants at DNA damage sites . Scale bar , 10 m m . All data are expressed as the mean ± SD . ( E ) Phase separation of FUS arginine mutants quantiﬁed by the relative amount of condensed protein versus the protein concentration . All data are expressed as the mean ± SD . ( F ) Foci formation by FUS arginine mutants at DNA damage sites . Scale bar , 10 m m . All data are expressed as the mean ± SD . See also Table S3 . Cell 174 , 688 – 699 , July 26 , 2018 693 of FUS family proteins , the stickers appear to be tyrosine and arginine residues . To identify potential spacer regions within FUSfamilyproteins , weanalyzedthecompositionalbiaseswithin each of the full - length proteins with PLD - RBD architectures . Fig - ures S6A and S6B summarize the results from this analysis . Glycine ( G ) is the most frequently occurring amino acid in 20 of the 22 protein sequences as shown in Figure S6A . Glycine - rich regions would be optimal spacers because of the conformational ﬂexibility of the peptide bond ( Brady et al . , 2017 ; Wei et al . , 2017 ) . Addition of a single methyl group in the side chain by substitut - ing glycine for alanine would lead to a substantial reduction in the local ﬂexibility of the polypeptide backbone ( Ramachandran et al . , 1963 ) . Consistent with its role as a spacer , substitution of glycine for alanine in FUS does not signiﬁcantly affect the satu - ration concentration ( Figures 6A , 6B , S6C , and S6D ) . However , a glycine to alanine ( G / A ) variant changes the fusion rate of two droplets by more than two orders of magnitude ( Figures 6C – 6E ; Video S1 ) ( for details , see the STAR Methods ) . This suggests that the glycine residues maintain the liquid - like nature of the drops , perhaps by increasing the ﬂexibility of the molecules , although we cannot rule out the possibility that the increased hydropho - bicity due to glycine to alanine substitution could lead to the for - mation of droplets with less dynamic . Among the 22 protein sequences , serine is the second most abundant amino acid on average ( Figure S6A ) , and the contents of glutamine and glycine are negatively correlated ( Figure S6B ) . A E C B D Figure 5 . Tuning Protein Phase Behavior by Electrostatic Interactions ( A ) Phase separation of FUS PLD variants in the absence or presence of crowding agents . Scale bar , 5 m m . ( B ) Additionofnegativecharges promotes phaseseparationofFUS invitro . Thepositionsofthenewlyaddedasparticacidresiduesareindicated byyellowlines . The phase separation assays were conducted at 75 mM KCl . All data are expressed as the mean ± SD . ( C ) FociformationbyFUS6DatDNAdamagesites . Scalebar , 10 m m . Alldataareexpressedasthemean ± SD . Theimagesshowing fociformationbyWTarethe same as those in Figures 4D and 4E , because the assays in Figures 4D , 4E , and 5C were done in parallel . ( D ) Comparisonof c sat valuesofFUSvariants determined bymeasuringthesupernatantconcentration at75mMKCl ( seealso TableS4 ) . Theinsetshowsthe c sat values of full - length FUS and PLD in the presence of dextran ( Figure S2D ) . ( E ) A hierarchy of interactions involving aromatic and charged residues governs the saturation concentration . See also Figure S5 . 694 Cell 174 , 688 – 699 , July 26 , 2018 As with the glycine to alanine substitution , the saturation concen - tration of a serine to alanine ( S / A ) variant and a glutamine to glycine ( Q / G ) variant did not change signiﬁcantly . However , the hardening of the droplets slowed considerably . The ( S / A ) variant slowed hardening by a factor of two . More strikingly , the ( Q / G ) variant produced droplets that neither hardened nor underwent any morphological changes over 24 hr ( Figures 6F – 6H ) . Based on recent structural studies of the PLD ( Murray et al . , 2017 ) , glutamine residues could also be required for the formation of labile cross - beta sheets , and therefore it seems possible that this mutation prevents hardening by preventing the formation of such higher order structures . DISCUSSION In this work , we show that phase separation of FUS family pro - teins is governed primarily by interactions between tyrosine and arginine residues . Productive interactions among tyrosine and arginine residues are regulated by complementary electrostatic interactions involving negatively charged amino acids , which reduce self - interaction among the PLDs ( Monahan et al . , 2017 ; Murray et al . , 2017 ) and promote interactions among the PLDs and RBDs . The material properties of condensates are governed by serine , glutamine , and glycine residues . These ﬁndings are summarized in Figures 7A and 7B . Taken together , our results provide a framework for developing a molecular grammar that governs phase separation of the FUS family proteins . We have built on our understanding of the molecular grammar to design targeted mutations that modulate the phase behavior of proteins in cells . The relative ease with which we can modulate and independently tune the driving forces for phase separation and the material properties of FUS by mutation and the corre - spondence between in vitro and in vivo properties is remarkable Time ( hr ) 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 M ob il e f r a c t i on - 0 . 3 0 . 0 0 . 3 0 . 6 0 . 9 1 . 2 WTS → A Q → G FUS variant ( μ M ) 0 2 4 6 8 10 R e l a t i v e a m oun t c onden s ed p r o t e i n - 0 . 5 0 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 WT G → A Q → G S → A A FUS PLD RRM WTS → A WTQ → G Ser Gln B * * * Scaled relaxation F u ll f u s i on ? Droplet hardening ( min ) W T E G → A 5 min - 5 . 8 s 0 . 0 s 43 . 2 s - 0 . 3 s 0 . 0 s 0 . 3 s 25 min - 0 . 6 s 0 . 6 s 0 . 0 s - 3 . 3 s 0 . 0 s 275 . 2 s 120 / 40 min ( WT / G → A ) 0 . 4 s 0 . 0 s - 0 . 3 s 0 . 0 s 211 s 334 s Gly WTG → A F WT G → A 0 . 1 1 . 0 10 . 0 100 . 0 120 60 0 27 D C WTG → A time ( s / μ m ) Yes No WT S → A Q → G 0 h 12 h 0 h 24 h 0 h 24 h H N o r m a li z ed f l uo r e sc en t i n t en s i t y Time ( sec ) 0 10 20 30 40 0 h 12 h 1 . 2 0 . 8 0 . 4 0 . 0 Time ( sec ) 0 10 20 30 40 0 h 12 h 24 h Time ( sec ) 0 10 20 30 40 0 h 12 h 24 h G WT S → A Q → G Figure 6 . Glycine and Serine / Glutamine Residues Act Oppositely to Modulate the Material Property of Droplets after Phase Separation ( A ) Distribution of glycine , serine , and glutamine residues within the PLD region of the full - length protein and the relative mutants used . ( B ) Glycine , serine , and glutamine residues have minor effects on the saturation concentrations for phase separation . Phase separation assays were conducted at 75 mM KCl . All data are expressed as the mean ± SD . ( C ) Droplets formed by G / A mutant fuse slowerthanthoseformedbyWT . Controlledfusion experiments with phase - separated FUS droplets were performed using a dual - trap optical tweezer instrument . Size - normalized median fusion times are 32 . 9 s / m m for G / A and 0 . 093 s / m m for WT , respectively . ( D ) Droplets formed by G / A mutant stop fusing after 40 min while WT droplets do not change dynamics ( quantiﬁcation ) . Fusion was monitored over time and was scored successful ( 1 ) or not ( 0 ) according to whether the resultant droplet relaxed to approximately spherical shape within 2 min . ( E ) Glycine residues maintain droplet liquidity . Controlled fusion experiments were done at different time points using dual - trap optical tweezers . Scale bar , 3 m m . ( F ) Serine and glutamine residues promote hard - ening . After 12 hr , the WT droplets converted into theﬁbers , whiletheS / AorQ / Gdroplets didn’t . Scale bar , 5 m m . ( G ) Dynamic change of the condensates formed by WT , S / A or Q / G mutant over time . The dy - namic change of the condensates was monitored by theﬂuorescence recovery after photobleaching ( FRAP ) . All data are expressed as the mean ± SD . ( H ) Mobile fraction of FUS variants over time . The mobile fraction of FUS variants was obtained from the FRAP experiments . See also Figure S6 and Video S1 . Cell 174 , 688 – 699 , July 26 , 2018 695 and unexpected . Our results suggest that it will be possible to use detailed structure - function analysis to analyze the role of phase separation in cells . Our experiments reinforce previous in vitro observations that isolated PLDs of the FET proteins have very different phase behavior than the full - length proteins ( Burke et al . , 2015 ; Han et al . , 2012 ; Lin et al . , 2015 ) . They further suggest interactions among the PLDs are unlikely to drive of phase separation in the full - length protein on their own , unless they are modulated by post - translational modiﬁcations . Supporting this idea , mu - tants in serine and glutamine that should disrupt cross - beta sheet interaction only marginally inﬂuence phase separation in vitro . However , once a condensate is formed , the concentration of the FET proteins inside the condensate is greatly elevated . This could promote interactions among PLDs , leading to different types of structures , including the cross - beta sheets ( Murray et al . , 2017 ; Hughes et al . , 2018 ; Luo et al . , 2018 ) , which may provide further physiological functions to the liquid - like con - densates , such as stimulating transcription ( Kwon et al . , 2013 ) , or shutting down biochemical reactions ( Berchowitz et al . , 2015 ; Boke et al . , 2016 ; Franzmann et al . , 2018 ; Woodruff et al . , 2018 ) . Because extensive PLD : PLD interactions only occur in the context of the condensate , any pathological interactions that then occur would be conﬁned to that compartment , and this could be dealt with , for instance , by autophagy of the compartment itself . In this idea , cells use cross beta sheet inter - actions to form stable structures and deal with any pathological consequences by sequestering interactions among PLDs to the condensates . If true , this would be another example of a cell us - ing phase separation to raise protein concentration and uncover new chemistry , as has been proposed for polymer dynamics and enzymatic reactions ( Banani et al . , 2017 ; Herna´ndez - Vega et al . , 2017 ; Shin and Brangwynne , 2017 ; Woodruff et al . , 2017 ) . Further work in vivo using amino - acid substitutuions in full - length proteins will be required to understand the relative roles of tyro - sine - arginine interactions and cross beta sheets in the formation of cellular condensates with different material properties . Phase separation of FET proteins is derived from collective in - teractions among tyrosine residues in the PLD and arginine C A B D Figure 7 . Model to Explain the Phase Behavior of FUS Family Proteins ( A ) Hierarchical organization that gives rise to for - mation of condensates depicted here as spherical droplets . Collective complementary interactions among the associative motifs , such as tyrosine and arginine residues , drive self - association , and electrostatic interactions play a modulatory role . The amino acid compositions of spacers , which are mainly enriched in glycine , glutamine , and serine residues , largely determine intra - conden - sate dynamics of proteins . While the saturation concentrationisgovernedbyacodeofassociating aromatic and charged residues ( Figure 5E ) , the spacers have little effect on the driving forces for droplet formation . ( B ) Material properties are controlled mainly by glycine , serine , and glutamine residues . Glycine - rich spacers yield highly dynamic droplets by im - parting ﬂexibility onto the amino acid backbone . This is manifest as droplets that undergo rapid internal rearrangement and rapid macroscopic relaxation . The presence of serine and glutamine residues in spacers appears to reduce the internal rearrangements and relaxation , leading to the reduction of droplet liquidity of droplets . ( C ) Comparison of the inverse of the product of the numbers of tyrosine and arginine residues ( ordi - nate ) to the measured saturation concentrations ( abscissa ) . The c sat values determined directly by measuring the supernatant concentrations were used ( see Figure S1 ; Table S4 ) . The measured numbers were ﬁt to a model of the form c sat = k ( n Tyr n Arg ) – 1 . Here , n Tyr and n Arg denotethenumber of tyrosine and arginine residues , respectively . The onlyadjustable parameter inthe ﬁttingprocedurewas k , whichplaces thevalence on thesameconcentrationscale astheexperimentaldata . Theﬁtshownhere , which was performed on a logarithmic scale , uses a value of k = 6 . 5 mM . ( D ) Identifying potential scaffold proteins that could undergo phase separation at physiologically relevant concentrations . This ﬁgure includes a two - dimensional histogram quantifying the frequencies of the disordered regions with the speciﬁc number of tyrosine and arginine residues . Overlaid atop this histogram are contours showing the predicted values of saturation concentration ( c sat ) in m M . The plot shows the locations , in terms of the number of tyrosine and arginine residues as well as the calculated values of c sat for proteins with predicted saturation concentrations that are on a par with the FET family of proteins . See also Figure S7 and Table S5 . 696 Cell 174 , 688 – 699 , July 26 , 2018 residues in the RBD . It is interesting that the same arginine res - idues in the RBD that are central to the phase separation of FET proteins are also important for RNA binding ( Schwartz et al . , 2013 ) . This suggests that RNA could regulate diverse as - pects of phase separation by modifying the underlying molecular grammar . This could involve changes to the saturation concen - tration or the material properties of the formed condensates ( Zhang et al . , 2015 ; Maharana et al . , 2018 ) . Future studies will have to investigate the exact role of the interplay between RNA - RBD interactions and PLD - RBD interactions , in regulating the phase behavior and pathological forms of FUS family proteins . The role of tyrosine and arginine residues in driving phase sep - aration of FUS family proteins provides support for recent studies that highlight the importance of cation - p interactions as drivers of phase separation ( Nott et al . , 2015 ; Pak et al . , 2016 ; Lee et al . , 2016 ; Boeynaems et al . , 2017 ) . Our studies build on this work by showing that there is a clear difference between arginine versus lysine as well as tyrosine versus phenylalanine . The central distinction between arginine and lysine lies in the chemical structure of the cationic side chain . The electron cloud is delocalized across the planar guanidinium group of arginine ( Gobbi and Frenking , 1993 ) . This enables speciﬁc directional preferences with aromatic moieties , such as tyrosine and phenylalanine . In contrast , interactions involving the amine in lysine should have weaker directional preferences ( Burley and Petsko , 1988 ; Gobbi and Frenking , 1993 ) . Accordingly , arginine and lysine will not lead to equivalent interactions as cations . More generally , the molecular grammar described here refers to the FUS family proteins . However , there are numerous exam - ples of non - prion - like intrinsically disordered regions that drive phase separation such as DDX4 , LAF - 1 and FIB1 ( Elbaum - Gar - ﬁnkle et al . , 2015 ; Feric et al . , 2016 ; Nott et al . , 2015 ) . There are also examples in which self - assembly is mediated by hydropho - bicity ( Simon et al . , 2017 ) , multivalent folded domains connected by ﬂexible linkers ( Banani et al . , 2016 ) , a coupling of folded oligo - merizing domains and disordered regions ( Feric et al . , 2016 ; Protter and Parker , 2016 ) , or coiled - coil proteins ( Woodruff et al . , 2017 ) . These differences could give rise to control of phase separation via speciﬁc sequence features , such as the creation of condensates with multiple phases as seen in the nucleolus and nuclear speckles , driving the formation of condensates with different identities ( Fei et al . , 2017 ; Feric et al . , 2016 ) . If the interactions among arginine and tyrosine residues govern the saturation concentration of FUS family proteins , then it should be possible to predict their approximate saturation concentrations by adapting mean ﬁeld theories that use the numbers of arginine and tyrosine residues as inputs ( Flory , 1941 ; Semenov and Rubinstein , 1998 ; Stockmayer , 1943 ) . Such theories predict that the saturation concentration should be inversely proportional to the product of the numbers of com - plementary stickers ( for details , see the STAR Methods ) . In our case , the complementary stickers are tyrosine and arginine res - idues . Indeed , this simple model shows that the measured satu - ration concentrations for all twelve constructs are positively correlated with the inverse of the product of the numbers of tyro - sine and arginine residues ( Figure 7C ) . We used this model to predict the saturation concentration for a catalog of proteins whose domains have similar lengths to those of PLDs and RBDs of FUS family proteins ( Figures 7D , S7A , and S7B ; Table S5 ) . These predictions identify interesting new proteins that may provide key scaffolding functions for numerous biochemical compartments inside cells . STAR + METHODS Detailed methods are provided in the online version of this paper and include the following : d KEY RESOURCES TABLE d CONTACT FOR REAGENT AND RESOURCE SHARING d EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT DETAILS d METHOD DETAILS B Domain and disorder prediction B Plot of domain structures / normalized occurrences B Constructs , protein expression and puriﬁcation B Image collection B Phase separation assays B Analysis for tyrosine and arginine number within the disordered regions B Determination of the saturation concentration B Client partitioning assays B Hardening assays B Fiber formation assays B Prediction of potential scaffold proteins B Fluorescence Recovery After Photobleaching ( FRAP ) B DNA damage data acquisition and analysis B BAC constructs and cell lines B Cell transfection and arsenate stress B Theoretical model d QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION Supplemental Information includes seven ﬁgures , six tables , and one video and can be found with this article online at https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2018 . 06 . 006 . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank the following Services and Facilities of the MPI - CBG for their sup - port : Protein Expression Puriﬁcation and Characterization , Light Microscopy , the Technology Development Studio , and the Scientiﬁc Computing Facility . WethankFrankJu¨licherforcritical comments ; membersofMPI - CBGforhelp - ful discussions and comments on the manuscript ; Avinash Patel and Titus Franzmann for help with the in vitro assays ; Nicola Maghelli and Dimitrios Pa - padopoulos for help with the in vivo assays ; Barbara Borgonovo for help with fast protein liquid chromatography ( FPLC ) ; Martine Ruer for help with protein puriﬁcation ; Regina Wegner for insect cell culture ; Aliona Bogdanova for vec - tors ; Marit Leuschner and Andrea Ssykor for cell lines ; Jan Peychl , Bert Nitz - sche , andBrittaSchroth - Diezforhelpwithlightmicroscopy ; MarcBickle , Cor - dula Andree , and Claudia Mo ¨ bius for screen experiments in cells ; Benoit Lombardot , Robert Haase , and Beatriz Ferreira Gomes for image analysis ; and Naharajan Lakshmanaperumal for bioinformatics analysis . This work was funded by a direct grant from the Max Planck Society and the MaxSynBio Consortium , the U . S . NIH ( 5R01NS056114 ) ( to R . V . P . ) , the Research Collabo - rative on Membraneless Organelles from the St . Jude Children’s Research Hospital ( to R . V . P . ) , the ERC ( 725836 and 643417 ) ( to S . A . ) , two BMBF grants ( 01ED1601A to S . A . ; 031A359A to A . A . H . ) , the JPND ( CureALS ) ( to S . A . ) , and the Human Frontier Science Program ( RGP0034 / 2017 ) ( to S . A . and R . V . P . ) . Cell 174 , 688 – 699 , July 26 , 2018 697 AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS J . W . puriﬁed proteins from insect cells with help from D . D . , R . L . , and X . Z . J . W . performed the in vitro phase separation experiments with help from X . Z . H . O . L . performed the in vivo DNA damage experiments with FUS , with help from J . W . , and I . P . performed the in vivo stress granule formation experiments . S . M . per - formed the in vivo photobleaching experiments . M . J . performed and analyzed the in vitro fusion optical tweezer experiments . J . W . and S . M . analyzed the invitro photobleachingexperiments . D . D . designedvectorsandhelpedwithpu - riﬁcationstrategies . A . P . constructedallclones . I . P . designed , characterized , and produced the cell lines . R . V . P introduced the stickers and spacers framework . J . - M . C . , J . W . , A . S . H . , and R . V . P . designed the mutations to distinguish stickers from spacers . J . - M . C . and R . V . P . developed the theory . A . S . H . and J . M . C . per - formed the informatics analysis . A . A . H . and S . A . conceived of the project . A . A . H . , S . A . , andR . V . P . wrotethepaperwithhelpfromJ . W . , J . M . C . , andA . S . H . DECLARATION OF INTERESTS The authors declare no competing interests . Received : November 30 , 2017 Revised : March 19 , 2018 Accepted : May 31 , 2018 Published : June 28 , 2018 REFERENCES Alberti , S . , Halfmann , R . , King , O . , Kapila , A . , and Lindquist , S . ( 2009 ) . A sys - tematic survey identiﬁes prions and illuminates sequence features of priono - genic proteins . Cell 137 , 146 – 158 . Aleksandrov , R . , Dotchev , A . , Poser , I . , Krastev , D . , Georgiev , G . , Panova , G . , Babukov , Y . , Danovski , G . , Dyankova , T . , Hubatsch , L . , et al . ( 2018 ) . Protein dynamics in complex DNA lesions . Mol . Cell 69 , 1046 – 1061 . e5 . Altmeyer , M . , Neelsen , K . J . , Teloni , F . , Pozdnyakova , I . , Pellegrino , S . , Grøfte , M . , Rask , M . B . , Streicher , W . , Jungmichel , S . , Nielsen , M . L . , and Lukas , J . ( 2015 ) . Liquid demixing of intrinsically disordered proteins is seeded by poly ( ADP - ribose ) . Nat . Commun . 6 , 8088 . Banani , S . F . , Rice , A . M . , Peeples , W . B . , Lin , Y . , Jain , S . , Parker , R . , andRosen , M . K . ( 2016 ) . Compositional control of phase - separated cellular bodies . Cell 166 , 651 – 663 . Banani , S . F . , Lee , H . O . , Hyman , A . A . , and Rosen , M . K . ( 2017 ) . Biomolecular condensates : organizers of cellular biochemistry . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 18 , 285 – 298 . Berchowitz , L . E . , Kabachinski , G . , Walker , M . R . , Carlile , T . M . , Gilbert , W . V . , Schwartz , T . U . , and Amon , A . ( 2015 ) . Regulated formation of an amyloid - like translational repressor governs gametogenesis . Cell 163 , 406 – 418 . Bergeron - Sandoval , L . P . , Safaee , N . , and Michnick , S . W . ( 2016 ) . Mechanisms and consequences of macromolecular phase separation . Cell 165 , 1067 – 1079 . Boeynaems , S . , Bogaert , E . , Kovacs , D . , Konijnenberg , A . , Timmerman , E . , Volkov , A . , Guharoy , M . , De Decker , M . , Jaspers , T . , Ryan , V . H . , et al . ( 2017 ) . Phase Separation of C9orf72 Dipeptide Repeats Perturbs Stress Granule Dynamics . Mol Cell 65 , 1044 – 1055 . Boke , E . , Ruer , M . , Wu¨hr , M . , Coughlin , M . , Lemaitre , R . , Gygi , S . P . , Alberti , S . , Drechsel , D . , Hyman , A . A . , and Mitchison , T . J . ( 2016 ) . Amyloid - like self - assembly of a cellular compartment . Cell 166 , 637 – 650 . Brady , J . P . , Farber , P . J . , Sekhar , A . , Lin , Y . H . , Huang , R . , Bah , A . , Nott , T . J . , Chan , H . S . , Baldwin , A . J . , Forman - Kay , J . D . , and Kay , L . E . ( 2017 ) . Structural and hydrodynamic properties of an intrinsically disordered region of a germ cell - speciﬁc protein on phase separation . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 114 , E8194 – E8203 . Brangwynne , C . P . , Eckmann , C . R . , Courson , D . S . , Rybarska , A . , Hoege , C . , Gharakhani , J . , Ju¨licher , F . , and Hyman , A . A . ( 2009 ) . Germline P granules are liquid droplets that localize by controlled dissolution / condensation . Sci - ence 324 , 1729 – 1732 . Burke , K . A . , Janke , A . M . , Rhine , C . L . , and Fawzi , N . L . ( 2015 ) . Residue - by - res - idue view of in vitro fus granules that bind the C - terminal domain of RNA poly - merase II . Mol . Cell 60 , 231 – 241 . Burley , S . K . , and Petsko , G . A . ( 1988 ) . Weakly polar interactions in proteins . Adv . Protein Chem . 39 , 125 – 189 . Crozat , A . , Aman , P . , Mandahl , N . , and Ron , D . ( 1993 ) . Fusion of CHOP to a novel RNA - binding protein in human myxoid liposarcoma . Nature 363 , 640 – 644 . Dougherty , D . A . ( 1996 ) . Cation - pi interactions in chemistry and biology : a new view of benzene , Phe , Tyr , and Trp . Science 271 , 163 – 168 . Dougherty , D . A . ( 2013 ) . The cation - p interaction . Acc . Chem . Res . 46 , 885 – 893 . Elbaum - Garﬁnkle , S . , Kim , Y . , Szczepaniak , K . , Chen , C . C . - H . , Eckmann , C . R . , Myong , S . , and Brangwynne , C . P . ( 2015 ) . The disordered P granule pro - tein LAF - 1 drives phase separation into droplets with tunable viscosity and dynamics . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 112 , 7189 – 7194 . Fei , J . , Jadaliha , M . , Harmon , T . S . , Li , I . T . S . , Hua , B . , Hao , Q . , Holehouse , A . S . , Reyer , M . , Sun , Q . , Freier , S . M . , etal . ( 2017 ) . Quantitativeanalysisofmultilayer organization of proteins and RNA in nuclear speckles at super resolution . J . Cell Sci . 130 , 4180 – 4192 . Feric , M . , Vaidya , N . , Harmon , T . S . , Mitrea , D . M . , Zhu , L . , Richardson , T . M . , Kriwacki , R . W . , Pappu , R . V . , and Brangwynne , C . P . ( 2016 ) . Coexisting liquid phases underlie nucleolar subcompartments . Cell 165 , 1686 – 1697 . Flory , P . J . ( 1941 ) . Molecular size distribution in three dimensional polymers . I . Gelation . J . Am . Chem . Soc . 63 , 3083 – 3090 . Franzmann , T . M . , Jahnel , M . , Pozniakovsky , A . , Mahamid , J . , Holehouse , A . S . , Nu¨ske , E . , Richter , D . , Baumeister , W . , Grill , S . W . , Pappu , R . V . , et al . ( 2018 ) . Phase separation of a yeast prion protein promotes cellular ﬁtness . Science 359 , aao5654 . Gallivan , J . P . , and Dougherty , D . A . ( 1999 ) . Cation - pi interactions in structural biology . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 96 , 9459 – 9464 . Gobbi , A . , and Frenking , G . ( 1993 ) . Y - conjugated compounds : the equilibrium geometries and electronic structures of guanidine , guanidinium cation , urea , and 1 , 1 - diaminoethylene . J . Am . Chem . Soc . 115 , 2362 – 2372 . Han , T . W . , Kato , M . , Xie , S . , Wu , L . C . , Mirzaei , H . , Pei , J . , Chen , M . , Xie , Y . , Allen , J . , Xiao , G . , and McKnight , S . L . ( 2012 ) . Cell - free formation of RNA gran - ules : bound RNAs identify features and components of cellular assemblies . Cell 149 , 768 – 779 . Hein , M . Y . , Hubner , N . C . , Poser , I . , Cox , J . , Nagaraj , N . , Toyoda , Y . , Gak , I . A . , Weisswange , I . , Mansfeld , J . , Buchholz , F . , et al . ( 2015 ) . A human interactome in three quantitative dimensions organized by stoichiometries and abun - dances . Cell 163 , 712 – 723 . Herna´ndez - Vega , A . , Braun , M . , Scharrel , L . , Jahnel , M . , Wegmann , S . , Hyman , B . T . , Alberti , S . , Diez , S . , and Hyman , A . A . ( 2017 ) . Local nucleation of microtubule bundles through tubulin concentration into a condensed tau phase . Cell Rep . 20 , 2304 – 2312 . Holehouse , A . S . , Das , R . K . , Ahad , J . N . , Richardson , M . O . , and Pappu , R . V . ( 2017 ) . CIDER : resources to analyze sequence - ensemble relationships of intrinsically disordered proteins . Biophys . J . 112 , 16 – 21 . Hughes , M . P . , Sawaya , M . R . , Boyer , D . R . , Goldschmidt , L . , Rodriguez , J . A . , Cascio , D . , Chong , L . , Gonen , T . , and Eisenberg , D . S . ( 2018 ) . Atomic struc - tures of low - complexity protein segments reveal kinked b sheets that assemble networks . Science 359 , 698 – 701 . Hyman , A . A . , and Brangwynne , C . P . ( 2011 ) . Beyond stereospeciﬁcity : liquids and mesoscale organization of cytoplasm . Dev . Cell 21 , 14 – 16 . Hyman , A . A . , Weber , C . A . , and Ju¨licher , F . ( 2014 ) . Liquid - liquid phase separa - tion in biology . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 30 , 39 – 58 . Jahnel , M . , Behrndt , M . , Jannasch , A . , Scha¨ffer , E . , and Grill , S . W . ( 2011 ) . Measuringthecompleteforceﬁeldofanopticaltrap . Opt . Lett . 36 , 1260 – 1262 . Kato , M . , Han , T . W . , Xie , S . , Shi , K . , Du , X . , Wu , L . C . , Mirzaei , H . , Goldsmith , E . J . , Longgood , J . , Pei , J . , et al . ( 2012 ) . Cell - free formation of RNA 698 Cell 174 , 688 – 699 , July 26 , 2018 granules : low complexity sequence domains form dynamic ﬁbers within hydrogels . Cell 149 , 753 – 767 . King , O . D . , Gitler , A . D . , and Shorter , J . ( 2012 ) . The tip of the iceberg : RNA - binding proteins with prion - like domains in neurodegenerative disease . Brain Res . 1462 , 61 – 80 . Kwon , I . , Kato , M . , Xiang , S . , Wu , L . , Theodoropoulos , P . , Mirzaei , H . , Han , T . , Xie , S . , Corden , J . L . , and McKnight , S . L . ( 2013 ) . Phosphorylation - regulated binding of RNA polymerase II to ﬁbrous polymers of low - complexity domains . Cell 155 , 1049 – 1060 . Lancaster , A . K . , Nutter - Upham , A . , Lindquist , S . , and King , O . D . ( 2014 ) . PLAAC : a web and command - line application to identify proteins with prion - like amino acid composition . Bioinformatics 30 , 2501 – 2502 . Lee , K . - H . , Zhang , P . , Kim , H . J . , Mitrea , D . M . , Sarkar , M . , Freibaum , B . D . , Cika , J . , Coughlin , M . , Messing , J . , Molliex , A . , et al . ( 2016 ) . C9orf72 Dipeptide RepeatsImpairtheAssembly , Dynamics , andFunctionofMembrane - LessOr - ganelles . Cell 167 , 774 – 788 . e17 . Lin , Y . , Protter , D . S . , Rosen , M . K . , and Parker , R . ( 2015 ) . Formation and maturation of phase - separated liquid droplets by RNA - binding proteins . Mol . Cell 60 , 208 – 219 . Lin , Y . H . , Forman - Kay , J . D . , and Chan , H . S . ( 2016 ) . Sequence - speciﬁc polyampholyte phase separation in membraneless organelles . Phys . Rev . Lett . 117 , 178101 . Lin , Y . , Currie , S . L . , andRosen , M . K . ( 2017 ) . Intrinsicallydisorderedsequences enable modulation of protein phase separation through distributed tyrosine motifs . J . Biol . Chem . 292 , 19110 – 19120 . Liu , W . , Xie , Y . , Ma , J . , Luo , X . , Nie , P . , Zuo , Z . , Lahrmann , U . , Zhao , Q . , Zheng , Y . , Zhao , Y . , et al . ( 2015 ) . IBS : an illustrator for the presentation and visualiza - tion of biological sequences . Bioinformatics 31 , 3359 – 3361 . Luo , F . , Gui , X . , Zhou , H . , Gu , J . , Li , Y . , Liu , X . , Zhao , M . , Li , D . , Li , X . , andLiu , C . ( 2018 ) . AtomicstructuresofFUSLCdomainsegmentsrevealbasesforrevers - ible amyloid ﬁbril formation . Nat . Struct . Mol . Biol . 25 , 341 – 346 . Maharana , S . , Wang , J . , Papadopoulos , D . K . , Richter , D . , Pozniakovsky , A . , Poser , I . , Bickle , M . , Rizk , S . , Guille´n - Boixet , J . , Franzmann , T . M . , et al . ( 2018 ) . RNA buffers the phase separation behavior of prion - like RNA binding proteins . Science 360 , 918 – 921 . Malinovska , L . , Kroschwald , S . , and Alberti , S . ( 2013 ) . Protein disorder , prion propensities , and self - organizing macromolecular collectives . Biochim . Bio - phys . Acta 1834 , 918 – 931 . Malinovska , L . , Palm , S . , Gibson , K . , Verbavatz , J . M . , and Alberti , S . ( 2015 ) . Dictyostelium discoideum has a highly Q / N - rich proteome and shows an unusual resilience to protein aggregation . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 112 , E2620 – E2629 . Mateju , D . , Franzmann , T . M . , Patel , A . , Kopach , A . , Boczek , E . E . , Maharana , S . , Lee , H . O . , Carra , S . , Hyman , A . A . , and Alberti , S . ( 2017 ) . An aberrant phase transition of stress granules triggered by misfolded protein and prevented by chaperone function . EMBO J 36 , 1669 – 1687 . Molliex , A . , Temirov , J . , Lee , J . , Coughlin , M . , Kanagaraj , A . P . , Kim , H . J . , Mit - tag , T . , and Taylor , J . P . ( 2015 ) . Phase separation by low complexity domains promotes stress granule assembly and drives pathological ﬁbrillization . Cell 163 , 123 – 133 . Monahan , Z . , Ryan , V . H . , Janke , A . M . , Burke , K . A . , Rhoads , S . N . , Zerze , G . H . , O’Meally , R . , Dignon , G . L . , Conicella , A . E . , Zheng , W . , et al . ( 2017 ) . Phosphor - ylation of the FUS low - complexity domain disrupts phase separation , aggre - gation , and toxicity . EMBO J . 36 , 2951 – 2967 . Murakami , T . , Qamar , S . , Lin , J . Q . , Schierle , G . S . , Rees , E . , Miyashita , A . , Costa , A . R . , Dodd , R . B . , Chan , F . T . , Michel , C . H . , et al . ( 2015 ) . ALS / FTD mu - tation - inducedphasetransitionofFUSliquiddropletsandreversiblehydrogels into irreversible hydrogels impairs RNP granule function . Neuron 88 , 678 – 690 . Murray , D . T . , Kato , M . , Lin , Y . , Thurber , K . R . , Hung , I . , McKnight , S . L . , and Tycko , R . ( 2017 ) . Structure of FUS protein ﬁbrils and its relevance to self - as - sembly and phase separation of low - complexity domains . Cell 171 , 615 – 627 . e16 . Necci , M . , Piovesan , D . , Doszta´nyi , Z . , and Tosatto , S . C . E . ( 2017 ) . MobiDB - lite : fast and highly speciﬁc consensus prediction of intrinsic disorder in pro - teins . Bioinformatics 33 , 1402 – 1404 . Nott , T . J . , Petsalaki , E . , Farber , P . , Jervis , D . , Fussner , E . , Plochowietz , A . , Craggs , T . D . , Bazett - Jones , D . P . , Pawson , T . , Forman - Kay , J . D . , andBaldwin , A . J . ( 2015 ) . Phase transition of a disordered nuage protein generates environ - mentally responsive membraneless organelles . Mol . Cell 57 , 936 – 947 . Pak , C . W . , Kosno , M . , Holehouse , A . S . , Padrick , S . B . , Mittal , A . , Ali , R . , Yunus , A . A . , Liu , D . R . , Pappu , R . V . , and Rosen , M . K . ( 2016 ) . Sequence determinants ofintracellularphaseseparationbycomplexcoacervationofadisorderedpro - tein . Mol . Cell 63 , 72 – 85 . Patel , A . , Lee , H . O . , Jawerth , L . , Maharana , S . , Jahnel , M . , Hein , M . Y . , Stoy - nov , S . , Mahamid , J . , Saha , S . , Franzmann , T . M . , etal . ( 2015 ) . A liquid - to - solid phase transition of the ALS protein FUS accelerated by disease mutation . Cell 162 , 1066 – 1077 . Poser , I . , Sarov , M . , Hutchins , J . R . , Heriche , J . K . , Toyoda , Y . , Pozniakovsky , A . , Weigl , D . , Nitzsche , A . , Hegemann , B . , Bird , A . W . , et al . ( 2008 ) . BAC TransgeneOmics : ahigh - throughputmethodforexplorationofproteinfunction in mammals . Nat Methods 5 , 409 – 415 . Protter , D . S . , and Parker , R . ( 2016 ) . Principles and properties of stress gran - ules . Trends Cell Biol . 26 , 668 – 679 . Ramachandran , G . N . , Ramakrishnan , C . , andSasisekharan , V . ( 1963 ) . Stereo - chemistry of polypeptide chain conﬁgurations . J . Mol . Biol . 7 , 95 – 99 . Riback , J . A . , Katanski , C . D . , Kear - Scott , J . L . , Pilipenko , E . V . , Rojek , A . E . , Sos - nick , T . R . , and Drummond , D . A . ( 2017 ) . Stress - triggered phase separation is an adaptive , evolutionarily tuned response . Cell 168 , 1028 – 1040 . e19 . Rubinstein , M . , and Dobrynin , A . V . ( 1997 ) . Solutions of associative polymers . Trends Polym . Sci . ( Regul . ) 5 , 181 – 186 . Schwartz , J . C . , Cech , T . R . , and Parker , R . R . ( 2015 ) . Biochemical properties and biological functions of FET proteins . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 84 , 355 – 379 . Schwartz , J . C . , Wang , X . , Podell , E . R . , and Cech , T . R . ( 2013 ) . RNA seeds higher - order assembly of FUS protein . Cell Rep 5 , 918 – 925 . Semenov , A . N . , and Rubinstein , M . ( 1998 ) . Thermoreversible gelation in solu - tions of associative polymers . 1 . Statics . Macromolecules 31 , 1373 – 1385 . Shin , Y . , and Brangwynne , C . P . ( 2017 ) . Liquid phase condensation in cell physiology and disease . Science 357 , eaaf4382 . Simon , J . R . , Carroll , N . J . , Rubinstein , M . , Chilkoti , A . , and Lo´pez , G . P . ( 2017 ) . Programmingmolecularself - assemblyofintrinsicallydisorderedproteinscon - taining sequences of low complexity . Nat . Chem . 9 , 509 – 515 . Stockmayer , W . H . ( 1943 ) . Theory of molecular size distribution and gel forma - tion in branched - chain polymers . J . Chem . Phys . 11 , 45 – 55 . Wei , M . - T . , Elbaum - Garﬁnkle , S . , Holehouse , A . S . , Chen , C . C . - H . , Feric , M . , Arnold , C . B . , Priestley , R . D . , Pappu , R . V . , andBrangwynne , C . P . ( 2017 ) . Phase behaviour of disordered proteins underlying low density and high permeability of liquid organelles . Nat . Chem 9 , 1118 – 1125 . Woodruff , J . B . , Ferreira Gomes , B . , Widlund , P . O . , Mahamid , J . , Honigmann , A . , andHyman , A . A . ( 2017 ) . Thecentrosomeisaselectivecondensatethatnu - cleates microtubules by concentrating tubulin . Cell 169 , 1066 – 1077 . e10 . Woodruff , J . B . , Hyman , A . A . , andBoke , E . ( 2018 ) . Organizationandfunctionof non - dynamic biomolecular condensates . Trends Biochem . Sci . 43 , 81 – 94 . Zhang , H . , Elbaum - Garﬁnkle , S . , Langdon , E . M . , Taylor , N . , Occhipinti , P . , Bridges , A . A . , Brangwynne , C . P . , and Gladfelter , A . S . ( 2015 ) . RNA controls PolyQ protein phase transitions . Mol . Cell 60 , 220 – 230 . Cell 174 , 688 – 699 , July 26 , 2018 699 STAR + METHODS KEY RESOURCES TABLE REAGENT or RESOURCE SOURCE IDENTIFIER Bacterial and Virus Strains Sf9 cells Expression Systems Cat # 94 - 001F Chemicals , Peptides , and Recombinant Proteins ( see Table S1 ) CSTF2 This study TH1269 CSTF2T This study TH1270 DAZAP1 This study TH1272 EWSR1 This study TH1259 EWSR1 This study TH1274 EWSR1 PLD 1 - 284 This study TH1276 EWSR1 RBD 285 - 656 This study TH1277 FUS This study TH0901 FUS This study TH1204 FUS ( PLD 6D ) This study TH1380 FUS ( PLD G / A ) This study TH1135 FUS ( PLD Q / G ) This study TH1141 FUS ( PLD S / A ) This study TH1138 FUS ( PLD Y / F RBD R / K ) This study TH1150 FUS ( PLD Y / F ) This study TH1148 FUS ( PLD Y / S ) This study TH0992 FUS ( RBD R / G ) This study TH1006 FUS ( RBD R / K ) This study TH1149 FUS 27R This study TH1112 FUS PLD 1 - 211 This study TH0994 FUS PLD 1 - 211 ( G / S / T / D ) This study TH1005 FUS PLD 1 - 211 ( Y / S ) This study TH1167 FUS PLD 1 - 211 : : hnRNPA1a RBD 1 - 194 This study TH1032 FUS PLD 1 - 211 : : EWSR1 RBD 285 - 656 This study TH0908 FUS RBD 212 - 526 This study TH0996 FUS RBD 212 - 526 ( R / G ) This study TH1165 hnRNPA0 This study TH1250 hnRNPA1a This study TH1130 hnRNPA1a This study TH1164 hnRNPA1a ( PLD 10R F / Y ) This study TH1199 hnRNPA1a ( PLD 6R ) This study TH1117 HNRNPA1b This study TH1261 HNRNPA1L2 This study TH1275 HNRNPA2B1 This study TH1252 hnRNPA3 This study TH1202 HNRNPAB This study TH1251 HNRNPD This study TH1260 hnRNPDL This study TH1254 hnRNPDL This study TH1273 HNRNPH1 This study TH1262 HNRNPH2 This study TH1264 ( Continued on next page ) e1 Cell 174 , 688 – 699 . e1 – e7 , July 26 , 2018 CONTACT FOR REAGENT AND RESOURCE SHARING Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be fulﬁlled by the Lead Contact , Anthony A . Hyman ( hymanofﬁce @ mpi - cbg . de ) . EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT DETAILS HeLa Kyoto cells ( female ) were grown at 37 (cid:3) C and 5 % CO2 in DMEM high glucose ( 4 . 5 g / L ) medium supplemented with 100 U / mL streptomycin , 100 ug / mL penicillin and 10 % fetal bovine serum . The cells were authenticated . METHOD DETAILS Domain and disorder prediction The prion - like domains and the intrinsically disordered regions were identiﬁed using the PLAAC ( http : / / plaac . wi . mit . edu / ) ( Lancaster et al . , 2014 ) . The minimal contiguous prion - like domain length for the hidden Markov model ( HMM ) was set to 60 and the background frequencies from S . cerevisiae was set to 100 % . The boundary of the prion - like domains of FUS , EWSR1 and TAF15 were slightly modiﬁed according to the distribution of the charged residues . Continued REAGENT or RESOURCE SOURCE IDENTIFIER HNRNPH3 This study TH1253 PSPC This study TH1255 TAF15 This study TH1258 TAF15 This study TH1203 TAF15 PLD 1 - 180 This study TH1168 TAF15 PLD 1 - 180 ( D / E / G ) This study TH1004 TAF15 PLD 1 - 180 ( Y / S ) This study TH1115 TAF15 RBD 181 - 589 This study TH1166 TAF15 RBD 181 - 589 ( 10Y / S ) This study TH1087 TAF15 RBD ( 12 repeats ) This study TH1085 TAF15 RBD 181 - 589 ( 19Y / S ) This study TH1088 TAF15 RBD ( 6 repeats ) This study TH1084 TDP - 43 This study TH1083 TIA1 This study TH1256 TIAL1 This study TH1257 untagged FUS This study TH0901 untagged FUS ( PLD Y / F RBD R / K ) This study TH1150 untagged FUS ( PLD Y / F ) This study TH1148 untagged FUS ( RBD R / K ) This study TH1149 untagged hnRNPA3 This study TH1202 Experimental Models : Cell Lines HeLa Kyoto Patel et al . , 2015 N / A HeLa Kyoto FUS knock out cell line This study MCP _ ky _ 9077 - 12 _ clone26 ( double KO via CRISPR targeting exon 1 / 2 and exon 6 ) G3BP1 bac cell line Mateju et al . , 2017 MCP _ ky _ 7510 ( C - terminal mCherry tag ; FACS sorted ) Software and Algorithms Fiji NIH https : / / ﬁji . sc / IBS The CUCKOO Workgroup http : / / ibs . biocuckoo . org easyFRAP Cell Cycle Laboratory http : / / ccl . med . upatras . gr / index . php ? id = easyfrap Origin 7 OriginLab https : / / www . originlab . com / Sigmaplot 12 . 5 Systat Software http : / / www . sigmaplot . co . uk Cell 174 , 688 – 699 . e1 – e7 , July 26 , 2018 e2 To identify the structured regions , we adopted distinct method according to different situations . If the structures of the indicated domains are available in PDB ( https : / / www . rcsb . org / ) , the domain boundaries shown in the structures are used ; if not , the domain boundaries are predicted by SMART ( http : / / smart . embl - heidelberg . de / ) or NCBI conserved domain ( https : / / www . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / Structure / cdd / wrpsb . cgi ) . In the cases that the homolog structures of certain domains are available , the domain boundaries are further optimized by structure - based sequence alignment . Intrinsically disordered regions were identiﬁed using MobiDB - lite ( Necci et al . , 2017 ) and sequences were analyzed using local - CIDER ( Holehouse et al . , 2017 ) . MobiDB - lite provides a sequence - speciﬁc meta - prediction based on a number of independent dis - order predictors . For a residue to be deﬁned as disordered , three or more predictors ( of 8 ) must predict a residue to be disordered . This is a relatively permissive threshold for identifying putative disordered regions , but is able to accurately identify the PLDs , which a number of disorder predictors fail to correctly designate as disordered . Plot of domain structures / normalized occurrences The domain structures of the proteins were generated using Illustrator for Biological Sequences ( IBS ) ( Liu et al . , 2015 ) . To plot the normalized occurrences of distinct residues in the intrinsically disordered regions or the prion - like domains of FUS family proteins , the number of each residue in a given sequence was counted and divided by the length of the sequence . The value was further divided by the number of FUS family proteins . A color gradient was used to indicate the normalized amino acid occurrences . Constructs , protein expression and puriﬁcation The construct information is listed in Table S1 . We adopted different puriﬁcation strategies depending on the intended purposes . For a screen purpose , we puriﬁed proteins in small scale ; while for normal experiments , we puriﬁed the proteins in large scale . For large - scale puriﬁcation , all the proteins were ﬁrst expressed in SF9 insect cells and harvested 72 hr post infection . Cells were collected by centrifugation for 5 min at 2 , 000 rpm . The pellets were re - suspended in lysis buffer ( 50 mM Tris - HCl pH 7 . 4 , 1 M KCl , 5 % Glycerol and 10 mM Imidazole ) . Protease inhibitors ( Calbiochem , 1 mM PMSF , 100 m M AEBSF , 0 . 08 m M Aprotinin , 5 m M Bestatin , 1 . 5 m M E - 64 , 2 m M Leupeptin and 1 m M Pepstatin A ) were added . The cells were lysed by sonication . The crude lysate was clariﬁed by centrifugation for 20 min at 13 , 000 rpm . After centrifugation , the supernatant was incubated with Ni - NTA agarose ( QIAGEN ) for 1 hr . The agarose beads were collected by centrifugation for 5 min at 1 , 500 rpm and were transferred to the gravity columns . The protein - bound beads were further washed with 3 column volumes ( CV , 1 CV = 20 mL ) of lysis buffer . The proteins were eluted with the elution buffer ( 50 mM Tris - HCl pH 7 . 4 , 1 M KCl , 5 % Glycerol and 500 mM Imidazole ) . To cleave the His - MBP tag , 3C pres - cission protease was added to the eluted protein at a 1 : 50 ratio . The mixture was incubated at RT for 4 hr and was loaded to the amylose resin ( NEB ) columns . The ﬂow through was collected and concentrated . The protein was further puriﬁed over the gel ﬁltration chromatography ( Superdex - 200 ; GE Healthcare ) equilibrated with storage buffer ( 50 mM Tris - HCl , 500 mM KCl , 1 mM DTT and 5 % Glycerol ) . Peak fractions were pooled and aliquoted in PCR tubes , ﬂash - frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at (cid:4) 80 (cid:3) C . Unless spe - ciﬁcally mentioned , all the proteins used in this study were puriﬁed in this way . In certain cases , we did small scale puriﬁcation . We followed the same protocol up to the step in which the proteins were eluted from Ni - NTA agarose . The eluted proteins were then directly puriﬁed over the gel ﬁltration chromatography equilibrated with storage buffer ( 50 mM Tris - HCl pH 7 . 4 , 500 mM KCl , 1 mM DTT and 5 % Glycerol ) . A tag cleavage step wasn’t included in the small - scale puriﬁcation . Peak fractions were directly pooled and aliquoted in PCR tubes , ﬂash - frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at (cid:4) 80 (cid:3) C . The His - MBP tag was cleaved off before the phase separation experiments to generate the proteins linked to GFP tag alone . Protein concentration was determined by measuring absorbance at 280 nm using a NanoDrop ND - 1000 spectrophotometer ( Thermo Sci - entiﬁc ) before cleavage . To visualize the SNAP tagged proteins , the proteins were mixed with SNAP - Surface Alexa Fluor 546 or 488 ( NEB ) at a 1 : 1 . 5 ratio at RT for 2 hr . Free dye was further removed by Zeba Spin Desalting Columns ( Thermo Scientiﬁc , Lot # QH222764 ) equilibrated with the storage buffer . Image collection For the in vitro assays , images were taken using an IX71 / IX81 inverted Spinning Disc Microscopes with an Andor Neo sCMOS / Andor Clara CCD camera and an UPlanSApo 60x oil - immersion objective or 100x oil - immersion objective ( Olympus ) . To check the local - ization of FUS variants and G3BP1 in vivo , images were taken with an inverted Olympus IX71 microscope using 60x 1 . 42 NA or 100x 1 . 4 NA Plan Apochromat oil objectives , CoolSNAP HQ camera ( Photometrics ) , and DeltaVision control unit ( AppliedPrecision ) . To quantify the formation of FUS granules and the partition coefﬁcient of FUS variants in stress granules , high - throughput imaging technique was used . The images were collected by a Yokogawa CV7000 high - content spinning disk confocal microscope equipped with a 60x 1 . 2 NA water immersion objective . Cells were ﬁxed before imaging . Phase separation assays For droplet formation in the absence of crowding agents , proteins were diluted into various concentrations in the corresponding buffers in a total solution volume of 20 m L . For droplet formation in the presence of crowding agent , proteins at the indicated con - centrations were tested for phase separation in buffer containing 10 % Dextran , 25 mM Tris - HCl 7 . 4 , 150 mM KCl , 2 . 5 % Glycerol and 0 . 5 mM DTT . The samples were added into the 384 well non - binding microplates ( greiner bio - one ) . The images were taken after e3 Cell 174 , 688 – 699 . e1 – e7 , July 26 , 2018 all the droplets had settled down to the bottom of the plate . For the assays in Figure S1A , the MBP tag was cleaved off before the experiment . All the assays in other ﬁgures were done with proteins tagged with either GFP or SNAP alone . To avoid the effect of the ﬂuorescent tag on phase separation , the ﬂuorescent tag is always positioned on the opposite side of the PLD ( see also Table S1 ) . Note that the ﬂuorescent tag has minimal effect on the phase separation of the full - length protein ( Figures S1G – S1I ) . Analysis for tyrosine and arginine number within the disordered regions The analysis was performed on disordered regions extracted from the complete non - redundant human proteome with a threshold of 650 or fewer disordered residues in a given protein ( 96 % of proteins ) . Determination of the saturation concentration In the ﬁrst method , we used microscopy to measure the ﬂuorescence intensity and determine the total protein amount inside and outside the droplets . In the second method , we measured the turbidity of the solution at 340 nm or 450 nm . Phase separation will induce a signiﬁcant change in the absorbance at these wavelengths . In a third assay , we used a centrifugation approach , in which we phase separated the samples at the indicated salt concentration , spun down the droplets and measured the concentration in the clariﬁed supernatant by determining the ﬂuorescence intensity or using a spectrophotometer NanoDrop . All assays produced com - parable results . Client partitioning assays 10 m M unlabeled FUS - SNAP , 200 nM SNAP - Surface Alexa Fluor 546 labeled FUS - SNAP , and 1 m M GFP tagged client proteins were mixed and incubated in 15 mM Tris - 7 . 4 , 0 . 3 mM DTT , 1 . 6 % Glycerol and 150 mM KCl . The images were taken after all the droplets settled down to the bottom of the plate . 19 out of 22 FUS family proteins were classiﬁed as clients according to their ability to undergo phase separation at the physiological salt concentration ( Figure S1A ) . 12 out of 19 clients were able to partition into the scaffold droplets formed by FUS . Partition coefﬁcients for the 12 clients were determined . The plot shows the partition coefﬁcient versus tyro - sine and arginine number of the clients . A straight line was used to ﬁt the data points . Hardening assays To estimate the material properties of different FUS mutants , controlled fusion experiments with phase separated FUS droplets were performed using a dual - trap optical tweezer instrument ( Jahnel et al . , 2011 ; Patel et al . , 2015 ) . Freshly formed droplets by 7 . 5 m M FUS variants in the phase separation buffer containing 10 mM Tris - HCl 7 . 4 , 2 % Dextran , 10 mM DTT , 100 mM KCl , and 1 % Glycerol were applied to the sealed glass ﬂow chambers ( 24 mm x 60 mm x 0 . 1 mm ) . Two droplets were trapped in two optical traps and brought into contact to induce droplet fusion . Fusion times of successful fusion events were measured from the differential laser signal between the two traps ( recorded throughout at 1 kHz ) by ﬁtting a stretched exponential relaxation model with decay time t _ st and stretch exponent b : S ð t Þ = offset + ð plateau (cid:4) offset Þ , " 1 (cid:4) exp (cid:2) (cid:4)ð t (cid:4) t start Þ t st (cid:3) b # The mean relaxation time , t , – also denoted as fusion time in the main text – was extracted from the ﬁtted stretched exponential decay function according to : ð t Þ = t st b G (cid:4) b (cid:4) 1 (cid:5) ; with G ( . ) being the Gamma function . Note that b = 1 corresponds to the decay constant of a single exponential decay . Median stretch exponent of all ﬁtted data ( N = 63 ) was 1 . 69 ( IQR = 1 . 30 – 2 . 05 ) . The radii of all droplets before fusion were extracted from bright - ﬁeld images using custom written Python scripts for image processing and the geometric radius of two droplets was used to normalize the obtained fusion times . Successful and unsuccessful droplet fusion events were recorded over time since the induction of phase separation and the resulting curve was ﬁtted with a logistic regression model in R . In Figure 6C , the assays were done with the freshly formed droplets . Mean relaxation times of recorded fusion events were scaled by characteristic droplet size . G / A droplets ( magenta , N = 9 ) fuse at least 2 orders of magnitude slower than WT droplets ( green , N = 55 ) ( log - scale , p < 1e (cid:4) 5 , Wilcoxon - Mann - Whitney test ) . Size - normalized median fusion times for the freshly formed droplets of G / A and WT are 32 . 9 s / m m ( IQR = 15 . 7 – 54 . 6 s / m m ) for G / A and 0 . 093 s / m m ( IQR = 0 . 081 – 0 . 176 s / m m ) for WT , respectively . In Figure 6D , fusion was monitored over time and was scored successful ( 1 ) or not ( 0 ) according to whether the resulting droplet relaxed to approximately spherical shape within 2 min . G / A droplets ( magenta , closed symbols , N = 50 ) solidiﬁed after 27 ± 9 min ( logistic regression , 95 % conﬁdence ) whereas WT droplets ( green , open symbols , N = 118 ) remained ﬂuid for the whole experimental time ( 2 h ) . In Figure 6E , to test how glycine residues affect droplet liquidity , still images ( see also Video S1 ) of controlled fusion experiments at different time points were taken using dual - trap optical tweezers . 40 min after phase separation , droplets formed by G / A mutant did Cell 174 , 688 – 699 . e1 – e7 , July 26 , 2018 e4 not fuse anymore , while the fusion dynamics of FUS WT did not change within 2 h . Collecting several droplets formed by G / A mutant resulted in a large gel - like assembly . Fiber formation assays To check the effect of distinct residues on ﬁber formation , 20 m L freshly formed droplets by 7 . 5 m M FUS variants in the phase sep - aration buffer containing 10 mM Tris - HCl 7 . 4 , 100 mM KCl and 1 % Glycerol were added into the 384 well Non - binding microplates . To induce ﬁber formation , the plate was shaken at 800 rpm on a benchtop shaker at RT . The images and the FRAP data were acquired at different time points . It should be noted that , due to temperature ﬂuctuation , the stock solution of FUS and certain mutants imme - diately underwent phase separation after being freshly thawed . The process was reversible since the solution turned transparent when the temperature reached RT . However , temporary phase separation induced by freeze and thaw could generate some ﬁber seeds . With those preformed seeds in the solution , the time - dependent transition of droplets into ﬁbers could be affected ( Murakami et al . , 2015 ) . To evaluate the effect of distinct residues precisely and avoid or minimize the effect of the preformed seeds on ﬁber formation , we took advantage of the MBP tag . It was shown that the N - terminal MBP tag can suppress phase separation of FUS ( Burke et al . , 2015 ) . Indeed , we have not observed a long turbid state for the stock of the N - terminal MBP tagged FUS variants after thawing . Further aging experiments were done by freshly cleaving off the MBP tag before the aging - related experiments . FUS pro - teins in presence of freshly cleaved MBP tag have slightly increased phase separation ability compared to preparations from which the MBP tag was separated by gel ﬁltration . This is probably due to the crowding effect of MBP . However , even in the presence of the free MBP tag , FUS variants showed distinct phase behavior and these differences were comparable to those observed with the pro - teins separated from MBP tag . This suggests the free MBP tag only has a minor crowding effect . The concentrations of the free MBP tag and prescission protease in the samples were 7 . 5 m M and 500 nM , respectively . Prediction of potential scaffold proteins In Figure 7D , shown is the application of the model from Figure 7C in a proteome - wide analysis . The analysis was performed on disor - dered regions that were extracted from 13 , 354 proteins in the human proteome , as in Figure 2C . The ﬁgure shows two sets of data . This ﬁgure includes a two - dimensional histogram quantifying the frequencies of the disordered regions with the speciﬁc number of tyrosine and arginine residues . Overlaid atop this histogram are contours showing the predicted values of saturation concentration ( c sat ) in m M . The values of c sat decrease with increasing numbers of tyrosine and arginine residues . The plot shows the locations , in terms of numbers of tyrosine and arginine residues as well as the calculated values of c sat for proteins with predicted saturation concentrations that are on a par with the FET family of proteins . These predictions enable the identiﬁcation of disordered regions that are likely to be scaffold molecules that undergo phase separation at physiologically relevant concentrations ( Table S5 ) . The top 10 prion - like proteins ( Figure S7B ) predicted to have the lowest saturation concentration are shown . Fluorescence Recovery After Photobleaching ( FRAP ) Droplets formed in vitro were photo - bleached with a spot 2 m m in diameter and the recovery of ﬂuorescence intensity within the region of interest was obtained for each experiment . The recovery was recorded at the rate of 100 ms / frame . in vivo FRAP was performed at pixel resolution of x = 80 nm and y = 80 nm by a 100x oil immersion objective mounted on Olympus IX71 / IX81 inverted confocal microscope with Andor spinning disc and Andor iXon EMCCD camera . Point bleach was performed for approximately 20 ns with 50 % – 60 % of maximum laser power of a 488 nm laser ( 3 . 5 mW ) . The recovery was recorded at the rate of 50 ms / frame for 50 s . The FRAP data were analyzed by easyFRAP . DNA damage data acquisition and analysis The indicated FUS variants were transfected into the FUS knock out HeLa cell line . DNA damage was induced by focusing 15 Hz cutter laser with 365 nm and 405 nm dye cells ( MicroPoint laser Illumination and ablation system ) on a spot in the nuclei using the minimum laser power required to induce FUS - GFP variant positive foci without disrupting nuclear morphology . Images were captured on a spinning disc microscope with inverted Olympus IX71 stand and Andor iXON EM + DU - 897 BV back illuminated EMCCD using Olympus UPlanSApochromat 100x 1 . 4 Oil objective . For comparison , only the cells with the similar expression level of FUS variant were selected for the DNA damage assay . The changes in the ﬂuorescence intensity at the DNA damage sites was analyzed using FIJI . Fluorescence intensity plots are generated from 8 or more cells per genotype with error bars representing stan - dard errors of the mean . All the data points were normalized such that 0 corresponed to the lowest point of the dataset and 1 rep - resented the maximum intensity of the WT . BAC constructs and cell lines Stable HeLa cell line expressing C - terminal mCherry tagged human G3BP1 were generated by random integration into the genome via BAC recombineering technology , as previously reported ( Poser et al . , 2008 ) . The cell line was kept under selection in Blasticidin ( Life Technologies , 2 m g / ml ) . e5 Cell 174 , 688 – 699 . e1 – e7 , July 26 , 2018 Cell transfection and arsenate stress 50 , 000 indicated cells were plated in each well of 4 well 3 . 5 cm 2 glass bottom culture plates ( Greiner Bio - One , catalog # 627870 ) two days before imaging . After 24 hr of plating the cells , plasmids expressing FUS - GFP variants were transfected using Lipofectamine 2000 ( Life technologies ) , according to the manufacturer’s recommendations . The cells were washed with fresh cell culture medium the next day after transfection and imaged at 37 (cid:3) C and 5 % CO 2 . For the stressed condition , 1 mM sodium arsenate in culture media ( diluted from a 100 mM stock solution , Sigma - Aldrich ) was added to cells one hour before imaging . Theoretical model A Mean - ﬁeld theory for networking of multivalent polymers with complementary pairs of associative motifs is used . The mean - ﬁeld model we deploy in this work considers a solution of linear multivalent polymers , each with two types of associative motifs . The size of each motif is identical to that of an individual amino acid unit . We denote the motifs as Y and R for tyrosine and arginine . The inter - action energy for a pair of Y and R residues may be written as ε k B T . Here , ε is a scaling parameter , k B is Boltzmann’s constant , and T is temperature . Each chain has n Y tyrosine and n R arginine residues separated by spacers . The concentration of residues is c and the number of polymers is : N pol = ( cV / N ) where N is the number of residues and V is the system volume . The number of interacting motifs of type i , where i is either Y or R , is given by : n ð i Þ motif = n i N pol = n i cV N ; ( 1 ) If the number of Y - R pairs is N pairs , then the fraction of associated motifs of type i is : p i = N pairs n ð i Þ motif ! ; ( 2 ) Following Semenov and Rubinstein , we separate the free energy of the system into two parts ( Semenov and Rubinstein , 1998 ) : F = F null + F motif ; ( 3 ) Here , F null is Flory’s expression for the free energy of non - associative polymers . In terms of the two - and three - body interaction coefﬁcients viz . , a 2 and a 3 , respectively this is written as : F null k B T = c N ln (cid:6) c eN (cid:7) + a 2 c 2 2 + a 3 c 3 6 ; ( 4 ) The term F motif is a distinct mean - ﬁeld term that accounts for contributions from interacting motifs and is written in in terms of the partition function Z motif as : F motif k B T = (cid:4) (cid:2) ln Z motif V (cid:3) ; ( 5 ) Here , Z motif = U w exp ð ε N pairs Þ ; ( 6 ) Equation ( 6 ) is written in terms of U , which denotes the number of unique ways of choosing N pairs of associative motifs out of n Y Y - motifs and n R R - motifs and w is the probability that the associative motifs are close to one another in order to form bonds with their partners . This implies that the bonds themselves are short - ranged . Accordingly , w = (cid:6) v b V (cid:7) N pairs ; ( 7 ) Here , v b is the volume taken up by a single bond between associative motifs . The combinatorial parameter U is a product of the ( i ) the number of different ways of choosing n pairs out of n Y Y - motifs , ( ii ) the number of different ways of choosing n pairs out of n R R - motifs , and ( iii ) the number of different ways of forming n pairs of Y - R motifs . Therefore , the overall free energy expression takes the form : F k B T = c N ln (cid:6) c eN (cid:7) + a 2 c 2 2 + a 3 c 3 6 (cid:4) n Y ln n Y + ð n Y (cid:4) n pairs Þ ln ð n Y (cid:4) n pairs Þ(cid:4) n R ln n R + ð n R (cid:4) n pairs Þ ln ð n R (cid:4) n pairs Þ + n pairs ln (cid:2) n pairs v v b (cid:3) (cid:4)ð ε (cid:4) 1 Þ n pairs ; ( 8 ) Minimization of F with respect to n pairs yields : ð n Y (cid:4) n pairs Þð n R (cid:4) n pairs Þ n pairs = V v b exp ε ð Þ h V l ; ( 9 ) Cell 174 , 688 – 699 . e1 – e7 , July 26 , 2018 e6 As in the Flory - Stockmayer theories ( Flory , 1941 ; Stockmayer , 1943 ) , we assume tree - like clusters with no closed loops . Given this structure for the network formed by polymers with associative motifs , the gel point is deﬁned as the point where a single polymer is connected to exactly two neighbors . Through a further simpliﬁcation , we assume the absence of intramolecular interactions . These simpliﬁcations lead to the ﬁnding that : ( n pairs / N pol ) z 2 at the gel point . Combining this with Equations ( 1 ) and ( 9 ) and making one last assumption that N [ v b exp ( ε ) ] – 1 > > 1 , which holds for sufﬁciently weak interactions that allow us to ignore higher order terms , we obtain the concentration at the gel point , our proxy for the saturation concentration , to be : c g h c sat z N 2 l n Y n R f 1 n Y n R ; ( 10 ) QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS Images were analyzed with FIJI ( http : / / ﬁji . sc / ) , origin 7 ( OriginLab ) and Sigmaplot ( Systat Software ) . All data are expressed as the mean ± the standard deviation ( SD ) . To plot the relative amount of condensed protein versus the protein concentration , a mask of the droplets is built by thresholding the images and applying a median ﬁlter to remove spurious noise detection . Median ﬁlter window radius is equal to 2 pixels . The threshold is determined in the same way for each condition as the mean intensity of the background plus k times the standard deviation of the background . This way the threshold is well deﬁned even if no droplets are present in the image . The background signal appearing as a sharp peak in the images histogram , background mean , and standard deviation are estimated by the maximum and standard deviation of this peak . The user parameter k was set to the value 3 at the beginning of the analysis . The integrated intensity inside the droplet , Idroplet , and outside , Imedia , is measured by summing , respectively , the intensity of each pixel inside , outside the droplet mask . If no droplets appear , the ratio is set to 0 . In case of non - zero camera offset , an image can be acquired with shutter closed and its average intensity removed from each pixel contribution . To plot the relative amount of condensed protein versus the protein concentration , we ﬁrst measured the amount condensed pro - tein for a certain candidate . The amount condensed protein for a given candidate under a certain concentration is deﬁned by the ratio of Idroplet to Imedia . To normalize this value , we measured the amount condensed FUS under different protein concentrations in the same buffer condition to ﬁnd the maximal amount condensed FUS . The relative amount condensed protein for a given candidate is deﬁned by the ratio : amount condensed candidate under distinct protein concentration / the maximal amount condensed FUS . The measured datasets for the relative amount of condensed protein versus the protein concentration were ﬁtted by the following equation : f = a (cid:8)(cid:2) 1 + exp (cid:2) (cid:4) ð x (cid:4) x 0 Þ b (cid:3)(cid:3) ; where f is the relative amount condensed protein , and x is the corresponding protein concentration . To analyze the partition of clients into FUS droplets , we report the average intensity of the client proteins in the droplet versus the bulk solution after background subtraction for individual droplet ( Partition coefﬁcient ) . To analyze the in vivo granules , the image analysis consisted of four steps : 1 ) semi - automatic segmentation of cell cytoplasm , 2 ) local maxima detection to determine granules positions , 3 ) segmentation of the granules using region growing and 4 ) signal readout for the different derived regions of interest ( ROI ) . All the steps were performed in the ImageJ / Fiji software . In detail , threshold - based segmentation of the nuclei in the ﬁrst channel was performed using the default threshold . Afterward , the cytoplasm was segmented in the second channel . Then , all pixels being marked as part of the nuclei were removed from the cytoplasm ROIs . Finally , the user had the chance to manually correct the segmentation . Detection of the granules was performed using the built - in method for local maxima detection . These point positions were then allocated to the cytoplasm segmentations derived before . Afterward , every granule is segmented using a region growing approach starting at the local maximum position including all pixels where the intensity is above a certain threshold . This threshold was calculated by summing average signal intensity within the cytoplasm and the signal intensity at the detected local maximum and dividing the sum by two . Finally , signal intensities as well as pixel counts were derived from the cytoplasm ROI , all granule ROIs and the cytoplasm ROI excluding all granule ROIs . e7 Cell 174 , 688 – 699 . e1 – e7 , July 26 , 2018 Supplemental Figures E I A C B F D H G ( legend on next page ) Figure S1 . Determination of the Saturation Concentration with Different Methods , Related to Figure 1 ( A ) Phase separation of FUS family proteins at the physiological salt concentration requires further addition of crowding agents except the FET proteins . Phase separation assays were conducted with proteins puriﬁed in small scale ( see the STAR Methods ) . 5 m M proteins tagged with MBP and GFP were ﬁrst mixed with prescission protease to cleave off the MBP tag and then submitted to the phase separation assays in the absence or presence of 10 % dextran at 150 mM KCl . Bar , 5 m m . ( B ) An overall schematic of the various methods used . ( C ) Results of six different approaches for identifying c sat . All six methods give almost identical values . These methods are : [ top left ] Measuring the amount of condensed protein ( condensed protein only appears above c sat ) ; [ top right ] Intensity ratio inside of droplet versus inside + outside of droplet ; [ middle left ] Absorbance at 340 nm ( condensed protein has a signiﬁcantly different absorbance proﬁle , leading to a pronounced uptick in A340 absorbance ) ; [ middle right ] Absorbance at 405 nm ( same as A340 ) ; [ bottom left ] Concentration in supernatant after spin - down ( c out ) as measured by NanoDrop . Above c sat the supernatant concentration should be ﬁxed ( excessproteinwill partition into condensates ) . [ bottom right ] Averageﬂuorescence intensityfor supernatant after spin . Above c sat the average ﬂuorescence intensity should be ﬁxed ( excess protein will partition into condensates ) . ( D ) An overall schematic of the c out measurement in the non - phase separation condition and the phase separation condition . ( E ) Measured c out in the non - phase separation condition and the phase separation condition . ( F ) Correlation of the c sat values determined by images or by measuring c out with NanoDrop . The Pearson correlation coefﬁcient is determined to be 0 . 99 . ( G ) SDS - PAGE for the untagged hnRNPA3 and FUS . ( H ) Phase separation of the SNAP - tagged and untagged FUS described by relative amount condensed protein versus FUS concentration . The phase separation assays were done at 150 mM KCl . All data are expressed as the mean ± the standard deviation ( SD ) . ( I ) Phase separation of the GFP - tagged and untagged hnRNPA1 quantiﬁed by relative amount condensed protein versus hnRNPA3 concentration . The phase separation assays were done at 150 mM KCl . All data are expressed as the mean ± the standard deviation ( SD ) . E B G A F I H C D Figure S2 . Low Saturation Concentrations of FUS and EWSR1 Are Determined by Both the Tyrosine - Rich PLD and the Arginine - Rich RBD , Related to Figure 2 ( A ) SDS - PAGE for the fragments , mutants and fusion proteins of FUS and EWSR1 . ( B ) Colocalization of the PLD and RBD from FUS ( top ) and from EWSR1 ( bottom ) . Droplets were formed at 75 mM KCl . The PLDs and RBDs were labeled with SNAP - Surface Alexa Fluor 488 and 546 dyes , respectively . Bar , 5 m m . ( C ) The saturation concentration of FUS PLD is over 120 m M . The assays were conducted at 75 mM KCl in the absence of crowding agents . The saturation concentration of FUS is around 2 m M ( Figure 2B ) . Bar , 5 m m . ( D ) Phase separation of FUS full length ( FL ) or PLD in the presence of dextran . The assays were conducted at 150 mM KCl . Bar , 15 m m . ( E ) The RBD of EWSR1 signiﬁcantly promotes phase separation of the PLD . The assays were conducted at 75 mM KCl with 15 m M proteins in the absence of crowding agent . The PLD and RBD were mixed at a ratio of 1 : 1 . Bar , 5 m m . ( F ) Tyrosine residues in PLDs and arginine residues in RBDs contribute to co - phaseseparation . Phase separation assays were performed at 75 mM KCl . All data are expressed as the mean ± the standard deviation ( SD ) . ( G - I ) Representative images for the quantiﬁcation in Figures 2B , 2D , 2E , and S2E . Phase separation assays were conducted at 75 mM KCl . Bar , 5 m m . E G F D C B A Figure S3 . Separation of Tyrosine and Arginine Is Not Required for Determining the Saturation Concentration , Related to Figure 2 ( A ) Tyrosine and arginine residues are in an embedded pattern in the disordered regions of TAF15 RBD . The positions of tyrosine and arginine residues in the disordered regions of TAF15 are indicated with green and red lines , respectively . ( B ) SDS - PAGE for the fragments and mutants of TAF15 . ( C ) Colocalization of PLD and RBD from TAF15 . Droplets were formed at 100 mM KCl . The PLD and RBD were labeled with SNAP - Surface Alexa Fluor 488 and 546 dyes , respectively . Bar , 5 m m . ( D and E ) TAF15 RBD with tyrosine and arginine embedded into each other has a low saturation concentration similar to that of the full - length protein . Phase separation assays were conducted at 100 mM KCl . ( D ) , phase separation of TAF15 fragments at the indicated protein concentrations . Bar , 5 m m ; ( E ) , phase separation described by the relative amount of condensed protein versus the protein concentration . The saturation concentration is indicated by a red arrow . All data are expressed as the mean ± the standard deviation ( SD ) . ( F and G ) Decreasing the number of tyrosine or GGY [ G / S ] GDR repeats increases the saturation concentration . The positions of 19 GGY [ G / S ] DR repeats are indicated by the white triangles . The yellow triangle represents that the tyrosine residues inside the repeat are mutated to serine residues . Phase separation assays were conducted at 100 mM KCl . ( F ) , phase separation of TAF15 RBD mutants and fragments at the indicated protein concentrations . Bar , 5 m m ; ( G ) , phase separation described by the relative amount of condensed protein versus the protein concentration . All data are expressed as the mean ± the standard deviation ( SD ) . B A C E D F G Figure S4 . Manipulating Protein Phase Behavior In Vitro and In Vivo , Related to Figure 3 ( A ) SDS - PAGE for FUS ( 27R ) , hnRNPA1 ( PLD 6R ) and hnRNPA1a ( PLD 10R , F / Y ) . ( B ) Representative images for the quantiﬁcation in Figure 6B . Phase separation assays were conducted at 150 mM KCl . Bar , 5 m m . ( C ) Representative images for the quantiﬁcation in Figure 3D . The inset shows a zoomed - in area . Bar , 5 m m . ( D ) In the absence of stress , preformed WT ( D NLS ) granules were dynamic while 27R ( D NLS ) granules were not . The dynamic of the preformed granules was measured by FRAP . ( D ) Partitioning of WT ( D NLS ) and 27R ( D NLS ) into stress granules upon arsenate treatment . Bar , 5 m m . ( F ) Insidestressgranules , WT ( D NLS ) isdynamic while27R ( D NLS ) isnot . FRAP data were collected . Alldata are expressed asthemean ± thestandarddeviation ( G ) 27R ( D NLS ) is enriched more in stress granules than WT ( D NLS ) after arsenate treatment . Bar , 5 m m . All data are expressed as the mean ± the standard deviation ( SD ) . A F C E D G B Figure S5 . Tuning Protein Phase Behavior by Distinct Composition of Electrostatic Amino Acids , Related to Figure 5 ( A ) SDS - PAGE for FUS PLD and TAF15 PLD mutants . ( B ) Representative images for the quantiﬁcation in Figure 4B . Phase separation assays were conducted at 75 mM KCl in the absence of crowding agents . Bar , 5 m m . ( C andD ) Addition ofnegativecharges promotes co - phaseseparationofFUSPLD andFUS RBD . WTFUS PLDhas alowcontentofnegativecharges ( 4aspartic acids / glutamate acids ) . Indicated amount of FUS PLD variant was titrated into 30 m M FUS RBD in the absence of crowding agents at 75 mM KCl . All data are expressed as the mean ± the standard deviation ( SD ) . Bar , 5 m m . ( E ) Substitution of aspartate and glutamate residues with glycine restores tyrosine - tyrosine interactions and leads to phase separation of TAF15 PLD in the presence of crowding agents . Phase separation assays were conducted in the absence or presence of 10 % dextran at 150 mM KCl . Top , TAF15 PLD did not undergo phase separation even in the presence of 10 % dextran ; middle , replacement of aspartate and glutamate residues with glycine residues enables phase separation of TAF15 PLD in the presence of dextran ; bottom , phase behavior of a TAF15 PLD variant with tyrosine residues mutated to serine residues . The positions of tyrosine and aspartate residues are indicated by green and yellow lines . Bar , 5 m m . ( F and G ) Reduction of negative charges decreases co - phase separation of TAF15 PLD and FUS RBD . The wild - type TAF15 PLD has a high content of negative charges ( 20 aspartic acids / glutamate acids ) . Indicated amount of TAF15 PLD variant was titrated into 30 m M FUS RBD in the absence of crowding agents at 75 mM KCl . All data are expressed as the mean ± the standard deviation ( SD ) . Bar , 5 m m . A B C D Figure S6 . Amino Acid Composition of the Intrinsically Disordered Regions of FUS Family Proteins , Related to Figure 6 ( A ) Amino acid composition of the intrinsically disordered regions of FUS family proteins ( top ) and FUS PLD ( bottom ) . It is worth noting that FUS PLD has a strikingly limited set of amino acid alphabet , and only 4 types of residues , namely , glycine , glutamine , serine , and tyrosine residues , together account for (cid:1) 82 % residues in FUS PLD . ( B ) Pearson correlation analysis for glycine content versus other residue contents of other amino acids in the PLDs intrinsically disordered regions of FUS family proteins . ( C ) SDS - PAGE for FUS G / A , S / A and Q / G mutant . ( D ) Representative images for the quantiﬁcation in Figure 5B . Phase separation assays were conducted at 75 mM KCl . Bar , 5 m m . GSPQNADMEKTFVL I HWC TAF15 ( Q92804 ) EWSR1 ( Q01844 ) HNRNPUL1 ( Q9BUJ2 ) FUS ( P35637 ) DROSHA ( Q9NRR4 ) ZFR2 ( Q9UPR6 ) SMG6 ( Q86US8 ) HNRNPR ( O43390 ) BAG4 ( O95429 ) SYNCRIP ( O60506 ) ARPP21 ( Q9UBL0 ) LENG8 ( Q96PV6 ) ILF3 ( Q12906 ) TAB3 ( Q8N5C8 ) SUPT5H ( O00267 ) POLR2A ( P24928 ) RBM14 ( Q96PK6 ) SFPQ ( P23246 ) HNRNPU ( Q00839 ) NCOA5 ( Q9HCD5 ) SUPT6H ( Q7KZ85 ) MED12L ( Q86YW9 ) PRPF40A ( O75400 ) CAPRIN1 ( Q14444 ) HNRNPDL ( O14979 ) AMOT ( Q4VCS5 ) KHSRP ( Q92945 ) FAM98A ( Q8NCA5 ) PTPN23 ( Q9H3S7 ) COL12A1 ( Q99715 ) HNRNPA3 ( P51991 ) FUBP1 ( Q96AE4 ) DDX17 ( Q92841 ) HNRNPUL2 ( Q1KMD3 ) MYO15B ( Q96JP2 ) SOX9 ( P48436 ) NFAC3 ( Q12968 ) HNRNPA1b ( P09651 ) DYRK1A ( Q13627 ) SS18 ( Q15532 ) LPP ( Q93052 ) SMG7 ( Q92540 ) CCAR1 ( Q8IX12 ) DHX9 ( Q08211 ) K1C9 ( P35527 ) K2C1 ( P04264 ) SS18L1 ( O75177 ) ZCCHC2 ( Q9C0B9 ) RBM3 ( P98179 ) HNRNPA2B1 ( P22626 ) TAB2 ( Q9NYJ8 ) FAM117B ( Q6P1L5 ) CBLL1 ( Q75N03 ) FOXJ2 ( Q9P0K8 ) HNRNPH3 ( P31942 ) ATXN1 ( P54253 ) EYA1 ( Q99502 ) SMARCC1 ( Q92922 ) PUM1 ( Q14671 ) CRTC1 ( Q6UUV9 ) HNRNPAB ( Q99729 ) HOXB1 ( P14653 ) FAM103A1 ( Q9BTL3 ) SIK2 ( Q9H0K1 ) ZMIZ2 ( Q8NF64 ) SYNRG ( Q9UMZ2 ) DAZAP1 ( Q96EP5 ) TRIM24 ( O15164 ) FOXO1 ( Q12778 ) GPS2 ( Q13227 ) SEC24C ( P53992 ) SF1 ( Q15637 ) KIAA0355 ( O15063 ) SEC24A ( O95486 ) MPLKIP ( Q8TAP9 ) HNRNPA1L2 ( Q32P51 ) PYGO1 ( Q9Y3Y4 ) VPS37C ( A5D8V6 ) HGS ( O14964 ) FGA ( P02671 ) HNRNPA0 ( Q13151 ) FOXJ3 ( Q9UPW0 ) ZNF207 ( O43670 ) CIZ1 ( Q9ULV3 ) K1C10 ( P13645 ) PHC3 ( Q8NDX5 ) K22O ( Q01546 ) TOX ( O94900 ) DDX5 ( P17844 ) ERVK - 19 ( Q9YNA8 ) NUP98 ( P52948 ) PHC2 ( Q8IXK0 ) TFAP2A ( P05549 ) TFG ( Q92734 ) EOMES ( O95936 ) EYA4 ( O95677 ) K2C1B ( Q7Z794 ) ERVK - 6 ( Q7LDI9 ) PDCD6IP ( Q8WUM4 ) NFKB2 ( Q00653 ) SEC24D ( O94855 ) K22E ( P35908 ) ERVK - 9 ( P63128 ) SEC24B ( O95487 ) ERVK - 9 ( P63126 ) ERVK - 21 ( P62683 ) ERVK - 24 ( P63145 ) ZNF341 ( Q9BYN7 ) SOX2 ( P48431 ) EYA2 ( O00167 ) MEIS2 ( O14770 ) AAK1 ( Q2M2I8 ) CLINT1 ( Q14677 ) HERVK _ 113 ( P62684 ) ERVK - 7 ( P63130 ) SOX1 ( O00570 ) CCNK ( O75909 ) ARNT2 ( Q9HBZ2 ) SEC31A ( O94979 ) SSBP2 ( P81877 ) SSBP3 ( Q9BWW4 ) SATB1 ( Q01826 ) CNOT3 ( O75175 ) TRIM33 ( Q9UPN9 ) YTHDF2 ( Q9Y5A9 ) SSBP4 ( Q9BWG4 ) CDSN ( Q15517 ) FAM222B ( Q8WU58 ) HNRNPH2 ( P55795 ) RFX6 ( Q8HWS3 ) TBR1 ( Q16650 ) YTHDF1 ( Q9BYJ9 ) SEC23IP ( Q9Y6Y8 ) CNOT2 ( Q9NZN8 ) HNRNPH1 ( P31943 ) TSC22D2 ( O75157 ) ERVK - 10 ( P87889 ) FOXA1 ( P55317 ) SF3B4 ( Q15427 ) FUBP3 ( Q96I24 ) WWTR1 ( Q9GZV5 ) HNF1B ( P35680 ) UPF1 ( Q92900 ) PYGO2 ( Q9BRQ0 ) TLX1 ( P31314 ) CPEB4 ( Q17RY0 ) SMARCD1 ( Q96GM5 ) EBF3 ( Q9H4W6 ) PAXIP1 ( Q6ZW49 ) EBF2 ( Q9HAK2 ) RFX1 ( P22670 ) YTHDF3 ( Q7Z739 ) CITED2 ( Q99967 ) CDK19 ( Q9BWU1 ) MYOZ1 ( Q9NP98 ) ROR2 ( Q01974 ) CELF3 ( Q5SZQ8 ) YR 1e - 32e - 3 5e - 31e - 22e - 2 5e - 21e - 12e - 1 5e - 1 N o r m a li z e d o cc u rr e n ce 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 A b s o l u t e o cc u r e n ce PLD BAG4 ( 9 ) BAG PLD RNase III RNase III DRBM DROSHA ( 5 ) PLD ZFR2 ( 6 ) DZF PLD PINc SMG6 ( 7 ) PLD RRM RRM RRM HNRN P R ( 8 ) PLD RRM RRM RRM SYNCRIP ( 10 ) PLD SAP B30 . 2 / SPRY HNRNPUL1 ( 3 ) A B ( legend on next page ) Figure S7 . Amino Acid Composition of the Prion - like Candidates with the Predicted Saturation Concentration , Related to Figure 7 ( A ) Amino acid composition of the prion - like candidates . The proteins are listed in an order based on the values of the saturation concentration ( from low to high ; Table S5 ) . The absolute occurrence represents the absolute number of the indicated residues , whereas the normalized occurrence reﬂects the number of the indicated residuesnormalizedbythesequence length ( seeMethodDetails ) . Weusedtheabsoluteoccurrenceratherthanthenormalizedoccurrencefortyrosine orarginineresiduessincethesaturationconcentrationislargelydeterminedbytheabsolutenumbersoftyrosine and arginineresidues . Thenamesoftheproteins tested to be capable of phase separation in this study are colored in blue . ( B ) Domain structures of the top 10 prion - like candidates predicted tohave the lowest saturation concentration . The ranking number is shown behind the protein name . The domain structures of the FET proteins are not shown . SAP , domain shared by SAF - A / B , Acinus and PIAS ; B30 . 2 / SPRY : B30 . 2 , domain encoded by exon B30 - 2 ; SPRY , domain named after SPla and Ryanodine receptor ; RNase III , ribonuclease III ; DRBM , dsRNA - binding motif ; DZF , domain associated with zinc ﬁngers ; PINc , PilT N terminus , or PINc domain ( SMART database ) ; BAG , domain presented in Bcl - 2 - associated athanogene .