Aesthetic Information Collages : Generating Decorative Displays that Contain Information James Fogarty † , Jodi Forlizzi † * , and Scott E . Hudson † † HCI Institute , and * School of Design , Carnegie Mellon University 5000 Forbes Ave . Pittsburgh , PA 15213 { jfogarty , forlizzi , scott . hudson } @ cs . cmu . edu ABSTRACT Normally , the primary purpose of an information display is to convey information . If information displays can be aesthetically interesting , that might be an added bonus . This paper considers an experiment in reversing this imperative . It describes the Kandinsky system which is designed to create displays which are first aesthetically interesting , and then as an added bonus , able to convey information . The Kandinsky system works on the basis of aesthetic properties specified by an artist ( in a visual form ) . It then explores a space of collages composed from information bearing images , using an optimization technique to find compositions which best maintain the properties of the artist’s aesthetic expression . Keywords Visual design , aesthetics in computational objects , display generation , ambient information displays in decorative objects , optimization , simulated annealing . “…But does it go with the couch ? ” INTRODUCTION AND MOTIVATION As computer use has shifted into wider aspects of life , the requirements that it has faced have shifted as well . The value of computing technology was traditionally measured by its results – largely its usefulness in solving problems of interest . With the advent of personal computers came the important imperative of usability . As computational technology moves beyond the confines of the work environment and into the rest of our lives , we have begun to see an additional requirement emerge : desirability . Products such as the Apple iMac have shown that selling computers is starting to be about “cool” and “interesting” and even “beautiful” , as well as “understandable” , “easy to use” and “powerful” . As computing continues its transformation from specialized tool into everyday object , we expect the role of desirability to increase . For example , if we were to buy a low - end computer to place in our living room today , it is fairly likely that it could be purchased for less money than was spent on the furniture nearby ( and it certainly will need to be replaced sooner ) . In this environment , new questions start to arise such as : “ Does it go with the couch ? ” As yet , we have only rarely addressed questions of this sort – which have issues of visual design and aesthetics at their core – as a central part of interactive system designs . The work described here considers technology that may be useful when approaching systems from this viewpoint . This paper considers the Kandinsky system for generating aesthetic information collages . An aesthetic information collage is designed to be a type of ambient information display in a decorative object ( see also [ 5 ] ) . Normally , the central imperative for an information display is to effectively convey information – if it can also be aesthetically interesting , that might be an added bonus . The Kandinsky system is an experiment in turning this imperative upside - down . We envision this system being used in a home or office setting to produce the equivalent of a painting or poster hanging on the wall . ( With current advances such as low cost Organic LED displays , this may be widely practical in only a few years . ) Like other images we hang on the wall , we would typically choose this display primarily because of its aesthetic properties . To these aesthetic properties , we wish to add the ability to convey ambient information – information that we may wish to be aware of , but that should not necessarily demand our attention . Kandinsky works by composing images representing information items to be displayed into a collage in a way that tries to maintain certain aesthetic properties ( for other approaches to automatic generation of collages , see for example [ 4 , 9 , 14 , 20 ] ) . If necessary , the system will also create images to represent information given to it in only textual form . Figure 1 shows an example of a collage created by the Kandinsky system . This collage represents a message from the comp . human - factors news group , with the title : “ CfP Ubicomp 2001 - Late breaking Results , Workshop … ” . It was generated by first creating a set of images based on the textual message subject string using the ImageConjure subsystem . These images were then combined using an aesthetic template to form the final collage . We envision that a series of these collages would be generated from the same template over time , each representing a small number of messages . We would then slowly shift between the collages to present a larger body of information . Artists exhibit a capacity for creativity and aesthetic judgment that is poorly understood and not currently well suited to automation . Rather than attempt to build robust knowledge of aesthetic principles into the system , or to create a form of artificial artist ( a very challenging task , see for example [ 7 , 1 ] ) , we have chosen instead an approach that allows the artist to express aesthetic concepts in visual form – an aesthetic template . Aesthetic templates allow an artist to express overall compositional form , dominant colors , and other aesthetic properties that the final collage is to follow , along with fixed elements of its content . We then attempt to reuse that expression by casting the collage generation process into an optimization problem – one of matching and manipulation of the visual properties of potential collage elements in order to mimic the properties of various parts of the template . In this way , we use the computer for a repetitive algorithmic task that it is well suited for in order to leverage and amplify the knowledge and skill of a human artist . In the next section we will present an overview of the components and basic action of the Kandisnsy system . We will then consider a simple technique for fabricating images that are likely to be representative of information given in only textual form . This is followed by a discussion of the extensible optimization process that forms the core of the Kandinsky system . Next , a discussion of visual properties will be provided , followed by a detailed discussion of the aspects actually used by the system , and how they are implemented . We will then show some results of the system and provide a conclusion . ARCHITECTURAL OVERVIEW Figure 2 illustrates the architecture of the Kandinsky system . Typical use begins with the arrival of information that we might want to be displayed ambiently . In the work described here , we have chosen electronic messages ( e . g . , email or news group postings ) as a ready and familiar source of information , but many other sources could be used instead . From the incoming information , we extract textual summaries such as message subject lines , as well as any suitable images that might come with the information ( for the examples in this paper we have chosen to work only from text to illustrate the more challenging problem ) . When images are not provided , we use textual information with the ImageConjure subsystem ( described in the next section ) to find images within a large indexed image collection that are likely to reflect the semantic content of the message . The Kandinsky system then composes these images on the basis of an aesthetic template to create a collage . As discussed in the section after next , an aesthetic template is defined using a collection of layered regions supplied by an artist . Regions can directly contribute image components to the final result , can specify layout and matching criteria , and / or can specify image manipulations to be performed . The Kandinsky system uses the layout and matching criteria of the template ( for example , color or texture matching against the template image ) as the definition of an optimization problem . In particular , each criteria in the system comes with a scoring function which evaluates how well the criteria holds within a given composition or partial composition . Roughly speaking , the system generates a series of candidate assignments of images to regions and a layout within those regions . Based on the matching and Figure 1 . Example Collage Generated From : “ CfP Ubicomp 2001 - Late breaking Results , Workshop… ” ( Please see the ACM digital library for color versions of all figures . ) Information Source ImageConjure Result T extual Information ImagesImagesImages AestheticTemplate Selection , Manipulation , & Placement Optimization Figure 2 . Architecture of the Kandinsky System layout criteria specified in the template , it does a simulated annealing optimization to improve the goodness of the match and layout . This optimization process is iterated until a fixed time limit is reached . At this point any image manipulations ( such as clipping to a region mask , applying a texture , or modifying colors ) that are specified by a region are performed . Finally , the regions are rendered as a series of layers in order to produce the final result . By casting the composition algorithm as a general optimization problem , we have created a system that is extensible and flexible . With suitable matching metrics , it can handle a number of the properties of importance in visual design . In addition , new properties can be added when new metrics are invented , without disturbing existing templates or regions . Further , while in the examples presented here we have concentrated on visual properties , other kinds of metrics can be applied as well . For example , regions might include criteria based on the type or content of information being represented . This would allow , for example , the images associated with email messages from senders on a list of close colleagues to be placed in a particular location simply by creating a region which “has an affinity” for that kind of information ( as expressed by its optimization criteria ) . This allows both aesthetic and communicative properties to be expressed in the same framework , and allows different templates to trade off these criteria in different ways . Finally while seemingly complex and technical , this framework as we will see later in the paper , in fact lends itself to a simple artist’s interface which hides many of the details behind a metaphor of paint and painting . REPRESENTATIVE IMAGES The Kandinsky system works by composing images . However , many of the information sources we might wish to display ambiently – such as the state of our unread email – are primarily textual in nature . The ImageConjure subsystem is responsible for overcoming this limitation by converting text into a set of representative images . The authors first came across this image summarization problem in our experiences using the What’s Happening community awareness system [ 21 ] , where some information sources ( e . g . , Slashdot article excerpts [ 17 ] ) had iconic subject indicators with them because a human editor had chosen an appropriate image as a part of the publishing process . We found these to be very helpful in assessing the information at a glance . However , for the majority of the information presented , the luxury of a human editor was not available . The job of the ImageConjure subsystem can be seen as providing some approximate replacement for a human editor picking summary images . While this at first blush seems like an exceedingly hard task , we realized that the human knowledge necessary to do this had , in some sense , already been captured . In particular , there are large collections of stock photo and clip art images available that have been topically indexed . The ImageConjure subsystem makes use of this prior human effort via some simple information retrieval technology . It uses a textual summary of the information to be represented ( e . g . , the subject of a message – which has also been prepared by a person ) as a search string against the indexing information provided with several large image collections . For our current implementation , we have acquired a license for use of two indexed image collections . The first collection ( from PhotoDisc Inc . [ 13 ] ) contains approximately 24 , 000 royalty - free stock photos . This collection is at relatively low resolution ( primarily 278x183 pixels ) . However , this is generally suitable for our purposes and was available at reasonable cost . This collection has the significant advantage that nearly all photos have been carefully composed by professional photographers . As a result , they have relatively high production values and generally contribute positively to our overall result . This collection , however , has at least one drawback . In some cases , it seems to be “over indexed” for our application – in particular , peripheral or background objects appearing in the photos are included in the index . This causes images to be selected that contain an appropriate object in the background , but whose dominant object or theme is unrelated to the query at hand . This is an instance of a slightly more general problem . It stems from the fact that information retrieval systems of all sorts have been tuned primarily to uses where humans make a final judgment . As a result , they typically tend to reduce the precision of their results in various ways in order to attain greater recall . Our second collection ( licensed from Hemera Inc . [ 6 ] ) contains approximately 50 , 000 images of background - separated objects ( i . e . , each image comes with a mask separating its object ( s ) , from the background ) . This collection has the advantage of non - rectangular images and , because of its primarily single - object images , queries against it seem to typically have higher precision in their topical match . However , the images in this collection have somewhat lower production values and do not typically represent an interesting composition in and of themselves . Also we found that in this very large collection there were sometimes several different photographs of the same object ( e . g . , taken from different points of view ) . Because of the matching process , if one of these images scored highly , the other variations tended to be returned as well . In some cases this squeezed out images of other objects which would have been more interesting than a repeated object . Based on some experimentation with the properties of these two image collections , we have tentatively settled on giving a significantly higher weight to the selection of images from the Photodisc collection – primarily because of the typically higher aesthetic value of the pictures it contains . Specifically , we have been using a strategy of selecting one image from the Hemera collection and three or four images from the Photodisc collection . Searching by the ImageConjure system is done using the Lucene indexing and search package ( available free with Java source code on the web [ 2 ] ) . However , many information retrieval systems would probably produce similar results , and more sophisticated systems might offer somewhat improved outcomes . Overall , we found the results of the ImageConjure to be quite useful , although not perfect . Figure 3 gives a representative sample of results . The queries used here are taken from the subject lines of messages found in the comp . human - factors news group ( these titles were simply the first ones on the list the day we collected them ) . Within these examples , we can see many relevant images . For example , the selection of images related to Denmark and the pictographic equivalent of “late breaking” both work very well . In addition , we can see several typical ( partial ) failures . For example , the results for “ Seeking Entry - level HCI work ” show a typical issue with alternate meanings ( here we have an entry - way and a level for “entry - level” , and slightly lower ranked images also return religious themes based on “seeking” ) . This instance also illustrates the repeated object problem . In addition to the 10 queries shown below , two other queries from our first 12 failed to retrieve any images from our collections ( these were : “ any interesting GUI interfaces ? ” and “ TM ” ) . In cases where the message subject fails to return a result , we can consider several different fallbacks . First , we search based on words in the message body . In these cases , both messages returned multiple images based on the first 10 words of the message . If this fails , we currently use a “not found” image randomly selected from a small collection of appropriate images ( which we formed based on results from the query “ question missing gone mystery ” ) . We could also employ a It is not always the developers CFP : NordiCHI 2002 . Aarhus , Denmark , Oct 19 - 23 , 2002 3D User Interface on 2D screen ? More MS ' advances ' Seeking Entry - level HCI work CfP Ubicomp 2001 - Late breaking Results , Workshop … Human Factors and Training Analysis Vacancies - UK Interviewing resources for UI / Usability positions HCI Standards and Guidelines references Layered reading - levels ? Web Vs GUI Figure 3 . Representative Results from the ImageConjure Subsystem . fallback strategy of rendering the text itself to form an image in various interesting ways . THE OPTIMIZATION PROCESS The optimization mechanism that forms the core of the Kandinsky system takes a general simulated annealing approach . This approach works with a configuration of components ( comprised of properties such as the selection of information images , their placement within the collage , etc . ) Over the course of the optimization , it attempts to improve that configuration by iteratively perturbing the configuration in some way , then evaluating the result . In normal simulated annealing fashion , a “temperature” parameter is maintained which controls the perturbation and iterative direction of the system . The temperature is initially set high , indicating that large perturbations are to be employed , and that the system may retain some perturbation steps that actually decreased the assessment of the overall system . Over time , the temperature is decreased . This indicates that smaller perturbation steps are to be taken , and that only steps which improve the assessment of the overall system will be retained . Aesthetic templates are the central mechanism for expressing the aesthetic properties which the simulated annealing optimization operates over . An aesthetic template is composed from a layered set of regions . As detailed below , regions may specify four things : Fixed visual elements , an initial selection and placement strategy , a series of evaluation criteria , and a set of post - processing effects . Fixed visual elements : These provide specific image content that is added directly to the collage , and forms a backdrop to any information images associated with the region . In some cases , artist provided visual elements actually dominate the composition . However , the degree to which the final collage is the result of direct composition by the artist , versus composed from information images , is something fully at the control of the artist . Further some regions will be solely for composition or layout purposes , and will provide no visual elements of their own . Initial image selection and placement strategy : This is a mechanism for initially selecting images which are to be associated with a region , and initially placing them ( laying them out ) within the region . It provides the details necessary for the initialization of the optimization process at a particular configuration . The basis for selections might be visual in nature , or might be semantic . Similarly a variety of initial placement strategies might be employed . ( At present the system only supports one image selection and placement strategy : a random one , relying instead on the evaluation and optimization process alone to produced the desired results . However , this can be inefficient , and more targeted strategies will be added as the system matures . ) Evaluation criteria : Central to each region is a set of evaluation criteria . These criteria measure the goodness of a candidate configuration for the region . The artist indicates which evaluation criteria will be applied for each region in order to describe which visual properties are desired for the region . Typical criteria include layout criteria ( e . g . , favoring non - overlapping layouts , layouts staying within a region mask , or layouts conforming to a grid structure ) , as well as visual matching criteria ( e . g . , criteria for matching color , texture , dominant image direction , or balance requirements ) . With each evaluation criteria comes a system - supplied scoring function , and an artist - supplied weight expressing how important the criteria is . Evaluation criteria can be provided in three forms . The criteria can be applied on a per image basis ( evaluating aspects of the inclusion , placement or other properties of a single image in the region ) , or on a per region basis ( evaluating the goodness of the entire region configuration ) . In addition , evaluation criteria that apply to the entire collage can be provided as part of the aesthetic template . The final composition process for a collage involves placing the selected information images for a region in their optimized configuration ( e . g . at their optimized positions ) over the fixed visual elements of the region . Post - processing effects are then applied to the resulting composition . Post - processing effects : Each region may provide one or more post processing effects that are to be applied after its final configuration is determined . Typical effects include clipping to a mask supplied with the region , and applying color and texture changes . The results from each region are then rendered as an ordered set of layers to create the final collage . Optimization proceeds by selecting and applying a perturbation operator . The current temperature is typically used by these operators to determine how large a perturbation to generate , and to balance between gradient - decent steps ( at lower temperatures ) and random steps ( at higher temperatures ) . The resulting configuration is then scored using the local , regional , and global evaluation criteria and associated weights from the aesthetic template . Generally , if a perturbation improves a configuration , the new configuration is retained for future steps , otherwise it is discarded ( this corresponds to a simple hill - climbing optimization strategy ) . However , as is characteristic of simulated annealing optimizations , in order to avoid being trapped at less desirable local maxima , the system will also allow the retention of “backward” steps with a small probability which is proportional to the current temperature . The Kandinsky system provides an extensible library of mechanisms , evaluation criteria , and post - processing effects that can be made available to the artist for inclusion in an aesthetic template . In addition , the system contains an extensible library of perturbation methods each of which modifies some aspect of a candidate configuration . For example , perturbation operators are provided for reassigning images to different regions , and for moving the spatial position of images within regions . The next section describes properties from principles of visual design that we might use to create such a library in a principled way . It also considers how some of these properties might be operationalized , by either measuring them ( for use in evaluation criteria to drive optimization ) , or being able to generate images which embody them ( for use in perturbation or post - processing methods ) . PROPERTIES OF INTEREST Since the earliest civilization , humans have communicated and solved problems through the use of visual information . Visual composition is critical in both communicating and problem - solving . However , it is not well known how artists and designers create visual compositions , nor is it easy to replicate . Artists and designers often “operate from the gut” and are not able to fully articulate what compositional decisions they have made and the rationale for doing so . However , much as syntax has evolved as a way to bring order and structure to language , researchers in art and visual perception have evolved a syntax of visual literacy – a set of concepts and principles for understanding and creating structure in visual compositions ( see for example [ 3 , 10 , 19 ] ) . Although the details of these constructs vary somewhat in form and emphasis , they have a good deal in common because they are all derived from the same underlying human sensory , perceptual , and cognitive phenomena . For the work presented here , we have adapted ( paraphrasing , slightly reorganizing , and simplifying ) the constructs presented by Dondis [ 3 ] as a guide for understanding what aspects of visual composition we should consider addressing . Following Dondis , there are two levels at which important properties for visual compositions emerge . One level considers primarily low - level image features and corresponds roughly to a sensory level . The second level concerns itself primarily with the psychological reactions that are induced by images . This corresponds roughly to perceptual and cognitive levels of human image perception and understanding . At the lower level are five primary properties of interest . These include : color , texture , “edges and lines” , direction , and shape . Five additional important properties emerge at the higher level . These include : “relative contrast” , dimensionality , balance , motion , and stress . Each of these properties is briefly considered below and is related to potential computational treatments of them . Color is an invaluable source of information in perception of the environment . Color is also often used to create symbolic or emotional meaning . For example , red can represent blood . Therefore , we see color as information operating on universal , cultural and even personal levels . Color is a familiar concept computationally , and color matching and manipulation primitives are readily available for use . Texture is the visual element that best represents what we might feel if we were to touch a surface . Texture in a visual composition takes the form of minute variations on a surface or artifact . Our perceptual systems are extremely sensitive to detecting different textures . For example , false texture is used by animals in nature to confuse possible predators . Significant work in computer vision has been done on analysis and synthesis of textures ( see [ 18 ] for a survey ) and a number of these techniques can be adapted for use in our context . Edges and Lines are fundamental to our perception of boundaries , and hence to the perception of separate objects . As a result , lines – both in isolation and as formed by the juxtaposition of contrasting image components – represent strong and important visual components . Again , because they are fundamental perceptual constructs , computer vision research provides a ready set of techniques for dealing with lines and edges in images . Direction . Moving to a slightly higher level , lines and edges induce a sense of directionality within an image . The horizontal and vertical ( which are reinforced and given special importance by gravity and the horizon in the physical world ) form an important frame of reference for directionality in visual composition . Again , simple computer vision techniques for extracting approximations of directionality information are readily available . Shape is induced by lines or edges in closed form . Visual designs are often expressed in terms of the composition of basic shapes such as squares or rectangles , circles or ovals , and triangles . For example , when learning to draw the human figure , teachers will abstract the form into a series of ovals and rectangles . Shapes can also impart meaning . For example : “The square has associated [ with ] it dullness , honesty , straightness , and workmanlike meaning ; the triangle , action , conflict , tension ; the circle , endlessness , warmth , protection . ” [ 3 , p . 44 ] . Computationally , measurement of shape has at its core a notion of separation and segregation of objects . Unfortunately , tasks such as robust separation of foreground objects from a naturalistic background ( figure - ground separation ) are beyond the current abilities of computer vision systems in most cases . However , on the generative side , we can take advantage of readily available capabilities for masking or clipping to create shapes of interest . In addition , it may be possible to use shape - oriented metrics such as ( approximate ) fractal dimension [ 11 ] without explicit object separation . Relative Contrast concerns the relationship of objects with respect to some property with magnitude ( such as size or brightness ) . This property is evident in the forms of proportion and scale , which are contrasts of size between different objects , and between objects and the overall visual field , respectively . These properties can have an important impact on the effects of a composition . For example , a small image of a person surrounded by a vast landscape evokes a different feeling than a portrait at close range . Computational measurements of contrasts in color or brightness are relatively easy to perform . On the other hand , computational measurement of scale and proportion are again impeded by a lack of robust object separation techniques . However , on the generative side , manipulation of size properties via image scaling is well understood . Dimensionality . The human perceptual system does a remarkable job of perceiving three - dimensional structure from two - dimensional images . Dimensionality refers to the extent to which an image induces a sense of depth , and to the mechanisms ( such as different forms of perspective ) by which this is accomplished . At present , little is available computationally to help with notions of dimensionality as they arise in this context . Balance . At a higher level , we intrinsically estimate properties of physical objects from their images . One such property is balance . Man’s need for balance is an important physiological as well as physical influence . As a result , equilibrium , in the form of balance , is a strong visual referent – we rely on horizontal and vertical axis when interpreting a visual composition , and feel comfortable if those axes are reinforced in the composition via balance with respect to them . A variety of moment and center of gravity calculations can be used to estimate balance properties of images . Motion . At a similarly high level , we intrinsically estimate properties of implied movement from aspects of still images . These properties take their imperative from the physics of the world and ( implied ) movement brings with it meanings from the physical world . Computationally , we have few tools for measurement of implied movement within still images , but generative capabilities such as simulation of motion blur are available . Stress ( vs . Stability ) . At an even higher level of abstraction , properties such as balance , motion , shape , and contrast , can induce feelings of stability ( and when lacking , tension or stress ) in a composition . For example , compositions which lack balance , or which shift the implied axis of balance or symmetry far away from the center , induce a feeling of tension or stress which conveys subtle meaning . Since stress as described above is not a well understood concept , it is not surprising that few computational approaches for measuring or generating it are readily apparent . As a general trend , we can see that at the lower levels of abstraction , the principles we have outlined here can be more easily operationalized in either an evaluative form ( that can be used to drive optimization ) or a generative form ( that can be used in perturbation , or more commonly post - processing effects ) . At the higher levels of abstraction we may only have available techniques that can generate some limited forms of various properties . EVALUATION AND GENERATION SPECIFICS In this section , we describe the specifics of how aesthetic properties are evaluated and generated within the system . Recall that the system deals with aesthetic properties in four ways : initial image selection and placement methods ( used to initialize configurations prior to optimization ) , evaluation criteria and perturbation rules ( used to drive improvement of aesthetic property matches ) , and after - effects ( used to generate desired properties ) . As indicated earlier , in our initial implementation of the system , only simple random initial selection and placement methods are provided – we instead rely on subsequent perturbation steps to achieve desired properties . We also presently support only a minimal set of perturbation methods – a method for switching the assignment of images to layers , and another for image placement within regions . Since the system is fully pluggable , these limited methods can easily be extended with more efficient and sophisticated methods in future versions . The library of evaluation criteria offered by the current system is more extensive . Criteria are provided that operate at the level of individual images ( e . g . , scoring the placement of a particular image at a particular point within a region ) , at the level of regions ( i . e . , scoring the goodness of the current configuration of a region ) , and at the level of the whole composition ( i . e . , scoring some property that is measured across the configuration of the entire collage ) . At the individual image level , criteria are provide for : containment of the image within a region’s clipping mask , aspect ratio match ( compared to the target aspect ratio of the region ) , local color match ( compared to the region image in the neighborhood of a particular placement location ) , region color match ( compared to a region target color ) , direction match , and texture match . Figure 4 shows an example of color matching along with balance , “single image” , and “stay within mask” criteria . Here each bottle is a separate region employing color matching against the dominant color of the region image , as well as expressing an affinity for exactly one image which is contained within its clipping mask . Each region also specifies a balance point , resulting in the ‘ V ’ placement . Direction match is performed by doing edge extraction on the region image with a local gradient operator , then classifying local direction of the edges as horizontal , vertical , left diagonal , right diagonal , or none . The distribution of these edge classifications is then compared Figure 4 . Example of Color Matching and Balance with a similar distribution computed for candidate images to be placed over the region . Figure 5 shows an example of direction matching where the background wood grain provides the direction matched against . Texture matching is done via the Local Binary Pattern ( LBP ) and Local Binary Pattern Contrast ( LBP / C ) classification methods described and evaluated in [ 12 ] . Evaluation criteria currently operating at the region level include : number of items placed in the region ( comparing to preferred upper and lower limits ) , non - overlap of items , color match ( compared to overall color of the region ) , and balance . Balance is computed by calculating the center of mass with respect to an edge density metric . We also intend to experiment with an image segmentation - based center of mass metric . Centers of mass calculated for images and regions are also used to estimate image centers and are employed in several after - effects described below . Figure 4 provides an example of the use of balance criteria . Here the five regions are all center balanced horizontally and set to top , center , bottom , center , and top - heavy respectively . Evaluation criteria operating at the level of the full composition include : non - overlap of images , and balance . After - effects currently supported include : colorization ( reducing an image to grayscale , then tinting it with color ( s ) coming from the region ) , clipping of images to their region , scaling , and blur . Scaling is done around the calculated center of an image ( typically the center of mass as calculated for balance ) . The overall set of after - effects that might be applied is quire large due to the proliferation of commercial effect filters ( e . g . , Photoshop plug - ins ) . Nearly any of these effects might be considered for the after - effect library . Figure 6 provides a complete example combining several evaluation criteria and after - effects . This template is based on the Kandinsky painting “Composition IV” [ 8 ] . As illustrated in the lower center , several regions supply fixed images from the original painting , while the remainder of the regions in the template are set for color matching , and direction matching ( with equal weights in one or two directions ) . In addition , each of these regions applies an aspect ratio match . Finally , these regions also apply an after - effect of colorization using colors from the original painting as illustrated in the upper center . The final result when combined with images ( left ) representing “ Web vs . GUI ” and “ BayCHI 5 / 8 / 01 Using Ethnography in the New Economy ” , is shown at the right . The set of methods , criteria , and effects described above provide reasonably good coverage of the basic visual properties considered in the previous section . However , a key feature of the Kandinsky system is its extensibility . This will allow us to extend and enhance the current library in an incremental fashion without changing the underlying system architecture . In addition , to the basic visual properties targeted above , we have also experimented with an evaluation criteria based on recognition of a very high - level visual construct which has significant aesthetic impact : the human face . For this evaluation criteria we used software previously developed by some of our colleagues that is able to robustly recognize human faces within arbitrary images [ 15 , 16 ] . This allowed us to create an image level evaluation criteria of face affinity which scores images containing faces highly , and other images poorly . The face detection routines also identify the location and bounds of faces so After Effects Region Colors & Directions Input Images TEMPLATE Figure 6 . Example Images , Aesthetic Template , and Result Figure 5 . Example of Directional Matching Figure 7 . Example Results that they may be counted , and so that centers of single faces can be approximated for use in after - effects such as scaling . THE ARTIST’S INTERFACE While a general optimization framework provides a number of advantages from the point of view of flexibility and extensibility , the specifications that drive it may also contain a large number of individual criteria that need to be established and parameters that need to be set . Key to the success of the Kandinsky system is its ability to capture and reuse the aesthetic expression of artists . However , this expression normally comes in a fairly fluid form such as sketching or painting . This fluidity will be significantly impeded if the artist is asked to express their work as a list of evaluation criteria , parameters , and weighting factors instead of forms more familiar to them . To attempt to address this potential mismatch , we have used the region as the central organizational component of our aesthetic templates . From the artist’s point of view , regions can be thought of in much the same terms as other constructs they are used to working with in drawing or painting programs – they can be considered primarily in spatial and visual terms . They are organized into the same layer structure that is now common in many painting and illustration programs . Overall , they are defined spatially – covering a particular area of the overall composition ( defined internally with a alpha channel mask which might include translucency ) . Further , parameters needed by many of the primary evaluation criteria can be defined via images . For example , color , direction , and texture matching can all be defined as matches against the properties of the image contained in the region . This allows the majority of the properties of a typical region to be defined simply by drawing an image of the region in a layer in the same way that images are created with the artist’s normal tools . However , some information specifying a region is not visual . This includes the specification of evaluation criteria to be applied or ignored , the weights to be used in combining the scores from criteria , and various semantic criteria ( such as an affinity for faces , or limits on the number of images to be associated with a region ) . At present , we have artists create templates in whatever ( layered ) tool they normally use , and communicate non - visual criteria to us separately ( as annotations on the images ) , which we enter in tables . This approach , while workable for the artists , clearly is not a viable long - term solution . However , it has shown us that fairly course grained settings of weights ( e . g . , ratings such as “ignore” , “low priority” , “medium priority” , or “high priority” for each criteria ) are generally sufficient . To allow the artist to directly specify weights and other non - visual attributes in the future , we plan to use a metaphor of property paints . Within this metaphor , paints will have colors and patterns much like a conventional painting program . In addition , each paint may contain additional information regarding other properties of a region . For example , paint may contain a factor enabling a particular evaluation criteria such as face affinity . When this face paint is applied to a region , the face affinity evaluation criteria becomes enabled for the region . The more area of the region the paint covers , the higher the weighting for that criteria . We can easily extend this painting metaphor to support facile manipulation of weights and other parameters by supporting dilution and mixing of paints . For example , blue paint could be mixed equally with “horizontal” paint to create regions that used color matching and image direction matching criteria equally weighted . Paint mixing also provides a mechanism by which visual properties of a region can be specified together with non - visual properties . For example , “blue - tint after - effect” paint ( which specifies an after - effect of applying a blue hue to the luminance values of a composed region ) could be mixed with “face paint” , “single image” paint and “centering” paint to create a region that had an affinity for including a single face near its center of mass , then applied the “blue - tint” after - effect . Overall , the metaphor of using paint to specify properties of regions should provide an intuitive and familiar mechanism for artists to fully define regions . An interesting research issue will be how to best portray to the artists the likely effects of a given paint mixture . At present , the optimization mechanism that causes the criteria implied by a paint to have effect does not run quickly enough for interactive use . However , it may be possible to use a fixed set of example images along with pre - processing and approximation of effects to create approximations of paint actions in real - time . ( We can also expect that the optimization algorithm will run in near real time after a few of the CPU speed doublings predicted by Moore’s law . ) Figure 7 provides several additional examples of results produced by the Kandinsky system . CONCLUSION As computing continues to move from being a highly specialized and expensive tool used by professionals , to a ubiquitous part of most people’s every day lives , the need to consider aesthetics , or more generally desirability , in the design of interactive systems will increase . To explore what happens when these criteria are foremost , this paper has turned the normal imperative for information displays upside down . It has considered how technology might be used to create displays that are first aesthetically interesting , and second able to convey information . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We would like to extend special thanks to Henry Schneiderman and Takeo Kanade for making their face recognition software available for this project , and to Doug Cutting for making his Lucene indexing and search package available on the web . We would also like to thank Joonhwan Lee for lending his talents in preparing several of the aesthetic templates used for examples . This work was supported in part by DARPA , the National Science Foundation under Grant IIS - 9800597 , and the first author’s National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Cohen , H . , “The Further Exploits of AARON , Painter” , Stanford Electronic Humanities Review , v4 , n2 , 1995 ( see : http : / / www . stanford . edu / group / SHR / 4 - 2 / text / cohen . html ) . [ 2 ] Cutting , D . , The Lucene Search Engine , Web page : http : / / www . lucene . com / . [ 3 ] Dondis , D . , A Primer of Visual Literacy , MIT Press , 1973 ( reprinted 2000 ) . [ 4 ] Greenberg , S . , and Rounding , M . , “The Notification Collage : Posting Information to Public and Personal Displays” , CHI Letters ( Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ) , v3 , n1 , pp . 514 – 521 , March 2001 . [ 5 ] Heiner , J . , Hudson , S . , and Tanaka , K . , “The Information Percolator : Ambient Information Display in a Decorative Object” , CHI Letters ( Proceedings of the ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology ) , v1 , n1 , pp . 141 - 148 , November 1999 . [ 6 ] Hemera Technologies Inc . , Hemera Home Page , Web page : http : / / www . hermera . com . [ 7 ] Hofstadter , D . and McGraw , G . , “Letter Spirit : An Emergent Model of the Perception and Creation of Alphabetic Style” , Technical Report 68 , Center for Research on Concepts and Cognition , Indiana University , 1993 . [ 8 ] Kandinsky , W . , “Composition IV” , 1911 , ( see : http : / / www . oir . ucf . edu / wm / paint / auth / kandinsky / kandinsky . comp - 4 . jpg ) . [ 9 ] Kerne , A . , “Collage Machine : Temporality and Indeterminacy in Media Browsing via Interface Ecology” ACM SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems Extended Abstracts , pp . 297 - 298 , March 1997 . ( see : http : / / www . mrl . nyu . edu / ~ andruid / ecology / collageMachine ) [ 10 ] Kosslyn , S . , Principles of Graph Design , W . H . Freeman and Company , 1994 . [ 11 ] Mandelbrot , B . , “How Long is the Coast of Great Britain , Statistical Self Similarity and Fractional Dimension” , Science , v155 , pp . 636 - 638 , 1967 . [ 12 ] Ojala , J . , Pietikainen , M , and Harwood , A . , “A Comparative Study of Texture Measures with Classification Based on Feature Distributions” , Pattern Recognition , v 29 , pp . 51 - 50 , 1996 . [ 13 ] PhotoDisc : Royalty - free Stock Photography , Web page : http : / / www . photodisc . com . [ 14 ] The Random Collage Generator , Web page : http : / / www . albany . net / ~ egon / . [ 15 ] Schneiderman , H . , “A Statistical Approach to 3D Object Detection Applied to Faces and Cars” , Doctoral Dissertation , Robotics Institute , Carnegie Mellon University ( Available as Robotics Institute Technical Report 00 - 06 ) , May , 2000 . [ 16 ] Schneiderman , H . , and Kanade , T . , “A Statistical model for 3D Object Detection Applied to Faces and Cars” , IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , June , 2000 . [ 17 ] Slashdot : News for Nerds , Stuff That Matters , Web page : http : / / www . slashdot . org . [ 18 ] Tuceryan , M . , and Jain , A . , “Texture Analysis” in The Handbook of Pattern Recognition and Computer Vision ( 2 nd Edition ) , C . Chen , L . Pau , and P . Wang ( eds ) , pp . 207 - 249 , World Scientific Publishing , 1998 . [ 19 ] Tufte , E . , Envisioning Information , Graphics Press , 1990 . [ 20 ] Zawinski , J . WebCollage , Web page : http : / / www . jwz . org / webcollage / . [ 21 ] Zhao , Q . and Stasko , J . , “What ' s Happening ? The Community Awareness Application” , ACM SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems Extended Abstracts , pp . 253 - 254 , April 2000 .