P . Floréen , A . Krüger , and M . Spasojevic ( Eds . ) : Pervasive 2010 , LNCS 6030 , pp . 174 – 191 , 2010 . © Springer - Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2010 The Secret Life of Machines – Boundary Objects in Maintenance , Repair and Overhaul Matthias Betz Fraunhofer Institute for Applied Information Technology FIT 53754 Sankt Augustin , Germany Department of Information Systems and New Media , University of Siegen 57068 Siegen , Germany matthias . betz @ fit . fraunhofer . de Abstract . The increasing level of automation in tight just - in - time subcontract - ing relationships in the automotive industry makes the complex , weak structured , knowledge intense and highly cooperative practice of Reactive Maintenance ( RM ) in Maintenance Repair and Overhaul ( MRO ) in this branch a demanding and stressful job . In this paper two typical breakdown situations are presented which occurred in a participative observation to gain insights to this field . Based on the analysis of the observations and the existing MRO re - lated IT infrastructure we refer to the theoretical concept of ‘boundary objects’ to understand the practice in this field . Finally , implications for design for a MRO supporting pervasive computing environment are derived from this con - ceptualization . We highlight the potentials of attaching relevant information to physical objects in place to support and motivate documentation by bridging the physical world of machines with the virtual information space and to enhance the discovering of relevant information in breakdowns situations . Keywords : maintenance , repair , overhaul , collaboration , boundary - objects , his - tories , practice , observation , UbiComp , autoID , physical , sensor - networks . 1 Introduction Modern mass - production , especially the production of automotive - components is complex and time - critical . With the introduction of Lean - Production and the perva - siveness of Just - In - Time logistics the need for storage capacity was reduced at the cost of an increasing dependency on the availability and reliability of production facilities . In production settings with a high level of automation , machines are com - plex conglomerates of different technologies like pneumatics , hydraulics , electronics , programmable controllers , interfaces to information systems like production data acquisition , enterprise - resource - planning systems etc . Additionally , machines in mass - production are also embedded into complex workflows , i . e . inputs and outputs of different machines are connected in complex interdependencies . Due to the in - creasing requirements regarding availability and reliability of the technical equipment the routine character of maintenance , repair and overhaul ( MRO ) work in such set - tings develops towards a time - critical more “first responder” like work . Beyond that , The Secret Life of Machines – Boundary Objects in Maintenance , Repair and Overhaul 175 the increasing complexity of the production facilities in terms of heterogeneity of machinery - vendors , age , compositions of different equipment types , standards , work - flows , breakdown - situations etc . makes MRO work a hardly predictable , weak struc - tured and knowledge - intense process . To increase the reliability and the availability of the technical equipment in time - critical production settings the support of MRO is an important factor in this domain . This contribution summarizes the results of an empirical study in a MRO depart - ment of a medium - size company for plastic shaping . It focuses on the questions how maintenance workers deal with repair - related information , how this information is related to objects and places and to which extend those objects can be seen as bound - ary - objects for the involved groups of actors . Consequently – from a HCI perspective – the question arises how maintenance workers could be supported in collaboration , i . e . finding relevant information , artifacts and experts for efficiently bringing facilities back into a productive state . After providing an overview of current concepts and approaches in supporting MRO work with information technology the methods and findings of the empirical work in the MRO department will be summarized . Based on the findings , implications for the design of pervasive IT support of MRO workers will be presented based on the theoretical concept of ‘boundary objects’ ( c . f . [ 1 , 2 , 3 ] ) . Following [ 3 ] especially the aspect of information reuse of recorded states of bound - ary objects in time , i . e . the MRO history of machines , is taken into account . 2 MRO in Research : Terms and Focus in IT Support Focusing on MRO in the literature there is only little research in the area of mainte - nance and reliability . Given the significance of MRO to manufacturing competitive - ness , it is surprising how little research is being carried out in this area . Within the CSCW research there are some MRO related works , e . g . the investigations on main - tenance and repair of copy and printing machines at Xerox . As stated in [ 4 ] mainte - nance is a highly non - routine work with combined social and technical complexities : Individual machines have idiosyncrasies that defy understanding ; replacement parts often don ' t work ; work rotation sometimes has one technician invading another ' s service territory , neither the regular technician nor the interloper knows the history of the machine ( which turns out to be very important in this contribution ) . All these social and technical complexities make this apparently routine work highly non - routine . The work practices of these technicians require constant improvisation . Additionally , MRO in industry is even more complex due to the fact that industrial facilities are complex systems of buildings , infrastructures and machines [ 5 ] . 2 . 1 Terms , Classifications , Policies To minimize risks and to increase productivity and efficiency , there are different investigations and policies from the field of operational research . Paz et al . [ 6 ] sum - marize two broad classes of policies for maintaining and reliability . First : Policies for reducing the frequency of failures , e . g . ( a ) preventive maintenance , ( b ) early equip - ment replacement , ( c ) predictive maintenance and ( c ) overbuilding of equipment . Second : Policies for reducing the severity of failures , e . g . ( a ) speeding the repair task 176 M . Betz by modular equipment design and ( b ) providing alternate output during repair by alternate job routings , standby machines or buffer inventories . Following [ 6 ] it is also useful to classify maintenance on the basis of when the work must be done : ( 1 ) emergency , breakdown or reactive maintenance ( RM ) is work that must be done immediately ; ( 2 ) routine or planned maintenance ( PM ) is work that must be done in the finite , foreseeable future ; and ( 3 ) preventive maintenance ( PM ) is work that must be carried out on a planned schedule . However , the difference be - tween PM and RM is more of a continuum than a dichotomy in many situations and there is a need for further investigations in the complex relationship between PM and RM to integrate breakdown and preventive maintenance . For this it is necessary to understand the nature of RM from a practitioner’s perspective which is the aim of this contribution . 2 . 2 MRO in Research There are already some interesting contributions in the literature of CSCW around MRO . Kovalainen et al . [ 7 , 8 ] performed a large scale investigation on the work of operators in Finish paper mills . They tried to understand the role of Organizational Memory for the support of communication between workers of different shifts . They introduced an electronic diary and analyzed the conversations articulated in this diary and compared the changes in practice with the usage of a prior paper based diary . Legner and Thiesse [ 5 ] focus on Ubiquitous Computing to support the facility maintenance at Frankfurt Airport . Due to the strict fire - prevention policies the re - quirements for a standardized and controllable process regarding to accuracy , com - pleteness and documentation they introduced RFID to support PM in this highly de - manding field . However , they do not focus on RM ; but for a successful and efficient MRO work they identified three criteria which are also relevant in the field presented and described in this paper : ( 1 ) precise and timely information on the objects to be maintained , ( 2 ) real - time transfer of information on critical incidents , and ( 3 ) fast access to the knowledge and means necessary to overcome problems caused by the incidents . There are already research investigations in designing technologies to sup - port maintenance work but under different perspectives and different aims . Lampe et al . [ 9 , 10 ] worked on the potentials of Ubiquitous Computing technologies to support the maintenance work on airplanes by introducing a RFID - based asset management system . However , they do not analyze the work of maintainers itself , they just offer a tool to deal with the concrete problem of managing and tracking tools because losing a tool in an airplane’s engine is dangerous . Though , from the management perspective there are some approaches to create policies to shift maintenance from a reactive to more preventive and predictive type of intervention to minimize the unpredictable and risky character of RM . Nevertheless , there are still unpredictable and unforeseen breakdown situations maintenance work - ers have to deal with and always will be . Through the increasing requirements regard - ing availability and reliability of the technical equipment in production facilities , further investigations are necessary especially in the support of reactive maintenance ( RM ) . To understand this weak structured , knowledge intense and highly cooperative work , insights of this particular practice are necessary to provide appropriate techno - logical support . From a theoretical perspective Phelps and Reddy [ 1 ] reflect on the The Secret Life of Machines – Boundary Objects in Maintenance , Repair and Overhaul 177 critical role boundary objects play in construction project teams . In this domain , boundary objects extend beyond their traditional role as information artifacts used to communicate between teams to serve a more influential role as guides for team col - laboration . The theoretical concept of ‘boundary objects’ in those settings has been used in several former contributions to provide a better understanding how communi - cation and cooperation is organized around relevant information artifacts ( c . f . [ 1 , 2 , 3 , 11 , 12 ] ) . 2 . 3 Field , Methods and Theoretical Grounding To design technologies to support reactive maintenance ( RM ) work in the complex field of production facilities it is necessary to understand how maintenance workers work and how they deal with the complex and time critical task of breakdown inter - vention . To get a deep understanding and to prepare the design and development of an appropriate technology the author of this paper started with an ethnographic phase based on a Grounded Theory approach [ 13 , 14 ] . To collect the empirical data the author conducted three weeks of participant observations in a MRO department of a medium enterprise in the domain of plastic moulding for automotives , two weeks in the morning shift and one week in the late shift . The collection of data and the documentation of the observed practices were sub - ject to several restrictions . Because of the high pressure of competition in this domain and lack of trust in the beginning of the observation , the management of the company prohibited documentation with photos , audio - or video recordings . Therefore , the documentation was limited to field notes and the creation of a successive narrative documentation in form of a diary to capture the observations and experiences the author made . Observed dialogues were reconstructed immediately in every break after they occurred and written down as a field note [ 3 ] . Every day , after the end of the shift , the field notes have been integrated with and supplemented by protocols based on retrospections and memories of the day [ 13 ] . Upcoming questions during the observations have been made to a subject of dis - cussions with local actors in ad - hoc interviews in coffee - and cigarette - breaks . The observations were rather passive in the beginning but after a few days of becoming acquainted with the workers in the department , the observations developed towards a more active participation in terms of assistance of maintenance workers and self - responsible conduction of simple tasks like running errands , cleaning a machine dur - ing PM activities etc . After two weeks of participating in the company , the author was allowed to make some photos , but only under permission of the head of the MRO department . The result of the documentation is a series of 44 photos and 42 pages of handwritten pages of field notes in the diary . It was possible to get an insight of the used documents in the department . There were several individual paper - based handwritten documents , a cabinet with folders for each of the 54 machines containing the complete documentation including technical drawings for hydraulics , electrics ( place is marked with ( d ) in Fig . 1 ) . The folders also contain the list of spare parts for each machine with order codes . There was also a network drive containing all digital representations of hydraulic and electric drawings as unsearchable TIF files named and ordered by the IDs of the machines accessible from all PCs in the MRO department . During the observations the field notes have 178 M . Betz been successively analyzed to identify patterns in the work routines to build up cate - gories . The results have been combined with the findings from the document structure analysis [ 13 ] . These categories provide a mask for successively sharpen the focus of the observation on the aspect of boundary objects , location and locality of machines , persons , tools and information resources in the work practice of the actors in the MRO department . Additionally , the analysis was supported by researchers from HCI , CSCW and so - cial - sciences within three interpretation workshops to provide external perspectives on the collected data . The interpretation sessions were held after each week of obser - vation . Each session was structured in three cycling phases . The observer created a report and a presentation about the observations he made in field . During presentation the scientists of each discipline wrote down open questions which were answered by the observer after the presentation . The purpose of this technique was to gain the observer’s retrospection and to enrich the field notes with additional data . Questions which could not be answered by the observer were included into the next observation phase . The sessions were also used to recognize patterns in the observed work to sharpen the next phase of observation . After finishing three weeks of observation , the collected material has been analyzed by the same group to finish the category - building process and summarize the findings . 3 MRO in the Domain of Injection Moulding The domain of automotive production is a cornerstone of the German industry and in particular the domain of plastic moulding is an important sub - domain for subcontract - ing for the automotive production and assembly industry . The subcontracting condi - tions mostly are based on just - in - time logistics . Therefore , breakdown situations have a critical impact on the reliability in those tight contracting relationships . Within that setting , technological support for the MRO activities seems to be important to reduce the risks of breakdowns and especially to react fast and effectively on unpredictable breakdown situations . 3 . 1 The ‘Automotive Plastics Inc . ’ The participant observation took place in the MRO department of a small and medium enterprise ( SME ) in the domain of plastic molding . In this paper the enterprise is called “Automotive Plastics Inc . ” which is not its real name . The company offers concept and series development of automotive interiors with focus on kinematic solutions like ashtrays , cup holders , sunroofs etc . The enterprise as a whole has ap - proximately 1200 employees and the MRO department hosts 7 electricians , 1 mecha - tronician , 6 mechanicians , 1 lacquerer and painter , 2 office workers ( assistance of head and dispatching ) and 1 leading engineer ( head of the department ) . The members of the MRO department are responsible for maintaining 54 injection moulding ma - chines , the corresponding infrastructure for cooling , heating , granulate material logis - tics and the facility , power - and energy - management . As illustrated in Fig . 1 . ( left ) the department resides within an own building on the area of the company ( MRO ) . The production , were all 54 injection moulding The Secret Life of Machines – Boundary Objects in Maintenance , Repair and Overhaul 179 machines reside , is distributed over three different factory buildings ( KV1 - 3 ) . The MRO department is responsible for managing the spare part storage which is located in the basement of the KV1 next to the plastic granulate drying facilities , which are also located in the basement . The MRO department building is divided in several areas itself : ( a ) marks the of - fice of the head of the department . From this office the leading engineer organizes the division of labor , creates schedules of planned overhauls and calibrations in tight coordination with the head of production , leads meetings of the department , acts as an intermediate between the head of production and the MRO department . During the time of observation the head was involved in planning of investments in new facili - ties . Therefore he was not available at least half of the day . The neighbor - room ( b ) is the office of the two dispatchers . The dispatchers are responsible for receiving incom - ing repair claims coming from the production department . They are also responsible for ordering spare parts . Both rooms are directly connected by a door which stands open most of the time except in case of meetings in the head’s office . Therefore , if the head is working in his office , he is very aware of repair claims reaching the dispatch - ers via phone . The group of mechanicians usually works in the area marked with ( d ) . They have a massive workbench and the walls around it are completely covered with tools they use to work with . Nearby ( e ) the electricians and the mechatronician have their own workshop separated with glass - walls from the rest of the MRO department . Within this room there are many cabinets for special spare parts and components for the work of the electricians . There is a workbench in the middle of the room where every electricians and the mechatronician has its own desktop - like area . In the area of ( f ) there are cabinets and shelves for screws and several small parts which are needed by all MRO members . 3 . 2 Existing Structures , Routines and IT Support To organize the different maintenance , repair and overhaul tasks in terms of internal cost allocation the observed MRO department uses a SAP - PM module ( SAP - Planned - Maintenance ) to manage each maintenance and repair task and process . In summary , there are 6 desktop - PCs in the maintenance workshop with TFT display , mouse , key - board and unrestricted Internet access . They are running a SAP - PM Client , a browser ( Internet - Explorer ) and unrestricted Internet access . Regarding the classification in section 2 . 1 the observed MRO work is divided in two different categories : Planned ( or Preventive ) maintenance ( PM ) and Reactive Maintenance ( RM ) . An example for PM - activities is the routinely performed calibra - tion of the injection moulding machines which is important for the accuracy and qual - ity of the products . These tasks are fully integrated within the production plan and structured by a step - by - step instruction which is part of each machine’s documentation . The head of the production coordinates these regular tasks together in cooperation with the head of the MRO . He constitutes teams of electricians and mechanicians ( 2 - 3 peo - ple ) and gives them the order when and where the calibration has to take place . The official process of dealing with an unplanned breakdown is organized as fol - lows : The operator of a machine recognizes failures or quality loss of the output of an injection moulding machine or she is not able to operate the machine anymore be - cause the machine stops and switches into an error state . Then she asks her fitter to 180 M . Betz help her solving the problem . If they are not able to fix the problem autonomously , the fitter calls the MRO department . The dispatcher registers the breakdown and clari - fies how urgent the machine is needed within the production plan . She creates a new repair task within the SAP - PM by typing a short description of the case , assigning a responsible MRO worker , estimating the effort in hours and printing out a documenta - tion - and time - sheet ( c . f . DIN - A4 sheets in Fig . 2 . 3 ) . After that , the dispatcher commits this sheet to the responsible maintenance worker . In urgent cases the mainte - nance worker has to interrupt her current task to directly start with fixing the actual breakdown . After she successfully finished her work , she has to do the documentation of the finished case . She has to use the time sheet to fill in the time needed , a short description of what she did , which spare parts she took from the store and finally has to sign for confirming the accuracy of the information . After that she hands back the complete time sheet to the dispatcher . The dispatcher enters the information from the sheet into the SAP - PM , orders spares removed from the store and finishes the task . The collected data is used later on to calculate the internal cost allocation and calcu - lating and anticipating the needed man - power of the MRO department . 4 The Observed Practice In the following we provide some observed examples of the complex work of diag - nosing , intervention and documentation which provides a good basis for identifying weaknesses and gaps in the current processes and gives an insight of the observed MRO work . Especially cooperative aspects around relevant objects and their locality and location during the diagnosis phase are taken into consideration . Consequently the documented cases focus on the “first - responding” like practice of RM within the MRO department - which is often embedded into PM activities . 4 . 1 Case 1 : “Just” a Broken Ventilator Grid A new repair - claim arrives at the MRO department . There is a broken ventilator grid at a machine from the vendor “Arburg” in KV1 . Due to some safety restriction it is not allowed to run the machine as long as it is not fixed . Therefore , the responsible fitter ( Mark ) from the production department calls the department and articulates a repair - claim . The dispatcher ( Paul ) creates a repair task in the SAP - PM and assigns it to an electrician ( Peter ) . Paul states that there are some grids left in the spare store . Peter walks to the machine and measures the broken grid to identify the right form factor and makes some notes in his personal diary . After that he walks into the spare store to get the right grid . After 10 minutes of searching Peter states that there are lots of grids but not one that fits . He then walks back to the machine and describes the problem to the fitter Mark . After that he calls the dispatcher Paul with his cordless telephone ( DECT ) . The dispatcher orders the missing spare part and states that is will arrive by no longer than the day after tomorrow , maybe earlier . Mark blocks the ma - chine in the production plan and alternates to another machine . In the meantime Peter receives a call from a colleague ( Josh ) who is working at another ‘Arburg’ machine in the ‘KV2’ which is 15 years old . Arriving at the machine the problem has reached another MRO worker - a mechanician ( Andy ) . He arrives at The Secret Life of Machines – Boundary Objects in Maintenance , Repair and Overhaul 181 the same time as Peter . Josh immediately starts to explain the problem with the han - dling . After this short introduction all three MRO workers in place try to reconstruct the complete repair history to figure out if there were similar cases in the past and who was responsible . During the discussion everybody points to several components of the machine , walk around it , watching the handling from different perspectives . After approximately 15 minutes of diagnosing and discussion Peter walks back to the MRO department to fetch the documentation of the machine . 10 Minutes later Peter is back from the MRO department . He had some problems finding the right folder with the documentation . Then , another electrician colleague named Kevin calls Josh . He has received a breakdown of the central drying facilities . Josh states that he has no time at the mo - ment to help with that . Josh asks Peter to walk down in the basement to help Kevin . After that Peter and Andy leave Josh to visit Kevin . In the basement - nearby the spare parts store - Kevin waits by the main drying unit of the KV1 . The drying unit is responsible to prepare the plastic granulate to transfer it from the delivery state into production state . The material has to be very dry ( dew point under - 60° Celsius ) to ensure high quality standards . He states that the head of production reported problems with some products ( bubbles and foam ) and the production data acquisition confirmed KV1 KV2 KV3 200m MRO STORAGE SPARE STORAGE ( basement ) open air storagearea e f g O F F I C E a b c d ( a ) office of MRO head ( b ) office of dispatchers ( c ) cabinet for machine documentation ( d ) mechanicians area ( e ) room of electricians , mechatronician ( f ) cabinets for small parts ( g ) fixture construction Fig . 1 . left : Area of the Automotive Plastics Inc . and detailed view on MRO department build - ing | right : . ( 1 ) Josh , cleaning cartridges ( 2 ) step - by - step instruction for a complete reset of the PLC found in a compartment for documents in the switchgear cabinet’s door . 182 M . Betz the suspicion of humid material . Humid material in a centralized material management could cause a complete stop of production in KV1 which has a deep impact on the just - in - time delivery to the customers . After a short discussion everybody recommends exchanging the heating elements of the drying unit . After fetching some new heating - elements from the store nearby Peter leaves the basement and goes back to the MRO department to have a break . After 10 minutes he calls Kevin , who is still in the base - ment . He figures out that Kevin seems to be still very nervous because after the heater element exchange the temperature of the drying unit does not increase but does not decrease as well - which is probably a good sign . After the call Peter makes some notes in his diary . He explains , that they have to document their work after completion and hand over the filled in time sheet to the dispatcher . But after the break he has to start working on a recalibration of a machine in KV2 and therefore he has no time to do the documentation work directly after the tasks . He states - while pointing on a stack of timesheets on his workbench - that he collects the time sheets until he has to work in the late shift . From his point of view , late shifts are not that busy . To recall the relevant information he takes some notes in his personal diary ( cf . Fig . 2 . 3 ) . He states that all his colleagues have the same strat - egy and some of them do not even make notes . Finally , Josh returns the MRO de - partment . He looks satisfied and reports correctly running handling at the “Arburg” . There was corrosion at a plug which hindered vertical movements of the handling . 4 . 2 Case 2 : Diagnosing a Machine - Breakdown A fitter from KV1 calls Josh directly at his phone without calling the dispatcher . Josh states that he knows him very well and he calls him regularly . He reports a breakdown of a machine from the vendor “Demag” . The fitter tries to explain the problem by describing the current state of the machine and the error - code prompted at the display . Josh quits the call by promising that he will come over to take a look at that . On the way to KV1 he meets the head of the department , Mr . Sheppard . He describes him the actual breakdown situation and the name of the machine . Mr . Sheppard has already heard from the new breakdown because he comes from KV1 . He states the case is trivial and easy to fix . He worked on the 12 year old machine several times and re - members the error pattern very well . The solution is to remove all cartridges of the PLC control unit , clean them and treat the contacts with a special spray . After that he should reboot the machine . It would work again “…like if it was new . ” Then , Josh meets the mechanician Andy and tells him about the new breakdown . Because Andy likes the older “Demag” machines in the park and Josh is much younger and works just half a year with the company he accompanies him on his way to the machine . The fitter is already waiting and begins to explain the current issue coupled with pointing at the display and recalling the situation in which the machine stopped working . Josh opens the switchgear cabinet and directly puts his head into it . He states that this is a typical way to identify fused electrical components . He smells nothing unusual and opens the doors of the cabinet completely . Meanwhile , Andy started to move the mould manually by switching the machine into the manual mode . He is irritated because nothing happens . He takes a look at the display and sees some error codes ( c . f . Fig . 2 . 1 / 2 / 4 . ) . The responsible fitter states that the error codes do not say that much about the state of the machine . The display The Secret Life of Machines – Boundary Objects in Maintenance , Repair and Overhaul 183 shows error codes all the time but works without any problems . Kevin passes by and asks if he could help . Josh shuts down the machine and starts to apply the workaround of Mr . Sheppard . After removing all cartridges ( c . f . Fig . 2 . 1 ) he figures out that one of them is darker than the others and smells a little bit smoky . After that Kevin , the fitter and Andy started a discussion about the breakdown his - tory of the machine and the proposed workaround of Mr . Sheppard . Andy is not sure if Mr . Sheppard has enough expertise and experience to make helpful suggestions . Josh joins the discussion and shows the probably fused cartridge . Kevin smells at it and is not sure if it is fused . Josh cleans it , uses the spray and puts all cartridges back into the PLC control . He calls the dispatcher and asks him if there is an appropriate replacement part in the store . The dispatcher is not sure , because this machine is rela - tively old compared with the rest of the park . Andy walks downstairs and tries to find a new cartridge . The fitter ( who is part of the production - and not of the MRO - department ) states that approximately one year ago a maintenance worker did a complete reset of the PLC unit . As far as he remembers , it was the head of the MRO , Mr . Sheppard . Kevin calls him and asked him about the reset . Mr . Sheppard remembers the reset and states that there is a paper with the instruction . But he is not sure where it is . He proposes to have a look into the documentation folder of the machine which resides in the related cabinet in the MRO department . Fig . 2 . ( 1 / 2 / 4 ) Diagnosis as a cooperative and discursive practice in place , with directly refer - encing to relevant objects between different experts ( mechanician in front and electrician behind ) | ( 3 ) A personal diary containing a list of tasks with the needed time in hours . Stacks of uncompleted time sheets in the MRO department . 184 M . Betz Kevin walks back from KV1 to the MRO department and starts to look for the right folder which takes some time . After he finds it he goes back to his colleagues and they start to search the folder for the sheet of paper . After 10 minutes of browsing the folder they surrender and Kevin calls Mr . Sheppard again . He promises to come around and as he joined the others he pointed to a compartment on the inner surface of the switchgear cabinet’s door ( cf . Fig . 1 . 2 ) . Mr . Sheppard tells everybody how this paper was created several years ago . The reset to factory defaults was not part of the original documentation of the machine . In those days , the instructions were dictated by an external service man via phone and written down with a typewriter . Mr . Sheppard is sure that the copy they found in the cabinet is the last copy the company has and he recommends making a new copy and putting it into the documentation folder . Josh starts immediately resetting the machine by following the step - by - step instructions . After that , the machine still displays error messages and does not work . The fitter points at the electro - static hydraulic - oil - filtering - device which is plugged into the machine . This is a PM task the fitters have to perform autonomously . He states that older PLCs sometimes crash if a filtering device is plugged into a machine . After the fitter has switched off the filtering device , Josh reboots the machine again . There is no error message anymore and the fitter installs the actual program again . The machine works normally , in automatic and manual mode . Josh and Andy go back to the MRO department and discuss the electrostatic effect on older PLCs . They state that this was definitely something new and a lesson learned . 5 Findings The descriptions of the two typical cases illustrate the complexity of the work in a MRO department in the addressed domain . In the following the model of a standard RM process is used as a basis to structure the observed MRO practice . Within each phase relevant groups of actors are identified . The analysis focuses on broken ma - chines on - site and their role as ‘Boundary Objects’ in the cooperative process of re - pair and overhaul ( c . f . [ 1 , 2 , 3 ] ) . From the findings implications for a design are intro - duced to provide a guideline to design information technology to support the coopera - tive MRO work around those Boundary Objects – involving the actual groups of interest and additional new groups in future . 5 . 1 Breakdown and Repair Claim Especially small and medium enterprises are social systems where people know each other very well . Hence , in case of a machine’s breakdown , there are different ways of getting help : the first and official way is calling the dispatcher . This strategy has a “fire and forget” character and the dispatcher is responsible to find the right mainte - nance worker . A dominant observed practice is directly calling somebody you already know . In this case the dispatcher does not know something about the breakdown , therefore , the time sheet has to be created and filled out afterwards . A similar way to get help is to ask a maintenance worker who walks by or works at another machine nearby . Repair claim and diagnosis is often an interwoven process . The diagnosis often starts during the phone call before the maintenance worker has reached the The Secret Life of Machines – Boundary Objects in Maintenance , Repair and Overhaul 185 defective machine because the responsible operator or fitter in - place starts to talk about the new case to isolate possible error sources . MRO workers avoid those situa - tions by quitting the calls . As observed in both cases MRO workers prefer to visit the machine and talk face to face and have look at the affected objects . In the early phase of breakdown and repair claim maintenance workers which are not directly involved often feel responsible for the actual case without an official assignment of the dis - patcher . If a maintenance worker needs help and has to act in time critical conditions , he seeks for the help of other maintainers without requesting it from the dispatcher . Therefore lots of repair claims also come directly from maintenance colleagues . Maintainers seek the help of those colleagues which seem to have the appropriate profession and / or experience to make a helpful contribution . They try to find out , which colleague has worked with the affected machine in the past . In summary , actors from various involved parties use the broken machine as a meeting - point for the discussion of possible reasons for and consequences of the cur - rent breakdown . This forms the stage for the next phase , the diagnosis . 5 . 2 Diagnosis The main diagnosis phase usually starts when the maintenance worker reaches the defective machine . Local actors like operators and fitters are important initial coun - terparts in early stages of the diagnosing process . Regarding the involvement of the different actors in place the isolation of the error source is a highly cooperative , crea - tive and improvisational practice . In all observed breakdown situations maintainers asked their direct colleagues and the responsible operators and fitters to have a look at the problem and to take part in a discursive diagnosing conversation . By observing and listening to the discussions it is noticeable that every observed discursive diagno - sis situation is based on the reconstruction of the past . The history of a machine seems to be very important for the isolation of the source of error . Maintenance workers experience that the older a machine is , the probability increases that the actual break - down happens before . Hence , discussions often are led by the challenge to reconstruct the ‘machines life’ . The discursive reconstruction is strongly connected to the physi - cal presence of the broken machine . This was observable in the integration of the machine’s parts into the discussion by pointing and touching . To increase the accuracy of the reconstruction it is very important to include other maintenance workers into the discussion - especially the older and more experienced . Relevant information is often hidden in aspects of what happened in the past around a particular machine and who was involved . It was never observed that a maintainer browsed the SAP - PM for reconstruction purposes which is caused by the weak docu - mentation ( as described later on ) . Especially older machines have a history which often blends over into a world of myths , e . g . stories about persons who are no more part of the team since years . In comparison to the effort of fixing a particular problem diagnosis work is very time intensive . Diagnosis work can tie up 3 persons for 30 minutes just for isolating the possible error source . Dependent on the profession , maintainers use all senses to isolate the possible defective component of a machine . Mechanicians mostly switch the machine into manual mode and move the mould back and forth . While doing this the listen to the sounds of pumps , gears and joints . They touch several components to feel the vibrations . Everything which seems to be 186 M . Betz uncommon is a possible source of error . Electricians often use their nose to smell if electrical components are fused ( cf . [ 15 ] ) . 5 . 3 Intervention It was observed that repairing is often an integral part of the diagnosis work . Looking at Case 2 , after isolating possible error sources the maintenance workers used spare parts and exchanged possible defective components to exclude possible error sources systematically . If the defective part is found the new part resides into the machine and the intervention is finished successfully . Therefore , spare parts play an important role in the intervention phase . The selection of the right spare part is determined by the spare part list which is part of the machine’s documentation folder . This paper based folder is an important abstraction of the concrete machine and often provides alterna - tive views on it . Due to their complexity and level of abstraction the construction plans of the machines are exclusively used by the MRO workers and are living docu - ments ; i . e . they are annotated by MRO workers during PM and RM activities . They are also used as boundary objects to support the communication and the collaboration between different professions within the MRO department . However , the documenta - tion folders are experienced as an inconvenient medium , hard to find and hard to browse . The use of the documentation folder sometimes is concurrent : the documen - tation folders in the MRO department are needed by different MRO members . The dispatcher needs the replacement spares list to order new parts if they were taken from the store . The maintenance workers need the documentation for PM activities like recalibrations and for diagnosing and intervention in RM . In this case sharing this paper based resource leads in a centralized storage in the MRO department which causes time intensive and exhaustive ‘legwork’ ( c . f . section 3 . 4 Documentation ) . 5 . 4 Documentation The documentation within the SAP - PM generated time sheets often is quite poor . Studying several hundred cases within SAP - PM reveals that more than 80 % of the documentation of the performed repair activities consists of only one sentence : “Main - tained and repaired . ” As observed in the first case the maintenance workers have a batching strategy of filling out the time sheets . One week between the performed task and its documentation is not unusual . From an analytical point of view there are several interdependent reasons for that phenomenon : The SAP - PM has a process - oriented structure . The time - and documentation - sheet has to be filled out at the end of a suc - cessful performed repair claim . As illustrated in the first case sometimes spare parts are not available from the store . In consequence , the MRO worker has to postpone finish - ing the task until the new part arrives . Only when he has got the parts and finished the task he is able to fill out the form on the sheet ( date and time of breakdown , time needed , date and time of finishing the task , used spare parts , affected machine , etc . ) . From a process perspective several repair tasks run in parallel for days which leads to a batch - strategy documented in the first case . Another reason is a motivational problem : maintainers have no direct benefit from providing a detailed documentation . The SAP - PM database is not comfortably searchable and the access to the database is only pos - sible by leaving the place of the defective machine or facility and walking back to the The Secret Life of Machines – Boundary Objects in Maintenance , Repair and Overhaul 187 MRO department . In consequence distances of walking from KV1 to the MRO de - partment and back can summarize up to 500m by walking . 6 Implications for Design From the different perspectives of the involved actors machines or any other equip - ment in the observed setting have two facets . First , from the perspective of the pro - duction department , machines are necessary resources for the production processes and need to be always up and running for reliable production planning in tight just - in - time logistics . That is , they act as an infrastructure for productive processes . On the other side , from a MRO perspective , machines , their ( spare ) parts and their abstract representations ( e . g . the construction plans ) are the centerpiece of consideration . They are not infrastructures for a particular purpose ; they are the artifact to work on . In that role they act as boundary objects by enhancing the coordination and communication between different stakeholders in breakdown situations . Star et al . [ 16 ] define ‘Boundary Objects’ as “… objects which are both plastic enough to adapt to local needs and constraints of the several parties employing them , yet robust enough to maintain a common identity across sites . They are weak struc - tured in common use , and become strongly structured in individual - site use . They may be abstract or concrete . They have different meanings in different social worlds but their structure is common enough to more than one world to make them recogniz - able means of translation . The creation and management of boundary objects is the key in developing and maintaining coherence across intersecting social worlds . ” Especially the diagnosis and isolation of defective parts is a highly cooperative and discursive task where the broken machine and its parts in certain places serve as physical meeting points for different involved groups of stakeholders . They are used as mental ‘drawing tables’ for information exchange between different groups in the organization and outside . All involved groups gather around them to exchange infor - mation about their experiences to make contributions to solve the current problem . Following this , machines and spare parts serve as boundary objects to enhance the development of a common understanding between all involved actors around a ma - chine breakdown . To enrich physical objects in the observed domain to emphasize their role as boundary objects in MRO work the following guidelines are derived from the findings . Support documentation work Documentation is an important basis to build up the breakdown history of each ma - chine , facility or infrastructure the MRO department probably has to deal with in future . In the current state the documentation work is experienced by the MRO work - ers as an extra workload , performed out of the concrete working context and - from the workers perspective - provides no benefit for the practice . However , as illustrated in case 2 , maintenance workers already use paper based handwritten notes to build up personal maintenance histories ( c . f . [ 17 ] ) . They are weak structured informal notes but never the less accessible and useful on - site . Referring to the introduced theoretical framework of boundary objects , the documentation history should be accessible for every involved actor in - situ . The actual documentation - work should be performed 188 M . Betz during all phases of intervention and the complete documentation history should be directly associated with the relevant objects . IT support should extend the relevant physical objects to provide a surface , plastic enough to enable every involved actor to express whatever they think is useful for others in the future . The challenge probably still is motivating the workers to document their work - especially if there is no direct benefit for them . As observed in the field , most of the MRO workers are motivated to document their work because they take advantage from those personal notes in future . ‘Publishing’ those notes and associating them to the objects could be an important first step . The motivational challenge could also be faced by partially automating the documentation of involved persons , used spare parts , date and time of the breakdown and the completion of the task . Ubiquitous computing technologies like autoID sys - tems could be used to identify involved actors and used spare parts around machines . Bridging between the machines and documentation To support maintenance workers finding relevant information repositories have to be searchable and browseable from the place where the action is : the defective machine or facility . As described in the both cases - especially during the diagnosis phase - the responsible MRO workers walk around the machines , point to relevant objects and try to reconstruct the breakdown history of the machine . In the current state of IT support the relevant information about the history of the machine is stored case by case and process - oriented in the SAP - PM system . MRO work is an object - oriented work ; strongly rooted in the physical , therefore a layer of ‘bookmarks’ providing a direct access to relevant information attached at the affected objects would be useful to improve the often speculative and error - prone diagnosing work of reconstructing the past . Those ‘markers’ or ‘hooks’ should be brought out by the MRO workers them - selves while they are coping with a breakdown situation because they have the ex - perience and the expertise to associate the right object with the relevant information . Provide access to local and remote experts The third and probably most important aspect is finding the right local experts who have the knowledge and experience to help in a particular breakdown situation ( cf . [ 18 , 19 ] ) . The identification and documentation of involved persons in certain break - downs is an important aspect of supporting indirectly the MRO worker’s work . Sup - port for finding the right colleague for a discussion about the current problem in the diagnosis phase is an important contribution for a more efficient and effective diagno - sis . Because the diagnosing phase is time consuming efficiency and effectiveness in this phase is a promising contribution to reduce downtime of production - critical ma - chines . To involve other potential stakeholders this locally created and stored infor - mation should be accessible from other places to enable MRO workers to browse the whole information space for similar or related cases in other places . In very compli - cated and persistent breakdowns it is also possible to enhance the cooperation with external experts , e . g . from a particular vendor , by giving them access to a machine’s history . In this case , the information space around augmented machines could also work as a boundary object to involve external experts and provide all relevant infor - mation about the history to them , too ( c . f . Fig . 3 ‘external actors’ ) . The Secret Life of Machines – Boundary Objects in Maintenance , Repair and Overhaul 189 MROhead operators fitters electricians MRO dispatchers MRO services machinevendorengineers mechanic - ians mecha - tronicians productionhead machinevendorR & D machines suppliers relatedmachines docu - mentation spareparts personalnotes MROhistories manage - ment capitalbudgeting productionplanning procure - ment qualitymanage - ment sparepartvendors external actors time - / docu - mentation - sheets Fig . 3 . Machines as boundary objects for supporting collaboration between related stakeholders in the organization of MRO and MRO related activities 7 Conclusion and Future Work The current IT support in the observed setting is too office - , process - and manage - ment - oriented to fulfill the information needs for the operative MRO workers . The observations reveal that RM activities are still an important part in MRO . In current research - especially against the background of the increasing application of embedded computing technologies - there are only few contributions which give prac - tical insights of this work and discussing them against paradigms of pervasive and ubiquitous computing . The enrichment of physical objects with embedded ubiquitous information technology has two key characteristics which are highly relevant in the addressed domain : First , relevant information moves in places where the need of information occurs - embedded into the existing practices . Second , the same informa - tion , created and explicated in - situ gets available independent from the location . The applied qualitative ethnographic methods revealed some important findings which lead to implications for design of IT support in the addressed domain . Regard - ing their special characteristics we propose the introduction of Ubiquitous Computing technologies to embed relevant information into the locally contextualized practice around objects on - site especially to support the cooperative and discursive reconstruc - tion of the breakdown history in - situ . Augmenting the physical objects in place could provide a plastic semi - virtual surface where maintainers and other involved groups exchange information . This would bring the defective machines into the role of boundary objects that mediate between all involved groups of actors in breakdown situations . Due to the limited observation time in - place and the limitations regarding the gathering of empirical data the next step is to build first design sketches and intro - duce them in the observed practice with the aim of gathering more data about this indeed very complex domain and to observe early signs of appropriation to inform the further design . E . g . autoID - technologies could be a first appropriate means to enable 190 M . Betz the MRO workers to annotate affected objects with links to information like involved persons , relevant spare parts and folders in the machine documentation cabinet ( cf . [ 2 , 3 , 4 ] ) . The next evolution of this approach will be the introduction of ad - hoc deploy - able and interconnected sensor notes to automatically gather additional information about a machine’s history like deviating vibrations and temperatures to both enhance the prediction of breakdowns and to support the reconstruction of the past . Further investigations have to consider if autoID systems and wireless sensor networks work in environments with lots of metal or if they sustain on temporally hot surfaces . References 1 . Phelps , A . F . , Reddy , M . : The influence of boundary objects on group collaboration in con - struction project teams . In : Proceedings of the ACM 2009 international conference on Supporting group work - GROUP 2009 , pp . 125 – 128 . ACM Press , New York ( 2009 ) 2 . Star , S . L . : The structure of ill - structured solutions : boundary objects and heterogeneous distributed problem solving . In : Distributed Artificial Intelligence , vol . 2 , pp . 37 – 54 . Mor - gan Kaufmann Publishers Inc . , San Francisco ( 1989 ) 3 . Lutters , W . G . , Ackerman , M . S . : Beyond Boundary Objects : Collaborative Reuse in Air - craft Technical Support . Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ) 16 ( 3 ) , 341 – 372 ( 2006 ) 4 . Orr , J . E . : Talking About Machines : An Ethnography of a Modern Job ( Collection on Technology and Work ) . Cornell University Press , New York ( 1996 ) 5 . Legner , C . , Thiesse , F . : RFID - Based Facility Maintenance at Frankfurt Airport . IEEE Per - vasive Computing 5 ( 1 ) , 34 – 39 ( 2006 ) 6 . Paz , N . M . , Leigh , W . : Maintenance Scheduling : Issues , Results and Research Needs . In - ternational Journal of Operations & Production Management 14 ( 8 ) , 47 – 69 ( 1994 ) 7 . Auramäki , E . , Robinson , M . , Aaltonen , A . , Kovalainen , M . , Liinamaa , A . , Tuuna - Väiskä , T . : Paperwork at 78kph . In : Proceedings of the 1996 ACM conference on Computer sup - ported cooperative work - CSCW 1996 , pp . 370 – 379 . ACM Press , New York ( 1996 ) 8 . Kovalainen , M . , Robinson , M . , Auramäki , E . : Diaries at work . In : Proceedings of the 1998 ACM conference on Computer supported cooperative work - CSCW 1998 , pp . 49 – 58 . ACM Press , New York ( 1998 ) 9 . Lampe , M . , Strassner , M . : The Potential of RFID for Moveable Asset Management . In : Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on Ubiquitous Computing , Workshop on Ubiquitous Commerce . Springer , Heidelberg ( 2003 ) 10 . Lampe , M . , Strassner , M . , Fleisch , E . : A Ubiquitous Computing environment for aircraft maintenance . In : Proceedings of the 2004 ACM symposium on Applied computing - SAC 2004 , pp . 1586 – 1592 . ACM Press , New York ( 2004 ) 11 . Carlile , P . R . : A Pragmatic View of Knowledge and Boundaries . Organization Sci - ence 13 ( 4 ) , 442 – 455 ( 2002 ) 12 . Martens , A . , Hambach , S . , Lucke , U . : Multi - perspective Cooperation Based on Boundary Objects . In : 2009 Ninth IEEE International Conference on Advanced Learning Technolo - gies , pp . 476 – 478 . IEEE , Washington ( 2009 ) 13 . Glaser , B . G . , Strauss , A . : The Discovery of Grounded Theory : Strategies for Qualitative Research . In : Aldine Transaction , Piscataway , NJ , USA ( 1999 ) 14 . Strauss , A . : Work and the Division of Labor . The Sociological Quarterly 26 ( 1 ) , 1 – 19 ( 1985 ) The Secret Life of Machines – Boundary Objects in Maintenance , Repair and Overhaul 191 15 . Suchman , L . : Embodied Practices of Engineering Work . Mind , Culture , and Activity 7 ( 1 ) , 4 – 18 ( 2000 ) 16 . Star , S . L . , Griesemer , J . R . : Institutional Ecology , ‘Translations’ and Boundary Objects : Amateurs and Professionals in Berkeley’s Museum of Vertebrate Zoology , 1907 - 39 . So - cial Studies of Science 19 ( 3 ) , 387 – 420 ( 1989 ) 17 . Luff , P . , Heath , C . , Greatbatch , D . : Tasks - in - interaction : paper and screen based documen - tation in collaborative activity . In : Proceedings of the 1992 ACM conference on Com - puter - supported cooperative work , pp . 163 – 170 . ACM , New York ( 1992 ) 18 . Pfeffer , J . , Hinds , P . : Why Organizations Don’t “Know What They Know” : Cognitive and Motivational Factors Affecting the Transfer of Expertise . In : Ackerman , M . , Pipek , V . , Wulf , V . ( eds . ) Sharing Expertise : Beyond Knowledge Management , pp . 3 – 32 . MIT Press , Camebridge ( 2002 ) 19 . Reichling , T . , Veith , M . : Expertise sharing in a heterogeneous organizational environment . In : Gellersen , H . , Schmidt , K . , Beaudouin - Lafon , M . , Mackay , W . ( eds . ) Proceedings of the ninth conference on European Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work , pp . 325 – 345 . Springer , New York ( 2005 )