HYLE – International Journal for Philosophy of Chemistry , Vol . 6 ( 2000 ) , 5 - 15 . Copyright (cid:211) 2000 by HYLE and Giuseppe Del Re . Models and analogies in science Giuseppe Del Re Abstract : Science makes extensive use of models , i . e . simplified or idealized representations of the systems found in the physical world . Models fall into at least two categories : mathematical and physical models . In this paper , we focus attention mainly on the latter , trying to show that they are essential tools not only of the scientific description of the world ‘out there’ , but of man’s cogni - tion of things , especially things not directly accessible to the senses . The spring - and - ball ( SB ) model of chemistry is a most instructive example of a physical model . In other disciplines , from cosmology to physiology , models are used that are of the same kind or play the same role . It is concluded that physical models are objects which belong to the world accessible to man’s di - rect experience , often constructed ad hoc and possibly idealized . They serve as referents for analogies , which appear to be indispensable in most aspects of scientific theorizing , especially for the understanding of the submicroscopic levels of reality . Keywords : models , analogies , idealization , truth , molecular spring - and - ball models . 1 . Models in chemistry and in other sciences 1 . 1 A concrete case : the spring - and - ball model Let us briefly examine , first of all , the nature and meaning of the stick - and - ball model of a molecule , or its improved form , the spring - and - ball ( SB ) model . This is an extension of the sphere model of the atom and of the mass - point model of elementary particles . As discussed in a previous paper , 1 the basic explanatory concept of chemistry , molecular structure , is defined in terms of the SB model , developed from an idea of Kekulé going back to 1858 . The question “does a molecule have a structure ? ” should be answered as fol - lows : “a molecule has a structure in the sense that it has a property analogous to the structure of its SB model . ” The explanation of the observed spectro - scopic bands as due to transitions between vibrational states , and the Born - Oppenheimer proof 2 that quantum mechanics is compatible with the SB 6 Giuseppe Del Re model proves the validity of statements on molecules based on the assump - tion that the latter behave essentially – i . e . with respect to their geometrical and mechanical properties – as if the SB model a chemist has on his desk were a faithful magnification ( roughly a hundred million times ) of a molecule . This analogy is the origin and justification of the introduction of structure and shape as characteristic molecular properties . Chemistry , therefore , shows how far analogical thinking is entrenched in science . Analogy in general is not a simple notion ; in this case , however , its meaning is clear : the geometrical and mechanical properties of the macro - scopic model are assumed to match closely ( though not completely ) the properties of the corresponding real molecule . 3 The SB model of chemistry thus provides a concrete example of thinking by analogy in science , and hence a good starting point in a general study of models . 1 . 2 The role of models in science It is not an overstatement that a sapient use of models is the essential trait of Galilean science . Galileo himself used what three centuries later Einstein called Gedankenexperimente to establish the foundations of mechanics ; 4 and those idealized experiments may be treated as taking place in a world that closely matches those features of reality which science can study . It seems legitimate to say that the name ‘physical models’ applies to the objects of which this ideal world is made . The objects in question were originally just limiting cases of objects and processes in the world which we perceive direct - ly in typical Gedankenexperimente ; but in contemporary science they can be representations , such as our five senses can perceive or our imagination can shape in our minds , of those real entities that are too small or too big or too complex for direct observation . In these cases they are not referents for a critical analysis of the laws governing concrete situations and processes ; they are as it were the representatives of the objects of study before the court of human reason . In this perspective , a reflection on models in science is a chapter of any study on the relation between sensible reality and the procedures by which science derives knowledge about it . Let us admit that models are the tools of scientific thinking : physical models are tools of descriptive analogical think - ing , mathematical models at large are the tools of argumentative analogical thinking . 5 But what exactly does the term ‘tool’ mean in this case ? This is no easy question , because , as the SB model shows , at least physical models have different functions depending on whether one is studying the world of our ordinary experience or the submicroscopic world . To find an answer we have to examine the nature of scientific truth taking the ontological structure of sensible reality into account . In plain words : if the statements of science con - Models and analogies in science 7 cern models , how can they be expected to disclose the truth about what lies ‘out there’ , i . e . what appears to be independent of the observer’s will and wishes ? 6 2 . True statements in science 2 . 1 Examples , images , and truth judgments The current , largely intuitive view is that a scientific statement is true , in principle at least , either because it is logically derived from the fundamental laws of nature or because it matches observed facts . However , if use is made of analogies , both physical and logical , what justifies the belief that scientific statements concern reality ? A schematic answer is that one should distin - guish between different degrees of truth . This has been well known since an - tiquity , but the rise of empiricism and analytical philosophy has impaired the philosophical memory of our culture . The famous ( and infamous ) classifica - tion of things into genera , species , etc . implies the use of limited truths . The statement that a diatom is a microscopic unicellular animal can be qualified as true provided , ( a ) , the meanings of the terms used , e . g . what is an animal , are clearly known ; ( b ) , it is implied that all there is to know about a diatom is contained in those terms . Similarly , the statement that a gas in a container with a mobile wall responds to increases in external pressure by reducing its volume does not describe entirely the behavior of a real system , but it is true under the agreement that there are no other perturbations , that friction can be neglected , and so on . Let us thus grant that , in order to be true , a statement need not match re - ality in all its aspects , relations , and / or details , but has to match it only as far as it goes . This consideration applies both to scientific concepts and to rela - tions between them . The difficulties begin at this point . When a zoologist thinks of the term ‘animal’ , does that evoke any picture in his imagination ? This question should be turned to the psychologists , but it will suffice here to answer that when thinking of an animal at least some people do imagine a lion , a bee , an amoe - ba , so as to visualize those properties which make them animals , ignoring at the same time those which are specific of their class , order or minor subdivi - sions . The ‘ignoring’ here can be an extremely fast and subconscious process , but even ordinary people know by observation on their children that this combination of a concrete image with an abstraction process is learned in tender age . 8 Giuseppe Del Re The fact that physical models provide images is a reasonable explanation for the extensive use of models in science . If this is granted , why should we waste more time in working towards a precise definition of models , in con - trast with the current opinion that definitions are not necessary ? Why not try to understand what models are just by means of examples , in accordance with the practice of modern education ? The answer can be given in two points . First , ‘understanding by examples’ can only be considered sufficient by people not familiar with introductory mathematics , where that view is shown to be limited to negative assertions . Secondly , there has been a decline of the belief that science is the only way to knowledge of a reliable kind . This trend is good in itself , but it is lia - ble to go too far , and make scientists lose confidence in their work . It would seem that the only defensive measure is to bring to light the scope and limits of scientific ‘truths’ , by making explicit a number of tacit beliefs till now im - plicit in scientific thought . Now , an important unexpressed belief is that models are ‘tricks’ used during the preliminary stages of research , and that science should reach beyond them . If this belief is mistaken , and models are indispensable tools , or indeed built - in features of the scientific enterprise , then it becomes indispensable that we should know how to use them . It thus appears that a clearer understanding of models is worthwhile . In order to proceed in this direction , we must consider how science arrives at ‘truth’ , and in what sense the scientists qualify their statements as true . 2 . 2 Truth and understanding The paradigms of science are paths towards the intellection of facts . As a metaphor for this , Galileo spoke of “reading the Book of Nature” . This met - aphor – although suggested to Galileo by the custom of relying on real books by honored Masters 7 – was well chosen , for ‘intellection’ comes from Latin inter - legere , ‘to pick among’ . Now , legere also means ‘to read’ , and reading a message so as to be able to communicate its content is an excellent illustra - tion of the process of understanding . The output of a scientific study , in fact , consists in judgments constructed in terms of appropriate concepts from the analysis of data . The judgments and the concepts are said to be formalized , meaning that at the conscious level they are expressed in a language , and they become ‘propositions’ or ‘statements’ which must then be tested for their truth value : if they are false , they are rejected as not being knowledge . 8 In practice – though seldom at a philosophical level – the statements fall - ing within the realm of science are said to be true if they are : ( a ) correctly derived from ( or at least consistent with ) principles and other premises ; ( b ) faithful to reality . Models and analogies in science 9 Condition ( a ) is necessary ( cf . end of this section ) for the statements of sci - ence to be true , but it is not sufficient , unless the premises are true in sense ( b ) . Those premises , however , are the ‘laws of nature’ , which are hypotheses so satisfactory that scientists treat them as unquestionable , but are generali - zations , and hence cannot be proven experimentally . Even such a fundamen - tal principle as the conservation of energy is all the time sub judice . 9 There - fore , strictly speaking , the only sufficient condition for a truly scientific statement is ( b ) , whereas ( a ) is only a necessary condition . Then two ques - tions arise : • Is science a set of statements true in sense ( a ) ? • Are the statements of science susceptible of tests for truth in sense ( b ) ? It would seem that in either case the answer is negative , unless the terms ‘true’ and ‘truth’ are carefully qualified , essentially because the statements of science are the output of a special information processing . This processing is guided by two simplifications : ( i ) , it selects patterns of events by ignoring details and fluctuations ; ( ii ) , it treats as identical real entities which differ on - ly by ‘accidental’ details . An example is the statement that ammonia and hy - drochloric acid react to give ammonium chloride : HCl + NH 3 ﬁ NH 4 + Cl - The meaning and validity of this equation are easily tested experimentally ; for example , if an open bottle of household ammonia is placed close to an open bottle of household hydrochloric acid , fumes of ammonium chloride will be seen to form above the bottles . Therefore , it should be considered scientifi - cally true . In fact , however , it is subject to three limitations at least : • it refers to pure substances , and the substances actually used are not pure ; • it does not contain information on the time evolution of the process ; • it does not describe the details of the actual experiment . The equation under consideration thus applies to a ‘model world’ , and only in that world do questions 1 and 2 above under consideration apply . The exam - ple of ammonia and hydrochloric acid thus provides an illustration of the claim that scientific knowledge obtained depends on models in two ways – in the processing of factual information and in the assessment of the truth - value of the resulting statements . The entities and processes referred to in science are not entities and processes as such , but suitable idealizations , which may be called ‘models’ and ‘model processes’ , respectively . Therefore , in point ( a ) above , which concerns the logical status of scientific statements , the expres - sion ‘other premises’ should include in particular the criteria and limits of va - lidity of the analogies on which the statements of science rest ; in point ( b ) , 10 Giuseppe Del Re faithfulness to reality , the proviso should be added that faithfulness is re - quired within the limits imposed by the models used . 3 . Reality according to science 3 . 1 Ontological structure of sensible reality Let us say it again : the physical world according to science is not the real world ; it is a world that matches faithfully those features of reality which sci - ence can study , but lacks the variable details which make each instance of our experience of reality unique ; a world in which all surfaces are perfectly smooth , all horses of a type or sort are identical to one another , all pure ben - zene bottles contain but molecules of benzene , and so on . It would seem that science works with a ‘a world of shadow types’ , a copy of the world of sensi - ble experience in which only standard objects ( types ) are admitted , and those types are as it were shadows of the individual objects or beings which they represent . 10 It is nevertheless quite a rich world , because several types are of - ten assigned to a particular object of the real world – just think of horses from the points of view of a race - horse breeder and a zoologist – ; but in it , for example , there is no type for my horse Thaumasios . As mentioned , it seems that one acceptation of the term ‘model’ in science applies to the shad - ow types under consideration . Horses and other objects or beings of the same size belong to the world accessible to our direct experience . However , science is also concerned with objects and processes that are not directly perceived by our senses . In what sense , if any , are they reduced by science to models or phantoms of what they really are ? We have already an idea of the answer from the SB model ( Sect . 1 . 1 ) . To make that idea more explicit we have to examine briefly the ‘ontological structure of sensible reality’ . This rather formal expression ap - plies to the result of an attempt to describe reality as an ordered collection of objects and beings – entities – of different sizes , degrees of complexity , ac - cessibility to observation . Let us consider an example discussed by Heidegger : 11 a tree in full bloom standing before us on a meadow . Is the tree real ? Or is it only a collection of nuclei and electrons suspended as it was in emptiness ? The latter question is answered positively by physicalistic reductionism , but on further reflection , it appears to be untenable . As we have tried to show in a previous paper , 12 a tree is a collection of particles , but it is not just that ; because it is the actual - ization of one system out of the huge number of systems those particles can Models and analogies in science 11 make up . The tree is also a collection of cells and dead material ; it is a collec - tion of leaves and branches and roots , and it is a tree , indeed a blooming tree , with its colors and its pleasant smell . Examples of this sort suggest a general view of what ‘to exist’ means that is unconceivable in a physicalistic frame of mind . According to this view , the physical world consists of objects ( physical systems ) more or less independ - ent but clearly distinguishable from one another . Concrete examples of those objects , roughly in descending size order , are : - an intergalactic gas cloud , the Sombrero galaxy ; - the red giant star Betelgeuse , the planet Mars ; - the Pacific ocean , the Himalaya mountains range ; - the ecosystem of Easter Island , the Schwarzwald , a whale ; - an oak , a human being , the heart of a lion , a bee ; - a microscopic mite , a diatom , a cell of an anatomical tissue ; - a DNA molecule , a carbon dioxide molecule , a hydrogen atom ; - a photon , a neutron . These objects belong to different fields of inquiry in Bunge’s sense , 13 and are therefore studied by different disciplines . Those in italics belong to the DA ( direct access ) level of reality , because man can see , touch , smell , hear ( and sometimes taste ) them in their entirety ; they are perceived by man as such . 14 Careful examination of the list above will give the reader a feeling for the nature of the ‘size ladder’ of material reality ; that ladder , which seems at first sight to extend from infinity to infinity , was the object of Pascal’s famous reflection on ‘the two infinities’ . 15 Before the DA objects , large objects are listed whose entire reality cannot be perceived by all our senses , if at all . Even in the case of a familiar object such as a mountain one can easily realize that for us to see it as a whole it must be so remote that we cannot touch it , and vice versa . A star is only per - ceived as a shining point , or not at all . As to the objects listed after those which belong to the DA level , a mite or a cell can only be examined visually with a microscope , and cannot be de - tected by touch . A molecule cannot even be seen by simple magnification , because it is smaller than the wavelength of visible light ; so that what we call an ‘image’ obtained , say , by scanning tunnel microscopy is a theoretical con - struction based on the formal similarity between matter waves and light waves . Even when an image can be obtained with light , it is actually based on an analogy , albeit a very close one . The varying theory - dependence of our knowledge of material entities too large or too small for man’s direct access – and the resulting problems with the nature of our ‘perception’ of them – sug - gest that we should attribute to material reality a layer structure from the point of view of intelligibility . This level structure may or may not have an 12 Giuseppe Del Re ontological import , but it is essential for the ‘existence judgments’ which sci - ence is expected to pronounce . The size levels ( or layers ) should not be confused with another aspect of the structure of reality , namely complexity . Each object or being in the uni - verse only belongs to one size level , whereas different complexity levels are simultaneously present in any given object . Moreover , objects such as a mi - croscopic mite and a whale belong to the same level of reality on the com - plexity scale and are by far more complex than a star : despite their difference in size they are studied by the same discipline – zoology . In short , complexity is another feature of reality according to which entities should be classified and disciplines distinguished . We have discussed it elsewhere in connection with chemistry , 16 and shall not pause on it here , because all that is needed about levels of reality in connection with models has been said above . The major inference to be drawn is that , since man has no direct perception of a large majority of the objects which science has detected in the physical uni - verse , his knowledge is based on analogies with ad hoc objects , possibly artifi - cial , as is the case with the SB model of molecules . 3 . 2 About analogies and metaphors In support of the above remarks , we recall the points raised in Sect . 2 . 1 , namely that , in the vast realm of perception and thought , analogies with di - rect sensible experience are much more important than people usually think . They lie at the very roots of the terms used to express abstract concepts and processes , for those terms were created by ‘metaphors’ , i . e . analogies with physical operations . 17 For example , when we say that ‘we grasp an idea’ we unwittingly use two metaphors . First , we imagine that our mind is like a man stretching out his hand and closing his fingers on an object that is the idea ; second , we treat the idea as a shape which we see with our inner eyes ( ‘idea’ in Greek means primarily ‘shape’ , ‘outer aspect’ ) . Similarly , when we say that we ‘express’ something , we use a metaphor , for the Latin verb ‘ exprimere ’ , from which ‘to express’ comes , means ‘to squeeze out . ’ These examples show , if need be , that , although the etymological roots of words are seldom present in our minds , even speculative thinking has its roots in the everyday sensible experience . According to historians , even mathematics began with concrete , visualiz - able problems ; and there are grounds for believing that formulas are visual - ized by the mathematicians for their minds to work on , even in transfinite mathematics . However that may be , in the sciences of nature visualization ( and sometimes association with other sensations , like sounds ) plays a fun - damental role , not only as regards creativity but as regards understanding . Models and analogies in science 13 If – and to the extent to which – this is so , it implies that the categories of our direct - access level of reality are those which we use for understanding objects and processes belonging to size and ( perhaps ) complexity levels far remote from that level . This is why those models which are representations at man’s DA level of material objects not directly accessible are indispensable tools of science . 3 . 3 Analogical models We can now restate what we already saw about the fundamental model of chemistry . Atoms and molecules belong to a size level of reality whose ob - jects cannot be perceived by our senses . Man’s familiarity with wheat , sand , flour , and his ability to imagine a succession of smaller and smaller sizes even beyond what he actually observes suggest the conjecture that matter is made of tiny indivisible particles which we call ‘atoms’ ( Greek for ‘objects that cannot be cut into smaller pieces’ ) . The chemists make that conjecture into the fundamental hypothesis that molecules have a specific property called structure . From that hypothesis , they start the enterprise of disentangling observations and partial inferences about chemical transformations . Let us denote by R the real size level of an object , by DA man’s direct - access level , by M - DA a physical model belonging to the DA level . The pro - cedure under consideration can then be schematized as follows : - atoms are assumed to exist ( R ) ; - they are visualized as tiny spheres ( M - DA ) ; - the elements are assumed to be made of identical atoms ( DA ) ; - pure substances are defined in terms of the elements ( DA ) ; - molecules are introduced ( R ) ; - they are assumed to be groups of atoms ( R ) ; - they are visualized as clusters of spheres ( M - DA ) ; - isomers are discovered ( DA ) ; - the clusters are replaced by edifices of spheres ( M - DA ) ; - molecular structure is defined by analogy ( R ) . Molecular structure , as defined , is then used to explain chemical transfor - mations , with the help of further guesses and tests , observations and infer - ences . 4 . Conclusion The above scheme completes our argument about physical models in science . Let me conclude with a brief recapitulation . 14 Giuseppe Del Re We recalled at the beginning that the word ‘model’ can be used for a mathematical model , already discussed by other authors , and for a physical model , which appeared to require further reflection . A brief examination of the SB model of molecules confirmed the claim that science studies an ideal - ized copy of reality , and suggested that we should therefore explore the role of idealizations and analogies in our endeavor to apprehend and comprehend reality . Idealizations ( reduction to standard types ) provide analogies used in science to cope with difficulties arising from those details which make each perceived object unique . Reality beyond the thresholds of direct perception is apprehended by means of analogies constructed ad hoc , namely with very special , often artificial systems , real or imaginary , belonging to our direct ac - cess level of reality . This led us to focus our attention on these physical or ‘analogical’ models and their relation to reality . Physical models thus serve a double purpose : they allow scientists to ig - nore inessential details of entities belonging to the ordinary environment of man without dismissing their collocation on space and time ; and they provide counterparts in that same ordinary environment of entities not immediately accessible to the five senses of man . To grasp the ontological significance of models of objects lying beyond our direct perception , from galaxies to elec - trons , layers or ‘levels’ of reality corresponding to size and to complexity should be considered . There is a size level of reality which can be perceived by man with his five senses ; it may be called ‘man’s direct - access’ ( DA ) level . It turns out that our knowledge , including abstract thinking , is based on analogies with material objects or processes at the DA level . Ad hoc objects ( ‘models’ ) at the DA level supporting analogies for objects not directly acces - sible to our senses are essential tools of scientific thinking . Notes 1 G . Del Re : ‘The Ontological Status of Molecular Structure’ , Hyle – An Interna - tional Journal for the Philosophy of Chemistry , 4 ( 1998 ) , 1 - 23 . 2 M . Born , J . R . Oppenheimer : ‘Zur Quantentheorie der Moleküle’ , Annalen der Physik , 84 ( 1927 ) , 457 - 84 . 3 Of course , the results of a calculation of the vibrational properties of a molecule will usually match the observed vibrational frequencies only if the parameters are chosen in the proper way . This is consistent with the fact that the theory is based on an analogy . 4 For example , when he established Galilean relativity , by considering flies in a ship in perfect uniform motion . 5 For mathematical models , cf . the survey by Salvo D’Agostino , Sandro Petruccioli ( eds . ) : Mathematical Models and Physical Theories , published as a reprint from : Rendiconti dell’Accademia Nazionale delle Scienze detta dei XL ( Rome ) , serie V , Models and analogies in science 15 vol . IX , parte II , 1985 , pp . 65 - 198 . The general question of mathematics vs . de - scription in terms of visualizations was treated by Henri Poincaré : La science et l’hypothèse ( 1902 ) , Paris , Champs - Flammarion , 1968 ; cf . G . Del Re : ‘Poincaré et le mécanisme’ , Philosophia Scientiae ( Nancy ) , 1 ( 1996 ) , spec . issue 1 , 55 - 69 . 6 Although for our present purposes this intuitive description of realism is suffi - cient , there would be much to add in the frame of a general theory of thought and perception . The Kantian critique to essentialism and the difficulties which it raised in connection with realism is well known to everybody since secondary school . 7 Il Saggiatore ( 1623 ) , Ed . Naz . Op . Galileo , Firenze , Barbèra , 1896 , vol . VI , p . 235 . 8 This is a cursory mention of the view on science adopted for this study , and is not intended to dispose of the numberless studies on scientific knowledge published in this century . 9 Henri Poincaré , op . cit . , p . 148f . 10 A . S . Eddington , The Nature of the Physical World ( 1935 ) , London , J . M . Dent & Sons , Everyman’s Library , 1947 , pp . 5 - 10 and passim . Note that Eddington was writing when science was assumed to coincide with physics . 11 Martin Heidegger , Was heißt Denken ? – Vorlesungen des Wintersemesters 1951 - 52 , Stuttgart , Reclam , 1992 , pp . 25 - 29 . Cf . A . S . Eddington , loc . cit . 12 Del Re , ‘On the ontological status … ’ , op . cit . 13 Mario Bunge : ‘Is Chemistry a Branch of Physics ? ’ , Zeitschrift für Allgemeine Wis - senschaftstheorie , 13 ( 1982 ) , 209 - 223 . 14 Strictly speaking , only the objects that man can handle belong to the DA level ; but the separation we are trying to establish has a somewhat fuzzy border , and , as the reader certainly sees , it is not worthwhile to try to be more precise . 15 Blaise Pascal , Pensées ( ca . 1660 ) , ed . by Louis Lafuma , Paris , Éd . du Seuil 1963 , pp . 199 - 72 . 16 G . Del Re : ‘Chemistry and Complexity’ , in : G . Costa , G . Calucci , M . Giorgi ( eds . ) , Proceedings of the Third International Symposium on Conceptual Tools for Understanding Nature , Singapore , World Scientific 1997 , pp . 153 - 164 ; cf . also works by the same author already cited . The complexity levels are very close to what N . Hartmann called Seinsschichten ( layers of reality ) . This was pointed out in connection with chemistry by J . Schummer : Realismus und Chemie , Würzburg , Königshausen & Neumann , 1996 . Independently from Hartmann ( and perhaps in a less systematic form ) , also S . Alexander proposed around 1920 a layer structure of reality . 17 A great merit of Heidegger was precisely that he brought this point to the fore - front of philosophical thought . It is unfortunate that the recent dramatic decline of classical studies has caused a loss of feeling for the original values of most phil - osophical words , which is slowly but steadily spreading from the Anglo - Saxon world to the Latin and the German countries . Giuseppe Del Re : Cattedra di Chimica teoretica , Università di Napoli ‘Federico II’ , Via Mezzocannone 4 , I - 80134 Naples , Italy ; G . Delre @ agora . stm . it