This article was downloaded by : [ 217 . 112 . 157 . 7 ] On : 04 July 2016 , At : 03 : 25 Publisher : Institute for Operations Research and the Management Sciences ( INFORMS ) INFORMS is located in Maryland , USA Organization Science Publication details , including instructions for authors and subscription information : http : / / pubsonline . informs . org Organizational Adaptation in Offshoring : The Relative Performance of Home - and Host - Based Learning Strategies Christian Geisler Asmussen , Marcus M . Larsen , Torben Pedersen To cite this article : Christian Geisler Asmussen , Marcus M . Larsen , Torben Pedersen ( 2016 ) Organizational Adaptation in Offshoring : The Relative Performance of Home - and Host - Based Learning Strategies . Organization Science Published online in Articles in Advance 20 Jun 2016 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1287 / orsc . 2016 . 1060 Full terms and conditions of use : http : / / pubsonline . informs . org / page / terms - and - conditions This article may be used only for the purposes of research , teaching , and / or private study . Commercial use or systematic downloading ( by robots or other automatic processes ) is prohibited without explicit Publisher approval , unless otherwise noted . For more information , contact permissions @ informs . org . The Publisher does not warrant or guarantee the article’s accuracy , completeness , merchantability , fitness for a particular purpose , or non - infringement . Descriptions of , or references to , products or publications , or inclusion of an advertisement in this article , neither constitutes nor implies a guarantee , endorsement , or support of claims made of that product , publication , or service . Copyright © 2016 , INFORMS Please scroll down for article—it is on subsequent pages INFORMS is the largest professional society in the world for professionals in the fields of operations research , management science , and analytics . For more information on INFORMS , its publications , membership , or meetings visit http : / / www . informs . org Organization Science Articles in Advance , pp . 1 – 18 ISSN 1047 - 7039 ( print ) (cid:151) ISSN 1526 - 5455 ( online ) http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1287 / orsc . 2016 . 1060 ©2016 INFORMS Organizational Adaptation in Offshoring : The Relative Performance of Home - and Host - Based Learning Strategies Christian Geisler Asmussen , Marcus M . Larsen Department of Strategic Management and Globalization , Copenhagen Business School , 2000 Frederiksberg , Denmark { cga . smg @ cbs . dk , mml . smg @ cbs . dk } Torben Pedersen Department of Management and Technology , Bocconi University , 30125 Milan , Italy , torben . pedersen @ unibocconi . it O ffshoring offers managers the promise of substantial economic beneﬁts , but also comes with the risk of increased complexity and coordination challenges . We argue that offshoring ﬁrms must accumulate architectural knowledge to keep the cost of coordination of the geographically separated activities at bay . Based on a simulation model that examines the performance implications of ﬁrms’ learning strategies when offshoring , we show that such knowledge accumulation can be achieved through either a home - based or a host - based learning strategy . Our analysis suggests that the relative performance of these two strategies depends on nontrivial interactions among the costs of communication , the distance to the offshoring location , and the level of noise in the ﬁrm’s performance function . In particular , the difﬁculties of interpreting performance signals in noisy situations suggest that there are beneﬁts of making changes to the conﬁguration after the offshoring implementation ( host - based learning ) . In contrast , when coordination costs and distance dominate , the strategy of gearing the organization for offshoring prior to separating them across country borders prevails ( home - based learning ) . Thus , by formalizing these two learning strategies for acquiring architectural knowledge in offshoring , we show that important contingencies can lead to signiﬁcant performance trade - offs in the search for new organizational conﬁgurations that span international borders . Keywords : adaptation ; offshoring ; architectural knowledge ; coordination cost ; noisy search History : Published online in Articles in Advance . Introduction As much as the beneﬁts of offshoring have attracted a large number of multinational ﬁrms to relocate busi - ness activities to distant locations , the strategy has also introduced managers to difﬁcult dilemmas . In particular , it has been noted that ﬁrms’ value chains are subject not only to centrifugal forces encouraging geographic dispersion , but also to centripetal forces that encourage colocation of related activities ( Baldwin and Venables 2013 ) . Accordingly , many ﬁrms struggle to reap the economic returns from offshoring without getting over - whelmed by the complexity of coordinating dispersed activities across vast distances ( Contractor et al . 2010 , Larsen et al . 2013 , Srikanth and Puranam 2011 ) . To shed light on this issue , we explore the performance implica - tions of organizational adaptation when offshoring . The extensive research on organizational adaptation has demonstrated that changing technologies and envi - ronments force boundedly rational problem solvers to engage in an adaptive search for satisfactory solutions to complex problems ( Cyert and March 1963 , Gavetti 2005 , Levinthal 1997 , Levinthal and March 1981 , March and Simon 1958 , Nelson and Winter 1982 ; see also Online Appendix 1 , available as supplemental mate - rial at http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1287 / orsc . 2016 . 1060 , for an overview ) . However , as recent research shows , the ways in which ﬁrms actually engage in such processes is unclear ( Baumann and Siggelkow 2014 , Fleming 2001 , Winter et al . 2007 ) . In particular , the answer to the ques - tion of when ﬁrms should initiate adaptive search pro - cesses when they are faced with uncertainty regarding integration of separated ( but interdependent ) activities and the added coordination requirements across distance is not straightforward . Given that the literature streams on offshoring and adaptation remain largely disjointed , extant research provides little guidance on this question . In an attempt to bridge these two literature streams and provide a more complete picture of how ﬁrms adapt their organizations in an international context , we build a simulation model that allows us to analyze the per - formance implications of different learning strategies in relation to offshoring . We embed our argument in the observation that the structure of ﬁrms’ search pro - cesses has important performance effects ( Baumann and Siggelkow 2014 ) and focus on how ﬁrms accumulate architectural knowledge to accommodate for the added coordination requirements associated with offshoring . Hence , we emphasize that ﬁrms reconstructing their organizations in a new international setting must gain architectural knowledge regarding the interfaces within a 1 D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 217 . 112 . 157 . 7 ] on 04 J u l y 2016 , a t 03 : 25 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . Asmussen , Larsen , and Pedersen : Organizational Adaptation in Offshoring 2 Organization Science , Articles in Advance , pp . 1 – 18 , ©2016 INFORMS system of complex , causally ambiguous , and imperfectly understood tasks , processes , and organizational routines . We investigate the performance implications of two generic learning strategies that ﬁrms may employ in their approach to offshoring . First , ﬁrms can pursue a host - based learning strategy , in which they initiate the accumulation of architectural knowledge only after a relocation has taken place . Thus , ﬁrms pursuing this strategy adapt their conﬁgurations to the technological landscape on the basis of their actual offshoring experi - ence . Second , ﬁrms can follow a home - based learning strategy through which they initiate the accumulation of architectural knowledge prior to the actual offshoring of activities . In these cases , ﬁrms accumulate architectural knowledge by experimenting with different conﬁgura - tions while the activities are still located in the home country . When these ﬁrms begin to offshore , they can utilize this knowledge for effective adaptation in the new location . Received wisdom on the importance of “being pre - pared” would seem to favor the home - based approach . By engaging in deliberate planning and due diligence prior to offshoring ( see Ansoff et al . 1970 , Puranam et al . 2006 ) , ﬁrms can gear their organizations to handle the coordinative challenges of offshoring . However , in our simulation , this intuition is not necessarily supported . On the one hand , we ﬁnd that a home - based learning strat - egy is often associated with higher performance than a host - based learning strategy when distances and commu - nication costs are high . As the costs of coordinating an international organization across geographical distances rise , ﬁrms can beneﬁt from accumulating architectural knowledge prior to an international reconﬁguration . As such , the beneﬁts of “being prepared” outweigh the costs of such up - front investments . On the other hand , as the noise in the search function increases , we ﬁnd that the host - based learning strategy becomes associated with higher performance than the home - based learning strat - egy . Noise—resulting from the uncertainty of the tech - nologies being relocated—makes it difﬁcult for ﬁrms to estimate the impact and consequences of an organi - zational reconﬁguration prior to its implementation . In such situations , ﬁrms may invest in accumulating archi - tectural knowledge before the offshoring event , only to ﬁnd that the acquired knowledge does not reﬂect the actual coordination challenges in the globally dispersed organization . With this article , we contribute to the extant litera - ture by applying the concept of organizational adapta - tion in the context of offshoring . In addition to building on extant , formal models of adaptation by acknowledg - ing the roles of distance , noise , and opposing learn - ing strategies , we extend the research on offshoring and the global distribution of work by stressing the impor - tance of coordination costs and the need to accumu - late architectural knowledge . While extant research on internationalization has often focused on the degree to which ﬁrms must adapt their strategies to serve local requirements ( Lord and Ranft 2000 , Makino and Delios 1996 , Siegel and Larson 2009 ) , we suggest that ﬁrms face a paradox when deciding to reconﬁgure internation - ally . More speciﬁcally , we argue that deliberate plan - ning and due diligence ( Ansoff et al . 1970 , Puranam et al . 2006 ) through home - based learning may lead to performance - deteriorating trajectories . In this regard , our results echo those presented by Szulanski and Jensen ( 2006 , 2008 ) , who studied the performance effects of a replication strategy ( “copying exactly” ) versus a local adaptation strategy when internationalizing . A key point of their research is the necessity of acknowledging the distinction between the adaptation of spatial dimensions ( related to the accumulation of local market knowledge ) and the adaptation of organizational dimensions ( simi - lar to accumulating architectural knowledge ) . However , while they focus on the immediate trade - off between pursuing architectural knowledge ( replication ) and local market knowledge ( local adaptation ) , we focus on the issue of adaptation in offshoring given the complexi - ties of disaggregating an interdependent organization and relocating tasks and subcomponents to foreign locations . Thus , in the context of noise , the difﬁculties of interpret - ing performance signals suggest that there are beneﬁts of making changes in the conﬁguration in the host loca - tion . In contrast , in the context of coordination costs and distance , it makes sense to gear the organization for off - shoring prior to separating them across country borders . In the following , and before introducing our theoret - ical background and the model itself , we discuss the dilemma inherent in offshoring adaptation through an illustrative case study of product development in Nokia Denmark ( a Danish research and development ( R & D ) subsidiary of the Nokia Corporation ) . Adaptation in Offshoring : The Case of Product Development in Nokia Denmark 1 The primary activity of Nokia Denmark in the early 2000s was the development of new mobile - phone mod - els , including every aspect of mechanics , electromechan - ics , electronics , and software . Nokia Denmark possessed all of the competencies needed to move a new mobile phone from the initial speciﬁcation to ﬁnal production . The development process included designing the speciﬁ - cations of a new mobile phone , working with suppliers , and preparing the phone for production , after which the entire project was transferred to a production site for mass - market production . Nokia Denmark had conducted many development projects over the years , and it followed the standardized process as shown in Figure 1 . The various activities were organized according to ﬁve milestones that could only be reached if an assigned committee approved the develop - ment . PD0 marks the initiation of the product program , D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 217 . 112 . 157 . 7 ] on 04 J u l y 2016 , a t 03 : 25 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . Asmussen , Larsen , and Pedersen : Organizational Adaptation in Offshoring Organization Science , Articles in Advance , pp . 1 – 18 , ©2016 INFORMS 3 Figure 1 Nokia Product Development Product - portfolio planning Product development Product maintenance Roadmapping Conceptmapping PD2 : Manufacturing release PD3 : Delivery release PD4 : Product dev . determination PD1 : Product development release P0 P4 P2 P1 P3 Product maintenance Rampdown PD1 notes the product - development release ( i . e . , full functionality of the product ) , PD2 indicates the manufac - turing release ( i . e . , full performance of the product ) , PD3 notes the delivery release ( i . e . , ready for the market ) , and PD4 represents the determination of product devel - opment ( i . e . , handover to product maintenance ) . Each of these cycles typically took around one year . One Nokia product development manager explained the process as follows : Concept mapping focuses on creating a lot of different ideas and ﬁnding the ones with most promise . Product development is basically maturing what we have at that point—a concept . Product maintenance aims at keeping the product alive and integrating different components . We have divided the process into these parts , as each phase requires different competences and mindsets . Offshoring to China . On average , Nokia Denmark conducted around eight mobile - phone development projects running in parallel . However , in 2007 , the man - agement of Nokia Denmark decided to begin offshoring parts of the process to China , where they were to be handled by Foxconn , a major multinational electron - ics component manufacturer . Nokia Denmark decided to offshore two of the parallel development projects , while retaining around six projects in Denmark . The move was motivated by a desire for cost savings and by the fact that Foxconn had supplied electronics components to Nokia for a number of years . As such , the two compa - nies already had a relatively high degree of integration . The intention of the collaboration was that the Dan - ish organization would be responsible for development of the advanced parts of new mobile phones , while the Chinese organization would focus on more standardized parts , such as the molding and ﬁtting of plastic com - ponents . Speciﬁcally , the responsibility for the product - development phase ( PD1 – PD4 ) was relocated to China , while product portfolio management and product main - tenance were still handled in Denmark . Consequently , the entire development function was reconﬁgured from being exclusively located in Denmark to become dis - persed , with interdependent tasks split between Denmark and China . Adaptation Challenges . Nokia’s Danish management team had little experience in offshoring knowledge - intensive and technologically sophisticated activities across such vast distances . Therefore , it had little archi - tectural knowledge on how the offshored activities could best be re - integrated into the product - development pro - cess . The company had hoped that the foreign activities would be largely self - manageable and require minimum intervention . However , the management quickly learned that the critical interfaces between concept mapping and product maintenance in Denmark on the one hand and product development in China on the other pre - sented substantial coordination challenges . In particular , safeguarding against misinterpretations and misbehavior required substantially more coordination than initially expected . According to a Nokia manager , We started out with mechanics and plastic parts in China because the Chinese had the competencies and could , therefore , govern themselves . However , we quickly came to the conclusion that this did not really work . It required too much management overhead and it did not really free up any resources . We were still sitting here reviewing the drawings to see if they had done them properly and checking that the test results were good enough . Therefore , although the architecture may have been effective while all of the activities were located in Den - mark , the decision to relocate certain activities to China gave rise to new coordination challenges for manage - ment . For example , while the crucial interdependencies could originally be coordinated through relatively infor - mal mechanisms , such as face - to - face meetings , the off - shoring move required new architectural knowledge and the introduction of alternative mechanisms that could accompany the new conﬁguration . Consequently , the Danish management began to experiment with different architectural solutions , such D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 217 . 112 . 157 . 7 ] on 04 J u l y 2016 , a t 03 : 25 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . Asmussen , Larsen , and Pedersen : Organizational Adaptation in Offshoring 4 Organization Science , Articles in Advance , pp . 1 – 18 , ©2016 INFORMS as disaggregating the value chain in different ways , standardizing the interdependencies , and implement - ing new coordination mechanisms . For example , Nokia Denmark’s management learned that frequent meetings and task monitoring were vital for ensuring that the products were developed as expected . They also realized that it was necessary to transfer substantially more infor - mation to China on the interfaces inherent in the mobile phones . Consequently , the Danish management decided to assign eight full - time Nokia Denmark employees to follow and monitor the offshored projects , which were handled by 30 to 50 engineers in China . The Nokia employees arranged weekly video conferences to discuss the status of each project as well as speciﬁc techno - logical and organizational challenges or alterations that might have arisen . Moreover , the partners met in either Denmark or China every six to eight weeks . In addi - tion , Nokia began altering the conﬁguration by assigning more technical responsibilities to China . Nokia Denmark soon learned that the original intention of handling the mechanical and plastic parts in China and technical opti - mization in Denmark was far too costly in terms of coor - dinating the interfaces between the activities . Therefore , management decided to transfer parts of these activities to China . In terms of the terminology introduced earlier in this article , Nokia Denmark’s approach to the offshoring process can be categorized as an example of host - based learning . Along these lines , one Nokia manager commented the following : It is really learning by doing . Nokia is kind of a “cow - boy” company . We plunge into things , muddle our way through and eventually become wiser . There is not much design in the things we do . We go out and try , and then we adjust . Nokia Denmark was well experienced in conduct - ing development projects domestically . However , it embarked on the offshoring process rather abruptly with - out acknowledging the likely challenges of international coordination . In this respect , it is interesting to explore whether Nokia Denmark would have been better off if it had diligently attempted to map out the coordina - tive challenges of offshoring prior to the implementation ( i . e . , a home - based strategy ) . Thus , this illustrative case gives rise to our central questions : How do ﬁrms adapt to technological landscapes in an international context ? What are the performance implications of different adap - tion approaches ? Theoretical Background Firms engage in offshoring for a number of reasons , including a desire to access low - cost labor , talent , and markets ( Manning et al . 2008 ) . For example , Nokia Den - mark’s decision to offshore product development was largely driven by cost considerations . Evidently , the pur - suit of offshoring strategies has been a proliﬁc adventure for many ﬁrms ( e . g . , Dossani and Kenney 2003 ) . How - ever , research also ﬁnds evidence of hidden or unex - pected offshoring costs and challenges that make the practice less beneﬁcial ( Dibbern et al . 2008 , Larsen et al . 2013 , Stringfellow et al . 2008 ) . The geographical relocation of activities can generate major organiza - tional changes that may not only undermine previously coherent ﬂows of knowledge and communication , but also force additional investments into costly coordination efforts ( e . g . , Jensen et al . 2013 , Srikanth and Puranam 2011 ) . When activities are colocated , ﬁrms may rely on informal coordination mechanisms as daily chal - lenges can be solved in a face - to - face manner ( Allen 1977 , Storper and Venables 2004 ) . However , as activi - ties become geographically dispersed , the opportunities for building collegial social environments and com - mon ground due to less communication and shared context are undermined ( Srikanth and Puranam 2011 ) . For example , after offshoring parts of its activities , Nokia was forced to experiment with new conﬁgura - tions that could accommodate the unexpected coordina - tion challenges between Denmark and China . Accordingly , to address the magniﬁed coordination costs of offshoring , we stress that ﬁrms must engage in local adaptive search to understand the technologi - cal landscapes underlying their international organiza - tions ( see , e . g . , Ethiraj and Levinthal 2004a , Rivkin and Siggelkow 2003 ) . A technological landscape describes the structure and interdependencies of ﬁrms’ underly - ing microactivities—such as component design , product production , product assembly , and marketing—and rep - resents the “true underlying structure of the system of interdependent choices” ( Ethiraj and Levinthal 2004b , p . 162 ) . Thus , the purpose of adaptation is to reconﬁgure elements in ﬁrms’ organization to match the underlying technological landscape . The closer the match between the organizational conﬁguration and the technological landscape , the better the ﬁrms’ utilization of its resources and , thus , its performance ( Levinthal 1997 ) . In this respect , successful adaptation requires knowl - edge about the individual organizational activities that constitute the technological landscape and how those activities can best be integrated into an organizational system . In the literature , this “architectural knowledge” ( Baldwin and Clark 2000 , Brusoni and Prencipe 2006 , Ethiraj and Levinthal 2004a , Henderson and Clark 1990 ) is deﬁned as an “understanding of how the components of a system are related to each other” ( Puranam et al . 2012 , p . 420 ) . Henderson and Clark ( 1990 ) , for exam - ple , refer to architectural knowledge as consisting of knowledge about the different components underlying a distinct system ( i . e . , product technology ) and knowl - edge about how those components are integrated into an orchestrated systemic whole . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 217 . 112 . 157 . 7 ] on 04 J u l y 2016 , a t 03 : 25 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . Asmussen , Larsen , and Pedersen : Organizational Adaptation in Offshoring Organization Science , Articles in Advance , pp . 1 – 18 , ©2016 INFORMS 5 To understand the performance implications of acquir - ing architectural knowledge in offshoring we explore two distinct learning strategies : a host - based learning strategy and a home - based learning strategy . First , a ﬁrm can commence the adaptation process after the activities have physically been offshored , as in Nokia Denmark’s case . In such cases , the ﬁrm commences an adaptive search for organizational conﬁgurations based on the technological landscape , but it does not do so until it encounters the actual costs of offshoring . This strategy allows the ﬁrm to avoid up - front invest - ments in accumulating architectural knowledge during the onsite transition phase , as it only accumulates archi - tectural knowledge through experiential learning . As ﬁrms encounter the actual challenges of offshoring , they become better able to understand how to adapt to those challenges and thereby enhance performance . Along these lines , studies by Szulanski and Jensen ( 2006 , 2008 ) on the international expansion of franchise projects in which exact copies of the existing template turn out , at least initially , to be the best performing strategy indicate that adaptation before internationalization is less beneﬁ - cial . Therefore , this approach is supportive of research that views offshoring as a learning - by - doing process ( e . g . , Jensen 2009 , Manning et al . 2008 , Maskell et al . 2007 ) and , more broadly , the view of emergent strategies ( Mintzberg and Waters 1985 ) . We refer to this strategy as a host - based learning strategy . Second , a ﬁrm can accumulate architectural knowl - edge prior to the actual offshoring by employing differ - ent measures to improve its understanding of how it can best adapt to the technological landscape appearing after offshoring . In other words , ﬁrms can use the disposable time before the physical relocation , while the activities are still colocated , to experiment with different adapta - tion possibilities . This may involve experimenting with the reconﬁguration of activities in distinct but colocated units to understand the roles and functions of the activ - ities to be offshored and how those activities are inter - connected . This strategy of due diligence , or “strategic planning” ( Ansoff et al . 1970 , Puranam et al . 2006 ) , is in accordance with the literature suggesting that ﬁrms with explicit , corporatewide strategies for offshoring gener - ally experience better performance ( e . g . , Massini et al . 2010 ) . Henceforth , we refer to this type of strategy as a home - based learning strategy . In comparing these learning strategies , we seek a bet - ter understanding of the performance implications of the ﬁrms’ adaptive efforts in offshoring . In this respect , we focus on three speciﬁc contingencies relevant to the offshoring context : the level of coordination costs , distance , and noise in the adaptive search processes . First , because ﬁrms must devise appropriate mecha - nisms of communication to ensure efﬁcient coordina - tion in an interdependent organization , we note that the costs of using different communication measures can vary considerably ( Allen 1977 ) . Such mechanisms may range from informal , more cost - intensive , people - based mechanisms to formal , more cost - effective information mechanisms . Thus , we account for the variance in the marginal costs of devising the necessary communication and decisions among organizational members to com - plete work jointly or individually across or within orga - nizational boundaries ( e . g . , Galbraith 1973 , Thompson 1967 , Zhou 2011 ) . Second , as we saw in the Nokia case , a key conse - quence of offshoring is that the distance introduced has an impact on the coordination challenges ( Kumar et al . 2009 , Niederman et al . 2006 , Srikanth and Puranam 2011 ) . For example , when its activities were colo - cated in Denmark , Nokia could rely more on infor - mal coordination to ensure joint action . However , after offshoring , Nokia was forced to invest in new coordi - nation mechanisms based on travel , personnel rotation , and socialization—the costs of which are largely pro - portional to the physical distance between the units . Employees at geographically dispersed locations may have few opportunities to engage in informal , face - to - face coordination , and they may ﬁnd themselves forced to rely on less effective technology - based coordination mechanisms ( Allen 1977 , Cummings and Kiesler 2007 , Storper and Venables 2004 ) . Project teams may ﬁnd it more difﬁcult to build collegial social environments and common ground ( Clark and Brennan 1991 , Kraut et al . 1990 ) , and may instead opt for what Siegel and Larson ( 2009 ) term “ﬂexible intermediate adaptation” to uphold and increase performance . Therefore , while prior models of adaptation have not explicitly addressed the impact of geography , we focus on explicitly on dis - tance and its impact on the challenges of coordination . Although we acknowledge the multidimensional nature of distance ( e . g . , Berry et al . 2010 ) , our focus on the geographical dimension is motivated by fact that it is likely to be a particular problematic type of distance for offshoring ﬁrms , because it is directly associated with key sources of coordination costs including travel time and cost ( Asmussen and Goerzen 2013 ) . Moreover , geo - graphical distance can be seen as a proxy for other types of distance , since offshoring to physically distant loca - tions often brings with it a cultural and institutional ele - ment as well ( as in the Nokia case above ) . Finally , because offshoring eventually implies the relocation of technologies to foreign locations , we focus on the impact of technological uncertainty and the resulting noisy performance signals it produces ( e . g . , Fleming 2001 , Knudsen and Levinthal 2007 , Lant and Mezias 1990 , Levinthal 1997 , Lounamaa and March 1987 ) . Speciﬁcally , the uncertainty associated with the relocated technologies—coming from factors such as demand ﬂuctuations ( Storper 1996 ) and technological changes ( Teece and Pisano 1994 ) —creates noise that D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 217 . 112 . 157 . 7 ] on 04 J u l y 2016 , a t 03 : 25 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . Asmussen , Larsen , and Pedersen : Organizational Adaptation in Offshoring 6 Organization Science , Articles in Advance , pp . 1 – 18 , ©2016 INFORMS may impact the processes of adaptation in a signiﬁ - cant manner ( e . g . , Denrell and March 2001 , Nelson and Winter 1982 , Sommer and Loch 2004 ) . In the Nokia case , the rapid evolution of technologies in the mobile - phone industry meant that the performance - related sig - nals arising from altered conﬁgurations were obscured by noisy performance signals . In contrast , a company operating in an industry characterized by stable sup - ply and demand and low technological uncertainty—an example could be the cement industry—would be less exposed to noise . Notably , noise can create errors in per - ceiving or interpreting experience ( Lounamaa and March 1987 , Lant and Mezias 1990 , Miner and Mezias 1996 ) . For example , in their simulation study of ﬁrm adaption , Denrell and March ( 2001 , p . 533 ) argue that “Noise generates errors in the feedback on which adaptation is based and produces failures ( eliminations ) and successes ( survivals ) that are arbitrary relative to the true poten - tials at the time . ” Similarly , Lounamaa and March ( 1987 , p . 118 ) , emphasize that “Since noise has a greater impact on performance than any single change in the control variable , the search for a good value for the coordina - tion factor becomes a random , highly unstable , process with an outcome worse than any reasonable ﬁxed level of coordination . ” Following this logic , we henceforth use the term “noise” to refer to the degree of technological uncertainty inherent in the focal relocated technology . The Model We develop a model that allows us to simulate and investigate ﬁrm adaptation in the context of offshoring ( see Online Appendix 2 for associations to similar mod - els ) . In the model , the ﬁrm faces a ﬁxed , exogenous technological landscape and chooses its conﬁguration of activities against this landscape , assigning and reassign - ing various activities to different organizational units . To illustrate , after the relocation of its product - development function to China , Nokia began to experiment with the geographical composition of engineers assigned to product - development projects with the purpose of man - aging the coordinative challenges . We assume that the company initially has no architectural knowledge as all activities were previously colocated and coordinated informally , but that such knowledge is necessary once it embarks on offshoring . To introduce and execute our model , the following characteristics are speciﬁed : ( a ) the underlying technological landscape ; ( b ) a function introducing the key parameters of ﬁrm performance , including coordination costs , the compounding effect of distance , and the impact of noise ; ( c ) a description of the two different offshoring learning strategies ﬁrms may employ for adaptation ; and ( d ) the contingencies for the simulation , including the value parameters and their rela - tionship to the offshoring context . 2 The Technological Landscape A ﬁrm’s technological landscape includes information on whether its activities are interdependent and there - fore need coordination . Without loss of generality , we assume 100 activities in our model . The structure of the interdependencies in the technological landscape is not completely random , as activities can often be grouped according to their natural interdependencies . For exam - ple , one can assume that the subactivities within Nokia’s product portfolio planning ( e . g . , road and concept map - ping ) and product development ( e . g . , product develop - ment , manufacturing , and delivery release ) activities are more tightly coupled together than the two groups of activities are interlinked with each other ( the interde - pendency represented by P0 in Figure 1 ) . To capture this idea , we assume that the landscape consists of two larger “natural modules” in which activities 1 – 50 belong to Module A and activities 51 – 100 belong to Module B . This structure is initially unknown to the ﬁrm’s decision makers , but its performance impact can be exposed over time through experimental learning . We deﬁne the tech - nological landscape’s degree of modularity ( x ∈ (cid:54) 0 (cid:49) 1 (cid:55) ) as the extent to which the interdependencies between activities occur within , rather than across , Modules A and B . With no modularity (cid:52)x = 0 (cid:53) , activities are not only interdependent on other activities within the same module , but also ( and equally strongly ) on activities in the other module . Hence , there is no obvious way for the ﬁrm to group its activities into two units . With full modularity (cid:52)x = 1 (cid:53) , each activity is only interdependent on other activities within the same module , and the mod - ules are thus attractive candidates for such a grouping . We model the extent to which a pair of activities are interdependent on each other as a binominal outcome ( 0 (cid:49) 1 ) , which is determined in our model by the proba - bility p ij = xM ij + 12 (cid:52) 1 − x(cid:53) , where M ij = 1 if activities i and j are in the same natural module ( in other words , both are in A or both are in B ) and 0 otherwise . Hence , the higher the x , the more modular is the landscape . 3 The derived technological landscape with its predeﬁned interaction structure remains constant over time in each individual run of the model . Modeling Performance in the Context of Offshoring Managers make adaptation choices regarding the struc - ture of activities with respect to each activity’s assign - ment to an organizational unit and , thus , its location ( at home or abroad ) . Unlike the ﬁxed technological land - scape , adaptation efforts are endogenous to the decisions of managers . At any given time , there is no guarantee that the conﬁguration of activities in the ﬁrm’s units reﬂects the grouping implied by the natural modules ( although the ﬁrm’s coordination costs will be lower if it does ) . Therefore , the purpose of accumulating architec - tural knowledge is to understand the technological land - scape to ensure efﬁcient adaptation . We assume the ﬁrm D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 217 . 112 . 157 . 7 ] on 04 J u l y 2016 , a t 03 : 25 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . Asmussen , Larsen , and Pedersen : Organizational Adaptation in Offshoring Organization Science , Articles in Advance , pp . 1 – 18 , ©2016 INFORMS 7 is able to reassign and relocate any activity except for a subset consisting of activities 1 to E ( with 0 < E < 50 ) , which are locked in unit 1 in the home country and can - not be offshored . Our assumption is that these E activ - ities are locally embedded in the home country—e . g . , key R & D activities that are closely linked to domestic universities , specialized skills present in the domestic labor force , or tasks central to the ﬁrm’s core competen - cies . Furthermore , we assume this is known by the ﬁrm’s managers who will therefore keep them in the home country . 4 In contrast , the rest of the activities ( activities E + 1 to 100 ) can be considered “footloose” in the sense that they can be placed freely either at home or abroad . Based on the ﬁrm’s conﬁguration of activities into the two units at a given point in time , we model per - formance at that time as the result of a constant rev - enue stream ( denoted by R ) , from which we subtract the costs of production ( P ) and the costs of coordination ( K ) , both of which are determined by the activity con - ﬁguration . Finally , to capture noise , we add a normally distributed stochastic term ( (cid:152) ) with a mean of 0 and dif - ferent degrees of standard deviation (cid:52)(cid:145)(cid:53) . Performance is thus given by (cid:143) = R − P − K + (cid:152)(cid:48) ( 1 ) Production costs are deﬁned as P = A H P H + A F P F , where A H is the number of activities currently performed at the home location and A F the number of activities performed at the foreign location , and P H is the pro - duction cost of one activity at home and P F the pro - duction cost abroad . We assume that the activities can be conducted at a lower cost abroad ( P F < P H (cid:53) because this is a key reason to offshore in the ﬁrst place . To model coordination costs , we assume that a marginal coordination cost ( k ) is incurred for every activity pair that is linked by interdependencies . We assume that the cost of coordinating two activities between two units is higher than the cost of coordination within the same organizational unit , even if these two units are located in the same country . As seen with Nokia Denmark prior to offshoring , as activities within each unit may share common inputs , and as each unit may develop its own tacit knowledge , informal communication styles , formal communication channels , and value systems , coordina - tion within a unit is easier than coordination between units . Thus , the coordination of intraunit activities can be based on common ground and knowledge to a greater extent than the coordination of interunit activities , which relies more on costly ongoing communication ( Srikanth and Puranam 2011 ) . Formally , this can be expressed as k LW < k LB , where L refers to local coordination , and W and B refer to within a unit and between units , respec - tively . For simplicity but without loss of generality , we set k LW = 0 in the model , but assume that k LB > 0 . We model the compounding effect of distance on coordination by assuming that k LB < k IB , where I rep - resents the marginal coordination costs associated with international activities , so that there is a hierarchy of coordination costs : k LW = 0 < k LB < k IB . We set k IB = (cid:52) 1 + D(cid:53)k LB and let D > 0 capture the impact of geo - graphical separation on coordination costs . Hence , D can be interpreted as the geographic distance between the home base and the offshoring location and its impact on coordination costs , and the higher the distance , the higher the coordination cost penalty is incurred by the ﬁrm . Given these assumptions , the total cost of coordi - nation is determined by the number of local interunit ( N LB ) and international interunit ( N IB ) interdependen - cies , where the number of activity pairs with interde - pendencies ( N ) is multiplied by the marginal costs of coordination ( k ) for each type of interdependency . For - mally , this can be written as K = N LW k LW + N LB k LB + N IB k IB = (cid:52)N LB + N IB (cid:52) 1 + D(cid:53)(cid:53)k LB (cid:48) ( 2 ) Finally , our modeling of noise ( with the term (cid:152) in Equation ( 1 ) ) is similar to prior research that seeks to understand the impact of noise or unforeseeable uncer - tainties on adaptive search behavior ( e . g . , Denrell and March 2001 , Levinthal 1997 , Nelson and Winter 1982 , Sommer and Loch 2004 ) . For example , in his original model , Levinthal ( 1997 , p . 946 ) explores the implica - tions of “noisy search” by including an error term in the performance function . Similarly , Denrell and March ( 2001 ) subject ﬁrms’ learning trials and competitive - selection processes to random errors to better capture the precision of adaptation . Therefore , by including a stochastic term in the performance equation , we assume that ﬁrms face noise that is conceptually different from the uncertainty of not possessing the architectural knowl - edge required for successful adaptation ( but related , as it makes it more difﬁcult to obtain such knowledge ) . The combination of the above assumptions about the technological landscape and the performance of the ﬁrm enables us to rigorously capture a core dilemma of offshoring—the trade - off between production and coor - dination costs—and makes it clear why architectural knowledge is such a valuable asset in the ﬁrm’s efforts to solve this dilemma . To see this , note ﬁrst that the ﬁrm incurs 0 international coordination costs , but sub - stantial production costs ( 100 P H ) if it does not offshore . In contrast , if it offshores all of its ( 100 − E ) “footlose” activities , it incurs much lower production costs ( EP H + (cid:52) 100 − E(cid:53)P F ) but also higher international coordina - tion costs ( 12 E(cid:52) 100 − E − xE(cid:53)k LB (cid:52) 1 + D(cid:53)(cid:53) . 5 However , if the ﬁrm has acquired knowledge about its technolog - ical landscape , it would be able to place its activities according to their modular linkages , so that one unit D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 217 . 112 . 157 . 7 ] on 04 J u l y 2016 , a t 03 : 25 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . Asmussen , Larsen , and Pedersen : Organizational Adaptation in Offshoring 8 Organization Science , Articles in Advance , pp . 1 – 18 , ©2016 INFORMS coincides with natural Module A ( activities 1 – 50 ) and another one with natural Module B ( 51 – 100 ) . The lat - ter unit can then be offshored , resulting in intermediate levels of both coordination costs ( 1 (cid:49) 250 (cid:52) 1 − x(cid:53)k LB (cid:52) 1 + D(cid:53) ) and production costs ( 50 (cid:52)P H + P F (cid:53) ) . This results in superior overall performance when there is a balance between centrifugal forces ( in our model , the cost sav - ings of P H − P F ) and centripetal forces ( the international coordination costs of k LB (cid:52) 1 + D(cid:53)(cid:53) , as captured by 2 / (cid:52)x(cid:52) 50 + E(cid:53) + E − 50 (cid:53) < (cid:52)k LB (cid:52) 1 + D(cid:53)(cid:53) / (cid:52)P H − P F (cid:53) < 1 / (cid:52) 25 (cid:52) 1 − x(cid:53)(cid:53)(cid:48) ( 3 ) Intuitively , Inequality ( 3 ) implies that the ratio of international coordination costs to production cost sav - ings is within an intermediate range , reﬂecting the rival - ing importance of both of these factors to offshoring ﬁrms , as emphasized earlier and demonstrated by empir - ical studies ( Ferreira and Prokopets 2009 , Larsen et al . 2013 ) . Modular offshoring then provides an attractive way to strike a balance between these opposing forces , but can be achieved only if the ﬁrm possesses sufﬁcient architectural knowledge to identify the technological interdependencies between its activities . This reinforces the importance of understanding how ﬁrms explore and adapt to the structure of the technological landscape , and thus how they obtain architectural knowledge to begin with , a process that is the focus of our simulation . Two Learning Strategies for Accumulating Architectural Knowledge We model the knowledge acquisition process as taking place over H discrete time periods ( rounds ) denoted t ∈ (cid:54) 1 (cid:49)H(cid:55) , with the offshoring event itself occurring at an intermediate time period t = T , with 1 < T < H . The ﬁrm’s performance in a given round , as described by Equations ( 1 ) and ( 2 ) , constitutes the objective function that the decision maker continuously aims to improve by incrementally adapting the conﬁguration of the ﬁrm’s activities , thereby accumulating learning about the tech - nological landscape . On the basis of the two strategies portrayed earlier , we construct two learning scenarios : one in which the ﬁrm commences its search for a conﬁg - uration already before the offshoring event at time T ( the home - based learning strategy ) and one in which the ﬁrm only begins its search after offshoring ( the host - based learning strategy ) . Hence , in the home - based scenario , the ﬁrm uses rounds t ∈ (cid:54) 1 (cid:49)T − 1 (cid:55) prior to offshoring to learn about the technological landscape and continues this learning process in the time period after offshoring , t ∈ (cid:54)T + 1 (cid:49)H(cid:55) , building on the architectural knowledge obtained in the ﬁrst period . In the host - based scenario , the ﬁrm acquires no knowledge prior to offshoring , but begins to pursue a learning - by - doing approach in the time period after offshoring , t ∈ (cid:54)T + 1 (cid:49)H(cid:55) . Initial Activity Split and Subsequent Learning Algo - rithm . At the outset of the simulation , all of the ﬁrm’s activities are included in one organizational unit located in the home country , implying that no coordination costs are incurred . However , the ﬁrm splits its activities into two equally large units either in preparation for the off - shoring event at time 1 ( in the home - based learning strat - egy ) or as part of the offshoring event at time T ( in the host - based strategy ) . It makes subsequent modiﬁcations to this initial activity split in an attempt to improve upon it . In terms of notation , we deﬁne unit 1 as the unit that resides ( or will reside after offshoring ) in the home country , and unit 2 as the unit that is placed in or moved to the foreign country . 6 Both the initial activity split and the subsequent mod - iﬁcations to that split are subject to the aforementioned constraint that activities 1 to E are ﬁxed in unit 1 . Other than this constraint , we assume that the initial activity split is completely random , reﬂecting the ﬁrm’s lack of architectural knowledge . Hence , for each activity E + 1 to 100 , we draw a lottery with a probability (cid:52) 50 − E(cid:53) / (cid:52) 100 − E(cid:53) that the selected activity will be placed in unit 1 . This results in an expected unit size of 50 for the two units ( with unit 1 , for example , consisting of activi - ties 1 to E and an average of (cid:52) 100 − E(cid:53)(cid:52) 50 − E(cid:53) / (cid:52) 100 − E(cid:53) = 50 − E of the remaining activities E + 1 to 100 , for a total of E + 50 − E = 50 activities ) . After this initial activity split , we assume that the company will adapt with the goal of enhancing perfor - mance . To capture adaptation , we assume that bound - edly rational decision makers in each period take one activity at random and experiment with relocating it to the other unit . This experimentation process is based on making incremental changes to a benchmark that we call the “latest performance - enhancing conﬁguration . ” Those changes are kept whenever they improve performance and discarded when they do not . The latest performance - enhancing conﬁguration is the most recent conﬁguration that resulted in improved performance ( or the initial activity split if no improvements have been found so far ) . Therefore , in each round , the ﬁrm takes the latest performance - enhancing conﬁguration , randomly chooses one activity between E + 1 and 100 , moves it to the opposing unit , and observes performance . If the change results in performance that is better than the performance exhibited by the most recent performance - enhancing conﬁguration , the new conﬁguration is stored as the “new” latest performance - enhancing conﬁguration ( over - riding the old one ) . Future changes are then based on this benchmark . If the change results in poorer performance , it is abandoned , and future changes are made to the “old” latest performance - enhancing conﬁguration , which may lie several rounds in the past , especially when it is close to the optimal solution . Importantly , in this learn - ing process , we assume that it is only possible to observe aggregate performance changes as opposed to individual D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 217 . 112 . 157 . 7 ] on 04 J u l y 2016 , a t 03 : 25 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . Asmussen , Larsen , and Pedersen : Organizational Adaptation in Offshoring Organization Science , Articles in Advance , pp . 1 – 18 , ©2016 INFORMS 9 Figure 2 Performance Proﬁles of the Two Strategies 760 780 800 820 840 860 880 900 920 0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350 400 450 Time P e r f o r m an c e Host - based H o m e - b a s e d components of performance . Hence , the decision maker cannot know how much of the impact on performance can be attributed to changes in the underlying ﬁt with the landscape , or the extent to which the impact is the result of round - to - round ﬂuctuations in the noise param - eter . The decision maker therefore keeps any change that increases the sum of the two . Performance of the Two Strategies . As depicted in Figure 2 , each of the two knowledge - accumulation strategies has a distinct performance proﬁle . A ﬁrm adopting the host - based strategy does not experiment with different organizational conﬁgurations prior to off - shoring . Similar to Nokia , it adapts on a learning - by - doing approach in which it attempts to identify the best conﬁguration for its activities after the offshoring occurs . As a consequence , the ﬁrm does not accumulate any architectural knowledge of the dispersed setup prior to the actual offshoring ( here , T = 200 and H = 500 ) . Performance is therefore held constant up to the point of implementation . However , when the ﬁrm commences offshoring at time T , it begins experimenting with differ - ent conﬁgurations with the purpose of enhancing perfor - mance . Given the added distance between the domestic and foreign activities , the costs of reconﬁguration and coordination are signiﬁcantly higher than they were prior to offshoring . In contrast , in the home - based strategy , the ﬁrm exper - iments with the conﬁguration of activities while all activ - ities are still colocated domestically . The purposes of the experimentation are to gain architectural knowledge and to understand the performance effects of different conﬁgurations . As Figure 2 shows , a ﬁrm that pursues a home - based strategy ﬁnds that the costs of accumu - lating architectural knowledge negatively affect perfor - mance immediately prior to offshoring . However , as the ﬁrm accumulates knowledge about how to best conﬁg - ure itself prior to offshoring , its performance improves . Moreover , as the ﬁrm has utilized the period prior to offshoring to identify a conﬁguration that reduces coor - dination costs , the coordination cost increase associated with actually relocating activities abroad at time T are relatively low . Therefore , the ﬁrm’s relocation of activ - ities abroad has few major , disruptive implications for performance . The fact that the ﬁrm gains architectural knowledge while the activities are still colocated subse - quently reduces the coordination costs associated with offshoring . As is evident in Figure 2 , the differences in per - formance between the two approaches create a poten - tial dilemma . When the additional coordination costs associated with unprepared offshoring ( the area between the two curves furthest to the right ) are higher than the costs of accumulating architectural knowledge prior to offshoring ( the area between the two curves fur - thest to the left ) , the home - based approach results in higher accumulated performance than the host - based approach . Conversely , when the opposite is the case , the host - based strategy results in higher accumulated performance . Thus , to explore this tension and derive the implications of adaptation in offshoring , we run our simulation model for a variety of parameter - value combinations . Contingencies for Offshoring : A Simulation of the Two Learning Strategies Parameter Conﬁguration . To set the numerical val - ues of the parameters for the simulation , we rely on a combination of ( 1 ) a detailed analysis of the economic logic of the model , ( 2 ) quantitative data relating to the variables in our model , ( 3 ) conversations with managers from multinational ﬁrms , and ( 4 ) prior studies in the offshoring and simulation literatures . Furthermore , we subsequently provide a number of robustness tests where we deviate from our baseline parameter choices to test the impact of our choices on the results of the model . First , it is important that our parameters are internally consistent with each other and with the empirical phe - nomenon that the model aims to explain . Our study is motivated by the observation that ﬁrms struggle to reap performance beneﬁts from offshoring and that a key rea - son for this is the apparent cost savings being hollowed out by increases in coordination costs when activities become geographically dispersed . This tension implies that a relevant model of offshoring should be calibrated so that there is balance between production cost savings and international coordination costs , implying parameter choices that fulﬁll Inequality ( 3 ) developed above . The alternative is to assume that centripetal and centrifugal forces are “unbalanced , ” with international coordination costs that are either prohibitively high ( in which case ﬁrms would never ﬁnd it attractive to offshore in the ﬁrst place ) or trivially low ( in which case ﬁrms would easily D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 217 . 112 . 157 . 7 ] on 04 J u l y 2016 , a t 03 : 25 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . Asmussen , Larsen , and Pedersen : Organizational Adaptation in Offshoring 10 Organization Science , Articles in Advance , pp . 1 – 18 , ©2016 INFORMS redeploy entire value chains to foreign countries ) com - pared to cost savings . Arguably , both of these scenarios are at odds with real - world observation ( e . g . , Ferreira and Prokopets 2009 , Larsen et al . 2013 ) . We can also see from Inequality ( 3 ) that the range in which these forces are balanced is determined by the number of home country embedded activities ( E ) and the degree of natural modularity in the technological land - scape ( x ) . In fact , a condition for this range to exist is that both of these parameters are sufﬁciently high , as deﬁned by x > (cid:52) 100 − E(cid:53) / (cid:52) 100 + E(cid:53) . Intuitively , when the technological landscape is highly modular ( and the entire value chain is not footloose ) , it is particularly use - ful for the offshoring ﬁrm to acquire architectural knowl - edge so that it can selectively relocate activities along these modular boundaries . For example , Nokia decided to only relocate a subset of their product development processes , reﬂecting the more general tendency of ﬁrms to offshore carefully delimited parts of their value chains ( Contractor et al . 2010 ) . Different combinations of x and R could fulﬁll this constraint , but we choose in our main analysis to keep home country embeddedness rel - atively low ( E = 10 ) and landscape modularity corre - spondingly high ( x = 0 (cid:48) 9 ) to give the ﬁrm signiﬁcant room for experimentation and architectural knowledge accumulation . With these values , the condition for cen - trifugal and centripetal forces to be balanced reduces to 17 < (cid:52)k LB (cid:52) 1 + D(cid:53)(cid:53) / (cid:52)P H − P F (cid:53) < 25 . Based on statistics on wage differences across devel - oped and emerging markets , we set the production cost savings at 70 % ( by setting P H = 1 and P F = 0 (cid:48) 3 ) in our main run of the simulation . 7 This choice , in turn , implies a parameter range for the international coordi - nation costs where 0 (cid:48) 10 < k LB (cid:52) 1 + D(cid:53) < 0 (cid:48) 28 . Again , many different combinations of k LB and D could fulﬁll this constraint . However , our conversations with exec - utives from the telecommunications sector have indi - cated that coordination costs might be roughly three to four times as high after offshoring as they are before , depending on the distance . 8 The sources of these addi - tional costs include the increased time that individuals spend on coordination activities , the need to create ded - icated liaison positions that specialize in coordination across functions and borders , the costs of business travel relating to coordination meetings , and a need for social - ization by rotating people across borders to understand local context and share tacit knowledge . These mecha - nisms are to a large extent driven by the loss of face - to - face interaction resulting from geographic separation of activities ( Storper and Venables 2004 ) . Hence , to capture a tripling or quadrupling of coordi - nation costs , we set D = (cid:52) 2 (cid:49) 3 (cid:53) in our model and com - bine those values with k LB = (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 04 (cid:49) 0 (cid:48) 06 (cid:53) to arrive at a reasonable range for k LB (cid:52) 1 + D(cid:53) , which then varies from 0 . 12 to 0 . 24 . This is well within the required range for international coordination costs calculated above ( 0 . 10 to 0 . 28 ) while still giving us enough variation in these costs to assess the importance of the underlying parameters . The average ( k LB (cid:52) 1 + D(cid:53) = 0 (cid:48) 18 ) results in the selective offshoring strategy incurring expected international coor - dination costs of 1 (cid:49) 250 (cid:52) 1 − x(cid:53)k LB (cid:52) 1 + D(cid:53) = 22 12 , which is about 64 % of the expected production costs savings of 35 . This is consistent with estimates from offshoring consultants implying that slightly more than half of the wage cost savings are often offset by the “soft costs” of offshoring ( NeoIT 2004 ) . In addition to these choices , we also need speciﬁc val - ues for noise , timing , and revenue to run the simulation . As noted by Levinthal ( 1997 , p . 947 ) , “It is appropriate to calibrate [ the noise parameter ] (cid:133) relative to the mag - nitude of the distribution of actual ﬁtness values . ” We adopt this principle in our simulation to avoid the risk of setting noise levels that are out of proportion to the underlying ﬁtness levels . Arguably , the appropriate cali - bration benchmark in the context of our speciﬁc model is the coordination cost change that provides feedback in the learning process , since our noise parameter is conceptualized as a disturbance that interferes strongly or weakly with the acquisition of architectural knowl - edge . To see the impact of noise clearly , we therefore suggest that “low” noise should mostly enable learning even while allowing for occasional mistakes , whereas “high” noise should reduce learning about the landscape to a minimum , but without eliminating it altogether . We operationalize this as having a 95 % probability of keep - ing a good decision when noise is low and 55 % when it is high . 9 It can be shown that probabilities of this mag - nitude are achieved in the ﬁrst round of the simulation when setting low noise to (cid:145) = 0 (cid:48) 15 and high noise to (cid:145) = 2 ( underlying calculations can be found in Online Appendix 3 ) . We set the horizon of the model to H = 500 and the time of the offshoring event to T = 200 , as these choices seem to give sufﬁcient time to exploit ( without fully exhausting ) learning opportunities both before and after offshoring . Finally , we set R = 1 (cid:49) 000 . This is without loss of generality since , being constant across the two strategies , the revenue disappears when we difference them and thus has no effect on our conclusions . Results The results of our simulation are reported in Table 1 . Since the technological landscape is randomly drawn , the reported results are averaged over 100 landscapes to smooth out the stochastic component in any single landscape ( for similar procedures , see , e . g . , Ethiraj and Levinthal 2004a , b ; Ethiraj et al . 2008 ) . To derive each cell in the table , we set the speciﬁed values of k LB , (cid:145) , and D for that cell . Based on those parameter values , we run 50 simulations of the host - based strategy and 50 simulations of the home - based strategy on each of D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 217 . 112 . 157 . 7 ] on 04 J u l y 2016 , a t 03 : 25 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . Asmussen , Larsen , and Pedersen : Organizational Adaptation in Offshoring Organization Science , Articles in Advance , pp . 1 – 18 , ©2016 INFORMS 11 Table 1 Relative Attractiveness of the Host - Based Strategy Low coordination High coordination cost ( k LB = 0 (cid:48) 04 ) cost ( k LB = 0 (cid:48) 06 ) Low noise High noise Low noise High noise ( (cid:145) = 0 (cid:48) 15 ) ( (cid:145) = 2 ) ( (cid:145) = 0 (cid:48) 15 ) ( (cid:145) = 2 ) High distance − 9 (cid:49) 476 8 (cid:49) 246 − 15 (cid:49) 647 11 (cid:49) 192 ( D = 3 ) Low distance − 4 (cid:49) 687 9 (cid:49) 183 − 9 (cid:49) 414 11 (cid:49) 489 ( D = 2 ) the 100 landscapes , for a total of 5 , 000 simulations of each strategy for each cell . To determine the relative attractiveness of the two strategies , we compare the total accumulated performance of each strategy over the 500 time periods ( (cid:80) 500 t = 1 (cid:143) t ) . We average the cumulative per - formance of each strategy over those 5 , 000 simulations and subtract the cumulative performance of the home - based strategy from that of the host - based strategy . The resulting number is reported in the relevant cell , with a positive number indicating that the host - based strategy yields higher performance than the home - based strategy and a negative number indicating the opposite . In Table 2 , we treat each landscape of our simula - tion as a random sampling from a “population” of land - scapes and apply statistical techniques to the averages of those 100 landscapes . This enables us to assess whether the effects of the different parameters are signiﬁcant , as opposed to being merely caused by ﬂuctuations from landscape to landscape . Speciﬁcally we take the dif - ferences between the averages in Table 1 for different parameter values and using the t - test to assess whether those differences are high enough to warrant a ﬁrm con - clusion given the underlying standard deviation . In the following , we discuss the implications of this table for the comparative statics of noise , distance , and coordina - tion costs , and use these to develop a number of theo - retical propositions . The Effect of Noise Our results strongly indicate that high noise in the per - formance function ( measured by its standard deviation (cid:145) ) makes the host - based learning strategy relatively more attractive . As mentioned above , we can see that each high - noise column in Table 1 features larger values than the corresponding low - noise column . In Table 2 , this translates into positive numbers ( indicating a posi - tive effect on the relative attractiveness of the host - based learning strategy ) for noise under all four combinations of the other parameters . Therefore , in situations with high levels of noise , our model suggests that ﬁrms bene - ﬁt from choosing a host - based learning strategy in which successful adaptation is the result of learning by doing over longer periods of time . This effect is formalized as follows : Table 2 Effect of Parameters on Relative Attractiveness of the Host - Based Strategy Effect of Contingencies Avg . SD N T Noise Low distance , 13 (cid:49) 870 1 (cid:49) 475 100 93 (cid:48) 9 ∗∗ low c . cost Noise Low distance , 20 (cid:49) 903 3 (cid:49) 034 100 68 (cid:48) 9 ∗∗ high c . cost Noise High distance , 17 (cid:49) 722 2 (cid:49) 124 100 83 (cid:48) 5 ∗∗ low c . cost Noise High distance , 26 (cid:49) 839 3 (cid:49) 344 100 80 (cid:48) 3 ∗∗ high c . cost Distance Low noise , − 4 (cid:49) 789 919 100 − 52 (cid:48) 1 ∗∗ low c . cost Distance Low noise , − 6 (cid:49) 233 1 (cid:49) 566 100 − 39 (cid:48) 8 ∗∗ high c . cost Distance High noise , − 937 2 (cid:49) 485 100 − 3 (cid:48) 8 ∗∗ low c . cost Distance High noise , − 296 4 (cid:49) 044 100 − 0 (cid:48) 7 high c . cost C . cost Low distance , − 4 (cid:49) 727 1 (cid:49) 038 100 − 45 (cid:48) 5 ∗∗ low noise C . cost Low distance , 2 (cid:49) 306 3 (cid:49) 237 100 7 (cid:48) 1 ∗∗ high noise C . cost High distance , − 6 (cid:49) 171 1 (cid:49) 493 100 − 41 (cid:48) 3 ∗∗ low noise C . cost High distance , 2 (cid:49) 946 3 (cid:49) 361 100 8 (cid:48) 8 ∗∗ high noise Noise ∗ Distance Low c . cost 3 (cid:49) 852 2 (cid:49) 639 100 14 (cid:48) 6 ∗∗ Noise ∗ Distance High c . cost 5 (cid:49) 937 4 (cid:49) 495 100 13 (cid:48) 2 ∗∗ Noise ∗ C . cost Low distance 7 (cid:49) 033 3 (cid:49) 521 100 20 (cid:48) 0 ∗∗ Noise ∗ C . cost High distance 9 (cid:49) 117 3 (cid:49) 753 100 24 (cid:48) 4 ∗∗ Note . C . , Coordination . ∗∗ p < 0 (cid:48) 0001 . Proposition 1 . Noise has a positive effect on the rel - ative attractiveness of the host - based strategy . To get a clearer indication of the mechanism under - lying Proposition 1 , it is useful to take a detailed look at how noise inﬂuences the performance proﬁles of the two strategies . As illustrated in the left panel of Figure 3 , in the absence of noise , a ﬁrm pursuing a home - based strategy for offshoring incrementally learns and accumulates knowledge about how to conﬁgure the organization to enhance performance . In this example , this learning strategy is valuable because the distance to the host country is relatively large , and because a ﬁrm that decides to follow a host - based strategy of off - shoring without ﬁrst trying to learn about the natural modules in the technological landscape will suffer very high costs of coordination immediately after offshoring . As a consequence , as the left panel of Figure 3 shows , the home - based strategy is clearly better—the beneﬁt of home - based learning ( the area between the curves after offshoring ) is greater than the costs of such learning ( the area between the curves before offshoring ) . However , as demonstrated in the right panel , this con - clusion may change as soon as we incorporate noise into the model . As that panel indicates , given a high D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 217 . 112 . 157 . 7 ] on 04 J u l y 2016 , a t 03 : 25 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . Asmussen , Larsen , and Pedersen : Organizational Adaptation in Offshoring 12 Organization Science , Articles in Advance , pp . 1 – 18 , ©2016 INFORMS Figure 3 Impact of Noise on the Two Strategies P e r f o r m an c e Time 760 780 800 820 840 860 880 900 920 P e r f o r m an c e 760 780 800 820 840 860 880 900 920 0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350 400 450 Time 0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350 400 450 Low noise ( (cid:1) = 0 . 15 ) High noise ( (cid:1) = 2 ) Host - based Host - based Home - based H o m e - b a s e d degree of noise in the performance function , the learn - ing that would otherwise take place in the home - based strategy is less likely to occur . Therefore , the ﬁrm’s per - formance does not improve as much prior to offshoring despite the proactive search for new conﬁgurations that will yield higher performance . As noise creates uncer - tainty that overwhelms the relatively low coordination costs at home , the decision maker cannot properly eval - uate the effects of organizational decisions prior to off - shoring . In such situations , decision makers may ﬁnd that organizational conﬁgurations and preparation mea - sures taken prior to offshoring in a home - based strategy may prove inadequate , and that they need to unlearn the knowledge accumulated at home while accommo - dating the higher coordination costs of operating in the offshoring locations . As the ﬁrm commences offshoring ( t = 200 ) , therefore , it will experience a decline in per - formance that is almost as large as the decline experi - enced by the host - based learning ﬁrm . This means that when the noise level is high , the costs of home - based learning are higher and the beneﬁts are lower , which in turn means that the host - based strategy offers better performance . Essentially , it is not worthwhile to prepare for an event if the causality of that event can only be understood through actual experiential learning . The Effect of Distance The negative values for distance in Table 2 indicate that , in general , distance favors the home - based strategy . This is also visible in Table 1 , where the high - distance row consistently contains lower numbers than the low - distance row does . Intuitively , high distance leads to a high performance penalty for the host - based learning strategy , which results in high coordination costs imme - diately after offshoring . In contrast , a ﬁrm adopting a home - based learning strategy has learned about the land - scape in advance and , therefore , does not suffer these high coordination costs . Hence , when a ﬁrm decides to offshore activities to a location where the impact of dis - tance on coordination costs is high , a home - based strat - egy may yield higher accumulated performance than a host - based strategy . Conversely , the host - based learning strategy may in fact be better when the offshoring loca - tion is more proximate , as seen by the positive numbers in the low - distance row in Table 1 . However , there is an important caveat to this conclu - sion : the effect of distance is not equally strong across different levels of noise . In fact , distance becomes much less important when noise is high , as indicated by the relatively weak effects and low t - values in the third and fourth row in Table 2 , and in one case the effect even disappears ( as the t - value becomes insigniﬁcant ) . As the positive effect of distance on the relative attractiveness of the home - based strategy is contingent on successful home - based learning , high noise reduces this effect . In other words , when noise is high , distance has an almost equally strong negative effect on the home - based and the host - based strategies , whereas distance has a much stronger negative effect on the host - based strategy when noise is low . This is clear in Table 2 , where both inter - action terms are signiﬁcant ( their positive sign is due to the host - based strategy being the benchmark in the table ) . On this basis , we derive our second proposition : Proposition 2 . Noise negatively moderates the pos - itive effect of distance on the relative attractiveness of the home - based strategy , such that this effect becomes weak and may disappear at high levels of noise . The Effect of Coordination Costs Finally , the magnitude of coordination costs also has implications for the relative attractiveness of the two strategies . However , the implications are even more ambiguous than for the other two parameters : high coor - dination costs sometimes favor the host - based strategy D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 217 . 112 . 157 . 7 ] on 04 J u l y 2016 , a t 03 : 25 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . Asmussen , Larsen , and Pedersen : Organizational Adaptation in Offshoring Organization Science , Articles in Advance , pp . 1 – 18 , ©2016 INFORMS 13 ( especially when noise is high ) , whereas at other times it has no effect or even favors the home - based strat - egy ( when noise is low ) . This surprising ﬁnding can be explained intuitively by looking at the way in which noise inﬂuences the effectiveness of home - based learn - ing . We know that with high levels of noise , the home - based strategy does not produce much learning prior to offshoring . Therefore , the ﬁrm does not reap much of a postoffshoring beneﬁt compared to the host - based strategy . In this case , higher marginal coordination costs merely lead to the home - based strategy incurring higher initial coordination costs without the associated beneﬁts , which speaks in favor of the host - based strategy . With low noise , we know that home - based learning can be effective . In that case , there are two effects of increased marginal coordination costs : an increase in the costs of home - based learning before offshoring ( favoring the host - based strategy ) and an increase in the beneﬁt of learning after offshoring ( favoring the home - based strategy ) . The latter could conceivably dominate the former . In that scenario , an increase in coordination costs is particularly costly for the host - based strategy , which experiences the full coordination costs , inﬂated by distance , after offshoring . For example , successful coordination in a ﬁrm may depend on costly face - to - face coordination ( in contrast to formalized coordination mechanisms , such as standardization and centralization ) , such that employees need to be physically colocated to ensure effective joint work ( e . g . , research and develop - ment ) . This may be the case in industries that rely on tacit and complex knowledge—types of knowledge that are difﬁcult and costly to communicate . In these cases , our model suggests that it is beneﬁcial to search for an organizational conﬁguration while the activities are still colocated so that activities requiring costly coordination are placed in one country rather than across countries . The idea that noise moderates the effect of coordination costs , which is supported by the signiﬁcant t - values in Table 2 , is captured by our ﬁnal proposition : Proposition 3 . Noise positively moderates the effect of coordination costs on the relative attractiveness of the host - based strategy , which may then be negative at low levels of noise and positive at high levels of noise . Robustness In addition to the parameter conﬁgurations described above , we also performed a number of robustness tests to see to what extent the results were sensitive to changes in the other assumptions of the model . First , we exam - ined the impact of changing the timing of the model . Hence , holding the underlying technological landscape constant , we set T = 200 ( as above ) , T = 150 ( early offshoring ) , and T = 250 ( late offshoring ) , respectively , running 50 simulations of both strategies in each case . We then looked at how the parameter effects ( as reported in Table 2 ) changed as a consequence of this varia - tion . The conclusion was that the effects were virtu - ally unchanged , with correlations between the effect size vectors for different values of T being in the 0 . 94 – 0 . 96 range . We repeated this procedure for the time horizon , setting H = (cid:52) 450 (cid:49) 500 (cid:49) 550 (cid:53) , with identical conclusions ( correlations also in the 0 . 94 – 0 . 96 range ) . Furthermore , since we held production cost savings constant in our main parameterization of the model , we tested the sen - sitivity of the results to these costs in a similar manner and with similar results , setting P F = (cid:52) 0 (cid:48) 22 (cid:49) 0 (cid:48) 30 (cid:49) 0 (cid:48) 38 (cid:53) and obtaining correlations in the 0 . 94 – 0 . 98 range . Finally , a different take on the robustness of our results is to assess the statistical properties associated with the number of landscapes ( 100 ) we have drawn in the simulation . While more landscapes would always be better and provide an even stronger indication that our results are not artifacts of the randomly drawn land - scapes , we can at least assess the statistical conﬁdence and power associated with 100 draws . First , as to con - ﬁdence , we can see from Table 2 that all of our propo - sitions are based on coefﬁcients that are signiﬁcant at p < 0 (cid:48) 0001 , suggesting that 100 draws in our case is more than sufﬁcient to reduce the risk of type 2 error to a generally accepted level . Second , power is less of a problem since there is only one effect in Table 2 that is insigniﬁcant ( the effect of distance under high noise and high uncertainty ) . It has an effect size ( mean divided by standard deviation ) of 0 . 07 , and to detect such a low effect size with , for example , 99 % conﬁdence and 80 % power would require a sample size of 2 , 048 landscapes . Hence , while we cannot rule out that we have made a type 1 error in rejecting this effect , it is worth noting the ( more than 20 - fold ) increase in the number of landscapes that would be required to detect such a small effect , and also that this effect is in any case about 1 % of the effect sizes underlying proposition 1 ( noise ) . Discussion and Conclusion In this article , we have developed and explored a formal model of local adaptive search in the context of relo - cating organizational activities to foreign locations ( i . e . , offshoring ) . Our results are twofold . First , we portray the process of organizational adaptation in the context of offshoring . We do so by juxtaposing two knowledge - accumulation strategies : a home - based learning strategy , in which the ﬁrm starts to experiment and search for a conﬁguration prior to offshoring while the activities are still colocated at home , and a host - based learning strat - egy , in which the ﬁrm starts to search for a conﬁgura - tion using its experiences with the actual offshoring . We show that a ﬁrm pursuing a home - based strategy experi - ences comparatively poorer performance while the activ - ities are still colocated , and that performance improves as the ﬁrm identiﬁes conﬁgurations that reduce coordi - nation costs . Conversely , a ﬁrm pursuing the host - based D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 217 . 112 . 157 . 7 ] on 04 J u l y 2016 , a t 03 : 25 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . Asmussen , Larsen , and Pedersen : Organizational Adaptation in Offshoring 14 Organization Science , Articles in Advance , pp . 1 – 18 , ©2016 INFORMS strategy experiences a signiﬁcant decline in performance following the offshoring implementation , as coordina - tion costs rise due to the spatial separation , after which it experiments with different conﬁgurations to improve performance . Second , we demonstrate how the general adaptation patterns are largely dependent on the levels of geo - graphic distance , noise , and coordination costs . When ﬁrms aim to offshore to geographically distant locations , pursuing a home - based learning strategy becomes rela - tively more attractive because it reduces the risk of being overwhelmed by coordination costs after the offshoring implementation . Hence , a combination of high coordi - nation costs and high distance to an offshoring destina - tion is a particularly deadly combination for ﬁrms that have not done careful and elaborate preparation before offshoring . More interesting , however , we also ﬁnd that when the level of noise in ﬁrms’ performance function is high , the host - based learning strategy becomes rela - tively more attractive irrespective of the level of the other contingencies . As noise generates uncertainty , the abil - ity to evaluate the appropriateness of the architectural knowledge is undermined , and the likelihood of making inefﬁcient design decisions increases . Noise lowers the beneﬁts of learning at home and leaves the ﬁrm more vulnerable to higher coordination costs when it goes abroad . Thus , in situations with high levels of uncer - tainty , ﬁrms beneﬁt from pursuing host - based learning strategies despite vast distances and costly coordina - tion requirements . Noise increases the risk of judgment error ( Lampel and Shapira 2001 ) or due - diligence fail - ure ( Puranam et al . 2006 ) to the point that the ﬁrm would beneﬁt more from relying on actual experience or learning by doing . In that sense , Nokia Denmark’s host - based approach to the offshoring of complex product - development activities may have been a sound one , even though it led to unexpected costs and problems that required corrective action . Given the noise that arguably exists in the highly volatile mobile - phone industry , it may have been very difﬁcult for Nokia Denmark to accu - mulate the necessary architectural knowledge through a home - based strategy . Moreover , an attempt to do so might have created a risk of accumulating the wrong knowledge about the underlying technological land - scape , which may have led to a need to unlearn knowl - edge as the organization embarked on offshoring . With this study , we contribute to research on off - shoring and the global distribution of work ( Contractor et al . 2010 , Jensen et al . 2013 , Srikanth and Puranam 2011 ) . In our formal modeling of how ﬁrms adapt to underlying international technological landscapes , we have investigated two distinct offshoring strategies that yield different performance implications given central contingencies—marginal coordination costs , the impact of distance on the coordination of international activi - ties , and the role of noise in the performance function . Arguably , adaption in an international context includes both a spatial and an organizational dimension , where the former involves adaption to the differences mani - fested in the host locations and the latter relates to mak - ing the value chain work in a new setting ( Szulanski and Jensen 2008 ) . However , while most international busi - ness research has focused on how ﬁrms adapt along the spatial dimension ( e . g . , Lord and Ranft 2000 , Makino and Delios 1996 , Siegel and Larson 2009 ) , this study stresses the performance implications of the ways in which ﬁrms gain architectural knowledge when going abroad . In particular , we argue that the added dis - tance between organizational activities increases ﬁrms’ coordination costs and that they must search for new conﬁgurations that ﬁt the international dispersion to optimize performance . As such , ﬁrms must accumulate both local market knowledge and architectural knowl - edge ( Baldwin and Clark 2000 , Brusoni and Prencipe 2006 , Ethiraj and Levinthal 2004a , Henderson and Clark 1990 ) . In fact , one of the advantages of our model is that we conceptualize and formalize architectural knowl - edge as distinct from local market knowledge , in con - trast to most studies on international expansion , which lump these two types of knowledge together . Future research could , therefore , carefully investigate how dis - tance affects the interdependencies among organizational units when reconﬁguring and how those interdepen - dencies eventually affect performance ( see also Kumar et al . 2009 , Srikanth and Puranam 2011 ) . Relatedly , future research could empirically investigate how deci - sion makers accumulate architectural knowledge in the process of offshoring . Moreover , our study suggests that the accumulation of architectural knowledge ( Ethiraj and Levinthal 2004a , Henderson and Clark 1990 ) presents ﬁrms with a strategy that is useful to balance the trade - offs among strategic rationales—such as lower production costs in foreign locations with the costs of coordination and distance . However , our results suggest that the noise surrounding such decisions is particularly detrimental in shaping effective adaptation processes . Accordingly , we argue that noise can lead to situations of causal ambiguity in which ﬁrms cannot determine the causes of their performance ( Lippman and Rumelt 1982 , Powell et al . 2006 ) . In such situations , ﬁrms and their decision makers are unable either ex ante or ex post to produce an unambiguous explanation of how the key components of a system work and interact ( Denrell and March 2001 , King and Zeithaml 2001 ) . While it has been argued that ﬁrms must rely on additional heuris - tics to guide effective adaptation in noisy situations ( Lounamaa and March 1987 , Denrell and March 2001 ) , we ﬁnd that noise , in general , undermines ﬁrms’ abilities to accumulate the architectural knowledge necessary for adaptation . Therefore , efforts to learn prior to implemen - tation may be counterproductive or based on incorrect premises . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 217 . 112 . 157 . 7 ] on 04 J u l y 2016 , a t 03 : 25 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . Asmussen , Larsen , and Pedersen : Organizational Adaptation in Offshoring Organization Science , Articles in Advance , pp . 1 – 18 , ©2016 INFORMS 15 Rather , ﬁrms that are able to recognize noisy situa - tions will experience more accurate search and better outcomes . Instead of being stuck on a suboptimal peak as a result of an imprecise home - based search strategy , ﬁrms that acknowledge the need for more accurate per - formance signals will sustain a comparative advantage . In our context , such performance signals would be more easily attained through a host - based search strategy . Accordingly , we suggest that it is important to consider the ability of ﬁrms to identify noisy situations and thus the need to explore more distant search options when planning on how to most efﬁciently accumulate architec - tural knowledge ( see also Knudsen and Levinthal 2007 , Gavetti and Levinthal 2000 ) . Importantly , we hold that future research should pay much closer attention to the concept , antecedents , and consequences of noisy search in processes of international expansion and learning . For example , under what contingencies are search processes likely to be noisier ? How can noise be captured empir - ically ? Is noisy search unavoidable ? Can some ﬁrms better foresee and cope with the challenges of noise ? Undoubtedly , unraveling the answers to such questions would be of vast importance in advancing our under - standing of ﬁrms’ adaptation processes . Hence , while noise is an exogenous parameter in our model , a pos - sible extension could be to endogenize it , for example , modeling it as a function of industry or market charac - teristics or of the actions and strategies pursued by the ﬁrm . Also , as opposed to our ( technology - driven ) noise function , other types of noise could be explored , such as those stemming from the value chain activities’ geo - graphic footprint or their distribution across ﬁrm bound - aries ( e . g . , outsourcing ; see , e . g . , Levy 1995 ) . Taken together , our results shed light on the conven - tional wisdom on the initiation of learning processes in offshoring ( e . g . , Massini et al . 2010 ) and on the value of strategic planning and due diligence in general ( Ansoff et al . 1970 , Puranam et al . 2006 ) . We demon - strate that the ﬁrms’ strategies are subject to learning and that learning depends on the signal - to - noise ratio . Thus , rather than conﬁrming the proposition that ﬁrms that pre - pare upfront by implementing predeﬁned , corporatewide offshoring strategies are more likely to generate higher offshoring performance , our results suggest that ﬁrms may beneﬁt from pursuing a learning - by - doing strat - egy in some cases , especially when the noise levels inherent in the technological landscape are high . With higher noise , the performance signals are weak , mak - ing it difﬁcult for ﬁrms to accumulate proper archi - tectural knowledge through a home - based strategy . In this situation , a ﬁrm might run the risk of accumulating the wrong knowledge about the underlying technologi - cal landscape , which would result in a need to unlearn knowledge as it embarks on offshoring . While we exam - ined this paradox in a simulation study of offshoring , future research could investigate other organizational and environmental contingencies that may be equally relevant for ﬁrms attempting to address this paradox . For example , although our model is designed with the pri - mary purpose of understanding adaptation in offshoring , its underlying logic of architectural knowledge accumu - lation given organizational reconﬁgurations is applicable to other contexts , such as diversiﬁcation ( Rawley 2010 ) , unit reconﬁgurations ( Karim and Williams 2012 ) , and , as mentioned above , outsourcing ( Williamson 2008 ) . As to the latter , our arguments are general enough to apply to all scenarios in which coordination costs are inﬂated by distance , and such scenarios would arguably also include outsourcing , given that coordination with third parties located in distant countries is more difﬁcult than coordi - nation with domestic outsourcing partners . Nevertheless , an extension of our model could be to model both off - shoring and outsourcing choices explicitly , as the two dimensions could have potentially compounding impli - cations for coordination and production costs . Our ﬁndings are largely in line with the work of Szulanski and Jensen ( 2006 , 2008 ) , who also focus on the role of architectural knowledge accumulation . Their studies on franchising projects focus on the temporal aspects of adaptation after going international . They ﬁnd that , initially , architectural knowledge is key , while local market adaptation only becomes important at a later point . We go beyond such studies by including the pre - offshoring phase and the possibility of a home - based learning strategy aimed at predicting the conﬁgurations that might work after offshoring . Similar to Szulanski and Jensen ( 2006 , 2008 ) , we ﬁnd that home - based learn - ing cannot serve as a substitute for experiential learning after offshoring in some cases . In this respect , however , it should be mentioned that we have examined two rather stylized strategies of off - shoring , i . e . , home - and host - based learning . Naturally , other ﬁrms may opt for other strategies . For exam - ple , a ﬁrm may decide to have an entire team spend some months together doing pilot tests of reconﬁgura - tion either at home or at the host location . Pursuing this strategy would enable the teams to establish mechanism of tacit coordination , being deﬁned as “mechanisms that enable the formation and leverage of common ground without the need for direct , ongoing communication” ( Srikanth and Puranam 2011 , p . 850 ) . Thus , by establish - ing common knowledge and shared focal points through socialization efforts , teams can create a basis of shared knowledge that enables interacting agents to accurately adjust and align their actions to each other—in other words , to coordinate successfully . Thus , going forward , we encourage future research to investigate the costs and beneﬁts of such strategies in processes of adaptation when offshoring . Finally , we contribute to research that embraces for - mal methods to investigate ﬁrm adaptation by acknowl - edging that distance , noise , and different strategies for D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 217 . 112 . 157 . 7 ] on 04 J u l y 2016 , a t 03 : 25 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . Asmussen , Larsen , and Pedersen : Organizational Adaptation in Offshoring 16 Organization Science , Articles in Advance , pp . 1 – 18 , ©2016 INFORMS accumulating architectural knowledge affect ﬁrm per - formance . While some models have focused on noise or uncertainty in an attempt to understand adaptive search ( e . g . , Denrell and March 2001 , Levinthal 1997 , Knudsen and Levinthal 2007 , Sommer and Loch 2004 ) , the impact of geography and distance has largely been neglected . In our model , we show how noise and the dis - tance between organizational units magnify coordination costs and , consequently , complicate the process of adap - tation . As such , we demonstrate how distance shapes the structure of ﬁrms’ underlying performance landscapes . Moreover , our model is unique in terms of its simulation of local search strategies given the implementation of a strategic initiative ( i . e . , the inclusion of foreign opera - tions ) . This approach has allowed us to investigate a cen - tral question regarding the effects and value of different learning strategies . Indeed , opposing search strategies , such as cognition versus experiential search ( Gavetti and Levinthal 2000 ) , search versus stability ( Rivkin and Siggelkow 2003 ) , and integrated versus chunky search ( Baumann and Siggelkow 2014 ) , are emphasized in the modeling literature . However , by including an exoge - nous shock to the model , we have been able to iso - late and compare the opposing learning effects in the context of strategy implementation . Future research on strategy implementation processes could therefore apply approaches similar to the one presented here . Supplemental Material Supplemental material to this paper is available at http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1287 / orsc . 2016 . 1060 . Acknowledgments The authors thank editor Giovanni Gavetti and two anonymous reviewers for their comments and suggestions , which signif - icantly improved this paper . They also thank Nicolai Hutters and Matteo Dal Pos for their assistance on developing the model . Endnotes 1 This illustrative case draws on primary data collected by the authors through a number of semistructured interviews con - ducted with Nokia Denmark managers in 2009 and 2010 ( see also Larsen and Pedersen 2011 ) . It should , of course , be noted that the generalizability of this case may be limited , especially when considering the broader context of the events described in this case : in 2012 , the activities in Denmark were shut down and moved to other Nokia R & D sites , and in 2013 , Microsoft announced that it would acquire Nokia’s entire mobile phone business . Thus , we acknowledge that the illustrative example used here potentially bears on multiple complex issues , but retain that it also provides interesting insights that motivate the relevance of our model and simulation . 2 Please note that the full code of the simulation in Microsoft Excel Visual Basic for Applications ( VBA ) is available as Online Appendix 4 to this article . 3 This is shown by the fact that setting x = 0 results in p ij = 1 / 2 , which implies that the natural modules have no impact on the random structure of interdependencies , while setting x = 1 results in p ij = M ij , which makes the interdependencies fall predictably into the two natural modules . 4 We thereby rule out the risk that the ﬁrm accidentally off - shores its core competencies and the potential performance consequences of doing so . 5 The derivation of these cost functions and the proofs of all analytical results in this paper can be found in Online Appendix 3 . 6 A related decision is whether the foreign unit remains a wholly owned part of the parent ﬁrm , becomes a joint ven - ture with a local partner , or is made part of an outsourcing agreement with a foreign supplier ( as in the Nokia Denmark example ; Mudambi and Venzin 2010 ) . While this decision has implications for core competencies , knowledge appropriation , and other important issues , it is beyond the scope of this study . The performance elements we model—coordination costs , pro - duction cost , and noise—are just as relevant when the two units are separated by organizational boundaries as when they are contained in the same ﬁrm . 7 The wage statistics are found in UBS ( 2012 ) . We took the average ratio of engineering wages in selected emerg - ing market cities ( Rio de Janeiro , Taipei , Sao Paolo , Tallinn , Budapest , Bratislava , Prague , Shanghai , and Mumbai ) to engi - neering wages in selected developed market cities ( Copen - hagen , Munich , Tokyo , and Chicago ) and rounded it up to 0 . 3 . 8 A summary of an interview with a TelCo executive and cal - culations of different coordination cost scenarios based on this interview are available from the authors upon request . 9 Fifty percent is a natural lower limit for this probability , since it implies that the decision maker does not see any difference between the good and bad changes and therefore applies the same stochastic decision rule to them . Probabilities below 50 % would imply that the decision maker is biased against good changes , which deﬁes both common sense and the logic of our model . References Allen TJ ( 1977 ) Managing the Flow of Technology ( MIT Press , Cam - bridge , MA ) . Ansoff HI , Avner J , Brandenburg RG , Portner FE , Radosevich R ( 1970 ) Does planning pay ? The effect of planning on success of acquisitions in American ﬁrms . Long Range Planning 3 ( 2 ) : 2 – 7 . Asmussen CG , Goerzen A ( 2013 ) Unpacking dimensions of for - eignness : Firm - speciﬁc capabilities and international dispersion in regional , cultural , and institutional space . Global Strategy J . 3 ( 2 ) : 127 – 149 . Baldwin CY , Clark KB ( 2000 ) Design Rules : The Power of Modular - ity , Vol . 1 ( MIT Press , Cambridge , MA ) . Baldwin R , Venables A ( 2013 ) Spiders and snakes : Offshoring and agglomeration in the global economy . J . Internat . Econom . 90 ( 2 ) : 245 – 254 . Baumann O , Siggelkow N ( 2014 ) Dealing with complexity : Integrated vs . chunky search processes . Organ . Sci . 24 ( 1 ) : 116 – 132 . Berry H , Guillén MF , Zhou N ( 2010 ) An institutional approach to cross - national distance . J . Internat . Bus . Stud . 41 ( 9 ) : 1460 – 1480 . Brusoni S , Prencipe A ( 2006 ) Making design rules : A multidomain perspective . Organ . Sci . 17 ( 2 ) : 179 – 189 . Clark H , Brennan S ( 1991 ) Grounding in communication . Resnick LB , Levine JM , Teasley SD , eds . Perspectives on Socially Shared Cognition ( APA Books , Washington , DC ) , 127 – 149 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 217 . 112 . 157 . 7 ] on 04 J u l y 2016 , a t 03 : 25 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . Asmussen , Larsen , and Pedersen : Organizational Adaptation in Offshoring Organization Science , Articles in Advance , pp . 1 – 18 , ©2016 INFORMS 17 Contractor FJ , Kumar V , Kundu SK , Pedersen T ( 2010 ) Reconceptu - alizing the ﬁrm in a world of outsourcing and offshoring : The organizational and geographical relocation of high - value com - pany functions . J . Management Stud . 47 ( 8 ) : 1417 – 1433 . Cummings JN , Kiesler S ( 2007 ) Coordination costs and project out - comes in multi - university collaborations . Res . Policy 36 ( 10 ) : 1620 – 1634 . Cyert RM , March JG ( 1963 ) A Behavioral Theory of the Firm ( Prentice - Hall , Englewood Cliffs , NJ ) . Denrell J , March JG ( 2001 ) Adaptation as information restriction : The hot stove effect . Organ . Sci . 12 ( 5 ) : 523 – 538 . Dibbern J , Winkler J , Heinzl A ( 2008 ) Explaining variations in client extra costs between software projects offshored to India . MIS Quart . 32 ( 2 ) : 333 – 366 . Dossani R , Kenney M ( 2003 ) “Lift and shift” : Moving the back ofﬁce to India . Inform . Tech . Internat . Development 1 ( 2 ) : 21 – 37 . Ethiraj SK , Levinthal DA ( 2004a ) Bounded rationality and the search for organizational architecture : An evolutionary perspective on the design of organizations and their evolvability . Admin . Sci . Quart . 49 ( 3 ) : 404 – 437 . Ethiraj SK , Levinthal DA ( 2004b ) Modularity and innovation in com - plex systems . Management Sci . 50 ( 2 ) : 159 – 173 . Ethiraj SK , Levinthal DA , Roy RR ( 2008 ) The dual role of modular - ity : Innovation and imitation . Management Sci . 54 ( 5 ) : 939 – 955 . Ferreira J , Prokopets L ( 2009 ) Does offshoring still make sense ? Sup - ply Chain Management Rev . 13 ( 1 ) : 20 – 27 . Fleming L ( 2001 ) Recombinant uncertainty in technological search . Management Sci . 47 ( 1 ) : 117 – 132 . Galbraith JR ( 1973 ) Designing Complex Organizations ( Addison Wesley , Reading , MA ) . Gavetti G ( 2005 ) Cognition and hierarchy : Rethinking the microfoun - dations of capabilities development . Organ . Sci . 16 ( 6 ) : 599 – 617 . Gavetti G , Levinthal D ( 2000 ) Looking forward and looking back - ward : Cognitive and experiential search . Admin . Sci . Quart . 45 ( 1 ) : 113 – 137 . Henderson R , Clark KB ( 1990 ) Architectural innovation : The recon - ﬁguration of existing product technologies and the failure of established ﬁrms . Admin . Sci . Quart . 35 ( 1 ) : 9 – 30 . Jensen PDØ ( 2009 ) A learning perspective on the offshoring of advanced services . J . Internat . Management 15 ( 2 ) : 181 – 193 . Jensen PDØ , Larsen MM , Pedersen T ( 2013 ) The organizational design of offshoring . Taking stock and moving forwards . J . Inter - nat . Management 19 ( 4 ) : 315 – 323 . Karim S , Williams C ( 2012 ) Structural knowledge : How executive experience with structural composition affects intraﬁrm mobil - ity and unit reconﬁguration . Strategic Management J . 33 ( 6 ) : 681 – 709 . King AW , Zeithaml C ( 2001 ) Competencies and ﬁrm performance : Examining the causal ambiguity paradox . Strategic Management J . 22 ( 1 ) : 75 – 99 . Knudsen T , Levinthal DA ( 2007 ) Two faces of search : Alternative generation and alternative evaluation . Organ . Sci . 18 ( 1 ) : 39 – 54 . Kraut RE , Egido C , Galegher J ( 1990 ) Patterns of contact and com - munication in scientiﬁc research collaboration . Galegher J , Kraut RE , Egido C , eds . Intellectual Teamwork : Social and Techno - logical Foundations of Cooperative Work ( Erlbaum Associates , Hillsdale , NJ ) , 149 – 171 . Kumar K , Van Fenema PC , von Glinow MA ( 2009 ) Offshoring and the global distribution of work : Implications for task interdepen - dence theory and practice . J . Internat . Bus . Stud . 40 ( 4 ) : 642 – 667 . Lampel J , Shapira Z ( 2001 ) Judgment errors , interactive norms and the difﬁculty of detecting strategic surprises . Organ . Sci . 12 ( 5 ) : 599 – 611 . Lant TK , Mezias SJ ( 1990 ) Managing discontinuous change : A sim - ulation study of organizational learning and entrepreneurship . Strategic Management J . 11 ( 5 ) : 147 – 179 . Larsen MM , Pedersen T ( 2011 ) From in - house to joint - R & D : The way forward for Nokia Denmark . Case 9B11M114 , Ivey Man - agement Services , London , Ontario , Canada . Larsen MM , Manning S , Pedersen T ( 2013 ) Uncovering the hidden costs of offshoring : The interplay of complexity , organizational design , and experience . Strategic Management J . 34 ( 5 ) : 533 – 552 . Levinthal DA ( 1997 ) Adaptation on rugged landscapes . Management Sci . 43 ( 7 ) : 934 – 950 . Levinthal DA , March JG ( 1981 ) A model of adaptive organizational search . J . Econom . Behav . Organ . 2 ( 4 ) : 307 – 333 . Levinthal DA , Warglien M ( 1999 ) Landscape design : Designing for local action in complex worlds . Organ . Sci . 10 ( 3 ) : 342 – 357 . Levy D ( 1995 ) International sourcing and supply chain stability . J . Internat . Bus . Stud . 26 ( 2 ) : 343 – 360 . Lippman SA , Rumelt RP ( 1982 ) Uncertain imitability : An analysis of interﬁrm differences in efﬁciency under competition . Bell J . Econom . 13 ( 2 ) : 418 – 438 . Lord MD , Ranft AL ( 2000 ) Organizational learning about new inter - national markets : Exploring the internal transfer of local market knowledge . J . Internat . Bus . Stud . 31 ( 4 ) : 573 – 589 . Lounamaa PH , March JG ( 1987 ) Adaptive coordination of a learning team . Management Sci . 33 ( 1 ) : 107 – 123 . Makino S , Delios A ( 1996 ) Local knowledge transfer and perfor - mance : Implications for alliance formations in Asia . J . Internat . Bus . Stud . 27 ( 5 ) : 905 – 927 . Manning S , Massini S , Lewin AY ( 2008 ) A dynamic perspective on next - generation offshoring : The global sourcing of science and engineering talent . Acad . Management Perspect . 22 ( 3 ) : 35 – 54 . March JG , Simon HA ( 1958 ) Organizations ( Wiley , New York ) . Maskell P , Pedersen T , Petersen B , Dick - Nielsen J ( 2007 ) Learning paths to offshore outsourcing : From cost reduction to knowledge seeking . Indust . Innovation 14 ( 3 ) : 239 – 257 . Massini S , Pern - Ajchariyawong N , Lewin AY ( 2010 ) Role of corporate - wide offshoring strategy on offshoring drivers , risks and performance . Indust . Innovation 17 ( 4 ) : 337 – 371 . Miner AS , Mezias SJ ( 1996 ) Ugly duckling no more : Pasts and futures of organizational learning research . Organ . Sci . 7 ( 1 ) : 88 – 99 . Mintzberg H , Waters JA ( 1985 ) Of strategies , deliberate and emergent . Strategic Management J . 6 ( 3 ) : 257 – 272 . Mudambi R , Venzin M ( 2010 ) The strategic nexus of offshoring and outsourcing decisions . J . Management Stud . 47 ( 8 ) : 1510 – 1533 . Nelson RR , Winter SG ( 1982 ) An Evolutionary Theory of Economic Change ( Belknap Press , Cambridge , MA ) . NeoIT ( 2004 ) Total cost of offshore ( TCO ) : Understanding the true offshore ﬁnancial rewards and costs . Offshore Insights White Paper Series . Accessed May 23 , 2016 , http : / / itonews . eu / ﬁles / f1213794631 . pdf . Niederman F , Kundu S , Salas S ( 2006 ) IT software development offshoring : A multi - level theoretical framework and research agenda . J . Global Inform . Management 14 ( 2 ) : 52 – 74 . Powell TC , Lovallo D , Caringal C ( 2006 ) Causal ambiguity , manage - ment perception , and ﬁrm performance . Acad . Management Rev . 31 ( 1 ) : 175 – 196 . Puranam P , Powell BC , Singh H ( 2006 ) Due diligence failure as a signal detection problem . Strategic Organ . 4 ( 4 ) : 319 – 348 . Puranam S , Raveendran M , Knudsen T ( 2012 ) Organizational design : The epistemic interdependency perspective . Acad . Management Rev . 37 ( 3 ) : 419 – 440 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 217 . 112 . 157 . 7 ] on 04 J u l y 2016 , a t 03 : 25 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . Asmussen , Larsen , and Pedersen : Organizational Adaptation in Offshoring 18 Organization Science , Articles in Advance , pp . 1 – 18 , ©2016 INFORMS Rawley E ( 2010 ) Diversiﬁcation , coordination costs , and organiza - tional rigidity : Evidence from micro - data . Strategic Management J . 31 ( 8 ) : 873 – 891 . Rivkin JW , Siggelkow N ( 2003 ) Balancing search and stability : Inter - dependencies among elements of organizational design . Manage - ment Sci . 49 ( 3 ) : 290 – 311 . Siegel JI , Larson BZ ( 2009 ) Labor market institutions and global strategic adaptation : Evidence from Lincoln Electric . Manage - ment Sci . 55 ( 9 ) : 1527 – 1546 . Sommer SC , Loch CH ( 2004 ) Selectionism and learning in projects with complexity and unforeseeable uncertainty . Management Sci . 50 ( 10 ) : 1334 – 1347 . Srikanth K , Puranam P ( 2011 ) Integrating distributed work : Compar - ing task design , communication , and tacit coordination mecha - nisms . Strategic Management J . 32 ( 8 ) : 849 – 875 . Storper M ( 1996 ) Innovation as collective action : Conventions , prod - ucts and technologies . Indust . Corporate Change 5 ( 3 ) : 761 – 790 . Storper M , Venables AJ ( 2004 ) Buzz : Face - to - face contact and the urban economy . J . Econom . Geography 4 ( 4 ) : 351 – 370 . Stringfellow A , Teagarden MB , Nie W ( 2008 ) Invisible costs in off - shoring services work . J . Oper . Management 26 ( 2 ) : 164 – 179 . Szulanski G , Jensen RJ ( 2006 ) Presumptive adaptation and the effec - tiveness of knowledge transfer . Strategic Management J . 27 ( 10 ) : 937 – 957 . Szulanski G , Jensen RJ ( 2008 ) Growing through copying : The neg - ative consequences of innovation on franchise network growth . Res . Policy 37 ( 10 ) : 1732 – 1741 . Teece D , Pisano G ( 1994 ) The dynamic capabilities of ﬁrms : An introduction . Indust . Corporate Change 3 ( 3 ) : 537 – 556 . Thompson JD ( 1967 ) Organizations in Action : Social Science Bases of Administrative Theory ( McGraw - Hill , New York ) . UBS ( 2012 ) Prices and earnings . Report , Chief Investment Ofﬁce of Wealth Management Research , UBS , Zurich , Switzerland . Williamson OE ( 2008 ) Outsourcing : Transaction cost economics and supply chain management . J . Supply Chain Management 44 ( 2 ) : 5 – 16 . Winter SG , Cattani G , Dorsch A ( 2007 ) The value of moderate obses - sion : Insights from a new model of organizational search . Organ . Sci . 18 ( 3 ) : 403 – 419 . Zhou YM ( 2011 ) Synergy , coordination costs , and diversiﬁcation choices . Strategic Management J . 32 ( 6 ) : 624 – 639 . Christian Geisler Asmussen is professor of strategic and international management at Copenhagen Business School , where he received his Ph . D . Drawing on a background in economics , but applying an interdisciplinary approach , his research and teaching revolve around competitive advantage , globalization , and the expansion trajectories of multinational corporations . He currently heads a research project aiming to uncover the drivers of the microlocation choices of multina - tional ﬁrms . Marcus M . Larsen is assistant professor of strategic and international management at Copenhagen Business School , where he also received his Ph . D . His dissertation won the Peter J . Buckley and Mark Casson Dissertation Award ( Academy of International Business ) and the Barry M . Richman Best Dissertation Award ( Academy of Management ) in 2014 . His research focuses on the organizational design of offshoring and emerging economy multinationals . Torben Pedersen is professor at Bocconi University , Milan , Italy . He received his Ph . D . from Copenhagen Business School . His research interests are in the interface between strategy and international management , and he has published over 100 articles and books concerning the managerial and strategic aspects of globalization . He is coeditor of the Global Strategy Journal and Advances in International Management and serves on numerous editorial boards . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 217 . 112 . 157 . 7 ] on 04 J u l y 2016 , a t 03 : 25 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d .