REVIEW Regulation of intestinal epithelial permeability by tight junctions Takuya Suzuki Received : 3 April 2012 / Revised : 19 June 2012 / Accepted : 21 June 2012 / Published online : 11 July 2012 (cid:2) Springer Basel AG 2012 Abstract The gastrointestinal epithelium forms the boundary between the body and external environment . It effectively provides a selective permeable barrier that limits the permeation of luminal noxious molecules , such as pathogens , toxins , and antigens , while allowing the appropriate absorption of nutrients and water . This selec - tive permeable barrier is achieved by intercellular tight junction ( TJ ) structures , which regulate paracellular per - meability . Disruption of the intestinal TJ barrier , followed by permeation of luminal noxious molecules , induces a perturbation of the mucosal immune system and inﬂam - mation , and can act as a trigger for the development of intestinal and systemic diseases . In this context , much effort has been taken to understand the roles of extracel - lular factors , including cytokines , pathogens , and food factors , for the regulation of the intestinal TJ barrier . Here , I discuss the regulation of the intestinal TJ barrier together with its implications for the pathogenesis of diseases . Keywords Tight junction (cid:2) Intestinal epithelium (cid:2) Cytokine (cid:2) Pathogen (cid:2) Nutrient Abbreviations AJ Adherens junction ALD Alcoholic liver disease AMPK AMP activated protein kinase BBDP Biobreeding diabetes - prone BiCM Conditioned medium of Biﬁdobacterium infantis BT - IgSF Brain - and testis - speciﬁc immunoglobulin superfamily C10 Capric acid C12 Lauric acid CAR Coxsacki and adenovirus receptor CD Crohn’s disease CHO Chinese hamster ovary CPE Clostridium perfringen enterotoxin DHA Docosahexaenoic acid DSS Dextran sodium sulfate ECN Escherichia coli Nissle1917 EGF Epidermal growth factor EHEC Enterohemorrhagic Escherichia coli EPA Eicosapentaenoic acid EPEC Enteropathogenic Escherichia coli ERK Extracellular signal - regulated kinase ESAM Endothelial selective adhesion molecule EspF Escherichia coli secreted protein F GPCR G - protein - coupled receptor HA / P Hemagglutinin / protease HS / R Hemorrhagic shock and resuscitation IBD Inﬂammatory bowel disease IBS Irritative bowel syndrome IFN Interferon Ig Immunoglobulin IL Interleukin JAM Junctional adhesion molecule LA Linolec acid LCFA Long chain fatty acid LIGHT Lymphotoxin - like inducible protein L . plantarum Lactobacillus plantarum L . rhamnosus Lactobacillus rhamnosus MAGUK Membrane - associated guanylate kinase homolog MAP Mitochondrial - associated protein T . Suzuki ( & ) Department of Biofunctional Science and Technology , Graduate School of Biosphere Science , Hiroshima University , 1 - 4 - 4 , Kagamiyama , Higashi - Hiroshima 739 - 8528 , Japan e - mail : takuya @ hiroshima - u . ac . jp Cell . Mol . Life Sci . ( 2013 ) 70 : 631 – 659 DOI 10 . 1007 / s00018 - 012 - 1070 - x Cellular and Molecular Life Sciences 123 MCFA Medium chain fatty acid MEK Mitogen - activated protein kinase MLC Myosin light chain MLCK Myosin light chain kinase NF j B Nuclear factor - j B PAR Proteinase activated receptor PDZ Post - synaptic density 95 / Drosophila discs large / zona - occludens 1 PI3K Phosphatidyl inositol - 3 kinase PK Protein kinase PKA cAMP - dependent kinase PP Protein phosphatase PPAR Peroxisome proliferator - activated receptor PTP Protein tyrosine phosphatase ROCK Rho - associated kinase SCFA Short chain fatty acid SH Src homology T1D Type I diabetes TER Transepithelial electrical resistance TGF Transforming growth factor TJ Tight junction TLR Toll - like receptor TNF Tumor necrosis factor TNFR TNF - a receptor TPN Total parenteral nutrition VDR Vitamin D receptor ZO Zonula occludens ZOT Zonula occludens toxin Introduction The gastrointestinal epithelium forms the body’s largest interface with the external environment . The epithelium allows the absorption of nutrients while providing a physical barrier to the permeation of proinﬂammatory molecules , such as pathogens , toxins , and antigens , from the luminal environment into the mucosal tissues and circulatory system ( see Fig . 1 ) . The epithelial cells create this selective per - meability by two pathways : the transcellular and the paracellular pathway . The transcellular pathway is involved in the absorption and transport of nutrients , including sugars , amino acids , peptides , fatty acids , minerals , and vitamins . As the cell membrane is impermeable , this process is predom - inantly mediated by speciﬁc transporters or channels located on the apical and basolateral membranes [ 1 – 3 ] . The para - cellular pathway is associated with transport in the intercellular space between the adjacent epithelial cells . It is regulated by an apical junctional complex , which is com - posed of tight junctions ( TJs ) and adherence junctions ( AJs ) [ 4 – 7 ] . The AJ , along with desmosomes , provides strong adhesive bonds between the epithelial cells and also aids intercellular communication , but does not determine para - cellular permeability [ 6 , 7 ] . The TJs encircle the apical ends of the lateral membranes of epithelial cells and determine the selective paracellular permeability to solutes [ 4 , 5 ] . In this regard , the TJs provide both a barrier to noxious molecules and a pore for the permeation of ions , solutes , and water as appropriate . TJs are multiple protein complexes composed of transmembrane proteins , such as claudins and occludin , and a wide spectrum of cytosolic proteins . The modiﬁcation of TJ barrier function and paracellular permeability is dynamically regulated by various extracellular stimuli and is closely associated with our health and susceptibility disease [ 8 – 10 ] . TJ barrier disruption and increased paracellular permeability , followed by permeation of luminal proin - ﬂammatory molecules , can induce activation of the mucosal immune system , resulting in sustained inﬂammation and tissue damage . Evidence from basic science and clinical studies indicate that the intestinal TJ barrier has a critical role in the pathogenesis of intestinal and systemic diseases [ 8 , 10 , 11 ] . Under pathophysiological conditions , pro - inﬂamma - tory cytokines , antigens , and pathogens contribute to barrier impairment [ 9 , 12 ] . In contrast , food factors and nutrients Bacterial products and dietary antigens Impaired barrier Normal barrier Dendritic cells Macrophages T cells T cells I n t e s t i na l l u m en La m i na p r op r i a E p i t he li a l c e ll s Immune activation Inflammation Tight junction Fig . 1 Barrier function of intestinal tight junctions ( TJs ) . The intestinal epithelium provides a physical barrier to luminal bacteria , toxins , and antigens . The barrier is organized by different barrier components , including the TJs . The TJs regulate the paracellular passages of ions , solutes , and water between adjacent cells . Luminal noxious macromolecules cannot penetrate the epithelium because of the TJ barrier ; however , TJ barrier impairment allows the passage of noxious molecules , which can induce the excessive activation of mucosal immune cells and inﬂammation . Therefore , intestinal barrier defects are associated with the initiation and development of various intestinal and systemic diseases 632 T . Suzuki 123 also participate in intestinal TJ regulation , and some of these could be developed as preventive and therapeutic tools for defective barrier - associated diseases [ 13 , 14 ] . Experimen - tally , TJ barrier integrity and permeability in intestinal tissues and cells are evaluated by measurement of transepi - thelial electrical resistance ( TER ) and the paracellular passage of small molecules , such as mannitol , dextran , and inulin . This review ﬁrst describes the molecular structure of intestinal TJs , then summarizes the regulation of the intes - tinal TJ structure and permeability by extracellular factors , such as cytokines , growth factors , pathogens , nutrients , and food factors , and ﬁnally discusses the involvement of intestinal TJs in health and disease pathogenesis . Molecular structure of TJs TJs are multiple protein complexes located at the apical ends of the lateral membranes of intestinal epithelial cells ( see Fig . 2 ) . They regulate the paracellular passage of ions , solutes , and water , and are also known to act as a fence to maintain cell polarity by blocking the free diffusion of proteins and lipids between the apical and basolateral domains of the plasma membrane [ 8 , 11 ] . Four integral transmembrane proteins , occludin [ 15 ] , claudins [ 16 ] , junctional adhesion molecule ( JAM ) [ 17 ] , and tricellulin [ 18 ] , have been identiﬁed , with the claudin family con - sisting of at least 24 members . The extracellular domains of the transmembrane proteins form the selective barrier by hemophilic and heterophilic interactions with the adjacent cells [ 19 ] . The intracellular domains of these transmem - brane proteins interact with cytosolic scaffold proteins , such as zonula occludens ( ZO ) proteins , which in turn anchor the transmembrane proteins to the perijunctional actomyosin ring . The interaction of TJ proteins with the actin cytoskeleton is vital to the maintenance of TJ struc - ture and function . In addition , the interaction of the TJ complex with the actomyosin ring permits the cytoskeletal regulation of TJ barrier integrity . The circumferential contraction and tension in the perijunctional actomyosin ring is regulated by myosin light chain ( MLC ) activity ( phosphorylation ) [ 20 ] . Induction of MLC phosphorylation by kinases such as myosin light chain kinase and Rho - associated kinase ( ROCK ) causes the contraction of the actomyosin ring , resulting in the opening of the para - cellular pathways . This section summarizes the structures and functions of the integral TJ proteins [ 20 – 22 ] . Occludin Occludin ( * 65 kDa ) was the ﬁrst integral membrane TJ protein identiﬁed in 1993 [ 15 ] . Confocal immunoﬂuo - rescence microscopy , immunoelectron microscopy , and freeze - fracture immunoreplica electron microscopy spe - ciﬁcally visualize occludin at the TJs in the epithelia . Occludin is a tetraspanin membrane protein with 4 trans - membrane domains , 2 extracellular loops , and 1 intra - cellular loop : a short N - terminal and a long C - terminal domain project into the cytoplasm . The homophilic inter - action of the extracellular loops of occludin with the adjacent cells appears to create a barrier against macro - molecules , but not against small ions [ 23 ] . The long C - terminal domain interacts with several intracellular TJ proteins , such as ZO proteins , which are required to link occludin to the actin cytoskeleton [ 24 ] . The function of occludin is not yet fully understood , but numerous studies Occludin Claudins JAM - A E - cadherin β - catenin F - actin MLCK Keratin Desmoglein Desmocolin Desmoplakin ZO - 1 ZO - 1 α - catenin Myosin Tightjunction Adherensjunction Desmosome Lumen Enterocyte Fig . 2 Molecular structure of the intercelluar junction of intestinal epithelial cells . The intercellular junctions of intestinal epithelial cells are sealed by different protein complexes , including TJs , adherens junctions ( AJs ) , and desmosomes . The TJs , multiple protein com - plexes , locate at the apical ends of the lateral membranes of intestinal epithelial cells . The TJ complex consists of transmembrane and intracellular scaffold proteins . The extracellular loops of the trans - membrane proteins ( occludin , claudins , JAMs , and tricellulin ) create a permselective barrier in the paracellular pathways by hemophilic and heterophilic interactions with adjacent cells . The intracellular domains of the transmembrane proteins interact with the intracellular scaffold proteins such as zonula occludens ( ZO ) proteins and cingulin , which in turn anchor the transmembrane proteins to the actin cytoskeleton . Myosin light chain kinase ( MLCK ) is associated with the perijuctional actomyosin rings and regulates paracellular permeability through myosin contractility . The AJs along with desmosomes provide strong adhesive bonds between the epithelial cells and also intercellular communication , but do not determine paracellular permeability Regulation of intestinal tight junction 633 123 using animals and cell cultures indicate that it has crucial roles in the TJ structure and permeability in the intestinal epithelia [ 23 , 25 ] . In earlier studies using embryonic stem cells , occludin depletion was shown not to prevent the TJ assembly or differentiation into polarized epithelial cells [ 26 ] . Occludin knockout mice also showed a density and organization of TJs in the intestinal epithelium equivalent to those seen in wild - type mice [ 26 ] . Further , intestinal barrier function and ion transport in the knockout mice appeared electrophysi - ologically normal [ 27 ] . These studies raised the question of whether occludin is required for TJ assembly and barrier integrity . However , a recent study demonstrated that his - tological and functional abnormalities are present in several tissues in occludin knockout mice [ 28 ] . For example , the occludin knockout mice showed chronic inﬂammation and hyperplasia of the gastric epithelium , testicular atrophy , and loss of cytoplasmic granules in striated duct cells of the salivary gland , suggesting that the function of occludin is more complex than previously supposed [ 28 ] . In addition , synthetic peptides with a sequence corresponding to the occludin extracellular loops , which inhibit the interaction of occludin extracellular domains with adjacent cells , disrupt TJs , and increase paracellular permeability [ 25 ] . In a more recent study using intestinal Caco - 2 cells and mouse intestines , occludin knockdown was found to induce an increase in paracellular permeability to macromolecules [ 23 ] . These data consis - tently indicate that occludin plays a role in the maintenance and assembly of TJs . In vitro studies demonstrate that phosphorylation of occludin regulates occludin localization and TJ permeabil - ity . This phosphorylation is regulated by the balance between kinases and phosphatases responsible for the phosphorylation sites . In the intact epithelium , occludin is highly phosphorylated on the Ser and Thr residues [ 29 ] , and the phosphorylation has a role in the maintenance and assembly of the TJ structure [ 30 ] . Some kinases , such as protein kinase C ( PKC ) g and f , and casein kinase I and II , have been identiﬁed as responsible for the phosphorylation [ 31 – 35 ] . Depletion and inhibition of PKC g and f induce occludin dephosphorylation resulting in TJ disruption [ 31 , 32 ] . Protein phosphorylation detection by mass spec - trometryandsite - directedmutagenesisreveal that T403 , T404 , T424 , and / or T436 in the C - terminal domain of occludin are the phosphorylation sites targeted by PKC g and f . The mutation of these threonine residues to alanine , which prevents the phosphorylation , delays occludin assembly into the TJs . Conversely , occludin undergoes dephospho - rylation on Ser and Thr residues during TJ disassembly [ 29 , 36 ] . Protein phosphatase ( PP ) 1 and 2A have been reported to directly interact with occludin to dephosphorylate it at Ser and Thr residues [ 37 , 38 ] . Experimentally , TJs can be disassembled by extracellular calcium depletion , and reassembly is induced after calcium repletion . The calcium - induced reassembly of TJs is accelerated by the knockdown of PP1 and 2A [ 37 ] . Interestingly , PP1 dephosphorylates occludin preferentially on Ser residues , while PP2A was more active in dephosphorylating occludin at the Thr residues . On the other hand , the level of tyrosine - phos - phorylated occludin is very low in the intact epithelium ; however , several studies have shown that tyrosine phos - phorylation is caused during disassembly by various stimuli [ 39 – 41 ] . Hydrogen peroxide induces TJ disruption via a tyrosine kinase - dependent mechanism . In hydrogen peroxide - mediated TJ disruption , Y398 and Y402 in the C - terminal domain of occludin are phosphorylated by c - Src tyrosin kinase , and the tyrosine phosphorylation induces TJ disassembly [ 39 ] . Underlying this mechanism , the tyrosine phosphorylation of occludin attenuates the interaction with ZO - 1 , leading to dissociation from the junctional complex [ 41 ] . Like hydrogen peroxide , acetaldehyde , a biological metabolite of ethanol , also induces TJ disruption in Caco - 2 cells in an occludin tyrosine phosphorylation - dependent manner [ 42 , 43 ] . Interestingly , acetaldehyde does not affect cellular tyrosine kinase activity , but directly inhibits protein tyrosine phosphatase ( PTP ) 1B , resulting in occludin phosphorylation on the Tyr residues . Claudins Claudins ( 20 – 27 kDa ) are tetraspanin membrane proteins with 1 intracellular and 2 extracellular loops , and C - ter - minal and N - terminal cytoplasmic domains [ 16 ] . Claudins do not have any sequence similarity to occludin . The extracellular loops of claudin molecules make homophilic and heterophilic interactions with adjacent cells , and the interactions create either barriers against or pores for the passage of selective molecules in the paracellular pathways [ 5 , 44 ] . The post - synaptic density 95 / Drosophila discs large / zona - occludens 1 ( PDZ ) binding domain in the claudin C - terminal domains interacts with intracellular TJ proteins such as ZO proteins , which in turn anchor the claudins to the actin cytoskeleton . Numerous studies have demonstrated that claudins are the key component and backbone of TJs . When claudins are expressed in ﬁbro - blasts , they are incorporated into TJ strands and form paired strands at the cell – cell contacts [ 16 ] . Recent studies using claudin knockout mice have shown that claudins have critical roles in barrier formation and paracellular permselectivity in various tissues [ 45 – 50 ] . As a prominent example , claudin - 1 knockout mice die within 24 h of birth because of a dramatic loss of ﬂuid and electrolytes through the impaired epidermal barrier [ 45 ] . Claudins are a multigene family with at least 24 mem - bers in humans and mice , and each isoform shows a unique 634 T . Suzuki 123 expression pattern in tissues and cell lines . In mouse intestines , claudin - 1 , - 2 , - 3 , - 4 , - 5 , - 7 , - 8 , - 10 , - 12 , - 13 , - 14 , - 15 , - 17 , and - 18 are detected at the gene expression level , but the relative expression of each isoform varies throughout the segments of the intestine [ 51 ] . In contrast to their structural similarities , claudins perform different functions and can be roughly divided into two types : those involved in barrier formation ( decreasing paracellular permeability ) and those playing a role in channel pores ( increasing paracellular permeability ) [ 5 , 44 ] . To our knowledge , in the intestines , claudin - 1 , - 3 , - 4 , - 5 , - 8 , - 9 , - 11 , and - 14 can be categorized as barrier - forming clau - dins , while claudin - 2 , - 7 , - 12 , and - 15 are pore - forming claudins [ 5 , 52 – 60 ] . Importantly , the functional properties of each claudin depend on the numbers and positions of charged amino acids in the 1st extracellular loop of the molecule [ 61 ] . For example , claudin - 2 and - 12 , pore - forming isoforms , have 3 ( positions 53 , 65 and 75 ) and 4 ( positions 62 , 66 , 71 and 74 ) negatively charged amino acids , respectively , and form selective cation pores [ 53 , 54 , 62 ] . It is suggested that the distribution and orientation of negatively charged residues in the extracellular loop work to repel negatively charged ions ( anions ) and favor posi - tively charged ions ( cations ) [ 61 ] . Barrier - forming claudins , on the other hand , such as claudin - 1 and - 3 , block the permeability of charged and uncharged molecules according to differences in the distribution and orientation of charged amino acids . However , no detailed information at the atomic level is available because of a lack of x - ray or NMR analysis of claudins . As is the case with occludin , some claudin isoforms are phosphorylated in the cells , and this phosphorylation is associated with localization and paracellular permeability . Claudin - 1 phosphorylation on the serine residues is regu - lated by a protein phosphatase , PP2A , and a protein kinase , PKC f [ 38 ] . The pharmacological inhibition of PP2A pro - motes recruitment of ZO - 1 and occludin as well as claudin - 1 to the TJs after calcium repletion . Similarly , claudin - 1 phosphorylation at T203 increases claudin - 1 insolubility and TJ integrity in rat lung endothelial cells [ 63 ] . Phos - phorylation at T207 in claudin - 5 also plays an analogous role to that at T203 in claudin - 1 [ 64 ] . In contrast , some phosphorylation sites have been characterized as nega - tively regulating TJ barrier integrity . cAMP - dependent kinase ( PKA ) phosphorylates claudin - 3 at T192 , and the phosphorylation leads to TJ disruption in ovarian cancer OVCA433 cells [ 65 ] . An ephrin receptor tyrosine kinase , EphA2 , which is largely expressed in various tumor cells , interacts with and phosphorylates claudin - 4 at Y208 , leading to an increase in paracellular permeability [ 66 ] . A pull - down assay using recombinant Eph2 proteins revealed that the tyrosine phosphorylation attenuates the interaction with ZO - 1 . Another example of post - translational regulation of claudin function and localization is palmitoylation [ 67 ] , although information on this is limited . In kidney epithelial MDCK cells , incorporation of [ 3 H ] - palmitic acid into claudin - 2 , - 4 , and - 14 is observed , indicating palmitoyla - tion [ 67 ] . The palmitoylation of claudin - 14 at two sets of cysteines in the second intracellular loop and intracellular C - terminal tail , which are well conserved in all claudin isoforms , is required for efﬁcient localization of claudin - 14 at the TJ . Junctional adhesion molecule The JAM family belongs to the immunoglobulin ( Ig ) superfamily and is characterized by 2 extracellular Ig domains , one transmembrane domain , and one intracellular C - terminal domain . They are divided into 2 subfamilies based on sequence similarities in the cytoplasmic domains . JAM - A [ 17 ] , - B [ 68 ] and - C [ 69 ] ( or JAM - 1 , - 2 , and - 3 ) have class II PDZ - binding motifs in the intracellular C - terminal domain , which interact with ZO - 1 and Par - 3 , a polarity - related protein . In contrast , JAM - 4 [ 70 ] , coxsackievirus and adenovirus receptor ( CAR ) [ 71 ] , endothelial selective adhesion molecule ( ESAM ) [ 72 ] , and the brain - and testis - speciﬁc immunoglobulin superfamily ( BT - IgSF ) [ 73 ] have class I PDZ - binding motifs . The extracellular N - terminal domains of the JAM family members bind to various ligands through homophilic and heterophilic interactions [ 74 ] . The homophilic interactions involving the JAM members have a role in the formation of TJs and the cell – cell border . In contrast , the heterophilic interactions function in cell – cell adhesion , association between leukocytes and epi - / endo - thelial cells , platelet activation , and virus recognition . JAM members are expressed in various cell types including epi - thelial , endothelial , and immune cells , and exhibit different expression patterns in both a tissue - and cell type - speciﬁc manner . In intestinal epithelial cells , JAM - A , JAM - 4 , and CAR are expressed and involved in TJ regulation . In vitro and in vivo studies demonstrate that JAM - A ( * 43 kDa ) participates in the regulation and maintenance of the TJ barrier . In Chinese hamster ovary ( CHO ) cells , exogenously expressed JAM - A is concentrated at the intercellular junctions [ 17 ] . Treatment of intestinal T84 cells with monoclonal JAM - A antibodies inhibits the resealing of the TJs , indicated by delays in TER recovery and occludin assembly [ 75 ] . Recent studies using JAM - A knockout mice have also shown the importance of JAM - A in intestinal barrier function [ 76 ] . The JAM - A knockout mice exhibit higher permeability to dextran and myelo - peroxidase activity in the colon compared to wild - type mice . Further , the colonic injury and inﬂammation induced by dextran sodium sulfate ( DSS ) are more severe in the JAM - A knockout mice than in wild - type mice . Regulation of intestinal tight junction 635 123 JAM - 4 ( * 40 kDa ) protein expression is seen in the liver and skeletal muscle as well as in epithelial cells [ 70 ] . A study indicates that JAM - 4 has a role in epithelial barrier function although there is an absence of direct evidence in the intestinal epithelium . In kidney epithelial MDCK cells , JAM - 4 is localized at the intercellular junctions , where it is co - localized with ZO - 1 and MAGI - 1 , and in vitro binding assays show that JAM - 4 directly interacts with MAGI - 1 , but not ZO - 1 . In CHO cells , JAM - 4 overexpression decreases dextran paracellular permeability [ 70 ] . CAR ( * 46 kDa ) is a JAM family protein , and the heterophilic interaction of its extracellular domain with coxsackievirus and adenovirus appears to limit virus invasion [ 71 ] . CAR is concentrated at cell - cell contacts and is co - localized with ZO - 1 in intestinal T84 cells [ 77 ] . The recombinant soluble CAR protein , which encodes the extracellular domain and inhibits the intercellular interac - tion of CAR , delays the recovery of TER after calcium repletion [ 77 ] . In CHO and MDCK cells , CAR overex - pression decreases dextran permeability and increases TER [ 77 ] . This evidence indicates that CAR contributes to epithelial TJ regulation . Tricellulin Epithelial and endothelial cells form not only bicellular junctions between two adjacent cells but also tricellular junctions at the cell - cell contacts of 3 adjacent cells . Tricellulin is preferentially localized at tricellular junctions , although it is also observed at bicellular junctions along with occludin and claudins [ 18 ] . Tricellulin ( * 64 kDa ) is a tetratranspan membrane protein with one intracellular and two extracellular loops , and C - and N - terminal cytoplasmic domains . The amino acid sequence of the C - terminal domain is * 32 % identical to that of occludin , while the N - terminal domain is longer than that of occludin . An in vitro study using the site - mutagenesis technique suggests that the C - terminal domain of tricellulin is important for the lateral translocation of tricellulin , whereas the N - ter - minal domain appears to be involved in directing tricellulin to tricellular contacts [ 78 ] . Recent studies have indicated that tricellulin plays an important role in epithelial TJ barrier regulation at both tricellular and bicellular junctions , although with different permselective properties . Krug et al . [ 79 ] closely examined the permeselectivity of tricellulin at bicellular and tricel - lular junctions in MDCK cells exogenously expressing tricellulin at low and high levels . When tricellulin is exogenously expressed at low levels in cells , tricellulin localized at the tricellular junctions , but not at the bicel - lular junction . In these cells , the paracellular permeability of macromolecules , but not small ions , is decreased , indicating that tricellulin limits macromolecule movement at the tricellular junctions . Whereas , when tricellulin is exogenously expressed at high levels , tricellulin localizes at all TJs ( bicellular and tricellular ) , and decreases their permeability to both macromolecules and small ions . These data suggest that tricellulin forms an effective barrier to macromolecules at the tricellular junctions and to all solutes at the bicellular junctions . Interestingly , occludin and tricellulin seem to affect each other’s cellular localization , although the mechanism is unknown . In MDCK cells , occludin knockdown induces the mislocal - ization of tricellulin to bicellular rather than tricellular junctions , and remedial occludin expression abolishes bicellular tricellulin [ 80 ] . Further , in mammary epithelial Eph4 cells , the knockdown of tricelluin remarkably decreases the TER and increases dextran ﬂux with decreased occludin localization at both bicellular and tricellular junctions [ 18 ] . Zonula occludens The ZO proteins were the ﬁrst TJ - speciﬁc proteins inden - tiﬁed and 3 ZO proteins , ZO - 1 ( * 220 kDa ) , - 2 ( * 160 kDa ) , and - 3 ( * 130 kDa ) , have been identiﬁed to date [ 81 – 83 ] . According to sequence analysis , these ZO proteins are categorized as members of the membrane - associated guanylate kinase homolog ( MAGUK ) family [ 19 ] . They are multi - domain proteins carrying 3 PDZ domains , a Src homology - 3 ( SH3 ) domain and a region of homology to GUK from the side of the N - terminus ( see Fig . 3 ) . These multi - domain structures provide an intracellular scaffold in the TJs and are required for regulation and maintenance of TJ structure . Interestingly , many TJ proteins bind to the N - terminal half region of ZO proteins , while the C - terminal region interacts with the actin cytoskeleton and cytoskele - ton - associated proteins [ 84 ] . For example , claudins bind to the ﬁrst PDZ domains of ZO - 1 , - 2 , and - 3 [ 85 ] ; JAM - A binds to the 3rd PDZ domain of ZO - 1 [ 86 ] , and occludin binds to the GUK domain of ZO - 1 [ 24 ] . The 2nd PDZ domains are used for interactions between ZO proteins [ 81 , 83 , 84 , 87 , 88 ] . Among the ZO proteins , the biochemical function and property of ZO - 1 have been well - examined . ZO - 1 localizes to the nascent cell - cell contacts in both cell cultures and animal models . Therefore , it has been proposed that ZO proteins may mediate the early assembly of TJ proteins into cell - cell contacts . To date , intensive efforts have been made to clarify the functional role of ZO proteins , but it has been difﬁcult to obtain clear evidence showing the importance of ZO proteins in TJ regulation . For example , the exogenous expression of full - length or truncated ZO - 1 has only a slight effect on the distribution of other TJ proteins and the formation of TJs [ 89 ] . Tsukita et al . [ 90 ] have suggested that the unexpected results described above 636 T . Suzuki 123 are due in part to the functional redundancy in ZO proteins , and they have generated epithelial Eph cells lacking both ZO - 1 alleles to validate their hypothesis . These ZO - 1 - deﬁcient cells are still able to form normal TJ structures and show normal permeability ; however , an obvious delay in the assembly of other TJ proteins including occludin and claudins into the TJ is observed , indicating that ZO pro - teins have an important role in the regulation of TJ assembly . Cingulin Cingulin ( * 140 kDa ) is a component of intracellular pla - que proteins in the TJs and has been identiﬁed as an actin cytoskeleton - associated protein . Sequence analysis shows that cingulin forms a homodimer with a large globular N - terminal head , a small globular C - terminal tail , and coiled - coil rod domain [ 19 ] . Studies demonstrate that cingulin localizes at the TJs and directly or indirectly interacts with several TJ proteins , indicating a role in TJ assembly [ 86 , 91 , 92 ] ; however , its functional role has not yet been fully understood . A GST pull - down assay dem - onstrated that the head domain of cingulin interacts with ZO - 1 , - 2 , and - 3 [ 91 ] . Further , an in vitro binding assay detected the direct binding of cingulin to JAM - A and occludin [ 86 , 92 ] . However , embryoid bodies lacking the cingulin gene did not show any signs of a barrier formation defect , although the expression of TJ proteins , such as ZO - 1 , ZO - 2 , occludin , and claudin - 6 , was altered [ 93 ] . Intestinal TJ regulation by cytokines and growth factors The roles of cytokines in intestinal TJ regulation under pathophysiological conditions have been well investigated using cell cultures and animal models . The cytokine - mediated dysfunction of the TJ barrier , resulting in immune activation and tissue inﬂammation , is thought to be important in the initiation and / or development of several intestinal and systemic diseases [ 8 , 11 ] . In contrast , some growth factors play roles in the protection and maintenance of TJ integrity . This section summarizes recent knowledge regarding the cytokine - and growth factor - mediated regu - lation of intestinal TJ barrier function . Tables 1 and 2 provide lists of cytokines and growth factors that increase and decrease the intestinal TJ barrier and their molecular mechanisms , respectively . Although there are a number of reports showing their effects on the barrier function in other cell types , such as kidney epithelial cells , vascular endothelial cells and the blood – brain barrier , those will not be discussed here . Interferon - c Interferon - c ( IFN - c ) is a Th1 proinﬂammatory cytokine that is predominantly secreted by T cells and natural killer cells . IFN - c is mainly involved in the regulation of inﬂammatory immune responses , and levels are elevated in the intestinal mucosa in patients with inﬂammatory bowel disease ( IBD ) [ 94 , 95 ] . Recent studies have also demonstrated that this cytokine increases paracellular permeability in intestinal epithelial cells through the redistribution and expression of TJ proteins and the rear - rangement of the actin cytoskeleton . In intestinal T84 cells , IFN - c induces the cellular internalization of transmem - brane TJ proteins ( occludin , claudin - 1 , claudin - 4 , and JAM - A ) from the junctional region , resulting in a decrease in TER and increase in dextran ﬂux [ 96 , 97 ] . Immunoﬂu - orescence microscopy has revealed that this protein internalization is mediated by large actin - coated vacuoles that originate from the apical plasma membrane . Impor - tantly , the internalization of occludin and JAM - A into the subapical cytosolic compartment is observed in the mucosal biopsies of patients with ulcerative colitis ( UC ) [ 97 ] . The vacuoles are co - localized with active myosin and are suppressed by inhibition of ROCK , but not myosin light chain kinase ( MLCK ) . IFN - c activates a ROCK regulator , small GTPase RhoA , and also increases ROCK expression . Taken together , these facts indicate that IFN - c increases acto - myosin contractility in a ROCK - dependent manner and induces TJ protein internalization , resulting in intesti - nal TJ disruption . PDZ1 PDZ2 PDZ3 SH3 GUK ZO - 1 PDZ1 PDZ2 PDZ3 SH3 GUK ZO - 2 PDZ1 PDZ2 PDZ3 SH3 GUK ZO - 3 Claudins ZO - 2 ZO - 3 JAM - A Occludin Actin Cingulin ZO - 1 ZO - 3 Claudins Actin Cingulin ZO - 1 Claudins OccludinCingulin Occludin Fig . 3 Interaction of proteins with the integral scaffold tight junction ( TJ ) proteins , zonula occludens ( ZO ) - 1 , - 2 , and - 3 . ZO proteins carry 3 post - synaptic density 95 / Drosophila disc large / zona - occludens 1 ( PDZ ) domains , a Src homology - 3 ( SH3 ) domain , and a region of homology to guanylate kinase ( GUK ) from the side of the N - termi - nus . Several TJ proteins and cytoskeletal actin interact with the ZO proteins Regulation of intestinal tight junction 637 123 Tumor necrosis factor - a Tumor necrosis factor - a ( TNF - a ) is a proinﬂammatory cytokine that is produced mainly by activated T cells and macrophages . As the efﬁcacy of TNF - a antibodies for the treatment of IBD has shown , TNF - a , like IFN - c , has a crucial role in the pathogenesis of IBD [ 98 , 99 ] . Clinical studies show that this cytokine is elevated in the intestinal mucosa , serum , and stools of IBD patients [ 95 , 100 , 101 ] . TNF - a is known to induce apoptosis and inﬂammatory response in intestinal epithelial cells [ 102 ] , and recent studies have also demonstrated that it impairs the intestinal TJ barrier through different mechanisms . In intestinal Caco - 2 cells , treatment with TNF - a decreases the TER and increases the inulin permeability by 48 h post - treatment ; however , the alterations delayed the TNF - a - induced decrease in ZO - 1 , a TJ integral protein , suggesting the presence of additional mechanisms [ 103 ] . The authors then revealed that the MLCK expression , which has an important role in TJ regulation , was interre - lated with the TNF - a - induced barrier defect . The TNF - a - induced decrease in TER is well correlated with MLCK Table 1 Cytokines and growth factors which increase intestinal TJ permeability a Permeability is based on results for TER and the paracellular passage of molecules b Symbols : and ; indicate increases and decreases in the protein or mRNA expression , respectively Cytokine and growth factor Permeability a Cell Mechanism b IFN - c Increase T84 Myosin II - dependent vacuolarization , internalization of JAM - A , occludin , claudin - 1 and claudin - 4 [ 96 , 97 ] TNF - a Increase Caco - 2 ZO - 1 ; [ 103 ] Increase Caco - 2 MLCK : , pMLC : [ 104 , 106 ] Increase HT29 / B6 Claudin - 2 : [ 107 ] TNF - a / IFN - c Increase Caco - 2 MLCK : , pMLC : [ 109 , 110 ] LIGHT / IFN - c Increase Caco - 2 MLCK : , pMLC : , Caveolar endocytosis ( occludin , ZO - 1 and claudin - 1 ) [ 111 ] IL - 1 b Increase Caco - 2 Occludin ; [ 116 ] Increase Caco - 2 MLCK : , pMLC : [ 117 ] IL - 4 Increase T84 Claudin - 2 : [ 121 ] IL - 6 Increase Caco - 2 , T84 Claudin - 2 : [ 128 ] IL - 13 Increase T84 Claudin - 2 : [ 142 ] Increase HT29 / B6 Claudin - 2 : [ 141 ] Increase Caco - 2 Potentiate oxidant [ 150 ] Table 2 Cytokines and growth factors which decrease and restore intestinal TJ permeability a Permeability is based on results for TER and the paracellular passage of molecules b Symbols : and ; indicate increases and decreases in the protein or mRNA expression , respectively Cytokine and growth factor Permeability a Cell Mechanism b IL - 10 Decrease T84 Neutralize IFN - c [ 134 ] IL - 17 Decrease T84 Claudin - 1 : , Claudin - 2 : [ 146 ] TGF - a antibody Decrease Caco - 2 Neutralize hydrogen peroxide [ 149 ] TGF - b Decrease T84 Claudin - 1 : [ 151 ] Decrease HT29 / B6 Claudin - 4 : [ 152 ] Decrease T84 Neutralize EHEC , restoration of occludin , claudin - 2 and ZO - 1 expression [ 151 ] Decrease T84 Neutralize IFN - c [ 152 ] Decrease T84 Neutralize cryptosporidium parvum [ 153 ] EGF Decrease Caco - 2 Neutralize hydrogen peroxide , restoration of occludin and ZO - 1 distribution [ 155 ] Decrease Caco - 2 Neutralize hydrogen peroxide , restoration of actin cytoskeleton assembly [ 157 , 292 ] Decrease Caco - 2 Neutralize ethanol , restoration of microtubule assembly and oxidation / nitration of tubulin [ 158 ] Decrease Caco - 2 Neutralize acetaldehyde , restoration of occludin and ZO - 1 distribution [ 42 , 159 ] 638 T . Suzuki 123 expression and MLC phosphorylation , and is inhibited by a MLCK inhibitor [ 104 ] . Further , mice injected with TNF - a show increased MLCK expression in the colon [ 105 ] . A series of their studies shows that the NF ( nuclear factor ) - j B signaling mediates TNF - a - induced MLCK expression and barrier defect [ 106 ] . In intestinal HT29 / B6 cells , TNF - a was seen to decrease TER through claudin - 2 expression [ 107 ] . Claudin - 2 is expressed throughout the intestines and forms a pore for cations such as Na ? . These TNF - a - induced alterations are blocked by the pharmaco - logical inhibition of phosphatidyl inositol - 3 kinase ( PI3K ) , indicating the involvement of PI3K / Akt signaling . Collectively , TNF - a directly impairs the intestinal TJ bar - rier through cytoskeletal rearrangement and TJ protein expression . Combination of TNF - a and IFN - c Under inﬂammatory conditions , tissues including the intestinal epithelium are exposed to multiple cytokines [ 95 , 100 , 108 ] . Both TNF - a and IFN - c are often increased in intestinal mucosa under inﬂammatory conditions including IBD [ 95 ] . Although the application of multiple cytokines to the experimental model complicates the mechanistic interpretation , it may more faithfully reﬂect pathophysiological conditions . The achievement in under - standing the combined effect of TNF - a and IFN - c is a good example . As described above , TNF - a and IFN - c independently cause intestinal barrier dysfunction . Furthermore , studies have revealed that these 2 cytokines synergistically impair intestinal barrier function . In intestinal Caco - 2 cells , TNF - a only induces a decrease in TER and an increase in dextran ﬂux after treatment with IFN - c , indicating that IFN - c primes the intestinal cells to regulate TJ integrity in response to TNF - a [ 109 ] . The TNF a / IFN - c - induced barrier dysfunction is caused by actomyosin contractility , resulting from MLCK expression and MLC phosphorylation . It is known that TNF - a activates the signaling pathways leading to various cellular responses through TNF - a receptor ( TNFR ) 1 and 2 on the membrane surface . IFN - c increases both TNFR1 and 2 in the cells , but a blocking antibody for TNFR2 , but not TNFR1 , inhibits the TNF a / IFN - c - induced barrier dysfunction , indicating that IFN - c primes the cells by increasing TNFR2 in response to TNF a [ 110 ] . In addition , the same research group has reported that another TNF - a family member , lymphotoxin - like inducible protein ( LIGHT ) , synergizes with IFN - c to induce intestinal barrier dysfunction [ 111 ] . This LIGHT / IFN - c - mediated barrier dysfunction requires MLCK activation and internalization of TJ proteins . Consistent with these observations , TNF - a and IFN - c synergistically induce intestinal barrier defects through cytoskeletal rearrangement . Interleukin - 1 b Interleukin - 1 b ( IL - 1 b ) , an IL - 1 family member , is one of the ﬁrst cytokines to be discovered . It has been reported that IL - 1 b is markedly elevated in intestinal mucosa under inﬂammatory conditions , such as in Crohn’s disease ( CD ) patients [ 108 , 112 ] . A direct correlation has been found between increased levels of IL - 1 b and increases in the severity of intestinal inﬂammation in CD patients [ 108 , 113 ] . In clinical studies , an IL - 1 receptor antagonist is currently being developed for therapeutic usage [ 114 , 115 ] . Thus , IL - 1 b plays a central role in the intestinal inﬂam - matory process , and recent studies show that IL - 1 b causes increased intestinal TJ permeability . In intestinal Caco - 2 cells , IL - 1 b decreases TER and increases inulin ﬂux [ 116 , 117 ] . This barrier defect is in part mediated by the decreased expression and redistribu - tion of occludin , an integral transmembrane TJ protein [ 116 ] . The IL - 1 b - induced decrease in occludin expression occurs at a transcription level . As another mechanism , the reduction of TER by IL - 1 b is associated with MLCK expression and MLC phosphorylation [ 117 ] . The authors show that the knockdown of NF - j B p65 inhibits the decrease in occludin and increases in MLCK expression , indicating NF - j B - dependent transcriptional regulation by IL - 1 b . Further , MEKK1 activity is required for IL - 1 b - induced NF - j B activation [ 118 ] . Collectively , IL - 1 b impairs the intestinal TJ barrier through decreases in occludin and cytoskeletal rearrangement . Interleukin - 4 Interleukin - 4 ( IL - 4 ) , which is predominantly secreted by T cells , basophils , and mast cells , plays a central role in humoral and adaptive immune responses . IL - 4 is regarded as a major mediator of allergic diseases , because it pro - motes the differentiation of naı¨ve helper T - cells into Th2 cells , the proliferation and differentiation of B cells , B cell class switching to IgE , and the expression of MHC class II antigens and low - afﬁnity IgE receptors [ 119 , 120 ] . Fur - thermore , IL - 4 leads to intestinal barrier impairment , although the mechanism remains unclear . In intestinal T84 cells , IL - 4 decreases TER and increa - ses dextran ﬂux [ 121 , 122 ] . Immunoblot analysis and immunoﬂuorescence microscopy reveal that IL - 4 induces pore - forming claudin - 2 expression and localization at the TJs [ 121 ] . Claudin - 2 , however , is characterized as forming pores for cations , but not for macromolecules such as dextran , suggesting the presence of additional mechanisms . Another research group demonstrated that the pharmaco - logical inhibition of PI3K blocks the IL - 4 - induced reduction in TER in T84 cells , indicating the involvement of the PI3K pathways in IL - 4 - induced barrier impairment Regulation of intestinal tight junction 639 123 [ 123 ] . However , claudin - 2 expression was not examined by that group . Interleukin - 6 Interleukin - 6 ( IL - 6 ) is a pleiotropic cytokine whose expression is important for the host response to a number of infections , and which exerts antigen - speciﬁc immune responses and has both pro - as well as anti - inﬂammatory effects [ 124 , 125 ] . Excessive secretion of IL - 6 and dys - regulation of the signaling pathway may play a major role in the pathogenesis of many diseases , including IBD . A clinical study showed that IL - 6 is produced in substantially higher amounts in both the serum and tissues of IBD patients [ 108 , 126 ] . The major source of IL - 6 seen in IBD has been shown to be intestinal epithelial cells and lamina propria mononuclear cells [ 127 ] . Recent studies also indi - cate the involvement of IL - 6 in intestinal TJ regulation . IL - 6 increases paracellular permeability selectively to cations , but not to macromolecules , with an increase in pore - forming claudin - 2 in intestinal Caco - 2 cells [ 128 ] . These alterations are also observed in T84 cells and mouse colons . This IL - 6 - mediated claudin - 2 expression and bar - rier defect require the MEK / ERK and PI3K / Akt signaling activations . IL - 6 binds to cell surface IL - 6 receptors , which in turn initiate intracellular signaling via gp130 , a signal - transducer subunit . The claudin - 2 expression induced by IL - 6 is caused at a transcription level in a Cdx2 - dependent mechanism . In addition , IL - 6 is necessary for the devel - opment of gut barrier dysfunction after hemorrhagic shock and resuscitation ( HS / R ) in mice [ 129 ] . HS / R increases intestinal permeability to dextran ﬂux and bacterial trans - location to mesenteric lymph nodes along with increased mucosal IL - 6 expression and decreased occludin and ZO - 1 expression in the intestinal epithelium . However , these alterations are not observed in IL - 6 knockout mice , indi - cating that IL - 6 has a central role in barrier defect formation after HS / R . Interleukin - 10 Interleukin - 10 ( IL - 10 ) , a homodimeric cytokine mainly produced by Th2 cells , regulatory T cells , monocytes / macrophages , and dendritic cells , is regarded as an anti - inﬂammatory cytokine [ 130 , 131 ] . In vitro studies have demonstrated that IL - 10 opposes the cellular functions induced by TNF - a and Th1 cytokines such as IFN - c [ 132 ] . IL - 10 knockout mice , which are widely used as a model of spontaneous colitis , show increased intestinal permeability with elevated TNF - a , IL - 1 b , and IL - 6 expression prior to exhibiting histologic signs of intestinal inﬂammation [ 133 ] . These observations suggest that IL - 10 has a role in the protection of the intestinal barrier . Consistent with this hypothesis , in vivo and in vitro studies have shown that IL - 10 exhibits protective effects on the intestinal TJ barrier . In intestinal T84 cells , IL - 10 prevents INF - c - induced increa - ses in mannitol and inulin ﬂux [ 134 ] . Clinical and animal studies have demonstrated that a major physiological consequence of total parenteral nutrition ( TPN ) is the loss of intestinal barrier integrity [ 135 – 137 ] . Mice administered with TPN show increased intestinal paracellular perme - ability and decreased levels of TJ proteins ( ZO - 1 , ZO - 2 and occludin ) , concomitantly with a decrease in mucosal IL - 10 expression [ 138 ] . In these mice , IL - 10 treatment restores the intestinal barrier defect . Interleukin - 13 Interleukin - 13 ( IL - 13 ) is an immunoregulatory cytokine that plays a key role in the pathogenesis of allergic asthma and atopy . It is mainly secreted by Th2 cells , natural killer cells , visceral smooth muscle cells , eosinophils , mast cells , and basophils . It has been reported that IL - 13 expression is elevated under inﬂammatory conditions , such as in the colonic mucosa of UC and CD patients [ 139 , 140 ] , and that this elevation possibly contributes to intestinal barrier dysfunction . In intestinal T84 and HT29 / B6 cells , IL - 13 increases pore - forming claudin - 2 expression and the paracellular permeability with little effect on other TJ proteins [ 139 , 141 , 142 ] . The colonic epithelium of mice adminis - tered with IL - 13 also exhibits increased claudin - 2 expression and permeability to Na ? [ 142 ] . IL - 6 - mediated claudin - 2 expression and TJ permeability require activation of the PI3K / Akt signaling pathways . Interleukin - 17 Th17 has recently received considerable attention as it exhibits effector functions distinct from those of Th1 and Th2 cells . Interleukin - 17 ( IL - 17 ) is mainly produced in Th17 cells , potently induces tissue inﬂammation , and is associated with the pathogenesis a variety of autoimmune conditions including rheumatoid arthritis , multiple sclero - sis , and IBD [ 143 – 145 ] . Information regarding intestinal barrier regulation by IL - 17 is limited , but one study has demonstrated that this cytokine induces claudin expression . In intestinal T84 cells , IL - 17 increases 2 claudin isoforms , claudin - 1 and - 2 , which have opposing effects on TJ integrity [ 146 ] : claudin - 1 is categorized as a barrier - form - ing isoform , while claudin - 2 forms cation - selective pores . As a consequence of the increases in claudin - 1 and - 2 induced by IL - 17 , the cells exhibit increased TER and decreased mannitol permeability [ 146 ] . Interestingly , the induction of claudin - 1 and - 2 is mediated through distinct signaling pathways . The pharmacological inhibition of 640 T . Suzuki 123 MEK blocks IL - 17 - induced claudin - 2 , but not claudin - 1 expression . The MEK pathway is also required for the claudin - 2 expression induced by other cytokines , such as IL - 6 and IL - 13 , as described above [ 128 , 142 ] . However , the mechanisms underlying IL - 17 - mediated claduin - 1 expression are yet to be elucidated . Transforming growth factor - a Transforming growth factor - a ( TGF - a ) is a member of the EGF family and is synthesized as a transmembrane pre - cursor with EGF structural units in the extracellular domain [ 147 ] . The soluble form of TGF - a is released from the transmembrane protein by proteolytic cleavage . TGF - a binds to the EGF receptor on the cell surface and activates cellular signaling . Accordingly , TGF - a is known to show a similar potency to that of EGF , demonstrating , for example , promotive effects on cell proliferation and differentiation [ 148 ] . However , the effects of TGF - a on the intestinal barrier are reportedly controversial . Forsyth et al . [ 149 ] demonstrated that hydrogen peroxide - mediated barrier defects are blocked by a TGF - a antibody in intestinal Caco - 2 cells , indicating that the oxidative stress induces cleavage and release of endogenous TGF - a and that the released TGF - a contributes to barrier impairment . This effect is mediated by the EGFR - MEK / ERK pathway . In contrast , Rao et al . [ 150 ] demonstrate that oxidative stress - induced barrier disruption , which is induced by xanthine oxidase and xanthine , is potentiated by the TGF - a antibody in Caco - 2 cells . Transforming growth factor - b Transforming growth factor - b ( TGF - b ) is a highly pleio - tropic cytokine that is apparently secreted by all cell types . This growth factor is proposed to act as a cellular switch to regulate immune function , proliferation , and epithelial mesenchymal transition . Previous studies have demon - strated that TGF - b has protective or promotive effects on intestinal barrier function . In intestinal T84 cells , TGF - b increases the basal TER in both a dose - and time - dependent manner [ 151 ] . This increase in TER is mediated by claudin - 1 expression through MEK / ERK signaling . In intestinal HT29 / B6 cells , TGF - b decreases the paracellular perme - ability with increased claudin - 4 expression [ 152 ] . Further , TGF - b protects the intestinal TJ barrier against noxious stimuli including IFN - c [ 152 ] , cryptosporidium parvum [ 153 ] , and enterohemorrhagic Escherichia coli ( EHEC ) [ 151 ] . For example , in T84 cells , EHEC disrupts the TJ barrier by disturbing the expression and distribution of TJ proteins ( ZO - 1 , claudin - 2 , and occludin ) . Pre - treatment of the cells with TGF - b attenuates the EHEC - induced TJ disruption [ 151 ] . Epidermal growth factor Epidermal growth factor ( EGF ) is largely produced in and secreted from the submandibular glands , kidney , lactating mammary glands , and pancreas . The activity derived from EGF secreted by submandibular glands can be detected in the intestinal contents . EGF is initially synthesized as a 130 - kDa precursor transmembrane protein , and the mature and soluble form is released by proteolytic cleavage . The EGF receptor is expressed on the membrane surface of most cell types , and EGF mediates various biological functions , including cellular proliferation , differentiation , and survival through the receptor . Further , recent studies have shown that EGF protects intestinal barrier function against noxious stimuli including oxidative stress , ethanol , and acetaldehyde . Numerous studies have demonstrated that oxidative stress impairs intestinal barrier function [ 154 ] . In intestinal Caco - 2 cells , pre - treatment with EGF inhibits oxidative stress - induced barrier disruption , as indicated by TER , macromolecule ﬂux , and TJ protein ( occludin and ZO - 1 ) distributions [ 155 ] . EGF is known to activate several sig - naling pathways such as PKC and MAPK . The activation of the MEK / ERK pathway seems to be required for the EGF - mediated protection of the intestinal barrier against the oxidative stress , because pre - treatment of cells with a MEK inhibitor blocks the EGF - mediated effect [ 155 ] . In cells treated with EGF , ERK directly interacts with occludin , although the speciﬁc role is still unknown . Another research group has demonstrated that PKC - b and - f isoforms also have an important role in the EGF - medi - ated protection of barrier integrity against oxidative stress [ 156 , 157 ] . On the other hand , ethanol and its oxidized metabolite , acetaldehyde , also induce intestinal hyperper - meability , which contributes to the development of alcoholic liver disease ( ALD ) ( see ‘‘Alcoholic liver dis - ease’’ ) . EGF prevents the microtubule disassembly and paracellular hyperpermeability induced by ethanol in Caco - 2 cells [ 158 ] . Acetaldehyde , which is produced from ethanol by alcohol dehydrogenase , disrupts barrier func - tion , as indicated by TER , macromolecule ﬂux , and TJ protein ( occludin and ZO - 1 ) redistributions in Caco - 2 cells . Pretreatment of cells with EGF inhibits these alterations through the activation of EGFR - phospholipase ( PLC ) - c - PKC b 1 / e and EGFR - MEK / ERK signaling pathways [ 42 , 159 ] . Intestinal TJ regulation by pathogens A variety of exogenous bacteria symbiotically live in our intestinal lumen . They contribute to the maintenance of intestinal function and health ; however , on occasion , Regulation of intestinal tight junction 641 123 pathogenic bacteria intrude into the intestines and tissues to cause infectious diseases . The interaction of enteric pathogens with intestinal epithelial cells often disturbs the intestinal TJ barrier , leading to abnormal electrolyte and ﬂuid transport and tissue inﬂammation . The pathogens disrupt the barrier through direct binding to epithelial cells or the secretion of toxins . This section provides examples of barrier disruption by enteric pathogens and describes the underlying molecular mechanisms . Vibrio cholerae Enteric infection with V . cholerae , a gram - negative path - ogenic bacterium , induces diarrhea leading to dehydration . Studies suggest that intestinal barrier impairment contrib - utes in part to the pathogen - induced disaster . The major reservoirs of V . cholerae are aquatic sources , and infections are often associated with copepods , shellﬁsh , and aquatic plants . V . cholerae produces several toxins , such as Cholerae toxin , hemmagglutinin / protease ( HA / P ) , Zonula occludens toxin ( ZOT ) , and accessary cholerae entero - toxin . ZOT and HA / P have been reported to disrupt intestinal barrier function . ZOT has been found as a second enterotoxin produced in V . cholerae [ 160 , 161 ] . It decreases TER in the small intestines of rats , rabbits , and intestinal Caco - 2 cells [ 161 ] . ZOT is synthesized in the V . cholerae outer membrane and has a molecular mass of * 45 kDa ( * 399 a . a . ) , and the C - terminal fragment of 12 kDa ( a . a . 288 – 399 ) is excreted in the intestinal host milieu . The C - terminal fragment seems to be responsible for the disruptive effect on the TJs , as the reduction in TER caused by a truncated mutant named D G - ZOT , which retains a . a . 264 – 399 , is nearly comparable to that by full - length ZOT in intestinal Caco - 2 cells [ 162 ] . The ZOT and D G - ZOT induce the redistribution of TJ proteins ( occludin and ZO - 1 ) and cytoskeletal rearrangement , resulting in barrier disruption [ 163 ] . This process requires PKC a activation . Further , structure – function analysis has identiﬁed a hexapeptide ( FCIGRL , a . a . 288 – 293 ) as one of the biologically active domains of D G - ZOT [ 162 ] . This hexapeptide , FCIGRL , is structurally similar to a motif ( SLIGRL ) contained in the ligand for proteinase activated receptor ( PAR ) 2 , which has a role in TJ regulation . The FCIGRL - mediated disruptive effects on the TJs are not observed in the small intestines of PAR2 knockout mice , indicating that PAR2 is one of the receptors for D G - ZOT and that the hexapeptide at least partially contributes to ZOT - induced TJ disruption [ 163 ] . However , additional mechanisms and receptors are also suggested as a higher concentration of FCIGRL is required for biological activity than that of D G - ZOT [ 163 ] , and a glycine residue at 298 ( referred to the full - length ZOT ) has a critical role in the binding of D G - ZOT to the intestinal membrane [ 162 ] . The HA / P produced by V . cholerae is a zinc - binding metalloprotease that disrupts the intestinal barrier through occludin degradation . The HA / P was identiﬁed from results showing that the culture supernatants of toxin - attenuated vaccine strains still exhibit a disruptive effect on intestinal TJs [ 164 ] . The HA / P activity cleaves the extracellular domain of occludin , resulting in the dissociation of ZO - 1 from the intracellular domain of occludin [ 165 ] . This dis - sociation ﬁnally results in actin cytoskeletal rearrangement and hyperpermeability . Enteropathogenic E . coli EPEC , a noninvasive enteric pathogen , causes acute watery diarrhea and is of great medical importance in developing countries . This pathogen disrupts the barrier through attachment to the intestinal epithelial cells . EPEC infection induces paracellular hyperpermeability in the mouse intes - tines ( ileum and colon ) and intestinal T84 cells , as indicated by decreased TER [ 166 – 170 ] . In T84 cells infected with EPEC , cytoskeletal rearrangement , and aberrant distribu - tions of TJ proteins ( ZO - 1 , occludin , and claudin - 1 ) are observed [ 166 ] . Faroll et al . demonstrated that EPEC - induced barrier disruption is attenuated by the pharmaco - logical inhibition of either PKC f or MLCK [ 171 ] . MLCK inhibition did not inhibit the EPEC - induced PKC f translo - cation to intercellular junctions , but it remains unclear whether these 2 pathways independently affect the TJ barrier or whether PKC f acts proximally in the MLCK pathway . Recently , Dean et al . [ 172 ] have revealed that the EPEC - induced barrier disruption is mediated by two effector molecules , E . coli - secreted protein F ( EspF ) and mitochon - drial - associated protein ( Map ) , and a bacterial surface protein , intimin . EspF is required for the barrier disruption at an early time point after EPEC infection in mice [ 168 ] , but the precise roles of the 3 proteins are still unclear . Enterohemorrhagic E . coli EHEC , also referred to as verotoxin - producing E . coli or Shiga toxin - producing E . coli , is a pathogenic bacterium . Enteric infection causes diarrhea and hemorrhagic colitis , and can lead to life - threatening systemic effects including hemolytic - uremic syndrome and thrombotic thrombocyto - penic purpura . Although EHEC organisms produce Shiga toxins or verotoxins , which inhibit cell protein synthesis , these toxins do not appear to play a role in the diarrheal illness induced by EHEC [ 173 ] . In intestinal T84 cells , live EHEC , but not dead cells or a conditioned medium , disrupt the TJ barrier with redistribution of TJ proteins ( ZO - 1 and occludin ) , suggesting that the direct interaction of bacteria with the intestinal cells triggers barrier disruption [ 173 ] . The EHEC - induced hyperpermeability is attenuated by a 642 T . Suzuki 123 MLCK inhibitor , indicating that MLC activation and cytoskeletal contraction is one of the underlying mecha - nisms [ 173 ] . Although EHEC translocates PKC f to the intercellular junction , as is the case in EPEC , PKC f does not seem to be involved in the EHEC - induced barrier disruption [ 171 ] . Clostridium perfringens Clostridium perfringens is a gram - positive , anaerobic , and spore - forming bacterium of the genus Clostridium . C . perfringens is ever present in nature and can be found as a normal component of decaying vegetation , marine sedi - ment , the intestinal tract of humans and other vertebrates and insects , and soil . Therefore , this pathogen is the third most common cause of food poisoning in the UK , and the US [ 174 ] . C . perfringens induces diarrhea through enterotoxin ( CPE , * 35 kDa ) secretion [ 175 ] . CPE consists of two functional domains , an N - terminal cytotoxic region and a C - terminal receptor - binding region ( C - CPE ) [ 176 , 177 ] . Two functional receptors for CPE expressed in the various cell types , including the intestinal epithelial cells , have been identiﬁed as CPE - R and RVP - 1 [ 178 , 179 ] . Interestingly , the 2 receptors were designated as claudin - 3 and - 4 , because the amino acid sequences of the receptors are similar to claudin - 1 and - 2 , which were the only claudin members identiﬁed at that time [ 180 ] . CPE and C - CPE induce intestinal hyperpermeability in animals and cell cultures , as indicated by macromolecule ﬂux and TER [ 181 ] . The direct binding of C - CPE to the extracellular domains of claudin - 3 and - 4 causes the internalization of claudins from the junctions [ 180 ] . Further , CPE becomes associated with occludin during the internalization [ 182 ] . Freeze fracture replica images also show disintegrated TJ strands in cells exposed to CPE [ 180 ] . Intestinal TJ regulation by nutrients and food factors Although information is still limited , food factors and nutrients have been speculated to participate in intestinal TJ regulation . Studies suggest that several food factors , such as glutamine , polyphenols , and probiotics , enhance and protect TJ barrier integrity and could be developed as therapeutic tools for diseases associated with barrier defects . In contrast , alcohol and its metabolite , acetalde - hyde , impair the TJ barrier , and this impairment may play a role in disease pathogenesis . This section summarizes the evidence from experimental and clinical studies showing intestinal TJ regulation by food factors and nutrients . Tables 3 and 4 presents lists of nutrients and food factors known to increase and decrease the intestinal TJ barrier and their molecular mechanisms , respectively . Amino acids and peptides Among the many amino acids , glutamine ( Gln ) and tryp - tophan ( Trp ) have been reported to maintain , promote , and protect intestinal barrier function . Gln , one of the non - essential amino acids , is a primary energy source for intestinal epithelial cells . In vivo , the protective effects of Gln on the intestinal barrier have been shown in highly stressed patients [ 183 ] and rodents subjected to total parental nutrition [ 184 – 186 ] . In intestinal Caco - 2 cells , exogenous Gln increases claudin - 1 , but not occludin or ZO - 1 , in the detergent - insoluble fraction of cells [ 187 ] . Further , Gln deprivation by a combination of Gln - free media and Gln synthase inhibition decreases TER and increases mannitol permeability [ 187 ] . The barrier impairment is caused by the perturbation of TJ protein ( ZO - 1 , occludin and claudin - 1 ) expression and distribution . The Gln deprivation - induced TER reduction is restored by PI3K Table 3 Nutrients and food factors increase intestinal TJ permeability Nutrients and food factors a Permeability Cell Mechanism b Amino acid Gln deprivation Increase Caco - 2 Occludin ; , claudin - 1 $ , ZO - 1 $ [ 187 , 188 ] Fatty acid EPA , DHA , c - LA Increase Caco - 2 Unknown [ 195 , 196 ] Capric acid Increase Caco - 2 Occludin $ , ZO - 1 $ , MLCK activation [ 198 , 199 ] Lauric acid Increase Caco - 2 MLCK activation [ 198 , 199 ] Other Ethanol Increase Caco - 2 ZO - 1 $ , occludin $ , pMLC : [ 244 ] Acetaldehyde Increase Caco - 2 ZO - 1 $ , occludin $ , E - cadherin $ , b - catenin $ [ 43 , 220 , 246 ] a Permeability is based on TER and the paracellular passage of molecules b Symbols : and ; indicate increases and decreases in the protein or mRNA expression , respectively . The symbol $ indicates alterations in the cellular distribution of the proteins Regulation of intestinal tight junction 643 123 inhibition or knockdown , indicating the involvement of the PI3K / Akt pathway [ 188 ] . Another research group demon - strates that Gln protects the intestinal TJ barrier from acetaldehyde , which is an oxidized metabolite of ethanol , in Caco - 2 cells [ 189 ] and human intestinal biopsy specimens [ 190 ] . Pre - treatment of cells and intestinal tissues with Gln attenuates the acetaldehyde - induced redistribution of ZO - 1 and occludin . The Gln - mediated protective effect requires EGF receptor activation . A promotive effect of Trp on the intestinal barrier has been found in the analysis of intestinal contents of ovo - alubumin - induced food allergy model mice [ 191 ] . Trp increases basal TER in Caco - 2 cells in a dose - dependent manner ; however , the underlying molecular mechanism for this increase is totally unknown [ 191 ] . Peptides derived from food proteins such as milk and cheese have been shown to suppress intestinal permeability [ 192 – 194 ] . A casein - derived octapeptide ( Asn - Pro - Trp - Asp - Gln ) increases both occludin expression and TER in Caco - 2 cells [ 194 ] . Fatty acids Long chain fatty acids ( LCFAs ) have roles as cell mem - brane components , cellular energy sources , and precursors of eicosanoids in our body , and contribute to cellular functions . The regulation of paracellular permeability by LCFAs , such as eicosapentaenoic , docosahexaenoic , and c - linoleic acids ( EPA , DHA and c - LA ) , has been demon - strated in vitro , although the results are controversial . In intestinal Caco - 2 cells , treatment with EPA , DHA , or c - LA decreases TER and increases permeability to FITC - sul - fonic acids [ 195 , 196 ] . In contrast , EPA , DHA , arachidonic acid , c - LA , and di - homo - c - LA increase TER in T84 cells [ 197 ] . Except for c - LA , these LCFAs attenuate IL - 4 - induced increases in dextran ﬂux . Incorporation of these LCFA into epithelial membrane phospholipids has been observed , but the molecular mechanisms underlying their barrier regulation remain unclear . Medium chain fatty acids ( MCFAs ) are less commonly found in nature and foods , but are relatively common in milk and coconut oil as triglyceride forms . It is not clear whether food - derived MCFAs affect intestinal permeabil - ity , but two MCFAs , capric ( C10 ) and lauric ( C12 ) acids , which are known drug absorption enhancers , increase paracellular permeability [ 198 – 200 ] . In Caco - 2 cells , C10 and C12 rapidly decrease TER and increase mannitol ﬂux . C10 , but not C12 , induces the redistribution of TJ proteins ( occludin and ZO - 1 ) and rearrangement of the actin cyto - skeleton , indicating that the two MCFAs operate via different molecular mechanisms [ 199 ] . Both the C10 - and C12 - induced paracellular permeability requires intracellu - lar Ca 2 ? - dependent MLCK activation . C10 , but not C12 , mobilizes Ca 2 ? from the inositol 3 - phosphate - sensitive intracellular Ca 2 ? store via phospholipase C activation . The levels of short chain fatty acids ( SCFAs ) , mainly acetic , propionic , and butyric acids ( C4 ) , are limited in foods , being mainly found in vinegar and fermented foods such as kimchi and cheese . In contrast , the intestinal microﬂora metabolizes undigested carbohydrates and pro - duces a large amount of SCFAs in the large intestines . The production of SCFAs is important for normal intestinal biology such as energy salvage , cell proliferation , and barrier function [ 201 , 202 ] . Some studies conclude that SCFAs regulate the intestinal barrier as a consequence of stimulated cell proliferation and differentiation [ 203 , 204 ] , but mechanisms independent from these stimulations have also been reported . Different research groups have con - sistently demonstrated that butyric acid enhances intestinal barrier integrity . Peng et al . [ 205 ] have reported that butyric acid increases basal TJ integrity and promotes Ca 2 ? - induced TJ assembly , as indicated by TER and / or inulin ﬂux , in intestinal Caco - 2 cells . In Ca 2 ? - induced TJ assembly , butyric acid facilitates ZO - 1 and occludin localization at the intercellular junctions . The activation of AMP - activated protein kinase ( AMPK ) is involved in the butyric acid - mediated effect . The promotive effects of acetic and propionic acids on barrier integrity have also been shown . Acetic and propionic acids increase TER and decrease permeability to lucifer yellow in a dose - dependent manner in the rat colon and intestinal cells ( Caco - 2 and T84 ) [ 206 ] . The acetic acid - mediated increase in TER is suppressed by the pharmacological inhibition of PI3K and Gq protein [ 206 ] . Recently , two functional receptors for SCFAs , GPCR41 , and 43 , have been identiﬁed [ 207 , 208 ] . GPCR43 is expressed in the colon [ 209 , 210 ] and is associated with Gq and Gi / o proteins [ 208 ] , although the implications of these associations for intestinal barrier regulation are unknown . Vitamins Vitamins are essential nutrients needed in small amounts for a variety of cellular functions . They are categorized into water - and fat - soluble groups . There have been very few reports on the roles of two fat - soluble vitamins , A and D , in intestinal barrier regulation . Vitamin A and D receptors belong to the nuclear receptor superfamily of steroid / thy - roid hormone receptors [ 211 , 212 ] . These receptors are expressed in most organs , including the intestinal epithe - lium , and transcriptionally regulate gene expressions . Retinol , an alcohol form of vitamin A , partially attenuates Clostridium difﬁcile toxin A - induced decreases in TER in intestinal Caco - 2 cells [ 213 ] ; however , the underlying mechanism remains to be elucidated . The protective effect of vitamin D on the intestinal barrier has been seen in the 644 T . Suzuki 123 Table 4 Nutrients and food factors decrease and restore intestinal TJ permeability Nutrients and food factors a Permeability Cell Mechanism b Amino acid Gln Not determined Caco - 2 Claudin - 1 $ [ 187 ] Gln Decrease Caco - 2 Neutralize acetaldehyde , restoration of occludin and ZO - 1 distribution [ 189 ] Trp Decrease Caco - 2 Unknown [ 191 ] Peptide Casein peptide Decrease Caco - 2 Occludin : [ 194 ] Cheese peptide Decrease Caco - 2 Unknown [ 192 ] Fatty acid EPA , DHA , arachidonic acid , c - LA , di - homo - c - LA Decrease T84 Unknown [ 197 ] EPA , DHA , arachidonic acid , di - homo - c - LA Decrease T84 Neutralize IL - 4 [ 197 ] Acetic acid Decrease Caco - 2 , T84 Unknown [ 206 ] Propionic acid Decrease Caco - 2 , T84 Unknown [ 206 ] Butyric acid Decrease Caco - 2 Promotion of occludin and ZO - 1 assembly in Ca - induced TJ reassembly [ 205 ] Vitamin Vitamin A Decrease Caco - 2 Neutralize Clostridium difﬁcile toxin A [ 213 ] Vitamin D Not determined SW480 ZO1 : , claudin - 1 : , claudin - 2 : , E - cadherin : [ 214 ] Decrease Caco - 2 Neutralize DSS [ 214 ] Polyphenol Quercetin Decrease Caco - 2 Claudin - 4 : , ZO - 2 $ , claudin - 1 $ , occludin $ [ 217 ] Kaempferol Decrease Caco - 2 ZO - 2 : , claudin - 4 : occluidn $ , claudin - 1 $ , claudin - 3 $ [ 218 ] Myricetin Decrease Caco - 2 Unknown [ 217 ] Genistein Decrease Caco - 2 Neutralize hydrogen peroxide , occludin $ , ZO - 1 $ [ 40 ] Decrease Caco - 2 Neutralize acetaldehyde , occludin $ , ZO - 1 $ [ 43 ] Curcumin Decrease Caco - 2 Neutralize TNF - a [ 106 ] Decrease Caco - 2 Neutralize IL - 1 b [ 116 ] EGCG Decrease T84 Neutralize IFN - c [ 221 ] Probiotics ECN Decrease T84 Unknown [ 225 ] Decrease T84 Neutralize EPEC , ZO - 2 $ [ 225 ] Streptococcus thermophilus Decrease Caco - 2 Unknown [ 226 ] Lactobacillus acidophilus Decrease Caco - 2 Unknown [ 226 ] Spreptococcus thermophiles / Lactobacillus acidophilus Decrease HT29 / cl . 19A Neutralize enteroinvasive E . coli , restoration of occludin and ZO - 1 phosphorylation [ 226 ] Decrease HT29 cl . 19A Neutralize TNF - a / IFN - c [ 226 ] VSL # 3 Decrease HT29 Neutralize TNF - a [ 228 ] Lactobacillus plantarum Decrease Caco - 2 Neutralize TNF - a [ 231 ] Decrease Caco - 2 Neutralize phorbol ester [ 232 ] Lactobacillus rhamnosus OLL2838 Decrease Caco - 2 Neutralize TNF - a , normalization of MLCK and ZO - 1 expressions [ 234 ] Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG Decrease Caco - 2 Neutralize TNF - a / IFN - c , restoration of ZO - 1 distribution [ 235 ] Decrease T84 Neutralize EHEC , restoration of ZO - 1 expression and distribution [ 236 ] Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG ( soluble proteins ) Decrease Caco - 2 Neutralize hydrogen peroxide , restoration of occludin and ZO - 1 distributions [ 238 ] Regulation of intestinal tight junction 645 123 observation that vitamin D receptor ( VDR ) knockout mice exhibit more severe colitis compared with wild - type mice [ 214 ] . In this colitis model using DSS , VDR knockout mice exhibit intestinal barrier defects , as indicated by TER and TJ protein ( claudin - 1 and occludin ) expression , at an earlier phase than in the wild - type mice . In intestinal SW480 cells , vitamin D treatment enhances the expression of TJ ( ZO - 1 , claudin - 1 and claudin - 2 ) and adherens junction ( E - cadherin ) proteins [ 214 ] . Further , vitamin D prevents DSS - induced decreases in TER across Caco - 2 cells in a VDR - dependent manner [ 214 ] . Polyphenols Polyphenols are secondary metabolites ubiquitously dis - tributed throughout the plant kingdom . The major sources of polyphenols in the human diet are fruits , vegetables , and beverages such as tea and coffee . Polyphenols represent a vast group of compounds having aromatic ring ( s ) , and are characterized by the presence of one or more hydroxyl groups of varying structural complexity . Based on their chemical structures , polyphenols are divided into a number of subgroups including ﬂavonoids and curcuminoids . Recently , considerable attention has been given to the physiological effects of polyphenols , including their anti - oxidative , anti - inﬂammatory , and anti - carcinogenic effects [ 215 , 216 ] . Information about their roles in intestinal barrier function is limited , but recent studies have demonstrated that some polyphenols ( quercetin , kaempferol , myricetin , genistein , catechin , and curcumin ) participate in barrier regulation . Quercetin , myricetin , and kaempferol are cate - gorized into the ﬂavonoid subgroup , ﬂavonol , and enhance barrier integrity in intestinal Caco - 2 cells [ 217 – 219 ] . Quercetin increases TER and decreases permeability to lucifer yellow , and the effect is involved in the transcrip - tional regulation of claudin - 4 and the assembly of ZO - 2 , occludin and claudin - 1 at the TJs [ 217 , 219 ] . Direct inhibi - tion of PKC d by quercetin seems to be the proximal event in relation to barrier regulation [ 217 ] . The kaempferol - medi - ated promotion of TJ integrity is involved in the increases in the expression ( ZO - 2 and claudin - 4 ) and redistribution ( occludin , claudin - 1 and claudin - 3 ) of TJ proteins [ 218 ] . Genistein , curcumin , and epigallocatechin gallate pro - tect the intestinal barrier against noxious stimuli such as acetaldehyde , oxidative stress , and cytokines . Genistein and curcumin activity result from their potential as inhib - itors of tyrosine kinase and NF j B , respectively . In Caco - 2 cells , oxidative stress and acetaldehyde separately disrupt the epithelial barrier in a tyrosine kinase - dependent manner [ 40 , 43 , 220 ] . Pretreatment of the cells with genistein inhibits the tyrosine phosphorylation of occludin and ZO - 1 and their dissociation from the junctional complex , and protects barrier integrity against acetaldehyde and oxida - tive stress [ 40 , 43 , 220 ] . Curcumin protects the intestinal barrier from two proinﬂammatory cytokines , TNF - a and IL - 1 b . In Caco - 2 cells , TNF - a and IL - 1 b separately impair the TJ barrier , as indicated by the increase in macromole - cule ﬂux and decrease in TER [ 104 , 106 , 116 , 117 ] . These cytokines induce NF - j B - dependent MLCK expression and the phosphorylation of MLC , resulting in actin cytoskeletal contraction [ 106 , 116 , 117 ] . Pre - treatment of the cells with curcumin blocks cytokine - induced NF - j B activation and intestinal hyperpermeability [ 106 , 116 ] . A green tea ﬂa - vonoid , EGCG , also ameliorates the intestinal barrier dysfunction provoked by IFN - c , as indicated by TER and macromolecule ﬂux , in T84 cells , but the precise mecha - nism is unclear [ 221 ] . Probiotics Probiotics are deﬁned as ‘‘live microorganisms which when administered in adequate amounts confer a health beneﬁt on the host’’ [ 222 ] . Accumulating evidence in basic sci - ences and clinical studies has indicated ameliorative and preventive effects of probiotics on systemic as well as intestinal disorders . To exert beneﬁcial effects on the intestines , probiotics often regulate and improve microbial ecology , epithelial cell survival , immune function , and barrier function . Both in vivo and in vitro studies have demonstrated that probiotics protect the intestinal barrier from stress , infection , and cytokines . E . coli Nissle1917 ( ECN ) is widely used as a probiotic in Europe . Ingestion of ECN restores hyperpermeability and the loss of ZO - 1 , an integral TJ protein , in the colons in an Table 4 continued Nutrients and food factors a Permeability Cell Mechanism b Biﬁdobacterium infantis Y1 ( conditioned medium ) Decrease T84 ZO - 1 : , occludin : , claudin - 4 : , claudin - 2 ; [ 240 ] Decrease T84 Neutralize TNF - a / IFN - c , restoration of occludin and claudin - 1 distributions [ 240 ] a Permeability is based on TER and the paracellular passage of molecules b Symbols : and ; indicate increases and decreases in the protein or mRNA expression , respectively . The symbol $ indicates alterations in the cellular distribution of the proteins 646 T . Suzuki 123 experimental mouse model of colitis [ 223 , 224 ] . In intestinal T84 cells , treatment with ECN enhances basal TJ integrity , as indicated by TER [ 225 ] . Further , ECN inhibits EPEC - induced decreases in TER and the dissociation of ZO - 2 from the intercellular junctions [ 225 ] . Activation of PKC f is required for EPEC - induced barrier disruption , but ECN prevents PKC f translocation to the intercellular regions . Streptococcus thermophilus and Lactobacillus acidoph - ilus separately increase basal TER in Caco - 2 cells [ 226 ] . Further , the combination of two probiotics attenuates the barrier disruption induced by enteroinvasive E . coli in intestinal HT29 / cl . 19A cells [ 226 ] . The promotion and maintenance of phosphorylation in ZO - 1 and occludin seem to be involved in the protective effects of the com - bined probiotics , although they did not alter TJ protein expression [ 226 ] . The combined probiotics also restore TNF - a - and IFN - c - induced decreases in TER in HT29 / cl . 19A cells [ 227 ] . VSL # 3 , a probiotic formula , is a mixture of S . thermo - philus , 4 Lactobacillus species , and 3 Biﬁdobacterium species , and is often used in clinical treatment . In the experimental mouse model of colitis induced by DSS , VSL # 3 administration prevents hyperpermeability and inﬂammation in the colon [ 228 ] . This prevention is accom - panied by normalization of the expression and localization of TJ proteins ( ZO - 1 , occludin and claudins ) . In HT - 29 cells , VSL # 3 restores TNF - a - induced barrier impairment , as indicated by TER and TJ protein expression [ 229 ] . The protective effect of VSL # 3 is mediated through the activa - tion of the p38 MAPK and ERK signaling pathways . Lactobacillus plantarum ( L . plantarum ) is a lactic acid bacterium used in fermented products , including sauerk - rant , kimuchi , and pickles . Both in vivo and vitro studies have shown the protective effects of L . plantarum on the intestinal barrier . In IL - 10 knockout mice , a mouse model of spontaneous colitis , the ingestion of L . plantarum improves TER and mannitol ﬂux in the colon , accompanied with restoration of TJ protein ( ZO - 1 , occludin , and claudin - 1 ) expression [ 230 ] . In Caco - 2 cells , L . plantarum prevents TNF - a - and phorbol ester - induced decreases in TER by suppressing the NF - j B signal pathway [ 231 , 232 ] . Extra - cellular L . plantarum is recognized by the membrane surface toll - like receptor 2 ( TLR2 ) and evokes protective signaling [ 232 ] . TLR2 , a member of the TLR family , recognizes conserved molecular patterns associated with both gram - negative and - positive bacteria , including lipo - proteins , peptidoglycans , lipoteichoic acid , and zymosan . TLR2 signaling is known to protect intestinal barrier integrity both in vivo and in vitro [ 233 ] . Lactobacillus rhamnosus ( L . rhamnosus ) is a gram - negative , lactic acid bacterium that was ﬁrst isolated from healthy human stools . Studies demonstrate that different strains of L . rhamnosus have protective effects on the intestinal barrier . In the mouse model of DSS - induced colitis , ingestion of live or heat - killed L . rhamnosus OLL2838 ameliorates intestinal inﬂammation and barrier defects , as indicated by dextran permeability and ZO - 1 expression [ 234 ] . The OLL2838 strain also prevents TNF - a induced decreases in TER in Caco - 2 cells , accompanied with the normalization of ZO - 1 and MLCK expression . Another strain , L . rhamnosus GG , protects the intestinal barrier against infection and cytokines in vitro . Costimu - lation by TNF - a and IFN - c impairs barrier integrity in Caco - 2 cells , as indicated by decreased TER and redis - tributed ZO - 1 [ 235 ] . Pretreatment of the cells with L . rhamnosus GG inhibits these alterations . In addition , pretreatment with L . rhamnosus GG prevents EHEC - induced decreases in TER and decreases in or the redis - tribution of ZO - 1 in T84 cells [ 236 ] . Interestingly , metabolites and secretion products from probiotics often exert protective effects on intestinal barrier function . Two soluble proteins , p40 and p70 , from L . rhamnosus GG inhibit cytokine - induced apoptosis [ 237 ] and oxidative stress - induced barrier disruption [ 238 ] . In Caco - 2 cells , the combination of p40 and p75 attenuates hydrogen oxide - induced barrier disruption , as indicated by TER and inulin ﬂux , accompanied with normalization of TJ and AJ protein ( ZO - 1 , occludin , E - cadherin , and b - catenin ) distribution . This protective effect is mediated through the activation of the PKC b / e and ERK pathways . In mice , delivery of p40 to the colon using a hydrogel bead system ameliorates the DSS - induced intestinal barrier defect , indicated by dextran permeability and ZO - 1 localization [ 239 ] . Interestingly , the p40 - mediated ameliorative effect was not observed in EGF receptor - deﬁcient mice , indicat - ing the involvement of EGF receptor in the p40 - mediated signal transduction . Similarly , secreted bioactive factors from Biﬁdobacterium infantis Y1 , which is contained in VSL # 3 , exhibit protective and promotive effects on the intestinal barrier . The conditioned medium of B . infantis ( BiCM ) enhances basal TJ integrity in T84 cells , as indi - cated by TER and mannitol ﬂux [ 240 ] . This enhancing effect of BiCM is accompanied by increases in ZO - 1 , occludin , and claudin - 4 and a decrease in claudin - 2 . Fur - ther , BiCM prevents TNF - a - and IFN - c - induced decreases in TER and the redistribution of TJ proteins ( occludin and claudin - 1 ) . These effects of BiCM are mediated by the MEK / ERK signaling pathway . In addition , BiCM ingestion was found to attenuate colitis in IL - 10 knockout mice [ 240 ] , although intestinal permeability was not examined . Alcohol and acetaldehyde Alcohol and its oxidized metabolite , acetaldehyde , impair the intestinal barrier , and this impairment is involved in the development of ALD ( see ‘‘Alcoholic liver disease’’ ) . Regulation of intestinal tight junction 647 123 In animal models , acute and chronic administrations of alcohol induce intestinal hyperpermeability [ 241 – 243 ] . However , the hyperpermeability observed in the duodenum and jejunum upon acute administration seems to result from histological injury induced by the high concentration of alcohol [ 243 ] . In intestinal Caco - 2 cells , ethanol decreases TER and increases mannitol ﬂux [ 244 ] . Immu - noﬂuorescence microscopy shows the ethanol - induced redistribution of TJ proteins , ZO - 1 and occludin . Barrier impairment is caused by a MLCK - dependent mechanism . Acetaldehyde accumulates in the large intestinal lumen upon alcohol drinking [ 245 ] . Exposure of the rat colon to acetaldehyde impairs barrier integrity , as indicated by TER and dextran permeability [ 242 ] . Studies using Caco - 2 cells reveal that acetaldehyde induces barrier disruption via a tyrosine kinase - dependent mechanism [ 43 , 246 ] . Acetal - dehyde does not change the overall tyrosine kinase activity in cells , but effectively suppresses the PTP - 1B , 1C , and 1D [ 43 ] . The acetaldehyde - induced suppression of PTP activity causes tyrosine phosphorylation of TJ and AJ proteins ( ZO - 1 , occludin , E - cadherin , and b - catenin ) , and their dissociation from the respective TJ and AJ complexes , ﬁnally leading to increased paracellular permeability [ 43 , 220 ] . Clinical implications of intestinal TJ regulation As described above , the intestinal TJs provide a physical barrier against luminal noxious molecules such as patho - gens , toxins , and allergens [ 8 , 11 ] . Increased diffusion of these noxious molecules through the defective barrier can cause excessive activation of the immune system and inﬂammation . Therefore , barrier defects are closely asso - ciated with the pathogenesis of various intestinal and systemic inﬂammatory diseases . Although multiple factors are involved in disease pathogenesis , and barrier defects can be the consequence of disease development , evidence from basic science and clinical studies suggests that barrier defects can play roles in both the initiation and development of diseases . The ﬁnal section describes the implications of intestinal TJ barrier defects for disease pathogenesis , focusing mainly on clinical data . Inﬂammatory bowel disease IBDs , including UC and CD , are chronic and relapsing - remitting inﬂammatory diseases . These diseases afﬂict millions of people throughout the world , and impair their daily functions and quality of life . Accumulating evidence from basic science and clinical studies suggests 3 essential factors for IBD pathogenesis : ( 1 ) disruption of the intesti - nal barrier , ( 2 ) exposure of the luminal content to mucosal immune cells , and ( 3 ) an abnormal immune response [ 10 ] . Although the factor responsible for initiating the disease has not been speciﬁed , some evidence suggests that intes - tinal barrier impairment can initiate IBD . For example , hyperpermeability is observed in the non - involved intesti - nal segments of IBD patients [ 247 ] . A subset of ﬁrst - degree relatives of patients with CD has increased intestinal per - meability despite being apparently healthy [ 248 ] . The possible mechanism underlying hyperpermeability in apparently healthy subjects is subclinical immune activa - tion and cytokine secretion . Hyperpermeability resulting in the permeation of luminal bacterial products and antigens into the intestinal mucosa induces an abnormally robust inﬂammatory response . Further , the immune activation stimulates cytokine production from macrophages , T cells , and mast cells , leading to a substantial barrier defect . Clinical studies show that the levels of inﬂammatory cytokines , including TNF - a [ 100 , 101 ] , IFN - c [ 94 , 95 ] , IL - 1 b [ 108 , 112 ] , IL - 6 [ 108 , 126 ] , and IL - 17 [ 143 , 144 ] , are elevated in the intestines of IBD patients . These cytokines are known to disturb intestinal barrier function as men - tioned above ( see ‘‘Intestinal TJ regulation by cytokines and growth factors’’ ) . In particular , TNF - a may have an important role in the initiation and development of intes - tinal barrier defects in IBD , because anti - TNF - a treatment suppresses the inﬂammatory response and improves intes - tinal permeability [ 249 ] . As a consequence of perturbation by multiple cytokines , the alterations to the intestinal TJ structures in IBD patients could be complicated . Clinical studies show decreased expression and redistribution of barrier - forming proteins ( occludin , claudin - 3 , claudin - 5 , claudin - 8 , and JAM - A ) , and increased expression of pore - forming claudin - 2 in CD patients [ 250 , 251 ] . In UC patients , decreased expression and redistribution of occlu - din , claudin - 1 , claudin - 4 , tricellulin , and JAM - A , and increased claudin - 2 expression are observed [ 139 , 251 ] . In addition , MLCK expression and MLC phosphorylation are also observed in the intestines of both UC and CD patients , indicating cytoskeletal dysregulation of intestinal perme - ability [ 252 ] . Celiac disease Celiac disease is an immune - mediated disorder of the small intestine , triggered by an inappropriate T cell - mediated response to gliadin found in the wheat protein , gluten . Although celiac disease pathogenesis is complicated and remains obscure , some evidence suggests that intestinal barrier defects have a role in initiating celiac disease . For example , a symptomatic patient on a gluten - free diet con - tinues to display intestinal hyperpermeability [ 253 , 254 ] . Many healthy ﬁrst - degree relatives of patients also show hyperpermeability [ 255 ] . These observations suggest that intestinal hyperpermeability occurs prior to disease onset in 648 T . Suzuki 123 celiac disease . Clinical and experimental studies indicate that gliadin induces intestinal barrier defects through the direct stimulation of epithelial cells and excessive activa - tion of mucosal immune cells . Recently , a functional gliadin receptor , CXCR3 , has been identiﬁed , and evidence suggests its involvement in intestinal hyperpermeability and inﬂammation in celiac disease [ 256 ] . CXCR3 is expressed in both epithelial cells and the lamina propria of the human intestines , although the expression level in the lamina propria is higher than that in the epithelial cells [ 256 ] . The binding of gliadin to CXCR3 on the epithelial cells induces zonulin secretion in a MyD88 - dependent manner . Zonulin is a human intestinal ZOT homolog [ 257 , 258 ] and is known to disrupt epithelial barrier function via a mechanism similar to that of ZOT ( see ‘‘ Vibrio cholerae ’’ ) . Clinical studies demonstrate that the expression of CXCR3 and zonulin in the intestinal mucosa of patients with celiac disease is highly elevated . Further , the treatment of intestinal biopsy specimens from celiac disease patients with gliadin induces zonulin release and barrier impairment [ 259 ] . Gliadin permeation through the lamina propria may be negligible under healthy con - ditions because of barrier integrity , but barrier impairment results in the substantial exposure of immune cells to gli - adin . The binding of gliadin to CXCR3 expressed in T cells induces an inﬂammatory cascade and further increases intestinal permeability . Clinical studies show the down - regulation of occludin and ZO - 1 and upregulation of claudin - 2 and - 3 in the intestines of patients with celiac disease [ 259 , 260 ] . On the other hand , inherited factors are also associated with celiac disease pathogenesis . Gene mapping in the human leukocyte antigen ( HLA ) region has identiﬁed genes encoding class II molecules DQ2 and DQ8 as key genetic risk factors in celiac disease [ 261 ] . How - ever , it is unknown if the class II HLA genotype is associated with intestinal barrier function and gluten tolerance . Type I diabetes Type I diabetes ( T1D ) is characterized by the loss of insulin - producing b - cells from the islets of Langerhans in the pan - creas resulting in insulin deﬁciency . T1D is an autoimmune disorder and the loss of the b - cells occurs through a T cell - mediated autoimmune attack . It is believed that genetically predisposed individuals develop T1D after encountering one or more environmental factors associated with the disease . In 1986 , Mooradian et al . [ 262 ] ﬁrst reported the increased intestinal permeability in diabetic patients . The interplay between increased intestinal permeability and the initiation of T1D is still unclear , but evidence from experimental and clinical studies indicates that intestinal barrier defects have a role in T1D pathogenesis . In a clinical study , intestinal permeability was examined in diabetic patients at different disease stages [ 263 , 264 ] . All diabetic groups showed increased permeability , but notably the prediabetic group exhibited the greatest increase , indicating that increased permeability occurs prior to disease onset and that the increased exposure to luminal antigens leads to the autoimmune distraction of b - cells . Further , elevated TNF - a and IFN - c levels were observed in small intestinal biopsy specimens from T1D patients , indicating an intestinal inﬂammatory response [ 265 ] . Similar to in celiac disease , the gliadin - zonulin axis possibly plays a role in the intestinal barrier defects in T1D [ 266 , 267 ] . In a study using biobreeding diabetes - prone ( BBDP ) rats , elevated zonulin levels in the sera and intes - tinal contents were coincident with hyperpermeability in the small intestines [ 266 ] . These alterations precede the pro - duction of autoantibodies against pancreatic b - cells and the elevation of blood glucose levels . Importantly , a zonulin inhibitor is known to suppress intestinal hyperpermeability and the development of diabetes in the BBDP rats [ 266 ] . In clinical studies , T1D patients and their relatives exhibit elevated serum levels of zonulin , which is correlated with intestinal permeability [ 268 ] . Alcoholic liver disease ALD is a disorder that encompasses many hepatic mani - festations of alcohol overconsumption including hepatic steatosis , hepatitis , chronic hepatitis with hepatic ﬁbrosis , and cirrhosis . Although hepatic steatosis develops in all individuals who consume a large amount of alcohol bev - erages for a long period of time , this process is transient and reversible . Of all chronic heavy drinkers , only 15 – 20 % develop hepatitis or cirrhosis , which can occur concomitantly or in succession . A striking observation is that endotoxemia and endotoxin - mediated alteration of the liver cell functions plays a crucial role in the pathogenesis of ALD [ 269 ] . Indeed , high levels of endotoxin are observed in the serum of alcoholics [ 270 , 271 ] and alcohol - fed animals [ 241 ] . In animal models , a signiﬁcant corre - lation is known to exist between endotoxin levels and the severity of alcohol - induced liver damage [ 272 , 273 ] . Fur - ther , treatment with antibiotics or lactobacillus species that lower blood endotoxin levels suppresses the liver damage in alcohol - fed rats [ 274 , 275 ] . Endotoxins derived from luminal bacteria are highly immunogenic and induce the production of proinﬂammatory cytokines such as IL - 1 b and TNF - a in liver cells , suggesting that endotoxins from luminal bacteria induce liver inﬂammation leading to hepatitis and cirrhosis in ALD . One postulated mechanism of the endotoxemia observed in ALD patients is intestinal barrier defects , although bacterial overgrowth in the intestines could also increase the penetration of endotoxins Regulation of intestinal tight junction 649 123 [ 276 ] . A clinical study showed that intestinal permeability to macromolecules with a comparable molecular size to that of endotoxins was higher in alcoholics than in normal subjects [ 277 ] . Further , alcohol administration increases intestinal permeability in both the normal subjects and ALD patients [ 278 ] . Possible candidates for the induction of intestinal barrier impairment after alcohol consumption are ethanol and its oxidized metabolite , acetaldehyde . Acetaldehyde is pro - duced from ethanol in the large intestines by alcohol dehydrogenase in the mucosa and luminal bacteria , while the capacity of the colonic mucosa and microbes to oxidize acetaldehyde to acetate is low compared to that of other tissues . Therefore , a considerable amount of acetaldehyde could be accumulated in the colon after alcohol con - sumption . A study by Visapa¨a¨ et al . [ 245 ] demonstrated that the intracolonic acetaldehyde level in rats after alcohol consumption may reach as high as 3 mM . The dysregula - tion of intestinal barrier function by ethanol and acetaldehyde are described in ‘‘Alcohol and acetaldehyde . ’’ Collectively , the endotoxemia resulting from the intestinal barrier defects induced by ethanol and acetaldehyde is closely associated with ALD pathogenesis . Irritable bowel syndrome Irritable bowel syndrome ( IBS ) is a disorder most com - monly characterized by cramping , abdominal pain , bloating , constipation , and diarrhea , but the symptoms vary among the patients . IBS has been regarded as a disorder of the psychological sphere associated with gut motor abnormalities and increased sensory perception . However , recent studies suggest that mucosal inﬂammation , which is linked to enhanced exposure of mucosal immune cells to antigens because of increased intestinal permeability , also participates in the initiation and development of IBS [ 279 ] . In IBS patients , the intestinal mucosa appears normal at endoscopic or conventional histologic examination , but contains a greater number of immune cells , including mast cells and T cells , indicating increased cytokine production and inﬂammation [ 280 , 281 ] . In a clinical study , paracel - lular permeability was found to be increased in the colonic biopsies of IBS patients compared to that in healthy sub - jects [ 282 ] . The hyperpermeability is accompanied with decreased ZO - 1 expression [ 282 ] . According to evidence from clinical and experimental studies , the barrier impair - ment in IBS patients is possibly caused by psychological and environmental stress . In a clinical study , jejunal per - meability was examined by intestinal albumin output in healthy subjects experiencing low and moderate stress [ 283 ] . The moderate stress group showed higher perme - ability than did the low stress group , and , furthermore , additional cold stress increased permeability in both groups [ 283 ] . In animal studies , rodents exposed to different stresses showed increased intestinal permeability , coinci - dently with the disturbance of TJ structures [ 284 – 286 ] . One possible mechanism for stress - induced hyperpermeability is the activation of mucosal immune cells , particularly mast cells . The mast cells release a variety of inﬂammatory substances such as TNF - a , IL - 4 , IL - 6 , IL - 13 , and proteases , which have been shown to impair intestinal barrier function ( see ‘‘Intestinal TJ regulation by cytokines and growth factors’’ ) . In human subjects , elevated release of mast cell mediators , such as tryptase and histamine , occurs in response to cold stress [ 283 ] . An animal study demon - strated that stress - induced intestinal hyperpermeability was not caused in mast cell - deﬁcient rats [ 286 ] . Interestingly , higher serine protease activity is observed in the luminal contents of diarhhetic IBS patients , and this activity increases paracellular permeability in the mouse colon and Caco - 2 cells [ 282 ] . Food allergies Prior exposure to a food antigen by the oral route generates a regulatory T cell response that can suppress allergic sensitization to the food antigen . Food allergies are deﬁned as an immunologically mediated adverse reaction to foods and are caused by food tolerance dysfunction . The devel - opment of a food allergy is dependent on exposure of the food antigens to mucosal immune cells , which leads to antigen sensitization and production of antigen - speciﬁc CD4 ? Th2 cells and IgE [ 287 ] . Therefore , intestinal barrier defects have a role in the initiation and development of food allergies . A clinical study examined intestinal per - meability in food allergic patients who had been on an allergen - free diets for at least 6 month [ 288 ] . Notably , the increase in intestinal permeability remained in the patients , indicating that increased permeability is not simply a consequence of the allergic reaction . In contrast , a similar study was conducted in patients after an allergen challenge [ 288 , 289 ] . The increased permeability in response to the allergen was correlated with the severity of the clinical symptoms , suggesting the involvement of intestinal per - meability in allergy development . The mechanism for hyperpermeability in the absence of antigens is obscure , but the hyperpermeability during the allergic reaction is possibly mediated by mast cells . In a mouse model of an oral ovoalubumin - induced food allergy , intestinal hyper - permeability was observed after an allergen challenge and was accompanied with marked mucosal mast cell degran - ulation , but no hyperpermeability was observed in mast cell - depleted mice [ 290 ] , indicating that the mediators secreted from the mucosal mast cells increase intestinal hyperpermeability . In the patients with food allergies , mast cells induce degranulation and release a variety of 650 T . Suzuki 123 inﬂammatory mediators in response to the food antigens [ 291 ] . At the very least it has been shown that inﬂamma - tory mediators , such as TNF - a , IL - 4 , IL - 6 , IL - 13 , and tryptases , released from mast cells on activation impair intestinal barrier integrity ( see ‘‘Intestinal TJ regulation by cytokines and growth factors’’ ) . Concluding remarks Intestinal TJ structures are organized by multiple integral proteins and signaling molecules . Clinical and experimental studies demonstrate that defects in the intestinal TJ barrier and increased permeability are observed in various intesti - nal and systemic diseases . Although barrier defects may be caused as a consequence of the disease development , recent studies have suggested that increased intestinal permeabil - ity resulting in excessive activation of mucosal immune cells , and inﬂammation could play a role in initiating and also developing diseases . In this regard , the intestinal TJ barrier is dynamically regulated by physiological and pathophysiological factors , including cytokines , pathogens , and food factors . Understanding the molecular mechanisms underlying TJ regulation by the extracellular factors will lead to the development of effective therapeutic and pre - ventive approaches against diseases associated with intestinal barrier defects . Further , understanding of the precise associations between the TJ barrier and the innate and adaptive immune systems will help us clarify disease pathogenesis . Acknowledgments This work was supported by Japan Society for the Promotion of Science , a Grant - in - Aid for Young Scientists ( B ) 23780135 to T . Suzuki . References 1 . Ferraris RP , Diamond J ( 1997 ) Regulation of intestinal sugar transport . Physiol Rev 77 : 257 – 302 2 . Broer S ( 2008 ) Amino acid transport across mammalian intes - tinal and renal epithelia . Physiol Rev 88 : 249 – 286 3 . Kiela PR , Ghishan FK ( 2009 ) Ion transport in the intestine . Curr Opin Gastroenterol 25 : 87 – 91 4 . Tsukita S , Furuse M , Itoh M ( 2001 ) Multifunctional strands in tight junctions . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2 : 285 – 293 5 . Van Itallie CM , Anderson JM ( 2006 ) Claudins and epithelial paracellular transport . Annu Rev Physiol 68 : 403 – 429 6 . Oda H , Takeichi M ( 2011 ) Evolution : structural and functional diversity of cadherin at the adherens junction . J Cell Biol 193 : 1137 – 1146 7 . Baum B , Georgiou M ( 2011 ) Dynamics of adherens junctions in epithelial establishment , maintenance , and remodeling . J Cell Biol 192 : 907 – 917 8 . Turner JR ( 2009 ) Intestinal mucosal barrier function in health and disease . Nat Rev Immunol 9 : 799 – 809 9 . Nusrat A , Turner JR , Madara JL ( 2000 ) Molecular physiology and pathophysiology of tight junctions . IV . Regulation of tight junctions by extracellular stimuli : nutrients , cytokines , and immune cells . Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 279 : G851 – G857 10 . Clayburgh DR , Shen L , Turner JR ( 2004 ) A porous defense : the leakyepithelial barrier inintestinal disease . Lab Invest84 : 282 – 291 11 . Farhadi A , Banan A , Fields J , Keshavarzian A ( 2003 ) Intestinal barrier : an interface between health and disease . J Gastroenterol Hepatol 18 : 479 – 497 12 . Capaldo CT , Nusrat A ( 2009 ) Cytokine regulation of tight junctions . Biochim Biophys Acta 1788 : 864 – 871 13 . Amasheh M , Andres S , Amasheh S , Fromm M , Schulzke JD ( 2009 ) Barrier effects of nutritional factors . Ann N Y Acad Sci 1165 : 267 – 273 14 . Mullin JM , Skrovanek SM , Valenzano MC ( 2009 ) Modiﬁcation of tight junction structure and permeability by nutritional means . Ann N Y Acad Sci 1165 : 99 – 112 15 . Furuse M , Hirase T , Itoh M , Nagafuchi A , Yonemura S , Tsukita S ( 1993 ) Occludin : a novel integral membrane protein localizing at tight junctions . J Cell Biol 123 : 1777 – 1788 16 . Furuse M , Fujita K , Hiiragi T , Fujimoto K , Tsukita S ( 1998 ) Claudin - 1 and - 2 : novel integral membrane proteins localizing at tight junctions with no sequence similarity to occludin . J Cell Biol 141 : 1539 – 1550 17 . Martin - Padura I , Lostaglio S , Schneemann M , Williams L , Romano M , Fruscella P , Panzeri C , Stoppacciaro A , Ruco L , Villa A , Simmons D , Dejana E ( 1998 ) Junctional adhesion molecule , a novel member of the immunoglobulin superfamily that distributes at intercellular junctions and modulates mono - cyte transmigration . J Cell Biol 142 : 117 – 127 18 . Ikenouchi J , Furuse M , Furuse K , Sasaki H , Tsukita S ( 2005 ) Tricellulin constitutes a novel barrier at tricellular contacts of epithelial cells . J Cell Biol 171 : 939 – 945 19 . Gonzalez - Mariscal L , Betanzos A , Nava P , Jaramillo BE ( 2003 ) Tight junction proteins . Prog Biophys Mol Biol 81 : 1 – 44 20 . Madara JL , Moore R , Carlson S ( 1987 ) Alteration of intestinal tight junction structure and permeability by cytoskeletal con - traction . Am J Physiol 253 : C854 – C861 21 . Turner JR , Rill BK , Carlson SL , Carnes D , Kerner R , Mrsny RJ , Madara JL ( 1997 ) Physiological regulation of epithelial tight junctions is associated with myosin light - chain phosphorylation . Am J Physiol 273 : C1378 – C1385 22 . Walsh SV , Hopkins AM , Chen J , Narumiya S , Parkos CA , Nusrat A ( 2001 ) Rho kinase regulates tight junction function and is necessary for tight junction assembly in polarized intestinal epithelia . Gastroenterology 121 : 566 – 579 23 . Al - Sadi R , Khatib K , Guo S , Ye D , Youssef M , Ma T ( 2011 ) Occludin regulates macromolecule ﬂux across the intestinal epithelial tight junction barrier . Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 300 : G1054 – G1064 24 . Furuse M , Itoh M , Hirase T , Nagafuchi A , Yonemura S , Tsukita S ( 1994 ) Direct association of occludin with ZO - 1 and its pos - sible involvement in the localization of occludin at tight junctions . J Cell Biol 127 : 1617 – 1626 25 . Wong V , Gumbiner BM ( 1997 ) A synthetic peptide corre - sponding to the extracellular domain of occludin perturbs the tight junction permeability barrier . J Cell Biol 136 : 399 – 409 26 . Saitou M , Fujimoto K , Doi Y , Itoh M , Fujimoto T , Furuse M , Takano H , Noda T , Tsukita S ( 1998 ) Occludin - deﬁcient embryonic stem cells can differentiate into polarized epithelial cells bearing tight junctions . J Cell Biol 141 : 397 – 408 27 . Schulzke JD , Gitter AH , Mankertz J , Spiegel S , Seidler U , Amasheh S , Saitou M , Tsukita S , Fromm M ( 2005 ) Epithelial transport and barrier function in occludin - deﬁcient mice . Bio - chim Biophys Acta 1669 : 34 – 42 28 . Saitou M , Furuse M , Sasaki H , Schulzke JD , Fromm M , Takano H , Noda T , Tsukita S ( 2000 ) Complex phenotype of mice Regulation of intestinal tight junction 651 123 lacking occludin , a component of tight junction strands . Mol Biol Cell 11 : 4131 – 4142 29 . Sakakibara A , Furuse M , Saitou M , Ando - Akatsuka Y , Tsukita S ( 1997 ) Possible involvement of phosphorylation of occludin in tight junction formation . J Cell Biol 137 : 1393 – 1401 30 . Rao R ( 2009 ) Occludin phosphorylation in regulation of epi - thelial tight junctions . Ann N Y Acad Sci 1165 : 62 – 68 31 . Jain S , Suzuki T , Seth A , Samak G , Rao R ( 2011 ) Protein kinase Czeta phosphorylates occludin and promotes assembly of epi - thelial tight junctions . Biochem J 437 : 289 – 299 32 . Suzuki T , Elias BC , Seth A , Shen L , Turner JR , Giorgianni F , Desiderio D , Guntaka R , Rao R ( 2009 ) PKC eta regulates occludin phosphorylation and epithelial tight junction integrity . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 106 : 61 – 66 33 . Dorfel MJ , Westphal JK , Huber O ( 2009 ) Differential phos - phorylation of occludin and tricellulin by CK2 and CK1 . Ann N Y Acad Sci 1165 : 69 – 73 34 . McKenzie JA , Riento K , Ridley AJ ( 2006 ) Casein kinase I epsilon associates with and phosphorylates the tight junction protein occludin . FEBS Lett 580 : 2388 – 2394 35 . Smales C , Ellis M , Baumber R , Hussain N , Desmond H , Stad - don JM ( 2003 ) Occludin phosphorylation : identiﬁcation of an occludin kinase in brain and cell extracts as CK2 . FEBS Lett 545 : 161 – 166 36 . Wong V ( 1997 ) Phosphorylation of occludin correlates with occludin localization and function at the tight junction . Am J Physiol 273 : C1859 – C1867 37 . Seth A , Sheth P , Elias BC , Rao R ( 2007 ) Protein phosphatases 2A and 1 interact with occludin and negatively regulate the assembly of tight junctions in the CACO - 2 cell monolayer . J Biol Chem 282 : 11487 – 11498 38 . Nunbhakdi - Craig V , Machleidt T , Ogris E , Bellotto D , White CL 3rd , Sontag E ( 2002 ) Protein phosphatase 2A associates with and regulates atypical PKC and the epithelial tight junction complex . J Cell Biol 158 : 967 – 978 39 . Elias BC , Suzuki T , Seth A , Giorgianni F , Kale G , Shen L , Turner JR , Naren A , Desiderio DM , Rao R ( 2008 ) Phosphory - lation of Y398 and Y402 in occludin prevents its interaction with ZO - 1 and destabilizes its assembly at the tight junctions . J Biol Chem 284 : 1559 – 1569 40 . Rao RK , Basuroy S , Rao VU , Karnaky KJ Jr , Gupta A ( 2002 ) Tyrosine phosphorylation and dissociation of occludin - ZO - 1 and E - cadherin - beta - catenin complexes from the cytoskeleton by oxidative stress . Biochem J 368 : 471 – 481 41 . Kale G , Naren AP , Sheth P , Rao RK ( 2003 ) Tyrosine phos - phorylation of occludin attenuates its interactions with ZO - 1 , ZO - 2 , and ZO - 3 . Biochem Biophys Res Commun 302 : 324 – 329 42 . Suzuki T , Seth A , Rao R ( 2008 ) Role of phospholipase Cgamma - induced activation of protein kinase Cepsilon ( PKCepsilon ) and PKCbetaI in epidermal growth factor - medi - ated protection of tight junctions from acetaldehyde in Caco - 2 cell monolayers . J Biol Chem 283 : 3574 – 3583 43 . Atkinson KJ , Rao RK ( 2001 ) Role of protein tyrosine phos - phorylation in acetaldehyde - induced disruption of epithelial tight junctions . Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 280 : G1280 – G1288 44 . Tsukita S , Furuse M ( 2000 ) Pores in the wall : claudins constitute tight junction strands containing aqueous pores . J Cell Biol 149 : 13 – 16 45 . Furuse M , Hata M , Furuse K , Yoshida Y , Haratake A , Sugitani Y , Noda T , Kubo A , Tsukita S ( 2002 ) Claudin - based tight junctions are crucial for the mammalian epidermal barrier : a lesson from claudin - 1 - deﬁcient mice . J Cell Biol 156 : 1099 – 1111 46 . Tamura A , Hayashi H , Imasato M , Yamazaki Y , Hagiwara A , Wada M , Noda T , Watanabe M , Suzuki Y , Tsukita S ( 2011 ) Loss of claudin - 15 , but not claudin - 2 , causes Na ? deﬁciency and glucose malabsorption in mouse small intestine . Gastroen - terology 140 : 913 – 923 47 . Miyamoto T , Morita K , Takemoto D , Takeuchi K , Kitano Y , Miyakawa T , Nakayama K , Okamura Y , Sasaki H , Miyachi Y , Furuse M , Tsukita S ( 2005 ) Tight junctions in Schwann cells of peripheral myelinated axons : a lesson from claudin - 19 - deﬁcient mice . J Cell Biol 169 : 527 – 538 48 . Weber S , Hoffmann K , Jeck N , Saar K , Boeswald M , Kuwertz - Broeking E , Meij II , Knoers NV , Cochat P , Sulakova T , Bonzel KE , Soergel M , Manz F , Schaerer K , Seyberth HW , Reis A , Konrad M ( 2000 ) Familial hypomagnesaemia with hypercalci - uria and nephrocalcinosis maps to chromosome 3q27 and is associated with mutations in the PCLN - 1 gene . Eur J Hum Genet 8 : 414 – 422 49 . Gow A , Southwood CM , Li JS , Pariali M , Riordan GP , Brodie SE , Danias J , Bronstein JM , Kachar B , Lazzarini RA ( 1999 ) CNS myelin and sertoli cell tight junction strands are absent in Osp / claudin - 11 null mice . Cell 99 : 649 – 659 50 . Morita K , Sasaki H , Furuse M , Tsukita S ( 1999 ) Endothelial claudin : claudin - 5 / TMVCF constitutes tight junction strands in endothelial cells . J Cell Biol 147 : 185 – 194 51 . Holmes JL , Van Itallie CM , Rasmussen JE , Anderson JM ( 2006 ) Claudin proﬁling in the mouse during postnatal intestinal development and along the gastrointestinal tract reveals com - plex expression patterns . In . Gene expr patterns 6 : 581 – 588 52 . Inai T , Kobayashi J , Shibata Y ( 1999 ) Claudin - 1 contributes to the epithelial barrier function in MDCK cells . Eur J Cell Biol 78 : 849 – 855 53 . Amasheh S , Meiri N , Gitter AH , Schoneberg T , Mankertz J , Schulzke JD , Fromm M ( 2002 ) Claudin - 2 expression induces cation - selective channels in tight junctions of epithelial cells . J Cell Sci 115 : 4969 – 4976 54 . Colegio OR , Van Itallie CM , McCrea HJ , Rahner C , Anderson JM ( 2002 ) Claudins create charge - selective channels in the paracellular pathway between epithelial cells . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 283 : C142 – C147 55 . Hou J , Gomes AS , Paul DL , Goodenough DA ( 2006 ) Study of claudin function by RNA interference . J Biol Chem 281 : 36117 – 36123 56 . Milatz S , Krug SM , Rosenthal R , Gunzel D , Muller D , Schulzke JD , Amasheh S , Fromm M ( 2010 ) Claudin - 3 acts as a sealing component of the tight junction for ions of either charge and uncharged solutes . Biochim Biophys Acta 1798 : 2048 – 2057 57 . Yu AS , Enck AH , Lencer WI , Schneeberger EE ( 2003 ) Claudin - 8 expression in Madin – Darby canine kidney cells augments the paracellular barrier to cation permeation . J Biol Chem 278 : 17350 – 17359 58 . Alexandre MD , Jeansonne BG , Renegar RH , Tatum R , Chen YH ( 2007 ) The ﬁrst extracellular domain of claudin - 7 affects paracellular Cl - permeability . Biochem Biophys Res Commun 357 : 87 – 91 59 . Amasheh S , Schmidt T , Mahn M , Florian P , Mankertz J , Tavalali S , Gitter AH , Schulzke JD , Fromm M ( 2005 ) Contri - bution of claudin - 5 to barrier properties in tight junctions of epithelial cells . Cell Tissue Res 321 : 89 – 96 60 . Van Itallie C , Rahner C , Anderson JM ( 2001 ) Regulated expression of claudin - 4 decreases paracellular conductance through a selective decrease in sodium permeability . J Clin Invest 107 : 1319 – 1327 61 . Krause G , Winkler L , Piehl C , Blasig I , Piontek J , Muller SL ( 2009 ) Structure and function of extracellular claudin domains . Ann N Y Acad Sci 1165 : 34 – 43 62 . Fujita H , Chiba H , Yokozaki H , Sakai N , Sugimoto K , Wada T , Kojima T , Yamashita T , Sawada N ( 2006 ) Differential expres - sion and subcellular localization of claudin - 7 , - 8 , - 12 , - 13 , and 652 T . Suzuki 123 - 15 along the mouse intestine . J Histochem Cytochem 54 : 933 – 944 63 . Fujibe M , Chiba H , Kojima T , Soma T , Wada T , Yamashita T , Sawada N ( 2004 ) Thr203 of claudin - 1 , a putative phosphory - lation site for MAP kinase , is required to promote the barrier function of tight junctions . Exp Cell Res 295 : 36 – 47 64 . Soma T , Chiba H , Kato - Mori Y , Wada T , Yamashita T , Kojima T , Sawada N ( 2004 ) Thr ( 207 ) of claudin - 5 is involved in size - selective loosening of the endothelial barrier by cyclic AMP . Exp Cell Res 300 : 202 – 212 65 . D’Souza T , Agarwal R , Morin PJ ( 2005 ) Phosphorylation of claudin - 3 at threonine 192 by cAMP - dependent protein kinase regulates tight junction barrier function in ovarian cancer cells . J Biol Chem 280 : 26233 – 26240 66 . Tanaka M , Kamata R , Sakai R ( 2005 ) EphA2 phosphorylates the cytoplasmic tail of claudin - 4 and mediates paracellular perme - ability . J Biol Chem 280 : 42375 – 42382 67 . Van Itallie CM , Gambling TM , Carson JL , Anderson JM ( 2005 ) Palmitoylation of claudins is required for efﬁcient tight - junction localization . J Cell Sci 118 : 1427 – 1436 68 . Cunningham SA , Arrate MP , Rodriguez JM , Bjercke RJ , Vanderslice P , Morris AP , Brock TA ( 2000 ) A novel protein with homology to the junctional adhesion molecule . Characterization of leukocyte interactions . J Biol Chem 275 : 34750 – 34756 69 . Arrate MP , Rodriguez JM , Tran TM , Brock TA , Cunningham SA ( 2001 ) Cloning of human junctional adhesion molecule 3 ( JAM3 ) and its identiﬁcation as the JAM2 counter - receptor . J Biol Chem 276 : 45826 – 45832 70 . Hirabayashi S , Tajima M , Yao I , Nishimura W , Mori H , Hata Y ( 2003 ) JAM4 , ajunctionalcelladhesionmoleculeinteractingwith a tight junction protein , MAGI - 1 . Mol Cell Biol 23 : 4267 – 4282 71 . Bergelson JM , Cunningham JA , Droguett G , Kurt - Jones EA , Krithivas A , Hong JS , Horwitz MS , Crowell RL , Finberg RW ( 1997 ) Isolation of a common receptor for Coxsackie B viruses and adenoviruses 2 and 5 . Science 275 : 1320 – 1323 72 . Hirata K , Ishida T , Penta K , Rezaee M , Yang E , Wohlgemuth J , Quertermous T ( 2001 ) Cloning of an immunoglobulin family adhesion molecule selectively expressed by endothelial cells . J Biol Chem 276 : 16223 – 16231 73 . Suzu S , Hayashi Y , Harumi T , Nomaguchi K , Yamada M , Hayasawa H , Motoyoshi K ( 2002 ) Molecular cloning of a novel immunoglobulin superfamily gene preferentially expressed by brain and testis . Biochem Biophys Res Commun 296 : 1215 – 1221 74 . Bazzoni G ( 2003 ) The JAM family of junctional adhesion molecules . Curr Opin Cell Biol 15 : 525 – 530 75 . Liu Y , Nusrat A , Schnell FJ , Reaves TA , Walsh S , Pochet M , Parkos CA ( 2000 ) Human junction adhesion molecule regulates tight junction resealing in epithelia . J Cell Sci 113 ( Pt 13 ) : 2363 – 2374 76 . Laukoetter MG , Nava P , Lee WY , Severson EA , Capaldo CT , Babbin BA , Williams IR , Koval M , Peatman E , Campbell JA , Dermody TS , Nusrat A , Parkos CA ( 2007 ) JAM - A regulates permeability and inﬂammation in the intestine in vivo . J Exp Med 204 : 3067 – 3076 77 . Cohen CJ , Shieh JT , Pickles RJ , Okegawa T , Hsieh JT , Bergelson JM ( 2001 ) The coxsackievirus and adenovirus receptor is a transmembrane component of the tight junction . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 98 : 15191 – 15196 78 . Westphal JK , Dorfel MJ , Krug SM , Cording JD , Piontek J , Blasig IE , Tauber R , Fromm M , Huber O ( 2010 ) Tricellulin forms homomeric and heteromeric tight junctional complexes . Cell Mol Life Sci 67 : 2057 – 2068 79 . Krug SM , Amasheh S , Richter JF , Milatz S , Gunzel D , Westphal JK , Huber O , Schulzke JD , Fromm M ( 2009 ) Tricellulin forms a barrier to macromolecules in tricellular tight junctions without affecting ion permeability . Mol Biol Cell 20 : 3713 – 3724 80 . Ikenouchi J , Sasaki H , Tsukita S , Furuse M ( 2008 ) Loss of occludin affects tricellular localization of tricellulin . Mol Biol Cell 19 : 4687 – 4693 81 . Gumbiner B , Lowenkopf T , Apatira D ( 1991 ) Identiﬁcation of a 160 - kDa polypeptide that binds to the tight junction protein ZO - 1 . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 88 : 3460 – 3464 82 . Willott E , Balda MS , Fanning AS , Jameson B , Van Itallie C , Anderson JM ( 1993 ) The tight junction protein ZO - 1 is homologous to the Drosophila discs - large tumor suppressor protein of septate junctions . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 90 : 7834 – 7838 83 . Haskins J , Gu L , Wittchen ES , Hibbard J , Stevenson BR ( 1998 ) ZO - 3 , a novel member of the MAGUK protein family found at the tight junction , interacts with ZO - 1 and occludin . J Cell Biol 141 : 199 – 208 84 . Fanning AS , Ma TY , Anderson JM ( 2002 ) Isolation and func - tional characterization of the actin binding region in the tight junction protein ZO - 1 . FASEB J 16 : 1835 – 1837 85 . Itoh M , Furuse M , Morita K , Kubota K , Saitou M , Tsukita S ( 1999 ) Direct binding of three tight junction - associated MAG - UKs , ZO - 1 , ZO - 2 , and ZO - 3 , with the COOH termini of claudins . J Cell Biol 147 : 1351 – 1363 86 . Bazzoni G , Martinez - Estrada OM , Orsenigo F , Cordenonsi M , Citi S , Dejana E ( 2000 ) Interaction of junctional adhesion molecule with the tight junction components ZO - 1 , cingulin , and occludin . J Biol Chem 275 : 20520 – 20526 87 . Alexandre MD , Lu Q , Chen YH ( 2005 ) Overexpression of claudin - 7 decreases the paracellular Cl - conductance and increases the paracellular Na ? conductance in LLC - PK1 cells . J Cell Sci 118 : 2683 – 2693 88 . Wittchen ES , Haskins J , Stevenson BR ( 2000 ) Exogenous expression of the amino - terminal half of the tight junction protein ZO - 3 perturbs junctional complex assembly . J Cell Biol 151 : 825 – 836 89 . Balda MS , Matter K ( 2000 ) The tight junction protein ZO - 1 and an interacting transcription factor regulate ErbB - 2 expression . EMBO J 19 : 2024 – 2033 90 . Umeda K , Matsui T , Nakayama M , Furuse K , Sasaki H , Furuse M , Tsukita S ( 2004 ) Establishment and characterization of cultured epithelial cells lacking expression of ZO - 1 . J Biol Chem 279 : 44785 – 44794 91 . Cordenonsi M , D’Atri F , Hammar E , Parry DA , Kendrick - Jones J , Shore D , Citi S ( 1999 ) Cingulin contains globular and coiled - coil domains and interacts with ZO - 1 , ZO - 2 , ZO - 3 , and myosin . J Cell Biol 147 : 1569 – 1582 92 . Cordenonsi M , Turco F , D’Atri F , Hammar E , Martinucci G , Meggio F , Citi S ( 1999 ) Xenopus laevis occludin . Identiﬁcation of in vitro phosphorylation sites by protein kinase CK2 and association with cingulin . Eur J Biochem 264 : 374 – 384 93 . Guillemot L , Hammar E , Kaister C , Ritz J , Caille D , Jond L , Bauer C , Meda P , Citi S ( 2004 ) Disruption of the cingulin gene does not prevent tight junction formation but alters gene expression . J Cell Sci 117 : 5245 – 5256 94 . Niessner M , Volk BA ( 1995 ) Altered Th1 / Th2 cytokine pro - ﬁles in the intestinal mucosa of patients with inﬂammatory bowel disease as assessed by quantitative reversed transcribed polymerase chain reaction ( RT - PCR ) . Clin Exp Immunol 101 : 428 – 435 95 . Stallmach A , Giese T , Schmidt C , Ludwig B , Mueller - Molaian I , Meuer SC ( 2004 ) Cytokine / chemokine transcript proﬁles reﬂect mucosal inﬂammation in Crohn’s disease . Int J Colorectal Dis 19 : 308 – 315 96 . Bruewer M , Luegering A , Kucharzik T , Parkos CA , Madara JL , Hopkins AM , Nusrat A ( 2003 ) Proinﬂammatory cytokines dis - rupt epithelial barrier function by apoptosis - independent mechanisms . J Immunol 171 : 6164 – 6172 Regulation of intestinal tight junction 653 123 97 . Bruewer M , Utech M , Ivanov AI , Hopkins AM , Parkos CA , Nusrat A ( 2005 ) Interferon - gamma induces internalization of epithelial tight junction proteins via a macropinocytosis - like process . FASEB J 19 : 923 – 933 98 . Sandborn WJ , Hanauer SB ( 1999 ) Antitumor necrosis factor therapy for inﬂammatory bowel disease : a review of agents , pharmacology , clinical results , and safety . Inﬂamm Bowel Dis 5 : 119 – 133 99 . Ricart E , Panaccione R , Loftus EV , Tremaine WJ , Sandborn WJ ( 1999 ) Successful management of Crohn’s disease of the ileo - anal pouch with inﬂiximab . Gastroenterology 117 : 429 – 432 100 . Murch SH , Braegger CP , Walker - Smith JA , MacDonald TT ( 1993 ) Location of tumour necrosis factor alpha by immuno - histochemistry in chronic inﬂammatory bowel disease . Gut 34 : 1705 – 1709 101 . Braegger CP , Nicholls S , Murch SH , Stephens S , MacDonald TT ( 1992 ) Tumour necrosis factor alpha in stool as a marker of intestinal inﬂammation . Lancet 339 : 89 – 91 102 . Schulzke JD , Bojarski C , Zeissig S , Heller F , Gitter AH , Fromm M ( 2006 ) Disrupted barrier function through epithelial cell apoptosis . Ann N Y Acad Sci 1072 : 288 – 299 103 . Ma TY , Iwamoto GK , Hoa NT , Akotia V , Pedram A , Boivin MA , Said HM ( 2004 ) TNF - alpha - induced increase in intestinal epithelial tight junction permeability requires NF - kappa B activation . Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 286 : G367 – G376 104 . Ma TY , Boivin MA , Ye D , Pedram A , Said HM ( 2005 ) Mechanism of TNF - { alpha } modulation of Caco - 2 intestinal epithelial tight junction barrier : role of myosin light - chain kinase protein expression . Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 288 : G422 – G430 105 . Graham WV , Wang F , Clayburgh DR , Cheng JX , Yoon B , Wang Y , Lin A , Turner JR ( 2006 ) Tumor necrosis factor - induced long myosin light chain kinase transcription is regulated by differentiation - dependent signaling events . Characterization of the human long myosin light chain kinase promoter . J Biol Chem 281 : 26205 – 26215 106 . Ye D , Ma I , Ma TY ( 2006 ) Molecular mechanism of tumor necrosis factor - alpha modulation of intestinal epithelial tight junction barrier . Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 290 : G496 – G504 107 . Mankertz J , Amasheh M , Krug SM , Fromm A , Amasheh S , Hillenbrand B , Tavalali S , Fromm M , Schulzke JD ( 2009 ) TNFalpha up - regulates claudin - 2 expression in epithelial HT - 29 / B6 cells via phosphatidylinositol - 3 - kinase signaling . Cell Tissue Res 336 : 67 – 77 108 . Reinecker HC , Steffen M , Witthoeft T , Pﬂueger I , Schreiber S , MacDermott RP , Raedler A ( 1993 ) Enhanced secretion of tumour necrosis factor - alpha , IL - 6 , and IL - 1 beta by isolated lamina propria mononuclear cells from patients with ulcerative colitis and Crohn’s disease . Clin Exp Immunol 94 : 174 – 181 109 . Wang F , Graham WV , Wang Y , Witkowski ED , Schwarz BT , Turner JR ( 2005 ) Interferon - gamma and tumor necrosis factor - alpha synergize to induce intestinal epithelial barrier dysfunc - tion by up - regulating myosin light chain kinase expression . Am J Pathol 166 : 409 – 419 110 . Wang F , Schwarz BT , Graham WV , Wang Y , Su L , Clayburgh DR , Abraham C , Turner JR ( 2006 ) IFN - gamma - induced TNFR2 expression is required for TNF - dependent intestinal epithelial barrier dysfunction . Gastroenterology 131 : 1153 – 1163 111 . Schwarz BT , Wang F , Shen L , Clayburgh DR , Su L , Wang Y , Fu YX , Turner JR ( 2007 ) LIGHT signals directly to intestinal epithelia to cause barrier dysfunction via cytoskeletal and endocytic mechanisms . Gastroenterology 132 : 2383 – 2394 112 . Dinarello CA ( 1994 ) The interleukin - 1 family : 10 years of discovery . FASEB J 8 : 1314 – 1325 113 . Carty E , De Brabander M , Feakins RM , Rampton DS ( 2000 ) Measurement of in vivo rectal mucosal cytokine and eicosanoid production in ulcerative colitis using ﬁlter paper . Gut 46 : 487 – 492 114 . Barksby HE , Lea SR , Preshaw PM , Taylor JJ ( 2007 ) The expanding family of interleukin - 1 cytokines and their role in destructive inﬂammatory disorders . Clin Exp Immunol 149 : 217 – 225 115 . Dinarello CA ( 2003 ) Anti - cytokine therapeutics and infections . Vaccine 21 ( Suppl 2 ) : S24 – S34 116 . Al - Sadi RM , Ma TY ( 2007 ) IL - 1beta causes an increase in intestinal epithelial tight junction permeability . J Immunol 178 : 4641 – 4649 117 . Al - Sadi R , Ye D , Dokladny K , Ma TY ( 2008 ) Mechanism of IL - 1beta - induced increase in intestinal epithelial tight junction permeability . J Immunol 180 : 5653 – 5661 118 . Al - Sadi R , Ye D , Said HM , Ma TY ( 2010 ) IL - 1beta - induced increase in intestinal epithelial tight junction permeability is mediated by MEKK - 1 activation of canonical NF - kappaB pathway . Am J Pathol 177 : 2310 – 2322 119 . Oliphant CJ , Barlow JL , McKenzie AN ( 2011 ) Insights into the initiation of type 2 immune responses . Immunology 134 : 378 – 385 120 . Okoye IS , Wilson MS ( 2011 ) CD4 ? T helper 2 cells - microbial triggers , differentiation requirements and effector functions . Immunology 134 : 368 – 377 121 . Wisner DM , Harris LR 3rd , Green CL , Poritz LS ( 2008 ) Opposing regulation of the tight junction protein claudin - 2 by interferon - gamma and interleukin - 4 . J Surg Res 144 : 1 – 7 122 . Colgan SP , Resnick MB , Parkos CA , Delp - Archer C , McGuirk D , Bacarra AE , Weller PF , Madara JL ( 1994 ) IL - 4 directly modulates function of a model human intestinal epithelium . J Immunol 153 : 2122 – 2129 123 . Ceponis PJ , Botelho F , Richards CD , McKay DM ( 2000 ) Interleukins 4 and 13 increase intestinal epithelial permeability by a phosphatidylinositol 3 - kinase pathway . Lack of evidence for STAT 6 involvement . J Biol Chem 275 : 29132 – 29137 124 . Tilg H , Dinarello CA , Mier JW ( 1997 ) IL - 6 and APPs : anti - inﬂammatory and immunosuppressive mediators . Immunol Today 18 : 428 – 432 125 . Alonzi T , Fattori E , Lazzaro D , Costa P , Probert L , Kollias G , De Benedetti F , Poli V , Ciliberto G ( 1998 ) Interleukin 6 is required for the development of collagen - induced arthritis . J Exp Med 187 : 461 – 468 126 . Louis E , Belaiche J , van Kemseke C , Franchimont D , de Groote D , Gueenen V , Mary JY ( 1997 ) A high serum concentration of interleukin - 6 is predictive of relapse in quiescent Crohn’s dis - ease . Eur J Gastroenterol Hepatol 9 : 939 – 944 127 . Kusugami K , Fukatsu A , Tanimoto M , Shinoda M , Haruta J , Kuroiwa A , Ina K , Kanayama K , Ando T , Matsuura T et al ( 1995 ) Elevation of interleukin - 6 in inﬂammatory bowel disease is macrophage - and epithelial cell - dependent . Dig Dis Sci 40 : 949 – 959 128 . Suzuki T , Yoshinaga N , Tanabe S ( 2011 ) Interleukin - 6 ( IL - 6 ) regulates claudin - 2 expression and tight junction permeability in intestinal epithelium . J Biol Chem 286 : 31263 – 31271 129 . Yang R , Han X , Uchiyama T , Watkins SK , Yaguchi A , Delude RL , Fink MP ( 2003 ) IL - 6 is essential for development of gut barrier dysfunction after hemorrhagic shock and resuscitation in mice . Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 285 : G621 – G629 130 . Ouyang W , Rutz S , Crellin NK , Valdez PA , Hymowitz SG ( 2011 ) Regulation and functions of the IL - 10 family of cyto - kines in inﬂammation and disease . Annu Rev Immunol 29 : 71 – 109 131 . Saraiva M , O’Garra A ( 2010 ) The regulation of IL - 10 produc - tion by immune cells . Nat Rev Immunol 10 : 170 – 181 654 T . Suzuki 123 132 . Kucharzik T , Lugering N , Pauels HG , Domschke W , Stoll R ( 1998 ) IL - 4 , IL - 10 and IL - 13 down - regulate monocyte - chem - oattracting protein - 1 ( MCP - 1 ) production in activated intestinal epithelial cells . Clin Exp Immunol 111 : 152 – 157 133 . Madsen KL , Malfair D , Gray D , Doyle JS , Jewell LD , Fedorak RN ( 1999 ) Interleukin - 10 gene - deﬁcient mice develop a primary intestinal permeability defect in response to enteric microﬂora . Inﬂamm Bowel Dis 5 : 262 – 270 134 . Madsen KL , Lewis SA , Tavernini MM , Hibbard J , Fedorak RN ( 1997 ) Interleukin 10 prevents cytokine - induced disruption of T84 monolayer barrier integrity and limits chloride secretion . Gastroenterology 113 : 151 – 159 135 . Duran B ( 2005 ) The effects of long - term total parenteral nutri - tion on gut mucosal immunity in children with short bowel syndrome : a systematic review . BMC Nurs 4 : 2 136 . Wildhaber BE , Yang H , Spencer AU , Drongowski RA , Teitel - baum DH ( 2005 ) Lack of enteral nutrition – effects on the intestinal immune system . J Surg Res 123 : 8 – 16 137 . Kansagra K , Stoll B , Rognerud C , Niinikoski H , Ou CN , Harvey R , Burrin D ( 2003 ) Total parenteral nutrition adversely affects gut barrier function in neonatal piglets . Am J Physiol Gastro - intest Liver Physiol 285 : G1162 – G1170 138 . Sun X , Yang H , Nose K , Nose S , Haxhija EQ , Koga H , Feng Y , Teitelbaum DH ( 2008 ) Decline in intestinal mucosal IL - 10 expression and decreased intestinal barrier function in a mouse model of total parenteral nutrition . Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 294 : G139 – G147 139 . Heller F , Florian P , Bojarski C , Richter J , Christ M , Hillenbrand B , Mankertz J , Gitter AH , Burgel N , Fromm M , Zeitz M , Fuss I , Strober W , Schulzke JD ( 2005 ) Interleukin - 13 is the key effector Th2 cytokine in ulcerative colitis that affects epithelial tight junctions , apoptosis , and cell restitution . Gastroenterology 129 : 550 – 564 140 . Fuss IJ , Heller F , Boirivant M , Leon F , Yoshida M , Fichtner - Feigl S , Yang Z , Exley M , Kitani A , Blumberg RS , Mannon P , Strober W ( 2004 ) Nonclassical CD1d - restricted NK T cells that produce IL - 13 characterize an atypical Th2 response in ulcera - tive colitis . J Clin Invest 113 : 1490 – 1497 141 . Prasad S , Mingrino R , Kaukinen K , Hayes KL , Powell RM , MacDonald TT , Collins JE ( 2005 ) Inﬂammatory processes have differential effects on claudins 2 , 3 and 4 in colonic epithelial cells . Lab Invest 85 : 1139 – 1162 142 . Weber CR , Raleigh DR , Su L , Shen L , Sullivan EA , Wang Y , Turner JR ( 2010 ) Epithelial myosin light chain kinase activation induces mucosal interleukin - 13 expression to alter tight junction ion selectivity . J Biol Chem 285 : 12037 – 12046 143 . Pappu R , Ramirez - Carrozzi V , Sambandam A ( 2011 ) The interleukin - 17 cytokine family : critical players in host defence and inﬂammatory diseases . Immunology 134 : 8 – 16 144 . Chang SH , Dong C ( 2011 ) Signaling of interleukin - 17 family cytokines in immunity and inﬂammation . Cell Signal 23 : 1069 – 1075 145 . Cosmi L , Liotta F , Maggi E , Romagnani S , Annunziato F ( 2011 ) Th17 cells : new players in asthma pathogenesis . Allergy 66 : 989 – 998 146 . Kinugasa T , Sakaguchi T , Gu X , Reinecker HC ( 2000 ) Claudins regulate the intestinal barrier in response to immune mediators . Gastroenterology 118 : 1001 – 1011 147 . Harris RC , Chung E , Coffey RJ ( 2003 ) EGF receptor ligands . Exp Cell Res 284 : 2 – 13 148 . Booth BW , Smith GH ( 2007 ) Roles of transforming growth factor - alpha in mammary development and disease . Growth Factors 25 : 227 – 235 149 . Forsyth CB , Banan A , Farhadi A , Fields JZ , Tang Y , Shaikh M , Zhang LJ , Engen PA , Keshavarzian A ( 2007 ) Regulation of oxidant - induced intestinal permeability by metalloprotease - dependent epidermal growth factor receptor signaling . J Pharma - col Exp Ther 321 : 84 – 97 150 . Rao R , Baker RD , Baker SS ( 1999 ) Inhibition of oxidant - induced barrier disruption and protein tyrosine phosphorylation in Caco - 2 cell monolayers by epidermal growth factor . Biochem Pharmacol 57 : 685 – 695 151 . Howe KL , Reardon C , Wang A , Nazli A , McKay DM ( 2005 ) Transforming growth factor - beta regulation of epithelial tight junction proteins enhances barrier function and blocks entero - hemorrhagic Escherichia coli O157 : H7 - induced increased permeability . Am J Pathol 167 : 1587 – 1597 152 . Hering NA , Andres S , Fromm A , van Tol EA , Amasheh M , Mankertz J , Fromm M , Schulzke JD ( 2011 ) Transforming growth factor - beta , a whey protein component , strengthens the intestinal barrier by upregulating claudin - 4 in HT - 29 / B6 cells . J Nutr 141 : 783 – 789 153 . Roche JK , Martins CA , Cosme R , Fayer R , Guerrant RL ( 2000 ) Transforming growth factor beta1 ameliorates intestinal epi - thelial barrier disruption by Cryptosporidium parvum in vitro in the absence of mucosal T lymphocytes . Infect Immun 68 : 5635 – 5644 154 . Rao R ( 2008 ) Oxidative stress - induced disruption of epithelial and endothelial tight junctions . Front Biosci 13 : 7210 – 7226 155 . Basuroy S , Seth A , Elias B , Naren AP , Rao R ( 2006 ) MAPK interacts with occludin and mediates EGF - induced prevention of tight junction disruption by hydrogen peroxide . Biochem J 393 : 69 – 77 156 . Banan A , Fields JZ , Talmage DA , Zhang L , Keshavarzian A ( 2002 ) PKC - zeta is required in EGF protection of microtubules and intestinal barrier integrity against oxidant injury . Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 282 : G794 – G808 157 . Banan A , Fields JZ , Talmage DA , Zhang Y , Keshavarzian A ( 2001 ) PKC - beta1 mediates EGF protection of microtubules and barrier of intestinal monolayers against oxidants . Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 281 : G833 – G847 158 . Banan A , Keshavarzian A , Zhang L , Shaikh M , Forsyth CB , Tang Y , Fields JZ ( 2007 ) NF - kappaB activation as a key mechanism in ethanol - induced disruption of the F - actin cyto - skeleton and monolayer barrier integrity in intestinal epithelium . Alcohol 41 : 447 – 460 159 . Samak G , Aggarwal S , Rao RK ( 2011 ) ERK is involved in EGF - mediated protection of tight junctions , but not adherens junc - tions , in acetaldehyde - treated Caco - 2 cell monolayers . Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 301 : G50 – G59 160 . Baudry B , Fasano A , Ketley J , Kaper JB ( 1992 ) Cloning of a gene ( zot ) encoding a new toxin produced by Vibrio cholerae . Infect Immun 60 : 428 – 434 161 . Fasano A , Baudry B , Pumplin DW , Wasserman SS , Tall BD , Ketley JM , Kaper JB ( 1991 ) Vibrio cholerae produces a second enterotoxin , which affects intestinal tight junctions . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 88 : 5242 – 5246 162 . Di Pierro M , Lu R , Uzzau S , Wang W , Margaretten K , Pazzani C , Maimone F , Fasano A ( 2001 ) Zonula occludens toxin structure - function analysis . Identiﬁcation of the fragment bio - logically active on tight junctions and of the zonulin receptor binding domain . J Biol Chem 276 : 19160 – 19165 163 . Goldblum SE , Rai U , Tripathi A , Thakar M , De Leo L , Di Toro N , Not T , Ramachandran R , Puche AC , Hollenberg MD , Fasano A ( 2011 ) The active Zot domain ( aa 288 – 293 ) increases ZO - 1 and myosin 1C serine / threonine phosphorylation , alters inter - action between ZO - 1 and its binding partners , and induces tight junction disassembly through proteinase activated receptor 2 activation . FASEB J 25 : 144 – 158 164 . Mel SF , Fullner KJ , Wimer - Mackin S , Lencer WI , Mekalanos JJ ( 2000 ) Association of protease activity in Vibrio cholerae vac - cine strains with decreases in transcellular epithelial resistance Regulation of intestinal tight junction 655 123 of polarized T84 intestinal epithelial cells . Infect Immun 68 : 6487 – 6492 165 . Wu Z , Nybom P , Magnusson KE ( 2000 ) Distinct effects of Vibrio cholerae haemagglutinin / protease on the structure and localization of the tight junction - associated proteins occludin and ZO - 1 . Cell Microbiol 2 : 11 – 17 166 . Muza - Moons MM , Schneeberger EE , Hecht GA ( 2004 ) Enter - opathogenic Escherichia coli infection leads to appearance of aberrant tight junctions strands in the lateral membrane of intestinal epithelial cells . Cell Microbiol 6 : 783 – 793 167 . Philpott DJ , McKay DM , Sherman PM , Perdue MH ( 1996 ) Infection of T84 cells with enteropathogenic Escherichia coli alters barrier and transport functions . Am J Physiol 270 : G634 – G645 168 . Shifﬂett DE , Clayburgh DR , Koutsouris A , Turner JR , Hecht GA ( 2005 ) Enteropathogenic E . coli disrupts tight junction barrier function and structure in vivo . Lab Invest 85 : 1308 – 1324 169 . Simonovic I , Rosenberg J , Koutsouris A , Hecht G ( 2000 ) Enteropathogenic Escherichia coli dephosphorylates and disso - ciates occludin from intestinal epithelial tight junctions . Cell Microbiol 2 : 305 – 315 170 . Spitz J , Yuhan R , Koutsouris A , Blatt C , Alverdy J , Hecht G ( 1995 ) Enteropathogenic Escherichia coli adherence to intesti - nal epithelial monolayers diminishes barrier function . Am J Physiol 268 : G374 – G379 171 . Tomson FL , Koutsouris A , Viswanathan VK , Turner JR , Savkovic SD , Hecht G ( 2004 ) Differing roles of protein kinase C - zeta in disruption of tight junction barrier by enteropathogenic and enterohemorrhagic Escherichia coli . Gastroenterology 127 : 859 – 869 172 . Dean P , Kenny B ( 2004 ) Intestinal barrier dysfunction by enteropathogenic Escherichia coli is mediated by two effector molecules and a bacterial surface protein . Mol Microbiol 54 : 665 – 675 173 . Philpott DJ , McKay DM , Mak W , Perdue MH , Sherman PM ( 1998 ) Signal transduction pathways involved in enterohemor - rhagic Escherichia coli - induced alterations in T84 epithelial permeability . Infect Immun 66 : 1680 – 1687 174 . Brynestad S , Granum PE ( 2002 ) Clostridium perfringens and foodborne infections . Int J Food Microbiol 74 : 195 – 202 175 . McClane BA , Wnek AP , Hulkower KI , Hanna PC ( 1988 ) Divalent cation involvement in the action of Clostridium perfringens type A enterotoxin . Early events in enterotoxin action are divalent cation - independent . J Biol Chem 263 : 2423 – 2435 176 . Hanna PC , Mietzner TA , Schoolnik GK , McClane BA ( 1991 ) Localization of the receptor - binding region of Clostridium perfringens enterotoxin utilizing cloned toxin fragments and synthetic peptides . The 30 C - terminal amino acids deﬁne a functional binding region . J Biol Chem 266 : 11037 – 11043 177 . Hanna PC , Wieckowski EU , Mietzner TA , McClane BA ( 1992 ) Mapping of functional regions of Clostridium perfringens type A enterotoxin . Infect Immun 60 : 2110 – 2114 178 . Katahira J , Sugiyama H , Inoue N , Horiguchi Y , Matsuda M , Sugimoto N ( 1997 ) Clostridium perfringens enterotoxin utilizes two structurally related membrane proteins as functional receptors in vivo . J Biol Chem 272 : 26652 – 26658 179 . Katahira J , Inoue N , Horiguchi Y , Matsuda M , Sugimoto N ( 1997 ) Molecular cloning and functional characterization of the receptor for Clostridium perfringens enterotoxin . J Cell Biol 136 : 1239 – 1247 180 . Sonoda N , Furuse M , Sasaki H , Yonemura S , Katahira J , Horiguchi Y , Tsukita S ( 1999 ) Clostridium perfringens entero - toxin fragment removes speciﬁc claudins from tight junction strands : evidence for direct involvement of claudins in tight junction barrier . J Cell Biol 147 : 195 – 204 181 . Takahashi A , Kondoh M , Masuyama A , Fujii M , Mizuguchi H , Horiguchi Y , Watanabe Y ( 2005 ) Role of C - terminal regions of the C - terminal fragment of Clostridium perfringens enterotoxin in its interaction with claudin - 4 . J Controlled Release 108 : 56 – 62 182 . Singh U , Van Itallie CM , Mitic LL , Anderson JM , McClane BA ( 2000 ) CaCo - 2 cells treated with Clostridium perfringens enterotoxin form multiple large complex species , one of which contains the tight junction protein occludin . J Biol Chem 275 : 18407 – 18417 183 . Peng X , Yan H , You Z , Wang P , Wang S ( 2004 ) Effects of enteral supplementation with glutamine granules on intestinal mucosal barrier function in severe burned patients . Burns 30 : 135 – 139 184 . Ding LA , Li JS ( 2003 ) Effects of glutamine on intestinal per - meability and bacterial translocation in TPN - rats with endotoxemia . World J Gastroenterol 9 : 1327 – 1332 185 . Li J , Langkamp - Henken B , Suzuki K , Stahlgren LH ( 1994 ) Glutamine prevents parenteral nutrition - induced increases in intestinal permeability . JPEN J Parenter Enteral Nutr 18 : 303 – 307 186 . Foitzik T , Stuﬂer M , Hotz HG , Klinnert J , Wagner J , Warshaw AL , Schulzke JD , Fromm M , Buhr HJ ( 1997 ) Glutamine stabi - lizes intestinal permeability and reduces pancreatic infection in acute experimental pancreatitis . J Gastrointest Surg 1 : 40 – 46 ( discussion 46 – 47 ) 187 . Li N , Lewis P , Samuelson D , Liboni K , Neu J ( 2004 ) Glutamine regulates Caco - 2 cell tight junction proteins . Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 287 : G726 – G733 188 . Li N , Neu J ( 2009 ) Glutamine deprivation alters intestinal tight junctions via a PI3 - K / Akt mediated pathway in Caco - 2 cells . J Nutr 139 : 710 – 714 189 . Seth A , Basuroy S , Sheth P , Rao RK ( 2004 ) L - Glutamine ameliorates acetaldehyde - induced increase in paracellular per - meability in Caco - 2 cell monolayer . Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 287 : G510 – G517 190 . Basuroy S , Sheth P , Mansbach CM , Rao RK ( 2005 ) Acetalde - hyde disrupts tight junctions and adherens junctions in human colonic mucosa : protection by EGF and L - glutamine . Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 289 : G367 – G375 191 . Watanabe J , Fukumoto K , Fukushi E , Sonoyama K , Kawabata J ( 2004 ) Isolation of tryptophan as an inhibitor of ovalbumin permeation and analysis of its suppressive effect on oral sensi - tization . Biosci Biotechnol Biochem 68 : 59 – 65 192 . Isobe N , Suzuki M , Oda M , Tanabe S ( 2008 ) Enzyme - modiﬁed cheese exerts inhibitory effects on allergen permeation in rats suffering from indomethacin - induced intestinal inﬂammation . Biosci Biotechnol Biochem 72 : 1740 – 1745 193 . Tanabe S ( 2012 ) Short peptide modules for enhancing intestinal barrier function . Curr Pharm Des 18 : 776 – 781 194 . Yasumatsu H , Tanabe S ( 2010 ) The casein peptide Asn - Pro - Trp - Asp - Gln enforces the intestinal tight junction partly by increasing occludin expression in Caco - 2 cells . Br J Nutr 104 : 951 – 956 195 . Usami M , Muraki K , Iwamoto M , Ohata A , Matsushita E , Miki A ( 2001 ) Effect of eicosapentaenoic acid ( EPA ) on tight junc - tion permeability in intestinal monolayer cells . Clin Nutr 20 : 351 – 359 196 . Usami M , Komurasaki T , Hanada A , Kinoshita K , Ohata A ( 2003 ) Effect of gamma - linolenic acid or docosahexaenoic acid on tight junction permeability in intestinal monolayer cells and their mechanism by protein kinase C activation and / or eicosa - noid formation . Nutrition 19 : 150 – 156 197 . Willemsen LE , Koetsier MA , Balvers M , Beermann C , Stahl B , van Tol EA ( 2008 ) Polyunsaturated fatty acids support epithelial barrier integrity and reduce IL - 4 mediated permeability in vitro . Eur J Nutr 47 : 183 – 191 198 . Anderberg EK , Lindmark T , Artursson P ( 1993 ) Sodium caprate elicits dilatations in human intestinal tight junctions and 656 T . Suzuki 123 enhances drug absorption by the paracellular route . Pharm Res 10 : 857 – 864 199 . Lindmark T , Nikkila T , Artursson P ( 1995 ) Mechanisms of absorption enhancement by medium chain fatty acids in intes - tinal epithelial Caco - 2 cell monolayers . J Pharmacol Exp Ther 275 : 958 – 964 200 . Soderholm JD , Oman H , Blomquist L , Veen J , Lindmark T , Olaison G ( 1998 ) Reversible increase in tight junction perme - ability to macromolecules in rat ileal mucosa in vitro by sodium caprate , a constituent of milk fat . Dig Dis Sci 43 : 1547 – 1552 201 . Mortensen PB , Clausen MR ( 1996 ) Short - chain fatty acids in the human colon : relation to gastrointestinal health and disease . Scand J Gastroenterol Suppl 216 : 132 – 148 202 . Topping DL , Clifton PM ( 2001 ) Short - chain fatty acids and human colonic function : roles of resistant starch and nonstarch polysaccharides . Physiol Rev 81 : 1031 – 1064 203 . Mariadason JM , Barkla DH , Gibson PR ( 1997 ) Effect of short - chain fatty acids on paracellular permeability in Caco - 2 intes - tinal epithelium model . Am J Physiol 272 : G705 – G712 204 . Kinoshita M , Suzuki Y , Saito Y ( 2002 ) Butyrate reduces colonic paracellular permeability by enhancing PPARgamma activation . Biochem Biophys Res Commun 293 : 827 – 831 205 . Peng L , Li ZR , Green RS , Holzman IR , Lin J ( 2009 ) Butyrate enhances the intestinal barrier by facilitating tight junction assembly via activation of AMP - activated protein kinase in Caco - 2 cell monolayers . J Nutr 139 : 1619 – 1625 206 . Suzuki T , Yoshida S , Hara H ( 2008 ) Physiological concentra - tions of short - chain fatty acids immediately suppress colonic epithelial permeability . Br J Nutr 100 : 297 – 305 207 . Le Poul E , Loison C , Struyf S , Springael JY , Lannoy V , Decobecq ME , Brezillon S , Dupriez V , Vassart G , Van Damme J , Parmentier M , Detheux M ( 2003 ) Functional characterization of human receptors for short chain fatty acids and their role in polymorphonuclear cell activation . J Biol Chem 278 : 25481 – 25489 208 . Brown AJ , Goldsworthy SM , Barnes AA , Eilert MM , Tcheang L , Daniels D , Muir AI , Wigglesworth MJ , Kinghorn I , Fraser NJ , Pike NB , Strum JC , Steplewski KM , Murdock PR , Holder JC , Marshall FH , Szekeres PG , Wilson S , Ignar DM , Foord SM , Wise A , Dowell SJ ( 2003 ) The Orphan G protein - coupled receptors GPR41 and GPR43 are activated by propionate and other short chain carboxylic acids . J Biol Chem 278 : 11312 – 11319 209 . Karaki S , Mitsui R , Hayashi H , Kato I , Sugiya H , Iwanaga T , Furness JB , Kuwahara A ( 2006 ) Short - chain fatty acid receptor , GPR43 , is expressed by enteroendocrine cells and mucosal mast cells in rat intestine . Cell Tissue Res 324 : 353 – 360 210 . Karaki S , Tazoe H , Hayashi H , Kashiwabara H , Tooyama K , Suzuki Y , Kuwahara A ( 2008 ) Expression of the short - chain fatty acid receptor , GPR43 , in the human colon . J Mol Histol 39 : 135 – 142 211 . Rowe A ( 1997 ) Retinoid X receptors . Int J Biochem Cell Biol 29 : 275 – 278 212 . Dusso AS , Brown AJ ( 1998 ) Mechanism of vitamin D action and its regulation . Am J Kidney Dis 32 : S13 – S24 213 . Maciel AA , Oria RB , Braga - Neto MB , Braga AB , Carvalho EB , Lucena HB , Brito GA , Guerrant RL , Lima AA ( 2007 ) Role of retinol in protecting epithelial cell damage induced by Clostridium difﬁcile toxin A . Toxicon 50 : 1027 – 1040 214 . Kong J , Zhang Z , Musch MW , Ning G , Sun J , Hart J , Bisson - nette M , Li YC ( 2008 ) Novel role of the vitamin D receptor in maintaining the integrity of the intestinal mucosal barrier . Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 294 : G208 – G216 215 . Kandaswami C , Middleton E Jr ( 1994 ) Free radical scavenging and antioxidant activity of plant ﬂavonoids . Adv Exp Med Biol 366 : 351 – 376 216 . Hamalainen M , Nieminen R , Vuorela P , Heinonen M , Moilanen E ( 2007 ) Anti - inﬂammatory effects of ﬂavonoids : genistein , kaempferol , quercetin , and daidzein inhibit STAT - 1 and NF - kappaB activations , whereas ﬂavone , isorhamnetin , naringe - nin , andpelargonidininhibitonlyNF - kappaBactivationalongwith their inhibitory effect on iNOS expression and NO production in activated macrophages . Mediat Inﬂamm 2007 : 45673 217 . Suzuki T , Hara H ( 2009 ) Quercetin enhances intestinal barrier function through the assembly of zonula occludens - 2 , occludin , and claudin - 1 and the expression of claudin - 4 in Caco - 2 cells . J Nutr 139 : 965 – 974 218 . Suzuki T , Tanabe S , Hara H ( 2011 ) Kaempferol enhances intestinal barrier function through the cytoskeletal association and expression of tight junction proteins in Caco - 2 cells . J Nutr 141 : 87 – 94 219 . Amasheh M , Schlichter S , Amasheh S , Mankertz J , Zeitz M , Fromm M , Schulzke JD ( 2008 ) Quercetin enhances epithelial barrier function and increases claudin - 4 expression in Caco - 2 cells . J Nutr 138 : 1067 – 1073 220 . Sheth P , Seth A , Atkinson KJ , Gheyi T , Kale G , Giorgianni F , Desiderio DM , Li C , Naren A , Rao R ( 2007 ) Acetaldehyde dissociates the PTP1B - E - cadherin - beta - catenin complex in Caco - 2 cell monolayers by a phosphorylation - dependent mechanism . Biochem J 402 : 291 – 300 221 . Watson JL , Ansari S , Cameron H , Wang A , Akhtar M , McKay DM ( 2004 ) Green tea polyphenol ( - ) - epigallocatechin gallate blocks epithelial barrier dysfunction provoked by IFN - gamma but not by IL - 4 . Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 287 : G954 – G961 222 . Sanders ME ( 2003 ) Probiotics : considerations for human health . Nutr Rev 61 : 91 – 99 223 . Ukena SN , Singh A , Dringenberg U , Engelhardt R , Seidler U , Hansen W , Bleich A , Bruder D , Franzke A , Rogler G , Suerbaum S , Buer J , Gunzer F , Westendorf AM ( 2007 ) Probiotic Esche - richia coli Nissle 1917 inhibits leaky gut by enhancing mucosal integrity . PLoS One 2 : e1308 224 . Garrido - Mesa N , Utrilla P , Comalada M , Zorrilla P , Garrido - Mesa J , Zarzuelo A , Rodriguez - Cabezas ME , Galvez J ( 2011 ) The association of minocycline and the probiotic Escherichia coli Nissle 1917 results in an additive beneﬁcial effect in a DSS model of reactivated colitis in mice . Biochem Pharmacol 82 : 1891 – 1900 225 . Zyrek AA , Cichon C , Helms S , Enders C , Sonnenborn U , Schmidt MA ( 2007 ) Molecular mechanisms underlying the probiotic effects of Escherichia coli Nissle 1917 involve ZO - 2 and PKCzeta redistribution resulting in tight junction and epi - thelial barrier repair . Cell Microbiol 9 : 804 – 816 226 . Resta - Lenert S , Barrett KE ( 2003 ) Live probiotics protect intestinal epithelial cells from the effects of infection with enteroinvasive Escherichia coli ( EIEC ) . Gut 52 : 988 – 997 227 . Resta - Lenert S , Barrett KE ( 2006 ) Probiotics and commensals reverse TNF - alpha - and IFN - gamma - induced dysfunction in human intestinal epithelial cells . Gastroenterology 130 : 731 – 746 228 . Mennigen R , Nolte K , Rijcken E , Utech M , Loefﬂer B , Senninger N , Bruewer M ( 2009 ) Probiotic mixture VSL # 3 protects the epithelial barrier by maintaining tight junction protein expression and preventing apoptosis in a murine model of colitis . Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 296 : G1140 – G1149 229 . Dai C , Zhao DH , Jiang M ( 2012 ) VSL # 3 probiotics regulate the intestinal epithelial barrier in vivo and in vitro via the p38 and ERK signaling pathways . Int J Mol Med 29 : 202 – 208 230 . Chen HQ , Yang J , Zhang M , Zhou YK , Shen TY , Chu ZX , Hang XM , Jiang YQ , Qin HL ( 2010 ) Lactobacillus plantarum ame - liorates colonic epithelial barrier dysfunction by modulating the Regulation of intestinal tight junction 657 123 apical junctional complex and PepT1 in IL - 10 knockout mice . Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 299 : G1287 – G1297 231 . Ko JS , Yang HR , Chang JY , Seo JK ( 2007 ) Lactobacillus plantarum inhibits epithelial barrier dysfunction and interleukin - 8 secretion induced by tumor necrosis factor - alpha . World J Gastroenterol 13 : 1962 – 1965 232 . Karczewski J , Troost FJ , Konings I , Dekker J , Kleerebezem M , Brummer RJ , Wells JM ( 2010 ) Regulation of human epithelial tight junction proteins by Lactobacillus plantarum in vivo and protective effects on the epithelial barrier . Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 298 : G851 – G859 233 . Cario E , Gerken G , Podolsky DK ( 2004 ) Toll - like receptor 2 enhances ZO - 1 - associated intestinal epithelial barrier integrity via protein kinase C . Gastroenterology 127 : 224 – 238 234 . Miyauchi E , Morita H , Tanabe S ( 2009 ) Lactobacillus rhamnosus alleviates intestinal barrier dysfunction in part by increasing expression of zonula occludens - 1 and myosin light - chain kinase in vivo . J Dairy Res 92 : 2400 – 2408 235 . Donato KA , Gareau MG , Wang YJ , Sherman PM ( 2010 ) Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG attenuates interferon - { gamma } and tumour necrosis factor - alpha - induced barrier dysfunction and pro - inﬂammatory signalling . Microbiology 156 : 3288 – 3297 236 . Johnson - Henry KC , Donato KA , Shen - Tu G , Gordanpour M , Sherman PM ( 2008 ) Lactobacillus rhamnosus strain GG prevents enterohemorrhagic Escherichiacoli O157 : H7 - inducedchangesin epithelial barrier function . Infect Immun 76 : 1340 – 1348 237 . Yan F , Cao H , Cover TL , Whitehead R , Washington MK , Polk DB ( 2007 ) Soluble proteins produced by probiotic bacteria regulate intestinal epithelial cell survival and growth . Gastro - enterology 132 : 562 – 575 238 . Seth A , Yan F , Polk DB , Rao RK ( 2008 ) Probiotics ameliorate the hydrogen peroxide - induced epithelial barrier disruption by a PKC - and MAP kinase - dependent mechanism . Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 294 : G1060 – G1069 239 . Yan F , Cao H , Cover TL , Washington MK , Shi Y , Liu L , Chaturvedi R , Peek RM Jr , Wilson KT , Polk DB ( 2011 ) Colon - speciﬁc delivery of a probiotic - derived soluble protein ameliorates intestinal inﬂammation in mice through an EGFR - dependent mechanism . J Clin Invest 121 : 2242 – 2253 240 . Ewaschuk JB , Diaz H , Meddings L , Diederichs B , Dmytrash A , Backer J , Looijer - van Langen M , Madsen KL ( 2008 ) Secreted bioactive factors from Biﬁdobacterium infantis enhance epithe - lial cell barrier function . Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 295 : G1025 – G1034 241 . Keshavarzian A , Farhadi A , Forsyth CB , Rangan J , Jakate S , Shaikh M , Banan A , Fields JZ ( 2009 ) Evidence that chronic alcohol exposure promotes intestinal oxidative stress , intestinal hyperpermeability and endotoxemia prior to development of alcoholic steatohepatitis in rats . J Hepatol 50 : 538 – 547 242 . Ferrier L , Berard F , Debrauwer L , Chabo C , Langella P , Bueno L , Fioramonti J ( 2006 ) Impairment of the intestinal barrier by ethanol involves enteric microﬂora and mast cell activation in rodents . Am J Pathol 168 : 1148 – 1154 243 . Tamai H , Kato S , Horie Y , Ohki E , Yokoyama H , Ishii H ( 2000 ) Effect of acute ethanol administration on the intestinal absorp - tion of endotoxin in rats . Alcohol Clin Exp Res 24 : 390 – 394 244 . Ma TY , Nguyen D , Bui V , Nguyen H , Hoa N ( 1999 ) Ethanol modulation of intestinal epithelial tight junction barrier . Am J Physiol 276 : G965 – G974 245 . Visapaa JP , Jokelainen K , Nosova T , Salaspuro M ( 1998 ) Inhibition of intracolonic acetaldehyde production and alcoholic fermentation in rats by ciproﬂoxacin . Alcohol Clin Exp Res 22 : 1161 – 1164 246 . Rao RK ( 1998 ) Acetaldehyde - induced increase in paracellular permeability in Caco - 2 cell monolayer . Alcohol Clin Exp Res 22 : 1724 – 1730 247 . Soderholm JD , Peterson KH , Olaison G , Franzen LE , Westrom B , Magnusson KE , Sjodahl R ( 1999 ) Epithelial permeability to proteins in the noninﬂamed ileum of Crohn’s disease ? Gastro - enterology 117 : 65 – 72 248 . Hollander D , Vadheim CM , Brettholz E , Petersen GM , Delah - unty T , Rotter JI ( 1986 ) Increased intestinal permeability in patients with Crohn’s disease and their relatives . A possible etiologic factor . Ann Intern Med 105 : 883 – 885 249 . Suenaert P , Bulteel V , Lemmens L , Noman M , Geypens B , Van Assche G , Geboes K , Ceuppens JL , Rutgeerts P ( 2002 ) Anti - tumor necrosis factor treatment restores the gut barrier in Crohn’s disease . Am J Gastroenterol 97 : 2000 – 2004 250 . Zeissig S , Burgel N , Gunzel D , Richter J , Mankertz J , Wahnschaffe U , Kroesen AJ , Zeitz M , Fromm M , Schulzke JD ( 2007 ) Changes in expression and distribution of claudin 2 , 5 and 8 lead to discontinuous tight junctions and barrier dys - function in active Crohn’s disease . Gut 56 : 61 – 72 251 . Vetrano S , Rescigno M , Cera MR , Correale C , Rumio C , Doni A , Fantini M , Sturm A , Borroni E , Repici A , Locati M , Malesci A , Dejana E , Danese S ( 2008 ) Unique role of junctional adhesion molecule - a in maintaining mucosal homeostasis in inﬂammatory bowel disease . Gastroenterology 135 : 173 – 184 252 . Blair SA , Kane SV , Clayburgh DR , Turner JR ( 2006 ) Epithelial myosin light chain kinase expression and activity are upregu - lated in inﬂammatory bowel disease . Lab Invest 86 : 191 – 201 253 . Smecuol E , Bai JC , Vazquez H , Kogan Z , Cabanne A , Niveloni S , Pedreira S , Boerr L , Maurino E , Meddings JB ( 1997 ) Gas - trointestinal permeability in celiac disease . Gastroenterology 112 : 1129 – 1136 254 . Schulzke JD , Bentzel CJ , Schulzke I , Riecken EO , Fromm M ( 1998 ) Epithelial tight junction structure in the jejunum of chil - dren with acute and treated celiac sprue . Pediatr Res 43 : 435 – 441 255 . van Elburg RM , Uil JJ , Mulder CJ , Heymans HS ( 1993 ) Intes - tinal permeability in patients with coeliac disease and relatives of patients with coeliac disease . Gut 34 : 354 – 357 256 . Lammers KM , Lu R , Brownley J , Lu B , Gerard C , Thomas K , Rallabhandi P , Shea - Donohue T , Tamiz A , Alkan S , Netzel - Arnett S , Antalis T , Vogel SN , Fasano A ( 2008 ) Gliadin induces an increase in intestinal permeability and zonulin release by binding to the chemokine receptor CXCR3 . Gastroenterology 135 ( 194 – 204 ) : e193 257 . Lu R , Wang W , Uzzau S , Vigorito R , Zielke HR , Fasano A ( 2000 ) Afﬁnity puriﬁcation and partial characterization of the zonulin / zonula occludens toxin ( Zot ) receptor from human brain . J Neurochem 74 : 320 – 326 258 . Wang W , Uzzau S , Goldblum SE , Fasano A ( 2000 ) Human zonulin , a potential modulator of intestinal tight junctions . J Cell Sci 113 ( Pt 24 ) : 4435 – 4440 259 . Drago S , El Asmar R , Di Pierro M , Grazia Clemente M , Tripathi A , Sapone A , Thakar M , Iacono G , Carroccio A , D’Agate C , Not T , Zampini L , Catassi C , Fasano A ( 2006 ) Gliadin , zonulin and gut permeability : effects on celiac and non - celiac intestinal mucosa and intestinal cell lines . Scand J Gastroenterol 41 : 408 – 419 260 . Szakal DN , Gyorffy H , Arato A , Cseh A , Molnar K , Papp M , Dezsoﬁ A , Veres G ( 2010 ) Mucosal expression of claudins 2 , 3 and 4 in proximal and distal part of duodenum in children with coeliac disease . Virchows Arch 456 : 245 – 250 261 . Louka AS , Sollid LM ( 2003 ) HLA in coeliac disease : unravel - ling the complex genetics of a complex disorder . Tissue Antigens 61 : 105 – 117 262 . Mooradian AD , Morley JE , Levine AS , Prigge WF , Gebhard RL ( 1986 ) Abnormal intestinal permeability to sugars in diabetes mellitus . Diabetologia 29 : 221 – 224 263 . Bosi E , Molteni L , Radaelli MG , Folini L , Fermo I , Bazzigal - uppi E , Piemonti L , Pastore MR , Paroni R ( 2006 ) Increased 658 T . Suzuki 123 intestinal permeability precedes clinical onset of type 1 diabetes . Diabetologia 49 : 2824 – 2827 264 . Vaarala O ( 2008 ) Leaking gut in type 1 diabetes . Curr Opin Gastroenterol 24 : 701 – 706 265 . Westerholm - Ormio M , Vaarala O , Pihkala P , Ilonen J , Savilahti E ( 2003 ) Immunologic activity in the small intestinal mucosa of pediatric patients with type 1 diabetes . Diabetes 52 : 2287 – 2295 266 . Watts T , Berti I , Sapone A , Gerarduzzi T , Not T , Zielke R , Fasano A ( 2005 ) Role of the intestinal tight junction modulator zonulin in the pathogenesis of type I diabetes in BB diabetic - prone rats . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 102 : 2916 – 2921 267 . Meddings JB , Jarand J , Urbanski SJ , Hardin J , Gall DG ( 1999 ) Increased gastrointestinal permeability is an early lesion in the spontaneously diabetic BB rat . Am J Physiol 276 : G951 – G957 268 . Sapone A , de Magistris L , Pietzak M , Clemente MG , Tripathi A , Cucca F , Lampis R , Kryszak D , Carteni M , Generoso M , Iafusco D , Prisco F , Laghi F , Riegler G , Carratu R , Counts D , Fasano A ( 2006 ) Zonulin upregulation is associated with increased gut permeability in subjects with type 1 diabetes and their relatives . Diabetes 55 : 1443 – 1449 269 . Rao RK , Seth A , Sheth P ( 2004 ) Recent Advances in Alcoholic Liver Disease I . Role of intestinal permeability and endotoxemia in alcoholic liver disease . Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 286 : G881 – G884 270 . Keshavarzian A , Holmes EW , Patel M , Iber F , Fields JZ , Pethkar S ( 1999 ) Leaky gut in alcoholic cirrhosis : a possible mechanism for alcohol - induced liver damage . Am J Gastroen - terol 94 : 200 – 207 271 . Fujimoto M , Uemura M , Nakatani Y , Tsujita S , Hoppo K , Tamagawa T , Kitano H , Kikukawa M , Ann T , Ishii Y , Kojima H , Sakurai S , Tanaka R , Namisaki T , Noguchi R , Higashino T , Kikuchi E , Nishimura K , Takaya A , Fukui H ( 2000 ) Plasma endotoxin and serum cytokine levels in patients with alcoholic hepatitis : relation to severity of liver disturbance . Alcohol Clin Exp Res 24 : 48S – 54S 272 . Nanji AA , Jokelainen K , Fotouhinia M , Rahemtulla A , Thomas P , Tipoe GL , Su GL , Dannenberg AJ ( 2001 ) Increased severity of alcoholic liver injury in female rats : role of oxidative stress , endotoxin , and chemokines . Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 281 : G1348 – G1356 273 . Mathurin P , Deng QG , Keshavarzian A , Choudhary S , Holmes EW , Tsukamoto H ( 2000 ) Exacerbation of alcoholic liver injury by enteral endotoxin in rats . Hepatology 32 : 1008 – 1017 274 . Nanji AA , Khettry U , Sadrzadeh SM ( 1994 ) Lactobacillus feeding reduces endotoxemia and severity of experimental alcoholic liver ( disease ) . Proc Soc Exp Biol Med 205 : 243 – 247 275 . Adachi Y , Moore LE , Bradford BU , Gao W , Thurman RG ( 1995 ) Antibiotics prevent liver injury in rats following long - term exposure to ethanol . Gastroenterology 108 : 218 – 224 276 . Bode C , Bode JC ( 2003 ) Effect of alcohol consumption on the gut . Best Pract Res Clin Gastroenterol 17 : 575 – 592 277 . Parlesak A , Schafer C , Schutz T , Bode JC , Bode C ( 2000 ) Increased intestinal permeability to macromolecules and endo - toxemia in patients with chronic alcohol abuse in different stages of alcohol - induced liver disease . J Hepatol 32 : 742 – 747 278 . Keshavarzian A , Fields JZ , Vaeth J , Holmes EW ( 1994 ) The differing effects of acute and chronic alcohol on gastric and intestinal permeability . Am J Gastroenterol 89 : 2205 – 2211 279 . Camilleri M , Gorman H ( 2007 ) Intestinal permeability and irritable bowel syndrome . Neurogastroenterol Motil 19 : 545 – 552 280 . Barbara G , Stanghellini V , De Giorgio R , Cremon C , Cottrell GS , Santini D , Pasquinelli G , Morselli - Labate AM , Grady EF , Bun - nett NW , Collins SM , Corinaldesi R ( 2004 ) Activated mast cells in proximity to colonic nerves correlate with abdominal pain in irritable bowel syndrome . Gastroenterology 126 : 693 – 702 281 . Collins SM ( 2005 ) Dysregulation of peripheral cytokine pro - duction in irritable bowel syndrome . Am J Gastroenterol 100 : 2517 – 2518 282 . Piche T , Barbara G , Aubert P , Bruley des Varannes S , Dainese R , Nano JL , Cremon C , Stanghellini V , De Giorgio R , Galmiche JP , Neunlist M . ( 2009 ) Impaired intestinal barrier integrity in the colon of patients with irritable bowel syndrome : involvement of soluble mediators . Gut 58 : 196 – 201 283 . Alonso C , Guilarte M , Vicario M , Ramos L , Ramadan Z , Antolin M , Martinez C , Rezzi S , Saperas E , Kochhar S , Santos J , Malagelada JR ( 2008 ) Maladaptive intestinal epithelial respon - ses to life stress may predispose healthy women to gut mucosal inﬂammation . Gastroenterology 135 ( 163 – 172 ) : e161 284 . Mazzon E , Crisafulli C , Galuppo M , Cuzzocrea S ( 2009 ) Role of peroxisome proliferator - activated receptor - alpha in ileum tight junction alteration in mouse model of restraint stress . Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 297 : G488 – G505 285 . Estienne M , Claustre J , Clain - Gardechaux G , Paquet A , Tache Y , Fioramonti J , Plaisancie P ( 2010 ) Maternal deprivation alters epithelial secretory cell lineages in rat duodenum : role of CRF - related peptides . Gut 59 : 744 – 751 286 . Soderholm JD , Yang PC , Ceponis P , Vohra A , Riddell R , Sherman PM , Perdue MH ( 2002 ) Chronic stress induces mast cell - dependent bacterial adherence and initiates mucosal inﬂammation in rat intestine . Gastroenterology 123 : 1099 – 1108 287 . Berin MC , Sicherer S ( 2011 ) Food allergy : mechanisms and therapeutics . Curr Opin Immunol 23 : 794 – 800 288 . Ventura MT , Polimeno L , Amoruso AC , Gatti F , Annoscia E , Marinaro M , Di Leo E , Matino MG , Buquicchio R , Bonini S , Tursi A , Francavilla A ( 2006 ) Intestinal permeability in patients with adverse reactions to food . Dig Liver Dis 38 : 732 – 736 289 . Andre C , Andre F , Colin L , Cavagna S ( 1987 ) Measurement of intestinal permeability to mannitol and lactulose as a means of diagnosing food allergy and evaluating therapeutic effectiveness of disodium cromoglycate . Ann Allergy 59 : 127 – 130 290 . Brandt EB , Strait RT , Hershko D , Wang Q , Muntel EE , Scribner TA , Zimmermann N , Finkelman FD , Rothenberg ME ( 2003 ) Mast cells are required for experimental oral allergen - induced diarrhea . J Clin Invest 112 : 1666 – 1677 291 . Moneret - Vautrin DA , de Korwin JD , Tisserant J , Grignon M , Claudot N ( 1984 ) Ultrastructural study of the mast cells of the human duodenal mucosa . Clin Allergy 14 : 471 – 481 292 . Banan A , Zhang LJ , Farhadi A , Fields JZ , Shaikh M , Kesha - varzian A ( 2004 ) PKC - beta1 isoform activation is required for EGF - induced NF - kappaB inactivation and IkappaBalpha sta - bilization and protection of F - actin assembly and barrier function in enterocyte monolayers . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 286 : C723 – C738 Regulation of intestinal tight junction 659 123