Novel Espin Actin - Bundling Proteins Are Localized to Purkinje Cell Dendritic Spines and Bind the Src Homology 3 Adapter Protein Insulin Receptor Substrate p53 Gabriela Sekerkova´ , Patricia A . Loomis , Benjarat Changyaleket , Lili Zheng , Ron Eytan , Bin Chen , Enrico Mugnaini , and James R . Bartles Department of Cell and Molecular Biology , Feinberg School of Medicine and the Institute for Neuroscience , Northwestern University , Chicago , Illinois 60611 We identified a group of actin - binding – bundling proteins that are expressed in cerebellar Purkinje cells ( PCs ) but are not detected in otherneuronsoftheCNS . Theseproteinsarenovelisoformsoftheactin - bundlingproteinespinthatarisethroughtheuseofauniquesite for transcriptional initiation and differential splicing . Light and electron microscopic localization studies demonstrated that these espin isoforms are enriched in the dendritic spines of PCs . They were detected in the head and neck and in association with the postsynaptic density ( PSD ) of dendritic spines in synaptic contact with parallel or climbing fibers . They were also highly enriched in PSD fractions isolated from cerebellum . The PC espins efficiently bound and bundled actin filaments in vitro , and these activities were not inhibited by Ca 2 (cid:1) . When expressed in transfected neuronal cell lines , the PC espins colocalized with actin filaments and elicited the formation of coarsecytoplasmicactinbundles . Theinsulinreceptorsubstratep53 ( IRSp53 ) , anSrchomology3 ( SH3 ) adapterproteinandregulatorof the actin cytoskeleton , was identified as an espin - binding protein in yeast two - hybrid screens . Cotransfection studies and pull - down assays showed that this interaction was direct and required the N - terminal proline - rich peptide of the PC espins . Thus , the PC espins exhibit the properties of modular actin - bundling proteins with the potential to influence the organization and dynamics of the actin cytoskeleton in PC dendritic spines and to participate in multiprotein complexes involving SH3 domain - containing proteins , such as IRSp53 . Key words : espin ; actin ; cytoskeleton ; cerebellum ; Purkinje cell ; dendritic spine ; actin - bundling protein ; postsynaptic density ; IRSp53 ; SH3 domain Introduction Dendritic spines are dynamic components of the neuron that undergo changes in density or shape during development , learn - ing , and disease and in response to hormones , neurotransmitters , and synaptic activity ( Nimchinsky et al . , 2002 ) . Many of these changes reflect the dynamics of the dendritic spine actin cytoskel - eton ( Matus , 2000 ) . Studies of live neurons indicate that den - dritic spines undergo rapid actin - based movements ( Fischer et al . , 1998 ; Dunaevsky et al . , 1999 ; Korkortian and Segal , 2001 ) and that a major portion of spine - associated actin is dynamic ( Star et al . , 2002 ) . In cultured hippocampal neurons , glutamate receptor activation or electrical stimulation decreases actin - based spine movements ( Fischer et al . , 2000 ) and the fraction of dynamic spine actin ( Star et al . , 2002 ) but can also lead to the redistribu - tion ( Colicos et al . , 2001 ) or loss ( Halpain et al . , 1998 ) of spine F - actin . To understand the molecular mechanisms that underlie den - dritic spine dynamics , it is important to identify the proteins that influence the actin cytoskeleton of dendritic spines and mediate its connection to the postsynaptic density ( PSD ) . Efforts to iden - tifytheproteincomponentsofspineshavefocusedonhippocam - pal neurons ( Zhang and Benson , 2000 ; Hering and Sheng , 2001 ) . Fewer such studies have examined the spines of cerebellar Pur - kinje cells ( PCs ) . Implicated in motor control and cognitive func - tions ( Hansel et al . , 2001 ; Houk and Mugnaini , 2002 ; Molinari et al . , 2002 ) , PCs are rich in dendritic spines that receive excitatory input from two major sources . The spines of PC distal dendrites form synapses with (cid:2) 150 , 000 – 200 , 000 parallel fibers , whereas the sparser spines of PC proximal dendrites form (cid:2) 1000 – 1500 synapses with a single climbing fiber , resulting in one of the most powerful synaptic contacts in the brain ( Strata et al . , 2000 ; Hansel et al . , 2001 ) . There are indications that the spines and PSDs of PCs differ from those elsewhere in the CNS in ultrastructure , protein composition , and signaling pathways ( Carlin et al . , 1980 ; Araki et al . , 1993 ; Brenman et al . , 1996 ; Capani et al . , 2001 ; Okubo et al . , 2001 , Miyagi et al . , 2002 ) . We determined that the dendritic spines of PCs contain novel isoforms of the actin - bundling protein espin . Espins have been found previously in association with parallel actin bundles in Sertoli cell – spermatid junctions ( Bartles et al . , 1996 ; Chen et al . , 1999 ) , brush border microvilli ( Bartles et al . , 1998 ) , and hair cell stereocilia ( Zheng et al . , 2000 ) . [ Espin should not be confused with epsin , an endocytic adaptor protein with a similar name ( De Camilli et al . , 2002 ) . ] Encoded by a single gene , espin isoforms ReceivedSept . 4 , 2002 ; revisedNov . 14 , 2002 ; acceptedDec . 4 , 2002 . This work was supported by National Institutes of Health Grant DC04314 and Independent Scientist Award HD01210 ( J . R . B . ) . WethankDr . AnthonyFrankfurterforprovidingtubulinantibody . CorrespondenceshouldbeaddressedtoDr . JamesR . Bartles , DepartmentofCellandMolecularBiology , Ward Building 11 - 185 , Feinberg School of Medicine , Northwestern University , 303 East Chicago Avenue , Chicago , IL 60611 . E - mail : j - bartles @ northwestern . edu . Copyright©2003SocietyforNeuroscience 0270 - 6474 / 03 / 231310 - 10 $ 15 . 00 / 0 1310 • TheJournalofNeuroscience , February15 , 2003 • 23 ( 4 ) : 1310 – 1319 share a C - terminal peptide that is necessary and sufficient for potent actin - bundling activity , but their N - terminal peptides contain different protein – protein interaction motifs as a result of differences in transcriptional initiation and splicing ( Bartles , 2000 ) . Here we report the localization of the novel PC espin isoforms , elucidate their sequences , and highlight their interac - tions with F - actin and the insulin receptor substrate p53 ( IRSp53 ) , an Src homology 3 ( SH3 ) adapter protein and known regulator of the actin cytoskeleton ( Krugmann et al . , 2001 ; Miki and Takenawa , 2002 ) . Materials and Methods Animals . Young adult Sprague Dawley rats and CD - 1 or CBA / CaJ mice were purchased from Harlan Sprague Dawley ( Indianapolis , IN ) or The Jackson Laboratories ( Bar Harbor , ME ) . All experiments conformed to protocolsapprovedbytheNorthwesternUniversityInstitutionalAnimalCareandUseCommitteeandCenterforComparativeMedicine , an Association for Assessment and Accreditation of Laboratory Animal Care - accredited facility , and followed guidelines issued by the National Institutes of Health and the Society for Neuroscience . Antibodies . Espin antibodies were produced in rabbits and affinity purified on columns of recombinant PC espin 1 or its N - or C - terminal fragments ( Bartles et al . , 1996 ; Chen et al . , 1999 ) . Rabbit polyclonal an - tibody to rat PSD - 93 / chapsyn - 110 and mouse monoclonal actin anti - body C4 were from Chemicon ( Temecula , CA ) . Mouse monoclonal tu - bulin antibody TuJ1 was from Dr . Anthony Frankfurter ( University of Virginia , Charlottesville , VA ) . Immunolocalization in brain sections . For immunoperoxidase histo - chemistry , rodents were perfused transcardially with 4 % formaldehyde in 0 . 12 M phosphate buffer , pH 7 . 4 , and brains were infiltrated with 30 % sucrose . Frozen sections ( 30 (cid:1) m thick ) were treated with 0 . 6 % H 2 O 2 – 10 % methanol and labeled with espin antibody or preimmune IgG . Bound antibody was visualized by the ABC method ( Vector Laborato - ries , Burlingame , CA ) . Some labeled frozen sections were dehydrated , flat - embedded in Epon , and examined as 1 - (cid:1) m - thick sections . Images were obtained with a Spot RT CCD camera and Nikon ( Melville , NY ) Eclipse 800 microscope . Some frozen sections were labeled with espin antibody and tubulin antibody , followed by Alexa488 - and Alexa594 - labeled goat secondary antibodies or phalloidin ( Molecular Probes , Eu - gene , OR ) , and optical z - sections ( 1 . 5 (cid:1) m thick ) were obtained using a Nikon microscope with a PCM 2000 confocal laser scanning system . For labeling at the electron microscopic level , rats were perfused with 4 % formaldehyde ( with or without 0 . 1 % glutaraldehyde ) in 0 . 12 M phos - phate buffer , pH 7 . 4 . Brain sections ( 60 (cid:1) m thick ) were cut on a Vi - bratome , cryoprotected with glycerol – dimethylsulfoxide mixtures , fro - zenandthawedfourtimes , treatedwith1 % sodiumborohyride , followed by 0 . 6 % H 2 O 2 – 10 % methanol , and labeled with espin antibody or pre - immune IgG . Bound antibody was visualized by the peroxidase – antiper - oxidase method ( Sternberger Immunochemicals , Lutherville , MD ) . Sec - tions were treated with 2 % OsO 4 and 1 % uranyl actetate , dehydrated , and flat - embedded in Epon . Ultrathin sections were counterstained with uranyl acetate and lead citrate and examined on a Zeiss ( Thornwood , NY ) EM10 electron microscope at 80 kV . Subcellular fractionation and Western blot analysis . PSDs were isolated from rat cerebellum by subcellular fractionation in the presence of 1 m M phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride , 1 (cid:1) g / ml antipain , and 1 (cid:1) g / ml leupeptin using the modified method of Carlin et al . ( 1980 ) followed by Dosemeci andReese ( 1993 ) . ProteinsweredetectedonWesternblotsusingtheECL method ( Amersham Biosciences , Arlington Heights , IL ) . In some exper - iments , a modified PSD fraction , prepared using only a single extraction with 0 . 5 % Triton X - 100 , was subjected to additional extraction ( Cho et al . , 1992 ) . PCR , DNA sequence analysis , mutagenesis , and cloning . The sequences of the PC espin isoforms were inferred by DNA sequence analysis of overlapping PCR products resulting from reverse transcription ( RT ) - PCR and 5 (cid:3) rapid amplification of cDNA ends ( RACE ) - PCR reactions conducted using RNA isolated from rat and mouse cerebellum and se - lected espin primers in conjunction with kits and reagents purchased from Invitrogen ( Carlsbad , CA ) . Full - length cDNAs for the rat PC espins and rat PC espin 1 deletion constructs missing the N - terminal ( 96 - SSLPPPPPPSFPPPPPPGTQLPPPPGTPAPNPPVGL - 132 for (cid:2) 1 ) or C - terminal proline - rich peptide ( 256 - PPPPPPPPLPEALSSPP - PAPPLPIEG - 281 for (cid:2) 2 ) were prepared by ligating selected restriction fragments . A near full - length cDNA encoding the short form of mouse IRSp53 ( GenBank accession number BC016411 ) was obtained in yeast two - hybrid screens ( see below ) . A cDNA encoding the 186 amino acid C - terminal peptide ( M367 - R552 ) of the long form ( tran - script variant 2 ) of human IRSp53 ( GenBank accession number NP _ 059345 ) was obtained from HeLa cell RNA by RT - PCR . Yeast two - hybrid screens . Screening was performed using the Clontech Matchmaker GAL4 System 2 ( BD Biosciences Clontech ) . A cDNA en - coding the N - terminal portion of rat PC espin 1 ( D13 - Q421 ) , which included the two proline - rich peptides , was fused in - frame to the GAL4 binding domain of the pAS2 - 1 vector and used as “bait” to screen Clon - tech Matchmaker pACT2 cDNA libraries from mouse brain and testis in Y190 yeast cells . His (cid:1) transformants were confirmed through a second round of growth on selection plates and a (cid:3) - galactosidase filter assay . Bacterial expression , purification , and characterization of recombinant proteins . PC espin isoforms were expressed in Escherichia coli BL - 21 Star ( DE3 ) with a short ( (cid:2) 1 . 5 kDa ) N - terminal 6 (cid:4) His tag using the ProEXHTa vector ( Invitrogen ) , affinity purified from soluble bacterial extracts under nondenaturing conditions on Ni - NTA agarose ( Qiagen , Valencia , CA ) , dialyzed against assay buffer , and clarified by ultracentrif - ugation before use ( Bartles et al . , 1998 ; Chen et al . , 1999 ) . Cosedimenta - tion F - actin - bundling assays were performed as described previously ( Bartles et al . , 1998 ; Chen et al . , 1999 ) . For pull - down assays , the 186 aminoacidC - terminalpeptideofhumanIRSp53 , whichincludesitsSH3 domain , was expressed as a glutathione S - transferase ( GST ) fusion pro - tein using the pGEX4T - 3 vector ( Amersham Biosciences ) . Recombinant rat PC espin proteins were incubated with glutathione - Sepharose 4B beads preloaded with GST - IRSp53 SH3 domain fusion protein or GST alone in 0 . 1 M KCl , 20 m M imidazole - HCl , 1 m M DTT , and 1 . 5 m M NaN 3 , pH 7 . 4 , for 1 hr at 4°C . After washing four times at 13 , 000 (cid:4) g for 30 sec , the bound proteins were released by heating in SDS and resolved in SDS gels . Cell transfection . Cells of the mouse Neuro - 2a neuroblastoma line ( American Type Culture Collection , Manassas , VA ) were cultured in DMEM containing 10 % fetal bovine serum and differentiated by cultur - ing in DMEM containing 2 % fetal bovine serum and 0 . 5 m M dibutyryl - cAMP ( Sigma , St . Louis , MO ) for 1 – 11 d ( Wu et al . , 1998 ) . Twenty - four hours before transfection , cells were trypsinized and replated on cover - slips coated with poly - L - lysine ( Sigma ) followed by laminin . Transient transfectionwithLipofectamine ( Invitrogen ) , fixation , immunolabeling , and examination by fluorescence microscopy were performed as de - scribed previously ( Chen et al . , 1999 ) using a Zeiss Axioplan 2 Imaging microscope system equipped with an Axiocam digital camera . The PC espins and the mouse IRSp53 construct were expressed using pEGFP - C vectors ( BD Biosciences Clontech ) and detected as green fluorescent protein ( GFP ) fusions . For cells examined 8 hr after transfection , the signal was boosted using GFP monoclonal antibody ( Roche , Indianapo - lis , IN ) , followed by Alexa488 - secondary antibody ( Molecular Probes ) . For cotransfections , untagged PC espins were expressed using the pcDNA3 vector ( Invitrogen ) . Multiple labeling for F - actin and DNA were performed with using Texas Red - phalloidin or 4 (cid:3) , 6 - diamidino - 2 - phenylindole ( Sigma ) , respectively . Results Localization of espin isoforms in cerebellum When frozen sections of rat or mouse brain were labeled with affinity - purified rabbit polyclonal espin antibodies , intense spe - cific immunostaining was observed in the cerebellar cortex ( Fig . 1 A , B ) but was absent in cerebral cortex , hippocampus , striatum , and brainstem . The dark diaminobenzidine ( DAB ) reaction product occupied the PC and molecular layers of the cerebellar cortex , whereas the granular layer and white matter were free of staining ( Fig . 1 A , B ) . When immunoperoxidase - labeled frozen Sekerkova´etal . • EspinsinPurkinjeCellDendriticSpines J . Neurosci . , February15 , 2003 • 23 ( 4 ) : 1310 – 1319 • 1311 sections of rat cerebellum were embedded in plastic and analyzed as 1 - (cid:1) m - thick sections , the DAB reaction product was detected as dark puncta , (cid:2) 1 (cid:1) m in diameter , distributed densely over the molecular layer and as a weaker diffuse staining in the cell bodies and stem dendrites of PCs but not in their axons ( Fig . 1 B , C ) . The density of puncta over the molecular layer was estimated to be (cid:2) 2 . 5 - to 3 - fold higher than over the cell bodies of PCs . No other celltypeswerelabeled , includingthegranuleandGolgicellsofthe granular layer and the stellate and basket cells of the molecular layer . Therefore , these results suggested that PCs were the only cerebellar cell type containing espins and that the PC espins were enriched in PC dendritic spines . A dense punctate staining of the molecular layer was also ob - served when espins were localized by confocal immunofluores - cence ( Fig . 2 B ) . Consistent with a localization to PC dendritic spines , the espin - positive puncta showed extensive overlap with F - actin - rich puncta as revealed by double labeling with fluores - cent phalloidin ( Fig . 2 A – C ) . Moreover , double labeling for espin and tubulin showed an enrichment of espin in tiny ( (cid:2) 1 (cid:1) m ) , gemmule - shaped projections studding the tubulin - positive shafts of PC spiny branchlets ( Fig . 2 D , E ) . The level of espin an - tibody staining appeared consistently intense in the heads of the spines . Espin localization at the electron microscopic level defini - tively confirmed immunostaining of PC dendritic spines ( Fig . 3 ) . Dendritic spines containing DAB reaction product were involved in synapses with either parallel fibers ( Fig . 3 B , C ) or climbing fibers ( Fig . 3 D ) . After fixation with 4 % formaldehyde and mod - erate permeabilization of the Vibratome sections by repeated freezing and thawing before immunolabeling , the majority of PC spines stained positively for espin ( Fig . 3 A ) . In these sections , the PSD , subsynaptic globules , and tubules of the endoplasmic retic - ulum in the head and neck were stained components of the spines ( Fig . 3 A , B ) . Little staining was detected in the dendritic shaft . Addition of even small amounts ( 0 . 1 % ) of glutaraldehyde to the fixative resulted in a sharp decline in immunostaining , causing it to appear more restricted to the PSD ( Fig . 3 C , D ) . The conspicu - ous labeling of the PSD was remarkable , although it is well known that the DAB reaction product can diffuse locally within the (cid:2) 1 - (cid:1) m - thick spine . Attempts to localize PC espins by postembed - ment immunogold labeling of ultrathin sections prepared using LR White ( Bartles et al . , 1998 ) or the freeze - substitution Lowicryl embedding method ( Landsend et al . , 1997 ; Roche et al . , 1999 ) were not successful , presumably attributable to epitope masking or inactivation . We were , however , able to obtain independent biochemical evidence in support of the localization of PC espins to the PSD using subcellular fractionation ( see below ) . Figure 1 . Immunoperoxidase localization of espins to the PC and molecular layers of the cerebellarcortexatthelightmicroscopiclevel . A , Inthisfrozensectionofratbrain , thedarkDAB reaction product is restricted to the cerebellar cortex . The cerebral cortex ( Cx ) , hippocampus ( Hip ) , cerebellarnuclei ( CN ) , andotherbrainregionsarenotstained . B , Thepatternofimmu - nostaininginfrozensectionsofmousecerebellumisidenticaltothatofratandisconfinedtothePClayerandmolecularlayer ( ml ) . The granule cell layer ( gcl ) , white matter ( wm ) , and cere - bellarnuclei ( CN ) arenotstained . C , DiffusestainingofPCbody ( PC ) andstemdendritesanda densepunctatestainingofthemolecularlayer ( ml ) areshowninthis1 - (cid:1) m - thicksectioncut fromanimmunoreactedfrozensectionofratcerebellumembeddedinEpon . Stellateandbas - ketcells ( arrows ) arenotstained . Figure2 ImmunofluorescencelocalizationofespinstoPCdendriticspinesbylaserconfocal microscopy . A – C , Frozensectionofratbrainlabeledwithespinantibody ( red ; B ) andfluorescent phalloidin ( green ; C ) showing molecular layer of the cerebellar cortex . Note the extensive overlap ( yellow ; A ) ofthepunctathatareespinpositive ( B ) andthepunctathatcontainF - actin ( C ) . D , E , Frozensectionofratbrainlabeledwithespinantibody ( green ) andtubulinantibody ( red ) . D , ThisfieldofPCdendritesinthesuperficialhalfofthemolecularlayerincludesseveral spiny branchlets ( red ) covered with espin - positive spines ( green ) . A tubulin - positive stellate cell body ( Sc ) with an emerging dendrite is also evident . E , To highlight the relationship be - tween the espin - positive spines and tubulin - positive dendritic shaft , the segment of PC spiny branchlet demarcated by arrows in D is shown here ( rotated 90 o ) after digitally erasing the surroundingtissueinPhotoshop ( AdobeSystems , SanJose , CA ) . 1312 • J . Neurosci . , February15 , 2003 • 23 ( 4 ) : 1310 – 1319 Sekerkova´etal . • EspinsinPurkinjeCellDendriticSpines Molecular characterization of PC espin isoforms Western blot analysis using affinity - purified espin antibodies showedthepresenceofmultipleimmunoreactivepolypeptidesincerebellum . Intense specific labeling of a poorly resolved doublet at 60 – 65 kDa was observed in homogenate of rat cerebellum ( Fig . 4 A ) . A minor band at (cid:2) 53 kDa was also labeled specifically . The pattern of specific labeling for mouse cerebellar homogenate showed a major band at (cid:2) 68 kDa and a poorly resolved multiplet at 55 – 60 kDa ( Fig . 4 A ) . No specific labeling was detected in homogenate of cerebral cortex ( Fig . 4 A ) . The multiplicity of bands observed on Western blots appeared to be attributable to the presence of multiple espin isoforms in PCs . Sequence analysis of cDNAs obtained by RT - PCR and 5 (cid:3) RACE - PCR using espin primers revealed the presence of tran - scripts for four novel espin isoforms in RNA isolated from cere - bellum ( GenBank accession numbers AF540942 – AF540945 for mouse and AF540946 – AF540949 for rat ) . The stick - figure dia - gram in Figure 4 B summarizes the structural relationships be - Figure 4 Western blot detection and sequences of multiple PC espin isoforms . A , Western blot detection of multiple espin isoforms in mouse and rat cerebellum and comigration with proteinsexpressedbycDNAsencodingthefourratPCespinisoforms . Westernblotcontaining mouse ( M ) andrat ( R ) cerebellarhomogenate ( Cerebellum ) labeledwithespinantibody ( Ab ) showsmultiplebandsinthe53 – 68kDarange . Thesebandsarenotdetectedinhomogenateof ratcerebralcortex ( Cortex ) orwhenblotsofcerebellarhomogenatearelabeledwithpreimmune IgG ( PI ) . cDNAsencodingthefourratPCespinisoforms ( 1 (cid:1) , 1 , 2 , or 2 (cid:1) ) elicittheexpression of proteins with similar electrophoretic mobilities in mouse Neuro - 2a neuroblastoma cells ( Neuro - 2a ; Western blot of transfected cells ) or in bacteria [ E . coli ; Coomassie blue ( Coom . Blue ) - stainedgelofaffinity - purifiedproteinsbearingshortN - terminal6 (cid:4) Histag ] . Theposi - tionsofmolecularmassmarkersareshownatthe right inkilodaltons . B , Exonmapsrevealing thenoveltranscriptionstartsiteanddifferentialsplicingofthefourPCespinisoforms . The top is amapofan (cid:2) 18kbsegmentofthemouseespingeneshowingtherelativesizesandpositions oftheknownexons ( m – z ) . Exonsw – z encodetheC - terminalactin - bundlingmodule ( ABM ) , a peptidenecessaryandsufficientforactin - bundlingactivity invitro thatissharedamongknown espin isoforms . Exon o encodes the N - terminal proline - rich peptide ( PR1 ) and the additional F - actin - bindingsite ( xAB ) . Exonr encodestheC - terminalproline - richpeptide ( PR2 ) . The bottom showshowtheexonsarejoinedtomakethedesignatedPCespinisoform ( 1 , 1 (cid:1) , 2 , or 2 (cid:1) ) . The noveltranscriptionstartsiteofthePCespinsisencodedby exonm . Differentialsplicingof exons q ( asterisks ) and s ( plussigns ) accountforatotaloffoursequencepermutations . Exonsp , t , and v arenotincludedinanyPCespinisoform . Exonp ispresentinmouseSertolicellespin . Exonst and v arespecifictomousesmallespin . Onlypartofthe3 (cid:3) - UTR ( filledbox encodedby exonz ) is shown . Figure3 ImmunoperoxidaselocalizationofespinstoPCdendriticspinesbyelectronmicros - copy . Ratbrainswerefixedwitheither4 % formaldehyde ( A , B ) or4 % formaldehydeand0 . 1 % glutaraldehyde ( C , D ) . A , Arrows designate multiple examples of espin - positive PC spines . B , Two espin - positive PC spines in synaptic contact with a single axonal ending are shown at higher magnification . Espin antibody staining is detected in association with the PSD ( arrow - heads ) , insubsynapticglobulessituatedbeneaththePSD , andaroundelementsofendoplasmic reticuluminthecytoplasmofthespinehead . An arrow pointstotheneckregionofthelower spine . C , APCspinybranchlet ( PCd ) emitsespin - positivespines ( arrowheads ) insynapticcontact with parallel fiber varicosities ( pf ) . Arrows point to the neck region of two spines . Asterisks , Processes of astrocytic Bergmann glia . SCd , Stellate cell dendrite . D , An espin - positive spine arisingfromaprimaryPCdendrite ( PCd ) formsasynapticcontactwithaclimbingfibervaricosity ( cf ) . The arrowhead indicatesthedenselystainedPSD , andthe arrow indicatesthespineneck . Asterisks , ProcessesofastrocyticBergmannglia . BCa , Basketcellaxonterminalcontainingple - omorphicsynapticvesicles . Sekerkova´etal . • EspinsinPurkinjeCellDendriticSpines J . Neurosci . , February15 , 2003 • 23 ( 4 ) : 1310 – 1319 • 1313 tween these four espin isoforms , which we designated PC espins 1 , 1 (cid:1) , 2 , and 2 (cid:1) . It also includes an updated map of the mouse espin gene showing the relative positions and sizes of known exons . Mouse and rat counterparts were 92 – 93 % identical at the amino acid sequence level . The C - terminal peptides of all four PC espins ( encoded by exons w – z ) were identical to those of the other espin isoforms characterized to date ( Chen et al . , 1999 ) , but their N termini were different . Overall , their N termini more closely resembled that of the (cid:2) 110 kDa Sertoli cell espin isoform ( Bartles et al . , 1996 ) than the (cid:2) 30 kDa small espin isoform of enterocytes and renal proximal tubular epithelial cells ( Bartles et al . , 1998 ) . For example , all four PC espin isoforms contained the two proline - rich peptides ( exons o and r ) and the additional F - actin - binding peptide ( exon o ) just downstream of the N - terminal proline - rich peptide . However , in place of the ankyrin - like repeats found at the N terminus of Sertoli cell espin ( Bartles et al . , 1996 ) , the PC espins contained a unique 3 amino acid peptide ( initiator methionine plus two additional amino acids ) encoded , along with the 5 (cid:3) - untranslated region ( UTR ) , by exon m . In addition , the PC espins were missing the short peptide encoded by exon p . Two of the isoforms , PC espin 2 and 2 (cid:1) , were missing the peptide between the two proline - rich peptides en - coded by exon q ( Fig . 4B , asterisks ) , thereby bringing the two proline - rich peptides closer together in primary sequence . Fi - nally , two of the isoforms , one with and one without the peptide encoded by exon q , contained an additional 9 amino acid peptide rich in positively charged amino acids ( KVRVLRHRK in mouse and KVRILRHRK in rat ) encoded by small exon s ( Fig . 4 B , plus signs ) and hence were designated PC espins 1 (cid:1) and 2 (cid:1) , respectively . To clarify the relationship between cDNA sequence and ap - parent molecular mass , rat versions of all four PC espin isoforms were expressed in untagged form in transiently transfected cells ofthemouseNeuro - 2aneuroblastomalineandalsoin E . coli with a short ( (cid:2) 1 . 5 kDa ) N - terminal 6 (cid:4) His tag ( Fig . 4 A ) . Regardless of expression system , the rat PC espin proteins migrated in SDS gels in the same general region in which the immunoreactive bands were detected on Western blots of cerebellum ( Fig . 4 A ) . The minor bands detected at lower positions on the Western blot of the transfected Neuro - 2a cells represent proteolytic break - down products . Ignoring the effects of posttranslational modifi - cation , these comparisons suggested that the (cid:2) 60 kDa PC espin 1 and , to a lesser extent , the (cid:2) 65 kDa PC espin 1 (cid:1) were the two major espin isoforms present in rat cerebellum . Only small amountsofproteinscomigratingwiththeexpressedratPCespins2or2 (cid:1) were detected on the Western blots of rat cerebellum . A different outcome was obtained for the mouse , whose PC espin isoforms are predicted to be (cid:2) 2 kDa larger than their rat coun - terpartsattributabletominordifferencesinaminoacidsequence . More than one - half of the label detected on the Western blots of mouse cerebellum migrated at the lower molecular mass ( 55 – 60 kDa ) expected for mouse PC espins 2 and 2 (cid:1) . In agreement with this trend toward increased expression of PC espin 2 and 2 (cid:1) proteins in the mouse , RT - PCR analysis of cerebellar RNA showed a greater relative abundance of transcripts encoding PC espins 2 and 2 (cid:1) in mouse than in rat ( data not shown ) . Actin binding and bundling by PC espins in vitro Consistent with the presence of the C - terminal peptide shared among known espin isoforms and the additional F - actin - binding site encoded by exon o ( Chen et al . , 1999 ) , all four PC espin isoforms efficiently bound and bundled preformed actin fila - ments in vitro under physiological buffer conditions . These re - sults are illustrated in Figure 5 A using a standard cosedimenta - tion actin - bundling assay . When preformed actin filaments were incubated in the absence of espins and then centrifuged at me - dium speed , (cid:5) 95 % of the preformed actin filaments remained in the supernatant . In contrast , when even very low amounts of the PCespinisoformsweremixedwiththepreformedactinfilaments ( in this case , only (cid:2) 1 espin for every 15 – 20 actin monomers ) , most of the actin filaments were recovered in the pellet . This shift of F - actin from the supernatant to the pellet in this assay is indic - ative of actin bundle formation ( Bartles et al . , 1998 ; Chen et al . , 1999 ) . From this assay , it was also apparent that all four PC espin isoforms bound efficiently to actin filaments . In the presence of F - actin , the PC espins were quantitatively recovered in the pellet , but , in the absence of F - actin , they remained soluble and were not detected in the pellet ( Fig . 5 A ) . Actin bundle formation was also noted in these mixtures by increases in solution turbidity and by negative staining electron microscopy ( data not shown ) , which confirmed the presence of copious actin bundles resembling the partially ordered parallel actin bundles elicited by other espin Figure5 EfficientactinbindingandbundlingbyallfourPCespinisoformsandinsensitivity to Ca 2 (cid:1) . A , When incubated with preformed actin filaments at ratios of 1 espin for every 15 – 20actinmonomers , eachratPCespinisoform ( 1 (cid:1) , 1 , 2 , or 2 (cid:1) ) shiftsthemajorityofthe actin ( (cid:5) ) fromthesupernatant ( S ) tothepellet ( P ) , whichisindicativeofefficientactinbundle formationinthiscosedimentationassay . TherecoveryofPCespins ( bracket ) inthepelletinthe presence of actin filaments ( (cid:1) F - Actin ) , but not in their absence ( right panel ) , is indicative of high - affinitybindingtoF - actin . B , NodifferencesareobservedintheabilityofratPCespin1 ( 1 and bracket ) toshifttheF - actin ( (cid:5) ) fromthesupernatant ( S ) tothepellet ( P ) ortoberecov - eredwithF - actininthepelletwhenthecosedimentationassayisconductedinthepresenceof 1m M EGTAtochelateCa 2 (cid:1) ( EGTA ) orinthepresenceof20 (cid:1) M CaCl 2 ( Ca 2 (cid:1) ) . 1314 • J . Neurosci . , February15 , 2003 • 23 ( 4 ) : 1310 – 1319 Sekerkova´etal . • EspinsinPurkinjeCellDendriticSpines isoforms ( Bartles et al . , 1998 ; Chen et al . , 1999 ) . Unlike other proteins with actin - bundling activity , such as villin and fimbrin ( Glenney et al . , 1981 ; Alicea and Mooseker , 1988 ; Namba et al . , 1992 ; Lin et al . , 1994 ) , the espins appear not to be inhibited by Ca 2 (cid:1) . This result is illustrated in Figure 5 B for rat PC espin 1 , which shows no difference in the ability to bind and bundle F - actin in cosedimentation assays conducted in the presence of EGTA ( to chelate any trace Ca 2 (cid:1) that might be present in the buffer ) or 20 (cid:1) M CaCl 2 . Similar results were obtained with using allfourPCespinisoformsandforCaCl 2 concentrationsashighas 100 (cid:1) M ( data not shown ) . PC espins in transiently transfected neuronal cell lines To examine the localization and effects of the PC espins in vivo , we expressed GFP - tagged versions of the four rat PC espin iso - forms by transient transfection in cells of the mouse Neuro - 2a neuroblastoma line . We did not detect endogenous espins in these cells using espin antibody . The results were similar for the four rat PC isoforms , so only examples of rat PC espin 1 are shown in Figure 6 A – F . When examined at times after transfec - tion ranging from 8 to 48 hr , the GFP - PC espins were colocalized with F - actin . At early times after transfection ( 8 hr ) , when levels of the GFP - PC espins were still relatively low , the GFP - PC espins were localized to spiky , F - actin - rich pro - jections ( filopodia ) and arcs beneath some concave cell margins ( Fig . 6 A , B ) . As the time after transfection and level of GFP - PC espin increased , the GFP - PC es - pins and F - actin remained colocalized , but the labeling of filopodia decreased as espin - rich coarse cytoplasmic F - actin bundles became the dominant labeled structure ( Fig . 6 C , D ) . These coarse cyto - plasmic F - actin bundles were not detected in untransfected control cells ( data not shown ) . A similar effect was noted previ - ously during expression of other espin isoforms in cells of the NRK and BHK fi - broblastic lines ( Bartles et al . , 1996 , 1998 ; Chen et al . , 1999 ) but was more evident in the Neuro - 2a cells because they contain fewer actin stress fibers than NRK or BHK cells . In cells displaying a neuronal mor - phology , the coarse cytoplasmic espin / F - actin bundles were frequently present in large neurites ( Fig . 6 E , F ) . None of these results depended on the presence of the GFP tag , because identical results were obtained when the PC espin isoforms were expressed in untagged form using the pcDNA3 vector and detected with es - pin antibody ( data not shown ) . PC espins in the cerebellar PSD fraction To obtain independent biochemical veri - fication for the presence of espins in PC PSDs , PSDs were isolated from rat cere - bellar homogenate by centrifugation in discontinuous sucrose density gradients using standard procedures . When West - ern blots containing 1 (cid:1) g of protein from cerebellar homogenate , synaptosomes , and PSD fraction were labeled with espin antibody , a dramatic enrichment of PC espins was observed in the PSD fraction ( Fig . 7 A ) . The extent of enrichment observed for the PC espins was similar to that noted for a known protein of the PC PSD ( Brenman et al . , 1996 ) , the membrane - associated guan - ylate kinase PSD - 93 / chapsyn - 110 ( Fig . 7 A ) . The weak band po - sitioned immediately beneath the espin band in the synaptosome lane was attributable to nonspecific binding and was not evident on the Western blot containing 30 (cid:1) g of protein ( Fig . 7 A ) . We next checked to see whether PC espins fractionated like “core” proteins of the PSD , as defined operationally by resistance to extraction with 3 % n - laurylsarcosine ( Cho et al . , 1992 ) . PSDs isolated from rat cerebellum by a single extraction with 0 . 5 % TritonX - 100weresubjectedtoasecondextractionstepinvolving buffer alone , 0 . 5 % Triton X - 100 , or 3 % n - laurylsarcosine . The PC espins remained associated with the PSD fraction after a sec - ond extraction in Triton X - 100 ( Fig . 7 B ) , suggesting that they were tightly associated with the PSD . However , they were mostly solubilized by 3 % n - laurylsarcosine ( Fig . 7 B ) , suggesting that they do not represent core proteins of the PSD . In contrast , PSD - 93 / chapsyn - 110 better resisted extraction with 3 % n - laurylsarco - sine ( Fig . 7 B ) . The 3 % n - laurylsarcosine also extracted the majority of the actin from the PSD fraction ( Fig . 7 B ) . Figure 6 . Colocalization of PC espins , F - actin , and IRSp53 in transfected mouse Neuro - 2a neuroblastoma cells . Cell nuclei labeledwith4 (cid:3) , 6 - diamidino - 2 - phenylindoleareshownin blue . A – F , CellstransfectedwithGFPPC - espin1 ( green ) andlabeledfor actin filaments with Texas Red - phalloidin ( red ) . At early times after transfection ( 8 h ; A , B ) , the GFP - PC espin and F - actin are colocalizedinfilopodiaandarcsbeneathsomeconcavemargins . ThegreenfluorescentsignalofthesecellswasboostedwithGFP antibody and Alexa488 - labeled secondary antibody . Scale bar ( in A ) , 25 (cid:1) m . At later times after transfection ( 12 h ; C , D ) , the GFP - PCespinandF - actinremaincolocalized , butlabelinginfilopodiaprogressivelydiminishesascoarsecytoplasmicespin / F - actin bundlesbecomethedominantlabeledstructure ( seealso G ) . Incellsdisplayingadifferentiatedneuronalmorphology ( 24h ; E , F ) , the coarse cytoplasmic espin / F - actin bundles are frequently present in large - diameter neurites . G – N , Cells cotransfected with GFP - IRSp53 ( green ) and full - length or mutated PC espin 1 and labeled for F - actin with Texas Red - phalloidin ( red ) . G – J , Cells expressingGFP - IRSp53inconjunctionwitheitherratPCespin1 ( 1 ; G , H ) orratPCespin1missingitsC - terminalproline - richpeptide ( (cid:2) 2 ; I , J ) show extensive colocalization of GFP - IRSp53 to the coarse cytoplasmic espin / F - actin bundles elicited by the PC espin . Scale bar ( in G ) , 20 (cid:1) m . K , L , Cells expressing GFP - IRSp53 in conjunction with rat PC espin 1 missing its N - terminal proline - rich peptide ( (cid:2) 1 ) still contain coarse cytoplasmic espin / F - actin bundles ( K ) , but the GFP - IRSp53 does not colocalize to the bundles . Instead , itaccumulatesatlowerlevelsinadenseperinuclearaggregate ( L ) . M , N , CellsexpressingGFP - IRSp53withoutPCespindo not contain coarse cytoplasmic actin bundles ( M ) and also show relatively low levels of GFP - IRSp53 accumulation in a dense perinuclearaggregate ( N ) . Sekerkova´etal . • EspinsinPurkinjeCellDendriticSpines J . Neurosci . , February15 , 2003 • 23 ( 4 ) : 1310 – 1319 • 1315 Interaction between the PC espins and IRSp53 We obtained evidence for a direct binding interaction between PC espins and IRSp53 , an SH3 adapter and known regulator of the actin cytoskeleton ( Krugmann et al . , 2001 ; Miki and Tak - enawa , 2002 ) that has been localized previously to PC PSDs ( Ab - bottetal . , 1999 ) . TheN - terminalportionofPCespin1 , including its two proline - rich peptides , was used as bait in a yeast two - hybrid screen to identify candidate espin - binding proteins in commercial mouse brain and testis cDNA libraries . Of the 35 positive clones obtained in two independent screens , seven were overlapping clones of the short form of mouse IRSp53 ( GenBank accession number BC016411 ) . The inserts ranged in size from 1 . 8 to 2 . 5 kb . All encoded the C - terminal half of IRSp53 , which con - tained its SH3 domain ( Yeh et al . , 1998 ; Krugmann et al . , 2001 ; Miki and Takenawa , 2002 ) and included the 3 (cid:3) - UTR . The longest clone was nearly full length , starting at A49 . To confirm this binding interaction in mammalian cells , we expressed this long - est IRSp53 construct as a GFP fusion in the presence of untagged versions of the rat PC espins in transiently cotransfected mouse Neuro - 2a neuroblastoma cells . Regardless of PC espin isoform , the GFP - IRSp53 colocalized with the espin - rich coarse cytoplas - mic F - actin bundles shown previously ( Fig . 6 C , D ) to be elicted by expression of the PC espins . This result is illustrated for rat PC espin 1 in Figure 6 , G and H . This interaction required the N - terminal proline - rich peptide of the PC espins . Deletion of either proline - rich peptide from the PC espins had no effect on the ability to elicit the formation of coarse cytoplasmic F - actin bundles ( Fig . 6 , compare G , I , and K with control in M ) or to become colocalized with the F - actin bundles ( data not shown ) . When expressed in the presence of PC espins that were missing the C - terminal proline - rich peptide ( (cid:2) 2 ) , the GFP - IRSp53 main - tained its colocalization with the coarse cytoplasmic espin / F - actin bundles ( Fig . 6 I , J ) . In contrast , deletion of the N - terminal proline - rich peptide of the PC espins ( (cid:2) 1 ) eliminated the binding of GFP - IRSp53 to the espin / F - actin bundles . Instead , the GFP - IRSp53 showed lower levels of accumulation and localization to a dense aggregate , possibly an aggresome ( Kopito , 2000 ) , in the perinuclear region ( Fig . 6 K , L ) . This was the same pattern of lo - calization observed for the GFP - IRSp53 when it was expressed in the absence of the PC espins ( Fig . 6 M , N ) . These results suggested that the N - terminal proline - rich peptide of the PC espins bound IRSp53 , presumably through its SH3 domain . The direct nature of this interaction between the PC espins and the SH3 domain - containing C - terminal peptide of IRSp53 was confirmed in vitro using pull - down assays . When glutathione - Sepharose beads loaded with GST - IRSp53 SH3 do - main fusion protein or GST alone were incubated with the PC espin isoforms , relatively large amounts of the espins bound to the GST - IRSp53 beads but not to the GST control beads ( Fig . 7 C ) . All bead pellet samples contained minor amounts of a bac - Figure 7 . Enrichment of PC espins in cerebellar PSD fraction and binding to IRSp53 SH3 domain . A , Western blots containing 1 (cid:1) g of protein from rat cerebellar homogenate ( Hom ) , synaptosomes ( Syn ) , and PSD fraction ( PSD ) labeled with antibody to PSD - 93 / chapsyn - 110 ( PSD93 ) or espin ( Espin ) show a similar high enrichment in the PSD fraction . Note that the synaptosome lane labeled with espin antibody contains a weak , nonspecifically labeled band just below the PC espin . This band is not evident on the Western blot of homogenate and synaptosomes loaded with 30 (cid:1) g of protein ( Espin 30 X ) . B , Western blots of the high - speed pellet ( P ) and supernatant ( S ) resulting from the extraction of a rat cerebellar PSD fraction ( 1TritonX - 100treatment ) withHEPES - buffered0 . 32 M sucrose ( Control ) , 0 . 5 % TritonX - 100in 150 m M KCl ( 0 . 5 % TX ) , or 3 % n - laurylsarcosine ( 3 % nLS ) are labeled with antibody to PSD - 93 / chapsyn - 110 ( PSD93 ) , espin ( Espin ) , oractin ( Actin ) . Allthreeproteinsremainpredominantlyin thepelletduringextractionwiththe0 . 5 % TritonX - 100in150m M KCl , butthePCespinandthe actinareprimarilyextractedby3 % n - laurylsarcosine , suggestingthat , althoughtightlyassoci - atedwiththePSD , theydonotrepresent“core”components . C , D , Coomassieblue - stainedSDS gels showing binding to IRSp53 SH3 domain peptide . The positions of the PC espin proteins ( Espin ) , the GST - IRSp53 SH3 domain fusion protein ( GST - IRSp53 ) , and GST alone ( GST ) in the gels are designated by brackets at the left . C , Gel of washed bead pellets resulting from a pull - down assay showing that all four rat PC espin isoforms ( 1 (cid:1) , 1 , 2 , or 2 (cid:1) ) bind to glutathione - Sepharose beads loaded with GST - IRSp53 SH3 domain fusion protein 4 ( (cid:1) GST - IRSp53 ) but not to those loaded with an equivalent amount of GST alone ( (cid:1) GST ) . Right , Gelshowing15 % oftheamountoftheratPCespinisoformsaddedintheassay [ Added ( 15 % ) ] . D , Gel of washed bead pellets resulting from a pull - down assay showing that rat PC espin 1 ( 1 ) and rat PC espin 1 missing its C - terminal proline - rich peptide ( (cid:2) 2 ) bind to glutathione - Sepharose beads loaded with GST - IRSp53 SH3 domain fusion protein ( (cid:1) GST - IRSp53 ) butnottothoseloadedwithGSTalone ( (cid:1) GST ) . Incontrast , ratPCespin1missingits N - terminal proline - rich peptide ( (cid:2) 1 ) does not bind to the beads loaded with GST - IRSp53 SH3 domain fusion protein . Right , Gel showing 20 % of the amount of the PC espin 1 constructs addedintheassay [ Added ( 20 % ) ] . Notethat , inboth C and D , thewashedbeadpelletscontain small amounts of a bacterial protein that comigrates with rat PC espins 1 and 1 (cid:1) and is contributedbytheloadedbeadsandnotthePCespinconstructs . 1316 • J . Neurosci . , February15 , 2003 • 23 ( 4 ) : 1310 – 1319 Sekerkova´etal . • EspinsinPurkinjeCellDendriticSpines terial protein that comigrated with PC espins 1 and 1 (cid:1) and was contributed by the beads loaded with GST or GST - IRSp53 SH3 domain not the PC espins . Additional pull - down assays compar - ing equivalent amounts of PC espin 1 and PC espin 1 missing either its N - terminal or C - terminal proline - rich peptide con - firmed the involvement of the N - terminal proline - rich peptide . PC espin 1 and PC espin 1 missing its C - terminal proline - rich peptide ( (cid:2) 2 ) boundtothebeadsathighlevels ( Fig . 7 D ) . However , deletionoftheN - terminalproline - richpeptideofPCespin1 ( (cid:2) 1 ) decreased the level of binding to the low background levels noted for beads loaded with GST alone ( Fig . 7 B ) . Discussion We localized espins to PCs in the cerebellar cortex of mouse and rat and identified four novel espin isoforms in these neurons . These espins are enriched in PC dendritic spines and are not detected in other spiny neurons of the CNS . The PC espins ex - hibit the properties of modular actin - bundling proteins that could efficiently cross - link the actin cytoskeleton in PC dendritic spines and / or mediate its connection to the PSD by binding SH3 adapter proteins . The PC espins show no obvious relationship to other modular actin - binding proteins , such as spinophilin / neurabin - II , synaptopodin , or (cid:4) - actinin - 2 , that are present in the dendritic spines of other brain regions but are either absent or expressed at low levels in PCs ( Allen et al . , 1997 ; Mundel et al . , 1997 ; Satoh et al . , 1998 ; Wyszynski et al . , 1998 ; Deller et al . , 2000 ) . Previously , espins have been detected only in epithelial cells ( Bartles et al . , 1996 , 1998 ; Zheng et al . , 2000 ) . Thus , this first report of espins in neurons indicates that the espin family of actin - binding – bundling proteins has a wider cell - type distribu - tion than originally appreciated . Although novel in sequence , the PC espin isoforms fit the established pattern for espin isoform structure ( Bartles , 2000 ) : they contain the C - terminal peptide shared by all known isoforms , but they differ from other espin isoforms in the N - terminal peptides that are connected to the shared C - terminal peptide . A PC - specific site for transcriptional initiation specifies espin isoforms that resemble superficially a truncated version of the (cid:2) 110 kDa Sertoli cell espin missing its N - terminal ankyrin repeats ( Bartles et al . , 1996 ) . However , the situation is further complicated by differential splicing , which , through the differential use of exons q and s , accounts for a total of four sequence permutations . The significance of these differ - ences in splicing with regard to isoform localization or function remains to be established . All four PC espin isoforms contain the espin C - terminal pep - tide , which is believed to include at least two F - actin - binding sites and is both necessary and sufficient for espin - mediated actin - bundling activity in vitro ( Bartles et al . , 1998 ) . All four PC espin isoforms also contain a third F - actin - binding site , the additional F - actin - binding site encoded by exon o ( Chen et al . , 1999 ) . Ac - cordingly , all four PC espins appear as efficient as Sertoli cell espin constructs at binding and bundling actin filaments in vitro ( Chen et al . , 1999 ) . In view of the high activity they demonstrate in actin - bundling assays and their structural similarity to the (cid:6) N338 truncated version of Sertoli cell espin characterized pre - viously in quantitative binding assays ( Chen et al . , 1999 ) , it is likely that PC espins also bind F - actin with K d values in the 50 – 100 n M range . This affinity is one to two orders of magnitude greater than that observed for many other actin - binding and actin - cross - linking proteins ( Bartles , 2000 ) . These observations lead naturally to the hypothesis that the PC espins function in part to cross - link actin filaments in PC spines in situ . Light and electron microscopic immunocytochemistry dem - onstrates that the PC espins are enriched in dendritic spines , although they are distributed to some extent throughout the so - matodendritic compartment of the PC . Compared with the par - allel actin bundles in which other espin isoforms have been local - ized ( Bartles , 2000 ; Zheng et al . , 2000 ) , the actin filaments of dendritic spines appear sparse , less organized , and more dynamic ( Landis and Reese , 1983 ; Hirokawa , 1989 ; Fischer et al . , 1998 , 2000 ; Matus , 2000 ; Colicos et al . , 2001 ; Star et al . , 2002 ) . Never - theless , the PC espins could still perform an actin cross - linking function and , thereby , stabilize the actin cytoskeleton of PC den - dritic spines . This could help explain why PC cell spines appear relatively similar in size and shape ( Strata et al . , 2000 ) and uni - formly rich in F - actin ( Capani et al . , 2001 ) . A stabilizing effect on the actin cytoskeleton might also help explain what appears to be a unique attribute of PC spines : the ability to grow and / or to be retained in the absence of afferents ( Hirano et al . , 1977 ; Taka´cs et al . , 1997 ; Bravin et al . , 1999 ) . When expressed in transfected cells , the PC espins consis - tently elicit the formation of coarse cytoplasmic F - actin bundles and appear to increase the levels of F - actin . These effects were noted previously in transfected fibroblastic cells expressing es - pins ( Bartles et al . , 1996 , 1998 ; Chen et al . , 1999 ) . It is unclear whether the increase in the level of F - actin reflects an upregula - tion of actin synthesis in response to the creation of an espin cross - linked actin bundle “sink” for actin monomer ( Lyubimova et al . , 1999 ) or whether espins might also somehow stimulate actin polymerization . One characteristic property of the espins is that their actin - bundling activity is not inhibited by Ca 2 (cid:1) . To account for the degeneration of the parallel actin bundles in the hair cell stereo - cilia of espin - deficient homozygous jerker mice , we postulated that espin cross - links stabilize the actin bundles against the tran - sient local increases in Ca 2 (cid:1) that accompany mechanoelectrical signal transduction in hair cell stereocilia ( Zheng et al . , 2000 ) . Dendritic spines are known to experience transient local in - creases in Ca 2 (cid:1) concentration during synaptic transmission ( Holthoff et al . , 2002 ; Nimchinsky et al . , 2002 ; Segal , 2002 ) . De - pending on assay system and conditions , increases in Ca 2 (cid:1) con - centration have been reported to reduce spine motility ( Fischer et al . , 2000 ) , decrease the fraction of dynamic spine actin ( Star et al . , 2002 ) , and , at higher concentrations , elicit the selective loss of F - actin from spines ( Halpain et al . , 1998 ) . PC dendritic spines experience large activity - dependent increases in the concentra - tion of Ca 2 (cid:1) through voltage - dependent entry and inositol - 1 , 4 , 5 - trisphosphate - mediated release from intracellular stores ( Finch and Augustine , 1998 ; Wang et al . , 2000 ; Okubo et al . , 2001 ) . In fact , these increases in Ca 2 (cid:1) concentration are corre - lated with cerebellar long - term depression and motor learning ( Wang et al . , 2000 ; Hansel et al . , 2001 ) . Thus , it is possible that espins may also help protect the actin cytoskeleton of PC spines from the excitotoxic effects associated with these large increases in Ca 2 (cid:1) concentration . We are currently examining the structure and function of PCs in jerker mice to determine whether they show defects in morphology , electrophysiology , or dynamics . Our immunocytochemical evidence suggests a close associa - tion between the PC espins and the PSD and explains why PC espins are so highly enriched in cerebellar PSD fractions . It is unclear whether this association is mediated by direct binding between the PC espins and PSD - associated actin filaments ( Ma - tus et al . , 1982 ; Landis and Reese , 1983 ; Hirokawa , 1989 ) or whether the PC espins bind PSD proteins other than actin . Rep - resentatives of (cid:5) 70 families of proteins have been identified in dendritic spines and PSDs ( Husi et al . , 2000 ; Kennedy , 2000 ; Sekerkova´etal . • EspinsinPurkinjeCellDendriticSpines J . Neurosci . , February15 , 2003 • 23 ( 4 ) : 1310 – 1319 • 1317 Scannevin and Huganir , 2000 ; Zhang and Benson , 2000 ; Hering and Sheng , 2001 ) . Among these are proteins that interact with actin filaments indirectly as members of signaling cascades or multiprotein adapter complexes . It is possible that the PC espins bind such proteins via domains believed not to participate di - rectly in binding F - actin . Promising candidates include the two proline - rich peptides of the PC espins . We identified IRSp53 as an SH3 adapter protein that binds to the N - terminal proline - rich peptide of the PC espins in vivo and in vitro . This interaction may be physiologically relevant , because IRSp53 has been localized previously to PC PSDs . IRSp53 mRNA and protein are moder - ately abundant in rat cerebellum , and , among cerebellar cell types , high levels of transcript are detected only in PCs ( Abbott et al . , 1999 ; Thomas et al . , 2001 ) . Moreover , the IRSp53 protein has been shown to be highly enriched in rat cerebellar PSD fractions and , when localized by immunofluorescence , to be concentrated at synapses distributed densely throughout the molecular layer of the cerebellar cortex ( Abbott et al . , 1999 ) . IRSp53 has been iden - tified independently as a substrate for the insulin receptor ty - rosine kinase ( Yeh et al . , 1996 ) and as a protein ligand for brain angiogenesis inhibitor 1 ( Oda et al . , 1999 ) and for atrophin - 1 , the product of the dentatorubral – pallidoluysian atrophy gene ( Okamura - Oho et al . , 1999 ) . It is unclear how IRSp53 is tied to signaling by insulin or insulin - like growth factors in the brain , but recent discoveries suggest that IRSp53 can regulate the actin cytoskeleton . During binding Cdc42 to its partial Cdc42 - and Rac - interactive binding ( CRIB ) domain , IRSp53 avails its SH3 domain for binding the Ena / VASP ( vasodilator - stimulated phos - phoprotein ) family member Mena , and the two proteins appear to act synergistically to promote the formation of F - actin - rich filopodia or neurites ( Govind et al . , 2001 ; Krugmann et al . , 2001 ) . Conversely , WAVE2 , a nucleation - promoting factor for Arp2 / 3 - mediated actin polymerization , can bind the SH3 domain of IRSp53 and thereby enhance the binding of Rac to its CRIB do - main ( Miki and Takenawa , 2002 ) . Rac is known to regulate the numbers and sizes of PC dendritic spines ( Luo et al . , 1996 ; Na - kayama et al . , 2000 ; Tashiro et al . , 2000 ) . Thus , in addition to affecting the organization and dynamics of PC dendritic spines directly , the PC espins may influence these parameters indirectly through their participation in a multiprotein scaffold that con - tains IRSp53 or other SH3 adapter proteins . The existence of an alternate multiprotein scaffold in the PC PSD may explain why PSD - 93 knock - out mice fail to show structural or functional ab - normalities ( McGee et al . , 2001 ) . References Abbott M - A , Wells DG , Fallon JR ( 1999 ) The insulin receptor tyrosine ki - nase substrate p58 / 53 and the insulin receptor are components of CNS synapses . J Neurosci 19 : 7300 – 7308 . Alicea HA , Mooseker MS ( 1988 ) Characterization of villin from the intesti - nalbrushborderoftherat , andcomparativeanalysiswithavianvillin . Cell Motil Cytoskel 9 : 60 – 72 . Allen PB , Ouimet CC , Greengard P ( 1997 ) Spinophilin , a novel protein phosphatase 1 binding protein localized to dendritic spines . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 94 : 9956 – 9961 . Araki K , Meguro H , Kushiya E , Takayama C , Inoue Y , Mishina M ( 1993 ) Selective expression of the glutamate receptor channel (cid:2) 2 subunit in cer - ebellar Purkinje cells . Biochem Biophys Res Commun 197 : 1267 – 1276 . Bartles JR ( 2000 ) Parallel actin bundles and their multiple actin - bundling proteins . Curr Opin Cell Biol 12 : 72 – 78 . Bartles JR , Wierda A , Zheng L ( 1996 ) Identification and characterization of espin , an actin - binding protein localized to the F - actin - rich junctional plaques of Sertoli cell ectoplasmic specializations . J Cell Sci 109 : 1229 – 1239 . Bartles JR , Zheng L , Li A , Wierda A , Chen B ( 1998 ) Small espin : a third actin - bundling protein and potential forked protein ortholog in brush border microvilli . J Cell Biol 143 : 107 – 119 . Bravin M , Morando L , Vecelli A , Rossi F , Strata P ( 1999 ) Control of spine formationbyelectricalactivityintheadultratcerebellum . ProcNatlAcad Sci USA 96 : 1704 – 1709 . Brenman JE , Christopherson KS , Craven SE , McGee AW , Bredt DS ( 1996 ) Cloning and characterization of postsynaptic density 93 , a nitric oxide synthase interacting protein . J Neurosci 16 : 7407 – 7415 . Capani F , Martone ME , Deerinck TJ , Ellisman MH ( 2001 ) Selective local - ization of high concentrations of F - actin in subpopulations of dendritic spines in the rat central nervous system : a three - dimensional electron microscopic study . J Comp Neurol 435 : 156 – 170 . Carlin RK , Grab DJ , Cohen RS , Siekevitz P ( 1980 ) Isolation and character - ization of postsynaptic densities from various brain regions : enrichment of different types of postsynaptic densities . J Cell Biol 86 : 831 – 843 . Chen B , Li A , Wang D , Wang M , Zheng L , Bartles JR ( 1999 ) Espin contains an additional actin - binding site in its N terminus and is a major actin - bundling protein of the Sertoli cell - spermatid ectoplasmic specialization junctional plaque . Mol Biol Cell 10 : 4327 – 4339 . ChoK - O , HuntCA , KennedyMB ( 1992 ) Theratbrainpostsynapticdensity fraction contains a homolog of the Drosophila discs - large tumor suppres - sor protein . Neuron 9 : 929 – 942 . Colicos MA , Collins BE , Sailor MJ , Goda Y ( 2001 ) Remodeling of synaptic actin induced by photoconductive stimulation . Cell 107 : 605 – 616 . De Camilli P , Chen H , Hyman J , Panepucci E , Bateman A , Brunger AT ( 2002 ) The ENTH domain . FEBS Lett 513 : 11 – 18 . Deller T , Merten T , Roth SU , Mundel P , Frotscher M ( 2000 ) Actin - associatedproteinsynaptopodinintherathippocampalformation : local - ization in the spine neck and close association with the spine apparatus of principal neurons . J Comp Neurol 418 : 164 – 181 . Dosemeci A , Reese T ( 1993 ) Inhibition of endogenous phosphatase in a postsynapticdensityfractionallowsextensivephosphorylationofthema - jor postsynaptic density protein . J Neurochem 61 : 550 – 555 . Dunaevsky A , Tashiro A , Majewska A , Mason C , Yuste R ( 1999 ) Develop - mental regulation of spine motility in the mammalian central nervous system . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 96 : 13438 – 13443 . Finch EA , Augustine GJ ( 1998 ) Local calcium signalling by inositol - 1 , 4 , 5 - trisphosphate in Purkinje cell dendrites . Nature 396 : 753 – 756 . Fischer M , Kaech S , Knutti D , Matus A ( 1998 ) Rapid actin - based plasticity in dendritic spines . Neuron 20 : 847 – 854 . Fischer M , Kaech S , Wagner U , Brinkhaus H , Matus A ( 2000 ) Glutamate receptors regulate actin - based plasticity in dendritic spines . Nat Neurosci 3 : 887 – 894 . Glenney Jr JR , Kaulfus P , Matsudaira P , Weber K ( 1981 ) F - actin binding and bundling properties of fimbrin , a major cytoskeletal protein of mi - crovillus core filaments . J Biol Chem 256 : 9283 – 9288 . Govind S , Kozma R , Monfries C , Lim L , Ahmed S ( 2001 ) Cdc42Hs facili - tates cytoskeletal reorganization and neurite outgrowth by localizing the 58 - kDa insulin receptor substrate to filamentous actin . J Cell Biol 152 : 579 – 594 . HalpainS , HipolitoA , SafferL ( 1998 ) RegulationofF - actinstabilityinden - dritic spines by glutamate receptors and calcineurin . J Neurosci 18 : 9835 – 9844 . Hansel C , Linden DJ , D’Angelo E ( 2001 ) Beyond parallel fiber LTD : the diversity of synaptic and non - synaptic plasticity in the cerebellum . Nat Neurosci 4 : 467 – 475 . Hering H , Sheng M ( 2001 ) Dendritic spines : structure , dynamics and regu - lation . Nat Rev Neurosci 2 : 880 – 888 . Hirano A , Dembitzer HM , Yoon CH ( 1977 ) Development of Purkinje cell somatic spines in the weaver mouse . Acta Neuropathol 40 : 85 – 90 . Hirokawa R ( 1989 ) The arrangement of actin filaments in the postsynaptic cytoplasm of the cerebellar cortex revealed by quick - freeze deep - etch electron microscopy . Neurosci Res 6 : 269 – 275 . Holthoff K , Tsay D , Yuste R ( 2002 ) Calcium dynamics of spines depend on their dendritic location . Neuron 33 : 425 – 437 . Houk JC , Mugnaini E ( 2002 ) Cerebellum . In : Fundamental neuroscience ( Squire LR , Bloom FE , McConnell SK , Roberts JL , Spitzer NC , Zigmond MJ , eds ) , pp 841 – 872 . San Diego : Academic . Husi H , Ward MA , Choudhary JS , Blackstock WP , Grant SG ( 2000 ) Pro - teomic analysis of NMDA receptor - adhesion protein signaling com - plexes . Nat Neurosci 3 : 661 – 669 . 1318 • J . Neurosci . , February15 , 2003 • 23 ( 4 ) : 1310 – 1319 Sekerkova´etal . • EspinsinPurkinjeCellDendriticSpines Kennedy MB ( 2000 ) Signal - processing machines at the postsynaptic den - sity . Science 290 : 750 – 754 . Kopito RR ( 2000 ) Aggresomes , inclusion bodies and protein aggregation . Trends Cell Biol 10 : 525 – 530 . Korkortian E , Segal M ( 2001 ) Regulation of dendritic spine motility in cul - tured hippocampal neurons . J Neurosci 21 : 6115 – 6124 . Krugmann S , Jordens I , Gevaert K , Driessens M , Vandekerchove J , Hall A ( 2001 ) Cdc42 induces filopodia by promoting the formation of an IRSp53 : Mena complex . Curr Biol 11 : 1645 – 1655 . Landis DM , Reese T ( 1983 ) Cytoplasmic organization in cerebellar den - dritic spines . J Cell Biol 97 : 1169 – 1178 . Landsend AS , Amiry - Moghaddam M , Maatsubara A , Bergersen L , Usami S , Wenthold RJ , Ottersen OP ( 1997 ) Differential localization of (cid:2) gluta - mate receptors in the rat cerebellum : coexpression with AMPA receptors in parallel fiber - spine synapses and absence from climbing fiber - spine synapses . J Neurosci 17 : 834 – 842 . Lin CS , Shen W , Chen ZP , Tu YH , Matsudaira P ( 1994 ) Identification and characterization of I - plastin , a human fimbrin isoform expressed in in - testine and kidney . Mol Cell Biol 14 : 2457 – 2467 . LuoL , HenschTK , AckermanL , BarbelS , JanLY , JanYN ( 1996 ) Differential effects of the Rac GTPase on Purkinje cell axons and dendritic trunks and spines . Nature 379 : 837 – 840 . Lyubimova A , Bershadsky AD , Ben - Ze’ev A ( 1999 ) Autoregulation of actin synthesis requires the 3 (cid:3) - UTR of actin mRNA and protects cells from actin overproduction . J Cell Biochem 76 : 1 – 12 . Matus A ( 2000 ) Actin - based plasticity in dendritic spines . Science 290 : 754 – 758 . MatusA , AckermannM , PehlingG , ByersHR , FujiwaraK ( 1982 ) Highactin concentrations in brain dendritic spines and postsynaptic densities . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 79 : 7590 – 7594 . McGee AW , Topinka JR , Hashimoto K , Petralia RS , Kakizawa S , Kauer F , Aguilera - Moreno A , Wenthold RJ , Kano M , Bredt DS ( 2001 ) PSD - 93 knock - out mice reveal that neuronal MAGUKs are not required for de - velopmentorfunctionofparallelfibersynapsesincerebellum . JNeurosci 21 : 3085 – 3091 . Miki H , Takenawa T ( 2002 ) WAVE2 serves a functional partner of IRSp53 by regulating its interaction with Rac . Biochem Biophys Res Commun 293 : 93 – 99 . Miyagi Y , Yamashita T , Masahiro F , Sonoda T , Okuno T , Yamada K , Wa - tanabe M , Nagashima Y , Aoki I , Okuda K , Mishina M , Kawamoto S ( 2002 ) Delphilin : a novel PDZ and formin homology domain - containing protein that synaptically colocalizes and interacts with gluta - mate receptor (cid:2) 2 subunit . J Neurosci 22 : 803 – 814 . Molinari M , Filippini V , Leggio MG ( 2002 ) Neuronal plasticity of interre - lated cerebellar and cortical networks . Neuroscience 111 : 863 – 870 . Mundel P , Heid HW , Mundel TM , Kruger M , Reiser J , Kreiz W ( 1997 ) Synaptopodin : an actin - associated protein in telecephalic dendrites and renal podocytes . J Cell Biol 139 : 193 – 204 . NakayamaAY , HarmsMB , LuoL ( 2000 ) SmallGTPasesRacandRhointhe maintenance of dendritic spines and branches in hippocampal pyramidal neurons . J Neurosci 20 : 5329 – 5338 . Namba Y , Ito M , Zu Y , Shigesada K , Maruyama K ( 1992 ) Human T - cell L - plastin bundles actin filaments in a calcium - dependent manner . J Bio - chem 112 : 503 – 507 . Nimchinsky EA , Sabatini BL , Svoboda K ( 2002 ) Structure and function of dendritic spines . Annu Rev Physiol 64 : 313 – 353 . Oda K , Shiratsuchi T , Nishimori H , Inazawa J , Yoshikawa , Taketani Y , Naka - mura Y , Tokino T ( 1999 ) Identification of BAIAP2 ( BAI - associated protein 2 ) , a novel human homologue of hamster IRSp53 , whose SH3 domain interacts with the cytoplasmic domain of BAI1 . Cytogenet Cell Genet 84 : 75 – 82 . Okamura - Oho Y , Miyashita T , Ohmi K , Yamada M ( 1999 ) Dentatorubral - pallidoluysian atrophy protein interacts through a proline - rich region near polyglutamine with the SH3 domain of an insulin receptor tyrosine kinase substrate . Hum Mol Genet 8 : 947 – 957 . Okubo Y , Kakizawa S , Hirose K , Iino M ( 2001 ) Visualization of IP 3 dynam - ics reveals a novel AMPA receptor - triggered IP 3 production pathway me - diated by voltage - dependent Ca 2 (cid:1) influx in Purkinje cells . Neuron 32 : 113 – 122 . Roche KW , Ly CD , Petralia RS , Wang Y - X , McGee AW , Bredt DS , Wenthold RJ ( 1999 ) Postsynapticdensity - 93interactswiththe (cid:2) 2glutamaterecep - tor subunit at parallel fiber synapses . J Neurosci 19 : 3926 – 3934 . Satoh A , Nakanishi H , Obaishi H , Wada M , Takahashi K , Satoh K , Hirao K , Nishioka H , Hata Y , Mizoguchi A , Takai Y ( 1998 ) Neurabin - II / spinophi - lin . An actin filament - binding protein with one PDZ domain localized at cadherin - based cell - cell adhesion sites . J Biol Chem 273 : 3470 – 3475 . Scannevin RH , Huganir RL ( 2000 ) Postsynaptic organization and regula - tion of excitatory synapses . Nat Rev Neurosci 1 : 133 – 141 . Segal M ( 2002 ) Changing views of Cajal’s neuron : the case of the dendritic spine . Prog Brain Res 136 : 101 – 107 . Sheng M ( 2001 ) Molecular organization of the postsynaptic specialization . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 98 : 7058 – 7061 . Star EN , Kwiatkowski DJ , Murthy VN ( 2002 ) Rapid turnover of actin in dendritic spines and its regulation by activity . Nat Neurosci 5 : 239 – 246 . Strata P , Morando L , Bravin M , Rossi F ( 2000 ) Dendritic spine density in Purkinje cells . Trends Neurosci 23 : 53 – 57 . Taka´cs J , Gombos G , Go¨rcs T , Becker T , de Barry J , Ha´mori J ( 1997 ) Distri - bution of metabotropic glutamate receptor type 1a in Purkinje cell den - dritic spines is independent of the presence of presynaptic parallel fibers . J Neurosci Res 50 : 433 – 442 . Tashiro A , Minden A , Yuste R ( 2000 ) Regulation of dendritic spine mor - phologybytheRhofamilyofsmallGTPases : antagonisticrolesofRacand Rho . Cereb Cortex 10 : 927 – 938 . ThomasEA , FoyePE , AlvarezCE , UsuiH , SutcliffeJG ( 2001 ) Insulinrecep - tor substrate protein p53 localization in rats suggests mechanism for spe - cific polyglutamine neurodegeneration . Neurosci Lett 309 : 145 – 148 . Wang SS - H , Denk W , Ha¨usser M ( 2000 ) Coincidence detection in single dendriticspinesmediatedbycalciumrelease . NatNeurosci3 : 1266 – 1273 . Wu G , Fang Y , Lu ZH , Ledeen RW ( 1998 ) Induction of axon - like and dendrite - like processes in neuroblastoma cells . J Neurocytol 27 : 1 – 14 . Wyszynski M , Kharazia V , Shanghvi R , Rao A , Beggs AH , Craig AM , Wein - berg R , Sheng M ( 1998 ) Differential regional expression and ultrastruc - tural localization of alpha - actinin - 2 , a putative NMDA receptor - anchoring protein , in rat brain . J Neurosci 18 : 1383 – 1392 . Yeh TC , Ogawa W , Danielsen AG , Roth RA ( 1996 ) Characterization and cloning of a 58 / 53 - kDa substrate of the insulin receptor tyrosine kinase . J Biol Chem 271 : 2921 – 2928 . Yeh TC , Li W , Keller G - A , Roth RA ( 1998 ) Disruption of a putative SH3 domain and the proline - rich motifs in the 53 - kDa substrate of the insulin receptorkinasedoesnotalteritssubcellularlocalizationofabilitytoserveasasubstrate . J Cell Biochem 68 : 139 – 150 . Zhang W , Benson DL ( 2000 ) Development and molecular organization of dendritic spines and their synapses . Hippocampus 10 : 512 – 526 . Zheng L , Sekerkova G , Vranich K , Tilney LG , Mugnaini E , Bartles JR ( 2000 ) The deaf jerker mouse has a mutation in the gene encoding the espin actin - bundling proteins of hair cell stereocilia and lacks espins . Cell 102 : 377 – 385 . Sekerkova´etal . • EspinsinPurkinjeCellDendriticSpines J . Neurosci . , February15 , 2003 • 23 ( 4 ) : 1310 – 1319 • 1319