ORIGINAL ARTICLE Building a BRIDGE between children and users : a socio - cultural approach to child – computer interaction Ole Sejer Iversen Æ Christina Brodersen Received : 3 July 2006 / Accepted : 4 March 2007 (cid:1) Springer - Verlag London Limited 2007 Abstract The ﬁeld of child – computer interaction has received growing attention as a result of the penetration of IT into children’s everyday lives . Consequently , the involvement of children in the design of children’s tech - nology has been widely discussed . So far , literature on children’s involvement in design has mainly treated design with children as a distinct design discipline regarding children as ‘‘cognitive incomplete’’ in comparison with adult users . With a point of departure in the framework of socio - cultural activity theory , this paper provides a new perspective on design with children , based on understand - ing children as participants in meaningful communities of practices . Thus , we argue that children could and should be involved in design on the same terms as adult users ; chil - dren are treated as experts in their everyday lives and we cannot design future IT for children without involving these experts . The paper introduces the BRIDGE method including a palette of design techniques as a practice - based method for designing with children based on this per - spective . Keywords Socio - cultural activity theory (cid:1) Design with children (cid:1) BRIDGE method (cid:1) Practice - based design 1 Introduction In the last decade , an increasing amount of attention has been paid to children as a special user group in system design , motivated by both the technological progress in non - professional and domestic settings as well as the alluring market potential in children’s technology [ e . g . McNeal ( 1999 ) ] . Today , it is widely accepted to involve children in the process of designing new technology for children . Kids are experts in the way they live and their everyday lives , and this expertise is a keystone when designing meaningful artefacts for children . However , when it comes to discussing how children should be in - volved in the design process , the answer is far from clear . Several research contributions discuss the role of chil - dren in the design process , e . g . as design partners ( Druin 1999a , b ) , informants ( Scaife et al . 1997 ; Scaife and Rogers 1999 ) or testers ( Gilutz and Nielsen 2002 ) . Common for much research in this ﬁeld is the grounding of methods and techniques on Piaget’s theory of children and learning , and building on an understanding that children are ‘‘cognitive incomplete’’ beings or ‘‘human becomings’’ ( Lee 2001 ) . In this context , we still see a need for discussing child – computer interaction ( CCI ) on a methodological level , speciﬁcally with respect to introducing an alternative view of children as ‘‘human beings’’ belonging to meaningful communities of practice and the consequences this has on how they may be involved in the design process . With this paper we introduce the BRIDGE method ; a practise - based approach to CCI based on the socio - theoretical framework , and present three examples of concrete techniques based on this method that involve children in design as legitimate stakeholders on the same terms as any other group of ( adult ) participants . We argue that design with children is not a distinct design discipline . Rather , designing with O . S . Iversen ( & ) Department of Information and Media Studies , University of Aarhus , Helsingforsgade 14 , 8200 A˚arhus , Denmark e - mail : oiversen @ imv . au . dk C . Brodersen Department of Computer Science , University of Aarhus , A˚bogade 34 , 8200 A˚arhus , Denmark e - mail : sorsha @ daimi . au . dk 123 Cogn Tech Work DOI 10 . 1007 / s10111 - 007 - 0064 - 1 children can beneﬁt from conventional participatory design ( PD ) as well as provide new insights to PD through the development of innovative design techniques . 1 . 1 A short note on terminology As different deﬁnitions of method and methodology exist , we will specify how we use these terms and how they relate to BRIDGE and the research ﬁeld in general . We employ Mathiassen’s ( 1981 ) account of a design method to frame the notion of a design method . Mathiassen ( 1981 ) makes a distinction between method , tool , and technique in his work on theories and methods for system development 1 . According to Mathiassen , a design method has a limited application area in relation to who participates in the process , to the type of organizational and technological changes , or how they are implemented , and to the number of people involved in the process . For example , the MUST method is applied in commercial settings as a resource for professional IT - Designers to conduct investigations into organizations ( Bødker et al . 2000 , 2004 ) , and the Cooper - ative Inquiry method is solely applied in design with children ( Druin 1999a , b ) . A method also includes a par - ticular perspective on phenomena ( e . g . on the user orga - nization and its need for new IT - artefacts ) and a coherent set of tools , techniques , and principles of organization . A technique informs of how a design intervention can be conducted . Techniques such as Future Workshop ( Kensing 1987 ) and Prompted Reﬂections ( Kensing 1998 ) are part of the MUST method , whereas Technological Immersion ( Boltman et al . 1998 ) and ‘‘Mixing Ideas’’ ( Guha et al . 2004 ) are techniques applied in Cooperative Inquiry . A design technique makes use of different tools , and is developed to support the different activities in the tech - niques . The principles of organization inform how user participation is conducted and how the resources in the design process will be used . Accordingly , we treat ‘‘methodology’’ as a body of methods which shares the same perspectives in design in spite of differences in application areas , tools , techniques , and principles of organization . PD is an example of a de - sign methodology embracing a variety of different methods such as Cooperative Design ( Greenbaum and Kyng 1991 ) , the MUST method ( Kensing 2003 ) , Cooperative Inquiry ( Druin 1999a ) and Contextual Inquiry ( Holzblatt and Jones 1993 ) . Thus , for the purpose of clarity , we have chosen to refer to Cooperative Inquiry as a method rather than a methodology even though this is contrary to the terminol - ogy used in Druin ( 1999a , b ) . 2 Child – computer interaction Today , child involvement , at some point in the design process , is accepted as an approach for gaining insight into the future use practice of children ( Westerlund et al . 2001 ; Rogers et al . 2004 ; Druin et al . 2003 ; Bruckman and Bandlow 2002 ) . As a result of the growing interest into design with and for children , the interaction design and children community emerged as an international confer - ence in 2002 on interaction design in relation to children . The conference organizers drew heavily on the experi - ences from the ACM SIGCHI . kids events ( e . g . Druin 1997 – 2003 ) . The conference attracted a lot of attention from a range of disciplines such as human – computer interaction ( HCI ) , Interaction Design , Educational studies , PD , Pedagogy , Developmental Psychology , and Computer Science with a shared focus on children as users ( and producers ) of technology . The research interest in designing with children is , to a high degree , driven by researchers with a background in PD , however these contributions all include a dissociation with conventional PD research propagating ‘‘designing with children’’ as a distinct design discipline . PD was originally concerned with interventions into workplace environments in which tasks were clearly deﬁned ( e . g . Bjerknes et al . 1987 ; Greenbaum and Kyng 1991 ) . As technology penetrated the domestic and non - professional use practices , the need for a revised PD methodology for designing with children ( as non - professional users ) was claimed , of which the most prevalent within mainstream CCI research is Druin’s ( 1999a , b ) cooperative inquiry method . Cooperative in - quiry emphasizes : ( 1 ) a multidisciplinary partnership with children ; ( 2 ) ﬁeld research that emphasizes understanding of context , activities , and artefacts and ; ( 3 ) iterative low - tech and high - tech prototyping ( Druin 1999b ) . Further - more , the cooperative inquiry method contains a set of guidelines and techniques specially equipped for design collaboration with children ( Druin 1999b ) . Druin keeps a close connection to PD and emphasizes a design - centred learning approach in contrast to , e . g . Soloway et al . ( 1994 ) whose learner - centred design method is based on peda - gogical concerns . Soloway et al . ( 1994 ) emphasize both pedagogical , curricula and didactical aspects of the design process . Teachers as well as children are involved in the learner - centred design process . The approach is further developed by Kafai ( 1995 ) who treats games as a context for learning by placing children in the roles of producers rather than consumers of games . In Kafai and Resnick ( 1996 ) , the learner - centred design approach is discussed with respect to the way design activities can provide personally meaningful contexts for learning . Scaife et al . ( 1997 ) provide an Informant Design method that treats children , teachers , researchers , and other stakeholders as 1 Mathiassen ( 1981 ) uses the notion of system development . In this chapter I will use the notion of design to develop an understanding of a method for designing with children . Cogn Tech Work 123 ‘‘native informants’’ , all contributing their particular expertise to iteratively develop new technology . Our contribution to the methodological discussion is based on yet another shift in perspective , namely neither focused on learner - centred design nor design - centred learning , but on what we may call practice - based design . Practice - based design draws upon the socio - cultural activity theory ( SCAT ) framework Vygotsky ( 1978 , 1998 ) , Hedega˚rd ( 1995 , 2003 ) , Leontjev ( 1978 ) , Newman et al . ( 1989 ) , and deploys the viewpoint that children participate in meaningful communities of practice , which is a valuable resource to be considered in the design process . In the following , we discuss what characterizes a SCAT based approach to CCI and present the BRIDGE method that builds upon it . 3 A socio - cultural based approach to CCI Design with children is often treated as a special research ﬁeld within the ﬁeld of design and HCI ( Bekker et al . 2003 ) . Bruckman and Bandlow ( 2002 ) introduce the ﬁeld of designing with children with an account of the Piagetean scheme theory emphasizing that children lack knowledge and experience and have fundamentally different experi - ences and understanding of the world compared to adults . Thus Bruckman and Bandlow ( 2002 ) list general differ - ences between CCI and conventional HCI in relation to dexterity , speech , reading , background knowledge , and interaction styles ( Bruckman and Bandlow 2002 , pp . 8 – 12 ) . This basic assumption of child incompleteness is also found in the ‘‘Cooperative Inquiry’’ method ( Druin 1999a , b ) . Druin argues that children ( as opposed to adult users ) do not have a deﬁned task and their activities are ‘‘ . . . open - ended and exploratory ’’ as opposed to professional prac - tices ( Druin 1999a , b , p . 52 ) . Children , according to Druin ‘‘ . . . have their own likes , dislikes , curiosities and needs that are not the same as their parents or teachers ’’ ( Druin 2002 ) and she pinpoints that children are not just short adults but ‘‘ . . . an entirely different user population with their own culture , norms and complexity ’’ . ( Druin 2002 , p . 1 ) . According to Druin ( 1999b ) these differences legitimize a dedicated design method embracing the design with children . This approach is presented and discussed further in Markopoulos and Bekker ( 2003 ) . The theoretical foundation for understanding children and childhood is primarily adapted from developmental psychology . Within developmental psychology an empha - sis is put on the cognitive and physical development as individuals develop from infants to adults . Piaget [ Mark - opoulos and Bekker 2003 ] argues that children ( as opposed to adults ) lack basic knowledge and experiences and di - vides children’s cognitive development into a series of stages in which children develop into adulthood ( Piaget 1970 ) . According to the work of Piaget ( e . g . 1970 ) and Erikson ( 1971 ) , children are in a cognitive developmental process in which cognitive skills are accommodated and assimilated in the process that leads to the ultimate goal of adulthood . An alternative view presented by Vygotsky ( 1978 ) and Leontjev ( 1978 ) acknowledges the work of Piaget but voices the need for a more socio - cultural frame for understanding children’s development . According to Leontjev ( 1978 ) , personal development takes place through participation in social practice and is dependent on the condition these practices give for a person’s participation in speciﬁc activities . Different phases in children’s devel - opment can be related to the qualitative changes in insti - tutional practice ( El’konin 1972 ; Hedega˚rd 1995 ) . Leontjev ( 1978 ) introduces the notion of appropriation to emphasize the social nature of children’s development and learning . According to Leontjev , the child’s appropriation of cul - turally devised tools comes about through involvement in culturally organized activities in which the tool plays a role ( as described in Newman et al . 1989 ) . Leontjev ( 1978 ) treats human development primary driven by the social and cultural expectations to the individual , when engaged in cultural practices . Thus , with this point of departure , we embrace a focus on children as technically competent , resourceful partners with a distinct social practice , able to make key decisions in the design process on the same terms as any other stakeholders . A similar view can be found in Downes ( 1999 ) , arguing that it is of vital importance to move away from the socially constructed bias of immaturity , which promotes a view of children ‘‘ in the future voice as adults in preparation , in passive voice as recipients of adults’ attention and treatment or as objects of structural determinations ’’ ( Downes 1999 , p . 334 ) for them to be able to participate in the design process as ‘‘authentic stakeholders’’ rather than informants . This corresponds well to the argument made by Lee ( 2001 ) that promotes a view of children as ‘‘human beings’’ rather than cog - nitive incomplete ‘‘human becomings’’ . We agree with the standpoint presented in Downes ( 1999 ) : ‘‘ For chil - dren to be identiﬁed and engaged in this process as stakeholders , both evaluators and other stakeholders must put aside their assumptions of superiority based on age and cognitive maturity . This is not to say that a differential does not exist , but that regardless of differ - ences , all stakeholders are accorded the rights to par - ticipate fully in the negotiation process ’’ . ( Downes 1999 , p . 337 ) . Downes ( 1999 ) promotes a view of children as a minority group with similar power relations ( or lack of same ) to the other stakeholders and with reference to Mandell ( 2001 ) argues that ‘‘ once the adult assumption of superiority based on age and cognitive maturity is put Cogn Tech Work 123 aside , evaluators can build on the techniques that ﬁeld workers long ago developed to reduce social distance . ’’ ( Mandell 2001 , pp . 337 – 338 ) . Thus , from this perspective there is no reason why children should not be admitted into the design process as authentic stakeholders and be seen as a resource in design on equal terms with any other partner . A common argument against seeing chil - dren as equal partners in design is that children cannot be experts in something they have not yet learned . However , that is a general concern : surgeons cannot participate in the design process as engineers , nurses cannot be experts in waste water treatment , and , even though we have all been young , researchers and teachers cannot be experts in being children attending school to - day . Paying attention to power relations and focusing on children’s practices is also supported by Robbins ( 2005 ) , who emphasizes the need for considering e . g . contexts , collaboration and cultural tools in relation to how chil - dren think . Issues that need careful consideration when doing research with young children include a focus on the relationship between how children learn and develop and : ‘‘ . . . participation in particular contexts , with their own practices , traditions , philosophies , histories , values , belief systems , artefacts , and ‘‘ways of behaving’’ ’’ ( Robbins 2005 , p . 144 ) . This moves beyond the focus of ‘‘ chronological age and developmental milestones ’’ ( Robbins 2005 , p . 140 ) and promotes a view similar to ours of children as ‘‘thinking , learning , developing , and changing through participation in the socio - cultural activities of their communities ’’ ( Robbins 2005 , p . 147 , original emphasis ) . In the following , we present the BRIDGE method in more detail and explain how this perspective on children as authentic stakeholders in the design process helps us draw upon traditional techniques for user involvement in design as well as creates new techniques that are generally applicable in PD . 4 The BRIDGE method The understanding of children and their role in design based on the socio - cultural theoretical framework provide the foundation for the BRIDGE ( Danish : BRuger Invol - vering i Design , GEntænkt – English : User Involvement in Design , Revised ) method . We see the BRIDGE method as a theoretically grounded bridge between research contribu - tions from HCI / PD and CCI that provide a common ground for understanding and expanding the research ﬁeld to the mutual beneﬁt of both research areas . In the following , we give a brief characteristic of the core elements of the BRIDGE method . The BRIDGE method is deﬁned by : – Children’s participation in meaningful communities of practice rather than focusing on any cognitive differ - ences between arbitrary age groups . Rather than seeing children as cognitive incomplete ‘‘human becomings’’ , we need to create a design space that allows children to contribute to the design on the same terms as any other group of participants . – Designing new technology for a community of practice requires the active participation of members of the practice in the design process Based on our background in PD , we ﬁrmly believe that good design cannot be achieved without a serious involvement of teachers and pupils , who are the experts of use when we deal with teaching and learning in schools . In particular , children are experts in their everyday lives and constitute as valuable a resource in design as any other stakeholder in this process . Thus , being socio - culturally based , a core issue in the BRIDGE method is that it treats children as living their lives in meaningful socio - cultural dependant practices . These practices can and should ( in line with work practices ) be the starting point for design , and the design process must allow the children to partici - pate as authentic stakeholders . – Engaging children in design requires legitimate access to their practice Design is the process of mutual learning between the several different practices belonging to the stakeholders in the design process , e . g . the children’s practice and the designers’ practice . For mutual learning to occur success - fully , legitimate access to each other’s practices must be an integrated part of the design process . By legitimate we refer to the fact that design interventions must create a meaningful frame that reﬂects the cultural expectations belonging to the children’s everyday lives . The design techniques embody and prescribe the conditions for the meeting of designers’ and children’s practices . Hence , the BRIDGE method and the design techniques must build upon legitimacy . It is important to understand that we do not see design with children as a symmetrical relationship . Speciﬁcally , we consider it the responsibility of the designers : to choose the appropriate tools and techniques for the task at hand ; to understand the children’s practice ; to confront the chil - dren’s present practice with new technological options with the aim of supporting the process of shaping new visions of design and use ; and to develop their own practice as an integrated part of the design process . This is reﬂected in the BRIDGE method through the main domains of discourse when designing with children consists of : children’s present practice ; the new IT - artefact being designed ; technological options ; and the designers’ present practice . We position the Cogn Tech Work 123 BRIDGE method as a part of the PD methodology , sharing general perspectives with PD . Accordingly , we treat user involvement as a key factor in design , however , with its basis on SCAT our primary focus becomes designing for children as belonging to a social practice rather than designing for children as cognitive incomplete beings , the latter as seen in main contributions within CCI research . For a more detailed description and a thorough discussion of the BRIDGE method , see Iversen ( 2005 ) . 4 . 1 Applying the BRIDGE method to CCI : an example A core consequence of applying the BRIDGE method to the area of CCI is exempliﬁed in the discussion of whether and how we may use video in the design process depending on whether the users are children or adults . Within PD , research efforts have revealed the potential of using video recordings in user participation ( Mackay 1995 ; Buur and Bødker 2000 ) . Video is used for documenting user trials , test scenarios and workshops , and in later years video has also been more widely acknowledged as part of the ethnographically inspired inquiry into user contexts ( Buur et al . 2000 ; Binder 1999 ; Sperschneider and Bagger 2003 ; Mackay 1999 ; Mackay et al . 2000 ) . Video documentary on work practices appears to most designers as a valuable input to the design process . Lately , Pedersen and Buur ( 1999 ) , Buur et al . ( 2000 ) , Buur and Binder ( 2001 ) explore the po - tential of video recordings as design material . Design material is in this sense ‘‘ . . . stories created by users and designers to frame the design problem and to establish new design solutions ’’ ( Buur and Binder 2001 , p . 821 ) ( Fig . 1 ) . However , the use of video recordings when designing with children is widely discussed ( e . g . in Druin 1999b ; Bruckman and Bandlow 2002 ) . The question is whether children respond to the use of video camera in design and to which extent the video camera interferes with the design process . Iversen ( 2002 ) argues that children do respond to the video camera—just as adult users do—and states that children are very explicit about their relation to the presence of a video camera . They make funny faces ; try to get in front of the camera , etc . However , when designing with adult users ( operators , engineers , teachers , etc . ) they perform in front of the camera too . Meta statements are uttered according to individual strategies . Adults move to one or the other side to be out of the camera range when uttering a ‘‘private’’ statement to other participants , etc . The dis - crepancy between the assumptions in the Cooperative In - quiry method and the PD approach can be exempliﬁed by seeing the video camera as a design artefact . In PD , the video camera is treated as a mediating ‘‘why’’ artefact in the design collaboration activity ( Engestro¨m 1987 ) . The video camera captures why the collaborative process is initiated , namely to provide empirical input for designing meaningful artefacts . When participants respond to the presence of the video camera , they relate to the premises of the design activity . Grown - ups extend the physical room with ‘‘meta’’ statements that are intended to travel on through time and space and ﬁnally meet their recipient . In the same way , children respond to the framework of the design activity by performing or freezing in front of the camera . By responding to the camera both children and grown - ups relate to the activity system of design collabo - ration . They relate to an activity system that is different from their existing practice . By accepting that the activity , in which collaboration between designers and users occurs , is different to the users’ existing practice , the users act normally in the situation in which a camera is present . Thus , we argue that the ﬁeld of designing with children can beneﬁt from using video as design material when involving children as participants in the design process , and use video extensively throughout the techniques presented below . The example of video use in CCI is further dis - cussed in Iversen ( 2002 ) . 5 BRIDGE techniques for designing with children : three examples The BRIDGE method is developed over a 5 - year period within two consecutive research projects 2 with the overall Fig . 1 Using video in design with children : documenting children’s practice 2 The NetWorking . Kids project ( project page : www . networkingk - ids . dk ) and the iSchool project ( project page : www . interactivespac - es . net ) Cogn Tech Work 123 aim of developing an open and ‘‘ﬂuent’’ information technology with sufﬁcient accessibility and robustness to support learning in and outside the physical limits of the school . The progression of the research projects is char - acterized by a continuous interchange between the devel - opment of design methods and new concepts of IT ( prototypes ) for school environments , and the transfer of knowledge between these two areas . The IT concepts in - clude a digital schoolbag ( see Brodersen et al . 2005 ) , a temporary learning niche ( Brodersen and Iversen 2005 ) , and a context - based , mobile learning system ( Bouvin et al . 2003 , 2005 ) , two of which are currently being developed for commercial sale . Within this experimental , theoretically based context we have operationalized the BRIDGE method into a palette of techniques ( Iversen 2005 ) . In the following , we present three of these techniques that deal with different aspects of CCI and are derived from the different , related research areas or directly from the BRIDGE method : a PD - based video prototyping technique applied in CCI ; CCI - based technological immersion modiﬁed to the BRIDGE method ; and a novel BRIDGE technique—ﬁctional inquiry in a shared narrative space . 5 . 1 Video prototyping with children : applying participatory design techniques in CCI The potential of Video prototypes is well documented within PD . Vertelney ( 1989 ) suggests a ‘‘stop - motion’’ technique for designers to video prototype the appearance and dynamics of a user interface . Young ( 1992 ) developed this technique by emphasizing user participation in the creation of the video prototype . Sato and Salvador ( 1999 ) used acted - out dramas in a focus - group like setting . In - spired by the work of Binder ( 1999 ) , Pedersen and Buur ( 1999 ) describes how video prototyping with users propose new work practices and new technologies . Mackay et al . ( 2000 ) used the Video Prototyping technique for the pro - cess of videotaping the use of physical prototyping material ( paper , transparencies , Post - it notes ) when acting out an interaction idea as part of a design process . In their expe - rience , this technique produced very detailed outcome—a shared design artefact , which could be directly imple - mented in a software prototype . Their general assumption is that videotaped design ideas are more likely to inﬂuence later design activities . Ylirisku ( 2004 ) describes how par - ticipatory video scenarios can be used to facilitate user participation in the development of collaborative infor - mation systems . Ylirisku ( 2004 ) emphasizes that co - cre - ating video scenarios in participation with users are at the best both efﬁcient and motivating . We present two cases where video prototyping was used in the iSchool project to engage children actively in the design process by generating and visualizing ideas about future use of technology . 5 . 1 . 1 Case : blue Monday in 2010 At a ‘‘Video Prototyping’’ workshop , the pupils were di - vided into groups of 4 . Each group was encouraged to visualize an immediately upcoming social event : the day following their conﬁrmation , also known as Blue Monday where they go out with friends to the fun fair or go to a party to celebrate this quasi - ritual ‘‘coming into’’ adult - hood . The pupils visualized the chain of events on a pre - printed storyboard . The groups presented the work in plenum to get feedback from their classmates . Afterwards , the groups were asked to redo the storyboard by imagining that the illustrated chain of events would take place in the year 2010 . We used small movie sequences to initiate a group discussion about future technology and future living before working on the future storyboard . Again , the groups presented their storyboard in plenum . Finally , the groups were encouraged to dramatize the storyboard ( or frag - ments of the storyboard ) . Props were produced from cardboard , and existing IT gadgets were revised to ﬁt in the scenery . The storyboards of the future scenarios were video recorded and ﬁnally presented in plenum in a cin - ema - like setting . The pupils themselves directed and produced the video prototypes assisted by designers and teachers . 5 . 1 . 2 Case : context dependent information services A similar video prototyping workshop was later con - ducted with 12 students from three different schools to Fig . 2 Video prototyping : envisioning future technology with children Cogn Tech Work 123 brainstorm with the children about different , interest - ing types of context dependent information on mobile devices ( Fig . 2 ) . In both cases , the video prototypes helped the designers and children collaboratively envision future technologies driven by the children’s imagination and expectations of the technological possibilities . The con - tent of the assignment became legitimate to the children because it was based on actual events in their lives and legitimate to the researchers because it focused on developing future technologies . This is an example of how ‘‘traditional’’ PD techniques can cross the bound - aries into CCI and provide valuable insights into chil - dren’s practice . 5 . 2 Technological immersion with children : drawing on an existing CCI technique The Probing Practice technique provides a workshop setting for inquiry into the children’s appropriation of new technology in their existing school practice . As argued above , the BRIDGE method treats children’s present practice as the outset for design . The visions for change and thereby the visions of a new IT - artefact are inherent in children’s present practice . By providing technological options to children’s present practice , the Probing Practice technique can crystallize these visions for change and thereby contribute to the design of new IT - artefacts . The Probing Practice technique is a continuation of the research into Technology Immersion . Technology immer - sion is a technique for observing what children do when exposed to extraordinary amounts of technology [ Boltman et al . ( 1998 ) ; Druin ( 1999a , b ) ] . The technique was developed as a part of the ACM SIGCHI’s annual CHI conferences in which children exposed to a large amount of technology were able to produce a conference newsletter and website in the CHIkids Newsroom ( Boltman et al . ( 1998 ) . A key aspect of the Technological Immersion is that children themselves are the decision makers in the technology - rich environment provided by designers . Ex - posed to a large amount of technology , children choose what they like and do not like and thereby provide designers an opportunity to get ﬁrst - hand insight into children’s account of technological options . Technology Immersion is also the inspiration of the ‘‘KidsReporter’’ technique as developed by Bekker et al . ( 2003 ) . In the KidsReporter children act as reporters and photographers in school assignments in a technology enhanced Zoo . The KidsReporter technique evaluates new technology accord - ing to its ability to support educational IT in deﬁned set - tings such as the Zoo . 5 . 2 . 1 Case : NetWorking . News—probing school practice with mobile devices In the NetWorking . Kids project we wanted to investigate the potential of mobile technology to support ﬁeld trips and project assignments in educational settings . We wanted to discover how children in their existing school environment would appropriate the mobile technology . A workshop session depending on the Probing Practice was conducted at a local school and repeated ﬁve additional times in different school settings . We named this probing inquiry into mobile technology in school environments ‘‘Net - Working . News’’ ( see Nørregaard et al . ( 2003 ) for a de - tailed account of the NetWorking . News sessions ) ( Fig . 3 ) . The NetWorking . News session was a time - intensive workshop ( usually 3 hours ) where a class of 7th graders was asked to produce a web - based news site by means of the technology that we provided . An editorial group located in the classroom edited the news site and coordinated the work of three to four groups of reporters in the ﬁeld , aided by their teachers and two researchers . The content of the news site was initially discussed at an editorial meeting where the children chose which stories to include . The reporter groups were sent out into the school campus and into the immediate neighbourhood to cover the stories , followed by a researcher with a video camera to document their efforts . The reporters could communicate with the editorial group in the classroom by means of the technol - ogy provided . In each of the six NetWorking . News sessions , the children succeeded in the process of produc - ing a news website covering a diverse set of areas ranging from the war in Iraq , local sports , fashion , exit polls on an election , and music and ﬁlms . The website produced by the children was published on the Internet with links from the school’s own website . At the end of the day we debriefed the session with both teachers and children in a plenum session . We documented each of the ﬁve NetWorking . News sessions on video tape and conducted video analysis in - spired by the Video Analysis Labs ( Jordan and Henderson 1994 ) on selected episodes of the video material . The technology immersion technique let the children experiment with new technology in a school setting and thus framed the session with respect to their present prac - tice . They were active producers of content for the news site . Thus , the NetWorking News sessions exempliﬁed that we may share techniques and tools from the existing CCI toolbox . However , the application of the techniques differ signiﬁcantly according to our theoretical point of depar - ture ; we introduce the technology into the children’s ( and teachers ) existing practice aiming at getting access to their situated appropriation of technology . Cogn Tech Work 123 5 . 3 Developing a BRIDGE technique : ﬁctional inquiry in a shared narrative space Creating a shared narrative space is a way to gain insight into children’s present practice through role - play . The ﬁctional shared space of a role - play temporarily short - cuts existing norms , values and power relations in the design collaboration between designers and children . This pro - vides the designers with an opportunity to ask questions that would otherwise be considered odd and exposes the children to the structure of their present practice . The basic premise is to establish a shared narrative space between the designers’ and children’s practices in which both children and designers gain access to the existing use practice . The technique is inspired by current discussions within PD emphasizing an ‘‘in - between’’ space for design col - laboration [ e . g . ( Muller 2003 ) ] . Robins ( 1999 ) states that there are basically two spaces , or in Muller’s ( 2003 ) ter - minology : sitings , in which PD occurs : either the designers enter the world of the users ; or the users are invited to the design laboratory . Pedersen and Buur ( 1999 ) offer an ac - count of the importance of where the design interventions take place . When choosing the designers’ turf as siting for design intervention , designers generally learn from hearing the users exchange practice experiences . On the designers’ turf , users tend to take a more general view of things ( Pedersen and Buur 1999 ) . When choosing the users’ turf , the conversations are grounded in more concrete and spe - ciﬁc practice experiences . The users generally tend to feel more at ease in their home environment . This binary choice of sitings is questioned by Muller ( 2003 ) , proposing a third space of PD in between the world of the designers and the users . In order to gain access and insight into the everyday life of children , several techniques have already been developed . Oosterholt et al . ( 1996 ) propagate the use of Photo Diaries as a way to gain access to children’s practice in the process of designing children’s technology . This technique is further developed by Hutchinson et al . ( 2003 ) who suggest the use of technology probes as a way to comprehend the needs and desires of users in a real - world setting . Bekker et al . ( 2003 ) offer the ‘‘KidsRe - porter’’ technique as a way for children to contribute to a design problem through the making of a newspaper with the children’s ideas about a certain topic . NetWork - ing . News provides a similar framework in which chil - dren’s use of mobile technology is investigated and reported during a 3 - hour workshop . Both the KidsRe - porter and the NetWorking . News techniques provide a framework for gathering user requirements in the geo - graphical and social context of the children . Both tech - niques establish inspiring social settings in which children are encouraged to participate and thereby expose their practice and especially their use of technology for designers . These techniques are useful , when conducting open - ended research into children’s practice . However , neither of the techniques provide a framework for ques - tioning speciﬁc user requirements according to elements in children’s practices and none of them consider the siting of the design intervention . Fig . 3 The editorial group and reporters in the ﬁeld hard at work Cogn Tech Work 123 The Mission from Mars technique was developed in the iSchool project where we experimented with a software infrastructure in which pupils could access their digital school material by using BlueTooth technology . The basic idea was to provide children with access to digital material with a seamless login and thereby provide the pupil access to their digital ‘‘eBag’’ as easily as they access their physical school bag . However , the design of the eBag de - manded a detailed understanding of the physical schoolbag . ‘‘Mission from Mars’’ was initiated to understand the children’s use and understanding of the schoolbag . The shared narrative space was established so we could ask questions according to the children’s existing school bag . The Mission from Mars sessions are accounted for in Dindler et al . ( 2005 ) . The eBag is further described in Brodersen et al . ( 2005 ) . 5 . 3 . 1 Case : mission from mars Twelve 5th graders were invited to participate in the 3 - hour ‘‘Mission from Mars’’ session . In the introduction , a ses - sion facilitator revealed the plot of the event : By means of high - tech equipment , contact had been made to a space mission from Mars . A text document was handed out to the children containing a ‘‘Martian’’ message such as : ‘‘ H & # all¤ % o E’’ # ¤arth ; H ! ’’ow A # ) ( ) re y¤o { u ? ‘‘ [ Hallo Earth , How are you ] . The children were encouraged to interpret the Martian message . In the text document it was revealed that a Martian was conducting a study of ‘‘parental care’’ . The Martian wanted to identify how hu - man beings become educated and skilled citizens . There - fore , the Martian kindly asked the pupils to prepare a live broadcast from their classroom to her visiting space shuttle in outer space . The children were encouraged to tell about their everyday lives with special focus on their everyday artefacts . The transmission was established through a software ‘‘translator’’ that translated ‘‘Martian’’ to a lan - guage close to the children’s mother tongue ( in this case Swedish 3 ) ( Fig . 4 ) . The session set - up was established in two locations . The children were situated in the classroom in front of a video camera that recorded the event and sent picture and sound to a location nearby . In this location , a researcher ( the Martian ) was located . A wireless microphone transmitted the messages to loud - speakers in the children’s classroom . The children talked to the Martian in small groups . The Martian asked the children to explain the contents of their school bags , the information hidden in the different pockets in the school bag , etc . In this way , the Mission from Mars intervention informed the design process with detailed descriptions of the children’s school bag . The shared ﬁctional narrative space legitimized the asking of stupid or obvious questions like ‘‘what is a school bag ? ’’ because the children were playing along with the story of talking to an extra terrestrial being who was not part of their culture , and this let them reﬂect on what they were carrying and how they structured the contents of the bag . Thus , the narrative space created in this setting helped us suspend the norms , cultural values and expectations that would otherwise be present in , e . g . an open - ended inter - view . The shared narrative space is a powerful technique for addressing core values deeply embedded in a culture , e . g . revealing tacit knowledge within a practice , by creat - ing a context in which the usual becomes unusual . Hence , the shared narrative space technique shows potential for informing design in a greater PD context by offering a general framework for playing with conventions in a temporary , legitimate space . The premise for the success of this technique lies within the creation of the shared narra - tive space , employing props and the right framing to allow the participants to suspend disbelief , thus having a broad application area . This technique has recently been used very successfully with groups of teachers , administrators and architects participating in a series of ‘‘Olympic sports events’’ as a part of investigating into kinesthetic learning tools ( Grønbæk et . al . , in press ) . 6 Conclusion and future work This paper introduces the BRIDGE method ; a practise - based approach to CCI based on the SCAT framework . We presented three examples of concrete techniques based on the BRIDGE method that all involve children in design as legitimate stakeholders rather than considering them Fig . 4 Fictional inquiry in a shared narrative space 3 The Swedish language is close to Danish . However , the Danish pupils in the MiM session had some difﬁculties understanding the ‘‘Martian’’ properly . Cogn Tech Work 123 ‘‘human - becomings’’ with the need of a special method to guide their participation in design . We see the BRIDGE method as a very promising supplement to the existing CCI methodologies and as a step towards bridging the research efforts in CCI and PD . The BRIDGE method acknowl - edges children as participants in meaningful communities of practice , and it may use many of the techniques devel - oped within conventional PD as well as create new tech - niques to inform PD in general . Despite our differences in perspective , we fully acknowledge the great work done by the CCI research community to bring focus on bringing children into the design process , an effort without which children would still not have a voice in the development of technology speciﬁcally targeted at them as a user group . Through the examples of concrete techniques based on the BRIDGE PD method , we show that existing CCI techniques are both valuable and meaningful within the BRIDGE framework even through they are created from another methodological background . We share our emerging de - sign method to invite other designers and researchers to participate in establishing and developing the BRIDGE method further . References Bekker M , Beusmans J , Keyson D , Lloyd P ( 2003 ) KidReporter : a user requirements gathering technique for designing with children . In : Interacting with computers , vol 15 , no . 2 . Elsevier Science , Amsterdam , pp 187 – 202 Binder T ( 1999 ) Setting the stage for improvised video scenarios . In : CHI’99 extended abstracts , Pittsburgh , May 1999 , ACM Press , Boulder , pp 230 – 231 Bjerknes G , Ehn P , Kyng M ( eds ) ( 1987 ) Computers and democracy : a Scandinavian challenge . Aldershot , Avebury Bødker K , Kensing F , Simonsen J ( 2000 ) Professionel IT - forun - dersøgelse – grundlaget for bæredygtige IT - anvendelser ( in Danish ) . Samfundslitteratur , Copenhagen Bødker K , Kensing F , Simonsen J ( 2004 ) Participatory IT design . Designing for business and workplace realities . MIT , Cambridge Boltman A , Druin A , Miura A ( 1998 ) What children can tell us about technology : the CHIkids model of technology immersion . CHI98 Tutorial . ACM Publications , Los Angeles Bouvin NO , Hansen FA , Christensen BG , Grønbæk K ( 2003 ) HyCon : a framework for context - aware mobile hypermedia . In : New review of hypertext and hypermedia , vol 9 . Taylor Graham , London , pp 59 – 88 Bouvin NO , Brodersen C , Hansen FA , Iversen OS , Nørregaard P ( 2005 ) Tools of contextualization : extending the classroom to the ﬁeld . In : Proceedings of the 4th international conference for interaction design and children ( IDC 2005 ) , 2005 , ACM Press , Boulder , pp 24 – 31 Brodersen C , Iversen OS ( 2005 ) eCell—spatial IT design for group collaboration and learning in school environments . In : Proceed - ings of the 2005 international conference on supporting group work ( GROUP’05 ) . ACM Press , Boulder , pp 227 – 235 Brodersen C , Christensen BG , Grønbæk K , Dindler C ( 2005 ) eBag—a ubiquitous web infrastructure for nomadic learning . In : Proceed - ings of the 14th international conference on world wide web . ACM Press , Boulder , 2005 , pp 298 – 306 Bruckman A , Bandlow A ( 2002 ) HCI For kids . In : Jacko J , Sears A ( eds ) Handbook of human – computer interaction . Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , Mahwah Buur J , Binder T ( 2001 ) Video as design material—expanding the potential of video in user centred design . In : Hirose M ( eds ) Human – computer interaction—INTERACT ‘01 . IOS Press , IFIP Tokyo , pp 821 – 822 Buur J , Bødker S ( 2000 ) From usability lab to ‘design collaborato - rium’ : reframing usability practice . In : Boyarski D , Kellogg W ( eds ) Proceedings of the 3rd conference on designing interactive systems ( DIS2000 ) . ACM Press , New York , pp 297 – 307 Buur J , Binder T , Brandt E ( 2000 ) Taking video beyond ‘Hard Data’ in user centered design . In : Proceedings of the participatory design conference , CPRS , New York , 2000 , pp 21 – 29 Dindler C , Eriksson E , Iversen OS , Ludvigsen M , Lykke - Olesen A ( 2005 ) Mission from mars—a method for exploring user requirements for children in a narrative space . In : Proceedings of the interaction design and children conference , ACM press , Boulder , 2005 , pp 40 – 47 Druin A ( 1997 – 2003 ) Computers and kids column . SIGCHI Bulletin . ACM Press , New York Druin ( ed ) ( 1999a ) The design of children’s technology . Morgan Kaufmann , San Francisco Druin A ( 1999b ) Cooperative inquiry : developing new technologies for children with children . In : Proceedings of CHI’99 , ACM Press , New York , pp 592 – 599 Druin A ( 2002 ) The role of children in the design of new technology . Behav Inf Technol 21 ( 1 ) : 1 – 25 Druin A , Revelle G , Bederson BB , Hourcade JP , Farber A , Lee J , Campbell D ( 2003 ) A collaborative digital library for children : a descriptive study of children’s collaborative behaviors and dialogue . J Comput Assist Learn 19 ( 2 ) : 239 – 224 El’Konin DB ( 1972 ) Towards the problem of stages in the mental development of the child , 1971 . Sov Psychol 4 : 6 – 20 Engestro¨m Y ( 1987 ) Learning by expanding . Orienta - Konsultit , Helsinki Erikson EH ( 1971 ) Barnet og samfundet . Hans Reitzels Forlag , København Gilutz S , Nielsen J ( 2002 ) Usability of websites for children : 70 design guidelines . Nielsen Norman Group , Fremont , http : / / www . nngroup . com / reports / kids / Greenbaum J , Kyng M ( eds ) ( 1991 ) Design at work—cooperative design of computer systems . Lawrence Erlbaum Associates Publishers , Hillsdale Grønbæk K , Iversen OS , Kortbek KJ , Nielsen KR , Aagaard L ( 2007 ) iGameFloor : a platform for co - located collaborative games . In : Proceedings of the international conference on advances in computer entertainment technology ( ACE2007 ) , 13 – 15 June 2007 , Salzburg Guha ML , Druin A , Chipman G , Fails J , Simms S , Farber A ( 2004 ) Mixing ideas : a new technique for working with young children as design partners . In : Proceedings of interaction design and children ( IDC’2004 ) , College Park , pp 35 – 42 Hedega˚rd M ( 1995 ) Tænkning , viden og udvikling , Tanke - og vidensformer og deres betydning for udvikling af tænkning og motivation i skolealderen . Aarhus Universitetsforlag , A˚rhus Hedega˚rd M ( 2003 ) Børn og unges udvikling diskuteret ud fra et kultur - historisk perspektiv . Arbejdspapir nr . 117 – 03 , Center for Kulturforskning , A ˚ rhus Universitet , marts , 2003 Holzblatt K , Jones S ( 1993 ) Contextual inquiry : a participatory technique for system design . In : Schuler D , Namioka A ( eds ) Participatory design : principles and practices . Lawrence Erlbaum , New York , pp 177 – 210 Cogn Tech Work 123 Hutchinson H , Mackay W , Westerlund B , Bederson BB , Druin A , Plaisant C , Beaudouin - Lafon M , Conversy S , Evans H , Hansen H , Roussel N , Eiderba¨ck B ( 2003 ) Domesticated design : technology probes : inspiring design for and with families . In : Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on human factors in computing systems ( CHI’03 ) , ACM Press , New York , pp 17 – 24 Iversen O ( 2002 ) Designing with children : using video camera as an instrument of provocation . In : Bekker M , Markopoulos P , Kersten - Tsikalkina M ( eds ) Proceedings of the ﬁrst interaction design and children conference ( IDC’02 ) , 28 – 29 August , Eindhoven , The Netherlands , pp 73 – 81 Iversen OS ( 2005 ) Participatory design beyond work prac - tices—designing with children , Ph . D . dissertation , Department of Computer Science , University of Aarhus Jordan B , Henderson A ( 1994 ) Interaction analysis : foundations and practice . Institute for research on learning ( IRL 94 – 0027 ) , Palo Alto Kafai Y ( 1995 ) Minds in play : computer game design as a context for children’s learning . Lawrence Erlbaum Publishers , Hillsdale Kafai Y , Resnick M ( 1996 ) Constructionism in practice . Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , Hillsdale Kensing F ( 1987 ) Generation of visions in systems development : a supplement to the toolbox . In : Docherty P , Fuchs - Kittowski K , Kolm P , Mathiassen L ( eds ) System design for human devel - opment and productivity : participation and beyond . Elsevier Science Publishers , Amsterdam , pp 285 – 301 Kensing F ( 1998 ) Prompted reﬂections : a technique for understanding complex work . Interactions 5 ( 1 ) : 7 – 15 Kensing F ( 2003 ) Methods and practices in participatory design . ITU Press , Copenhagen Lee N ( 2001 ) Childhood and society . Growing up in an age of uncertainty . Open University Press , Maidenhead Leontjev AN ( 1978 ) Activity , consciousness , and personality . Prentice - Hall , Englewood Cliffs Mackay WE ( 1995 ) Ethics , lies and videotape . In : Proceedings of CHI 95 , New York , pp 138 – 145 Mackay WE ( 1999 ) Is paper safer ? The role of paper ﬂight strips in air trafﬁc control . ACM Trans Comput Hum Interact 6 ( 4 ) : 311 – 340 Mackay WE , Ratzer AV , Janecek P ( 2000 ) Video artefacts for design : bridging the gap between abstraction and detail . In : Boyarski D , Kellogg W ( eds ) Proceedings of the 3rd conference on designing interactive systems ( DIS2000 ) , New York , pp 72 – 82 Markopoulos P , Bekker M ( 2003 ) Interaction design and children ( editorial ) . Interact Comput 15 ( 3 ) : 141 – 149 Mathiassen L ( 1981 ) System development and system development method ( in Danish ) . Ph . D . thesis , DAIMI PB - 136 , Computer Science , A˚rhus University McNeal JU ( 1999 ) The kids market—myths and realities . Paramount Market Publishing , New York Muller MJ ( 2003 ) Participatory design : the third space in HCI . In : Jacko J , Sears A ( eds ) Handbook of HCI . Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , Mahwah Newman D , Grifﬁn P , Cole M ( 1989 ) The construction zone : working for cognitive change in school . Cambridge University Press , Cambridge Nørregaard P , Andersen J , Dindler C , Frich J , Iversen O , Nielsen C ( 2003 ) Networking news , a method for engaging children actively in design . In : Electronic proceedings of the 26th information systems research seminar in Scandinavia ( IRIS26 ) , Haikko Manor , 9 – 12 August 2003 Oosterholt R , Kusano M , de Vries G ( 1996 ) Interaction design and human factors support in the development of a personal communicator for children . In : Proceedings of CHI 96 , April 1996 , ACM Press , Vancouver , pp 450 – 457 Pedersen J , Buur J ( 1999 ) Games and movies—towards an innovative engagement with users . In : Scrivener S ( ed ) Collaborative design . Springer , London Piaget J ( 1970 ) Science of education and the psychology of the child . Orion Press , New York Robbins J ( 2005 ) Contexts , collaboration , and cultural tools : a sociocultural perspective on researching children’ thinking . Contemp Issues Early Child 6 ( 2 ) : 140 – 149 Robins J ( 1999 ) Participatory design ( class notes ) . University of Illinois , Champaign . http : / / www . lis . uiuc . edu / jrobins / pd / Rogers Y , Price S , Fitzpatrick G , Fleck R , Harris E , Smith H , Randell C , Muller H , O’Malley C , Stanton D , Thompson M , Weal M ( 2004 ) . Ambient wood : designing new forms of digital augmen - tation for learning outdoors . In : Proceedings of interaction design and children ( IDC’04 ) , ACM , New York Sato S , Salvador T ( 1999 ) Playacting and focus troupes : theatre techniques for creating quick , intensive , immersive and engaging focus group sessions . Interactions 6 ( 5 ) : 35 – 41 Scaife M , Rogers Y ( 1999 ) Kids as informants : telling us what we didn’t know or conﬁrming what we knew already ? In : Druin A ( ed ) The design of children’s technology : how we design , what we design , and why . Morgan Kaufman , Francisco Scaife M , Rogers Y , Aldrich F , Davies M ( 1997 ) Designing for or designing with ? Informant design for interactive learning environments . In : Proceedings of CHI 1997 , ACM Press , pp 343 – 350 Soloway E , Guzdial M , Hay KE ( 1994 ) Learner - centered design : the challenge for HCI in the 21st century . Interactions 1 ( 1 ) : 36 – 48 Sperschneider W , Bagger K ( 2003 ) Ethnographic ﬁeldwork under industrial constraints : towards design in context . In : The International Journal of Human Computer Interaction , vol 15 , no . 1 . Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , New Jersey , pp 41 – 50 Vertelney L ( 1989 ) Using video to prototype user interfaces . SIGCHI Bull 21 ( 2 ) : 57 – 61 Vygotsky LS ( 1978 ) Mind in society : the development of higher psychological processes . Harvard University Press , Cambridge Vygotsky LS ( 1998 ) The collected works of L . S . Vygotsky . Vol 5 child psychology . Plenum Press , New York Westerlund B , Lindqvist S , Mackay W , Sundblad Y ( 2003 ) Co - design methods for designing with and for families . In : Proceedings of EAD’03 , the 5th European Academy of Design conference , Barcelona , Spain Ylirisku S ( 2004 ) Getting to the point with participatory video scenario . Cooperative systems design , scenario - based design of collaborative systems ( COOP 2004 ) . IOS Press , Amsterdam , pp 7 – 22 Young E ( 1992 ) Participatory video prototyping . Posters and short talks of the 1992 SIGCHI conference on human factors in computing systems . ACM Press , Boston , p 28 Cogn Tech Work 123