dePENd : Augmented Sketching System Using Ferromagnetism of a Ballpoint Pen Junichi Yamaoka Keio University 5322 , Endo , Fujisawa yamajun @ sfc . keio . ac . jp Yasuaki Kakehi Keio University 5322 , Endo , Fujisawa ykakehi @ sfc . keio . ac . jp ABSTRACT This paper presents dePENd , a novel interactive system that assists in sketching using regular pens and paper . Our sys - tem utilizes the ferromagnetic feature of the metal tip of a regular ballpoint pen . The computer controlling the X and Y positions of the magnet under the surface of the table pro - vides entirely new drawing experiences . By controlling the movements of a pen and presenting haptic guides , the system allows a user to easily draw diagrams and pictures consisting of lines and circles , which are difﬁcult to create by free - hand drawing . Moreover , the system also allows users to freely edit and arrange prescribed pictures . This is expected to reduce the resistance to drawing and pro - mote users’ creativity . In addition , we propose a commu - nication tool using two dePENd systems that is expected to enhance the drawing skills of users . The functions of this system enable users to utilize interactive applications such as copying and redrawing drafted pictures or scaling the pictures using a digital pen . Furthermore , we implement the system and evaluate its tech - nical features . In this paper , we describe the details of the design and implementations of the device , along with appli - cations , technical evaluations , and future prospects . Author Keywords Creativity Supporting Tools ; Pen - based UIs ; Sketching ; Interactive Fabrication ; ACM Classiﬁcation Keywords H5 . 2 [ Information Interfaces and Presentation ] : User Inter - faces . General Terms Design ; Human Factors INTRODUCTION Until now , many researchers have attempted to expand the act of drawing by augmenting pens and paper by combining Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full cita - tion on the ﬁrst page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or re - publish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior speciﬁc permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from permissions @ acm . org . UIST’13 , October 8 – 11 , 2013 , St . Andrews , United Kingdom . Copyright c ⃝ 2013 ACM 978 - 1 - 4503 - 2268 - 3 / 13 / 10 . . . $ 15 . 00 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2501988 . 2502017 Figure 1 . ( a ) Augmented sketching system dePENd that uses regular pens and paper and desk - shaped device . ( b ) The system enables users to draw exact shapes such as lines and ( c ) diagrams . ( d ) The system also allows users to edit and change pictures freely during the drawing process . hand - drawn images and digital information . As a typical ap - proach , pen - type input interfaces ( e . g . , pen tablets and digital pens ) are often used . By using these devices , the system can capture hand - drawn information , process it , and show addi - tional information . However , in these systems , the data out - puts are limited to digital displays ( monitors , projectors ) . In contrast , Willis et al . proposed “Interactive Fabrication [ 17 ] , ” a series of prototype systems that combine intuitive embod - ied interfaces and digital fabrication machines to empower a user’s creativity via real - time interactions . At this time , we incorporate such an interactive fabrication approach into the acts of drawing and writing with a pen . We propose a novel interface system called dePENdthat aug - ments the act of drawing using haptic guides . This system can control the motions of a pen directly , and assist and augment the act of drawing . In our dePENdsystem ( Figure 1 ) , users place a piece of paper on a table and draw lines as usual without wearing any spe - cial equipment . They can use normal ballpoint pens with this interface . In fact , many tips of commercially available ball - point pens can be attracted to magnets because they are made of a ferromagnetic material . We focused on this feature , and controlled the movement of the pen by moving the position of a magnet under the table . A signiﬁcant feature of our system is its ability to inﬂuence the movements of pens to provide Crowd & Creativity UIST’13 , October 8 – 11 , 2013 , St . Andrews , UK 203 haptic guides . Because our system provides haptic guides for the fundamental movements of the user’s pen , the user is able to draw diagrams and pictures consisting of lines and circles , which are difﬁcult to draw by free - hand drawing . Therefore , it is expected that there will be less reluctance to drawing and a certain amount of inﬂuence on the users’ creativity . Moreover , users may be able to improve their skills by learn - ing from the direct guidance of experienced artists . As an - other important feature of this system , owing to the use of magnetic ballpoint pens , the system also allows users to edit and arrange prescribed pictures freely during the drawing pro - cess aided by a computer . In addition , digital pens can be used in this system to change actions interactively according to the user’s movement . This enables users to adopt interactive applications such as copy - ing and redrawing drafted pictures or scaling pictures . In this paper , we present the details of dePENd and several applications of this system . RELATED WORK Prior to our research , a considerable number of studies were conducted on sketching , interactive fabrication , and inter - faces using magnetic forces . Support for Sketching via a Stylus Input A considerable number of studies have focused on support - ing users in sketching and improving their skills in digital environments . SketchPad [ 15 ] , which is considered to be a pioneer of CAD software , alters traditional drafting by us - ing a display and light pen . This system was implemented to change imprecise sketchy input into precise designs , and to duplicate drawings . ScanScribe [ 13 ] is a software tool that detects a group of drawn shapes , and allows users to move these freely . Unlike sketching with a pen and paper , digi - tal functions such as copying , undo , scaling , and moving are more likely to let users experience the trial and error process and improve their overall design skills . In addition , studies have been conducted not only on draw - ing using computers , but also on detecting drawn lines and shapes , and suggesting prospective shapes . Pegasus [ 5 ] is a software tool that automatically revises hand - drawn lines , while ShadowDraw [ 8 ] improves users’ sketches . By pre - dicting the pictures users want to draw and displaying these predictions as guides , this system allows users to draw the ﬁgures in an easier way . These software systems support users with visual information via digital screens . In addition to providing visual aids , our system attempts to effect users’ physical motions by manipu - lating the pen’s movement during sketching . Interactive Fabrication Gershenfeld proposed personal fabrication [ 3 ] , which was an effort to support rapid prototyping using automated ma - chine tools such as 3D printers and laser cutters , which are connected to a computer network . Among these various ma - chines , a plotter is a familiar tool for printing graphics . As research that adopted an approach similar to our system , thesuspendedpenonanXYplotter [ 10 ] controls the position of a pen hung from a topside structure , while thecenterpivot penplotter [ 2 ] draws and moves a pen in an arch . These are automatic drawing machines . However , these systems do not have functions for interaction during the drawing process . Shaper [ 17 ] , which is a steric modeling system that uses a computer - numeric controlled machine and transparent touch - screen , is a system developed in one of the studies on inter - active fabrication that combines handcrafts and digital tech - nologies . This system allows users to create steric sculptures intuitively by dispensing polyurethanes at the point where the touchscreen is touched . Interactive Construction [ 11 ] is a woodworking support system with a laser pointer and a laser cutter . As a user drafts a wooden board with a laser pointer , a computer transforms the hand - drawn lines into exact lines , and cuts these with a laser cutter . These studies allow users to design intuitively , unlike traditional designs using CAD sys - tems . However , there is still room for improvement in terms of intuitive inputs , rather than actual modeling tasks . As for a typical study on modeling support , Haptic Intelli - gentsia [ 7 ] is a handheld 3D printing machine that uses a haptic interface ( Phantom Omni [ 14 ] ) and a glue gun . As users dispense the glue under the guide of tactile feedback , the system creates input data for the sculptures . FreeD [ 19 ] is a handheld digital milling machine consisting of a mag - netic sensor , small milling machine , and computer . As users trace the wood , the tip of the milling machine slides along the outlines of the three - dimensional input data and creates the sculptures . These studies are similar to our research in terms of adding artifacts , arranging creations by hand , and modify - ing the way editing is done using the motion of machines as guides . In comparison with these studies , our research espe - cially focuses on pen writing / drawing . An example of a tool supporting sketching on paper in the same way as our study , which combines input and output , is DigitalRubbing [ 6 ] . This system allows users to copy graph - ics projected on a display using a pen device . As the tip of the pen device , which contains tablet sensors and solenoids , touches the graphics on the tablet display , the system extends the tip of the pen device , thereby drawing the same graph - ics on the paper by rubbing . A further example of a tool similar to our research is Blind Self Portrait [ 9 ] , which is a system that allows users to draw their self - portraits automat - ically with their eyes closed . As a user places his / her pen on the table , the position of the table moves along the outline of a photograph that was taken beforehand , thereby allowing the user to draw his / her own face . Self - PortraitMachine [ 4 ] con - trols the pen’s motions through a robotic arm attached to the user’s hand . In contrast to normal printers , these systems incorporate the merits of handcrafting in digital fabrications , because their ar - tifacts can be changed by hand and a variety of user arrange - ments can be added . However , our research includes features that augment sketching and add interactive functions without having to wear or grab special devices . Crowd & Creativity UIST’13 , October 8 – 11 , 2013 , St . Andrews , UK 204 Interfaces Using Magnetic Forces In the research ﬁeld of haptic displays and tangible interfaces , several systems have functions that involve moving physical objects or a user’s ﬁngers by using magnetic forces . Actuated Workbench [ 12 ] and Proactive Desk II [ 18 ] are tabletop systems that can make physical objects placed on the table move using an array of electromagnets . These systems were designed to serve as intuitive interfaces with computers . FingerFlux [ 16 ] also uses electromagnets under a projection screen . The aim of this research was to provide haptic feed - back to users . By attaching a small magnet to a ﬁnger or a pen , the user experiences haptic force according to the posi - tion . In comparison with these systems , our system aims to control the movement of a pen with a magnetic force and assist users with drawing . BASIC DESIGN OF DEPEND SYSTEM The augmented sketching system dePENd controls the mo - tions of ballpoint pens by moving magnets . Users can draw shapes and pictures , which have been input into computers , using regular ballpoint pens . In other words , after spreading a piece of paper on a desk - shaped device and placing a regu - lar ballpoint pen on the paper , a user can draw ﬁgures semi - automatically as the magnetic tip of the pen is controlled by a computer . Figure 2 shows an overview of the dePENdsys - tem . For example , if users need to draw , they can handwrite di - agrams such as circles and lines that exist on the computer . As an important feature of this system , because we use reg - ular ballpoint pens , the system allows users to intervene and change the pictures freely during the machine - assisted draw - ing process . As for the method of controlling the motion of the ballpoint pens , several approaches can be included . For example , Phan - tomOmni [ 14 ] uses arms with built - in actuators , while SPI - DAR [ 1 ] uses motors and nylon strings . These methods are suitable for tactile presentation and controlling physical pens . However , we consider these interfaces to be unsuitable for daily use , because users must wear external devices on their hands to hold the pens . Thus , in our system , the ability to use regular ballpoint pens the metal tips of which are ferro - magnetic allows users to make use of pens intuitively in daily life . In addition , by using digital pens that have ferromagnetism similar to regular pens , the system can detect hand motions , which allows users to operate the system interactively . For example , the guides allow users to start drawing ﬁgures from any position , and can record and play back drawings / sketches of users with highly skilled drawing abilities . Moreover , dig - ital pens enable functions such as copying and redrawing , which are difﬁcult to achieve using ordinary sketching , and can be a novel method of sketching . Figure 2 . Overview of dePENd system . Figure 3 . Size of magnets and acrylic boards . Structure for Moving Pens dePENd consists of a computer with input control programs and a desk - type device comprising a ballpoint pen , magnets , electric actuators , and controller . Because the electric actu - ators on the x and y axes control the positions of magnets , the system can change the positions of the absorbed tips of ballpoint pens . In this research , ballpoint pens are used as the writing instru - ments . The material used for the tips of regular ballpoint pens is stainless steel with nickel , which is ferromagnetic . There - fore , the tips can be manipulated by the motion of the mag - nets . We used neodymium magnets ; because the magnetic ﬂux density of such magnets is high , they have strong mag - netism . The neodymium magnets are round , with a 14 - mm diameter and a height of 30 mm ( Figure 3 ) . The magnetic ﬂux density is about 450 mT , and the adsorption power is about 12 kgf . Because the magnets are round in shape , the pen tips can move close to the center of the magnets . More - over , the tips and magnets are physically close if there is pa - per or a board between them , because neodymium magnets are stronger than ferrite magnets . In addition , we use 1 - mm - thick acrylic boards as the tops of the tables . The two electric actuators on the x and y axes are electric sliders ( Oriental Motor Co . , Ltd . , EZ limo EZSII ) , which are drives in ball screws . The movable ranges of these actuators are 500 mm on the x - axis and 300 mm on the y - axis , with a resolution of 0 . 01 mm and a maximum speed of 60 mm / s . The maximum thrust of an electric actuator is 43 N . In addi - tion , photomicrosensors ( Oriental Motor Co . , Ltd . , PAES - S ) are placed at the origin of each coordinate axis . The system corrects errors by periodically moving the table position back to the origin . A microcomputer ( ATMEGA328P ) is used to control the electric actuators . The system connects the microcomputer and controller using serial communication , and controls the Crowd & Creativity UIST’13 , October 8 – 11 , 2013 , St . Andrews , UK 205 actuators by sending the values of the motor’s direction of ro - tation and speed from the controller to the microcomputer in real time . The transmitted values are the advanced data input or the input values from the digital pens . The current proto - type includes both a controller and a microcomputer . How - ever , in the future , the system will run with a controller only for moving the motors . The values for controlling the motions of the ballpoint pen are calculated by the software on the controlling computer . Speciﬁcally , the software converts the data we want to draft into values for the motors’ direction of rotation and speed . By sending the converted data to the controllers of the desk - type devices , the system can control the electric actuators and allow users to draw pictures . System for Sensing Pens Using a digital pen , which allows the coordinates of the tip of the pen to be acquired , instead of a regular ballpoint pen , is an attempt at allowing users to draw pictures at any posi - tion the pen is placed , along with interactive control such as duplicating the picture being drawn . For the current system , we designed and developed the de - vices using digital pens ( MVPen Technologies . , Ltd . , MVP - 1 ) , that is , versions with the ability to interact . Infrared and ultrasonic sensors ( attached to the MVP - 1 ) placed on the desk detect the position of the tip of the pen on the paper , as well as events that allow the tip to stay in touch with the paper ( Figure 4 ) . The position of the pen is converted to coordinates for the controlling magnets , and the movement of the pen is linked to the movements of the magnets . Speciﬁcally , the system is able to identify the position at which the user starts drawing , and record the shapes that are drawn , as described below . Figure 4 . Infrared and ultrasonic sensors and Digital Pen . BASIC FUNCTIONS OF DEPEND By using this hardware , the system can guide the user’s pen on the paper in various interactive ways . For interactive rapid prototyping , we developed the basic functions for drawing basic ﬁgures , drawing input pictures , and duplicating pictures that have been drawn . Each function is selected using key input . Here , we describe these basic functions . Drawing Pre - set Data The ﬁrst function is drawing preset line pattern data . The data consist of a series of position information . When we use a regular ball point pen , we have to touch the pen on a certain point on the table to start drawing . In this case , there is a limitation in that the drawing pattern must be traversable . On the other hand , when we use a digital pen , we can point to the starting point of a drawing interactively . In the current implementation , we assigned the pattern data to several keys and change the drawing pattern using the keys . Drawing shapes In addition to preset data drawing , in this system , users can interactively determine what they want to draw in the drawing process . The second function is drawing basic shapes such as circles and lines . Usually , we use compasses and rulers to draw circles and lines . But our system allows users to draw various shapes using one device by moving magnets in con - stant directions and circles . To draw shapes with various lengths and diameters and at dif - ferent locations , the system uses digital pens . To draw a line , the user only needs to draw any two points on the paper . For example , after selecting the appropriate key for thelinedraw - ing function , the user draws a point at the location shown in point ( a ) in Figure 5 using a digital pen . Then , the user draws the next point ( b ) , as shown in Figure 5 , and the magnet moves to where the tip of the pen is positioned . The system then assists the user to draw the line by moving the tip of the pen toward the ﬁrst drawn point . After moving the tip from point ( b ) to point ( a ) with the help of the magnets , the user can draw new lines by drawing a new point at any place and placing the tip of the pen at point ( a ) as the second point . By repeating this process , a user can draw various shapes such as triangles and squares . Changing the distance between the two points modiﬁes the length . Figure 5 . Line drawing function : To draw a line , the user only needs to draw any two points on the paper . Similarly , to draw circles , the circle drawing function uses any two points . After selecting the circle drawing function via the appropriate key , the user draws the ﬁrst point at the center of the circle using the digital pen ( see point ( a ) in Fig - ure 6 ) , and the second point ( b ) shown in Figure 6 , which sets the radius of the circle . After drawing the second point , the device draws a perfect circle automatically by moving the pen . The system allows the user to change the position of the circle by changing the position of point ( a ) , and the size of the circle by changing the position of point ( b ) . Crowd & Creativity UIST’13 , October 8 – 11 , 2013 , St . Andrews , UK 206 Figure 6 . Circle drawing function . The functions of drawing circles and lines can be combined . Figure 7 shows a picture of a chair drawn using thelinedraw - ingfunction . Figure 7 . Users can combine functions for drawing circles and lines . Copy and Redraw Function In addition to the functions for sketching precise lines and cir - cles , we developed novel expressions by adding digital tech - nology to sketching . For example , thecopyandredrawfunc - tion duplicates drawn pictures by using digital pens ( Figure 8 ) . The computer records the distance from where the tip of the pen is released . Thus , when the user places the tip of the pen at any other point , the magnet automatically moves to the position of the tip , and the system allows the user to draw the recorded picture . Usually , it is difﬁcult to exactly redraw the same picture when sketching . However , in our system , which can duplicate pictures exactly , users can draw crowds of characters and sketches through trial and error by changing the forms bit by bit . Moreover , by recording the pen motions of experienced sketch artists , these motions can be used as guides and sup - port to improve the drawing skill of inexperienced users . Scaling We also provided a scaling function to change the size of drawn pictures when copying them . First , the system records the drawing process using functions such as the line and Figure 8 . Copy - and - redraw function : users can duplicate drawn pic - tures . circle drawing functions or freehand drawing using digital pens . After recording these processes and selecting thescal - ingfunction , users draw arrows to change the size of the pic - ture ( Figure 9 ) . The computer calculates the coordinates ac - cording to the changed size . After changing the paper and us - ing regular pens at the origin , the system allows the user to au - tomatically draw the pictures according to the changes in size with a single stroke of the pen . The system changes the size of the picture according to the length of the arrows . More - over , depending on the direction of the arrows , the change in size could be reversed . Figure 9 . Scaling function . The system changes the size of the picture according to the arrows drawn by users . ADVANCED USAGE EXAMPLES Adding Additional Arrangements A characteristic expression of our research is that users are allowed to add a hand - drawn arrangement to a drawing done by the computer . Speciﬁcally , the system uses the movement of a magnet as a guide for drawing . For example , when the system draws a circle using the movement of a magnet , the user can move the ballpoint pen slightly to add an arrange - ment manually . For instance , users can modify any line to make it dotted or wavy ( Figure 10 ) . Likewise , users can change the colors in the drawing by using different colored ballpoint pens ( Figure 11 ) . While repeating the same pen motions , users can try various arrangements such as different forms and colors in their quest for new artistic expressions . Crowd & Creativity UIST’13 , October 8 – 11 , 2013 , St . Andrews , UK 207 By using these techniques , this system supports the drawing of animations . Our system has the ability to draw the same picture repeatedly . Thus , while drawing a recorded picture , the user can add motions or change shapes partially by mov - ing some of the shapes in the picture . Figure 12 illustrates how this can be done . This feature is expected to lead to the efﬁcient creation of animations . Figure 10 . Adding an Arrangement : ( a ) wavy lines or ( b ) dotted lines . Figure 11 . users can change colors by using different - colored ballpoint pens . Communication Function Through communication between multiple devices , it is pos - sible to create a drawing as a team . As the sender draws a picture on paper with a digital pen , the receiver moves his / her pen in the same motion in real time ( Figure 13 ) . Furthermore , it is also possible to change the sender and re - ceiver . Communication between desk devices uses the Open - Sound Control protocol , with changes the sending or receiv - ing taking place via switches . Although the input requires a digital pen to send data , the receiver can use a regular ball - point pen . If the receiver draws with a regular pen , the pen must be placed at the origin at the start ( Figure 14 ) . In this way , users can modify and draw pictures in collab - oration with each other in real time . Moreover , because the motions of one person’s pen can be sent to other people , users can share drawings with each other . Figure 12 . Users can add animation by moving some of the shapes in the picture . Figure 13 . Communication function , ( b ) sender draws picture with dig - ital pen , and ( c ) receiver moves his / her pen in same motion . Figure 14 . Communication function for system using OpenSound Con - trol protocol . This function is useful not only for drawing shapes , but also for education by allowing teachers to send examples of pen - manship to their students . Crowd & Creativity UIST’13 , October 8 – 11 , 2013 , St . Andrews , UK 208 TECHNICAL EVALUATION We demonstrated this system at several events to obtain feed - back from users ( Figure 15 ) . We next discuss several techni - cal issues that we discovered through actions and experiences of these users . Figure 15 . Demonstration at the event . Attractive force of magnet We measured the attractive forces by pulling spring balances attached to the ballpoint pen while changing the height of the neodymium magnet . The force ranged from 0 . 9 to 1 . 15 N according to the height of the magnet , which was 5 to 40 mm , as shown in Figure 16 . This is the necessary force users need in order to separate the tip of a pen from the magnet . By using this force as a guide because it is necessary for the pen to adhere to the magnet we decided that the height of the magnet should be 30 mm . However , because some users did not understand how to ap - ply the pressure of the writing pen on the paper to achieve a magnetic force , they could not follow the motion of the mag - nets . In this case , by teaching them to grasp the pen lightly , they were able to determine the suitable pressure for writing . Accuracy We also examined the resolution of the pictures drawn using the devices . Because the magnets and pens are not completely ﬁxed , the pens deviate from the center of the magnets . The tips of the pens can move from one edge of the diameter to the other . In terms of precision , plotters , which can draw ﬁgures faith - fully , are superior to our system . However , because users have room to move to a certain extent , increasing the diame - ter of the magnet would be effective for guiding and adding additions to the drawing / sketch . To differentiate our system from digital fabrication tools such as plotters , we considered increasing the diameter of the magnet . Nevertheless , increasing the diameter of the magnet will de - crease the accuracy of the drawn ﬁgures . Speed of actuation The maximum speed of the electric actuators used in this re - search was 60 mm / s . We investigated whether ﬁve subjects could draw circles with a diameter of 230 mm while the ac - tuators moved at the maximum speed . We found that all the subjects were able to do this . Furthermore , we decided that the maximum speed for drawing using this device would be 60 mm / s . Drawing patterns This system allows users to draw with a single stroke . Users have to separate the pen from the magnet within the limit of the attractive force of the magnet . This is why we considered changing the line thickness by moving the devices along not only the x and y axes but also the z axis . In this way , users can feel a change in the attractive force of the pen and draw lines with various intensities . Moreover , if we attach actuators such as solenoids to pens and adopt functions where the tip of a pen slides in and out such as with DigitalRubbing [ 6 ] , the drawing will not be limited to a single consistent stroke . On the other hand , adding complex machinery for pens will create problems that make it hard to use . Figure 16 . Relationship between the attractive force and the height of the neodymium magnets . Size The size of the device is relative to the size of the actuators . In this research , we developed two devices with different sizes : one with a length of 300 mm and width of 500 mm , and the other with a length of 150 mm and width of 150 mm . Users that tried this system mentioned that this device is more suit - able for drawing long lines and large circles than drawing by hand , because it easily permits long strokes . However , to cre - ate miniature devices such as mobile devices , it would be ad - visable to use smaller actuators . Sensing In this research , digital pens with infrared and ultrasonic sen - sors were used for the stylus input . The detection range of the digital pens is a height of 210 mm and width of 297 mm . To increase this range , a possible improvement would be to attach a reﬂective material ( 3M , Scotchlite ) to a regular pen and detect the position of the pen using infrared cameras . Crowd & Creativity UIST’13 , October 8 – 11 , 2013 , St . Andrews , UK 209 CONCLUSION In this paper , we proposed dePENd as an augmented hand - writing system using the ferromagnetism of a ballpoint pen . By using electric actuators with a magnet , the system can control the pen’s motion dynamically . Moreover , by using a digital pen as an input interface , various functions such as copying - and - redrawing and scaling can be realized . As for the future work on this system , we plan to develop an intuitive interface for selecting functions during drawing . For example , by sensing the pressure exerted by the user on the pen , the device can assist when the pressure is weak and stop assisting when the pressure is strong . Moreover , we intend to extend the system by detecting the writing motion and pressure of the user and create interactive motions of the pen , speciﬁcally , moving the magnet back to the position where the tip of the pen was disconnected , and allowing the system to draw the picture that the user intends to draw by predicting their motion . In our research , we propose a method to support manual drawing by the computer . In the future , in order to create a new style of fabrication , we plan to develop various appli - cations by using haptic guides not only for drawing but also for cutting or carving in other tools such as cutting machines . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This research is supported by CREST , JST . REFERENCES 1 . Anusha Jayasiri , Katsuhiko Akahane , M . S . Haptic rnedering of dynamic image sequence using string based haptic device spidar . In Proceedingsofthe24thannual ACMsymposiumonUserinterfacesoftwareand technology ( 2012 ) . Virtual Reality Conference of ICAT - EGVE - EuroVR ( 2012 ) , DOI : 10 . 2312 / EGVE / JVRC12 / 009 - 015 , 10 . 17 - 19 . 2 . Bynoe , D . Drawing Machine . http : / / dbynoe . blogspot . ca / 2012 / 09 / drawing - machine . html . 3 . Gershenfeld , N . Fab : TheComingRevolutiononYour Desktop – fromPersonalComputerstoPersonal Fabrication . Basic Books , Inc . , New York , NY , USA , 2007 . 4 . hui Liao , J . Self - Portrait Machine . http : / / www . jenhui - liao . com / selfportraitmachine / . 5 . Igarashi , T . , Kawachiya , S . , Tanaka , H . , and Matsuoka , S . Pegasus : a drawing system for rapid geometric design . In CHI98CconferenceSummaryonHuman FactorsinComputingSystems , CHI ’98 , ACM ( New York , NY , USA , 1998 ) , 24 – 25 . 6 . Kim , H . , Kim , S . , Lee , B . , Pak , J . , Sohn , M . , Lee , G . , and Lee , W . Digital rubbing : playful and intuitive interaction technique for transferring a graphic image onto paper with pen - based computing . In CHI’08 ExtendedAbstractsonHumanFactorsinComputingSystems , CHI EA ’08 , ACM ( New York , NY , USA , 2008 ) , 2337 – 2342 . 7 . Lee , J . Haptic Intelligentsia . http : / / studiohomunculus . com / portfolio / haptic - intelligentsia - humanprototyping - machine . 8 . Lee , Y . J . , Zitnick , C . L . , and Cohen , M . F . Shadowdraw : real - time user guidance for freehand drawing . ACM Trans . Graph . 30 , 4 ( July 2011 ) , 27 : 1 – 27 : 10 . 9 . McDonald , K . a . Blind Self Portrait . The 3rd Annual NYCR Interactive Show ( 2012 ) . 10 . Moon , H . Suspended Pen on an XY Plotter : The Drawing Machine . http : / / unanything . com / . 11 . Mueller , S . , Lopes , P . , and Baudisch , P . Interactive construction : interactive fabrication of functional mechanical devices . In Proceedingsofthe25thannual ACMsymposiumonUserinterfacesoftwareandtechnology , UIST ’12 , ACM ( New York , NY , USA , 2012 ) , 599 – 606 . 12 . Pangaro , G . , Maynes - Aminzade , D . , and Ishii , H . The actuated workbench : computer - controlled actuation in tabletop tangible interfaces . In Proceedingsofthe15th annualACMsymposiumonUserinterfacesoftwareand technology , UIST ’02 , ACM ( New York , NY , USA , 2002 ) , 181 – 190 . 13 . Saund , E . , Fleet , D . , Larner , D . , and Mahoney , J . Perceptually - supported image editing of text and graphics . In Proceedingsofthe16thannualACM symposiumonUserinterfacesoftwareandtechnology , UIST ’03 , ACM ( New York , NY , USA , 2003 ) , 183 – 192 . 14 . Sensable . PHANTOM Omni . http : / / www . sensable . com / haptic - phantom - omni . htm . 15 . Sutherland , I . E . Sketchpad : a man - machine graphical communication system . In ProceedingsoftheMay 21 - 23 , 1963 , springjointcomputerconference , AFIPS ’63 ( Spring ) , ACM ( New York , NY , USA , 1963 ) , 329 – 346 . 16 . Weiss , M . , Wacharamanotham , C . , Voelker , S . , and Borchers , J . Fingerﬂux : near - surface haptic feedback on tabletops . In Proceedingsofthe24thannualACM symposiumonUserinterfacesoftwareandtechnology , UIST ’11 , ACM ( New York , NY , USA , 2011 ) , 615 – 620 . 17 . Willis , K . D . , Xu , C . , Wu , K . - J . , Levin , G . , and Gross , M . D . Interactive fabrication : new interfaces for digital fabrication . In Proceedingsoftheﬁfthinternational conferenceonTangible , embedded , andembodied interaction , TEI ’11 , ACM ( New York , NY , USA , 2011 ) , 69 – 72 . 18 . YOSHIDA , S . , NOMA , H . , and HOSAKA , K . Proactive desk ii : Development of a new multi - object haptic display using a linear induction motor . IEEEVR2006 ( 2006 ) . 19 . Zoran , A . , and Paradiso , J . A . Freed : a freehand digital sculpting tool . In ProceedingsoftheSIGCHI ConferenceonHumanFactorsinComputingSystems , CHI ’13 , ACM ( New York , NY , USA , 2013 ) , 2613 – 2616 . Crowd & Creativity UIST’13 , October 8 – 11 , 2013 , St . Andrews , UK 210