Article A Basal Ganglia Circuit Sufﬁcient to Guide Birdsong Learning Highlights d Optogenetic excitation and inhibition of dopaminergic axon terminals in songbirds d Ventral tegmental area to basal ganglia pathway is sufﬁcient to guide song learning d Activation and inhibition have opposing effects on song learning d Optogenetically learned changes in song are temporally and spectrally precise Authors Lei Xiao , Gaurav Chattree , Francisco Garcia Oscos , Mou Cao , Matthew J . Wanat , Todd F . Roberts Correspondence todd . roberts @ utsouthwestern . edu In Brief The role of basal ganglia ( BG ) in learning motor behaviors is poorly understood . Using optogenetic manipulation of axon terminals in singing songbirds , Xiao et al . demonstrate that the ventral tegmental area to BG pathway is sufﬁcient to guide song learning . Xiao et al . , 2018 , Neuron 98 , 208 – 221 April 4 , 2018 ª 2018 Elsevier Inc . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . neuron . 2018 . 02 . 020 Neuron Article A Basal Ganglia Circuit Sufﬁcient to Guide Birdsong Learning Lei Xiao , 1 Gaurav Chattree , 1 Francisco Garcia Oscos , 1 Mou Cao , 2 Matthew J . Wanat , 3 and Todd F . Roberts 1 , 4 , * 1 Department of Neuroscience , University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center , Dallas , TX 75390 , USA 2 Department of Pediatrics , University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center , Dallas , TX 75390 , USA 3 Department of Biology , Neuroscience Institute , University of Texas at San Antonio , San Antonio , TX 78249 , USA 4 Lead Contact * Correspondence : todd . roberts @ utsouthwestern . edu https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . neuron . 2018 . 02 . 020 SUMMARY Learning vocal behaviors , like speech and birdsong , is thought to rely on continued performance evalua - tion . Whether candidate performance evaluation cir - cuits in the brain are sufﬁcient to guide vocal learning is not known . Here , we test the sufﬁciency of VTA projections to the vocal basal ganglia in singing zebra ﬁnches , a songbird species that learns to produce a complex and stereotyped multi - syllabic courtship song during development . We optogenetically manipulate VTA axon terminals in singing birds contingent on how the pitch of an individual song syllable is naturally performed . We ﬁnd that optical inhibition and excitation of VTA terminals are each sufﬁcient to reliably guide learned changes in song . Inhibition and excitation have opponent effects on future performances of targeted song syllables , consistent with positive and negative reinforcement of performance outcomes . These ﬁndings deﬁne a central role for reinforcement mechanisms in learning vocalizations and demonstrate minimal circuit ele - ments for learning vocal behaviors . INTRODUCTION The ability to imitate vocal behaviors is exceedingly rare , with humans , songbirds , and parrots providing canonical examples of this remarkable trait ( Doupe and Kuhl , 1999 ; Konopka and Roberts , 2016a , 2016b ; Petkov and Jarvis , 2012 ) . Fluent produc - tion of learned vocalizations requires continual evaluation of performances using auditory feedback . Changes in neuronal activity , indicating whether vocal performances are well and / or poorly performed relative to performance goals , may provide general mechanisms for maintaining and shaping vocalizations ( Fee and Goldberg , 2011 ; Gadagkar et al . , 2016 ) , as well as other skilled behaviors . Indeed , circuits involved in learning and pro - duction of behaviors are tightly linked with those associated with performance evaluation ( den Ouden et al . , 2012 ; Desroch - ers et al . , 2015 ; Frank et al . , 2004 ; Hosp et al . , 2011 ; Lee and Tomblin , 2012 ; Leemburg et al . , 2018 ; Mandelblat - Cerf et al . , 2014 ; Smith and Graybiel , 2016 ; Stephenson - Jones et al . , 2016 ; Yttri and Dudman , 2016 ) . However , it is not known whether evaluative signals indicating better performances or worse performances are sufﬁcient to guide adaptive changes in vocal behaviors , or how such signals are implemented in the brain . Zebra ﬁnches provide a useful model in which to test these questions because they learn a single courtship song during development and use extensive daily practice to maintain expert performance of this song in adulthood ( Doupe and Kuhl , 1999 ; Immelmann , 1969 ; Price , 1979 ) . Cortical ( Bottjer and Altenau , 2010 ; Bottjer et al . , 1984 ; London and Clayton , 2008 ; Mandel - blat - Cerf et al . , 2014 ; Roberts et al . , 2012 , 2017 ) and basal ganglia ( Ali et al . , 2013 ; Brainard and Doupe , 2000 ; Haesler et al . , 2007 ; Hoffmann et al . , 2016 ; Scharff and Nottebohm , 1991 ) circuits have been uniquely implicated in song learning , and neurons signaling aspects of performance evaluation have been identiﬁed in at least three regions in the songbird brain , including auditory and premotor cortical circuits ( Achiro et al . , 2017 ; Keller and Hahnloser , 2009 ; Mandelblat - Cerf et al . , 2014 ) and in the ventral tegmental area ( VTA ) ( Gadagkar et al . , 2016 ) . Here , we focus on the function of VTA neurons projecting to the striatopallidal vocal basal ganglia ( Area X ) . In vertebrates , the basal ganglia are thought to play a central role in the volitional control of skilled motor behaviors ( Dhawale et al . , 2017 ; Dudman and Krakauer , 2016 ; Graybiel and Grafton , 2015 ; Hikosaka et al . , 1998 ; Jin and Costa , 2015 ; Yttri and Dudman , 2016 ) . The stria - tum is a main input hub of the basal ganglia , and striatal medium spiny neurons ( MSNs ) integrate inputs from the cortex and from dopaminergic neurons in VTA and substantia nigra pars com - pacta ( SNc ) ( Tritsch and Sabatini , 2012 ) . Divergent striatal MSN output pathways play integral roles in the execution of mo - tor behaviors by supporting action initiation , action selection , and action vigor ( Cui et al . , 2013 ; Jin and Costa , 2010 ; Jin et al . , 2014 ; Nelson and Kreitzer , 2014 ; Panigrahi et al . , 2015 ; Tecuapetla et al . , 2016 ; Wall et al . , 2013 ) . Phasic changes in dopaminergic signaling are also sufﬁcient to directly inﬂuence ongoing movements ( Howe and Dombeck , 2016 ; Panigrahi et al . , 2015 ) . In addition to their motor role , dopaminergic inputs to the basal ganglia also carry information about reward and aversion and have been shown to encode both positive and negative reward prediction errors ( RPEs ) ( Bromberg - Martin et al . , 2010 ; Cohen et al . , 2012 ; Eshel et al . , 2015 ; Frank et al . , 2004 ; Gadagkar et al . , 2016 ; Graybiel , 2008 ; Hikosaka et al . , 2006 ; Hollerman 208 Neuron 98 , 208 – 221 , April 4 , 2018 ª 2018 Elsevier Inc . and Schultz , 1998 ; Hong and Hikosaka , 2011 ; Howard et al . , 2017 ; Howe and Dombeck , 2016 ; Montague et al . , 1996 ; Morales and Margolis , 2017 ; Reynolds et al . , 2001 ; Schultz , 2015 ; Schultz et al . , 1993 , 1997 ; Watabe - Uchida et al . , 2017 ; Wise , 2004 ) , a key component of reinforcement learning theory and associated temporal difference and actor - critic models ( Barto , 1995 ; Bush and Mosteller , 1951a , 1951b ; Glimcher , 2011 ; Houk et al . , 1995 ; Montague et al . , 1996 ; Rescorla and Wagner , 1972 ; Suri and Schultz , 1998 ; Sutton and Barto , 1981 , 1998 ) . These ﬁndings raise the possibility that dopaminergic in - puts to the striatum may also play a role in learning of ﬁne motor skills involved in vocal performance ( Hoffmann et al . , 2016 ) . Indeed , lesion and pharmacological inactivation studies in song - birds indicate that the output of the vocal basal ganglia circuitry is important for initial song learning ( Bottjer et al . , 1984 ; Scharff and Nottebohm , 1991 ) and continued vocal plasticity ( Andalman and Fee , 2009 ; Brainard and Doupe , 2000 ; Charlesworth et al . , 2012 ; Olveczky et al . , 2005 ; Tanaka et al . , 2016 ; Warren et al . , 2011 ) . Moreover , inputs from the VTA encode ‘‘performance errors , ’’ a signal thought to reﬂect whether songs were correctly or incorrectly performed relative to performance goals ( Gadag - kar et al . , 2016 ) . However , the functional signiﬁcance of these evaluative sig - nals in vocal learning is not known , and several fundamental questions regarding the function of VTA projections to the basal ganglia are left unresolved . For example , are phasic changes in VTA activity sufﬁcient to instruct changes in vocal performance ? Does VTA have direct effects on ongoing song performances , or primarily function to instruct changes in future performances ? Are evaluative signals from VTA sufﬁcient to guide learning of an individual vocal parameter even when embedded within a larger vocal sequence ? To address these and other related questions , we developed axon - targeted opto - genetic methods to excite or inhibit VTA axon terminals in the vocal basal ganglia of freely singing zebra ﬁnches . On - line assessment of the fundamental frequency ( pitch ) of a targeted song syllable permitted precise trial - to - trial targeting of optical manipulations based on natural variation in syllable pitch . We ﬁnd that activation or inhibition of VTA axon terminals is sufﬁ - cient to guide learned changes in the future performance of single song syllables within the birds’ larger polysyllabic song . Moreover , activation and inhibition guide rapid and reliable pitch learning in opposing directions . These ﬁndings deﬁne a minimal synaptic circuit for vocal learning and highlight unex - pected precision in how the VTA - basal ganglia pathway can guide changes to vocal behaviors . RESULTS Pitch - Contingent Auditory Feedback Negatively Reinforces Learned Changes in Vocal Pitch We ﬁrst tested the ability of zebra ﬁnches to adaptively modify the pitch of a song syllable in a negative reinforcement learning task ( Ali et al . , 2013 ; Andalman and Fee , 2009 ; Roberts et al . , 2017 ; Tumer and Brainard , 2007 ) . Zebra ﬁnches practice their song hundreds to thousands of times each day and exhibit a small amount of natural , trial - to - trial variability in how they pro - duce the pitch of individual syllables . Pitch - contingent auditory feedback ( pCAF ; Figures 1A – 1F ) triggers playback of white noise when the pitch of a syllable is below or above an experimenter - deﬁned threshold . Brief pulses of white noise playback are thought to function as an aversive cue , perhaps perceived as an error in vocal performance ( Tumer and Brainard , 2007 ) . Birds rapidly learned to shift the pitch of the pCAF - targeted syllable throughout the day , exhibiting signiﬁcant increases in the pitch of the targeted syllable and signiﬁcant decreases in the number of syllables that fell below the threshold for white noise playback ( Figures 1E and 1F ) . These ﬁndings conﬁrm the ability of zebra ﬁnches to rapidly and selectively modify their song in a negative reinforcement task . Optogenetic Manipulation of VTA Terminals in the Songbird Vocal Basal Ganglia ( Area X ) Learning to shift the pitch of an individual syllable embedded in a complex song motif is a form of motor skill learning that may depend on positive and / or negative reinforcement signals from VTA to Area X ( Gadagkar et al . , 2016 ) ( Figures 1G and 1H ) . To test whether phasic increases or decreases in VTA AX activity are sufﬁcient to guide song learning , we sought to opto - genetically manipulate VTA AX axon terminals in freely singing birds . To enhance axonal distribution and membrane trafﬁcking of virally expressed opsins , the intracellular targeting sequence of neurexin 1 a was attached to the C - terminal end of channelr - hodopsin ( ChR2 ) or archaerhodopsin ( ArchT ) , resulting in ad - eno - associated virus ( AAV ) viral constructs referred to here as axChR2 and axArchT . Targeted viral injections into VTA revealed that we could efﬁciently infect dopaminergic VTA AX neurons and robustly label their terminals in Area X ( Figures 2A , 2B , S1 , and S2 ) . We next tested our ability to optically manipulate axon termi - nals of VTA AX neurons and the phasic release of DA . To test whether optical activation or inhibition of axon terminals in Area X was sufﬁcient to control dopamine release , we made fast scanning cyclic voltammetric recordings from Area X several weeks following injection of either AAV1 - axChR2 or AAV1 - axArchT into VTA ( Figures 2C – 2J ) . We prepared brain slices maintaining axonal connections between VTA and Area X and used electrical stimulation of VTA somata to assess the electrochemical signature for dopamine in zebra ﬁnch Area X . We found that a 100 - ms pulse of blue ( 470 nm ) light was sufﬁcient to reliably evoke dopamine release from VTA AX axon terminals expressing axChR2 ( recordings from ﬁve birds ; Fig - ures 2C – 2F ) . In birds expressing axArchT , we paired electrical stimulation of VTA somata with light inhibition of terminals in Area X in order to test the efﬁcacy of axon - terminal optical inhi - bition . We found that a 100 - ms pulse of green ( 540 nm ) light was sufﬁcient to signiﬁcantly suppress electrically evoked dopamine release in area X ( Figures 2G – 2J ) . Together , these ﬁndings indi - cate that brief optogenetic excitation or inhibition of VTA AX axon terminals is sufﬁcient to control phasic dopamine signaling in the songbird basal ganglia . Although these in vitro experiments cannot reveal the full complement of effects our optogenetic manipulations may have on downstream circuits in vivo , they nonetheless open the door for testing the role of VTA AX dopami - nergic projections in shaping performance of learned vocal behaviors . Neuron 98 , 208 – 221 , April 4 , 2018 209 Phasic Stimulation of VTA Axon Terminals Guides Bidirectional Learned Changes in Vocal Pitch To test whether manipulation of VTA AX axon terminals is sufﬁ - cient to guide learned changes in the pitch of a targeted syllable , we ﬁrst used closed - loop , pitch - contingent optogenetic stimula - tion in freely singing adult zebra ﬁnches . Unlike pCAF experi - ments , these experiments do not rely on playback of an aversive auditory cue , but rather test whether optogenetic manipulation alone is sufﬁcient to guide learning ( Figure 3A ) . We implanted adult male zebra ﬁnches with ﬁber optic cables overlying Area X 6 – 12 weeks after bilateral injections of axChR2 into VTA ( Fig - ures 3B and 3C ) . Birds were allowed to acclimate for up to a week following implantation of ﬁber optic cables , as measured by a return in their normal daily singing behavior . On the ﬁrst A B C D E H G F Figure 1 . Pitch - Contingent Auditory Feedback Guides Pitch Learning ( A ) Schematic of experimental design for closed - loop pitch - contingent auditory feedback . ( B ) Sonogram from the bird used in the pCAF experiment illustrated in ( C ) and ( D ) . White noise ( WN ) bursts were delivered over syllable ‘d’ during lower pitch variants . ‘iabbcd’ indicates the syllables that comprise the bird’s motif and the introductory syllable . Arrowhead indicates a 5 - ms segment where the pitch of target syllable ‘d’ was measured ; black box indicates target syllable ; red line marks 100 - ms playback of white noise . ( C ) Plot of the pitch of syllable ‘d’ across 1 , 500 motifs before and during pCAF ; each point corresponds to one rendition of the syllable . Closed - loop targeting of WN to lower pitch variants ( red dots , hit ) , but not higher pitch variants ( black dots , escape ) , resulted in an increase in the number escape of trials . ( D ) Plot of the running average of the pitch and hit rate ( contingency ) during the day of closed - loop pCAF illustrates the rapid increases in running average of pitch ( black line ) and concomitant decreases in contingency percentage ( red line ) . Each point corresponds to a single syllable rendition and shaded region indicates ±1 SD ; gray box indicates the baseline period before WN was delivered . ( E ) Changes in running average of pitch during baseline day ( open ) and WN day ( ﬁlled ) in 7 birds in which WN was delivered to lower pitch variants ( downward pointing triangles ) . WN delivering elicited increases in the running average of pitch ( p = 0 . 016 , n = 7 , Wilcoxon matched - pairs signed - rank test ) . ( F ) Changes in contingency percentage during baseline day ( open ) and WN day ( ﬁlled ) in 7 birds in which WN was delivered to lower pitch variants . WN elicited decreases in the contingency ( p = 0 . 015 , n = 7 , Wilcoxon matched - pairs signed - rank test ) . ( G ) Hypothetical source of instructive signal in natural pitch learning . ( H ) General hypothesis tested in this paper : phasic increases and decreases in VTA neurons projecting to Area X encode positive and negative reinforcement signals that are each sufﬁcient to guide song learning . 210 Neuron 98 , 208 – 221 , April 4 , 2018 B A C D E F G H I J Figure 2 . Optogenetic Manipulation of VTA Terminals in Singing Zebra Finches ( A ) Schematic showing injection of AAV1 - CAG - axChR2 into VTA . ( B ) Left image : representative coronal section through VTA shows that most neurons infected with AAV1 - CAG - axChR2 - 2a - YFP are TH positive and located in ventralandventrolateralportionsofVTA . Scalebar , 100 m m . ( Middleimage : representativeparasagittalsectionshowsthatareaXwaswellinnervatedwithaxonal terminals ( green ) arisingfromVTA . Dashed - linecircleoutlinestheborderofAreaXwithdarkerstainingofTH ( red ) relativetothesurroundingbasalgangliaregion . Scale bar , 300 m m ; D , dorsal ; L , lateral ; R , rostral . Right image : enlarged image from Area X shows that axChR2 - positive axons ( green ) are overlapping with TH staining ( red ) . Scale bar , 20 m m . ( C ) Schematic showing projection - speciﬁc optical stimulation of VTA terminals in Area X and electrical stimulation of VTA in axChR2 + birds . ( D ) Representative voltammetric color plot of dopamine ( DA ) release in Area X following electrical stimulation of either VTA ( n = 2 ) or Area X ( n = 3 ) within parasagittal brain slices . Electrical stimulation of either VTA or Area X gave rise to comparable voltammetry proﬁles ( data not shown ) . Black arrow , 50 – 100 ms , 50 – 60 Hz of electrical stimulation . ( E ) Representative voltammetric color plot of DA release in Area X following optical stimulation of VTA terminals in Area X within parasagittal brain slices of axChR2 + birds ( n = 5 ) . Blue arrow , 100 ms , 470 nm . ( F ) Background - subtracted cyclic voltammogram from electrical - ( E . S . ) and optical ( O . S . ) - stimulated DA release in the Area X , ex vivo . Single light pulse stimulation ( O . S . blue , 100 ms , n = 5 birds ) produced signature DA signals ( E . S . , black , 50 – 100 ms , 50 – 60 Hz , n = 5 ) . Scale bar , 200 mV ; shaded region indicates SEM . ( G ) SchematicshowinginjectionofAAV1 - CAG - axArchTintoVTAandprojection - speciﬁcinhibitionofVTAterminalsintheAreaXpairedwithelectricalstimulation of VTA . ( H ) Representative voltammetric color plots of dopamine ( DA ) release in Area X following electrical stimulation of VTA within a parasagittal brain slice of either control ( n = 2 ) or axArchT + ( n = 3 ) birds . Black arrow , 50 ms , 60 Hz of electrical stimulation . ( I ) Representative voltammetric color plots of DA release in Area X when electrical stimulation of VTA is paired with optical inhibition of VTA terminals in axArchT + birds ( n = 3 , green arrow , 100 ms , 540 nm ) . ( J ) Averaged DA responses to electrical stimulation ( E . S . ) of VTA with ( black ) or without ( orange ) optical inhibition ( O . I . ) of VTA terminals in the Area X of axArchT + birds ( n = 3 ) as measured by fast - scan cyclic voltammetry ( FSCV ) . Scale bar , 2 s , 2 nA ; shaded region indicates SEM . Insert panel : optical inhibition resulted in reduced peak DA levels evoked by electrical stimulation ( p = 0 . 0002 ; paired t test ) . See also Figures S1 and S2 . Neuron 98 , 208 – 221 , April 4 , 2018 211 A D I B C E F G H Figure 3 . Pitch - Contingent Optical Excitation of VTA - Area X Terminals Is Sufﬁcient to Bidirectionally Guide Pitch Learning ( A ) Schematic of closed - loop pitch - contingent optogenetic experimental paradigm . ( B ) A zebra ﬁnch with optical cannula bilaterally implanted over Area X . ( C ) Parasagittal section shows implantation track of ﬁber optic overlying Area X and anterior to lateral magnocellular nucleus of the anterior nidopallium ( lMAN ) . Dashed lines outline both the border of Area X and lMAN . Scale bar , 300 m m . ( D ) Sonogram from the bird used in the closed - loop optical stimulation experiment illustrated in ( E ) and ( F ) . Light pulses ( (cid:1) 460 nm , 100 ms ) were delivered over syllable ‘c’ during lower pitch variants ( hit ) and not during higher pitch variants ( escape ) . Scale bar , 100 ms . ( E ) Plot of the pitch of syllable ‘c’ across 1 , 000 motifs before and during optical stimulation ; each point corresponds to one rendition of the syllable . Closed - loop optical stimulation of target syllable ‘c’ to lower pitch variants ( blue dots ) , but not higher pitch variants ( black dots ) , resulted in an increase in the number of hit trials . ( F ) Plot of the running average of the pitch and hit rate ( contingency ) during the day of closed - loop optical stimulation illustrates the rapid decreases in running average of pitch ( black line ) and concomitant increases in contingency percentage ( blue line ) . Each point corresponds to one rendition of the syllable ; gray box indicates the baseline period before optical stimulation . ( G ) Changes in running average of pitch during baseline day ( open ) and stimulation day ( ﬁlled ) for experiments in which optical stimulation was delivered to variants withhigher pitch ( upward pointing triangleswithblack outline , n = 4 ) or lower pitch ( downward pointing triangles , n = 3 ) , resulting insigniﬁcant upward or downward shift in pitch ( p = 0 . 016 , n = 7 , Wilcoxon matched - pairs signed - rank test ) . Changes in running average of pitch are expressed in units of the SD of the last baseline session ( Z score ) . ( H ) Closed - loop optical stimulation of syllables with either higher pitch ( upward pointing triangles with black outline , n = 4 ) or lower pitch ( downward pointing triangles , n = 3 ) elicitedincreases incontingency ( 33 . 81 % ±2 . 92 % to66 . 94 % ±6 . 47 % , p = 0 . 016 , n = 7 , Wilcoxonmatched - pairs signed - ranktest ) . Contingency on baseline day ( open ) and stimulation day ( ﬁlled ) was determined according to the same preset threshold for each individual experiment . ( I ) Closed - loopopticalillumination ofeither higher pitchvariants ( up ) orlower pitchvariants ( down ) elicited upward ( p = 0 . 0045 ) or downward ( p = 0 . 015 , unpaired t test with Welch’s correction ) shift in running average of pitch in axChR2 birds ( ﬁlled , up n = 4 , down n = 3 ) , but not in GFP birds ( open , up n = 3 , down n = 3 ) . Error bars indicate SEM . See also Figure S3 . 212 Neuron 98 , 208 – 221 , April 4 , 2018 day of the experiment , birds were continuously recorded to establish baseline pitch levels for the syllable to be targeted . The next morning , birds received optogenetic stimulation contin - gent on how they sang their syllable during individual song mo - tifs . We targeted stimulation to natural syllable variants that fell within the lowest third of all pitch variants . Illumination onset occurred within 25 ms ( 24 ± 0 . 4 ms ) of the syllable - pitch mea - surement and persisted for 100 ms , a temporal window overlap - ping with the production of the targeted song syllable . Birds readily sang through optical pulses and did not appear to have any overt changes in their singing behavior ( Figure 3D ) . We found rapid and reliable changes in the pitch of the tar - geted syllable following pitch - contingent optogenetic stimula - tion . For the experiments shown in Figures 3D – 3F , we targeted optogenetic stimulation only to those renditions in which the bird sang syllable ‘c’ with a pitch lower than 875 Hz ( Figures 3D – 3F ) . The pitch of syllable c decreased by 17 . 1 Hz , 1 . 2 times the SD of its baseline values , during the ﬁrst day of stimulation ( Figure 3F ; see Figure S3 for ﬁber optic targeting controls ) . Correspondingly , as the bird learned to shift the pitch of the tar - geted syllable , the number of syllables that reached threshold for light stimulation increased by a third , from 46 % to 79 % . Across experiments , we found that targeting optogenetic stimulation to syllable renditions in the lower third of the normal pitch range resulted in decreases in the average pitch of that syllable , consistent with stimulation functioning as a positive reinforce - ment signal ( downward pointing triangles always correspond to illumination targeting lower pitch variants and upward pointing triangles correspond to illumination targeting higher pitch vari - ants ; Figure 3G ) . The running average of pitch decreased by 1 . 39 ± 0 . 25 SDs during the stimulation day while it changed only 0 . 02 ± 0 . 06 SDs during the baseline day ( Figure 3G ) . The rapid decreases in syllable pitch observed following optogenetic stimulation to lower - pitch syllable renditions stand in sharp contrast to the rapid increases in pitch seen in our pCAF exper - iments ( Figures 1C – 1F ) . These results support the idea that phasic activation of VTA AX axon terminals functions as a teach - ing signal that guides song learning by positively reinforcing associated performances . To test whether stimulation of VTA AX axon terminals is sufﬁ - cient to guide bidirectional changes in vocal performance , we targeted light stimulation to syllable renditions sung within the highest third of all pitch variants , rather than in the lowest third . We found that targeting optogenetic stimulation to syllable ren - ditions in the higher third of the normal pitch range resulted in substantial increases in the pitch of that syllable throughout the training day ( upward pointing triangles , Figure 3G ) . The running average of pitch increased by 0 . 84 ± 0 . 02 SDs during the stimulation day , while it changed only (cid:3) 0 . 007 ± 0 . 035 SDs during the baseline day ( Figure 3G ) . These ﬁndings suggest that optogenetic stimulation of VTA AX axon terminals can guide learned increases or decreases in syllable pitch and further sup - port the idea that phasic activation of VTA AX axon terminals is sufﬁcient to positively reinforce associated performances . Consistent with this , as birds learned to shift the pitch of the tar - geted syllable during the stimulation day , the light stimulation contingency increased for all birds , regardless of targeting higher or lower pitch variants ( Figure 3H ) . To test whether changes in syllable pitch reﬂect a non - speciﬁc effect on song behavior , we conducted identical pitch - contingent optical manipulations in birds injected in VTA with viral constructs only expressing GFP . Targeting light ﬂashes to GFP - expressing VTA AX axon terminals during performance of either the higher or lower pitch syllable variants did not drive pitch learning and re - sulted in signiﬁcantly smaller changes in pitch than optogenetic activation ( Figure 3I ) . These results show that phasic activation of VTA inputs to Area X is sufﬁcient to reliably guide rapid pitch learning and support the idea that phasic increases in activity signal better than expected performances outcomes ( Gadagkar et al . , 2016 ) . Inhibition of VTA Axon Terminals Is Sufﬁcient to Negatively Reinforce Changes in Vocal Pitch The idea that VTA dopamine neurons encode a bidirectional teaching signal , capable of reﬂecting positive and negative eval - uation of performance outcomes , is an essential component of prediction - error - based learning models ( Chang et al . , 2016 ; Glimcher , 2011 ; Montague et al . , 1996 ; Schultz et al . , 1997 ) . Therefore , causal evidence showing that phasic decreases in activity are also sufﬁcient to guide learning , and do so in a manner consistent with negative performance errors , is neces - sary to support the role of reinforcement learning models in vocal learning . To examine this , we tested whether pitch - contingent optical inhibition of VTA AX axon terminals was sufﬁcient to guide learned changes in song . We implanted adult male zebra ﬁnches with ﬁber optic cables overlying Area X 6 – 12 weeks after bilateral injections of axArchT into VTA . On the experimental day , we tar - geted inhibition to all but the highest or lowest pitch variants of an individual syllable in the birds’ polysyllabic song ( upper or lower 60 % – 90 % of variants were yoked to optical inhibition ; see STAR Methods for description of contingencies ) . In contrast to optical activation of VTA AX axon terminals , we found that optical inhibi - tion resulted in rapid shifts in syllable pitch , which mirrored those seen in birds exposed to a negative reinforcement pCAF task ( Figures 4A – 4C , 1C , and 1D ) . For the experiments shown in Fig - ures 4A – 4C , we targeted optogenetic inhibition to renditions in which the bird sang syllable ‘e’ with a pitch lower than 595 Hz ( orange dots in Figure 4B ) . The pitch of syllable ‘e’ increased by 7 . 5 Hz , 0 . 72 times the SD of its baseline values , over the course of a single experimental day and the stimulation contin - gencyratedecreasedby 19 . 5 % ( Figure 4C ) . Acrossexperiments , we found that targeting optogenetic inhibition to lower pitch ren - ditions resulted in rapid and substantial increases in the pitch of the targeted syllable . The running average of pitch increased by 1 . 08 ± 0 . 15 SDs during the experimental day while it changed only 0 . 11 ± 0 . 18 SDs during the baseline day ( Figure 4D ) . More - over , we found that optogenetic inhibition of VTA AX axon termi - nals was sufﬁcient to guide bidirectional changes in the pitch of song syllables in a manner consistent with negative reinforce - ment signals . Targeting inhibition to low pitch variants resulted in birds increasing the pitch of their song syllable , while targeting inhibition to high pitch variants resulted in birds decreasing the pitch of their song syllable ( targeting high pitch variants , upward facing triangles : running average of pitch decreased by 1 . 36 ± 0 . 2 SDs during the experimental day while it only changed Neuron 98 , 208 – 221 , April 4 , 2018 213 0 . 33 ± 0 . 08 SDs during the baseline day , p = 0 . 016 , n = 7 , Wilcoxon matched - pairs signed - rank test ; Figure 4D ) . Consistent with this , as birds learned to shift the pitch of the targeted syllable during the stimulation day , the light stimulation contingency decreased for all birds , regardless of targeting higher or lower pitch variants ( Figure 4E ) . Lastly , we found that birds expressing only GFP did not exhibit any shifts in the pitch following identical pitch - contingent illumination over Area X and resulted in signiﬁ - cantly smaller changes in pitch than optogenetic inhibition ( Figure 4F ) . These results demonstrate that optical inhibition of VTA AX axon terminals is sufﬁcient to guide changes in behavior consistent with negative reinforcement of vocal performances . Together with our optogenetic stimulation results , these ﬁndings provide strong causal support for VTA AX dopamine neurons en - coding positive and negative reinforcement signals that are each sufﬁcient to guide rapid and selective learned changes to song . Optogenetic Manipulation of VTA Axon Terminals Guides Changes in Future Performances of Song Reinforcement signals could shape changes in song by directly inﬂuencing motor performances ( Howard et al . , 2017 ; Howe and Dombeck , 2016 ; Panigrahi et al . , 2015 ; Yttri and Dudman , 2016 ) or through evaluation of performance outcomes ( Gadag - kar et al . , 2016 ) . We examined these ideas in several ways . First , if activation or inhibition had direct effects on syllable pitch , we A B C D E F Figure 4 . Pitch - Contingent Inhibition of VTA - Area X Terminals Is Sufﬁcient to Aversively Guide Pitch Learning ( A ) Sonogram from the bird used in the closed - loop optical inhibition experiment illustrated in ( B ) and ( C ) . Pitch - contingent optical inhibition does not induce systematic changes in either song or syllable structure . Spectrograms of a song before ( top ) and during ( bottom ) an experiment in which light pulse ( (cid:1) 520 nm , 100 ms , orange line ) was delivered over syllable ‘e’ during lower pitch variants . Scale bar , 100 ms . ( B ) Plotofthepitchofsyllable‘e’across1 , 701motifsbeforeandduringopticalinhibition ; eachpointcorrespondstoonerenditionofsyllable . Closed - loop optical inhibition of target syllable ‘e’ to lower pitch variants ( orange dots ) , but not higher pitch variants ( black dots ) , resulted in a decrease in the number of hit trials . ( C ) Plot of the running average of the pitch and hit rate ( contingency ) during the day of closed - loop optical inhibition illustrates the rapid increases in running averageofpitch ( blackline ) andconcomitantdecreasesincontingencypercentage ( orangeline ) . Eachpointcorrespondstoonerenditionofthesyllable ; graybox indicates the baseline period before optical inhibition . ( D ) Changes in running average of pitch during baseline day ( open ) and inhibition day ( ﬁlled ) for experiments in which optical inhibition was delivered to variants with higher pitch ( upward pointing triangles with black outline , n = 3 ) or lower pitch ( downward pointing triangles , n = 4 ) , resulting in signiﬁcant upward or downward shift in pitch ( p = 0 . 016 , n = 7 , Wilcoxon matched - pairs signed - rank test ) . Changes in running average of pitch are expressed in units of the SD of the last baseline session ( Z score ) . ( E ) Closed - loop optical inhibition of syllables with either higher pitch ( upward pointing triangles with black outline , n = 3 ) or lower pitch ( downward pointing triangles , n = 4 ) elicitedincreasesincontingency ( p = 0 . 016 , n = 7 , Wilcoxonmatched - pairssigned - ranktest ) . Contingencyonbaselineday ( open ) andstimulation day ( ﬁlled ) was determined according to the same preset threshold for each individual experiment . ( F ) Closed - loop optical illumination of syllables with either higher pitch ( up ) or lower pitch ( down ) elicited downward ( p = 0 . 014 ) or upward ( p = 0 . 014 , unpaired ttestwithWelch’scorrection ) shiftinrunningaverageofpitchinaxArchTbirds ( ﬁlled , upn = 3 , downn = 4 ) , butnotinGFP + birds ( open , upn = 3 , downn = 4 ) . Error bars indicate SEM . See also Figure S3 . 214 Neuron 98 , 208 – 221 , April 4 , 2018 would expect immediate and consistent effects on syllable behavior . Instead , we found accumulation of changes over the course of the day , consistent with iterative learning from an instructive signal ( Figures 3F and 4C ) . Second , direct motor ef - fects on syllable pitch would likely result in overall increase in variance of pitch as optogenetically manipulated syllables diverge from the normal distribution of pitch . We found that the coefﬁcient of variation of syllable pitch was not altered by our phasic activation or inhibition of VTA AX axon terminals ( Figures 5A and 5B ) . This ﬁnding indicates that activation or inhibition of a subset of pitch variants resulted in learned changes across the entire distribution of pitch variants and supports the idea that learning resulted from incremental effects on future perfor - mances . Third , phasic activation or inhibition of VTA AX axon ter - minals could result in direct motor effects on non - targeted vocal parameters ( parameters other than pitch ) . To test this , we quan - tiﬁed several syllable performance parameters from interleaved light illuminated and escape trials during the ﬁrst day of stimula - tion or inhibition . We were unable to detect differences in any of the quantiﬁed features during optogenetic manipulation of VTA AX axon terminals ( Figures 5C and 5D ) . Beyond direct motor effects , repeated activation or inhibition of VTA AX axon terminals could drive changes in pitch through changes in behavioral motivation . Dopamine signaling has been generally linked with reward , and successive activation or inhibition of VTA AX axon terminals could lead to overall changes in the motivation to sing ( Hu , 2016 ) . We examined singing rate in our birds and found that neither stimulation nor inhibition of VTA AX axon terminals altered singing rate ( Figures 5E and 5F ) . We have shown that closed - loop optogenetic manipulation of VTA AX axon terminals is sufﬁcient to guide bidirectional changes in the future performances of song , independent of direct inﬂu - ences on ongoing song performance or generalized motivational changes in singing . These results indicate that phasic increases and decreases in dopaminergic input to Area X are sufﬁcient to guide rapid and opponent changes in learned song and support the idea that this single synaptic input provides a minimal circuit sufﬁcient to direct vocal learning . VTA Axon Terminal Manipulations Drive Signiﬁcant and Sustained Learned Changes in Song The rapid , within - day changes in pitch , driven by optogenetic excitation or inhibition , reveal remarkable precision in the teaching signal that VTA conveys to Area X . Nonetheless , changes to syllable pitch in most of our birds remained within the natural range that the syllable could be produced prior to our optogenetic manipulations , raising concerns that manipula - tions of VTA AX axon terminals are not sufﬁcient to guide large - scale changes in behavior , akin to those needed during initial learning of a new vocalization or recovery of vocal behaviors following peripheral or central injuries . To test whether this teaching signal is capable of guiding sustained and large - scale changes in vocal behavior , we extended our pitch - contingent optogenetic manipulations over several days , updating pitch - illumination thresholds each morning in order to continue driving changes in vocal behavior ( 3 – 12 days , n = 8 birds ) . Optogenetic stimulation and inhibition continued to have opponent effects on the direction of pitch learning . For example , successive targeting of lower pitch syllable renditions with optogenetic excitation resulted in cumulative decreases in F B D E A C Figure 5 . VTA - Area X Terminal Manipula - tions Do Not Have Motor or Motivational Effects on Song ( A ) Variabilityinpitchoftargetsyllablesforbaseline day ( open , coefﬁcient of variation [ CV ] = 1 . 91 % ± 0 . 42 % ) and stimulation day ( ﬁlled , CV = 1 . 73 % ± 0 . 27 % ) . Closed - loop optical stimulation of target syllables did not change the coefﬁcient of variation of syllable pitch of target syllables ( p = 0 . 81 , n = 7 , Wilcoxon matched - pairs signed - rank test ) . ( B ) Variabilityinpitchoftargetsyllablesforbaseline day ( open , CV = 1 . 71 % ±0 . 29 % ) andinhibitionday ( ﬁlled , CV = 1 . 75 % ± 0 . 28 % ) . Closed - loop optical inhibition of target syllables did not change vari - ability in pitch of target syllables ( p = 0 . 47 , n = 7 , Wilcoxon matched - pairs signed - rank test ) . ( C ) Spectral characteristics of hit ( ﬁlled ) and escape ( open ) syllableduringtheﬁrststimulationsession ( 200 motifs ) . Across experiments ( n = 7 ) , there were no differencesinamplitude ( p = 0 . 69 ) , duration ( p = 0 . 30 ) , Weiner entropy ( p = 0 . 16 ) , goodness ( p = 0 . 38 ) , fre - quency modulation ( FM , p = 0 . 69 ) , and amplitude modulation ( AM , p = 0 . 11 , Wilcoxon matched - pairs signed - ranktest ) betweenhitandescape . ( D ) Spectral characteristics of hit ( ﬁlled ) and escape ( open ) syllable during the ﬁrst inhibition session ( 200 motifs ) . Across experiments ( n = 7 ) , there were no differences in amplitude ( p = 0 . 38 ) , duration ( p = 0 . 81 ) , Weiner entropy ( p = 0 . 81 ) , goodness ( p = 0 . 93 ) , frequency modulation ( FM , p > 0 . 99 ) , and amplitude modulation ( AM , p = 0 . 078 , Wilcoxon matched - pairs signed - rank test ) between hit and escape . ( E ) Motif number for baseline day ( open , 1 , 444 ± 441motifs ) and stimulation day ( ﬁlled , 1 , 215 ± 425motifs ) . Closed - loop optical stimulation oftarget syllables did not change singing rate ( p = 0 . 15 , n = 7 , Wilcoxon matched - pairs signed - rank test ) . ( F ) Motif number for baseline day ( open , 1 , 544 ± 204 motifs ) and inhibition day ( ﬁlled , 1 , 413 ± 144 motifs ) . Closed - loop optical inhibition of target syllables did not change singing rate ( p > 0 . 999 , n = 7 , Wilcoxon matched - pairs signed - rank test ) . Neuron 98 , 208 – 221 , April 4 , 2018 215 syllable pitch , while optogenetic inhibition resulted in cumula - tive increases in syllable pitch over several days ( Figure 6A ) . We found that changes in pitch learned on the ﬁrst day of training were retained in the bird’s behavior the following morn - ing , consistent with overnight consolidation of learned changes in song ( Figure S4 ) . Manipulations over several consecutive days , therefore , resulted in large changes in syllable pitch , with some birds shifting the pitch of their syllable by 3 – 6 SDs away from baseline values ( quantiﬁed as Z scores and absolute d - prime values [ I d 0 I ] ; STAR Methods ; Figures 6A – 6E ) . To understand whether these learned changes in pitch consti - tute behaviorally signiﬁcant and sustained deviations , we as - sessed changes relative to a conservative threshold for naturally occurring variability of syllable pitch ( I d 0 I = 0 . 75 signiﬁcance threshold ; Figure 6F ) ( Canopoli et al . , 2014 ) . Both excitation and inhibition of VTA AX axon terminals were sufﬁcient to guide sustained and signiﬁcant changes in syllable pitch , while similar manipulations in GFP birds did not result in learned changes in pitch ( Figure 6F ) . In addition , we found that the SD of syllable pitch at baseline positively correlated with maximum pitch shift birds were able to achieve ( Figure S5 ) . This ﬁnding held even for within - day changes in syllable pitch from birds receiving either activation or inhibition of VTA AX axon terminals . These re - sults further underscore that our optogenetic manipulations do not alter syllable variability ; rather , changes in pitch are brought about by shifting the entire distribution of syllable variants over time . Together , these results demonstrate that positive and negative reinforcement signals can guide large - scale changes in the pitch of a song syllable , constrained only by the intrinsic variability in how the bird naturally sings the targeted syllable . Although changes in performance , guided by optogenetic manipulation of VTA AX axon terminals , appear to be consoli - dated in motor circuits , birds were still able to recover the base - line levels of syllable pitch once optogenetic manipulations were stopped . In 7 out of 8 cases in which we were able to monitor the recovery phase , the pitch of target syllables returned to its orig - inal range within 7 – 10 days after we ceased optogenetic manip - ulations , similar to recovery of normal song behavior at the end of pCAF training ( Figure 6G ) ( Ali et al . , 2013 ; Canopoli et al . , 2014 ; Roberts et al . , 2017 ; Tumer and Brainard , 2007 ) . Changes in Vocal Behavior Are Spectrally and Temporally Precise Fluent production of vocalizations involves the sequencing or concatenation of many small volitional movements . In bird - song , this is reﬂected in the correct ordering of individual sylla - bles and song notes , each with their own learned spectral and temporal features ( Williams , 2004 ; Zann , 1996 ) . For reinforce - ment signaling from VTA AX neurons to be a viable mechanism for learning and maintenance of song , it should be able to guide changes in syllable performance that are both spectrally and temporally precise and not result in changes to other features of a song syllable , such as its frequency modulation , or to changes in other portions of the song . To quantify this spectral and temporal precision , we focused on birds in which we optogenetically shifted the pitch of a song syllable for several A B C D E F G Figure 6 . VTA - Area X Terminal Manipula - tions Are Sufﬁcient to Guide Opponent and Signiﬁcant Changes in Song - Syllable Pitch ( A ) Difference in mean pitch between illumination day ( ﬁlled ) and baseline or recovery days ( open ) from one axChR2 ( blue ) and one axArchT ( orange ) bird in which variants with lower pitch ( downward pointing triangles ) were targeted . Changes in mean pitch are expressed in units of the SD of the baseline distribution ( Z score ) . ( B ) Frequency distribution of pitch for the axChR2 bird shown in ( A ) . After illumination ( blue ) , mean pitch shifted by 4 . 68 SD of baseline distribution ( black ) over3daysandrecovered ( gray ) to0 . 37SD away from baseline distribution over 12 days . Pitchisexpressed inunitsoftheSDofthebaseline distribution ( Z score ) . ( C ) Frequency distribution of pitch for the axArchT bird shown in ( A ) . After illumination ( orange ) , mean pitch shifted by 2 . 67 SD of baseline distribution ( black ) over 10 days and recovered ( gray ) to 0 . 02 SD away from baseline distribution over 5 days . Pitchisexpressed inunitsoftheSDofthebaseline distribution ( Z score ) . ( D ) Shifts in mean pitch that expressed in units of j d 0 j ( STAR Methods ) in four axChR2 birds over 3 – 6 days . ( E ) Shifts in mean pitch that expressed in units of j d 0 j in four axArchT birds over 5 – 10 days . ( F ) Average of shift in mean pitch , expressed in units of j d 0 j , for GFP birds ( n = 6 ) , axChR2 birds ( n = 4 ) , and axArchT birds ( n = 4 ) . Average shift in mean pitch for bothaxChR2 and axArchTbirdswas higher than0 . 75 , and alsosigniﬁcantly higherthanrespective controlGFP groups ( axChR2 , p = 0 . 016 ; axArchT , p = 0 . 0095 ; Mann - Whitney test ) . Error bars indicate SEM . ( G ) Shifts in mean pitch for last illumination day and the day within a week following termination of illumination for both axChR2 ( n = 3 ) and axArchT ( n = 4 ) birds . Shifts in mean pitch were recovered toward baseline within a week ( changes in average of pitch I d 0 I , 2 . 6 ± 0 . 5 versus 0 . 75 ± 0 . 33 , p = 0 . 016 , n = 7 , Wilcoxon matched - pairs signed - rank test ) . See also Figures S4 and S5 . 216 Neuron 98 , 208 – 221 , April 4 , 2018 days and conﬁned our analysis to the day in which they dis - played the largest shift in behavior , typically the last day of our optogenetic manipulations . All birds used in these experi - ments had at least two harmonic syllables in their core song motif , only one of which was targeted for pitch - contingent op - togenetic stimulation or inhibition ( n = 8 birds ) . We ﬁrst asked whether learned changes in pitch also resulted in changes to other features in the song syllable , or if they resulted in coinci - dent changes to a non - targeted harmonic syllable in the song motif . We quantiﬁed several features of the song syllable and found that none of these other features were signiﬁcantly changed when compared to baseline values , conﬁrming that only the pitch of the targeted syllable had been systematically modiﬁed in both our optogenetically stimulated and inhibited birds ( Figures 7A and 7B ) . Additionally , we found that changes in the pitch of the target syllables did not result in any system - atic changes in the features of the non - targeted harmonic syllables ( control in Figures 7A and 7B ) . These ﬁndings show that positive and negative reinforcement signals are able to guide changes in a single spectral feature in a bird’s syllable , revealing remarkable precision in how these signals can inﬂu - ence learning of vocal behaviors . To examine the temporal precision of behavioral changes guided by optogenetic manipulation of VTA AX terminals , we measured changes to the pitch of harmonic syllables produced immediately before or after the targeted syllable in the same birds described above . Measuring out from the time point in the target syllable when the fundamental frequency was calculated , we measured changes in the mean pitch of adjacent harmonic syllables produced between ±100 – 200 ms and ±200 – 300 ms before or after the target syllable . We found our effects on vocal pitch are largely restricted to the target syllables , which in these birds were (cid:1) 100 ms in duration ( range = 47 . 19 – 148 . 9 ms , mean = 96 . 16 ± 37 . 2 ms ; Figure 7C ) , and tend to not extend to neighboring syllables as little as 100 ms removed from the onset of illumination . In 6 of 8 birds , we were unable to detect any changes to the pitch of harmonic syllables produced within ± 100 – 200 ms of the targeted syllable ( 7 of 9 syllables ) and no changes to syllables produced within ± 200 – 300 ms of the targeted syllable ( 6 syllables ) . In reinforcement learning , all aspects of performance corre - lated with reinforcement are prone to modiﬁcation ( Charlesworth et al . , 2011 ) . We measured changes to pitch in harmonic sylla - bles immediately following the targeted syllables in four birds and found that in two of these birds , syllables shifted along with the target syllable , while in the two other birds they did not ( Figures 7C and S6 ) . We found that this shift in the pitch of non - targeted syllable was predicted by baseline correlations in the pitch of target and non - target syllables . Together , these ﬁndings show that , barring covariation across performance vari - ables , the VTA - Area X pathway can direct changes to an individ - ual feature in a bird’s syllable and has the temporal resolution necessary to conﬁne changes to only targeted syllables . DISCUSSION Birdsong is one of the best - studied naturally learned skilled motor behaviors and the foremost model for investigating neural circuit mechanisms for learning vocalizations ( Doupe and Kuhl , 1999 ; Konopka and Roberts , 2016b ) . Like birdsong , many ﬁne motor skills are learned through extensive practice and require continued training to maintain expert performance . Gaining proﬁciency in motor performance is thought to require neural circuits capable of evaluating performance outcomes relative to motor goals and the ability to bias future performances in accordance with these evaluative signals . Our ﬁndings demon - strate that phasic manipulation of evaluative signals from VTA to Area X during natural performances is sufﬁcient to guide song learning and provide causal support for positive and nega - tive reinforcement signals in learning vocalizations . Although the role of the basal ganglia in learning vocalizations has been intensively studied , the origin of instructive signals sufﬁcient to guide changes in performance has remained elusive . We show that manipulating the activity of VTA axon terminals in the vocal basal ganglia of singing birds biases future performances of song in a manner consistent with positive and negative performance errors . Pitch - contingent activation and inhibition are each sufﬁcient to guide either decreases or increases in the pitch of a targeted syllable ( Figures 3 , 4 , and 6 ) . These effects are independent of direct motor effects A B C Figure 7 . Spectral and Temporal Precision of Optically Directed Changes in Song ( A ) Shift in song spectral features for target ( ﬁlled ) and control ( open ) syllables of axChR2 birds ( n = 4 ) . Changesinsongwererestrictedtothepitch of target syllables ( p = 0 . 024 , Mann - Whitney test ) . Spectral characteristics including amplitude ( p = 0 . 65 ) , duration ( p = 0 . 11 ) , Weiner entropy ( p = 0 . 11 ) , goodness ( p = 0 . 53 ) , FM ( p = 0 . 72 ) , and AM ( p = 0 . 16 ) were not altered for either target or control syllables . Error bars indicate SEM . ( B ) Shift in song spectral features for target ( ﬁlled ) and control ( open ) syllables of axArchT birds ( n = 4 ) . Changes in song were restricted to pitch of target syllables ( p = 0 . 0081 , Mann - Whitney test ) . Spectral characteristicsincludingamplitude ( p = 0 . 68 ) , duration ( p = 0 . 46 ) , Weinerentropy ( p = 0 . 57 ) , goodness ( p = 0 . 15 ) , FM ( p = 0 . 21 ) , andAM ( p = 0 . 15 ) werenotaltered for either target or control syllables . Error bars indicate SEM . ( C ) Shift in mean pitch for target ( ﬁlled ) and control ( open ) syllables from both axChR2 birds ( blue , n = 4 ) and axArchT + birds ( orange , n = 4 ) at millisecond timescale . Changes in pitch are restricted to target syllables ( ANOVA , F 4 , 19 = 13 . 62 , p < 0 . 05 , the diamonds denote SEM and whiskers denote the 10 % – 90 % range ) . See also Figure S6 . Neuron 98 , 208 – 221 , April 4 , 2018 217 or motivational inﬂuences on song performance ( Figure 5 ) , consistent with the idea that the VTA AX circuit encodes an eval - uation of performance outcome capable of instructing future performances . We ﬁnd that phasic activation and inhibition have opponent effects on future performances of song . Birds change the pitch of their song in the direction that increases the number of song trials targeted with illumination following activation of VTA AX axon terminals , while they bias future perfor - mances away from pitch ranges targeted with optical inhibition . These results highlight the importance of using both activation and inhibition to dissect neural circuit function and the use of optogenetic methods in the study of naturally performed skilled behaviors . Together , our ﬁndings underscore the role of a bidi - rectional teaching signal in reinforcement learning , such as those envisioned by reward predictions errors ( Fee and Goldberg , 2011 ; Gadagkar et al . , 2016 ; Hikosaka et al . , 2006 ; Schultz et al . , 1997 ; Suri and Schultz , 1998 ; Watabe - Uchida et al . , 2017 ; Yttri and Dudman , 2016 ) and extend it to learning of ﬁne motor skills associated with vocal performances . Models of basal ganglia - dependent reinforcement learning postulate that song learning relies on the convergence of three signals onto MSNs in the vocal basal ganglia ( Fee and Goldberg , 2011 ) : a signal encoding information about the time - step in the song , a signal encoding information about motor variability ( for example , if the pitch is going to be sung higher or lower at speciﬁc moment in the song ) , and a reinforcement signal from VTA ( see circuit schematics in Figure 2 ) . Consistent with these models , lesion and pharmacological inactivation studies have shown that cortical vocal basal ganglia pathways play an essen - tial role in biasing future performances of song ( Ali et al . , 2013 ; Andalman and Fee , 2009 ; Charlesworth et al . , 2012 ; Gadagkar et al . , 2016 ) and that dopaminergic input is necessary for learning during negative reinforcement auditory feedback tasks ( Hoff - mann et al . , 2016 ) . Simple formulations of these results support the view that input from VTA is permissive for learning spectral features of song . Our results instead argue that this circuit func - tions instructively in song learning . We show that phasic inhibi - tion of VTA inputs to Area X is sufﬁcient to guide song away from its natural performance range and inhibition and excitation of VTA inputs guide song changes in opposing directions . Indeed , a bidirectional instructive signal is a cornerstone of RPE models , and our results provide causal support for this bidi - rectional instructive signal in vocal learning . Nonetheless , it is still not known whether dopamine neurons exhibit phasic excitation or inhibition during natural tutor song learning . Additional research will be needed to test whether phasic changes in dopa - minergic signaling are necessary and sufﬁcient to guide normal imitation of a vocal model . The axon - targeted optogenetic tools developed here provide new avenues for starting to address these important questions . The data presented here also extend beyond current models by highlighting an unappreciated temporal precision and execu - tion parameter speciﬁcity in VTA - dependent song learning . Our manipulations were sufﬁcient to guide spectrally speciﬁc changes to single song syllables as short as 50 ms and conﬁned changes in song to a 50 - to 300 - ms time window ( Figure 7 ) . We suggest that this form of temporal precision is likely a common attribute of performance error signaling , and not a specialization associated with production and learning of birdsong . In rodents , dopaminergic inputs to the direct and indirect pathway have been shown to be involved in action selection and capable of di - recting learned changes in movement kinematics ( Howard et al . , 2017 ; Yttri and Dudman , 2016 ) . Subthreshold activation of the direct and indirect pathways for as little as 450 ms is sufﬁcient to bidirectionally control movement velocity and bias velocity on future performances ( Yttri and Dudman , 2016 ) , underscoring the role of basal ganglia circuitry and dopamine in learning pre - cise behaviors . However , it is still unclear how dopaminergic signaling alone may be able to provide the temporal precision needed for learning the microstructure of ﬁne motor behaviors . For example , reinforcement learning experiments in songbirds indicate that song can be modiﬁed on timescales as short as 10 ms , implicating remarkable temporal precision in how the ner - vous system tracks and evaluates performances ( Charlesworth et al . , 2011 ) . One possibility is that co - release of glutamate and / or GABA from either dopaminergic or non - dopaminergic neurons could serve as a fast synaptic tag , marking synapses for plasticity ( Granger et al . , 2017 ) . Further experiments will be needed to understand how performance evaluation circuits guide learning on this ﬁne temporal scale . In addition to their role in learning , dopaminergic inputs to the dorsal striatum are associated with kinematic control ( Howe and Dombeck , 2016 ) . Our results , on the other hand , indicate that phasic manipulation of dopaminergic inputs to Area X does not result in overt changes in ongoing vocalizations . Anatomical segregation of dopaminergic inputs to the rodent dorsal striatum and songbird Area X may account for these differences . The ma - jority of dopaminergic inputs to the rodent dorsal striatum arise from the SNc ( Ikemoto , 2007 ) , while a large fraction of inputs to the ventral striatum arise from VTA . Dopaminergic inputs to the ventral striatum in mice are thought to reﬂect reward signaling and are not known to elicit direct changes in movement kinematics . Although Area X anatomically resides in the dorsal striatum , a large fraction of its dopaminergic inputs arise from VTA ( current results ) , perhaps accounting for the lack of direct motor effects on song . It will be of interest in future studies to examine whether manipulation of SNc inputs to Area X is sufﬁ - cient to directly modify song production . Indeed , pharmacolog - ical manipulations suggest that dopamine signaling in Area X can directly inﬂuence song . Infusion of D1 - like receptor antagonists in Area X modulates the spectral variability of song syllables ( Leblois and Perkel , 2012 ; Leblois et al . , 2010 ) . These results may reﬂect global manipulation of dopamine signaling , affecting neurons targeted by VTA and SNC inputs , or may also reﬂect the different functional roles of fast and slow dopamine signaling ( Lapish et al . , 2007 ) . Singing directly to a female bird is associ - ated with increase in dopamine in Area X ( Sasaki et al . , 2006 ) , while infusion of D1 - like receptor antagonists into Area X blocks changes in song typically associated with female directed singing ( Leblois et al . , 2010 ) . These slow , context - dependent changes in dopamine signaling may provide a separate signaling regime than the phasic manipulations employed to guide changes in song spectral features . In humans , basal ganglia - dependent reinforcement learning is thought to play an important role in speech and language learning ( Konopka and Roberts , 2016b ; Watkins , 2011 ) . By 218 Neuron 98 , 208 – 221 , April 4 , 2018 applying closed - loop optogenetic methods in freely singing songbirds , we show that VTA inputs to the basal ganglia are suf - ﬁcient to guide learning of a select vocal feature without disrupt - ing other aspects of the learned vocalizations . We suggest that the temporal and movement - parameter precision observed here is likely a common attribute of circuitry involved in evalua - tion of ﬁne motor behaviors , like speech and language . Overall , our ﬁndings in the songbird reveal that positive and negative reinforcement signals from VTA are sufﬁcient to guide temporally precise and movement - parameter - speciﬁc learned changes in song and highlight the utility of focusing on naturally learned , ethologically relevant behaviors when dissecting neural circuit function . STAR + METHODS Detailed methods are provided in the online version of this paper and include the following : d KEY RESOURCES TABLE d CONTACT FOR REAGENT AND RESOURCE SHARING d EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT DETAILS B Animal models d METHOD DETAILS B Viral Vectors B Stereotaxic Surgery B Behavioral Assays B Fast - Scan Cyclic Voltammetry B Histology d QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS B Behavioral Analysis B Statistical Analysis d DATA AND SOFTWARE AVAILABILITY SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION Supplemental Information includes six ﬁgures and can be found with this article online at https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . neuron . 2018 . 02 . 020 . A video abstract is available at https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . neuron . 2018 . 02 . 020 # mmc3 . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The authors thank Drs . Joseph Takahashi , Samuel Sober , and Richard Hahnloser and members of the Roberts laboratory for discussions and com - ments on the manuscript ; Dr . Jeremy Clark for advice on fast scanning cyclic voltammetry experiments ; Dr . Claire Stelly and Merridee Lefner for fabrication of voltammetry electrodes ; Dr . Bence O¨lveczky for CAF software ; Drs . Karl Deisseroth and Edward Boyden for providing optogenetic constructs ; Marguerita Kline for cloning of initial axon - targeted constructs ; and Jennifer Holdway and Andrea Guerrero for laboratory support and animal husbandry . The Roberts laboratory was supported by grants from the NIH ( R01NS102488 , R01DC014364 , and R03MH111319 ) , the National Science Foundation ( IOS - 1457206andIOS - 1451034 ) , UniversityofTexasBRAINInitia - tive ( 362808and362430 ) , theKlingenstein - SimonsFellowship , andaNARSAD Young Investigator Grant ( Essel Investigator ) from the Brain & Behavior Research Foundation ( T . F . R . ) . AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS L . X . , G . C . , and T . F . R . conceived and designed all experiments . L . X . collected and analyzed the in vivo optogenetic behavioral and the anatomical tracing data . G . C . collected and analyzed the pitch - contingent auditory feedback data and optogenetic behavioral data . F . G . O . and T . F . R . collected the cyclic voltammetry data . M . C . analyzed and imaged the anatomical data and helped analyze optogenetic behavioral data . M . J . W . analyzed the voltammetry data and provided reagents and advice to help collect these data in songbirds . T . F . R . and L . X . wrote the manuscript . All authors read and commented on the manuscript . DECLARATION OF INTERESTS The authors declare no competing interests . Received : December 18 , 2017 Revised : January 28 , 2018 Accepted : February 20 , 2018 Published : March 15 , 2018 REFERENCES Achiro , J . M . , Shen , J . , and Bottjer , S . ( 2017 ) . Neural activity in cortico - basal ganglia circuits of juvenile songbirds encodes performance during goal - directed learning . Elife . Published online December 19 , 2017 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 7554 / eLife . 26973 . Ali , F . , Otchy , T . M . , Pehlevan , C . , Fantana , A . L . , Burak , Y . , and O¨lveczky , B . P . ( 2013 ) . The basal ganglia is necessary for learning spectral , but not temporal , features of birdsong . Neuron 80 , 494 – 506 . Andalman , A . S . , and Fee , M . S . ( 2009 ) . A basal ganglia - forebrain circuit in the songbird biases motor output to avoid vocal errors . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 106 , 12518 – 12523 . Barto , A . G . ( 1995 ) . Adaptive critics and the basal ganglia . In Models of Information Processing in the Basal Ganglia , J . Houlk , J . Davis , and B . Beiser , eds . ( MIT Press ) , pp . 215 – 232 . Bottjer , S . W . , and Altenau , B . ( 2010 ) . Parallel pathways for vocal learning in basal ganglia of songbirds . Nat . Neurosci . 13 , 153 – 155 . Bottjer , S . W . , Miesner , E . A . , and Arnold , A . P . ( 1984 ) . Forebrain lesions disrupt development but not maintenance of song in passerine birds . Science 224 , 901 – 903 . Brainard , M . S . , and Doupe , A . J . ( 2000 ) . Interruption of a basal ganglia - forebrain circuit prevents plasticity of learned vocalizations . Nature 404 , 762 – 766 . Bromberg - Martin , E . S . , Matsumoto , M . , andHikosaka , O . ( 2010 ) . Dopamine in motivational control : Rewarding , aversive , and alerting . Neuron 68 , 815 – 834 . Bush , R . R . , and Mosteller , F . ( 1951a ) . A mathematical model for simple learning . Psychol . Rev . 58 , 313 – 323 . Bush , R . R . , and Mosteller , F . ( 1951b ) . A model for stimulus generalization and discrimination . Psychol . Rev . 58 , 413 – 423 . Canopoli , A . , Herbst , J . A . , and Hahnloser , R . H . ( 2014 ) . A higher sensory brain regionisinvolvedinreversingreinforcement - inducedvocalchangesinasong - bird . J . Neurosci . 34 , 7018 – 7026 . Chang , C . Y . , Esber , G . R . , Marrero - Garcia , Y . , Yau , H . J . , Bonci , A . , and Schoenbaum , G . ( 2016 ) . Brief optogenetic inhibition of dopamine neurons mimics endogenous negative reward prediction errors . Nat . Neurosci . 19 , 111 – 116 . Charlesworth , J . D . , Tumer , E . C . , Warren , T . L . , and Brainard , M . S . ( 2011 ) . Learning the microstructure of successful behavior . Nat . Neurosci . 14 , 373 – 380 . Charlesworth , J . D . , Warren , T . L . , and Brainard , M . S . ( 2012 ) . Covert skill learning in a cortical - basal ganglia circuit . Nature 486 , 251 – 255 . Cohen , J . Y . , Haesler , S . , Vong , L . , Lowell , B . B . , andUchida , N . ( 2012 ) . Neuron - type - speciﬁc signals for reward and punishment in the ventral tegmental area . Nature 482 , 85 – 88 . Cui , G . , Jun , S . B . , Jin , X . , Pham , M . D . , Vogel , S . S . , Lovinger , D . M . , and Costa , R . M . ( 2013 ) . Concurrent activation of striatal direct and indirect pathways during action initiation . Nature 494 , 238 – 242 . Neuron 98 , 208 – 221 , April 4 , 2018 219 den Ouden , H . E . , Kok , P . , and de Lange , F . P . ( 2012 ) . How prediction errors shape perception , attention , and motivation . Front . Psychol . 3 , 548 . Desrochers , T . M . , Amemori , K . , and Graybiel , A . M . ( 2015 ) . Habit learning by naive macaques is marked by response sharpening of striatal neurons repre - senting the cost and outcome of acquired action sequences . Neuron 87 , 853 – 868 . Dhawale , A . K . , Smith , M . A . , and O¨lveczky , B . P . ( 2017 ) . The role of variability in motor learning . Annu . Rev . Neurosci . 40 , 479 – 498 . Doupe , A . J . , and Kuhl , P . K . ( 1999 ) . Birdsong and human speech : common themes and mechanisms . Annu . Rev . Neurosci . 22 , 567 – 631 . Dudman , J . T . , and Krakauer , J . W . ( 2016 ) . The basal ganglia : from motor com - mands to the control of vigor . Curr . Opin . Neurobiol . 37 , 158 – 166 . Eshel , N . , Bukwich , M . , Rao , V . , Hemmelder , V . , Tian , J . , andUchida , N . ( 2015 ) . Arithmetic and local circuitry underlying dopamine prediction errors . Nature 525 , 243 – 246 . Fee , M . S . , and Goldberg , J . H . ( 2011 ) . A hypothesis for basal ganglia - depen - dent reinforcement learning in the songbird . Neuroscience 198 , 152 – 170 . Frank , M . J . , Seeberger , L . C . , and O’reilly , R . C . ( 2004 ) . By carrot or by stick : cognitive reinforcement learning in parkinsonism . Science 306 , 1940 – 1943 . Gadagkar , V . , Puzerey , P . A . , Chen , R . , Baird - Daniel , E . , Farhang , A . R . , and Goldberg , J . H . ( 2016 ) . Dopamineneuronsencodeperformanceerrorinsinging birds . Science 354 , 1278 – 1282 . Glimcher , P . W . ( 2011 ) . Understanding dopamine and reinforcement learning : the dopamine reward prediction error hypothesis . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 108 ( Suppl 3 ) , 15647 – 15654 . Granger , A . J . , Wallace , M . L . , and Sabatini , B . L . ( 2017 ) . Multi - transmitter neurons in the mammalian central nervous system . Curr . Opin . Neurobiol . 45 , 85 – 91 . Graybiel , A . M . ( 2008 ) . Habits , rituals , and the evaluative brain . Annu . Rev . Neurosci . 31 , 359 – 387 . Graybiel , A . M . , and Grafton , S . T . ( 2015 ) . The striatum : where skills and habits meet . Cold Spring Harb . Perspect . Biol . 7 , a021691 . Haesler , S . , Rochefort , C . , Georgi , B . , Licznerski , P . , Osten , P . , and Scharff , C . ( 2007 ) . IncompleteandinaccuratevocalimitationafterknockdownofFoxP2in songbird basal ganglia nucleus area X . PLoS Biol . 5 , e321 . Hikosaka , O . , Miyashita , K . , Miyachi , S . , Sakai , K . , and Lu , X . ( 1998 ) . Differential roles of the frontal cortex , basal ganglia , and cerebellum in visuo - motor sequence learning . Neurobiol . Learn . Mem . 70 , 137 – 149 . Hikosaka , O . , Nakamura , K . , and Nakahara , H . ( 2006 ) . Basal ganglia orient eyes to reward . J . Neurophysiol . 95 , 567 – 584 . Hoffmann , L . A . , Saravanan , V . , Wood , A . N . , He , L . , and Sober , S . J . ( 2016 ) . Dopaminergic contributions to vocal learning . J . Neurosci . 36 , 2176 – 2189 . Hollerman , J . R . , and Schultz , W . ( 1998 ) . Dopamine neurons report an error in the temporal prediction of reward during learning . Nat . Neurosci . 1 , 304 – 309 . Hong , S . , and Hikosaka , O . ( 2011 ) . Dopamine - mediated learning and switch - ing in cortico - striatal circuit explain behavioral changes in reinforcement learning . Front . Behav . Neurosci . 5 , 15 . Hosp , J . A . , Pekanovic , A . , Rioult - Pedotti , M . S . , and Luft , A . R . ( 2011 ) . Dopaminergic projections from midbrain to primary motor cortex mediate motor skill learning . J . Neurosci . 31 , 2481 – 2487 . Houk , J . , Adams , J . , and Barto , A . G . ( 1995 ) . A model of how the basal ganglia generate and use neural signals that predict reinforcement . In Models of Information Processing in the Basal Ganglia , J . Houk , J . Davis , and D . Beiser , eds . ( MIT Press ) , pp . 249 – 270 . Howard , C . D . , Li , H . , Geddes , C . E . , and Jin , X . ( 2017 ) . Dynamic nigrostriatal dopamine biases action selection . Neuron 93 , 1436 – 1450 . Howe , M . W . , and Dombeck , D . A . ( 2016 ) . Rapid signalling in distinct dopami - nergic axons during locomotion and reward . Nature 535 , 505 – 510 . Hu , H . ( 2016 ) . Reward and aversion . Annu . Rev . Neurosci . 39 , 297 – 324 . Ikemoto , S . ( 2007 ) . Dopamine reward circuitry : Two projection systems from the ventral midbrain to the nucleus accumbens - olfactory tubercle complex . Brain Res . Brain Res . Rev . 56 , 27 – 78 . Immelmann , K . ( 1969 ) . Song development in zebra ﬁnch and other Estrildid ﬁnches . In Bird Vocalisations , R . A . Hinde , ed . ( Cambridge University Press ) , pp . 61 – 74 . Jin , X . , and Costa , R . M . ( 2010 ) . Start / stop signals emerge in nigrostriatal circuits during sequence learning . Nature 466 , 457 – 462 . Jin , X . , and Costa , R . M . ( 2015 ) . Shaping action sequences in basal ganglia circuits . Curr . Opin . Neurobiol . 33 , 188 – 196 . Jin , X . , Tecuapetla , F . , and Costa , R . M . ( 2014 ) . Basal ganglia subcircuits distinctively encode the parsing and concatenation of action sequences . Nat . Neurosci . 17 , 423 – 430 . Keller , G . B . , and Hahnloser , R . H . ( 2009 ) . Neural processing of auditory feedback during vocal practice in a songbird . Nature 457 , 187 – 190 . Konopka , G . , and Roberts , T . F . ( 2016a ) . Animal models of speech and vocal communication deﬁcits associated with psychiatric disorders . Biol . Psychiatry 79 , 53 – 61 . Konopka , G . , and Roberts , T . F . ( 2016b ) . Insights into the neural and genetic basis of vocal communication . Cell 164 , 1269 – 1276 . Lapish , C . C . , Kroener , S . , Durstewitz , D . , Lavin , A . , and Seamans , J . K . ( 2007 ) . The ability of the mesocortical dopamine system to operate in distinct tempo - ral modes . Psychopharmacology ( Berl . ) 191 , 609 – 625 . Leblois , A . , andPerkel , D . J . ( 2012 ) . Striataldopaminemodulatessongspectral but not temporal features through D1 receptors . Eur . J . Neurosci . 35 , 1771 – 1781 . Leblois , A . , Wendel , B . J . , andPerkel , D . J . ( 2010 ) . Striataldopaminemodulates basal ganglia output and regulates social context - dependent behavioral vari - ability through D1 receptors . J . Neurosci . 30 , 5730 – 5743 . Lee , J . C . , and Tomblin , J . B . ( 2012 ) . Reinforcement learning in young adults with developmental language impairment . Brain Lang . 123 , 154 – 163 . Leemburg , S . , Canonica , T . , andLuft , A . ( 2018 ) . Motorskilllearningandreward consumption differentially affect VTA activation . Sci . Rep . 8 , 687 . London , S . E . , and Clayton , D . F . ( 2008 ) . Functional identiﬁcation of sensory mechanisms required for developmental song learning . Nat . Neurosci . 11 , 579 – 586 . Mandelblat - Cerf , Y . , Las , L . , Denisenko , N . , and Fee , M . S . ( 2014 ) . A role for descending auditory cortical projections in songbird vocal learning . eLife 3 , e02152 . Mattis , J . , Tye , K . M . , Ferenczi , E . A . , Ramakrishnan , C . , O’Shea , D . J . , Prakash , R . , Gunaydin , L . A . , Hyun , M . , Fenno , L . E . , Gradinaru , V . , et al . ( 2012 ) . Principlesforapplyingoptogenetictoolsderivedfromdirectcomparativeanal - ysis of microbial opsins . Nat . Methods 9 , 159 – 172 . Montague , P . R . , Dayan , P . , and Sejnowski , T . J . ( 1996 ) . A framework for mesencephalic dopamine systems based on predictive Hebbian learning . J . Neurosci . 16 , 1936 – 1947 . Morales , M . , andMargolis , E . B . ( 2017 ) . Ventraltegmental area : cellularhetero - geneity , connectivity and behaviour . Nat . Rev . Neurosci . 18 , 73 – 85 . Nelson , A . B . , and Kreitzer , A . C . ( 2014 ) . Reassessing models of basal ganglia function and dysfunction . Annu . Rev . Neurosci . 37 , 117 – 135 . Olveczky , B . P . , Andalman , A . S . , and Fee , M . S . ( 2005 ) . Vocal experimentation in the juvenile songbird requires a basal ganglia circuit . PLoS Biol . 3 , e153 . Panigrahi , B . , Martin , K . A . , Li , Y . , Graves , A . R . , Vollmer , A . , Olson , L . , Mensh , B . D . , Karpova , A . Y . , and Dudman , J . T . ( 2015 ) . Dopamine is required for the neural representation and control of movement vigor . Cell 162 , 1418 – 1430 . Petkov , C . I . , and Jarvis , E . D . ( 2012 ) . Birds , primates , and spoken language origins : Behavioral phenotypes and neurobiological substrates . Front . Evol . Neurosci . 4 , 12 . Price , P . H . ( 1979 ) . Developmental determinants of structure in zebra ﬁnch song . J . Comp . Physiol . Psychol . 93 , 260 – 277 . Rescorla , R . , and Wagner , A . ( 1972 ) . A theory of Pavlovian conditioning : vatiaions in the effectiveness of reinforcement and nonreinforcement . In Classical Conditioning II : Current Research and Theory , A . Black and W . Prokasy , eds . ( Appleton Century Crofts ) , pp . 64 – 99 . 220 Neuron 98 , 208 – 221 , April 4 , 2018 Reynolds , J . N . , Hyland , B . I . , andWickens , J . R . ( 2001 ) . Acellularmechanismof reward - related learning . Nature 413 , 67 – 70 . Roberts , T . F . , Gobes , S . M . , Murugan , M . , O¨lveczky , B . P . , and Mooney , R . ( 2012 ) . Motor circuits are required to encode a sensory model for imitative learning . Nat . Neurosci . 15 , 1454 – 1459 . Roberts , T . F . , Hisey , E . , Tanaka , M . , Kearney , M . G . , Chattree , G . , Yang , C . F . , Shah , N . M . , and Mooney , R . ( 2017 ) . Identiﬁcation of a motor - to - auditory pathway important for vocal learning . Nat . Neurosci . 20 , 978 – 986 . Sasaki , A . , Sotnikova , T . D . , Gainetdinov , R . R . , and Jarvis , E . D . ( 2006 ) . Social context - dependent singing - regulated dopamine . J . Neurosci . 26 , 9010 – 9014 . Scharff , C . , and Nottebohm , F . ( 1991 ) . A comparative study of the behavioral deﬁcitsfollowinglesions ofvariouspartsofthezebraﬁnchsongsystem : impli - cations for vocal learning . J . Neurosci . 11 , 2896 – 2913 . Schultz , W . ( 2015 ) . Neuronal reward and decision signals : from theories to data . Physiol . Rev . 95 , 853 – 951 . Schultz , W . , Apicella , P . , and Ljungberg , T . ( 1993 ) . Responses of monkey dopamine neurons to reward and conditioned stimuli during successive steps of learning a delayed response task . J . Neurosci . 13 , 900 – 913 . Schultz , W . , Dayan , P . , and Montague , P . R . ( 1997 ) . A neural substrate of pre - diction and reward . Science 275 , 1593 – 1599 . Smith , K . S . , and Graybiel , A . M . ( 2016 ) . Habit formation coincides with shifts in reinforcement representations in the sensorimotor striatum . J . Neurophysiol . 115 , 1487 – 1498 . Stachniak , T . J . , Ghosh , A . , andSternson , S . M . ( 2014 ) . Chemogeneticsynaptic silencing of neural circuits localizes a hypothalamus / midbrain pathway for feeding behavior . Neuron 82 , 797 – 808 . Stephenson - Jones , M . , Yu , K . , Ahrens , S . , Tucciarone , J . M . , van Huijstee , A . N . , Mejia , L . A . , Penzo , M . A . , Tai , L . H . , Wilbrecht , L . , andLi , B . ( 2016 ) . Abasal ganglia circuit for evaluating action outcomes . Nature 539 , 289 – 293 . Suri , R . E . , andSchultz , W . ( 1998 ) . Learningofsequentialmovementsbyneural network model with dopamine - like reinforcement signal . Exp . Brain Res . 121 , 350 – 354 . Sutton , R . S . , and Barto , A . G . ( 1981 ) . Toward a modern theory of adaptive net - works : expectation and prediction . Psychol . Rev . 88 , 135 – 170 . Sutton , R . S . , and Barto , A . G . ( 1998 ) . Reinforcement Learning : An Introduction ( MIT Press ) . Tanaka , M . , Singh Alvarado , J . , Murugan , M . , and Mooney , R . ( 2016 ) . Focal expression of mutant huntingtin in the songbird basal ganglia disrupts cortico - basal ganglia networks and vocal sequences . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 113 , E1720 – E1727 . Tchernichovski , O . , Nottebohm , F . , Ho , C . E . , Pesaran , B . , and Mitra , P . P . ( 2000 ) . A procedure for an automated measurement of song similarity . Anim . Behav . 59 , 1167 – 1176 . Tecuapetla , F . , Jin , X . , Lima , S . Q . , and Costa , R . M . ( 2016 ) . Complementary contributions of striatal projection pathways to action initiation and execution . Cell 166 , 703 – 715 . Tritsch , N . X . , and Sabatini , B . L . ( 2012 ) . Dopaminergic modulation of synaptic transmission in cortex and striatum . Neuron 76 , 33 – 50 . Tumer , E . C . , and Brainard , M . S . ( 2007 ) . Performance variability enables adap - tive plasticity of ‘‘crystallized’’ adult birdsong . Nature 450 , 1240 – 1244 . Wall , N . R . , De La Parra , M . , Callaway , E . M . , and Kreitzer , A . C . ( 2013 ) . Differential innervation of direct - and indirect - pathway striatal projection neurons . Neuron 79 , 347 – 360 . Warren , T . L . , Tumer , E . C . , Charlesworth , J . D . , and Brainard , M . S . ( 2011 ) . Mechanisms and time course of vocal learning and consolidation in the adult songbird . J . Neurophysiol . 106 , 1806 – 1821 . Watabe - Uchida , M . , Eshel , N . , and Uchida , N . ( 2017 ) . Neural circuitry of reward prediction error . Annu . Rev . Neurosci . 40 , 373 – 394 . Watkins , K . ( 2011 ) . Developmental disorders of speech and language : from genes to brain structure and function . Prog . Brain Res . 189 , 225 – 238 . Williams , H . ( 2004 ) . Birdsong and singing behavior . Ann . N Y Acad . Sci . 1016 , 1 – 30 . Wise , R . A . ( 2004 ) . Dopamine , learning and motivation . Nat . Rev . Neurosci . 5 , 483 – 494 . Yttri , E . A . , and Dudman , J . T . ( 2016 ) . Opponent and bidirectional control of movement velocity in the basal ganglia . Nature 533 , 402 – 406 . Zann , R . A . ( 1996 ) . The Zebra Finch : A Synthesis of Field and Laboratory Studies ( Oxford University Press ) . Neuron 98 , 208 – 221 , April 4 , 2018 221 STAR + METHODS KEY RESOURCES TABLE CONTACT FOR REAGENT AND RESOURCE SHARING Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be fulﬁlled by the Lead Contact , Todd Roberts ( todd . roberts @ utsouthwestern . edu ) . REAGENT or RESOURCE SOURCE IDENTIFIER Antibodies rabbit anti - tyrosine hydroxylase Millipore RRID : AB _ 390204 rabbit anti - GFP Invitrogen RRID : AB _ 221569 mouse anti - GFP Invitrogen RRID : AB _ 221568 Bacterial and Virus Strains scAAV1 - Cbh - GFP Duke viral vector core N / A scAAV9 - Cbh - GFP Duke viral vector core N / A scAAV1 - CBh - ChR2 ( H134R ) - nrxn - EYFP Duke viral vector core N / A AAV1 - CAG - ChR2 ( H134R ) - nrxn - 2a - EYFP This lab N / A AAV1 - CAG - ArchT - nrxn UNC Vector Core N / A AAV1 - CAG - ArchT3 . 0 - nrxn - 2a - EYFP This lab N / A Chemicals , Peptides , and Recombinant Proteins L - DOPA Tocris Cat # 3788 Dextran , Alexa Fluor 488 Invitrogen Cat # D22910 Critical Commercial Assays NeuroTrace 530 / 615 Red Fluorescent Nissl Stain Invitrogen Cat # N21482 Experimental Models : Organisms / Strains zebra ﬁnches ( Taeniopygia guttata ) This lab N / A Recombinant DNA scAAV1 - CBh - ChR2 ( H134R ) - nrxn - EYFP This paper Request from Lead Contact AAV1 - CAG - ChR2 ( H134R ) - nrxn - 2a - EYFP This paper Request from Lead Contact AAV1 - CAG - ArchT - nrxn This paper Request from Lead Contact AAV1 - CAG - ArchT3 . 0 - nrxn - 2a - EYFP This paper Request from Lead Contact Software and Algorithms MATLAB MATLAB https : / / www . mathworks . com / Custom - written MATLAB code for data analysis This lab Request from Lead Contact Labview National Instruments http : / / www . ni . com / en - us / shop / labview . html Custom - written Labview software ( CAF ) Ali et al . , 2013 , this paper Request from Lead Contact Other Fiber Optic Cannula Prizmatix www . goldstonescientiﬁc . com / prizmatix - optogenetics - implantable - cannula / High NA Dual Polymer Optical Fiber for Bilateral Stimulation Prizmatix http : / / www . goldstonescientiﬁc . com / high - na - dual - optical - ﬁber - for - bilateral - stimulation - rotary - joint - to - cannulae / Mating Sleeves Prizmatix http : / / www . goldstonescientiﬁc . com / prizmatix - mating - sleeves / e1 Neuron 98 , 208 – 221 . e1 – e4 , April 4 , 2018 EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT DETAILS Animal models Experiments described in this study were conducted using 66 adult male zebra ﬁnches ( Taeniopygia guttata ; > 90 days post hatch ) that were raised in our breeding facility and housed with their parents until at least 50 days of age . During experiments , birds were housed individually in sound - attenuating recording chambers ( Med Associates ) on a 12 / 12 h day / night schedule and were given ad libitum access to food and water . All birds ( range : 111 to 178 days post hatch at start of experiment ) were subjected to undirected song recording ( i . e . , with no female present ) with Sound Analysis Pro ( SAP2011 , http : / / soundanalysispro . com / ; Tchernichovski et al . , 2000 ) . All procedures were performed in accordance with established protocols approved by the UT Southwestern Medical Center Animal Care and Use Committee . METHOD DETAILS Viral Vectors Vector of scAAV1 - CBh - ChR2 ( H134R ) - nrxn - EYFP and AAV1 - CBh - ArchT - nrxn were synthesized by the Duke viral vector core facility ( Durham , NC , USA ) . The scAAV1 – CBh - ChR2 ( H134R ) - nrxn - EYFP vector was prepared by ligating ChR2 ( H134R ) and EYFP with an intervening DNA fragment encoding the intracellular domain of neurexin - 1a ( nrxn , aa 1 , 425 – 1 , 479 ) , inserted into the scAAV2 - Cbh backbone . The AAV1 - CAG - ArchT - nrxn vector was prepared by ligating ArchT ( archaerhodopsin from Halorubrum strain TP009 ) and the nrxn fragment , inserted into the AAV2 - CAG backbone . The AAV1 - CAG - ChR2 ( H134R ) - nrxn - 2a - EYFP vector was prepared by ligating ChR2 ( H134R ) - nrxn and EYFP with an intervening DNA fragment encoding a 2a amino acid sequence from porcine tescho - virus - 1 ( ( GSG ) ATNFSLLKQAGDVEENPGP ) and insertion into the AAV2 - CAG backbone . ArchT3 . 0 - nrxn was constructed from ArchT3 . 0 ( Mattis et al . , 2012 ) with a C - terminal 2xHA ( YPYDVPDYA ) tag and followed by the nrxn fragment ( between enhanced trafﬁcking signal ( KSRITSEGEYIPLDQIDINV ) and ER export signal ( FCYENEV ) ) ( Stachniak et al . , 2014 ) . The AAV1 - CAG - ArchT3 . 0 - nrxn - 2a - EYFP was prepared by replacing ChR2 ( H134R ) - nrxn with ArchT3 . 0 - nrxn . The recombinant AAV vectors were serotyped with AAV1 coat proteins and produced by the University of North Carolina vector core facility ( Chapel Hill , NC , USA ) with titer exceeding 10 12 vg / ml or in the lab with titer exceeding 5X10 11 vg / ml . The self - complementary AAV ( scAAV ) vectors were serotyped with AAV1 or AAV9 coat proteins and produced by the Duke viral vector core facility ( Durham , NC , USA ) . AAV1 - CAG - ChR2 ( H134R ) - nrxn - 2a - EYFP or scAAV1 - CBh - ChR2 ( H134R ) - nrxn - EYFP viruses were used interchangeably for targeted stimulation of VTA AX axon terminals , abbreviated to axChR2 . AAV1 - CAG - ArchT3 . 0 - nrxn - 2a - EYFP or AAV1 - CBh - ArchT - nrxn viruses were used interchange - ably for targeted inhibition of VTA AX axon terminals , abbreviated to axArchT . scAAV1 - Cbh - GFP virus was used as an opsin - negative control . Both scAAV1 and scAAV9 - Cbh - EGFP were used for tracing experiments . All viral vectors were aliquoted and stored at – 80 (cid:4) C until use . Stereotaxic Surgery Virus / tracer injection All surgical procedures were performed under aseptic conditions . Birds were anesthetized using isoﬂurane inhalation ( 1 . 5 % – 2 % ) and placed in a stereotaxic apparatus . Viral injections were performed using previously described procedures ( Roberts et al . , 2012 , 2017 ) at the following approximate stereotaxic coordinates relative to interaural zero and the brain surface were ( rostral , lateral , depth , in mm ) : Ov ( 2 . 8 , 1 . 0 , 5 . 75 ) , the center of Ov was located and mapped based on its robust white noise responses ; VTA relative to the center of Ov ( + 0 . 3 , (cid:3) 0 . 2 , + 1 . 8 ) ( Mandelblat - Cerf et al . , 2014 ) ; Area X ( 5 . 1 , 1 . 6 , 3 . 3 ) with 43 - degree head angle or ( 5 . 8 , 1 . 6 , 3 ) with 20 - degree head angle , the boundary of Area X was veriﬁed using extracellular electrophysiological recordings . For behavioral exper - iments , 0 . 7 m L AAVs were injected into the VTA between 70 - 90dph after identiﬁcation of target syllables and allowed at least 4 - 6 weeks for expression . For tracing experiments , 0 . 12 m L Alexa Fluor 488 – conjugated dextran amines ( D22910 , Invitrogen , CA , USA ) or scAAVs were injected into the Area X or the VTA and allowed 3 - 5 days for sufﬁcient retrograde transport and labeling . Optical ﬁber placement : Birds were bilaterally implanted with optical ﬁber cannula ( Prizmatix , Israel ) , prior to behavioral training and following the surgery procedure for viral injection . Fiber implants ( 200 or 250um , NA = 0 . 66 , Prizmatix ) were targeted to the dorsomedial aspect of the Area X and were secured to the skull with C & B Metabond quick adhesive cement ( Parkell , NY , USA ) followed by dental cement ( Diamond Springs , CA , USA ) . The optical ﬁbers were connected to a LED source ( l = (cid:1) 460 nm or (cid:1) 520 nm ; Prizmatix ) via a rotary joint ( Prizmatix ) using an optic ﬁber sleeve ( Prizmatix ) . LED power was adjusted to produce the desired output at the tip of the implanted optic probe ( 3 - 5mw for 460nm LED ; 1 . 5 - 4mw for 520nm LED ) . Behavioral Assays CAF program Custom LabView software ( National Instruments ) was used for online detection of target syllables and implementation of optogenetic manipulation ( Ali et al . , 2013 ) . Pitch was computed on a 5ms sound segment located 15 - 80ms into the target syllable . The target segment was constant for a given bird but varied between birds . Running average of pitch was calculated as the average of the pitch over the last 200 renditions ( one session ) of the target . Neuron 98 , 208 – 221 . e1 – e4 , April 4 , 2018 e2 Habituation Before baseline recordings , birds were given at least 1 week to recover from cannula implantation and habituate to singing with attached optical ﬁbers . Songs were recorded for several days to measure baseline statistics on the pitch of targeted syllables and develop spectral templates to detect syllables in real - time and trigger closed - loop optogenetic manipulation . False positive and false negative rates were quantiﬁed and maintained under 10 % for all birds . Threshold setup and contingency calculation Thresholds for triggering the LED light source were set at the running average of last baseline session for each animal , such that approximately one - third of baseline rage would be either supra - threshold or subthreshold . If the pitch met the escape criterion , no illumination was triggered ( ‘escape’ ) . Otherwise , a 100 - ms light pulse was delivered within 25ms of the measurement ( ‘hit’ ) . Contingency was calculated as the percentage of ‘hit’ renditions out of total rendition numbers for a day or a session . During baseline periods , contingency was calculated in the absence of illumination . For optogenetic activation experiments we targeted the upper or lower third of naturally produced pitch variants ( Yttri and Dudman , 2016 ) . For optogenetic inhibition experiments we targeted the up - per or lower two - thirds of pitch variants , similar to procedures used in white - noise playback experiments ( Ali et al . , 2013 ; Andalman and Fee , 2009 ; Roberts et al . , 2017 ; Tumer and Brainard , 2007 ) . Closed - loop optogenetic manipulation The threshold for triggering illumination was constant during each day , and was updated each morning . Optogenetic manipulations were maintained over several days and not ceased until the pitch approached an asymptotic state within a day ( Figure 6B , blue col - umns ) or constant state for three consecutive days ( Figure 6A , last three ﬁlled orange downward pointing triangles ) . The same training parameters were used for axChR2 , axArchT and GFP experiments . Pitch - contingent auditory feedback ( pCAF , Figures 1A – 1F ) pCAF targets white - noise playback when the pitch of a syllable is below or above an experimenter - deﬁned threshold . Brief pulses of white - noise playback are thought to function as an aversive cue , perhaps perceived as an error in vocal performance ( Tumer and Brainard , 2007 ) . We targeted 100ms pulses of white - noise playback ( 60 - 80 dB SPL ) to low - pitch variants of individual song syllables in seven birds ( single targeted syllable in each bird ) . Birds were acclimated to pCAF acoustic chambers for 3 - 4 days . On the ﬁrst day of the experiment their song was continually recorded in order to establish baseline levels of the pitch for each syllable . Pitch - contingent auditory feedback was started in the morning of the second day . Fast - Scan Cyclic Voltammetry Birdswereanesthetized usingisoﬂuraneanddecapitated . Thebrain wasquickly removed andimmersedin ice - cold oxygenatedzero - sodium ACSF containing the following ( in mM ) : 225 sucrose , 3 KCl , 1 . 25 NaH2PO4 , 26 NaHCO3 , 10 D - ( + ) - glucose , 2 MgSO4 , 2 CaCl2 . Thebrain wasthen cutalong thesagittalplaneandthelateralsideof therightorlefthemispherewasgluedontoa specimen tiltingdisc . The disc was tilted such that the vibratome blade entered the brain at a 10 - 15 (cid:4) angle . Slices ( 300 m m ) containing Area X - Ventral Tegmental Area ( VTA ) were produced using a vibratome ( Leica VT1200 / VT1200S ) and an advancing speed of 0 . 12 mm / s . Slices were incubated in a custom - made holding chamber saturated with 95 % / 5 % O2 / CO2 mix with reduced sodium ACSF containing the following ( in mM ) : 60 NaCl , 75 sucrose , 2 . 5 KCl , 1 . 2 NaH2PO4 , 30 NaHCO3 , 25 D - ( + ) - glucose , 20 HEPES , 2 MgSO4 , 2 CaCl2 at a temperature of 32 (cid:4) C for 40 min . The slices remained in the recovery chamber for at least another 40 min at room temperature before FSCV recording . Slices were transferred to a recording chamber perfused with ACSF contained the following ( in mM ) : 126 NaCl , 3 KCl , 1 . 25 NaH2PO4 , 26 NaHCO3 , 10 D - ( + ) - glucose , 2 MgSO4 , 2 CaCl2 50 m M of L - DOPA ( CAT # 3788 , Tocris , USA ) , perfused at 3 mL min - 1 ) at 31 - 33 C (cid:4) . Stimulation of dopamine ( DA ) release was initiated typically 30 min after transfer to the chamber . Record - ings were made in slices for up to 5 h after cutting . Recordings were conducted using carbon - ﬁber electrodes ( 7 m m ﬁber diameter ) , the exposed carbon ﬁber tip was cut to a length of 30 - 150 m m . The tip of the CFE was gently lowered into the slice to a depth of 50 - 150 m m . The potential applied to the carbon ﬁber was ramped from (cid:3) 0 . 4 V ( versus Ag / AgCl ) to + 1 . 3 V and back at a rate of 400 V / s during a voltammetric scan and held at (cid:3) 0 . 4 V between scans at a frequency of 10 Hz . All extracellular solutions were adjusted to 310 mOsm , pH 7 . 3 - 7 . 4 , and aerated with a 95 % / 5 % O2 / CO2 mix . DA release was evoked either by light emitted from a collimated light - emitting diode ( 470 nm ) driven by a Cube LED Driver pE - 300 ( CoolLED ) under the control of an Axon Digidata 1550B Data Acquisition System and Clampex 10 . 6 or through electrical stimulation . Light was delivered through the reﬂected light ﬂuorescence illuminator port and the X 40 objective . For electrical stimulation a bipolar concentric stimulating electrode was placed in VTA controlled by a stimulus isolator ( A365 , WP ) triggered by Axon Digidata 1550B data Acquisition System and Clampex 10 . 6 . Optimal stimulation employed a single 100ms light pulse . Electrical stimulation used a pulse - train at 50 Hz , 200 - 300 m A , 1 ms pulses , for 50 ms . After establishment of DA release , a laser light source ( 540nm ; (cid:1) 10mW ) was used to illuminate Area X via the light ﬂuorescence illuminator port and the X 40 objective for 100 ms single pulse . Histology Immunohistochemistry experiments were performed following standard procedures . Brieﬂy , birds were anesthetized with Ethanol ( Virbac , TX , USA ) and transcardially perfused with PBS , followed by 4 % paraformaldehyde in PBS . Coronal sections ( 30 m m ) were cut using a freezing microtome ( Leica SM 2010R , Leica ) . Sections were ﬁrst washed in PBS , incubated in PBST ( 0 . 3 % Triton e3 Neuron 98 , 208 – 221 . e1 – e4 , April 4 , 2018 X - 100 in PBS ) for 15min at room temperature ( RT ) and then washed with PBS . Next , sections were blocked in 5 % donkey serum in PBST for 30 min at RT and then incubated with primary antibodies overnight at 4 (cid:4) C . Sections were washed with PBS and incubated with ﬂuorescent secondary antibodies at RT for 1 h . After washing with PBS , sections were mounted onto slides with Fluoromount - G ( eBioscience , CA , USA ) . Composite images were acquired and stitched using a LSM 710 laser - scanning confocal microscope ( Carl Zeiss , Germany ) or an upright compound microscope ( Leica DM5500 B , Leica ) . The primary antibodies used were : rabbit anti - tyrosine hydroxylase ( AB152 , Millipore , Germany ) , rabbit anti - GFP ( A11122 , Invitrogen , CA , USA ) and mouse anti - GFP ( A11120 , Invitrogen , CA , USA ) . Primary antibodies were incubated with appropriate ﬂuorophore - conjugated secondary antibodies ( Life Technologies , Carlsbad , California , USA ) depending on the desired ﬂuorescence color . Localization of probes : post - mortem histology was performed on sectioned ( 30 - 50 mm thick , sagittal ) tissue to conﬁrm placement of optical ﬁber overlaying Area X . Tissue damage , revealed by Nissl ( N21482 , Invitrogen , CA , USA ) and Hoechst stain , indicated the location of the optical ﬁber . QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS Behavioral Analysis All behavioral events were recorded by computer systems ( CAF and SAP2011 program see in Method Details ) . Data analysis for the pitch of targeted syllables were performed using custom software written in MATLAB ( MathWorks ; Natick , Massachusetts ) . All birds subjected for behavior assay were pre - screened , and only birds with well - deﬁned harmonic syllables that permitted reliable detection included . Experiments described in Figure 2 were randomized for allocation of virus or tracer injections . Other experiments were not randomized , but investigators were blinded to allocation and outcome assessments during analysis . Sample sizes were not prede - termined but were comparable to previous related studies ( Andalman and Fee , 2009 ; Tumer and Brainard , 2007 ; Yttri and Dudman , 2016 ) . For our optogenetic experiments 19 birds were excluded from analysis because either 1 ) their song syllables were difﬁcult to reliably target using CAF software ( birds with false positive / negative rates above 10 % , n = 11 birds , 4 axChR2 birds and 7 axArchT birds ) , or 2 ) they were found to have miss - targeted placement of ﬁber optic implants above Area X following processing of tissue sections ( n = 8 birds , 5 axChR2 birds and 3 axArchT birds ) . To summarize effects across syllables , we expressed the daily changes in pitch of targeted syllables as z - scores : z i = p i (cid:3) p i (cid:3) 1 s b p i is the running average of pitch from last session on day i and s b is the standard deviation of last baseline session . d 0 scores were computed to express the changes in mean daily pitch relative to last baseline day for each experimental day : d 0 i = ﬃﬃﬃ 2 p ð P i (cid:3) P b Þ ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ s 2 i + s 2 b p P i is the mean daily pitch on day i and s 2 i is variance . Day b refers to last baseline day . In the case of equal variances ð s 2 i = s 2 b Þ , d 0 i reports the changes in average between experimental day i and baseline day in the unit of SDs . Maximum shift in mean daily pitch was computed as the difference in mean daily pitch between baseline day and the day d’ reaches maximum value ( day max ) . For analysis of spectral characteristics , SAP2011 was used to quantify longer segments ( 15 – 100 ms ) of targeted or non - targeted harmonic stacks . Acoustic features were measured from one time - matched session from baseline day and day max . d’ score for acoustics features were calculated using the same formula as for pitch shift . For analysis of immediate motor effect , the ﬁrst session of stimulation or inhibition day and time - matched session of last baseline day was analyzed . Z scores were computed for hit and escape renditions , using the last baseline session mean and standard deviation within each animal . Statistical Analysis To determine whether parametric tests could be used , the Shapiro - Wilk Test was performed on all data as a test for normality . Unless otherwise noted , statistical signiﬁcance was tested with non - parametric statistical tests ; Wilcoxon signed - rank tests and Wilcoxon rank - sum tests were used where appropriate . Statistical signiﬁcance refers to * p < 0 . 05 , * * p < 0 . 02 . Statistical details for all experiments are included in their corresponding ﬁgure legends . DATA AND SOFTWARE AVAILABILITY Data and custom - written software are available upon request . Neuron 98 , 208 – 221 . e1 – e4 , April 4 , 2018 e4