Advances in the understanding of mast cell function Valeska Heib , 1 Marc Becker , 1 Christian Taube 2 and Michael Stassen 1 1 Institute for Immunology , Johannes Gutenberg University , and 2 III . Medical Clinic , Johannes Gutenberg University , Mainz , Germany Summary Mast cells were formerly thought to contribute mainly to , sometimes even , fatal allergic reactions through the release of biologically highly active cytokines , chemokines , lipid media - tors , proteases and biogenic amines . This potential harmful response is triggered by crosslinking of cell - bound IgE by the respective allergen . This review updates our current under - standing of the emerging roles of mast cells with an emphasis on their relevance in protective host immunity . The activation of mast cells independently of Immunoglobulin E can lead to the initiation of fast inﬂammatory reactions , which were shown to be life - saving in murine models of bacterial infections . Besides their critical functions in innate immunity , mast cells promote and shape the development of adaptive immune responses . Thus , mast cells are increasingly being recognized as sentinels of innate and modulators of adaptive immunity . Keywords : immunoglobulin E , asthma , mucosal immunity , bacterial infections , innate immunity , adaptive immunity . Since ancient times , mast cells have been part of host defence . Even Ciona intestinalis , an urochordate that is regarded as an ancestor of both cephalochordates and vertebrates some 550 million years ago , contains cells that closely resemble mammalian connective tissue - type mast cells in that they contain electron - dense granules which stain metachromatic with toluidine blue due to the presence of large amounts of heparin - proteoglycan - protease complexes . Furthermore , just like their mammalian counterparts , these cells are also able to release histamine and Prostaglandin D2 ( Stevens & Adachi , 2007 ) . Thus , mast cells evolved long before cells of the adaptive immune system entered the arena and are being preserved . In mammals , the potential harmful immunoglobulin E ( IgE ) - mast cell - allergy axis has been described in detail and overshadowed the contribution of mast cells in protective host defence . After spending decades in the doldrums , we now witness the come back of mast cells as critical effectors and modulators of innate and adaptive immunity . This review will brieﬂy summarize some important mast cell basics and give an update on the role of mast cells in critical IgE - mediated reactions , including expulsion of gastrointestinal nematodes and allergic asthma . However , the main focus of the present article is on the contribution of mast cells in protective immune responses , as the involvements of mast cells in allergic and autoimmune diseases have been summarized recently ( Benoist & Mathis , 2002 ; Theoharides & Kalogeromi - tros , 2006 ) . Mast cell - deﬁcient mice have become precious tools and greatly accelerated research in this ﬁeld , therefore we will place emphasis on murine data and models ; recent ﬁndings on human mast cells have been extensively reviewed elsewhere ( Bischoff , 2007 ) . Mast cell development , tools , and basics Mast cells reside in all vascularized tissues and particularly high mast cell numbers can be found at the interfaces of host and environment , i . e . in skin and mucosal surfaces . Kitamura et al ( 1977 ) ﬁrst showed that mast cells derive from bone marrow precursors . Using the abnormal giant cellular granules of beige mice ( C57BL - Bg J / Bg J ) as a traceable marker , they found that tissue mast cells developed from grafted beige bone marrow in irradiated wild type recipient mice . Mast cells are inconspic - uous in histological sections unless stained with dyes like toluidine blue , binding to negatively charged proteoglycans stored within cytoplasmic granules ( Kitamura , 1989 ) . Based on their speciﬁc staining characteristics , morphologically distinct subpopulations of rodent mast cells were initially identiﬁed as connective tissue mast cells ( CTMC ) and mucosal mast cells ( MMC ) , and heterogeneity among human mast cells also exists ( see Table I ) . It is striking that mast cells , following transfer from one anatomical site to a different one , can interchange their phenotype , underlining the importance of the microen - vironment for differentiation ( Kitamura et al , 1987 ) . The most outstanding growth factor for both murine and human mast cells is stem cell factor ( SCF ) , the ligand for CD117 / c - kit ( Li & Krilis , 1999 ) . Furthermore , interleukin 3 ( IL - 3 ) is critical for the development of murine mast cells from their bone marrow precursors in vitro . However , IL - 3 is not essential for the development of murine mast cells in vivo , as IL - 3 - deﬁcient Correspondence : Dr Michael Stassen , Institute for Immunology , Johannes Gutenberg University , Hochhaus am Augustusplatz , 55131 Mainz , Germany . E - mail : stassenm @ uni - mainz . de Some of the work reviewed herein was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft , grants STA984 / 1 - 1 and SFB548 ( A10 ) to M . S . and SFB548 ( A11 ) to C . T . review ª 2008 The Authors First published online 30 May 2008 Journal Compilation ª 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd , British Journal of Haematology , 142 , 683 – 694 doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1365 - 2141 . 2008 . 07244 . x mice display no mast cell deﬁciency . Yet , their ability to develop intestinal mastocytosis following nematode infections is impaired ( Lantz et al , 1998 ) , and it is still controversial as to whether IL - 3 also inﬂuences differentiation and proliferation of human mast cells . IL - 3 is commonly recommended for the generation of mast cells from progenitors in human cord blood and it was reported that cord blood - derived mast cells expressed the IL - 3 receptor during development and as matured cells ( Dahl et al , 2004 ) . Nevertheless , IL - 3 does not affect the differentiation of human mast cells derived from bone marrow CD34 + progenitors ( Shimizu et al , 2008 ) . The importance of SCF as a mast cell growth factor is underscored by the fact that mice with certain loss - of - function mutations ( see Table II ) affecting either SCF or its receptor CD117 are devoid of mast cells ( Kitamura et al , 2000 ; Grimbaldeston et al , 2005 ; Wolters et al , 2005 ) . Such mice are valuable tools in order to study the role of mast cells in vivo . Importantly , mice with defective CD117 can be reconstituted systemically or locally with mast cells derived from bone marrow or embryonic stem cells in vitro ( Tsai et al , 2000 ) . Using mast cells obtained from mice with genetic deﬁciencies for reconstitution , the inﬂuence of mast cell - derived signals can thus be elegantly analysed in vivo . Gain - of - function mutations of CD117 are associated with mastocytosis , a neoplastic human disease characterised by the expansion and accumulation of mast cells in different tissues Table I . Predominant murine and human mast cell subsets and their characteristics . Mast cell type Tissue distribution Protease Biogenic amine Proteoglycan Murine mucosal ( MMC ) Lung and nasal mucosa , intestinal lamina propria mMCP - 1 , - 2 Histamine , serotonin Chondroitin sulphate Murine connective tissue ( CTMC ) Skin , peritoneum mMCP - 3 , - 4 , - 5 , - 6 carboxypeptidase Histamine , serotonin Heparin Human MC T Intestinal and nasal mucosa , lung alveolar wall Tryptase Histamine Heparin , chondroitin sulphate Human MC TC Intestinal submucosa , skin Tryptase , chymase , carboxypeptidase , cathepsin G Histamine Heparin , chondroitin sulphate Murine mast cells are termed according to their tissue localization , human mast cells according to their protease content . MC T most closely correspond to murine MMC , whereas MC TC resemble murine CTMC . Murine CTMC can be distinguished from murine MMC by staining with safranin due to the presence of large amounts of heparin in secretory granules . mMCP , mast cell protease . Table II . Commonly used strains of mast cell - deﬁcient mice and their properties . Genotype Mutation Phenotype Mast cell - deﬁciency restored following injection of SCF Mast cell - deﬁciency restored following injection of mast cells Sl / Sl d Sl ( ‘‘Steel’’ ) encodes an allele for SCF which contains a deletion encompassing most , if not all , of the coding region . Sl d ( ‘‘Steel Dickie’’ ) encodes a soluble truncated protein lacking both transmembrane and cytoplasmic domains . Anaemia , white coat colour due to absence of melanocytes , sterility due to lack of germ cells , depletion of mast cells and interstitial cells of Cajal ( ICC ) . Yes No Kit W / W - v W ( ‘‘white spotting’’ ) mutant allele encodesac - kitproteinnotexpressed on the cell surface due to the lack of the transmembrane domain . W - v ( ‘‘viable white spotting’’ ) encodes a point mutation at the tyrosine kinase domain , leading to decreased activity . Anaemia , white coat colour due to absence of melanocytes , sterility due to lack of germ cells , depletion of mast cells and ICC . No Yes Kit W - sh Sh ( ‘‘sash’’ ) is an inversion mutation affecting regulatory elements upstream of the transcriptional start site of kit . White coat colour due to absence of melanocytes , lack of mast cells and ICC . No Yes Review ª 2008 The Authors 684 Journal Compilation ª 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd , British Journal of Haematology , 142 , 683 – 694 and organs . The underlying activating CD117 mutations lead to constitutional CD117 phosphorylation and activation of downstream events independent of SCF binding ( reviewed by Orfao et al , 2007 ) . Mast cells do not complete their differentiation in the bone marrow but mature in tissues under the inﬂuence of the local micromilieu . Consequently , mature mast cells cannot be found in the circulation . Rodewald et al ( 1996 ) ﬁrst identiﬁed mast cell - committed progenitors ( MCPs ) in blood collected from late murine embryos . These progenitors already contain some cytoplasmic granules , express CD117 and mRNAs encoding mast cell - speciﬁc proteases but still lack expression of the high - afﬁnity receptor for IgE , Fc e RI . Recently , MCPs were also identiﬁed in adult murine bone marrow based on the expression of the integrin b 7 ( Chen et al , 2005 ) , and a bipotent mast cell and basophil progenitor has been found in the mouse spleen , although this has not yet been traced back to the bone marrow ( Arinobu et al , 2005 ) . These bipotent progenitor cells were shown to differentiate into mast cells in vivo and give rise to basophils in vitro , yet it has to be shown whether these cells also provide basophils in vivo . However , the issue of mast cell development is still controversial ( Hallgren & Gurish , 2007 ) . Kocabas et al ( 2005 ) used the D816V mutation of CD117 as a signature in patients with systemic mastocytosis to investigate the lineage relationship between mast cells and basophils . Basophils with this mutation were only detected when cells of other lineages ( monocytes , neutrophils ) were also affected , which strongly argues against the presence of a bilineage - restricted committed progenitor for mast cells and basophils in men . The requirements for homing of MCPs to peripheral tissues remained unknown until recently , when Gurish et al ( 2001 ) showed that constitutive basal homing to the small intestine in mice was directed by binding of the a 4 b 7 integrin expressed on mast cells to the ‘‘mucosal address in cell adhesion molecule - 1’’ ( MAdCAM - 1 ) and to ‘‘vascular cell adhesion molecule - 1’’ ( VCAM - 1 ) as endothelial counterligands for this integrin . Furthermore , homing to the intestine is also controlled by the a chemokine receptor 2 expressed on MCPs . Inﬂammation - induced recruitment of MCPs to the lungs was shown to require both a 4 b 7 and a 4 b 1 binding to VCAM - 1 , implicating organ - speciﬁc control of MCP inﬂux ( Gurish & Boyce , 2006 ) . Interestingly , the transcription factor T - bet , although not expressed in mast cells , plays an important role in homing of MCPs to mucosal tissues and it was reported that T - bet expression in dendritic cells ( DCs ) is required for efﬁcient MCP homing ( Alcaide et al , 2007 ) . IgE and mast cells : a fatal connection in mucosal immunity ? It has long been recognized that reactivity to an allergen can be transferred from an allergic donor to a non - allergic recipient by intradermal injection of serum containing skin - sensitizing antibodies or ‘‘reagins’’ . However , it took until the 1960s to identify the reaginic activity to the experimental allergen ‘‘ragweed antigen E’’ as a novel class of immunoglobulins , the IgE class . At the beginning of the 1970s , release of histamine and ‘‘slow reacting substance of anaphylaxis’’ from mast cells following crosslinking of cell - bound IgE by allergen was demonstrated ( Ishizaka , 1985 ) . Since then , mast cells have had the reputation as ‘‘allergy cells’’ . The role of mast cells in mucosal pathophysiology is probably best exempliﬁed by their impact on allergic asthma , which is a syndrome characterized by airway inﬂammation , airway obstruction and airway hyperresponsiveness ( AHR ) . Airway inﬂammation commonly is comprised by activated T - cells , eosinophils and also mast cells . In the human airways mast cells can be found adjacent to blood vessels in the lamina propria . Interestingly , in patients with asthma , mast cells also migrate into other structures , such as the airway epithelium ( Bradding et al , 1994 ) , the mucous glands ( Carroll et al , 2002 ) and airway smooth muscle ( Brightling et al , 2002 ) . This anatomical prox - imity to key structures involved in asthma and in vitro evidence for direct interactions between mast cells and e . g . airway smooth muscle cells ( Yang et al , 2006 ) suggests that mast cells play a signiﬁcant role in the pathophysiology of this disease . However , investigating the function of mast cells in murine models of allergic airway disease led to controversial results . Studies using models of systemic sensitization with adjuvant have repeatedly shownasimilardegree ofAHRandairway inﬂammationinmast cell - orIgE - deﬁcient micecompared torespectivewild typemice ( Taube et al , 2004a ) . In most of these studies , animals were sensitized systemically by injection of allergen in combination with an adjuvant ( mostly aluminium hydroxide ) and subse - quently challenged via the airways . Indeed , aluminium hydrox - ide can strongly enhance T H 2 polarisation in the system ( Brewer et al , 1999 ) and the use of this adjuvant could potentially mask the role of other cells and mediators in this setting . Using ‘‘less potent’’ protocols , a prominent role for mast cells in the development of allergic airway disease has emerged and mast cells have been shown to be necessary for the induction of allergen - induced airway disease in several models with different sensitization protocols ( Kung et al , 1995 ; Ogawa et al , 1999 ; Williams & Galli , 2000 ; Taube et al , 2004b ; Yu et al , 2006 ) . Mast cells can be activated through a variety of different stimuli ( Stassen et al , 2002a ) , which will also be discussed later in this article , and in the context of allergic airway disease this occurs primarily through IgE / allergen - mediated crosslinking of Fc e RI . Recent studies by Yu et al ( 2006 ) showed that the expression of the Fc receptor c chain in mast cells , which is necessary for the surface expression of the Fc c receptor I , Fc c receptor III and Fc e RI receptor , is critical for the induction of most features of allergen - induced lung pathology . Studies in a model of allergen inhalation have suggested that activation through Fc e RI , which in mice is only displayed on mast cells and basophils , contributes to increased airway reactivity ( Taube et al , 2004b ) . However , mast cells can also be activated by IgE - independent mechanisms , e . g . through toll - like recep - tors ( TLRs ) , and might worsen already established allergic Review ª 2008 The Authors Journal Compilation ª 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd , British Journal of Haematology , 142 , 683 – 694 685 airway disease . Indeed , the administration of bacterial lipo - polysaccharide ( LPS ) , particularly at low doses , can enhance eosinophilic airway inﬂammation following sensitization and airway challenge . Interestingly , administration of LPS to mast - cell - deﬁcient mice , similar to TLR4 - deﬁcient mice , does not lead to an exacerbation of airway inﬂammation ( Nigo et al , 2006 ; Murakami et al , 2007 ) . Reconstitution of mast cell - deﬁcient mice with TLR4 - deﬁcient mast cells does also not restore the increased eosinophilic inﬂammation ( Nigo et al , 2006 ) . These studies showed that mast cells are not only mere effector cells but rather induce the development and modulate airway disease . Furthermore , they illustrated that , in addition to IgE - dependent - , IgE - independent activation of mast cells can also inﬂuence the course of allergic diseases . Despite several studies demonstrating a contribution of mast cells in the development of acute and chronic allergic airway disease , little is known about which mast cell - derived mediator ( s ) may be necessary for these responses . Following activation , mast cells are capable of releasing a host of pleiotropic mediators , including proteases , lipid mediators , cytokines and chemokines . Some of these mediators have been linked to the development of allergic airway disease , but it remains unclear if mast cells are an essential source for them as other cells might also contribute to their production . Indeed , IL - 13 has been repeatedly shown to be a central effector cytokine in allergic airway disease ( Wills - Karp et al , 1998 ; Taube et al , 2002 ) . However , the production of IL - 13 by mast cells seems not to be a necessity for the induction of increased airway reactivity following inhaled allergen chal - lenge ( Taube et al , 2004b ) . On the other hand , specialized adoptive transfer models have suggested a role of mast cell - derived lipid mediators for the recruitment of allergen - speciﬁc CD8 + T effector cells into the lung ( Taube et al , 2006 ) , which are necessary for the development of allergen - speciﬁc lung pathology ( Miyahara et al , 2004 ) . Further mediators produced by mast cells are histamine and tumour necrosis factor - a ( TNF - a ) . Indeed , the expression of histamine receptor 1 on T cells induces their migration and is associated with the development of allergic airway disease ( Bryce et al , 2006 ) . Mast cells have the capability to store and rapidly release TNF - a following activation , and this cytokine has been associated with many mast cell - dependent inﬂammatory responses . TNF - a has been implicated during the induction of allergic airway disease in studies using human lung ( Casale et al , 1996 ) but also in murine models ( Busse et al , 2005 ; Choi et al , 2005 ) . Following allergen challenge , mast cell - deﬁcient mice express lower levels of TNF - a in bronchoalve - olar lavage ( BAL ) ﬂuid , and reconstitution with bone marrow - derived mast cells restored BAL ﬂuid levels of TNF - a and AHR ( Kim et al , 2007 ) . Recently , reduced AHR and airway inﬂammation was demonstrated in TNF - a - deﬁcient mice ( Nakae et al , 2007a ) . Using mast cell reconstitution models , it was recently shown that TNF - a production from mast cells is necessary to induce AHR , airway inﬂammation and mucus production in the airways ( Nakae et al , 2007b ; Reuter et al , 2008 ) . This has also potential clinical relevance , as patients with asthma demonstrate improvements following treatment with TNF - a neutralizing antibodies ( Howarth et al , 2005 ; Berry et al , 2006 ; Erin et al , 2006 ) . Mast cell - derived TNF - a might affect the various features of allergic airway disease by different mechanisms . Based on current knowledge , it is conceivable that migration of dendritic cells from the lung to the regional lymph nodes is impaired in the presence of TNF - a - deﬁcient mast cells ( van Rijt et al , 2005 ) . This assumption is substantiated by reports showing that IgE - dependent mast cell activation induces Langerhans cell ( LC ) migration ( Jawdat et al , 2004 ) and that mast cell - derived TNF - a directly inﬂuences dendritic cell migration from the lung ( Suto et al , 2006 ) . However , a direct effect on T cells can also be suggested , as TNF - a from mast cells can directly inﬂuence T cell activation and proliferation ( Nakae et al , 2005 , 2006 ) . Indeed , Nakae et al ( 2007a ) suggested that local T cell activation is inﬂuenced by mast cell - derived TNF - a . Besides the function of mast cells as armed effector cells of allergy , these recent examples strongly suggest that these cells are also able to promote or modulate the development of adaptive immune responses , which will be outlined below . In the search for protective functions of mast cells in IgE - mediated host immunity , it was noted that mast cells were involved in the expulsion of some ( e . g . Trichinella spiralis , Strongyloides spec . ) but not all parasitic gastrointestinal nem - atodes in rodents ( reviewed by Finkelman & Urban , 2001 ) . A characteristic feature of infection with intestinal helminths , which affects an estimated 1000 million people world - wide , is the induction of a prominent Th2 - type immune response , characterized by high numbers of CD4 + T cells , elevated levels of Th2 cytokines such as IL - 4 , IL - 5 , IL - 9 and IL - 13 , as well as large amounts of IgE in the serum . Yet , unlike in atopy to allergens , most of the IgE produced upon helminth infections is polyclonal and not parasite - speciﬁc and anaphylactic reactions hardly occur in infected patients ( Erb , 2007 ) . Woodbury et al ( 1984 ) were the ﬁrst to show that mucosal mast cells in infected rats are activated and release mast cell protease - 2 during expulsion of nematodes . An interesting underlying mechanical explanation for the expulsion of T . spiralis observed in mice is that mast cells increase intestinal permeability by mast cell protease 1 ( mMCP - 1 ) - mediated destruction of the tight junction protein occludin ( McDermott et al , 2003 ) . The resulting ﬂow of liquid obviously helps to ‘‘wash away’’ the parasite . This protease is constitutively expressed in intestinal mucosal mast cells and its expression and release increases in helminthic infections ( Scudamore et al , 1997 ; Wastling et al , 1997 ) . In line with this , it was shown that mice lacking mMCP - 1 display reduced intestinal inﬂammation ( Lawrence et al , 2004 ) and impaired expulsion of T . spiralis ( Knight et al , 2000 ) . Thus , the development of mast cell - dependent enter - opathy leading to the expulsion of parasites may also cause damage to the host . Review ª 2008 The Authors 686 Journal Compilation ª 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd , British Journal of Haematology , 142 , 683 – 694 Mast cells in innate immunity Within the last decade , mast cells came to the fore as key players in the innate immune response against bacterial infections in murine models . In their seminal work on acute septic peritonitis , Echtenacher et al ( 1996 ) reported that mast cells are indispensable to survive caecum ligation and puncture ( CLP ) . In this study , all mast cell - deﬁcient mice died within 5 d in response to fecal peritonitis whereas their wild - type littermates exhibited only 25 % mortality . Furthermore , the authors showed that TNF - a signiﬁcantly contributes to the rescue of CLP - treated mice . These ﬁndings were corroborated by the group of Malaviya et al ( 1996a ) , demonstrating that mast cell - deﬁcient mice showed limited bacterial clearance and impaired neutrophil recruitment upon infection with Klebsiella pneumoniae . Importantly , in both models the diminished ability of mast cell - deﬁcient animals to efﬁciently combat infections was restored following adoptive transfer of mast cells . In the meantime , several other models conﬁrmed that mast cell - deﬁcient mice display reduced innate responses against bacterial infections ( recently reviewed by Dawicki & Marshall , 2006 ) . Besides TNF - a , mast cell - derived leucotrienes ( Malaviya & Abraham , 2000 ) , mouse mast cell protease 6 ( mMCP - 6 ; Huang et al , 1998 ; Thakurdas et al , 2007 ) and macrophage inﬂammatory protein - 2 ( MIP - 2 , the murine equivalent of IL - 8 ; Mercer - Jones et al , 1999 ) were shown to be critical for an early and protective neutrophil inﬂux into inﬂamed tissues . The available data imply that mMCP - 6 triggers the release of MIP - 2 from endothelial cells , which in turn enhances the release of mast cell - derived TNF - a , followed by sustained secretion of leucotrienes . In this context , the unique ability of mast cells to store preformed TNF - a ( Gordon & Galli , 1990 ) , which can be released upon demand within minutes , is of outstanding importance to initiate inﬂamma - tion , as TNF - a enables the fast recruitment of neutrophils ( Stassen et al , 2002b ) . This critical role of mast cell - derived TNF - a was shown in a model for immune complex - mediated peritonitis in mice ( Zhang et al , 1992 ) . Five minutes after i . v . injection of antigen and i . p . application of antigen - speciﬁc antibody , a ﬁrst wave of TNF - a appeared in the peritoneal cavity of wild - type mice , which had declined by 15 min , and a second pulse of grater magnitude appeared between 4 to 8 h after the challenge . This ﬁrst wave of TNF - a was absent in mast cell - deﬁcient mice and the second peak was reduced by 60 % , but TNF - a production could be fully restored upon transfer of mast cells . Consequently , inﬂux of neutrophils into the peritoneal cavity of mast cell - deﬁcient mice was delayed and diminished . The ability of mast cells to control infections is based on the expression of a whole variety of receptors leading to the activation of these cells independently of IgE , including TLRs , complement receptors and CD48 , binding to the FimH subunit of type 1 - ﬁmbriated E . coli ( Stassen et al , 2002a ; Marshall , 2004 ; Matsushima et al , 2004 ) . It was reported that mast cells are able to phagocytose and kill adherent bacteria ( Malaviya et al , 1994 ) . Furthermore , mast cells are able to present antigens from engulfed bacteria to T cells ( Malaviya et al , 1996b ) . TLR4 - mediated recognition of LPS by mast cells was shown to be essential for their protective role in CLP ( Supajatura et al , 2001 ) and also strongly enhances expression of Th2 - type cytokines ( Stassen et al , 2001 ) . In inﬂammatory settings , complement was repeatedly shown to be critically involved in mast cell activation . Complement component C3 - deﬁcient mice are unable to activate all three complement pathways , including classical , alternate and man - nose binding pathways . Such mice were found to be much more sensitive to CLP and exhibit reductions in peritoneal mast cell degranulation , production of TNF - a , neutrophil inﬁltration and clearance of bacteria ( Prodeus et al , 1997 ) . Peptidoglycan ( PGN ) from Gram - positive bacteria was also recently shown to activate mast cells via complement in vivo , and not , as might be expected , through TLR2 ( Jawdat et al , 2006 ) . Mast cells express receptors for the ‘‘anaphylatoxins’’ C3a and C5a , and recently it was also reported that mast cells are able to bind the complement factor C1q via the integrin a 2 b 1 ( Edelson et al , 2006 ) . Ligation of this integrin on mast cells was shown to promote mast cell - mediated inﬂammatory reactions , most likely by contributing to mast cell activation and cytokine secretion ( Edelson et al , 2004 , 2006 ) . A non - immunological trigger for mast cells with impact on mast cell - mediated inﬂammation is the neuropeptide neu - romedin U ( NMU ) . According to a recent report ( Moriyama et al , 2005 ) , NMU activates mast cells to degranulate in vivo via a speciﬁc receptor , thereby initiating inﬂammation . NMU is not the only neuropeptide able to activate mast cells ( Bauer & Razin , 2000 ) but , unlike other neuropeptides , it is expressed in epidermal cells and released by injection of complete Freunds adjuvant ( CFA ) , an inducer of mast cell - mediated inﬂammation . A variety of substances were shown to activate mast cells without a need for speciﬁc receptors , including bacterial toxins and polycationic compounds like defensins ( Stassen et al , 2002a , 2003 ) . Defensins are small cationic peptides divided into a - defensins , stored in neutrophil granules , and b - defen - sins , which are mainly expressed in epithelial cells . Together with the group of cathelicidins these antimicrobial peptides are regarded as ‘‘natural antibiotics’’ ( Eckmann , 2005 ) . Interest - ingly , defensins induce degranulation of mast cells ( Befus et al , 1999 ) which in turn are able to release several antimicrobial peptides , thereby exerting antimicrobial defence ( Di et al , 2003 ; Chen et al , 2007 ) . Furthermore , at sites of acute inﬂammation , this might allow bidirectional communication between mast cells and neutrophils ( Befus et al , 1999 ) . Another group of endogenous peptides , but of non - immunological origin , are the endothelins ( ETs ) . They were ﬁrst described as potent vasoconstricting peptides produced by endothelial cells , able to promote severe pathophysiological reactions like in septic shock ( Hultner & Ehrenreich , 2005 ) . Mast cells can undergo ET - dependent activation and they also release pro - teases that degrade ETs . These abilities enable mast cells to Review ª 2008 The Authors Journal Compilation ª 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd , British Journal of Haematology , 142 , 683 – 694 687 counteract the otherwise fatal toxicity induced by high concentrations of ETs ( Maurer et al , 2004 ) . Mast cell - derived carboxypeptidase A was also recently shown to detoxify sarafotoxins , a group of toxins in snake venom , which display high homology to ETs ( Metz et al , 2006 ) . Intriguingly , mast cells have the ability to ﬂexibly respond to stimulation , depending on the nature and dose of the stimulating agent . With respect to IgE - mediated triggering , it was reported that low concentrations of antigen or low occupancy of mast cells with IgE favours production of leucocyte - attracting chemokines in the absence of considerable degranulation ( Gonzalez - Espinosa et al , 2003 ) . A variety of studies investigating IgE - independent mast cell triggers , including TLRs , also revealed that degranulation and release of cytokines do not necessarily have to be coupled . Differential release of distinct mediators without degranulation was shown to involve small vesicles unrelated to the large ( approximately 1 l m ) secretory granules ( reviewed in Theoharides et al , 2007 ; Malaviya & Abraham , 2001 ) . This plasticity enables mast cells to initiate both fatal IgE - triggered anaphylactic responses and life - saving inﬂammatory reactions . In the latter case , careful release of proinﬂammatory mediators without extensive degranulation permits the function of mast cells in innate and acquired immunity , as discussed below . A novel concept : mast cells as a hinge between innate and adaptive immunity The development of efﬁcient speciﬁc immune responses against pathogens critically relies on the fast initiation of innate reactions with an adequate penetrating power . If successful , such responses culminate in local inﬂammations , thereby setting the stage on which cells of the adaptive immune system are primed and can act . As summarized so far in this review , mast cells turned out to be potent initiators of inﬂammatory reactions . Therefore , it might well be that these cells are suitable to promote the development of adaptive immune responses as well . Strong evidence for a role of mast cells in the induction of an adaptive response was reported by Wang et al ( 1998 ) , investigating a murine model for 2 , 4 - dinitroﬂuorobenzene ( DNFB ) - induced contact hypersensitivity ( CHS ) . This study showed that skin mast cells degranulated in response to sensitisation with the hapten DNFB , and that local mast cell numbers decreased by half , accompanied by a 5 - fold expansion of mast cells in draining lymph nodes ( LNs ) . Using ﬂuorescently labelled mast cells , the authors demonstrated migration of these cells from the DNFB - treated skin to the regional LNs . Importantly , in the above - mentioned study ( Wang et al , 1998 ) and in an addi - tional report ( Tedla et al , 1998 ) , mast cells in LNs were found to produce MIP - 1 b , which was shown to promote T cell recruitment . These studies were extended by the observation that mast cells strongly support LN hypertrophy after bacterial infection , which critically depends on mast cell - derived TNF - a , also triggering the recruitment of circulating T cells ( McLach - lan et al , 2003 ) . In the latter study , the authors did not see any increase in nodal mast cell numbers , suggesting that mast cell - derived TNF - a is not produced locally but drains into LN via afferent lymphatics within a few hours following mast cell activation . Thus , depending on the model , migration of mast cells to the draining LN seems not to be necessary . Taken together , these studies already proposed critical roles for mast cells and mast cell - derived products with respect to the initiation of an adaptive response , as LNs provide the platform for the interaction of antigen - presenting cells ( APCs ) with cells of the adaptive immune system . These reports were supple - mented by Bryce et al ( 2004 ) who demonstrated crucial functions for both IgE and mast cells during the sensitization phase to the chemical hapten oxazolone . For efﬁcient sensi - tization to occur , both mast cells and IgE have to be present , irrespective of the antigen speciﬁcity of IgE , whereas , upon re - exposure to the antigen , only the presence of mast cells is required and IgE is dispensable . Importantly , the authors showed for the ﬁrst time that reduction of Langerhans cells ( LCs ) in the epidermis following hapten exposure is impaired in both IgE - and mast cell - deﬁcient animals . Upon their ability to deliver antigen to the draining LN , LCs are important APCs in the skin . Thus , this ﬁnding strongly suggested that mast cells might promote the development of an adaptive immune response by controlling migration of APCs . Jawdat et al ( 2004 ) employed passive cutaneous anaphylaxis ( PCA ) in order to demonstrate that local IgE - mediated activation of mast cells provides an important signal for migration of LCs to the LNs . Following blockade of H2 histamine receptor in mice , migration of LCs is severely impaired , although injection of histamine alone in order to mimic the local effects of mast cells has no effect on LC migration , indicating that additional mast cell - derived factors are necessary . In another study , mast cell - derived TNF - a was shown to promote migration of LC 24 h after topical application of the contact allergen ﬂuorescein isothiocyanate ( FITC ) , but levels of DC migration in both mast cell - deﬁcient and TNF - a - deﬁcient mice caught up with and ﬁnally even exceeded those observed in wild - type animals 48 – 72 h after hapten application ( Suto et al , 2006 ) . Thus , in this approach , mast cells are obviously able to accelerate the migration of LC . However , 6 d following hapten exposure , identical levels of T cell proliferation induced upon restimu - lation with FITC ex vivo were measured in wild - type , mast cell - and TNF - a - deﬁcient mice , indicating that mast cells are not required to drive an adaptive T cell response in this model . Analyzing the host response to mosquito bites , Demeure et al ( 2005 ) revealed that components of mosquito saliva induce degranulation of dermal mast cells , causing extravasa - tion of ﬂuid , inﬂux of neutrophils , enhanced migration of CD11c + DC to the LN and mast cell - dependent LN hypertro - phy , although the latter appeared to be independent of TNF - a . With respect to the role of TNF - a for LN hypertrophy , Jawdat et al ( 2006 ) reported that peptidoglycan ( PGN ) , a cell wall component of gram positive bacteria , induces mast cell - dependent LN hypertrophy independent of TNF - a , whereas Review ª 2008 The Authors 688 Journal Compilation ª 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd , British Journal of Haematology , 142 , 683 – 694 hypertrophy induced by crosslinking IgE on mast cells requires TNF - a . In line with this , injection of PGN also promotes mast cell - dependent migration of LCs , which only partly depends on TNF - a , whereas migration induced by IgE - mediated activation is TNF - a dependent . The apparent discrepancies with respect to the role of TNF - a for both LN hypertrophy and LC migration are most probably due to the release of a distinct panel of mast cell mediators under speciﬁc activation condi - tions . The authors of the latter study showed that treatment of bone marrow - derived mast cells ( BMMCs ) with PGN does not induce production of TNF - a ; this is in sharp contrast to crosslinking of IgE which causes the production of large amounts of this cytokine . Notably , neither hypertrophy of LNs nor migration of LCs requires TLR2 or the adapter molecule MyD88 but depend on complement component C3 , indicating that PGN acts via activation of the complement cascade independent of TLR signaling in vivo . Taken together , the studies cited above strongly suggest that mast cells can contribute to the sensitization phase of acquired immune responses by virtue of their ability to produce mediators that can promote migration of APCs and that also enable regional LNs to become the meeting point of APCs and cells of the adaptive branch of the immune system ( Fig 1 ) . Consequently , a recent publication established a link between mast cells and the ability of mice to mount a peptide - speciﬁc cytotoxic T lymphocyte ( CTL ) response following transcuta - neous immunization ( Heib et al , 2007 ) . Immunization was carried out by topical application of the synthetic TLR7 agonist imiquimod as adjuvant in combination with the major histocompatibility complex ( MHC ) class I - restricted CTL peptide SIINFEKL . In this model , mast cells activated via TLR7 were responsible for the induction of a fast inﬂammatory reaction and they also promoted the migration of LCs to the draining LNs and LN hyperplasia . Mast cell - derived IL - 1 and TNF - a are both required for the induction of a fast inﬂam - matory skin reaction , whereas migration of LC partly depends on IL - 1 and LN hypertrophy on TNF - a produced by mast cells . Importantly , as shown in this report , the ability to mount a peptide - speciﬁc CTL response following transcutaneous immunization was severely impaired in mast cell - deﬁcient mice . This demonstrates that mast cells are able to bridge the gap between innate and adaptive immune reactions under certain conditions . However , immunization with mature peptide - loaded DCs elicits a potent CTL response in mast cell - deﬁcient mice , comparable to that seen in wild - type animals ( Heib et al , 2007 ) . Thus , using vigorous immunization Damaged host / environment interface Vessel Endothelium Recruitment of neutrophils ( immediate ) , macrophages , APC and T cells ( sustained ) Invading pathogens Chemotaxis Phagocytosis and Killing of Bacteria Immediate ( TNF - α , histamine ) and sustained response ( eicosanoids , chemokines , cytokines ) Mast Defensins Pathogeniccomponents Complement Neuropeptides Immunocomplexes Innate response T T T T T Release of armed effector T cells Adaptiveresponse APC Antigen loading Migration APC T Recruitment of naive T cells Antigen presentation in regional lymph node I L - 1 , T N F - α T N F - α , m i g r a t i on t o l y m ph nod es , l o ca l p r odu c t i on o f c h e m o k i n es T Mast Modulation of Activity T T N F - α , O X 40 - O X 40 L T T T T T Fig 1 . Mast cells activated independently of IgE / antigen are able to initiate fast inﬂammatory reactions characterized by the inﬂux of neutrophils able to phagocytose and kill bacteria . Furthermore , mast cells also promote the development of an adaptive response by secretion of cytokines ( TNF - a and IL - 1 ) , which act on the migration of antigen - loaded antigen - presenting cells ( APCs ) to the lymph nodes ( LNs ) , and by inducing hypertrophy of LNs . In addition , mast cells might also migrate to the LNs and produce chemokines important for the recruitment of naı¨ve T cells to the side of priming . Recall responses of T cells can also be enhanced locally by mast cell - derived TNF - a and by ligands for T cell costimulatory molecules expressed on mast cells . For details please refer to the text . Review ª 2008 The Authors Journal Compilation ª 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd , British Journal of Haematology , 142 , 683 – 694 689 protocols , the function of mast cells can be bypassed . This phenomenon also explains why mouse models for allergic airway disease employing strong immunization approaches repeatedly showed comparable symptoms in mast cell - deﬁcient and wild - type mice ( discussed above ) . Hence , the investigation of potentially mast cell - dependent phenomena in vivo requires careful consideration of such parameters . The ability of mast cells to promote and even to shape acquired immune responses was further corroborated by Maurer et al ( 2006 ) , investigating host defence mechanisms in Leishmania major infections . Compared to wild - type littermates , mast cell - deﬁcient mice infected with this parasite develop larger skin lesions and recruitment of inﬂammatory cells including DC is impaired . In line with this , the appearance of parasite - speciﬁc T cells is signiﬁcantly delayed . Notably , in mast cell - deﬁcient mice the T cell response is skewed toward an unprotective Th2 priming . CD11c + infected DCs are crucial for the initiation of a protective Th1 - driven immune response against L . major , therefore the impaired local recruitment of IL - 12 producing DCs is supposedly responsible for the delayed and shifted T cell response . Besides their inﬂuence on APCs , evidence accumulates that mast cells are also able to directly enhance T cell activity . This was shown to require mast cell – T cell contact and TNF - a ( Nakae et al , 2005 ) . Furthermore , mast cells express various ligands for costimulatory molecules on T cells , and it was reported that the application of neutralizing antibodies to OX40L reduces mast cell - mediated enhancement of T cell activity ( Nakae et al , 2006 ) . One outstanding observation with respect to the conse - quences of mast cell – T cell interactions was based on the ﬁnding that mast cell - and T regulatory cell ( Treg ) - associated genes are expressed in tolerated skin grafts ( Zelenika et al , 2001 ) . This led to the assumption that mast cells and Tregs somehow cooperate to mediate graft tolerance , which was further corroborated by the ﬁnding that mast cell - deﬁcient mice do not develop long - term allograft tolerance unless such mice receive mast cells from in vitro cultures ( Lu et al , 2006 ) . Tregs are of vital importance to limit autoaggressive reactions and the emerging relationship between Tregs and mast cells will certainly galvanize research in this ﬁeld . Quo vadis , mast cell ? Mast cells can be traced back a long way down the evolutionary tree . The best explanation for this phenomenon is their potent role in life - saving innate inﬂammatory reactions that was established long before the advent of speciﬁc immune responses . The appearance of antibody - mediated immunity allowed mast cells to participate in mucosal immunity against the overwhelming burden of extracellular parasites , with the inherent disadvantages of IgE - mediated allergies . But the evolution of adaptive immu - nity also required experienced sentinels of innate immunity to act as accelerators , able to bridge the gap between stereotypic , non - speciﬁc inﬂammatory and highly speciﬁc immune reactions . Mast cells are not unique in this position , but they have unique abilities : a very short response time and ﬂexibility . It is their outstanding property to initiate potent life - saving reactions not within hours or days but within minutes , and time matters when eradicating foreign invaders . Mast cells are also highly ﬂexible with respect to the production of important cytokines , chemokines , ligands for costimulatory molecules and so forth , which enables mast cells to support cells and organs of the adaptive branch of the immune system . One might postulate that we will soon learn much more about their role in modulating immune responses ; their crosstalk with regulatory T cells might be a good starting point . References Alcaide , P . , Jones , T . G . , Lord , G . M . , Glimcher , L . H . , Hallgren , J . , Arinobu , Y . , Akashi , K . , Paterson , A . M . , Gurish , M . A . & Luscinskas , F . W . ( 2007 ) Dendritic cell expression of the transcription factor T - bet regulates mast cell progenitor homing to mucosal tissue . Journal of Experimental Medicine , 204 , 431 – 439 . Arinobu , Y . , Iwasaki , H . , Gurish , M . F . , Mizuno , S . , Shigematsu , H . , Ozawa , H . , Tenen , D . G . , Austen , K . F . & Akashi , K . ( 2005 ) Devel - opmental checkpoints of the basophil / mast cell lineages in adult murine hematopoiesis . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sci - ences of the United States of America , 102 , 18105 – 18110 . Bauer , O . & Razin , E . ( 2000 ) Mast cell - nerve interactions . News in Physiological Sciences , 15 , 213 – 218 . Befus , A . D . , Mowat , C . , Gilchrist , M . , Hu , J . , Solomon , S . & Bateman , A . ( 1999 ) Neutrophil defensins induce histamine secretion from mast cells : mechanisms of action . Journal of Immunology , 163 , 947 – 953 . Benoist , C . & Mathis , D . ( 2002 ) Mast cells in autoimmune disease . Nature , 420 , 875 – 878 . Berry , M . A . , Hargadon , B . , Shelley , M . , Parker , D . , Shaw , D . E . , Green , R . H . , Bradding , P . , Brightling , C . E . , Wardlaw , A . J . & Pavord , I . D . ( 2006 ) Evidence of a role of tumor necrosis factor alpha in refractory asthma . New England Journal of Medicine , 354 , 697 – 708 . Bischoff , S . C . ( 2007 ) Role of mast cells in allergic and non - allergic immune responses : comparison of human and murine data . Nature Reviews . Immunology , 7 , 93 – 104 . Bradding , P . , Roberts , J . A . , Britten , K . M . , Montefort , S . , Djukanovic , R . , Mueller , R . , Heusser , C . H . , Howarth , P . H . & Holgate , S . T . ( 1994 ) Interleukin - 4 , - 5 , and - 6 and tumor necrosis factor - alpha in normal and asthmatic airways : evidence for the human mast cell as a source of these cytokines . American Journal of Respiratory Cell and Molec - ular Biology , 10 , 471 – 480 . Brewer , J . M . , Conacher , M . , Hunter , C . A . , Mohrs , M . , Brombacher , F . & Alexander , J . ( 1999 ) Aluminium hydroxide adjuvant initiates strong antigen - speciﬁc Th2 responses in the absence of IL - 4 - or IL - 13 - mediated signaling . Journal of Immunology , 163 , 6448 – 6454 . Brightling , C . E . , Bradding , P . , Symon , F . A . , Holgate , S . T . , Wardlaw , A . J . & Pavord , I . D . ( 2002 ) Mast - cell inﬁltration of airway smooth muscle in asthma . New England Journal of Medicine , 346 , 1699 – 1705 . Bryce , P . J . , Miller , M . L . , Miyajima , I . , Tsai , M . , Galli , S . J . & Oettgen , H . C . ( 2004 ) Immune sensitization in the skin is enhanced by anti - gen - independent effects of IgE . Immunity , 20 , 381 – 392 . Review ª 2008 The Authors 690 Journal Compilation ª 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd , British Journal of Haematology , 142 , 683 – 694 Bryce , P . J . , Mathias , C . B . , Harrison , K . L . , Watanabe , T . , Geha , R . S . & Oettgen , H . C . ( 2006 ) The H1 histamine receptor regulates allergic lung responses . Journal of Clinical Investigation , 116 , 1624 – 1632 . Busse , P . J . , Zhang , T . F . , Srivastava , K . , Lin , B . P . , Schoﬁeld , B . , Sealfon , S . C . & Li , X . M . ( 2005 ) Chronic exposure to TNF - alpha increases airway mucus gene expression in vivo . Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology , 116 , 1256 – 1263 . Carroll , N . G . , Mutavdzic , S . & James , A . L . ( 2002 ) Increased mast cells and neutrophils in submucosal mucous glands and mucus plugging in patients with asthma . Thorax , 57 , 677 – 682 . Casale , T . B . , Costa , J . J . & Galli , S . J . ( 1996 ) TNF alpha is important in human lung allergic reactions . American Journal of Respiratory Cell and Molecular Biology , 15 , 35 – 44 . Chen , C . C . , Grimbaldeston , M . A . , Tsai , M . , Weissman , I . L . & Galli , S . J . ( 2005 ) Identiﬁcation of mast cell progenitors in adult mice . Pro - ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America , 102 , 11408 – 11413 . Chen , X . , Niyonsaba , F . , Ushio , H . , Hara , M . , Yokoi , H . , Matsumoto , K . , Saito , H . , Nagaoka , I . , Ikeda , S . , Okumura , K . & Ogawa , H . ( 2007 ) Antimicrobial peptides human beta - defensin ( hBD ) - 3 and hBD - 4 activate mast cells and increase skin vascular permeability . European Journal of Immunology , 37 , 434 – 444 . Choi , I . W . , Sun , K . , Kim , Y . S . , Ko , H . M . , Im , S . Y . , Kim , J . H . , You , H . J . , Lee , Y . C . , Lee , J . H . , Park , Y . M . & Lee , H . K . ( 2005 ) TNF - alpha induces the late - phase airway hyperresponsiveness and airway inﬂammation through cytosolic phospholipase A ( 2 ) activation . Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology , 116 , 537 – 543 . Dahl , C . , Hoffmann , H . J . , Saito , H . & Schiotz , P . O . ( 2004 ) Human mast cells express receptors for IL - 3 , IL - 5 and GM - CSF ; a partial map of receptors on human mast cells cultured in vitro . Allergy , 59 , 1087 – 1096 . Dawicki , W . & Marshall , J . S . ( 2006 ) New and emerging roles for mast cells in host defence . Current Opinion in Immunology , 19 , 31 – 38 . Demeure , C . E . , Brahimi , K . , Hacini , F . , Marchand , F . , Peronet , R . , Huerre , M . , St - Mezard , P . , Nicolas , J . F . , Brey , P . , Delespesse , G . & Mecheri , S . ( 2005 ) Anopheles mosquito bites activate cutaneous mast cells leading to a local inﬂammatory response and lymph node hyperplasia . Journal of Immunology , 174 , 3932 – 3940 . Di , N . A . , Vitiello , A . & Gallo , R . L . ( 2003 ) Cutting edge : mast cell antimicrobial activity is mediated by expression of cathelicidin antimicrobial peptide . Journal of Immunology , 170 , 2274 – 2278 . Echtenacher , B . , Mannel , D . N . & Hultner , L . ( 1996 ) Critical protective role of mast cells in a model of acute septic peritonitis . Nature , 381 , 75 – 77 . Eckmann , L . ( 2005 ) Defence molecules in intestinal innate immunity against bacterial infections . Current Opinion in Gastroenterology , 21 , 147 – 151 . Edelson , B . T . , Li , Z . , Pappan , L . K . & Zutter , M . M . ( 2004 ) Mast cell - mediated inﬂammatory responses require the alpha 2 beta 1 inte - grin . Blood , 103 , 2214 – 2220 . Edelson , B . T . , Stricker , T . P . , Li , Z . , Dickeson , S . K . , Shepherd , V . L . , Santoro , S . A . & Zutter , M . M . ( 2006 ) Novel collectin / C1q receptor mediates mast cell activation and innate immunity . Blood , 107 , 143 – 150 . Erb , K . J . ( 2007 ) Helminths , allergic disorders and IgE - mediated immune responses : where do we stand ? European Journal of Immunology , 37 , 1170 – 1173 . Erin , E . M . , Leaker , B . R . , Nicholson , G . C . , Tan , A . J . , Green , L . M . , Neighbour , H . , Zacharasiewicz , A . S . , Turner , J . , Barnathan , E . S . , Kon , O . M . , Barnes , P . J . & Hansel , T . T . ( 2006 ) The effects of a monoclonal antibody directed against tumor necrosis factor - alpha in asthma . American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medi - cine , 174 , 753 – 762 . Finkelman , F . D . & Urban , J . F . Jr . , ( 2001 ) The other side of the coin : the protective role of the TH2 cytokines . Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology , 107 , 772 – 780 . Gonzalez - Espinosa , C . , Odom , S . , Olivera , A . , Hobson , J . P . , Martinez , M . E . , Oliveira - Dos - Santos , A . , Barra , L . , Spiegel , S . , Penninger , J . M . & Rivera , J . ( 2003 ) Preferential signaling and induction of allergy - promoting lymphokines upon weak stimulation of the high afﬁnity IgE receptor on mast cells . Journal of Experimental Medicine , 197 , 1453 – 1465 . Gordon , J . R . & Galli , S . J . ( 1990 ) Mast cells as a source of both pre - formed and immunologically inducible TNF - alpha / cachectin . Nat - ure , 346 , 274 – 276 . Grimbaldeston , M . A . , Chen , C . C . , Piliponsky , A . M . , Tsai , M . , Tam , S . Y . & Galli , S . J . ( 2005 ) Mast cell - deﬁcient W - sash c - kit mutant Kit W - sh / W - sh mice as a model for investigating mast cell biology in vivo . American Journal of Pathology , 167 , 835 – 848 . Gurish , M . F . & Boyce , J . A . ( 2006 ) Mast cells : ontogeny , homing , and recruitment of a unique innate effector cell . Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology , 117 , 1285 – 1291 . Gurish , M . F . , Tao , H . , Abonia , J . P . , Arya , A . , Friend , D . S . , Parker , C . M . & Austen , K . F . ( 2001 ) Intestinal mast cell progenitors require CD49dbeta7 ( alpha4beta7 Integrin ) for tissue - speciﬁc homing . Journal of Experimental Medicine , 194 , 1243 – 1252 . Hallgren , J . & Gurish , M . F . ( 2007 ) Pathways of murine mast cell development and trafﬁcking : tracking the roots and routes of the mast cell . Immunological Reviews , 217 , 8 – 18 . Heib , V . , Becker , M . , Warger , T . , Rechtsteiner , G . , Tertilt , C . , Klein , M . , Bopp , T . , Taube , C . , Schild , H . , Schmitt , E . & Stassen , M . ( 2007 ) Mast cells are crucial for early inﬂammation , migration of Langer - hans cells , and CTL responses following topical application of TLR7 ligand in mice . Blood , 110 , 946 – 953 . Howarth , P . H . , Babu , K . S . , Arshad , H . S . , Lau , L . , Buckley , M . , McConnell , W . , Beckett , P . , Al , A . M . , Chauhan , A . , Wilson , S . J . , Reynolds , A . , Davies , D . E . & Holgate , S . T . ( 2005 ) Tumour necrosis factor ( TNFalpha ) as a novel therapeutic target in symptomatic corticosteroid dependent asthma . Thorax , 60 , 1012 – 1018 . Huang , C . , Friend , D . S . , Qiu , W . T . , Wong , G . W . , Morales , G . , Hunt , J . & Stevens , R . L . ( 1998 ) Induction of a selective and persistent extravasation of neutrophils into the peritoneal cavity by tryptase mouse mast cell protease 6 . Journal of Immunology , 160 , 1910 – 1919 . Hultner , L . & Ehrenreich , H . ( 2005 ) Mast cells and endothelin - 1 : a life - saving biological liaison ? Trends in Immunology , 26 , 235 – 238 . Ishizaka , K . ( 1985 ) Twenty years with IgE : from the identiﬁcation of IgE to regulatory factors for the IgE response . Journal of Immunol - ogy , 135 , i – x . Jawdat , D . M . , Albert , E . J . , Rowden , G . , Haidl , I . D . & Marshall , J . S . ( 2004 ) IgE - mediated mast cell activation induces Langerhans cell migration in vivo . Journal of Immunology , 173 , 5275 – 5282 . Jawdat , D . M . , Rowden , G . & Marshall , J . S . ( 2006 ) Mast cells have a pivotal role in TNF - independent lymph node hypertrophy and the mobilization of Langerhans cells in response to bacterial peptido - glycan . Journal of Immunology , 177 , 1755 – 1762 . Kim , Y . S . , Ko , H . M . , Kang , N . I . , Song , C . H . , Zhang , X . , Chung , W . C . , Kim , J . H . , Choi , I . H . , Park , Y . M . , Kim , G . Y . , Im , S . Y . & Lee , H . K . ( 2007 ) Mast cells play a key role in the development of late airway Review ª 2008 The Authors Journal Compilation ª 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd , British Journal of Haematology , 142 , 683 – 694 691 hyperresponsiveness through TNF - alpha in a murine model of asthma . European Journal of Immunology , 37 , 1107 – 1115 . Kitamura , Y . ( 1989 ) Heterogeneity of mast cells and phenotypic change between subpopulations . Annual Review of Immunology , 7 , 59 – 76 . Kitamura , Y . , Shimada , M . , Hatanaka , K . & Miyano , Y . ( 1977 ) Development of mast cells from grafted bone marrow cells in irra - diated mice . Nature , 268 , 442 – 443 . Kitamura , Y . , Kanakura , Y . , Sonoda , S . , Asai , H . & Nakano , T . ( 1987 ) Mutual phenotypic changes between connective tissue type and mucosal mast cells . International Archives of Allergy and Applied Immunology , 82 , 244 – 248 . Kitamura , Y . , Hirota , S . , Morii , E . & Nishida , T . ( 2000 ) Gain - of - function mutations of c - kit in human diseases . In : Mast Cell and Basophils ( eds by G . Marone , L . M . Lichtenstein & S . J . Galli ) , pp . 21 – 29 . Academic Press , London . Knight , P . A . , Wright , S . H . , Lawrence , C . E . , Paterson , Y . Y . & Miller , H . R . ( 2000 ) Delayed expulsion of the nematode Trichinella spiralis in mice lacking the mucosal mast cell - speciﬁc granule chymase , mouse mast cell protease - 1 . Journal of Experimental Medicine , 192 , 1849 – 1856 . Kocabas , C . N . , Yavuz , A . S . , Lipsky , P . E . , Metcalfe , D . D . & Akin , C . ( 2005 ) Analysis of the lineage relationship between mast cells and basophils using the c - kit D816V mutation as a biologic signature . Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology , 115 , 1155 – 1161 . Kung , T . T . , Stelts , D . , Zurcher , J . A . , Jones , H . , Umland , S . P . , Kreutner , W . , Egan , R . W . & Chapman , R . W . ( 1995 ) Mast cells modulate allergic pulmonary eosinophilia in mice . American Journal of Respiratory Cell and Molecular Biology , 12 , 404 – 409 . Lantz , C . S . , Boesiger , J . , Song , C . H . , Mach , N . , Kobayashi , T . , Mulli - gan , R . C . , Nawa , Y . , Dranoff , G . & Galli , S . J . ( 1998 ) Role for interleukin - 3 in mast - cell and basophil development and in immunity to parasites . Nature , 392 , 90 – 93 . Lawrence , C . E . , Paterson , Y . Y . , Wright , S . H . , Knight , P . A . & Miller , H . R . ( 2004 ) Mouse mast cell protease - 1 is required for the enter - opathy induced by gastrointestinal helminth infection in the mouse . Gastroenterology , 127 , 155 – 165 . Li , L . & Krilis , S . A . ( 1999 ) Mast - cell growth and differentiation . Allergy , 54 , 306 – 312 . Lu , L . F . , Lind , E . F . , Gondek , D . C . , Bennett , K . A . , Gleeson , M . W . , Pino - Lagos , K . , Scott , Z . A . , Coyle , A . J . , Reed , J . L . , Van , S . J . , Strom , T . B . , Zheng , X . X . & Noelle , R . J . ( 2006 ) Mast cells are essential interme - diaries in regulatory T - cell tolerance . Nature , 442 , 997 – 1002 . Malaviya , R . & Abraham , S . N . ( 2000 ) Role of mast cell leukotrienes in neutrophil recruitment and bacterial clearance in infectious perito - nitis . Journal of Leukocyte Biology , 67 , 841 – 846 . Malaviya , R . & Abraham , S . N . ( 2001 ) Mast cell modulation of immune responses to bacteria . Immunological Reviews , 179 , 16 – 24 . Malaviya , R . , Ross , E . A . , MacGregor , J . I . , Ikeda , T . , Little , J . R . , Jakschik , B . A . & Abraham , S . N . ( 1994 ) Mast cell phagocytosis of FimH - expressing enterobacteria . Journal of Immunology , 152 , 1907 – 1914 . Malaviya , R . , Ikeda , T . , Ross , E . & Abraham , S . N . ( 1996a ) Mast cell modulation of neutrophil inﬂux and bacterial clearance at sites of infection through TNF - alpha . Nature , 381 , 77 – 80 . Malaviya , R . , Twesten , N . J . , Ross , E . A . , Abraham , S . N . & Pfeifer , J . D . ( 1996b ) Mast cells process bacterial Ags through a phagocytic route for class I MHC presentation to T cells . Journal of Immunology , 156 , 1490 – 1496 . Marshall , J . S . ( 2004 ) Mast - cell responses to pathogens . Nature Reviews . Immunology , 4 , 787 – 799 . Matsushima , H . , Yamada , N . , Matsue , H . & Shimada , S . ( 2004 ) TLR3 - , TLR7 - , and TLR9 - mediated production of proinﬂammatory cyto - kines and chemokines from murine connective tissue type skin - derived mast cells but not from bone marrow - derived mast cells . Journal of Immunology , 173 , 531 – 541 . Maurer , M . , Wedemeyer , J . , Metz , M . , Piliponsky , A . M . , Weller , K . , Chatterjea , D . , Clouthier , D . E . , Yanagisawa , M . M . , Tsai , M . & Galli , S . J . ( 2004 ) Mast cells promote homeostasis by limiting endothelin - 1 - induced toxicity . Nature , 432 , 512 – 516 . Maurer , M . , Lopez , K . S . , Siebenhaar , F . , Moelle , K . , Metz , M . , Knop , J . & vonStebut , E . ( 2006 ) Skin mast cells control T cell - dependent host defense in Leishmania major infections . FASEB Journal , 20 , 2460 – 2467 . McDermott , J . R . , Bartram , R . E . , Knight , P . A . , Miller , H . R . , Garrod , D . R . & Grencis , R . K . ( 2003 ) Mast cells disrupt epithelial barrier function during enteric nematode infection . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America , 100 , 7761 – 7766 . McLachlan , J . B . , Hart , J . P . , Pizzo , S . V . , Shelburne , C . P . , Staats , H . F . , Gunn , M . D . & Abraham , S . N . ( 2003 ) Mast cell - derived tumor necrosis factor induces hypertrophy of draining lymph nodes during infection . Nature Immunology , 4 , 1199 – 1205 . Mercer - Jones , M . A . , Shrotri , M . S . , Heinzelmann , M . , Peyton , J . C . & Cheadle , W . G . ( 1999 ) Regulation of early peritoneal neutrophil migration by macrophage inﬂammatory protein - 2 and mast cells in experimental peritonitis . Journal of Leukocyte Biology , 65 , 249 – 255 . Metz , M . , Piliponsky , A . M . , Chen , C . C . , Lammel , V . , Abrink , M . , Pejler , G . , Tsai , M . & Galli , S . J . ( 2006 ) Mast cells can enhance resistance to snake and honeybee venoms . Science , 313 , 526 – 530 . Miyahara , N . , Swanson , B . J . , Takeda , K . , Taube , C . , Miyahara , S . , Kodama , T . , Dakhama , A . , Ott , V . L . & Gelfand , E . W . ( 2004 ) Effector CD8 + T cells mediate inﬂammation and airway hyper - responsive - ness . Nature Medicine , 10 , 865 – 869 . Moriyama , M . , Sato , T . , Inoue , H . , Fukuyama , S . , Teranishi , H . , Kangawa , K . , Kano , T . , Yoshimura , A . & Kojima , M . ( 2005 ) The neuropeptide neuromedin U promotes inﬂammation by direct activation of mast cells . Journal of Experimental Medicine , 202 , 217 – 224 . Murakami , D . , Yamada , H . , Yajima , T . , Masuda , A . , Komune , S . & Yoshikai , Y . ( 2007 ) Lipopolysaccharide inhalation exacerbates allergic airway inﬂammation by activating mast cells and promoting Th2 responses . Clinical and Experimental Allergy , 37 , 339 – 347 . Nakae , S . , Suto , H . , Kakurai , M . , Sedgwick , J . D . , Tsai , M . & Galli , S . J . ( 2005 ) Mast cells enhance T cell activation : importance of mast cell - derived TNF . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America , 102 , 6467 – 6472 . Nakae , S . , Suto , H . , Iikura , M . , Kakurai , M . , Sedgwick , J . D . , Tsai , M . & Galli , S . J . ( 2006 ) Mast cells enhance T cell activation : importance of mast cell costimulatory molecules and secreted TNF . Journal of Immunology , 176 , 2238 – 2248 . Nakae , S . , Lunderius , C . , Ho , L . H . , Schafer , B . , Tsai , M . & Galli , S . J . ( 2007a ) TNF can contribute to multiple features of ovalbumin - in - duced allergic inﬂammation of the airways in mice . Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology , 119 , 680 – 686 . Nakae , S . , Ho , L . H . , Yu , M . , Monteforte , R . , Iikura , M . , Suto , H . & Galli , S . J . ( 2007b ) Mast cell - derived TNF contributes to airway hyperreactivity , inﬂammation , and T ( H ) 2 cytokine production in an Review ª 2008 The Authors 692 Journal Compilation ª 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd , British Journal of Haematology , 142 , 683 – 694 asthma model in mice . Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology , 120 , 48 – 55 . Nigo , Y . I . , Yamashita , M . , Hirahara , K . , Shinnakasu , R . , Inami , M . , Kimura , M . , Hasegawa , A . , Kohno , Y . & Nakayama , T . ( 2006 ) Regulation of allergic airway inﬂammation through Toll - like receptor 4 - mediated modiﬁcation of mast cell function . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America , 103 , 2286 – 2291 . Ogawa , K . , Kaminuma , O . , Kikkawa , H . , Kameda , R . , Ikezawa , K . , Suko , M . , Okudaira , H . , Akiyama , K . & Mori , A . ( 1999 ) Primary role of CD4 + T cells and supplemental role of mast cells in allergic pulmonary eosinophilia . International Archives of Allergy and Immunology , 120 ( Suppl 1 ) , 15 – 18 . Orfao , A . , Garcia - Montero , A . C . , Sanchez , L . & Escribano , L . ( 2007 ) Recent advances in the understanding of mastocytosis : the role of KIT mutations . British Journal Haematology , 138 , 12 – 30 . Prodeus , A . P . , Zhou , X . , Maurer , M . , Galli , S . J . & Carroll , M . C . ( 1997 ) Impaired mast cell - dependent natural immunity in complement C3 - deﬁcient mice . Nature , 390 , 172 – 175 . Reuter , S . , Heinz , A . , Sieren , M . , Wiewrodt , R . , Gelfand , E . , Stassen , M . , Buhl , R . & Taube , C . ( 2008 ) Mast cell - derived tumour necrosis factor is essential for allergic airway disease . European Respiratory Journal , 31 , 773 – 782 . van Rijt , L . S . , Jung , S . , Kleinjan , A . , Vos , N . , Willart , M . , Duez , C . , Hoogsteden , H . C . & Lambrecht , B . N . ( 2005 ) In vivo depletion of lung CD11c + dendritic cells during allergen challenge abrogates the characteristic features of asthma . Journal of Experimental Medicine , 201 , 981 – 991 . Rodewald , H . R . , Dessing , M . , Dvorak , A . M . & Galli , S . J . ( 1996 ) Identiﬁcation of a committed precursor for the mast cell lineage . Science , 271 , 818 – 822 . Scudamore , C . L . , McMillan , L . , Thornton , E . M . , Wright , S . H . , New - lands , G . F . & Miller , H . R . ( 1997 ) Mast cell heterogeneity in the gastrointestinal tract : variable expression of mouse mast cell prote - ase - 1 ( mMCP - 1 ) in intraepithelial mucosal mast cells in nematode - infected and normal BALB / c mice . American Journal of Pathology , 150 , 1661 – 1672 . Shimizu , Y . , Matsumoto , K . , Okayama , Y . , Sakai , K . , Maeno , T . , Suga , T . , Miura , T . , Takai , S . , Kurabayashi , M . & Saito , H . ( 2008 ) Inter - leukin - 3 does not affect the differentiation of mast cells derived from human bone marrow progenitors . Immunological Investigations , 37 , 1 – 17 . Stassen , M . , Muller , C . , Arnold , M . , Hultner , L . , Klein - Hessling , S . , Neudorﬂ , C . , Reineke , T . , Serﬂing , E . & Schmitt , E . ( 2001 ) IL - 9 and IL - 13 production by activated mast cells is strongly enhanced in the presence of lipopolysaccharide : NF - kappa B is decisively involved in the expression of IL - 9 . Journal of Immunology , 166 , 4391 – 4398 . Stassen , M . , Hultner , L . & Schmitt , E . ( 2002a ) Classical and alternative pathways of mast cell activation . Critical Reviews in Immunology , 22 , 115 – 140 . Stassen , M . , Hultner , L . , Muller , C . & Schmitt , E . ( 2002b ) Mast cells and inﬂammation . Archivum Immunologiae et therapiae Experi - mentalis , 50 , 179 – 185 . Stassen , M . , Muller , C . , Richter , C . , Neudorﬂ , C . , Hultner , L . , Bhakdi , S . , Walev , I . & Schmitt , E . ( 2003 ) The streptococcal exotoxin streptolysin O activates mast cells to produce tumor necrosis factor alpha by p38 mitogen - activated protein kinase - and protein kinase C - dependent pathways . Infection and Immunity , 71 , 6171 – 6177 . Stevens , R . L . & Adachi , R . ( 2007 ) Protease - proteoglycan complexes of mouse and human mast cells and importance of their beta - tryptase - heparin complexes in inﬂammation and innate immunity . Immu - nological Reviews , 217 , 155 – 167 . Supajatura , V . , Ushio , H . , Nakao , A . , Okumura , K . , Ra , C . & Ogawa , H . ( 2001 ) Protective roles of mast cells against enterobacterial infection are mediated by Toll - like receptor 4 . Journal of Immu - nology , 167 , 2250 – 2256 . Suto , H . , Nakae , S . , Kakurai , M . , Sedgwick , J . D . , Tsai , M . & Galli , S . J . ( 2006 ) Mast cell - associated TNF promotes dendritic cell migration . Journal of Immunology , 176 , 4102 – 4112 . Taube , C . , Duez , C . , Cui , Z . H . , Takeda , K . , Rha , Y . H . , Park , J . W . , Balhorn , A . , Donaldson , D . D . , Dakhama , A . & Gelfand , E . W . ( 2002 ) The role of IL - 13 in established allergic airway disease . Journal of Immunology , 169 , 6482 – 6489 . Taube , C . , Dakhama , A . & Gelfand , E . W . ( 2004a ) Insights into the pathogenesis of asthma utilizing murine models . International Archives of Allergy and Immunology , 135 , 173 – 186 . Taube , C . , Wei , X . , Swasey , C . H . , Joetham , A . , Zarini , S . , Lively , T . , Takeda , K . , Loader , J . , Miyahara , N . , Kodama , T . , Shultz , L . D . , Donaldson , D . D . , Hamelmann , E . H . , Dakhama , A . & Gelfand , E . W . ( 2004b ) Mast cells , FcepsilonRI , and IL - 13 are required for devel - opment of airway hyperresponsiveness after aerosolized allergen exposure in the absence of adjuvant . Journal of Immunology , 172 , 6398 – 6406 . Taube , C . , Miyahara , N . , Ott , V . , Swanson , B . , Takeda , K . , Loader , J . , Shultz , L . D . , Tager , A . M . , Luster , A . D . , Dakhama , A . & Gelfand , E . W . ( 2006 ) The leukotriene B4 receptor ( BLT1 ) is required for effector CD8 + T cell - mediated , mast cell - dependent airway hyper - responsiveness . Journal of Immunology , 176 , 3157 – 3164 . Tedla , N . , Wang , H . W . , McNeil , H . P . , Di , G . N . , Hampartzoumian , T . , Wakeﬁeld , D . & Lloyd , A . ( 1998 ) Regulation of T lymphocyte trafﬁcking into lymph nodes during an immune response by the chemokines macrophage inﬂammatory protein ( MIP ) - 1 alpha and MIP - 1 beta . Journal of Immunology , 161 , 5663 – 5672 . Thakurdas , S . M . , Melicoff , E . , Sansores - Garcia , L . , Moreira , D . C . , Petrova , Y . , Stevens , R . L . & Adachi , R . ( 2007 ) The mast cell - restricted tryptase mMCP - 6 has a critical immunoprotective role in bacterial infections . Journal of Biological Chemistry , 282 , 20809 – 20815 . Theoharides , T . C . & Kalogeromitros , D . ( 2006 ) The critical role of mast cells in allergy and inﬂammation . Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences , 1088 , 78 – 99 . Theoharides , T . C . , Kempuraj , D . , Tagen , M . , Conti , P . & Kaloger - omitros , D . ( 2007 ) Differential release of mast cell mediators and the pathogenesis of inﬂammation . Immunological Reviews , 217 , 65 – 78 . Tsai , M . , Wedemeyer , J . , Ganiatsas , S . , Tam , S . Y . , Zon , L . I . & Galli , S . J . ( 2000 ) In vivo immunological function of mast cells derived from embryonic stem cells : an approach for the rapid analysis of even embryonic lethal mutations in adult mice in vivo . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America , 97 , 9186 – 9190 . Wang , H . W . , Tedla , N . , Lloyd , A . R . , Wakeﬁeld , D . & McNeil , P . H . ( 1998 ) Mast cell activation and migration to lymph nodes during induction of an immune response in mice . Journal of Clinical Investigation , 102 , 1617 – 1626 . Wastling , J . M . , Scudamore , C . L . , Thornton , E . M . , Newlands , G . F . & Miller , H . R . ( 1997 ) Constitutive expression of mouse mast cell Review ª 2008 The Authors Journal Compilation ª 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd , British Journal of Haematology , 142 , 683 – 694 693 protease - 1 in normal BALB / c mice and its up - regulation during intestinal nematode infection . Immunology , 90 , 308 – 313 . Williams , C . M . & Galli , S . J . ( 2000 ) Mast cells can amplify airway reactivity and features of chronic inﬂammation in an asthma model in mice . Journal of Experimental Medicine , 192 , 455 – 462 . Wills - Karp , M . , Luyimbazi , J . , Xu , X . , Schoﬁeld , B . , Neben , T . Y . , Karp , C . L . & Donaldson , D . D . ( 1998 ) Interleukin - 13 : central mediator of allergic asthma . Science , 282 , 2258 – 2261 . Wolters , P . J . , Mallen - St , C . J . , Lewis , C . C . , Villalta , S . A . , Baluk , P . , Erle , D . J . & Caughey , G . H . ( 2005 ) Tissue - selective mast cell reconstitu - tion and differential lung gene expression in mast cell - deﬁcient Kit ( W - sh ) / Kit ( W - sh ) sash mice . Clinical and Experimental Allergy , 35 , 82 – 88 . Woodbury , R . G . , Miller , H . R . , Huntley , J . F . , Newlands , G . F . , Palliser , A . C . & Wakelin , D . ( 1984 ) Mucosal mast cells are functionally active during spontaneous expulsion of intestinal nematode infections in rat . Nature , 312 , 450 – 452 . Yang , W . , Kaur , D . , Okayama , Y . , Ito , A . , Wardlaw , A . J . , Brightling , C . E . & Bradding , P . ( 2006 ) Human lung mast cells adhere to human airway smooth muscle , in part , via tumor suppressor in lung cancer - 1 . Journal of Immunology , 176 , 1238 – 1243 . Yu , M . , Tsai , M . , Tam , S . Y . , Jones , C . , Zehnder , J . & Galli , S . J . ( 2006 ) Mast cells can promote the development of multiple features of chronic asthma in mice . Journal of Clinical Investigation , 116 , 1633 – 1641 . Zelenika , D . , Adams , E . , Humm , S . , Lin , C . Y . , Waldmann , H . & Cobbold , S . P . ( 2001 ) The role of CD4 + T - cell subsets in determining transplantation rejection or tolerance . Immunological Reviews , 182 , 164 – 179 . Zhang , Y . , Ramos , B . F . & Jakschik , B . A . ( 1992 ) Neutrophil recruitment by tumor necrosis factor from mast cells in immune complex peritonitis . Science , 258 , 1957 – 1959 . Review ª 2008 The Authors 694 Journal Compilation ª 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd , British Journal of Haematology , 142 , 683 – 694