Actin Filament Structures in Migrating Cells Jaakko Lehtima¨ki , Markku Hakala , and Pekka Lappalainen Contents 1 Introduction 2 Actin - Rich Structures Involved in Adhesion - Dependent Cell Migration 2 . 1 Structure and Function of the Lamellipodium 2 . 2 Regulation of Actin Dynamics in the Lamellipodium 2 . 3 Structure and Functions of Filopodia 2 . 4 Actin Dynamics in Filopodia 2 . 5 Organization and Functions of Stress Fibers 2 . 6 Mechanisms of Stress Fiber Assembly 3 Cell Migration in a Three - Dimensional Environment 3 . 1 Podosomes and Invadopodia 3 . 2 Blebbing - Based Cell Migration 4 Future Perspectives References Abstract Cell migration is necessary for several developmental processes in multicellular organisms . Furthermore , many physiological processes such as wound healing and immunological events in adult animals are dependent on cell migration . Consequently , defects in cell migration are linked to various diseases including immunological disorders as well as cancer progression and metastasis formation . Cell migration is driven by speciﬁc protrusive and contractile actin ﬁlament structures , but the types and relative contributions of these actin ﬁlament arrays vary depending on the cell type and the environment of the cell . In this chapter , we introduce the most important actin ﬁlament structures that contribute to mesenchymal and amoeboid cell migration modes and discuss the mechanisms J . Lehtima¨ki • M . Hakala • P . Lappalainen ( * ) Institute of Biotechnology , University of Helsinki , P . O . Box 56 , 00014 Helsinki , Finland e - mail : pekka . lappalainen @ helsinki . ﬁ # Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2016 Handbook of Experimental Pharmacology , DOI 10 . 1007 / 164 _ 2016 _ 28 by which the assembly and turnover of these structures are controlled by various actin - binding proteins . Keywords Actin - binding proteins • Blebbing • Cell migration • Filopodia • Invadopodia • Lamellipodia • Myosin II • Podosome • Stress ﬁbers 1 Introduction Cell migration is a complex , dynamic process that has a fundamental role in the development and physiology of multicellular animals . Cell migration is also critical for the survival of many unicellular organisms . For example , unicellular protozoa migrate to hunt their prey , whereas immune cells travel in animal tissues to seek pathogens . Furthermore , antigen - presenting dendritic cells , which explore the tissues , migrate into the lymph nodes to present peripherally acquired antigens to T cells upon exposure to infection or inﬂammatory stimuli . On a higher level , cell migration is crucial for the majority of developmental processes , including gastru - lation and organ formation ( Nourshargh et al . 2010 ; Petrie and Yamada 2012 ; Doyle et al . 2013 ) and survival of animals , as , for example , wound healing depends on migration of different cell types to the injured area . Due to its fundamental roles in developmental and physiological processes , it is not surprising that defects in cell migration are linked to a variety of human disorders , including problems in the function of the immune system . For example , phagocytic cells with a mutation in the actin - binding protein WASP , which is an important regulator of cell motility , have a poor chemotactic response toward inﬂammatory chemoattractants . WASP - deﬁcient T cells display a marked migra - tion deﬁciency ( Moulding et al . 2013 ) . Conversely , uncontrolled cell migration is linked to cancer invasion and metastasis . In the case of carcinomas , these processes initiate with a delamination of otherwise nonmigratory epithelial cells from epithe - lial sheets , followed by migration of carcinoma cells across basal lamina and underlying cell layers into blood or lymph vessels . Both normal and cancer cells use similar machineries for migration , but cancer cells appear to lack the “stop signals” important for their anchoring and adhesion . Also their ability to properly read the chemical and mechanical signals of the environment is typically lost ( Friedl and Alexander 2011 ; Petrie and Yamada 2012 ) . For cells to move , they must extend their plasma membrane at the leading edge , subsequently move the cell body , and retract the tail of the cell ( Ridley 2011 ) . The force for these events is provided by actin , which is a ubiquitous protein found in all eukaryotes . In the cytoplasm , actin exists both in monomeric and ﬁlamentous forms . Actin ﬁlaments are polar structures that contain two biochemically and structurally distinct ends , named the barbed or plus end and the pointed or minus end . Under steady - state conditions , actin ﬁlament assembly takes place mainly at the barbed ends of existing ﬁlaments and strongly favors the addition of J . Lehtima¨ki et al . ATP - charged actin monomers . The actin ﬁlament itself functions as an ATPase , which leads to enrichment of ADP - Pi and ADP - actin subunits toward the ﬁlament pointed end , where the net disassembly of actin ﬁlaments occurs . These features result in simultaneous ATP - dependent elongation of actin ﬁlaments at their barbed ends and shortening at the pointed ends . This process , named actin ﬁlament treadmilling , provides force for a number of cellular processes involving membrane dynamics . In addition to treadmilling , actin ﬁlaments generate force through a fundamentally different mechanism involving myosin - family motor proteins . Here , the actin ﬁlaments serve as tracks for myosin molecules that , depending on the type of myosin , travel either toward the barbed or pointed end of the actin ﬁlament and transport different types of cargo or form bipolar bundles that can induce the contraction of actin ﬁlament arrays ( Pollard and Cooper 2009 ) . To ensure the formation of desired actin ﬁlament arrays at the correct location inside the cell , the organization and dynamics of actin ﬁlaments in cells are controlled by a large array of actin - binding proteins . The activities of these proteins are linked to various intracellular and extracellular biochemical and mechanical signals through their regulation by phosphorylation , Rho family of small GTPases , and plasma membrane phospholipids ( Heasman and Ridley 2008 ; Saarikangas et al . 2010 ) . In the following chapters , we will introduce the function and composition of the major three actin ﬁlament structures ( lamellipodia , ﬁlopodia , and stress ﬁbers ) that contribute to cell migration in a two - dimensional environment . We will also introduce the types of actin structures that drive cell migration speciﬁcally in a complex three - dimensional tissue environment . 2 Actin - Rich Structures Involved in Adhesion - Dependent Cell Migration Within the environment of the tissue , cells can use various different modes of individual migration , excluding the collective migration of entire epithelial sheets . Common to most of these is that cells require protrusion formation at the cell front , coupled to movement of cell body and retraction of the tail . Cell migration can either depend on adhesion to the extracellular matrix ( ECM ) or be independent of adhesion . In a two - dimensional environment such as on a tissue culture plate , most cell types display mainly the adhesion - dependent migration mode . Three different actin ﬁlament structures contribute to this type of cell migration . Lamellipodial protrusions , where branched actin ﬁlament arrays provide the force for the genera - tion of wide plasma membrane protrusions that drive the advancement of the leading edge . Thin ﬁlopodial actin ﬁlament bundles form ﬁngerlike plasma mem - brane protrusions that function as “sensory organs” at the leading edge . In addition to these actin treadmilling - dependent structures , also contractile myosin II - containing actin ﬁlament bundles , named stress ﬁbers , contribute to adhesion - dependent cell migration . However , the function of stress ﬁbers in cell migration varies depending on the cell type , ECM density , and stiffness of the matrix ( Ridley 2011 ; Tojkander et al . 2012 ) . Actin Filament Structures in Migrating Cells 2 . 1 Structure and Function of the Lamellipodium Lamellipodia are thin ( 100 – 160 nm ) , sheetlike plasma membrane protrusions at the leading edge of migrating cells . These dynamic , actin - rich structures extend for several micrometers behind the leading edge of cell . They tend to protrude and retract constantly creating membrane rufﬂes ( Abercrombie et al . 1970a , b ) . Extracted lamellipodia and lamella of ﬁsh keratocytes lacking microtubules , nuclei , and most other organelles are still able to undergo directional motility ( Euteneuer and Schliwa 1984 ) , indicating that these structures harbor all necessary functions required for cellular movement . In the three - dimensional environment of tissues and organs , lamellipodia are thought to serve as anchors for migrating cells to move through the tissue . They can extend over long distances in front of the cell body , attach to extracellular matrix , and pull the cell body through the tissue ( Giannone et al . 2007 ) . Although cells are able to migrate also without lamellipodia ( Gupton et al . 2005 ) , these structures are crucial for persistent directional migration , indicating that lamellipodia are respon - sible for sensing environmental cues for migration ( Wu et al . 2012 ; Suraneni et al . 2012 ) . Actin ﬁlaments form a dense , branched network in lamellipodia with more than 100 ﬁlaments in one micrometer . Filament density is highest at the distal region of the leading edge and gradually decreases toward the rear of the lamellipodium ( Svitkina et al . 1997 ; Abraham et al . 1999 ) . All actin ﬁlament barbed ends in lamellipodia are facing toward the plasma membrane , forming brushlike structures . Practically only very few ﬁlament pointed ends are observed in the lamellipodium as they elongate from Y - shaped junctions formed by the Arp2 / 3 complex , an assembly of actin - binding proteins which nucleates the formation of new actin ﬁlaments from the sides of preexisting mother ﬁlaments ( Mullins et al . 1998 ; Svitkina and Borisy 1999 ) . 2 . 2 Regulation of Actin Dynamics in the Lamellipodium The dendritic nucleation model proposes that an array of new daughter ﬁlaments is nucleated at the leading edge of cell close to the plasma membrane ( Mullins et al . 1998 ; Pollard and Borisy 2003 ) . On the other hand , actin monomers dissociate from ﬁlaments mainly at the proximal region of the lamellipodium through ﬁlament severing and depolymerization ( Iwasa and Mullins 2007 ; Lai et al . 2008 ) . Hence , assembly , dynamics , and disassembly of the complex meshwork of branched actin ﬁlaments are under tight regulation of a large number of actin - regulatory proteins . The activities of these proteins are precisely controlled by a variety of signaling proteins , including the small GTPase Rac1 , which is the master regulator of lamellipodia formation in many animal cell types . By activating those proteins that induce the nucleation and polymerization of a branched actin ﬁlament network and inhibiting those proteins that drive ﬁlament disassembly close to the plasma membrane , Rac1 ensures the formation of a proper branched actin ﬁlament network at the leading edge of the lamellipodium ( Ridley 2015 ) ( Fig . 1 ) . J . Lehtima¨ki et al . Formins Capping proteins CAP Active GTPase Proﬁlin Coﬁlin WAVE complex Arp2 / 3 Barbed end ( + ) ATP - actin Pointed end ( - ) ADP - actin A . B . Rac1 PAK WAVE LIMK Arp2 / 3 Assembly of branched actin ﬁlament network Coﬁlin Actin ﬁlament stabilization Fig . 1 Organization and assembly of the lamellipodial actin ﬁlament network . ( a ) The lamellipodium at the leading edge of a cell comprises a branched actin ﬁlament network , which is nucleated by the Arp2 / 3 complex . The rapidly growing actin ﬁlament barbed ends face the Actin Filament Structures in Migrating Cells 2 . 2 . 1 Nucleation of New Filaments The Arp2 / 3 complex , one of the key components in lamellipodial actin regulation , is composed of seven subunits , including two actin - related proteins , Arp2 and Arp3 ( Machesky et al . 1994 ) . It is present throughout the lamellipodium where it nucleates new actin ﬁlaments , stays associated at pointed ends of the newly formed ﬁlaments , and is released only after their dissociation ( Lai et al . 2008 ) . The initiation of new branched actin ﬁlaments occurs close to the plasma membrane , where the Arp2 / 3 complex binds to preexisting mother ﬁlaments and subsequently nucleates a new daughter ﬁlament . Daughter ﬁlaments elongate from the sides of mother ﬁlaments , forming characteristic 70 (cid:1) (cid:3) 7 (cid:1) angles between the mother and daughter ﬁlaments ( Mullins et al . 1998 ; Svitkina and Borisy 1999 ; Blanchoin et al . 2000 ) . Formation of these branched ﬁlaments is critical for the generation of the dendritic lamellipodial network . This has also been addressed by Arp2 / 3 depletion and loss - of - function experiments , which resulted in the disappearance of lamellipodia and loss of directional cell migration ( Rogers et al . 2003 ; Wu et al . 2012 ; Suraneni et al . 2012 ) . The Arp2 / 3 complex alone is not sufﬁcient to initiate ﬁlament formation , because it needs both preexisting mother ﬁlaments and speciﬁc activators to be functional . Activation of the Arp2 / 3 complex takes place at the plasma membrane and is catalyzed by nucleation promoting factors ( NPFs ) such as Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome protein ( WASP ) family and SCAR / WAVE complexes . The activities of these NPFs are in turn controlled by Rho family of small GTPases and membrane phosphoinositides to ensure accurate spatial and temporal regulation of the Arp2 / 3 - mediated assembly of lamellipodial actin ﬁlament meshworks ( Bear et al . 1998 ; Machesky et al . 1999 ; Campellone and Welch 2010 ) . 2 . 2 . 2 Regulation of Filament Elongation There are several enhancers and suppressors controlling actin ﬁlament elongation following the Arp2 / 3 - mediated nucleation . Heterodimeric capping protein localizes in the lamellipodia close to the plasma membrane where it prevents the assembly and disassembly of actin monomers to / from ﬁlaments by binding to ﬁlament barbed ends ( Isenberg et al . 1980 ; Mejillano et al . 2004 ; Lai et al . 2008 ) . Capping protein is vital for the Arp2 / 3 - dependent cell motility and formation of proper lamellipodial Fig . 1 ( continued ) plasma membrane and their elongation generates the force for advancement of the leading edge . In addition to the Arp2 / 3 complex , certain formins contribute to lamellipodial actin ﬁlament nucleation . Actin ﬁlament assembly and disassembly as well as monomer recycling in the lamellipodium are controlled by a large array of actin - binding proteins including capping protein , coﬁlin , proﬁlin , and cyclase - associated protein ( CAP ) . ( b ) The small GTPase Rac1 is the master regulator of lamellipodium assembly in many cell types . It controls actin ﬁlament assembly by activating Arp2 / 3 through the WAVE complex and prevents actin ﬁlament disassembly close to the plasma membrane by inhibiting coﬁlin through PAK and LIMK J . Lehtima¨ki et al . protrusions . Depletion of capping protein in mammalian cells leads to the loss of lamellipodia and an explosive formation of ﬁlopodia ( Mejillano et al . 2004 ) . Capping protein may thus limit the amount of free actin ﬁlament barbed ends , thus funneling actin monomers to a smaller number of assembly - competent barbed ends in the lamellipodium ( Loisel et al . 1999 ) . The counterparts for capping protein constitute from a family of formins and Ena / VASP proteins ( Reinhard et al . 1992 ; Sagot et al . 2002 ; Pruyne et al . 2002 ) . These proteins protect ﬁlament barbed ends from being capped , increase the rate of ﬁlament elongation , and reduce the amount of branches ( Skoble et al . 2001 ; Kovar et al . 2003 ; Romero et al . 2004 ; Breitsprecher et al . 2011a ) . Fibroblasts lacking lamellipodial Ena / VASP proteins display abnormally short and branched actin ﬁlaments , whereas Ena / VASP overexpression leads to longer and less branched ﬁlaments ( Bear et al . 2002 ) . Unlike Ena / VASP proteins , formins are also able to nucleate linear actin ﬁlaments . Formins remain associated at the barbed ends after their nucleation , walking along the ﬁlaments as they elongate ( Romero et al . 2004 ) . Depletion of certain formins inhibits lamellipodial protrusions and consequently reduces cell migration ( Yang et al . 2007 ; Block et al . 2012 ) . 2 . 2 . 3 Actin Filament Disassembly and Monomer Recycling Sustained actin polymerization and formation of new protrusions at the leading edge cannot continue for a long time without regeneration of the pool of polymerization - competent actin monomers . Therefore , it is necessary that cells can rapidly disassemble actin ﬁlaments and recycle monomers for the next elonga - tion cycle . The members of the ADF / coﬁlin protein family are the most critical regulators of actin ﬁlament disassembly in cells . The majority of ADF / coﬁlins bind both monomeric and ﬁlamentous actin with a preference for ADP - charged actin subunits ( Carlier et al . 1997 ) . Importantly , ADF / coﬁlins promote rapid actin ﬁla - ment disassembly by severing actin ﬁlaments and thus increasing the number of ﬁlament pointed ends from where actin monomers can dissociate ( Andrianantoandro and Pollard 2006 ) . Depletion of ADF / coﬁlins indeed leads to problems in proper lamellipodium formation due to decreased ﬁlament disassembly and consequent depletion of the pool of assembly - competent actin monomers ( Hotulainen et al . 2005 ; Kiuchi et al . 2007 ) . Recently , it has been shown that ADF / coﬁlins do not work independently in cells but that at least three proteins , cyclase - associated protein ( CAP ) , Aip1 , and coronin , enhance the activity of ADF / coﬁlins to promote rapid disassembly of actin ﬁlaments ( Chaudhry et al . 2013 ; Jansen et al . 2015 ; Gressin et al . 2015 ) . Furthermore , even following severing by ADF / coﬁlins , spontaneous depolymerization of actin ﬁlaments at their pointed ends is slow compared to what is needed for efﬁcient ﬁlament turnover in lamellipodia ( Pollard 1986 ; Watanabe and Mitchison 2002 ) . Twinﬁlin , another member of the ADF - H domain protein family , is able to enhance the depolymeri - zation rate of actin ﬁlaments when cooperating with CAP . Therefore , coﬁlin , CAP , and twinﬁlin appear to work in concert to rapidly disassemble actin ﬁlaments in cells ( Johnston et al . 2015 ) . Actin Filament Structures in Migrating Cells In addition to proteins promoting ﬁlament severing and depolymerization , speciﬁc proteins evolved in eukaryotes that catalyze the dissociation of Arp2 / 3 - stabilized ﬁlament branches . A most potent debranching factor is the glia - maturation factor ( GMF ) , which is a small globular protein that , similarly to ADF / coﬁlins , is composed of a single ADF - H domain ( Gandhi et al . 2010 ) . How - ever , unlike ADF / coﬁlins , GMF does not bind or sever actin ﬁlaments , but instead binds to and catalyzes the dissociation of Arp2 / 3 - nucleated ﬁlament branches . In migrating cells , depletion of GMF leads to decreased lamellipodial dynamics and consequent defects in directional cell migration ( Poukkula et al . 2014 ; Haynes et al . 2015 ) . Newly polymerized actin ﬁlaments consist of ATP - bound actin monomers , whereas monomers dissociating from the pointed ends predominantly contain ADP in the nucleotide - binding cleft . Thus , ADP in actin monomers has to be exchanged to ATP prior to a new round of ﬁlament assembly . CAPs and proﬁlin are considered as the main cellular factors that promote the nucleotide exchange on actin monomers . From these , especially CAP is well suited for promoting nucleo - tide exchange in cells because it binds both ADP - and ATP - actin monomers with high afﬁnity and efﬁciently catalyzes the nucleotide exchange on actin monomers ( Mattila et al . 2004 ; Quintero - Monzon et al . 2009 ) . Depletion of CAP leads to problems in lamellipodia formation and dynamics in migrating cells ( Bertling et al . 2004 ) . CAP also interacts with proﬁlin and can potentially deliver ATP - actin monomers to this protein ( Bertling et al . 2007 ) . Proﬁlin can promote the assembly of ATP - actin monomers to free ﬁlament barbed ends and localize ATP - actin monomers to Ena / VASP and formin family proteins . However , proﬁlin inhibits the spontaneous nucleation of actin ﬁlaments and is thus well suited to function as a gatekeeper of actin ﬁlament nucleation and assembly of actin monomers to desired actin ﬁlament arrays ( Pantaloni and Carlier 1993 ; Rotty et al . 2015 ; Suarez et al . 2015 ) . 2 . 3 Structure and Functions of Filopodia Filopodia are thin , dynamic plasma membrane protrusions that are ﬁlled with actin ﬁlament bundles . They are considered to function as sensory organs at the leading edge of motile cells by sensing , e . g . , growth factors , chemokines , and the extracel - lular matrix ( Mattila and Lappalainen 2008 ) . Filopodia are also often oriented toward the gradient of chemoattractants in migrating cells ( Bentley and Toroian - Raymond 1986 ) . In addition to motility , ﬁlopodia are involved in cell - to - cell and cell - to - matrix adhesion and maturation of neurons ( Vasioukhin et al . 2000 ; Gallo and Letourneau 2004 ; Galbraith et al . 2007 ) . Furthermore , ﬁlopodia have an essential role in the activation of T lymphocytes in antigen - presenting cells , and they function as phagocytic tentacles in macrophages ( Al - Alwan et al . 2001 ; Kress et al . 2007 ) . The diameter of ﬁlopodia is typically approximately 0 . 1 – 0 . 3 μ m and their length can be over 10 μ m as measured from the cell cortex . However , during sea urchin J . Lehtima¨ki et al . embryo gastrulation , ﬁlopodia can extend even up to 80 μ m from the cell cortex ( Miller et al . 1995 ) . In contrast , ﬁlopodial - like protrusions called microspikes are very short and often hardly visible by regular light microscopy approaches ( Taylor and Robbins 1963 ) . Thus , a huge variation exists between the morphological and dynamic parameters of different types of ﬁlopodial protrusions , and it is likely that membrane protrusions generally classiﬁed as “ﬁlopodia” consist of several func - tionally different groups of thin plasma membrane protrusions with distinct assem - bly pathways and molecular components ( Mattila and Lappalainen 2008 ) . Here , we focus on ﬁlopodia that are present at the leading edge of migrating vertebrate cells . In ﬁlopodia of the leading edge , individual actin ﬁlaments extend from the cell cortex to the tip of ﬁlopodium , and they form unipolar bundles with rapidly growing barbed ends facing toward the tip . The core of a ﬁlopodium typically consists of 15 – 30 individual ﬁlaments , which are tightly packed and arranged in parallel to each other ( Small and Celis 1978 ; Medalia et al . 2007 ) . At least in mammalian cells , ﬁlopodial actin ﬁlaments can be generated either from the preexisting branched lamellipodial actin network ( Svitkina et al . 2003 ) or through de novo nucleation of new actin ﬁlaments at speciﬁc foci at the plasma membrane ( Small and Celis 1978 ; Medalia et al . 2007 ) . The formation , morphology , and dynamics of ﬁlopodia are controlled by an array of actin - binding proteins . The activities of the actin - binding proteins are in turn controlled by various signaling proteins from which the small GTPase Cdc42 functions as the master regulator of ﬁlopodia formation in many vertebrate cells ( Ridley 2015 ) ( Fig . 2 ) . 2 . 4 Actin Dynamics in Filopodia Filopodia are not stable protrusive structures , but often undergo constant extension and retraction , especially in migrating cells and during neuronal growth cone pathﬁnding ( Bentley and Toroian - Raymond 1986 ) . Balance between extension and retraction is controlled by the rate of actin ﬁlament assembly at the tips of ﬁlaments ( Mallavarapu and Mitchison 1999 ; Bornschl € ogl 2013 ) as well as by ﬁlament disassembly through ADF / coﬁlin - mediated severing at the base of ﬁlopodia ( Breitsprecher et al . 2011b ) . 2 . 4 . 1 Nucleation and Elongation of Filaments Based on electron microscopy and genetic studies ( Svitkina et al . 2003 ; Schirenbeck et al . 2005 ; Medalia et al . 2007 ) , two alternative models for ﬁlament nucleation in ﬁlopodia have been suggested . The convergent elongation model proposes that actin ﬁlaments in ﬁlopodia arise from the lamellipodial actin network , whereas the tip nucleation model suggests that short individual ﬁlaments in a “terminal cone” of ﬁlopodia act as a nucleation site for continuous ﬁlament bundles ( Mattila and Lappalainen 2008 ; Yang and Svitkina 2011 ) . Depending on the model , either the Arp2 / 3 complex or formins are the best candidates for nucleating actin ﬁlaments for ﬁlopodia . From the tip nucleation point of view , formin mDia2 is the primary candidate to nucleate , elongate , and protect Actin Filament Structures in Migrating Cells Proﬁlin Coﬁlin IRSp53 Ena / VASP Arp2 / 3 Formins ( mDia2 ) Capping proteins Barbed end ( + ) ATP - actin Pointed end ( - ) ADP - actin Fascin Cdc42 IRSp53 Dia2 PAK LIMK Coﬁlin Actin ﬁlament stabilization Filopodia formation Membrane curvature Assembly of unbranched actin ﬁlaments B . A . Fig . 2 Organization and architecture of ﬁlopodial actin ﬁlament arrays . ( a ) Filopodia contain a bundle of unipolar actin ﬁlaments with their rapidly growing barbed ends facing the tip of the ﬁlopodium . Fascin is the main actin ﬁlament cross - linking / bundling protein in ﬁlopodia . Actin J . Lehtima¨ki et al . ﬁlament assembly in ﬁlopodia ( Peng et al . 2003 ; Schirenbeck et al . 2005 ; Yang et al . 2007 ) . Also other formins such as DAAM1 have been linked to ﬁlopodia formation ( Jaiswal et al . 2013 ) . However , defects in Arp2 / 3 expression , function , or localization lead to signiﬁcant problems in ﬁlopodial formation in cultured neurons , HeLa cells , Caenorhabditis elegans , and Drosophila melanogaster ( Machesky and Insall 1998 ; Korobova and Svitkina 2008 ; Norris et al . 2009 ) , supporting the convergent elongation model . Since cells contain different types of ﬁlopodia with distinct molecular compositions and dynamics , it is likely that both the convergent elongation and the tip nucleation model are relevant and that their relative contributions for ﬁlament nucleation vary depending on the cell and the ﬁlopodium type . How then could linear , parallel actin ﬁlaments of ﬁlopodia be nucleated by the Arp2 / 3 complex ? This is possible if ﬁlament barbed ends are uncapped and protected from capping by formins or Ena / VASP proteins ( Svitkina et al . 2003 ; Yang et al . 2007 ) . Interestingly , heterodimeric capping protein and Ena / VASP operate on the lamellipodial and ﬁlopodial actin networks in concert . Capping protein silencing leads to loss of lamellipodia and increased formation of ﬁlopodia , but when capping protein is depleted simultaneously with Ena / VASP , rufﬂes are formed at the leading edge ( Mejillano et al . 2004 ) . Capping protein is present also in ﬁlopodia in low levels but its role in the regulation of the ﬁlopodial actin network remains to be elucidated ( Sinnar et al . 2014 ) . 2 . 4 . 2 Filament Cross - Linking Proteins In ﬁlopodia , actin ﬁlaments form tight , unipolar bundles . Bundling is necessary to overcome the resistance of the plasma membrane because individual ﬁlaments are too ﬂexible to push the membrane forward . It has been mathematically estimated that a bundle of over 10 ﬁlaments has sufﬁcient rigidity to overcome the membrane resistance and that the optimal number of ﬁlaments in a bundle is around 30 ( Mogilner and Rubinstein 2005 ) . Fascin is an actin - bundling protein essential for generation of actin ﬁlament bundles in ﬁlopodia . It decorates the entire length of the ﬁlopodium , and its depletion reduces the number of ﬁlopodia in cells . Interac - tion of fascin with actin ﬁlaments is dynamic , which allows efﬁcient coordination of ﬁlament elongation and bundling during ﬁlopodia protrusion ( DeRosier and Edds (cid:1) Fig . 2 ( continued ) ﬁlaments in ﬁlopodia can be either nucleated de novo by formins or be generated from the preexisting lamellipodial Arp2 / 3 - nucleated network through Ena / VASP - mediated ﬁlament elongation and protection of ﬁlament barbed ends from capping protein . Ena / VASP also interacts with the I - BAR domain protein IRSp53 , which senses or generates the negative membrane curvature at the tip of the ﬁlopodium . Coﬁlin - promoted ﬁlament severing is inhibited toward the tip of the ﬁlopodium to stabilize the actin ﬁlament bundle . ( b ) The small GTPase Cdc42 is the master regulator of ﬁlopodial actin ﬁlament dynamics in many cell types . Cdc42 activates Dia2 formin to promote actin ﬁlament assembly . It inactivates coﬁlin through LIMK and PAK , thus inhibiting actin ﬁlament disassembly , and interacts with IRSp53 , which generates membrane curvature and functions as a scaffolding protein for other regulators of actin dynamics Actin Filament Structures in Migrating Cells 1980 ; Vignjevic et al . 2006 ) . In addition to fascin , also ﬁmbrin , α - actinin , and ﬁlamin are able to support actin - bundling - dependent motility ( Brieher et al . 2004 ) . Interestingly , also in the amoeboid cells of Dictyostelium discoideum , an Ena / VASP protein seems to be involved in the ﬁlament bundling in ﬁlopodia ( Schirenbeck et al . 2006 ) . 2 . 4 . 3 Actin – Plasma Membrane Interactions and Membrane Curvature Members of the Bin – amphiphysin – Rvs ( BAR ) protein family are important regulators of membrane curvature and can additionally link the actin cytoskeleton to the plasma membrane . N - BAR and most F - BAR domain proteins generate a positive membrane curvature and induce plasma membrane invaginations , whereas the I - BAR domain proteins generate a negative membrane curvature and can thus induce the formation of plasma membrane protrusions ( Peter et al . 2004 ; Suetsugu et al . 2006 ; Mattila et al . 2007 ; Shimada et al . 2007 ) . Interestingly , the diameter of membrane tubules induced by I - BAR domains is similar to the diameter of ﬁlopodia in cells , and overexpression of I - BAR domain proteins or their isolated I - BAR domains can induce ﬁlopodia - like protrusions at the plasma membrane ( Saarikangas et al . 2009 ) . From the I - BAR domain proteins , the insulin receptor substrate protein of 53 kDa ( IRSp53 ) has been intimately linked to ﬁlopodia formation . In addition to sensing or generating negative membrane curvature , IRSp53 functions as a scaf - folding protein for several actin - regulating proteins , such as Rho GTPases , Arp2 / 3 complex activator WAVE2 , Ena / VASP , and actin ﬁlament - bundling / capping protein Eps8 . Thus , IRSp53 can either sense or generate membrane curvature at the tip of the ﬁlopodium through its membrane - binding I - BAR domain and additionally promote actin ﬁlament assembly at this region by interacting with actin - binding proteins through its other domains ( Krugmann et al . 2001 ; Disanza et al . 2006 ; Lim et al . 2008 ; Pre ´ vost et al . 2015 ) . 2 . 5 Organization and Functions of Stress Fibers Stress ﬁbers were observed over 90 years ago under plain bright - ﬁeld microscope and were initially thought to be ﬁbers that reversibly build up in response to cytoplasmic tension or stress ( Lewis and Lewis 1924 ) . However , it is now well established that stress ﬁbers do not form due to internal stress , but rather reﬂect and respond to the physical rigidity of the extracellular matrix ( Riveline et al . 2001 ; Costa et al . 2002 ; Discher et al . 2005 ; Tojkander et al . 2015 ) . In cell types that experience strong external shearing forces , such as the endothelial cells of vascula - ture , stress ﬁbers are distinctively prominent ( Franke et al . 1984 ) . Moreover , stationary cells display thicker and more stable actomyosin bundles , i . e . , stress ﬁbers , compared to highly motile cells to better resist and respond to the external mechanical forces or to remodel the surrounding tissue ( Hinz et al . 2001 ; Pellegrin and Mellor 2007 ) . The role of stress ﬁbers in cell migration varies depending on the cell type and the extracellular environment of the cell . In two - dimensional J . Lehtima¨ki et al . environment , stress ﬁbers are believed to be involved in regulating cell polarity and promoting retraction of the tail of migrating cell , whereas in cells migrating in a three - dimensional extracellular matrix ( ECM ) , stress ﬁberlike actomyosin bundles may be more directly involved in adhesion to the matrix and advancement of the leading edge ( Tojkander et al . 2012 ) . The core of contractile stress ﬁbers is built up from short actin ﬁlaments that are organized in a bipolar manner . This resembles the sarcomeric units in muscles and enables the movement of bipolar myosin II ﬁlaments along the actin bundles to create contractility . However , whereas muscle myoﬁbrils are entirely composed of bipolar arrays of actin ﬁlaments , stress ﬁbers display often a mixed polarity and are composed of both unipolar and bipolar actin ﬁlament arrays ( Sanger et al . 1983 ; Cramer et al . 1997 ; Svitkina et al . 1997 ) . Stress ﬁbers are often coupled to the extracellular matrix via focal adhesions . These are large , multi - protein structures that enable cells to communicate with the extracellular matrix as they migrate ( Geiger et al . 2009 ) . Diverse members of the large family of integrins and other focal adhesion components anchor the extracel - lular matrix to the cytoplasmic stress ﬁbers ( Geiger and Yamada 2011 ) . The assembly and dynamics of stress ﬁbers are controlled both at focal adhesions and along the stress ﬁbers by a large array of actin - and myosin - binding proteins . The activities of these proteins are in turn controlled by mechanical forces and various signaling proteins , from which the RhoA family of small GTPase is often consid - ered as the master regulator of stress ﬁber assembly ( Ridley and Hall 1992 ) ( Fig . 3 ) . 2 . 5 . 1 Different Stress Fiber Subtypes Stress ﬁbers can be generally divided into three categories : dorsal stress ﬁbers , transverse arcs , and ventral stress ﬁbers ( Heath 1983 ; Small et al . 1998 ) . Dorsal stress ﬁbers are noncontractile actin bundles that associate with a focal adhesion at their distal end and extend toward the cell center through actin polymerization at focal adhesions . Dorsal stress ﬁbers display uniform polarity near the focal adhe - sion anchorage site , but appear to contain mixed polarity actin ﬁlaments toward the proximal part of the ﬁber ( Cramer et al . 1997 ) . Although dorsal stress ﬁbers do not contain myosin II and are unable to contract , they can connect the other stress ﬁber types to focal adhesions . Dorsal stress ﬁbers appear also important for cell migra - tion at least in a two - dimensional tissue culture environment ( Hotulainen and Lappalainen 2006 ; Tojkander et al . 2011 ; Kovac et al . 2013 ) . Transverse arcs are contractile , myosin II - containing actin bundles that are generated from the lamellipodial actin ﬁlament network . Transverse arcs are not directly associated with focal adhesions , but are linked to these contact sites through dorsal stress ﬁbers . As the transverse arcs contract , they ﬂow toward the cell center with a characteristic speed of ~ 0 . 3 μ m / min ( Hotulainen and Lappalainen 2006 ; Tee et al . 2015 ) . Although transverse arcs have not been directly linked to cell migration , they are important for the formation of the ﬂat lamellum at the leading edge of motile cells due to their association with the plasma membrane at the dorsal side of the cell ( Burnette et al . 2014 ; Jiu et al . 2015 ) . Actin Filament Structures in Migrating Cells Focal adhesion Bipolar myosin II bundle Tropomyosins 3 / 4 α - actinin Fascin T r an sv e r s e a r c D o r s a l s t r e ss ﬁ be r V en t r a l s t r e ss ﬁ be r A . RhoA ROCK LIMK Myosin light chain phosphorylation ( Thr18 / Ser19 ) Myosin II activation Coﬁlin Actin ﬁlament assembly Myosin phosphatase PP1 Dia1 Actin ﬁlament stabilization B . Assembly of contractile actomyosin bundles Fig . 3 Assembly and organization of actin stress ﬁbers . ( a ) Stress ﬁbers are thick bundles of actin ﬁlaments , which are decorated by tropomyosins and cross - linked mainly by α - actinin . Stress ﬁbers can be further divided into three different categories . Dorsal stress ﬁbers are noncontractile actin J . Lehtima¨ki et al . Dorsal stress ﬁbers and transverse arcs serve as precursors of ventral stress ﬁbers , which are usually oriented perpendicular to the direction of migration and are connected to focal adhesions with both their ends ( Small et al . 1998 ; Tojkander et al . 2012 ) . Ventral stress ﬁbers contain a sarcomeric array of bipolar myosin II and actin ﬁlament bundles and are thus able to contract and apply tensile force to focal adhesions located at the ends of the bundle . Therefore , ventral stress ﬁbers are important for cell adhesion , morphogenesis , and mechanosensing ( Tojkander et al . 2015 ) . Ventral stress ﬁbers are also responsible for retraction of the tail in many migrating cell types ( Kolega 2003 ) . 2 . 6 Mechanisms of Stress Fiber Assembly Compared to the lamellipodial and ﬁlopodial actin ﬁlament arrays , assembly of contractile stress ﬁbers is a complex process and involves many actin nucleation mechanisms and several different actin ﬁlament populations . The assembly of stress ﬁbers is regulated mainly by Rho family of GTPases , whose activation promotes stress ﬁber formation / stabilization through a number of actin - binding proteins . RhoA also enhances stress ﬁber contractility through activation of myosin II by myosin light chain ( MLC ) and ROCK ( Heasman and Ridley 2008 ) . In stress ﬁber assembly , lamellipodial actin ﬁlaments serve as building blocks for the generation of transverse arcs ( Hotulainen and Lappalainen 2006 ) . During this process , Arp2 / 3 complex - nucleated lamellipodial actin ﬁlaments assemble with formin - nucleated , myosin II - decorated actin ﬁlaments at the proximal end of the lamellipodium to generate transverse arcs ( Hotulainen and Lappalainen 2006 ; Tojkander et al . 2011 ) . Lamellipodia undergo cycles of protrusion and retraction in migrating cells . The appearance of transverse arc precursors coincides with the retraction phase , when actin ﬁlaments condense from the more criss - crossed mesh - work into bundled ﬁlament precursors ( Burnette et al . 2011 ) . Additionally , material from ﬁlopodial ﬁlaments can be recycled for generating stress ﬁbers ( Nemethova et al . 2008 ; Anderson et al . 2008 ) . Dorsal stress ﬁbers , on the other hand , are nucleated and elongated by different formins ( including at least Dia1 and INF2 ) and Ena / VASP family proteins at focal adhesions ( Hotulainen and Lappalainen 2006 ; (cid:1) Fig . 3 ( continued ) ﬁlament bundles that associate with , and elongate through , actin polymeriza - tion at focal adhesions located at their distal ends . Transverse arcs are myosin II - containing contractile actin bundles that associate with dorsal stress ﬁbers , but are not directly linked to focal adhesions . Transverse arcs are generated from the lamellipodial actin ﬁlament arrays . Ventral stress ﬁbers are contractile , myosin II - containing actin ﬁlament bundles that can be generated from the preexisting network of dorsal stress ﬁbers and transverse arcs . Ventral stress ﬁbers communicate with the extracellular matrix through focal adhesions located at both their ends . ( b ) The RhoA family of small GTPase is the master regulator of stress ﬁber assembly and contractility in many animal cell types . RhoA promotes actin ﬁlament assembly through Dia1 formin and inhibits actin ﬁlament disassembly through ROCK - and LIMK - mediated inactivation of coﬁlin . Additionally , RhoA promotes myosin II activation through ROCK Actin Filament Structures in Migrating Cells Gateva et al . 2014 ; Skau et al . 2015 ; Tojkander et al . 2015 ) . As the dorsal stress ﬁbers elongate , they associate with transverse arcs through a mechanism that is currently unknown . Thus , dorsal ﬁbers and transverse arcs create an entwined network in the lamellum , where individual arcs can be connected to several different dorsal stress ﬁbers ( Tojkander et al . 2011 ) . Ventral stress ﬁbers can be subsequently generated from the network of dorsal stress ﬁbers and transverse arcs through a complex mechanosensitive process if the cell is on a rigid matrix or if external forces are applied to the cell ( Tojkander et al . 2015 ) . Finally , it is important to note that stress ﬁbers are dynamic structures that undergo continuous assembly and disassembly as well as organization of the network ( Tojkander et al . 2012 ) . 2 . 6 . 1 Actin Filament Cross - Linking Proteins in Stress Fibers To date over 20 different protein classes have been reported to possess actin cross - linking activity . Most actin cross - linking proteins exist either as dimers or contain two actin - binding domains . α - Actinin and fascin are the most well - characterized , abundant cross - linking proteins of the contractile ﬁbers . Homodimeric α - actinin , with the subunits arranged in antiparallel fashion , links adjacent actin ﬁbers through a bivalent binding mechanism with its two actin - binding sites ( Puius et al . 1998 ; Edlund et al . 2001 ; T € urmer et al . 2015 ) . Monomeric fascin links actin ﬁlaments in a much more compact manner , forming tightly packed parallel actin bundles that have been recently shown to be important in the termini of mature stress ﬁbers , close to focal adhesions ( Otto et al . 1979 ; Elkhatib et al . 2014 ) . Cooperative cross - linking by α - actinin and fascin was shown to produce more elastic bundles than either of the two proteins could generate individually ( Tseng et al . 2001 ) . α - Actinin cross - links align periodically in transverse arcs and ventral ﬁbers , interposing with the two other central components of the contractile ﬁbers , myosin II and tropomy - osin , which also display a periodical localization pattern along stress ﬁbers . Thus , the two types of contractile stress ﬁbers display a similar periodic α - actinin – myosin II pattern that is characteristic for muscle myoﬁbrils ( Tojkander et al . 2012 ) . 2 . 6 . 2 Myosins and Tropomyosins Tropomyosins and myosin II bundles are important components of stress ﬁber function and contractility . Class II myosins are the major contractile proteins of the cardiac and skeletal muscle tissues , but have speciﬁc isoforms also in the non - muscle cells that associate with stress ﬁbers ( Vicente - Manzanares et al . 2009 ) . Mammalian non - muscle cells are able to utilize up to three different non - muscle myosin II ( NMII ) isoforms ( myosin IIA , IIB , and IIC ) each displaying distinct characteristics in terms of catalytic activity , localization , and role in various cellular functions ( Katsuragawa et al . 1989 ; Kawamoto and Adelstein 1991 ; Golomb et al . 2004 ) . Recent work demonstrated that these isoforms can also co - assemble with each other into bipolar bundles in different stress ﬁber subtypes ( Beach et al . 2014 ; Shutova et al . 2014 ) . In a polarized cell , NMIIA and NMIIB are both central components of stress ﬁbers , but are however enriched in the peripheral lamella and posterior contractile units , respectively ( Maupin et al . 1994 ; Sandquist and Means 2008 ) . The differential distribution reﬂects differences in the three J . Lehtima¨ki et al . isoforms regarding their rate of hydrolyzing ATP . The motor domain of NMIIB is able to hold the tension longer than the other isoforms , via its high afﬁnity for ADP . Long upkeep of tension is well suited for more stable contractile ﬁbers in the cortical and posterior part of the cell ( Wang et al . 2000 ) . In the more rapidly progressing cell front , NMIIA , with markedly higher ATP hydrolysis rate and lower afﬁnity for ADP , is able to exert tension more rapidly , e . g . , in response to extracellular signals ( Wang et al . 2003 ) . Tropomyosins are a family of actin - binding proteins that function as coiled - coil dimers forming continuous polymers located in the grooves of ﬁlamentous actin . The canonical mechanism of function for tropomyosins is to regulate skeletal muscle contraction by steric blocking of the myosin binding to actin ﬁlaments prior to Ca 2 + inﬂux ( Parry and Squire 1973 ) . Tropomyosins also efﬁciently stabilize actin ﬁlaments and may functionally specify different actin ﬁlament populations ( Hitchcock - DeGregori et al . 1988 ; Broschat et al . 1989 ; Gunning et al . 2015 ) . Over 40 different tropomyosins can be generated by alternative splicing from four mammalian tropomyosin genes ( Gunning et al . 2008 ) . Interestingly , recent studies revealed that in migrating osteosarcoma cells , at least ﬁve functionally nonredun - dant tropomyosin isoforms localize to stress ﬁbers and are important for their assembly and / or stability . Furthermore , some tropomyosin isoforms appear to be essential for myosin II recruitment to stress ﬁbers ( Tojkander et al . 2011 ) . Thus , tropomyosins are central components of stress ﬁbers , where they seem to specify functionally distinct actin ﬁlament populations and recruit myosin II molecules to stress ﬁber precursors . 3 Cell Migration in a Three - Dimensional Environment In tissues of multicellular animals , cells migrate predominantly in a complex three - dimensional environment . Here the cells can crawl on or through extracellular matrix as well as migrate on top of each other . In some cases , such as during transcellular migration of leukocytes from blood vessels to the underlying tissues , cells can even move through other cells ( Ridley 2011 ; Muller 2015 ) . In tissue environment , migration of cells can also be guided by variable biochemical or mechanical signals . Chemical signals include growth factor gradients that can either attract or repel migrating cells during developmental processes and angio - genesis as well as chemokine - induced migration of lymphocytes . On the other hand , ﬁbroblasts can read the mechanical properties of the environment and move toward the regions of highest substrate stiffness in a process called durotaxis ( Majumdar et al . 2014 ; Haeger et al . 2015 ) . Compared to migration on a two - dimensional tissue culture plate , cells in a three - dimensional tissue environment display more variation in their migration modes . The most widely studied migration types are mesenchymal and amoeboid migration modes . In the mesenchymal , adhesion - dependent migration mode , the cells moving along ECM are typically elongated and employ similar lamellipodial and ﬁlopodial structures for movement as used in a two - dimensional environment . Actin Filament Structures in Migrating Cells In contrast , amoeboid migration does not require the formation of adhesions or lamellipodial - like protrusive structures , but instead employs the myosin - dependent contractile actin cortex to form membrane blebs toward the direction of migration . Importantly , the same cell can switch between different types of migration modes , depending on the mechanical and chemical properties of the environment ( Petrie and Yamada 2012 ; Paluch and Raz 2013 ) . Cell migration in a three - dimensional tissue environment also employs other speciﬁc actin - dependent processes , such as invadopodia and podosomes , which are involved in matrix degradation , thus per - mitting cells to move through the dense extracellular matrix ( Linder and Wiesner 2015 ) . 3 . 1 Podosomes and Invadopodia Cell movement in two - dimensional matrices is limited to a planar level , whereas in a tissue environment , all three dimensions are available . In a three - dimensional environment , however , cells frequently need to degrade the extracellular matrix in order to crawl . Special structures termed podosomes and invadopodia can then be formed and applied to degrade the extracellular matrix during mesenchymal migra - tion ( Hoshino et al . 2013 ) . Both structures initially appear as punctae on the plasma membrane and utilize the polymerization of actin to breach the substratum perpen - dicularly . Podosome architecture consists of an actin core where the Arp2 / 3 - initiated branched actin network is surrounded by myosin II - containing unbranched actin ﬁlaments ( Kaverina et al . 2003 ; Osiak et al . 2005 ; Bhuwania et al . 2012 ) . A third structural component , surrounding the actin – myosin core , is composed of clusters of focal adhesion - associated proteins such as paxillin or vinculin ( Cox et al . 2012 ; van den Dries et al . 2013 ) . Also integrins co - localize with maturing podosomal structures and establish a linkage between the cell and the extracellular matrix ( Pfaff and Jurdic 2001 ) . In contrast to the compact , column - like podosomes , invadopodia are extended membrane protrusions invading the extracellular matrix ( Linder et al . 2011 ) . While podosomes display rapid actin dynamics and a short life span with a typical turnover time of one minute , invadopodia are able to persist over an hour ( Destaing et al . 2003 ; Li et al . 2010 ) . The tip of an invadopodium inhabits parallely aligned actin ﬁlament bundles that precede the branched actin meshwork at the base . Arp2 / 3 and several ﬁlament - polymerizing formins are important for establishing nascent invadopodia that form mature structures after recruitment of matrix metalloproteases ( Liza´rraga et al . 2009 ; Wiesner et al . 2010 ) . Interestingly , invadopodia do not extensively recruit integrins and it is still unknown whether they have adhesive contacts with the extracellular matrix ( Mueller and Chen 1991 ; Deryugina et al . 2001 ) . J . Lehtima¨ki et al . 3 . 2 Blebbing - Based Cell Migration Typically , animal cells contain a contractile cell cortex under their plasma mem - brane . Although this structure is not considered to be a subtype of the stress ﬁbers , it similarly constitutes from myosin II - decorated actin ﬁlaments with mixed or random polarity , associated with other actin - binding proteins ( Bray and White 1988 ; Charras et al . 2006 ) . Similarly to stress ﬁbers , the formation of the actin cortex requires both formins ( Dia1 ) and the Arp2 / 3 complex ( Bovellan et al . 2014 ) . The cortical actin ﬁlament network is linked to the plasma membrane at least through ezrin / radixin / moesin ( ERM ) family proteins ( Charras et al . 2006 ) . The contractile actin cortex has an important role in amoeboid cell migration , where propulsive blebs drive the migration , and adhesion points with the extracel - lular matrix are not utilized ( Wolf et al . 2003 ; Pinner and Sahai 2008 ) . Especially cancer cells are often highly contractile , making them prone to blebbing ( Bergert et al . 2012 ) . Furthermore , at least in mouse tissues , melanoma and breast cancer cells migrate by blebbing , suggesting that this is an important migration mode of many cancer cell types in vivo ( Tozluo (cid:2) glu et al . 2013 ) . A bleb forms when the actin cortex detaches from the plasma membrane or when the cortex itself is disrupted due to cytoplasmic buildup of pressure and tension caused by actomyosin contraction . Due to the contraction of the remaining actomy - osin cortex , cytosol ﬂows into the newly formed bleb lacking the cortex . Actin ﬁlaments then begin to reform under the membrane of the bleb ( Fig . 4 ) . This is followed by a retraction phase , driven by myosin II - promoted contraction of the newly formed actomyosin cortex underlying the plasma membrane of the bleb ( Cunningham 1995 ; Paluch et al . 2005 ; Charras et al . 2006 ; Charras and Paluch 2008 ) . Cells conﬁned in a nonadhesive environment often migrate in the direction of a very large “leader bleb , ” whose formation requires the presence of the actin ﬁlament - bundling protein Eps8 ( Logue et al . 2015 ) . Three distinct models for the role of blebbing in cell migration have been presented . The ﬁrst model proposes that blebbing plays a critical role in forward migration by transporting the cytoplasm and thereby moving the center point of mass of the cell forward . Actin is linked to the cell – cell contacts formed by E - cadherins , which anchor the migrating cell to the extracellular matrix ( Kardash et al . 2010 ) . “The chimneying” model , named after a rock climbing technique , proposes a migration mechanism in the total absence of adhesion with the environ - ment . Either actin polymerization against the sides of a cell or a backward ﬂow of the cell cortex could generate force that is strong enough to permit the cell to move forward . In either case , movement is supported by speciﬁc or nonspeciﬁc friction between the cell and the substrate ( La¨mmermann et al . 2008 ; Hawkins et al . 2009 ; Poincloux et al . 2011 ) . Finally , “the swimming model” suggests that cells could use blebbing in a swimming fashion , whereby the cell body translocates after cell shape changes during blebbing ( Lim et al . 2013 ) . Actin Filament Structures in Migrating Cells A . Bleb initiation B . Bleb formation C . Cortex reassembly D . Bleb retraction Cortical actin Myosin II ERM proteins Fig . 4 The life cycle of a bleb . ( a ) Many cells contain an actomyosin cortex , which can be linked with the plasma membrane via ezrin / radixin / moesin ( ERM ) proteins . The initiation of a bleb can result from a local disassembly of the actomyosin cortex . ( b ) Hydrostatic pressure of the cytoplasm drives the expansion of the bleb . ( c ) A new actin cortex assembles inside the bleb via Arp2 / 3 and formin - mediated actin ﬁlament nucleation and subsequent recruitment of myosin II . ( d ) Assembly of the actomyosin cortex is followed by myosin II - driven bleb retraction ( modiﬁed from Charras and Paluch 2008 ) J . Lehtima¨ki et al . 4 Future Perspectives Cell migration requires several different actin - based structures and is ﬁnely tuned by a large amount of regulatory proteins . Although actin dynamics and its role in cell migration have been intensively studied over several decades , many unan - swered questions concerning the mechanisms underlying cell migration still remain . For example , although the principles of actin ﬁlament assembly and disassembly in lamellipodia are beginning to be relatively well established , we still do not have a complete picture about how ﬁlopodia and contractile actomyosin bundles , such as stress ﬁbers , are assembled in cells . Furthermore , cell migration is not only controlled by chemical cues , but the mechanical environment of the cell is also important in regulating the assembly and turnover of actin ﬁlament structures involved in cell migration . However , the principles by which different actin ﬁla - ment arrays respond to mechanical cues remain largely elusive . Finally , the organi - zation , dynamics , and regulation of actin ﬁlament structures in cells migrating in a three - dimensional tissue environment are poorly understood . However , rapid evo - lution of light and electron microscopy methods , together with the revolution of CRISPR / Cas9 - based genome editing approaches , have now made it more feasible to examine actin dynamics also in normal as well as in cancer cells migrating in their “native” three - dimensional tissue environment . References Abercrombie M , Heaysman JEM , Pegrum SM ( 1970a ) The locomotion of ﬁbroblasts in culture I . Movements of the leading edge . Exp Cell Res 59 : 393 – 398 . doi : 10 . 1016 / 0014 - 4827 ( 70 ) 90646 - 4 Abercrombie M , Heaysman JEM , Pegrum SM ( 1970b ) The locomotion of ﬁbroblasts in culture . II . “Rufﬂing . ” . Exp Cell Res 60 : 437 – 444 . doi : 10 . 1016 / 0014 - 4827 ( 70 ) 90537 - 9 Abraham VC , Krishnamurthi V , Taylor DL , Lanni F ( 1999 ) The actin - based nanomachine at the leading edge of migrating cells . Biophys J 77 : 1721 – 1732 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0006 - 3495 ( 99 ) 77018 - 9 Al - Alwan MM , Rowden G , Lee TD , West KA ( 2001 ) Fascin is involved in the antigen presenta - tion activity of mature dendritic cells . J Immunol 166 : 338 – 345 . doi : 10 . 4049 / jimmunol . 166 . 1 . 338 Anderson TW , Vaughan AN , Cramer LP ( 2008 ) Retrograde ﬂow and myosin II activity within the leading cell edge deliver F - actin to the lamella to seed the formation of graded polarity actomyosin II ﬁlament bundles in migrating ﬁbroblasts . Mol Biol Cell 19 : 5006 – 5018 . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . E08 - 01 - 0034 Andrianantoandro E , Pollard TD ( 2006 ) Mechanism of actin ﬁlament turnover by severing and nucleation at different concentrations of ADF / coﬁlin . Mol Cell 24 : 13 – 23 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . molcel . 2006 . 08 . 006 Beach JR , Shao L , Remmert K et al ( 2014 ) Nonmuscle myosin II isoforms coassemble in living cells . Curr Biol 24 : 1160 – 1166 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2014 . 03 . 071 Bear JE , Rawls JF , Saxe CL ( 1998 ) SCAR , a WASP - related protein , isolated as a suppressor of receptor defects in late Dictyostelium development . J Cell Biol 142 : 1325 – 1335 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 142 . 5 . 1325 Bear JE , Svitkina TM , Krause M et al ( 2002 ) Antagonism between Ena / VASP proteins and actin ﬁlament capping regulates ﬁbroblast motility . Cell 109 : 509 – 521 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0092 - 8674 ( 02 ) 00731 - 6 Actin Filament Structures in Migrating Cells Bentley D , Toroian - Raymond A ( 1986 ) Disoriented pathﬁnding by pioneer neurone growth cones deprived of ﬁlopodia by cytochalasin treatment . Nature 323 : 712 – 715 . doi : 10 . 1038 / 323712a0 Bergert M , Chandradoss SD , Desai RA , Paluch E ( 2012 ) Cell mechanics control rapid transitions between blebs and lamellipodia during migration . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 109 : 14434 – 14439 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1207968109 Bertling E , Hotulainen P , Mattila PK et al ( 2004 ) Cyclase - associated protein 1 ( CAP1 ) promotes coﬁlin - induced actin dynamics in mammalian nonmuscle cells . Mol Biol Cell 15 : 2324 – 2334 . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . E04 - 01 - 0048 Bertling E , Quintero - Monzon O , Mattila PK et al ( 2007 ) Mechanism and biological role of proﬁlin - Srv2 / CAP interaction . J Cell Sci 120 : 1225 – 1234 . doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 000158 Bhuwania R , Cornﬁne S , Fang Z et al ( 2012 ) Supervillin couples myosin - dependent contractility to podosomes and enables their turnover . J Cell Sci 125 : 2300 – 2314 . doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 100032 Blanchoin L , Amann KJ , Higgs HN et al ( 2000 ) Direct observation of dendritic actin ﬁlament networks nucleated by Arp2 / 3 complex and WASP / Scar proteins . Nature 404 : 1007 – 1011 . doi : 10 . 1038 / 35010008 Block J , Breitsprecher D , K € uhn S et al ( 2012 ) FMNL2 drives actin - based protrusion and migration downstream of Cdc42 . Curr Biol 22 : 1005 – 1012 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2012 . 03 . 064 Bornschl € ogl T ( 2013 ) How ﬁlopodia pull : what we know about the mechanics and dynamics of ﬁlopodia . Cytoskeleton ( Hoboken ) 70 : 590 – 603 . doi : 10 . 1002 / cm . 21130 Bovellan M , Romeo Y , Biro M et al ( 2014 ) Cellular control of cortical actin nucleation . Curr Biol 24 : 1628 – 1635 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2014 . 05 . 069 Bray D , White J ( 1988 ) Cortical ﬂow in animal cells . Science 239 : 883 – 888 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 3277283 Breitsprecher D , Kiesewetter AK , Linkner J et al ( 2011a ) Molecular mechanism of Ena / VASP - mediated actin - ﬁlament elongation . EMBO J 30 : 456 – 467 . doi : 10 . 1038 / emboj . 2010 . 348 Breitsprecher D , Koestler SA , Chizhov I et al ( 2011b ) Coﬁlin cooperates with fascin to disassem - ble ﬁlopodial actin ﬁlaments . J Cell Sci 124 : 3305 – 3318 . doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 086934 Brieher WM , Coughlin M , Mitchison TJ ( 2004 ) Fascin - mediated propulsion of Listeria monocytogenes independent of frequent nucleation by the Arp2 / 3 complex . J Cell Biol 165 : 233 – 242 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200311040 Broschat KO , Weber A , Burgess DR ( 1989 ) Tropomyosin stabilizes the pointed end of actin ﬁlaments by slowing depolymerization . Biochemistry 28 : 8501 – 8506 . doi : 10 . 1021 / bi00447a035 Burnette DT , Manley S , Sengupta P et al ( 2011 ) A role for actin arcs in the leading - edge advance of migrating cells . Nat Cell Biol 13 : 371 – 381 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncb2205 Burnette DT , Shao L , Ott C et al ( 2014 ) A contractile and counterbalancing adhesion system controls the 3D shape of crawling cells . J Cell Biol 205 : 83 – 96 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201311104 Campellone KG , Welch MD ( 2010 ) A nucleator arms race : cellular control of actin assembly . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 11 : 237 – 251 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nrm2867 Carlier MF , Laurent V , Santolini J et al ( 1997 ) Actin depolymerizing factor ( ADF / coﬁlin ) enhances the rate of ﬁlament turnover : implication in actin - based motility . J Cell Biol 136 : 1307 – 1322 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 136 . 6 . 1307 Charras G , Paluch E ( 2008 ) Blebs lead the way : how to migrate without lamellipodia . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 9 : 730 – 736 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nrm2453 Charras GT , Hu C - KC - K , Coughlin M , Mitchison TJ ( 2006 ) Reassembly of contractile actin cortex in cell blebs . J Cell Biol 175 : 477 – 490 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200602085 Chaudhry F , Breitsprecher D et al ( 2013 ) Srv2 / cyclase - associated protein forms hexameric shurikens that directly catalyze actin ﬁlament severing by coﬁlin . Mol Biol Cell 24 : 31 – 41 . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . E12 - 08 - 0589 Costa KD , Hucker WJ , Yin FCP ( 2002 ) Buckling of actin stress ﬁbers : A new wrinkle in the cytoskeletal tapestry . Cell Motil Cytoskeleton 52 : 266 – 274 . doi : 10 . 1002 / cm . 10056 Cox S , Rosten E , Monypenny J et al ( 2012 ) Bayesian localization microscopy reveals nanoscale podosome dynamics . Nat Methods 9 : 195 – 200 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nmeth . 1812 J . Lehtima¨ki et al . Cramer LP , Siebert M , Mitchison TJ ( 1997 ) Identiﬁcation of novel graded polarity actin ﬁlament bundles in locomoting heart ﬁbroblasts : Implications for the generation of motile force . J Cell Biol 136 : 1287 – 1305 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 136 . 6 . 1287 Cunningham CC ( 1995 ) Actin polymerization and intracellular solvent ﬂow in cell surface blebbing . J Cell Biol 129 : 1589 – 1599 . doi : 0021 - 9525 / 95 / 06 / 1589 / 11 DeRosier DJ , Edds KT ( 1980 ) Evidence for fascin cross - links between the actin ﬁlaments in coelomocyte ﬁlopodia . Exp Cell Res 126 : 490 – 494 . doi : 10 . 1016 / 0014 - 4827 ( 80 ) 90295 - 5 Deryugina EI , Ratnikov B , Monosov E et al ( 2001 ) MT1 - MMP initiates activation of pro - MMP - 2 and integrin alphavbeta3 promotes maturation of MMP - 2 in breast carcinoma cells . Exp Cell Res 263 : 209 – 223 . doi : 10 . 1006 / excr . 2000 . 5118 Destaing O , Saltel F , Ge´minard J - C et al ( 2003 ) Podosomes display actin turnover and dynamic self - organization in osteoclasts expressing actin - green ﬂuorescent protein . Mol Biol Cell 14 : 407 – 416 . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . E02 - 07 - 0389 Disanza A , Mantoani S , Hertzog M et al ( 2006 ) Regulation of cell shape by Cdc42 is mediated by the synergic actin - bundling activity of the Eps8 - IRSp53 complex . Nat Cell Biol 8 : 1337 – 1347 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncb1502 Discher DE , Janmey P , Wang Y - L ( 2005 ) Tissue cells feel and respond to the stiffness of their substrate . Science 310 : 1139 – 1143 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 1116995 Doyle AD , Petrie RJ , Kutys ML , Yamada KM ( 2013 ) Dimensions in cell migration . Curr Opin Cell Biol 25 : 642 – 649 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . ceb . 2013 . 06 . 004 Edlund M , Lotano MA , Otey CA ( 2001 ) Dynamics of alpha - actinin in focal adhesions and stress ﬁbers visualized with alpha - actinin - green ﬂuorescent protein . Cell Motil Cytoskeleton 48 : 190 – 200 . doi : 10 . 1002 / 1097 - 0169 ( 200103 ) 48 : 3 < 190 : : AID - CM1008 > 3 . 0 . CO ; 2 - C Elkhatib N , Neu MB , Zensen C et al ( 2014 ) Fascin plays a role in stress ﬁber organization and focal adhesion disassembly . Curr Biol 24 : 1492 – 1499 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2014 . 05 . 023 Euteneuer U , Schliwa M ( 1984 ) Persistent , directional motility of cells and cytoplasmic fragments in the absence of microtubules . Nature 310 : 58 – 61 . doi : 10 . 1038 / 310058a0 Franke RP , Gra¨fe M , Schnittler H et al ( 1984 ) Induction of human vascular endothelial stress ﬁbres by ﬂuid shear stress . Nature 307 : 648 – 649 . doi : 10 . 1038 / 307648a0 Friedl P , Alexander S ( 2011 ) Cancer invasion and the microenvironment : plasticity and reciproc - ity . Cell 147 : 992 – 1009 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2011 . 11 . 016 Galbraith CG , Yamada KM , Galbraith JA ( 2007 ) Polymerizing actin ﬁbers position integrins primed to probe for adhesion sites . Science 315 : 992 – 995 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 1137904 Gallo G , Letourneau PC ( 2004 ) Regulation of growth cone actin ﬁlaments by guidance cues . J Neurobiol 58 : 92 – 102 . doi : 10 . 1002 / neu . 10282 Gandhi M , Smith BA , Bovellan M et al ( 2010 ) GMF is a coﬁlin homolog that binds Arp2 / 3 complex to stimulate ﬁlament debranching and inhibit actin nucleation . Curr Biol 20 : 861 – 867 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2010 . 03 . 026 Gateva G , Tojkander S , Koho S et al ( 2014 ) Palladin promotes assembly of non - contractile dorsal stress ﬁbers through VASP recruitment . J Cell Sci 127 : 1887 – 1898 . doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 135780 Geiger B , Yamada KM ( 2011 ) Molecular architecture and function of matrix adhesions . Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 3 : a005033 . doi : 10 . 1101 / cshperspect . a005033 Geiger B , Spatz JP , Bershadsky AD ( 2009 ) Environmental sensing through focal adhesions . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 10 : 21 – 33 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nrm2593 Giannone G , Dubin - Thaler BJ , Rossier O et al ( 2007 ) Lamellipodial actin mechanically links myosin activity with adhesion - site formation . Cell 128 : 561 – 575 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2006 . 12 . 039 Golomb E , Ma X , Jana SS et al ( 2004 ) Identiﬁcation and characterization of nonmuscle myosin II - C , a new member of the myosin II family . J Biol Chem 279 : 2800 – 2808 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M309981200 Gressin L , Guillotin A , Gue´rin C et al ( 2015 ) Architecture dependence of actin ﬁlament network disassembly . Curr Biol 25 : 1437 – 1447 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2015 . 04 . 011 Actin Filament Structures in Migrating Cells Gunning P , O’Neill G , Hardeman E ( 2008 ) Tropomyosin - based regulation of the actin cytoskele - ton in time and space . Physiol Rev 88 : 1 – 35 . doi : 10 . 1152 / physrev . 00001 . 2007 Gunning PW , Hardeman EC , Lappalainen P , Mulvihill DP ( 2015 ) Tropomyosin - master regulator of actin ﬁlament function in the cytoskeleton . J Cell Sci 128 : 2965 – 2974 . doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 172502 Gupton SL , Anderson KL , Kole TP et al ( 2005 ) Cell migration without a lamellipodium : translation of actin dynamics into cell movement mediated by tropomyosin . J Cell Biol 168 : 619 – 631 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200406063 Haeger A , Wolf K , Zegers MM , Friedl P ( 2015 ) Collective cell migration : guidance principles and hierarchies . Trends Cell Biol 25 : 556 – 566 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . tcb . 2015 . 06 . 003 Hawkins RJ , Piel M , Faure - Andre G et al ( 2009 ) Pushing off the walls : a mechanism of cell motility in conﬁnement . Phys Rev Lett 102 : 058103 . doi : 10 . 1103 / PhysRevLett . 102 . 058103 Haynes EM , Asokan SB , King SJ et al ( 2015 ) GMF β controls branched actin content and lamellipodial retraction in ﬁbroblasts . J Cell Biol 209 : 803 – 812 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201501094 Heasman SJ , Ridley AJ ( 2008 ) Mammalian Rho GTPases : new insights into their functions from in vivo studies . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 9 : 690 – 701 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nrm2476 Heath JP ( 1983 ) Behaviour and structure of the leading lamella in moving ﬁbroblasts . I . Occurrence and centripetal movement of arc - shaped microﬁlament bundles beneath the dorsal cell surface . J Cell Sci 60 : 331 – 354 . doi : 10 . 1016 / 0309 - 1651 ( 81 ) 90079 - 5 Hinz B , Mastrangelo D , Iselin CE et al ( 2001 ) Mechanical tension controls granulation tissue contractile activity and myoﬁbroblast differentiation . Am J Pathol 159 : 1009 – 1020 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0002 - 9440 ( 10 ) 61776 - 2 Hitchcock - DeGregori SE , Sampath P , Pollard TD ( 1988 ) Tropomyosin inhibits the rate of actin polymerization by stabilizing actin ﬁlaments . Biochemistry 27 : 9182 – 9185 . doi : 10 . 1021 / bi00426a016 Hoshino D , Branch KM , Weaver AM ( 2013 ) Signaling inputs to invadopodia and podosomes . J Cell Sci 126 : 2979 – 2989 . doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 079475 Hotulainen P , Lappalainen P ( 2006 ) Stress ﬁbers are generated by two distinct actin assembly mechanisms in motile cells . J Cell Biol 173 : 383 – 394 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200511093 Hotulainen P , Paunola E , Vartiainen MK , Lappalainen P ( 2005 ) Actin - depolymerizing factor and coﬁlin - 1 play overlapping roles in promoting rapid F - actin depolymerization in mammalian nonmuscle cells . Mol Biol Cell 16 : 649 – 664 . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . E04 - 07 - 0555 Isenberg G , Aebi U , Pollard TD ( 1980 ) An actin - binding protein from Acanthamoeba regulates actin ﬁlament polymerization and interactions . Nature 288 : 455 – 459 . doi : 10 . 1038 / 288455a0 Iwasa JH , Mullins RD ( 2007 ) Spatial and temporal relationships between actin - ﬁlament nucle - ation , capping , and disassembly . Curr Biol 17 : 395 – 406 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2007 . 02 . 012 Jaiswal R , Breitsprecher D , Collins A et al ( 2013 ) The formin Daam1 and fascin directly collaborate to promote ﬁlopodia formation . Curr Biol 23 : 1373 – 1379 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2013 . 06 . 013 Jansen S , Collins A , Chin SM et al ( 2015 ) Single - molecule imaging of a three - component ordered actin disassembly mechanism . Nat Commun 6 : 7202 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncomms8202 Jiu Y , Lehtima¨ki J , Tojkander S et al ( 2015 ) Bidirectional interplay between vimentin intermediate ﬁlaments and contractile actin stress ﬁbers . Cell Rep 11 : 1511 – 1518 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . celrep . 2015 . 05 . 008 Johnston AB , Collins A , Goode BL ( 2015 ) High - speed depolymerization at actin ﬁlament ends jointly catalysed by Twinﬁlin and Srv2 / CAP . Nat Cell Biol . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncb3252 Kardash E , Reichman - Fried M , Maıˆtre J - L et al ( 2010 ) A role for Rho GTPases and cell - cell adhesion in single - cell motility in vivo . Nat Cell Biol 12 : 47 – 53 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncb2003 Katsuragawa Y , Yanagisawa M , Inoue a , Masaki T ( 1989 ) Two distinct nonmuscle myosin - heavy - chain mRNAs are differentially expressed in various chicken tissues . Identiﬁcation of a novel gene family of vertebrate non - sarcomeric myosin heavy chains . Eur J Biochem 184 : 611 – 616 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1432 - 1033 . 1989 . tb15057 . x J . Lehtima¨ki et al . Kaverina I , Stradal TEB , Gimona M ( 2003 ) Podosome formation in cultured A7r5 vascular smooth muscle cells requires Arp2 / 3 - dependent de - novo actin polymerization at discrete microdomains . J Cell Sci 116 : 4915 – 4924 . doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 00818 Kawamoto S , Adelstein R ( 1991 ) Chicken nonmuscle myosin heavy chains : differential expres - sion of two mRNAs and evidence for two different polypeptides . J Cell Biol 112 : 915 – 924 . doi : 0021 - 9525 / 91 / 03 / 915 / 10 Kiuchi T , Ohashi K , Kurita S , Mizuno K ( 2007 ) Coﬁlin promotes stimulus - induced lamellipodium formation by generating an abundant supply of actin monomers . J Cell Biol 177 : 465 – 476 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200610005 Kolega J ( 2003 ) Asymmetric distribution of IIB in migrating endothelial cells is regulated by a Rho - dependent kinase and contributes to tail retraction . Mol Biol Cell 14 : 4745 – 4757 . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . E03 Korobova F , Svitkina T ( 2008 ) Arp2 / 3 complex is important for ﬁlopodia formation , growth cone motility , and neuritogenesis in neuronal cells . Mol Biol Cell 19 : 1561 – 1574 . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . E07 - 09 - 0964 Kovac B , Teo JL , Ma¨kela¨ TP , Vallenius T ( 2013 ) Assembly of non - contractile dorsal stress ﬁbers requires α - actinin - 1 and Rac1 in migrating and spreading cells . J Cell Sci 126 : 263 – 273 . doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 115063 Kovar DR , Kuhn JR , Tichy AL , Pollard TD ( 2003 ) The ﬁssion yeast cytokinesis formin Cdc12p is a barbed end actin ﬁlament capping protein gated by proﬁlin . J Cell Biol 161 : 875 – 887 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200211078 Kress H , Stelzer EHK , Holzer D et al ( 2007 ) Filopodia act as phagocytic tentacles and pull with discrete steps and a load - dependent velocity . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 104 : 11633 – 11638 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0702449104 Krugmann S , Jordens I , Gevaert K et al ( 2001 ) Cdc42 induces ﬁlopodia by promoting the formation of an IRSp53 : Mena complex . Curr Biol 11 : 1645 – 1655 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0960 - 9822 ( 01 ) 00506 - 1 Lai FPL , Szczodrak M , Block J et al ( 2008 ) Arp2 / 3 complex interactions and actin network turnover in lamellipodia . EMBO J 27 : 982 – 992 . doi : 10 . 1038 / emboj . 2008 . 34 La¨mmermann T , Bader BL , Monkley SJ et al ( 2008 ) Rapid leukocyte migration by integrin - independent ﬂowing and squeezing . Nature 453 : 51 – 55 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nature06887 Lewis WH , Lewis MR ( 1924 ) Behavior of cells in tissue cultures . In : Cowdry EV ( ed ) General cytology . The University of Chicago Press , Chicago , pp 385 – 447 Li R , Li G , Deng L et al ( 2010 ) IL - 6 augments the invasiveness of U87MG human glioblastoma multiforme cells via up - regulation of MMP - 2 and fascin - 1 . Oncol Rep 23 : 1553 – 1559 . doi : 10 . 3892 / or _ 00000795 Lim KB , Bu W , Goh WI et al ( 2008 ) The Cdc42 effector IRSp53 generates ﬁlopodia by coupling membrane protrusion with actin dynamics . J Biol Chem 283 : 20454 – 20472 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M710185200 Lim FY , Koon YL , Chiam K - H ( 2013 ) A computational model of amoeboid cell migration . Comput Methods Biomech Biomed Engin 16 : 1085 – 1095 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 10255842 . 2012 . 757598 Linder S , Wiesner C ( 2015 ) Tools of the trade : podosomes as multipurpose organelles of monocytic cells . Cell Mol Life Sci 72 : 121 – 135 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s00018 - 014 - 1731 - z Linder S , Wiesner C , Himmel M ( 2011 ) Degrading devices : invadosomes in proteolytic cell invasion . Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 27 : 185 – 211 . doi : 10 . 1146 / annurev - cellbio - 092910 - 154216 Liza´rraga F , Poincloux R , Rom ~ ao M et al ( 2009 ) Diaphanous - related formins are required for invadopodia formation and invasion of breast tumor cells . Cancer Res 69 : 2792 – 2800 . doi : 10 . 1158 / 0008 - 5472 . CAN - 08 - 3709 Logue JS , Cartagena - Rivera AX , Baird MA et al ( 2015 ) Erk regulation of actin capping and bundling by Eps8 promotes cortex tension and leader bleb - based migration . Elife 4 , e08314 . doi : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 08314 Actin Filament Structures in Migrating Cells Loisel TP , Boujemaa R , Pantaloni D , Carlier MF ( 1999 ) Reconstitution of actin - based motility of Listeria and Shigella using pure proteins . Nature 401 : 613 – 616 . doi : 10 . 1038 / 44183 Machesky LM , Insall RH ( 1998 ) Scar1 and the related Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein , WASP , regulate the actin cytoskeleton through the Arp2 / 3 complex . Curr Biol 8 : 1347 – 56 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0960 - 9822 ( 98 ) 00015 - 3 Machesky LM , Atkinson SJ , Ampe C , Vandekercldaove J ( 1994 ) Puriﬁcation of a cortical complex containing two unconventional actins from acanthamoeba by afﬁnity chromatography on proﬁlin - agarose . J Cell Biol 127 : 107 – 115 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 127 . 1 . 107 Machesky LM , Mullins RD , Higgs HN et al ( 1999 ) Scar , a WASp - related protein , activates nucleation of actin ﬁlaments by the Arp2 / 3 complex . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 96 : 3739 – 3744 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 96 . 7 . 3739 Majumdar R , Sixt M , Parent CA ( 2014 ) New paradigms in the establishment and maintenance of gradients during directed cell migration . Curr Opin Cell Biol 30 : 33 – 40 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . ceb . 2014 . 05 . 010 Mallavarapu A , Mitchison T ( 1999 ) Regulated actin cytoskeleton assembly at ﬁlopodium tips controls their extension and retraction . J Cell Biol 146 : 1097 – 1106 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 146 . 5 . 1097 Mattila PK , Lappalainen P ( 2008 ) Filopodia : molecular architecture and cellular functions . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 9 : 446 – 454 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nrm2406 Mattila PK , Quintero - Monzon O , Kugler J et al ( 2004 ) A high - afﬁnity interaction with ADP - actin monomers underlies the mechanism and in vivo function of Srv2 / cyclase - associated protein . Mol Biol Cell 15 : 5158 – 5171 . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . E04 - 06 - 0444 Mattila PK , Pyka¨la¨inen A , Saarikangas J et al ( 2007 ) Missing - in - metastasis and IRSp53 deform PI ( 4 , 5 ) P2 - rich membranes by an inverse BAR domain - like mechanism . J Cell Biol 176 : 953 – 964 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200609176 Maupin P , Phillips C , Adelstein R , Pollard T ( 1994 ) Differential localization of myosin - II isozymes in human cultured cells and blood cells . J Cell Sci 107 : 3077 – 3090 Medalia O , Beck M , Ecke M et al ( 2007 ) Organization of actin networks in intact ﬁlopodia . Curr Biol 17 : 79 – 84 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2006 . 11 . 022 Mejillano MR , Kojima S , Applewhite DA et al ( 2004 ) Lamellipodial versus ﬁlopodial mode of the actin nanomachinery . Cell 118 : 363 – 373 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2004 . 07 . 019 Miller J , Fraser SE , McClay D ( 1995 ) Dynamics of thin ﬁlopodia during sea urchin gastrulation . Development 121 : 2501 – 2511 Mogilner A , Rubinstein B ( 2005 ) The physics of ﬁlopodial protrusion . Biophys J 89 : 782 – 795 . doi : 10 . 1529 / biophysj . 104 . 056515 Moulding DA , Record J , Malinova D , Thrasher AJ ( 2013 ) Actin cytoskeletal defects in immuno - deﬁciency . Immunol Rev 256 : 282 – 299 . doi : 10 . 1111 / imr . 12114 Mueller SC , Chen WT ( 1991 ) Cellular invasion into matrix beads : localization of beta 1 integrins and ﬁbronectin to the invadopodia . J Cell Sci 99 : 213 – 225 Muller WA ( 2015 ) The regulation of transendothelial migration : new knowledge and new questions . Cardiovasc Res 107 : 310 – 320 . doi : 10 . 1093 / cvr / cvv145 Mullins RD , Heuser JA , Pollard TD ( 1998 ) The interaction of Arp2 / 3 complex with actin : nucleation , high afﬁnity pointed end capping , and formation of branching networks of ﬁlaments . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 95 : 6181 – 6186 . doi : 0027 - 8424y98y956181 - 6 Nemethova M , Auinger S , Small JV ( 2008 ) Building the actin cytoskeleton : Filopodia contribute to the construction of contractile bundles in the lamella . J Cell Biol 180 : 1233 – 1244 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200709134 Norris AD , Dyer JO , Lundquist EA ( 2009 ) The Arp2 / 3 complex , UNC - 115 / abLIM , and UNC - 34 / Enabled regulate axon guidance and growth cone ﬁlopodia formation in Caenorhabditis elegans . Neural Dev 4 : 38 . doi : 10 . 1186 / 1749 - 8104 - 4 - 38 Nourshargh S , Hordijk PL , Sixt M ( 2010 ) Breaching multiple barriers : leukocyte motility through venular walls and the interstitium . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 11 : 366 – 378 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nrm2889 J . Lehtima¨ki et al . Osiak AE , Zenner G , Linder S ( 2005 ) Subconﬂuent endothelial cells form podosomes downstream of cytokine and RhoGTPase signaling . Exp Cell Res 307 : 342 – 353 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . yexcr . 2005 . 03 . 035 Otto JJ , Kane RE , Bryan J ( 1979 ) Formation of ﬁlopodia in coelomocytes : Localization of Fascin , a 58 , 000 Dalton actin cross - linking protein . Cell 17 : 285 – 293 . doi : 10 . 1016 / 0092 - 8674 ( 79 ) 90154 - 5 Paluch EK , Raz E ( 2013 ) The role and regulation of blebs in cell migration . Curr Opin Cell Biol 25 : 582 – 590 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . ceb . 2013 . 05 . 005 Paluch E , Piel M , Prost J et al ( 2005 ) Cortical actomyosin breakage triggers shape oscillations in cells and cell fragments . Biophys J 89 : 724 – 733 . doi : 10 . 1529 / biophysj . 105 . 060590 Pantaloni D , Carlier M - F ( 1993 ) How proﬁlin promotes actin ﬁlament assembly in the presence of thymosin β 4 . Cell 75 : 1007 – 1014 . doi : 10 . 1016 / 0092 - 8674 ( 93 ) 90544 - Z Parry DA , Squire JM ( 1973 ) Structural role of tropomyosin in muscle regulation : analysis of the x - ray diffraction patterns from relaxed and contracting muscles . J Mol Biol 75 : 33 – 55 . doi : 10 . 1016 / 0022 - 2836 ( 73 ) 90527 - 5 Pellegrin S , Mellor H ( 2007 ) Actin stress ﬁbres . J Cell Sci 120 : 3491 – 3499 . doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 018473 Peng J , Wallar BJ , Flanders A et al ( 2003 ) Disruption of the Diaphanous - related formin Drf1 gene encoding mDia1 reveals a role for Drf3 as an effector for Cdc42 . Curr Biol 13 : 534 – 45 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0960 - 9822 ( 03 ) 00170 - 2 Peter BJ , Kent HM , Mills IG et al ( 2004 ) BAR domains as sensors of membrane curvature : the amphiphysin BAR structure . Science 303 : 495 – 499 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 1092586 Petrie RJ , Yamada KM ( 2012 ) At the leading edge of three - dimensional cell migration . J Cell Sci 125 : 5917 – 5926 . doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 093732 Pfaff M , Jurdic P ( 2001 ) Podosomes in osteoclast - like cells : structural analysis and cooperative roles of paxillin , proline - rich tyrosine kinase 2 ( Pyk2 ) and integrin alphaVbeta3 . J Cell Sci 114 : 2775 – 2786 Pinner S , Sahai E ( 2008 ) PDK1 regulates cancer cell motility by antagonising inhibition of ROCK1 by RhoE . Nat Cell Biol 10 : 127 – 137 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncb1675 Poincloux R , Collin O , Liza´rraga F et al ( 2011 ) Contractility of the cell rear drives invasion of breast tumor cells in 3D Matrigel . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 108 : 1943 – 1948 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1010396108 Pollard TD ( 1986 ) Rate constants for the reactions of ATP - and ADP - actin with the ends of actin ﬁlaments . J Cell Biol 103 : 2747 – 2754 . doi : 0021 - 9525 / 86 / 12 / 2747 / 8 Pollard TD , Borisy GG ( 2003 ) Cellular motility driven by assembly and disassembly of actin ﬁlaments . Cell 112 : 453 – 465 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0092 - 8674 ( 03 ) 00120 - X Pollard TD , Cooper JA ( 2009 ) Actin , a central player in cell shape and movement . Science 326 : 1208 – 1212 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 1175862 Poukkula M , Hakala M , Pentinmikko N et al ( 2014 ) GMF promotes leading - edge dynamics and collective cell migration in vivo . Curr Biol 24 : 2533 – 2540 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2014 . 08 . 066 Pre´vost C , Zhao H , Manzi J et al ( 2015 ) IRSp53 senses negative membrane curvature and phase separates along membrane tubules . Nat Commun 6 : 8529 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncomms9529 Pruyne D , Evangelista M , Yang C et al ( 2002 ) Role of formins in actin assembly : nucleation and barbed - end association . Science 297 : 612 – 615 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 1072309 Puius YA , Mahoney NM , Almo SC ( 1998 ) The modular structure of actin - regulatory proteins . Curr Opin Cell Biol 10 : 23 – 34 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0955 - 0674 ( 98 ) 80083 - 5 Quintero - Monzon O , Jonasson EM , Bertling E et al ( 2009 ) Reconstitution and dissection of the 600 - kDa Srv2 / CAP complex : roles for oligomerization and coﬁlin - actin binding in driving actin turnover . J Biol Chem 284 : 10923 – 10934 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M808760200 Reinhard M , Halbr € ugge M , Scheer U et al ( 1992 ) The 46 / 50 kDa phosphoprotein VASP puriﬁed from human platelets is a novel protein associated with actin ﬁlaments and focal contacts . EMBO J 11 : 2063 – 2070 Ridley AJ ( 2011 ) Life at the leading edge . Cell 145 : 1012 – 1022 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2011 . 06 . 010 Actin Filament Structures in Migrating Cells Ridley AJ ( 2015 ) Rho GTPase signalling in cell migration . Curr Opin Cell Biol 36 : 103 – 112 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . ceb . 2015 . 08 . 005 Ridley AJ , Hall A ( 1992 ) The small GTP - binding protein rho regulates the assembly of focal adhesions and actin stress ﬁbers in response to growth factors . Cell 70 : 389 – 399 . doi : 10 . 1016 / 0092 - 8674 ( 92 ) 90163 - 7 Riveline D , Zamir E , Balaban NQ et al ( 2001 ) Focal contacts as mechanosensors : externally applied local mechanical force induces growth of focal contacts by an mDia1 - dependent and ROCK - independent mechanism . J Cell Biol 153 : 1175 – 1185 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 153 . 6 . 1175 Rogers SL , Wiedemann U , Stuurman N , Vale RD ( 2003 ) Molecular requirements for actin - based lamella formation in Drosophila S2 cells . J Cell Biol 162 : 1079 – 1088 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200303023 Romero S , Le Clainche C , Didry D et al ( 2004 ) Formin is a processive motor that requires proﬁlin to accelerate actin assembly and associated ATP hydrolysis . Cell 119 : 419 – 429 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2004 . 09 . 039 Rotty JD , Wu C , Haynes EM et al ( 2015 ) Proﬁlin - 1 serves as a gatekeeper for actin assembly by Arp2 / 3 - dependent and - independent pathways . Dev Cell 32 : 54 – 67 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2014 . 10 . 026 Saarikangas J , Zhao H , Pyka¨la¨inen A et al ( 2009 ) Molecular mechanisms of membrane deforma - tion by I - BAR domain proteins . Curr Biol 19 : 95 – 107 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2008 . 12 . 029 Saarikangas J , Zhao H , Lappalainen P ( 2010 ) Regulation of the actin cytoskeleton - plasma membrane interplay by phosphoinositides . Physiol Rev 90 : 259 – 289 . doi : 10 . 1152 / physrev . 00036 . 2009 Sagot I , Klee SK , Pellman D ( 2002 ) Yeast formins regulate cell polarity by controlling the assembly of actin cables . Nat Cell Biol 4 : 42 – 50 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncb719 Sandquist JC , Means AR ( 2008 ) The C - terminal tail region of nonmuscle myosin II directs isoform - speciﬁc distribution in migrating cells . Mol Biol Cell 19 : 5156 – 5167 . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . E08 - 05 - 0533 Sanger JW , Sanger JM , Jockusch BM ( 1983 ) Differences in the stress ﬁbers between ﬁbroblasts and epithelial cells . J Cell Biol 96 : 961 – 969 Schirenbeck A , Bretschneider T , Arasada R et al ( 2005 ) The Diaphanous - related formin dDia2 is required for the formation and maintenance of ﬁlopodia . Nat Cell Biol 7 : 619 – 625 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncb1266 Schirenbeck A , Arasada R , Bretschneider T et al ( 2006 ) The bundling activity of vasodilator - stimulated phosphoprotein is required for ﬁlopodium formation . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 103 : 7694 – 7699 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0511243103 Shimada A , Niwa H , Tsujita K et al ( 2007 ) Curved EFC / F - BAR - domain dimers are joined end to end into a ﬁlament for membrane invagination in endocytosis . Cell 129 : 761 – 772 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2007 . 03 . 040 Shutova MS , Spessott WA , Giraudo CG , Svitkina T ( 2014 ) Endogenous species of mammalian nonmuscle myosin IIA and IIB include activated monomers and heteropolymers . Curr Biol 24 : 1958 – 1968 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2014 . 07 . 070 Sinnar SA , Antoku S , Safﬁn J - M et al ( 2014 ) Capping protein is essential for cell migration in vivo and for ﬁlopodial morphology and dynamics . Mol Biol Cell 25 : 2152 – 2160 . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . E13 - 12 - 0749 Skau CT , Plotnikov SV , Doyle AD , Waterman CM ( 2015 ) Inverted formin 2 in focal adhesions promotes dorsal stress ﬁber and ﬁbrillar adhesion formation to drive extracellular matrix assembly . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 112 : 2447 – 2456 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1505035112 Skoble J , Auerbuch V , Goley ED et al ( 2001 ) Pivotal role of VASP in Arp2 / 3 complex - mediated actin nucleation , actin branch - formation , and Listeria monocytogenes motility . J Cell Biol 155 : 89 – 100 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200106061 Small JV , Celis JE ( 1978 ) Filament arrangements in negatively stained cultured cells : the organi - zation of actin . Cytobiologie 16 : 308 – 325 J . Lehtima¨ki et al . Small JV , Rottner K , Kaverina I , Anderson KI ( 1998 ) Assembling an actin cytoskeleton for cell attachment and movement . Biochim Biophys Acta Mol Cell Res 1404 : 271 – 281 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0167 - 4889 ( 98 ) 00080 - 9 Suarez C , Carroll RT , Burke TA et al ( 2015 ) Proﬁlin regulates F - actin network homeostasis by favoring formin over Arp2 / 3 complex . Dev Cell 32 : 43 – 53 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2014 . 10 . 027 Suetsugu S , Murayama K , Sakamoto A et al ( 2006 ) The RAC binding domain / IRSp53 - MIM homology domain of IRSp53 induces RAC - dependent membrane deformation . J Biol Chem 281 : 35347 – 35358 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M606814200 Suraneni P , Rubinstein B , Unruh JR et al ( 2012 ) The Arp2 / 3 complex is required for lamellipodia extension and directional ﬁbroblast cell migration . J Cell Biol 197 : 239 – 251 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201112113 Svitkina TM , Borisy GG ( 1999 ) Arp2 / 3 complex and actin depolymerizing factor / coﬁlin in dendritic organization and treadmilling of actin ﬁlament array in Lamellipodia . J Cell Biol 145 : 1009 – 1026 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 145 . 5 . 1009 Svitkina TM , Verkhovsky AB , McQuade KM , Borisy GG ( 1997 ) Analysis of the actin - myosin II system in ﬁsh epidermal keratocytes : mechanism of cell body translocation . J Cell Biol 139 : 397 – 415 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 139 . 2 . 397 Svitkina TM , Bulanova EA , Chaga OY et al ( 2003 ) Mechanism of ﬁlopodia initiation by reorganization of a dendritic network . J Cell Biol 160 : 409 – 421 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200210174 Taylor AC , Robbins E ( 1963 ) Observations on microextensions from the surface of isolated vertebrate cells . Dev Biol 7 : 660 – 673 . doi : 10 . 1016 / 0012 - 1606 ( 63 ) 90150 - 7 Tee YH , Shemesh T , Thiagarajan V et al ( 2015 ) Cellular chirality arising from the self - organization of the actin cytoskeleton . Nat Cell Biol 17 : 445 – 457 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncb3137 Tojkander S , Gateva G , Schevzov G et al ( 2011 ) A molecular pathway for myosin II recruitment to stress ﬁbers . Curr Biol 21 : 539 – 550 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2011 . 03 . 007 Tojkander S , Gateva G , Lappalainen P ( 2012 ) Actin stress ﬁbers – assembly , dynamics and biological roles . J Cell Sci 125 : 1855 – 1864 . doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 098087 Tojkander S , Gateva G , Husain A et al ( 2015 ) Generation of contractile actomyosin bundles depends on mechanosensitive actin ﬁlament assembly and disassembly . Elife 4 : e06126 Tozluo (cid:2) glu M , Tournier AL , Jenkins RP et al ( 2013 ) Matrix geometry determines optimal cancer cell migration strategy and modulates response to interventions . Nat Cell Biol 15 : 751 – 762 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncb2775 Tseng Y , Fedorov E , McCaffery JM et al ( 2001 ) Micromechanics and ultrastructure of actin ﬁlament networks crosslinked by human fascin : a comparison with alpha - actinin . J Mol Biol 310 : 351 – 366 . doi : 10 . 1006 / jmbi . 2001 . 4716 T € urmer K , Orba´n J , Gro´f P , Nyitrai M ( 2015 ) FASCIN and alpha - actinin can regulate the conformation of actin ﬁlaments . Biochim Biophys Acta 1850 : 1855 – 1861 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . bbagen . 2015 . 05 . 018 van den Dries K , Schwartz SL , Byars J et al ( 2013 ) Dual - color superresolution microscopy reveals nanoscale organization of mechanosensory podosomes . Mol Biol Cell 24 : 2112 – 2123 . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . E12 - 12 - 0856 Vasioukhin V , Bauer C , Yin M , Fuchs E ( 2000 ) Directed actin polymerization is the driving force for epithelial cell - cell adhesion . Cell 100 : 209 – 219 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0092 - 8674 ( 00 ) 81559 - 7 Vicente - Manzanares M , Ma X , Adelstein RS , Horwitz R ( 2009 ) Non - muscle myosin II takes centre stage in cell adhesion and migration . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 10 : 778 – 790 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nrm2786 . Non - muscle Vignjevic D , Kojima S , Aratyn Y et al ( 2006 ) Role of fascin in ﬁlopodial protrusion . J Cell Biol 174 : 863 – 875 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200603013 Wang F , Harvey EV , Conti MA et al ( 2000 ) A conserved negatively charged amino acid modulates function in human nonmuscle myosin IIA . Biochemistry 39 : 5555 – 5560 . doi : 10 . 1021 / bi000133x Actin Filament Structures in Migrating Cells Wang F , Kovacs M , Hu A et al ( 2003 ) Kinetic mechanism of non - muscle myosin IIB : functional adaptations for tension generation and maintenance . J Biol Chem 278 : 27439 – 27448 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M302510200 Watanabe N , Mitchison TJ ( 2002 ) Single - molecule speckle analysis of actin ﬁlament turnover in lamellipodia . Science 295 : 1083 – 1086 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 1067470 Wiesner C , Faix J , Himmel M et al ( 2010 ) KIF5B and KIF3A / KIF3B kinesins drive MT1 - MMP surface exposure , CD44 shedding , and extracellular matrix degradation in primary macrophages . Blood 116 : 1559 – 1569 . doi : 10 . 1182 / blood - 2009 - 12 - 257089 Wolf K , Mazo I , Leung H et al ( 2003 ) Compensation mechanism in tumor cell migration : mesenchymal - amoeboid transition after blocking of pericellular proteolysis . J Cell Biol 160 : 267 – 277 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200209006 Wu C , Asokan SB , Berginski ME et al ( 2012 ) Arp2 / 3 is critical for lamellipodia and response to extracellular matrix cues but is dispensable for chemotaxis . Cell 148 : 973 – 987 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2011 . 12 . 034 Yang C , Svitkina T ( 2011 ) Filopodia initiation : focus on the Arp2 / 3 complex and formins . Cell Adh Migr 5 : 402 – 408 . doi : 10 . 4161 / cam . 5 . 5 . 16971 Yang C , Czech L , Gerboth S et al ( 2007 ) Novel roles of formin mDia2 in lamellipodia and ﬁlopodia formation in motile cells . PLoS Biol 5 , e317 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 0050317 J . Lehtima¨ki et al .