Costs and Benefits of Structured Information Foraging Aniket Kittur , Andrew M . Peters , Abdigani Diriye , Trupti Telang and Michael R . Bove Carnegie Mellon University 5000 Forbes Ave , Pittsburgh , PA 15213 { nkittur , andrewpe , adiriye } @ cs . cmu . edu , { ttelang , mbove } @ andrew . cmu . edu ABSTRACT People spend an enormous amount of time searching for and saving information online . Existing tools capture only a small portion of the cognitive processing a user engages in while making sense of a new domain . In this paper we introduce a novel interface for capturing online infor - mation in a structured but lightweight way . We use this in - terface as a platform to experimentally characterize the costs and benefits of structuring information during the sensemaking process . Our results contribute empirical knowledge relevant to theories of information seeking and sensemaking , and practical implications for the develop - ment of tools to capture and share online information . Author Keywords Sensemaking , search , foraging , structure . ACM Classification Keywords H . 5 . m . Information interfaces and presentation ( e . g . , HCI ) : Miscellaneous . INTRODUCTION People are constantly engaged in making sense of the world : patients try to make sense of their symptoms ; con - sumers try to make sense of which digital camera to buy ; scientists try to make sense of the literature in an unfamil - iar field . A large majority of people engage in information seeking behaviors online : 81 % of online adults research products ; 68 % make travel reservations ; 51 % search for a job ; 89 % use search engines ; 75 % get health information ; 71 % buy something online [ 19 ] . People spend a significant amount of effort capturing and organizing their sensemaking to support revisiting im - portant information , decision making , or sharing their findings with others . This can involve varying degrees of structure , ranging from low ( e . g . , saving bookmarks or taking notes , in which users may at most create organiz - ing folders ) to moderate ( e . g . , tagging pages with key - words ) to high ( e . g . , in intelligence analysis or cobrows - ing ) . For example , Wikipedia lists more than 20 commer - cial social bookmarking systems in which users provide keyword tags for web pages 1 ; in 2008 , Delicious . com alone reported more than 5 . 3 million users and 180 mil - lion unique bookmarked URLs . For notetaking and organ - izational tools , Wikipedia lists more than 60 systems ; Evernote , one of the more popular , claims more than 11 million users . In addition to the utility for the individuals using them , adding structure during sensemaking can lead to significant benefits for others as well . Even minimal structure such as keywords enable systems such as Deli - cious to aggregate tags across users to develop rich “folk - sonomies” [ 36 ] that help visitors find popular pages on topics of interest . More structured argumentation systems ( e . g . , [ 9 , 26 ] ) use pre - specified templates to enable the aggregation of evidence and opinions across people . However , a number of challenges prevent us from fully realizing the benefits of captured information . First , exist - ing approaches capture only a small portion of the work that an individual does as they process information on the web . There are many important judgments that a user makes that are not captured by the dominant paradigm of tagging an item with simple unstructured keywords . For example , a person deciding where to go for dinner might judge the quality of a review , its slant ( positive or nega - tive ) , the likelihood of the reviewer being a shill for the restaurant , the names of other similar restaurants and how the reviewer feels about them in comparison , the dimen - sions on which someone should evaluate a restaurant , specific information about that restaurant that would be useful to have ( e . g . , what is the best thing on the menu , where to park ) , and more . Furthermore , important user - specific contextual factors also aren’t captured , such as the goals of the user , why they are looking for the infor - mation , and their expertise . A second challenge is the cost of adding structure . As is well known from previous work , systems that rely on in - dividuals doing work that benefits others but not them - selves often have serious adoption problems [ 6 , 16 , 22 ] . Even if a particular system would result in great benefits to sensemaking for everyone in the long run , if it has high participation costs for the initial person doing the work with low immediate benefits , adoption will suffer . Fur - thermore , while added information has the potential to 1 http : / / en . wikipedia . org / wiki / List _ of _ social _ bookmarking _ websites Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . CHI 2013 , April 27 – May 2 , 2013 , Paris , France . Copyright © 2013 ACM 978 - 1 - 4503 - 1899 - 0 / 13 / 04 . . . $ 15 . 00 . . Session : Searching and Finding CHI 2013 : Changing Perspectives , Paris , France 2989 imwtulthso Asthinothsstiwcdpsimg inSssthine Oetup e r rc a Fp mprove sensem whelm or misl uring more in ead to costs th hey find doing suming , they d overwhelmed b A third challen structure inform he web they en n which they i of an informati his process is standing of a s simultaneouslyies in the spac which that spac ciding who to v derstanding of portant issues a simultaneouslymportant crite gests there may ng information Since a person space is struct structure too ea heir later unde ng later may m er information . Our contributio el interface for ured but light platform to exp efits of structur results contribu ries of informa cal implication and share inform Figure 1 . When prompts the us making , it als ead the consu nformation suc he user is unw g so cognitive do not see the b by the resulting ge is determin mation . As peo ngage in a com iteratively dev ion space [ 27 , dynamic and space evolves o y developing a ce as well as t ce is structured vote for simult who the cand are ; a person d y learns about eria by which y be different c n early vs . late n’s understand tured changes arly may lead erstanding of t mean missing o ons in this pape r capturing on weight way , a perimentally ch ring informatio ute empirical k ation seeking a ns for the deve mation on the n enabled , the c er to specify the o has the pote mer . This sugg ch as described willing to bear ly difficult an benefit to them g added inform ing the best tim ople consume i mplex process o velop a mental 30 , 39 ] . A ke iterative : a p over time as th model of the i the important d . For example taneously build didates are and deciding what the different m to evaluate th costs and benef in the sensem ding of how th over time , fo to data that d the space ; how or needing to r er include intro nline informati and using this haracterize the on during sens knowledge rel and sensemakin elopment of to web . lipping tool app e item , dimensi ential to over - gests that cap - d above could r , especially if d / or time con - mselves , or are mation . me for users to information on of sensemaking representationey point is that erson’s under - hey explore it , important enti - dimensions on e , a person de - ds up their un - d what the im - camera to buy models and the hem . This sug - fits to structur - making process he information orcing them to does not match wever , structur - reprocess earli - oducing a nov - ion in a struc - interface as a costs and ben - semaking . Our levant to theo - ng , and practi - ools to capture pears after high on , and valence 3 - - d f - e o n g n t - , - n - - - y e - - . n o h - - - - a - r - - e STRU Our w build spacementgenerand s formfindinknowphaseinterp In th stagea sig 34 ] . captudeepforageasiedata ; the in that r relateformchoo Capt TheropedSysteSpar . to bo One flexib exam ing f than ible Don t hlighting text on e of the text usin UCTURE AND work builds on ding up a men e in service of ts of specific s rally agree it i sensemaking . T mation seeking , ng and colla wn as interpr e , is the stage pret informatio his paper we ar e of sensemaki gnificant portio Specifically , w ure structure er and more s ger with a num er for them to helping them nformation spa require structu ed to the three mation to captu osing when to c turing informa re are several c d to capture inf ems like del . . tag . us [ 17 ] , an ookmark , share major topic o bility and stru mple , Hunter - G fine grain clip entire docume approach to t tcheva et al . [ 1 n a web page ; in ng a sentence sc D SENSEMAKI n theories of se ntal represent f a user’s goals sensemaking th involves two m The first phase scanning or f ating informat retation , integ which people b on . re particularly i ing , which has on of informat we are interest during the fo structured info mber of benef aggregate , rel m to build a co ace ; and harnes ured data . Bel challenges int ture , the costs capture it . ation commercial an formation duri icio . us , CiteU nd DogEar [ 28 e , organize and of research ha ucture during t Gatherer [ 35 ] s ps of informati ents ; Spar . tag . u tagging throug 13 ] introduce m n the full condit chema . NG ensemaking as tation of an in s [ 12 , 24 , 39 ] . heories differ , r main processes e , often referre foraging , invol ion ; the seco gration or se build represen interested in th been shown t tion seeking ti ted in how an oraging proces ormation can p fits , including : late and compa oherent mental ssing computat ow we discus troduced earlie s of structurin nd academic to ing the foragin ULike , Mr . Ta 8 ] , exist to mak d categorize in as been suppor the capture pr supported users ion on web pa us [ 17 ] extende gh paragraph - methods to co tion ( shown her defined as nformation While ele - researchers s : foraging ed to as in - lves people ond phase , ensemaking tations and he foraging to consume ime [ 7 , 27 , nd when to ss . Having provide the making it are diverse l model of tional tools s literature er : what in - ng it , and ools devel - ng process . aggy [ 21 ] , ke it easier nformation . rting more rocess . For s in select - ages rather ed this flex - - level tags . ollect , view re ) it 1 Session : Searching and Finding CHI 2013 : Changing Perspectives , Paris , France 2990 and share web content using structured templates . Despite these advances , these tools only capture a small portion of the work that an individual is doing as they process in - formation . There are many important judgments that a us - er makes that are not captured by where they go or what they look at , and much contextual information , user ac - tions , goals and cognitive processes are largely ignored . Costs of structured sensemaking Significant prior research has also aimed at better struc - turing collected information . Researchers have explored argumentation - style approaches ( e . g . , [ 4 , 9 ] ) as well as more flexible collection management and exploration tools ( e . g . , [ 2 , 11 , 38 ] ) . Another goal for capturing and structuring information is to go beyond the individual to support multiple searchers ( e . g . , [ 29 ] ) . These tools offer more support and added value , but at the same time they incur added workload and learning . There have been efforts to make such systems more lightweight ( e . g . , [ 26 ] ) , but can still feel like “learning a new lan - guage” [ 23 ] . In this paper , we build on this prior work but aim to significantly reduce the costs of structuring infor - mation . Dynamics of sensemaking In addition to what to capture , another key question is when to capture it . One robust finding is that for many in - formation seeking tasks , over time the search problem transforms from vague and ill - defined to focused and well - defined , with people’s mental models becoming more structured and richer as people progress with their task or are more knowledgeable of the topic or domain [ 40 ] . People’s articulation of their search becomes more sophisticated and specific and they become more selective about consuming and saving information [ 18 ] . These results suggest that eliciting structure may have very different effects depending on when that structure is elicited . On the one hand , asking users about structure during foraging runs the risk of answers that will quickly become obsolete as the user’s mental model changes , and it may be difficult for a user to crystallize and externalize their formative internal state . On the other hand , waiting until after foraging is complete incurs extra work , as users will need to look at the foraged information again in order to decide how to structure it . This may be especially diffi - cult if time has passed since foraging , and users have for - gotten much of the context they were in during the pro - cess . CORE DESIGN RATIONALE We first describe the iterative development of the web in - terface we use as a platform for the experiment in order to ground subsequent discussion of hypotheses and experi - ment design . Through a series of formative prototypes and user studies over the past two years we iterated on an in - terface for capturing structured information online . The main goal was to capture more detailed information that would help a user build up a mental representation of an information landscape . Structured capture To understand what kinds of information users wanted to capture without the constraints of existing systems we conducted a low - fidelity study in which users built free - form information spaces using pre - existing clips printed out from the web [ 14 ] . We found that users consistently structured these clips into a two - dimensional table , usual - ly with rows corresponding to different items ( e . g . , restau - rants ) , columns corresponding to different dimensions to evaluate those options on ( e . g . , price , food quality ) , and evaluations of the clips in the cells . Based on these observations we built and evaluated a se - ries of prototypes aimed at eliciting this < item , dimension , value > structure , rather than the unstructured keyword ( i . e . , tagging ) paradigm now commonly in use . Early ver - sions of the interface had difficulty consistently eliciting this information from users . We piloted a variety of ter - minology to describe our intended use of these fields , but failed to find any terms that conveyed their intended use consistently . Instead , we took advantage of a paradigm most users are already familiar with : the structure inherent in natural language . Specifically , we restructured the in - terface to follow a sentence completion schema : “The { item } is { valence : good / bad / neutral } in terms of { dimen - sion } . ” Thus , a user might summarize a clip as : “The { Canon T2i } is { good } in terms of { image quality } . ” We found that , in pilot tests , structuring these inputs as parts of a sentence was the easiest schema for users to un - derstand and resulted in more consistent data . From the natural hinting provided by a sentence structure , users could more easily deduce the nature of each input . For example , “in terms of { dimension } ” hints that the dimen - sion input should be some aspect of the specified item ; the “is { good / bad / neutral } ” hints that the valence input refers to the item’s performance on the specified dimension . Implementation The application was built using Javascript ( 92 . 8 % of file structure ) to manage the client - side , and PHP / MySql ( 7 . 2 % ) to strictly handle AJAX - type requests and return database information to the client . It was implemented as a Google Chrome extension in the context of this study . The application was developed in a small team , using an iterative process guided by user observation and feedback . To minimize interference with the user’s natural foraging process , the application runs automatically in the back - ground on web pages ( via Chrome extension ) so its func - tionality is available natively on any page without the need to be explicitly run . Full functionality is also availa - ble across browsers as a bookmarklet . The application persists across tabs , accommodating the common foraging style of browsing across many tabs at once . Session : Searching and Finding CHI 2013 : Changing Perspectives , Paris , France 2991 When active , highlighting text on the page opens the clip - ping tool , which allows the user to save “clips , ” or snip - pets of web page text , as they conduct their natural infor - mation - gathering activity on the web . Along with the ac - tual snippet text the system saves the associated styles . The interface also includes mechanisms to make inputting data easier with continued use :  Dimension suggestion : most recent and most common dimensions are hinted below the dimension input as dimensions are accumulated  Dimension autocomplete : dimensions are also suggest - ed via text auto - completion as users type in the dimen - sion input box .  Node guessing : the item is guessed based on web page elements Results confirm that users were able to specify clip data such as dimensions more quickly with continued usage ( F 1 , 598 = 11 . 5 , p < . 001 ) . As users save data during information gathering , they ac - cumulate clips and build a schema of interrelated items and dimensions . To orient them with this information , we display the “workspace pane , ” a list of top items and di - mensions , overlaid on the right side of the web page . Here users see their clipping action reflected in real - time . They may also click on any item , or dimension to show the va - lence of the clips collected in that context . For example , clicking on “battery” shows how the corresponding items have been evaluated in terms of “battery . ” Finally , we supported a number of ways for users to re - view and edit their clips and dimensions : 1 . Clip review : A tabular , spreadsheet view that en - ables users to see and edit their clips and corre - sponding assigned items , dimensions and values in a compact and easy to read format . 2 . Dimension review : A sortable , draggable , and editable view of dimensions . Users are free to re - arrange these units as they please , dragging and dropping to reorder , create a hierarchy , rename , delete , or merge dimensions . 3 . Workspace review : the final workspace summary graph is presented as an interactive table that plots items vs . dimensions with aggregated clip valences in each cell . EXPERIMENTAL APPROACH We use the platform described above to investigate how and when to capture structure in the foraging process . In - stead of viewing foraging as a simple search and filtering process , we view it as a process of schema induction [ 20 ] in which users induce a structured information space . Us - ers come into the process with some preconceptions , for example their goals and their previous knowledge , but during the process of foraging their understanding of what information space looks like – e . g . , what the items in the space are , how they are related , what the important di - mensions in the space are – may change dramatically . This sets up a fundamental tension between eliciting the structure of the users’ mental model during the foraging process versus afterwards . Capturing their structure dur - ing the process may be difficult , as users may have trou - ble formulating and describing their nascent mental mod - el , which may also lead to a poorer structure of the result - ing information space as their mental model might change significantly during the foraging process . Conversely , eliciting structure afterwards means that users have al - ready built up a rich representation of the information space and may be able to externalize it more easily . Fur - thermore , users can process all their items at once , which may promote comparison and contrast – conditions that benefit the induction process [ 20 ] . However , waiting to elicit their mental model until afterwards means that items must be reprocessed in order to capture users’ judgments of them , leading to potentially wasted time ( though there are likely savings if not too much time has passed and some cognitive processing is still in memory ) . We investigate this tradeoff between conditions favoring induction vs . memory through three versions of the inter - face differing in terms of when the < item , dimension , val - ue > structure is elicited during the foraging process ( see Figure 1 ) . We expected that the < dimension > element would be especially difficult for participants to specify early , as it would involve defining the structure of their information space while their mental model is still imma - ture and mutable . In contrast , we expected that the < item > and < value > elements would be relatively time - invariant , as their referents are to the local clip rather than the global information space . The three interface conditions progres - sively removed one of these elements from being required up front ( when a clip is saved ) and move that element to being filled out later ( after all clips have been saved ) in a separate spreadsheet view .  Condition 1 : Participants are required to fill out all three of the < item , dimension , value > elements when a clip is saved . 2 The spreadsheet view is for review purposes only .  Condition 2 : Participants are required to fill out the < item , value > elements when a clip is saved . The < dimension > is filled out for each clip in the subse - quent spreadsheet view .  Condition3 : Participants are required to fill out only the < item > when the clip is saved , and fill out the < dimension , value > in the subsequent spreadsheet view . 2 Practically , the item information is not very interesting as it is usually easily pre - populated . In the experiment we do so for the user in all versions of the interface , though it is modifiable . Session : Searching and Finding CHI 2013 : Changing Perspectives , Paris , France 2992 1 . Costs of capturing information We hypothesize these manipulations will result in differ - ences in both the costs of capturing information as well as differences in the structure of the captured information . In terms of time taken , Condition 1 is weighted towards up - front costs as all structure is elicited during the foraging process . Conversely , Conditions 2 and 3 shift capturing the dimension and the value to the review phase . This shift means that participants need to process all of their foraged information twice , potentially increasing total ( clipping + reviewing ) time . However , this cost may be offset by the benefits of eliciting structure later , which in - clude having a richer mental model of the domain , and being able to see and compare all items together . Thus our hypothesis is that Conditions 2 and 3 may take more time overall , but ( as per our later hypotheses ) this may be offset in the quality of their resulting information struc - ture . Hyp1 . 1 : C1 will take more clipping time than C2 and C3 Hyp1 . 2 : C2 and C3 will take more reviewing time Hyp1 . 3 : C2 and C3 will take less total time Each condition may also have different costs in terms of cognitive workload . Condition 1 requires the most cogni - tive processing up front but little processing later , while Conditions 2 and 3 spread out the needed judgments across the foraging and review phases . We hypothesize that the upfront costs in Condition 1 will lead to greater perceived workload and hence lower user preference than Conditions 2 and 3 . Hyp1 . 4 : C1 will result in greater perceived cognitive workload Hyp1 . 5 : C2 and C3 will be preferred over C1 2 . Changes in mental models As discussed above , viewing information seeking as a process of schema induction predicts that a user’s repre - sentation of an information space will change as they ex - plore and become familiar with the domain . Hyp2 . 1 : Users’ mental models of the information space will change from the beginning to the end of the foraging process We also predict that users who are already familiar with a domain may have more mature mental models that may not change as much as those who are unfamiliar with the domain . Hyp2 . 2 : Users with more domain familiarity will change their mental model less than those with less familiarity The way in which users’ mental models change may differ based on when structure is elicited . Being forced to expli - cate a dimension early in the process may anchor users to that dimension , making them less likely to learn and change than users who are asked to provide dimensions late in the process . Hyp2 . 3 : Users’ mental models will change less when di - mensions are elicited during foraging ( C1 ) than after for - aging ( C2 , C3 ) . We also investigated whether different interfaces affect what users learn and remember . Different cognitive fac - tors favor different interfaces : for example , in Condition 1 eliciting all structure during foraging means that users are likely to process the information more deeply when first encountering it . The cognitive literature on levels of pro - cessing is lengthy and robust , predicting advantages for deeply processed information for later recall [ 10 ] . On the other hand , in Conditions 2 and 3 users need to process each piece of information twice : once while saving and once in the spreadsheet view to add dimensions and / or values . This creates a spacing effect which is also advan - tageous to later recall [ 7 ] . Given that conditions 2 and 3 also are set up well to promote comparison and induction [ 20 ] by having users process all the information at once in the spreadsheet view , we hypothesize a slight advantage for them . Hyp2 . 4 : Users will recall more information when they process the information twice ( C2 , C3 ) than doing their processing all at once ( C1 ) . 3 . Structure of captured information After foraging , users may have a better feeling for the dis - tribution of information among dimensions . This may re - sult in fewer dimensions being used overall , as users fo - cus on dimensions that are more discriminative . It may al - so result in fewer singleton dimensions with only a single exemplar created with the expectation of information that never appeared . Hyp3 . 1 : Fewer dimensions will be used when dimensions are elicited after foraging ( C2 , C3 ) than during foraging ( C1 ) . Hyp3 . 2 : Fewer singleton dimensions will occur when di - mensions are elicited after foraging ( C2 , C3 ) than during foraging ( C1 ) . We hypothesize that after going through the foraging pro - cess users may have a better idea of what dimensions are prototypical ( i . e . , important and common ) , and will focus less on more peripheral or uncommon dimensions . This may lead to their dimensions having more overlap with others , despite never encountering or being aware of oth - ers’ information spaces . Hyp3 . 3 : Users’ dimensions will overlap more with others’ dimensions when they are elicited after foraging ( C2 , C3 ) than during foraging ( C1 ) . 4 . User characteristics We also examine how characteristics of the user may af - fect their use and resulting information structure . The two Session : Searching and Finding CHI 2013 : Changing Perspectives , Paris , France 2993 peinhmmtos Hmu Hizd P Pprytieainlsjs P PgtoinippthwawA ( 2uit Fvsea primary charac expertise , and a nformation an have a pre - ex mation and ma more and may ool more usefu spend a lot of ti Hyp4 . 1 : Users most structured users without d Hyp4 . 2 : Users ze more will u do not . Participants Participants we pool . Forty - five recruited with years ) . Particip ired medical d elementary sch average 14 . 89 h nformation ga earn about ne signed to each ects ) . Each par sion . Procedure Participants we general demogr ory video dem ng process the pant encounter ping , spreadshe hey were show well . Participan about three DS which included Amazon produ ( Condition 1 ) o 2 , 3 ) all of their ue ) in a spread ty to review , c Figure 3 : The fin s . dimensions , s ach intersection cteristics we e a more general nd maximizing isting orientat aximizing ( vs . y find the mor ful than those w ime seeking in with domain e d version of th domain expertis who tend to s use and like th ere recruited fr e participants an average ag pants had a var doctors to unde hool teachers . hours per week athering exerci ew topics . Part condition ( 15 rticipant was p ere initially giv raphic informa monstrating the y would engag red new functi eet view , review wn a brief , tar nts first were SLR cameras o d 8 reviews sele uct review page or filled out th r clips ( includi sheet view . N ombine or cha nal workspace r summarized by n . examine are sp l disposition to g vs . satisficin tion towards satisficing ) ma re structured v who are satisfi nformation onli expertise will p he interface ( C se . seek informatio e tools more th from a univers ( 19 males , 26 e of 26 . 9 year iety of backgro ergrads and Ph They reported k ( SD = 7 . 5 ho ses , e . g . , to bu ticipants were per condition , paid $ 15 for a ven a questionn ation and show e entire clippin ge in . The first ionality ( e . g . , t wing dimensio rgeted introdu asked to gath on a simulated ected from the e . They then e he information ing item , dimen ext they were ange any dimen review shows a the valence of s pecific domain owards seeking ng . Users who seeking infor - ay use the tool versions of the icers or do not ine . prefer using the C1 ) more than on and maxim - han users who ity - run subject females ) were rs ( SD = 10 . 69 ounds from re - hD students to d spending on ours ) online on uy products or randomly as - , between sub - 90 minute ses - naire collecting wn an introduc - ng and review - t time a partic - the initial clip - ns , table view ) ctory video as er information Amazon page correspondingeither reviewed for ( Condition nsion , and val - given the abil - nsions they de - table of nodes saved clips in n g o - l e t e n - o t e 9 - o n n r - - - g - - - - ) s n e g d n - - - siredganizthen memback eras threery vid colleworker / ma RESU 1 . Co The interfturingtask t Task We r phaseto ite We h clip t the a betwany d ting t took took 9 . 0 , p ating ating confibe m Figucarseerage 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 T i m e ( M i n s ) d , and to view zed by item an asked to fill ou mory of the thre k and use their they would ch e carseats also deos ) . Finally , ecting feedback kload instrum aximizer scale ULTS ost of capturin differentiatingfaces is how m g . In this sectio times and user k Times recorded the t e making clips ems in the spre hypothesized t than Condition actual time spen ween Condition data entry , and the save button an average of only 2 . 0 secon p < . 01 ) and c g a value took g a dimension irming the hyp more difficult th ure 4 : Clipping a eat tasks . The n e number of cli ( 20 . 47 ) ( 0 5 0 5 0 5 0 Condition 1 Cond Camera T Clip Ti Review a summary of nd dimension ( ut a questionna ee items , then a clips to decide hoose . This pro taken from Am participants fi k on the clipp ent [ 31 ] , and [ 32 ] . ng information g factor betwe much each sup on we gather r r preferences ar time participan s and the review eadsheet view . that Condition ns 2 and 3 ( H1 . nt entering data ns 1 and 2 ( Co d generally onl n , so was clear 8 . 7 seconds pe nds per clip , a s onfirming the approximately took an addi pothesis that ad han adding a va and review time numbers in pare ips made in that ( 30 . 4 ) ( 22 . 4 ) ition 2 Condition 3 Task ime w Time f their clips in see Figure 4 ) . aire which firs allowed particip e which of the ocedure was re mazon ( minus i illed out a gene per tool , a N d a shortene n een the differe pports informa results to under re affected . nts spent in th w phase makin n 1 would take 1 ) . We looked a into the clipp ondition 3 did n ly consisted of rly different ) . C er clip , while C significant diff hypothesis . Th y 2 seconds , w itional 6 . 7 sec dding a dimens alue ( H1 . 6 ) . es for the camer entheses refer t t condition . ( 19 . 53 ) ( 23 . 0 Condition 1 Condition Carsea a table or - They were st tested for pants to go three cam - epeated for introducto - eral survey NASA TLX d satisfic - ent Clipper ation struc - rstand how he foraging ng changes e longer to at whether per differed not require f users hit - Condition 1 Condition 2 ference ( t = hus , gener - while gener - conds , also sion would ra and o the av - 7 ) ( 17 . 67 ) n 2 Condition 3 at Task Session : Searching and Finding CHI 2013 : Changing Perspectives , Paris , France 2994 We also hypothesized that Conditions 2 and 3 would take longer in the reviewing phase , as they required partici - pants to review all their clips again in order to add dimen - sions and values ( H1 . 2 ) . We did find significant differ - ences for the review stage in both tasks ( camera : F 2 , 42 = 5 . 9 , p = . 0055 ; car seat : F 2 , 42 = 4 . 6 , p = . 016 ) , with Condi - tions 2 ( M = 4 . 6 min ) and 3 ( M = 6 . 7 min ) taking longer than Condition 1 ( M = 3 . 2 min ) , confirming this hypothe - sis . Interestingly , when we combined the total time spent in the foraging phase ( both reading and clipping ) and the re - view phase we did not find a significant difference be - tween the three conditions for either of the tasks ( camera : F 2 , 42 = 1 . 1 , p = . 33 ; car seat : F 2 , 42 = 0 . 090 , p = . 91 ) . In oth - er words , the more structured support provided by condi - tions 2 and 3 did increase the time spent reviewing , but overall did not increase the amount of time participants spent carrying out the task ( see Figure 3 ) . This discon - firms our hypothesis ( H1 . 3 ) that Condition 1 would take less total time than Conditions 2 and 3 , and suggests that the savings of being able to provide structure after devel - oping a rich mental model offset the costs of processing the data twice . User Preference The general usability of any tool plays a significant role in whether it will be adopted by users . To understand users’ preference , we asked how easy and helpful were the fea - tures of Clipper in carrying out specific actions , and how enjoyable , effective , easy and useful they rated the inter - face . Overall , participants found the interface both easy to use and useful , with all 17 feature - specific and overall scores averaging above 5 on a 7 - point scale . Examples of typical feedback include : “ [ It was ] Easy to use – nice way to organize information that you need to remember , you have time to review in - formation clipped after reading the whole article or all reviews . ” – Participant 8 , Condition 2 “The speed , the user friendly nature , didn ' t require extra time , makes it easy to make your mind . ” – Participant 9 , Condition 3 . However , no significant differences were found between conditions , indicating that users did not perceive a differ - ence in either usability or usefulness whether structure was elicited during or after foraging . This disconfirms our hypothesis that Conditions 2 and 3 would be preferred over Condition 1 ( H1 . 5 ) . Cognitive Workload To understand the effect the different versions of Clipper on cognitive workload , we had participants fill out a NASA Task Load Index ( TLX ) [ 30 ] to determine what the difference in the perceived mental demand , physical de - mand , temporal demand , performance , effort and frustra - tion was . Across the three conditions , we did not find a significant differences in participants’ perceptions of cog - nitive workload ( All : F 2 , 42 < 3 . 0 , p > . 05 ) , also disconfirm - ing H1 . 4 . 2 . Change in mental models To measure change in participants’ mental models we asked them to provide the dimensions they entered the experiment thinking were important in guiding their deci - sion , what dimensions they left thinking were important , and why 3 . Despite the relatively short time participants spent on each task , they reported quite large changes in their mental models from the beginning to the end of the foraging process . On average participants reported 4 . 9 important dimensions at the beginning versus 5 . 4 at the end , and an average change of 2 . 2 dimensions either add - ed or removed . This difference is quite large : on average , a 45 % change from their initial mental model of what di - mensions were important , supporting H2 . 1 . These results provide quantitative evidence of the foraging process be - ing remarkably dynamic , with users’ mental representa - tions of the information space changing quite dramatically and quickly . To gain a more nuanced understanding of how mental models changed during sensemaking , we analyzed the re - sponses from our participants on how they evolved during the course of their task . Two coders independently labeled 89 responses in an open - ended manner into a data - driven coding schema , with a Cohen’s kappa ( κ ) of 0 . 84 indicat - ing a significant level of agreement between the coders . Participants’ reported five main ways in which their men - tal models evolved : by expanding and becoming more de - tailed either through learning or recollection ; concepts be - coming more salient and important ; no change ( 20 % ) ; or other ( 10 % ) . For example , 41 % of participants learned or were reminded of considerations they had not initially considered : “ As I read the reviews , I was reminded of taking into con - sideration whether the car seat would fit in a smaller car or not . ” – Participant 36 Similarly , 29 % reported that the importance of certain concepts became more salient in their mental model dur - ing the course of their task : “ I started considering picture quality and the overall per - formance to be the most important aspect while evaluat - ing a camera . ” – Participant 31 However , a significant portion ( 20 % ) of our participants reported that due to factors like familiarity with the do - main , their mental models and thought process remained “Unchanged” . Finally , several participants reported “Oth - 3 We chose not to ask this question to participants before they engaged in foraging so as to not bias their resulting foraging process ; the trade - off is a reliance on self - report . However , giv - en that we have consistent quantitative and qualitative results , we believe this was not a significant issue . Session : Searching and Finding CHI 2013 : Changing Perspectives , Paris , France 2995 er” changes ( 6 . 7 % ) , such as a deeper understanding of the context or a realization of their needs . Contrary to H2 . 3 , we did not find any differences between conditions in terms of change in mental models – all con - ditions showed similarly large differences . We also exam - ined whether familiarity with the domain ( negatively ) predicts change in dimensions , under the reasoning that those who are already familiar with a domain may not change their mental model as much . However , we found no significant results , disconfirming H2 . 2 . Thus the large change in participants’ mental models appears to be ro - bust across condition and to hold even for those who con - sider themselves already familiar with a domain . Recall After each task we asked participants to list as many strengths and weaknesses as they could remember for each product without looking back at their data . However , no significant difference was found between the condi - tions for the number of facts recalled ( car seat : F 2 , 42 = 0 . 88 , p = . 42 ; camera : F 2 , 42 = 0 . 086 , p = . 92 ) , disconfirm - ing our hypothesis ( H2 . 4 ) . One possible explanation for this finding is that the benefits of the spacing effect from processing information twice in Conditions 2 and 3 is bal - anced by the deeper level of processing in Condition 1 . Another possibility is that the interval between processing items and recall was too short to see any effects . 3 . Structure of captured information Despite no differences in the total time , workload , prefer - ence , or recall across conditions , we found significant dif - ferences in the resulting structure of participants’ infor - mation spaces . In Table 1 we have an overview of all their user actions and workspace attributes . We hypothesized that when dimensions were elicited after foraging ( C2 , C3 ) participants would have better - structured information spaces . Specifically , we posited that users would focus on more discriminative dimensions , leading to fewer dimen - sions overall ( H3 . 1 ) . Collapsing over the two tasks , Con - ditions 2 and 3 indeed resulted in significantly fewer di - mensions than Condition 1 ( see Table 1 ; F 2 , 87 = 3 . 6 , p < . 05 ) . We also hypothesized and found significantly fewer singleton dimensions in Conditions 2 and 3 than Condi - tion 1 ( see Table 1 ; F 2 , 87 = 8 . 4 , p < . 001 ) , supporting H3 . 2 . Together , these results suggest that eliciting structure after users have developed a rich mental model leads to better structured data . We also examined the hypothesis that capturing structure after foraging would focus users on more prototypical di - mensions which would overlap more with others , despite never actually encountering others’ dimensions ( H3 . 3 ) . We calculated this by summing the number of others’ workspaces that a participant’s dimensions appeared in . This was weighted by the number of clips the dimension appeared in the participant’s workspace , so as to minimize the effect of dimensions used rarely or only once . Across both tasks we found a significant difference in overlap with others’ dimensions ( F 2 , 86 = 4 . 0 , p < . 03 ) , with Condi - tion 1 resulting in less overlap than Condition 3 , and Condition 2 falling in between . This supports H3 . 3 , and suggests the intriguing possibility that one way to pro - mote a shared mental model between users who are oth - erwise independent is to wait to elicit structure from them until they have a more developed mental model of an in - formation space . 4 . User characteristics We next look at the role participants’ prior knowledge and orientation had on our results . We found that participants’ maximizing ( vs . satisficing ; [ 32 ] ) orientation was a good predictor for how enjoyable they found Clipper ( F 1 , 43 = 5 . 1 , p = . 030 ) , how helpful they found Clipper ( F 1 , 43 = 4 . 7 , p = . 036 ) , the total time spent reviewing information gathered ( F 1 , 43 = 8 . 7 , p = . 0052 ) , and the total user actions conducted on their information items ( F 1 , 43 = 5 . 8 , p = . 021 ) . In our linear regression models , there was a mar - ginal significance in how well we could estimate how confident our participants’ felt when using Clipper ( F 1 , 43 = 3 . 8 , p = . 057 ) . In our analysis , we carried out a multiple regression to understand the interaction between condition and prior knowledge and participant orientation . What we found is that the role of familiarity was a better predictor in the multiple regression model . We find participants’ prior knowledge and the version of Clipper they were assigned to would predict how easy they found categorizing the different clips ( F 1 , 43 = 2 . 8 , p = . 051 ) , and the size of the workspaces in terms of characters ( F 1 , 43 = 3 . 0 , p = . 040 ) and words ( F 1 , 43 = 3 . 0 , p = . 041 ) . DISCUSSION We introduced a novel interface for capturing information in a lightweight but structured way , based on the < item , dimension , value > paradigm . Feedback from users showed that the interface was easy to understand and use , and was useful in capturing and organizing their evolving mental model of an information space . We used this interface as an experimental platform to in - vestigate the costs and benefits of eliciting structure either Condition 1 Condition 2 Condition 3 C li pp i ng # Characters 2876 . 46 5587 . 93 5793 . 53 1102 . 80 40 . 07 # Words # Clips 571 . 73 40 . 00 1061 . 80 53 . 47 W o r ks p ace # Dimensions # Singletons Dimension Overlap 22 . 86 7 . 33 5 . 80 18 . 40 3 . 47 7 . 22 17 . 80 4 . 53 8 . 44 Table 1 . Average clipping and workspace composition across conditions Session : Searching and Finding CHI 2013 : Changing Perspectives , Paris , France 2996 during or after the foraging process . Specifically , we quantified how differences in when structure was elicited impacted the costs of capture and change in the resulting structure of a users’ foraged information . Our results showed that while there were local differences in time taken per phase ( e . g . , eliciting full structure ( C1 ) took the longest during clipping , while the other conditions ( C2 , C3 ) took longer in the review phase ) there was no differ - ence in the total time taken across phases . There were also no differences found for perceived workload , or for user preference between conditions . However , there were sig - nificant differences in the resulting structure of users’ for - aged information : eliciting structure after foraging result - ed in more useful and well - distributed dimensions . These results paint a picture of the cognitive processes at play when people make sense of information , especially in unfamiliar domains . Our data quantitatively demon - strate how people’s mental models change significantly over time , even in the short duration of information seek - ing users engaged in during our experiment . Given these dynamics of the foraging process , we hypothesized and demonstrated that waiting until people have formed a rich mental model ( e . g . , in conditions 2 and 3 ) is beneficial in terms of the structure of the resulting information . Fur - thermore , Conditions 2 and 3 took no extra time com - pared to Condition 1 , even though they require people to process the data twice . This suggests there are significant costs to eliciting structure early in the foraging process , possibly due to users having only a formative mental model of the information space , and that space changing over time . The savings from not having to undergo the costly cognitive processing involved in choosing a dimen - sion apparently makes up for the extra costs of having to reload and reprocess the data . Another cognitive factor involved is the ease of inducing a coherent schema . Previous research suggests that sche - ma induction involves the alignment of many examples in order to find the commonalities and overlaps between them [ 20 ] . Since in the spreadsheet view items could all be easily seen and compared to each other , it may have been easier for users to induce a coherent schema than during foraging ( when items were encountered one by one , and in sequence ) . Viewing information seeking through the lens of schema induction may provide design opportunities for helping users to align unstructured in - formation in ways that match their cognitive processing . Our results also have implications for the design of new information seeking and capture systems . One far - reaching implication is that asking a user to structure their information too early leads to a more poorly structured in - formation space . In practice , nearly all systems for captur - ing structured information commonly in use today fall prey to this . When tagging a webpage , saving a document , or filing an email we are asked up front to structure our information space ( e . g . , our tags or folder structure ) . Re - searchers have long noted the challenges that users have in these situations ; here we provide empirical evidence for why this process is difficult and how we could address it . We propose the need for a two - stage process in which in - formation is first saved , and then later structured . Current approaches either force structure during the saving pro - cess ( as above ) or rely on saving information and then avoiding structure entirely ( e . g . , through search , as in Gmail ) . Encouraging a second stage of structuring infor - mation can promote induction and the formation of a bet - ter structured information space which could be useful for both the initial forager and others interested in the same information . However , realizing this in practice will require facing the challenge that users do not want to spend even more time structuring their data , especially if they do not see the benefits to themselves [ 16 , 22 ] . One encouraging result is that even though structuring the data after foraging re - quired users to process their data a second time , it did not take them any longer in total than structuring their data in - itially , nor was it preferred less . The costs of adding di - mensions and values after foraging might be mitigated even further . In order to have a well - controlled experi - ment we intentionally forced the dimension / value entry process in the spreadsheet view for C2 and C3 to be con - sistent with entry process for C1 . For example , we did not allow people to batch apply dimensions or values to more than one clip , even though the functionality for that exist - ed . We also did not use computational techniques ( such as entity extraction or summarization ) to partially automate or suggest dimensions to users . Finally , it is possible that reusing or suggesting the structure that other users had applied to the same content might further ameliorate these costs . Further research is needed to identify the barriers to users capturing structured information and developing novel cognitively - compatible interfaces and computation - al techniques to overcome them . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This work was supported by NSF grants IIS - 1149797 , IIS - 1217559 , OCI - 0943148 , IIS - 0968484 , IIS - 1111124 , Microsoft , and Google . REFERENCES 1 . R . E . Anderson . ( 1992 ) . Social impacts of computing : Codes of professional ethics . Social Science Computing Review 10 , 2 , 453 - 469 . 2 . M . Baldonado , T . Winograd . ( 1997 ) . SenseMaker : An In - formation - Exploration Interface Supporting the Con - tex - tual Evolution of a User ' s Interests . ACM CHI’97 . 3 . N . J . Belkin , R . Oddy and H . Brooks . ( 1982 ) . ASK for in - formation retrieval : Part 1 . Journal of Documentation , 38 ( 2 ) , pp . 61 – 71 . 4 . P . Bell , ( 1997 ) . Using argument representation to make thinking visible for individuals and groups . In CSCL ’97 , pp . 10 - 19 . Session : Searching and Finding CHI 2013 : Changing Perspectives , Paris , France 2997 5 . K . Bharat . 2000 . SearchPad : explicit capture of search context to support Web search . Comput . Netw . 33 , 1 - 6 , 493 - 501 . 6 . G . Bock , R . W . Zmud , Y . Kim , & J . Lee . ( 2005 ) . Behav - ioral intention formation in knowledge sharing : Examin - ing the roles of extrinsic motivators , social - psychological forces , and organizational climate . MIS Quarterly , 29 ( 1 ) : 87 – 111 . 7 . N . J . Cepeda , H . Pashler , E . Vul , J . T . Wixted , and D . Roh - rer . ( 2006 ) . Distributed practice in verbal recall tasks : A review and quantitative synthesis . Psychological bulletin 132 , 3 , 354 . 8 . C . W . Choo , B . Detlor , and D . Turnbull . ( 2000 ) . Infor - mation Seeking on the Web : An Integrated Model of Browsing and Searching . First Monday , 5 ( 2 ) : 2000 . 9 . Conklin , J . , Begeman , M . ( 1988 ) . gIBIS : A Hypertext Tool for Exploratory Policy Discussion . ACM Trans . on Office Information System , 4 ( 6 ) , pp . 303 - 331 . 10 . F . I . M . Craik and R . S . Lockhart . ( 1972 ) . Levels of pro - cessing : A framework for memory research . Journal of verbal learning and verbal behavior 11 , 6 , 671 – 684 . 11 . D . R . Cutting , D . R . Karger , J . O . Pedersen , & J . W . Tuk - ey . ( 1992 ) . Scatter / gather : A cluster - based approach to browsing large document collections . In SIGIR ‘92 . 12 . B . Dervin . ( 1992 ) . From the Mind’s Eye of the User : the Sense - Making Qualitative - Quantitative Methodology . In Qualitative Research in Information Management , pp . 61 - 84 . 13 . M . Dontcheva , S . M . Drucker , G . Wade , D . Salesin , and M . F . Cohen . ( 2006 ) . Summarizing personal web brows - ing sessions . In UIST ' 06 . pp . 115 - 124 . 14 . K . Fisher . S . Counts and A . Kittur . ( 2012 ) . Distributed sensemaking : Improving sensemaking by leveraging the efforts of previous users . In CHI ’12 . pp . 247 – 256 . 15 . P . Foltz T . and Landauer . ( 2007 ) . Helping people find and learn from documents : Exploiting synergies between hu - man and computer retrieval with SuperManual . In the Handbook of Latent Semantic Analysis , pp . 323 - 345 . 16 . J . Grudin . ( 1988 ) . Why CSCW applications fail : problems in the design and evaluation of organizational interfaces . In CSCW 1988 . 17 . L . Hong , E . H . Chi , R . Budiu , P . Piroll and L . Nelson . ( 2008 ) . SparTag . us : Low Cost Tagging System for Forag - ing of Web Content . In AVI 2008 . 18 . I . Hsieh - Yee . Effects of search experience and subject knowledge on the search tactics of novice and experi - enced searchers . JASIST , 44 ( 3 ) , 1993 . 19 . http : / / www . pewinternet . org / Infographics / Generational - differences - in - online - activities . aspx 20 . J . E . Hummel and K . J . Holyoak . ( 2003 ) . A symbolic - connectionist theory of relational inference and generali - zation . Psychological Review , 110 , 220 - 264 . 21 . Y . Kammerer , R . Nairn , P . Pirolli , and E . H . Chi . ( 2009 ) . Signpost from the masses : learning effects in an explora - tory social tag search browser . In Proc . of CHI’09 , pages 625 – 634 . 22 . A . Kankanhalli , A . , B . C . Y . Tan and K . Wei . ( 2005 ) . Con - tributing knowledge to electronic knowledge repositories : An empirical investigation . MIS Quarterly , 29 ( 1 ) : 113 – 143 . 23 . P . A . Kirschner , S . Buckingham Shum and C . S . Carr . ( 2003 ) . Visualizing Argumentation : Software Tools for Collaborative and Educational Sense - Making . London , UK : Springer . 24 . G . Klein , B . Moon and R . Hoffman . ( 2006 ) . Making Sense of Sensemaking 2 : A Macrocognitive Model . IEEE Intelligent Systems , vol . 21 , no . 5 , pages 88 – 92 . 25 . C . C . Kuhlthau . ( 2004 ) . Seeking meaning : a process ap - proach to library and information services . Inf . Res . , vol . 9 , no . 3 . 26 . K . Luther , S . Counts , K . B . Stecher , A . Hoff and P . Johns . ( 2009 ) . Pathfinder : an online collaboration environment for citizen scientists . In CHI 2009 . 27 . G . Marchionini . ( 1995 ) . Information seeking in electronic environments . Cambridge University Press , New York , NY , USA . 28 . D . R . Millen , J . Feinberg and B . Kerr . ( 2006 ) . Dogear : Social bookmarking in the enterprise . In CHI 2006 . pp . 111 – 120 . 29 . D . Morris , M . Ringel Morris , and G . Venolia . ( 2008 ) . SearchBar : a search - centric web history for task resump - tion and information re - finding . In CHI ' 08 . pp . 1207 – 1216 . 30 . M . Ringel Morris and E . Horvitz . ( 2007 ) . S 3 : storable , shareable search . In INTERACT ' 07 . pp . 120 – 123 . 31 . NASA . ( 2003 ) . NASA Task Load Index ( TLX ) : Comput - erized Version ( Version 2 . 0 ) [ Computer Software ] . Mof - fett Field , CA : NASA - Ames Research Center , Aerospace Human Factors Research Division 32 . G . Nenkov , M . Morrin , B . Schwartz , A . Ward , and J . A . Hulland . ( 2011 ) . Short form of the Maximization Scale : Factor structure , reliability and validity studies . Judgment and Decision Making 3 , 5 ( 2011 ) , 371 – 388 . 33 . P . Pirolli and S . K . Card . ( 2005 ) . The sensemaking pro - cess and leverage points for analyst technology . In 2005 International Conference on Intelligence Analysis . 34 . P . Pirolli and S . K . Card . ( 1999 ) . Information foraging . Psychological Review , 106 , 643 - 675 . 35 . m . c . schraefel , Y . Zhu , D . Modjeska , D . Wigdor , and S . Zhao . ( 2002 ) . Hunter gatherer : interaction support for the creation and management of within - web - page collections . In WWW ' 02 . pp . 172 – 181 . 36 . C . Shirky . ( 2009 ) . Here comes everybody : The power of organizing without organizations . Penguin Group USA . 37 . Y . Qu . A sensemaking - supporting information gathering system . In Proc . of CHI ’03 , pages 906 – 907 , 2003 . 38 . Y . Qu and G . W . Furnas . ( 2005 ) . Sources of structure in sense - making . In CHI ’05 : CHI ’05 extended ab - stracts on Human factors in computing systems , pages 1989 – 1992 . 39 . D . Russell , M . J . Stefik , P . Pirolli , and S . K . Card . ( 1993 ) . The Cost Structure of Sensemaking . Proc . Inter - CHI ’93 , Amsterdam , Netherlands , 269 - 276 , ( 1993 ) 40 . P . Vakkari and N . Hakala . ( 2000 ) . Changes in relevance criteria and problem stages in task perfor mance . Journal of Documentation , 56 , 540 – 562 . Session : Searching and Finding CHI 2013 : Changing Perspectives , Paris , France 2998