Vol . 22 no . 14 2006 , pages e464 – e471 doi : 10 . 1093 / bioinformatics / btl207 BIOINFORMATICS An ontology for a Robot Scientist Larisa N . Soldatova (cid:1) , Amanda Clare , Andrew Sparkes and Ross D . King Department of Computer Science , The University of Wales , Aberystwyth , Penglais , Aberystwyth , SY23 3DB , Ceredigion , UK ABSTRACT Motivation : A Robot Scientist is a physically implemented robotic sys - temthatcanautomaticallycarryoutcyclesofscientificexperimentation . We are commissioning a new Robot Scientist designed to investigate gene function in S . cerevisiae . This Robot Scientist will be capable of initiating > 1 , 000experiments , andmaking > 200 , 000observationsaday . Robot Scientists provide a unique test bed for the development of methodologiesforthecurationandannotationofscientificexperiments : becausetheexperimentsareconceivedandexecutedautomaticallyby computer , it is possible to completely capture and digitally curate all aspectsofthescientificprocess . Thisnewabilitybringswithitsignificant technical challenges . To meet these we apply an ontology driven approach to the representation of all the Robot Scientist’s data and metadata . Results : We demonstrate the utility of developing an ontology for our new Robot Scientist . This ontology is based on a general ontology of experiments . The ontology aids the curation and annotating of the experimental data and metadata , and the equipment metadata , and supportsthedesignofdatabasesystemstoholdthedataandmetadata . Availability : EXPO in XML and OWL formats is at : http : / / sourceforge . net / projects / expo / . All materials about the Robot Scientist project are available at : http : / / www . aber . ac . uk / compsci / Research / bio / robotsci / . Contact : lss @ aber . ac . uk 1 INTRODUCTION 1 . 1 Our new Robot Scientist A Robot Scientist is a physically implemented robotic system that applies techniques from artiﬁcial intelligence to carry out cycles of scientiﬁc experimentation ( King et al . , 2004 ) . A Robot Scientist automatically : originates hypotheses to explain observations ; devises experiments to test these hypotheses ; physically runs the experiments using laboratory robotics ; interprets the results ; and then repeats the cycle . The ﬁrst Robot Scientist was built in Aberystwyth to investigate S . cerevisiae gene function using deletion mutants and auxotrophic growth experiments . In our original proof - of - principle work we demonstrated that a Robot Scientist could rediscover biological knowledge concerning gene function in the aromatic amino acid synthesis pathway . Recently , we have demonstrated that the same approach can be extended to the discovery of novel biological knowledge ( King et al . , 2005 ) . An important limitation of our Robot Scientist research has been that although all the intellectual steps were automatic , for some experimental steps it was necessary to intervene manually , owing limitations in our robotic equipment . To eliminate this manual intervention we are commissioning a fully automated Robot Scientist ( Figures 1 and 2 ) . This new system is designed to auto - matically execute yeast growth experiments by : selecting frozen yeast strains from a freezer ; inoculating these strains into rich medium ; then harvesting a deﬁned quantity of cells ; inoculating these cells into speciﬁed media ( base plus added metabolites and / or inhibitors ) ; and ﬁnally accurately measuring growth curves by measuring optical density ( OD ) ( King et al . , 2005 ) . We believe , after consulting with the laboratory automation industry , that our new Robot Scientist is one of the most complicated laboratory automated systems in any academic laboratory . In constructing this new Robot Scientist we have taken advantage of the key beneﬁt of automation : its ability to be easily scaled up . The new Robot Scientist is designed to initiate > 1 , 000 new strain / deﬁned growth - medium experiments a day , using a minimum of 50 different yeast strains , with up to 7 metabolites per experiment , and with each experiment lasting up to 3 days ( plus an initiation day ) . Accurate growth curves will be obtained by observing optical density for every experiment every 20 minutes . This will result in > 200 , 000 data measurements a day . In addition , we expect > 1 , 000 , 000 meta - data measurements each day . These include hypo - theses , experimental plans , experimental actions , temperature , humidity , etc . 1 . 2 Ontologies for curation and annotation of scientific experiments Robot Scientists provide unsurpassed test beds for the development of methodologies for the curation and annotation of scientiﬁc experiments . This is because , as the experiments are conceived and executed automatically by computer , it is possible to com - pletely capture and digitally curate all aspects of the scientiﬁc process : the hypotheses , the experimental goals , the results , etc . The use of a Robot Scientist removes the often ‘show stopping’ sociological problems associated with trying to capture such data from human scientists . The ability to capture all relevant experimental information brings with it signiﬁcant technical challenges : (cid:1) We require a very detailed and formalised description of all the domains involved in an experiment : experimental design , methods and technologies ; experimental object models and (cid:1) To whom correspondence should be addressed . (cid:1) The Author 2006 . Published by Oxford University Press . All rights reserved . For Permissions , please email : journals . permissions @ oxfordjournals . org The online version of this article has been published under an open access model . Users are entitled to use , reproduce , disseminate , or display the open access version of this article for non - commercial purposes provided that : the original authorship is properly and fully attributed ; the Journal and Oxford University Press are attributed as the original place of publication with the correct citation details given ; if an article is subsequently reproduced or disseminated not in its entirety but only in part or as a derivative work this must be clearly indicated . For commercial re - use , please contact journals . permissions @ oxfordjournals . org by gu e s t on J a nu a r y 21 , 2016 h tt p : / / b i o i n f o r m a ti c s . ox f o r d j ou r n a l s . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m background knowledge ; reasoning rules for analysis of the experimental results , etc . (cid:1) We need to curate and ensure the integrity of the large amount of data and metadata that the Robot Scientist will produce . (cid:1) We wish to make the experimental information as open as possible to both the scientific community and the general public—as part of the mission to improve the public under - standing of science . To meet these challenges we have selected an ontology driven approach to the representation of all the data and metadata relevant to the project . The value of the utilisation of ontologies for the curation and annotation of scientiﬁc results is now generally recog - nised ( Bard and Rhee , 2004 ) . The use of ontologies make scientiﬁc knowledge more explicit , helps detect errors , enables the sharing and reuse of common knowledge , removes redundancies in domain - speciﬁc ontologies , and promotes the interchange and reliability of experimental methods and conclusions . Bioinformatics has led the way in the application of ontologies to the curation and annotation of experimental data ( Brazma et al . , 2001 ) . Probably the best known application of ontologies to des - cribing experiments is that developed by the Microarray Gene Expression Society ( MGED ) ( Stoeckert et al . , 2002 ) . The MGED Ontology ( MO ) is designed to provide descriptors required by MIAME ( Minimum Information About a Microarray Experiment ) standard for capturing core information about microarray experi - ments . MO aims to provide a conceptual structure for microarray experiment descriptions and annotation . Similar approaches have been made in proteomics ( http : / / psidev . sourceforge . net / ontology / ) , metabolomics ( Jenkins et al . , 2004 ) and anatomy ( Ryn and Sternberg , 2003 ) . Unfortunately , the existing ontologies for experiments repres - entation are not suitable for extension to a Robot Scientist ( Soldatova and King , 2005 ) . They are highly human - oriented , and they do not contain concepts about general principles for organ - ising and execution of experiments and analysis of the results . In Fig . 1 . Plan of our new Robot Scientist . Fig . 2 . Our new Robot Scientist ( during assembly , Nov . , 2005 ) . An ontology for a Robot Scientist e465 by gu e s t on J a nu a r y 21 , 2016 h tt p : / / b i o i n f o r m a ti c s . ox f o r d j ou r n a l s . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m addition , no ontology is yet available for microbiological experi - ments , the domain of the robot scientist experiments . We have therefore applied our generic ontology of scientiﬁc experiments EXPO ( Soldatova , 2005 ) to our Robot Scientist and formed the instantiation EXPO - RS . The goals of this ontology are as follows : (cid:1) To formalise the concepts involved in Robot Scientist experiments , and to identify what metadata are essential for the experiment’s description and repeatability . (cid:1) To provide a controlled vocabulary for all the participants of the project . This includes specialists from different scientific areas ( and the general public ) . (cid:1) To organise all the information and knowledge about the Robot Scientist project into different meta - levels . This ensures a clear structure , allows maintenance and updating of the knowledge , and enables coordination of multiple tasks : planning of an experiment ; execution of an experiment ; access to the results ; technical support of the robot , etc . (cid:1) To design a database for the storage of experimental data and track experiment execution . In section 2 we describe a generic ontology of experiments as a method for representation of the information about the Robot Scientist project . Section 3 presents three example applications of the ontology for the Robot Scientist description , namely : its metadata , representation of the data about the experimental equipment and the data base model for storing information about Robot Scientist experiments . Section 4 is devoted to discussion of problems of the data representation for a robot and new challenges . 2 GENERIC ONTOLOGICAL DESCRIPTION OF EXPERIMENTS We used the generic ontology of scientiﬁc experiments EXPO as a method to represent the metadata and data of the Robot Scientist experiments ( Soldatova and King , 2006 ) . EXPO provides a clear structured framework for a consistent and shareable description of experiments for both humans and computer systems . EXPO form - alises the generic concepts of experimental design , methodology , experimental objects , subjects , equipment , experimental protocols and actions , observations and results representation . EXPO is expressed in the W3C standard ontology language OWL - DL ( www . w3 . org / TR / owl - guide / ) . EXPO contains 200 classes and it is available at http : / / sourceforge . net / projects / expo / . In deﬁning an ontology , we follow the deﬁnition given by Barry Smith 1 : An ontology is a representation of some pre - existing domain of reality which : ( 1 ) reﬂects the properties of the objects within its domain in such a way that there obtains a systematic correlation between reality and the representation itself ; ( 2 ) is intelligible to a domain expert ; ( 3 ) is formalised in a way that allows it to support automatic information processing . To build up the Robot Scientist’s ontology EXPO - RS we use the following structure elements : (cid:1) A concept X ( ¼ class ) . ‘X is a class if and only if ( iff ) each element x of X satisfies the intrinsic property of X . The intrinsic propertyofathingisapropertywhichisessentialtothethinganditloosesitsidentitywhenthepropertychanges’ ( Mizoguchi , 2004 ) . (cid:1) An instance x , an element of the class X . (cid:1) Is - a relation . ‘ < class A is - a class B > relation holds between classes if and only if ( iff ) every instance of the class A is also aninstanceoftheclassB’ ( Mizoguchi , 2004 ) . Inordertoprovide a simple hierarchical structure , the concepts are assumed to be disjoint . (cid:1) Instance - of relation . If and only if ( iff ) the definition above holds then the relation < x instance - of X > is true . (cid:1) Attribute - of ( a / o ) relation is used for describing properties of the concept . It can be considered as a predicate attribute ( Concept , Property ) . This relation can have a fixed cardinality or a range 0 , . . . , n , where n is a natural number ; minimum cardinality 0 means that some of instances of the class might not have this property , i . e . the property is not intrin - sic , but still important for the class description as a whole . (cid:1) Part - of relation ( p / o ) is used for describing partronomic relations between concepts . For simplicity’s sake and because it is not essential for the selected domain , we do not distinguish the different types of whole - part relations ( Guarino , 1998 ) . The above comments about cardinality are also true for part - of relations . All concepts of the Robot Scientist project are deﬁned as sub - classes of the following top concepts : ( 1 ) Physical object , i . e . experimental equipment . ( 2 ) Process , such as an execution of experiment , interpreting the results , experimental actions . ( 3 ) Proposition : tasks of experiments , experimental goals , hypotheses , experimental design strategy , models , standards . ( 4 ) Substrate forrepresenting timepoints andintervals , measure - ment units and locations . ( 5 ) Role , for instance functional role , or subject , object role . The role concept is particularly important for the Robot Scientist because the robot can play different roles in the same experiment : (cid:1) The robot is the object of an experiment when we study the automation of science . The experimental domain in this case is Artificial Intelligence and Robotics . (cid:1) The robot is the subject of the experiment when we employ the robot to discover new knowledge in a scientific domain . In this article we concentrate on the description of robot - subject experiments . EXPO - RS is built as an extension of EXPO by adding the speciﬁcs of the Robot Scientist project to the classes and instances . 3 APPLICATIONS OF AN ONTOLOGY FOR THE ROBOT SCIENTIST 3 . 1 Metadata We illustrate in Figures 3 and 4 an example of a Robot Scientist experiment annotated using EXPO - RS ( King et al . , 2005 ) . In 1 The Buffalo Ontology Site : http : / / ontology . buffalo . edu / L . N . Soldatova et al . e466 by gu e s t on J a nu a r y 21 , 2016 h tt p : / / b i o i n f o r m a ti c s . ox f o r d j ou r n a l s . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m Figure 3 ( and further in the text ) the terms in angled brackets are from EXPO - RS . Figure 3 shows the corresponding fragment of EXPO - RS in a text format and Figure 4 in a graphic format ( Kozaki et al . , 2002 ) . The goal of the illustrated experiment is to investigate the func - tion of the gene named ‘YER152c’ . This gene is currently classiﬁed by SGD / GO as ‘Uncharacterized’ , and by MIPS as ‘Unclassiﬁed’ . In previous work on predicting gene function we predicted the gene to be involved in ‘metabolism’ with estimated > 80 % accuracy ( Clare and King , 2003 ) . The Robot Scientist used its background bioinformatics know - ledge in its internal databases to abduce the hypothesis that YER152c encodes the enzyme 2 - aminoadipate : 2 - oxoglutarate aminotransferase . This is formally encoded in the Prolog fact ‘encodes ( yer152c , ‘2 - aminoadipate : 2 - oxoglutarate aminotrans - ferase’ ) ’ . Given this abduction , and its general model of yeast metabolism , the Robot Scientist deduced that the removal of this gene would produce a strain with reduced growth ( a brady - trophic mutant ) or no growth ( an auxotrophic mutant ) ; and that addition of the metabolite L - 2 - aminoadipate to the standard deﬁned growth medium would restore growth . Analysis of the experimental results provided evidence that was consistent with YER152c encoding the missing 2 - aminoadipate : 2 - oxoglutarate aminotransferase II ( N . B . it is a known iso - enzyme : ( Masuda and Ogur , 1969 ) ) . The application of an ontology to this experiment demonstrates its value in providing the structure for annotating and curating our Robot Scientist’s experimental information . Note in particular , the use of the ontology made explicit : the analysis of alternative hypo - theses , assumptions about the domain model and possible factors that could affect the experimental results . Finally , as EXPO is a general ontology of scientiﬁc experiments , its application provides the framework to link the Robot Scientist’s data and metadata to other scientiﬁc data and metadata . 3 . 2 Description of experimental equipment Our new Robot Scientist’s laboratory automation hardware is extremely complicated and comes supplied with substantial amounts of technical description . Application of an ontology helps to deﬁne which of the equipment characteristics are most important to describe to ensure experimental reproducibility . < scientific experiment > : < admin . info about experiment > : < title > : Robot scientist < ID > : exp200401113 - 0001 < classification by domain > : < domain of experiment > : < DDC ( Dewey ) classification > : 576 Microbiology < research hypothesis > : < representation style > : < text > < linguistic expression > : < natural language > : Knocked out gene named ` ` yer152c ' ' ( = met8 ) has the function named ` ` 2 - aminoadipate : 2 - oxoglutarate aminotransferase ' ' ( E . C . 2 . 6 . 1 . 39 ) < linguistic expression > : < artificial language > : encodes ( yer152c , ' 2 - aminoadipate : 2 - oxoglutarate aminotransferase ' ) < null hypothesis > : < linguistic expression > : < artificial language > : ˜ encodes ( yer152c , ' 2 - aminoadipate : 2 - oxoglutarate aminotransferase ' ) < alternative hypothesis > : < linguistic expression > : < natural language > : < time effect > : maturation effect ( incubator too cold ) < alternative hypothesis > : < linguistic expression > : < natural language > : < object effect > : no entry of metabolite into the cells < alternative hypothesis > : < linguistic expression > : < natural language > : < object effect > : cross contamination < domain model > : < representation style > : < text > < linguistic expression > : < artificial language > : Prolog A logical model of yeast metabolism < reference > : Whelan , K . E . & King , R . D . ( 2005 ) Using a logical model to predict the growth behaviour of yeast cell cultures . Department of Computer Science Report , University of Wales , Aberystwyth . UWA - DCS - 05 - 045 . < experimental design > : < subject > : The Robot Scientist < object > : S . cerevisiae < experimental model > : < factor > : Strain - 2 strains : wild [ Mat A , by4741 ] and its yer152c knockout < factor > : addition or not of metabolite 2 - aminoadipate : 2 - oxoglutarate aminotransferase < model assumption > : stationarity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . < experimental conclusion > : < representation style > : < text > < linguistic expression > : < natural language > : The yer152c knockout strain has a quite different growth profile to the wild type . This is consistent with yer152c encoding a 2 - aminoadipate : 2 - oxoglutarate aminotransferase . We hypothesize that yer152c is the missing 2 - aminoadipate : 2 - oxoglutarate aminotransferase II . Fig . 3 . EXPO - RS formalisation of a Robot Scientist experiment in a text format ( a fragment ) . An ontology for a Robot Scientist e467 by gu e s t on J a nu a r y 21 , 2016 h tt p : / / b i o i n f o r m a ti c s . ox f o r d j ou r n a l s . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m A description of the functionality of the equipment highlights the requirement for collection of metadata from the equipment . For example : if the equipment can do an action A , do we need to make sure whether or not A happened is recorded in our data records ; if part of the equipment is replaced due to failure , does the new equipment satisfy the functionality that the old equipment provided , and what are the differences ? An ontological description of this functionality gives us a systematic framework for making decisions about the metadata we need to record , and a framework for comparing metadata collected from differing pieces of equipment . In EXPO - RS each piece of laboratory equipment is deﬁned through ‘physical’ object . For example , a well is deﬁned as < plate part > ( see Figure 5 ) . As a well cannot exist separately Fig . 4 . EXPO - RS representation of a robot scientist experiment ( a fragment ) . Fig . 5 . EXPO - RS representation of the experimental equipment ( a fragment for a plate ) . L . N . Soldatova et al . e468 by gu e s t on J a nu a r y 21 , 2016 h tt p : / / b i o i n f o r m a ti c s . ox f o r d j ou r n a l s . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m from a plate it cannot be a single object . A representation of a well is essential for representing the Robot Scientist’s experimental obser - vations , because optical density is measured in each individual well , and stored by well . The ontology describes a concept < well > with its important characteristics : identiﬁcation number < well id > ( from plate < column id > and plate < row id > ) ; < well shape > that can be < round bottom > or < square bottom > , and < well size > . Note that the attributes < well shape > and < well size > are also used for plate descriptions . The reason for this is that no plate can have wells of differing size and shape . Plates for the pregrowth stage of the experiment will have < round bottom > < well shape > for better centrifugation separation , while those used in the freezer and in the growth phase will have < square bottom > wells . Administrative information about the equipment , contact details of suppliers and models information are represented as propositions . Each < model > is characterised by its < id > , < name > and has < model description > . The latter can have different < representations > ( not shown ) on different representation media such as electronic e . g . a CD or paper e . g . a book . < Plate model > inherits properties of < model > concept and additionally has < plate size > , < number of wells > properties , etc . These attributes are not essential in describ - ing a plate as a piece of experimental equipment or for experiment Fig . 6 . EXPO - RS representation of a plate reader functions . Fig . 7 . Data base model for the Robot Scientist ( a fragment ) , where PK is a primary key and FK is a foreign key . An ontology for a Robot Scientist e469 by gu e s t on J a nu a r y 21 , 2016 h tt p : / / b i o i n f o r m a ti c s . ox f o r d j ou r n a l s . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m representation ; thus they characterise a particular plate model and are stored separately . A record of the < plate model > and < manufacturer > , and the same for the plate lid ( not shown in this fragment ) ensures that experimental variation due to readings of different types of plate may be noticed . The ontology also contains a description of the equipment func - tionality . We illustrate the application of this ontology by showing a fragment of the functionality of a plate reader . The fragment in Figure 6 shows the main functions of a Robot Scientist plate reader , that is to perform an < optical density read > , to < agitate > the plate , to < record > information such as the plate barcode , timestamp , and temperature , and to allow the correct parameters of the read and agitation to be set . The plate readers currently used in the Robot Scientist are two SpectraMax 190s . This information would be recorded as the model name under the part of the ontology that describes the equipment . Describing these readers in terms of the plate reader functionality part of the ontology enforces a record of the speciﬁcs of our laboratory setup . The < number of readings per well > is one , and there is one < measurement wavelength > at 595nm . The reader does < maintain internal temperature > at 30 degrees C . Usually the reader does not < agitate > the plate , as the plates are continually agitated while they are in the incubators but there is one occasion on which the reader must < agitate > < before measurement > for a < duration > of 30 seconds . This is to resuspend the yeast after centrifugation . This particular model of plate reader does not inform us what the < intensity > or < agitation mode > are . All this metadata is to be recorded in our database . The next section describes the use of the ontology in the design of this database . 3 . 3 Use of the ontology for the design of a data model As described above , a Robot Scientist will generate a very large amount of data and metadata . To ensure the integrity of this data , and to provide for its easy access , we will store all the data and metadata in a relational database . The principal application of the ontology to database design was as an aid to identifying objects and events that needed to be recorded in the database . This was of key importance , as the primary aim when creating a good relational database design is to model the real world system as closely as possible . You ﬁrst identify the objects and events that you want the database to represent : creating a structured ontology of your system is a good way of doing this . You then deﬁne the tables and all the relevant ﬁelds that they should contain , and ﬁnally describe how they are all related . The ontology also helped with naming both tables and columns , with deﬁning relationships between various data , and as a veriﬁca - tion that the database design had incorporated all of the data useful to the project . The fragment of the database design shown in Figure 7 handles the data records of individual 96 - well plates ; what model of plate and lid it is , what use it is being put to , what actions have happened to it during its lifetime within the Robot Scientist project , and the details of the robotic equipment that have been used to handle it . For each piece of equipment ( e . g . a plate reader ) it stores what settings were used and over what timeframe . This allows you to retrieve exactly what settings were used on any piece of equipment that interacted with any particular plate at any time in the history of the project . To explain the main ‘plates’ table columns in more detail : (cid:1) id _ plate _ barcode : Each physical 96 - well plate has a unique 8 - digit < barcode > label attached to it for tracking purposes . There are three barcode readers on the Robot Scientist , one foreachofthethreesubsystems ( seeFig . 1 ) . Theplateisscanned once in the first subsystem to create it , and again on entry into subsystemstwoandthreeto checkitsidentitybeforeitisworked on . For example , 00012345 . (cid:1) id _ plate _ location : Each physical position on the Robot Scien - tist where a plate can be placed or moved to has a unique < location > number , with all valid locations stored on the separate ‘locations’ table . For example the plate reader in sub - system three is location 3300 . (cid:1) id _ plate _ use _ type : This is a reference to the < plate usage > for the specific plate . These are held on the ‘plate _ use _ types’ table . There are currently three uses a plate could be put to ; as a < yeast strain library plate > , as a < yeast pregrowth plate > , and as an < experiment nutrient cocktail plate > . (cid:1) id _ plate _ status : Each plate has a < status > associated with it to record its current condition . Generally a plate will initially start off in an < empty > state , then become < in use > , and then when it is finished with and disposed of it becomes < destroyed > . This allows us to quickly identify which plates are active and which are historical . (cid:1) id _ plate _ model : This is a reference to the < model > of plate , we use different models for different parts of the system ; for exam - ple the yeast library plates are larger to accommodate greater volumes in deeper wells , whilst the experiment cocktail plates are made of clear polystyrene and have flat - bottomed wells to allow optical readings to be taken . Similar plates may also be made by different manufacturers so we need to record this . The various models of plate are stored on the ‘plate _ models’ table which in turn is linked to supplier information ( not shown ) . (cid:1) is _ plate _ lidded : A Boolean flag to indicate whether the plate has a < lid > or not . (cid:1) id _ lid _ model : This is a reference to the < lid model > . For exam - ple a lid may be flat or it may have ridges to reduce evaporation from wells . The various models of lid are stored on the ‘lid _ models’ table . (cid:1) created _ ts : Thisfieldisusedtostorethe < timestamp > ( timeand date ) of when the plate was created . In database terms this refers to the first time its unique barcode was scanned , normally when a robot arm has first taken it from a consumables plate stack for use . (cid:1) created _ by : This field is used to store who or what created the plate . If the plate was manually created and introduced to the system ( e . g . a yeast library plate ) this field will contain the name of the person who set it up . Otherwise it will contain a name related to where on the Robot Scientist it was created . As in the application of EXPO to curating and annotating experi - mental metadata , and the curation and annotation of metadata on experimental equipment , the application of a general experimental ontology to database design allows data and metadata to be com - pared and shared between experiments and laboratories . L . N . Soldatova et al . e470 by gu e s t on J a nu a r y 21 , 2016 h tt p : / / b i o i n f o r m a ti c s . ox f o r d j ou r n a l s . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m 4 DISCUSSIONS AND CONCLUSION A Robot Scientist enables us to capture an unprecedented amount of information about scientiﬁc experiments . For the ﬁrst time it is possible to completely capture and digitally curate all aspects of the scientiﬁc process . This presents us both with unique opportun - ities and challenges . The opportunity is the ability for the ﬁrst time to record and fully understand how and why a particular experiment was conceived and executed , and to remove all subjectivity in experimental actions . This enables all aspects of experimentation , including hypothesis formation and testing , to be fully repeatable . The great technical challenge is how to capture and digitally curate all this information . We argue that formation of a Robot Scientist ontology is a key step in meeting this challenge . We have used such an ontology to curate and annotate the experimental data and metadata and the equipment metadata , and to help design the associated database systems . As our ontology is linked to a general ontology of scientiﬁc experiments ( EXPO ) all the data and metadata captured can be shared with other experiments . We envisage our ontology as a start point for further community efforts in developing a general ontology for fully automated laboratories . We believe that this increased ability to record and curate all aspects of scientiﬁc experiments will have important ramiﬁcations for scientiﬁc publishing . As in the e - Science ‘vision’ it will be increasingly easy to link papers to all the relevant data and meta - data , ensuring full repeatability . In this task we believe that natural language will be required less and less to describe experiments . This is to be welcomed as natural language is notorious for its impre - cision and ambiguity . Its use is also a great hindrance when using computers to store and analyse data—hence text - mining . We there - fore argue that the content of scientiﬁc papers should increasingly be expressed in formal languages with ontological foundations . ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS We wish to thank all the members of the Robot Scientist team : Jem Rowland , Mike Young , Ken Whelan , Magdalena Markham , Emma Byrne and Wayne Aubrey . The work was funded by the BBSRC and the Royal Commission for the Great Exhibition of 1851 . REFERENCES Bard , J . and Rhee , S . ( 2004 ) New ontologies in biology : design , applications and future challenges . Nature Reviews . Genetics , 5 / 3 , 213 – 222 . Brazma , A . , Hingamp , P . , Quackenbush , J . , Sherlock , G . etal . ( 2001 ) Minimum informa - tion about a microarray experiment ( MIAME ) : toward standards for microarray data . Nature Genetics , 29 , 365 – 371 . Clare , A . and King , R . D . ( 2003 ) Predicting gene function in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . In Proceedings of the 2nd European Conference on Computational Biology . Guarino , N . ( 1998 ) Some ontological principles for designing upper level lexical resources . In First International Conference on Language Resources and Evalu - ation ( eds . Rubio , Gallardo , Castro , Tejada ) , 527 – 534 . Jenkins , H . , Hardy , N . , Beckmann , M . , Draper , J . et al . ( 2004 ) A proposed framework for the description of plant metabolomics experiments and their results . Nature Biotechnology , 22 ( 12 ) , 1601 – 1606 . King , R . D . , Whelan , K . , Jones , M . , Reiser , P . and Bryant , C . ( 2004 ) Functional genomics hypothesis generation by a robot scientist . Nature , 427 , no 6971 , 247 – 252 . King , R . , Young , M . , Clare , A . , Whelan , K . and Rowland , J . ( 2005 ) The robot scientist project . In SpringerLecture NotesinComputerScience3735 ( eds . A . G . Hoffmann , Motada , H . , Scheffer , T . ) , pages 16 – 25 . Kozaki , K . , Kitamura , Y . , Ikeda , M . and Mizoguchi , R . ( 2002 ) Hozo : An environment for building / using ontologies based on a fundamental consideration of ‘‘role’’ and ‘‘relationship’’ . In Knowledge Engineering and Knowledge Management , 213 – 218 . Masuda , M . and Ogur , M . ( 1969 ) Enzymatic and physiological properties of the yeast glutamate - alpha - ketoadipate transaminase . J . Biol . Chem . , 244 , 5153 – 8 . Mizoguchi , R . ( 2004 ) Tutorial on ontological engineering , Part 3 : Advanced course of ontological engineering . New Generation Computing , 22 / 2 , 193 – 220 . Ryn , L . and Sternberg , P . W . ( 2003 ) Building a cell and anatomy ontology of Caenorhabditis elegans . Comparative and Functional Genomics , 4 , 121 – 126 . Soldatova , L . and King , R . ( 2005 ) Are the current ontologies used in biology good ontologies ? Nature Biotechnology , 9 / 23 , 1096 – 1098 . Soldatova , L . and King , R . ( 2006 ) An ontology of scientiﬁc experiments . Journal of the Royal Society Interface , ( in press ) . Soldatova , L . ( 2005 ) EXPO . http : / / sourceforge . net / projects / expo / Stoeckert , C . , Causton , H . and Ball , C . ( 2002 ) Microarray databases : standards and onto - logies . Nature Genetics , 32 , 469 – 473 . An ontology for a Robot Scientist e471 by gu e s t on J a nu a r y 21 , 2016 h tt p : / / b i o i n f o r m a ti c s . ox f o r d j ou r n a l s . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m