Mobile Internet and Political Polarization ∗ Nikita Melnikov October 19 , 2021 Abstract How has mobile internet affected political polarization in the United States ? Using Gallup Daily Poll data covering 1 , 765 , 114 individuals in 31 , 499 ZIP codes between 2008 and 2017 , this paper shows that , after getting access to 3G internet , Demo - cratic voters became more liberal in their political views and increased support for Democratic congressional candidates and policy priorities . Republican voters shifted in the opposite direction . The increase in polarization largely did not take place among social media users . Instead , following the arrival of 3G , active inter - net and social media users from both parties became more pro - Democratic , less active users—pro - Republican . This divergence is partly driven by differences in news consumption between the two groups : after the arrival of 3G , active internet users decreased consumption of Fox News , increased consumption of CNN , and experienced an increase in political knowledge . Polarization also increased due to a political realignment of voters with wealthy , educated individuals becoming more liberal ; poor , uneducated individuals—more conservative . ∗ Melnikov : Princeton University , Princeton , NJ , United States ( e - mail : melnikov @ princeton . edu ) . I thank Matilde Bombardini , Leah Boustan , Ellora Derenoncourt , Natalia Emanuel , Dana Foarta , Thomas Fujiwara , Andy Guess , Sergei Guriev , Matias Iaryczower , Anne Karing , Faizaan Kisat , Ilyana Kuziemko , Eliana La Ferrara , Mónica Martínez Bravo , Leon Musolff , Maria Petrova , Stephen Redding , Jacob Shapiro , María Micaela Sviatschi , Tianyi Wang , Ekaterina Zhu - ravskaya , Owen Zidar , Esmée Zwiers , and all the participants of the seminars at Princeton University for helpful com - ments and suggestions . 1 Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3946055 I I NTRODUCTION During the past years , the United States has experienced a signiﬁcant increase in political polarization . According to Gallup , 2019 witnessed a record - setting 82 percentage point gap in the presidential job approval rating between Republicans ( 89 % ) and Democrats ( 7 % ) , surpassing previous records set by President Trump in 2018 and President Obama in 2016 ( Jones , 2020 ) . The increase in partisanship was not limited to presidential approval , with a recent study ﬁnding that 60 % of both political parties consider the opposing party “a serious threat to the United States” and more than 40 % think of the other side as “downright evil” ( Kalmoe and Mason , 2019 ) . Many observers have blamed the internet and social media for the recent increase in polit - ical polarization . For instance , in an interview to Vox , prominent social psychologist , Jonathan Haidt , describes social media in the following way : “I really believe it’s one of our biggest prob - lems . So long as we are all immersed in a constant stream of unbelievable outrages perpetrated by the other side , I don’t see how we can ever trust each other and work together again , ” ( Illing , 2018 ) . This general sentiment has been echoed in a number of recent studies , which suggest that social media users are , indeed , largely exposed to like - minded content ( e . g . , see Flaxman , Goel and Rao , 2016 ; Halberstam and Knight , 2016 ; Lelkes , Sood and Iyengar , 2017 ; Levy , 2021 ; Pariser , 2011 ; Peterson , Goel and Iyergar , 2021 ; Sunstein , 2017 ) . However , other studies have presented contradicting evidence , showing that there is little segregation of online news consumption ( Eady et al . , 2019 ; Gentzkow and Shapiro , 2011 ; Guess , 2021 ; Prior , 2013 ) ; the increase in polarization can partly be explained by factors unrelated to the internet ( Autor et al . , 2020 ; Boxell , 2020 ) ; the ideo - logical gap primarily increased among individuals who are less likely to be active internet users ( Boxell , Gentzkow and Shapiro , 2017 ) ; exposure to opposing views may not lead to the moderation of political attitudes ( Bail et al . , 2018 ) ; and that social media use might actually decrease political polarization ( Barberá , 2015 ; Beam , Hutchens and Hmielowski , 2018 ) . This paper attempts to address the debate about the effects of the internet and social media on political polarization in the United States . It is the ﬁrst to analyze how the expansion of third - generation ( 3G ) mobile networks—the ﬁrst generation of mobile networks that allowed users to actively browse the internet from the smartphone , becoming a major driver of social media usage ( Rainie and Wellman , 2012 ) —affected the ideological views and policy preferences of the United States population . Using data from the Gallup Daily Poll , covering 1 , 765 , 114 individuals living in 31 , 499 ZIP codes between 2008 and 2017 , it shows that , after the arrival of 3G internet to the ZIP code , Democratic - leaning voters became more liberal in their political views , while Republican - 2 Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3946055 leaning voters became more conservative . Similarly , Democratic voters increased their support for Democratic candidates in elections to the House of Representatives as well as Democratic policy positions on abortion , gay marriage , the Affordable Care Act ( ACA ) , and immigration . Republican voters shifted in the opposite direction . The paper also presents novel evidence on the mechanisms behind the effects of mobile internet and social media on political polarization . The existing literature on this topic has over - whelmingly focused on polarization within social media ( e . g . , Facebook ) , primarily on the question of whether social media algorithms create so - called “echo chambers” , where social media users are disproportionately exposed to like - minded content ( e . g . , Bail et al . , 2018 ; Bakshy , Messing and Adamic , 2015 ; Barberá , 2015 ; Beam , Hutchens and Hmielowski , 2018 ; Eady et al . , 2019 ; Guess , 2021 ; Halberstam and Knight , 2016 ; Levy , 2021 ) . However , this approach overlooks the fact that not all internet users are present on social media , and , while social media algorithms may , indeed , partly contribute to increasing partisan divides ( e . g . , see Levy , 2021 ) , this paper shows that the 3G - driven increase in political polarization largely did not take place among social media users . Instead , after the arrival of 3G , residents of ZIP codes with a large pre - 3G share of social media users ( and ac - tive internet users more generally ) became more liberal in their political views and increased their support for Democratic congressional candidates and their policy priorities ; residents of ZIP codes with a small pre - 3G share of social media users changed their views in the opposite direction . This divergence took place both in Democratic and Republican areas , suggesting that the results are not driven by Democratic voters having a more substantial online presence . These ﬁndings do not necessarily imply that social media usage has a causal effect on indi - viduals’ political views . However , they demonstrate that the internet - driven increase in political polarization largely did not take place among social media users , suggesting that researchers and policymakers should adjust their focus away from algorithms used by social media companies and , instead , explore other mechanisms behind the internet’s effects on political polarization . This paper presents evidence in support of two such mechanisms . First , it shows that after the arrival of 3G networks , active and less active internet users diverged in their news consump - tion , with residents of ZIP codes with many active users becoming relatively less likely to watch Fox News and more likely to watch CNN . Active internet users also experienced an increase in their political knowledge , becoming more likely to know the identities of their congressional rep - resentative and two senators , possibly due to the shift in news consumption . The second mechanism focuses on the insights from recent work by Bonomi , Gennaioli and Tabellini ( 2021 ) , which suggests that when cultural conﬂict in society becomes more prominent , 3 Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3946055 as it has in the United States , the conﬂict over redistributive policies becomes muted . Thus , by increasing the salience of cultural disagreements , the expansion of mobile internet , may have re - sulted in a political realignment of voters in the United States , making poor , uneducated , and out of the labor force voters—who beneﬁt the most from redistribution policies supported by Democrats—more conservative ; wealthy , employed , and educated individuals—more liberal . Given that wealthy , educated individuals are also more likely to be active on the internet and social me - dia , the divergence between the views of active and less active internet users may be partly driven by this political realignment of voters in the United States . The results in the paper rely on two empirical strategies : a difference - in - differences analysis and an instrumental variable design . The difference - in - differences analysis uses the variation in the timing of the expansion of 3G networks across ZIP codes , controlling for geographic and time ﬁxed effects as well as many individual - and county - level socioeconomic characteristics . The paper documents the absence of pre - trends : the change in political views takes place only after the arrival of mobile internet , and the future availability of 3G networks is not related to political views in the ZIP code . The results are also robust to including state - year and county - year ﬁxed effects , demonstrating that the estimates are driven by local variation in the availability of 3G . In addition , the paper presents the results of a test developed by Oster ( 2017 ) , showing that the effects of mobile internet on individuals’ political views are highly unlikely to be driven by omitted - variable bias . The instrumental variable identiﬁcation strategy follows the design previously used by Man - acorda and Tesei ( 2020 ) and Guriev , Melnikov and Zhuravskaya ( 2021 ) . It relies on the fact that areas with a high frequency of lightning strikes experienced a slower rollout of mobile infrastruc - ture due to damage caused by the lightnings , which increase the costs of maintaining the infras - tructure and providing telecommunication services . The instrumental variable estimates conﬁrm the ﬁndings of the difference - in - differences analysis . The paper also presents several placebo exercises , which demonstrate that the effects of 3G on political attitudes are driven by access to online content and not by other features on mobile infrastructure . First , it shows that the previous generation of mobile networks ( 2G ) —which al - lowed to perform calls and send text messages but not to actively browse the internet—did not affect individuals’ political views . Second , it documents that , in the short run , the expansion of 3G infrastructure did not have an impact on local socioeconomic conditions or migration patterns . First and foremost , this paper contributes to the extensive literature studying political po - larization in the United States ( Autor et al . , 2020 ; Bail et al . , 2018 ; Barberá , 2015 ; Beam , Hutchens and Hmielowski , 2018 ; Boxell , 2020 ; Eady et al . , 2019 ; Flaxman , Goel and Rao , 2016 ; Gentzkow and 4 Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3946055 Shapiro , 2011 ; Guess , 2021 ; Halberstam and Knight , 2016 ; Lelkes , Sood and Iyengar , 2017 ; Levy , 2021 ; Pariser , 2011 ; Peterson , Goel and Iyergar , 2021 ; Prior , 2013 ; Spohr , 2017 ; Sunstein , 2017 ) . In particular , it provides novel evidence on the effects of mobile broadband internet on political views , policy preferences , and voting behavior . It also shows that the increase in political polar - ization largely did not take place due to algorithms used by social media companies , as has been widely hypothesized in the literature . The paper presents evidence for two previously ignored mechanisms that may instead be responsible for this divide . In addition , this paper contributes to the broader literature on the political effects of infor - mation technology , especially the internet and social media . The study most closely related to this work is Guriev , Melnikov and Zhuravskaya ( 2021 ) , which shows that the expansion of 3G mobile internet around the globe resulted in a decrease in government approval . In addition to focusing on different political outcomes , my paper differs from this study in several important ways . First , it demonstrates that , in a polarized environment , where individuals on opposite sides of the po - litical spectrum are exposed to different information , the direction of the mobile internet’s effects on political views depends on individuals’ initial position on the political spectrum . Second , it provides an analysis of the mechanisms behind these divergent effects of 3G network availability . Another important paper studying the effects of information technology on political out - comes is Manacorda and Tesei ( 2020 ) , which shows that the expansion of 2G infrastructure be - tween 1998 and 2012 facilitated political protests during economic downturns across the African continent . However , 2G technology does not allow users to actively browse the internet , which makes it very different from 3G infrastructure , the effects of which are studied in this paper . More - over , as noted above , this paper uses 2G network coverage as a placebo treatment , showing that the non - internet - related aspects of mobile network coverage did not affect the political opinions of the United States population . This paper is also related to a growing literature studying the effects of the internet on elec - toral outcomes . Recent studies have found that in Germany ( Falck , Gold and Heblich , 2014 ) , Italy ( Campante , Durante and Sobbrio , 2018 ) , the United Kingdom ( Gavazza , Nardotto and Valletti , 2019 ) , and in Europe more generally ( Guriev , Melnikov and Zhuravskaya , 2021 ) the availability of broadband internet reduced voter participation in elections , possibly by crowding out news con - sumption with entertainment content . A number of papers have also found that the expansion of internet access has negatively affected the electoral performance of incumbent political parties ( Donati , 2019 ; Guriev , Melnikov and Zhuravskaya , 2021 ; Miner , 2015 ) and , in Europe , contributed to the rise of populists ( Campante , Durante and Sobbrio , 2018 ; Guriev , Melnikov and Zhuravskaya , 5 Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3946055 2021 ; Schaub and Morisi , 2019 ) . In the United States , greater exposure to Twitter has been shown to decrease the probability of supporting Donald Trump in the 2016 and 2020 presidential elections ( Fujiwara , Müller and Schwarz , 2021 ) . Other recent papers have also studied the effectiveness of campaign advertising on social media ( Bright et al . , 2020 ; Liberini et al . , 2020 ) as well as the ef - fects of social media on protest participation ( Enikolopov , Makarin and Petrova , 2020 ; Fergusson and Molina , 2019 ; Qin , Strömberg and Wu , 2019 ) , exposing corruption ( Enikolopov , Petrova and Sonin , 2018 ; Enríquez et al . , 2021 ) , xenophobia ( Bursztyn et al . , 2019 ; Müller and Schwarz , 2020 ) , and political contributions ( Petrova , Sen and Yildirim , 2020 ) . 1 My paper contributes to this literature by analyzing how the internet’s effects on political outcomes differ , depending on individuals’ initial position on the political spectrum and study - ing the mechanisms behind these differences . In particular , it shows that after the arrival of 3G , residents of ZIP codes with many and few social media and internet users diverged both in their political views and in their news consumption . It also shows that the internet - driven increase in the salience of cultural differences resulted in a realignment of United States voters , with educated , wealthy individuals becoming more liberal ; uneducated , poor individuals—more conservative . Finally , the paper contributes to the rapidly expanding literature studying the spread of fake news and misinformation on social media ( e . g . , see Allcott and Gentzkow , 2017 ; Allcott , Gentzkow and Yu , 2019 ; Bovet and Makse , 2019 ; Cantarella , Fraccaroli and Volpe , 2020 ; Del Vicario et al . , 2016 ; Faris et al . , 2017 ; Grinberg et al . , 2019 ; Guess , Nyhan and Reiﬂer , 2018 ; Spohr , 2017 ) . Speciﬁcally , it shows that , after the arrival of 3G , residents of ZIP codes with many social media and internet users became better informed about politics . This result is fully consistent with the ﬁndings of Allcott et al . ( 2020 ) , which suggest that the deactivation of Facebook can reduce individuals’ news knowledge . Therefore , while certain groups of voters may be susceptible to the effects of online disinformation , social media and the internet can also increase political knowledge by providing access to accurate information . The rest of the paper is structured in the following way . Section II describes the data and the identiﬁcation strategy . Section III presents the effects of 3G internet on political views , policy preferences , and voting outcomes and discusses the identiﬁcation assumptions underlying the estimation . Section IV provides an analysis of the mechanisms behind the effects of mobile internet on political polarization . Section V concludes . 1 For a recent review of the literature on the political effects of the internet and social media , see Zhuravskaya , Petrova and Enikolopov ( 2020 ) . 6 Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3946055 II D ATA AND I DENTIFICATION S TRATEGY II . A Data This subsection provides a brief description of the main data sources used in the analysis . Further details about these data sources as well as a description of the secondary variables used in the analysis are available in Appendix Section A . I . Mobile network coverage . —The data on 3G and 2G network coverage come from annual maps provided by Collins Bartholomew’s Mobile Coverage Explorer and cover the period from 2007 to 2019 . The data consist of 1 × 1 - kilometer binary grid cells . Figure 1 illustrates the expansion of 3G network coverage between 2008 and 2018 ( i . e . , the years the analysis focuses on ) for the contiguous United States , showing that very few locations had 3G coverage in 2008 , while by 2018 , 3G mobile internet had become available in most parts of the country . 2 To combine data on mobile network coverage with the other variables used in the analysis , which have ZIP code or county - level geolocalization , I calculate the share of the ZIP codes’ and counties’ territory covered by mobile networks . Gallup Daily Poll . —The data on individuals’ political preferences come from the Gallup Daily Poll and cover the period from 2008 to 2017 . The data consist of repeated cross - sectional daily polls of 1 , 000 respondents with geolocalization at the ZIP code level . The main question of interest is the following : “ How would you describe your political views : very liberal , liberal , moderate , conservative , or very conservative ? ” Other questions also ask the respondents about their political afﬁliation , gender , race , age , education level , marital status , and income group . After merging the Gallup Daily Poll and mobile network coverage data , the sample consists of approximately 1 , 765 , 000 observations from 31 , 499 ZIP codes in all 50 states and the District of Columbia . Cooperative Congressional Election Study ( CCES ) . —The data on individuals’ policy preferences come from the CCES and cover the period from 2007 to 2019 . The data consist of repeated cross - sectional annual polls of 10 , 000 - 18 , 000 respondents in non - election years and 25 , 000 - 60 , 000 respon - dents in election years with geolocalization at the ZIP code level . In the survey , the respondents are asked to state their opinions about whether abortion should always be legal ( 2007 - 2019 ) , whether they support gay marriage ( 2008 - 2016 ) , whether the Affordable care act should be repealed ( 2012 - 2019 ) , and whether security between US - Mexico border should be increased ( 2007 , 2010 - 2019 ) . The dataset also includes a question about political views , similar to the one included in the Gallup 2 By deﬁnition , all grid cells that have 4G network coverage also have 3G coverage . Thus , the maps should be interpreted as showing which areas have at least 3G network coverage . 7 Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3946055 Daily Poll , and a variable for whom the individual voted for in the previous presidential election . House election data . —The data for the 2008 - 2016 Presidential elections and 2008 - 2018 elections to the United States House of Representatives come from Dave Leip’s Atlas of United States Elec - tions . The unit of observation is a county . 3 The data include the vote shares of the Republican and Democratic candidates , the total number of ballots cast , and the number of Republican and Democratic candidates that participated in the election . To calculate turnout , the number of ballots cast is divided by the population of the county from the 2010 population census . SimplyAnalytics . —The data on internet and social media use come from SimplyAnalytics , a mapping application that aggregates demographic , business , and marketing data from multiple sources . The main variables of interest represent the percent of households that in the last 30 days have ( i ) used the internet to obtain the latest news / current events , ( ii ) visited a TV network or TV show’s website , ( iii ) visited YouTube . com , ( iv ) visited Facebook . com , ( v ) visited CNN . com , and ( vi ) visited FoxNews . com . Other variables also present the percent of households that use the internet ( in general ) , that used the internet yesterday , and that spent more than 30 minutes on the internet yesterday . The data for all these variables come from annual MRI Consumer Surveys , which cover the period from 2011 onwards . 4 These data are available both at the ZIP code and county levels . Lightning strike frequency . —The data on the frequency of lightning strikes come from NASA’s LIS / OTD Gridded Lightning Climatology Data Collection , which presents a map of the average annual lightning ﬂash rate in each 0 . 5 × 0 . 5 decimal degree grid cell . 5 These data are used to calcu - late the average population - weighted frequency of lightning strikes in each county in the United States . Thus , the resulting variable represents the average number of people per square kilometer potentially affected by the lightning strikes . II . B Identiﬁcation strategy To estimate the effects of mobile broadband internet on individuals’ political views , I per - form the following identiﬁcation strategy . First , I calculate the share of the ZIP codes’ territory ( or counties’ territory , depending on the geolocalization of the outcome variable ) covered by 3G 3 In Alaska , election results are not available at the level of the county . For this reason , Alaska is not included in the regressions analyzing the effects of 3G internet on voting outcomes . In the non - county - level regressions , all locations in Alaska are characterized as Republican - leaning based on how the state voted in the 2008 Presidential election . 4 The one exception is the variable for the percent of households that in the last 30 days have visited FoxNews . com . This variable is only available from 2017 onwards . 5 The data can be found and are described here : https : / / ghrc . nsstc . nasa . gov / lightning / data / data _ lis _ otd - climatology . html ( accessed on June 26 , 2021 ) . 8 Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3946055 networks in that year . 6 I then estimate the following difference - in - differences model : Pol . views i , t = α 1 3G z , t × Pol . afﬁliation i + α 2 Pol . afﬁliation i + X (cid:48) i , c , t λ + ϕ c + τ t + ε i , t , ( 1 ) where i , z , c and t index individuals , ZIP codes , counties , and years , respectively . Pol . views repre - sents the respondents’ political views ( e . g . , a dummy variable for whether the respondent charac - terizes their views as liberal or very liberal ) . 3G is the share of territory covered by 3G networks , the main explanatory variable . Pol . afﬁliation is a variable for the respondents’ party afﬁliation . ϕ c and τ t are county and year ﬁxed effects . 7 X is a vector of baseline individual - level and county - level controls which include dummies for the respondents’ gender , race , year of birth , education level , marital status , and income group as well as the county’s unemployment rate , log of median household income , median age , and the share of population that is single , married , white , black , asian , has no schooling , has at least a bachelors degree , and is on food stamps . Standard errors are corrected for clusters at the level of the states and the District of Columbia . 8 For the regression estimates to be valid , Pol . afﬁliation needs to be an exogenous measure of individuals’ party membership ( e . g . , party membership before the arrival of 3G ) . In reality , party membership is only observed at the time when the survey was conducted , making it valid only under the assumption that individuals never switch their party membership . This assumption is unlikely to be satisﬁed . For this reason , the regression speciﬁcation that will be more commonly used throughout the paper is the following : Pol . views i , t = α 1 3G z , t × Pol . afﬁliation c + X (cid:48) i , c , t λ + ϕ c + τ t + ε i , t , ( 2 ) where Pol . afﬁliation is represented by the political afﬁliation of the individual’s county of residence in the 2008 presidential election . This deﬁnition of party membership is deﬁned at the beginning 6 Given that the ZIP codes represent very small geographic areas , in the vast majority of cases , the share of the ZIP codes’ territory covered by 3G is equal to either zero or one . 7 The results are robust to including ZIP code ﬁxed effects instead of county ﬁxed effects . However , most ZIP codes have only a small number of observations per year ( e . g . , the average ZIP code has 5 observations per year ) , making the speciﬁcation with ZIP code ﬁxed effects very restrictive . At the same time , measuring 3G network coverage at the more local ZIP code level allows to precisely measure individuals’ treatment status ( measuring 3G network coverage at the county level is equivalent to introducing measurement error to the treatment variable ) . 8 The choice to cluster the standard errors at this level is made because , in the United States , most policies and regu - lations are deﬁned at the state level . The potential alternative is to correct the standard errors for spatial and over - time correlation as suggested in Conley ( 1999 ) , Hsiang ( 2010 ) , and Collela et al . ( 2018 ) . However , in the main regression speciﬁcations , the sample consists of approximately 1 , 765 , 000 observations , making this calculation extremely com - putationally demanding and practically impossible to implement . In the regression speciﬁcations where the sample is smaller ( e . g . , voting behavior at the county level ) , I have veriﬁed that even very conservative Conley standard er - rors that allow for spatial correlation within a 1 , 000 - kilometer radius and autocorrelation of 10 - year temporal lags are generally smaller than the standard errors corrected for clusters at the state level . 9 Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3946055 of the sample period and is robust to individuals switching their party membership . As ﬁrst pointed out by Guriev , Melnikov and Zhuravskaya ( 2021 ) , the availability of 3G net - work coverage affects internet usage in multiple ways , all of which are important for interpreting the overall effect of mobile infrastructure on political views . First , 3G network coverage increases internet use on the extensive margin by providing a connection to people who previously did not have it . Second , mobile broadband affects internet use on the intensive margin by making it eas - ier to spend more time online . Finally , the availability of 3G impacts what individuals do on the internet , most notably by facilitating engagement with social media ( Rainie and Wellman , 2012 ) . To document the importance of all these factors , I estimate the following relationship between 3G network coverage and various aspects of internet usage , the data for which are available at the ZIP code level from annual MRI Consumer Surveys : Internet usage z , t = γ 3G z , t + ϕ z + τ t + ε z , t . ( 3 ) The main identiﬁcation challenge for interpreting the difference - in - differences estimates as causal is that the expansion of 3G mobile networks could have taken place in locations that were already experiencing a change in political views before the arrival of 3G internet . To address this concern , Subsection III . C presents a number of robustness and placebo exercises , as well as the results of the test proposed in Oster ( 2017 ) , all of which show that the estimates of Speciﬁcation ( 2 ) represent the causal effect of 3G internet on individuals’ political views . For instance , I show that individuals’ views are not affected by the future availability of mobile internet but start to change as soon as the ZIP code becomes covered by 3G networks . The results of the Oster test also show that the estimates are highly unlikely to be driven by omitted variable bias . In addition , Subsection III . C shows that the expansion of 3G infrastructure was not correlated with changes in major local socioeconomic characteristics such as income , unemployment , poverty , or education . To alleviate remaining concerns that the identiﬁcation assumptions behind the difference - in - differences estimates might be violated , I use variation in the frequency of lightning strikes per square kilometer across United States counties to predict the speed of the expansion of 3G net - work coverage , an identiﬁcation strategy used in several recent studies ( e . g . , see Manacorda and Tesei , 2020 ; Guriev , Melnikov and Zhuravskaya , 2021 ) . The frequency of lightning strikes affects the spread of digital technologies by increasing the expected costs of building and maintaining this type of infrastructure ( Andersen et al . , 2012 ) . Mobile internet towers are especially sensitive to lightning strikes , which can both cause immediate damage and result in quicker depreciation 10 Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3946055 of equipment ( Zeddam and Day , 2014 ; Martin , 2016 ) . The problem can partially be addressed by surge protection equipment , but a large part of United States infrastructure is not protected . For instance , in 2017 , the United States experienced 3 , 526 power outages affecting 36 . 7 million people ( EATON , 2017 ) , and its energy infrastructure received a D + score on an A - F scale from the Ameri - can Society of Civil Engineers ( ASCE , 2017 ) . 9 Overall , the expanion of 3G networks is likely to be slower in areas with a high frequency of lightning strikes . Therefore , I use the following ﬁrst - stage equation to predict 3G network coverage in year t : 3G z , t = β Lightning strikes per km 2c × t + Z (cid:48) z , c , t λ + ϕ c + τ t + ε z , t , ( 4 ) where Lightning strikes per km is the population - weighted frequency of lightning strikes per square kilometer , t is a linear time trend , and Z represents all the control variables , including all the base - line controls listed above as well as separate year ﬁxed effects for all quartiles of county population size , the log of maximum elevation in the county interacted with a time trend , and the share of the county’s territory that is uninhabited interacted with a time trend . Additional controls are added to account for other factors that potentially inﬂuenced the speed of the expansion of 3G networks . Finally , I study the mechanisms behind the internet - driven increase in political polariza - tion . The existing literature on this topic has overwhelmingly focused on polarization within social media , often emphasizing the role of algorithms in creating so - called “echo chambers” within so - cial media : the phenomenon that individuals become disproportionately exposed to like - minded news , which , in turn , reafﬁrm their initial beliefs . While social media algorithms may , indeed , contribute to increasing partisan attitudes ( e . g . , see Levy , 2021 ) , I show that the 3G - driven growth in political polarization largely did not take place among social media users . Instead , after the ar - rival of mobile internet , social media users ( and active internet users more generally ) became more liberal in their political views and increased support for Democratic congressional candidates and their policy priorities , while social media nonusers changed their views in the opposite direction . To demonstrate this fact , I interact 3G network coverage with pre - 3G measures of social media and internet usage in the respondent’s ZIP code of residence ( e . g . , the share of households 9 Guriev , Melnikov and Zhuravskaya ( 2021 ) ﬁnd that lightning strikes affect the expansion of mobile infrastructure primarily in countries with below - median per capita income , presumably because surge protection equipment is widely used in most rich countries . However , despite the fact that the United States has above - median per capita income , the poor state of its infrastructure makes it vulnerable to damage from lightning strikes . 11 Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3946055 in the ZIP code that use Facebook ) and estimate the following model . 10 Pol . views i , t = ψ 1 3G z , t + ψ 2 3G z , t × Internet usage z + ψ 3 Internet usage z + X (cid:48) i , c , t λ + ϕ c + τ t + ε i , t . ( 5 ) To show that the estimates of Speciﬁcation ( 5 ) are not driven by members of a particular party being more active on the internet and social media , I also interact 3G , Internet usage , and 3G × Internet usage with a variable representing the political afﬁliation of the respondent’s county of residence . As demonstrated in Subsection IV . A , the results hold for members of both parties . It is important to note that the decision to be active on social media is an individual choice and , therefore , not an exogenous characteristic . For this reason , the estimates of Speciﬁcation ( 5 ) do not necessarily represent the causal effect of active internet and social media usage on political views . Instead , they serve a descriptive function , showing that the 3G - driven increase in polit - ical polarization largely did not take place among social media users . Thus , while social media algorithms that disproportionately expose users to like - minded content may also contribute to the growth in partisan attitudes , future research should additionally explore other mechanisms behind the effects of the internet on political polarization . This paper provides suggestive evidence on two such mechanisms . First , I use MRI data on media consumption at the ZIP code level to estimate Speciﬁcation ( 5 ) for these outcome vari - ables , showing that after the arrival of 3G networks , active and less active internet users diverged in their news consumption , with active users becoming relatively less likely to watch Fox News and more likely to watch CNN . 11 I also analyze whether this divergence in the choices of news sources translated into differences in political knowledge . Speciﬁcally , I estimate Speciﬁcation ( 5 ) for the outcome variables of whether the respondent knows the identities of their congressional representative and two senators . Second , I test the insights from recent work by Bonomi , Gennaioli and Tabellini ( 2021 ) , which suggests that increased cultural conﬂict in society should lead to less conﬂict over redistribution policies , resulting in a political realignment of voters . As demonstrated in Table 2 , the arrival of 3G 10 The data for social media and internet usage ﬁrst became available in 2011 , three years after the emergence of 3G . Therefore , to estimate the level of social media and internet usage in the ZIP codes prior to the arrival of 3G ( i . e . , Internet usage z ) , I perform the following calculation . First , I estimate Speciﬁcation ( 3 ) to ﬁnd the effects of mobile internet on social media and internet usage ( i . e . , γ ) . Then , I calculate Residual internet usage z , t : = Internet usage z , t − γ 3G z , t , which provides a measure of social media and internet usage in the absence of 3G infrastructure . Internet usage z is then calculated as the average of Residual internet usage z , t in the ﬁrst four years for which the data are available ( i . e . , ﬁrst half of the sample period ) and represents the estimated level of internet usage prior to the arrival of 3G . The focus on the ﬁrst half of the sample period is made to ensure that Internet usage z is not affected by technologies that became available in later years . The results are very similar if one , instead , uses the data for a different time period ( e . g . , the ﬁrst two years for which the data are available ) . 11 Given that the data for media consumption are only available at the ZIP code level , the exact regression speciﬁca - tion used in this part of the analysis is the following : Media z , t = ψ 1 3G z , t + ψ 2 3G z , t × Internet usage z + ϕ z + τ t + ε z , t . 12 Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3946055 internet has indeed widened the cultural divide between Democrats and Republicans . Therefore , according to Bonomi , Gennaioli and Tabellini ( 2021 ) , the expansion of mobile infrastructure should have also resulted in poor , uneducated , and out of the labor force voters—the main beneﬁciaries of the redistribution policies supported by Democrats—becoming more conservative ; and wealthy , employed , and educated individuals—more liberal . To test this mechanism , the paper presents the heterogeneity of the effects of mobile internet on political views by education , income , and employment status . Speciﬁcally , I estimate Speciﬁcation ( 2 ) , replacing the variable for political afﬁliation with dummy variables for all the values of the socioeconomic characteristic of interest , controlling for all the baseline covariates , including dummies for the direct effects of all the values of the socioeconomic characteristic . III 3G INTERNET AND POLITICAL POLARIZATION III . A Main results Table 1 presents the results of estimating the effect of 3G network coverage on individuals’ political views using Speciﬁcations ( 1 ) and ( 2 ) . The sample consists of approximately 1 , 765 , 000 observations from 31 , 499 ZIP codes in all 50 states and the District of Columbia . In Columns 1 and 2 , the outcome variable is a dummy for an individual having liberal or very liberal views . Column 1 presents how the availability of 3G internet affects the probability of holding such views , depending on individuals’ political afﬁliation . Democratic voters become 5 . 1 percentage points more likely to hold liberal or very liberal views , while Republican voters become 3 . 5 percentage points less likely to do so . Figure 2 illustrates these results . Under the assumption that individuals do not switch their political afﬁliation , the estimates in Column 1 of Table 1 represent the causal effect of 3G internet on holding liberal or very liberal political views . However , it is quite likely that , along with a shift in political views , individuals also change their party afﬁliation . For this reason , Column 2 of Table 1 presents the results of es - timating Speciﬁcation ( 2 ) , where the respondents’ political afﬁliation is replaced with the political afﬁliation of the counties where they live . The political afﬁliation of the counties is based on voting outcomes in the 2008 Presidential election . Counties that Obama won by a margin of at least 30 percentage points are characterized as reliably Democratic ; counties that Obama won by a margin of 10 - 30 percentage points—as Democratic - leaning ; counties that Obama lost by a margin of at least 30 percentage points—as reliably Republican ; counties that Obama lost by a margin of 10 - 30 percentage points—as Republican - leaning ; other counties are characterized as swing counties . 13 Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3946055 The results in Column 2 of Table 1 present the same pattern as those in Column 1 : after the arrival of 3G internet , residents of counties with mainly Democratic voters become more likely to hold liberal or very liberal political views , while for counties with mainly Republican voters the effect is the opposite . Unsurprisingly , the estimates in Column 2 are smaller in magnitude than those reported in Column 1 , which happens because all counties consist of a mix of Democratic , Republican , and Independent voters , whose views change in opposite directions . On the other hand , the results in Column 2 are robust to individuals potentially changing their party afﬁliation as long as they do not selectively migrate in or out of partisan counties , an assumption that is checked and veriﬁed in Subsection III . C of the paper . Columns 3 and 4 present similar results for the outcome variable of having conservative or very conservative political views . 12 After getting access to 3G internet , Democratic voters and res - idents of Democratic - voting counties became less likely to hold conservative political views , while Republican voters and residents of reliably Republican counties became more likely to describe themselves as conservative . The effects are stronger in Democratic counties than in Republican counties , which is explained by the fact that , similarly to Democratic voters , Independent voters became less conservative after the arrival of 3G network coverage . Thus , the share of Republican voters needs to be very high for the effect of mobile internet on Republican voters to dominate the effect on Democratic and Independent voters . 13 Overall , the results in Table 1 conﬁrm the notion that the expansion of 3G network coverage has increased political polarization . III . B 3G coverage and internet usage When interpreting the impact of mobile internet on political outcomes , it is important to note that the availability of 3G infrastructure affects several dimensions of internet usage , all of which can contribute to the overall effects of 3G . To document the importance of these factors , I estimate Speciﬁcation ( 3 ) for various aspects of internet usage . Table A1 presents the results . The estimates in Columns 1 and 2 demonstrate that the availability of 3G network coverage increased internet usage on the extensive margin by affecting the share of people using the internet . 14 The results in 12 Notably , the outcome variable for having conservative or very conservative political views is not perfectly collinear with the variable for holding liberal or very liberal views because the respondents could also describe themselves as moderate . 13 In addition , as discussed in detail in Subsection IV . C , residents of Republican counties primarily became more conservative in their views during the years when President Obama was in ofﬁce , especially the years when , in addition to controlling the White House , Democrats controlled both chambers of Congress . In contrast , during the ﬁrst years of the Trump presidency , residents of Republican counties became less conservative in their political views . 14 To highlight the magnitudes of the effects , the outcome variables are normalized by the average of the within - ZIP - code standard deviations of the respective variables ( i . e . , the outcome variables are measured in standard deviations ) . 14 Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3946055 Column 3 show that mobile internet coverage also affected internet usage on the intensive margin by increasing the amount of time people spend online . Finally , Columns 4 - 8 illustrate that the ex - pansion of 3G impacted how people use the internet . In particular , it led to an increase in social media usage and in the share of people using the internet to access the news . All of these dimen - sions are potentially important for interpreting the effects of mobile internet on political views . III . C Identiﬁcation assumptions and robustness checks This subsection analyzes a number of assumptions that need to be satisﬁed for the effects of mobile internet on individuals’ political views to be interpreted as causal . Most notably , it demonstrates that the change in political views started to take place only after the arrival of 3G networks . It also shows the results of the instrumental - variable analysis , in which the frequency of lightning strikes per square kilometer is used as an exogenous source of variation affecting the speed of the expansion of 3G networks . In addition , this subsection presents a number of other tests and robustness checks . State - year , county - year , and political - afﬁliation - year ﬁxed effects . —A potential concern is that the change in individuals’ political views may be driven not by the local availability of 3G networks but by certain state - level , county - level , or party - level factors unrelated to mobile internet . To ad - dress this concern , I estimate Speciﬁcations ( 1 ) and ( 2 ) , controlling for state - year , county - year , and political - afﬁliation - year ﬁxed effects ( in separate regressions ) , which absorb all the variation from the respective sources . Table A2 in the Appendix presents the results , which are very similar to those presented in Table 1 . The estimates remain highly signiﬁcant even if one controls for county - year ﬁxed effects , which is a very demanding speciﬁcation given that counties represent very small geographic areas , many parts of which experience an increase in 3G network coverage in the same year . Nevertheless , the results in Table A2 demonstrate that it is local variation in mobile internet availability that is driving the effects on political views . Leads of 3G network coverage . —Another potential concern is that , instead of causing individ - uals to change their opinions , 3G networks expanded to areas that were already experiencing a change in political views before the arrival of mobile internet . To address this concern , I estimate Speciﬁcation ( 2 ) , additionally controlling for the leads of 3G network coverage interacted with the counties’ political afﬁliation . 15 Appendix Table A3 presents the results . If the expansion of mobile The choice to use within - ZIP - code standard deviations ( instead of overall standard deviations ) is based on the fact that they reﬂect within - ZIP - code changes in internet use and not the heterogeneity in internet use across ZIP codes . 15 More generally , because the assumption that individuals do not change their political afﬁliation after experiencing a shift in their views is unlikely to be satisﬁed , the rest of the paper primarily focuses on the political afﬁliation of the counties where the respondents live . 15 Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3946055 internet took place in areas that were already becoming more partisan before the arrival of 3G , then individuals’ views would be correlated with the future availability of 3G network coverage . However , the results in Table A3 show that the respondents’ views started to change only after mo - bile internet became available ( i . e . , the leads of 3G coverage are not correlated with individuals’ political views , while the effects of contemporaneous 3G availability remain signiﬁcant ) . Event study . —To further demonstrate that the change in political views started to take place only after the arrival of mobile internet , I conduct an event - study analysis , in which a ZIP code is assumed to be treated when it ﬁrst becomes fully covered by 3G networks . 16 Figure 3 presents the event - study estimates for the subsample of Democratic - voting and swing counties ( the regression estimates are presented in Appendix Table A4 ) . 17 In the years before the arrival of 3G network coverage , the residents of those counties did not experience any change in their political views . However , after getting access to mobile internet , their views started to shift , becoming less conser - vative and more liberal , with the magnitudes of the effects growing over time . 18 The underlying assumption behind the estimates presented in Figure 3 is the absence of 16 Because the ZIP codes represent very small geographic areas , in the vast majority of cases , they have either no or full 3G coverage . Thus , in the ﬁrst treatment year , most ZIP codes experience a sigiﬁcant increase in the share of territory covered by 3G . The event - study results are very similar if , instead , the deﬁnition of treatment status is based on the ZIP code experiencing an increase in the share of territory covered by 3G of x percentage points , where x is any number above 50 . However , observationally , the residents of ZIP codes with non - full 3G coverage are largely unaffected by the partial availability of mobile internet . A potential explanation for this fact is that , because ZIP codes represent very small geographic areas , non - full coverage might imply that the internet signal is not stable in the entire ZIP code . When 3G network coverage is calculated for larger areas ( e . g . , a county or a state ) , this problem disappears because the larger areas consist of many smaller units that either have full ( and stable ) coverage or no coverage at all . 17 Thus , the sample consists of all the counties that Obama either won or narrowly lost ( by a margin of no more than 10 percentage points ) in 2008 . All these counties are combined in one group to increase the precision of the estimates and because , as shown in Table 1 and Appendix Tables A2 and A3 , the residents of these counties change their views in the same direction after the arrival of 3G . 18 It is important to note that an equivalent event - study design for Republican - voting counties ( not reported ) does not present the opposite relationship ( i . e . , individuals becoming less liberal and more conservative after the arrival of 3G ) . Instead , although the effects are signiﬁcantly closer to zero , it presents a pattern that is qualitatively similar to the one presented in Figure 3 . The explanation of this fact is the following . First , it appears that the effect of 3G internet on Democratic voters’ political views is much stronger than on Republican voters’ political views . Therefore , given that the estimated effect on the views of the counties’ residents is a weighted average of the individual effects on Democrats , Republicans , and Independents , a large effect on Democratic voters can overwhelm the smaller effect on Republicans , even in Republican - voting counties . This ﬁnding is generally consistent with the results for Republican - voting counties in Table 1 and Appendix Tables A2 and A3 , where the effects on the political views of individuals living in Republican - voting counties have also been weaker and less robust . However , as shown in Subsection III . D , the arrival of 3G internet did affect the policy preferences and voting patterns in Republican counties . Thus , while 3G network coverage has had a limited effect on Republicans’ self - described political views , it did affect their attitudes and preferences . The second factor that explains why , while the effects are signiﬁcantly closer to zero , the event - study graph for Republican counties is qualitatively similar to the one presented in Figure 3 is the following . As discussed in detail in Subsection IV . C , the effect of mobile internet on the views of residents of Republican counties changed over time , depending on the party in control of the government . In the ﬁrst years of the Obama administration , when Democrats controlled both chambers of Congress as well as the White House , residents of Republican counties became more conservative in their political views . In the later years of the Obama presidency , when Republicans took control over at least one of the chambers of Congress , this effect stopped being statistically signiﬁcant . Finally , during the ﬁrst years of the Trump administration , when Republicans controlled both chambers of Congress as well as the White House , residents of Republican counties became less conservative in their political views . 16 Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3946055 heterogeneous treatment effects across the ZIP codes in the sample . If this assumption is not satisﬁed , the event - study estimates might place negative weights on the average treatment ef - fects for certain groups and periods ( e . g . , see Borusyak , Jaravel and Spiess , 2021 ; De Chaisemartin and D’Haultfœuille , 2020 ; Goodman - Bacon , 2021 ; Sun and Abraham , 2021 ) . To demonstrate that the results are robust to heterogeneity in the treatment effects , I also use an alternative estimator suggested in De Chaisemartin and D’Haultfœuille ( 2020 ) , which calculates the average of the in - dividual treatment effects . The estimates are presented in Appendix Figure A1 ( the underlying coefﬁcients are reported in Appendix Table A4 ) , conﬁrming the notion that individuals started to change their political views after getting access to 3G internet , while before the arrival of 3G , their views remained stable . Sensitivity to omitted - variable bias . —To evaluate whether the effects of 3G network coverage on individuals’ political views can be driven by omitted - variable bias , I follow Oster ( 2017 ) and calcu - late Oster’s δ statistic , which shows how much more important unobservable characteristics need to be compared to observable controls to fully explain the regression results by omitted - variable bias . Appendix Table A5 re - estimates the effects of 3G internet on self - identiﬁed Democratic , Re - publican , and Independent voters as well as on the residents of Democratic - voting , Republican - voting , and swing counties . 19 It also reports Oster’s δ s for the effects of 3G on Democratic - and Republican - leaning voters and counties , which are calculated based on the standard methodology suggested in Oster ( 2017 ) . 20 The results suggest that the regression estimates are highly unlikely to be driven by omitted - variable bias . For instance , in the regression speciﬁcations with political afﬁliation measured at the county level , the δ s for the statistically signiﬁcant coefﬁcients vary be - tween 2 . 34 and 9 . 87 , suggesting that unobserved characteristics need to be at least 2 . 34 times more important than observed controls to make the effects on political views equal to zero . Given that 19 Hereafter , counties previously characterized as “reliably Democratic / Republican” and “Democratic / Republican - leaning” are combined into one category of “Democratic / Republican - leaning” counties . The reason for the change is that the two groups generally change their views in very similar ways , and a smaller number of groups increases the statistical power of the estimation . More generally , there is a tradeoff between the size of the effect on a particular group ( e . g . , reliably Democratic counties are likely to be more affected by 3G internet than Democratic - leaning counties because they have more Democratic voters and fewer Republican voters ) and statistical power , which depends on the number of observations in that group . Therefore , when statistical power is sufﬁcient to highlight the differences between Democratic - voting , Republican - voting , and swing counties , which is the case for most estimates in the paper , the results are reported for each of those groups . However , in some cases , in order to increase statistical power , the results are presented for just two groups : counties that Obama won in 2008 and counties that Obama lost in 2008 . 20 In particular , to calculate the δ s , as suggested in Oster ( 2017 ) , I set R 2 max —the R - squared from a hypothetical regres - sion of the outcome variable on all observed and unobserved controls—to be equal to 1 . 3 ˜ R 2 , where ˜ R 2 is the R - squared reported in the table . In the context of the empirical exercise in this paper , this level of R 2 max is likely to be appropriate because the R 2 of a regression that includes ZIP code - year ﬁxed effects—which presents an unrealistically high upper bound of the share of variation that can be explained by observed and unobserved controls because it assumes that a re - searcher can perfectly predict political views at the ZIP code level ( including the composition of the sample respondents in each ZIP code - year ) —has an R 2 that is only slightly larger than R 2 max . 17 Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3946055 observed controls include individuals’ race , education , age , gender , income , and many other im - portant individual - and county - level characteristics , all of which are well - known determinants of political views in the United States , it is very unlikely that such unobserved characteristics exist . ZIP code ﬁxed effects . —To demonstrate that the effects of 3G network coverage on political views are not driven by time - invariant characteristics of the ZIP codes , I show that the results are robust to the inclusion of ZIP code ﬁxed effects . This regression speciﬁcation is very restrictive because the median number of observations in each ZIP code - year is equal to four , and 23 % of ZIP code - years have only one observation . Nevertheless , the results in Appendix Table A6 conﬁrm the notion that the availability of 3G internet increases political polarization , even after the inclusion of ZIP code ﬁxed effects . 3G availability and local economic conditions . —Two potential concerns are that ( i ) the expan - sion of 3G networks primarily took place in areas with higher economic growth and that ( ii ) the arrival of 3G could have further improved local socioeconomic conditions , potentially leading to a shift in political views . I address these concerns in the following ways . First , I analyze whether the changes in counties’ socioeconomic characteristics—namely , medium household income , the unemployment rate , the share of the population on food stamps , the share of the population with a college degree , and the share of the population with no schooling—can predict the current or future availability of 3G networks . Speciﬁcally , I estimate the effects of these characteristics on county - level 3G network coverage in years t and t + 1 , controlling for county and year ﬁxed ef - fects as well as the other baseline county - level controls . Columns 1 and 2 of Appendix Table A7 present the regression estimates . The results suggest that none of these characteristics affected the expansion of mobile infrastructure . Next , I analyze whether the arrival of 3G had an impact on future local socioeconomic con - ditions . In particular , Columns 3 - 5 of Table A7 present the relationship between county - level 3G network coverage in year t − 1 and the counties’ medium household income , unemployment rate , and share of the population on food stamps in year t , respectively . None of these outcome vari - ables were affected by previous expansions of 3G , at least in the short run . 21 Thus , it is unlikely that the immediate effect of 3G availability on individuals’ political views can be explained by 3G affecting local socioeconomic conditions . Lightning strikes and the expansion of 3G networks . —To allay remaining concerns about the validity of the effects of 3G coverage on political views , I perform the instrumental - variable iden - 21 I also veriﬁed that there are no effects on the share of the population with a college degree and the share of the population with no schooling . These results are not reported because education outcomes are unlikely to change within one year , so the non - results for these variables are not surprising . 18 Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3946055 tiﬁcation strategy previously used by Manacorda and Tesei ( 2020 ) and Guriev , Melnikov and Zhu - ravskaya ( 2021 ) , which uses the frequency of lightning strikes to predict the speed of the expansion of 3G networks . Lightning strikes damage mobile infrastructure , often causing service interuptions and necessitating repairs . As a result , because of the higher costs of providing and maintaining 3G infrastructure in areas with a high frequency of lightning strikes , the expansion of mobile networks is likely to be slower in those areas . 22 As described in Subsection II . B , I use Speciﬁcation ( 4 ) to predict the speed of the expan - sion of 3G coverage . The ﬁrst - stage relationships between 3G network coverage and the excluded instrument in counties that Obama lost and won in 2008 are reported in Columns 1 and 4 of Ta - ble A8 , respectively . Appendix Figure A2 illustrates the results . In both cases , the estimates are highly signiﬁcant . Columns 2 and 5 report the reduced form relationships between the instrument and individuals’ political views , and Columns 3 and 6 present the 2SLS estimates along with the ﬁrst - stage F - stats for the excluded instrument . The results conﬁrm the notion that the spread of 3G internet has contributed to increasing political polarization , with Democratic voters becoming more liberal and Republican voters more conservative . 2G coverage as placebo treatment . —To demonstrate that 3G coverage affects individuals’ po - litical views through providing access to online content and not through other features of mobile networks , I use the expansion of 2G networks as a placebo treatment . 2G ( or GSM ) technology allows one to make phone calls and to send text messages , but it does not allow to browse the in - ternet or to watch online videos . Thus , if 3G affects individuals’ views not by providing access to internet content but through other aspects of mobile networks , one would expect the effects of 2G availability to be similar to the effects of 3G . Table A9 presents the results of the placebo exercise , showing that 2G has had no effect on the political views of the respondents . This result conﬁrms the notion that the availability of 3G affects people by providing access to online content . No effect on migration . —Another potential concern is that the arrival of mobile infrastructure might have an effect on migration to or from the affected areas , which can change the composition of the survey respondents living in the location . To alleviate this concern , I estimate the effect that the expansion of 3G internet has had on migration between the counties in the sample ( i . e . , the unit of analysis used to measure the political afﬁliation of the area ) , controlling for county and year ﬁxed effects as well as the other baseline county - level controls . The results are reported in Appendix Table A10 , which show that 3G network coverage has no impact on any of the outcome 22 It should be noted that , while Guriev , Melnikov and Zhuravskaya ( 2021 ) ﬁnd that the frequency of lightning strikes primarily affects the expansion of mobile infrastructure in countries with below - median income , the fact that the United States’ electricity infrastructure is old and unreliable ( e . g . , see American Society of Civil Engineers , 2017 ) makes it vulnerable to damage from lightning strikes . 19 Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3946055 variables ( i . e . , the in - migration , out - migration , and net - migration rates ) . Moreover , given that the outcome variables are measured in percentage points , the regression coefﬁcients are very small . 23 Vote type in last presidential election . —As a further robustness check , I consider an alternative measure of individuals’ political afﬁliation : whether they voted for the Democratic or Republi - can presidential nominee in the last election . The advantage of this approach is that the survey respondents cannot change their vote in past presidential elections like they can switch their cur - rent political afﬁliation . The drawback of this approach is that , in the United States , not all adults participate in elections ( in the 2008 - 2016 presidential elections , turnout varied between 58 % and 61 . 6 % ) , with turnout being higher among older , wealthier , and more educated individuals and lower among minority groups . 24 The Gallup Daily Poll does not include data on votes cast in the last presidential election , so , instead , Speciﬁcation ( 1 ) is estimated using CCES data . 25 Table A11 presents the regression estimates , which conﬁrm the results previously presented in the paper . III . D Policy preferences and voting outcomes The evidence presented in the previous subsections demonstrates that the expansion of mo - bile internet has had a signiﬁcant effect on individuals’ political views , shifting Democratic and Republican voters towards opposite ends of the political spectrum . This subsection addresses the question of whether 3G infrastructure similarly affected policy preferences and voting outcomes . Policy preferences . —The data on individuals’ policy preferences come from the CCES dataset , which includes questions on many polarizing topics ( namely , abortion , gay rights , the Affordable Care Act , and immigration ) . For all the policy questions , it is well known that Democrats generally stand on one side of the policy debate ( e . g . , abortion should be legal ) , while Republicans support the opposite point of view ( e . g . , abortion should not be legal ) . Therefore , under the hypothesis that 3G internet increases political polarization , individuals’ policy preferences are expected to converge with the position of the party that they support . To test this hypothesis , I estimate Speciﬁcation ( 2 ) , using dummies for various policy prefer - ences as the outcome variables . Table 2 reports the results . For all the policy variables , residents of Democratic - and Republican - leaning counties shift their views in opposite directions . Thus , 23 Thus , in addition to not being statistically signiﬁcant , the effects are not economically meaningful . For instance , the arrival of 3G internet , on average , increases the out - migration rate by 0 . 08 % . 24 The personalities of the presidential nominees can also affect the composition of voters who participate in the election that year . 25 After the data are cleaned , the CCES dataset includes 293 , 587 observations that can be used in the analysis , which is six times fewer than in the Gallup Daily Poll . The substantial difference in sample size is the main reason why the Gallup Daily Poll is chosen over CCES to be the main dataset used in the paper . 20 Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3946055 the expansion of 3G internet affected not only individuals’ overall political views but also their attitudes towards speciﬁc policy proposals . 26 The availability of mobile internet also impacted the salience of some of the problems fac - ing the country in the eyes of the voters . The data on this question come from the Gallup Poll Social Series , where the respondents were asked to name the most important problem facing the country . Appendix Table A13 presents the results of estimating the effects of 3G internet on indi - viduals’ perceptions of whether immigration , inequality , race relations , and gun violence are the most important problem facing the country today . 27 As expected , after the arrival of 3G networks , Democratic and Republican voters diverge in their views about the salience of these problems . Voting outcomes . —To estimate the effects of mobile internet on voting outcomes , I use 2008 - 2018 county - level data on elections to the United States House of Representatives . The outcome variables of interest are the vote shares of Republican and Democratic candidates as well as the vote margins of the Republican candidates ( i . e . , the vote share of the Republican candidate minus the vote share of the Democratic candidate ) . Columns 1 - 6 of Table 3 report the results of estimat - ing Speciﬁcation ( 2 ) for these outcome variables . Odd columns present the estimates for the full sample ; even columns—for the subsample of county - years with at least one Republican candi - date and at least one Democratic candidate running for ofﬁce . The results conﬁrm the notion that the expansion of 3G internet has increased political polarization . After the arrival of 3G , voters in Republican - leaning counties increased their support for Republican congressional candidates , while proportionally decreasing the vote share of Democratic candidates ; in Democratic - leaning counties , the relationship is reversed . Figure 4 illustatrates the results for the Republican and Democratic vote shares ( Column 2 and 4 of Table 3 ) . 28 The magnitudes of the effects are quite large , especially in Republican - leaning counties . For instance , the results in Column 2 suggest that , after the county becomes fully covered by 3G net - works , the vote share of Republican candidates increases by 4 . 5 percentage points in Republican - leaning counties and decreases by 2 . 6 percentage points in Democratic - leaning counties . 29 The 26 Appendix Table A12 demonstrates that , similarly to the change in political views , individuals’ attitudes towards these policies started to change only after the arrival of 3G , while the future availability of 3G is not correlated with current policy views . 27 Individuals on different sides of the political spectrum have very disparate views about the salience of these prob - lems , with Republican voters being more concerned about immigration and Democratic voters being more concerned about race relations , inequality , and gun safety . 28 Appendix Table A14 demonstrates that , similarly to the change in political views and policy preferences , voting outcomes are affected by current levels of 3G coverage , not the future availability of 3G ( i . e . , the future availability of 3G is not correlated with current voting outcomes ) . 29 The fact that , for voting outcomes , the magnitudes of the effects are larger than those for political views and policy preferences is likely explained by the composition of people who vote in elections . Most notably , election turnout is consistently higher among older Americans , who generally favor Republican candidates . Also , as shown in Appendix Table A19 , 3G internet primarily increased polarization among older voters . 21 Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3946055 results in Columns 7 and 8 also suggest that the expansion of 3G internet resulted in an ap - proximately 1 percentage point decrease in turnout both in Democratic - and Republican - leaning counties , which is consistent with the previously documented effects of the internet on turnout in Europe ( Campante , Durante and Sobbrio , 2018 ; Falck , Gold and Heblich , 2014 ; Gavazza , Nar - dotto and Valletti , 2019 ; Guriev , Melnikov and Zhuravskaya , 2021 ) . 30 Thus , a part of the effects on the vote shares of Democratic and Republican candidates might be explained by the decreases in turnout , although the impact on turnout is not sufﬁciently large ( approximately 1 percentage point ) to be fully driving the results . Overall , the results demonstrate that , in addition to causing individuals to change their political views and policy preferences , the expansion of 3G networks also induced people to change their voting behavior . III . E Magnitudes of the effects Share of increase in political polarization explained by 3G . —To analyze the extent to which mobile internet is responsible for the increase in political polarization , I perform the following exercise . First , for each outcome variable , I consider the share of population in Democratic - and Republican - leaning counties that is aligned with the position of the dominant party in the county ( e . g . , the share of population that votes for the party ) and calculate the change in that share between 2008 and 2018 . 31 This change represents the overall increase in political polarization that took place during this time period . I then calculate the effect that mobile internet had on increasing the share of population that is aligned with the position of their county’s dominant party . For each outcome variable , I consider the regression coefﬁcients for the effects of 3G on the probability of holding the same views as the main party in the county , separately for Democratic - and Republican - leaning counties . Then , I multiply these estimates by the average increases in 3G network coverage that Democratic - and Republican - leaning counties experienced during the time period and take the average of the effects on Democratic - and Republican - leaning counties , weighted by their relative sample size . The resulting variable represents the effect of mobile internet on political polarization . Finally , I calculate the share of the increase in political polarization that can be explained by mobile internet . The full details of the calculations are presented in Section A . II of the Appendix . Appendix Table A15 presents the results of estimating the share of the increase in political 30 The decrease in turnout might be driven by voters’ disillusionment with the partisan nature of United States pol - itics . It is also possible that the internet might decrease participation among certain groups of voters by crowding out political information with entertainment content ( e . g . , see Campante , Durante and Sobbrio , 2018 ) . More generally , the previous literature has shown that political participation can both increase and decrease with access to the internet ( see the review of the literature by Zhuravskaya , Petrova and Enikolopov , 2020 ) . 31 For the outcome variables that did not cover the entire period from 2008 to 2018 , I consider the change between the ﬁrst and last years for which the data are available . 22 Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3946055 polarization that can be explained by mobile internet . 3G network coverage can account for 11 . 3 % of the increase in polarization in political views , 37 . 7 % of the increase in polarization in voting behavior , and , on average , 34 . 8 % of the increase in polarization in policy preferences . Persuasion rates . —I also follow DellaVigna and Kaplan ( 2007 ) and Enikolopov , Petrova and Zhuravskaya ( 2011 ) and calculate the persuasion rates for the effects of mobile internet on po - litical views and voting behavior ( i . e . , the share of population exposed to mobile internet that is persuaded by its message ) . As demonstrated in Table A1 , 3G coverage affects individuals’ polit - ical preferences through multiple dimensions , and mobile internet should not be thought of as a “ﬁrst - stage” for any one variable . For this reason , it is difﬁcult to ﬁnd the appropriate estimate of individuals’ “exposure” to the treatment , which is one of the parameters needed to calculate the persuasion rates . To accurately measure the share of population affected by mobile broadband , while ensuring that all dimensions of internet usage are taken into account , I consider the average share of the ZIP codes’ population that has a subscription to a cellular internet data plan , sepa - rately for Democratic - and Republican - leaning areas . Using this and other assumptions , the full details of which are presented in Section A . III of the Appendix , I calculate the persuasion rates for the effects of 3G internet of individuals’ political views , voting behavior , and policy preferences . Appendix Table A16 presents the results . For residents of Democratic - leaning counties , the average persuasion rate is equal to 10 . 98 / N ; for residents of Republican - leaning counties— 13 . 42 / N , where N represents the number of people affected by the internet per cellular data plan subscription ( i . e . , if N = 1 , there are no spillover effects , and only one person is affected per connec - tion ; N > 1 indicates the presence of spillover effects ) . 32 These magnitudes are fully consistent with the persuasion effects of the media documented in the previous literature ( e . g . , see an overview by DellaVigna and Gentzkow , 2010 ) . IV M ECHANISMS This section examines the determinants of the internet - driven increase in political polariza - tion . The previous literature on this topic has overwhelmingly focused on polarization within social media , often emphasizing the role of “echo chambers” created by social media algorithms . While social media algorithms may indeed increase political polarization ( e . g . , see Levy , 2021 ) , by deﬁnition , they can only affect the views of people using these platforms . In reality , not all internet users are active on social media , and neither do all of them use the internet to search for the news . 32 These averages include the results reported in Appendix Table A16 in which the estimates are statistically signiﬁ - cant . Full details of the calculations of the persuasion rates are presented in Section A . III of the Appendix . 23 Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3946055 In this section , I analyze the differential impact of mobile internet on the political views and voting behavior of active and less active internet users , showing that the differences in the effects on these two groups are largely responsible for the 3G - driven increase in political polarization . IV . A Internet usage and political polarization To analyze how the expansion of mobile internet differentially affected individuals’ political views depending on how they use the internet , I estimate Speciﬁcation ( 5 ) , in which 3G network coverage is interacted with various measures of internet and social media usage prior to the arrival of 3G infrastructure ( Internet usage z ) . 33 Table 4 presents the results . In Columns 1 - 4 and 7 - 10 , 3G network coverage is interacted with four different measures of internet usage : the share of households in the ZIP code that use the internet to obtain news , visit TV networks’ websites , use YouTube , and use Facebook . All the measures are normalized to have the mean of zero and the standard deviation of one ( at the ZIP code level ) . The results show that , after the arrival of 3G internet , residents of ZIP codes with many active internet and social media users became less likely to hold conservative political views and more likely to hold liberal views . For instance , the estimates in Column 4 suggest that a one standard deviation difference in the share of households using Facebook , on average , is associated with a 3 . 5 percentage point change in the probability of holding conservative political views after the arrival of mobile internet . Given the similarity of the ﬁndings in Columns 1 - 4 and 7 - 10 , Columns 5 and 11 present the estimates for the average of the four aforementioned variables , which will henceforth be the main measure of internet usage used in the paper . Finally , the results in Columns 6 and 12 of Table 4 demonstrate that the increase in political polarization can also be partly explained by individuals’ choices of online news consumption . After the arrival of 3G , ZIP codes where many residents use the internet to access CNN . com became less conservative and more liberal in their views , while ZIP codes with many individuals visiting FoxNews . com experienced the opposite effect . In general , the results in Table 4 show that the expansion of 3G network coverage differ - entially affected individuals’ political views depending on how they use the internet , with active internet and social media users becoming more liberal and less active users—more conservative . Importantly , these results are not driven by Democratic voters having higher levels of online en - 33 Internet usage z is calculated in the following way . First , Internet usage z , t is regressed on 3G coverage and ZIP code and year ﬁxed effects , as described in Speciﬁcation ( 3 ) . Then , Internet usage z is calculated as the residual of Internet usage z , t , after subtracting the effect of 3G , in the ﬁrst four years of the sample period . Thus , Internet usage z represents internet usage in the ZIP codes prior to the arrival of 3G infrastructure . All the regression results are robust to performing this procedure separately for Democratic - leaning , Republican - leaning , and swing counties ( i . e . , there is little heterogeneity in the effects of 3G coverage on internet usage ) . 24 Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3946055 gagement . To demonstrate this point , I re - estimate Speciﬁcation ( 5 ) , interacting 3G network cov - erage , internet usage , and their interaction term with the political afﬁliation of the respondent’s county of residence . Appendix Table A17 presents the results , showing that the divergence be - tween the effects of 3G coverage on the views of active and less active internet users took place within party afﬁliation . For instance , the estimates in Column 3 suggest that in both Democratic and Republican counties , a one standard deviation difference in the share of households using Facebook , on average , is associated with a 3 . 7 percentage point change in the probability of hold - ing conservative political views after the arrival of mobile internet . 34 After the arrival of 3G coverage , active and less active internet users also diverged in their voting behavior and policy preferences . Table 5 reports the results of estimating Speciﬁcation ( 5 ) for individuals’ voting behavior ; Table 6—for policy preferences . The results suggest that after the arrival of 3G , active internet and social media users increased their support for Democratic congressional candidates and their policy priorities , while less active internet users shifted their views in the opposite direction . Similarly to the estimates reported in Appendix Table A17 , this divergence took place within party afﬁliation and , therefore , cannot be explained by Democratic voters having a more substantial online presence . Notably , after the arrival of 3G , ZIP codes with many active internet users also experienced an increase in turnout ( e . g . , see Columns 15 and 16 of Table 5 ) . This result stands in contrast with the estimates reported in Columns 7 and 8 of Table 3 , which suggest that , on average , the availabil - ity of mobile internet decreased turnout . Thus , while the average internet user became less likely to vote after getting access to mobile internet , possibly as a result of exposure to entertainment content , active internet users became more engaged in politics . Figure 5 illustrates the results reported in Columns 5 and 10 of Table A17 and Columns 10 and 12 of Table 5 . The left - hand side of the ﬁgure presents the average effects of 3G network coverage on residents of Democratic counties who live in ZIP codes that are in the highest and lowest quartiles of internet usage , along with 90 % conﬁdence intervals . 35 , 36 The right - hand side of the ﬁgure presents the same results for residents of Republican counties . In both cases , there is a clear divergence between the views and voting behavior of individuals living in ZIP codes in the 34 In Democratic counties , the 3 . 7 percentage point decrease in the probability of holding conservative political views is accompanied by a 3 . 2 percentage point increase in the probability of holding liberal views , while in Republican counties , the effect on liberal views is smaller and not statistically signiﬁcant . This fact demonstrates that in Democratic counties , active internet and social media users became more liberal after the arrival of 3G , while in Republican counties , active users became more “moderate” ( the intermediate category between “conservative” and “liberal” ) . 35 Appendix Figure A3 presents a similar illustration for the results in Columns 2 , 4 , 6 , and 8 of Table 6 . 36 In Figure 5 , the Republican and Democratic vote shares are measured in shares ( i . e . , not percentage points ) to be consistent with the outcome variables for holding liberal and conservative political views . 25 Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3946055 highest and lowest quartiles of internet usage . Overall , the results presented in this subsection suggest that the divergence between the views of active and less active internet users is largely responsible for the 3G - driven increase in political polarization . This divergence took place both in Democratic and Republican counties , showing that it is unlikely to be caused by members of one political party being more engaged on - line than supporters of the other party . Together these two facts demonstrate that the 3G - driven in - crease in political polarization largely did not occur among social media users , as has been widely hypothesized in the literature , but instead was determined by differential effects of mobile inter - net on social media users and nonusers . This result does not necessarily imply that active internet and social media usage cause a one - sided shift in individuals’ political views , but it suggests that future research should devote more attention to studying the mechanisms behind this divergence . Subsection IV . B presents suggestive evidence for two such mechanisms . IV . B Mechanisms behind the increase in political polarization News consumption and political knowledge . —One mechanism that may be partly responsible for the divergence between the views of active and less active internet users is related to the differences in news consumption between the two groups . To test this hypothesis , I estimate Speciﬁcation ( 5 ) , using MRI data on the share of the ZIP codes’ households that watch Fox News and CNN as the outcome variables . 37 Columns 1 and 2 of Table 7 present the results , showing that , after the arrival of 3G networks , residents of ZIP codes with many active internet users became less likely to watch Fox News and more likely to watch CNN . Thus , the divergence between the views of the two groups can be partly explained by their choices of information sources . Next , I analyze a related question regarding the quality of the information received by the two groups . Namely , I consider whether , after the arrival of 3G , active internet users became better informed about politics than less active users . To address this question , I use CCES data , in which the survey respondents were asked whether they know the identities of the politicians representing them in Congress , and estimate Speciﬁcation ( 5 ) for the outcome variables of whether the individual knows their congressional representative and two senators . The results are reported in Columns 3 - 5 of Table 7 , showing that , after the arrival of 3G , active internet users increased their political knowledge , becoming more likely to know who represents them in Congress , possibly as a result of their choices of news consumption . Notably , these results are fully consistent with the 37 The outcome variables are normalized by the average of the within - ZIP - code standard deviations of the respective variables ( i . e . , the outcome variables are measured in standard deviations ) . 26 Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3946055 ﬁndings in Allcott et al . ( 2020 ) , Chen and Yang ( 2019 ) , and Guriev , Melnikov and Zhuravskaya ( 2021 ) , all of which suggest that , when the internet is uncensored , it can make individuals better informed about politics . 38 It should be noted that , while the expansion of 3G infrastructure , on average , increased the political knowledge of active internet users , less active users may be susceptible to propaganda and disinformation , which might , in turn , affect their political views and voting behavior . This hy - pothesis is indirectly conﬁrmed by the ﬁndings that exposure to social media has been shown to increase xenophobic attitudes ( Bursztyn et al . , 2019 ) and hate crimes ( Müller and Schwarz , 2020 ) . Thus , while , on average , active internet users become better informed about politics , certain changes to the online ecosystem may be necessary to limit the potential for individuals’ exposure to online propaganda and disinformation . Political realignment of voters . —Another potential mechanism that might explain the differ - ential effects of 3G availability on active and less active internet users is related to the differences in the socioeconomic characteristics between the two groups . Recent work by Bonomi , Gennaioli and Tabellini ( 2021 ) suggests that when cultural issues become more prominent , as they have in the United States since 2008 , the salience of redistributive policies goes down , and conﬂict along this dimension is muted . As a result , the expansion of mobile internet , which increased the cultural di - vide among Democrats and Republicans ( see Table 2 ) , may have resulted in a political realignment of voters in the United States with poor , uneducated , and out of the labor force individuals—who beneﬁt the most from redistribution policies supported by Democrats—becoming more conser - vative and wealthy , employed , and educated voters—more liberal . At the same time , wealthy , educated individuals are also more likely to be active on the internet and social media than poor , uneducated individuals . Thus , the divergence between the views of active and less active internet users may be partly driven by the realignment of United States voters . To test this hypothesis , I present the heterogeneity of the effects of 3G internet on political views by socioeconomic characteristics such as education , income , and employment status . In the analysis , the outcome variables are regressed on 3G network coverage interacted with all the values of the socioeconomic characteristic of interest , controlling for all the baseline controls , in - cluding the direct effect of the socioeconomic characteristic . The estimates are presented in Table 8 and suggest that , after the arrival of 3G , educated , wealthy , and employed individuals became less likely to hold conservative political views and more likely to hold liberal views . In contrast , the opinions of uneducated , poor , and out of the labor force respondents shifted in the opposite direc - 38 Gerber , Karlan and Bergan ( 2009 ) also suggest that , in the United States , exposure to the media may increase support for Democratic candidates . 27 Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3946055 tion . These results conﬁrm the notion that a part of the increase in political polarization might be driven by the political realignment of voters in the United States . Importantly , if the growth in political partisanship is largely determined by existing societal inequalities , a potential long - term solution to the problem of increasing political polarization could lie in reducing educational , income , and other inequalities currently existing in the United States . While further research is needed to conﬁrm this policy implication , it stands in stark contrast with most of the existing literature , which has predominantly focused on search and recommendation algorithms used by social media companies . Can differences in socioeconomic status fully account for the disparate effects of 3G coverage on the views of active and less active internet users ? To address this question , I estimate Speciﬁca - tion ( 5 ) , controlling for 3G network coverage interacted with dummies for individuals’ education , income , and age as well as the level of poverty in the ZIP code . 39 Appendix Table A18 reports the results , showing that the coefﬁcients for the interaction terms between 3G coverage and in - ternet usage remain statistically signiﬁcant , although slightly smaller in magnitude . Thus , while the socioeconomic differences between active and less active internet users are likely to be partly responsible for the increase in political polarization , they do not appear to be the sole determinants of the divergence between the effects of 3G on the views of the two groups . IV . C Other heterogeneity Age . —In previous work , Boxell , Gentzkow and Shapiro ( 2017 ) have suggested that political polarization predominantly increased among older individuals , who are less active online , con - cluding that the internet is unlikely to be a major determinant of the recent growth in polarization . To address this debate , I present the heterogeneity of the effects of 3G network coverage by age . Namely , I estimate Speciﬁcation ( 2 ) , replacing 3G × Pol . afﬁliation with its interaction terms with dummies for the respondent being younger and older than 40 . 40 Appendix Table A19 presents the result , showing that , indeed , the expansion of mobile in - ternet increased political polarization primarily among middle - aged and older individuals ( i . e . , age > 40 ) . For those respondents , the direction of the effect of 3G on political views strongly de - pends on whether they live in a Republican - leaning or Democratic - leaning county . In contrast , 39 The full set of additional controls include 3G network coverage interacted with dummies for individuals not having a high school degree , having at least a bachelors degree , 20 - year age bins , ﬁve survey - deﬁned income groups , and the share of people living in poverty in the ZIP code in 2010 - 2014 . All the regressions also control for the direct effects of all the characteristics that are interacted with 3G coverage . 40 Additional controls also include non - collinear lower - level interaction terms between 3G coverage , the political afﬁliation of the counties , and the dummies for the two age groups . 28 Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3946055 after the arrival of 3G , younger individuals became less likely to hold conservative political views and more likely to hold liberal political views , regardless of where they live . This result is likely explained by the fact that the vast majority of young people actively use the internet , whereas there is substantially more hetrogeneity in internet usage among older people . Overall , the ﬁndings in Appendix Table A19 conﬁrm those of Boxell , Gentzkow and Shapiro ( 2017 ) , showing that political polarization primarily increased among older individuals . However , despite this fact , the expan - sion of mobile internet played an important role in widening the gap between the political views of Republican and Democratic voters . Heterogeneity by time . —Appendix Table A20 presents the heterogeneity of the effects of 3G internet on political views by time . The results suggest that residents of Republican counties be - came more conservative in their political views in 2008 - 2009 , when President Obama assumed ofﬁce and Democrats controlled both Chambers of Congress . In turn , in 2016 - 2017 , when Presi - dent Trump came to power and Republicans controlled both Chambers of Congress , residents of both Democratic - and Republican - leaning counties became less conservative in their views . 41 The ﬁndings suggest that the internet ampliﬁes voters’ reaction to events in national politics , plausibly by providing access to ( partisan ) information about these events . The results are fully consistent with those of Guriev , Melnikov and Zhuravskaya ( 2021 ) , who show that corruption scandals led to higher corruption perception in places covered by 3G networks . Spillover effects . —Appendix Table A21 presents how the effects of 3G on individuals of a par - ticular political afﬁliation depend on the political afﬁliation of the other residents of the area where they live ( i . e . , spillover effects ) . These results should be interpreted with caution because , as previ - ously discussed , individuals can change their political afﬁliation along with their political views . Keeping in mind this caveat , the results suggest that the effect of mobile internet on Republican voters is stronger in counties with a large number of Democratic voters . One potential explanation for this result could be that the presence of Democratic voters antagonizes Republicans , produc - ing a larger effect on their political views . However , it is also possible that in Democratic - leaning counties , after the arrival of 3G , Republicans with more moderate political views might choose not to identify with the party . The effect of 3G internet on Democratic voters also depends on the polit - ical afﬁliations of the other residents of their county . In particular , Democratic voters become more likely to hold liberal political views if they live in a Democratic - leaning county . However , they are also less likely to stop holding conservative views if they live in a Democratic - leaning county . 41 The results for Republican - leaning counties are not necessarily driven by Republican voters changing their political views . Instead , it could be the case that the views of Republican voters did not change , while Democratic residents of those counties became less conservative . 29 Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3946055 Thus , Democratic peer pressure induces individuals not to identify as a moderate but , instead , to hold either liberal or conservative political views . V C ONCLUDING REMARKS This paper demonstrates that the expansion of mobile internet has increased political polar - ization . After the arrival of 3G networks , residents of Democratic - leaning counties started holding more liberal political views and increased their support for Democratic congressional candidates and their policy priorities ; residents of Republican - leaning counties shifted in the opposite direc - tion . The increase in political polarization largely did not take place among social media users . Instead , after the arrival of 3G network coverage , regardless of political afﬁliation , ZIP codes with many active internet users became more likely to hold liberal views and increased their support for Democratic candidates and policy priorities , while ZIP codes with few active internet users became more conservative and pro - Republican . The paper presents evidence for two mechanisms that may be partly responsible for this divergence in political views . First , it shows that , after the arrival of 3G , active internet users changed their news consumption and became better informed about politics . Second , the expan - sion of mobile internet resulted in a political realignment of voters in the United States , with ed - ucated , wealthy , and employed individuals becoming more liberal ; uneducated , poor , and out of the labor force individuals—more conservative . The latter mechanism suggests that a potential long - term solution to the problem of increasing political polarization could lie in reducing existing educational and income inequalities . R EFERENCES Allcott , Hunt , and Matthew Gentzkow . 2017 . “Social Media and Fake News in the 2016 Election . ” Journal of Economic Perspectives , 31 ( 2 ) : 211 – 236 . Allcott , Hunt , Luca Braghieri , Sarah Eichmeyer , and Matthew Gentzkow . 2020 . “The Welfare Effects of Social Media . ” American Economic Review , 110 ( 3 ) : 629 – 676 . Allcott , Hunt , Matthew Gentzkow , and Chuan Yu . 2019 . “Trends in the diffusion of misinforma - tion on social media . ” Research & Politics , 6 ( 2 ) : 1 – 8 . American Society of Civil Engineers . 2017 . “2017 Infrastructure Report Card : Energy . ” https : / / 2017 . infrastructurereportcard . org / cat - item / energy / ( accessed on June 28 , 2021 ) . Andersen , Thomas Barnebeck , Jeanet Bentzen , Carl - Johan Dalgaard , and Pablo Selaya . 2012 . “Lightning , IT diffusion , and economic growth across U . S . states . ” Review of Economics and Statis - tics , 94 ( 4 ) : 903 – 924 . 30 Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3946055 Autor , David , David Dorn , Gordon Hanson , and Kaveh Majlesi . 2020 . “Importing Political Po - larization ? The Electoral Consequences of Rising Trade Exposure . ” American Economic Review , 110 ( 10 ) : 3139 – 3183 . Bail , Christopher A . , Lisa P . Argyle , Taylor W . Brown , John P . Bumpus , Haohan Chen , M . B . Fallin Hunzaker , Jaemin Lee , Marcus Mann , Friedolin Merhout , and Alexander Vol - fovsky . 2018 . “Exposure to opposing views on social media can increase political polarization . ” PNAS , 115 ( 37 ) : 9216 – 9221 . Bakshy , Eytan , Solomon Messing , and Lada A . Adamic . 2015 . “Exposure to ideologically diverse news and opinion on Facebook . ” Science , 348 ( 6239 ) : 1130 – 1132 . Barberá , Pablo . 2015 . “How Social Media Reduces Mass Political Polarization . Evidence from Ger - many , Spain , and the U . S . ” Mimeo . Beam , Michael A . , Myiah J . Hutchens , and Jay D . Hmielowski . 2018 . “Facebook news and ( de ) polarization : reinforcing spirals in the 2016 US election . ” Information , Communication & Soci - ety , 21 ( 7 ) : 940 – 958 . Bonomi , Giampaolo , Nicola Gennaioli , and Guido Tabellini . 2021 . “Identity , Beliefs , and Political Conﬂict . ” Quarterly Journal of Economics , 136 ( 4 ) : 2371 – 2411 . Borusyak , Kirill , Xavier Jaravel , and Jann Spiess . 2021 . “Revisiting Event Study Designs : Robust and Efﬁcient Estimation . ” Mimeo . Bovet , Alexandre , and Hernán A . Makse . 2019 . “Inﬂuence of fake news in Twitter during the 2016 US presidential election . ” Nature Communications , 10 ( 7 ) : 1 – 14 . Boxell , Levi . 2020 . “Demographic change and political polarization in the United States . ” Eco - nomics Letters , 192 : 1 – 4 . Boxell , Levi , Matthew Gentzkow , and Jesse M . Shapiro . 2017 . “Greater Internet use is not as - sociated with faster growth in political polarization among US demographic groups . ” PNAS , 114 ( 40 ) : 10612 – 10617 . Bright , Jonathan , Scott Hale , Bharath Ganesh , Andrew Bulovsky , Helen Margetts , and Phil Howard . 2020 . “Does Campaigning on Social Media Make a Difference ? Evidence From Candi - date Use of Twitter During the 2015 and 2017 U . K . Elections . ” Communication Research , 47 ( 7 ) : 988 – 1009 . Bursztyn , Leonardo , Georgy Egorov , Ruben Enikolopov , and Maria Petrova . 2019 . “Social Media and Xenophobia : Evidence from Russia . ” NBER Working Paper № 26567 . Campante , Filipe , Ruben Durante , and Francesco Sobbrio . 2018 . “Politics 2 . 0 : The Multifaceted Effect of Broadband Internet on Political Participation . ” Journal of the European Economic Associa - tion , 16 ( 4 ) : 1094 – 1136 . Cantarella , Michele , Nicolò Fraccaroli , and Roberto Volpe . 2020 . “Does Fake News Affect Voting Behaviour ? ” CEIS Working Paper № 493 . Chen , Yuyu , and David Yang . 2019 . “The Impact of Media Censorship : 1984 or Brave New World ? ” American Economic Review , 109 ( 6 ) : 2294 – 2332 . Collela , Fabrizio , Rafael Lalive , Seyhun Orcan Sakalli , and Mathias Thoenig . 2018 . “Inference with arbitrary clustering . ” University of Lausanne , Mimeo . 31 Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3946055 Conley , T . G . 1999 . “GMM estimation with cross sectional dependence . ” Journal of Econometrics , 92 ( 1 ) : 1 – 45 . De Chaisemartin , Clément , and Xavier D’Haultfœuille . 2020 . “Two - way ﬁxed effects estimators with heterogeneous treatment effects . ” American Economic Review , 110 ( 9 ) : 2964 – 2996 . DellaVigna , Stefano , and Ethan Kaplan . 2007 . “The Fox News Effect : Media Bias and Voting . ” Quarterly Journal of Economics , 122 ( 3 ) : 1187 – 1234 . DellaVigna , Stefano , and Matthew Gentzkow . 2010 . “Persuasion : Empirical Evidence . ” Annual Review of Economics , 2 : 643 – 669 . Del Vicario , Michela , Alessandro Bessi , Fabiana Zollo , Fabio Petroni , Antonio Scala , Guido Cal - darelli , H . Eugene Stanley , and Walter Quattrociocchi . 2016 . “The spreading of misinformation online . ” PNAS , 113 ( 3 ) : 554 – 559 . Donati , Dante . 2019 . “Mobile Internet access and political outcomes : Evidence from South Africa . ” Universitat Pompeu Fabra , Mimeo . Eady , Gregory , Jonathan Nagler , Andy Guess , Jan Zilinsky , and Joshua A . Tucker . 2019 . “How Many People Live in Political Bubbles on Social Media ? Evidence From Linked Survey and Twitter Data . ” SAGE Open , 9 ( 1 ) : 1 – 21 . EATON . 2017 . “Blackout Tracker . United States Annual Report 2017 . ” https : / / switchon . eaton . com / plug / blackout - tracker ( accessed on June 28 , 2021 ) . Enikolopov , Ruben , Alexey Makarin , and Maria Petrova . 2020 . “Social media and protest partic - ipation : evidence from Russia . ” Econometrica , 88 ( 4 ) : 1479 – 1514 . Enikolopov , Ruben , Maria Petrova , and Ekaterina Zhuravskaya . 2011 . “Media and Political Per - suasion : Evidence from Russia . ” American Economic Review , 101 : 3253 – 3285 . Enikolopov , Ruben , Maria Petrova , and Konstantin Sonin . 2018 . “Social Media and Corruption . ” American Economic Journal : Applied Economics , 10 ( 1 ) : 150 – 174 . Enríquez , José Ramón , Horacio Larreguy , John Marshall , and Alberto Simpser . 2021 . “Online Political Information , Electoral Saturation , and Electoral Accountability in Mexico . ” Mimeo . Falck , Oliver , Robert Gold , and Stephan Heblich . 2014 . “E - lections : Voting Behavior and the Internet . ” American Economic Review , 104 ( 7 ) : 2238 – 2265 . Faris , Robert , Hal Roberts , Bruce Etling , Nikki Bourassa , Ethan Zuckerman , and Yochai Ben - kler . 2017 . “Partisanship , Propaganda , and Disinformation : Online Media and the 2016 U . S . Presidential Election . ” Berkman Klein Center for Internet & Society at Harvard University Re - search Publication № 2017 - 6 . Fergusson , Leopoldo , and Carlos Molina . 2019 . “Facebook Causes Protests . ” Universidad de los Andes . mimeo . Flaxman , Seth , Sharad Goel , and Justin M . Rao . 2016 . “Filter Bubbles , Echo Chambers , and Online News Consumption . ” Public Opinion Quarterly , 80 : 298 – 320 . Fujiwara , Thomas , Karsten Müller , and Carlo Schwarz . 2021 . “The Effect of Social Media on Elections : Evidence from the United States . ” Mimeo . 32 Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3946055 Gavazza , Alessandro , Mattia Nardotto , and Tommaso Valletti . 2019 . “Internet and Politics : Ev - idence from U . K . Local Elections and Local Government Policies . ” Review of Economic Studies , 86 ( 5 ) : 2092 – 2135 . Gentzkow , Matthew , and Jesse M . Shapiro . 2011 . “Ideological Segregation Online and Ofﬂine . ” Quarterly Journal of Economics , 126 : 1799 – 1839 . Gerber , Alan S . , Dean Karlan , and Daniel Bergan . 2009 . “Does the Media Matter ? A Field Experi - ment Measuring the Effect of Newspapers on Voting Behavior and Political Opinions . ” American Economic Journal : Applied Economics , 1 ( 2 ) : 35 – 52 . Goodman - Bacon , Andrew . 2021 . “Differences - in - Differences with Variation in Treatment Timing . ” Journal of Econometrics , forthcoming . Grinberg , Nir , Kenneth Joseph , Lisa Friedland , Briony Swire - Thompson , and David Lazer . 2019 . “Fake news on Twitter during the 2016 U . S . presidential election . ” Science , 363 ( 6425 ) : 374 – 378 . Guess , Andrew . 2021 . “ ( Almost ) Everything in Moderation : New Evidence on Americans’ Online Media Diets . ” American Journal of Political Science , forthcoming . Guess , Andrew , Brendan Nyhan , and Jason Reiﬂer . 2018 . “Selective Exposure to Misinforma - tion : Evidence from the consumption of fake news during the 2016 U . S . presidential campaign . ” European Research Council . Guriev , Sergei , Nikita Melnikov , and Ekaterina Zhuravskaya . 2021 . “3G Internet and Conﬁdence in Government . ” Quarterly Journal of Economics , 136 ( 4 ) : 2533 – 2613 . Halberstam , Yosh , and Brian Knight . 2016 . “Homophily , group size , and the diffusion of political information in social networks : Evidence from Twitter . ” Journal of Public Economics , 143 : 73 – 88 . Hsiang , Solomon . 2010 . “Temperatures and cyclones strongly associated with economic produc - tion in the Caribbean and Central America . ” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 107 ( 35 ) : 15367 – 15372 . Illing , Sean . 2018 . “Why social media is terrible for multiethnic democracies . ” Vox . Jones , Jeffrey M . 2020 . “Trump Third Year Sets New Standard for Party Polarization . ” Gallup . Kalmoe , Nathan P . , and Lilliana Mason . 2019 . “Lethal Mass Partisanship : Prevalence , Correlates , & Electoral Contingencies . ” National Capital Area Political Science Association American Politics Meeting . Lelkes , Yphtach , Gaurav Sood , and Shanto Iyengar . 2017 . “The Hostile Audience : The Effect of Access to Broadband Internet on Partisan Affect . ” American Journal of Political Science , 61 ( 1 ) : 5 – 20 . Levy , Ro’ee . 2021 . “Social Media , News Consumption , and Polarization : Evidence from a Field Experiment . ” American Economic Review , 111 ( 3 ) : 831 – 870 . Liberini , Federica , Michela Redoano , Antonio Russo , Ángel Cuevas , and Ruben Cuevas . 2020 . “Politics in the Facebook Era - Evidence from the 2016 US Presidential Elections . ” CESifo Working Paper № 8235 . Manacorda , Marco , and Andrea Tesei . 2020 . “Liberation Technology : Mobile Phones and Political Mobilization in Africa . ” Econometrica , 88 ( 2 ) : 533 – 567 . 33 Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3946055 Martin , Al . 2016 . “Effects of Lightning on ICT Circuits : Induction and GCR . ” In Compliance Mag - azine . https : / / incompliancemag . com / article / effects - of - lightning - on - ict - circuits - induction - and - gcr / ( accessed on June 28 , 2021 ) . Miner , Luke . 2015 . “The unintended consequences of Internet diffusion : Evidence from Malaysia . ” Journal of Public Economics , 132 ( C ) : 66 – 78 . Müller , Karsten , and Carlo Schwarz . 2020 . “From Hashtag to Hate Crime : Twitter and Anti - Minority Sentiment . ” Mimeo . Oster , Emily . 2017 . “Unobservable Selection and Coefﬁcient Stability : Theory and Evidence . ” Jour - nal of Business & Economic Statistics , 37 ( 2 ) : 187 – 204 . Pariser , Eli . 2011 . The Filter Bubble : What the Internet Is Hiding from You . Penguin Books . Peterson , Erik , Sharad Goel , and Shanto Iyergar . 2021 . “Partisan selective exposure in online news consumption : evidence from the 2016 presidential campaign . ” Political Science Research and Methods , 9 : 242 – 258 . Petrova , Maria , Ananya Sen , and Pinar Yildirim . 2020 . “Social Media and Political Contributions : The Impact of New Technology on Political Competition . ” Management Science , 67 ( 5 ) : 2997 – 3021 . Prior , Markus . 2013 . “Media and Political Polarization . ” Annual Review of Political Science , 16 : 101 – 127 . Qin , Bei , David Strömberg , and Yanhui Wu . 2019 . “Social Media , Information Networks , and Protests in China . ” Mimeo . Rainie , Lee , and Barry Wellman . 2012 . Networked – The New Social Operating System . MIT Press . Schaub , Max , and Davide Morisi . 2019 . “Voter mobilization in the echo chamber : Broadband internet and the rise of populism in Europe . ” Collegio Carlo Alberto . mimeo . Spohr , Dominic . 2017 . “Fake news and ideological polarization : Filter bubbles and selective expo - sure on social media . ” Business Information Review , 34 ( 3 ) : 150 – 160 . Sun , Liyang , and Sarah Abraham . 2021 . “Estimating Dynamic Treatment Effects in Event Studies with Heterogeneous Treatment Effects . ” Journal of Econometrics , forthcoming . Sunstein , Cass R . 2017 . # Republic : Divided Democracy in the Age of Social Media . Princeton University Press . Zeddam , Ahmed , and Phil Day . 2014 . “Improving the protection of ICT equipment against light - ning strikes . ” ITU News . https : / / news . itu . int / improving - protection - ict - equipment - lightning - strikes / ( accessed on June 28 , 2021 ) . Zhuravskaya , Ekaterina , Maria Petrova , and Ruben Enikolopov . 2020 . “Political effects of the internet and social media . ” Annual Review of Economics , 12 ( 1 ) : 415 – 438 . 34 Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3946055 F IGURES Figure 1 : Expansion of 3G network coverage between 2008 and 2018 Note : The ﬁgure presents maps of 3G network coverage for the contiguous United States in 2008 and 2018 . The data consist of 1 × 1 - kilometer binary grid cells . 35 Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3946055 Figure 2 : 3G internet and political polarization Note : The ﬁgure presents the relationship between the respondents’ political views and the availability of 3G internet in their ZIP code of residence . The regression estimates are presented in Columns 1 and 3 of Table 1 . In the left part of the ﬁgure , the outcome variable is a dummy for whether the respondent describes their political views as liberal or very liberal ; in the right part—a similar dummy for having conservative or very conservative political views . The bars show the means of the outcome variable , net of all controls along with 95 % conﬁdence intervals . Standard errors are corrected for clusters at the level of the states and the District of Columbia . 36 Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3946055 Figure 3 : Event study analysis Note : The ﬁgure presents an event study showing how the respondents’ political views changed after the arrival of 3G internet to their ZIP code of residence . The regression estimates are presented in Columns 1 and 3 of Table A4 . A ZIP code is deﬁned to be treated when it becomes fully covered by 3G networks for the ﬁrst time . The sample consists of individuals living in Democratic - leaning and swing counties . In the ﬁrst part of the ﬁgure , the outcome variable is a dummy for whether the respondent describes their political views as conservative or very conservative ; in the second part—a similar dummy for self - described views being liberal or very liberal . 37 Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3946055 Figure 4 : 3G internet and voting outcomes Note : The ﬁgure presents the relationship between the availability of 3G internet in a county and voting outcomes in the county . The outcome variables are the Republican and Democratic vote shares in the 2008 - 2018 House elections . The regression estimates are presented in Columns 2 and 4 of Table 3 . The sample focuses on county - years when at least one Republican and at least one Democratic candidates ran for ofﬁce . A county is assumed to be Democratic if Obama won the county in 2008 by a margin of at least 10 percentage points ; a county is assumed to be Republican if Obama lost the county in 2008 by a margin of at least 10 percentage points . The bars show the means of the outcome variable ( net of all controls ) along with 90 % conﬁdence intervals , which are corrected for clusters at the level of the states and the District of Columbia using 1 , 000 bootstrap replications , which take into account the uncertainty regarding the effects of the control variables . 38 Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3946055 Figure 5 : Internet usage and political polarization Note : The ﬁgure illustrates the relationship between internet usage , political views , and voting outcomes presented in Columns 5 and 10 of Table A17 and Columns 10 and 12 of Table 5 . The vertical axis represents the outcome variables for which the results are reported . The left part of the ﬁgure shows the effects on residents of Democratic - leaning counties ; the right part of the ﬁgure—on residents of Republican counties . The reported effects represent the effects of mobile internet on individuals living in ZIP codes that are in the top 25 % of internet users and in the lowest 25 % of internet users . The 90 % conﬁdence intervals are corrected for clusters at the level of the states and the District of Columbia using bootstrap replications , which take into account the uncertainty regarding the effects of the control variables . 39 Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3946055 T ABLES Table 1 : 3G internet and political polarization ( 1 ) ( 2 ) ( 3 ) ( 4 ) Dep . Var . : Political views are : Liberal or Conservative or very liberal very conservative 3G network coverage × × Democratic voter 0 . 051 * * * - 0 . 017 * * * ( 0 . 006 ) ( 0 . 005 ) × Independent voter - 0 . 015 * * * - 0 . 019 * * * ( 0 . 003 ) ( 0 . 003 ) × Republican voter - 0 . 035 * * * 0 . 020 * * * ( 0 . 002 ) ( 0 . 003 ) × Resident of reliably Democratic county 0 . 013 * * - 0 . 016 * * * ( 0 . 006 ) ( 0 . 004 ) × Resident of Democratic - leaning county 0 . 008 * * * - 0 . 019 * * * ( 0 . 003 ) ( 0 . 003 ) × Resident of swing county 0 . 000 - 0 . 007 * * * ( 0 . 002 ) ( 0 . 002 ) × Resident of Republican - leaning county - 0 . 007 * * * - 0 . 001 ( 0 . 002 ) ( 0 . 004 ) × Resident of reliably Republican county - 0 . 004 0 . 005 * ( 0 . 002 ) ( 0 . 003 ) Observations 1 , 765 , 114 1 , 765 , 113 1 , 765 , 114 1 , 765 , 113 R - squared 0 . 205 0 . 073 0 . 260 0 . 091 Mean dep . var 0 . 234 0 . 234 0 . 420 0 . 420 Number of clusters 51 51 51 51 Number of ZIP codes 31 , 499 31 , 499 31 , 499 31 , 499 County & year FEs (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) Baseline controls (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) Note : * * * p < 0 . 01 , * * p < 0 . 05 , * p < 0 . 1 . The table presents the results of estimating Speciﬁcations ( 1 ) and ( 2 ) for respondents’ self - described political views . The unit of observation is an individual . In Columns 1 and 2 , the outcome variable is a dummy for whether the respondent describes their political views as liberal or very liberal ; in Columns 3 and 4—a similar dummy for self - described views being conservative or very conservative . Baseline controls include county and year ﬁxed effects , dummies for the respondents’ gender , race , age , education level , marital status , and income group , the counties’ unemployment rate , log of median household income , median age , and share of population that is single , married , white , black , asian , has no schooling , has at least a bachelors degree , and is on food stamps . Other controls also include a dummy variable for whether the ZIP code was fully covered by 3G networks in 2008 ( i . e . , the ﬁrst year in the sample ) and separate year ﬁxed effects for the ZIP codes that were . In Columns 1 and 3 , controls also include dummies for individuals’ political afﬁliation ( i . e . , Democratic voter , Republican voter , etc . ) . A county is assumed to be reliably Democratic if Obama won the county in 2008 by a margin of at least 30 percentage points ; Democratic - leaning—if Obama won the county in 2008 by a margin of 10 - 30 percentage points ; Republican - leaning—if Obama lost the county in 2008 by a margin of 10 - 30 percentage points ; reliably Republican—if Obama lost the county in 2008 by a margin of at least 30 percentage points ; other counties are characterized as swing counties . Standard errors in parentheses are corrected for clusters at the level of the states and the District of Columbia . 40 Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3946055 Table 2 : 3G internet and policy preferences ( 1 ) ( 2 ) ( 3 ) ( 4 ) Dep . Var . : Always allow Support gay Repeal Increase border abortion marriage the ACA security 3G network coverage × × Resident of Democratic - leaning county 0 . 013 * * 0 . 037 * * * - 0 . 053 * * * - 0 . 029 * * * ( 0 . 006 ) ( 0 . 011 ) ( 0 . 019 ) ( 0 . 010 ) × Resident of swing county 0 . 004 0 . 017 0 . 007 - 0 . 019 * * ( 0 . 007 ) ( 0 . 012 ) ( 0 . 019 ) ( 0 . 009 ) × Resident of Republican - leaning county - 0 . 012 * * - 0 . 033 * * * 0 . 027 0 . 017 * * ( 0 . 006 ) ( 0 . 009 ) ( 0 . 016 ) ( 0 . 007 ) Observations 394 , 518 316 , 521 278 , 657 356 , 933 R - squared 0 . 110 0 . 107 0 . 109 0 . 107 Mean dep . var 0 . 536 0 . 578 0 . 486 0 . 523 Number of clusters 51 51 51 51 Number of ZIP codes 23 , 216 22 , 450 21 , 375 22 , 614 County & year FEs (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) Baseline controls (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) Note : * * * p < 0 . 01 , * * p < 0 . 05 , * p < 0 . 1 . The table presents the results of estimating Speciﬁcation ( 2 ) for the respondents’ policy preferences . The unit of observation is an individual . The outcome variables are dummies for for the respondents’ policy preferences . Baseline controls include county and year ﬁxed effects , dummies for the respondents’ gender , race , age , education level , marital status , and income group , the counties’ unemployment rate , log of median household income , median age , and share of population that is single , married , white , black , asian , has no schooling , has at least a bachelors degree , and is on food stamps . Other controls also include a dummy variable for whether the ZIP code was fully covered by 3G networks in 2008 and separate year ﬁxed effects for the ZIP codes that were . A county is assumed to be Democratic - leaning if Obama won the county in 2008 by a margin of at least 10 percentage points ; a county is assumed to be Republican - leaning if Obama lost the county in 2008 by a margin of at least 10 percentage points ; other counties are characterized as swing counties . Standard errors in parentheses are corrected for clusters at the level of the states and the District of Columbia . 41 Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3946055 Table 3 : 3G internet and voting outcomes ( 1 ) ( 2 ) ( 3 ) ( 4 ) ( 5 ) ( 6 ) ( 7 ) ( 8 ) Dep . Var . : Republican Democratic Republican vote Turnout vote share ( R ) vote share ( D ) margin ( R - D ) 3G network coverage × × Resident of Democratic - leaning county - 5 . 063 * * - 2 . 577 * 4 . 423 * 2 . 396 * - 9 . 486 * * - 4 . 973 * - 1 . 516 * * * - 1 . 068 * * ( 2 . 340 ) ( 1 . 390 ) ( 2 . 223 ) ( 1 . 355 ) ( 4 . 474 ) ( 2 . 716 ) ( 0 . 475 ) ( 0 . 415 ) × Resident of swing county 1 . 692 3 . 106 * - 1 . 645 - 2 . 913 * 3 . 338 6 . 019 * - 1 . 242 * * - 1 . 083 * * ( 2 . 058 ) ( 1 . 666 ) ( 2 . 012 ) ( 1 . 569 ) ( 4 . 021 ) ( 3 . 191 ) ( 0 . 481 ) ( 0 . 512 ) × Resident of Republican - leaning county 4 . 573 * * * 4 . 540 * * * - 4 . 530 * * * - 4 . 789 * * * 9 . 103 * * * 9 . 329 * * * - 0 . 943 * - 0 . 753 * ( 1 . 325 ) ( 1 . 249 ) ( 1 . 401 ) ( 1 . 190 ) ( 2 . 686 ) ( 2 . 408 ) ( 0 . 477 ) ( 0 . 440 ) Observations 18 , 573 16 , 864 18 , 573 16 , 864 18 , 573 16 , 864 18 , 573 16 , 864 R - squared 0 . 793 0 . 858 0 . 779 0 . 857 0 . 794 0 . 862 0 . 893 0 . 915 Mean dep . var 60 . 74 59 . 53 36 . 08 38 . 11 24 . 66 21 . 42 37 . 33 37 . 93 Number of counties 3 , 110 3 , 110 3 , 110 3 , 110 3 , 110 3 , 110 3 , 110 3 , 110 County & year FEs (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) Baseline controls (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) Excluding unopposed races (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) Note : * * * p < 0 . 01 , * * p < 0 . 05 , * p < 0 . 1 . The table presents the results of estimating Speciﬁcation ( 2 ) for voting outcomes . The unit of observation is a county . The outcomes are measured in percentage points . In odd columns , the results are reported for the full sample ; in even columns—for county - years with at least one Democrat and at least one Republican running for ofﬁce . Alaska is excluded from the sample because , in Alaska , election results are not available at the county level . Baseline controls include county and year ﬁxed effects , the counties’ unemployment rate , log of median household income , median age , and share of population that is single , married , white , black , asian , has no schooling , has at least a bachelors degree , and is on food stamps . Other controls also include a dummy variable for whether the county was fully covered by 3G networks in 2008 ( i . e . , the ﬁrst year in the sample ) and separate year ﬁxed effects for the counties that were . A county is assumed to be Democratic - leaning if Obama won the county in 2008 by a margin of at least 10 percentage points ; a county is assumed to be Republican - leaning if Obama lost the county in 2008 by a margin of at least 10 percentage points ; other counties are characterized as swing counties . Standard errors in parentheses are corrected for clusters at the level of the states . 42 E l e c t r on i c c op y a v a il ab l e a t : h tt p s : / / ss r n . c o m / ab s t r a c t = 3946055 Table 4 : Internet usage and political views ( 1 ) ( 2 ) ( 3 ) ( 4 ) ( 5 ) ( 6 ) ( 7 ) ( 8 ) ( 9 ) ( 10 ) ( 11 ) ( 12 ) Dep . Var . : Conservative or very conservative political views Liberal or very liberal political views 3G network coverage × × Share of households using the - 0 . 011 * * * 0 . 004 * * * internet to obtain news ( 0 . 002 ) ( 0 . 001 ) × Share of households visiting - 0 . 013 * * * 0 . 005 * * TV networks’ websites ( 0 . 002 ) ( 0 . 002 ) × Share of households using YouTube - 0 . 033 * * * 0 . 018 * * ( 0 . 005 ) ( 0 . 008 ) × Share of households using Facebook - 0 . 035 * * * 0 . 018 * ( 0 . 006 ) ( 0 . 009 ) × Average of internet usage measures - 0 . 020 * * * 0 . 008 * * ( 0 . 003 ) ( 0 . 004 ) × Share of households visiting CNN . com - 0 . 139 * * * 0 . 136 * * * ( 0 . 013 ) ( 0 . 023 ) × Share of households visiting FoxNews . com 0 . 036 * * * - 0 . 043 * * * ( 0 . 005 ) ( 0 . 007 ) Observations 1 , 765 , 004 1 , 765 , 004 1 , 765 , 004 1 , 765 , 004 1 , 765 , 004 1 , 764 , 815 1 , 765 , 004 1 , 765 , 004 1 , 765 , 004 1 , 765 , 004 1 , 765 , 004 1 , 764 , 815 R - squared 0 . 091 0 . 091 0 . 091 0 . 091 0 . 091 0 . 093 0 . 074 0 . 073 0 . 073 0 . 073 0 . 073 0 . 076 Mean dep . var 0 . 420 0 . 420 0 . 420 0 . 420 0 . 420 0 . 420 0 . 234 0 . 234 0 . 234 0 . 234 0 . 234 0 . 234 Number of ZIP codes 31 , 473 31 , 473 31 , 473 31 , 473 31 , 473 31 , 434 31 , 473 31 , 473 31 , 473 31 , 473 31 , 473 31 , 434 County & year FEs (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) Baseline controls (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) Note : * * * p < 0 . 01 , * * p < 0 . 05 , * p < 0 . 1 . The table demonstrates how individuals’ political views are affected depending on how they use the internet . The internet usage variables represent the average values of the respective variables in the ﬁrst four years for which the data are available ( i . e . , the ﬁrst half of the sample period ) after subtracting the effect of 3G internet on these variables . The unit of observation is an individual . In Columns 1 - 6 , the outcome variable is a dummy for whether the respondent describes their political views as conservative or very conservative ; in Columns 7 - 12—a similar dummy for self - described views being liberal or very liberal . Baseline controls include county and year ﬁxed effects , dummies for the respondents’ gender , race , age , education level , marital status , and income group , the counties’ unemployment rate , log of median household income , median age , and share of population that is single , married , white , black , asian , has no schooling , has at least a bachelors degree , and is on food stamps . All the regressions also control for the direct effects of the internet usage measures . Standard errors in parentheses are corrected for clusters at the level of the states and the District of Columbia . 43 E l e c t r on i c c op y a v a il ab l e a t : h tt p s : / / ss r n . c o m / ab s t r a c t = 3946055 Table 5 : Internet usage and voting outcomes Panel A : Full sample ( 1 ) ( 2 ) ( 3 ) ( 4 ) ( 5 ) ( 6 ) ( 7 ) ( 8 ) Dep . Var . : Republican Democratic Republican vote Turnout vote share ( R ) vote share ( D ) margin ( R - D ) 3G network coverage × - 8 . 944 * * * 9 . 285 * * * - 18 . 229 * * * 3 . 783 * * * × Average of internet usage measures ( 2 . 221 ) ( 2 . 087 ) ( 4 . 239 ) ( 0 . 552 ) Resident of Democratic - leaning county × × 3G network coverage × - 5 . 287 8 . 179 * * * - 13 . 466 * 5 . 284 * * * × Average of internet usage measures ( 4 . 252 ) ( 2 . 893 ) ( 7 . 006 ) ( 1 . 041 ) Resident of Republican - leaning county × × 3G network coverage × - 8 . 689 * * * 8 . 291 * * * - 16 . 981 * * * 3 . 546 * * * × Average of internet usage measures ( 2 . 355 ) ( 2 . 471 ) ( 4 . 765 ) ( 0 . 573 ) Observations 18 , 573 18 , 573 18 , 573 18 , 573 18 , 573 18 , 573 18 , 573 18 , 573 Mean dep . var 60 . 74 60 . 74 36 . 08 36 . 08 24 . 66 24 . 66 37 . 33 37 . 33 Number of counties 3 , 110 3 , 110 3 , 110 3 , 110 3 , 110 3 , 110 3 , 110 3 , 110 Panel B : Excluding unopposed races ( 9 ) ( 10 ) ( 11 ) ( 12 ) ( 13 ) ( 14 ) ( 15 ) ( 16 ) Dep . Var . : Republican Democratic Republican vote Turnout vote share ( R ) vote share ( D ) margin ( R - D ) 3G network coverage × - 8 . 256 * * * 8 . 348 * * * - 16 . 604 * * * 3 . 663 * * * × Average of internet usage measures ( 1 . 533 ) ( 1 . 553 ) ( 3 . 064 ) ( 0 . 527 ) Resident of Democratic - leaning county × × 3G network coverage × - 6 . 886 * * * 7 . 980 * * * - 14 . 866 * * * 4 . 256 * * * × Average of internet usage measures ( 2 . 206 ) ( 2 . 097 ) ( 4 . 285 ) ( 0 . 853 ) Resident of Republican - leaning county × × 3G network coverage × - 7 . 405 * * * 7 . 137 * * * - 14 . 542 * * * 3 . 667 * * * × Average of internet usage measures ( 1 . 946 ) ( 2 . 029 ) ( 3 . 929 ) ( 0 . 636 ) Observations 16 , 864 16 , 864 16 , 864 16 , 864 16 , 864 16 , 864 16 , 864 16 , 864 Mean dep . var 59 . 53 59 . 53 38 . 11 38 . 11 21 . 42 21 . 42 37 . 93 37 . 93 Number of counties 3 , 110 3 , 110 3 , 110 3 , 110 3 , 110 3 , 110 3 , 110 3 , 110 County & year FEs (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) Baseline controls (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) Note : * * * p < 0 . 01 , * * p < 0 . 05 , * p < 0 . 1 . The table demonstrates how voting outcomes are affected by 3G network coverage , depending on how individuals use the internet . The unit of observation is a county . The outcomes are measured in percentage points . In Columns 1 - 8 , the results are reported for the full sample ; in Columns 9 - 16—for county - years with at least one Democrat and at least one Republican running for ofﬁce . Alaska is excluded from the sample because , in Alaska , election results are not available at the county level . Baseline controls include county and year ﬁxed effects , the counties’ unemployment rate , log of median household income , median age , and share of population that is single , married , white , black , asian , has no schooling , has at least a bachelors degree , and is on food stamps . A county is assumed to be Democratic - leaning if Obama won the county in 2008 by a margin of at least 10 percentage points ; a county is assumed to be Republican - leaning if Obama lost the county in 2008 by a margin of at least 10 percentage points ; other counties are characterized as swing counties . Standard errors in parentheses are corrected for clusters at the level of the states . 44 Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3946055 Table 6 : Internet usage and policy preferences ( 1 ) ( 2 ) ( 3 ) ( 4 ) ( 5 ) ( 6 ) ( 7 ) ( 8 ) Dep . Var . : Always allow Support gay Repeal the ACA Increase border abortion marriage security 3G network coverage × 0 . 027 * * * 0 . 042 * * * - 0 . 085 * * * - 0 . 044 * * * × Average of internet usage measures ( 0 . 009 ) ( 0 . 008 ) ( 0 . 031 ) ( 0 . 014 ) Resident of Democratic - leaning county × × 3G network coverage × 0 . 025 0 . 037 * * - 0 . 146 * * - 0 . 093 * * * × Average of internet usage measures ( 0 . 016 ) ( 0 . 015 ) ( 0 . 057 ) ( 0 . 029 ) Resident of Republican - leaning county × × 3G network coverage × 0 . 051 * * * 0 . 035 * * * - 0 . 107 * * - 0 . 040 * * × Average of internet usage measures ( 0 . 014 ) ( 0 . 011 ) ( 0 . 044 ) ( 0 . 016 ) Observations 394 , 319 394 , 184 316 , 343 316 , 223 278 , 535 278 , 458 356 , 786 356 , 683 Mean dep . var 0 . 536 0 . 536 0 . 578 0 . 578 0 . 486 0 . 486 0 . 523 0 . 523 Number of ZIP codes 23 , 129 23 , 078 22 , 369 22 , 320 21 , 313 21 , 280 22 , 545 22 , 502 County & year FEs (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) Baseline controls (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) Note : * * * p < 0 . 01 , * * p < 0 . 05 , * p < 0 . 1 . The table demonstrates how the respondents’ policy preferences are affected by 3G network coverage , depending on how they use the internet . The unit of observation is an individual . The outcome variables are dummies for for the respondents’ policy preferences . Baseline controls include county and year ﬁxed effects , dummies for the respondents’ gender , race , age , education level , marital status , and income group , the counties’ unemployment rate , log of median household income , median age , and share of population that is single , married , white , black , asian , has no schooling , has at least a bachelors degree , and is on food stamps . All the regressions also control for the direct effect of the internet usage measure . In even columns , an additional control also includes 3G coverage interacted with the level of poverty in the ZIP code . Standard errors in parentheses are corrected for clusters at the level of the states and the District of Columbia . 45 Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3946055 Table 7 : Internet usage , the choice of media outlets , and political knowledge ( 1 ) ( 2 ) ( 3 ) ( 4 ) ( 5 ) Dep . Var . : Share of households that : Respondent knows their : Watch Fox News Watch CNN Congressional First senator Second senator representative 3G network coverage × × Average of internet usage measures - 1 . 500 * * * 0 . 576 * * * 0 . 007 * * 0 . 007 * * 0 . 008 * * ( 0 . 174 ) ( 0 . 128 ) ( 0 . 003 ) ( 0 . 003 ) ( 0 . 003 ) Observations 285 , 508 285 , 508 396 , 317 398 , 902 398 , 729 Number of clusters 51 51 51 50 50 Number of ZIP codes 32 , 513 32 , 513 23 , 224 23 , 233 23 , 233 County & year FEs (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) ZIP code & year FEs (cid:88) (cid:88) Note : * * * p < 0 . 01 , * * p < 0 . 05 , * p < 0 . 1 . The table demonstrates the divergence between active and less active internet users in their choices of news consumption and in political knowledge . In Columns 1 and 2 , the unit of observation is a ZIP code ; in Columns 3 - 5—an individual . In Columns 1 and 2 , the outcome variables represent the shares of the ZIP codes’ households that watch Fox News and CNN , respectively , normalized by the average within - ZIP - code standard deviations of the outcome variables . In Columns 3 - 5 , the outcome variables are dummies for whether the respondents’ know their congressional representatives and senators . In Columns 1 and 2 , controls include ZIP code and year ﬁxed effects . In Columns 3 - 5 , controls include county and year ﬁxed effects , dummies for the respondents’ gender , race , year of birth , education level , marital status , and income group , the counties’ unemployment rate , log of median household income , median age , and share of population that is single , married , white , black , asian , has no schooling , has at least a bachelors degree , and is on food stamps . Standard errors in parentheses are corrected for clusters at the level of the states and the District of Columbia . 46 Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3946055 Table 8 : Heterogeneity by education , income , and employment status ( 1 ) ( 2 ) ( 3 ) ( 4 ) ( 5 ) ( 6 ) Dep . Var . : Political views are : Conservative or Liberal or very conservative very liberal 3G network coverage × × Less than high school degree 0 . 070 * * * - 0 . 036 * * * ( 0 . 006 ) ( 0 . 005 ) × High school degree 0 . 009 * * - 0 . 008 * * * ( 0 . 004 ) ( 0 . 003 ) × Technical / Vocational school - 0 . 004 - 0 . 005 * ( 0 . 004 ) ( 0 . 003 ) × Some college education - 0 . 008 * * 0 . 000 ( 0 . 003 ) ( 0 . 002 ) × College degree - 0 . 033 * * * 0 . 013 * * * ( 0 . 003 ) ( 0 . 003 ) × Post - graduate degree - 0 . 019 * * * 0 . 011 * * ( 0 . 004 ) ( 0 . 004 ) × Income < $ 24 , 000 0 . 026 * * * - 0 . 015 * * * ( 0 . 003 ) ( 0 . 003 ) × $ 24 , 000 ≤ Income < $ 48 , 000 - 0 . 001 0 . 004 ( 0 . 003 ) ( 0 . 003 ) × $ 48 , 000 ≤ Income < $ 90 , 000 - 0 . 018 * * * 0 . 010 * * * ( 0 . 003 ) ( 0 . 002 ) × Income ≥ $ 90 , 000 - 0 . 031 * * * 0 . 008 * * * ( 0 . 004 ) ( 0 . 003 ) × Employed - 0 . 025 * * * 0 . 009 * * ( 0 . 004 ) ( 0 . 004 ) × Unemployed - 0 . 003 - 0 . 004 ( 0 . 005 ) ( 0 . 004 ) × Out of labor force 0 . 018 * * * - 0 . 009 * * ( 0 . 004 ) ( 0 . 004 ) Observations 1 , 765 , 114 1 , 765 , 114 1 , 244 , 135 1 , 765 , 114 1 , 765 , 114 1 , 244 , 135 Mean dep . var 0 . 420 0 . 420 0 . 421 0 . 234 0 . 234 0 . 235 Number of ZIP codes 31 , 499 31 , 499 30 , 934 31 , 499 31 , 499 30 , 934 County & year FEs (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) Baseline controls (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) Note : * * * p < 0 . 01 , * * p < 0 . 05 , * p < 0 . 1 . The table illustrates the heterogeneity of the effects of 3G coverage by education , income , and employment status . The unit of observation is an individual . In Columns 1 - 3 , the outcome variable is a dummy for whether the respondent describes their political views as conservative or very conservative ; in Columns 4 - 6—a similar dummy for self - described views being liberal or very liberal . Baseline controls include county and year ﬁxed effects , dummies for the respondents’ gender , race , age , education level , marital status , and income group , the counties’ unemployment rate , log of median household income , median age , and share of population that is single , married , white , black , asian , has no schooling , has at least a bachelors degree , and is on food stamps . Other controls also include a dummy variable for whether the ZIP code was fully covered by 3G networks in 2008 ( i . e . , the ﬁrst year in the sample ) and separate year ﬁxed effects for the ZIP codes that were . In Columns 3 and 6 , controls also include dummies for individuals’ employment status . Standard errors in parentheses are corrected for clusters at the level of the states and the District of Columbia . 47 Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3946055 A PPENDIX A . I Data This section presents information about the secondary data sources used in the analysis as well as additional information about the primary data sources . Mobile network coverage . —The data on 3G and 2G network coverage come from maps pro - vided by Collins Bartholomew’s Mobile Coverage Explorer and cover the period from 2007 to 2019 with the exception of 2011 . 42 Collins Bartholomew does not provide the data for 2011 due to a change in the company administering the collection of mobile network coverage data , which prevented the data from being collected that year . Therefore , throughout the analysis , the data for 2011 are imputed as the average of the values for 2010 and 2012 . The results are robust to excluding 2011 altogether . It should also be noted that , in certain other countries , mobile network operators occasionally do not submit data to Collins Bartholomew , leading to measurement error in mobile coverage . For the United States this issue is not relevant : the maps of mobile coverage were updated every year . Cooperative Congressional Election Study ( CCES ) . —The data on individual’s policy preferences come the CCES and cover the period from 2007 to 2019 . 43 The exact wording of the questions is the following : ( i ) Do you support or oppose each of the following proposals ? Always allow a woman to obtain an abortion as a matter of choice . ( ii ) Do you favor or oppose allowing gays and lesbians to marry legally ? ( iii ) Congress Considered many important bills over the past two years . For each of the following tell us whether you support or oppose the legislation in principle . Repeal Affordable Care Act . Would repeal the Affordable Care Act . ( iv ) What do you think Congress and the President should do about immigration ? Increase the number of border patrol on the USMexican border . Gallup Poll Social Series . —The data on individuals’ opinions about the most important prob - lem facing the country come from the Gallup Poll Social Series and cover the period from 2008 to 2018 . 44 The data consist of repeated cross - sectional monthly polls of approximately 1 , 000 respon - dents with geolocalization at the ZIP code level . The question of interest is the following : What do you think is the most important problem facing this country today ? PolicyMap . —The data for several county - level variables come from PolicyMap , a mapping application that aggregates data with detailed geolocalization from multiple sources . The vari - 42 These data are described here : https : / / www . collinsbartholomew . com / map - data - products / vector - map - data / mobile - coverage - explorer / ( accessed on June 25 , 2021 ) . 43 These data are described here : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 7910 / DVN / II2DB6 ( accessed on June 26 , 2021 ) . 44 The data are described here : https : / / www . gallup . com / 175307 / gallup - poll - social - series - methodology . aspx ( ac - cessed on June 26 , 2021 ) . 48 Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3946055 ables obtained via PolicyMap are the following : — Median Family Income . The data cover the period from 2008 to 2019 and were originally pro - vided by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development . — Unemployment rate . The data cover the period from 2008 to 2019 and were originally provided by the Bureau of Labor Statistics Local Area Unemployment Statistics Program . — Share of population receiving food stamps . The data cover the period from 2008 to 2019 and were originally provided by the United States Census Small Area Income and Poverty Estimates . — Migration data . The data cover the period from 2008 to 2017 and were originally provided by the IRS Statistics of Income Division , County - to - County Migration Data Files . SimplyAnalytics . —The data for several county - level control variables come from SimplyAn - alytics , a mapping application that aggregates data with detailed geolocalization from multiple sources . The control variables obtained via SimplyAnalytics are the following : — Median age of the population . The data cover the period from 2010 to 2018 and originally come from the American Community Survey . In order not to reduce the sample to 2010 - 2018 , the data for 2008 - 2009 are imputed to have the same values as in 2010 . — Share of population that is single . The data cover the period from 2010 to 2018 and originally come from the American Community Survey . In order not to reduce the sample to 2010 - 2018 , the data for 2008 - 2009 are imputed to have the same values as in 2010 . — Share of population that is married . The data cover the period from 2010 to 2018 and originally come from the American Community Survey . In order not to reduce the sample to 2010 - 2018 , the data for 2008 - 2009 are imputed to have the same values as in 2010 . — Share of population that is white , black , and asian . The data cover the period from 2010 to 2018 and originally come from the American Community Survey . In order not to reduce the sam - ple to 2010 - 2018 , the data for 2008 - 2009 are imputed to have the same values as in 2010 . — Share of population that have no schooling . The data cover the period from 2010 to 2018 and originally come from the American Community Survey . In order not to reduce the sample to 2010 - 2018 , the data for 2008 - 2009 are imputed to have the same values as in 2010 . — Share of population that have at least a bachelors degree . The data cover the period from 2010 to 2018 and originally come from the American Community Survey . In order not to reduce the sample to 2010 - 2018 , the data for 2008 - 2009 are imputed to have the same values as in 2010 . 49 Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3946055 — Share of population with a cellular data plan . The ZIP - code - level data are available for 2018 and originally come from the American Community Survey . These data are not used as a control variable in any of the regression speciﬁcations . Instead , these data are used in the calculation of the persuasion rates , a detailed discussion of which is presented in Appendix Section A . III . A . II Share of the increase in political polarization explained by 3G To calculate the share of the change in political polarization that is driven by mobile internet , I use the following formula : m = 100 × β R ∆3G R w R + β D ∆3G D w D w R + w D × 1 ∆ P = 100 × ∆ P I ∆ P . ( 6 ) ∆P denotes the overall change in polarization ( i . e . , the change in the share of Democratic and Re - publican counties’ population that holds views aligned with the views of the county’s dominant party ) ; ∆3G is the average change in 3G network coverage ; β denotes the regression coefﬁcients for 3G increasing the share of population in Democratic - and Republican - leaning counties that hold views aligned with the views of the dominant party in the county ; w represents the relative sample size of Democratic - and Republican - leaning counties ; and D and R index Democratic - and Republican - leaning counties , respectively . All changes represent the changes between the begin - ning and end of the sample period . The ﬁrst part of the formula ( i . e . , ∆ P I ) represents the effect of mobile internet on political polarization ; the second part of the formula ( i . e . , ∆ P ) —the overall change in political polarization . The formula can only be applied when both parts have the same sign . If , instead , ∆ P I × ∆ P < 0 , m can be calculated as the absolute value of 100∆ P I / ( ∆ P − ∆ P I ) . Appendix Table A15 presents the results of applying Formula ( 6 ) to the outcome variables for individuals’ views and voting behavior . Mobile internet can account for 11 . 3 % of the increase in polarization in political views , 37 . 7 % of the increase in polarization in voting behavior , and , on average , 34 . 8 % of the increase in polarization in policy preferences . A . III Persuasion rates The calculations of the persuasion rates are generally based on the following baseline for - mula developed by DellaVigna and Kaplan ( 2007 ) : f = 100 × y T − y C e T − e C × 1 1 − y 0 , ( 7 ) 50 Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3946055 where e denotes exposure to the message , y is the outcome variable , y 0 is the outcome variable in the absence of the message , and T and C index the treatment and control groups , respectively . Formula ( 7 ) was later extended by Enikolopov , Petrova and Zhuravskaya ( 2011 ) to allow for con - tinuous variation in exposure to the message , which is the case in the setting of this paper , and take into account the effect of turnout : f = 100 × 1 1 − y 0 t 0 (cid:18) tdyde + y dt de (cid:19) , ( 8 ) where t represents turnout , and the other notation is described above . Formula ( 8 ) can also be re - written as f = 100 × 1 1 − y 0 t 0 (cid:18) t dy dn + y dt dn (cid:19) 1 de / dn , ( 9 ) where n represents 3G network coverage . The main difﬁculty of applying Formula ( 9 ) to the effects of 3G availability on Democratic and Republican voters is that it is not immediately clear how to measure exposure to 3G internet . On the one hand , the assumption that all residents of the ZIP code are affected by the arrival of 3G would lead to the underestimation of the persuasion rates because , in reality , it is unlikely that all invidiuals are affected . On the other hand , as shown in Subsection III . E , 3G networks have an impact on multiple dimensions of internet usage and should not be thought of as a “ﬁrst - stage” for any one variable ( e . g . , access to the internet ) . The variable that represents the best measure of exposure to 3G internet is the share of the ZIP codes’ population that has a subscription to a cellular data plan , the data for which are available for 2018 from SimplyAnalytics . By deﬁnition , 3G network coverage is necessary for an individual to use a cellular data plan . Therefore , the share of population that has a mobile internet subscription represents the share of people that are directly affected by 3G availability . 45 Nevertheless , it is possible that more than one individual is affected by each subscription . For instance , if one family member has access to mobile internet , they might share information they get online with other members of the household . Thus , one can only measure exposure to 3G internet up to a factor of N , where N represents the extent of spillover effects ( i . e . , if N = 1 , there are no spillover effects , and only one person is affected per connection ; N > 1 represents the presence of spillover effects ) . In the context of the United States , where most individuals can afford to get a mobile internet data plan , spillover effects are unlikely to be large , but they can still play a role in determining the magnitudes of the persuasion rates . 45 It is potentially possible that a small number of individuals have cellular data plans even though they live in ZIP codes without 3G network coverage ( e . g . , if they work in a ZIP code with a 3G connection and need to use mobile internet for work ) . However , the share of such individuals is likely to be quite small . 51 Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3946055 y 0 is measured as the average of the outcome variables after subtracting the effects of 3G internet , separately for Democratic - and Republican - voting counties . A similar strategy is used for t 0 in the election regressions . 46 The measures of dy / dn and dt / dn come from the regression estimates ; y and t are represented by the average values of the respective variables . Overall , the assumptions used in the calculation of the persuasion rates are exactly the same as those used by Guriev , Melnikov and Zhuravskaya ( 2021 ) . Table A16 presents the persuation rates of the effects of 3G internet on the preferences of Republican - and Democratic - leaning voters . For residents of Democratic - leaning counties , the av - erage persuasion rate is equal to 10 . 98 / N ; for residents of Republican - leaning counties—13 . 42 / N . Assuming that N is ﬁxed throughout the regression speciﬁcations , the persuasion rates are some - what larger for election outcomes . However , it is plausible that the spillover effects ( i . e . , N ) are larger for election outcomes because of the high salience of elections . 46 In the survey - based regressions , turnout is assumed to be universal . 52 Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3946055 Figure A1 : De Chaisemartin - D’haultfœuille event - study estimator Note : The ﬁgure presents the De Chaisemartin - D’haultfœuille event - study estimator showing how the respondents’ political views changed after the arrival of 3G internet to their ZIP code of residence . The regression estimates are presented in Columns 2 and 4 of Table A4 . A ZIP code is deﬁned to be treated when it becomes fully covered by 3G networks for the ﬁrst time . The sample consists of in - dividuals living in Democratic - leaning and swing counties . In the ﬁrst part of the ﬁgure , the outcome variable is the share of respondents in a ZIP code that describe their political views as conservative or very conservative ; in the second part—a similar share of respondents with self - described views being liberal or very liberal . 53 Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3946055 Figure A2 : Expansion of 3G coverage , by frequency of lightning strikes Note : The ﬁgure illustrates the ﬁrst - stage of the IV analysis , described in Speciﬁcation ( 4 ) , showing that areas with a high frequency of lightning strikes experienced signiﬁcantly slower growth in 3G network coverage . The left part of the ﬁgure illustrates the relationship in Column 1 of Table A8 ; the right part of the ﬁgure—the relationship in Column 4 of Table A8 . The bars represent the mean residual of 3G network coverage ( net of all controls ) along with 95 % conﬁdence intervals . Standard errors are corrected for clusters at the level of the states and the District of Columbia . 54 Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3946055 Figure A3 : Internet usage and policy preferences Note : The ﬁgure illustrates the relationship between internet usage and political preferences presented in Columns 2 , 4 , 6 , and 8 of Table 6 . The vertical axis represents the outcome variables for which the results are reported . The left part of the ﬁgure shows the effects on residents of Democratic - leaning counties ; the right part of the ﬁgure—on residents of Republican counties . The reported effects represent the effects of mobile internet on individuals living in ZIP codes that are in the top 25 % of internet users and in the lowest 25 % of internet users . The 90 % conﬁdence intervals are corrected for clusters at the level of the states and the District of Columbia using bootstrap replications , which take into account the uncertainty regarding the effects of the control variables . 55 Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3946055 Table A1 : 3G network coverage and internet use ( 1 ) ( 2 ) ( 3 ) ( 4 ) ( 5 ) ( 6 ) ( 7 ) Dep . Var . : Share of households that : Use the internet Used the internet Spent > 30 minutes on Use the internet Use the internet to visit Use YouTube Use Facebook yesterday the internet yesterday to obtain news a TV network’s website 3G network coverage 0 . 800 * * * 0 . 569 * * * 0 . 369 * * * 0 . 268 * * 0 . 480 * * * 0 . 177 * * * 0 . 420 * * * ( 0 . 138 ) ( 0 . 108 ) ( 0 . 094 ) ( 0 . 120 ) ( 0 . 135 ) ( 0 . 053 ) ( 0 . 056 ) Observations 254 , 451 254 , 451 254 , 451 254 , 451 254 , 451 254 , 451 254 , 451 R - squared 0 . 975 0 . 988 0 . 993 0 . 966 0 . 957 0 . 995 0 . 996 Number of clusters 51 51 51 51 51 51 51 Number of ZIP codes 32 , 507 32 , 507 32 , 507 32 , 507 32 , 507 32 , 507 32 , 507 ZIP code & year FEs (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) Note : * * * p < 0 . 01 , * * p < 0 . 05 , * p < 0 . 1 . The table presents the estimates of Speciﬁcation ( 3 ) , showing that the availability of 3G networks affected multiple dimensions of internet usage in the ZIP codes where it became available . The unit of observation is a ZIP code . The outcome variables are normalized by the average of their within - ZIP - code standard deviations . Standard errors in parentheses are corrected for clusters at the level of the states and the District of Columbia . 56 E l e c t r on i c c op y a v a il ab l e a t : h tt p s : / / ss r n . c o m / ab s t r a c t = 3946055 Table A2 : State - year , county - year , and political - afﬁliation - year ﬁxed effects ( 1 ) ( 2 ) ( 3 ) ( 4 ) ( 5 ) ( 6 ) ( 7 ) ( 8 ) ( 9 ) ( 10 ) ( 11 ) ( 12 ) Dep . Var . : Liberal or very liberal political views Conservative or very conservative political views 3G network coverage × × Democratic voter 0 . 052 * * * 0 . 059 * * * 0 . 061 * * * - 0 . 018 * * * - 0 . 025 * * * - 0 . 011 * ( 0 . 006 ) ( 0 . 008 ) ( 0 . 007 ) ( 0 . 005 ) ( 0 . 006 ) ( 0 . 006 ) × Independent voter - 0 . 014 * * * - 0 . 008 * * - 0 . 013 * * * - 0 . 019 * * * - 0 . 027 * * * - 0 . 032 * * * ( 0 . 003 ) ( 0 . 003 ) ( 0 . 003 ) ( 0 . 003 ) ( 0 . 004 ) ( 0 . 003 ) × Republican voter - 0 . 034 * * * - 0 . 028 * * * - 0 . 043 * * * 0 . 020 * * * 0 . 012 * * * 0 . 028 * * * ( 0 . 002 ) ( 0 . 004 ) ( 0 . 003 ) ( 0 . 003 ) ( 0 . 003 ) ( 0 . 004 ) × Resident of reliably Democratic county 0 . 013 * * 0 . 055 * * * 0 . 018 * * - 0 . 016 * * * - 0 . 030 * * * - 0 . 017 * * * ( 0 . 006 ) ( 0 . 011 ) ( 0 . 008 ) ( 0 . 004 ) ( 0 . 010 ) ( 0 . 005 ) × Resident of Democratic - leaning county 0 . 009 * * * 0 . 037 * * * 0 . 012 * * * - 0 . 021 * * * - 0 . 049 * * * - 0 . 023 * * * ( 0 . 003 ) ( 0 . 010 ) ( 0 . 003 ) ( 0 . 003 ) ( 0 . 008 ) ( 0 . 003 ) × Resident of swing county 0 . 002 0 . 011 0 . 005 - 0 . 009 * * * - 0 . 023 * * * - 0 . 008 * * * ( 0 . 002 ) ( 0 . 007 ) ( 0 . 003 ) ( 0 . 002 ) ( 0 . 005 ) ( 0 . 003 ) × Resident of Republican - leaning county - 0 . 006 * * * - 0 . 009 - 0 . 008 * * * - 0 . 000 - 0 . 013 0 . 000 ( 0 . 002 ) ( 0 . 006 ) ( 0 . 002 ) ( 0 . 004 ) ( 0 . 009 ) ( 0 . 005 ) × Resident of reliably Republican county - 0 . 003 - 0 . 013 * * - 0 . 006 * 0 . 011 * * * 0 . 006 0 . 006 ( 0 . 003 ) ( 0 . 006 ) ( 0 . 003 ) ( 0 . 004 ) ( 0 . 010 ) ( 0 . 006 ) Observations 1 , 765 , 114 1 , 764 , 198 1 , 765 , 114 1 , 765 , 113 1 , 764 , 197 1 , 765 , 113 1 , 765 , 114 1 , 764 , 198 1 , 765 , 114 1 , 765 , 113 1 , 764 , 197 1 , 765 , 113 R - squared 0 . 205 0 . 215 0 . 205 0 . 074 0 . 085 0 . 073 0 . 261 0 . 273 0 . 261 0 . 091 0 . 106 0 . 091 Mean dep . var 0 . 234 0 . 234 0 . 234 0 . 234 0 . 234 0 . 234 0 . 420 0 . 420 0 . 420 0 . 420 0 . 420 0 . 420 Number of clusters 51 51 51 51 51 51 51 51 51 51 51 51 Number of ZIP codes 31 , 499 31 , 458 31 , 499 31 , 499 31 , 458 31 , 499 31 , 499 31 , 458 31 , 499 31 , 499 31 , 458 31 , 499 County & year FEs (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) Baseline controls (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) State - year FEs (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) County - year FEs (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) Political - afﬁliation - year FEs (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) Note : * * * p < 0 . 01 , * * p < 0 . 05 , * p < 0 . 1 . The table presents the results of estimating Speciﬁcations ( 1 ) and ( 2 ) for respondents’ self - described political views , controlling for state - year , county - year , and political - afﬁliation - year ﬁxed effects . The unit of observation is an individual . In Columns 1 - 6 , the outcome variable is a dummy for whether the respondent describes their political views as liberal or very liberal ; in Columns 7 - 12—a similar dummy for self - described views being conservative or very conservative . Baseline controls include county and year ﬁxed effects , dummies for the respondents’ gender , race , age , education level , marital status , and income group , the counties’ unemployment rate , log of median household income , median age , and share of population that is male , single , married , white , black , asian , of multiple race , has no schooling , has at least a bachelors degree , and is on food stamps . Baseline controls also include a dummy variable for whether the ZIP code was fully covered by 3G networks in 2008 ( i . e . , the ﬁrst year in the sample ) and separate year ﬁxed effects for the ZIP codes that were . In Columns 1 - 3 and 7 - 9 , controls also include dummies for individuals’ political afﬁliation ( i . e . , Democratic voter , Republican voter , etc . ) . A county is assumed to be Democratic - leaning if Obama won the county in 2008 by a margin of at least 10 percentage points ; a county is assumed to be Republican - leaning if Obama lost the county in 2008 by a margin of at least 10 percentage points ; other counties are characterized as swing counties . Standard errors in parentheses are corrected for clusters at the level of the states and the District of Columbia . 57 E l e c t r on i c c op y a v a il ab l e a t : h tt p s : / / ss r n . c o m / ab s t r a c t = 3946055 Table A3 : Leads of 3G network coverage ( 1 ) ( 2 ) ( 3 ) ( 4 ) ( 5 ) ( 6 ) Dep . Var . : Political views are : Liberal or very liberal Conservative or very conservative 3G network coverage in year t × × Resident of reliably Democratic county 0 . 015 * * 0 . 016 * * 0 . 015 * * - 0 . 015 * * * - 0 . 016 * * * - 0 . 015 * * * ( 0 . 007 ) ( 0 . 007 ) ( 0 . 007 ) ( 0 . 004 ) ( 0 . 005 ) ( 0 . 004 ) × Resident of Democratic - leaning county 0 . 008 * * * 0 . 010 * * * 0 . 008 * * * - 0 . 015 * * * - 0 . 017 * * * - 0 . 015 * * * ( 0 . 003 ) ( 0 . 003 ) ( 0 . 003 ) ( 0 . 004 ) ( 0 . 004 ) ( 0 . 004 ) × Resident of swing county 0 . 005 * 0 . 003 * 0 . 005 * - 0 . 007 * * - 0 . 007 * * - 0 . 007 * * ( 0 . 002 ) ( 0 . 002 ) ( 0 . 003 ) ( 0 . 003 ) ( 0 . 003 ) ( 0 . 003 ) × Resident of Republican - leaning county - 0 . 005 * - 0 . 006 * * * - 0 . 005 0 . 001 0 . 001 0 . 001 ( 0 . 003 ) ( 0 . 002 ) ( 0 . 003 ) ( 0 . 005 ) ( 0 . 004 ) ( 0 . 006 ) × Resident of reliably Republican county - 0 . 001 - 0 . 001 - 0 . 002 - 0 . 002 0 . 002 - 0 . 002 ( 0 . 004 ) ( 0 . 003 ) ( 0 . 004 ) ( 0 . 005 ) ( 0 . 004 ) ( 0 . 005 ) 3G network coverage in year t + 1 × × Resident of reliably Democratic county 0 . 006 0 . 005 - 0 . 006 - 0 . 006 ( 0 . 007 ) ( 0 . 012 ) ( 0 . 005 ) ( 0 . 011 ) × Resident of Democratic - leaning county 0 . 007 0 . 004 - 0 . 009 - 0 . 005 ( 0 . 004 ) ( 0 . 004 ) ( 0 . 006 ) ( 0 . 006 ) × Resident of swing county - 0 . 004 - 0 . 003 0 . 001 - 0 . 001 ( 0 . 004 ) ( 0 . 004 ) ( 0 . 004 ) ( 0 . 006 ) × Resident of Republican - leaning county 0 . 000 - 0 . 002 - 0 . 002 - 0 . 000 ( 0 . 004 ) ( 0 . 005 ) ( 0 . 005 ) ( 0 . 007 ) × Resident of reliably Republican county - 0 . 002 0 . 002 0 . 012 0 . 008 ( 0 . 005 ) ( 0 . 006 ) ( 0 . 007 ) ( 0 . 009 ) 3G network coverage in year t + 2 × × Resident of reliably Democratic county 0 . 006 0 . 001 - 0 . 005 - 0 . 000 ( 0 . 015 ) ( 0 . 023 ) ( 0 . 014 ) ( 0 . 022 ) × Resident of Democratic - leaning county 0 . 009 0 . 006 - 0 . 011 - 0 . 007 ( 0 . 006 ) ( 0 . 006 ) ( 0 . 008 ) ( 0 . 008 ) × Resident of swing county - 0 . 004 - 0 . 002 0 . 003 0 . 004 ( 0 . 004 ) ( 0 . 005 ) ( 0 . 005 ) ( 0 . 008 ) × Resident of Republican - leaning county 0 . 002 0 . 003 - 0 . 003 - 0 . 003 ( 0 . 004 ) ( 0 . 005 ) ( 0 . 005 ) ( 0 . 005 ) × Resident of reliably Republican county - 0 . 004 - 0 . 005 0 . 009 0 . 004 ( 0 . 005 ) ( 0 . 006 ) ( 0 . 007 ) ( 0 . 008 ) Observations 1 , 765 , 113 1 , 765 , 113 1 , 765 , 113 1 , 765 , 113 1 , 765 , 113 1 , 765 , 113 Mean dep . var 0 . 234 0 . 234 0 . 234 0 . 420 0 . 420 0 . 420 Number of clusters 51 51 51 51 51 51 Number of ZIP codes 31 , 499 31 , 499 31 , 499 31 , 499 31 , 499 31 , 499 County & year FEs (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) Baseline controls (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) Note : * * * p < 0 . 01 , * * p < 0 . 05 , * p < 0 . 1 . Political views are affected by the current availability of 3G network coverage but not by the future availability of 3G . The unit of observation is an individual . In Columns 1 - 3 , the outcome variable is a dummy for whether the respondent describes their political views as liberal or very liberal ; in Columns 4 - 6—a similar dummy for self - described views being conservative or very conservative . Baseline controls include county and year ﬁxed effects , dummies for the respondents’ gender , race , age , education level , marital status , and income group , the counties’ unemployment rate , log of median household income , median age , and share of population that is single , married , white , black , asian , has no schooling , has at least a bachelors degree , and is on food stamps . A county is assumed to be reliably Democratic if Obama won the county in 2008 by a margin of at least 30 percentage points ; Democratic - leaning— if Obama won the county in 2008 by a margin of 10 - 30 percentage points ; Republican - leaning—if Obama lost the county in 2008 by a margin of 10 - 30 percentage points ; reliably Republican—if Obama lost the county in 2008 by a margin of at least 30 percentage points ; other counties are characterized as swing counties . Standard errors in parentheses are corrected for clusters at the level of the states and the District of Columbia . 58 Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3946055 Table A4 : Event - study estimates , Democratic - leaning and swing counties ( 1 ) ( 2 ) ( 3 ) ( 4 ) Dep . Var . : Political views are : Conservative or Liberal or very conservative very liberal Fully covered by 3G networks in : Year t + 4 - 0 . 003 0 . 002 - 0 . 003 0 . 005 ( 0 . 003 ) ( 0 . 006 ) ( 0 . 003 ) ( 0 . 007 ) Year t + 3 - 0 . 003 - 0 . 004 0 . 002 0 . 004 ( 0 . 004 ) ( 0 . 005 ) ( 0 . 003 ) ( 0 . 004 ) Year t + 2 - 0 . 003 0 . 000 0 . 001 0 . 001 ( 0 . 003 ) ( 0 . 004 ) ( 0 . 002 ) ( 0 . 003 ) Year t - 0 . 015 * * * - 0 . 005 * * 0 . 011 * * * 0 . 002 ( 0 . 003 ) ( 0 . 003 ) ( 0 . 002 ) ( 0 . 003 ) Year t − 1 - 0 . 019 * * * - 0 . 007 * * 0 . 017 * * * 0 . 006 * * ( 0 . 003 ) ( 0 . 003 ) ( 0 . 003 ) ( 0 . 002 ) Year t − 2 - 0 . 023 * * * - 0 . 005 0 . 021 * * * 0 . 006 * ( 0 . 003 ) ( 0 . 004 ) ( 0 . 003 ) ( 0 . 004 ) Year t − 3 - 0 . 026 * * * - 0 . 011 * * * 0 . 024 * * * 0 . 012 * * * ( 0 . 004 ) ( 0 . 003 ) ( 0 . 003 ) ( 0 . 003 ) Year t − 4 - 0 . 033 * * * - 0 . 010 * * 0 . 030 * * * 0 . 010 * * * ( 0 . 004 ) ( 0 . 004 ) ( 0 . 004 ) ( 0 . 003 ) Year t − 5 or earlier - 0 . 039 * * * 0 . 035 * * * ( 0 . 005 ) ( 0 . 005 ) Observations 1 , 170 , 457 1 , 170 , 457 1 , 170 , 457 1 , 170 , 457 Number of clusters 51 51 51 51 Number of ZIP codes 18 , 116 18 , 116 18 , 116 18 , 116 Standard event study estimates (cid:88) (cid:88) De Chaisemartin - D’Haultfœuille estimator (cid:88) (cid:88) Note : * * * p < 0 . 01 , * * p < 0 . 05 , * p < 0 . 1 . The table presents the event study estimates for the effects of the arrival of 3G internet on political views in Democratic - leaning and swing counties . A ZIP code is deﬁned to be treated when it becomes fully covered by 3G networks for the ﬁrst time . Columns 1 and 3 present standard event study estimates ; Columns 2 and 4—the De Chaisemartin - D’haultfœuille event - study estimator . In Columns 1 and 3 , the unit of observation is an individual ; in Columns 2 and 4—a ZIP code . In Columns 1 and 2 , the outcome variable is a dummy for whether the respondent describes their political views as conservative or very conservative ; in Columns 3 and 4—a similar dummy for self - described views being liberal or very liberal . In Columns 1 and 3 , unreported controls include county and year ﬁxed effects , dummies for the respondents’ gender , race , age , education level , marital status , and income group , the counties’ unemployment rate , log of median household income , median age , and share of population that is single , married , white , black , asian , has no schooling , has at least a bachelors degree , and is on food stamps . In Columns 2 and 4 , observations are weighted by the number of observations in each ZIP code . Standard errors in parentheses are corrected for clusters at the level of the states and the District of Columbia . 59 Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3946055 Table A5 : Oster δ s for the effects of 3G coverage on political views ( 1 ) ( 2 ) ( 3 ) ( 4 ) Dep . Var . : Political views are : Liberal or Conservative or very liberal very conservative 3G network coverage × × Democratic voter 0 . 051 * * * - 0 . 017 * * * ( 0 . 006 ) ( 0 . 005 ) × Independent voter - 0 . 015 * * * - 0 . 019 * * * ( 0 . 003 ) ( 0 . 003 ) × Republican voter - 0 . 035 * * * 0 . 020 * * * ( 0 . 002 ) ( 0 . 003 ) × Resident of Democratic - leaning county 0 . 010 * * * - 0 . 018 * * * ( 0 . 003 ) ( 0 . 002 ) × Resident of swing county 0 . 000 - 0 . 007 * * * ( 0 . 002 ) ( 0 . 002 ) × Resident of Republican - leaning county - 0 . 006 * * * 0 . 001 ( 0 . 002 ) ( 0 . 003 ) Observations 1 , 765 , 114 1 , 765 , 113 1 , 765 , 114 1 , 765 , 113 R - squared 0 . 205 0 . 073 0 . 260 0 . 091 Oster δ for 3G × Democratic political afﬁliation 11 . 391 2 . 335 0 . 989 3 . 269 Oster δ for 3G × Republican political afﬁliation - 8 . 787 9 . 871 4 . 664 1 . 756 Note : * * * p < 0 . 01 , * * p < 0 . 05 , * p < 0 . 1 . The table presents the Oster δ s for the effects of 3G network coverage on individuals’ political views , showing that selection on unobservable variables needs to be very high to reduce the effects of 3G coverage to zero . Following Oster ( 2017 ) , I set the value of R 2 max —the R - squared from a hypothetical regression of the outcome variable on all observed and unobserved controls—to be equal to 1 . 3 ˜ R 2 , where ˜ R 2 is the R - squared reported in the table . The unit of observation is an individual . In Columns 1 and 2 , the outcome variable is a dummy for whether the respondent describes their political views as liberal or very liberal ; in Columns 3 and 4—a similar dummy for self - described views being conservative or very conservative . Baseline controls include county and year ﬁxed effects , dummies for the respondents’ gender , race , age , education level , marital status , and income group , the counties’ unemployment rate , log of median household income , median age , and share of population that is single , married , white , black , asian , has no schooling , has at least a bachelors degree , and is on food stamps . Other controls also include a dummy variable for whether the ZIP code was fully covered by 3G networks in 2008 ( i . e . , the ﬁrst year in the sample ) and separate year ﬁxed effects for the ZIP codes that were . In Columns 1 and 3 , controls also include dummies for individuals’ political afﬁliation ( i . e . , Democratic voter , Republican voter , etc . ) . A county is assumed to be Democratic - leaning if Obama won the county in 2008 by a margin of at least 10 percentage points ; Republican - leaning—if Obama lost the county in 2008 by a margin of at least 10 percentage points ; other counties are characterized as swing counties . Standard errors in parentheses are corrected for clusters at the level of the states and the District of Columbia . 60 Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3946055 Table A6 : 3G internet and political polarization , ZIP code ﬁxed effects ( 1 ) ( 2 ) ( 3 ) ( 4 ) Dep . Var . : Political views are : Liberal or Conservative or very liberal very conservative 3G network coverage × × Democratic voter 0 . 045 * * * - 0 . 011 * * ( 0 . 006 ) ( 0 . 005 ) × Independent voter - 0 . 018 * * * - 0 . 013 * * * ( 0 . 003 ) ( 0 . 003 ) × Republican voter - 0 . 036 * * * 0 . 025 * * * ( 0 . 002 ) ( 0 . 003 ) × Resident of Democratic - leaning county - 0 . 002 - 0 . 005 * * ( 0 . 003 ) ( 0 . 003 ) × Resident of swing county - 0 . 006 * * * 0 . 003 ( 0 . 002 ) ( 0 . 003 ) × Resident of Republican - leaning county - 0 . 010 * * * 0 . 011 * * * ( 0 . 002 ) ( 0 . 004 ) Observations 1 , 763 , 756 1 , 763 , 755 1 , 763 , 756 1 , 763 , 755 R - squared 0 . 222 0 . 099 0 . 275 0 . 113 Mean dep . var 0 . 234 0 . 234 0 . 420 0 . 420 Number of clusters 51 51 51 51 Number of ZIP codes 30 , 140 30 , 140 30 , 140 30 , 140 ZIP code & year FEs (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) Baseline controls (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) Note : * * * p < 0 . 01 , * * p < 0 . 05 , * p < 0 . 1 . The table presents the results of estimating Speciﬁcations ( 1 ) and ( 2 ) for respondents’ self - described political views . The unit of observation is an individual . The number of ZIP codes is smaller than in Table 1 because ZIP codes with only one observation are automatically dropped from the sample . In Columns 1 and 2 , the outcome variable is a dummy for whether the respondent describes their political views as liberal or very liberal ; in Columns 3 and 4—a similar dummy for self - described views being conservative or very conservative . Controls include ZIP code and year ﬁxed effects , dummies for the respondents’ gender , race , age , education level , marital status , and income group , the counties’ unemployment rate , log of median household income , median age , and share of population that is single , married , white , black , asian , has no schooling , has at least a bachelors degree , and is on food stamps . Other controls also include a dummy variable for whether the ZIP code was fully covered by 3G networks in 2008 ( i . e . , the ﬁrst year in the sample ) and separate year ﬁxed effects for the ZIP codes that were . In Columns 1 and 3 , controls also include dummies for individuals’ political afﬁliation ( i . e . , Democratic voter , Republican voter , etc . ) . A county is assumed to be Democratic - leaning if Obama won the county in 2008 by a margin of at least 10 percentage points ; Republican - leaning—if Obama lost the county in 2008 by a margin of at least 10 percentage points ; other counties are characterized as swing counties . Standard errors in parentheses are corrected for clusters at the level of the states and the District of Columbia . 61 Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3946055 Table A7 : 3G network coverage and county socioeconomic characteristics ( 1 ) ( 2 ) ( 3 ) ( 4 ) ( 5 ) Dep . Var . : 3G coverage 3G coverage Medium income Unemployment Share of population in year t in year t + 1 in county rate in county on food stamps 3G coverage in year t − 1 - 0 . 327 0 . 103 0 . 114 ( 0 . 419 ) ( 0 . 171 ) ( 0 . 193 ) Medium income in county - 0 . 001 - 0 . 000 ( 0 . 001 ) ( 0 . 001 ) Unemployment rate in county 0 . 003 0 . 000 ( 0 . 006 ) ( 0 . 007 ) Share of population on food stamps - 0 . 001 - 0 . 002 ( 0 . 003 ) ( 0 . 003 ) Share of population with no schooling - 0 . 002 - 0 . 002 ( 0 . 006 ) ( 0 . 005 ) Share of population with college degree - 0 . 000 - 0 . 003 ( 0 . 001 ) ( 0 . 002 ) Observations 34 , 496 34 , 496 34 , 496 34 , 496 34 , 496 Mean dep . var 0 . 477 0 . 544 56 . 91 6 . 701 14 . 41 Number of counties 3 , 139 3 , 139 3 , 139 3 , 139 3 , 139 County & year FEs (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) Baseline controls (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) Note : * * * p < 0 . 01 , * * p < 0 . 05 , * p < 0 . 1 . The table presents the relationship between 3G network coverage and the socioeconomic charac - teristics of the county . The unit of observation is a county . Medium income is measured in thousands . Baseline controls include county and year ﬁxed effects , the counties’ unemployment rate , log of median household income , median age , and share of population that is single , married , white , black , asian , has no schooling , has at least a bachelors degree , and is on food stamps . The three outcome variables in Columns 3 - 5 are excluded from the list of controls in those regressions . Standard errors in parentheses are corrected for clusters at the level of the states and the District of Columbia . 62 Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3946055 Table A8 : Lightning strikes , 3G network coverage , and political views ( 1 ) ( 2 ) ( 3 ) ( 4 ) ( 5 ) ( 6 ) Sample : Counties Obama lost in 2008 Counties Obama won in 2008 Dep . Var . : 3G network Political views : conservative 3G network Political views : liberal coverage or very conservative coverage or very liberal Lightning strikes per km 2 × t - 0 . 438 * * * - 0 . 017 * * * - 0 . 106 * * * - 0 . 003 * * ( 0 . 114 ) ( 0 . 005 ) ( 0 . 024 ) ( 0 . 001 ) 3G network coverage 0 . 038 * * 0 . 025 * ( 0 . 016 ) ( 0 . 014 ) Anderson - Rubin 90 % CI [ 0 . 018 , 0 . 080 ] [ 0 . 007 , 0 . 058 ] Observations 749 , 786 749 , 786 749 , 786 1 , 013 , 599 1 , 013 , 599 1 , 013 , 599 F - stat , excluded instrument 14 . 68 20 . 42 Mean dep . var 0 . 621 0 . 506 0 . 506 0 . 791 0 . 282 0 . 282 Number of clusters 47 47 47 51 51 51 Number of ZIP codes 17 , 707 17 , 707 17 , 707 14 , 173 14 , 173 14 , 173 County & year FEs (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) Baseline controls (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) Additional controls (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) Note : * * * p < 0 . 01 , * * p < 0 . 05 , * p < 0 . 1 . The table presents the IV results , where 3G network coverage is predicted using the frequency of lightning strikes . The unit of observation is an individual . In Columns 1 - 3 , the sample consists of counties that Obama lost in 2008 ; in Columns 4 - 6—counties that Obama won in 2008 . In Columns 1 and 4 , the outcome variable is the share of the ZIP code’s territory that has 3G network coverage ; in the other columns—a dummy for whether an individual holds certain political views . The frequency of lightning strikes is measured in standard deviations . Baseline controls include county and year ﬁxed effects , dummies for the respondents’ gender , race , age , education level , marital status , and income group , the counties’ unemployment rate , log of median household income , median age , and share of population that is single , married , white , black , asian , has no schooling , has at least a bachelors degree , and is on food stamps . Additional controls used in the IV analysis also include separate year ﬁxed effects for all quartiles of county population size , the log of maximum elevation in the county interacted with a time trend , and the share of the counties’ territory that is uninhabited interacted with a time trend . Standard errors in parentheses are corrected for clusters at the level of the states and the District of Columbia . In Columns 1 - 3 , the number of clusters is smaller because Obama won all the counties in Connecticut , the District of Columbia , Hawaii , and Vermont . 63 Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3946055 Table A9 : 2G network coverage and political views ( 1 ) ( 2 ) ( 3 ) ( 4 ) Dep . Var . : Political views are : Liberal or Conservative or very liberal very conservative 2G network coverage × × Counties Obama won in 2008 - 0 . 003 - 0 . 007 - 0 . 003 0 . 001 ( 0 . 004 ) ( 0 . 005 ) ( 0 . 004 ) ( 0 . 004 ) × Counties Obama lost in 2008 - 0 . 002 0 . 003 0 . 002 - 0 . 003 ( 0 . 002 ) ( 0 . 002 ) ( 0 . 003 ) ( 0 . 003 ) 3G network coverage × × Counties Obama won in 2008 0 . 011 * * * - 0 . 015 * * * ( 0 . 003 ) ( 0 . 003 ) × Counties Obama lost in 2008 - 0 . 004 * * * 0 . 001 ( 0 . 001 ) ( 0 . 003 ) Observations 1 , 762 , 802 1 , 762 , 795 1 , 762 , 802 1 , 762 , 795 Mean dep . var 0 . 234 0 . 234 0 . 420 0 . 420 Number of clusters 51 51 51 51 Number of ZIP codes 31 , 066 31 , 063 31 , 066 31 , 063 County & year FEs (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) Baseline controls (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) Note : * * * p < 0 . 01 , * * p < 0 . 05 , * p < 0 . 1 . The table presents the relationship between 2G network coverage and individuals’ political views . The unit of observation is an individual . In Columns 1 and 2 , the outcome variable is a dummy for whether the respondent describes their political views as liberal or very liberal ; in Columns 3 and 4—a similar dummy for self - described views being conservative or very conservative . Baseline controls include county and year ﬁxed effects , dummies for the respondents’ gender , race , age , education level , marital status , and income group , the counties’ unemployment rate , log of median household income , median age , and share of population that is single , married , white , black , asian , has no schooling , has at least a bachelors degree , and is on food stamps . Standard errors in parentheses are corrected for clusters at the level of the states and the District of Columbia . 64 Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3946055 Table A10 : 3G network coverage and migration ( 1 ) ( 2 ) ( 3 ) ( 4 ) ( 5 ) ( 6 ) Dep . Var . : In - migration rate Out - migration rate Net - migration rate 3G network coverage × 0 . 121 0 . 079 0 . 042 ( 0 . 073 ) ( 0 . 048 ) ( 0 . 061 ) 3G network coverage × × Resident of Democratic - leaning county 0 . 004 0 . 111 - 0 . 106 ( 0 . 110 ) ( 0 . 090 ) ( 0 . 073 ) × Resident of Republican - leaning county 0 . 129 0 . 037 0 . 093 ( 0 . 095 ) ( 0 . 058 ) ( 0 . 077 ) Observations 30 , 545 30 , 545 30 , 545 30 , 545 30 , 545 30 , 545 Mean dep . var 4 . 868 4 . 868 4 . 807 4 . 807 0 . 062 0 . 062 Number of counties 3 , 121 3 , 121 3 , 121 3 , 121 3 , 121 3 , 121 County & year FEs (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) Baseline controls (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) Note : * * * p < 0 . 01 , * * p < 0 . 05 , * p < 0 . 1 . The table presents the relationship between 3G network coverage and migration . The unit of observation is a county . The outcome variables are measured in percentage points . Baseline controls include county and year ﬁxed effects , the counties’ unemployment rate , log of median household income , median age , and share of population that is single , married , white , black , asian , has no schooling , has at least a bachelors degree , and is on food stamps . A county is assumed to be Democratic - leaning if Obama won the county in 2008 by a margin of at least 10 percentage points ; a county is assumed to be Republican - leaning if Obama lost the county in 2008 by a margin of at least 10 percentage points . Standard errors in parentheses are corrected for clusters at the level of the states and the District of Columbia . 65 Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3946055 Table A11 : 3G internet and political polarization , by past vote type ( 1 ) ( 2 ) ( 3 ) ( 4 ) Dep . Var . : Political views are : Liberal or Conservative or very liberal very conservative 3G network coverage × × Voted for Democratic presidential 0 . 045 * * * 0 . 050 * * * 0 . 008 0 . 001 nominee in last election ( 0 . 007 ) ( 0 . 008 ) ( 0 . 007 ) ( 0 . 007 ) × Voted for Republican presidential - 0 . 017 * * * - 0 . 016 * * * 0 . 013 * 0 . 021 * * * nominee in last election ( 0 . 005 ) ( 0 . 005 ) ( 0 . 007 ) ( 0 . 007 ) Observations 293 , 588 293 , 588 293 , 588 293 , 588 Mean dep . var 0 . 286 0 . 286 0 . 387 0 . 387 Number of clusters 51 51 51 51 Number of ZIP codes 21 , 701 21 , 701 21 , 701 21 , 701 County & year FEs (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) Baseline controls (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) Political - afﬁliation - year FEs (cid:88) (cid:88) Note : * * * p < 0 . 01 , * * p < 0 . 05 , * p < 0 . 1 . The table presents the results of estimating Speciﬁcation ( 1 ) for individuals who voted for the Democratic and Republican presidential nominees in the last election . The unit of observation is an individual . In Columns 1 and 2 , the outcome variable is a dummy for whether the respondent describes their political views as liberal or very liberal ; in Columns 3 and 4—a similar dummy for self - described views being conservative or very conservative . Baseline controls include county and year ﬁxed effects , dummies for the respondents’ gender , race , age , education level , marital status , and income group , the counties’ unemployment rate , log of median household income , median age , and share of population that is single , married , white , black , asian , has no schooling , has at least a bachelors degree , and is on food stamps . Other controls also include a dummy variable for whether the ZIP code was fully covered by 3G networks in 2008 ( i . e . , the ﬁrst year in the sample ) and separate year ﬁxed effects for the ZIP codes that were . Observations are weighted by survey weights . Standard errors in parentheses are corrected for clusters at the level of the states and the District of Columbia . 66 Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3946055 Table A12 : Policy preferences and leads of 3G network coverage ( 1 ) ( 2 ) ( 3 ) ( 4 ) Dep . Var . : Always allow Support gay Repeal Increase border abortion marriage the ACA security 3G network coverage in year t × × Resident of Democratic - leaning county 0 . 004 0 . 031 * * 0 . 009 - 0 . 031 ( 0 . 008 ) ( 0 . 015 ) ( 0 . 046 ) ( 0 . 024 ) × Resident of swing county - 0 . 002 0 . 020 0 . 005 - 0 . 010 ( 0 . 009 ) ( 0 . 015 ) ( 0 . 030 ) ( 0 . 016 ) × Resident of Republican - leaning county - 0 . 015 * * - 0 . 030 * * 0 . 038 * 0 . 035 * * * ( 0 . 007 ) ( 0 . 012 ) ( 0 . 022 ) ( 0 . 011 ) 3G network coverage in year t + 1 × × Resident of Democratic - leaning county 0 . 017 0 . 010 - 0 . 050 0 . 005 ( 0 . 012 ) ( 0 . 016 ) ( 0 . 051 ) ( 0 . 033 ) × Resident of swing county 0 . 011 - 0 . 004 - 0 . 015 - 0 . 015 ( 0 . 012 ) ( 0 . 012 ) ( 0 . 036 ) ( 0 . 022 ) × Resident of Republican - leaning county 0 . 005 - 0 . 003 - 0 . 023 - 0 . 031 * ( 0 . 009 ) ( 0 . 013 ) ( 0 . 026 ) ( 0 . 018 ) Observations 394 , 518 316 , 521 278 , 657 356 , 933 R - squared 0 . 110 0 . 108 0 . 109 0 . 107 Mean dep . var 0 . 536 0 . 578 0 . 486 0 . 523 Number of clusters 51 51 51 51 Number of ZIP codes 23 , 216 22 , 450 21 , 375 22 , 614 County & year FEs (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) Baseline controls (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) Note : * * * p < 0 . 01 , * * p < 0 . 05 , * p < 0 . 1 . Policy preferences are affected by current 3G network coverage , not future availability of 3G . The unit of observation is an individual . The outcome variables are dummies for the respondents’ policy preferences . Baseline controls include county and year ﬁxed effects , dummies for the respondents’ gender , race , age , education level , marital status , and income group , the counties’ unemployment rate , log of median household income , median age , and share of population that is single , married , white , black , asian , has no schooling , has at least a bachelors degree , and is on food stamps . In Columns 1 , 2 , and 4 , additional controls include a dummy variable for whether the ZIP code was fully covered by 3G networks in 2008 and separate year ﬁxed effects for the ZIP codes that were , separately for Democratic - leaning , Republican - leaning , and swing counties . In Column 3 , additional controls include the same speciﬁcation with 3G networks in 2012 . The reason for the change is that the question about repealing the ACA was ﬁrst asked in 2012 . A county is assumed to be Democratic - leaning if Obama won the county in 2008 by a margin of at least 10 percentage points ; a county is assumed to be Republican - leaning if Obama lost the county in 2008 by a margin of at least 10 percentage points ; other counties are characterized as swing counties . Standard errors in parentheses are corrected for clusters at the level of the states and the District of Columbia . 67 Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3946055 Table A13 : 3G internet and the main problem facing the country ( 1 ) ( 2 ) ( 3 ) ( 4 ) Dep . Var . : Main problem facing the country : Immigration Inequality Race Guns 3G network coverage × × Resident of Democratic - leaning county 0 . 005 0 . 007 * * * 0 . 001 0 . 001 ( 0 . 003 ) ( 0 . 002 ) ( 0 . 002 ) ( 0 . 001 ) × Resident of swing county - 0 . 000 - 0 . 003 * - 0 . 002 - 0 . 001 ( 0 . 003 ) ( 0 . 001 ) ( 0 . 002 ) ( 0 . 001 ) × Resident of Republican - leaning county 0 . 008 * * - 0 . 004 * * * - 0 . 008 * * * - 0 . 003 * * * ( 0 . 003 ) ( 0 . 001 ) ( 0 . 002 ) ( 0 . 001 ) Observations 105 , 217 105 , 217 105 , 217 105 , 217 R - squared 0 . 060 0 . 032 0 . 062 0 . 037 Mean dep . var 0 . 041 0 . 012 0 . 020 0 . 008 Number of clusters 51 51 51 51 Number of ZIP codes 20 , 392 20 , 392 20 , 392 20 , 392 County & year FEs (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) Baseline controls (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) Note : * * * p < 0 . 01 , * * p < 0 . 05 , * p < 0 . 1 . The table presents the results of estimating Speciﬁcation ( 2 ) for the respondents’ views on the most important problems facing the country . The unit of observation is an individual . The outcome variables are dummies for whether the respondent considers this problem to be the most important problem facing the country today . Baseline controls include county and year ﬁxed effects , dummies for the respondents’ gender , race , age , education level , marital status , and income group , the counties’ unemployment rate , log of median household income , median age , and share of population that is single , married , white , black , asian , has no schooling , has at least a bachelors degree , and is on food stamps . Other controls also include a dummy variable for whether the ZIP code was fully covered by 3G networks in 2008 ( i . e . , the ﬁrst year in the sample ) and separate year ﬁxed effects for the ZIP codes that were . A county is assumed to be Democratic - leaning if Obama won the county in 2008 by a margin of at least 10 percentage points ; a county is assumed to be Republican - leaning if Obama lost the county in 2008 by a margin of at least 10 percentage points ; other counties are characterized as swing counties . Standard errors in parentheses are corrected for clusters at the level of the states and the District of Columbia . 68 Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3946055 Table A14 : Voting outcomes and leads of 3G network coverage ( 1 ) ( 2 ) ( 3 ) ( 4 ) ( 5 ) ( 6 ) Dep . Var . : Republican Democratic Republican vote vote share ( R ) vote share ( D ) margin ( R - D ) 3G network coverage in year t × × Resident of Democratic - leaning county - 4 . 567 * * - 1 . 571 4 . 393 * 1 . 403 - 8 . 960 * * - 2 . 974 ( 2 . 240 ) ( 0 . 964 ) ( 2 . 261 ) ( 1 . 056 ) ( 4 . 380 ) ( 1 . 955 ) × Resident of swing county 1 . 287 1 . 497 0 . 017 - 0 . 770 1 . 271 2 . 267 ( 1 . 635 ) ( 1 . 281 ) ( 1 . 733 ) ( 1 . 207 ) ( 3 . 185 ) ( 2 . 305 ) × Resident of Republican - leaning county 3 . 687 * * 3 . 900 * * * - 3 . 823 * - 4 . 703 * * * 7 . 509 * * 8 . 602 * * * ( 1 . 531 ) ( 1 . 157 ) ( 2 . 216 ) ( 1 . 455 ) ( 3 . 675 ) ( 2 . 500 ) 3G network coverage in year t + 1 × × Resident of Democratic - leaning county - 0 . 377 - 1 . 049 - 0 . 346 1 . 151 - 0 . 031 - 2 . 200 ( 2 . 653 ) ( 1 . 569 ) ( 2 . 232 ) ( 1 . 575 ) ( 4 . 724 ) ( 3 . 099 ) × Resident of swing county 0 . 768 2 . 333 - 2 . 457 - 2 . 911 3 . 225 5 . 245 * ( 1 . 839 ) ( 1 . 424 ) ( 1 . 999 ) ( 1 . 752 ) ( 3 . 681 ) ( 3 . 094 ) × Resident of Republican - leaning county 1 . 352 1 . 061 - 1 . 201 - 0 . 260 2 . 553 1 . 321 ( 1 . 485 ) ( 1 . 320 ) ( 2 . 380 ) ( 1 . 935 ) ( 3 . 730 ) ( 3 . 183 ) Observations 18 , 573 16 , 864 18 , 573 16 , 864 18 , 573 16 , 864 R - squared 0 . 793 0 . 858 0 . 779 0 . 857 0 . 795 0 . 862 Mean dep . var 60 . 74 59 . 53 36 . 08 38 . 11 24 . 66 21 . 42 Number of counties 3 , 110 3 , 110 3 , 110 3 , 110 3 , 110 3 , 110 County & year FEs (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) Baseline controls (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) Excluding unopposed races (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) Note : * * * p < 0 . 01 , * * p < 0 . 05 , * p < 0 . 1 . Voting outcomes are affected by current 3G network coverage , not future availability of 3G . The unit of observation is a county . The outcomes are measured in percentage points . In odd columns , the results are reported for the full sample ; in even columns—for county - years with at least one Democrat and at least one Republican running for ofﬁce . Alaska is excluded from the sample because , in Alaska , election results are not available at the county level . Baseline controls include county and year ﬁxed effects , the counties’ unemployment rate , log of median household income , median age , and share of population that is single , married , white , black , asian , has no schooling , has at least a bachelors degree , and is on food stamps . Other controls also include a dummy variable for whether the county was fully covered by 3G networks in 2008 ( i . e . , the ﬁrst year in the sample ) and separate year ﬁxed effects for the counties that were , separately for Democratic - leaning , Republican - leaning , and swing counties . A county is assumed to be Democratic - leaning if Obama won the county in 2008 by a margin of at least 10 percentage points ; a county is assumed to be Republican - leaning if Obama lost the county in 2008 by a margin of at least 10 percentage points ; other counties are characterized as swing counties . Standard errors in parentheses are corrected for clusters at the level of the states . 69 Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3946055 Table A15 : Share of increase in political polarization explained by 3G ( 1 ) ( 2 ) ( 3 ) ( 4 ) ( 5 ) ( 6 ) Dep . Var . : Political views Voting Abortion Gay marriage The ACA Border security Share of increase in political 11 . 3 % 37 . 7 % 22 . 1 % 97 . 6 % 12 . 8 % 6 . 8 % polarization explained by 3G Source of results : Tab . A5 , Tab . 3 , Tab . 2 , Tab . 2 , Tab . 2 , Tab . 2 , Col . 2 and 4 Col . 2 and 4 Col . 1 Col . 2 Col . 3 Col . 4 Regression estimates for 0 . 010 * * * 2 . 396 * 0 . 013 * * 0 . 037 * * * 0 . 053 * * * 0 . 029 * * * Democratic counties ( β D ) ( 0 . 003 ) ( 1 . 355 ) ( 0 . 006 ) ( 0 . 011 ) ( 0 . 019 ) ( 0 . 010 ) Regression estimates for 0 . 001 4 . 540 * * * 0 . 012 * * 0 . 033 * * * 0 . 027 0 . 017 * * Republican counties ( β R ) ( 0 . 003 ) ( 1 . 249 ) ( 0 . 006 ) ( 0 . 009 ) ( 0 . 016 ) ( 0 . 007 ) Increase in polarization ( ∆P ) 0 . 034 7 . 765 0 . 038 0 . 024 0 . 014 0 . 075 Increase in 3G coverage , 0 . 613 0 . 687 0 . 607 0 . 601 0 . 020 0 . 126 Democratic counties ( ∆3G D ) Increase in 3G coverage , 0 . 775 0 . 733 0 . 780 0 . 749 0 . 109 0 . 432 Republican counties ( ∆3G R ) Share of Democratic counties ( w D ) 0 . 418 0 . 180 0 . 454 0 . 456 0 . 457 0 . 456 Share of Republican counties ( w R ) 0 . 323 0 . 575 0 . 287 0 . 284 0 . 284 0 . 284 Note : * * * p < 0 . 01 , * * p < 0 . 05 , * p < 0 . 1 . The table reports the share of the increase in poltical polarization that can be explained by mobile internet , using Formula ( 6 ) . Further details of the calculations are available in Section A . II of the Appendix . 70 Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3946055 Table A16 : Persuasion rates ( 1 ) ( 2 ) ( 3 ) ( 4 ) ( 5 ) ( 6 ) Dep . Var . : Liberal or very liberal political views Conservative or very conservative political views Persuasion rate 6 . 18 / N 7 . 51 / N 17 . 62 / N 9 . 46 / N 0 . 39 / N 15 . 98 / N Source of results : Tab . A5 , Col . 2 Tab . A5 , Col . 2 Tab . A8 , Col . 6 Tab . A5 , Col . 4 Tab . A5 , Col . 4 Tab . A8 , Col . 3 Political afﬁliation : Democratic Republican Democratic Democratic Republican Republican Regression estimates 0 . 010 * * * - 0 . 006 * * * 0 . 025 * - 0 . 018 * * * 0 . 001 0 . 038 * * ( 0 . 003 ) ( 0 . 002 ) ( 0 . 014 ) ( 0 . 002 ) ( 0 . 003 ) ( 0 . 016 ) Cellular coverage ( de / ds ) 0 . 549 N 0 . 488 N 0 . 541 N 0 . 549 N 0 . 488 N 0 . 493 N Mean of dep . var . 0 . 303 0 . 160 0 . 282 0 . 332 0 . 522 0 . 506 Mean of 3G coverage 0 . 816 0 . 608 0 . 791 0 . 816 0 . 608 0 . 620 ( 7 ) ( 8 ) ( 9 ) ( 10 ) ( 11 ) ( 12 ) Dep . Var . : Republican vote share ( R ) Democratic vote share ( D ) Always allow abortion Persuasion rate 16 . 80 / N 9 . 57 / N 2 . 18 / N 35 . 31 / N 3 . 93 / N 5 . 64 / N Source of results : Tab . 3 , Col . 2 Tab . 3 , Col . 2 Tab . 3 , Col . 4 Tab . 3 , Col . 4 Tab . 2 , Col . 1 Tab . 2 , Col . 1 Political afﬁliation : Democratic Republican Democratic Republican Democratic Republican Regression estimates - 2 . 577 * 4 . 540 * * * 2 . 396 * - 4 . 789 * * * 0 . 013 * * - 0 . 012 * * ( 1 . 390 ) ( 1 . 249 ) ( 1 . 355 ) ( 1 . 190 ) ( 0 . 006 ) ( 0 . 006 ) Effect on turnout - 1 . 068 * * - 0 . 753 * - 1 . 068 * * - 0 . 753 * ( 0 . 415 ) ( 0 . 440 ) ( 0 . 415 ) ( 0 . 440 ) Cellular coverage ( de / ds ) 0 . 549 N 0 . 488 N 0 . 549 N 0 . 488 N 0 . 549 N 0 . 488 N Mean of dep . var . 37 . 12 68 . 78 60 . 56 28 . 76 0 . 615 0 . 427 Mean of 3G coverage 0 . 536 0 . 447 0 . 536 0 . 447 0 . 906 0 . 738 Mean of turnout 38 . 58 37 . 12 38 . 58 37 . 12 ( 13 ) ( 14 ) ( 15 ) ( 16 ) ( 17 ) ( 18 ) Dep . Var . : Support gay marriage Repeal the ACA Increase border security Persuasion rate 11 . 10 / N 13 . 29 / N 20 . 87 / N 9 . 82 / N 10 . 72 / N 6 . 61 / N Source of results : Tab . 2 , Col . 2 Tab . 2 , Col . 2 Tab . 2 , Col . 3 Tab . 2 , Col . 3 Tab . 2 , Col . 4 Tab . 2 , Col . 4 Political afﬁliation : Democratic Republican Democratic Republican Democratic Republican Regression estimates 0 . 037 * * * - 0 . 033 * * * - 0 . 053 * * * 0 . 027 - 0 . 029 * * * 0 . 017 * * ( 0 . 011 ) ( 0 . 009 ) ( 0 . 019 ) ( 0 . 016 ) ( 0 . 010 ) ( 0 . 007 ) Cellular coverage ( de / ds ) 0 . 549 N 0 . 488 N 0 . 549 N 0 . 488 N 0 . 549 N 0 . 488 N Mean of dep . var . 0 . 640 0 . 486 0 . 411 0 . 587 0 . 465 0 . 542 Mean of 3G coverage 0 . 888 0 . 692 0 . 973 0 . 879 0 . 950 0 . 894 Note : * * * p < 0 . 01 , * * p < 0 . 05 , * p < 0 . 1 . The table presents the persuasion rates of the effects of 3G internet on political outcomes . N represents the number of individuals that are affected by the internet’s “message” per cellular data plan subscription ( i . e . , if N = 1 , there are no spillover effects , and only one person is affected per connection ; N > 1 indicates the presence of spillover effects ) . The calculation of the persuasion rates is based on the formulas in Enikolopov , Petrova and Zhuravskaya ( 2011 ) , which are also reproduced in Section A . III of the Appendix . Further details of the calculations are available in Section A . III of the Appendix . 71 Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3946055 Table A17 : Internet usage and political views , by party afﬁliation ( 1 ) ( 2 ) ( 3 ) ( 4 ) ( 5 ) ( 6 ) ( 7 ) ( 8 ) ( 9 ) ( 10 ) Dep . Var . : Conservative or very conservative political views Liberal or very liberal political views Resident of Democratic - leaning county × × 3G network coverage × × Share of households using the - 0 . 014 * * * 0 . 013 * * * internet to obtain news ( 0 . 004 ) ( 0 . 004 ) × Share of households visiting - 0 . 015 * * * 0 . 014 * * * TV networks’ websites ( 0 . 004 ) ( 0 . 005 ) × Share of households using YouTube - 0 . 031 * * 0 . 024 ( 0 . 012 ) ( 0 . 017 ) × Share of households using Facebook - 0 . 037 * * * 0 . 032 * ( 0 . 014 ) ( 0 . 018 ) × Average of internet usage measures - 0 . 025 * * * 0 . 024 * * * ( 0 . 007 ) ( 0 . 008 ) Resident of Republican - leaning county × × 3G network coverage × × Share of households using the - 0 . 011 * * * 0 . 001 internet to obtain news ( 0 . 004 ) ( 0 . 003 ) × Share of households visiting - 0 . 012 * * * 0 . 002 TV networks’ websites ( 0 . 003 ) ( 0 . 002 ) × Share of households using YouTube - 0 . 037 * * * 0 . 009 ( 0 . 007 ) ( 0 . 008 ) × Share of households using Facebook - 0 . 037 * * * 0 . 008 ( 0 . 008 ) ( 0 . 009 ) × Average of internet usage measures - 0 . 020 * * * 0 . 003 ( 0 . 005 ) ( 0 . 004 ) Observations 1 , 764 , 533 1 , 764 , 533 1 , 764 , 533 1 , 764 , 533 1 , 764 , 533 1 , 764 , 533 1 , 764 , 533 1 , 764 , 533 1 , 764 , 533 1 , 764 , 533 County & year FEs (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) Baseline controls (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) Note : * * * p < 0 . 01 , * * p < 0 . 05 , * p < 0 . 1 . The table demonstrates how individuals’ political views are affected depending on how they use the internet , separately for Democratic - leaning and Republican - leaning counties . The internet usage variables represent the average values of the respective variables in the ﬁrst four years for which the data are available ( i . e . , the ﬁrst half of the sample period ) after subtracting the effect of 3G internet on these variables . The unit of observation is an individual . In Columns 1 - 5 , the outcome variable is a dummy for whether the respondent describes their political views as conservative or very conservative ; in Columns 6 - 10—liberal or very liberal . Baseline controls include county and year ﬁxed effects , dummies for the respondents’ gender , race , age , education level , marital status , and income group , the counties’ unemployment rate , log of median household income , median age , and share of population that is single , married , white , black , asian , has no schooling , has at least a bachelors degree , and is on food stamps . Additional controls include 3G network coverage interacted with the ZIP code’s level of poverty in 2010 - 2014 as well as for the direct effects of 3G internet and the internet usage measures , separately for each political afﬁliation . Standard errors in parentheses are corrected for clusters at the level of the states and the District of Columbia . 72 E l e c t r on i c c op y a v a il ab l e a t : h tt p s : / / ss r n . c o m / ab s t r a c t = 3946055 Table A18 : Internet usage and political views , controlling for the effects of 3G by age , education , and income ( 1 ) ( 2 ) ( 3 ) ( 4 ) ( 5 ) ( 6 ) ( 7 ) ( 8 ) ( 9 ) ( 10 ) ( 11 ) ( 12 ) Dep . Var . : Conservative or very conservative political views Liberal or very liberal political views 3G network coverage × × Share of households using the - 0 . 005 * * 0 . 003 internet to obtain news ( 0 . 002 ) ( 0 . 002 ) × Share of households visiting - 0 . 008 * * * 0 . 005 * * TV networks’ websites ( 0 . 002 ) ( 0 . 002 ) × Share of households using YouTube - 0 . 022 * * * 0 . 015 * ( 0 . 006 ) ( 0 . 008 ) × Share of households using Facebook - 0 . 023 * * * 0 . 015 * ( 0 . 007 ) ( 0 . 009 ) × Average of internet usage measures - 0 . 012 * * * 0 . 008 * * ( 0 . 003 ) ( 0 . 004 ) × Share of households visiting CNN . com - 0 . 119 * * * 0 . 134 * * * ( 0 . 015 ) ( 0 . 025 ) × Share of households visiting FoxNews . com 0 . 044 * * * - 0 . 052 * * * ( 0 . 007 ) ( 0 . 009 ) Observations 1 , 764 , 534 1 , 764 , 534 1 , 764 , 534 1 , 764 , 534 1 , 764 , 534 1 , 764 , 350 1 , 764 , 534 1 , 764 , 534 1 , 764 , 534 1 , 764 , 534 1 , 764 , 534 1 , 764 , 350 R - squared 0 . 092 0 . 092 0 . 092 0 . 092 0 . 092 0 . 093 0 . 074 0 . 074 0 . 074 0 . 074 0 . 074 0 . 077 Mean dep . var 0 . 420 0 . 420 0 . 420 0 . 420 0 . 420 0 . 420 0 . 234 0 . 234 0 . 234 0 . 234 0 . 234 0 . 234 Number of ZIP codes 31 , 329 31 , 329 31 , 329 31 , 329 31 , 329 31 , 292 31 , 329 31 , 329 31 , 329 31 , 329 31 , 329 31 , 292 County & year FEs (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) Baseline controls (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) Controls for the effects of 3G by age , education , and income (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) Note : * * * p < 0 . 01 , * * p < 0 . 05 , * p < 0 . 1 . The table demonstrates how individuals’ political views are affected depending on how they use the internet , controlling for the effects of 3G by age , education , and income . The internet usage variables represent the average values of the respective variables in the ﬁrst four years for which the data are available ( i . e , the ﬁrst half of the sample period ) after subtracting the effect of 3G internet on these variables . The unit of observation is an individual . In Columns 1 - 6 , the outcome variable is a dummy for whether the respondent describes their political views as conservative or very conservative ; in Columns 7 - 12—a similar dummy for self - described views being liberal or very liberal . Baseline controls include county and year ﬁxed effects , dummies for the respondents’ gender , race , age , education level , marital status , and income group , the counties’ unemployment rate , log of median household income , median age , and share of population that is single , married , white , black , asian , has no schooling , has at least a bachelors degree , and is on food stamps . Additional controls include 3G network coverage interacted with dummies for individuals not having a high school degree , having at least a bachelors degree , 20 - year age bins , ﬁve survey - deﬁned income groups , and the share of people living in poverty in the ZIP code . All the regressions also control for the direct effects of 3G internet , the internet usage measures , and all the other additional controls . Standard errors in parentheses are corrected for clusters at the level of the states and the District of Columbia . 73 E l e c t r on i c c op y a v a il ab l e a t : h tt p s : / / ss r n . c o m / ab s t r a c t = 3946055 Table A19 : Heterogeneity by age and political afﬁliation ( 1 ) ( 2 ) Dep . Var . : Political views are : Conservative or Liberal or very conservative very liberal 3G network coverage × Age ≤ 40 × × Resident of Democratic - leaning county - 0 . 023 * * * 0 . 015 * * * ( 0 . 004 ) ( 0 . 004 ) × Resident of swing county - 0 . 027 * * * 0 . 005 ( 0 . 004 ) ( 0 . 004 ) × Resident of Republican - leaning county - 0 . 032 * * * 0 . 007 * * ( 0 . 006 ) ( 0 . 003 ) 3G network coverage × Age > 40 × × Resident of Democratic - leaning county - 0 . 017 * * * 0 . 008 * * ( 0 . 003 ) ( 0 . 004 ) × Resident of swing county - 0 . 002 0 . 000 ( 0 . 002 ) ( 0 . 002 ) × Resident of Republican - leaning county 0 . 010 * * * - 0 . 008 * * * ( 0 . 003 ) ( 0 . 002 ) Observations 1 , 747 , 806 1 , 747 , 806 Mean dep . var 0 . 419 0 . 234 Number of ZIP codes 31 , 492 31 , 492 County & year FEs (cid:88) (cid:88) Baseline controls (cid:88) (cid:88) Note : * * * p < 0 . 01 , * * p < 0 . 05 , * p < 0 . 1 . The table illustartes the heterogeneity of the effects of 3G network coverage by age , showing that polarization primarily increased among older individuals , which is consistent with the ﬁndings in Boxell , Gentzkow and Shapiro ( 2017 ) . The unit of observation is an individual . In Column 1 , the outcome variable is a dummy for whether the respondent describes their political views as conservative or very conservative ; in Column 2—a similar dummy for self - described views being liberal or very liberal . Baseline controls include county and year ﬁxed effects , dummies for the respondents’ gender , race , age , education level , marital status , and income group , the counties’ unemployment rate , log of median household income , median age , and share of population that is single , married , white , black , asian , has no schooling , has at least a bachelors degree , and is on food stamps . Other controls also include non - collinear lower - level interactions between 3G network coverage , the political afﬁliation of the counties , and the dummies for the two age groups as well as a dummy variable for whether the ZIP code was fully covered by 3G networks in 2008 ( i . e . , the ﬁrst year in the sample ) and separate year ﬁxed effects for the ZIP codes that were . Standard errors in parentheses are corrected for clusters at the level of the states and the District of Columbia . 74 Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3946055 Table A20 : Heterogeneity by time ( 1 ) ( 2 ) Dep . Var . : Political views are : Conservative or Liberal or very conservative very liberal Resident of Democratic county × × 3G network coverage × × 2008 - 2009 - 0 . 015 * * * 0 . 007 * ( 0 . 003 ) ( 0 . 004 ) × 2010 - 2011 - 0 . 017 * * * 0 . 007 * ( 0 . 004 ) ( 0 . 004 ) × 2012 - 2013 - 0 . 025 * * * 0 . 012 * * * ( 0 . 004 ) ( 0 . 004 ) × 2014 - 2015 - 0 . 021 * * * 0 . 007 ( 0 . 005 ) ( 0 . 006 ) × 2016 - 2017 - 0 . 050 * * * 0 . 030 * * * ( 0 . 006 ) ( 0 . 006 ) Resident of Republican county × × 3G network coverage × × 2008 - 2009 0 . 010 * - 0 . 013 * * * ( 0 . 005 ) ( 0 . 002 ) × 2010 - 2011 0 . 007 - 0 . 002 ( 0 . 005 ) ( 0 . 003 ) × 2012 - 2013 - 0 . 006 - 0 . 003 ( 0 . 005 ) ( 0 . 003 ) × 2014 - 2015 - 0 . 005 - 0 . 001 ( 0 . 005 ) ( 0 . 005 ) × 2016 - 2017 - 0 . 026 * * * 0 . 003 ( 0 . 005 ) ( 0 . 005 ) Observations 1 , 765 , 113 1 , 765 , 113 Mean dep . var 0 . 420 0 . 234 Number of ZIP codes 31 , 499 31 , 499 County & year FEs (cid:88) (cid:88) Baseline controls (cid:88) (cid:88) Note : * * * p < 0 . 01 , * * p < 0 . 05 , * p < 0 . 1 . The table illustartes the heterogeneity of the effects of 3G network coverage by time . The unit of observation is an individual . In Column 1 , the outcome variable is a dummy for whether the respondent describes their political views as conservative or very conservative ; in Column 2—a similar dummy for self - described views being liberal or very liberal . Baseline controls include county and year ﬁxed effects , dummies for the respondents’ gender , race , age , education level , marital status , and income group , the counties’ unemployment rate , log of median household income , median age , and share of population that is single , married , white , black , asian , has no schooling , has at least a bachelors degree , and is on food stamps . Other controls also include a dummy variable for whether the ZIP code was fully covered by 3G networks in 2008 ( i . e . , the ﬁrst year in the sample ) and separate year ﬁxed effects for the ZIP codes that were . Standard errors in parentheses are corrected for clusters at the level of the states and the District of Columbia . 75 Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3946055 Table A21 : Spillover effects ( 1 ) ( 2 ) Dep . Var . : Political views are : Conservative or Liberal or very conservative very liberal 3G network coverage × Democratic voter - 0 . 029 * * * 0 . 043 * * * ( 0 . 004 ) ( 0 . 007 ) 3G network coverage × Democratic voter × Obama’s vote margin in 2008 0 . 071 * * * 0 . 049 * * * ( 0 . 009 ) ( 0 . 011 ) 3G network coverage × Independent voter - 0 . 011 * * * - 0 . 018 * * * ( 0 . 003 ) ( 0 . 002 ) 3G network coverage × Independent voter × Obama’s vote margin in 2008 - 0 . 072 * * * 0 . 020 * * ( 0 . 006 ) ( 0 . 010 ) 3G network coverage × Republican voter 0 . 020 * * * - 0 . 034 * * * ( 0 . 003 ) ( 0 . 004 ) 3G network coverage × Republican voter × Obama’s vote margin in 2008 0 . 025 * * - 0 . 102 * * * ( 0 . 011 ) ( 0 . 009 ) Observations 1 , 759 , 896 1 , 759 , 896 Mean dep . var 0 . 420 0 . 234 Number of ZIP codes 31 , 335 31 , 335 County & year FEs (cid:88) (cid:88) Baseline controls (cid:88) (cid:88) Note : * * * p < 0 . 01 , * * p < 0 . 05 , * p < 0 . 1 . The table presents how the effects of 3G network coverage on a respondent of a particular political afﬁliation differ depending on the political afﬁliation of the county that respondent lives in . The unit of observation is an individual . In Column 1 , the outcome variable is a dummy for whether the respondent describes their political views as conservative or very conserva - tive ; in Column 2—a similar dummy for self - described views being liberal or very liberal . Baseline controls include county and year ﬁxed effects , dummies for the respondents’ gender , race , age , education level , marital status , and income group , the counties’ unemployment rate , log of median household income , median age , and share of population that is single , married , white , black , asian , has no schooling , has at least a bachelors degree , and is on food stamps . Other controls also include a dummy variable for whether the ZIP code was fully covered by 3G networks in 2008 ( i . e . , the ﬁrst year in the sample ) and separate year ﬁxed effects for the ZIP codes that were . Standard errors in parentheses are corrected for clusters at the level of the states and the District of Columbia . 76 Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3946055