The cell as a material Karen E Kasza , Amy C Rowat , Jiayu Liu , Thomas E Angelini , Clifford P Brangwynne , Gijsje H Koenderink and David A Weitz To elucidate the dynamic and functional role of a cell within the tissue it belongs to , it is essential to understand its material properties . The cell is a viscoelastic material with highly unusual properties . Measurements of the mechanical behavior of cells are beginning to probe the contribution of constituent components to cell mechanics . Reconstituted cytoskeletal protein networks have been shown to mimic many aspects of the mechanical properties of cells , providing new insight into the origin of cellular behavior . These networks are highly nonlinear , with an elastic modulus that depends sensitively on applied stress . Theories can account for some of the measured properties , but a complete model remains elusive . Addresses Department of Physics & DEAS , Harvard University , Cambridge , MA 02138 USA Corresponding author : Weitz , David A ( weitz @ deas . harvard . edu ) Current Opinion in Cell Biology 2007 , 19 : 101 – 107 This review comes from a themed issue on Cell structure and dynamics Edited by Daniel P Kiehart and Kerry Bloom Available online 15th December 2006 0955 - 0674 / $ – see front matter # 2006 Elsevier Ltd . All rights reserved . DOI 10 . 1016 / j . ceb . 2006 . 12 . 002 Introduction Cells are highly dynamic : they crawl , change shape and divide . In many critical biological processes , cells both exert and respond to forces in their surroundings ; the mechanical properties of the cell are intimately related to this behavior . Cells also continually remodel their internal structure and thereby change their mechanical properties . An integrated understanding of cell structure and mechanics is thus essential for elucidating many funda - mental aspects of cell behavior , from motility to differ - entiation and development . Here we focus on the mechanical properties of cells and review recent devel - opments in our understanding of the cell as a material . A variety of experimental techniques show that cells have both elastic and viscous characteristics , and thus are viscoelastic materials : their stiffness is similar to Jello , but they continue to slowly deform under a steady stress ( Figure 1a ) . Unlike most conventional materials , cells are highly nonlinear ; their elastic modulus depends on the degree of applied or internal stress ( Figure 2 ) [ 1 ! ! ] . More - over , their elastic behavior depends on the mechanical properties of their environment [ 2 ] . The mechanical properties of the cell are largely deter - mined by the cytoskeleton , a biopolymer network consist - ing of three major components : ﬁlamentous actin ( F - actin ) , intermediate ﬁlaments and microtubules ( Figure 3a ) . In addition , a myriad of ﬁlament crosslinker , motor and reg - ulatory proteins play a critical role in cytoskeletal structure and dynamics and hence in the mechanical properties of the cytoskeleton . The cytoskeleton is a complex , hetero - geneous and dynamic structure , which makes the study of its properties extremely difﬁcult . The two major approaches to this problem are in vitro studies of model networks designed to mimic the properties of individual components of the cytoskeleton , and studies of the mechanical properties of cells themselves . Reconstituted cytoskeletal networks A major advantage of reconstituted networks is that their viscoelastic properties can be probed by traditional engi - neering approaches [ 3 ! ] , as well as by more sophisticated optical methods ; by measuring the time - dependent response to an imposed stress or strain , both the elastic and viscous properties can be determined . Networks of F - actin are among the most widely studied reconstituted systems . As with the other cytoskeletal ﬁlaments , F - actin is a semi - ﬂexible polymer , neither completely ﬂexible , like more traditional synthetic polymers , nor perfectly rigid . Instead , the ﬁlaments are soft enough to have some thermally induced shape ﬂuctuations that play an impor - tant role in their elasticity . The effects of thermal ﬂuc - tuations are particularly apparent in the network elasticity at the shortest timescales , leading to a characteristic time dependence [ 4 ] ; the same behavior was also recently observed in cells [ 5 ! ! , 6 ! ] . Other recent measurements of F - actin networks demonstrate the important role of ﬁlament length [ 7 ] and additional relaxation mechanisms speciﬁc to semi - ﬂexible ﬁlaments [ 8 ] . While earlier stu - dies elucidate the behavior of solutions of entangled F - actin alone , current efforts focus primarily on the effects of crosslinking proteins and other actin - binding proteins ( Figure 3b ) . The elasticity of the resultant crosslinked networks has a different physical origin , and can depend sensitively on both actin and crosslinker concentration [ 9 – 11 , 12 ! ! , 13 ! ] . Studies of crosslinked networks are likely to remain an area of active investigation . The semi - ﬂexible nature of the ﬁlaments constituting these networks is particularly important under increasing www . sciencedirect . com Current Opinion in Cell Biology 2007 , 19 : 101 – 107 102 Cell structure and dynamics Figure 1 Mechanics of biopolymer networks and cells . ( a ) Quantities involved in mechanics measurements . Many materials have both elastic and viscous properties . The elasticity of biopolymer networks makes them resist deformation like a simple spring ( grey , upper ) for which the energy of deformation is stored in the material regardless of time ; to quantify this we measure an elastic modulus , G 0 , which is analogous to a spring constant . The viscosity of Current Opinion in Cell Biology 2007 , 19 : 101 – 107 www . sciencedirect . com applied stress . For most materials , the elastic constant is independent of the applied stress . By contrast , networks of semi - ﬂexible polymers often exhibit an unusual prop - erty : with increasing applied stress , their elastic modulus increases ( Figure 3c ) [ 9 , 14 ! ! ] . This is called stress - stiffen - ing and typically reﬂects individual ﬁlament behavior ; at low extensions , ﬁlament elasticity originates from thermal ﬂuctuations , while at higher extensions , thermal ﬂuctua - tions are ‘pulled out’ , leading to a dramatic increase in effective ﬁlament elasticity ( i . e . stiffening ) [ 9 , 11 ] . To accurately measure such nonlinear network behavior requires different techniques : for example , a steady stress is applied to the material , and the modulus is determined from the response to a small , superposed oscillatory stress ( Figure 2 ) [ 9 – 11 , 12 ! ! , 13 ! ] . The stress - stiffening of biopolymer networks has impor - tant implications : the magnitude of their linear elasticity is typically orders of magnitude less than that of cells ; however , when prestressed into the nonlinear regime , the elasticity of these networks dramatically increases , approaching that of cells [ 10 , 12 ! ! ] . This suggests that cells themselves are prestressed into a nonlinear regime , presumably by molecular motors such as myosin . It would be particularly interesting to test the role of myosin in in vitro networks [ 15 ] . Much less is known about the mechanics of networks reconstituted from other cytoskeletal proteins . The beha - vior of single intermediate ﬁlaments under applied stress [ 16 – 18 ] may help to explain the observed behavior of their networks [ 14 ! ! ] . Studies of the mechanical response of isolated microtubules suggests that their rigidity and bending are affected by internal motions of the tubulin subunits [ 19 ] ; how this affects microtubule network prop - erties is yet to be determined . Future work is likely to continue to focus on networks consisting of more than one cytoskeletal component to explore their composite mate - rial properties [ 20 , 21 , 22 ! ! ] . Measurements of cell mechanics The mechanical properties of cells are incredibly rich ; understanding them is challenging as there is a diversity of experimental techniques that probe different parts of the cell and report varying responses ( Figure 1b ) . All of these techniques entail the measurement of a deforma - tion in response to a force . While each method probes a different aspect of cell mechanics , together they are beginning to provide a more uniﬁed understanding . The structural heterogeneity and region - to - region varia - tion of cell properties make methods to probe local mechanical response essential . The local viscoelastic properties of a single cell can be probed through micro - indentation by atomic force microscopy ( AFM ) [ 23 – 26 ] . Alternatively , a local stress can be applied to a speciﬁc region of the cell by twisting or pulling a small magnetic bead that is attached to the cell [ 5 ! ! , 27 – 29 , 30 ! , 31 , 32 ] . In magnetic twisting cytometry ( MTC ) , the resultant bead displacement is measured either with video microscopy The cell as a material Kasza et al . 103 Figure 1 Legend ( continued ) biopolymer networks allows them to flow as a fluid , leading to resistance that depends on the rate of deformation like in a dashpot ( grey , lower ) for which the energy put into deformation is dissipated or lost ; a viscous modulus , G 00 , characterizes this . By measuring the material’s response to an applied stress as a function of time , the two contributions can be distinguished . Typically , G 0 and G 00 specifically refer to the moduli measured from an oscillatory shear deformation — see ‘‘Bulk rheology’’ in ( b ) ; here we use them to denote simply the elastic and viscous responses for some mechanical measurement . The techniques described in ( b ) provide different ways of probing the relationship between stress and strain to determine both the elastic and viscous properties of the material . ( b ) A simple guide to understanding common physical methods to probe mechanical properties of cells . Figure 2 Understanding linear versus nonlinear rheology and stress - stiffening . Under small deformations , the stress is proportional to the strain , and the material is said to be in the linear regime of its mechanical response . This is usually probed by applying a small oscillatory stress or strain to the material ( white double - headed arrow ) and measuring the response . However , under larger deformations , the stress for many biological materials increases more rapidly with applied strain . Here the material is said to be in the nonlinear regime . This is usually probed by applying a large , steady stress that brings the material into the nonlinear regime ( thick black arrow , top right ) , and then measuring the stiffness by applying an additional small , oscillatory stress or strain ( white double - headed arrow ) and measuring the response . The stiffness is reflected by the local slope ( dotted line ) of the stress - strain relationship , referred to as the differential modulus , K * . www . sciencedirect . com Current Opinion in Cell Biology 2007 , 19 : 101 – 107 or , to even higher precision , with laser particle tracking [ 5 ! ! ] . While this technique probes local mechanics , it suffers from uncertainties in the nature of the bead attachment to the cell , which makes determining a true magnitude for the elastic and viscous moduli difﬁcult . Other techniques rely on endogenous structures ; for example , local response is probed by the motion or deformation of microtubules [ 22 ! ! ] , actin ﬁlaments [ 33 ! ! , 34 ] , mitochondria and other subcellular structures ( Figure 4 ) [ 5 ! ! , 34 – 36 ] . These techniques also probe the transmission of force through the cell , and highlight the complexity of the mechanical coupling between different structural components . In addition , the mechanical prop - erties of the cell nucleus are probed using micropipette aspiration coupled to confocal microscopy ; these mea - surements show that the nuclear envelope behaves as an elastic shell [ 37 , 38 ! ! ] , which can contribute to the elas - ticity of the whole cell . Local material properties of cells are also investigated using measurements of the motion of probe particles within a cell . However , recent work [ 5 ! ! ] clearly shows the potential pitfalls in the interpretation of these results . To determine the elastic constant , the particle motion is assumed to be driven exclusively by thermal ﬂuctuations ; however , the activity of motor proteins and other non - equilibrium processes in cells also contribute to motion . Not considering these effects can produce erroneous results [ 39 , 40 ] . Recent experiments have highlighted the importance of the ﬂuid properties of the cell . Any motion of the net - works also entails motion of the water in which they are embedded , and this will contribute to the overall response [ 41 ] . The results from all of these techniques are beginning to provide a consistent picture : at timescales varying between a fraction of a second and several tens of seconds , the cell is a predominantly elastic material . At timescales shorter than a fraction of a second , the response reﬂects the effects of individual ﬁlaments and the elasticity increases [ 5 ! ! , 6 ! ] . At timescales of > 30 seconds , the effects of cell remodeling [ 42 ] lead to additional relaxa - tion [ 30 ! ] . External forces elicit active responses in cells over timescales of seconds to tens of seconds , such as changes in focal adhesion composition , contractility and cell stiffness [ 2 , 28 , 43 ] . Viscoelastic response can also be directly determined by deforming the whole cell [ 1 ! ! , 44 , 45 ] . Recent experiments demonstrate that the elasticity of a whole cell increases 104 Cell structure and dynamics Figure 3 From filaments to networks . ( a ) Schematic illustrations of the filaments that constitute the cytoskeleton : F - actin , microtubules and intermediate filaments . Denoted here is the persistence length , l p , the length scale above which these thermally fluctuating filaments appear to be floppy . ( b ) Left : in vitro network of F - actin ( 1 mg / ml ) filaments capped with gelsolin ( 1 : 555 molar ratio to actin ) and crosslinked with filamin A ( 1 : 50 molar ratio to actin ) . The sample is fixed , rotary - shadowed , and imaged by transmission electron microscopy . Scale bar = 200 nm . ( Courtesy of JH Hartwig . ) Right : schematic illustration of a crosslinked network . The actin filaments are much shorter in length than their persistence length , and hence are nearly rigid . The crosslinkers can themselves be flexible . ( c ) Bulk rheology measurement of a reconstituted actin network ( 1 mg / ml ) crosslinked with filamin A ( 1 : 50 molar ratio to actin ) . The differential elastic modulus , K 0 , is measured as a function of stress ( Figure 1 ) . K 0 increases nearly linearly with stress , stiffening by a factor of 350 before breaking . Inset : same data plotted as a function of strain , highlighting the dramatic stiffening with strain . Current Opinion in Cell Biology 2007 , 19 : 101 – 107 www . sciencedirect . com dramatically when it is stretched [ 1 ! ! ] , consistent with earlier experiments relating cell elasticity to internally generated prestress [ 46 ] and studies of the nonlinear material properties of reconstituted networks [ 10 , 12 ! ! ] . These observations suggest that prestress in the cytos - keleton may be a key parameter that determines cell elasticity . This prestress can be determined using trac - tion force microscopy , where the internal contractile stress in the cell is partially balanced by a measurable deformation of the substrate [ 33 ! ! , 41 , 46 ] . Alternatively , prestress is determined by monitoring the retraction of a cell after detachment from the substrate [ 47 ] . All pres - tress measurements to date are restricted to cells grown on surfaces ; traction force measurements in more com - plex , three - dimensional environments are only now emerging [ 41 ] . The prestress and elasticity of the cell , as well as its internal structure , are responsive to external cues . Recent work shows that in response to external forces applied through magnetic beads , cells stiffen in some cases [ 28 ] , but weaken in others [ 30 ! ] . There is also evidence that prestress impacts cell adhesion [ 43 ] , as well as the pro - pagation of stresses within the cell [ 36 ] . The relationship between the elasticity of the cell and its environment will continue to be a topic of active interest . Modeling cell mechanics The highly complex and heterogeneous structure of the cell makes modeling its mechanical properties very difﬁ - cult . A complete model should account for all components that contribute to the mechanics of the cell , as well as the interactions between these components that result in the full ‘system’ behavior . There are many models that describe at least some properties , and there has been extensive work on several of these models during the past two years . One widely debated model is the ‘tensegrity’ model [ 33 ! ! ] . While the details of the model have been described in many ways , the central principle is that some components in the cell are under tension , and these forces are balanced by other components under compression . Recent results have conﬁrmed that components of the cytoskeletal network are under tension : when stress ﬁbers are cut with a laser , they snap back ( Figure 4a ) [ 33 ! ! ] . Moreover , traction - force microscopy clearly demonstrates the internal tension in the cell [ 33 ! ! , 41 , 46 ] . Concomitant with this , recent studies of microtubules in cells conﬁrm that they bear compressive loads ; these can be unexpect - edly large because the surrounding cytoskeleton structu - rally reinforces the microtubules ( Figure 4b ) [ 22 ! ! ] . The tensegrity model highlights the role of prestress in deter - mining cell elasticity . A second model to describe cell elasticity that has gained considerable traction is the ‘soft glassy rheology’ ( SGR ) model [ 6 , 30 ! ] . This is a conceptual model for soft solids that suggests the material is composed of an elastic solid with some relaxation process driven by non - thermal stress ﬂuctuations , such as those generated by molecular motors . The predicted mechanical response displays a characteristic timescale dependence that is set by the effective temperature of these ﬂuctuations . Recent results using MTC conﬁrm the predictions of the SGR model at intermediate timescales , but show a deviation at short timescales where the response begins to reﬂect the behavior of single ﬁlaments [ 6 ! ] . Moreover , tracer beads attached to cell surfaces exhibit large scale motions , indicating structural rearrangements due to non - thermal relaxation events , consistent with the SGR model [ 30 ! ] . Interestingly , applying a large shear stress by MTC temporarily softens the cell , analogous to the shear - induced melting and rejuvenation that typiﬁes many The cell as a material Kasza et al . 105 Figure 4 Cells are complex materials with components under tension and compression . ( a ) Stress fibers in cells stained with EYFP – actin are severed by laser nanoscissors . After abscission , single stress fiber bundles snap back , exhibiting tension . Scale bar = 10 m m . Reprinted with permission from [ 33 ] . ( b ) Although microtubules are very rigid , in cells they are highly bent , indicating large internal stresses . These stresses are often compressive , leading to a characteristic short wavelength buckling response . Time sequence shows a buckling microtubule ( left to right , 5 s between images ) . Scale bar = 5 m m . Reprinted with permission from [ 22 ] . www . sciencedirect . com Current Opinion in Cell Biology 2007 , 19 : 101 – 107 traditional soft glasses . Further investigations will shed light on the nature of the non - thermal stress ﬂuctuations emphasized by the SGR model . There are many more ‘engineering’ approaches for under - standing the mechanics of the cell . Most of these are based on ﬁnite - element or other computer - generated solutions to constitutive relations [ 48 ] . While such approaches do have some value , their predictive power is ultimately limited by the exact input used to describe the components of the cell . Nevertheless , such models are essential in the interpretation of some experimental measurements . Models based on the physics of semi - ﬂexible polymers continue to provide an excellent description of the beha - vior of reconstituted networks [ 4 , 8 – 11 , 12 ! ! , 14 ! ! ] . Further reﬁnements are likely to capture the behavior of networks formed with speciﬁc crosslinkers and with motor proteins , and may ultimately describe the properties of the cell . A successful theory must incorporate the recent experi - mental evidence highlighting the importance of nonlinear mechanics and internal pre - stress . This requires reﬁning the non - equilibrium components of current theories or developing completely new approaches . Conclusions Cells are clearly very complex and dynamic materials whose mechanical properties are only now beginning to be understood . An array of techniques developed to probe cell mechanics show they are nonlinear , viscoelastic materials . Arriving at a consensus between all measure - ment techniques and all models of cell properties remains a challenge . Our knowledge will be advanced in part by continued studies of reconstituted in vitro systems of increasing complexity , as well as by the development of increasingly sophisticated techniques to directly probe cell mechanics . Ultimately our understanding of the material properties of the cell will help elucidate the interplay between mechanics and biochemistry that reg - ulates functional cell behavior . Acknowledgements The authors were supported by NSF ( DMR - 0602684 ) and the Integrated Training Program in Biomechanics ( DGE - 0221682 ) ( CPB ) , NDSEG ( KEK ) , European Marie Curie Fellowship ( FP6 - 2002 - Mobility - 6B , Contract No . 8526 ) ( GHK ) , and the Human Frontiers Science Program ( ACR , DAW ) . We thank Dr . J . H . Hartwig for providing the electron microscopy image of the actin network . References and recommended reading Papers of particular interest , published within the period of review , have been highlighted as : ! of special interest ! ! of outstanding interest 1 . ! ! Fernandez P , Pullarkat PA , Ott A : A master relation deﬁnes the nonlinear viscoelasticity of single ﬁbroblasts . Biophys J 2006 , 90 : 3796 - 3805 . This reports the ﬁrst direct measurement of the nonlinear elastic proper - ties of a whole cell . The cell is adhered between two glass plates , whose separation can be adjusted to controllably deform the cell , and the resultant force is measured . 2 . Jiang GY , Huang AH , Cai YF , Tanase M , Sheetz MP : Rigidity sensing at the leading edge through a v b 3 Integrins and RPTP a . Biophys J 2006 , 90 : 1804 - 1809 . 3 . ! Bausch AR , Kroy K : A bottom - up approach to cell mechanics . Nature Physics 2006 , 2 : 231 - 238 . This review paper gives an overview of the strategy to investigate cell mechanics based on reconstituting functional cytoskeletal modules from puriﬁed proteins . 4 . Koenderink GH , Atakhorrami M , MacKintosh FC , Schmidt CF : High - frequency stress relaxation in semiﬂexible polymer solutions and networks . Phys Rev Lett 2006 , 96 : 138307 . 5 . ! ! Hoffman BD , Massiera G , Van Citters KM , Crocker JC : The consensus mechanics of cultured mammalian cells . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2006 , 103 : 10259 - 10264 . A combination of measurement techniques provides a comprehensive probe of the mechanical properties of the cell , helping the authors in the ﬁrst attempt to probe the contributions of different structural compo - nents . This paper clearly elucidates both the strengths and weaknesses of these measurement techniques . 6 . ! Deng L , Trepat X , Butler JP , Millet E , Morgan KG , Weitz DA , Fredberg JJ : Fast and slow dynamics of the cytoskeleton . Nat Mater 2006 , 5 : 636 - 640 . The authors use MTC to probe the mechanical properties of the cell and showthatthe nearlypureelastic behavior that ischaracteristic oftheSGR model is restricted to intermediate timescales . At short timescales , a different elastic behavior is observed , consistent with the properties of individual ﬁlaments , and similar to that observed in in vitro networks . 7 . Liu J , Gardel ML , Kroy K , Frey E , Hoffman BD , Crocker JC , Bausch AR , Weitz DA : Microrheology probes length scale dependent rheology . Phys Rev Lett 2006 , 96 : 118104 . 8 . Gardel ML , Valentine MT , Crocker JC , Bausch AR , Weitz DA : Microrheology of entangled F - actin solutions . Phys Rev Lett 2003 , 91 : 158302 . 9 . Gardel ML , Shin JH , MacKintosh FC , Mahadevan L , Matsudaira P , Weitz DA : Elastic behavior of cross - linked and bundled actin networks . Science 2004 , 304 : 1301 - 1305 . 10 . Gardel ML , Nakamura F , Hartwig J , Crocker JC , Stossel TP , Weitz DA : Stress - dependent elasticity of composite actin networks as a model for cell behavior . Phys Rev Lett 2006 , 96 : 088102 . 11 . Gardel ML , Shin JH , MacKintosh FC , Mahadevan L , Matsudaira PA , Weitz DA : Scaling of F - actin network rheology to probe single ﬁlament elasticity and dynamics . Phys Rev Lett 2004 , 93 : 188102 . 12 . ! ! Gardel ML , Nakamura F , Hartwig JH , Crocker JC , Stossel TP , Weitz DA : Prestressed F - actin networks cross - linked by hinged ﬁlamins replicate mechanical properties of cells . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2006 , 103 : 1762 - 1767 . Rheological measurements of in vitro actin networks crosslinked with ﬁlamin show that there is a dramatic increase of the elastic constant with applied prestress , resulting in values comparable to those reported in cells . This suggests that the prestress typically found in cells plays a critical role in determining their elastic modulus . 13 . ! Wagner B , Tharmann R , Haase I , Fischer M , Bausch AR : Cytoskeletal polymer networks : molecular structure of crosslinkers determine macroscopic properties . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2006 , 103 : 13974 - 13978 . This paper investigates the mechanics of actin networks crosslinked with different isoforms of Dictyostelium ﬁlamin , and highlights the sensitivity of the mechanical properties to the speciﬁc character of the crosslinker . 14 . ! ! Storm C , Pastore JJ , MacKintosh FC , Lubensky TC , Janmey PA : Nonlinear elasticity in biological gels . Nature 2005 , 435 : 191 - 194 . The authors show that many different biopolymer networks all exhibit a universal behavior in their stress stiffening . They interpret these data with a model based on the properties of the individual ﬁlaments constituting the network . 15 . McGrath JL : Cell mechanics : FilaminA leads the way . Curr Biol 2006 , 16 : R326 - R327 . 106 Cell structure and dynamics Current Opinion in Cell Biology 2007 , 19 : 101 – 107 www . sciencedirect . com 16 . Kiss B , KarsaiA , Kellermayer MS : Nanomechanical propertiesof desmin intermediate ﬁlaments . J Struct Biol 2006 , in press . 17 . Guzman C , Jeney S , Kreplak L , Kasas S , Kulik AJ , Aebi U , Forro L : Exploring the mechanical properties of single vimentin intermediate ﬁlaments by atomic force microscopy . J Mol Biol 2006 , 360 : 623 - 630 . 18 . Kreplak L , Bar H , Leterrier JF , Herrmann H , Aebi U : Exploring the mechanical behavior of single intermediate ﬁlaments . J Mol Biol 2005 , 354 : 569 - 577 . 19 . Pampaloni F , Lattanzi G , Jonas A , Surrey T , Frey E , Florin EL : Thermal ﬂuctuations of grafted microtubules provide evidence of a length - dependent persistence length . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2006 , 103 : 10248 - 10253 . 20 . ParekhSH , ChaudhuriO , TheriotJA , Fletcher DA : Loading history determines the velocity of actin - network growth . Nat Cell Biol 2005 , 7 : 1119 - 1123 . 21 . Claessens MMAE , Tharmann R , Kroy K , Bausch AR : Microstructure and viscoelasticity of conﬁned semiﬂexible polymer networks . Nature Physics 2006 , 2 : 186 - 189 . 22 . ! ! Brangwynne CP , MacKintosh FC , Kumar S , Geisse NA , Talbot J , Mahadevan L , Parker KK , Ingber DE , Weitz DA : Microtubules can bear enhanced compressive loads in living cells because of lateral reinforcement . J Cell Biol 2006 , 173 : 733 - 741 . Microtubules display short wavelength buckling in response to naturally occurring compressive loads within the cell . This response indicates structural reinforcement from the surrounding cytoskeleton . 23 . Mahaffy RE , Park S , Gerde E , Kas J , Shih CK : Quantitative analysis of the viscoelastic properties of thin regions of ﬁbroblasts using atomic force microscopy . Biophys J 2004 , 86 : 1777 - 1793 . 24 . ParkS , KochD , CardenasR , KasJ , ShihCK : Cellmotilityandlocal viscoelasticity of ﬁbroblasts . Biophys J 2005 , 89 : 4330 - 4342 . 25 . Alcaraz J , Buscemi L , Grabulosa M , Trepat X , Fabry B , Farre R , Navajas D : Microrheology of human lung epithelial cells measured by atomic force microscopy . Biophys J 2003 , 84 : 2071 - 2079 . 26 . Rosenbluth MJ , Lam WA , Fletcher DA : Force microscopy of nonadherent cells : a comparison of leukemia cell deformability . Biophys J 2006 , 90 : 2994 - 3003 . 27 . Deng LH , Fairbank NJ , Cole DJ , Fredberg JJ , Maksym GN : Airway smooth muscle tone modulates mechanically induced cytoskeletal stiffening and remodeling . J Appl Physiol 2005 , 99 : 634 - 641 . 28 . Matthews BD , Overby DR , Mannix R , Ingber DE : Cellular adaptation to mechanical stress : role of integrins , Rho , cytoskeletal tension and mechanosensitive ion channels . J Cell Sci 2006 , 119 : 508 - 518 . 29 . Puig - de - Morales M , Millet E , Fabry B , Navajas D , Wang N , Butler JP , Fredberg JJ : Cytoskeletal mechanics in adherent human airway smooth muscle cells : probe speciﬁcity and scaling of protein – protein dynamics . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 2004 , 287 : C643 - C654 . 30 . ! Bursac P , Lenormand G , Fabry B , Oliver M , Weitz DA , Viasnoff V , Butler JP , Fredberg JJ : Cytoskeletal remodelling and slow dynamics in the living cell . Nat Mater 2005 , 4 : 557 - 561 . The contribution of nonthermal stress ﬂuctuations is probed by bead cytometry and microrheological techniques , suggesting that the rheolo - gical response of cells reﬂects non - equilibrium physical behavior . The results are interpreted in terms of the SGR model . 31 . Coughlin MF , Puig - de - Morales M , Bursac P , Mellema M , Millet E , Fredberg JJ : Filamin - A and rheological properties of cultured melanoma cells . Biophys J 2006 , 90 : 2199 - 2205 . 32 . Lenormand G , Millet E , Fabry B , Butler J , Fredberg J : Linearity and time - scale invariance of the creep function in living cells . J R Soc Interface 2004 , 1 : 91 - 97 . 33 . ! ! Kumar S , Maxwell IZ , Heisterkamp A , Polte TR , Lele TP , Salanga M , Mazur E , Ingber DE : Viscoelastic retraction of single living stress ﬁbers and its impact on cell shape , cytoskeletal organization , and extracellular matrix mechanics . Biophys J 2006 , 90 : 3762 - 3773 . Laserablationisusedtoseverstressﬁbersincells . Theretractionofthese severed ﬁbers conﬁrms that these structural components are under signiﬁcant tension . 34 . Wang N , Suo Z : Long - distance propagation of forces in a cell . Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2005 , 328 : 1133 - 1138 . 35 . Lau AWC , Hoffman BD , Davies A , Crocker JC , Lubensky TC : Microrheology , stress ﬂuctuations , and active behavior of living cells . Phys Rev Lett 2003 , 91 : 198101 . 36 . Hu S , Wang N : Control of stress propagation in the cytoplasm by prestress and loading frequency . Mol Cell Biomech 2006 , 3 : 49 - 60 . 37 . Rowat AC , Foster LJ , Nielsen MM , Weiss M , Ipsen JH : Characterization of the elastic properties of the nuclear envelope . J R Soc Interface 2005 , 2 : 63 - 69 . 38 . ! ! Rowat AC , Lammerding J , Ipsen JH : Mechanical properties of the cell nucleus and the effect of emerin deﬁciency . Biophys J 2006 , 91 : 1 - 16 . A combination of micropipette aspiration and confocal imaging is used to probe the response of the nucleus to deformations in cells . This highlights the importance of the mechanical properties of the nucleus . 39 . Tseng Y , Kole TP , Lee JS , Fedorov E , Almo SC , Schafer BW , Wirtz D : How actin crosslinking and bundling proteins cooperatetogenerateanenhancedcellmechanicalresponse . Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2005 , 334 : 183 - 192 . 40 . Lee JS , Panorchan P , Hale CM , Khatau SB , Kole TP , Tseng Y , Wirtz D : Ballistic intracellular nanorheology reveals ROCK - hard cytoplasmic stiffening response to ﬂuid ﬂow . J Cell Sci 2006 , 119 : 1760 - 1768 . 41 . MierkeCT , ParanhosZitterbart D , KochT , FabryB : Kraftmessung an Zellen in 2D und 3D . BIOspektrum ( Heidelb ) 2006 , 12 : 390 - 391 . 42 . Danuser G , Waterman - Storer CM : Quantitative ﬂuorescent speckle microscopy of cytoskeleton dynamics . Annu Rev Biophys Biomol Struct 2006 , 35 : 361 - 387 . 43 . Lele TP , Pendse J , Kumar S , Salanga M , Karavitis J , Ingber DE : Mechanical forces alter zyxin unbinding kinetics within focal adhesions of living cells . J Cell Physiol 2006 , 207 : 187 - 194 . 44 . Desprat N , Richert A , Simeon J , Asnacios A : Creep function of a single living cell . Biophys J 2005 , 88 : 2224 - 2233 . 45 . Wottawah F , Schinkinger S , Lincoln B , Ananthakrishnan R , Romeyke M , Guck J , Kas J : Optical rheology of biological cells . Phys Rev Lett 2005 , 94 : 098103 . 46 . Wang N , Tolic - Norrelykke IM , Chen J , Mijailovich SM , Butler JP , Fredberg JJ , Stamenovic D : Cell prestress . I . Stiffness and prestress are closely associated in adherent contractile cells . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 2002 , 282 : C606 - C616 . 47 . Grifﬁn MA , Engler AJ , Barber TA , Healy KE , Sweeney HL , Discher DE : Patterning , prestress , and peeling dynamics of myocytes . Biophys J 2004 , 86 : 1209 - 1222 . 48 . Herant M , Marganski WA , Dembo M : The mechanics of neutrophils : synthetic modeling of three experiments . Biophys J 2003 , 84 : 3389 - 3413 . The cell as a material Kasza et al . 107 www . sciencedirect . com Current Opinion in Cell Biology 2007 , 19 : 101 – 107