Molecular Biology of the Cell Vol . 19 , 5347 – 5359 , December 2008 Isoform and Splice - Variant Speciﬁc Functions of Dynamin - 2 Revealed by Analysis of Conditional Knock - Out Cells Ya - Wen Liu , Mark C . Surka , Thomas Schroeter , Vasyl Lukiyanchuk , and Sandra L . Schmid Department of Cell Biology , The Scripps Research Institute , La Jolla , CA 92037 Submitted August 29 , 2008 ; Revised October 1 , 2008 ; Accepted October 3 , 2008 Monitoring Editor : David G . Drubin Dynamin ( Dyn ) is a multifunctional GTPase implicated in several cellular events , including endocytosis , intracellular trafﬁcking , cell signaling , and cytokinesis . The mammalian genome encodes three isoforms , Dyn1 , Dyn2 , and Dyn3 , and several splice variants of each , leading to the suggestion that distinct isoforms and / or distinct splice variants might mediate distinct cellular functions . We generated a conditional Dyn2 KO cell line and performed knockout and reconstitution experiments to explore the isoform - and splice variant speciﬁc cellular functions of ubiquitously expressed Dyn2 . We ﬁnd that Dyn2 is required for clathrin - mediated endocytosis ( CME ) , p75 export from the Golgi , and PDGF - stimulated macropinocytosis and cytokinesis , but not for other endocytic pathways . Surprisingly , CME and p75 exocytosis were efﬁciently rescued by reintroduction of Dyn2 , but not Dyn1 , suggesting that these two isoforms function differen - tially in vesicular trafﬁcking in nonneuronal cells . Both isoforms rescued macropinocytosis and cytokinesis , suggesting that dynamin function in these processes might be mechanistically distinct from its role in CME . Although all four Dyn2 splice variants could equally restore CME , Dyn2ba and - bb were more effective at restoring p75 exocytosis . This splice variant speciﬁcity correlated with their differential targeting to the Golgi . These studies reveal isoform and splice - variant speciﬁc functions for Dyn2 . INTRODUCTION Dynamin ( Dyn ) is an (cid:1) 100 - kDa multidomain GTPase that was ﬁrst identiﬁed as a microtubule binding and bundling protein ( Shpetner and Vallee , 1989 ) . Subsequently , dynamin was found to be the mammalian homologue of the Drosoph - ila protein shibire , mutations in which block endocytosis , including synaptic vesicle recycling ( Chen et al . , 1991 ; van der Bliek and Meyerowitz , 1991 ) . Dynamin is conserved throughout higher eukaryotes . There is a single gene in Drosophila and Caenorhabditis elegan s , but there are three dynamin isoforms in mammals : Dyn1 , which is speciﬁcally expressed in neurons ; Dyn2 , which is ubiquitously ex - pressed ; and Dyn3 , which is mainly expressed in the brain and testes ( Urrutia et al . , 1997 , Ferguson et al . , 2007 ) . The best - studied cellular function of dynamin is its in - volvement in clathrin - mediated endocytosis ( CME ; Hin - shaw , 2000 ; Sever et al . , 2000 ; Praefcke and McMahon , 2004 ) . However , dynamin has also been implicated in several other membrane - trafﬁcking events including both caveolae - medi - ated and clathrin - and caveolin - independent endocytic path - ways ( Henley et al . , 1998 ; Oh et al . , 1998 ; Lamaze et al . , 2001 ; Pelkmans et al . , 2002 ) , phagocytosis ( Gold et al . , 1999 ; Yu et al . , 2006 ) , macropinocytosis ( Schlunck et al . , 2004 ) , and traf - ﬁcking from the trans - Golgi network ( TGN ; Jones et al . , 1998 ; Kreitzer et al . , 2000 ; Bonazzi et al . , 2005 ) . Because these functions have mostly emerged from studying the effects of overexpression of dominant - negative dynamin mutants , they may reﬂect indirect or nonspeciﬁc effects . Moreover , it is not known whether different dynamin isoforms and / or splice variants participate in distinct membrane - trafﬁcking events ( McNiven et al . , 2000 ) . Recent studies have also implicated dynamin in cellular processes other than membrane trafﬁcking . For example , dynamin may play signiﬁcant roles in regulating actin as - sembly and reorganization via its interactions with many actin - binding proteins ( Orth and McNiven , 2003 ; Schafer , 2004 ; Itoh et al . , 2005 ; Kruchten and McNiven , 2006 ) . Dyn2 , but not Dyn1 can function as a signaling GTPase to trigger p53 - dependent apoptosis ( Fish et al . , 2000 ) . Interestingly , this signaling activity does not require dynamin’s ability to self - assemble into the collar - like structures linked to mem - brane ﬁssion in CME ( Soulet et al . , 2006 ) . Moreover , analysis of Dyn2 / Dyn1 chimeras has shown that Dyn2’s signaling activity is conferred by its GTPase domain , despite its high degree of sequence identity with Dyn1 . It has also been suggested that dynamin plays a role in cytokinesis ( Konopka et al . , 2006 ) . Dynamin mutations prevent cleavage furrow completion in Drosophila embryos and small interfer - ing RNA ( siRNA ) - mediated knockdown causes a cytokine - sis defect in C . elegans . Dyn2 has been localized to the cen - trosome and its knockdown has been suggested to cause a centrosome cohesion defect in mammalian cells ( Thompson et al . , 2002 ; Konopka et al . , 2006 ) . The mechanisms guiding these diverse dynamin - mediated processes remain to be established . The multiple cellular functions that have been reported for dynamins would suggest that the different dynamin isoforms and / or splice variants might have different speciﬁc functions ( McNiven et al . , 2000 ) . However , because dynamin is a tetramer ( Hinshaw and Schmid , 1995 ; Ramachandran et al . , 2007 ) , overexpression of dominant - negative mutants— This article was published online ahead of print in MBC in Press ( http : / / www . molbiolcell . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1091 / mbc . E08 – 08 – 0890 ) on October 15 , 2008 . Address correspondence to : Sandra L . Schmid ( slschmid @ scripps . edu ) . © 2008 by The American Society for Cell Biology 5347 Figure 1 . Generation of Dyn2 conditional KO cells . ( A ) Schematic diagram of the three - step strategy for generating Dyn2 ﬂox / (cid:2) ES cells , by sequential transfection and selection of mouse ES cells with a conditional null vector and subsequent transfection and selection with a second Y . - W . Liu et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 5348 the approach most commonly taken to study dynamin func - tion in vivo—might not distinguish subtle isoform and splice variant differences due to the formation of hetero - tetramers and nonselective dominant interference of all en - dogenous dynamin isoforms . Therefore , to identify isoform - and / or splice - variant – speciﬁc functions of dynamin , it would be necessary to perform isoform - speciﬁc knockout and reconstitution experiments . In support of this approach , it was recently shown ( Ferguson et al . , 2007 ) that Dyn1 KO synapses exhibited a less severe phenotype than obtained with dominant - negative dynamin mutants , such as shibire ( Koenig and Ikeda , 1989 ) or with the dynamin inhibitor , dynasore ( Newton et al . , 2006 ) . These authors also provided evidence for isoform - speciﬁc function at the synapse be - cause reexpression of either Dyn1 or Dyn3 , but only to a lesser degree by Dyn2 , could rescue the defect in Dyn1 KO neurons ( Ferguson et al . , 2007 ) . Here we report the generation and characterization of a Dyn2 conditional KO ﬁbroblastoid cell line that has allowed us to deﬁne isoform and splice - variant speciﬁc functions of the ubiquitously expressed dynamin isoform . MATERIALS AND METHODS Generation of Dyn2 ﬂox / null Conditional KO Embryonic Stem Cells We generated a neomycin - resistant targeting vector in which loxP sites ﬂank exon 1 of the Dyn2 gene . Brieﬂy , a loxP site was inserted after the 5 (cid:3) UTR region of the Dyn2 gene , and a loxP - ﬂanked neomycin resistance ( Neo R ) and thymidine kinase ( TK ) cassette was inserted into intron 1 . The linearized vector was transfected into mouse embryonic stem ( ES ) cells , and neomycin - resistant clones were collected and assayed for proper gene insertion through PCR and Southern blotting techniques ( Figure 1A , step 1 ) . Neomycin - resistant ES clones were then transiently transfected with a vector encoding Cre recombinase to excise the Neo R and TK cassette . TK negative clones were selected and then analyzed by PCR and Southern blotting to ensure that the correct transposition event had occurred , i . e . , that only the Neo R and TK genes were excised , leaving behind a loxP - ﬂanked exon 1 of Dyn2 , and thus generating Dyn2 ﬂox / (cid:4) ES cells ( Figure 1A , step 2 ) . To knock out the remain - ing wild - type allele , a linearized KO vector , in which the majority of exon 1 of Dyn2 was replaced by a LacZ - hygromycin resistance ( Hyg R ) cassette , was transfected into the Dyn2 ﬂox / (cid:4) ES cell clone , and hygromycin - resistant clones were selected ( Figure 1A , step 3 ) . PCR analysis was used to screen for clones that had correctly inserted the Dyn2 KO vector into the WT Dyn2 allele , generating Dyn2 ﬂox / (cid:2) ES cells . Differentiation and Immortalization of Dyn2 ﬂox / (cid:1) ES cells Maintenance and growth of the Dyn2 ﬂox / (cid:2) ES cells was performed as pre - viously described ( Conner , 2001 ) . Differentiation of the Dyn2 ﬂox / (cid:2) ES cells involved growth of the ES cells in suspension for 5 d , giving rise to embryoid bodies ( EBs ) . The EBs were then subsequently plated on adherent tissue culture dishes , and differentiation and growth continued in the presence of DMEM with high glucose ( 4500 mg / l ) , 2 mM l - glutamine , and sodium pyruvate , containing 10 % ( vol / vol ) FCS ( Hyclone , Logan , UT ) , 1 (cid:5) MEM nonessential amino acids ( from 100 (cid:5) stock ) , and 20 mM HEPES , pH 7 . 3 . Passage of the adherent cells continued for four passage cycles , and immor - talization was performed . Dyn2 ﬂox / (cid:2) cells were immortalized by infection with amphotropic retro - viruses harboring the large T antigen from SV40 ( kindly given by Peiqing Sun , The Scripps Research Institute ) . Clones of ﬁbroblastoid - like cells were then generated after immortalization . These ﬁbroblastoid Dyn2 ﬂox / (cid:2) cells were maintained in MEM with 10 % FCS for no more than 30 passages . To excise exon 1 , the cells were infected with adenovirus expressing Cre recombinase ( Vector Biolaboratories , Burlingame , CA ) . Antibodies Anti - Dyn1 antibody ( ab3456 ) was purchased from Abcam ( Cambridge , MA ) and anti - Dyn2 antibody ( sc - 6400 ) was from Santa Cruz Biotechnology ( Santa Cruz , CA ) . Anti - (cid:1) - tubulin antibody ( T - 4026 ) was from Sigma ( St . Louis , MO ) and anti - actin antibody ( MAB1501R ) was from Chemicon International ( Te - mecula , CA ) . Anti - Dyn3 polyclonal serum was generously provided by S . Ferguson and P . De Camilli ( Yale ) because we found that the commercially available anti - Dyn3 antibody ( Abcam , ab3458 ) recognized a nonspeciﬁc band of 100 kDa in all of our cell lysates . The rabbit anti - pan - dynamin ( 748 ) was generated in our lab and hemagglutinin ( HA ; 12CA5 ) antibodies were puri - ﬁed from hybridomas obtained from Ian Wilson ( TSRI ) . Retroviral Transduction and Fluorescence - activated Cell Sorting HA - tagged human Dyn1 ( ba ) or rat Dyn2 ( aa , ab , ba , and bb ) were cloned into the retrovirus vector pMIEG3 containing an internal ribosome entry site allowing expression of enhanced green ﬂuorescent protein ( MIEG3 - EGFP ; Yang et al . , 2006 ) . Alternatively , HA - Dyn1 ( ba ) or HA - Dyn2 ( ba ) were fused to GFP on their C - termini and used to generate retroviruses . Retroviral supernatant was prepared by using the Phoenix packaging cell system , and subsequent infection was carried out in the presence of 8 (cid:2) g / ml Polybrene ( Sigma ) according to the described protocols ( Guo and Zheng , 2004 ) . Cells were harvested 48 h after infection and GFP - positive cells with low expres - sion levels were isolated using ﬂuorescence - activated cell sorting ( FACS ) . Cell Cycle Distribution Analysis Analysis of cell cycle distribution was determined by propidium iodide ( PI ) staining and ﬂow cytometry . Cells were harvested by trypsinization and 70 % cold ethanol ﬁxation overnight . Cells were then washed in PBS and resus - pended in PBS containing 10 (cid:2) g / ml PI and 250 (cid:2) g / ml RNase A . Cells were incubated at 37°C for 1 h before ﬂow cytometric analysis . Histograms of the PI signal were obtained using FlowJo software ( Tree Star , Ashland , OR ) . Adenovirus Infection Cells were coinfected with adenovirus expressing the tetracycline regulatable transactivator ( tTA ) and adenovirus encoding either HA - Dyn1K44A or HA - Dyn2K44A under control of a tetracycline - regulatable promoter as previous described ( Fish et al . , 2000 ) . Control cells were infected only with the tTA - adenovirus . Endocytosis assays were performed (cid:1) 24 h after infection . Genotype and Protein Expression Analysis To analyze the knockout efﬁciency of Cre adenovirus infection , total cellular DNA was isolated with DNeasy Blood and Tissue kit ( QIAGEN , Chatsworth , CA ) , and the region of Dyn2 exon 1 was ampliﬁed with the primer pair : Dyn2 - 3515 , CAGGTTGACGTTTCTGCGACCATTA , and Dyn2 - 4369 , CAGC - CATAGCCGGAACTAGAAGCAC ( as Figure 1A indicates ) in PCR . To ana - lyze protein expression , lysates were obtained from cells after different times of Cre adenoviral infection and analyzed by Western blotting using anti - Dyn2 antibodies or anti - pan dynamin antibodies as indicated . Endocytosis Assay Transferrin internalization were performed as described ( van der Bliek et al . , 1993 ) using biotinylated transferrin ( Tfn ) as ligand and assessing its internal - ization into an avidin - inaccessible compartment . For cholera toxin B ( CTB ) uptake , cells on coverslips were incubated with 1 (cid:2) g / ml Alexa ﬂuor - 594 CTB ( Invitrogen , Carlsbad , CA ) for 30 min at 4°C and then shifted to 37°C medium to allow internalization . Cells were washed extensively with cold PBS and acid buffer ( 150 mM NaCl , 150 mM glycine , pH 2 . 0 ) and then ﬁxed and mounted for ﬂuorescence microscopy . Internalization of lactosylceramide ( LacCer ) was analyzed as described in Antonescu et al . ( 2008 ) with some modiﬁcation . Brieﬂy , cells on coverslips were washed with cold PBS (cid:4)(cid:4) ( PBS with 1 mM CaCl 2 and 1 mM MgCl 2 ) and incubated with 5 (cid:2) g / ml BODIPY FL C 5 - LacCer ( Molecular Probes , Eugene , OR ) in PBS (cid:4)(cid:4) for 1 h at 4°C . After washing off unbound LacCer with ice - cold PBS (cid:4) , cells were incubated with warm media for 5 min at 37°C and then arrested with two washes of ice - cold PBS (cid:4)(cid:4) . LacCer remaining at the cell surface was then removed by six 10 - min washes in 2 % ( wt / vol ) defatted BSA ( Sigma ) at 10°C . After ﬁxation and mounting , the cells were viewed under an epi - ﬂuorescence microscope . To analyze macropinocytosis , cells were starved in 0 . 2 % serum for 16 h and then incubated with 1 mg / ml HRP with or without 10 ng / ml PDGF for 10 min in 37°C . The uptake was stopped by transferring to 4°C , and cells were washed six times with cold PBS (cid:4)(cid:4) containing 0 . 2 % BSA . Cells were trypsinized , harvested , and lysed . Then the cleared lysate was assayed for enzyme activity and protein concentration . Figure 1 ( cont ) . null targeting vector . ( B ) PCR analysis of the Dyn2 KO cells after Cre adenovirus infection . DNA isolated at the indi - cated times after Cre adenovirus infection was used as a template to amplify the exon 1 region of Dyn2 to monitor excision efﬁciency ( primer positions indicated in A ) . ( C ) Dyn2 protein depletion . Cell lysates were harvested at the indicated times after Cre adenovirus infection and Western - blotted with anti - Dyn2 or actin antibodies . ( D ) Dynamin expression in the Dyn2 ﬂox / (cid:2) ES cells . Cell lysates from control or Cre adenovirus – infected cells were harvested 96 h after infection and blotted with anti - pan - dynamin or with the indi - cated isoform - speciﬁc antibodies . Isoform Speciﬁc Functions of Dynamin - 2 Vol . 19 , December 2008 5349 p75 TGN Export Assay TheTGN - exitassayofp75 - mRFP ( fromE . Rodriguez - Boulan , WeillMedicalCollege of Cornell University , New York , NY ) was performed as described ( Bonazzi et al . , 2005 ) withsomemodiﬁcation . Brieﬂy , thecellstransfectedwithp75 - monermericred ﬂuorescent protein ( mRFP ) were incubated overnight in complete medium . To accumulate p75 - mRPF in the TGN and deplete newly synthesized p75 - mRPF from the early secretory pathway , the cells were incubated 3 . 5 h at 20°C in bicarbonate - free medium and 0 . 5 h under the same condition with 100 (cid:2) g / ml cycloheximide . To monitor p75 exit from the TGN , the temperature was shifted to 32°C , and the samples were ﬁxed with 4 % paraformaldehyde at the indicated time . Microscopy For indirect immunoﬂuorescence staining , cells cultured overnight on poly - lysine – coated coverslips were ﬁxed for 40 min with 4 % paraformaldehyde and permeabilized with 0 . 05 % saponin . After blocking with 2 % BSA , cells were stained with either anti - HA or anti - (cid:1) - tubulin antibodies . To detect actin , after 5 min PDGF or mock treatment and PBS wash , cells were ﬁxed , perme - abilized , and stained with Alexa Fluor 568 - phalloidin ( Invitrogen ) . For Dyn1 and - 2 localization , cells expressing either GFP - tagged dynamin or HA - tagged dynamin were ﬁxed and permeabilized simultaneously with 2 % warm paraformaldehyde and 0 . 5 % Triton X - 100 for 2 min , to reduce cytosolic background staining , and then ﬁxed with 4 % paraformaldehyde for 40 min . After immunoﬂuorescence staining or mounting alone , cells were observed under wide - ﬁeld epiﬂuorescence microscopy using an inverted Olympus IX - 70 microscope ( Melville , NY ) . RESULTS Dyn2 Conditional KO Cells To better deﬁne Dyn2 - speciﬁc cellular functions and to establish cell lines for reconstitution experiments , we gen - erated a conditional null Dyn2 cell line . To this end , a ﬂoxed allele of Dyn2 was designed and used to generate Dyn2 ﬂox / (cid:2) ES cells by three sequential transfections and selections ( Figure 1A ) , as described in detail in Materials and Methods . Cells were ﬁrst selected for incorporation of the conditional targeting vector , and then they were transfected with Cre recombinase and screened for excision of the Neo / TK sequences . The resulting Dyn2 ﬂox / (cid:4) cells were then transfected with a nonconditional KO targeting vector to disrupt the remaining wild - type allele and selected to obtain Dyn2 ﬂox / (cid:2) cells . The genotypes at each stage were conﬁrmed by PCR and Southern blot analysis ( data not shown ) . These Dyn2 ﬂox / (cid:2) cells were then used to generate immortalized , ﬁbroblastoid cells by in vitro differentiation of embryoid bodies and infection with retroviruses harboring the SV40 large T antigen . Infection of the Dyn2 ﬂox / (cid:2) cells with commercially avail - able adenoviruses encoding Cre recombinase resulted in complete excision of Dyn2 exon 1 within 24 h , as detected by PCR ( Figure 1B ) . Dyn2 protein levels were undetectable by 72 h after infection ( Figure 1C ) . Unexpectedly , despite a complete knockdown of endogenous Dyn2 , total dynamin in these cells , detected using a pan - dynamin antibody , was reduced by (cid:6) 50 % ( Figure 1D ) . Using isoform - speciﬁc anti - bodies , we conﬁrmed that these cells express both Dyn1 and - 2 , but not - 3 ( data not shown ) and that Dyn1 expression was Figure 2 . Cytokinesis defect in Dyn2 KO cells . Dyn2 ﬂox / (cid:2) ( A ) or Dyn2 KO cells ( B and C ) were ﬁxed and stained with anti - (cid:1) - tubulin antibody to detect the midbody and the morphology of cells undergoing cytokinesis . Panels A and B are same scale , and C is a lower scale image to detect the long connection between two incompletely separated cells . ( D ) Quantitation of percentage of control , Dyn2 KO cells or Dyn2 KO cells reconstituted with either Dyn2 or - 1 , accumulating in late cytokinesis , based on detection of midbody staining . Error bars , SD of three independent experiments ; 300 cells for each experiment were scored and counted . Y . - W . Liu et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 5350 unaffected by knockdown of Dyn2 . As an aside , we found that most cells in culture , including COS - 1 , HeLa , HEK293 , and BSC - 1 cells also express both Dyn1 and - 2 to varying degrees ( see Supplemental Figure S1 ) , indicating that the tissue - speciﬁc expression seen in whole animals can be lost in culture . Dyn2 KO Cells Exhibit Growth and Cytokinesis Defects Dyn2 has been reported to function in chromosome cohesion ( Thompson et al . , 2004 ) and in cytokinesis ( Thompson et al . , 2002 ) , and indeed we found that after excision of Dyn2 by Cre recombinase , the cells ( hereafter referred to as Dyn2 KO cells ) grew more slowly than the control ( Dyn2 ﬂox / (cid:2) ) cells ( Supplemental Figure S2A ) . PI staining and ﬂow cytometric analysis of the DNA content did not reveal a speciﬁc defect in cell cycle progression ( Supplemental Figure S2B ) , nor did we detect an increase in the percentage of multinucleate cells by DAPI staining ( data not shown ) . We also did not detect an increase in apoptosis . However , given the strong evi - dence for a role for dynamin in cytokinesis in C . elegans and other organisms ( Konopka et al . , 2006 ) , we used real - time imaging to monitor cell division in control and Dyn2 KO cells ( Supplemental Movies S1 and S2 ) . Consistent with the DNA content analysis , both control and KO cells progressed through mitosis , from prophase to telophase , with similar kinetics ( 23 . 00 (cid:7) 13 . 08 and 24 . 00 (cid:7) 6 . 00 min , respectively ) . However , the time required for completion of the midbody separation in KO cells was signiﬁcantly longer than in con - trol cells . Compared with an average of 54 min for cytoki - nesis in control cells , even after 2 . 5 h of imaging , many Dyn2 KO cells still had not completed cytokinesis . Given the delay in midbody scission , we used immunoﬂuorescence staining of (cid:1) - tubulin to detect midbodies in control ( Figure 2A ) and Dyn2 KO cells ( Figure 2 , B and C ) , as an assay for this late cytokinesis defect . As expected , we found that the percent - age of Dyn2 KO cells with detectable midbodies was higher than in control cells ( Figure 2D ) . We also detected examples in which daughter Dyn2 KO cells were connected with long membrane tethers consistent with a late block in cytokinesis and suggesting that adherent daughter cells might complete cytokinesis as they migrate away from each other ( Figure 2 , B and C ) . These results are consistent with evidence that dynamin functions in cytokinesis in Drosophila and C . elegans ( Konopka et al . , 2006 ) ; however , these organisms express only a single dynamin gene . We therefore wondered whether cytokinesis represented an isoform - speciﬁc function of the ubiquitously expressed Dyn2 . To test this possibility we generated retro - viruses encoding HA - Dyn1 and HA - Dyn2 using a retroviral vector containing an internal ribosomal entry site ( IRES ) upstream of GFP according to the strategy of Yang et al . ( 2006 ) . We used FACS to select GFP - expressing cells that also expressed low , near endogenous levels of HA - dynamin ( see below ) . After Cre adenovirus infection and KO of en - dogenous Dyn2 , cells reconstituted with either Dyn1 or - 2 displayed growth rates similar to control cells ( Supplemen - tal Figure S2A ) and also showed reduced accumulation of midbody staining ( Figure 2D ) . These data establish a role for mammalian dynamin in cytokinesis and suggest , perhaps unexpectedly , that either Dyn1 or - 2 isoforms can fulﬁll this function . Dyn2 Is Speciﬁcally Required for Clathrin - mediated Endocytosis in Fibroblastoid Cells Overexpression studies have suggested that Dyn1 and - 2 also play functionally redundant roles in clathrin - mediated endocytosis ( Altschuler et al . , 1998 ) . Therefore , given the partial knockdown of total dynamin in these cells , we did not expect to see a strong defect in CME . However , CME of Tfn was inhibited by (cid:1) 80 % in Dyn2 KO cells ( Figure 3A ) , more than we would expect based on the proportional re - duction of total dynamin . Moreover , overexpression of the dominant - negative Dyn1K44A mutant only slightly in - creased the level of inhibition of Tfn uptake ( Figure 3B ) , indicating that the residual Tfn uptake in Dyn2 KO cells was both dynamin - and clathrin - independent . These data sug - gest that CME in these nonneuronal cells is preferentially dependent on Dyn2 compared with Dyn1 . To directly test this hypothesis , we measured Tfn uptake in Dyn2 ﬂox / (cid:2) cells that had been reconstituted with either HA - Dyn1 or HA - Dyn2 using retroviral IRES GFP vectors described above . After Cre adenovirus infection and KO of endogenous Dyn2 , cells reconstituted with HA - Dyn2 exhib - ited fully restored Tfn endocytosis , whereas cells expressing HA - Dyn1 ( Figure 4A ) showed only partial recovery , despite exhibiting higher overall levels of dynamin expression ( Fig - ure 4A , right , lanes 3 and 4 ) and despite the ability of Dyn1 to rescue the growth defect of Dyn2 KO cells ( Supplemental Figure 3 . CME is potently inhibited in Dyn2 KO cells . ( A ) Kinetics of Tfn internalization in control and Dyn2 KO cells . Biotin - Tfn was incubated with Dyn2 ﬂox / (cid:2) or Dyn2 KO cells for the indicated times at 37°C . Cells were returned to ice and internalized Tfn was detected as described in Materials and Methods . ( B ) Effects of Dyn1K44A overexpression on Tfn uptake in control and Dyn2 KO cells . Dyn2 ﬂox / (cid:2) and Dyn2 KO cells were infected overnight with tTA - adenovirus alone ( control ) or together with Dyn1K44A - adenovirus . The extent of Tfn uptake after a 10 - min incubation at 37°C was measured as described in Materials and Methods . Isoform Speciﬁc Functions of Dynamin - 2 Vol . 19 , December 2008 5351 Figure 4 . Dyn2 rescues CME in Dyn2 KO cells more efﬁciently than Dyn1 . ( A ) Dyn2 ﬂox / (cid:2) cells were infected with retroviruses encoding HA - Dyn1 ( ba ) or HA - Dyn2 ( ba ) and IRES - driven GFP , FACS - sorted for comparable levels of expression , and subsequently infected with Cre adenovirus to delete endogenous Dyn2 . Their ability to internalize Tfn was assessed relative to control and Dyn2 KO cells as described above . The accompanying gels are Western blots with the indicated antibodies showing relative levels of expression ( lane 1 , Dyn2 KO cells ; lane 2 , Control cells ; lane 3 , Dyn2 KO cells reconstituted with HA - Dyn1 ; lane 4 , Dyn2 KO cells reconstituted with HA - Dyn2 ) . The small numbers below lanes 3 and 4 in B and C are fold - expression relative to endogenous dynamin after normalizing to actin loading controls . ( B and C ) Dyn2 ﬂox / (cid:2) cells were infected with retroviruses encoding Dyn1 ( ba ) - or Dyn2 ( ba ) - GFP , FACS sorted for comparable levels of expression , and subsequently infected with Cre adenovirus to delete endogenous Dyn2 . ( B ) Dyn2 KO cells expressing Dyn1 - GFP or Dyn2 - GFP and clathrin light chain - mCherry were ﬁxed and observed under epi - ﬂuorescence microscopy . ( C ) The kinetics of Tfn uptake in control , Dyn2 KO Y . - W . Liu et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 5352 Figure S2A ) . We also examined Tfn endocytosis in cells exhibiting even higher levels of overexpression and found that when Dyn1 was expressed at (cid:1) 10 times higher than endogenous levels , it could restore the Tfn uptake defect in Dyn2 KO cells to 80 – 90 % of control ( data not shown ) . Several groups have examined the dynamics of dynamin - GFP in live cells ( Merriﬁeld et al . , 2002 ; Soulet et al . , 2005 ) and some have reported differential behaviors of the two isoforms relative to clathrin - coated pit dynamics ( Rappoport and Simon , 2003 ) . To directly test the functionality of these C - terminally GFP - tagged constructs , we used retroviruses en - coding either Dyn1 - GFP or Dyn2 - GFP to infect Dyn2 ﬂox / (cid:2) cells and used FACS to select for cells expressing low or high levels of Dyn1 - GFP or Dyn2 - GFP . At high levels of overex - pression , both Dyn1 - GFP and Dyn2 - GFP formed large ag - gregates in the cytosol ( not shown ) . Therefore we restricted our analyses to cells expressing GFP - tagged proteins at lev - els near that of endogenous dynamin ( Figure 4C , right ) . These cells were then infected with Cre adenovirus to knock out endogenous Dyn2 . Both Dyn1 - GFP and Dyn2 - GFP were predominantly localized to the cytosol but could also be detected as punctate structures at the cell surface ( Figure 4B ) . The colocalization of Dyn2 - GFP with clathrin was greater than that of Dyn1 - GFP ( Figure 4B , right panels ) . We next examined Tfn uptake and found that the defect in CME could be fully rescued by Dyn2 - GFP expression at near endogenous levels ( Figure 4C ) . These data show that C - terminally tagged Dyn2 is fully functional ( the slight in - crease over control cells most likely reﬂects small cell - to - cell variations ) . In contrast , and consistent with our analysis of untagged protein , Dyn1 - GFP was only partially able to re - store Tfn uptake ( Figure 4C , right , lane 3 and 4 ) . Together , these data show that in these nonneuronal cells , Dyn2 is signiﬁcantly more effective than Dyn1 in supporting CME . Dyn2 Is Required for PDGF - stimulated Macropinocytosis , But Not for Other Endocytic Pathways Multiple , mechanistically distinct endocytic pathways oper - ate in mammalian cells ( Conner and Schmid , 2003 ) . To de - termine which of these might also speciﬁcally require Dyn2 , we examined the uptake of other ligands and receptor classes . CTB is internalized by both caveolae - dependent and other raft - dependent endocytic pathways , which have been shown to be inhibited both by antibody microinjection and by overexpression of dominant negative dynamin mutants ( Henley et al . , 1998 ; Oh et al . , 1998 , Pelkmans et al . , 2002 ) . We were unable to detect signiﬁcant inhibition of CTB internal - ization in our Dyn2 KO cells ( Figure 5A ) , although we conﬁrmed ﬁndings of others that the overexpression of a dominant negative mutant Dyn2K44A blocks CTB uptake in our ﬁbroblasts ( Figure 5B ) . Similar results were obtained using BODIPY - LacCer , which is reported to be a more spe - ciﬁc probe for caveolae - mediated endocytosis ( Singh et al . , 2003 ; Figure 5C ) . Because overexpressed Dyn2K44A will dominantly interfere with the function of both endogenous Dyn2 and - 1 isoforms , the more potent effect of dominant - negative overexpression suggests that the remaining Dyn1 may be sufﬁcient to support CTB uptake in the Dyn2 KO cells . Alternatively , the overexpressed Dyn2K44A may in - hibit CTB uptake through indirect effects or by sequestering some other essential component . Regardless these results indicate that Dyn2 is not speciﬁcally required for CTB or caveolae endocytosis . Recently , a clathrin - and caveolae - independent pathway that leads to the formation of GPI - anchored protein - en - riched endosomal compartments ( GEECs ) , has been identi - ﬁed . The GEEC pathway has been reported to be resistant to inhibition by dominant negative dynamin mutants ( Sabha - ranjak et al . , 2002 ) , and consistent with this , we found no detectable inhibition of uptake of rhodamine - conjugated fo - late by the endogenous GPI - anchored folate receptor in Dyn2 KO cells ( Supplemental Figure S3 ) . The GEEC pathway has also been suggested to be respon - sible for the bulk of constitutive ﬂuid phase endocytosis in mammalian cells ( Kirkham et al . , 2005 ) . Indeed , we found that constitutive ﬂuid - phase endocytosis of HRP was not inhibited in Dyn2 KO cells ( Figure 6A , serum - starved cells ) . Macropinocytosis , which is induced upon stimulation by growth factors , involves the actin - driven formation of mem - brane protrusions that engulf large volumes of ﬂuids . There are conﬂicting reports as to a role for dynamin in macropi - nocytosis ( Meier et al . , 2002 ; Schlunk et al . , 2004 ; Cao et al . , 2007 ) . Macropinocytosis in our Dyn2 KO cells can be trig - gered by stimulation with PDGF , resulting in a transient , sixfold , increase in ﬂuid phase uptake ( Figure 6A , PDGF ) . This PDGF - stimulated increase in ﬂuid phase endocytosis of HRP is partially inhibited in the Dyn2 KO cells to a degree that is roughly proportional to the extent of knockdown of total dynamin ( i . e . , (cid:1) 50 % ) . This suggests that both isoforms may function in PDGF - stimulated macropinocytosis and in - Figure 4 ( cont ) . cells and Dyn2 KO cells expressing Dyn2 - GFP or Dyn1 - GFP as indicated . The accompanying gels are Western blots with the indicated antibodies showing relative levels of expression ( lane 1 , Dyn2 KO cells ; lane 2 , Control cells ; lane 3 , Dyn2 KO cells reconstituted with Dyn1 - GFP ; lane 4 , Dyn2 KO cells reconstituted with Dyn2 - GFP ) . Figure 5 . Dyn2 is not speciﬁcally required for cholera toxin , caveo - lae , or raft - mediated endocytosis . ( A ) Control and Dyn2 KO cells were incubated with Alexa ﬂuor 594 – conjugated cholera toxin B ( CTB ) for 5 min at 37°C . Surface - bound CTB was stripped by acid washing and internalized CTB detected by epiﬂuorescence micros - copy . ( B ) Dyn2 ﬂox / (cid:2) cells were infected with Dyn2K44A or control adenovirus and then tested for CTB endocytosis as indicated in A . ( C ) BODIPY FL C 5 - LacSer uptake . Five - minute internalization of BODIPY FL C 5 - LacSer was analyzed in control and Dyn2 KO cells as described in Materials and Methods . Isoform Speciﬁc Functions of Dynamin - 2 Vol . 19 , December 2008 5353 deed , reintroduction of either Dyn1 or - 2 restores full activ - ity in this assay ( Figure 6A ) . That either dynamin isoform can rescue PDGF - stimulated macropinocytosis distinguishes this activity of dynamin from its role in CME in these nonneuronal cells . Given that macropinocytosis is an actin - based process , it was possible that this activity reﬂected dynamin’s function in regulating actin dynamics . To test this , we examined actin organization in control and PDGF - stimulated cells . There was no appar - ent change in actin stress ﬁber distribution in heterozygous control versus Dyn2 KO cells ( Figure 6B ) . On stimulation with PDGF , a dramatic actin reorganization takes place as actin stress ﬁbers disassemble and actin assembles to form membrane rufﬂes or dorsal rings ( Figure 6B ; see Supplemen - tal Figure S4 for quantiﬁcation ) . This actin reorganization is signiﬁcantly diminished in Dyn2 KO cells ( Figure 6B ) . As expected from our macropinocytosis assay results , both Dyn1 and - 2 can restore PDGF - stimulated dorsal actin ring formation in Dyn2 KO cells . These data suggest that dy - namin function in macropinocytosis might be related to its role in actin regulation and distinct from its role in CME . Indeed , as has been reported ( Krueger et al . , 2003 ) , Dyn2 - GFP localizes to dorsal rufﬂes upon PDGF stimulation in punctate structures that do not colocalize with the clathrin - coated pits ( Supplemental Figure S5 ) . Dyn2 Is Speciﬁcally Required for p75 Export from the TGN There are conﬂicting reports as to whether dynamin plays a general role in transport of proteins from the TGN to the plasma membrane ( Damke et al . , 1994 ; Altschuler et al . , 1998 ; Jones et al . , 1998 ; Kasai et al . , 1999 ) , and more recent results suggest that dynamin’s function in some TGN trafﬁcking events might be cell - type speciﬁc ( Bonazzi et al . , 2005 ) . Nonetheless , there is a strong consensus for a requirement of Dyn2 in the export of the apical plasma membrane marker , p75 / neurotrophin receptor , from the TGN ( Kreitzer et al . , 2000 ; Bonazzi et al . , 2005 ) . However , because these ﬁndings are based on overexpression of dominant - negative dynamin mutants , it is not known whether this represents an isoform - speciﬁc function of Dyn2 . To test this we transfected Dyn2 KO cells with p75 - mRFP overnight and then allowed newly synthesized protein to accumulate in the TGN by incubating cells for 4 h at 20°C . We then examined the efﬁciency of depletion of the TGN pool upon shift to 32°C . Whereas the accumulated p75 - mRFP had left the TGN within 40 min in (cid:1) 70 % of heterozygous control cells , its export was severely impaired in Dyn2 KO cells ( Figure 7 , A and C ) . This defect was rescued upon reintroduction of Dyn2 , but not Dyn1 ( Figure 7 , B and C ) . Thus , although both of these dynamin isoforms can localize to the Golgi compartment ( Figure 4B ) , the export of p75 from the TGN appears to be another isoform - speciﬁc function of Dyn2 . A Speciﬁc Function for Dyn2 Splice Variants at the Golgi Dyn2 has two alternatively spliced regions encoding se - quences located within the middle domain that could result in four different splice variants , referred to as aa , ab , ba , and bb ( Cao et al . , 1998 ; Figure 8A ) . Although all four splice variants of Dyn2 localize to clathrin - coated pits at the plasma membrane , it has been reported that Dyn2 splice variants carrying the second alternatively spliced 4 - aa insert ( Dyn2aa and Dyn2ba ) also preferentially localize to the TGN ( Cao et al . , 1998 ) . These studies , however , involved Dyn2 - GFP expression in cells also expressing endogenous Dyn2 , thus complicating analysis of potential splice - variant spe - ciﬁc functions due to heterotetramer formation with endog - enous Dyn2 . Indeed , coprecipitation studies showed that the exogenously expressed GFP - tagged dynamins could form hetero - oligomers with both endogenous Dyn1 and - 2 ; how - ever , at these low levels of exogenous dynamin expression , heteroligomers appeared to represent minor species com - pared with homo - oligomers ( see Supplemental Figure S6 ) . Nevertheless , to avoid possible complications due to hete - rooligomer formation between distinct Dyn2 splice variants , we separately introduced the various HA - Dyn2 splice vari - ants into Dyn2 ﬂox / (cid:2) cells using retroviral IRES GFP expres - sion vectors , selected for low , near endogenous levels of HA - Dyn2 expression , and then deleted endogenous Dyn2 by Cre recombinase ( Figure 8B ) . As previously reported , all four splice variants localized to punctate structures at the plasma membrane , but in contrast to previous ﬁndings , we Figure 6 . PDGF - stimulated macropinocytosis is supported by both Dyn1 and - 2 . ( A ) Fluid - phase uptake of HRP was measured in serum - starved cells before and after treatment with 10 ng / ml PDGF . Control and Dyn2 KO cells are equally effective at ﬂuid - phase uptake under basal conditions , but Dyn2 KO cells are defec - tive in PDGF - stimulated macropinocytosis . This defect is rescued by reexpression of either Dyn1 or - 2 . ( B ) Fluorescent phalloidin staining of actin in serum - starved and PDGF - treated cells reveals actin re - organization and dorsal ring formation upon PDGF stimulation . Dorsal ring formation is reduced in Dyn2 KO cells and restored by reintroduction of either Dyn1 or - 2 . Y . - W . Liu et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 5354 found that the two splice variants encoding the b variant of the ﬁrst spliced region showed localization to the Golgi ( Figure 8C ) . We performed PCR analysis of each cell line to conﬁrm the splice variant of Dyn2 expressed ( data not shown ) . Consistent with this localization , all four splice variants equally rescued the endocytosis defect in Dyn2 KO cells ( Figure 8D ) , whereas Dyn2ba and Dyn2bb were more effective at rescuing p75 export from the TGN than Dyn2aa and Dyn2ab splice variants ( Figure 8 , E and F ) . Dyn1 also encodes two possible splice variants corresponding to aa 399 - 444 in its middle domain . The Dyn1 splice variant we used encodes residues that are most homologous to the b variant in Dyn2 , consistent with its ability to localize to the Golgi . Hence its inability to rescue p75 export reﬂected a true isoform difference in function . DISCUSSION Dynamin 2 , the ubiquitously expressed isoform of dynamin , has been implicated in diverse cellular functions , largely Figure 7 . Dyn2 is speciﬁcally required for p75 export from the TGN . Control and Dyn2 KO cells were trans - fected with p75 - mRFP / neurotropin receptor and at 24 h after infection , p75 - mRFP was allowed to accumulate at the TGN as described in Materials and Methods . Cells were returned to 32°C to follow export of p75 - mRFP from the TGN . ( A ) p75 - mRFP accumulated in the TGN at t (cid:8) 0 is largely depleted from the TGN at t (cid:8) 40 min in control but not Dyn2 KO cells . ( B ) Reintroduction of Dyn2 , but not Dyn1 can rescue p75 - mRFP export in Dyn2 KO cells . ( C ) Quantiﬁcation of p75 - mRFP export in control , Dyn2 KO and Dyn1 or - 2 reconstituted Dyn2 KO cells . The efﬁciency of p75 - mRFP export from the TGN was determined by counting the percentage of cells without detectable p75 - mRFP in the TGN . Three independent experiments and 100 cells for each exper - iment were scored and counted . Isoform Speciﬁc Functions of Dynamin - 2 Vol . 19 , December 2008 5355 through overexpression of dominant - negative mutants . In addition to the potential of nonspeciﬁc effects , this approach has the disadvantage of not being able to assess potential isoform or splice - variant speciﬁc functions . To overcome these problems , we have generated conditional Dyn2 KO cells and reintroduced speciﬁc isoforms and splice variants to investigate the speciﬁcity for dynamin requirements in these distinct cellular functions . The Dyn2 ﬂox / (cid:2) ES - derived Figure 8 . Dyn2 splice variants are speciﬁcally required for targeting and function at the Golgi . ( A ) Schematic and sequences of Dyn2 splice variants . ( B ) The HA - tagged Dyn2 aa , ab , ba , or bb splice variants were introduced into Dyn2 KO cells using IRES - GFP retrovirus vectors . Low expressing cells were selected by FACS sorting . Western blot using anti - Dyn2 antibody showing comparable expression levels of Dyn2 splice variants reintroduced into Dyn2 KO cells . ( C ) Localization of four Dyn2 splice variants . Four Dyn2 splice variants expressed in Dyn2 KO cells were detected using anti - HA antibody . ( D ) Tfn internalization was measured as described in Materials and Methods . All 4 Dyn2 splice variants function in CME . ( E ) Differential ability of Dyn2 splice variants to rescue p75 - mRFP export from the TGN . ( F ) Quantiﬁcation of the activity of different Dyn2 splice variants on p75 - mRFP export . Three independent experiments as described in E were performed , and 100 cells from each experiment were scored for TGN exit of p75 - mRFP . Y . - W . Liu et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 5356 ﬁbroblastoid cells we generated , like other cells in culture , have failed to maintain the tissue - speciﬁc regulation of dy - namin isoform expression and therefore also express Dyn1 . Although this is a disadvantage in identifying redundant functions of Dyn1 and - 2 , it has the advantage of enabling us to readily identify Dyn2 - speciﬁc phenotypes and functions . Perhaps the biggest surprise from these studies is our ﬁnding that clathrin - mediated endocytosis in these nonneu - ronal cells is preferentially supported by Dyn2 and is only weakly supported by Dyn1 . This result , although unex - pected , is complementary to ﬁndings from analysis of Dyn1 KO mice on isoform - speciﬁc functions of dynamin at the synapse ( Ferguson et al . , 2007 ) . These studies revealed that Dyn1 was speciﬁcally required for rapid synaptic vesicle recycling under conditions of intense stimulation , but was dispensable for synaptic vesicle recycling under steady - state conditions . Interestingly , neuronal Dyn3 redistributed to the synapse in Dyn1 KO mice , presumably to compensate for the loss of Dyn1 in mediating endocytosis and synaptic vesicle recycling , whereas Dyn2 remained diffusely distrib - uted . Moreover , overexpression of Dyn1 or Dyn3 fully res - cued the endocytosis defect in cultured Dyn1 KO neurons , whereas Dyn2 was much less effective . Similarly , others have reported that the rapid versus slow endocytic path - ways trigger by stimulation of chromafﬁn cells are differen - tially sensitive to microinjected Dyn1 versus Dyn2 antibod - ies , respectively ( Artelejo et al . , 2002 ) . Thus , together these results suggest that the neuronal - speciﬁc Dyn1 and - 3 iso - forms have adapted to function during rapid stimulus - in - duced endocytosis , whereas Dyn2 has adapted to support constitutive CME in nonneuronal cells . Dyn1 and - 2 are 79 % similar in their sequences and both are equally similar to the single dynamin isoforms in Dro - sophila and C . elegans . What might account for their differ - ential ability to support CME in nonneuronal cells ? We observed that Dyn2 colocalizes with endocytic coated pits to a greater extent than Dyn1 ; thus , this differential efﬁciency of targeting may contribute to their functional differences . However , studies with Dyn1 - GFP have shown that it is recruited to clathrin - coated pits in nonneuronal cells before vesicle release ( Merriﬁeld et al . , 2002 ) , and thus other factors must also contribute to this striking functional difference . We list three , not mutually exclusive , possibilities . First , the differential activities may reﬂect differences in their bio - chemical and enzymatic properties . Most biochemical anal - yses have focused on Dyn1 ; however , previous studies have shown that Dyn2 has a higher propensity for self - assembly compared with Dyn1 and may have a higher basal rate of GTP hydrolysis ( Warnock et al . , 1997 ; Lin et al . , 1997 ) . Inter - estingly , nonconserved residues in the PH domain have been shown to confer isoform - speciﬁc functions that distin - guish Dyn1 and - 2 activity in compensatory endocytosis in adrenal cells ( Artelejo et al . , 1997 ) . A more careful and thor - ough comparison of Dyn1 and - 2 enzymatic activities and biochemical properties may reveal differences that account for their differing activities in CME . A second possibility is that Dyn1 and - 2 interact differentially with different partner proteins . These partners could either differentially affect dy - namin’s biochemical properties or its intracellular targeting . Most dynamin partners interact with dynamin through its C - terminal proline / arginine domain ( PRD ) . These domains are indeed the most divergent between the two isoforms , although they are both highly basic ( pI (cid:3) 12 ) and proline rich ( 30 % ) . Although most dynamin partners have been identiﬁed from analysis of brain lysates , to our knowledge when tested they have been shown to bind to both Dyn1 and - 2 . However , in light of our ﬁndings , it will be interesting to look for Dyn2 - speciﬁc binding partners in nonneuronal cell lysates . A third possibility relates to differential regulation of the two dynamin isoforms by posttranslational modiﬁcation ( Cousin and Robinson , 2001 ) . Both dynamin isoforms are known to be phosphorylated in vivo , and it may be that regulatory kinases and / or phosphatases necessary for Dyn1 function are not present or properly regulated in nonneuro - nal cells . Further experiments will be necessary to test these three possibilities . As was observed for synaptic vesicle recycling , overex - pression of dominant - negative dynamin mutants inhibited a broader set of endocytic pathways than did knockout of a single dynamin isoform . These data suggest that the remain - ing Dyn1 is functional in nonneuronal cells for mediating other forms of endocytosis that , for example , lead to CTB uptake . Dyn1 was also able to support PDGF - stimulated macropinocytosis as effectively as Dyn2 . Thus , Dyn1 is not completely inactive in nonneuronal cells . From these data we can also infer that the mechanism for Dyn1 and - 2 function in PDGF - stimulated macropinocytosis is distinct from the mechanism for Dyn2 function in CME . There are conﬂicting results as to the requirement for dynamin in macropinocytosis . Others have reported that dominant - negative mutants of dynamin do not inhibit ade - novirus - stimulated macropinocytosis ( Meier et al . , 2002 ) or vaccinia - virus induced macropinocytosis ( Mercer and Hele - nius , 2008 ) and that microinjection of Dyn2 antibodies or siRNA depletion of Dyn2 does not inhibit EGF - stimulated macropinocytosis ( Cao et al . , 2007 ) . In contrast , and consis - tent with our ﬁndings , overexpression of dominant - negative Dyn2 was previously shown to inhibit PDGF - stimulated macropinocytosis in Rat1 cells ( Schlunk et al . , 2004 ) . It will be interesting to determine whether the differential require - ment for dynamin reﬂects the different stimuli used to in - duce macropinocytosis . Are there mechanistically distinct macropinocytic pathways or might dynamin be differen - tially involved in the signaling pathways that lead to actin reorganization and macropinocytosis in response to these different stimuli ? A role for dynamin in cytokinesis has been shown in both C . elegans and Drosophila ; however , our study provides the ﬁrst direct evidence that mammalian dynamin is also re - quired for cytokinesis . Although we cannot rule out earlier effects of the Dyn2 deﬁciency on cytokinesis , we observed daughter cells connected with long membrane tubules in Dyn2 KO cells and an accumulation of midbodies , suggest - ing a late stage defect in cytokinesis , possibly in membrane ﬁssion . Membrane ﬁssion in cytokinesis is , however , topo - logically distinct from membrane ﬁssion leading to vesicle release . In the latter , the dynamin collar must initiate mem - brane ﬁssion on the noncytoplasmic leaﬂet of the membrane , whereas in cytokinesis , ﬁssion must occur between cytoplas - mic leaﬂets of the adjacent membranes . Thus , dynamin might serve other functions in cytokinesis , for example in vesicular trafﬁcking ( Albertson et al . , 2005 ) . Alternatively , the role for dynamin in cytokinesis may reﬂect its activities in actin regulation . Interestingly , Dyn1 and - 2 were func - tionally redundant for both cytokinesis and macropinocyto - sis , two actin - dependent processes . It will be important to identify dynamin mutants that uncouple these potentially distinct activities . Finally , our in vivo reconstitution experiments are the ﬁrst to analyze the functional speciﬁcity of the four Dyn2 splice variants in the absence of endogenous Dyn2 . Although each has similar activities in supporting CME , our data suggests that the b variant of the ﬁrst splice site within the middle domain is required for targeting Dyn2ba and Dyn2bb to the Isoform Speciﬁc Functions of Dynamin - 2 Vol . 19 , December 2008 5357 TGN and in enabling their function in p75 export from the Golgi . The middle domain can be subdivided into a more highly conserved N - middle , mutations in which impair dy - namin oligomerization ( Ramachandran et al . , 2007 ) and a more divergent C - middle , which bears the two Dyn2 splice regions ( Schmid et al . , 1998 ) . These data suggest that the C - middle domain might function in intracellular targeting . Further studies will be needed to determine the mechanism by which this splice variation affects this function . Our results differ from a previous study that suggested that the a variant of the second splice site was required for Golgi targeting ( Cao et al . , 1998 ) . Because there is direct evidence for cell type differences in a dynamin requirement for VSV - G ( vesicular stomatitis virus glycoprotein ) export from the Golgi ( Bonazzi et al . , 2005 ) , these differences may also reﬂect real differences between the epithelial cells used by Cao et al . and the ﬁbroblastoid cells we have studied . The Dyn1 splice variant we used ( Dyn1ba ) was most related to Dyn2ba , and although it was targeted to the Golgi , it was not able to support p75 export from the TGN . Thus the func - tional distinction between Dyn1 and - 2 isoforms is most likely a reﬂection of their different abilities to support vesicle formation ( at the TGN or PM ) rather than a targeting defect . Importantly , given the inability of Dyn1 to support p75 export the splice variant speciﬁcity we have observed could not be due to differential hetero - oligomer formation with endogenous Dyn1 . Our unexpected ﬁnding that Dyn2 is more effective than Dyn1 in supporting CME in nonneuronal cells and our identiﬁcation of other Dyn2 - speciﬁc functions coupled to the fact that Dyn2 mutants are linked to human neuropathies ( Niemann et al . , 2006 ) calls for more detailed functional analysis of Dyn2 , a relatively understudied , yet ubiquitously expressed isoform of dynamin . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank E . Rodriguez - Boulan , Yi Zheng ( University of Cincinnati ) , and Peiqing Sun for plasmids and the Flow Cytometry Core and Mouse Genetics Core for technical assistance . Bill Kiosses , in the Core Microscopy Facility in TSRI helped with time - lapse microscopy . Marilyn Leonard and Suhaila White provided technical assistance in preparing the dynamin - 2 targeting con - structs . Shawn Ferguson and Allen Liu gave helpful suggestions . This work was supported by National Institutes of Health Grants GM42455 and MH61345 to S . L . S . and a fellowship from the National Science Council of Taiwan to Y . - W . L . This is TSRI Manuscript No . 19737 . REFERENCES Albertson , R . , Riggs , B . , and Sullivan , W . ( 2005 ) . Membrane trafﬁc : a driving force in cytokinesis . Trends Cell Biol . 15 , 92 – 101 . Altschuler , Y . , Barbas , S . M . , Terlecky , L . J . , Tang , K . , Hardy , S . , Mostov , K . E . , and Schmid , S . L . ( 1998 ) . Redundant and distinct functions for dynamin - 1 and dynamin - 2 isoforms . J . Cell Biol . 143 , 1871 – 1881 . Antonescu , C . N . , Díaz , M . , Femia , G . , Planas , J . V . , and Klip , A . ( 2008 ) . Clathrin - dependent and independent endocytosis of glucose transporter 4 ( GLUT4 ) in myoblasts : regulation by mitochondrial uncoupling . Trafﬁc 9 , 1173 – 1190 . Artalejo , C . R . , Lemmon , M . A . , Schlessinger , J . , and Palfrey , H . C . ( 1997 ) . Speciﬁc role for the PH domain of dynamin - 1 in the regulation of rapid endocytosis in adrenal chromafﬁn cells . EMBO J . 16 , 1565 – 1574 . Artalejo , C . R . , Elhamdani , A . , and Palfrey , H . C . ( 2002 ) . Sustained stimulation shifts the mechanism of endocytosis from dynamin - 1 - dependent rapid endo - cytosis to clathrin - and dynamin - 2 - mediated slow endocytosis in chromafﬁn cells . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 99 , 6358 – 6363 . Bonazzi , M . et al . ( 2005 ) . CtBP3 / BARS drives membrane ﬁssion in dynamin - independent transport pathways . Nat . Cell Biol . 7 , 570 – 580 . Cao , H . , Chen , J . , Awoniyi , M . , Henley , J . R . , and McNiven , M . A . ( 2007 ) . Dynamin 2 mediates ﬂuid - phase micropinocytosis in epithelial cells . J . Cell Sci . 120 , 4167 – 4177 . Cao , H . , Garcia , F . , and McNiven , M . A . ( 1998 ) . Differential distribution of dynamin isoforms in mammalian cells . Mol . Biol . Cell 9 , 2595 – 2609 . Chen , M . S . , Obar , R . A . , Schroeder , C . C . , Austin , T . W . , Poodry , C . A . , Wadsworth , S . C . , and Vallee , R . B . ( 1991 ) . Multiple forms of dynamin are encoded by shibire , a Drosophila gene involved in endocytosis . Nature 351 , 583 – 586 . Conner , D . A . ( 2001 ) . Mouse embryonic stem ( ES ) cell culture . Curr . Protoc . Mol . Biol . 4 , Chapter 23 , 23 . 3 . 1 – 23 . 3 . 6 . Conner , S . D . , and Schmid , S . L . ( 2003 ) . Regulated portals of entry into the cell . Nature 422 , 37 – 44 . Cousin , M . A . , and Robinson , P . J . ( 2001 ) . The dephosphins : dephosphoryla - tion by calcineurin triggers synaptic vesicle endocytosis . Trends Neurosci . 24 , 659 – 665 . Damke , H . , Baba , T . , Warnock , D . E . , and Schmid , S . L . ( 1994 ) . Induction of mutant dynamin speciﬁcally blocks endocytic coated vesicle formation . J . Cell Biol . 127 , 915 – 934 . Ferguson , S . M . et al . ( 2007 ) . A selective activity - dependent requirement for dynamin 1 in synaptic vesicle endocytosis . Science 316 , 570 – 574 . Fish , K . N . , Schmid , S . L . , and Damke , H . ( 2000 ) . Evidence that dynamin - 2 functions as a signal - transducing GTPase . J . Cell Biol . 150 , 145 – 154 . Gold , E . S . , Underhill , D . M . , Morrissette , N . S . , Guo , J . , McNiven , M . A . , and Aderem , A . ( 1999 ) . Dynamin 2 is required for phagocytosis in macrophages . J . Exp . Med . 190 , 1849 – 1856 . Guo , F . , and Zheng , Y . ( 2004 ) . Rho family GTPases cooperate with p53 deletion to promote primary mouse embryonic ﬁbroblast cell invasion . On - cogene 23 , 5577 – 5585 . Henley , J . R . , Krueger , E . W . , Oswald , B . J . , and McNiven , M . A . ( 1998 ) . Dynamin - mediated internalization of caveolae . J . Cell Biol . 141 , 85 – 99 . Hinshaw , J . E . ( 2000 ) . Dynamin and its role in membrane ﬁssion . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 16 , 483 – 519 . Hinshaw , J . E . , and Schmid , S . L . ( 1995 ) . Dynamin self - assembles into rings suggesting a mechanism for coated vesicle budding . Nature 374 , 190 – 192 . Itoh , T . , Erdmann , K . S . , Roux , A . , Habermann , B . , Werner , H . , and De Camilli , P . ( 2005 ) . Dynamin and the actin cytoskeleton cooperatively regulate plasma membrane invagination by BAR and F - BAR proteins . Dev . Cell 9 , 791 – 804 . Jones , S . M . , Howell , K . E . , Henley , J . R . , Cao , H . , and McNiven , M . A . ( 1998 ) . Role of dynamin in the formation of transport vesicles from the trans - Golgi network . Science 279 , 573 – 577 . Kasai , K . , Shin , H . W . , Shinotsuka , C . , Murakami , K . , and Nakayama , K . ( 1999 ) . Dynamin II is involved in endocytosis but not in the formation of transport vesicles from the trans - Golgi network . J . Biochem . 125 , 780 – 789 . Kirkham , M . , Fujita , A . , Chadda , R . , Nixon , S . J . , Kurzchalia , T . V . , Sharma , D . K . , Pagano , R . E . , Hancock , J . F . , Mayor , S . , and Parton , R . G . ( 2005 ) . Ultrastructural identiﬁcation of uncoated caveolin - independent early endo - cytic vehicles . J . Cell Biol . 168 , 465 – 476 . Koenig , J . H . , and Ikeda , K . ( 1989 ) . Disappearance and reformation of synaptic vesicle membrane upon transmitter release observed under reversible block - age of membrane retrieval . J . Neurosci . 9 , 3844 – 3860 . Konopka , C . A . , Schleede , J . B . , Skop , A . R . , and Bednarek , S . Y . ( 2006 ) . Dynamin and cytokinesis . Trafﬁc 7 , 239 – 247 . Kreitzer , G . , Marmorstein , A . , Okamoto , P . , Vallee , R . , and Rodriguez - Boulan , E . ( 2000 ) . Kinesin and dynamin are required for post - Golgi transport of a plasma - membrane protein . Nat . Cell Biol . 2 , 125 – 127 . Kruchten , A . E . , and McNiven , M . A . ( 2006 ) . Dynamin as a mover and pincher during cell migration and invasion . J . Cell Sci . 119 , 1683 – 1690 . Krueger , E . W . , Orth , J . D . , Cao , H . , and McNiven , M . A . ( 2003 ) . A dynamin - cortactin - Arp2 / 3 complex mediates actin reorganization in growth factor - stimulated cells . Mol . Biol . Cell 14 , 1085 – 1096 . Lamaze , C . , Dujeancourt , A . , Baba , T . , Lo , C . G . , Benmerah , A . , and Dautry - Varsat , A . ( 2001 ) . Interleukin 2 receptors and detergent - resistant membrane domains deﬁne a clathrin - independent endocytic pathway . Mol . Cell 7 , 661 – 671 . Lin , H . C . , Barylko , B . , Achiriloaie , M . , and Albanesi , J . P . ( 1997 ) . Phosphati - dylinositol ( 4 , 5 ) - bisphosphate - dependent activation of dynamins I and II lacking the proline / arginine - rich domains . J . Biol . Chem . 272 , 25999 – 26004 . McNiven , M . A . , Cao , H . , Pitts , K . R . , and Yoon , Y . ( 2000 ) . The dynamin family of mechanoenzymes : pinching in new places . Trends Biochem . Sci . 25 , 115 – 120 . Meier , O . , Boucke , K . , Hammer , S . V . , Keller , S . , Stidwill , R . P . , Hemmi , S . , and Greber , U . F . ( 2002 ) . Adenovirus triggers macropinocytosis and endosomal Y . - W . Liu et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 5358 leakage together with its clathrin - mediated uptake . J . Cell Biol . 158 , 1119 – 1131 . Mercer , J . , and Helenius , A . ( 2008 ) . Vaccinia virus uses macropinocytosis and apoptotic mimicry to enter host cells . Science 320 , 531 – 535 . Merriﬁeld , C . J . , Feldman , M . E . , Wan , L . , and Almers , W . ( 2002 ) . Imaging actin and dynamin recruitment during invagination of single clathrin - coated pits . Nat . Cell Biol . 4 , 691 – 698 . Newton , A . J . , Kirchhausen , T . , and Murthy , V . N . ( 2006 ) . Inhibition of dynamin completely blocks compensatory synaptic vesicle endocytosis . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 103 , 17955 – 17960 . Niemann , A . , Berger , P . , and Suter , U . ( 2006 ) . Pathomechanisms of mutant proteins in Charcot - Marie - Tooth disease . Neuromolecular Med . 8 , 217 – 242 . Oh , P . , McIntosh , D . P . , and Schnitzer , J . E . ( 1998 ) . Dynamin at the neck of caveolae mediates their budding to form transport vesicles by GTP - driven ﬁssion from the plasma membrane of endothelium . J . Cell Biol . 141 , 101 – 114 . Orth , J . D . , and McNiven , M . A . ( 2003 ) . Dynamin at the actin - membrane interface . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 15 , 31 – 39 . Pelkmans , L . , Pu¨ntener , D . , and Helenius , A . ( 2002 ) . Local actin polymeriza - tion and dynamin recruitment in SV40 - induced internalization of caveolae . Science 296 , 535 – 539 . Praefcke , G . J . , and McMahon , H . T . ( 2004 ) . The dynamin superfamily : uni - versal membrane tubulation and ﬁssion molecules ? Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 5 , 133 – 147 . Ramachandran , R . , Surka , M . , Chappie , J . S . , Fowler , D . M . , Foss , T . R . , Song , B . D . , and Schmid , S . L . ( 2007 ) . The dynamin middle domain is critical for tetramerization and higher - order self - assembly . EMBO J . 26 , 559 – 566 . Rappoport , J . Z . , and Simon , S . M . ( 2003 ) . Real - time analysis of clathrin - mediated endocytosis during cell migration . J . Cell Sci . 1116 , 847 – 855 . Sabharanjak , S . , Sharma , P . , Parton , R . G . , and Mayor , S . ( 2002 ) . GPI - anchored proteins are delivered to recycling endosomes via a distinct cdc42 - regulated , clathrin - independent pinocytic pathway . Dev . Cell 2 , 411 – 423 . Schafer , D . A . ( 2004 ) . Regulating actin dynamics at membranes : a focus on dynamin . Trafﬁc 5 , 463 – 469 . Schlunck , G . , Damke , H . , Kiosses , W . B . , Rusk , N . , Symons , M . H . , Waterman - Storer , C . M . , Schmid , S . L . , and Schwartz , M . A . ( 2004 ) . Modulation of Rac localization and function by dynamin . Mol . Biol . Cell 15 , 256 – 267 . Schmid , S . L . , McNiven , M . A . , and De Camilli , P . ( 1998 ) . Dynamin and its partners : a progress report . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 10 , 504 – 512 . Sever , S . , Damke , H . , and Schmid , S . L . ( 2000 ) . Garrotes , springs , ratchets , and whips : putting dynamin models to the test . Trafﬁc 1 , 385 – 392 . Shpetner , H . S . , and Vallee , R . B . ( 1989 ) . Identiﬁcation of dynamin , a novel mechanochemical enzyme that mediates interactions between microtubules . Cell 59 , 421 – 432 . Singh , R . D . , Puri , V . , Valiyaveettil , J . T . , Marks , D . L . , Bittman , R . , and Pagano , R . E . ( 2003 ) . Selective caveolin - 1 - dependent endocytosis of glyco - sphingolipids . Mol . Biol . Cell 14 , 3254 – 3265 . Soulet , F . , Yarar , D . , Leonard , M . , and Schmid , S . L . ( 2005 ) . SNX9 regulates dynamin assembly and is required for efﬁcient clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Mol . Biol . Cell 16 , 1058 – 2067 . Soulet , F . , Schmid , S . L . , and Damke , H . ( 2006 ) . Domain requirements for an endocytosis - independent , isoform - speciﬁc function of dynamin - 2 . Exp . Cell Res . 312 , 3539 – 3545 . Thompson , H . M . , Cao , H . , Chen , J . , Euteneuer , U . , and McNiven , M . A . ( 2004 ) . Dynamin 2 binds gamma - tubulin and participates in centrosome cohesion . Nat . Cell Biol . 6 , 335 – 342 . Thompson , H . M . , Skop , A . R . , Euteneuer , U . , Meyer , B . J . , and McNiven , M . A . ( 2002 ) . The large GTPase dynamin associates with the spindle midzone and is required for cytokinesis . Curr . Biol . 12 , 2111 – 2117 . Urrutia , R . , Henley , J . R . , Cook , T . , and McNiven , M . A . ( 1997 ) . The dynamins : redundant or distinct functions for an expanding family of related GTPases ? Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 94 , 377 – 384 . van der Bliek , A . M . , and Meyerowitz , E . M . ( 1991 ) . Dynamin - like protein encoded by the Drosophila shibire gene associated with vesicular trafﬁc . Nature 351 , 411 – 414 . van der Bliek , A . M . , Redelmeier , T . E . , Damke , H . , Tisdale , E . J . , Meyerowitz , E . M . , and Schmid , S . L . ( 1993 ) . Mutations in human dynamin block an intermediate stage in coated vesicle formation . J . Cell Biol . 122 , 553 – 563 . Warnock , D . E . , Baba , T . , and Schmid , S . L . ( 1997 ) . Ubiquitously expressed dynamin - II has a higher intrinsic GTPase activity and a greater propensity for self - assembly than neuronal dynamin - I . Mol . Biol . Cell 8 , 2553 – 2562 . Yang , L . , Wang , L . , and Zheng , Y . ( 2006 ) . Gene targeting of Cdc42 and Cdc42GAP afﬁrms the critical involvement of Cdc42 in ﬁlopodia induction , directed migration , and proliferation in primary mouse embryonic ﬁbro - blasts . Mol . Biol . Cell 17 , 4675 – 4685 . Yu , X . , Odera , S . , Chuang , C . H . , Lu , N . , and Zhou , Z . ( 2006 ) . C . elegans dynamin mediates the signaling of phagocytic receptor CED - 1 for the engulf - ment and degradation of apoptotic cells . Dev . Cell 10 , 743 – 757 . Isoform Speciﬁc Functions of Dynamin - 2 Vol . 19 , December 2008 5359