Motile Dendritic Cells Sense and Respond to Substrate Geometry A MY C . B ENDELL , 1 N ICHOLAS A NDERSON , 1 D ANIEL B LUMENTHAL , 2 E DWARD K . W ILLIAMSON , 2 C HRISTOPHER S . C HEN , 3 J ANIS K . B URKHARDT , 2 and D ANIEL A . H AMMER 1 1 Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering , University of Pennsylvania , Philadelphia , PA , USA ; 2 Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine , Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia , Philadelphia , PA , USA ; and 3 Department of Biomedical Engineering , Boston University , Boston , MA , USA ( Received 31 July 2017 ; accepted 1 May 2018 ) Associate Editor Sriram Neelamegham oversaw the review of this article . Abstract — Dendritic cell ( DC ) migration is required for efﬁ - cient presentation of antigen to T cells and the initiation of an adaptive immune response . In spite of its importance , many aspects of DC migration have not been characterized . DCs encountera variety ofenvironmentswith different stiffnessand geometry , but the effect of these parameters on DC migration has not yet been determined . We addressed this question by comparing DC motility on standard migration surfaces ( poly - dimethylsiloxane ( PDMS ) - coated coverslips ) and micropost array detectors ( mPADs ) . These two surfaces differ in both stiffness and geometry . We found that DC migration was affected by substrate type , with signiﬁcant increases in speed and signiﬁcant decreases in persistence time on mPADs made of PDMS as compared to spin - coated PDMS coverslips . To determine whether the geometry or compliance of the post arrays was responsible for these changes in DC migration , we quantiﬁed DC motility on mPADs of identical geometry but different stiffness . Migration was indistinguishable on these mPADs , suggesting that DCs are responsive to geometry of ligand presentation and not stiffness . Further , by micropat - terning ligands on ﬂat PDMS surfaces in similar geometries to the mPAD arrays , we determined that DCs respond to the geometry of printed ligand . Finally , we used a variety of small molecule inhibitors to identify pathways involved in geometry sensing . We saw a signiﬁcant role for myosin contractility and a 5 b 1 integrin engagement . We also noted signiﬁcant reorgani - zation of the actin cytoskeleton into dynamic actin rings when DCs were motile on posts . From these experiments , we conclude that DCs are insensitive to substrate compliance in the range tested but respond to changes in geometry via a mechanism that involves integrin function , myosin contractil - ity , and remodeling of the actin cytoskeleton . As a possible explanation , we postulate a consistent role for ﬁlopodial extension and contraction as the driver of DC motility . Keywords — mPAD , Geometry , Stiffness , Actin , Dendritic cells , Migration , Mechanosensing . INTRODUCTION DCs are antigen presenting cells , capable of acti - vating naive T cells and launching potent adaptive immune responses . 26 As immature cells , DCs are dis - tributed throughout peripheral tissues , where they continuously capture and degrade material from the environment , displaying peptide fragments on surface - bound MHC complexes . When DCs detect molecular signs of infection and inﬂammation , 24 they undergo a series of phenotypic and functional changes called maturation . 1 Mature DCs become highly migratory and travel to T cell - rich areas of lymphoid tissues where they present surface bound antigens to T cells . 19 DC migration is therefore critical for the ability of the body to launch a proper immune response . One remarkable aspect of DC biology is their ability to migrate robustly through a wide range of body tis - sues . 20 Like all cells , migrating DCs must adjust to the mechanical and geometric characteristics of the microenvironment . 3 Geometry , whether physical structure or spatial patterning of extracellular matrix ligands , has been shown to control cell adhesion , guide cytoskeletal organization and regulate migration . 4 , 11 , 30 Likewise , stiffness strongly inﬂuences the physiology of many cell types , including their adhesion , force gen - eration and migration . 9 , 16 , 18 , 23 In particular , most im - mune cells respond to differences in the mechanics of their substrate . For example , neutrophil adhesion , directed migration and force generation increase with substrate stiffness , and macrophage force magnitude is dependent on substrate stiffness . 13 , 14 To our knowl - edge , it is unknown how DCs respond to the bio - physical properties of their surroundings . Micropost array detectors ( mPADs ) were developed as tools for probing cellular traction forces . 28 We have Address correspondence to Daniel A . Hammer , Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering , University of Pennsylvania , Philadelphia , PA , USA . Electronic mail : hammer @ seas . upenn . edu Annals of Biomedical Engineering ( (cid:2) 2018 ) https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10439 - 018 - 2041 - 7 (cid:2) 2018 Biomedical Engineering Society previously used mPADs to measure the forces that DCs exert during chemotaxis and chemokinesis . 2 , 21 We found that DCs exert traction stresses from the front , consistent with the elongation , adhesion , and con - traction of ﬁlopodial that were oriented in the front of the cell by an imposed chemotactic gradient . 21 While mPADs are useful tools for measuring forces of migration , we have not considered how switching the substrate from a PDMS - coated coverslip to an mPADs might affect the ability of the DCs to migrate . It stands to reason that the geometry of the contact points , as presented by the tips of the posts , might inﬂuence the ability of the DC to organize its migration machinery . Also , the compliance of those contacts might affect the ability of DCs to pull on the substrate . In this paper , we use the terms stiﬀness , elasticity and compliance to describe how stiﬀ the external environment appears to migrating DCs . Geometry refers to both the physical structure of the substrate as well as the patterning of ligand . We will specify ligand geometry when we are explicitly focusing on that parameter . The word discretization is used to describe a surface with discontinuous geometry . Finally , we use the word topography to describe all of these physical characteristics collectively . The goal of the present study was to determine how DCs respond to the physical characteristics of their surroundings . We observed that DC migration was unaﬀected by variations in stiﬀness over the range of 1 – 1000 kPa , but was sensitive to the geometry of the substrate . We further conﬁrmed the eﬀect of geometry on the dynamics of motility by testing patterns of li - gands printed on continuous PDMS surfaces , and conﬁrmed that the changes in motility are due to changes in the geometry of ligand presentation . Fur - ther , we saw that DC responses to geometry are reg - ulated by actomyosin contractility and integrin - based adhesions . Taken together , this work supports the observation that DCs are able to adapt to a variety of microenvironments . A greater understanding of how DCs modulate their migration in diﬀerent environ - ments can be applied to the development and admin - istration of immunotherapies to optimize treatment eﬃcacy and delivery and for the design of in vitro de - vices to manipulate immune cell behavior . MATERIALS AND METHODS Reagents Recombinant murine CCL19 was purchased from R & D Systems ( Minneapolis , MN ) . Lipopolysaccha - ride ( LPS ; L4516 ) , DMSO , Pluronics F127 , silane ( Trichloro ( 1H , 1H , 2H , 2H - perﬂuorooctyl ) silane ) and bovine ﬁbronectin were obtained from Sigma - Aldrich ( St . Louis , MO ) . PBS was obtained from Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc ( Hampton , NH ) . Poly ( dimethylsilox - ane ) ( Sylgard 184 Silicone Elastomer ) was purchased from Dow Corning , Midland , MI . Fetal bovine serum was obtained from Atlanta Biologicals ( Flowery Branch , GA ) . Recombinant GM - CSF was produced from the B78Hi / GMCSF . 1 cell line provided by T . Laufer ( University of Pennsylvania , Philadelphia , PA ) . Mice C57BL / 6 J mice from Jackson Laboratories and GFP - Lifeact mice bred on the C57BL / 6 J back - ground 22 were housed under pathogen - free conditions in the Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia animal facility . All studies involving animals were reviewed and approved by the Children’s Hospital of Philadel - phia Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee . Culture of Bone Marrow Derived DCs ( BMDCs ) Primary BMDCs were prepared following the pro - tocol of Sixt and La¨mmermann . 25 Mice were eutha - nized with CO 2 gas and cervical dislocation . Leg bones were harvested and bone marrow was ﬂushed with sterile PBS . Cells were spun at 1500 rpm for 10 min at 4 (cid:3) C and resuspended at 2 . 5 9 10 6 cell / mL . 1 mL of cells , 9 mL R10 media ( RPMI 1640 ( 1 9 with L - Glu - tamine and 25 mM HEPES ) + 50 mL heat inacti - vated FBS + 5 mL penicillin – streptomycin ( Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc , ﬁnal concentration 100 U / mL pen . and 100 l g / mL strep . ) ) and 100 l L GM - CSF were added to 10 cm Petri dishes . On day 3 of culture , an additional 10 mL R10 and 100 l L GM - CSF were added . On day 6 , 10 mL media was gently removed from each dish and replaced with 10 mL fresh R10 and 100 l L GM - CSF . Between days 7 and 9 DCs were transferred to 6 cm tissue culture dishes and matured for 24 h in the presence of 200 ng / mL LPS . DCs were maintained at 37 (cid:3) C under 5 % CO 2 throughout the culture period and experiments . Unpatterned PDMS - Coated Coverslip Preparation The following methods were adapted from our previous work . 2 2D migration experiments were con - ducted on PDMS - coated coverslips printed with ﬁ - bronectin . These surfaces were uniform , ﬂat and devoid of any micropatterning . Clean 25 mm round glass coverslips ( Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc ) were spun with a thin layer of 10 : 1 PDMS ( weight , base : cure ) on a Laurell spinner ( 4000 rpm , 1 min ) and cured over - night at 65 (cid:3) C . The PDMS layer on coverslips pre - B ENDELL et al . pared in this manner is ~ 10 l m thick . 12 Coverslips were mounted onto the bottom of laser - cut one - well dishes with 10 : 1 PDMS and cured for at least 3 h . 60 g of 10 : 1 PDMS was cast against a ﬂat silicon wafer and cured overnight at 65 (cid:3) C . The PDMS was carefully peeled away from the silicon wafer and cut into 1 cm 2 stamps . Stamps were sonicated in 200 proof ethanol for 10 min , rinsed twice in DiH 2 O and dried with N 2 gas . The clean stamps were inked with 10 l g / mL ﬁ - bronectin and incubated at room temperature for 2 h . The PDMS - coated coverslips were treated with UV / ozone for 7 min ( UVO Cleaner Model 342 , Jelight , Irvine , CA ) . The ﬁbronectin - coated stamps were gently rinsed twice in DiH 2 O and dried with N 2 gas . Fi - bronectin was transferred from the stamps to the PDMS - coated coverslips through microcontact print - ing 7 and the PDMS - coated coverslips were blocked with 0 . 2 % w / v Pluronic F127 for at least 1 h . The PDMS - coated coverslips were rinsed 2 9 with PBS and incubated with PBS at 4 (cid:3) C for at least 1 h . Ma - ture DCs were centrifuged for 10 min at 1500 rpm and 4 (cid:3) C and added to the PDMS - coated coverslips at a concentration of 100 , 000 cells / mL . Any inhibitors were added at this point ( for concentrations and incubation times , see below ) . The cells were incubated at 37 (cid:3) C and 5 % CO 2 throughout the entirety of the experi - ment . 10 nM CCL19 was used to stimulate the cells immediately prior to imaging . mPAD Preparation mPADs were prepared following the protocol of Yang et al . 31 Negative molds were created by casting degassed PDMS ( 10 : 1 base to cure ) against a silanized silicon master mold and curing for 12 min at 110 (cid:3) C . The negative molds were gently peeled away from the silicon master , plasma treated ( SPI Supplies Plasma Prep II , West Chester , PA ) for 7 s , and silanized overnight . PDMS ( 10 : 1 base to cure ) was added to the negative molds and degassed for 30 min to remove any air bubbles . 25 mm round glass coverslips were cleaned with N 2 gas and plasma treated for 90 s . The molds were placed , fresh PDMS side down , onto the cleaned coverslip and cured at 110 (cid:3) C for 20 h . The mPADs were gently peeled away from the negative molds , immediately submerged in 200 proof ethanol and supercritical dried ( SAMDRI - PVT - 3D , Tousimis Corporation , Rockville , MD ) in liquid CO 2 . Circular holes were laser cut from the bottom of one well dishes . mPAD coverslips were secured to the bottom of the one well dishes with 10 : 1 PDMS and cured overnight at 65 (cid:3) C . 10 l g / mL ﬁbronectin was microcontact printed onto the post tips , following the same procedure as above with minor modiﬁcations . After stamping the mPADs , 1 mL of 200 proof ethanol was added and the stamp was gently ﬂicked off the micropost array . The ethanol was immediately diluted to 60 % with diH 2 O . The mPADs were gently rinsed three times with diH 2 O . The post tips were blocked with 0 . 2 % Pluronic F127 for 1 h at room temperature , rinsed three times with sterile diH 2 O and stored at 4 (cid:3) C overnight . The following day , 1 mL of mature DCs ( 100 , 000 cells / mL ) was added to the mPADs . Any inhibitors were added at this point ( for concentrations and incubation times , see below ) . Motility was stimulated with 10 nM CCL19 immediately before moving the dish to the microscope stage , and cells were allowed to settle on the micropost array before imaging began . Spring constants for the mPADs were calculated using the known geometry of the posts and conﬁrmed by ﬁnite element method analysis . The eﬀective stiﬀ - ness was computed from the spring constant , and gives a description of the stiﬀness of the surface as perceived by the cell . Ligand Patterning on PDMS - Coated Coverslips Patterned stamps were created by casting polymer against a patterned silicon wafer , yielding a discon - tinuous stamp , with a surface complementary to the silicon mold . First , a rigid polymer solution was cre - ated by combining 3 . 4 grams of ( 7 . 0 – 8 . 0 % vinyl - methylsiloxane ) - dimethylsiloxane copolymer , trimethyl siloxy terminated ( Gelest , Inc . ) ; 1 . 0 g of ( 25 – 35 % methylhydrosiloxane ) - ( dimethylsiloxane ) copolymer ( Gelest , Inc . ) ; 4 drops of modulator 2 , 4 , 6 , 8 - tetram - ethyl - 2 , 4 , 6 , 8 - tetravinylcyclotetrasiloxane ( Sigma Al - drich ) ; and 4 drops of catalyst platinum ( 0 ) - 2 , 4 , 6 , 8 - tetramethyl - 2 , 4 , 6 , 8 - tetravinylcyclotetrasiloxane com - plex solution ( Sigma Aldrich ) . The solution was mixed thoroughly and cast against a patterned silicon wafer . Large , surface - trapped air bubbles were removed by gently blowing N 2 gas over the layer of polymer before baking for 40 min at 50 (cid:3) C . A soft PDMS layer ( 22 g of 10 : 1 PDMS ( weight , base : cure ) ) was poured over the rigid polymer and the stamp was baked overnight . The next day , the polymer was gently peeled away from the wafer and the stamps were trimmed . Micro - contact printing was performed as described above . The only difference was the use of ﬂuorescently labeled ﬁbronectin ( 488 - conjugated ) to visualize stamped pat - terns . The conjugated ﬁbronectin adsorbed only to the pattern on the top of the stamp , thus leading to the dot pattern observed by microcontact printing . The rigid polymer used to create the top of the stamp ( the pat - terned portion ) ensured stability of these small features and prevented stamp collapse . Motile Dendritic Cells Sense and Respond to Substrate Geometry Inhibitors and Antibodies Inhibitors and antibodies were added to one - well dishes along with mature DCs ( at 100 , 000 cells / mL ) prior to imaging . Cells were maintained at 37 (cid:3) C unless otherwise noted . The following concentrations and incubation times were used : blebbistatin ( B0560 ; Sig - ma - Aldrich , St . Louis , MO ) at 2 l M for 1 h ; CK666 ( SML006 ; Sigma - Aldrich , St . Louis , MO ) at 10 l M for 1 h ; a 5 and b 1 antibodies ( 14 - 0493 - 85 and 14 - 0292 - 85 , respectively ; eBioscience , San Diego , CA ) at 5 l g / mL for 10 min at room temperature then 10 min at 37 (cid:3) C . Live Cell Imaging Mature DCs were imaged at 10 9 by phase micro - scopy on a Nikon Eclipse TE300 ( Nikon , Melville , NY ) with MetaMorph software ( MetaMorph Inc . , Nashville , TN ) . Images were collected at multiple positions for 1 h at 1 min intervals using a motorized stage . Cells were maintained at 37 (cid:3) C and 5 % CO 2 . Image Analysis and Quantiﬁcation Cell migration was analyzed with the Manual Tracking plugin in ImageJ ( http : / / rsbweb . nih . gov / ij ) . Cells that were apoptotic or completely stationary were excluded , as well as any cells in contact with other cells . The list of x - and y - coordinates obtained from ImageJ was further analyzed with a custom - written MATLAB ( Mathworks , Natick , MA ) script . The MATLAB script computed the MSD of the compiled list of cell tracks and used the Dunn equation ( Eq . ( 1 ) ) to ﬁt speed ( S ) and persistence ( P ) . 8 The random motility coefﬁcient was calculated from the speed and persis - tence , as shown in Eq . ( 3 ) . 12 Statistical Analysis We used a one - way ANOVA along with Tukey’s post hoc test to determine statistical signiﬁcance . Sta - tistically signiﬁcant diﬀerences at p < 0 . 05 were marked with an asterisk ( * ) and differences at p < 0 . 01 were marked with a double asterisk ( * * ) . Atomic Force Microscopy All experiments were carried out at room tempera - ture using a Bruker Bioscope Catalyst AFM ( Billerica , MA , USA ) . We used a spherical tip from Novascan ( Boone , IA , USA ) with a nominal spring constant of 0 . 06 N / m and a nominal tip radius of 500 nm . The cantilever spring constant was calibrated using Nano - scope software ( Bruker ) . The AFM was operated in the ﬂuid contact mode at a force distance curve acquisition frequency of 2 Hz . RESULTS Dendritic Cell Migration is Aﬀected by the Underlying Substrate We have previously quantiﬁed DC chemokinesis on continuous PDMS surfaces , formed by uniformly spin coating PDMS on a glass coverslip , and we have measured DC force generation on discrete PDMS microposts . 2 , 21 Although we have always considered these experiments to be complementary , important differences between the two experimental systems leave open key questions about whether migration is affected by the stiffness and / or the geometry of the underlying substrate . To address these questions , we measured the random migration of DCs on mPADs , and compared it to our previous results for DCs randomly migrating on PDMS - coated coverslips . In both cases , the sur - faces were printed with ﬁbronectin to ensure cell adhesion , and blocked with Pluronic F127 to restrict cell attachment to the printed region . 10 nM CCL19 was also added to DCs to stimulate motility . DCs were able to move and had similar morphologies on the two surfaces ( Figs . 1a and 1b ; Supplementary Videos 1 and 2 ) . Sample trajectories of DCs on PDMS - coated cov - erslips and mPADs are shown in Figs . 1c and 1d , respectively . As a ﬁrst step of analysis , we used the trajectories to calculate the mean squared displacement ( MSD ) as a function of time . When plotted on a log – log scale , the slope of this curve provides a quantitative description of the form of migration . For DCs migrating randomly on either PDMS - coated coverslips or microposts , we found that the MSD vs . time had a slope of 1 , indicating purely diffusive migration ( Fig . 1e ) . We next analyzed this data using the Dunn equation ( Eq . ( 1 ) ) to determine the speed ( S ) and persistence time ( P ) . 8 We used speed and persistence time to calculate two additional quantitative features of motility—the persistence length ð P l Þ and random motility coefﬁcient ( l ) —given by Eqs . ( 2 ) and ( 3 ) , respectively . MSD s ð Þ ¼ 2 S 2 P s (cid:2) P 1 (cid:2) exp (cid:2) s = P (cid:2) (cid:3) (cid:2) (cid:3) (cid:4) (cid:5) ð 1 Þ P l ¼ ð P Þð S Þ ð 2 Þ l ¼ S 2 P 2 ð 3 Þ The results from these calculations are shown in Fig . 2 . We previously performed a thorough analysis B ENDELL et al . of the migration of WT DCs on PDMS - coated cov - erslips , and report these values here as Ref . 2 While DCs migrated diffusively on both PDMS - coated cov - erslips and mPADs , the method by which DCs achieved their random migration was quite different . DCs on PDMS - coated coverslips migrated at a speed of 4 . 00 ± 0 . 18 l m / min and persisted for 4 . 88 ± 0 . 46 min before changing directions ( Figs . 2a and 2b ) . DCs on mPADs exhibited a modest , but signiﬁcant increase in speed ( 4 . 92 ± 0 . 24 l m / min ) , and persisted for a signiﬁcantly shorter time ( 2 . 35 ± 0 . 25 min ) before changing direction . The sig - niﬁcant reduction in persistence time also led to a reduction in persistence length ( Fig . 2c ) . While there is a modest reduction in the random motility coefﬁcient of DCs on mPADs , it does not reach signiﬁcance FIGURE 1 . DCs on PDMS - coated coverslips persist in the same direction for longer periods of time . ( a ) Sample phase contrast images of DCs on mPADs and ( b ) PDMS - coated coverslips . Colored lines show sample cell trajectories at each time point . Trajectories are longer and more linear for DCs on PDMS - coated coverslips than for DCs on mPADs . DCs were plated on 10 l g / mL ﬁbronectin and stimulated with 10 nM CCL19 . Sample cell tracks for DCs on mPADs ( c ) and PDMS - coated coverslips ( d ) . In these speciﬁc samples , DCs on PDMS - coated coverslips cover a larger area during random migration . Over the entire population of cells tested for each condition , there was no statistically signiﬁcant difference in this parameter ( see random motility coefﬁcient , Fig . 4d ) . ( e ) The Mean Squared Displacement of both cell populations shows a linear ﬁt with time , on a log – log scale , with slope approximately equal to 1 ( gray dashed line ) , indicating diffusive migration . Motile Dendritic Cells Sense and Respond to Substrate Geometry FIGURE 2 . DCs migrated differently on PDMS - coated coverslips and mPADs . ( a ) The average speed of DCs on mPADs is signiﬁcantly greater than that of DCs on PDMS - coated coverslips . ( b ) The persistence time of DCs on mPADs is drastically reduced , as compared to the persistence time of DCs on PDMS - coated coverslips . ( c ) The reduction in persistence time is carried through to a reduction in the persistence length . ( d ) The combination of the increase in average speed and decrease in persistence time , results in a non - signiﬁcant difference in the overall diffusivity . Figures represent average values 6 SEM , for > 650 DCs from at least three independent experiments per condition . PDMS - coated coverslip values correspond to our previous data on characterizing DC migration on PDMS surfaces . 2 Statistical signiﬁcance calculated with single factor ANOVA and post hoc Tukey test . Indicates signiﬁcant difference compared to PDMS - coated coverslip . * p < 0 . 05 , * * p < 0 . 01 . TABLE 1 . Dimensions and stiffness of different mPADs . Name Post height ( l m ) Spring constant ( nN / l m ) Effective stiffness ( kPa ) Large mPADs Diameter : 1 . 83 pm Post - to - post spacing : ~ 3 l m Short 0 . 97 4523 . 98 1218 . 44 Medium 5 . 70 22 . 30 17 . 21 Tall 12 . 90 1 . 92 1 . 49 Small mPAD Diameter : 0 . 80 l m Post - to - post spacing : ~ 2 l m Small 4 . 77 1 . 39 2 . 49 The mPAD used for DC force measurement ( as well as the initial migration experiments and inhibitor studies ) was the tall mPAD . B ENDELL et al . ( Fig . 2d ) . By examining the cell trajectories on the PDMS - coated coverslip and mPAD surfaces , we can see that the majority of DCs on the PDMS - coated coverslips migrate over large distances . In contrast , there appear to be two separate populations of DCs on mPADs , with some DCs exhibiting long trajectories and some DCs exhibiting more circuitous trajectories huddled around the origin . This large variance in the phenotype of DC migration on mPADs accounts for the failure of the decrease in random motility coefﬁ - cient to reach signiﬁcance . Taken together , these measurements indicate that DCs are able to undergo random migration on mPADs , but the characteristics of their migration are quite different . Dendritic Cells Respond to Geometry and Not Stiﬀness Next , we sought to determine whether the DCs were responding to diﬀerences in geometry or elasticity of their substrate . The coverslips are coated with PDMS , the same material used to generate the mPADs . However , while the coverslip is coated with a contin - uous layer of PDMS , the mPAD is molded into a discrete array of posts with adjustable geometry ( di - ameter and post - to - post spacing ) and adjustable elas - ticity ( set by the height of the posts ) . 31 Both substrates present a 2D , ﬁbronectin - printed surface to migrating DCs , with the mPAD presenting discrete islands of ﬁbronectin . However , the stiffness of the PDMS - coated coverslip is two orders of magnitude greater than that of the tall mPAD we generally use , and the ligand is presented in a continuous pattern instead of a discrete array . Both the geometry and stiﬀness of the microenvi - ronment have been known to inﬂuence the migration of many diﬀerent types of cells . 3 Since most immune cells show functional dependence of motility on sub - strate stiffness , we hypothesized that DCs would also be responsive to this parameter . 13 , 14 , 17 To test whether the elasticity of the mPADs affects the migration of DCs , we repeated the migration experiments using two additional mPADs , called ‘‘short’’ and ‘‘medium . ’’ ( Table 1 ) . Each mPAD has the same 2D cross sectional geometry ( diameter 1 . 83 l m and post spacing ~ 3 l m ) but different heights , resulting in different effective stiffnesses . 31 ‘‘Tall’’ mPADs are approximately 1 kPa , ‘‘medium’’ mPADs are 10 kPa , and ‘‘short’’ mPADs are 10 3 kPa . In experiments on coverslips , we spun the surface with a layer of PDMS , which leads to a stiff - ness ( elastic modulus ) on the order of 100 kPa ( Sup - plementary Fig . 1 ) . By quantifying DC migration on these mPADs of different stiffnesses , we can effectively tease out the effect of stiffness while keeping substrate geometry constant . As shown in Fig . 3 , the average speed and persistence time of DCs are similar on all three mPADs . Consistent with our earlier ﬁnding , DCs exhibit diminished persistence time on all mPADs as compared with PDMS - coated coverslips . These results indicate that DC migratory behavior is unaltered by changes in stiffness in the range tested . Next , we wanted to determine if this geometry dependence was due to physical topography of the substrate ( i . e . discrete micropillars vs . continuous sur - face ) or the geometry of ligand printed on the surfaces . We addressed this question by spatially patterning li - gand on PDMS - coated coverslips ( Fig . 4a ) , which allowed us to probe ligand geometry independently of the physical structure of the substrate . DC migration on these patterned PDMS - coated coverslips was quantiﬁed as described above , and average speed and FIGURE 3 . DCs respond to mPAD geometry , not stiffness . ( a ) There is no trend in the average speed of DCs on the different mPADs . ( b ) The persistence time of DCs is signiﬁcantly reduced on all mPADs , regardless of stiffness . Figures represent average values 6 SEM , for > 180 DCs from at least three independent experiments per condition . PDMS - coated coverslip values correspond to our previous data on characterizing DC migration on PDMS surfaces . 2 Statistical signiﬁcance calculated with single factor ANOVA and post hoc Tukey test . Asterisks indicate signiﬁcant difference compared to PDMS - coated coverslip . * p < 0 . 05 , * * p < 0 . 01 There is no statistically signiﬁcant difference between the tall mPAD and the short and medium mPADs . Motile Dendritic Cells Sense and Respond to Substrate Geometry persistence time were compared to the values for migration on the continuously - printed PDMS - coated coverslips and mPADs ( Figs . 4b and 4c ) . DCs migrating on these patterned surfaces migrated signif - icantly faster than DCs on continuously printed PDMS - coated coverslips , while their speed was indis - tinguishable from that of DCs on mPADs ( Fig . 4b ) . DCs on patterned PDMS - coated coverslips also dis - played a signiﬁcant difference in persistence time , matching the values we calculated for persistence time on mPADs . These results indicate that DC migration responds to printed ligand geometry and is not affected by the physical structure of the substrate . Finally , we wanted to know how sensitive DCs are to variations in geometry . To address this question , we prepared mPADs with smaller dimensions ( diameter and interpost spacing ) . While the mPADs we used previously have a diameter of 1 . 8 l m and post - to - post spacing of ~ 3 l m , the new smaller mPADs have a diameter of 0 . 8 l m and post - to - post spacing of ~ 2 l m ( Table I ) . These two mPADs have similar effective stiffnesses ( Table I ) , ensuring that the only variable we are investigating is geometry . Quantiﬁcation of per - sistence time revealed no differences in DCs migrating on larger and smaller diameter posts ( Fig . 5 ) . There - fore , we conclude that migratory DCs are able to re - spond to large - scale differences in geometry ( i . e . continuous vs . discrete ligand presentation ) but are unable to discern differences in geometry on the scale of 1 l m . DCs Sense Diﬀerences in Geometry Through Myosin Contractility , Integrin - Based Adhesions and Reorganization of the Actin Cytoskeleton To gain an understanding of how substrate geom - etry aﬀects subcellular organization and signaling during DC migration , we used GFP - Lifeact DCs . On PDMS - coated coverslips , F - actin was highly concen - trated at the periphery of the cell , forming lamellipodia and ﬁlopodia ( Fig . 6a ) . When DCs were interacting with mPADs , the actin showed a very different distri - bution , with high levels of GFP signal surrounding each engaged post ( Fig . 6b ) . The process of ring for - mation is very dynamic , with the actin intensity in individual rings ﬂuctuating on a time - scale of 1 min ( Supplementary Video 3 ) , which is shorter than the persistence time ( 2 . 35 ± 0 . 25 min ) . The presence of b FIGURE 4 . DCs respond to geometry of printed ligand . ( a ) Patterned stamps were used to transfer 488 - conjugated ﬁbronectin to PDMS - coated coverslips . Tracking was performed on the pattern located in the top right corner , which closely matches the mPAD geometry . This large dot pattern has the following dimensions : diameter of circular islands is 2 l m and centroid - to - centroid spacing is 5 l m . ( b ) The average speed of DCs on PDMS - coated coverslips printed with islands of ﬁbronectin is signiﬁcantly greater than that on PDMS - coated coverslips printed with continuous ﬁbronectin , but indistinguishable from that on mPADs . ( c ) The persistence time of DCs on both mPADs and PDMS - coated coverslips printed with islands of ﬁbronectin is signiﬁcantly lower than that on PDMS - coated coverslips printed with continuous ﬁbronectin . Figures represent average values 6 SEM , for > 650 DCs from at least three independent experiments per condition . PDMS - coated coverslip values correspond to our previous data on characterizing DC migration on PDMS surfaces . 2 Statistical signiﬁcance was calculated with single factor ANOVA and post hoc Tukey test . Asterisk indicates signiﬁcant difference compared to PDMS - coated coverslip . * p < 0 . 05 , * * p < 0 . 01 . There are no statistically signiﬁcant differences between the tall mPAD and the patterned PDMS - coated coverslips . B ENDELL et al . these actin rings provides additional evidence that DCs detect differences in PDMS - coated coverslips and mPADs . This concentration of ﬂuorescence appears to be speciﬁc to mPADs , as imaging LifeAct labeled DCs on printed patterns of ﬁbronectin ( ss used to make the measurements in Fig . 4 ) did not show rings of actin , but rather local accumulation of actin near printed spots ( see Supplemental Fig . 2 ) . Thus , the formation of actin rings seems speciﬁc to mPADs but does not affect the dynamics of DC migration ( since there was no difference in migration between mPADs and printed spots ) . We next aimed to clarify the mechanisms involved in DC geometry sensing through the use of small molecule inhibitors . We ﬁrst used CK666 to investigate actin polymerization mediated by the Arp2 / 3 complex ( orange bars in Fig . 7 ) , which is a protein we had previously shown to regulate DC speed on PDMS - coated coverslips . 2 Treatment with CK666 had no effect on DC morphology on either PDMS - coated coverslips or mPADs ( Fig . 7c ; see Supplementary Vi - deos 1 and 2 for reference to normal morphology on both surfaces ) . Addition of CK666 to DCs on mPADs led to a signiﬁcant decrease in speed and had no FIGURE 5 . DCs do not detect micron - scale differences in geometry . ( a ) The average speed of DCs on smaller diameter mPADs is signiﬁcantly greater than that on PDMS - coated coverslips , but indistinguishable from that on larger diameter mPADs . ( b ) The persistence time of DCs on smaller diameter mPADs is signiﬁcantly lower than that on PDMS - coated coverslips , but is again indistinguishable from that on larger diameter mPADs . Figures represent average values 6 SEM , for > 290 DCs from at least three independent experiments per condition . PDMS - coated coverslip values correspond to our previous data on characterizing DC migration on PDMS surfaces . 2 Statistical signiﬁcance calculated with single factor ANOVA and post hoc Tukey test . Asterisks indicate signiﬁcant difference compared to PDMS - coated coverslip . * p < 0 . 05 , * * p < 0 . 01 . There are no statistically signiﬁcant differences between the tall mPAD and the small mPAD . FIGURE 6 . The actin cytoskeleton is reorganized on mPADs . Representative GFP - LifeAct DCs plated on PDMS - coated coverslips ( a ) or mPADs ( b and c ) . Cells were plated on 10 l g / mL ﬁbronectin and stimulated with 10 nM CCL19 . Scale bars represent 10 l m . ( a ) On PDMS - coated coverslips , actin is concentrated at the periphery . ( b ) On mPADs , actin is redistributed into rings at the periphery of engaged microposts . Motile Dendritic Cells Sense and Respond to Substrate Geometry inﬂuence on persistence time ( Figs . 7a and 7b ) . Al - though speed is reduced in DCs on both PDMS - coated coverslips and mPADs when CK666 is present , the signiﬁcant difference in speed between DCs on mPADs and PDMS - coated coverslips remains ( Figs . 7a and 7b ) . Thus , we conclude that while Arp2 / 3 complex activity is important for regulating migratory speed during DC chemokinesis , it does not contribute to geometry sensing . Next we probed myosin contractility by directly inhibiting of myosin with blebbistatin ( blue bars in Fig . 7 ) . At a concentration of 2 l M , cells remained viable but displayed elongated morphology ( Fig . 7c ) . We saw no signiﬁcant changes in average speed or persistence time under the inﬂuence of blebbistatin on mPADs ( Figs . 7a and 7b ) . We did however , see a sig - niﬁcant decrease in persistence time of DCs on PDMS - coated coverslips in the presence of blebbistatin ( Fig . 7b ) . Indeed , the persistence time of blebbistatin - treated DCs on PDMS - coated coverslips was indis - tinguishable from that of untreated DCs on mPADs . This indicates that myosin contractility contributes to geometry sensing , since inhibition of this pathway eliminates the ability of DCs to sense differences in geometry between the two surfaces . Finally , we used antibodies to impair integrin - me - diated adhesions . Both of our surfaces were printed with ﬁbronectin , so we chose to speciﬁcally block the FIGURE 7 . DC response to substrate geometry is inﬂuenced by myosin contractility . ( a ) The average speed of DCs on both PDMS - coated coverslips and mPADs is unaffected by myosin inhibition and is signiﬁcantly reduced by inhibition of the Arp2 / 3 Complex . ( b ) The persistence time of DCs on PDMS - coated coverslips is signiﬁcantly reduced in the presence of the myosin inhibitor blebbistatin . Blebbistatin has no effect on DC persistence on mPADs . Arp2 / 3 Complex inhibition has no effect on persistence time for DCs on either PDMS - coated coverslips or mPADs . ( c ) Sample phase contrast images of DCs inhibited with CK666 ( left ) or blebbistatin ( right ) , on PDMS - coated coverslips ( top ) and mPADs ( bottom ) . Colored lines indicate sample cell trajectories . Under these two inhibitor conditions DCs turn at similar frequencies . DCs were plated on 10 l g / mL ﬁbronectin and stimulated with 10 nM CCL19 . Figures represent average values 6 SEM , for > 290 DCs from at least three independent experiments per condition . PDMS - coated coverslip values correspond to our previous data on characterizing DC migration on PDMS surfaces . 2 Statistical signiﬁcance calculated with single factor ANOVA and post hoc Tukey test . Asterisks indicate signiﬁcant difference compared to PDMS - coated coverslip without inhibitors . * p < 0 . 05 , * * p < 0 . 01 . Crosses indicate signiﬁcant difference compared to tall mPAD without inhibitors . (cid:2) p < 0 . 05 , (cid:2)(cid:2) p < 0 . 01 . B ENDELL et al . two subunits of the major ﬁbronectin integrin in DCs : a 5 and b 1 . We selected antibody concentrations that would only partially block integrin function ( 5 l g / mL ) , thus allowing for continued adhesion but reduced availability of active integrins . DCs were able to mi - grate on the PDMS - coated coverslips and mPADs under these conditions ( Fig . 8a ) . Blocking of either subunit had no effect on the average speed or persis - tence time of DCs on PDMS - coated coverslips ( Figs . 8a and 8b ) . In contrast , there was a signiﬁcant decrease in average speed and a signiﬁcant increase in persistence time on mPADs . Indeed , treatment with either antibody effectively eliminated the geometry - induced differences in DC migration . Taken together , these results show that the response of DCs to sub - strate geometry is a dynamic process mediated through myosin contractility , integrin - based adhesions and cytoskeletal reorganization . DISCUSSION DCs have been shown to migrate well in a variety of settings including 2D surfaces , 3D gels and conﬁne - ment chambers and are capable of migrating both with and without the use of integrins . 15 , 29 In line with the adaptability of DC migration , we showed that DCs migrate well on different substrates and tune their FIGURE 8 . DC response to substrate geometry is inﬂuenced by integrin - based adhesions . ( a ) Blocking of either integrin subunit ( a 5 or b 1 ) had no effect on the average speed of DCs on PDMS - coated coverslips , but signiﬁcantly reduced the speed of DCs on mPADs . ( b ) Likewise , blocking of either integrin subunit had no effect on persistence time of DCs on PDMS - coated coverslips , but signiﬁcantly increased the persistence time of DCs on mPADs . ( c ) Sample phase contrast images of DCs blocked with antibodies against a 5 ( left ) or b 1 ( right ) , on PDMS - coated coverslips ( top ) and mPADs ( bottom ) . Under these two inhibitor conditions , cells persist for long periods of time on mPADs and often exhibit an elongated morphology pointed in the direction of migration . Scale bars equal 20 l m . DCs were plated on 10 l g / mL ﬁbronectin and stimulated with 10 nM CCL19 . Figures represent average values 6 SEM , for > 290 DCs from at least three independent experiments per condition . PDMS - coated coverslip values correspond to our previous data on characterizing DC migration on PDMS surfaces . 2 Statistical signiﬁcance calculated with single factor ANOVA and post hoc Tukey test . Asterisks indicate signiﬁcant difference compared to PDMS - coated coverslip without inhibitors . * p < 0 . 05 , * * p < 0 . 01 . Crosses indicate signiﬁcant difference compared to tall mPAD without inhibitors . (cid:2) p < 0 . 05 , (cid:2)(cid:2) p < 0 . 01 . Motile Dendritic Cells Sense and Respond to Substrate Geometry speed and persistence to optimize their efﬁciency . It is unclear which mode of migration is used in vivo , but we hypothesize that the decreased persistence time could be beneﬁcial to DCs in the lymph node where their goal is to probe surrounding cells and locate their cognate T cell . This initial observation motivated us to identify the speciﬁc biophysical parameters to which DCs respond . The two parameters we focused on the present study were stiffness and geometry . We per - formed experiments to explore each parameter indi - vidually and determine their relative contributions to DC migration . First , we used a set of mPADs with identical 2D geometry and different stiffness . In terms of physiological relevance , the softest mPAD ( ~ 1 kPa ) is similar to the stiffness of endothelial tissue , the medium mPAD ( ~ 10 kPa ) is similar to the stiffness of skeletal muscle and the stiffest mPAD ( ~ 1000 kPa ) starts to approach the compliance of rigid materials such as bone . 5 Somewhat surprisingly , we discovered that DCs are insensitive to stiffness . Since DCs are present throughout the body and in a variety of dif - ferent tissues , each having a characteristic stiffness , it would be useful for DCs to be able to migrate well in a variety of different environmental compliances . Next , we investigated the contribution of substrate geometry to DC migration . Substrate geometry can be split into two categories—the physical structure of the underlying surface and the patterning of adhesive li - gand . It has often been diﬃcult to probe the eﬀect of these two parameters individually . For example , Frey et al . showed that 3T3 ﬁbroblasts migrating on microposts moved faster and turned more frequently than ﬁbroblasts on continuous surfaces . 10 Even though ﬁbronectin was adsorbed to the entire substrate , the cells preferentially migrated on the post tips and not the interpost regions . 10 As a result , cells were exposed to discrete ligands and discrete substrates , and it was not determined whether the inﬂuence on migration was due to physical topography or the discrete pattern of ligand that the cells encountered . In a separate study , Wo´jciak - Stothard et al . exposed macrophages to grooved substrates containing regularly spaced , par - allel lines . 30 In this environment , macrophages were shown to migrate in straight lines , following the direction of the ridges and grooves , thus leading to a signiﬁcantly increased persistence time . 30 Again , it is not clear what aspect of the environment inﬂuences cell migration , as ligand patterning was restricted by the substrate structure . Our approach at printing patterns on a ﬂat substrate permitted us to separate the effect of physical geometry from ligand geometry , and allowed us to determine that DCs respond directly to ligand patterning and not substrate structure . It is unknown how sensitive DCs are to ligand patterning , but it is clear that they can robustly differentiate continuous from discrete ligand presentation . Overall , we found that DCs migrate faster and turn more frequently on punctate surfaces . Given that DCs migrate predomi - nantly through ﬁlopodial extension , adhesion , and contraction , 21 the increased turning seems consistent with a cell that reaches out to ﬁnd and touch spots ; if the number of spots on the substrate is limited , the contact and turning frequency would be signiﬁcantly enhanced . Finally , we investigated signaling pathways relevant for DC geometry sensing . Since we previously showed that myosin is necessary for interactions with post ar - rays and transmission of traction forces , 21 it seemed likely that myosin would also be important for geom - etry sensing and migration . Our experiments reveal that myosin inhibition reduces persistence time of DCs on ﬂat surfaces , to levels similar to that seen for DCs on posts . However , myosin inhibition of DCs on posts is unable to further decrease persistence time . This suggests that myosin contractility is indeed important for DC migration , in particular for regulation of per - sistence time . The normalization of migration on ﬂat surfaces and posts in the presence of blebbistatin has also been shown for ﬁbroblasts ( although the authors focused on normalization in terms of speed and not persistence time ) . 10 Our experiments with GFP - Lifeact DCs revealed that the organization of the actin cytoskeleton is af - fected by substrate geometry . Geometry - dependent reorganization of actin has also been observed in macrophages migrating along a series of ridges and grooves . 30 In these cells , actin was highly concentrated at the boundary of the ridge and groove interface , just as we see actin at the boundary of the posts on mPADs . 30 Others have shown that the actin cytoskeleton is reorganized in cells adhered to discrete patterns of ligand , 27 but unlike our observations , the actin is concentrated into solid circles over the patches and not into rings . These rings are dissimilar to other actin structures typically observed in DCs , such as podosomes , which have the appearance of punctate actin spots surrounded by a ring of adhesion protein . 6 However , the rings were not seen on surfaces in which ﬁbronectin was stamped in spots on PDMS ( see Sup - plemental Fig . 5 ) , which suggests the ring structure owes its origin in part to the curvature of the mPAD tips . Our observations suggest that actin is actively involved in the response of DCs to environmental geometry . The speciﬁc actin pathway responsible for this process has not been identiﬁed , but inhibition studies with CK666 have ruled out the Arp2 / 3 com - plex . A ﬁnal pathway we chose to investigate was the role of integrin - mediated adhesion . Since our surfaces are coated with ﬁbronectin , we chose to inhibit each of the B ENDELL et al . two subunits of a 5 b 1 . While DCs in 3D environments are capable of migrating without the use of integrins , we and others have shown that DCs migrating in 2D require integrins . 15 When we partially inhibit either integrin subunit in DCs migrating on posts , we see a complete elimination of geometry dependence . Thus , although DCs are capable of migrating in a manner that is independent of integrins , 15 integrin engagement was critical for the ability of DCs to sense geometry while migrating in our 2D systems . ELECTRONIC SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL The online version of this article ( https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10439 - 018 - 2041 - 7 ) contains supplementary material , which is available to authorized users . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS DAH , JKB and ACB acknowledge support from NIH R01 - GM104287 . ACB acknowledges support from the NSF GRFP under Grant No . DGE - 1321851 . REFERENCES 1 Banchereau , J . , F . Briere , C . Caux , J . Davoust , S . Lebec - que , Y . Liu , et al . Immunobiology of dendritic cells . Annu . Rev . Immunol . 18 : 767 – 811 , 2000 . 2 Bendell , A . C . , E . K . Williamson , C . S . Chen , J . K . Bur - khardt , and D . A . Hammer . The Arp 2 / 3 complex binding protein HS1 is required for efﬁcient dendritic cell random migration and force generation . Integr . Biol . 9 ( 8 ) : 695 – 708 , 2017 . 3 Charras , G . , and E . Sahai . Physical inﬂuences of the extracellular environment on cell migration . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 15 ( 12 ) : 813 – 824 , 2014 . 4 Chen , C . S . , M . Mrksich , S . Huang , G . M . Whitesides , and D . E . Ingber . Geometric control of cell life and death . Science 276 ( 5317 ) : 1425 – 1428 , 1997 . 5 Cox , T . R . , and J . T . Erler . Remodeling and homeostasis of the extracellular matrix : implications for ﬁbrotic diseases and cancer . Dis . Model . Mech . 4 ( 2 ) : 165 – 178 , 2011 . 6 Dehring , D . A . K . , F . Clarke , B . G . Ricart , Y . Huange , T . S . Gomez , E . K . Williamson , et al . Hematopoietic lineage cell - speciﬁc protein 1 functions in concert with the Wis - kott - Aldrich syndrome protein to promote podosome ar - ray organization and chemotaxis in dendritic cells . J . Immunol . 186 ( 8 ) : 4805 – 4818 , 2011 . 7 Desai , R . A . , M . K . Khan , S . B . Gopal , and C . S . Chen . Subcellular spatial segregation of integrin subtypes by patterned multicomponent surfaces . Integr . Biol . ( Camb . ) 3 ( 5 ) : 560 – 567 , 2011 . 8 Dunn , G . A . Characterising a kinesis response : time aver - aged measures of cell speed and directional persistence . Agents Actions Suppl . 12 : 14 – 33 , 1983 . 9 Eroshenko , N . , R . Ramachandran , V . K . Yadavalli , and R . R . Rao . Effect of substrate stiffness on early human embryonic stem cell differentiation . J . Biol . Eng . 7 ( 1 ) : 7 , 2013 . 10 Frey , M . T . , I . Y . Tsai , T . P . Russell , S . K . Hanks , and Y . - L . Wang . Cellular responses to substrate topography : role of myosin II and focal adhesion kinase . Biophys . J . 90 ( 10 ) : 3774 – 3782 , 2006 . 11 Henry , S . J . , J . C . Crocker , and D . A . Hammer . Ligand density elicits a phenotypic switch in human neutrophils . Integr . Biol . ( Camb . ) 6 ( 3 ) : 348 – 356 , 2014 . 12 Henry , S . J . , J . C . Crocker , and D . A . Hammer . Motile human neutrophils sense ligand density over their entire contact area . Ann . Biomed . Eng . 44 ( 4 ) : 886 – 894 , 2016 . 13 Hind , L . E . , M . Dembo , and D . A . Hammer . Macrophage motility is driven by frontal - towing with a force magnitude dependent on substrate stiffness . Integr . Biol . 7 : 447 – 453 , 2015 . 14 Jannat , R . A . , M . Dembo , and D . A . Hammer . Neutrophil adhesion and chemotaxis depend on substrate mechanics . J . Phys . Condens . Matter 22 ( 19 ) : 194117 , 2010 . 15 La¨mmermann , T . , B . L . Bader , S . J . Monkley , T . Worbs , R . Wedlich - So¨ldner , K . Hirsch , et al . Rapid leukocyte migration by integrin - independent ﬂowing and squeezing . Nature 453 ( 7191 ) : 51 – 55 , 2008 . 16 Lo , C . M . , H . B . Wang , M . Dembo , and Y . L . Wang . Cell movement is guided by the rigidity of the substrate . Bio - phys . J . 79 ( 1 ) : 144 – 152 , 2000 . 17 Mackay , J . L . , and D . A . Hammer . Stiff substrates enhance monocytic cell capture through E - selectin but not P - selectin . Integr . Biol . 8 : 62 – 72 , 2016 . 18 Raab , M . , J . Swift , P . C . D . P . Dingal , P . Shah , J . W . Shin , and D . E . Discher . Crawling from soft to stiff matrix polarizes the cytoskeleton and phosphoregulates myosin - II heavy chain . J . Cell Biol . 199 ( 4 ) : 669 – 683 , 2012 . 19 Randolph , G . J . , V . Angeli , and M . A . Swartz . Dendritic - cell trafﬁcking to lymph nodes through lymphatic vessels . Nat . Rev . Immunol . 5 ( 8 ) : 617 – 628 , 2005 . 20 Renkawitz , J . , K . Schumann , M . Weber , T . La¨mmermann , H . Pﬂicke , M . Piel , et al . Adaptive force transmission in amoeboid cell migration . Nat . Cell Biol . 11 ( 12 ) : 1438 – 1443 , 2009 . 21 Ricart , B . G . , M . T . Yang , C . A . Hunter , C . S . Chen , and D . A . Hammer . Measuring traction forces of motile den - dritic cells on micropost arrays . Biophys . J . 101 ( 11 ) : 2620 – 2628 , 2011 . 22 Riedl , J . , K . C . Flynn , A . Raducanu , F . Ga¨rtner , G . Beck , M . Bo¨sl , et al . Lifeact mice for studying F - actin dynamics . Nat . Methods 7 ( 3 ) : 168 – 169 , 2010 . 23 Saez , A . , M . Ghibaudo , A . Buguin , P . Silberzan , and B . Ladoux . Rigidity - driven growth and migration of epithelial cells on microstructured anisotropic substrates . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 104 ( 20 ) : 8281 – 8286 , 2007 . 24 Savina , A . , and S . Amigorena . Phagocytosis and antigen presentation in dendritic cells . Immunol . Rev . 219 ( 1 ) : 143 – 156 , 2007 . 25 Sixt , M . , and T . La¨mmermann . In vitro analysis of chemotactic leukocyte migration in 3D environments . In : Cell Migration , edited by C . M . Wells , and M . Parsons . New York : Humana Press , 2011 , pp . 149 – 165 . 26 Steinman , R . M . The dendritic cell system and its role in immunogenicity . Annu . Rev . Immunol . 9 : 271 – 296 , 1991 . 27 Tabdanov , E . , S . Gondarenko , S . Kumari , A . Liapis , M . L . Dustin , M . P . Sheetz , et al . Micropatterning of TCR and LFA - 1 ligands reveals complementary effects on Motile Dendritic Cells Sense and Respond to Substrate Geometry cytoskeleton mechanics in T cells . Integr . Biol . 7 ( 10 ) : 1272 – 1284 , 2015 . 28 Tan , J . L . , J . Tien , D . M . Pirone , D . S . Gray , K . Bhadri - raju , and C . S . Chen . Cells lying on a bed of microneedles : an approach to isolate mechanical force . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 100 ( 4 ) : 1484 – 1489 , 2003 . 29 Vargas , P . , P . Maiuri , M . Bretou , P . J . Saez , P . Pierobon , M . Maurin , et al . Innate control of actin nucleation determines two distinct migration behaviours in dendritic cells . Nat . Cell Biol . 18 ( 1 ) : 43 – 53 , 2016 . 30 Wo´jciak - Stothard , B . , M . Zbigniew , W . Korohoda , A . Curtis , and C . Wilkinson . Activation of macrophage - like cells by multiple grooved substrata . Topographical control of cell behaviour . Cell Biol . Int . 19 : 485 – 490 , 1995 . 31 Yang , M . T . , J . Fu , Y . - K . Wang , R . A . Desai , and C . S . Chen . Assaying stem cell mechanobiology on microfabri - cated elastomeric substrates with geometrically modulated rigidity . Nat . Protoc . 6 ( 2 ) : 187 – 213 , 2011 . B ENDELL et al .