Research Contribution : Kling and Elliott , " Digital Library Design for Organizational Usability " Research Contributio n Digital Library Design for Organizational Usabilit y Rob Kling and Margaret Elliot t University of California , Irvine Abstract ? During the last decade , software designers have mad e progress in improving the usability of software products , such as word processors , by focusing on the design of inter - faces . Less attention has been given to usability issues tha t go beyond the interface in the design of multi - user systems , such as a digital library ( DL ) . In this paper , we discuss two aspects of DL usabilit y - interface and organizational . While the Human - Computer - Interaction ( HCI ) research community has helped pioneer de - sign principles to improv e interface usability , organizational usability is less well understood . In fact , HCI researchers ofte n treat the term " DL usability " a s synonymous with a DL ' s interface usability . " Design for organizational usability " is a new term that refers to the desig n of computer - based systems s o that they are effectivel y integrated into the work practice s of organizations . Issues of organizational design have bee n identified and faced by researcher s and practitioners in neighborin g fields , such as Information Systems . DL developers need t o consider " design for organizational usability " issues during DL system design . Anthropologists have successfully used the concept p f " cultural models " to understand the cultural construct s through which people view their worlds . Computer systems development communities , including the DL design com - munity , usually have some consensus ( cultural models ) about the character of systems usability in their developmen t process— how people do and should use computer systems , and what roles different users should play in the design o f new systems . We discuss five typical models of compute r systems design . These models become cultural model s when they are taken for granted within a professional com - munity as THE ( natural ) way to design all systems . A new model that incorporates " design for organizational usability " principles into system design is proposed . We believe that this model has the strongest chance of producing DL sys - tems that diverse people can use effectively . 7 This paper is a significantly revised and enhance d version of " Digital Library Design for Usability " by Ro b Kling and Margaret Elliott . pp : 146 - 155 , Proc . Digital Libraries ' 94 Conference . John L . Schnase , John J . Leggett , Richard K . Furuta , and Ted Metcalfe ( Eds . ) . June 19 - 21 , 1994 . College Station Texas . 1 . Introductio n During the last decade , software designers have learned t o craft systems that are easier for many people to learn and t o use so as to improve their performance at work . Although some progress has been made in developing usable system s for such software as spreadsheets and word processors , les s progress has been made in the design of more complex in - formation systems such as a digital library ( DL ) . Even tal - ented computer scientists find that some DL systems whic h should be useful are too clumsy to bother with , and so the y avoid using them . Systems need to be created which ar e easy to learn and to use in order to prevent the insidiou s problem of " underused " systems . " Systems usability " refers t o how well people can actuall y exploit a computer system ' s intended functionality . Usability can characterize any as - pect of the ways that peopl e interact with a system , even its installation and maintenance . Usability issues should b e considered during the design o f digital library ( DL ) services i n order to build systems whic h people with limited technologica l skills can readily use . For an advanced NII to be successful i n its attempt to " wire " the United States to a informatio n superhighway within the near future , DL developers need t o consider how to accommodate users ' mix of skills , wor k practices , and resources to maximize DL usability . Otherwise , the realization of an advanced NII will b e hampered by " underused " DL systems . Ll this paper , we discuss two key forms of DL usabil - ity— interface usability and organizational usability . The HCI research community has helped pioneer design princi - ples to improve interface usability . And software produc t firms frequently advertise their products in terms of more us - able interfaces . In contrast , organizational usability is les s well understood . The organizational usability of specifi c computer systems depends upon the " fit " to specific organi - zations ; it cannot be readily packaged , advertised , and sold . " Design for organizational usability " is a new term tha t refers to the design of computer systems so that they are ef - fectively integrated into the work practices of organizations . Issues of organizational design have been identified and face d by researchers and practitioners in neighboring fields , suc h as Information Systems and Computer Supported Coopera - tive Work . ( See Appendix A for an annotated bibliograph y of relevant research . ) DL developers are often eager to have their system s widely used , and focus on the content of corpuses and th e features of interfaces . They rarely address organizational us - We propose a new model that incorporates " design for organi - zational usability " principles i n order to produce DL system s that diverse groups of peopl e can use effectively . SIGOIS Bulletin , December 1994 / Vol . l5 . No . 2 59 Research Contribution : Kling and Elliott , " Digital Library Design for Organizational Usability " ability issues head on . We raise this issue to stimulate peo - ple who design DLs , or those who integrate them into spe - cific organizations for professional use , to think in organiza - tional terms as well as in terms of interfaces to corpuses . The concept of " cultural models of computer system s design " helps us understand how people who develop com - puter systems within different niches in the computin g world conceptualize key meanings about " the use " of thei r products— who uses them , the circumstances under whic h they will typically use them , the amount of work that peo - ple should spend to use them , and so on . These conception s of computer usage are not " facts , " but assumptions whic h systems developers often take for granted . Consequently , when developers from two diverse subworlds meet , such a s multimedia conferencing and numerical analysis for scien - tists— each may be puzzled by the other ' s " strange views " of computer use . Anthropologists have been successful in using the con - cept of " cultural models " to understand the cognitive con - structs through which people view their worlds and ho w they internalize these constructs [ Da92 , Qu87 ] . For exam - ple , anthropologists have used cultural models to study ro - mance , marriage , parenthood and success of women and me n from different class and ethnic backgrounds of peopl e [ Da92 ] . Computer systems development organizations usu - ally have some consensus ( cultural models ) about the role o f usability issues in their development process and resultin g products . Similarly , DL development communities als o have a cultural model of the role of usability in their desig n process . In this paper , we discuss five models of computer sys - tems design which are typically found in the computer in - dustry and research community . These models become cul - tural models when they are taken for granted within an orga - nization or professional community as THE way that al l systems should be designed . In addition , we propose a new model that incorporates " design for usability " principles int o system design . Our belief is that this model has th e strongest chance of producing DL systems which many peo - ple find to be routinely usable in their workplaces . It is our intent to provoke thought and research on this importan t topic in DL development . Section 2 describes the dimensions of usability and ho w they apply to DLs , section 3 conveys how the content o f DLs affect their usability , and section 4 outlines the " desig n for usability " principles applied to DLs . Section 5 describe s the use of cultural models as frames of reference for desig n approaches , section 6 presents six models of computer sys - tems design , and section 7 contains the conclusion . 2 . Dimensions of Usability Applied to Digita l Librarie s In this section , we outline two key forms of DL usabil - ity interface and organizational . The interface dimension s are centered around an individual ' s effective acclimation to a user interface , while the organizational dimensions are con - cerned with how computer systems can be effectively inte - grated into work practices of specific organizations . Interfac e usability can be tested in a laboratory using a sample from a relevant population . But organizational usability must b e measured by the " fit " of specific systems to specific organi - zations . Examples of these dimensions applied to DLs are 60 SIGOIS Bulletin , December 1994 / Vol . 15 , No . 2 given . We do not contend that one DL is better than anothe r through these examples , but wish to show the differing di - mensions of usability in DLs . 2 . 1 Interface Usabilit y Usability can characterize any aspect of the ways tha t people interact with a computer system , even its installatio n and maintenance . Nielsen [ Ni93 ] identified five attributes o f a system ' s interface usability . While there is some contro - versy in the HCI field about which specific set of interfac e characteristics to treat as most important , Nielsen ' s list i s sufficiently good for making our key contrasts between in - terface usability and organizational usability . He suggests that these attributes can be evaluated through usability test - ing relative to certain users and tasks . Four of Nielsen ' s in - terface usability dimensions are : I . Learnability— Ease of learning such that a man or woman can quickly begin using it . Efficiency— Ability of a man or woman t o use the system with high level of productivity . Memorability— Capability of a person to easily remember how to use the system after not using it for some period . Reliability— System should have low erro r rates with few user errors , few catastrophic er - rors , and easy recovery from common errors . We illustrate how theses four attributes of interface usabilit y contribute to the effective usage of DLs by informally com - paring two DL services— Gopher and the Mosaic interfac e for World - Wide Web ( WWW ) . Gopher is a DL indexin g service which enables researchers to search for electroni c files containing information on a particular topic over a network of computers - both nationally and internationally . Its user interface is menu - driven with deep levels of sub - menus . Mosaic is a networked information discovery , re - trieval , and collaboration tool and WWW browser . Gopher is also accessible from Mosaic . WWW merges informatio n discovery and hypertext techniques for linkage to text , soun d and animation files . While Gopher and WWW have differen t capabilities , we have found that academics treat them as ef - fective substitutions . For example , some Graphics User In - terface ( GUI ) enthusiasts argue that Gopher is pass and tha t the Mosaic interface for WWW represents a much better D L model . Learning Gopher requires technical understanding of th e platform ' s operating system ( Gopher can be used on man y platforms : Unix , Dos , Microsoft Windows , Macintosh , Next , and VM ) . On any of these platforms , people mus t learn how to navigate Gopher submenus and how to re - search , retrieve , and save information . Similarly , learning to use Mosaic requires ready knowledge of the windowin g system upon which it resides ( Mosaic is available for X - windows , Windows for DOS , and Macintosh ) and familiarit y with the hypertext concept . Mosaic includes online demon - strations and detailed " help " menus , both of which are help - ful to novice users . While Gopher lacks the online demon - strations , it does include a shorter version of a " help " sys - tem . Some people might consider Gopher ' s interface easie r to learn than Mosaic ' s because Gopher ' s text - based , menu - 2 . 3 . 4 . Research Contribution : Kling and Elliott , " Digital Library Design for Organizational Usability " driven system may be more familiar to them than Mosaic ' s graphical , mouse - driven windowing system requiring knowl - edge of hypertext links . " Efficiency of use " refers to an expert person ' s steady - state level of performance when no more learning take s place . This can be measured by defining a level of expertis e and testing a representative sample of people who have tha t expertise by timing some typical tasks . Gopher ' s efficienc y of use could be measured by giving experienced people a topic to research , or a question to answer . Similarly , Mo - saic ' s WWW efficiency of use could be tested using the sam e technique . In both cases , the longer people use these DL in - terfaces , the more adept they become at seeking informa - tion . Since these interfaces are amorphous by their defini - tion , efficiency of use over an extended period of time migh t vacillate and be difficult to measure . Gopher ' s interface appears to be more readily memorabl e than Mosaic ' s . It is simpler and one can save bookmarks t o a particular search retrieval location to be used in a futur e session . In contrast , Mosaic ' s interface requires knowledg e of X - windows and the proper usage of a mouse to navigat e the windows— a skill which may need to relearned after a period of abstinence . Saving Mosaic ' s search paths consists of collecting a Uniform Resource Locator ( URL ) , a label as - sociated with a retrieved location , into a " hotlist " . The items in the " hotlist " menu— analogous to Gopher ' s book - mark list— may be selected again . However , Gopher ' s bookmarks , labeled with the same nomenclature of the orig - inal menu selection , are easily identifiable . In contrast , Mo - saic ' s " hotlist " items are named with a portion of the UR L which may not be unique , requiring editing of the " hotlist " items to translate them into easily remembered selections . One of the errors which could occur cluring usage of ei - ther system is the improper use of retrieval keywords . Searches using Gopher sometimes appear to invoke director y and file selections which are more pertinent to the searc h topic then a WWW search through Mosaic . For example , we performed an experiment where we chose to search for a specific topic— computer usage at the government agency , Center for Exploited and Missing Children . We searche d with the string " Missing Children " in both systems . Go - pher returned menu items directly pertaining to missin g children . Whereas , Mosaic ' s WWW search produced unrelate d items , such as one on the advertisement for flower basket s purchased over the Internet . However , Gopher is often unre - liable , failing to access specific directories and gettin g " stuck " in a loop during searching . A skilled and patient person can easily overlook these reliability problems . But we have found that some academics find Gopher ' s behavio r so confusing or annoying that they abandon Gopher as a vi - able work tool . 2 . 2 Organizational Usability Organizational usability refers to the ways that com - puter systems can be effectively integrated into work prac - tices of specific organizations . As we shall show , the sam e DL may be much more usable in some organizations than i n others . In this section , we examine five important character - istics of the fit between DLs and organizations which mak e them more or less usable by people in support of thei r work . We illustrate them with the design of Gopher an d Mosaic and also the way that we use these systems at Uni - versity of California , Irvine ( UCI ) . The dimensions of orga - nizational usability include : I . Accessibility— Ease with which people ca n locate specific computer systems , gain physi - cal access and electronic access to their elec - tronic corpuses . This dimension refers to bot h physical proximity and administrative / socia l restrictions on using specific systems . 2 . Compatibility— Level of compatibility of fil e transfers from system to system . 3 . Integrability into work practices— Ho w smoothly the system fits into a person ' s o r group ' s work practices , including access t o complementary computing resources ( ie . , communication lines , scanners , printers ) to fa - cilitate work - flows— how people actuall y prefer to work , 4 . Social - organizational expertise— The extent t o which people can obtain training and consult - ing to learn to use systems and can find hel p with problems in usage . 5 . Reliability— System should be reliable wit h easy recovery from common problems ( with the possible assistance of support staff ) . The accessibility of Gopher and Mosaic varies with a per - son ' s experiences with the necessary platforms and the ex - tent to which they can get hold of the computing resource s which they need for accessing them . The effective availabil - ity of platforms has a strong influence on who can use thes e systems . At UCI , Information and Computer Science un - dergraduates are permitted access to Gopher ( for limited peri - ods of time ) but not to WWW , because Mosaic require s workstations and ethernet access which are only available i n our graduate students ' laboratories . These undergraduate stu - dents are also not permitted to Telnet to locations wher e Gopher or WWW servers are located . ( In the near future , th e UCI Library plans to install Mosaic on several workstation s which will be available for general use . ) The compatibility of DLs refers to the retrieval of file s in text , graphics , audio , and / or animation format in a for m that can be readily translated into the formats that organiza - tional participants routinely use for other activities , such a s text processing . Text retrieval in Gopher and Mosaic fo r ASCII files is compatible for most computer systems . However , these files may be in a particular word processin g format which is not easily convertible to the individual ' s preferred format . In the X - Windows version of Mosaic , hy - pertext links of sections of a paper are retrievable by select - ing a hyperlink . If one then chooses to save this selectio n from a menu , it is saved in the format and size of the curren t window . This format may not be easily ported to a printe r at a future time . In addition , these hypertext links ma y comprise a list of sections of a document . So instead of re - trieving the document as one file , one may need to retriev e the document in pieces . In Gopher , documents that are stored as one file are retrieved and saved as one file . The us - age of graphics , audio , and animation files retrieved fro m these DL services depends on the availability of correc t translators and platforms on the receiving end . SIGOIS Bulletin , December 1994 / Vol . 15 , No . 2 61 Research Contribution : Kling and Elliott , " Digital Library Design for Organizational Usability " The integration of Gopher and Mosaic into work prac - tices is a function of the accessibility and performance of th e platforms and the users ' particular work practices . A profes - sor who is searching for a reference a few minutes before a class might find Gopher ' s long delays during file retrieval s to be unacceptable . In contrast , a student ( or faculty mem - ber ) who is searching for materials in support of a researc h paper might be willing to wait for ten minutes . Mosaic ' s WWW browsing may also deter someone from quickly lo - cating a specific piece of information . However , for peopl e with more time and patience , these DL services would fi t better into work practices . Also , a style of work which in - volves exploratory procedures lends itself well to the use o f DL services . People without a computer in the office o r nearby may not be able to easily integrate DL research int o their workplace . People ' s skills or their access to training , documents , and consulting during use of Gopher and WWW influence s their abilities to effectively utilize these DL services . For example , UCI ' s students and faculty typically can contact lo - cal support organizations on campus when questions arise . In some cases , training sessions are provided in these set - tings . Conversely , a person using these systems from a home computer usually lacks access to experts and may nee d to rely on local bulletin boards for help . 3 . The Usefulness and Usability of Digita l Libraries We suspect that a great deal of people ' s satisfaction with a DL service is influenced by the size and content of its cor - pus , and their abilities to effectively use it . We find th e contrast between useful and usable DLs to be important . A " useful " DL contains information that a person or grou p might value . ( Or it may play a symbolic role for people o r groups who want to make a statement about their social an d technological niche . ) A usable DL refers to one in which a person or group can readily locate " useful information . " For example , the University of California ( UC ) recentl y started an experiment with Pergammon Press to make th e full contents of scientific journals available online to facult y students and staff . UC and Pergammon selected journals i n the field of materials science , including Wear and Vacuum i n their corpus . This corpus is useful to only a small fractio n of UC ' s academic community . However , some groups may find ( or believe ) that the y can ' t effectively utilize a " useful " corpus . They may no t have access to critical equipment or may lack key skills . Or they may see the DL as providing a " low signal to noise ra - tio . " In this last case , a search for information in a D L may result in hundreds of " hits " which the searcher believe s are irrelevant . If the few " relevant hits " are buried in a moun - tain of irrelevant hits , the searcher may see the search as " unusable . " In contrast , some very usable DLs may not b e useful to a particular group . While the ideal DLs are bot h useful and usable , these values do not always go together . In fact , one key rationale for this paper started with our in - formal observation that many computer scientists and aca - demic administrators emphasize the usefulness of a DL ' s corpus , and tend to underestimate the role that it ' s organiza - tional usability plays in people ' s willingness to utilize it . 4 . " Design for Organizational Usability " i n Digital Librarie s " Design for organizational usability " is a new term tha t refers to the design of computer systems so that they can b e effectively integrated into the work practices of specific or - ganizations . It includes , but goes beyond , the focus on use r interfaces which is the subject of " design for usability " a s currently understood in the HCI community . " Design fo r organizational usability " includes designing the infrastruc - ture of computing resources that are necessary for support - ing and helping people learn to effectively use systems . " Design for organizational usability " encourages system de - signers either to accommodate to people ' s mix of skills , work practices , and resources or to try to systematically al - ter them . " Design for organizational usability " can be ap - plied to the selection and integration of diverse compute r systems or to the design of new systems to improve th e likelihood that people will use them . DL computer systems should be a prime target for " de - sign for organizational usability " . Their effective value de - pends upon their practical usability by people in organiza - tions and communities . The emerging DLs have come to include publicly available information and private informa - tion shared by collaborators : reference volumes , books , journals , newspapers , national phone directories , sound an d voice recordings , images , video clips , scientific data ( ra w data streams ) , and private information services such as pri - vate newsletters and stock market reports . We know very little about the working conditions an d institutional and organizational practices that make DL s most usable by faculty , academic staff , students , busines s associates , and people using home computers . Developer s take it for granted that men and women using DLs are self - serving . Research [ Cu83 , pp . 55 - 67 ] shows that people ap - pear to need help in effectively using DL services , but the y are being pushed by DL developers to " self - service " . Devel - opers of DL systems need to address complex usability is - sues to ensure that many people gain value from usin g these services . In fact , we argue that individuals need t o learn about the services ' contents , learn to use them , an d have access to complementary computing resources ( lik e disk space and printers ) to effectively utilize their output . 62 SIGOIS Bulletin , December 1994 / Vol . 15 , No . 2 Research Contribution : Kling and Elliott , " Digital Library Design for Organizational Usability " " DESIGN FOR ORGANIZATIONAL USABILITY " Organizationally - Specifi c Figure 1 : Design for Organizational Figure I illustrates the set of players involved in the desig n and usage of a DL in a typical university . It indicates whic h groups should consider " design for organizational usability " when making design decisions . First , the vendor - based de - sign team ( often influenced by researchers ) , create shrink - wrapped product designs which are distributed by the conten t providers to end - users— in this case , faculty and students . Both the design team and the content providers need to ad - dress usability issues to provide DL systems which will b e effective for people ' s varied skills , work practices and re - sources . Within the organizationally - specific box , the struc - turing group needs to consider the organizational dimension s of usability including the accessibility and integrability o f DL services into the work place . The box containing fac - ulty , students , local consultants and gurus are the peopl e most affected by the dimensions of usability . Our model o f " design for organizational usability " for DLs , presented i n section 6 , is intended for designers , content providers and or - ganizationally - specific structuring groups in order to pro - mote usable DL systems . 5 . Cultural Models as Frames of Referenc e for Design Approaches Computer systems development communities view usabilit y differently and each has a cultural model of systems desig n which motivate them to use one model versus another . Fur - ther , the DL community acts as a culture and has very spe - Usability in University Digital Librar y cific models of design to be discussed later . Anthropologist s have been successful in using the concept of cultural mod - els to understand the cultural constructs by which peopl e view the world and how they internalize these construct s [ Da92 ; Qu87 , pp . 3 - 40 ] . For example , anthropologists hav e used cultural models to study romance , marriage , parent - hood , and success of women and men from different clas s and ethnic backgrounds of people [ Da92 ] . Shared knowl - edge , including values and assumptions , within a group i s part of what anthropologists call culture . Our connectio n with culture influences how we make sense of different sit - uations , and how we interpret actions as pertinent to an y given situation [ Ge92 , pp . 3 - 30 ] . Cultural models are " presupposed , taken - for - grante d models of the world that are widely shared ( although no t necessarily to the exclusion of other , alternative models ) b y the members of a society and that play an enormous role i n their understanding of that world and their behavior in i t [ Qu87 , pp . 3 - 40 ] . " Cultural models can have motivationa l force [ Qu87 , pp . 3 - 40 ] because these models not only de - fine the world but also set forth goals ( both conscious an d unconscious ) and invoke or include desires [ Da92 ] . Our purpose in using cultural models is to aid in ou r analysis of how computer systems designers view usability . In understanding the various beliefs , values and assumption s within the " culture " of systems designers which underl y their usability design approach , we can formulate a metho d of changing designers ' behavior . It is our belief that the cul - SIGOIS Bulletin , December 1994 / Vol . 15 , No . 2 63 Research Contribution . Kling and Elliott , " Digital Library Design for Organizational Usability " tural model of " design for organizational usability " , pre - sented in section 6 , is the most effective way for DL design - ers to ensure usability in DLs . In order to enculturate thes e new beliefs and assumptions into DL designers , we need t o first understand the present cultural models of computer sys - tems design ( including DL design ) . 6 . Cultural Models of Computer System s Desig n Computer systems development industry and research com - munities usually have some consensus ( cultural models ) about the role of usability issues in their development pro - cess and resulting products . These cultural models of usabil - ity differ in the priority that they place on producing com - puter systems that are easy to use relative to other functiona l requirements . They also include typical ways for thinkin g about who is a user " , " how hard should people have t o work to learn a system " , " whether to include the user in th e design process " , etc . We present several models of computer systems design . The traditional functional life - cycle model , the user interfac e model , and the usability engineering model are discussed a s models of computer systems design . The highly automate d model seems to be a cultural model for the DL design world , and an expert systems design model which is common in th e artificial intelligence ( AI ) community . Our last model - the " design for organizational usability " model - represents a new approach to ways that software developers can desig n their systems to ensure usability . These models becom e cultural models when they are taken for granted within a n organization or professional community as THE way that al l systems should be designed . 6 . 1 Traditional Functional Life - cycle Mode l of Computer Systems Desig n The traditional functional life - cycle approach to compute r systems design includes six stages performed sequentially : Project Definition , Systems Study , Design , Programming , Installation , and Post - implementation . Each stage include s a set of activities which must be completed before advancin g to the next stage . This is a fairly rigid , simple model o f computer usability devoid of the influences of the surround - ing computing infrastructure— the physical , technological , and social supporting resources . While usability issues are addressed , the concerns are often supplanted by cultural in - fluences of how developers should view the needs and prefer - ences of people who will use their systems . Typically , communication between the developer an d end - user is frequent during the requirements specification pe - riod . But once requirements are set , the level of communica - tion diminishes and is mostly concerned with budgetary mat - ters . For example , the Project Definition step might entai l assessing the end - user profile in preparing a project proposa l report . One possibility is for a designer to involve the end - user which includes interviewing prospective end - users . In contrast , a different designer might decide not to involve th e end - user , and choose to determine the profiles of the peopl e who will use the system by his or her individual assump - tions . The instigation of one method versus another depend s on individual backgrounds and organizational cultural con - 64 SIGOIS Bulletin , December 1994 / Vol . 15 , No . 2 structs . For example , the motivations for choosing not t o involve the end - user might include : " Conform to standards " — It may be a standard practice in an organization to exclude the end - user in requirements planning . Workers may want to maintain their position by followin g orders , or they may just want to " fit in " wit h the norm . " Expectations that end - users will view the sys - tem as the developer does " — Involving th e end - user in seeking requirements is not neces - sary because assumptions are made that future end - users " think " like the developer . " Designer is developing a new technique with the attitude that I ' m the expert in this area an d the future end - users might not understand wha t they want . " " Rote application of present or former train - ing " — The developer may have had training i n school or in a current or previous organization , where it was learned that requirements docu - ments are written without consulting with the end - user . Typically , this model does not involve the end - user in ver y many steps during system development . Consequently , computer systems developed using this model often have se - rious drawbacks when implemented and become " underused " systems by the people for whom the system was designed . 6 . 2 User Interface Model of Computer Sys - tems Desig n Rettig [ Re92 , pp . 29 - 34 ] proposes a user interface model o f computer systems design for developers with limited re - sources and funds who do not typically consider interface us - ability issues , other than to mimic the design of user inter - faces which are already familiar to potential users . ( His model is a typical contemporary Human Factors model . ) Rettig bases his model on personal experience with a soft - ware development project which needed a manageabl e method for users to conceive , view , and manipulate comple x data structures . The user interface approach to computer design include s more concern for the potential people who will use the sys - tem than does the traditional life - cycle model . One way is through emphasis on ergonomics , the ease with which a person can work in the physiological surroundings of a computer system ' s environment . This is an improvemen t over the traditional life - cycle model but it still has limita - tions . One study [ Bu9l , pp . 257 - 287 ] , on the use of group - ware , showed that people often used the electronic mail an d ignored the other functions even though groupware system s provide a myriad of services— scheduling , calendaring , an d electronic mail . They found that groupware user interfaces with many options did little to encourage people to actuall y utilize them as part of their work routines . Iterative design and testing is emphasized in this mode l with the end - user ' s involvement permeating every step . Mo - tivations for including end - users in this design model migh t include : 2 . 3 . 4 . Research Contribution : Kling and Elliott , " Digital Library Design for Organizational Usability " 1 . " Conform to standards " — Organizational pol - icy might dictate end - user involvement . 2 . " Ensure usability in final product " — Devel - oper might foresee the need for end - user in - volvement as a prerequisite for useful systems . Efforts to focus on the end - users ' preferences and involv e them in the design process with user testing early and ofte n are integrated into this model . This model succeeds in appli - cation to shrink - wrapped products such as word processors o r airline reservations systems where the user interface is th e primary concern . For computer systems requiring assimila - tion into a person ' s work practice such as DLs , this mode l has limitations . The computing infrastructure includin g services for training and support are not considered . 6 . 3 Usability Engineering Model of Conn - puter Systems Desig n The usability engineering model is a leading - edge HCI ap - proach , and extends the user interface model . Usability de - sign and engineering advocates , such as John Gould and hi s colleagues [ Go91 , pp . 74 - 86 ] and Nielsen [ Ni93 ] , propos e systematic guides for ensuring a high degree of usability i n the final user interface . In this model , developers have a heightened awareness of user preferences and needs by identi - fying users and working with them early in a developmen t project . Nielsen ' s usability engineering life cycle model il - lustrates this model : 1 . Know the user— Study intended users and us e of the product . At a minimum , visit cus - tomer site to study user ' s current and desire d tasks , and to understand the evolution of th e user and the job . 2 . Competitive analysis— Analyze existin g products according to usability guidelines an d perform user tests with products . 3 . Setting usability goals— Establish minima l acceptable level of usability and estimate th e financial impact on cost of users ' time . 4 . Parallel design— Use several designers to ex - plore different design alternatives before decid - ing on one final design . 5 . Participatory design— Include end - user s throughout design phase . 6 . Coordinated design of the total interface — Maintain consistency across screen layouts , documentation , on - line help systems , and tu - torials . 7 . Apply guidelines and heuristic analysis— Se - lect user interface guideline appropriate fo r situation . 8 . Prototyping— Build prototype to pretest o n end - users . 9 . Empirical testing— Test end - users on specifi c usability attributes . 10 . Iterative design— Capture design rational e through iterative testing and design . Collect feedback from field use— Gather us - ability work from field studies for future de - sign . The preferences of potential end - users are reflected in inter - face designs through the use of prototyping and iterative us - ability testing in which end - users are repeatedly measured o n their effective use of revisions of the system until a satisfac - tory product emerges . There are several means of measurin g usability . One is to select a representative group of user s from the potential user population and have them use th e system in a predetermined set of tasks . Another is to ob - serve real users in the process of performing the tasks the y normally do as part of their job . In both cases , the system ' s usability is measured against certain users and certain tasks . Those measurements are part of Step 10 , Iterative testing , i n the usability engineering life - cycle . Based on the values o f these measurements during the first testing , the system i s revised in hopes of improving the attribute values closer t o the optimum . Although this model more closely attends to the need s and preferences of potential end - users than the traditional o r user interface models , it does not assess the " fit " of thes e systems into people ' s actual workplaces . Even though sys - tems may be designed with slick user interfaces , there is n o guarantee that user acceptance is automatic as we shall see i n the expert systems model of design . 6 . 4 Expert Systems Model of Desig n Even more important than having a user interface that i s comfortable is having a system that saves work and adds ex - pertise which comes from people ' s work . Expert system s have been applied to several domains , including manufactur - ing [ Ma93 ] , insurance underwriting , and medical problems , such as diagnosing diseases [ Sh76 ; Mi861 . Expert systems in medicine have received a lot of atten - tion , but few doctors want to use them . Some AI re - searchers and developers worry that AI designers continue t o produce expert systems which medical professionals do no t use [ Fo92 , pp . 95 - III ; Fo93 , pp . 460 - 479 ] . Forsythe [ Fo92 , pp . 95 - 111 ; Fo93 , pp . 460 - 479 ] has conducted a long - term study of the culture and action in A I design . Her research focuses on the relationship among th e values and assumptions that a community of scientists brin g to their work , the practices that comprise this work , and th e tools which they construct as a result of this work . Her study of the non - acceptance of medical expert systems illus - trates some of the key assumptions that AI developers mak e about usability [ Fo92 , pp . 95 - 111 ] . After an extensiv e study of computer scientists who develop medical exper t systems , she concluded : " . . . the problem of user acceptance is to a significant extent the outcome of values and assump - tions that the scientists bring to their own research and de - velopment process . While I do not suggest that this connec - tion is conscious or intentional , the nature of this particular tradition of scientific practice makes it very difficult for it s followers to see or entertain strategies from other tradition s that would probably help to solve their problem [ Fo92 , pp . 100 ] . SIGOIS Bulletin , December 1994 / Vol . 15 , No . 2 65 Research Contribution . Kling and Elliott , " Digital Library Design for Organizational Usability " In essence , the developers of medical expert systems see the problem of user acceptance as doctors ' and nurses ' resis - tance to using their expert systems . They do not seriously question their own abilities to design systems that wil l mesh with the work styles of doctors , nurses , or medica l technicians . Forsythe outlines some key beliefs and as - sumptions of these expert systems designers : 1 . Technical emphasis— Focus on technical fac - tors of problem assessment , design and evalua - tion . Decontextualize Problem Solving— Use gen - eral quantitative models for problem - solvin g and evaluation which can be used in all work - places . Quantitative , Formal Emphasis— Use of a formal perspective on problem - solving ( base d on the developer ' s training in mathematics , logic , or a physical science ) . AI researchers believe that they gain design power by ignor - ing the concrete working conditions in particular hospital s or clinics . However , this belief leads them to produce sys - tems as cultural artifacts that medical doctors can not use . According to Forsythe [ Fo92 , pp . 95 - 111 ] , the cultural model of medical informatics design prevents expert syste m developers from constructing medical systems which doc - tors , nurses and medical technicians are able to routinel y use . She reports that doctors often believe that the result - ing systems are irrelevant to their work . Other studies sho w that medical staff may use expert systems as simple record - keeping aids rather than as sophisticated analytical tool s [ Sa91 ] . 6 . 5 Highly Automated Model of DL Design Another model , which draws on search techniques from Al , serves as a cultural model of DL design in the DL researc h community . This model emphasizes DL designs based o n powerful search engines , and sometimes uses rubrics lik e " intelligent agents " and knowbots . While some of these search and retrieval techniques are anchored in Al , the mode l differs from the expert systems design model because th e " knowledge base " already exists in the form of a corpus o f pre - existing documents . A key issue is to find ways t o search large document collections give people references t o ( or text of ) the few documents which they actually want . Researchers who use this design model are usually cog - nizant of the user interface design model , and they occasion - ally study human behavior in laboratory settings [ Ea9l , pp . 299 - 312 ] . However , they rarely study the needs and prefer - ences of people who will use their systems in their ow n workplaces . Nor do they investigate what computing - sup - port infrastructure and complementary resources are neces - sary for training and continuing DL use . For example , Lesk , Fox , and McGill [ Le93 , pp . 4 - 24 ] call for a basic science , engineering , and technology librar y on - line accessible over the Internet / NREN and for research t o build and exploit it . Recommendations were made to in - corporate sophisticated computerized search techniques , suc h as " intelligent agents " into future DLs . However , the orga - 66 SIGOIS Bulletin , December 1994 / Vol . 15 , No . 2 nizational usability of these DLs was not treated as prob - lematic or as a key issue for research : " A traditional library is passive ; users come to it an d search for what they want . In an electronic library it is pos - sible to have pro - active elements , which send users mes - sages when agents discover items that , based on earlie r commands , it is known the users are looking for . In the electronic network of the future , we must compensate for th e inability of the users to look around rooms of physica l books . To facilitate this , we can build either asyn - chronously running programs which sit in the background , waiting for new information to arrive , as in SDI ( selectiv e dissemination of information ) programs ; or we can provid e sophisticated " agent " programs , such as the " knowbots " de - scribed by Vinton Cerf , which are dispatched by users t o search out and return desired documents . To truly serve a community of users these must learn about the needs , pref - erences , and capabilities of those users and consider that in - formation during both search and presentation phases [ Le93 , p . 14 ] . " Lesk , Fox and McGill suggest that DL research shoul d focus on the creation of online resources in varied scientifi c areas , to be used in new and exciting ways . These re - searchers follow a form of the method of involving the end - user by surveying communities of potential end - users fo r general requirements . However , they don ' t identify people ' s individual work practices , and institutional and organiza - tional practices as explicit considerations for DL design re - finements . One of the beliefs of the AI cultural model , " De - contextualize Thinking " , is closely related to the preferenc e of DL designers for SDI programs and " knowbots " . The at - tention to spiffy interface assistants focuses the DL desig n on devising succinct problem representations and powerfu l search algorithms rather than on organizational issues of th e effective " fit " of future DL systems into people ' s work - places . This DL design model shares some key features wit h the medical informatics design model . Forsythe ' s result s suggest that it would be risky for DL developers to ignor e usability issues in designing computer systems . Otherwis e their systems , like the AI expert systems , may end up " o n the shelf " with low levels of end - user acceptance . 6 . 6 Model of " Design for Organizational Us - ability " The model of systems " design for organizational usability " is relatively new . It refers to the design of computer sys - tems so that they can be effectively integrated into the wor k practices of specific organizations . It includes , but goes be - yond , the focus on user interfaces . The HCI traditional an d other computer science design approaches take organizationa l resources and relationships as given . These design ap - proaches focus upon producing new artifacts . It is assumed that a person ( end - user ) has sufficient physical , administra - tive , and electronic access to the computer system— such a s a DL . In contrast , those who " design for organizational usabil - ity " do not assume that people automatically have sufficien t access to utilize a specific computer system . They may rec - ommend altering an organization ' s resources , relationship s between organizational units , and also design / select artifact s 2 . 3 . Research Contribution : Kling and Elliott , " Digital Library Design for Organizational Usability " which fit well with the resulting organizational arrange - ments . Design for organizational usability involves design - ing a socio - technical system which fosters the accessibilit y of DL resources , compatibility of DL use with people ' s work practices , available expertise and reliable systems . " Design for organizational usability " includes taking ac - count of the infrastructure of computing resources which ar e necessary for supporting and accommodating people as the y learn to maintain and use systems . " Design for organiza - tional usability " encourages system designers either to ac - commodate to end - users ' mix of skills , work practices , an d resources or to try to alter them . Some HCI researchers recognize the need for further re - search to " raise the level of accountability of both manage - ment and usability people to meet human and organizationa l productivity goals [ Go9l , pp . 74 - 86 ] . " This model addresse s those issues as well as allowing for the altering of wor k practices to support effective use of a computer system i n an organization . Further , we argue that this model is th e most effective way for DL designers to ensure usability i n DLs . One means of ensuring usability in computer system s design is to characterize an organization ' s structure of work , skills , and resources , and examine how it fits with the in - tended computer system design . For example , web model s of computing consider the social and technical infras tructures for supporting effective computer use in an organizatio n [ K187 , K1921 . Web models make explicit connections be - tween a focal technology ( such as a digital library ) , its im - mediate users , and a rich ecology of social relationship s with other social groups and organizations in which th e technology is developed , adopted and used . Computer sys - tems , in this conception , are treated as a form of social or - ganization with important information processing , socia l and institutional properties : they are not only flexible in - formation processing tools . Their capabilities and " fit " within organizations depend upon these social relationship s as well as upon their information processing characteristics . The evidence for the value of the " design for organiza - tional usability " model comes from a body of research an d our own observations , which examines bottlenecks and fail - ure points that prevent computer systems from being use d and being used effectively . Research [ KI92 , Ma93 ] and ob - servations show that organizations would get more fro m their original investment in computer systems investments , if they assessed the social infrastructure for supporting com - puter use as well as specific tasks people need to use a par - ticular system . Likewise , we believe that DL research an d development communities could benefit from this approach . In order to enculturate the cultural constructs needed t o design computer systems using the " design for organiza - tional usability " model , changes in behavior patterns an d work practices must take place . Future research could pro - vide guidelines to DL development communities for th e adoption of the " design for organizational usability " mode l of computer systems design . 6 . 5 Highly Automated Model of DL Desig n Another model , which draws on search techniques from AI , serves as a cultural model of DL design in the DL researc h community . This model emphasizes DL designs based on powerful search engines , and sometimes uses rubrics lik e " intelligent agents " and knowbots . While some of thes e search and retrieval techniques are anchored in AT , the mode l differs from the expert systems design model because th e " knowledge base " already exists in the form of a corpus o f pre - existing documents . A key issue is to find ways t o search large document collections give people references t o ( or text of ) the few documents which they actually want . Researchers who use this design model are usually cog - nizant of the user interface design model , and they occasion - ally study human behavior in laboratory settings [ Ea91 , pp . 299 - 312 ] . However , they rarely study the needs and prefer - ences of people who will use their systems in their ow n workplaces . Nor do they investigate what computing - sup - port infrastructure and complementary resources are neces - sary for training and continuing DL use . For example , Lesk , Fox , and McGill [ Le93 , pp . 4 - 24 ] call for a basic science , engineering , and technology librar y on - line accessible over the Internet / NREN and for research t o build and exploit it . Recommendations were made to in - corporate sophisticated computerized search techniques , suc h as " intelligent agents " into future DLs . However , the orga - nizational usability of these DLs was not treated as prob - lematic or as a key issue for research : " A traditional library is passive ; users come to it an d search for what they want . In an electronic library it is pos - sible to have pro - active elements , which send users mes - sages when agents discover items that , based on earlie r commands , it is known the users are looking for . In the electronic network of the future , we must compensate for th e inability of the users to look around rooms of physica l books . To facilitate this , we can build either asyn - chronously running programs which sit in the background , waiting for new information to arrive , as in SDI ( selective dissemination of information ) programs ; or we can provid e sophisticated " agent " programs , such as the " knowbots " de - scribed by Vinton Cerf , which are dispatched by users t o search out and return desired documents . To truly serve a community of users these must learn about the needs , pref - erences , and capabilities of those users and consider that in - formation during both search and presentation phases [ Le93 , p . 141 . " Lesk , Fox and McGill suggest that DL research shoul d focus on the creation of online resources in varied scientifi c areas , to be used in new and exciting ways . These re - searchers follow a form of the method of involving the end - user by surveying communities of potential end - users fo r general requirements . However , they don ' t identify people ' s individual work practices , and institutional and organiza - tional practices as explicit considerations for DL design re - finements . One of the beliefs of the AI cultural model , " De - contextualize Thinking " , is closely related to the preferenc e of DL designers for SDI programs and " knowbots " . The at - tention to spiffy interface assistants focuses the DL desig n on devising succinct problem representations and powerfu l search algorithms rather than on organizational issues of th e effective " fit " of future DL systems into people ' s work - places . This DL design model shares some key features wit h the medical informatics design model . Forsythe ' s results suggest that it would be risky for DL developers to ignor e SIGOIS Bulletin , December 1994 / Vol . 15 , No . 2 67 Research Contribution . Kling and Elliott , " Digital Library Design . for Organizational Usability " usability issues in designing computer systems . Otherwis e their systems , like the AI expert systems , may end up " o n the shelf ' with low levels of end - user acceptance . 6 . 6 Model of " Design for Organizational Us - ability " The model of systems " design for organizational usability " is relatively new . It refers to the design of computer sys - tems so that they can be effectively integrated into the wor k practices of specific organizations . It includes , but goes be - yond , the focus on user interfaces . The HCI traditional an d other computer science design approaches take organizationa l resources and relationships as given . These design ap - proaches focus upon producing new artifacts . It is assumed that a person ( end - user ) has sufficient physical , administra - tive , and electronic access to the computer system— such a s a DL . In contrast , those who " design for organizational usabil - ity " do not assume that people automatically have sufficien t access to utilize a specific computer system . They may rec - ommend altering an organization ' s resources , relationship s between organizational units , and also design / select artifact s which fit well with the resulting organizational arrange - ments . Design for organizational usability involves design - ing a socio - technical system which fosters the accessibilit y of DL resources , compatibility of DL use with people ' s work practices , available expertise and reliable systems . " Design for organizational usability " includes taking ac - count of the infrastructure of computing resources which ar e necessary for supporting and accommodating people as the y learn to maintain and use systems . " Design for organiza - tional usability " encourages system designers either to ac - commodate to end - users ' mix of skills , work practices , an d resources or to try to alter them . Some HCI researchers recognize the need for further re - search to " raise the level of accountability of both manage - ment and usability people to meet human and organizational productivity goals [ Go9l , pp . 74 - 86 ] . " This model addresse s those issues as well as allowing for the altering of wor k practices to support effective use of a computer system i n an organization . Further , we argue that this model is the most effective way for DL designers to ensure usability i n DLs . One means of ensuring usability in computer system s design is to characterize an organization ' s structure of work , skills , and resources , and examine how it fits with the in - tended computer system design . For example , web model s of computing consider the social and technical infrastructure s for supporting effective computer use in an organizatio n [ K187 , K1921 . Web models make explicit connections be - tween a focal technology ( such as a digital library ) , its im - mediate users , and a rich ecology of social relationship s with other social groups and organizations in which th e technology is developed , adopted and used . Computer sys - tems , in this conception , are treated as a form of social or - ganization with important information processing , socia l and institutional properties : they are not only flexible in - formation processing tools . Their capabilities and " fit " within organizations depend upon these social relationship s as well as upon their information processing characteristics . 68 SIGOIS Bulletin , December I994Nol . 15 , No . 2 The evidence for the value of the " design for organiza - tional usability " model comes from a body of research an d our own observations , which examines bottlenecks and fail - ure points that prevent computer systems from being use d and being used effectively . Research [ K192 , Ma93 ] and ob - servations show that organizations would get more fro m their original investment in computer systems investments , if they assessed the social infrastructure for supporting com - puter use as well as specific tasks people need to use a par - ticular system . Likewise , we believe that DL research an d development communities could benefit from this approach . In order to enculturate the cultural constructs needed t o design computer systems using the " design for organiza - tional usability " model , changes in behavior patterns an d work practices must take place . Future research could pro - vide guidelines to DL development communities for th e adoption of the " design for organizational usability " mode l of computer systems design . 7 . Conclusion We have introduced the term " organizational usability " t o characterize the effective " fit " between computer system s ( and DLs ) with the social organization of computing in spe - cific organizations . While designers may not know the spe - cific organizations that will acquire their systems , they ma y learn key characteristics of typical organizations in their po - tential client community . For example , someone designin g a DL for earth scientists is designing for an audience whos e researchers are likely to have adequate access to high perfor - mance computing platforms and available support staff wit h expertise . In contrast , someone designing DL services for elementary school children has client organizations wher e Apple Its and low - end Macs are commonplace , and wher e computing expertise is thinly spread . The same DL archi - tecture which may add a nice database of space satellit e videos to a geophysics lab may be far too costly , inaccessi - ble and complicated for the grade school . These aspects o f organizational usability go beyond the interface design . In this paper , we have examined five models of com - puter system design which are known in the informatio n systems and computer science research and professiona l communities . Each of these models is a cultural model onl y in the specific organizations or professional communitie s where it is taken for granted as THE proper way to desig n new systems . Cultural models are hard to change , becaus e their assumptions seem so natural— " just obvious " t o members of the culture . We have characterized one desig n model which we believe is the dominant cultural desig n model in the DL research community . Each of the five de - sign models has strengths and weaknesses . We proposed a new organizationally - sensitive model which we believe ha s the strongest chance of producing DL systems which man y people find to be routinely usable in their workplaces . This is a good time for the DL research community t o examine its own design models in light of systematic empir - ical research about the nature of usable computer system s and the particular organizational conditions under whic h people will often use DLs ( See Appendix A ) . It is possible to begin useful field studies which ar e based on DLs in use today . It is also possible to study the Research Contribution . Kling and Elliott , " Digital Library Design for Organizational Usability " use of diverse DL resources , including OPACs , WWW , an d e - journals , by faculty and students in research universities . We can start developing systematic understanding of the ac - tual working conditions under which faculty , students , an d staff find these resources most useful . We can also lear n about the key bottlenecks that they face in a way that ca n help improve DL design methods . Empirical studies like these can also help systems designers have a better under - standing of the social requirements for DL services and thus , they can better plan and develop effective systems . The time is ripe for DL designers to appreciate the importance of " de - sign for organizational usability " to develop significantl y more effective systems . Acknowledgments Thanks to Jonathan Allen , Lisa Covi , Andrew Dillon , John Garrett , and Jonathan Grudin for their suggestions o n the content of this paper . We also appreciate the valuabl e comments from the anonymous referees . Cliff Lynch has been an important but tacit contributor to this research b y making the MELVYL System with several article database s ( including Psychinfo and ABI / Inform ) available to facult y and students and the University of California . The researc h for this paper is partially supported by NSF grant IRI 901 5 497 . Reference s [ Bo86 ] Borgman , Christine L . Why Are Online Cata - logs Hard to Use ? Lessons Learned from Information - Re - trieval Studies . Journal of the American Society for Infor - mation Science 37 ( 6 ) ( Nov ) : 387 - 400 . [ Bu9l ] Bullen , C . V . and Bennett , J . L . , Groupware in practice : An interpretation of work experiences , in Comput - erization and Controversy . C . Dunlop and R Kling , eds . Boston , MA : Academic Press , Inc . , Pp . 257 - 287 . [ Cu83 ] Culnan , M . 1983 . " Chauffeured Versus En d User Access to Commercial Databases : The Effects of Tas k and Individual Differences . " MIS Quarterly 7 , 55 - 67 . [ Da92 ] DAndrade , R . G . and Strauss , C . ( 1992 ) , eds . Human Motives and Cultural Models . Cambridge : Cam - bridge University Press . [ Ea91 ] Egan , D . E . ; Lesk , M . E . ; Ketchum , R . D . ; Lochbaum , C . C . ; and others . Hypertext for the electronic li - brary ? CORE sample results . Third ACM Conference o n Hypertext , San Antonio , TX , USA , 15 - 18 Dec . ) . New York , NY , USA : ACM , 1991 . Pp . 299 - 312 . [ Fo92 ] Forsythe , D . ( 1992 ) . Blaming the user in med - ical informatics : the cultural nature of scientific practice . Knowledge and Society : The Anthropology of Science an d Technology 9 , 95 - 111 . [ Fo93 ] Forsythe , D . ( 1993 ) . The construction of work in artificial intelligence . Science , Technology , & Huma n Values 18 , 4 ( Autumn ) , 460 - 479 . [ Fo93 ] Fox , E . A . ( 1993 ) . Source Book on Digita l Libraries . Version 1 . 0 , December 6 , 1993 . Prepared for and Sponsored by the National Science Foundation . Blacksburg , VA : Virginia Polytechnic Institute & State University . [ Ge92 ] Geertz , C . ( 1992 ) . Thick description : Toward an interpretive theory of culture , in The Interpretation o f Cultures . New York : Basic Books , Pp . 3 - 30 . [ Gi93 ] Gibbs , M . and Smith , R . ( 1993 ) . Navigating the Internet . Carmel , IN : Sams Publishing . [ Go91 ] Gould , J . D . and Lewis , C . ( 1991 ) . Making usable , useful , productivity - enhancing computer applica - tions . Communications of the ACM 34 , 74 - 86 . [ K187 ] Kling , R . ( 1987 ) . " Defining the Boundaries of Computing Across Complex Organizations . in Critical Is - sues in Information Systems , R . Boland and R . Hirschheim ( eds . ) . John - Wiley . [ K192 ] Kling , R . ( 1992 ) . Behind the terminal : The critical role of computing infrastructure in effective infor - mation systems ' development and use , in Cotterman , W . and Senn , J . ( ed . ) . Challenges and Strategies for Research i n Systems Development , John Wiley : London . [ Le93 ] Lesk , M . , Fox , E . , and McGill , M . ( 1993 ) . A National Electronic Science , Engineering , and Technolog y Library . In Source Book on Digital Libraries . Fox , E . A . , ed . Washington , D . C . : National Science Foundation . Pp . 4 - 24 . [ Ma93 ] Markus , M . L . and Keil , M . ( 1993 ) If We Build It , They Will Come : Designing Information System s That Users Want To Use . Technical Report , The Claremon t Graduate School , Claremont , CA . - [ Mi86 ] Miller , Perry L . ( 1986 ) . Expert critiquing sys - tems : practice - based medical consultation by computer . New York : Springer - Verlag . [ Qu87 ] Quinn , N . and Holland , D . ( 1987 ) . Introduc - tion . In Cultural Models in Language and Thought . Hol - land , D . and Quinn , N . , eds . New York : Cambridge Univer - sity Press . Pp . 3 - 40 . [ Ni93 ] Nielsen , J . ( 1993 ) . Usability Engineering . Boston , MA : Academic Press , Inc . [ Re92 ] Rettig , M . ( 1992 ) . Interface design when yo u don ' t know how . Communications of the ACM 35 , 29 - 34 . [ Sa91 ] Saetnan , Ann Rudinow . ( 1991 ) . Rigid politics and technological flexibility : The anatomy of a failed hospi - tal innovation . Science , Technology , & Human Value s 16 ( 4 ) : 419 - 447 . [ Sh76 ] Shortliffe , Edward Hance . Computer - based med - ical consultations , MYCIN . New York : Elsevier , c 1976 . Contact Informatio n Rob Kling and Margaret Elliott , Computing , Organizations , Policy and Society ( CORPS ) , Department of Informatio n and Computer Science and Center for Research on Informa - tion Technology in Organizations , University of California , Irvine , CA 92717 USA ; email : ( kling , mel - liott ) @ ics . uci . edu . SIGOIS Bulletin , December 1994 / Vol . 15 , No . 2 69 Research Contribution : Kling and Elliott , " Digital Library Design for Organizational Usability " Appendix A : Additional References fo r on Interface Usability re . Sample of Researc h Digital Libraries Fox , E . A . , Hix , D . , Nowell , L . T . , Brueni , D . J . , Wake , W . C . , and Heath , L . S . ( 1993 ) . Users , user inter - faces , and objects : envision , a digital library . Journal of The American Society for Information Science , 44 ( 8 ) : 480 - 491 . [ Usability Engineering Model , Domain : Digital Libraries ] Kahle , B . , Morris , H . , Goldman , J . , Erickson , T . , and Curran , J . ( 1993 ) . Interfaces for distributed systems of in - formation servers . Information Science , 44 ( 8 ) : 453 - 467 , 1993 . [ User Interface Model , Domain : Digital Libraries ] Sample of Research on Organizational Us - ability of Computer System s Berlin , L . M . , Jeffries , R . , O ' Day , V . L . , Paepcke , A . , and Wharton , C . ( 1993 ) . Where Did You Put It ? Issues i n the Design and Use of a Group Memory , Li INTERCH I ' 94 , Pp 23 - 30 . [ Integrability into Work Practices , Domain : Groupware ] Bullen , C . V . and Bennett , J . L . , Groupware in practice : An interpretation of work experiences , in Computerizatio n and Controversy . C . Dunlop and R Kling , eds . Boston , MA : Academic Press , Inc . , Pp . 257 - 287 . [ Integrability int o work practices , Social - organizational expertise , Domain : Groupware ] Culnan , M . ( 1983 ) . " Chauffeured Versus End User Ac - cess to Commercial Databases : The Effects of Task and In - dividual Differences . " MIS Quarterly , 1983 , 7 , 55 - 67 . [ Integrability into work practices , Social - organizational ex - pertise , Domain : Digital Libraries ] Dourish , P . , Bellotti , V . , Mackay , W . , and Ma , Chao - Ying ( 1993 ) . Information and Context : Lessons from a Study of Two Shared Information Systems , Tech Report ? , Rank Xerox EuroPARC , Cambridge . [ Integrability int o Work Practices , Domain : Shared Information Systems ] Forsythe , D . ( 1992 ) . Blaming the user in medical in - formatics : the cultural nature of scientific practice . Knowl - edge and Society : The Anthropology of Science and Tech - nology 9 , 95 - 111 . [ Integrability into work practices , So - cial - organizational expertise , Domain : Medical Informatics ] Forsythe , D . ( 1993 ) . The construction of work in arti - ficial intelligence . Science , Technology , & Human Values 18 , 4 ( Autumn ) , 460 - 479 . [ Integrability into work prac - tices , Social - organizational expertise , Domain : Medical Lr - formatics ] Digital Library Design for Organizational Usabilit y Gorry , G . A . , Burger , A . M . , Chaney , R . J . , Long , K . B . , and Tausk , C . M . ( 1988 ) . Computer Support fo r Biomedical Work Groups . In CSCW 1988 Proceedings , Pp . 39 - 51 . [ Integrability into Work Practices , Domain : Medical Informatics ] Kling , R . and T . Jewett ( 1991 ) . " The Dynamics of Computerization in a Social Science Research Team : A Case Study of Infrastructure , Strategies , and Skills " . Social Science Computer Review . 9 ( 2 ) ( Summer ) : 246 - 275 . [ Accessibility , Compatibility , Integrability into work prac - tices , Social - organizational expertise , Domain : Deskto p Computing ] Kling , R . ( 1992 ) . Behind the Terminal : The Critical Role of Computing Infrastructure in Effective Informatio n Systems ' Development and Use , in Cotterman , W . and Senn , J . ( ed . ) . Challenges and Strategies for Research i n Systems Development , John Wiley : London . [ Accessibility , Compatibility , Integrability into work prac - tices , Social - organizational expertise , Domain : Deskto p Computing ] Kling , R . and T . Jewett . ( in press ) The Social Desig n of Worklife With Computers and Networks : An Open Natu - ral Systems Perspective . Advances in Computers , vol 39 . San Diego : Academic Press . [ Accessibility , Compatibility , Integrability into work practices , Social - organizational ex - pertise , Domain : Email systems , computer networks ] Markus , M . L . and Keil , M . ( 1993 ) . If We Build It , They Will Come : Designing Information Systems Tha t Users Want To Use . Technical Report , The Clarmon t Graduate School , Claremont , CA . [ Integrability into work practices , Domain : Hardware / Software Configuration ] Orlikowski , W . J . ( 1992 ) Learning From Notes : Orga - nizational Issues in Groupware Implementation . In CSCW 1992 Proceedings , Pp . 362 - 369 . [ Integrability into work practices , Social - organizational expertise , Domain : Group - ware ] O ' Day , V . and R . Jeffries . ( 1993 ) . " Information Arti - sans : Patterns of Result Sharing by Information Artisans . " Proc . ACM Conference on Organizational Computing Sys - tems , New York , ACM Press . [ Integrability into work practices , Social - organizational expertise , Domain : Digital Libraries ] Trauth , Eileen M . and Cole , Elliot . ( 1992 ) . The Orga - nizational Interface : A Method for Supporting End Users o f Packaged Software . MIS Quarterly 16 ( 1 ) ( March ) : 35 - 53 . [ Integrability into work practices , Social - organizational ex - pertise , Domain : Information systems , databases , deskto p computing ] 70 SIGOIS Bulletin , December 1994 / Vol . 15 , No . 2