Designing Inclusive Interaction with Autonomous Vehicles for Older Passengers Ashratuz Zavin Asha Ehud Sharlin University of Calgary University of Calgary Calgary , Alberta , Canada Calgary , Alberta , Canada ashratuzzavin . asha @ ucalgary . ca ehud @ cpsc . ucalgary . ca Figure 1 : Inclusive interfaces for AV - older passenger communication : ( a ) interview session , ( b ) in - car interface prototype showing the map and start button , ( c ) VR simulation testing . ABSTRACT With the introduction of autonomous vehicles ( AVs ) in real - world trafc , there are several human - computer interactions ( HCI ) chal - lenges—especially how a passenger might interact with an AV where the human driver is absent . Riding inside an AV could be more challenging for older adults who are expected to be one of the largest user cohorts of AV . In this work , we conducted an in - terview session with senior participants ( N = 10 ) which allowed us to identify specifc design needs for elderly passengers to have reliable communication with AVs . Based on the fndings , we im - plemented fve proof - of - concept prototypes in virtual reality ( VR ) and evaluated them through a user study with another group of elderly participants ( N = 15 ) . Informed by the outcome , we discuss design insights for implementing inclusive interfaces inside the AVs that will be supportive of the functional abilities and cognitive needs of older adults to increase psychological driving comfort and perceived safety . CCS CONCEPTS • Human - centered computing → Accessibility . Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for proft or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the frst page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author ( s ) must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specifc permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from permissions @ acm . org . DIS ’23 , July 10 – 14 , 2023 , Pittsburgh , PA , USA © 2023 Copyright held by the owner / author ( s ) . Publication rights licensed to ACM . ACM ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 9893 - 0 / 23 / 07 . . . $ 15 . 00 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3563657 . 3596045 KEYWORDS Older adults , passengers , autonomous vehicles ACM Reference Format : Ashratuz Zavin Asha and Ehud Sharlin . 2023 . Designing Inclusive Interac - tion with Autonomous Vehicles for Older Passengers . In Designing Interac - tive Systems Conference ( DIS ’23 ) , July 10 – 14 , 2023 , Pittsburgh , PA , USA . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 17 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3563657 . 3596045 1 INTRODUCTION We are on the verge of a transportation revolution that will dramat - ically change the way people locomote . People and societies are embracing semi - autonomous vehicle technology in anticipation of the forthcoming benefts of fully autonomous vehicles ( AVs ) . Many automakers like Google and Uber 1 have been testing their au - tonomous cars on public roads for several years , and Waymo 2 has launched the frst commercial self - driving taxi service in Arizona , USA . In recent years , we have seen Tesla cars providing autopilot features to assist drivers with advanced functionalities while per - forming many driving tasks 3 . More importantly , certain sectors of the population such as the elderly , children , and disabled can gain the freedom of mobility ofered by self - driving cars [ 24 , 34 ] . As AVs will replace human drivers , they could signifcantly enhance the safety of our roads . It is considered that driverless vehicles can be safer by dramatically cutting the number of accidents on roads and saving millions of lives [ 43 ] . However , AVs will have to be able to 1 https : / / www . uber . com / blog / pennsylvania / new - wheels / 2 https : / / www . theverge . com / 2019 / 12 / 9 / 21000085 / waymo - fully - driverless - car - self - driving - ride - hail - service - phoenix - arizona 3 https : / / www . tesla . com / autopilot 2138 DIS ’23 , July 10 – 14 , 2023 , Pitsburgh , PA , USA Asha , et al . make quick decisions in all kinds of situations , carry passengers and share the roads with conventional vehicles , pedestrians , and cyclists . In the absence of human drivers on board , AVs can introduce communication challenges for the passengers which might be more acute for seniors . Older adults , or seniors , are often identifed as individuals aged 65 or older [ 62 ] and now make up 16 . 8 % of the United States population [ 9 ] . According to the World Population Ageing 2019 : Highlights Report by the United Nations [ 46 ] , the proportion of the world’s population aged 65 or over has increased from 6 % in 1990 to 9 % in 2019 . Furthermore , it is projected to in - crease to 16 % by 2050 , meaning that one in six people will be aged 65 or over . Older adults might have diferent age - related physical and cognitive health conditions - chronic disease , visual and hearing impairment , dementia , anxiety , etc . Therefore , it is considered that older drivers are more susceptible to accidents due to age - related impairments [ 2 ] , resulting in the potential loss of their driving li - censes . This situation leaves the elderly population vulnerable , as it greatly afects their mobility and independent living . Research has shown that older adults demonstrate a strong motivation to learn and adopt new technologies , driven by their desire to fulfll intel - lectual and emotional needs [ 41 , 42 ] . Thus , AVs can ofer a solution to the transportation needs of the older population once they em - brace and utilize this technology as passengers . As the autonomous vehicle is still an emerging technology and passengers have no experience in riding inside a fully AV , initially , they might feel less reliable in the autonomous driving systems due to a lack of trust [ 54 ] . For elderly passengers , it can also trigger negative emotions like anxiety , frustration , lack of confdence , and motivation [ 58 ] . Building trust of passengers towards AVs can start with the design of user interfaces [ 53 ] . With many sensors and advanced technol - ogy , AVs ofer innovative design opportunities for improved and suitable in - car experiences via novel automotive user interfaces . We are interested in designing inclusive interfaces for older adults to facilitate their communication with AVs by considering their specifc needs and preferences . For example , elderly passen - gers might prefer to have customizable fonts or icons , and auditory instructions with visual cues inside the vehicle to easily understand and process the information [ 19 ] . When we think about the in - teraction with a vehicle , we need to consider the entire journey - summoning and locating the vehicle , the journey itself , and then what to do at the destination [ 2 ] . These distinct stages involve dif - ferent components of accessibility which can promote usability for a larger group of passengers . Thus , we believe designing for older adults can actually result in designs that beneft people universally and bring inclusion . We situated our research exploration within an inclusive design lens as it considers individual perspectives by deeply engaging people with lived experiences [ 15 ] . Designing for inclusivity allows us to recognize exclusion and not design solu - tions with our own biases [ 35 ] . Therefore , we are motivated to understand the unique preferences of older people from the very start of our design process and design a safe and efcient ride ex - perience that empowers the elderly to efectively engage with AVs enabling them to beneft from this technology . For this work , we want to study this research question - how can we design inclusive interactions for older adults to communi - cate with autonomous vehicles ? To this end , frstly , we explored the specifc design needs of elderly passengers by performing a semi - structured interview session with ten senior participants . The interview fndings present inclusive interface ideas considering dif - ferent age - related cognitive and sensory impairments ( i . e . , vision , hearing ) and other challenges of older adults while riding inside an AV . Secondly , we implement some of the potential interface scenar - ios ( a total of 5 ) in VR informed by the fndings of our interview study . Then , we recruited another group of older adults ( N = 15 ) to evaluate the implemented prototypes by immersing them in a virtual environment and refecting on the designs . Our research outcome contributes in the • understanding of the unique design needs and concerns of the user group ( older adults ) considering their perceptual and cognitive functions • design of inclusive interfaces for older passengers to help them gain trust and acceptability towards AVs • new insights about older adults’ interaction with the AVs from the VR evaluation study . 2 RELATED WORK Our research draws on multiple bodies of literature : 1 ) scholarly research into designing human - machine interfaces ( HMIs ) for AV - passenger interaction , 2 ) exploring older passengers’ concerns and attitudes towards AVs , and 3 ) practice of AR ( augmented reality ) / VR ( virtual reality ) in AV interaction . 2 . 1 HMI for AV - Passenger Interaction Recent research mainly focuses on designing AV - passenger interac - tions for the non - disabled adult population . Some past works in - vestigated how diferent user interfaces can be designed to provide in - car experiences to passengers and promote trust . Among these , Oliveira et al . [ 47 ] evaluated diferent confgurations of screens for providing operational - related information to passengers while riding in a fully autonomous vehicle . Their fndings showed that participants wanted to monitor the state of the vehicle and see de - tails about the ride , including a map and other relevant information about the trip . Hartwich et al . [ 29 ] studied varying user require - ments for individual characteristics such as initial perspective ( low vs . high trust ) toward a new technology like AVs . Some passengers with higher confdence might prefer to see less driving - related infor - mation and instead feel comfortable trying entertainment - related features - reading books , playing games , or watching videos . There - fore , the authors suggested having user - adaptive HMI concepts that display context - specifc information and are customizable based on an individual’s preferences [ 29 ] . Surveys and interviews were conducted with participants to an - alyze passengers’ trust , usability , and experience while interacting with an AV . An intelligent agent approach was implemented in a study [ 50 ] to identify if personal traits can provide improved in - car experiences . The study fndings pointed out that designing inter - faces that mimic human behaviors might increase the adoption of AVs for passengers . Similarly , Haeuslschmid et al . [ 32 ] presented the idea of having a driver avatar to mimic the human driver’s behav - iors to help passengers gain trust in the system . Another research by Alpers et al . [ 51 ] investigated how the quality and quantity of 2139 Designing Inclusive Interaction with Autonomous Vehicles for Older Passengers DIS ’23 , July 10 – 14 , 2023 , Pitsburgh , PA , USA information through a digital assistant afects passengers’ expe - riences in AVs . Their fndings suggest that providing human - like features and more information about the ride enhances the overall experience and instills greater confdence in the vehicle’s driving capability . Limited research has focused on AV interaction for in - dividuals with impairments . Brinkley et al . [ 7 ] developed ATLAS ( Accessible Technology Leveraged for Autonomous Vehicles Sys - tem ) to assist passengers with visual impairments , utilizing auditory notifcations to enhance situational awareness . Additionally , the system addressed the location verifcation needs of the passengers by analyzing surrounding trafc images using computer vision tech - niques . However , further research is needed to comprehensively understand the specifc requirements and needs of passengers with varying ages and abilities to promote accessibility and inclusive design in the AV domain . 2 . 2 Older Adults’ Attitude Towards AVs Some studies have been conducted to explore the unique require - ments and opinions of older adults regarding autonomous vehicles . For instance , Faber et al . [ 21 ] conducted a focus group study to ex - amine the mobility needs of senior passengers and their challenges in accessing and using transportation . Their fndings highlighted that traveling with friends , automated ramps , and spacious interi - ors are important to improving accessibility and reducing mobility barriers . Previous studies [ 28 , 55 ] have investigated the willingness of older adults to use shared fully autonomous vehicles , revealing specifc concerns about the safety record , dependability , and ability to interact with the vehicle . Hassan et al . [ 30 ] found that older adults have skepticism about the safety and trust of technology , as well as a desire for the ability to override the automated system in case of emergencies . Previous literature found that older adults who use non - proft rideshare services report forming friendships with their drivers [ 11 , 19 , 45 ] . These studies informed that older adults might value a social connection with AVs to have a comfortable and friendly ride . To facilitate such social interaction , Eby et al . [ 19 ] suggested imple - menting conversational agents or human - like assistance . They also recommend using verbal guidance or notifcations to communi - cate information with passengers during various trafc conditions . Diferent studies have identifed the needs and expectations of older drivers regarding advanced driving aids / technologies and vehicle automation . For example , Bellet et al . [ 5 ] conducted a fo - cus group with 30 seniors and suggested designing advanced tools to support elderly drivers’ perception , situation awareness , and decision - making while driving . Another study by Hassan et al . [ 31 ] presented older adults’ opinions about using semi or fully autonomous vehicles . They preferred to ride semi - autonomous ve - hicles for being able to take control and proposed having automated braking technology in fully AVs to prevent accidents . A recent study by Gluck et al . [ 25 ] investigated older adults’ design preferences through a series of enactment - based design sessions and emphasized the importance of pre - training and vehicle performance records to increase trust among elderly passengers . Some of their AV design considerations were related to vehicle ingress / egress , the physical structure ( i . e . , foldable seats , wheelchair lift ) of the vehicle to accommodate the storage of mobility aids , and user interfaces with multi - modal notifcations . However , none of these works evaluated older adults’ interaction with AV HMIs to investigate their design needs considering age - related declines in both perception and cognition . 2 . 3 AR / VR in AV Interaction Utilizing VR to simulate scenarios has become a common approach in evaluating user experiences with autonomous vehicles . VR simu - lator is considered a promising tool since it allows for a quick , low - cost , and realistic evaluation of new designs and concepts [ 4 , 13 ] . Similarly , AR has also been found as a high potential approach to support visual augmentation and interactive experience in the real - world environment [ 61 ] . Past studies incorporated AR and VR to evaluate the implemented prototypes in a study testing with fully automated systems . For instance , Sawitzky et al . [ 59 ] evaluated fve AR user interface concepts aiming to increase system transparency in a user study where they presented the driving simulation in VR . Similarly , another study [ 12 ] displayed AV’s processed information on the dashboard and windshield using AR to show how it is iden - tifying vehicles , pedestrians , and making a decision based on the surroundings . These works have found that visualization using AR might increase situation awareness and improve passengers’ trust in AV’s performance . While virtual reality interfaces have been researched extensively over the last decades , these technologies have potentially benefcial applications in a wide variety of contexts . Recent research studied the acceptance of immersive head - mounted virtual reality in older adults and found that they have a positive attitude towards using VR which can promote their well - being and improve the treatment of their health problems [ 16 , 40 , 56 ] . Overall , VR can be considered a valid platform for the diferent groups of users including older adults which would allow a quick and safe medium to replicate and scale studies by introducing new interfaces and environmental conditions with lower cost and time . Overall , we have found several research gaps in the literature . For example , past studies conducted studies with older adults to mostly understand their concerns , and attitudes towards AV technology and provided broader suggestions on older adults - AV communi - cation . To the best of our knowledge , none of the previous works investigated specifc design interfaces between older passengers and AVs from the interaction aspects . Our work is the frst to ex - plore inclusive interaction design with older adults to facilitate AV communication and reveal new insights considering their cognitive and sensory declines and other age - related challenges through a user evaluation of the designed interfaces . 3 METHODOLOGY : INTERVIEW STUDY In the frst phase of our work , we aim to study older adults’ con - cerns while riding inside a fully AV and explore possible inclusive interfaces . With this goal , we conducted an interview study with older adults ( aged 65 + ) and gathered their opinion towards AV interaction and design preferences considering the psychological riding comfort and perceived safety . 2140 DIS ’23 , July 10 – 14 , 2023 , Pitsburgh , PA , USA Asha , et al . 3 . 1 Participants We recruited participants through various mediums , including se - nior group mailing lists , age - friendly newsletters , and senior com - munity Facebook groups . Only one participant , P10 , was recruited via direct email as a known contact . To be eligible for this study , each participant was required to be aged 65 or over . We recruited 10 participants with an age range between 69 and 84 ( mean = 73 . 10 years , SD = 4 . 30 years ; 6 female , 4 male ; 9 identifed as White , 1 Asian ) . All the participants are retired and one does short - term con - tractual jobs . Each participant holds a driving license with an avg . of 45 + years of driving experience and drives their own car . However , two participants do not drive regularly and avoid highways while driving and mostly travel with their friends and family . All of the participants have prior experience with using public transportation such as buses , trains , and taxis / Uber . See Table 1 for participants’ self - reported age , gender , education , usage of assistive devices , and physical or cognitive disability . All participants are from Canada . 3 . 2 Procedure The frst author conducted individual interview sessions with each participant and did some home visits as most participants preferred to participate from their homes . Only two participants came to the university lab for their sessions . Individual interviews facilitated the establishment of a comfortable and supportive environment , enabling the researcher to gain an in - depth understanding of the participant’s experiences and perspectives . At the beginning of each session , we provided a brief introduction to our research and explained the details of the study procedure . After that , we asked the participants to read the consent form and clarifed any questions they had . However , according to some participants’ preferences , the interviewer read out the consent form out loud to them . Later , we collected participants’ demographic information by asking them a list of questions from the pre - study questionnaire and started the session with their consent . At frst , we asked questions about participants’ daily life experiences , needs , and challenges while accessing transportation as a driver or a passenger , general perspec - tives or concerns about driverless cars , and their in - car interaction . Finally , we talked about the participant’s daily technology usage , how they learn or adapt to new technology , and how age - related functional changes / sensory declines might impact their experience with technology . As AV was a new concept for many of the par - ticipants , we showed them some videos and pictures of the future concept models of self - driving cars to facilitate our discussion . The interview sessions were semi - structured in nature and we asked follow - up questions based on the discussion . Each session lasted for approximately 70 to 90 minutes . Partici - pants were compensated with $ 20 gift cards . Sessions were recorded and transcribed for analysis using professional transcribing soft - ware . The setup for the interview study is shown in Figure 1 ( a ) . 3 . 3 Data Analysis We followed the refexive thematic analysis to analyze our data [ 6 ] . Since we are investigating the subjective perception of the participants to gain in - depth information about their interaction with AVs , we based our evaluation on open - ended questionnaires and collected qualitative data from the interview recordings . The authors read the transcripts several times while making rough notes and discarded unnecessary excerpts from the interviews . After preparing the data set for further analysis , we conducted open coding [ 37 ] followed by axial coding of the interviews to identify emerging themes . 4 FINDINGS AND DESIGN GUIDELINES : INTERVIEW STUDY We synthesized the collected data from the interview study with older adults and identifed three themes - 1 ) general opinion towards AVs , 2 ) physiological factors and design needs , and 3 ) AV - older pas - senger interaction . In this section , we discuss our fndings based on these themes supported by the sub - themes and their instances , and we also present the design guidelines derived from those fndings . 4 . 1 General Opinion Towards AVs 4 . 1 . 1 Driving Comfort and Perceived Safety . Participants expressed a broad range of views related to the driving comfort , performance , and reliability of autonomous driving technology . Most partici - pants regardless of their age showed positive attitudes towards automated driving considering its advanced technology , the poten - tial of reducing the number of accidents , and providing the freedom of mobility to a larger group of users . P9 mentioned his wife who is diagnosed with dementia and is not safe to be driving , but she can gain independence with a self - driving car . With the capability of having a self - driving car , she would have felt so much freer because she grew up driving . You know as soon as you take away her license , she feels like she’s trapped and she can’t go where she wants to go anymore . In the past studies [ 18 , 26 , 33 ] , older adults were found to be less inclined to accept future AVs , due to concerns about safety , relinquishing control of driving , reliability of automated driving , and deviating from individual driving styles . In contrast , our partic - ipants showed a higher willingness to travel in AVs . It is important to note that most of our study participants had a higher level of education and experience with various technologies in their pro - fessional lives , which may have infuenced their positive attitude toward AVs . Some participants even compared their envisioned AV experience to that of riding in an airplane operated by autopilot or traveling on an automated SkyTrain system 4 . Older adults , drawing from their life experiences , have successfully embraced diferent technologies to support their daily activities . This highlights one of their strengths— the ability to accept change and acquire new skills in diverse ways . Many older adults were excited about the prospect of using self - driving cars but at the same time were apprehensive . All the participants expressed skepticism about AV’s performance and their physical safety in case of any emergencies . There can be numerous unseen driving conditions on the road , and the automated cars might not have been tested with all the scenarios before . Seven participants highlighted the importance of getting periodic infor - mation from the AVs about their actions and surroundings . They 4 https : / / ddswireless . com / blog / the - worlds - longest - fully - automated - transit - system - is - in - vancouver / 2141 Designing Inclusive Interaction with Autonomous Vehicles for Older Passengers DIS ’23 , July 10 – 14 , 2023 , Pitsburgh , PA , USA Table 1 : Participants’ demographic for the interview study [ P stands for participant ] . Participant ID Age Gender Education Usage of Assistive Devices Self - reported Physical or Cognitive Disability P1 69 Female Teaching degree , BA Walking sticks Bad hip P2 69 Male University graduate , CPA CMA None None P3 70 Female Two bachelor’s degrees None Poor vision P4 71 Female Two bachelor’s degrees Hearing aids Hard of hearing P5 71 Male Master’s degree in environmental design None Minor dementia P6 72 Female University graduate None None P7 74 Female University graduate None Minor dementia P8 75 Male Master’s degree Hearing aids Hard of hearing P9 76 Female High school degree Walking sticks Bad hip P10 84 Male Polytechnic at architect None Slight Parkinson’s symptoms mentioned that an AV should inform the passengers about the traf - fc , critical weather conditions , any roadside accidents that might impact the arrival time , and unexpected driving maneuvers . P3 quoted , If there was an accident , it [ the AV ] would say something about the accident ahead . And then we need to detour on 19th Street or something [ for the roadside accident ] so that when you see the GPS or whatever , you understand that it’s not lost . Thus , it’s taking you around whatever the problem is ! The vehicles on real - world roads are being driven by a human driver , passengers already have a level of trust in the person’s driv - ing ability . However , while discussing the participants’ experience as a passenger in a regular taxi or Uber , they discussed how they still observe the driving style for the frst couple of minutes after entering the car . Three participants reported having trust concerns when riding with unfamiliar drivers and expressed discomfort in such situations . Likewise , a 72 - years old participant explained the necessity of having situational awareness that will provide a sense of comfort and reliability , and increase AV system transparency to the passengers . Previous literature also presented that visualizing internal information processed by an AV could calibrate the passen - gers’ trust by enabling situational awareness [ 12 , 59 , 61 ] . Overall , older adults seemed to have a higher preference for periodic updates to establish a sense of awareness during the early stages of using self - driving vehicles . Elderly passengers might get easily frustrated or confused with unknowns compared to the younger population due to the natural cognitive and physical changes that occur with aging [ 49 ] . Therefore , providing adequate transparency and situ - ational awareness can help alleviate safety concerns for seniors , allowing them to gain greater comfort and confdence in this new technology . 4 . 1 . 2 Complexity of Control Takeover or Overriding . In our study , we received mixed reactions from the participants about the takeover requests or overriding options . Participants mentioned their con - cerns about trusting a self - driving car and that there will be an adjustment period before they can completely rely on automated driving . Some participants discussed having a proven safety record which was found in past studies [ 26 , 55 ] as well . Three participants strengthened this point by highlighting the need for an outside source to verify the safety of AVs rather than auto companies . P5 shared , We know that technology can fail anytime and it’s hard to trust . As far as driving , I think it would be a question of habit , just getting used to it . But at the beginning , I think I’d be really scared ! Initially , with these concerns , all participants expressed having the option to take over the control in a full AV in case of any emer - gencies . P6 expressed how a passenger gets an instinctive driving reaction after having long years of driving experience - " Even if you’re sitting in the passenger seat , your foot goes forward as if it was going to hit the brake . " However , some participants also looked into the challenges of having this option - always monitoring the car , being ready to take over at any time , etc . To perform this , a passen - ger would require to actively receive real - time updates / information from the car . Being able to understand the takeover requests and re - act to them can be difcult for many older adults and it can increase their cognitive workload . Overall , all the participants except two agreed to be comfortable with not having the overriding options in a self - driving car after gaining some experience of riding on these cars and having trust in their emergency handling mechanism . 4 . 2 Psychological Factors and Design Needs 4 . 2 . 1 Amount of Information Needed . While AVs could signif - cantly enhance the safety of our roads , their successful deployment in real - world trafc depends on the intended user’s acceptance . Our participants reported that receiving information about the vehicle’s driving behavior can improve their experience in an AV and will eventually help them gain trust in the automated system . Highly automated vehicles do not actually require human monitoring , how - ever , many passengers still wish not to be entirely excluded from the driving process [ 20 ] and to keep monitoring by receiving infor - mation on the vehicle’s states [ 22 ] . One participant ( P2 ) commented on this , I think that for my age group , there would still be the feeling that you are responsible for what the car is doing . So you need to pay attention to the car , even if you’re not really controlling it ! I would still want to feel like I’m paying attention to what’s going on . Six participants expected the car to show basic information con - tinuously but again mentioned having the option to adjust the information content based on their comfort level / preference . Par - ticipants highlighted their desire for more frequent updates during the initial stages , as mentioned in Section 4 . 1 . 1 , nevertheless , their notifcation preferences may difer once they gain experience and 2142 DIS ’23 , July 10 – 14 , 2023 , Pitsburgh , PA , USA Asha , et al . build trust in self - driving cars . For older passengers , the age - related changes in memory , perception , and executive function may impact their preferences for information content shared by the car . Two participants with minor dementia felt the necessity of receiving continuous and relevant information from self - driving cars that can assist in maintaining their attention , and overall cognitive func - tioning . On the other hand , sharing information regarding every detail of the car’s driving behavior can cause distraction among the passenger and p3 expressed this saying - " And I wouldn’t want it [ the car ] nattering at me endlessly . [ . . . ] If something out of the ordinary happens [ kids on the road , detour . . ] , then , I would like to know that it is aware of that . " . Overall , participants preferred to have precise and clear communication with the car which could also restrain possible information overload for the elderly passengers . AVs with direct and streamlined interfaces can enable quick and easy access to the most relevant features , benefting a wide range of users . 4 . 2 . 2 Familiarity of Cues . We discussed with our participants about their experience with the in - vehicle technology of their owned cars . Our fndings revealed that most of them have older model cars and use the features that are required routinely - Bluetooth , and radio . Many of them use GPS from their phone as they fnd it easier to update / control the GPS through the mobile app . Though three of the participants have comparatively newer model cars , they still do not use many of the advanced features available to their cars like Apple car play , and cruise control . P10 disabled the lane departure warning in his car and shared his thoughts saying , " It keeps beeping at you and that scares me ! " Another participant , P1 initially showed her eagerness about using smart cars to travel diferent places without being dependent on others and maintain a social life . However , after realizing the possibility of having many new technologies that she has to adapt or learn to , she felt reluctant to use these cars . From our fndings , it can be suggested that older adults are more interested to have a car with familiar interfaces to their old cars - simple , straightforward , and less overwhelming . Though they are open to learning / trying new things which may take longer than for younger adults , it is not preferable to grapple with technological things to make those work . I love learning new things but do not know how to make technological things work . [ . . . ] the technology isn’t something that I embrace ! ( p8 ) Based on diferent personalities , interests , and habits , interaction with AVs can vary signifcantly . It might be quite diferent for the younger passengers who might want to explore most of the interface elements . Therefore , we need to balance and leave options for all users to try diferent AV design features . 4 . 3 AV - Older Passenger Interaction 4 . 3 . 1 Multi - sensory Interfaces . As aging is associated with sensory and cognitive declines , we focused on investigating the design needs of elderly passengers to allow them to have safe and reliable com - munication with AVs . Most of our participants also self - identifed themselves as having age - related frailty , hard of hearing , and poor vision . They identifed the benefts of implementing multi - sensory interfaces including both auditory and visual information which would not only beneft older adults , but also other users with im - pairments , including younger passengers . Among ten participants , six preferred verbal feedback over visual as it is more efective in grabbing attention . Four of the participants with hard of hearing had divided opinions about having audio feedback as the hearing aids do not properly work for them . Therefore , they favored high - contrast visual cues with enough time to read from the screen and react accordingly . P7 highlighted this saying , " I think the visuals would be better because most older people like me can see better than hearing , like , you get glasses or you get your cataracts fxed ! " Like - wise , another participant pointed out to include visual cues to guide the auditory commands that would help counteract the hearing difculty . Seniors face difculty in processing speech , thus requiring longer reaction and processing time due to age - related functional changes [ 1 , 14 ] . This was also evident in our study sessions where the fa - cilitator ensured the conversations were understandable to the participants by repeating or rephrasing the asked questions . Two participants highlighted a common hearing loss fact - missing high - pitched voices like women and children . This experience points to the importance of choosing message length ( word count ) , message format ( how the message will be conveyed , voice tone , pitch , and efects ) , and speech rate in the auditory feedback so that they can process and understand the command . 4 . 3 . 2 Ways of Communication . When participants shared about their general technology usage , we found that most of them use diferent mainstream applications in their daily life such as smart TVs , smartphones , and smart assistants like Alex or Google Home . Also , the majority of participants had digital photo frames in their homes to showcase cherished family memories . 6 out of 10 partici - pants use tablets to perform their online activities . All highlighted the utility of these mobile devices with touch - based interfaces and tactile feedback for ofering easy navigation through screens to the desired function . Some participants customized their font style and size to make the texts easily readable on a small screen like their mobile phones . They also described their experience while learning or adapting to new technology and fve participants mentioned taking help from their younger family members , neighbors , techni - cians , or friends to set up and solve any issues with the applications . A 74 - year - old elderly participant explained her experience telling , I sometimes call my neighbor’s kid across the street [ to solve issues with a mobile app ] . It’s just like , I didn’t grow up with that . And so , you know , I think kids are way better and smarter ! They’re also more comfortable with the technology . Four participants envisioned having human instructions at the beginning to walk them step - by - step through the basic AV func - tionalities . Some participants preferred to have two - way communi - cation like they are used to talking with Amazon Alexa or Google Home assistant . While sharing the experience with Alexa , P6 said , " I like it very much . That’s how I start my day ! You know , I ask Alexa , what is the news ? How is the weather ? " The participants wanted to have a similar conversation with the car to ask for a piece of music , nearby attractions , route information , and weather . However , two participants raised the concern about the voice recognition accu - racy of the AV technology as it should be able to recognize what the 2143 Designing Inclusive Interaction with Autonomous Vehicles for Older Passengers DIS ’23 , July 10 – 14 , 2023 , Pitsburgh , PA , USA passenger is saying with varying voice tone and speed . Otherwise , one will require to repeat the commands multiple times , or the car might do something else based on its inaccurate interpretation . Several participants expressed their need for emergency support while riding in self - driving cars . They emphasized the importance of having remote human assistance available in case of any issues or health emergencies , such as heart attacks or strokes . The par - ticipants expect the AV to be able to recognize such situations automatically or through the one - step activation of a help button and to promptly inform medical personnel or drive the passengers directly to the nearest hospital . Thus , given the age - related frail - ties and health concerns , the interaction with AVs in emergency situations may difer greatly for older adults compared to younger passengers . 4 . 4 Derived Design Guidelines Many of our fndings are closely aligned with prior work , however , our study presents new interface ideas beyond older passengers’ attitudes toward AVs and general design needs . Our interview study fndings emphasized the unique opinions and insights of the se - niors which led to inclusive design solutions inside the vehicles to help facilitate their interaction with AVs . The identifed design guidelines from the above discussion are listed below : G1 : Multi - Modal Interfaces . Considering the sensory and cog - nitive functional changes associated with aging , we found that participants preferred to receive both visual and auditory feedback from the car . Visual notifcations might get missed if the passenger is not paying attention at that time . Therefore , the car HMIs should have auditory cues to instantly notify about a specifc event . How - ever , older adults with hearing loss may have trouble responding to warnings , and hearing notifcations . Therefore , AV interfaces should be multi - sensory including both auditory and visual cues . For visual feedback , common information like destination details and route maps can be displayed on a screen to provide situational awareness . Our interview data revealed participants’ experience with using screen - based mobile devices where they prefer touch control and customized text fonts . Thus , HMIs inside AVs can have screens to display visual cues and interfaces should contain large text fonts and high - contrast text to allow easy navigation for senior passengers with poor vision . G2 : Choice of Auditory Feedback . Hearing loss is a common problem for older adults and it is important to consider their specifc needs when designing auditory feedback . From our interview , we observed that participants with hard of hearing faced challenges in processing speech and asked the interviewer to repeat or rephrase the conversation . Thus , it can be entailed that an audio message should be clear and short , and delivered with a slower speech rate . Furthermore , voice tone , pitch , and efects are also important as people with hearing loss may miss the high - pitch voices of women or children . Finally , auditory feedback should be guided with visual cues like adding text or icons in multi - modal interfaces as explained in the previous guideline G1 . G3 : Simple and Minimalist Interfaces . Older adults have years of experience in driving diferent models of cars and in our study , they shared their opinion on only using frequently required in - vehicle technology even if the cars ofer more advanced features . Some of the reasons for this could be—lack of perceived usabil - ity , complex designs , and integration of too many options that are overwhelming for the elderly . To make the interfaces fexible and adaptive , it is essential to have simple interfaces with little to no navigation like map apps and music selection on cars as stretched in our interviews . We also assume that interfaces incorporating the specifc needs and strengths of older passengers will motivate them more to embrace those technologies . G4 : Communicating Situational Awareness and Sense of Con - trol . Our fndings demonstrate the importance of having situational awareness about the vehicle’s next driving maneuver , details on the surrounding trafc , and any other road emergencies . It is cru - cial to balance the amount of information ( low / high ) to ease the psychological tension or stress of the passengers . For this , we need to consider the details of the conveyed information - the amount of information , frequency , communication medium , etc . However , as the recruited elderly population was diverse and exhibited a range of abilities , their preference for the information content ( low vs high ) was not evident from our interview results urging further investigation in our user study . Older adults have years of driving experience and it is hard to relinquish complete control of a vehicle which was highlighted by our participants as well . In - car HMIs should ofer some level of control to passengers - starting / stopping the car , selecting map routes , customizing the information preference , and so on . Allow - ing elderly passengers to have a sense of control and understanding of the vehicle’s actions can increase their confdence and indepen - dence , promoting engagement . G5 : Interfaces Inspired from the Past Experience . Older pas - sengers’ design needs might get infuenced by their experience , level of education , and pre - existing knowledge about new technol - ogy . From our interview , we see most older adults have experience using smartphones , and Amazon Alexa where they utilize voice commands and read information from the apps , etc . From this , it can be implied that older adults have already developed a mental model of how digital application works from their previous expe - riences . Therefore , in - car interfaces should incorporate familiar and common elements that are present in the current designs of mainstream applications ( e . g . , verbal commands , visual icons , touch input ) and match their mental concept to help the senior passengers easily adapt to the system . Overall , we believe the design guidelines perceived from the interview fndings will direct the design of HMIs to support older adults’ communication with AVs . The design needs and preferences of the elderly demographic are not entirely distinct from those of younger individuals . Therefore , we believe that the explored design elements are adaptable to other passengers , aligning with the primary goal of establishing inclusive design . Our participant sample refects the socio - demographic characteristics of the North American older adult population . Thus , the transferability of the presented design guidelines is restricted to some extent for older adults from other cultural backgrounds where most seniors may 2144 DIS ’23 , July 10 – 14 , 2023 , Pitsburgh , PA , USA Asha , et al . not use smartphones or the internet . For instance , our participants preferred to have conversations with vehicles like Alexa / Siri in - spired by their past experiences . However , this preference may not necessarily extend to elderly populations from diferent demo - graphics who have not previously used these types of applications . Therefore , future research should explore how the presented design guidelines can be tailored to meet the needs and requirements of a wide range of users , older adults or otherwise . Diferent aspects of control takeover by the drivers of highly automated / semi - automated vehicles are generally studied as a separate research area . Previous literature measured the impact of aging on takeover performance and they found slower reactions and decision - making among elderly drivers after regaining control due to the age - related cognitive changes [ 23 , 48 ] . According to our interviews , most participants were found comfortable with not having any overriding options , thus our design guideline excludes the use cases for the takeover control in the fully AVs . 5 DESIGN : INTERFACE PROTOTYPES AND VR TESTBED In this section , we frst provide a rationale for the design choices we made for the implemented interfaces . Then , we present the VR testbed for the developed scenarios . 5 . 1 Interface Prototypes We ideated the design interfaces and scenarios after a thorough consideration of the design guidelines discussed in Section 4 . 4 and brainstorming sessions among the authors of this paper . In most of the interfaces , we incorporated multi - modal interfaces including both auditory and visual feedback ( G1 ) . For visual modality , we primarily leverage visual cues like universal icons , animated graph - ics , and high - contrast and short text , which elderly passengers can readily perceive from their previous experience as suggested in the design guideline G5 . The auditory modality focuses on using both non - verbal sounds ( i . e . , car engine sound , warning beep ) and verbal messages to provide feedback to users . Also , we cautiously chose the message length , voice tone , pitch ( male vs . female ) , and intensity . We focused on delivering a short message at a slower speed so that it helps older adults process and react comfortably which was high - lighted in G2 . To feature simplicity ( G3 ) , we implemented interfaces containing commonly used elements such as touch displays and verbal commands . The displays provided information related to the surrounding environment and vehicle speed to ensure situational awareness ( G4 ) . To improve interaction fexibility as suggested in guideline G4 by allowing the user to control some of the features , we added a start / stop button , and route selection through the map . If we map a passenger’s journey in an AV , there can be three stages - 1 ) entering the vehicle , 2 ) engagement while driving , and 3 ) exiting the vehicle after arriving at the destination . For our evalu - ation , we implemented a total of fve sequential scenarios where the frst one simulates the interaction while entering the vehicle , the middle three scenarios demonstrate diferent interactions after riding inside the vehicle in three driving conditions ( regular trafc , heavy trafc , and extreme weather ) , and the last one presents the scene related to the destination arrival . As it is beyond our current scope to implement all the derived ideas , we decided to focus on Table 2 : Summary of the implemented design interfaces . Scena - Interface Cues Interface Interface Loca - rios Modality tion S1 Visual icons ( scanner ) Text ( destination details ) Audio cues ( verbal ) Auditory and Visual Side mirror Side windows S2 : 2A Displays ( maps , speed , pedestrian crossing ) Push buttons Visual icons ( weather , temperature , lane departure warning ) Audio cues ( sound , verbal ) Direct interaction ( touch ) Auditory and Visual Side mirror Side windows Near dashboard S2 : 2B Displays ( maps ) Audio cues ( verbal ) Auditory and Visual Back of seat ( in front of the rear passenger seat ) S2 : 2C Displays ( speed ) Visual icons ( trafc object high - light ) Visual Only Front windshield Back of seat S3 Displays ( maps , speed , pedestrian crossing ) Push button Audio cues ( sound , verbal ) Direct interaction ( touch ) Speak button Auditory and Visual Near dashboard fve proof - of - concept prototypes as a valid methodology to demon - strate a design space [ 60 ] . When a passenger will commute in an AV , he / she might want to interact with the vehicle to get information about the ride , weather , street navigation , roadside emergencies , and many more . There are many non - critical or critical driving sce - narios , such as lane changing , accelerating , driving in construction sites or critical weather , speeding , and overtaking [ 17 ] . In diferent scenarios , an AV should provide situational awareness by signaling its intentions or communicating its states to the passengers [ 10 ] , for example - collision warning , route planning , emergency stop , and so on [ 20 ] . Overall , the scenario examples were chosen to ac - commodate potential interface elements derived from the design guidelines and test the AV - older passenger interaction with possi - ble use cases in varying driving conditions and journey stages . We summarize the implemented prototypes in Table 2 and detail below the fve scenarios with design elements : 5 . 1 . 1 Entering the Vehicle ( S1 ) . The frst prototype demonstrated the interaction of older passengers while entering the vehicle and it was adapted from a prototype implemented in the author’s previous work [ 3 ] to verify an AV ride . The prototype includes an interactive authentication panel to identify users , provide trip details and allow vehicle entry access . In this scenario , the passenger’s mobile app is linked to the identifcation system . As QR or barcode scanning through mobile apps has become common , a scanner was added on the car’s side mirror where the user scans the app’s verifcation code to confrm the ride . After a successful verifcation , the car conveys a welcome message with an optional visualization display - ing trip - based information with verbal feedback which is shown in Figure 2 ( a ) . The usage of verbal commands was highlighted in our interviews which also aligns with past research [ 25 ] . However , audio recognition might have less accuracy in a noisy environment with street trafc and lead to erroneous user authentication . We incorporated touch input ( G5 ) to let the elderly passengers swipe the remaining textual message through direct interaction with the system . 2145 Designing Inclusive Interaction with Autonomous Vehicles for Older Passengers DIS ’23 , July 10 – 14 , 2023 , Pitsburgh , PA , USA Figure 2 : Implemented design interfaces : ( a ) user scans the verifcation code with the scanner in the side mirror of the car to get entry access , ( b ) dynamic display with speed and lane departure warning icon on the side mirror , ( c ) visual screen shows the animated pedestrian crossing progress . 5 . 1 . 2 Engagement while Driving ( S2 ) . To simulate older passengers’ engagement while riding inside the AVs , we prototyped diferent trafc scenarios - 1 ) regular trafc , 2 ) heavy trafc , and 3 ) extreme weather conditions . For each scenario , we also implemented the base scenarios without the interface elements for comparison and to capture passengers’ initial impression of automated driving . Details of the scenes are given below : • 2A . Regular Trafc : In the regular trafc scenario , we dis - played the typical amount of cars on the road and wanted to investigate older passengers’ preferences regarding the in - formation content as it was not apparent from our interview data ( G4 ) . Therefore , this scene has two diferent versions - 1 ) high information content , and 2 ) low information content . The scenario starts within a car’s interior where the passen - ger is seating in the front passenger’s seat of the car . Initially , the car greets the passenger ( " Hello , please put the seat belts on ! " ) and provides verbal instructions with steps to follow before the car starts riding . A screen is located in front of the windshield where the map with two diferent route options is shown . The car again plays , " Click on the map to choose the route . Once you are done , please press the button to start ! " . If a passenger prefers , he / she can choose any of the suggested routes by touching the screen or keep the default route and start the car by pressing the red button placed on the left side of the passenger ( see Figure 1 ( b ) ) . [ auditory and visuals ] Once the start button is pressed , the car drives from point A to B in the left lane , changes lanes in the middle , and then stops before a crosswalk where an adult pedestrian is waiting to cross the street . For the in - car interfaces , we presented a display with speed and periodic verbal feedback about the roadside surroundings such as " Playground nearby ! " . When the car tries to change a lane to the right , it plays an indicator sound and provides verbal command too " Changing a lane to the right ! " . As there was a nearby car in the other lane , the car played a lane departure warning with a beeping sound and icon on the side mirror which is shown in Figure 2 ( b ) . Finally , the car changes the lane to the right when it was safe and it keeps driving . Before the car fully stops in front of the crosswalk , a kid comes out of nowhere and starts running to cross the street . We designed this plot to observe the participant’s reaction and interaction with AVs during a sudden incident . Later , the car starts slowing down when it recognizes the pedestrians and informed the passenger saying , " Pedestrian ahead ! " . The adult pedestrian starts crossing and the display starts showing the pedestrian crossing progress with animated graphics ( see Figure 2 ( c ) ) . [ high information content ] In another version , the driving behavior remains the same , however , we reduced the amount of information that was being verbally presented in the high information content scene . For example , we removed the verbal feedback about the playground and lane changing . This version used a fe - male voice for the remaining auditory feedback to test the impact of high / low pitch for older adults with hearing im - pairment ( G2 ) . [ low information content ] • 2B . Heavy Trafc : This scenario presented a heavy trafc environment with multiple cars in both lanes . In the scene , the passenger sits in the rear seat and can see the context - specifc information on a screen attached to the back of the front passenger seat . After a certain moment , a map shows up on the screen ( see Figure 3 ( a ) ) and the vehicle says , " Heavy trafc on the road . 10 minutes delay ! " . The passengers might get curious while observing the trafc , but the car provides feedback about the trafc upfront to keep them updated about the road conditions ( G4 - situational awareness ) . Thus , seniors will not be required to seek information in advance as they will receive real - time auditory feedback with / without visual information . [ auditory and visuals ( G1 ) ] 2146 DIS ’23 , July 10 – 14 , 2023 , Pitsburgh , PA , USA Asha , et al . Figure 3 : Implemented design interfaces : ( a ) screen at the back of the seat shows the trafc updates for the rear seat passengers , ( b ) nearby vehicles in foggy weather are highlighted with green and yield colored icons , ( c ) visual screen shows the map and speak button . • 2C . Extreme Weather : In order to present a scene with an extreme driving condition , we implemented foggy weather . Through this simulation , we would like to test the poten - tial of AR assistance to increase user acceptance and trust by communicating transparent system behavior . The aug - mentation of trafc objects ( i . e . , other vehicles , pedestrians , cyclists , etc . ) otherwise invisible due to dense fog can help passengers to trust that the vehicle can perform properly in such an extreme situation . In our simulation , the vehicle dis - plays its speed to inform that it slows down when necessary in a super - human driving condition ( G3 ) and points to the nearby vehicles with green ( safe distance ) and yield ( close distance ) colored icons through visual augmentation ( see Figure 3 ( b ) ) . [ visuals only to understand how the absence of auditory command will afect the interaction ] 5 . 1 . 3 Exiting the Vehicle afer Arriving at the Destination ( S3 ) . This prototype demonstrates the interaction of older adults after arriving at the destination . Though this simulation starts with the same components as described in the 2A scene , we introduced voice commands so that it allows passengers to talk to the vehicle to get context - specifc information . We placed a speak button below the screen which is shown in Figure 3 ( c ) and it can be pressed to talk / give a command to the car which will establish two - way communication ( G5 ) . For our simulation , the speak button only works for music requests as we haven’t implemented the actual speech recognition considering the technical limitations and scope of our implementation . To clarify the functionality of the speak button , the car provides verbal instruction saying , " You can talk to me by pressing the speak button . " After pressing the button , it turns green and captures the command . For example , if the passenger says , " Please play music for me . " , the car will reply saying , " Playing the music ! " and the music will start playing . Once the start button is pressed , the car drives from point A to B in the left lane with the internal display showing the speed . It stops after a certain time ( approx . 2 minutes ) nearby the curb and tells the passenger , " Your destination has arrived ! Whenever you are ready , please get of the car carefully . " . 5 . 2 VR Testbed We created a VR environment using the Unity3D game engine for the Oculus Quest where we implemented and tested diferent AV interfaces . The simulation takes place in a small - town environment and in all scenarios , it was a one - way and two - lane road . We consid - ered several factors while designing our VR environments including vehicle interior , speed , number of vehicles on the street , trafc en - vironment , and modality of the interaction . We kept vehicle speed slow ( on average roughly 20 km / h ) to refect movement through trafc supporting the appropriate test setting without creating sim - ulation sickness . Lower speeds also increase visibility making early testing more efcient . We implemented direct interaction with the vehicle by incorporating Oculus Quest hand tracking and voice com - mand features , and indirect interaction with visual augmentation to enhance the user experience . A study by Mahadevan et al . [ 44 ] presented diferent levels of vehicle autonomy by changing its vi - sual appearance to mimic semi - autonomous , and fully autonomous modes with a distracted human driver , and an empty driver seat respectively . By adapting this approach , we used two models of cars with diferent interior designs to afect the perception of the autonomy level of the vehicle . For the frst one , we used Google Waymo 5 car model with no steering wheel inside ( used in S2 ( 2A ) , S3 ) . In the other scenes , we used a traditional car model with a modifcation of its visual features by leaving the driver seat empty . In the simulation , to evaluate the user interaction while driving ( second stage ) , we created three separate scenes ( 2A , 2B , 2C , approx . 1 . 5 minutes driving duration ) each with diferent environmental conditions instead of merging the three scenes into a single one ( 4 . 5 minutes ) . Having separate simulations for each diverse condition allowed us to discuss the participant’s experience after each trial 5 https : / / www . dezeen . com / 2016 / 12 / 14 / google - spins - of - self - driving - car - project - separate - company - waymo / 2147 Designing Inclusive Interaction with Autonomous Vehicles for Older Passengers DIS ’23 , July 10 – 14 , 2023 , Pitsburgh , PA , USA Table 3 : Participants’ demographic for the VR study [ SP stands for study participant ] . Study Par - ticipant ID Age Gender Education Usage of Assistive Devices Self - reported Physical or Cognitive Disability ( PCD ) SP1 65 Male Community college 2 years None Dyslexia SP2 66 Male Bachelor’s degree None None SP3 68 Male Master’s degree Hearing aids Weak memories , poor eye - sight , hard of hearing SP4 70 Male Bachelor’s degree Hearing aids Hard of hearing SP5 70 Female Grade 12 - college None None SP6 72 Male Bachelor’s degree None None SP7 72 Male College degree , university certifcate None Limited use of left hand SP8 74 Female Grade 12 - college None Weak memories , anxiety SP9 75 Female Trade school None None SP10 76 Female Postsecondary None Minor dementia SP11 77 Female Bachelor’s degree Hearing aids Hard of hearing SP12 77 Female Postsecondary Walking sticks Bad hip SP13 82 Female Early childhood education None Hard of hearing SP14 86 Male Bachelor’s degree None Not perfect hearing , poor eye - sight SP15 89 Male Bachelor’s in engineering Magnifying glasses Hard of hearing , poor vision by providing them with enough time to observe the surroundings . Participants were given the opportunity to repeat the same scenario more than once to fully explore and interact with the implemented interface elements . A large simulation with multiple environmen - tal conditions and diverse interfaces would have made the scene crowded and difcult to evaluate with the follow - up discussion . During the testing of each scenario , participants were asked to sit on a chair / couch and observe the in - car interfaces while immersing in a VR environment wearing an Oculus Quest headset . There was no physical movement , but participants experienced car movements inside the VR headset . Such locomotion mismatch with the virtual environment increases the risk of simulation sickness signifcantly [ 52 ] and it can impact older adults more severely . Considering the age group of our participants and their certain health conditions , we tried to make the simulations safer to test at a considerably slower speed as discussed above . Overall , our choice of shorter simulations greatly reduced the likeliness of having any motion sickness . 6 DESIGN EVALUATION : AV - OLDER PASSENGER VR STUDY We conducted a user study with another group of older adults to assess their level of engagement with the implemented scenarios within a virtual reality environment ( see Figure 1 ( c ) ) . The objec - tive of our study is to showcase the designed interfaces based on the guidelines derived from the interview fndings . We collected participants’ feedback and refections on the broader impact of these interfaces in facilitating communication with AVs , taking into account age - related functional changes and physiological factors . 6 . 1 Participants We recruited 15 new participants ( following the same recruitment method as the interview study ) with an age range between 65 and 89 ( mean = 74 . 60 years , SD = 6 . 69 years ; 7 female , 8 male ; 13 identifed as White , 2 Asian ) . None of the recruited participants were involved in our initial interview study to avoid potential biases . All the participants are retired and are from a healthy older community . However , it is more likely that they will have certain limitations due to cognitive and sensory declines with aging [ 5 ] . Each participant has an avg . of 42 + years of driving experience , and three participants ( 20 % ) currently do not hold a driving license . Three ( 20 % ) mentioned having poor vision , three ( 20 % ) stated having minor dementia or weak memories , and six ( 40 % ) reported being hard of hearing . All the participants have experience using public transportation like buses , trains , and taxis / Uber . However , only fve ( 33 . 33 % ) participants use public transport regularly as they started to face difculties in driving recently due to age - related sensory declines like poor vision and hearing loss . See Table 3 for participants’ self - reported age , gender , education , usage of assistive devices , and physical or cognitive disability ( PCD ) . 6 . 2 Procedure We conducted an individual session with each participant and most of the studies occurred at the participant’s homes according to their preferences . Out of 15 participants , 3 participants came to the university lab for their sessions . At the beginning of each session , we provided brief details about the research and further explained the study procedure . After taking consent from the participants , we started each session by collecting the participants’ biographic information . Each session is divided into two phases - 1 ) testing the simulations and 2 ) open discussion about the overall experience . Each session lasted for approximately 1 hour 45 minutes including the VR setup time . All participants reside in North America and they were compensated with $ 20 gift cards . The sessions were audio and video recorded for further analysis . To evaluate whether any participants were susceptible to VR sickness , we administered a simulation sickness questionnaire ( SSQ ) [ 36 ] . Since all participants scored below the threshold , we proceeded with setting up the VR environment which is shown in Figure 4 ( a ) . In the session , we introduced older adults to the Oculus Quest headset and its basic features through a test scenario . The test scenario featured an urban environment where the participant was riding inside a vehicle and could use their hands to select diferent menu items . Once the participant felt comfortable starting the main session , we opened the actual scene in VR and turned on casting to monitor the performed scenes on the facilitator’s laptop ( see 2148 DIS ’23 , July 10 – 14 , 2023 , Pitsburgh , PA , USA Asha , et al . Figure 4 : Design evaluation in VR study : ( a ) study facilitator setting up the VR scenes for the participant with a headset , ( b ) study setup showing the facilitator’s laptop to monitor the scene casting from the headset and video camera to record the session , ( c ) main scene with menu options to start each scenario using Oculus Quest hand tracking . Figure 4 ( b ) ) . The entire VR setup took around 15 minutes which was less for some participants having previous experience using VR . The participants were able to start all the scenarios from the main scene ( see Figure 4 ( c ) ) using their hands instead of controllers , which made navigation easier for them . In the frst phase , we explained the details of the scenarios and ob - served how the participants interacted with the designed interfaces while being immersed in the VR scenarios . As we implemented sequential scenarios to map the journey of a passenger , all the participants tested the scenes in the same order . Once the vehicle fnished driving from point A to B , the scene reloaded to the main menu after a few seconds . The simulation time varied based on the participant’s actions inside the scene . After each trial of the sim - ulation , participants were asked questions about their interaction experience with the design elements . We adopted the workload sub - scale of the NASA - TLX [ 27 ] on a 10 - point scale ( " Was the task easy or demanding ? , How stressed versus relaxed did you feel during the task ? , How much information overload did you feel ? " , 1 = Very Low to 10 = Very High ) . We compared each scenario ( 2A , 2B , and 2C ) with their base individually using 5 - point Likert scales ( 1 = Strongly disagree to 5 = Strongly agree ) on two statements ( “The system in - teraction was always clear to me . ” and “I was able to understand why things happened . ” ) [ 39 ] . All of the questions were read aloud and explained to the participants if required , and then the scores were collected from them by the interviewer . We also asked the participants to provide reasoning for their answers . Participants were allowed to take a break if they felt uncomfortable at any point during the session . After fshing the simulation testing for all fve scenarios , we started the second phase of the study to gather feedback about participants’ overall interaction experience and possible sugges - tions for improved designs . Finally , we ended the session with a post - secondary questionnaire including an adapted system us - ability scale ( SUS ) [ 8 ] where the questions were asked to collect participants’ feedback to understand the usefulness of in - vehicle interfaces , and their modalities . 6 . 3 Results In the design evaluation study , we collected data responses to a pre - study questionnaire , mid - study questionnaires between tasks , and a post - study questionnaire . We analyzed the Likert scale ques - tions using a quantitative statistical approach to test signifcance and used open coding to analyze qualitative data . We considered each column of participants’ demographic data ( see Table 3 ) as an independent variable , such as age , gender , and self - reported physi - cal or cognitive disability . Each scenario , including " Entering the Vehicle ( S1 ) " , " Engagement while Driving ( S2 ) " , and " Exiting the Vehicle ( S3 ) " , was analyzed independently . We performed pairwise comparisons using a t - test for the three scenes ( 2A , 2B , 2C ) of S2 with their base scenarios ( no interfaces ) . We considered various analysis factors , such as mental workload and ratings of in - vehicle interface elements ( displays , visual icons , verbal commands , etc . ) , and modalities ( auditory , visual , auditory , and visual ) , as dependent variables . Our results section highlights the statistically signifcant factors based on student t - test and standard deviation analysis and the kinds of considerations that afected the participants’ engage - ment with the implemented interfaces . 2149 Designing Inclusive Interaction with Autonomous Vehicles for Older Passengers DIS ’23 , July 10 – 14 , 2023 , Pitsburgh , PA , USA Situational Awareness Our results highlight the importance of a simple and intuitive in - teraction ( G3 ) experience with autonomous cars . For instance , par - ticipants appreciated the welcome message by the car in scene 2A , which acknowledged their presence and resembled a familiar inter - action with taxi or Uber drivers . However , some participants ( 5 out of 15 ) considered the initial verbal guidance on pre - journey steps unnecessary , as wearing seatbelts and choosing the route were already common practices . Most elderly participants discussed not being solely reliant on the map - suggested route when in familiar neighborhoods for having years of experience navigating the same roads and trafc . Thus , they felt the agency of the vehicle’s actions while having route selection and vehicle starting features in the implemented scenarios as discussed in design guideline G4 . How - ever , the location of the start button was problematic for 8 out of 15 participants , who found it difcult to reach based on their seating positions . Four of them suggested a voice command to start the vehicle instead of a physical button . Most participants expressed the usefulness of receiving periodic updates on trafc , potential delays , and arrival at their destination , among other information , as provided by the vehicle’s in - car in - terfaces in the scenarios . Specifcally , SP10 , who self - identifed as having minor dementia , emphasized it while getting auditory and visual feedback in scene 2B ( S2 ) with heavy trafc , stating that " . . . this will be quite helpful for me to stay updated in - stead of wondering about my surroundings , and I will feel more at ease and comfortable with a self - driving car . " We found that interfaces that presented necessary information periodically without requiring user input received higher prefer - ences from elderly participants in most scenarios . SP3 mentioned saying , " For emergencies , there should be really a one - step process with little to no navigation that anyone can do during the time as those moments are crucial ! " Out of 15 participants , 10 rated single - step navigation ( such as map selection or music play ) with a higher score ( M = 4 . 60 , SD = 1 . 02 ) than the multi - step navigation ( M = 3 . 45 , SD = 0 . 86 ) in S1 when entering the vehicle . The majority of partici - pants expressed the need for repeated instructions in S1 to be able to successfully enter the vehicle and verify the destination details . Multi - Modal Interaction All the scenarios incorporated both visual and auditory cues ( except 2C in S2 ) such as destination details , weather , and lane - departure icons guided with a non - verbal beep and verbal feedback . 13 out of 15 participants preferred the combination of both auditory and visual feedback ( G1 ) than having a single mode of communication as it will work for a large group of people with diferent abilities - hard of hearing or poor vision . Likewise , an 82 - years old participant ( SP13 ) who is hard of hearing explained the necessity of having both auditory and visual cues saying , It means that I can still access the information [ through visual feedback ] and participate fully in the experience , even if I am having difculty listening to the voice ! Scene 2C in S2 ( foggy weather ) did not work well for most of the participants as it contained visual cues only ( M = 2 . 60 , SD = 1 . 20 ) . However , three participants liked the visuals only as they did not want to hear the auditory feedback unless the situation needs an instant reaction . In general , auditory feedback ( M = 4 . 20 , SD = 1 . 05 ) was appreciated the most in comparison to visual ( M = 3 . 56 , SD = 0 . 89 ) for grabbing attention . During the simulations , participants usually remained involved in observing the implicit behavior of the vehicle such as driving style , speed , stopping distance , etc . For the visual cues , the participants had to look at the specifc places where the icons and displays are located . Thus , in S2 ( 2A regular trafc ) scene , the lane - changing icon placed on the side mirror was not noticed by most of the participants . They mentioned hearing the beeping sound associated with this interaction , but could not interpret the message without looking at it . Therefore , 10 participants preferred verbal feedback over the auditory tone for clear communication be - tween the AVs and passengers . Furthermore , two participants who had difculty hearing high - pitch tones preferred male voices over females used in the low - information content scene ( G2 ) . Overall , participants preferred receiving most of the auditory and visual cues initially when they start riding in these smart cars . A 77 - year - old participant mentioned , I will probably turn everything on initially for the frst few weeks to know how the car is going to react in certain situations . Later on , I might turn some of those auditory feedbacks of once I get more comfortable with the vehicle . I want to gain a certain level of confdence that I know that car’s going to do what I would do as a driver ! Impact of Information on Mental Workload In the base scenario of 2A , two participants got startled when the kids started running near the crosswalk and participants ( 11 out of 15 ) felt the necessity of some sort of feedback from the car say - ing it identifed the kid or the pedestrian . Though six participants wanted to override the control of AVs in such situations , others mentioned feeling reliant on AVs to perform the tasks after observ - ing the performance in the initial simulations . This can also imply that older passengers might feel more interested in traveling as passive passengers inside a self - driving car considering the overrid - ing complexities in a moving vehicle . In scene 2A , we added verbal notifcation about the pedestrian and displayed an animated walk trace of the pedestrian . Having both auditory and visual feedback was found not needed in this scenario and marked as potential information overload ( M = 7 . 5 , SD = 1 . 40 ) . Some participants felt the visual cues and texts were quite big for them and pointed out the need for adjusting the sizes according to their preferences . This implies that it is important to have a customization option instead of just implementing large fonts and slower auditory tones as commonly accepted designs for older adults considering their age - related vision and hearing declines . Some participants recommended adding specifc requirements ( e . g . , magnifying texts or reducing information content ) in the mobile app used to request these rides , to preset interfaces that incorporate passenger needs to reduce setup complexities . In the high - content version of scene 2A , we noticed that most of the participants ( 12 out of 15 ) did not notice all the information as multiple cues were provided simultaneously within a short time . All the participants preferred the low - content version where no - tifcations about the surroundings ( e . g . , playground nearby ) were 2150 DIS ’23 , July 10 – 14 , 2023 , Pitsburgh , PA , USA Asha , et al . removed as it was found unnecessary in the other scene . Partici - pants also suggested not to have lane - changing notifcations as this will occur frequently during a ride and will keep distracting the passengers with all the alerts . Based on the t - test analysis , we found diferences in information overload between the low information condition ( M = 3 . 9 , SD = 1 . 04 ) compared to high ( M = 7 . 2 , SD = 0 . 67 ) , p = 0 . 005 to be signifcant . Thus , our results of the statistical analysis also imply that the amount of information has a signifcant impact on the user’s mental workload ( G3 ) . Integration of Familiar Cues All the scenarios with interfaces performed well than their respec - tive base scenario except scene 2C ( foggy weather ) where partici - pants preferred the base one . It was also refected in the statistical scores of ‘stress’ [ Base ( M = 5 . 8 , SD = 0 . 69 ) vs . 2C ( M = 7 . 9 , SD = 1 . 07 ) , p = 0 . 10 ] . In the extreme weather scene ( 2C ) , we only used visual icons to highlight the vehicles in the foggy weather . Most partici - pants ( 10 out of 15 ) found the icons pointing to the cars were not self - explanatory and made confusion among the passengers . After explaining , fve participants acknowledged its usage in informing the passengers about AV’s awareness of the nearby cars which were not clearly visible due to the fog . Nine participants suggested using more familiar cues that are universally known and adding some verbal feedback to describe the conditions . According to the design guideline G5 , most elderly participants expressed their interest to have two - way communication with the vehicle as they do with Alexa or Google Home assistant . However , we received contradictory feedback from the participants in our simulation S3 as everything happens at a fast pace inside a vehicle . 9 out of 15 participants did not feel the necessity of talking to the car as it was already sharing enough information with visual and auditory cues . SP12 quoted , I wouldn’t talk to my vehicle like it’s Alexa or some other voice assistant in regular cases . I think I would prefer a more traditional interface that I can interact with using buttons or touch screens , rather than trying to have a conversation with my car ! Some participants ( 6 out of 15 ) wanted to still have this verbal command ( two - way ) option by looking into the potential of us - ing it in other scenarios such as asking for an immediate stop , detour options , and entertainment - related features . Our analy - sis indicated that elderly participants with hard of hearing had a lower preference for this feature inside an AV . Specifcally , our stu - dent’s t - test revealed a signifcant efect of hearing on the rating of the ‘speak’feature from the S3 scene [ ‘PCD = others / none’ ( M = 3 . 8 , SD = 0 . 95 ) vs . ‘PCD = hard of hearing’ ( M = 2 . 5 , SD = 0 . 80 ) , p = 0 . 025 ] . This suggests that the design of two - way communication inter - faces inside AVs needs to consider the age - related preferences and limitations of older users . For the interior design of the AVs , surprisingly , participants did not prefer the traditional design as the steering wheel without a driver was not a usual scene for them . They were more comfortable in the Waymo car model with large windows which also allowed easy observation of the surroundings and vehicle actions . One par - ticipant stated saying , " . . . the empty driving seat with a steering wheel feels a bit weird and seems like it is inviting me to grab it and drive ! " Though our design guidelines suggested including familiar designs , the results from the second study showed conficting feedback on the two - way communication and vehicle interior aspects . 7 DISCUSSION In this section , we revisit the in - vehicle interaction experiences w . r . t . design guidelines ( G1 - G5 ) derived from the interview data and refect on the fndings we received from our evaluation study with older adults . 7 . 1 Revisiting the In - vehicle Interfaces w . r . t . Design Guidelines Multi - sensory interfaces can provide users with multiple ways to interact with the interface , such as through touch , voice , or visual displays . Therefore , it was well received by the elderly participants as it can serve people with various abilities as well ( G1 ) . Design factors related to auditory feedback ( voice , tone , pitch , etc . ) needs to be considered carefully which was also highlighted in our VR study fndings ( G2 ) . To communicate with the vehicle in the absence of a human driver , participants preferred the design of interfaces that will keep them current before they start worrying about the vehicle’s state . Our fndings imply the signifcance of familiar in - terfaces in AVs as the known and consistent ( G3 ) feature elements inside the car can reduce the learning or adjusting period for senior passengers by matching with their previous experience and mental model of technology usage ( G5 ) . Older adults may have varying feelings about the level of agency they have over self - driving car features . Some may feel confdent and in control when using self - driving cars , while others may feel unsure or hesitant about giving up control of the car’s technology as they have long years of driving experience . It is benefcial for older adults to have some control options like starting / stopping the car , and selecting routes so that they can tailor the experience to their individual preferences and comfort levels . It is also important for AVs to provide clear and concise information to the user about the car’s actions and decisions so that older adults can understand and trust the technology . Overall , self - driving cars need to provide them with a sense of agency and control over the driving experience in fostering their acceptance ( G4 ) . 7 . 2 Becoming a Passive Passenger Designs for autonomous vehicles should prioritize automatic or self - running interfaces , with user input being optional . AVs should not solely rely on passenger input to perform a task , instead operate their in - vehicle technologies knowing the specifc needs which can be preset . These smart cars should be able to automatically adjust the interface setup according to the user’s requirement before picking up the passenger . Likewise , past research mentioned the ways a semi - autonomous vehicle can guide an older driver as a cognitive assistive device to help them tackle any driving task [ 38 ] . Our fndings suggest incorporating designs inside the vehicle that will enable the passengers to have a relaxed and comfortable ride without being engaged in the monitoring / setup activities . Adding too many instructions , user input , and parallel notifcations will not be ideal for many seniors as it will require high attention and can increase anxiety and frustration . Most seniors prefer to 2151 Designing Inclusive Interaction with Autonomous Vehicles for Older Passengers DIS ’23 , July 10 – 14 , 2023 , Pitsburgh , PA , USA notice things only if they are urgent , therefore the low content interface was scored highly in our evaluation study which varies with younger passengers’ preference for increased ride information [ 51 ] . In the long run , passengers will not remain fully involved and concerned about automated driving once they build trust and thus will act as passive passengers . 7 . 3 Impact of Cognitive and Mental Health Aspects When designing interfaces for senior passengers , it’s important to take into account age - related changes in memory , reaction time , and executive function . Our study showed that in scene 2A , most participants needed to repeat the instructions to complete the tasks , even though there were both direct interactions with cues and verbal instructions . In the last scene , S3 , multiple pieces of informa - tion were presented simultaneously , and most participants couldn’t process them all . Participants with hard of hearing had the most dif - fculty in processing all the instructions . For example , they found it overwhelming to monitor the interface cues while the car conveyed information more frequently . They also used the speak option less often . To avoid deluging older adults and demanding too much attention from them , it’s important to balance the number of inter - faces and provide a " repeat " option to replay the shared information or instructions as needed . The interaction with AVs should be easy to adapt and accessible for older adults , invoking positive inter - est in using AVs to promote psychological well - being and support independent living . 7 . 4 Matching the Passenger’s Prediction During the base scenarios of our evaluation study , participants typically observed the car’s driving behaviors and felt less con - cerned when the car followed a regular driving style . Also , they continuously tried to anticipate the car’s next maneuver while mon - itoring the surroundings . However , in the designed scenarios where diferent information was shared with the passengers to provide situational awareness , participants felt more comfortable and con - fdent with the AVs’ performance as the presented interface cues aligned with their predictions about the vehicle’s actions and the surrounding conditions . Therefore , it is crucial to design interfaces that keep participants informed about the context , while also min - imizing surprises or unexpected events . This cohesive approach ensures that passengers can maintain a sense of control and trust in the AVs’ capabilities . The fndings from Shabnam et al . ’s work [ 26 ] suggest that AVs should follow the passenger’s driving style to enhance their percep - tion of reliability in automated driving . The study emphasized that deviations from the passenger’s driving style led to a negative atti - tude toward fully autonomous cars . However , our research fndings present a contrasting perspective as most of the participants were comfortable with the regular driving pattern we implemented in the simulation . Though some participants mentioned they would have slowed down earlier after watching the pedestrian in 2A ( S2 ) , they are willing to adapt to the AV’s own driving style . 7 . 5 Limitations The limitations of our work exist in three specifc domains . Firstly , the interview study had a limited number of participants ( N = 10 ) , which may restrict the generalizability of our interview fndings . However , this does not necessarily reduce the validity of our fnd - ings as the in - depth discussion with each participant provided us with rich insights [ 57 ] . Furthermore , we were able to gather diverse feedback and refections on our prototyped interfaces through user evaluations with 15 other elderly participants who varied in tech - nology usage experiences and demographics . The second domain of limitation is related to the design consid - erations in our VR simulations . In a real - world context , passengers may encounter a wide range of diverse scenarios or incidents dur - ing their rides . We had to limit the variations in our implemented simulation considering the scope of the study . Further research should explore a broader range of scenarios and investigate the scalability of the designed interfaces . Also , the shorter duration and slower speed of our simulations limited the realism of the ex - perience . However , these design choices ensured the comfort and safety of the older adult participants , minimizing the risk of motion sickness while still allowing for an immersive VR experience . Lastly , the limitation is related to the demographic of the re - cruited participants . All of our participants were residents of North America , and many of them had prior experience using various technologies in their personal and professional lives . We received mostly positive feedback from the participants about accepting AV technology regardless of their age . It is plausible that our recruited participants generally have a positive outlook toward new technolo - gies due to their previous experiences which may have infuenced their insights on AVs . Further research is needed to investigate inclusive design solutions considering more broader aspects such as language diversity , cultural norms , habits , and social acceptance . 8 CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK Our work explored inclusive design interfaces for older adults to communicate with autonomous vehicles . We conducted an inter - view study to identify general design needs for seniors , followed by implementing fve proof - of - concept prototypes that integrated diferent interface elements—visualization on a display / screen , au - ditory feedback through sound and verbal commands , and two - way communication . We performed an evaluation study with older adults in a VR simulation to assess the feasibility of the design ele - ments . Our research outcome identifed promising interface ideas unique to senior passengers , and design fndings pointing to the concerns and preferences of the larger elderly community . All the participants preferred receiving occasional cues from the vehicle to remain updated about the vehicle’s movement . Some of our fnd - ings highlight the importance of designing interfaces that provide a sense of control over the driving experience , match the passenger’s prediction , and allow the elderly to travel as passive passengers . In future work , we plan to further develop and refne the inter - face designs based on the feedback from the evaluation study with elderly participants . Additionally , we aim to conduct a large - scale study that includes a diverse group of older adults with varying physical and cognitive abilities as well as sociodemographic charac - teristics , to assess the efectiveness of the interfaces in facilitating 2152 DIS ’23 , July 10 – 14 , 2023 , Pitsburgh , PA , USA Asha , et al . communication between seniors and AVs . Furthermore , we plan to investigate the potential benefts of using these interfaces for other vulnerable populations , such as individuals with cognitive impairments , and visual or hearing impairments . We recognize that most elderly individuals are equally capable and profcient in using technology . To ensure their successful adop - tion , it is crucial to develop interfaces that align with their mental models , leveraging their past experiences and infuencing their vol - untary use of the system . Thus , our research fndings contribute to the development of inclusive AV technologies that can enhance the safety and accessibility of transportation for all users . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This work was supported by NSERC grant RGPAS / 00077 - 2019 . We thank our participants for their contributions to the studies . We especially thank Barry Pendergast for his support and valuable insights toward this research . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Sarah Abdi , Alice Spann , Jacinta Borilovic , Luc de Witte , and Mark Hawley . 2019 . Understanding the care and support needs of older people : a scoping review and categorisation using the WHO international classifcation of functioning , disability and health framework ( ICF ) . BMC geriatrics 19 , 1 ( 2019 ) , 1 – 15 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1186 / s12877 - 019 - 1189 - 9 [ 2 ] Gus Alexiou . 2021 . How Passengers With Disabilities Can Drive The Autonomous Vehicle Revolution . Retrieved April 15 , 2022 from https : / / www . forbes . com / sites / gusalexiou / 2021 / 04 / 11 / how - passengers - with - disabilities - can - drive - the - autonomous - vehicle - revolution / ? sh = 7d0248b618a5 [ 3 ] Ashratuz Zavin Asha , Fahim Anzum , Patrick Finn , Ehud Sharlin , and Mario Costa Sousa . 2020 . Designing External Automotive Displays : VR Prototypes and Analysis . In 12th International Conference on Automotive User Interfaces and Interactive Vehicular Applications ( Virtual Event , DC , USA ) ( AutomotiveUI ’20 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 74 – 82 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3409120 . 3410658 [ 4 ] Ashratuz Zavin Asha , Christopher Smith , Georgina Freeman , Sean Crump , Sowmya Somanath , Lora Oehlberg , and Ehud Sharlin . 2021 . Co - Designing In - teractions between Pedestrians in Wheelchairs and Autonomous Vehicles . In Designing Interactive Systems Conference 2021 ( Virtual Event , USA ) ( DIS ’21 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 339 – 351 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3461778 . 3462068 [ 5 ] Thierry Bellet , Jean - Christophe Paris , and Claude Marin - Lamellet . 2018 . Dif - fculties experienced by older drivers during their regular driving and their expectations towards Advanced Driving Aid Systems and vehicle automation . Transportation Research Part F : Trafc Psychology and Behaviour 52 ( 2018 ) , 138 – 163 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . trf . 2017 . 11 . 014 [ 6 ] Virginia Braun and Victoria Clarke . 2019 . Refecting on refexive thematic analysis . Qualitative Research in Sport , Exercise and Health 11 , 4 ( 2019 ) , 589 – 597 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 2159676X . 2019 . 1628806 [ 7 ] Julian Brinkley , Brianna Posadas , Imani Sherman , Shaundra B . Daily , and Juan E . Gilbert . 2019 . An Open Road Evaluation of a Self - Driving Vehicle Human – Machine Interface Designed for Visually Impaired Users . Interna - tional Journal of Human – Computer Interaction 35 , 11 ( 2019 ) , 1018 – 1032 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 10447318 . 2018 . 1561787 [ 8 ] John Brooke et al . 1996 . SUS - A quick and dirty usability scale . Usability evaluation in industry 189 , 194 ( 1996 ) , 4 – 7 . [ 9 ] US Census Bureau . 2023 . Older Americans Month . Retrieved June 2 , 2023 from https : / / www . census . gov / newsroom / stories / older - americans - month . html [ 10 ] Elizabeth Cha , Yunkyung Kim , Terrence Fong , and Maja J . Matarić . 2018 . A Survey of Nonverbal Signaling Methods for Non - Humanoid Robots . Found . Trends Robotics 6 ( 2018 ) , 211 – 323 . [ 11 ] Sergiu Coicheci and Ioan Filip . 2020 . Self - driving vehicles : current status of development and technical challenges to overcome . In 2020 IEEE 14th International Symposium on Applied Computational Intelligence and Informatics ( SACI ) . 000255 – 000260 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / SACI49304 . 2020 . 9118809 [ 12 ] Mark Colley , Benjamin Eder , Jan Ole Rixen , and Enrico Rukzio . 2021 . Efects of Semantic Segmentation Visualization on Trust , Situation Awareness , and Cognitive Load in Highly Automated Vehicles . In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Yokohama , Japan ) ( CHI ’21 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , Article 155 , 11 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3411764 . 3445351 [ 13 ] Mark Colley , Marcel Walch , and Enrico Rukzio . 2019 . For a Better ( Simulated ) World : Considerations for VR in External Communication Research . In Pro - ceedings of the 11th International Conference on Automotive User Interfaces and Interactive Vehicular Applications : Adjunct Proceedings ( Utrecht , Netherlands ) ( AutomotiveUI ’19 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 442 – 449 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3349263 . 3351523 [ 14 ] S Czaja , M Ceruso , W Boot , N Charness , and W Rogers . 2021 . STRUMM : An Intelligent , Adaptive Software Package for Older Adults With a Cogni - tive Impairment . Innovation in Aging 5 , Suppl 1 ( 2021 ) , 194 – 194 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1093 / geroni / igab046 . 733 [ 15 ] Yngve Dahl and Geir Kjetil Hanssen . 2018 . “Do You See What I Hear ? ” : Designing for Collocated Patient – Practitioner Collaboration in Audiological Consultations . Human – Computer Interaction 33 , 5 - 6 ( 2018 ) , 372 – 421 . [ 16 ] Gordana Dermody , Lisa Whitehead , Graham Wilson , and Courtney Glass . 2020 . The Role of Virtual Reality in Improving Health Outcomes for Community - Dwelling Older Adults : Systematic Review . J Med Internet Res 22 , 6 ( 1 Jun 2020 ) , e17331 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2196 / 17331 [ 17 ] Haoyu Dong , Marieke Martens , and Bastian Pfeging . 2021 . An Online Study to Explore Trust in Highly Automated Vehicle in Non - Critical Automated Driving Scenarios . In 13th International Conference on Automotive User Interfaces and Interactive Vehicular Applications ( Leeds , United Kingdom ) ( AutomotiveUI ’21 Adjunct ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 34 – 38 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3473682 . 3480259 [ 18 ] David W Eby , Lisa J Molnar , and Sergiu C Stanciu . 2018 . Older adults’ attitudes and opinions about automated vehicles : A literature review . Technical Report . Center for Advancing Transportation Leadership and Safety ( ATLAS Center ) . University of Michigan Transportation Research Institute , Ann Arbor , MI , USA . https : / / rosap . ntl . bts . gov / view / dot / 63609 [ 19 ] David W . Eby , Lisa J . Molnar , Jennifer S . Zakrajsek , Lindsay H . Ryan , Nicole Zanier , Renée M . St . Louis , Sergiu C . Stanciu , David LeBlanc , Lidia P . Kostyniuk , Jacqui Smith , Raymond Yung , Linda Nyquist , Carolyn DiGuiseppi , Guohua Li , Thelma J . Mielenz , and David Strogatz . 2018 . Prevalence , attitudes , and knowledge of in - vehicle technologies and vehicle adaptations among older drivers . Accident Analysis & Prevention 113 ( 2018 ) , 54 – 62 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . aap . 2018 . 01 . 022 [ 20 ] Fredrick Ekman , Mikael Johansson , and Jana Sochor . 2018 . Creating Appro - priate Trust in Automated Vehicle Systems : A Framework for HMI Design . IEEE Transactions on Human - Machine Systems 48 , 1 ( 2018 ) , 95 – 101 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / THMS . 2017 . 2776209 [ 21 ] Koen Faber and Dea van Lierop . 2020 . How will older adults use automated vehicles ? Assessing the role of AVs in overcoming perceived mobility barriers . Transportation Research Part A : Policy and Practice 133 ( 2020 ) , 353 – 363 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . tra . 2020 . 01 . 022 [ 22 ] Alexander Feierle , Simon Danner , Sarah Steininger , and Klaus Bengler . 2020 . Information Needs and Visual Attention during Urban , Highly Automated Driv - ing—An Investigation of Potential Infuencing Factors . Information 11 , 2 ( 2020 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3390 / info11020062 [ 23 ] C . Gasne , L . Paire - Ficout , S . Bordel , S . Lafont , and M . Ranchet . 2022 . Takeover performance of older drivers in automated driving : A review . Transportation Research Part F : Trafc Psychology and Behaviour 87 ( 2022 ) , 347 – 364 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . trf . 2022 . 04 . 015 [ 24 ] Timothy Geary and David Danks . 2019 . Balancing the Benefts of Autonomous Vehicles . In Proceedings of the 2019 AAAI / ACM Conference on AI , Ethics , and Society ( Honolulu , HI , USA ) ( AIES ’19 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 181 – 186 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3306618 . 3314237 [ 25 ] Aaron Gluck , Kwajo Boateng , Earl W . Huf Jr . , and Julian Brinkley . 2020 . Putting Older Adults in the Driver Seat : Using User Enactment to Explore the Design of a Shared Autonomous Vehicle . In 12th International Conference on Automotive User Interfaces and Interactive Vehicular Applications ( Virtual Event , DC , USA ) ( AutomotiveUI ’20 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 291 – 300 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3409120 . 3410645 [ 26 ] Shabnam Haghzare , Jennifer L . Campos , Katherine Bak , and Alex Mihailidis . 2021 . Older adults’ acceptance of fully automated vehicles : Efects of exposure , driving style , age , and driving conditions . Accident Analysis & Prevention 150 ( 2021 ) , 105919 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . aap . 2020 . 105919 [ 27 ] Sandra G Hart and Lowell E Staveland . 1988 . Development of NASA - TLX ( Task Load Index ) : Results of empirical and theoretical research . In Advances in psy - chology . Vol . 52 . Elsevier , 139 – 183 . [ 28 ] Franziska Hartwich , Matthias Beggiato , and Josef F . Krems . 2018 . Driving comfort , enjoyment and acceptance of automated driving – efects of drivers’ age and driving style familiarity . Ergonomics 61 , 8 ( 2018 ) , 1017 – 1032 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 00140139 . 2018 . 1441448 [ 29 ] Franziska Hartwich , Cornelia Hollander , Daniela Johannmeyer , and Josef F . Krems . 2021 . Improving Passenger Experience and Trust in Automated Vehicles Through User - Adaptive HMIs : “The More the Better” Does Not Apply to Everyone . Fron - tiers in Human Dynamics 3 ( 2021 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3389 / fhumd . 2021 . 669030 [ 30 ] Hany M . Hassan , Mark R . Ferguson , Saiedeh Razavi , and Brenda Vrkljan . 2019 . Factors That Infuence Older Canadians’ Preferences for using Autonomous Vehicle Technology : A Structural Equation Analysis . Transportation Research Record 2673 , 1 ( 2019 ) , 469 – 480 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 0361198118822281 2153 Designing Inclusive Interaction with Autonomous Vehicles for Older Passengers DIS ’23 , July 10 – 14 , 2023 , Pitsburgh , PA , USA [ 31 ] Hany M . Hassan , Mark R . Ferguson , Brenda Vrkljan , Bruce Newbold , and Saiedeh Razavi . 2021 . Older adults and their willingness to use semi and fully autonomous vehicles : A structural equation analysis11Revised manuscript prepared for publi - cation at the special issue in Journal of Transport Geography : “Elderly’s mobility and the living environment” . Journal of Transport Geography 95 ( 2021 ) , 103133 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jtrangeo . 2021 . 103133 [ 32 ] Renate Häuslschmid , Max von Bülow , Bastian Pfeging , and Andreas Butz . 2017 . Supporting Trust in Autonomous Driving . In Proceedings of the 22nd International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces ( Limassol , Cyprus ) ( IUI ’17 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 319 – 329 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3025171 . 3025198 [ 33 ] Gaojian Huang , Ya - Hsin Hung , Robert W . Proctor , and Brandon J . Pitts . 2022 . Age is more than just a number : The relationship among age , non - chronological age factors , self - perceived driving abilities , and autonomous vehicle acceptance . Accident Analysis & Prevention 178 ( 2022 ) , 106850 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . aap . 2022 . 106850 [ 34 ] Earl W . Huf , Natalie DellaMaria , Brianna Posadas , and Julian Brinkley . 2019 . Am I Too Old to Drive ? Opinions of Older Adults on Self - Driving Vehicles . In Pro - ceedings of the 21st International ACM SIGACCESS Conference on Computers and Accessibility ( Pittsburgh , PA , USA ) ( ASSETS ’19 ) . Association for Computing Ma - chinery , New York , NY , USA , 500 – 509 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3308561 . 3353801 [ 35 ] Inclusive Design Research Centre ( IDRC ) . 2018 . What is Inclusive Design . Retrieved June 2 , 2023 from https : / / legacy . idrc . ocadu . ca / about - the - idrc / 49 - resources / online - resources / articles - and - papers / 443 - whatisinclusivedesign . [ 36 ] Robert S Kennedy , Norman E Lane , Kevin S Berbaum , and Michael G Lilienthal . 1993 . Simulator sickness questionnaire : An enhanced method for quantifying simulator sickness . The international journal of aviation psychology 3 , 3 ( 1993 ) , 203 – 220 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1207 / s15327108ijap0303 _ 3 [ 37 ] Shahedul Huq Khandkar . 2009 . Open coding . University of Calgary . https : / / pages . cpsc . ucalgary . ca / ~ saul / wiki / uploads / CPSC681 / open - coding . pdf [ 38 ] Frank Knoefel , Bruce Wallace , Rafk Goubran , Iman Sabra , and Shawn Marshall . 2019 . Semi - autonomous vehicles as a cognitive assistive device for older adults . Geriatrics 4 , 4 ( 2019 ) , 63 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3390 / geriatrics4040063 [ 39 ] Moritz Körber . 2019 . Theoretical Considerations and Development of a Question - naire to Measure Trust in Automation . In Proceedings of the 20th Congress of the International Ergonomics Association ( IEA 2018 ) , Sebastiano Bagnara , Riccardo Tartaglia , Sara Albolino , Thomas Alexander , and Yushi Fujita ( Eds . ) . Springer International Publishing , Cham , 13 – 30 . [ 40 ] Li Na Lee , Mi Jeong Kim , and Won Ju Hwang . 2019 . Potential of Augmented Reality and Virtual Reality Technologies to Promote Wellbeing in Older Adults . Applied Sciences 9 , 17 ( 2019 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3390 / app9173556 [ 41 ] Young S . Lee , Shirley Chaysinh , Santosh Basapur , Crysta J . Metcalf , and Hiren Mandalia . 2012 . Active Aging in Community Centers and ICT Design Implications . In Proceedings of the Designing Interactive Systems Conference ( Newcastle Upon Tyne , United Kingdom ) ( DIS ’12 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 156 – 165 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2317956 . 2317981 [ 42 ] Stephen Lindsay , Daniel Jackson , Guy Schofeld , and Patrick Olivier . 2012 . En - gaging Older People Using Participatory Design . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Austin , Texas , USA ) ( CHI ’12 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1199 – 1208 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2207676 . 2208570 [ 43 ] Todd Litman . 2015 . Autonomous Vehicle Implementation Predictions : Implications for Transport Planning . Technical Report . University of Michigan , Ann Arbor , Transportation Research Institute . https : / / hdl . handle . net / 2027 . 42 / 108384 [ 44 ] Karthik Mahadevan , Sowmya Somanath , and Ehud Sharlin . 2018 . Communi - cating Awareness and Intent in Autonomous Vehicle - Pedestrian Interaction . In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Montreal QC , Canada ) ( CHI ’18 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 12 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3173574 . 3174003 [ 45 ] Michael A . Nees , Benji Helbein , and Anna Porter . 2016 . Speech Auditory Alerts Promote Memory for Alerted Events in a Video - Simulated Self - Driving Car Ride . Human Factors 58 , 3 ( 2016 ) , 416 – 426 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 0018720816629279 [ 46 ] United Nations Department of Economic and Social Afairs . 2020 . World Popula - tion Ageing 2019 . UN - ilibrary . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 18356 / 6a8968ef - en [ 47 ] Luis Oliveira , Jacob Luton , Sumeet Iyer , Chris Burns , Alexandros Mouzakitis , Paul Jennings , and Stewart Birrell . 2018 . Evaluating How Interfaces Infuence the User Interaction with Fully Autonomous Vehicles . In Proceedings of the 10th Inter - national Conference on Automotive User Interfaces and Interactive Vehicular Appli - cations ( Toronto , ON , Canada ) ( AutomotiveUI ’18 ) . Association for Computing Ma - chinery , New York , NY , USA , 320 – 331 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3239060 . 3239065 [ 48 ] Qijia Peng , Yanbin Wu , Nan Qie , and Sunao Iwaki . 2022 . Age - related efects of executive function on takeover performance in automated driving . Scientifc Reports 12 , 1 ( 2022 ) , 1 – 12 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 022 - 08522 - 4 [ 49 ] Rebecca J Riley , Sandy Burgener , and Kathleen C Buckwalter . 2014 . Anxiety and stigma in dementia : a threat to aging in place . Nursing Clinics 49 , 2 ( 2014 ) , 213 – 231 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cnur . 2014 . 02 . 008 [ 50 ] Peter A . M . Ruijten , Jacques M . B . Terken , and Sanjeev N . Chandramouli . 2018 . Enhancing Trust in Autonomous Vehicles through Intelligent User Interfaces That Mimic Human Behavior . Multimodal Technologies and Interaction ( 2018 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3390 / mti2040062 [ 51 ] Benjamin S . Alpers , Kali Cornn , Lauren E . Feitzinger , Usman Khaliq , So Yeon Park , Bardia Beigi , Daniel Joseph Hills - Bunnell , Trevor Hyman , Kaustubh Desh - pande , Rieko Yajima , Larry Leifer , and Lauren Aquino Shluzas . 2020 . Capturing Passenger Experience in a Ride - Sharing Autonomous Vehicle : The Role of Digital Assistants in User Interface Design . In 12th International Conference on Auto - motive User Interfaces and Interactive Vehicular Applications ( Virtual Event , DC , USA ) ( AutomotiveUI ’20 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 83 – 93 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3409120 . 3410639 [ 52 ] Dimitrios Saredakis , Ancret Szpak , Brandon Birckhead , Hannah AD Keage , Albert Rizzo , and Tobias Loetscher . 2020 . Factors associated with virtual reality sickness in head - mounted displays : a systematic review and meta - analysis . Frontiers in human neuroscience 14 ( 2020 ) , 96 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3389 / fnhum . 2020 . 00096 [ 53 ] Kristin E . Schaefer and Edward R . Straub . 2016 . Will passengers trust driverless vehicles ? Removing the steering wheel and pedals . In 2016 IEEE International Multi - Disciplinary Conference on Cognitive Methods in Situation Awareness and Decision Support ( CogSIMA ) . 159 – 165 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / COGSIMA . 2016 . 7497804 [ 54 ] Brandon Schoettle and Michael Sivak . 2014 . A survey of public opinion about autonomous and self - driving vehicles in the US , the UK , and Australia . Technical Report . University of Michigan , Ann Arbor , Transportation Research Institute . https : / / www . vtpi . org / avip . pdf [ 55 ] Alexa L Siegfried , Alycia Bayne , Laurie F Beck , and Katherine Freund . 2021 . Older adult willingness to use fully autonomous vehicle ( FAV ) ride sharing . Geriatrics 6 , 2 ( 2021 ) , 47 . [ 56 ] Julian Specht , Helene Schroeder , Karsten Krakow , Günter Meinhardt , Barbara Stegmann , and Bozana Meinhardt - Injac . 2021 . Acceptance of immersive head - mounted display virtual reality in stroke patients . Computers in Human Behavior Reports 4 ( 2021 ) , 100141 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . chbr . 2021 . 100141 [ 57 ] Jean Toner . 2009 . Small is not too small : Refections concerning the validity of very small focus groups ( VSFGs ) . Qualitative Social Work 8 , 2 ( 2009 ) , 179 – 192 . [ 58 ] Eleftheria Vaportzis , Maria Giatsi Clausen , and Alan J . Gow . 2017 . Older Adults Perceptions of Technology and Barriers to Interacting with Tablet Computers : A Focus Group Study . Frontiers in Psychology 8 ( 2017 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3389 / fpsyg . 2017 . 01687 [ 59 ] Tamara von Sawitzky , Philipp Wintersberger , Andreas Riener , and Joseph L . Gabbard . 2019 . Increasing Trust in Fully Automated Driving : Route Indica - tion on an Augmented Reality Head - up Display . In Proceedings of the 8th ACM International Symposium on Pervasive Displays ( Palermo , Italy ) ( PerDis ’19 ) . As - sociation for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , Article 6 , 7 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3321335 . 3324947 [ 60 ] Mikael Wiberg and Erik Stolterman . 2014 . What Makes a Prototype Novel ? A Knowledge Contribution Concern for Interaction Design Research . In Proceedings of the 8th Nordic Conference on Human - Computer Interaction : Fun , Fast , Founda - tional ( Helsinki , Finland ) ( NordiCHI ’14 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 531 – 540 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2639189 . 2639487 [ 61 ] Philipp Wintersberger , Anna - Katharina Frison , Andreas Riener , and Tamara von Sawitzky . 2019 . Fostering User Acceptance and Trust in Fully Automated Vehicles : Evaluating the Potential of Augmented Reality . Presence 27 , 1 ( 2019 ) , 46 – 62 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1162 / pres _ a _ 00320 [ 62 ] Kenneth W Woodhouse , Hilary Wynne , Shelagh Baillie , OFW James , and MD Rawlins . 1988 . Who are the frail elderly ? , 505 - 506 pages . 2154