This is an electronic reprint of the original article . This reprint may differ from the original in pagination and typographic detail . Powered by TCPDF ( www . tcpdf . org ) This material is protected by copyright and other intellectual property rights , and duplication or sale of all or part of any of the repository collections is not permitted , except that material may be duplicated by you for your research use or educational purposes in electronic or print form . You must obtain permission for any other use . Electronic or print copies may not be offered , whether for sale or otherwise to anyone who is not an authorised user . Goguey , Alix ; Steer , Cameron ; Lucero , Andrés ; Nigay , Laurence ; Sahoo , Deepak Ranjan ; Coutrix , Céline ; Roudaut , Anne ; Subramanian , Sriram ; Tokuda , Yutaka ; Neate , Timothy ; Pearson , Jennifer ; Robinson , Simon ; Jones , Matt Pickcells : A Physically Reconfigurable Cell - composed Touchscreen Published in : CHI 2019 - Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems DOI : 10 . 1145 / 3290605 . 3300503 Published : 02 / 05 / 2019 Document Version Peer reviewed version Please cite the original version : Goguey , A . , Steer , C . , Lucero , A . , Nigay , L . , Sahoo , D . R . , Coutrix , C . , . . . Jones , M . ( 2019 ) . Pickcells : A Physically Reconfigurable Cell - composed Touchscreen . In CHI 2019 - Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - Proceedings ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290605 . 3300503 PickCells : A Physically Reconfigurable Cell - composed Touchscreen Alix Goguey 1 , Cameron Steer 1 , Andrés Lucero 2 , Laurence Nigay 3 , Deepak Ranjan Sahoo 1 , Céline Coutrix 4 , Anne Roudaut 5 , Sriram Subramanian 6 , Yutaka Tokuda 6 , Timothy Neate 7 , Jennifer Pearson 1 , Simon Robinson 1 , Matt Jones 1 1 Swansea University , 2 Aalto University , 3 Université Grenoble - Alpes , 4 CNRS , 5 University of Bristol , 6 University of Sussex , 7 City University of London name . surname @ { 1 swansea . ac . uk , 3 , 4 imag . fr , 6 sussex . ac . uk , 7 city . ac . uk } , 5 roudauta @ gmail . com 2 lucero @ acm . org o ff L o c k e d 4321 W e l c o m e 4 2 3 1 e c b d f a Figure 1 : Illustration of the PickCells concept . Using her PickCells device ( a ) composed of small cubical cells , Eve can : b ) snap - off cells to create a remote control while watching her movie ; c ) reorganise some cells to unlock her device by inputting a physical password ; d ) shape her device into a controller to comfortably play video games ; e ) snap - off a cell from her device , set it to control her smart light bulb and leave it in the living room so the whole family can control the bulb ; and f ) share one of her cell to show her vacation pictures on her friend’s device . ABSTRACT Touchscreens are the predominant medium for interactions with digital services ; however , their current fixed form factor narrows the scope for rich physical interactions by limiting interaction possibilities to a single , planar surface . In this paper we introduce the concept of PickCells , a fully re - configurable device concept composed of cells , that breaks the mould of rigid screens and explores a modular system Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personalorclassroomuseisgrantedwithoutfeeprovidedthatcopiesarenotmadeordistributedforprofitorcommercialadvantageandthatcopiesbearthisnoticeandthefullcitationonthefirstpage . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from permissions @ acm . org . CHI 2019 , May 4 – 9 , 2019 , Glasgow , Scotland UK © 2019 Association for Computing Machinery . ACM ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 5970 - 2 / 19 / 05 . . . $ 15 . 00 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290605 . 3300503 that affords rich sets of tangible interactions and novel across - device relationships . Through a series of co - design activities – involving HCI experts and potential end - users of such sys - tems – we synthesised a design space aimed at inspiring future research , giving researchers and designers a frame - work in which to explore modular screen interactions . The design space we propose unifies existing works on modu - lar touch surfaces under a general framework and broadens horizons by opening up unexplored spaces providing new interaction possibilities . In this paper , we present the Pick - Cells concept , a design space of modular touch surfaces , and propose a toolkit for quick scenario prototyping . CCS CONCEPTS • Human - centered computing → Human computer in - teraction ( HCI ) . KEYWORDS Touchscreen , shape changing interface , modular CHI 2019 Paper CHI 2019 , May 4 – 9 , 2019 , Glasgow , Scotland , UK Paper 273 Page 1 ACM Reference Format : AlixGoguey , CameronSteer , AndrésLucero , LaurenceNigay , Deepak Ranjan Sahoo , Céline Coutrix , Anne Roudaut , Sriram Subrama - nian , Yutaka Tokuda , Timothy Neate , Jennifer Pearson , Simon Robinson and Matt Jones . 2019 . PickCells : A Physically Recon - figurable Cell - composed Touchscreen . In CHI Conference on Hu - man Factors in Computing Systems Proceedings ( CHI 2019 ) , May 4 – 9 , 2019 , Glasgow , Scotland UK . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 14 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290605 . 3300503 1 INTRODUCTION Pervasive digital devices ( such as smartphones , tablets or tabletops ) are rigid and remain in their factory - formed shape encapsulating touchscreens that are almost always flat and static surfaces . Interactions are confined to the screen sensing capabilities ( e . g . contact points ) or potentially 3D positioning ( e . g . orientation ) ; and , in all cases , the screen shape cannot be used as a dynamic input . This " sameness " and lack of innovation in all touchscreens has even been noted in the popular press ( e . g . theweek’s article ) . In contrast , non - fixed form - factor touchscreens could enable a new realm of in - teractions : for instance , bendable screens ( e . g . MagicScroll [ 16 ] or PaperTab [ 52 ] ) , and more generally the Organic User Interfaces vision [ 55 ] , are on the verge of becoming com - mercially available . While a step forward in increasing the expressiveness of touch interaction , such proposals , though , are still based on screen surfaces that are single entities with set boundaries . One way to liberate displays from their static and flat form is to enable them to be decomposed into multiple touchscreen surfaces and to design them to be reconfigurable . By moving away from the one device - one screen model to a model of one device - multiple screens , like Lego ® bricks composing a model , device shapes and interface affordances would no longer be tied to the single flat surface default . Such modu - larity , as we will demonstrate , enables countless new ways to interact with touchscreens . The field of modular devices already demonstrates how devices can be broken apart in useful ways . For example , Seyed et al . [ 48 ] explored the use of lendable sub - devices from a mobile phone ; and , EXHI - bit [ 36 ] , Sifteo [ 33 ] and commercial examples such as the Nintendo ® Switch enable degrees of device re - configuration . In this paper , we integrate previous work on modular de - vices into a broader framework and contribute PickCells , a fully re - configurable device concept composed of cells . PickCells encompasses key interaction concepts : physical re - configuration ( i . e . adaptable form factor ) ; functional re - configuration ( i . e . fitting device features to a particular need ) ; and , easy inter - device connectivity ( i . e . enabling simple tan - gible sharing between devices ) . The PickCells concept is designed to go beyond just accounting for existing works on modular touch surfaces , though . It opens up the design space and creates new possibilities where the notions of physical configurations and tangible exchanges challenge the com - mon representation of personal devices . Figure 1 illustrates the PickCells concept through five scenarios . As in the paper that introduced inFORM [ 14 ] , we focus here on the description and exploration of the design space enabled by our technical concept . Our goal is to unify dif - ferent uses of modular devices under a single space using a single device , which would help designers and researchers to freely combine ideas derived from multiple existing works , and enable them to explore new ways of using modular de - vices . After presenting a review of modular devices as well as across - touch - device interactions , we describe the PickCells concept . We then introduce the co - creation methodology we used to enable HCI experts and potential future users to reflect creatively on the concept and its possibilities . We describe the design space derived from use case scenarios de - signed in the workshop and demonstrate its descriptive and generative power . We also provide an open - source implemen - tation of PickCells giving the community a tool to quickly prototype and evaluate use case scenarios . Along with the video figure , this implementation shows one possible vision of PickCells and how it could be used to implement sce - narios from different areas of the design space . Finally , we discuss the wider design implications of such a concept . 2 RELATED WORK In 1997 , Ishii et al . shared their vision of Tangible Bits which presented the concept of Tangible User Interfaces ( TUIs ) [ 21 ] . With TUIs , bits of information are embodied in physical ob - jects enabling easier data manipulations . However their fixed forms limit their use to a constrained array of functions as they are not as easily reconfigurable as pixels on a screen . Addressing this limitation , Ishii et al . evolved their vision , set - ting out the Radical Atoms agenda : the use of transformable and reconfigurable material for the future of human - material interaction [ 20 ] . With PickCells , we embrace the latter vi - sion by providing reconfigurable tangible pixels . Although we are not using a fully transformable and actuated material as envisioned in the Red Perfect example , we present a con - cept that explores the use of reconfigurable interfaces at a larger granularity using manually reconfigurable bricks . Early forms of modular devices have already been explored but these only consider inputs rather than the comprehensive input , output and across device interaction accommodated by our concept . We can for example cite the “bricks” of Fitz - maurice et al . [ 13 ] that were attached to virtual objects and operated on a tabletop ; “Triangles” from Gorbet et al . [ 17 ] with the manipulation of digital information through the reconfiguration of connectible triangle shaped tangibles ; or , ActiveCube [ 57 ] which achieve a similar goal with cubes . CHI 2019 Paper CHI 2019 , May 4 – 9 , 2019 , Glasgow , Scotland , UK Paper 273 Page 2 In this section , we first focus on related work exploring control reconfigurations . We then present work that focusses on screen reconfigurations and the social interaction and easy cross device sharing this enables . We finally present the Sifteo cubes [ 33 ] and their use cases . Input : control reconfiguration Modular control could be defined as control that can be physically reconfigured enabling a new way to interact with a device . A good example of such modular control used in commercial devices is the controller of the Nintendo ® Switch . Depending on its configuration , the player can , for example , use the console at home or on the go when out and about . SLAP is a system of translucent widgets that works on a tabletop [ 58 ] . Each widget interacts with the system’s con - tent depending on its predefined form factor , the screen be - hind it updating its current function . Since it is transparent the control can be redefined dynamically . Sparse Tangibles uses smartwatches as active tangibles [ 2 , 3 , 12 , 29 ] to visual - ize and manipulate data on a tabletop . These tangibles can be reconfigured dynamically . Chan et al . [ 6 ] developed capacitive bricks that can be recognized on a touchscreen . Each brick is used to control a function of the system . Bricks can also be stacked enabling complex composition of controls . ACTO is a similar project but embeds actuators on the bricks ( push button , motors , etc . ) [ 56 ] . Both systems are used on top of a touchscreen such as a tabletop . Similar bricks , but without touchscreens , like the Modular Robotics Cubelets and Kinematics [ 37 ] , directly embed functionalities allowing the creation of stand - alone robots . In this example , sensor and actuator bricks communi - cate to work together as a unit . In the same vein , Zhao et al . presented small cubical robots that self - assemble to create tangible proxies for tangible interaction and virtual reality [ 59 ] . This work is based on Zooids , a swarm user interface , that also illustrates the concept of molecular interfaces [ 24 ] . These previous tangibles do not exchange information between them but rather control data in a bigger system . In DataTiles , though , each tangible is communicating with oth - ers in its vicinity [ 42 ] . DataTiles are transparent objects on a display with unique tags ; when recognized by the display the function tied to the tile is projected on it ( video , timer , knob , etc . ) . Tiles act as modular construction units and when combined they work in conjunction to manipulate or display complex data . Tiles are not screens per se ( unsurprisingly as this work was published in 2001 ) but the idea could be adapted with today’s standard touch screen technology . Bianchi et al . [ 5 ] extend digital content to a “secondary” display . It uses a transparent sheet of plastic which when po - sitioned , as input , on a tablet touchscreen can be recognized using its capacitive footprint . The system is used to improve the reading experience by using this “screen” as a palette or a viewport referencing a distant content ( previous page , references , etc . ) . As it simulates a screen reconfiguration be - havior , it can also be considered as an example of output as well as input reconfigurations . Output : screen reconfiguration Screen reconfigurations are primarily used for viewport ex - tension or workspace organization . Works like Tilt displays ( a matrix of screens each mounted on a pivot point capable of re - orientation ) [ 1 ] or Tiltstacks ( a matrix of screens capable of re - orientation and slight translations ) [ 53 ] allow a partial reconfiguration of a screen to dynamically match its content . In SurfaceConstellation , a modular hardware platform for linking multiple mobile devices [ 30 ] , users can reorganize their workspace using multiple smart devices as a multi - display environment . The screens are connected using 3D printed stands and a web - based application is used to config - ure fixed screen setups . Such a system offers workspace re - configuration using many screens but cannot be changed dy - namically . Using the front camera to retrieve the relative posi - tion of multiple devices , [ 25 ] flexibly expands the workspace across all devices . Similarly , Hamilton et al . present a frame - work allowing users to easily deploy cross device applica - tions taking advantages of unused screens [ 19 ] . In all those works , the user requires multiple , and arguably costly , de - vices ; Cubimorph , however , points to a cheaper , dynamic and fully reconfigurable system [ 45 ] . It is composed of cubes embedding touchscreens on each face and connected using a hinge - mounted turntable mechanism . The chain cube is able to self - reconfigure and match any 3D shape in order to dynamically adapt the current form factor of the device to match its use ( e . g . a game controller ) . Paddle [ 40 ] , Projec - tagami [ 51 ] and Morphees [ 44 ] also offers a reconfigurable device . The user can fold the device , similar to manipulat - ing origami . Content and application are then adapted to the changed form factor . However the devices in these four projects cannot be torn apart in the way we demonstrate in the PickCells concept . PaperTab is a tablet composed of multiple flexible touch - screens tracked on the desk using an electro - magnetic tracker [ 52 ] . Each display represents an application . They can trans - fer data across displays or extend a view port . Screens are not modular per se but can be reorganized within the defined tracking space . EXHI - bit is a mechanical structure for prototyping shape - changing interfaces [ 36 ] . It enables the creation of expand - able surfaces in both 2D and 3D geometry . Surfaces can also be combined to enable tearable interfaces , which makes it dynamically reconfigurable and partially tearable . Doppio is a reconfigurable and tearable smartwatch with two touch - screens [ 47 ] . It encompasses the modular screen aspect of CHI 2019 Paper CHI 2019 , May 4 – 9 , 2019 , Glasgow , Scotland , UK Paper 273 Page 3 PickCells : the relative position of the screens enables an ex - pressive input vocabulary for the smartwatch environment . Cross - device interaction Expanding an application context across multiple devices not only offers the possibility to create a “bigger” screen , but also enables multi - user collaborations . Even though it does not make use of reconfigurable screens , distributing the overall screen real - estate across multiple devices could be considered as an implementation of a modular screen system . Similar to [ 25 ] , Dearman et al . use images taken by the back cameras of smartphones to create a network of position aware devices [ 10 ] . However , instead of expanding the viewport , they enable each device to easily share digital content by the user simply pushing it towards the wanted device . In Better Together , Robinson et al . propose a frame - work to enable cross - device and cross - user applications [ 43 ] . It allows multiple users to work on the same application and share data and controls . However , the system does not keep track of the device positions . With the HuddleLamp , a desktop lamp integrating a cam - era that tracks devices , Radle et al . enables spatially - aware multi - user and multi - device applications as long as the de - vices are in the camera field of view [ 39 ] . Meanwhile , Lucero et al . present a system using personal mobile phones for social interaction [ 26 , 27 ] . Phones are able to sense the rela - tive positions of each other using radio signals . This system supports social interaction through touch and manual ges - ture across the different devices . JuxtaPinch implements the concept using a pinching technique to connect devices and extend the viewport across several devices [ 34 ] . All of these systems cannot be considered as fully modular screens as they require the use of distinct devices . In contrast , Seyed et al . propose a smartphone concept integrating two smaller phones for easy sharing and lending [ 48 ] . Each sub - phone can be configured to have a restricted access to the phone functionality allowing the user to lend a phone to strangers or friends and controlling their access . Even though the implementation was done with separate devices , the concept envisions the hardware to be fully integrated and thus could be considered a modular screen . Sifteo cubes In 2012 , Merrill et al . presented the Sifteo cubes : a set of cubes integrating a touchscreen and gesture recognition ( e . g . shake , tilt or flip ) [ 33 ] Sifteo was inspired from an earlier project : Siftables a tangible user interface composed of tiles capable of short range sensing and used for visualizing information and physically re - arranging it [ 32 ] . A range of application scenarios have been explored in earlier research . In CubeQuery , Sifteo cubes are used on a table top and physically re - arranged to compose database queries [ 23 ] . In [ 8 ] , Claes et al . use them to display and filter data on a tabletop screen . In [ 38 ] and [ 46 ] , cubes are re - arranged to manipulate a game character . In [ 15 ] and [ 9 ] , the Sifteo cubes have been used to illus - trate the concept of object - oriented programming in a course . Rangoni et al . use the cubes as tangible widgets ( e . g . stamps , pen ) to trigger a function on a table top display [ 41 ] . In [ 54 ] , Valdes et al . conducted a user - elicitation study to define a vocabulary of gestures to manipulate a data - set displayed on “large” screens . In Active Pathways , Sifteo cubes are used to create and edit biochemical reactions on a tabletop envi - ronment [ 31 ] . Finally , Sifteo cubes have also been used on a tabletop to simulate interaction between E . Coli and an environment [ 7 , 18 , 35 , 49 ] . The Sifteos concept is a good example of modular bricks working . However there is a key difference with PickCells : each cube acts as a single independent entity ; the cubes never form , and do not begin as , a single device and therefore do not encompass the idea of a tearable , reconfigurable device . Moreover , the previously explored scenarios of the devices have barely explored the inter - cube communication possi - bilities , and the original Sifteo paper mainly focused on the implementation of the technology . 3 PICKCELLS CONCEPT All the works presented to this point focus on one particular aspect of modular screen and inter - device interaction . Our aim is to unify them under a single design space and propose a device that can be used to implement existing work and more . PickCells is a physically reconfigurable device composed of cells . Cells are self - powered entities embedding a touch - screen . Cells can be physically connected to each other . When physically connected , cells form groups that are self aware of their 3D configuration ( i . e . how cells are arranged in space ) . To complete the definition , a group can be composed of one isolated cell or several physically connected cells . At any given time , a PickCells device , which is composed of one or several groups , knows its current configuration . If we use the most common form factor of our modern screen , we could describe each cell as cuboid . In this example , each cuboid cell has a bottom , top , east , west , south and north face . We could for instance connect two cubical cells by their east - ern and western faces respectively . In general , PickCells cells could take any form factor derived from a 2D shape that can be repeated in a lattice . For instance a cuboid is derived from a square shape and rectangular - , hexagonal - or triangular - prism are derived from a rectangle , hexagon or triangle shape , respectively . The PickCells concept is agnostic to the shape implemented . For clarity , we use the cuboid cell representation ( i . e . square derived ) to set a form factor in the rest of the paper . CHI 2019 Paper CHI 2019 , May 4 – 9 , 2019 , Glasgow , Scotland , UK Paper 273 Page 4 group cell Figure 2 : Illustration of the PickCells notions through a cuboid and a hexagonal - prism implementation . Cells are atomic elements ( here cubes and hexagonal - prism ) whereas groups are isolated or physically connected cells . To summarise , we distinguish 2 PickCells notions ( c . f . Fig - ure 2 ) : • Cell , which represents the atomic level of PickCells . It is an input / output hardware module , that can be physically connected to other cells . In this paper , im - plementation of cells may also be referred to as cubes . • Group , or group of cells , which represents one isolated cell or several physically connected cells . 4 WORKSHOP DESCRIPTION Given the range of possible reconfigurations , the PickCells concept offers a lot of possibilities . In order to ease its use and exploration by designers , we aim to formalize and clas - sify them . To ground and expand our understanding of the PickCells design space , we ran a workshop where we gave participants opportunities to create scenarios in a world where PickCells is fully implemented . The structure of the workshop is based on the dialogue - labs method from Lucero et al . [ 28 ] which facilitates participant generation of ideas by stimulating their creative thinking through a sequence of co - design activities . Participants In total , 11 participants ( 27 . 2 mean age , 10 . 7 std dev , 2 fe - males , 4 computer scientists , recruited at the local university campus ) and 11 HCI researchers were split into 3 sessions . The HCI researchers were from a range of backgrounds : 2 had extensive experience in shape change , 2 in co - design , 5 in hardware , 1 in touch interaction , 1 in design space for - malisation . Each had at least 4 years of experience in HCI . Each session lasted around 2 hours and was divided into the following segments . Segment : Introduction ( 15 minutes ) The facilitators welcomed the participants and explained the main purpose of the workshop in a comfortable and re - laxed atmosphere [ 28 ] enabling creativity . Participants were presented slides introducing the possible evolutions of multi - touch devices form factors from flexible screens ( Samsung 6 Task Material Everyday life Video Atomic scale Storyboard Pocket scale Lego Wall scale Maps Social Collage 1 2 3 4 5 Activity 1 3 5 2 4 Figure 3 : Overview of the room in which the workshop ses - sions took place . Activities ( tasks and materials ) and their location in the room are summarized . Flexible OLED , The Verge’s article ) to tearable screens . A few concepts such as Sifteo [ 33 ] , SurfaceConstellation [ 30 ] , Cubimorph [ 45 ] and [ 48 ] were given as examples of thinking beyond single fixed displays . Participants were then pre - sented the PickCells concept and told that the goal was to explore screen reconfigurations and generate ideas that could be feasible in a near future ( as opposed to science - fiction scenarios ) . Segment : Co - design rounds in pairs ( 3x15 minutes ) Participants were paired with HCI researchers . Each pair chose and participated in three out of five possible activi - ties ( described below ) . The activities were designed to help participants think of new ideas , scenarios or concepts . Ideas came from the participants and HCI researchers acted as catalysts : they kept pushing the reasoning of the participant by asking questions . HCI researchers also helped by taking a step back and adapting science - fiction ideas into today or near - future realms of possibilities . The activities fostered creativity by drawing on different thinking and doing skills . Each activity was a combination of a task and materials , and each combination was meant to investigate inputs and outputs at different scales from tiny and individual to large and social interactions . Figure 3 summarizes the activities and their location in the room . The activities were presented and described as follows : • Discussing our everyday life : if you have one / several tablet - size PickCells device ( s ) , what use of it / them would you have ? To feed your discussion , you will find a short video compiling various projects 1 similarly exploring a novel idea . This material is meant to be a starting point for a discussion over the concept of PickCells . 1 The projects were : Time Square Coca - Cola 3D screen advert ; Cubimorph [ 45 ] ; Mozilla Seabird concept ; Tilt displays [ 1 ] ; SurfaceConstellation [ 30 ] ; lendable phones [ 48 ] ; Samsung Flexible OLED ; EXHI - bit [ 36 ] and inFORM [ 14 ] . CHI 2019 Paper CHI 2019 , May 4 – 9 , 2019 , Glasgow , Scotland , UK Paper 273 Page 5 • Storyboarding at the atomic scale : if you have one / several smart - watch - size PickCells device ( s ) , what use of it / them would you have ? To support your reflection , we spread out sticky notes on the table along with scis - sors , pen , tape and blu tack . In front of you , you will find a large white - board with magnets along with flash cards on which human , tables and everyday objects shapes have been ( simply ) drawn . White - board mark - ers are also available . Use the material to storyboard the use of such devices and how they would be worn . • Reshaping at the pocket scale : if you have one / several phone - size PickCells device ( s ) , what use of it / them would you have ? To support your reflexion , you will find a set of Lego ® bricks on the table with different sizes and colors . Use and play with the Lego ® bricks like you would fiddle around with your phone in order to manipulate a low fidelity prototype of the PickCells concept . • Extending at the wall scale : if you have one / several wall - size PickCells device ( s ) , what use of it / them would you have ? To inspire situations where you could in - teract or use a wall size display , you will find maps on which locations have been pinned such as Heathrow , Piccadilly Circus , local University , Highways and oth - ers . Feel free to explore the map to find a location that would inspire your use of the PickCells concept . During this activity round , your pair has to pick and explore at least four different locations and write or draw a scenario . • Social interactions in inspiring places : if you have one / several PickCells device ( s ) while out and about with others , what use of it / them would you have ? To inspire social situations where you could use , interact , share or split devices , you will find a collection of inspiring images . This material is meant to be a starting point for reflect - ing on the concept of PickCells using the first idea that comes to your mind while looking at the pictures . This activity should enable a discussion between the pair members on how the device could be used if part of one or several pictures 2 . Segment : Idea sharing & Group co - design ( 45 minutes ) After a five minutes coffee break , all the participants gathered as a single group . Taking turns , each pair shared an idea generated while going through the activities with the group . At any time , the group was invited to react and build upon the idea being presented . The facilitators took notes on sticky notes and displayed them on a large white board to keep track of the exposed / explored ideas and the activity from 2 We used 259 pictures from the galleries of unsplash . com . which they were initiated . The pairs took turns until the 45 minutes were elapsed . In the dialogue - lab method , as in Google Design Sprint [ 22 ] , the co - design segment is followed by a voting segment . However , we decided not to include this part in our design space reflection . Since our goal was to build a design space covering all the use cases of PickCells , we consider all the participants’ ideas . 5 RESULTS : USE CASE SCENARIOS We present the use case scenarios derived from the ideas presented by the participants during the workshop . We gath - ered participants’ ideas that were describing the same mech - anisms , but using different contexts of use , under a single scenario . Finally for clarity of presentation , we grouped them thematically . Modular customization Workspace customisation : Alice uses PickCells to customize the layout of her workspace by reorganising the different cells . Each of her cells is tied to functionalities . She uses it to reorganise the keys of her keyboard , change the position of the interactive widgets such as knobs and sliders and reorganise her video editing and sound mixing console . Minimalism : Bob uses PickCells to select and discard an array of functionalities . To have an uninterrupted reading session at the park , he leaves the social media applications at home . When going for a run , he only takes the step counter . Modular device : Eve uses PickCells to upgrade or delete certain features of her device . She swaps between different camera cells and battery cells to match her immediate need . The idea is similar to the Phonebloks vision ( implemented by the Project Ara or the Fairphone 2 ) ) where hardware modules could be bought separately . Peripheral controls Physical widgets : Michael uses PickCells to define custom controls to interact on his main group of cells by creating physical switches and slider . He also changes the shape of his device to better interact with his applications For instance when playing video games , he shapes his device as a video game controller ( figure 1 - d ) . Break - off controls : Emily uses PickCells to create separate controls interacting with her main group of cells . When watching a video , she creates a remote control to pause and resume her video ( figure 1 - b ) . She also creates yes / no voting cells that she distributes in her class to conduct live surveys with her students . Smarthome controls : Matthew uses PickCells to create dedicated cells controlling his smarthome appliances . He set one cell dedicated to switch - on / - off and control the colour of his Philips Hue light bulb ( figure 1 - e ) . CHI 2019 Paper CHI 2019 , May 4 – 9 , 2019 , Glasgow , Scotland , UK Paper 273 Page 6 Remote sensors : Emma uses PickCells to create remote sensors that transmit data to her main group of cells . For instance she detached her camera cell to spy on her dog while away from home . She also uses cells as GPS trackers to track her suitcases while travelling . When arriving at the airport she gathers flight information by using a cell to harvest information at a dedicated airport stand . Finally when out with friends , she distributes cells as walkie - talkies so they can communicate directly with her when lost in a crowd . Security Tangible password : Ethan uses PickCells to lock and unlock his phone by placing cells at a very specific locations . He sets tangible passwords where the physical configuration of a group of cells acts as a combination lock ( figure 1 - c ) . He also uses this system to stop his alarm clock and avoid snoozing . In this case he has to match a 3D shape . Security key : Sarah uses PickCells to grant permission to a digital content or an application such as her email account . She creates tangible security keys embodied by cells . These cells have to be connected to a main group of cells to grant or deny the permission . Some of her security keys are even composed of several cells that have to match a particular shape in the manner of the previously presented tangible password . Data management Data visualisation : Daniel uses PickCells to dynamically visualise data . He sets a main group of cells as his graph canvas on which data is plotted . He then uses secondary cells to change the axis , split and filter the data on the fly . Data editing : Hannah uses PickCells to dynamically edit data . She edits her video montage by moving timeline cells tied to sequences around . Similarly , when in a meeting with her architect colleagues , she modifies a city plan on the fly by swapping cells to assess how her modifications affect the traffic and the shadows across the squares , streets and parks . Trip planner : Andrew and Julie use PickCells to plan their trip in Europe . They use cells to represent Points Of Interests ( e . g . cities , museums ) . Each of them uses their main group of cells to navigate a map and visualise the current information of the trip ( e . g . distance , time , cost ) . They then snap - off cells tied to POIs to modify their trip outline represented by a common group of cells . They can add , remove or reorganise the cells within the common group . Tracking shared resource : Ashley and her colleagues use PickCells to track their shared resources . She sets a cell to represent a quantity and a set of cells to represent a list of items : in the first case to track now much money they have in their coffee kitty ; and in the second , the different tasks of the sales team . Each of them can be accessed and updated ( e . g . recharge or withdraw from the kitty and add or tick - off items ) by her co - workers’ PickCells device . Tangible reminders : Nicholas uses PickCells to create physical reminders and bookmarks , like using sticky notes . When doing research on his computer he sets cells to point directly to a web page and PDF section . He then connects these cells in his different PickCells devices to access the content later . Physicalization of digital content Repurposable resource : Olivia uses PickCells with her organ - isation to distribute flyers stored in cells . Her customers can access the digital content on their own PickCells device and re - purpose them afterwards to integrate them as their own cell . Souvenirs : William uses PickCells as tangible souvenirs . When playing a video game he is regularly awarded trophies and rare game items that he encapsulates in cells to com - plete his collection . Sometimes , he connects them back to his PickCells device to admire his achievement and gives the souvenirs that he has in multiple instances to his friends . He also stores pictures to expose them or gift them like he did with Polaroid ® prints . Uniqueness : Elizabeth uses PickCells to keep track of the number of instances of a digital data she shares . Whether she stores limited copies of pictures to gift them to friends or grant a one time access to a top - up virtual credit card to her children so they can shop in the mall , she controls access to her data . She started using this system after she bought a digital copy of a movie that she stored in a cell on an online shop . This Digital Rights Management of media content allowed her to lend that movie to friends and retrieve the tangible proxy she had when sharing physical DVDs . Viewport Screen perspectives : Tyler and her room - mates from all around the world use PickCells to watch movies . They set different groups of cells on which they display the movie with differ - ent subtitle options . Not only does this accommodate their respective level of English but also their different viewpoints . They also set the groups of cells so they can map and watch a 360 ◦ video . Screen sharing : Amy uses PickCells to share her screen with her friends . Since they are planning to rent a flat alto - gether , she snaps off part of her screen so they can all see the ads at the same time ( figure 1 - f ) . They also often share screens to co - create music playlists on Spotify ) . As can be seen , some of the scenarios see cells move from one person to another . One of the features of the PickCells concept is to challenge the notion of what in a device is personal with cells flowing freely over time and space . This CHI 2019 Paper CHI 2019 , May 4 – 9 , 2019 , Glasgow , Scotland , UK Paper 273 Page 7 will of course require users to “replace” cells that they donate or lend to others and this assumes a future where cells are cheaply and easily available , as today’s Lego ® bricks or sticky notes are . 6 DESIGN SPACE In this section we present a design space for the PickCells concept . It is derived and informed from our analysis of the workshop outcomes ( i . e . use case scenarios ) and the discussion that was carried out during the idea sharing & group co - design segment . PickCells allows for a free flow of cells in the 3D . Groups can be reconfigured : they can be split apart and / or connected to other cells or groups of cells . They can also form their own separate groups . All these flows give PickCells a rich array of possibilities . Extending the notion of free flows , cells could not only be re - located within one’s own set of groups but also within someone else’s set of groups . As cells can be unified , no matter the owner , the PickCells concept disrupts the notion of a single personal device . To ensure a comprehensive mental model for users , we define a design space with two axes capturing two core con - cepts : the physical configuration of the cells in use and the hierarchy between the cells . The first axis , Arrangement , describes the physical configuration of cells while in use . Using an analogy with USB sticks , Arrangement would describe where a USB stick is plugged in during its period of use , independently of whom owns the stick . The second axis , Hierarchy , describes which cell or group of cells is using the resources of a cell or a group of cells . To continue with the USB stick analogy , Hierarchy would describe which computer is using the auxiliary storage provided by the stick . This design space is inherently tied to the modular inter - device interaction paradigm , describing both from where and to whom cells communicate . The chosen axes are not the only ones that could have been used , however they pro - vide a new perspective not yet explored by the literature as well as adding a descriptive power to differentiate existing works . We are also careful not to describe it from a function or usage point of view , but rather having a classification based on intrinsic cells characteristics . In the following , we detail both axes . Both of them are defined from the point of view of the cells composing a group being manipulated to match the configuration required for a given application . Arrangement defines a set which describes the rele - vance of cell positioning such as : the 3D location of a cell and the 3D form factor of a group of cells . • Fixed : the location of each cell within a group or at - tached to another group conveys a semantic . Changing the location of one or several cells changes the over - all semantic . For instance , changing the position of the cells in the Tangible password scenario , dictates whether the password is correct or not . • Relative : the location of each cell within a group or attached to another group conveys a semantic tied to some of its neighbouring cells . Changing the loca - tion of one or several cells only changes the overall semantic if the relative positioning semantically tied cells is changed . For instance , in the Minimalism sce - nario , emails are accessible only to the group of cells physically connected to the communication cell . • FormFactor : the group form factor conveys a seman - tic . Changing the location of one or several cells only changes the overall semantic if the form factor is af - fected . For instance , in the Screen perspectives scenario , the number of different versions of a content available depends directly on the number screen groups avail - able . However , cells within a group can be swapped without affecting the content . • NotRelevant : each cell conveys a semantic inde - pendently of its location within a group . Changing the location of one or several cells does not affect the over - all semantic . For instance , in the Workspace customisa - tion scenario , the location of the cells that composed a keyboard can be completely re - arranged . Physically connected or not , the whole group of cells would still act as a keyboard . Hierarchy defines the relationship between cells or group of cells : it introduces a notion of resources depen - dency . • Standalone : is a cell or group of cells functioning independently . For instance , in the Data Visualisation scenario , all the cells work together and form an inde - pendent group focused on displaying data . • Satellite : is a cell or group of cells functioning depen - dent on a standalone cell or standalone group of cells . They cannot function without a standalone cell ( s ) . We define two different types of satellite : OriginalSatel - lite and BorrowedSatellite . OriginalSatellite : a satellite cell ( s ) which stays synchronised to its initial standalone cell ( s ) in order to function . Resources can only be used by the initial standalone . For instance , in the Remote sensor scenario , a cell used as a GPS tracker refers its position only to its standalone . BorrowedSatellite : a satellite cell ( s ) which can be synchronised to any standalone cell ( s ) in order to function . Resources can be used by any standalone . For instance , in the Uniqueness scenario , a cell representing a media content enables the access to the content to any standalone physically connected to it . CHI 2019 Paper CHI 2019 , May 4 – 9 , 2019 , Glasgow , Scotland , UK Paper 273 Page 8 The notions of Hierarchy is inherently tied to the dif - ferent context of use but also to the notion of ownership . For instance , a cell once labelled BorrowedSatellite in a particular context , could become part of its host Stan - dalone if the owners agreed on an ownership transfer , and therefore become a OriginalSatellite . For instance , a cell representing a unique instance of movie would be labelled BorrowedSatellite if lent but OriginalSatelliteif gifted . 7 DESIGN SPACE VALIDATION Describing the array of interaction possibilities enabled by PickCells , or more generally the modular inter - device con - cepts , could be tackled through different angles . Showing the completeness of such a design space is arguably unsolv - able . However , we have tackled this by defining two axis characterising unique aspects : capturing the possible physi - cal configurations as well as the semantics for the tangible exchanges afforded by PickCells . Describing the physical configurations ( i . e . Arrangement axis ) is an obvious ap - proach . As a matter fact , it is well explored by the related work as shown in the following section . However , the Hier - archy axis is a novel approach to take , articulating spaces that were not yet explored . This axis echoed concerns from the workshop participants who were wondering how cells would be able to work on different devices . As the approach taken by Delamare et al . [ 11 ] , we aim to validate our design space by showing its descriptive power ( i . e . the ability to describe a significant range of existing work [ 4 ] ) classifying the related work , and its generative power ( i . e . the ability to help create new applications [ 4 ] ) highlighting empty areas of the design space , later populated with our own scenarios . Descriptive power To illustrate the descriptive power of our design space , we position the following representative systems of the related work . Lendable phone [ 48 ] , DataTiles [ 42 ] and Better together [ 43 ] are three examples where Arrangement are NotRelevant . In the lendable phone system , all phones once set , including the auxiliary phones , work independently of their position in 3D space . In a similar way Better Together phones work independently once they start running the application . In DataTiles , each tile carries on its specific task ( e . g . weather map specific tile , time controller specific tile ) independently of the layout . Then as we look at Hierarchy DataTiles and Better Together exhibit only Standalone behaviour . The group of screens works as a single - goal focused independent group . In Better Together , phones are also Standalone them - selves since each can be used as a normal phone and break off from the application . In contrast , the lendable phone partly differs along the Hierarchy axis : the auxiliary phones are OriginalSatellite that are continuously synchronised and controlled by the primary phone ( e . g . it monitors and can shut down their activities ) which a Standalone by defini - tion is not . Other works are based on form factor manipulations and therefore classified as FormFactor . CubiMorph [ 45 ] and EXHI - bit [ 36 ] are both modular implementations that offer functional [ 45 ] or output [ 36 ] changes based on the shapes they are morphed into . They both exhibit Standalone be - haviours as Cubimorph has no removable element and EXHI - bit always works as a single - goal focused device . In addition , EXHI - bit also demonstrates a OriginalSatellite scenario using a separate controller to alter the visualisation of the screen it was broken from . Sifteos [ 33 ] , JuxtaPinch [ 34 ] , PaperTab [ 52 ] , Doppio [ 47 ] and the active reading system in [ 5 ] are classified as Rela - tive , each of their component adapting their behaviour in function of their direct vicinity . In Sifteos , cubes can transfer information to the adjacent cubes . In JuxtaPinch , combined phones extend the viewport in function of their position . In PaperTab , screens can transfer information and extend the viewport . In Doppio , the applications and actions depend on the secondary screen position . In [ 5 ] , the visualisation of the document updates depending on the position of the trans - parent sheet . However their Hierarchy differ slightly . In the Sifteo system , all the cubes form a group that acts as its own single purpose entity ( i . e . Standalone ) . PaperTab is simi - larly a confined system and by definition JuxtaPinch requires separate devices which all act as their own Standalone . In [ 5 ] , the transparent sheet acts as a OriginalSatellite since the sheet only works with and on the tablet , which acts as a Standalone by definition . Similarly in Doppio , the secondary screen acts as a OriginalSatellite since it only works with and around the primary screen acting as a Standalone . Finally , SurfaceConstellations [ 30 ] makes use of a Fixed Ar - rangement . In this system , once the screen setup has been completed , all the screens are meant to remain at the same position using the 3D printed stands , since they represent a virtual representation of the screen layout . However , it is ar - guable that the prototype can be broken apart and therefore the screens would have a NotRelevant behaviour . We chose to consider the concept and not the implementation . As for the Hierarchy axis , SurfaceConstellations is a Standalone as all screens form a group which acts as a single - goal fo - cused independent group . As for Better Together , devices are also Standalone themselves since each can be used as a normal device and break off from the application . Even though the Phonebloks project is not per se a modu - lar screen , it is a good example of a modular system in which the different components acts as BorrowedSatellite on any Standalone phone ( i . e . the phone skeleton ) . In most of CHI 2019 Paper CHI 2019 , May 4 – 9 , 2019 , Glasgow , Scotland , UK Paper 273 Page 9 A RR A N G E M E N T N O T R E L EV A N T F O R M F A C T O R R E L A T I VE F I XE D H IERARCHY S TANDALONE O RIGINAL S ATELLITE B ORROWED S ATELLITE EXHI - Bit [ 36 ] Data Editing Minimalism DataTiles [ 42 ] Lendable Phone [ 48 ] Project Ara SurfaceConstellation [ 30 ] Physical widgets Tangible password Break - off control Security key Data Visualisation JuxtaPinch [ 34 ] Sifteo [ 33 ] ActiveReading [ 5 ] Doppio [ 47 ] Screen perspective Cubimorph [ 45 ] BetterTogether [ 43 ] Smartphone Workspace customization Smarthome control Remote sensors Sharing screens Crowd contribution Modular device Security key Uniqueness Repurposable resources Tangible reminders Trip planner Tracking shared resources Souvenirs PaperTab [ 52 ] Figure 4 : Visual representation of the PickCells design space . The blue rectangular tags represent the existing works used in the descriptive power section . The white and grey rectangular tags represent the use case scenarios from the workshop ( the grey ones indicate scenarios in multiple areas ) . The rounded rectangle represent the Crowd contribution described in the end of the generative power section . the implementations , the components can be added and at - tached on different defined slots which makes it a Relative device . Generative power In figure 4 , we present the Arrangement and Hierarchy axis of the design space . From the previous section , we saw that the related work spans across the different region of the Arrangement axis confirming the descriptive power of our design space . However , they are also grouped on the Standalone region of the Hierarchy axis which confirm the existence of unexplored region in the design space con - firming its generative power . For completeness , we populate figure 4 with the use case scenarios derived from our work - shop sessions . After placing the scenarios from the workshop and from the related work , only one area of the design space was left empty : FormFactor & BorrowedSatellite . To populate this area , we came up with different examples adapted from outline ideas mentioned in the workshop and summarize them in the following scenario . All seemed to be part of the realm of art installation . Crowd contribution : Peter uses PickCells to start a collec - tive creative construction . He places a cell in the middle of a dedicated room in a museum . On the cell can be seen a small portion of an image . He then observes the crowd who donates or lends cells to expand the viewport and display even more of the content . It is the first time he sets this art installation in a museum . He used to do it just for himself and his friends at weddings or house - warming parties . 8 DISCUSSION With the PickCells concept and the design space , we aimed at unifying the different use of modular devices under a sin - gle space using a single device . Our objective is to allow designers and researchers to freely combine ideas derived from multiple existing works , but also to explore new ways of using modular devices . Another goal was to challenge and disrupt the notion of the personal device . Cells can become their self contained device , be loaned and even given to be part of different devices . For designers that want to imple - ment those new behaviours , reflecting on cells access might be necessary . Similar to file system rights on classical operat - ing systems , embedding ownership and life - span properties might come handy . Ownership could be restricted ( i . e . cells would only perform the function they were assigned ) or un - restricted ( i . e . cells would perform the function they were assigned but could also be reprogrammed by any host de - vice ) , and life - span could be limited ( i . e . function would be available for a certain amount of time or a certain number of uses ) . Using our design space , we reflected on existing modu - lar systems . This descriptive use of the design space shows that previous prototypes have covered isolated areas of the wider possibilities . This partitioning also shows currently under explored areas which we started to examine with the ideas generated by our workshop participants . Furthermore it highlights the versatility of the PickCells concept , as the whole design space could be covered by a single prototype . However , we do not claim that PickCells is the only concept that could achieve such a wide cover . It is interesting to note that apart from modular phone projects such as the Phonebloks vision , the BorrowedSatel - lite area of the design space , and to some extent the Fixed area , have been barely explored and thus might arguably , CHI 2019 Paper CHI 2019 , May 4 – 9 , 2019 , Glasgow , Scotland , UK Paper 273 Page 10 when tackled by designers , open up reflection on compelling innovative concepts . Furthermore , as shown in the design space validation section , the only area not explored by the participants was the i . e . BorrowedSatellite and FormFac - tor . We showed how by thinking about this unpopulated segment of the design space , yielded an atypical use case related to the realm of art installation . Evaluative power In [ 4 ] , Beaudouin - Lafon describes a third power of an inter - action model : the evaluative power ( i . e . the ability to help assess multiple design alternatives ) . However , since our im - plementation of PickCells is the only one exploring this design space , we cannot yet assess the evaluative power of our design space . All the documentation and sources to replicate our pro - totype are open - source and can be found at the following Github page : github . com / FITLab - Swansea / PickCells . Each cell is a cube made of a 3D printed case and integrates a £30 smartwatch . The smartwatch embeds a touch sensitive display and runs an android 4 . 4 OS , which can run our cus - tom application . A lever switch and a magnet are encased in each cube’s side . An Arduino board , placed inside the cube , streams the switches change of states to the watch via a Bluetooth module . Each Android application communicates with a server running on a external computer which purpose is to keep track of the current configuration and touch events . Cubes can be physically connected using the magnets on a 2D plane . When attached or detached , the changes of the switch states update the cubes configuration tracked by the server . A C + + application running on an external computer , inter - prets all the information gathered and relayed by the server and determines the different interactions and images to dis - play on the different cubes . Once determined , the application updates the display of each cube via the server . Since Sifteo is a discontinued product , we needed to bring a new solution and hence provide an open - source imple - mentation that can support a variety of scenarios fitting the presented design space . Compared to Sifteos , small but key differences can be noted : multiple PickCells can become a whole through magnetic snapping ; cells work as part of a whole device and not independently ; work on Sifteos does not explore the BorrowedSatellite space . We present this cuboid cell implementation of PickCells ( figure 5 ) to provide an initial tool for rapid prototyping and evaluation of use case scenarios and to encourage other re - searchers to explore alternative designs . The design of a fully functioning prototype will necessarily be affected by hardware constraints . However , we caution designers and developers against only considering hardware Figure 5 : Cuboid cell implementation of PickCells . constrains when choosing cell sizes . Sizes should also be defined with user experience in mind . Choosing cells with a small form factor might offer a lot of interaction possibilities , but as a result the great number of physical manipulations and reconfiguration could confuse the user on their role if the system does not include good affordances ( e . g . which cell to break - off to disable social media applications ) . On the contrary , choosing cells too big might lead to a prototype that will not be as versatile and could even become cumbersome . Another possibility to consider , might be to explore the use of multiple shapes ( e . g . using cube - cells alongside line - shape cells or L - shape cells ) . For instance , one could envision the use of a line - cell as a standalone phone and smaller cube - cells as side cells defining the current use . To go even further , reflecting on the shape of the cells might also mean exploring how the lattice cells interlock with each other . Instead of reasoning in 2D as we did , one could imagine the use of 3D lattices , for instance . Limitations and future work Our goal during the workshop sessions was to bring our par - ticipants into a creative mindset hence the the dialogue - labs method . Using this method , the resulting ideas are tightly coupled to the activities . Designing diverse enough activities is therefore important as our design space was partly in - formed by the scenarios created by our participants ( i . e . our chosen dimensions reflect their main focus ) . One could argue that another group could have focused on different topics , leading to a new axis . An interesting future work would be to re - run the workshop with different groups and / or differ - ent activities , but also with the presentation of the current design space to further explore the empty areas ( or cross areas ) . Our hardware implementation of the concept is an explo - ration prototype which we use to illustrate some possible sce - narios mapped to the PickCells design space . It should not be seen as a final , complete implementation but rather as an initial example which future iterations can draw inspiration from . For instance , our prototype lacks z - axis connections and relies on external hardware to track its configuration . CHI 2019 Paper CHI 2019 , May 4 – 9 , 2019 , Glasgow , Scotland , UK Paper 273 Page 11 It is , though , simple enough for researchers to reproduce it and build upon it . Another limitation might include the hardware size , cost and efficiency . Designing a prototype that can be small , cheap and battery efficient might not yet be feasible with current technologies . Although smartwatches as used in our pro - totype seem to be good candidate , they remain expensive when multiplying the number of cells . As a comparison , we also tailor - made 6 cube - cells at a total cost of around £300 including all the components . Research , such as [ 50 ] which helps reduce the cost of screens , is therefore still needed to envision the concept of PickCells at large scale . Another so - lution , might also be to iterate on the hardware architecture of the concept . For example , one could envision cells with dif - ferent computational power differentiating standalone and satellite cells . Some context of use might include the use of sensors , such as cameras , compasses or fingerprint readers . Specializing cells would for instance help reduce the battery consumption of individual cells . 9 CONCLUSION In this paper we proposed PickCells , a fully re - configurable device concept composed of cells . It explores physical re - configuration , functional re - configuration and easy inter - device connectivity to break the mould of rigid screens , chal - lenging and disrupting the notion of personal device . Along with the concept we provided an open - source implementa - tion for quick scenario prototyping . We formalized the use of PickCells in a design space with 2 axis describing the physical configuration of the cells in use and the hierarchy between the cells . We synthesised this design space from scenarios crafted during a series of co - design activities – involving HCI experts and potential end - users of such sys - tems – following the dialogue - labs method . We validated the proposed design space by demonstrating its descriptive and generative powers . Both PickCells and its design space are meant to unify uses of modular devices under a single space using a single device , to freely combine ideas derived from multiple existing works , and explore new scenarios . While the implementation of this new concept will need time to mature , it outlines the shape of a new design in an effort to revitalize innovation on touchscreens . 10 ACKNOWLEDGMENT This work was supported by the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council award number EP / N013948 / 1 and EPSRC EP / P004342 / 1 . We also thank Ben Jones for his help on the hardware . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Jason Alexander , Andrés Lucero , and Sriram Subramanian . 2012 . Tilt Displays : Designing Display Surfaces with Multi - axis Tilting and Ac - tuation . In Proceedings of the 14th International Conference on Human - computer Interaction with Mobile Devices and Services ( MobileHCI ’12 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 161 – 170 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2371574 . 2371600 [ 2 ] Ahmed Sabbir Arif , Brien East , Sean DeLong , Roozbeh Manshaei , Apurva Gupta , Manasvi Lalwani , and Ali Mazalek . 2017 . Extending the Design Space of Tangible Objects via Low - Resolution Edge Displays . In Proceedings of the Eleventh International Conference on Tangible , Embedded , and Embodied Interaction ( TEI ’17 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 481 – 488 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3024969 . 3025078 [ 3 ] Ahmed Sabbir Arif , Roozbeh Manshaei , Sean Delong , Brien East , Matthew Kyan , and Ali Mazalek . 2016 . Sparse Tangibles : Collaborative Exploration of Gene Networks Using Active Tangibles and Interactive Tabletops . In Proceedings of the TEI ’16 : Tenth International Conference on Tangible , Embedded , and Embodied Interaction ( TEI ’16 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 287 – 295 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2839462 . 2839500 [ 4 ] Michel Beaudouin - Lafon . 2004 . Designing Interaction , Not Interfaces . In Proceedings of the Working Conference on Advanced Visual Interfaces ( AVI ’04 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 15 – 22 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 989863 . 989865 [ 5 ] Andrea Bianchi , So - Ryang Ban , and Ian Oakley . 2015 . Designing a Physical Aid to Support Active Reading on Tablets . In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’15 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 699 – 708 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2702123 . 2702303 [ 6 ] Liwei Chan , Stefanie Müller , Anne Roudaut , and Patrick Baudisch . 2012 . CapStones and ZebraWidgets : Sensing Stacks of Building Blocks , Dials and Sliders on Capacitive Touch Screens . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’12 ) . ACM , NewYork , NY , USA , 2189 – 2192 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2207676 . 2208371 [ 7 ] KimberlyChang , WendyXu , NicoleFrancisco , ConsueloValdes , Robert Kincaid , and Orit Shaer . 2012 . SynFlo : An Interactive Installation Introducing Synthetic Biology Concepts . In Proceedings of the 2012 ACM International Conference on Interactive Tabletops and Surfaces ( ITS ’12 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 303 – 306 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2396636 . 2396685 [ 8 ] Sandy Claes , Jorgos Coenen , Karin Slegers , and Andrew Vande Mo - ere . 2015 . Design Implications of Casual Health Visualization on Tangible Displays . In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI EA ’15 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 1839 – 1844 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2702613 . 2732830 [ 9 ] José María Rodríguez Corral , Antón Civit Balcells , Arturo Morgado Estévez , Gabriel Jiménez Moreno , and María José Ferreiro Ramos . 2014 . A game - based approach to the teaching of object - oriented programming languages . Computers & Education 73 ( 2014 ) , 83 – 92 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . compedu . 2013 . 12 . 013 [ 10 ] David Dearman , Richard Guy , and Khai Truong . 2012 . Determining the Orientation of Proximate Mobile Devices Using Their Back Facing Camera . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’12 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 2231 – 2234 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2207676 . 2208377 [ 11 ] William Delamare , Céline Coutrix , and Laurence Nigay . 2015 . De - signing Guiding Systems for Gesture - based Interaction . In Proceed - ings of the 7th ACM SIGCHI Symposium on Engineering Interactive Computing Systems ( EICS ’15 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 44 – 53 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2774225 . 2774847 [ 12 ] Brien East , Sean DeLong , Roozbeh Manshaei , Ahmed Arif , and Ali Mazalek . 2016 . Actibles : Open Source Active Tangibles . In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM International Conference on Interactive Surfaces and CHI 2019 Paper CHI 2019 , May 4 – 9 , 2019 , Glasgow , Scotland , UK Paper 273 Page 12 Spaces ( ISS ’16 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 469 – 472 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2992154 . 2996874 [ 13 ] George W Fitzmaurice , Hiroshi Ishii , and William AS Buxton . 1995 . Bricks : laying the foundations for graspable user interfaces . In Proceed - ings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems . ACM Press / Addison - Wesley Publishing Co . , 442 – 449 . [ 14 ] Sean Follmer , Daniel Leithinger , Alex Olwal , Akimitsu Hogge , and Hiroshi Ishii . 2013 . inFORM : Dynamic Physical Affordances and Constraints Through Shape and Object Actuation . In Proceedings of the 26th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology ( UIST ’13 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 417 – 426 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2501988 . 2502032 [ 15 ] Mark Goadrich . 2014 . Incorporating Tangible Computing Devices into CS1 . J . Comput . Sci . Coll . 29 , 5 ( May 2014 ) , 23 – 31 . http : / / dl . acm . org / citation . cfm ? id = 2600623 . 2600627 [ 16 ] Antonio Gomes , Lahiru Lakmal Priyadarshana , Aaron Visser , Juan Pablo Carrascal , and Roel Vertegaal . 2018 . MagicScroll : A Rol - lable Display Device with Flexible Screen Real Estate and Gestural Input . In Proceedings of the 20th International Conference on Human - Computer Interaction with Mobile Devices and Services ( MobileHCI ’18 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 10 . http : / / www . hml . queensu . ca / s / MagicScrollWand - MobileHCI2018 - Final - CRC - v60 - 8kr3 . pdf [ 17 ] Matthew G . Gorbet , Maggie Orth , and Hiroshi Ishii . 1998 . Triangles : Tangible Interface for Manipulation and Exploration of Digital Infor - mation Topography . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’98 ) . ACM Press / Addison - Wesley Publishing Co . , New York , NY , USA , 49 – 56 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 274644 . 274652 [ 18 ] Casey Grote , Evan Segreto , Johanna Okerlund , Robert Kincaid , and Orit Shaer . 2015 . Eugenie : Multi - Touch and Tangible Interaction for Bio - Design . In Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Tangible , Embedded , and Embodied Interaction ( TEI ’15 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 217 – 224 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2677199 . 2680605 [ 19 ] Peter Hamilton and Daniel J . Wigdor . 2014 . Conductor : Enabling and Understanding Cross - device Interaction . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’14 ) . ACM , NewYork , NY , USA , 2773 – 2782 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2556288 . 2557170 [ 20 ] Hiroshi Ishii , Dávid Lakatos , Leonardo Bonanni , and Jean - Baptiste Labrune . 2012 . Radical Atoms : Beyond Tangible Bits , Toward Trans - formable Materials . interactions 19 , 1 ( Jan . 2012 ) , 38 – 51 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2065327 . 2065337 [ 21 ] Hiroshi Ishii and Brygg Ullmer . 1997 . Tangible Bits : Towards Seamless Interfaces Between People , Bits and Atoms . In Proceedings of the ACM SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’97 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 234 – 241 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 258549 . 258715 [ 22 ] J . Knapp , J . Zeratsky , and B . Kowitz . 2016 . Sprint : How to Solve Big Problems and Test New Ideas in Just Five Days . Simon & Schuster . https : / / books . google . fi / books ? id = rV0JCgAAQBAJ [ 23 ] Ricardo Langner , Anton Augsburg , and Raimund Dachselt . 2014 . Cube - Query : Tangible Interface for Creating and Manipulating Database Queries . In Proceedings of the Ninth ACM International Conference on Interactive Tabletops and Surfaces ( ITS ’14 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 423 – 426 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2669485 . 2669526 [ 24 ] Mathieu Le Goc , Lawrence H . Kim , Ali Parsaei , Jean - Daniel Fekete , Pierre Dragicevic , and Sean Follmer . 2016 . Zooids : Building Blocks for Swarm User Interfaces . In Proceedings of the 29th Annual Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology ( UIST ’16 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 97 – 109 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2984511 . 2984547 [ 25 ] Ming Li and Leif Kobbelt . 2012 . Dynamic Tiling Display : Building an Interactive Display Surface Using Multiple Mobile Devices . In Pro - ceedings of the 11th International Conference on Mobile and Ubiquitous Multimedia ( MUM ’12 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , Article 24 , 4 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2406367 . 2406397 [ 26 ] Andrés Lucero , Jussi Holopainen , and Tero Jokela . 2011 . Pass - them - around : Collaborative Use of Mobile Phones for Photo Sharing . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’11 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 1787 – 1796 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1978942 . 1979201 [ 27 ] Andrés Lucero , Jaakko Keränen , and Tero Jokela . 2010 . Social and Spatial Interactions : Shared Co - located Mobile Phone Use . In CHI ’10 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI EA ’10 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 3223 – 3228 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1753846 . 1753962 [ 28 ] Andrés Lucero , Kirsikka Vaajakallio , and Peter Dalsgaard . 2012 . The dialogue - labs method : process , space and materials as struc - turing elements to spark dialogue in co - design events . CoDesign 8 , 1 ( 2012 ) , 1 – 23 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 15710882 . 2011 . 609888 arXiv : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 15710882 . 2011 . 609888 [ 29 ] Roozbeh Manshaei , Nauman Baig , Sean DeLong , Shahin Khayyer , Brien East , and Ali Mazalek . 2016 . Exploring Genetic Mutations on Mitochondrial DNA Cancer Data with Interactive Tabletop and Active Tangibles . In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM International Conference on Interactive Surfaces and Spaces ( ISS ’16 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 461 – 464 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2992154 . 2996873 [ 30 ] NicolaiMarquardt , FrederikBrudy , CanLiu , BenBengler , andChristian Holz . 2018 . SurfaceConstellations : A Modular Hardware Platform for Ad - Hoc Reconfigurable Cross - Device Workspaces . In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’18 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , Article 354 , 14 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3173574 . 3173928 [ 31 ] Meghna Mehta , Ahmed Sabbir Arif , Apurva Gupta , Sean DeLong , Roozbeh Manshaei , Graceline Williams , Manasvi Lalwani , Sanjay Chandrasekharan , and Ali Mazalek . 2016 . Active Pathways : Using Active Tangibles and Interactive Tabletops for Collaborative Modeling in Systems Biology . In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM International Con - ference on Interactive Surfaces and Spaces ( ISS ’16 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 129 – 138 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2992154 . 2992176 [ 32 ] David Merrill , Jeevan Kalanithi , and Pattie Maes . 2007 . Siftables : To - wards Sensor Network User Interfaces . In Proceedings of the 1st Interna - tional Conference on Tangible and Embedded Interaction ( TEI ’07 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 75 – 78 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1226969 . 1226984 [ 33 ] David Merrill , Emily Sun , and Jeevan Kalanithi . 2012 . Sifteo Cubes . In CHI ’12 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI EA ’12 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 1015 – 1018 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2212776 . 2212374 [ 34 ] Heidi Selmer Nielsen , Marius Pallisgaard Olsen , Mikael B . Skov , and Jesper Kjeldskov . 2014 . JuxtaPinch : An Application for Collocated Multi - device Photo Sharing . In Proceedings of the 16th International Conference on Human - computer Interaction with Mobile Devices & # 38 ; Services ( MobileHCI ’14 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 417 – 420 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2628363 . 2633569 [ 35 ] Johanna Okerlund , Evan Segreto , Casey Grote , Lauren Westendorf , Anja Scholze , Romie Littrell , and Orit Shaer . 2016 . SynFlo : A Tangible Museum Exhibit for Exploring Bio - Design . In Proceedings of the TEI ’16 : Tenth International Conference on Tangible , Embedded , and Embodied Interaction ( TEI ’16 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 141 – 149 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2839462 . 2839488 [ 36 ] Michaël Ortega , Jérôme Maisonnasse , and Laurence Nigay . 2017 . EXHI - bit : A Mechanical Structure for Prototyping EXpandable Hand - held Interfaces . In Proceedings of the 19th International Conference on Human - Computer Interaction with Mobile Devices and Services ( Mo - bileHCI ’17 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , Article 4 , 11 pages . https : CHI 2019 Paper CHI 2019 , May 4 – 9 , 2019 , Glasgow , Scotland , UK Paper 273 Page 13 / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3098279 . 3098533 [ 37 ] Leonhard Oschuetz , Daniel Wessolek , and Wolfgang Sattler . 2010 . Con - structing with Movement : Kinematics . In Proceedings of the Fourth International Conference on Tangible , Embedded , and Embodied Interac - tion ( TEI ’10 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 257 – 260 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1709886 . 1709938 [ 38 ] Clément Pillias , Raphaël Robert - Bouchard , and Guillaume Levieux . 2014 . Designing Tangible Video Games : Lessons Learned from the Sifteo Cubes . In Proceedings of the 32Nd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’14 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 3163 – 3166 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2556288 . 2556991 [ 39 ] Roman Rädle , Hans - Christian Jetter , Nicolai Marquardt , Harald Reit - erer , and Yvonne Rogers . 2014 . HuddleLamp : Spatially - Aware Mo - bile Displays for Ad - hoc Around - the - Table Collaboration . In Pro - ceedings of the Ninth ACM International Conference on Interactive Tabletops and Surfaces ( ITS ’14 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 45 – 54 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2669485 . 2669500 [ 40 ] Raf Ramakers , Johannes Schöning , and Kris Luyten . 2014 . Paddle : Highly Deformable Mobile Devices with Physical Controls . In Pro - ceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’14 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 2569 – 2578 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2556288 . 2557340 [ 41 ] Yves Rangoni , Valérie Maquil , Eric Tobias , and Eric Ras . 2014 . Imple - menting Widgets Using Sifteo Cubes for Visual Modelling on Tangible User Interfaces . In Proceedings of the 2014 ACM SIGCHI Symposium on Engineering Interactive Computing Systems ( EICS ’14 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 205 – 210 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2607023 . 2610271 [ 42 ] Jun Rekimoto , Brygg Ullmer , and Haruo Oba . 2001 . DataTiles : A Modular Platform for Mixed Physical and Graphical Interactions . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’01 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 269 – 276 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 365024 . 365115 [ 43 ] Simon Robinson , Jennifer Pearson , Matt Jones , Anirudha Joshi , and Shashank Ahire . 2017 . Better Together : Disaggregating Mobile Ser - vices for Emergent Users . In Proceedings of the 19th International Con - ference on Human - Computer Interaction with Mobile Devices and Ser - vices ( MobileHCI ’17 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , Article 44 , 13 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3098279 . 3098534 [ 44 ] Anne Roudaut , Abhijit Karnik , Markus Löchtefeld , and Sriram Sub - ramanian . 2013 . Morphees : Toward High " Shape Resolution " in Self - actuated Flexible Mobile Devices . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Con - ference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’13 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 593 – 602 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2470654 . 2470738 [ 45 ] A . Roudaut , D . Krusteva , M . McCoy , A . Karnik , K . Ramani , and S . Sub - ramanian . 2016 . Cubimorph : Designing modular interactive devices . In 2016 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation ( ICRA ) . 3339 – 3345 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / ICRA . 2016 . 7487508 [ 46 ] Pejman Sajjadi , Edgar Omar Cebolledo Gutierrez , Sandra Trullemans , and Olga De Troyer . 2014 . Maze Commander : A Collaborative Asyn - chronous Game Using the Oculus Rift & # 38 ; the Sifteo Cubes . In Pro - ceedings of the First ACM SIGCHI Annual Symposium on Computer - human Interaction in Play ( CHI PLAY ’14 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 227 – 236 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2658537 . 2658690 [ 47 ] Teddy Seyed , Xing - Dong Yang , and Daniel Vogel . 2016 . Doppio : A Reconfigurable Dual - Face Smartwatch for Tangible Interaction . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’16 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 4675 – 4686 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2858036 . 2858256 [ 48 ] Teddy Seyed , Xing - Dong Yang , and Daniel Vogel . 2017 . A Modular Smartphone for Lending . In Proceedings of the 30th Annual ACM Sym - posium on User Interface Software and Technology ( UIST ’17 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 205 – 215 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3126594 . 3126633 [ 49 ] Orit Shaer , Consuelo Valdes , Sirui Liu , Kara Lu , Kimberly Chang , Wendy Xu , Traci L . Haddock , Swapnil Bhatia , Douglas Densmore , and Robert Kincaid . 2014 . Designing Reality - based Interfaces for Ex - periential Bio - design . Personal Ubiquitous Comput . 18 , 6 ( Aug . 2014 ) , 1515 – 1532 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s00779 - 013 - 0752 - 1 [ 50 ] D . Sweeney , N . Chen , S . Hodges , and T . Grosse - Puppendahl . 2016 . Displays as a Material : A Route to Making Displays More Pervasive . IEEE Pervasive Computing 15 , 3 ( July 2016 ) , 77 – 82 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / MPRV . 2016 . 56 [ 51 ] Dominique Tan , Maciej Kumorek , Andres A . Garcia , Adam Mooney , and Derek Bekoe . 2015 . Projectagami : A Foldable Mobile Device with Shape Interactive Applications . In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI EA ’15 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 1555 – 1560 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2702613 . 2732801 [ 52 ] Aneesh P . Tarun , Peng Wang , Audrey Girouard , Paul Strohmeier , Derek Reilly , and Roel Vertegaal . 2013 . PaperTab : An Electronic Paper Computer with Multiple Large Flexible Electrophoretic Dis - plays . In CHI ’13 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Comput - ing Systems ( CHI EA ’13 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 3131 – 3134 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2468356 . 2479628 [ 53 ] John Tiab , Sebastian Boring , Paul Strohmeier , Anders Markussen , Ja - son Alexander , and Kasper Hornbæk . 2018 . Tiltstacks : Composing Shape - changing Interfaces Using Tilting and Stacking of Modules . In Proceedings of the 2018 International Conference on Advanced Visual Interfaces ( AVI ’18 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , Article 44 , 5 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3206505 . 3206530 [ 54 ] Consuelo Valdes , Diana Eastman , Casey Grote , Shantanu Thatte , Orit Shaer , Ali Mazalek , Brygg Ullmer , and Miriam K . Konkel . 2014 . Ex - ploring the Design Space of Gestural Interaction with Active Tokens Through User - defined Gestures . In Proceedings of the 32Nd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’14 ) . ACM , NewYork , NY , USA , 4107 – 4116 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2556288 . 2557373 [ 55 ] Roel Vertegaal and Ivan Poupyrev . 2008 . Introduction . Commun . ACM 51 , 6 ( June 2008 ) , 26 – 30 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1349026 . 1349033 [ 56 ] Emanuel Vonach , Georg Gerstweiler , and Hannes Kaufmann . 2014 . ACTO : A Modular Actuated Tangible User Interface Object . In Pro - ceedings of the Ninth ACM International Conference on Interactive Tabletops and Surfaces ( ITS ’14 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 259 – 268 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2669485 . 2669522 [ 57 ] Ryoichi Watanabe , Yuichi Itoh , Masatsugu Asai , Yoshifumi Kitamura , Yoshifumi Kitamura , Fumio Kishino , and Hideo Kikuchi . 2004 . The Soul of ActiveCube : Implementing a Flexible , Multimodal , Three - dimensional Spatial Tangible Interface . Comput . Entertain . 2 , 4 ( Oct . 2004 ) , 15 – 15 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1037851 . 1037874 [ 58 ] Malte Weiss , Julie Wagner , Yvonne Jansen , Roger Jennings , Ramsin Khoshabeh , James D . Hollan , and Jan Borchers . 2009 . SLAP Widgets : Bridging the Gap Between Virtual and Physical Controls on Tabletops . In ProceedingsoftheSIGCHIConferenceonHumanFactorsinComputing Systems ( CHI ’09 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 481 – 490 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1518701 . 1518779 [ 59 ] Yiwei Zhao , Lawrence H . Kim , Ye Wang , Mathieu Le Goc , and Sean Follmer . 2017 . Robotic Assembly of Haptic Proxy Objects for Tangible Interaction and Virtual Reality . In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM Inter - national Conference on Interactive Surfaces and Spaces ( ISS ’17 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 82 – 91 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3132272 . 3134143 CHI 2019 Paper CHI 2019 , May 4 – 9 , 2019 , Glasgow , Scotland , UK Paper 273 Page 14