“The Printer is Telling Me about Itself” : Supporting the Appropriation of Hardware by Using Projection Mapping Thomas Ludwig University of Siegen Siegen , Germany thomas . ludwig @ uni - siegen . de Michael Döll University of Siegen Siegen , Germany michael . doell @ uni - siegen . de Christoph Kotthaus University of Siegen Siegen , Germany chirstoph . kotthaus @ uni - siegen . de ABSTRACT The increasing complexity of cyber - physical systems poses special challenges for users to be able to appropriate and apply such technologies within their practice . Classic tools to support appropriation have usually taken the form of written manuals or video tutorials . However , recent research regarding appropriation infrastructures and sociable technologies has suggested that appropriation support functionality can be integrated directly into software and cyber - physical systems . The problem confronting this kind of support is the adequate visualization of the information and the provision of user interfaces that could offer the necessary basis for appropriation . Based on the example of 3D printing , we examine how projection mapping — as an innovative form of visualization — can be used as a user interface for hardware - related appropriation support . Through reflections upon the design and evaluation of a projection - based 3D - printer system , we provide insights that extend the notion of appropriation support to encompass projection mapping and that can contribute to the future development of projection - based human - machine interfaces . Author Keywords Appropriation ; Projection Mapping ; Augmented Reality ; Sociable Technology ; Cyber - Physical System . CSS Concepts • Human - centered computing ~ Mixed / augmented reality INTRODUCTION The work we describe in this paper is an examination of the role of new technology in providing instructional affordances to people in a range of contexts and , more specifically to people who have little or no technical expertise . Our interest in this is prompted by our view that cyber - physical systems ( CPS ) of various kinds will become increasingly prevalent outside of industrial settings . We use 3D printing and the affordances of projection mapping as an elucidative example . CPS were initially driven by the vision of Mark Weiser , and his Xerox PARC colleagues , for ubiquitous computing [ 70 ] . Nowadays equipped with actuators and sensors and networked via communication infrastructures , CPS are increasingly pushing into the everyday lives of many users . To help CPS users with their machines , manufacturers usually offer printed manuals , quick start guides , or online video tutorials . Users often also informally search for support on the internet ( e . g . via YouTube or in online forums ) . In line with research on how to design such support for software systems [ 47 , 62 , 72 ] , Ludwig et al . [ 34 , 36 ] have recently introduced the concept of sociable technologies as hardware - centered appropriation infrastructures , using 3D printers as an example . Sociable technologies can capture a range of hardware - integrated affordances to support the documentation , communication and sharing of ( almost all ) practices of use—and , therefore , support collaborative appropriation . This means that the support that users currently find outside of the hardware ( on the internet ) can be integrated directly into the hardware itself . Building upon the original notion , sociable technologies can operate on different contextual levels to lead to a comprehensive understanding of their functionality and how they might be handled . However , for sociable technologies to work effectively , they require adequate visual support so that users understand the relationship between the large sets of sensor data and the ‘behavior’ of a complex machine [ 34 ] . This is currently absent from the kinds of support offered by CPS manufacturers , thus limiting the appropriation process . Projection mapping is a specific kind of augmented reality ( AR ) where digital images are projected onto physical objects using a video projector . At present , this technique is primarily used in the entertainment industry and for industrial assembly [ 7 ] . In these cases , activities are supported by simply projecting instructions , with the scope and depth of the information being limited and only small sections of an entire process being supported . However , as Pinatti et al . [ 9 ] have pointed out , AR technologies combined with appropriate sensory input and codified information about physical parameters , offer the prospect of much richer support of expertise sharing around complex technologies , enhancing the likelihood of their appropriation . In particular , these new types of visualization afford new forms of ostension , or ways of showing , that may overstep conventional understandings of the difficulty of conveying Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author ( s ) must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from Permissions @ acm . org . DIS 2019 , June 24 - 28 , 2019 , San Diego , CA , USA . Copyright is held by the owner / author ( s ) . Publication rights licensed to ACM . ACM 978 - 1 - 4503 - 5850 - 7 / 19 / 06… $ 15 . 00 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3322276 . 3322342 Making DIS ' 19 , June 23 – 28 , 2019 , San Diego , CA , USA 331 non - propositional knowledge [ 59 ] . Such ‘tacit’ or ‘local’ knowledge , it has been argued , is difficult to articulate and , as such , makes knowledge sharing more difficult [ 9 ] . This indicates that research regarding the use of projection mapping as a visual support and the role it may play in sociable technologies has significant potential for the support of appropriation of complex technologies across a range of different domains . In this paper , we explore the application of projection mapping in a specific context ( 3D printing ) , examine how it assisted with the constitution of 3D printers as sociable technologies and consider what design challenges and implications remain for the full realization of its potential to support instruction , learning and appropriation . This is particularly important as ‘production’ technologies such as 3D printing get used in a range of non - traditional contexts , for instance in the home or in educational contexts . That is , the non - expert user will be increasingly be confronted with significant operational complexities . Section 2 details the concepts of appropriation support , sociable technologies , and projection mapping . Section 3 outlines the current gap in the research . Based on this , we present our design and implementation of a projection - based user interface for interacting with sociable technologies in section 4 . How projection mapping supports the 3D printer appropriation is discussed in section 5 . Section 6 outlines the results of an evaluation of the usability and feasibility of the system . The study contributes to existing HCI discourses around appropriation infrastructures and the future design of projection - based user interfaces for sociable technologies . BACKGROUND Our research combines three research discourses . The first is based on appropriation and infrastructuring , the second on appropriation infrastructures and sociable technologies , and the third on the concept of AR and projection mapping . The Concept of Appropriation The concept of appropriation can be regarded as discovering and making sense of an artifact through its use in practice . The concept has its roots in the established HCI and computer - supported cooperative work literature , where appropriation is associated with the process of fitting new technologies to users’ practices in situ by adopting and adapting those technologies [ 2 , 15 , 37 , 62 ] . The term ‘appropriation’ has been used to address issues beyond technology configuration by referring to individual and collaborative sense - making regarding technologies , along with organizational issues [ 2 , 8 , 11 , 13 , 15 , 36 , 62 ] . It can also encompass fundamental changes in practice and embrace the possibility of users adopting and using a technology in ways not anticipated by designers [ 47 ] . Appropriation is also associated with processes of exchange and interaction in networks of ( co - ) end users , where experiences and stories are shared between all who are involved in the appropriation process [ 8 , 22 , 37 , 47 , 48 ] . Thus , a ‘user’ in this sense is reconstructed as a creator of actions who precedes an identity rather than one with an identity who prescribes actions [ 68 , 69 ] . On this basis , designing support for appropriation can become an inherent design goal , encouraging designers to design artifacts so they are open to and even invite use in ways that were not intended in the original design [ 69 ] . Focusing on the ‘doing’ of configuration as well as on sense - making involves , additionally , aspects of collaborative knowledge management as an aspect of the discussion and re - invention of technology - based practices [ 60 ] . A firm grounding of appropriation in doing—that is , in using the respective artifact and transforming it if needs be—can be viewed as being akin to do - it - yourself and maker perspectives , which utilize similar frames of mind and strategies when approaching new technologies [ 33 , 65 ] . Sociable Technologies as Hardware - Centered Appropriation Infrastructures Studies regarding the design of tools to support appropriation already exist . Stevens et al . [ 62 ] have looked at ensembles of software tools and have suggested an appropriation framework that also addresses a developer’s interests in improving the technology . Beyond the core features of an interactive system , this framework adds second - level functionality to support associated appropriation activities . Examples of appropriation frameworks for software - centered domains include the development and integration of a participatory feedback tool into the Eclipse IDE [ 16 , 17 ] , which attempts to formalize a theoretical appropriation model based on the evolution of digital artifacts and information structures to support identifying particular user operations and related digital transformations [ 4 ] . The integration of appropriation frameworks directly into the information systems that they are intended to support has been thoroughly investigated , tested , and seems to have some merit [ 47 , 62 , 72 ] . Traditionally , when hardware is involved in such studies , it is considered systemically in conjunction with software [ 10 , 38 ] . This makes sense because complex hardware usually also has software components . Thus , analysis of software and hardware appropriation needs to be mutually elaborative . As modern infrastructures can be understood to be socio - technical constructs with emerging practices [ 61 ] , it is insufficient to focus only on software ecosystems . Physical technologies and entities also have to be taken into account to support appropriation . Barraqand [ 3 ] has argued that technologies need to explicitly facilitate sociability in their design and thus tries to build a framework for technology rooted in psychological considerations , with an emphasis on collaboration and contextual information . Norman [ 44 ] has connected the notion of sociality embedded in technologies with the need to support communication , teamwork , and an approach to troubleshooting . This means careful design , with the cultural and social factors of a technology’s field of application in mind . As a first test for using improved functional components that are grounded in this way of thinking , Ludwig et al . [ 34 , 36 ] turned to 3D printing Making DIS ' 19 , June 23 – 28 , 2019 , San Diego , CA , USA 332 infrastructures ( encompassing a 3D printer itself , modelling and slicing software , the physical tools for shaping the artifact , and so forth ) . They argued that new hardware - based technologies could support the appropriation activities of their users by making their devices more ‘sociable’ . Here , too , we use the term ’sociable technology’ to capture the kinds of hardware - integrated affordances that can support communicating , documenting , and sharing practices of use . As Ludwig et al . have indicated [ 34 , 36 ] , sociable technologies need to operate on three contextual levels : ( 1 ) the internal context , where they provide information about their inner workings , current state and component and behavioral structure ; ( 2 ) the socio - material context , that encompasses location / surroundings , environmental data , and maintenance or user / usage data ; ( 3 ) the task / process context , which refers to the purpose of device use . Augmented Reality and Projection Mapping for Enhancing Interactivity Augmented Reality ( AR ) has featured in HCI research for many years . It refers to interactive experiences of real - world environments where objects residing in the real world are ‘augmented’ by digitalized information . AR lies on Milgram & Kishino’s [ 40 ] reality – virtuality continuum that encompasses all possible variations and compositions of real and virtual objects . For Azuma [ 1 ] , an AR system must ( 1 ) combine real and virtual objects in a real physical environment , ( 2 ) superimpose real and virtual objects with each other , and ( 3 ) be interactive in 3D in real time . A special sub - area of AR is “spatial augmented reality” ( SAR ) or projection mapping . Projection mapping describes a technological process in which a digital image is projected onto a surface of any physical object using a video projector [ 51 ] . In contrast to conventional projection on a white screen , the surface of the object does not have to be flat but can have a variable shape . This makes it possible to use any object as a digital display area . Thus , projection mapping has found its way into the fields of advertising , entertainment , theme parks , museum and art exhibitions , and even architecture [ 28 ] . Historically , it dates back to the application “singing busts” first patented in 1969 at the “Haunted Mansion” attraction in Disneyland [ 41 ] . Since then , technical methods for image generation and projection technology have steadily improved , increasing the popularity of projection mapping , especially in the context of mixed and virtual reality [ 24 ] . Thus , “The Luminous Room” [ 66 ] used digital graphic projections on real surfaces in a room , such as tables and walls . Extending this , the “Everywhere Displays Projector” [ 46 ] used in - situ projections to project information directly onto surfaces and objects in a viewer’s environment . While in these cases projections were limited to specific local surfaces of objects , Jones et al . [ 27 ] used a larger projection surface by extending the display area of a flat - screen TV to the wall behind the TV . Jones et al . [ 28 ] also introduced the use of several projectors to fill whole rooms with displays of digital content : for the first time entirely replacing display - centered representation with projections , thus fostering new kinds of interaction concepts . Otto et al . [ 57 ] have examined the use of a scalable , interactive floor projection for the planning of production facilities . To interact with the floor projection , they used a touchscreen display coupled with physical elements to represent later assembly points in the production plants . Gervais et al . [ 24 ] and Frey et al . [ 20 ] have also combined tangible objects with projection - based AR by using projections to map information onto real objects . Of especial note is the capacity of projection mapping to project content onto uneven surfaces with changing geometric structures ( see , for instance , “Illuminating Clay” [ 49 ] and “Inner Garden : Augmented Sandbox” [ 55 ] ) . Some work has examined applications which combine AR and 3D printing , such as Rivers et al [ 53 ] and Follmer et al [ 19 ] . There is already a lot of research that focuses on using AR to guide users through different tasks by using head - mounted displays [ 18 , 29 , 42 , 43 ] . However , studies [ 6 , 67 ] comparing in - situ projection , head - mounted displays , and printed operating instructions have shown that users prefer projection - based SAR systems . Projection - based SAR reduces error rates and better supports realizing complex tasks [ 56 ] . Aiming to improve quality assurance , Rüther et al . [ 58 ] have presented a projection - based SAR system that supports hospital staff when sterilizing medical instruments . Strict adherence to process and hygiene is essential in this environment , so they projected the steps to be carried out together with instructions directly onto the working surface to be used , thus ensuring hygienic guidance . Zhou et al . [ 74 ] have used projections in situ both for marking positions to be welded on assembly elements and for quality inspection of the correctly positioned seam after the welding process . AR has even been used to help people learning to play the piano [ 52 ] . In augmented manufacturing [ 21 , 31 , 32 ] projection - mapping - based workstations have been used to support manual assembly activities within industrial settings . The individual installation instructions are projected step - by - step onto a mounting surface by using in - situ projection . Dalle Mura et al [ 12 ] , Rodriguez et al [ 54 ] , and Gavish et al [ 23 ] have also addressed the role of projection mapping in assisting with assembly tasks . Dini and Dalle Mura [ 12 ] provide a useful summary of application domains where AR , image projection and related technologies might prove useful . However , these approaches are restricted to one - way pick - by - light systems and have no scope for interaction . Korn et al . [ 30 , 31 ] evaluated the effectiveness of support in assembling a LEGO model car and found that projected mounting instructions in a user ' s direct field of vision lead to higher efficiency and lower error rates . Höcherl et al . [ 26 ] have extended this to enabling a bidirectional exchange of information between the user and the technology through a gesture - based interface . Making DIS ' 19 , June 23 – 28 , 2019 , San Diego , CA , USA 333 The work we present here can also be seen as a continuation of a trajectory of research relating to printers and their augmentation that first began with Suchman’s studies of photocopier use [ 64 ] . It most particularly relates to work that explored how to provide more effective support for dealing with printer failure , initially from the perspective of engineers [ 5 ] , but moving towards how to support users being guided by remote troubleshooters through AR - type interfaces [ 45 ] . RESEARCH GAP AND RESEARCH APPROACH As it stands , the current literature presents the concept of sociable technologies as being about hardware - oriented appropriation infrastructures . Meanwhile , spatial augmented reality and projection mapping are seen as innovative ways of extending the information space for complex technology and the interaction space for users . We would argue , however , that much of the literature we discussed above has a limited view of what projection mapping might offer . It has hitherto been primarily used in constrained contexts such as entertainment and industrial assembly [ 7 ] , largely adopting a one - way pick - by - light approach . Our aim here is to examine how projection mapping might work as an adequate visual user interface to support the appropriation of complex technologies and , thus , how to design innovative ways of interacting with sociable technologies in non - expert contexts . We , focus on 3D printing as an exemplar because its complexity , its rapid technological progress and the way it binds hardware and software poses challenges for users and communities in learning how to operate such machines . As we point out above , the deployment of such technologies in non - traditional contexts introduces further operational complexities . A 3D - printing process usually starts by either constructing a 3D model via CAD software or downloading and , perhaps , customizing one from specialized and usually open - source sharing platforms on the internet . The model is then fed into the printing software on a computer . This generates tool paths for the print head . The paths are then uploaded to the printer and the printing process begins after the printer has been pre - heated and calibrated . Afterwards , there may be post - processing to do , such as cutting edges or painting the artefact . 3D printers are becoming increasingly important , with research indicating that digital fabrication technologies will significantly influence and change the landscape of personal device fabrication [ 39 ] . Some have suggested that digital fabrication technologies will become available in every household [ 14 , 71 ] . There is a need to support people in appropriating these kinds of complex technologies and to assist in guiding and facilitating their use . These kinds of technologies are both potentially sociable and often used in collaborative circumstances . The ostensive and interactive possibilities of projection mapping suggest that it may offer unique support for appropriating such technologies by providing a highly flexible visual user interface for interacting with them far more directly than is currently the case . CONCEPT Ludwig et al . [ 36 ] have already outlined that the appropriation ( primarily , operation ) of 3D printing for inexperienced users is based on experimentation rather than using official instructions or reading literature . They have shown that during 3D printing , problems can arise through media discontinuities , language barriers due to technical terminology , and a lack of orientation support . Users lack a deeper understanding of the general functioning and whether errors originate from hardware , software , or external issues and they need support to guide them in dealing with such complex technologies [ 36 ] . Ludwig et al [ 36 ] have already shown that users are particularly dependent on guidance if they encounter problems and the printing process does not run as they had originally expected . Areas of Guidance In order to implement the requirements [ 36 ] from a content perspective , we focus on four different areas of knowledge that cover the entire 3D printing process . ( 1 ) General information about 3D printing . Establishing a basic understanding of technical terminology for 3D printing ; visualizing specific printer models , technological structure , details about components , print materials , and the process of moving from a 3D model to a printed artefact . ( 2 ) Execution of a 3D print . Selecting a digital 3D model ; preparing and heating up the printer ; getting detailed instructions during the printing process ; visualizing the local context , printing parameters and temperatures ; checking whether the model has been printed correctly . ( 3 ) Troubleshooting and errors . According to Ludwig et al . [ 36 ] , when errors occur during 3D printing it can be hard to even know how to search for a solution . As a multitude of errors may arise , both on the device itself and on the printed artefact , we want to support the user step - by - step in identifying and correcting possible causes of error . ( 4 ) Maintenance activities . In addition to realizing printed objects and solving problems that arise , the practice of 3D printing is characterized by maintenance activities . This often requires complex manual work by the user , who needs special knowledge to carry out it out correctly . This results in a need for support and is realized in a fourth scenario that looks at the appropriation of practices for maintenance . Multimodal Communication Structures To mediate the different areas of guidance appropriately , our concept for supporting the appropriation of complex technology includes several multimodal communication structures . The main support is the visual component that will be realized as an in - situ projection onto the 3D printer . Here we focus on : ( a ) projecting graphical , textual , and animated content on the 3D printer and on adjacent table surfaces ; ( b ) highlighting in - situ objects in the form of specific technical components on the 3D printer and tools ; Making DIS ' 19 , June 23 – 28 , 2019 , San Diego , CA , USA 334 and ( c ) projecting in - situ videos for guiding complex work steps . In addition to projection mapping as the visual component of our multimodal communication and interaction , we will also provide auditory support , taking the form of : ( d ) an audio guide that supports visualized instructions ; ( e ) warnings of possible dangers emanating from the printer ; ( f ) ambient music to make the process of appropriation more relaxing with low volume background music . Additionally , the concept of multimodal communication includes the creation of a separate visual interface to control the functionality of the subsequent 3D - printing system projection . We will therefore provide ( g ) a graphical user interface to control system functionality . System Architecture and Interaction Types Based on the previously described requirements for multimodal communication structures , we designed an architecture that consists of three main modules ( Figure 1 ) : ( 1 ) A projector - based projection for realizing the visual information mediation by means of in - situ projections ( requirements a – c ) ; ( 2 ) An audio system for realizing the auditory information mediation ( requirements d – f ) ; ( 3 ) A control - tablet operating as a graphical user interface for controlling the system functionality ( requirement g ) . Figure 1 . Software Architecture In addition to these three modules , we designed an interface to enhance the 3D printer as a sociable technology . As a next step , we needed to design an interaction concept which supports user - oriented appropriation . We considered the tablet as a touch - based user interface . Here , a user selects a displayed functionality by tapping the relevant button indicated by his or her individual guidance support . Subsequently , the respective information is visualized by projection mapping in - situ directly onto the components of the 3D printer ; this is then coupled with auditory explanations to support the user ' s understanding . If technical components are explained , visual in - situ highlighting takes place . Depending on the area of guidance , this process can be extended by additional functions , such as in - situ video projection or the active control of the 3D printer for printing . PROTOTYPE : PROJECTION 3D PRINTING In modern CPS , it is usually necessary to implement both a hardware and software side . The 3D printer , the tablet as the control unit and the projector form the basic elements of the overall projection system . Between the 3D printer and the tablet , we implemented a bidirectional communication structure . The printer’s control board provided a USB interface for its control so that data could be exchanged based on serial bus communication . We used OctoPrint as an interface to query the printer status and to control the printer in general . Depending on the 3D printer status and on the interaction triggered by the user , we implemented a communication structure between the tablet and the projector to control the projected content . The primary task of the projector control was providing reactive video output . Consequently , the control tablet had to transmit to the projector control which video file was to be played , paused , or ended at what point in time . Setting up the Hardware Before implementing the functionality , it is necessary to evaluate different 3D printers — to what extent these are suitable for projection due to their physical shape . We therefore initially tested projections with three different printer models within our local FabLab . To discover what projection space each 3D printer offers and what limitations exist , images were projected from different heights and inclination angles ( Figure 2 ) . Figure 2 . Evaluation of the Printers’ Projection Space Based on having a printer open and without too many concealed parts , we selected the Lulzbot TAZ 5 for our technical implementation . This model only has a small amount of disruptive cladding of casing elements and , thus , allows the largest possible projection area with minimal shadow for projection mapping . We then had to determine which properties of the projection space would enable an easily perceptible visualization of the content . Use of the 3D printer’s print plate as a projection surface proved difficult because the glass installed by the manufacturer created a mirror effect and made the textual content blurry . We , therefore , mounted a heat - resistant special plastic plate as a permanent print plate over the glass ( Figure 3 ) : Figure 3 . Before and after Mounting the Print Plate Setting up the 3D Projection Mapping To enable the projection mapping , we had to ensure a distortion - free projection , with a correct alignment of the light beam to the projection layer as well as the correct mapping . Distortion was eliminated by projecting a test Making DIS ' 19 , June 23 – 28 , 2019 , San Diego , CA , USA 335 image with a grid onto the projection surface and using the projector’s keystone correction . An imaging layer was then created to record the space geometry of the real objects . This calibration phase ensured that digital elements could be assigned to the physical projection surface of a 3D printer , tabletop , and physical tools . This entailed projecting a calibration grid onto the projection space ( Figure 4 ) . Figure 4 . Projected Calibration Grid We created a connection between the digital vector graphics of the projected calibration grid and the projection on the physical elements . To do this , the digital coordinates for each square of pixels was mapped to the physical coordinates—which is the actual mapping of the projection mapping . By using this cyber - physical connection , any physical objects can be addressed by the projection and mapped with coordinates . Setting up the 3D - Printing Control Tablet After setting up the hardware as well as the 3D projection mapping , we implemented the tablet application ‘Projection 3D - Printing’ ( Figure 5 ) . This application offers the user access to basic functionalities related to the areas of guidance . The “Home” overview visualizes the three main functionalities : “Discovery” , “Printing” , and “Help” . Figure 5 . Projection 3D - Printing An interaction in the Projection 3D - Printing system triggers the corresponding projection - based visualization on the 3D printer . The landing page of the “Discovery” area offers ways of getting general information about 3D printing , the printer itself , and information from the community based on a wiki . The left button , “3D - Printing” , references functionality for acquiring basic knowledge . This is the first step of the discovery tour ( Figure 6 ) . Here , the printer explains , for example , the use of modelling software , the aim of slicing software , how to use a filament and how it is used within the extruder ( Figure 9A ) . With regard to using the filament and extruder , the projection highlights the parts and shows an animation that visualizes how extruders work . Figure 6 . Discovery Area The projection is coupled to the audio guide , e . g . : “ How does the plastic filament actually get from the spool to the printing plate ? This is done via the extruder , which is attached directly to the print head . It clips the filament via a clipping mechanism and presses the plastic wire directly into the heated printer’s jet . The heat causes the filament to liquefy . ” Figure 7 . Printing Area The “Printing” area of the “Home” overview refers to the execution of a 3D print and how to acquire operating skills . Here , as a first step , a user has to select a print object from the gallery for a first print job ( Figure 7 ) and available models are visualized . Then the heating up procedure starts ( Figure 9B ) and the modelled object is visualized at actual scale ( Figure 9C ) . The user is now guided to prepare the filament ( Figure 9D ) , with the extruder and the filament spool highlighted and the user getting audio feedback : “ Are there at least two revs of the filament on the spool ? Is the feed of the filament wire from the spool to the print head without any visible twists ? If everything is fine , please tap ‘Next . ’ If something is wrong , select ‘Help’” . Figure 8 . Help Area After the print , the object is highlighted ( Figure 9E ) and the user receives a notification that the printer is cooling down ( Figure 9F ) . Once the projected countdown of the cooling phase has elapsed , the user is guided to remove the object from the print plate by using a highlighted scraper ( Figure 9G ) . Making DIS ' 19 , June 23 – 28 , 2019 , San Diego , CA , USA 336 Figure 9 . 3D - Projection Printing Projections The third area on the home page is “Help , ” where a user finds support regarding app usage , troubleshooting and maintenance ( Figure 8 ) . Here , common problems and issues that were recorded by other users of the community are visualized , including icon - based representations and textual descriptions ( for example , warping or incomplete printing ) . Each item starts a recorded step - by - step troubleshooting process ( Figure 9H ) . The last area focuses on maintenance activities and covers the fourth area of guidance . As an example , a user may receive information about how to change the filament of the printer , a process that has six separate steps . These steps guide users in how to release the clip , where to find the filament spool and how to insert new material by highlighting the different components of the printer . These steps are further supported with videos , as this has proven effective for appropriation support ( Figure 9I ) . EVALUATION With Projection 3D - Printing , we implemented a fully - functioning user interface for fostering appropriation support as a visual component of a sociable technology . To evaluate our overall concept , we conducted three types of evaluation with 12 participants ( 10 males and 2 females , average age of 31 . 08 , standard deviation 7 . 67 ) . The participants were mainly students who were acquired via a mailing list . Only three of the 12 participants had previous experience with a 3D printer ( EP5 , EP6 , EP11 ) . We used qualitative methods , encompassing pre - and post - test interviews as well as a usability test including eye - tracking . In the first step , we assessed each participant’s level of experience in the field of 3D printing by using a semi - structured interview . Previous experience is particularly important as it influences their subsequent use of the system . The second phase of the evaluation was a task - oriented usability test , where the participants received individual tasks , which they had to fulfill by using the Projection 3D - Printing system . The tasks were : “Discover the 3D printer , ” “Execute a 3D print , ” “Your artifact is broken , find the error , ” and “Change the filament . ” This qualitative approach was used to empirically determine the extent to which the interactive functionality supported the user . The tasks were designed in such a way as to ensure that key functionality would be used during the test . To understand the users’ behavior and reasoning , they were asked to “think aloud” and the statements were recorded on audio . As our system uses optical highlighting of printer components through visual animations that use symbols , text , and video content on the print plate and tabletop , we also had to capture the user ' s gaze to assess their use of these elements . For this , we used eye - tracking glasses throughout the evaluation . In total , we recorded 11 hours and 48 minutes of video ( Figure 10 ) . In the third phase , the usability test was followed by a semi - structured interview . This was again recorded . The aim here was to get a more detailed understanding of the users’ impressions during the usability test . Making DIS ' 19 , June 23 – 28 , 2019 , San Diego , CA , USA 337 Figure 10 . Evaluation Setting We asked questions like : What is your impression of the projection system ? What ( dis ) advantages do you see ? Which aspects did you miss ? All of the post - test interview audio files were transcribed for subsequent analysis . The analysis was based on an inductive approach informed by grounded - theory [ 63 ] , with open - coding techniques being used to derive categories from the empirical data . Statements by the participants were divided into textual groupings and then into categories . Of particular interest were code families related to the challenges and potentials associated with projection mapping and the appropriation of complex technologies . Results of the Pre - Test Interview Most of the participants were novices in 3D printing . One participant said , “I was afraid of using the machine , because it costs a lot” ( EP5 ) . The participants wanted an easy way of being guided regarding the handling : “ As long as [ the 3D printing ] technology is as simple as using an ordinary printer , so that you can print easily , that would be very interesting” ( EP1 ) . One of the experienced participants remembered his first steps with 3D printing and the problems that can occur : “I would have liked to have had more information about error sources . What can I do better ? There are many factors that influence the print process” ( EP11 ) . The idea of a guide for troubleshooting was also considered by another participant : “Of course , you can use Google , but you might not be able to describe the problem properly at all” ( EP5 ) . One participant mentioned the idea of integrated knowledge support , which resonates closely with our founding concept : “It’d be nice if hardware brings everything along . Why are there always just written manuals for hardware and in software you click directly on everything . Why isn’t it similar ? ” ( EP8 ) . Results of the Task - based Usability Study Visualization of projected information The value of the presented information was positively emphasized : “ For someone who has never [ sic ] printed with a 3D printer before , everything is easy to get , also the technical terms . With this knowledge , I am able to search and read later in 3D - printing bulletin boards . So I’ve heard all the terms such as extruder and build plate . I feel well prepared” ( EP4 ) . The combination of the projection of animated content , accompanying audio guide , and control tablet represented a new experience for all of the participants . The participants valued the benefits of projected location - based knowledge acquisition and compared the system to collaborative appropriation activities among users : “It’s similar to when two people stand in front of the printer , and one person explains , ‘Here on the spool is the filament . ’ So to speak about the visualization and highlighting were then simulated as it were the pointing gesture [ sic ] ” ( EP6 ) . Projection mapping could therefore also offer a suitable interface for communicating resonance activities ( cp . [ 35 ] ) . Projection Mapping vs . Video Tutorial vs . Printing Guide The participants compared the mechanism to other types of information transfer : “Of course you can also watch a video , but this way you stand in front of the machine and know you can start right away . That’s what prepares you for directly handling [ sic ] the object” ( EP4 ) . Another said , “It ' s like watching a YouTube video . Instead of standing in front of a two - dimensional screen , you stand in front of a three - dimensional object . You’re the video , so to speak ; that’s very exciting” ( EP5 ) . During the initial steps , the users were particularly attentive . When it came to checking the print material , they all immediately reached for the filament spool after the projected highlighting and they easily unwound and fed it into the print head . The highlighting of the print material and print head in combination with the instructions of the audio guide animated the users to interact directly with the different hardware components . The participants acknowledged the visualization of warnings , temperature , and progress data as informative elements : “ Especially , that the temperature is displayed . Which value has just been reached and how long it will take . [ . . . ] That helps a lot . I can imagine if that wasn’t there , then you just stand around and don’t know when it’s finished” ( E1 ) . As one participant said , “You don’t notice anymore that information is projected . You think the printer has all that . The printer is telling me about itself ” ( EP8 ) . The Impact of an Integrated Overall System The participants expressed the view that projection mapping contributed to a fully unified 3D - printing system . Even the rather manual - oriented task of separating the finished printed object from the print plate , quality control and final cleaning of the print plate , was well received . They appreciated the immersiveness of the digital projection in combination with the physical printer as a first step towards an appropriate handling of a complex cyber - physical system . However , a mismatch between the physical components and the projection sometimes became obvious : “The printing plate has moved , but the visual projection hasn’t—if you think about it , it ' s totally logical . But because I perceive it as a fused - together system , I thought it moves together” ( EP7 ) . At the same time , this issue can be regarded as a proof that the projection mapping system used in the context of 3D printing was not being oriented to the users as an isolated system but rather as an integral component of a unified Making DIS ' 19 , June 23 – 28 , 2019 , San Diego , CA , USA 338 machine . To guide detailed process steps , such as releasing the clip on the 3D printer , detailed location - based instruction videos were used . These were visualized directly on the print plate and clarified the work to be carried out by showing the necessary steps . Thus , the existing highlighting of the functional physical components on the printer was elaborated in detail through videos that encouraged users to imitate the activities shown : “The video helped a lot . By the highlighting and blinking of components I knew exactly where to do what” ( EP8 ) . Areas for Improvement Building upon the improved scope for understanding how to use a 3D printer , there were suggestions for improvements . Participants mentioned that they needed an option for controlling the speed of the videos and audio guide : “I’d love to skip some videos later ” ( EP4 ) . There were also occasional problems with the interaction . One inexperienced user told us , “The video was very helpful . However , sometimes I covered the video with my hand . Maybe you can show the video in another place” ( EP10 ) . Not only the projection , but also the contextual factors such as the lighting conditions had an impact on the usage ; “When inserting the filament into the extruder , it would have been good to have proper light conditions so I could see what I was doing” ( EP6 ) . Here , a trade - off exists between the low brightness , which is needed for a suitable projection and necessary lighting conditions for the execution of the activities . Guiding Gaze through Highlighting To analyze the gaze data , we used aggregated heat maps that we applied to a recorded image of our tasks . For the task ‘Change the filament’ ( Figure 11 ) , the heat map clearly showed that the focus of attention was primarily on the video of the print plate ( where the video was visualized ) , the extruder , and the filament . The control tablet had a high rate too , especially on the right - hand side where the buttons were located . All of the heat maps confirmed the projection had successfully directed a user’s gaze to the relevant information . Since the focus of our study was on the interaction as such , the eye tracking was used to validate our statements and to check whether there were deviations . Figure 11 . Heat Map of Eye - Tracking Results of the Post - Test Interview Almost all participants mentioned that the videos combined with the highlighted physical components were the most memorable aspects . In addition to usability aspects , the interviews revealed four main conceptual aspects : High Level of Immersiveness The participants mentioned immersion in the Projection 3D - Printing system . Its intensity was compared to a movie with the user taking an active role : “Actually , what fascinates me the most is the fact that I am somehow actually in the movie itself and can print . [ . . . ] I am involved in a completely new way” ( E6 ) . In addition to the projection , the audio guide was perceived as an immersion - enhancing element : “I wanted to answer the system and then even did it” ( EP6 ) . Analysis of the audio recordings revealed that four of the participants were responding to the audio guide ' s instructions . One participant wanted to have speech - based interaction possibilities : “It would be a nice feature to communicate with the system via voice commands” ( EP8 ) . Another factor affecting the immersive experience was the overall design of the system : “I’ve tried to do or repair something with video instructions from YouTube before . Then my focus changes constantly ; I look at the screen and then back at the device . With this projection here , I fully focus on the device” ( EP7 ) . Game Mechanics for Maintaining Motivation Apart from imparting knowledge , several participants found elements of fun and pleasure in using the system : “ You are in your own world ! It’s not just like I ' m printing something because I need it . This is now somehow an event” ( EP4 ) . In addition , the system encouraged a playful attitude to knowledge transfer , which considerably enhanced their perception of the information and performance of the process steps : “I’m right in game mode ! [ . . . ] This actually changes something in the communication and in the reception of the guiding content” ( EP5 ) . Regarding this aspect of support , five users ( EP2 , 3 , 8 , 11 , 12 ) explicitly mentioned in their feedback that their fear of using 3D printers was overcome by the playful character of the projection - based operating system . On the back of this , the users asked for playful approaches to assessing the steps of the guide : “ That in the course of gamification one gets a kind of achievement like ‘3D printing beginner’ to ‘3D printing professional’” ( EP10 ) . A great potential of the gamification approach lies in the fact that the Projection 3D - Printing system covers all phases of 3D printing , from preparation to error analysis and maintenance . Each completed phase could be rewarded with a digital or physically printed badge so that the user would be playfully motivated to discover new knowledge . Collaborative Appropriation and Community Aspects The participants mentioned various possibilities regarding a shared and collaborative exchange of information . As the participants said , they wanted something that “integrat [ es ] a communication infrastructure directly into the hardware” ( EP8 ) and that a “useful feature would be troubleshooting via the community” ( EP6 ) . Community - based guidance was often mentioned : “If I were to add an expert who could control the videos and that there was something flashing or remote troubleshooting stuff , because that often only exists Making DIS ' 19 , June 23 – 28 , 2019 , San Diego , CA , USA 339 for software and if this could be implemented in hardware it would be an exciting innovation” ( EP8 ) . In addition to troubleshooting , with the help of experienced users from the 3D printing community , the exchange of print projects and print data was also suggested ( EP9 ) . According to users , the advantage of integrating the community into the system is primarily a dynamic information exchange that fosters troubleshooting and inspiration to print objects . Projection Mapping and Smart Glasses The users often compared the system with AR - based smart glasses : “ When I wear smart glasses , I can imagine that the image moves . Afterwards something wrong is displayed as being hot . The glasses would be more multifunctional and dynamic , but in terms of the printer I think the projection is much better” ( EP3 ) . The users mentioned the advantage of projection mapping in that it does not require any technical aids to be worn on the body to perceive AR . Furthermore , one user saw the perceived immersion of smart glasses as critical : “You always need a technical vehicle [ glasses ] . In this overall situation , the projection was just immersive— where I had all the game mechanics . As soon as I wear glasses , a lot of the immersive effect gets lost” ( EP5 ) . Beyond this , when comparing the projection mapping and AR glasses , the possibility of having a larger interaction area was appreciated : “You can address a larger area directly with information” ( EP6 ) . With regard to the use of smart glasses , it was also noted that images are directly in the viewer ' s field of vision—thus the fade - ins displayed in the glasses could hamper the physical - haptic handling of a 3D printer . “It could be that the holograms cover my own hand if I use the printer” ( EP10 ) . CONCLUSION In this paper , we have discussed how it is that radical new technology such as projection mapping will become more commonly used in a heterogeneous range of contexts , contexts where expertise and training cannot be assumed . How users appropriate technologies , of course , has a long tradition within HCI and CSCW [ 2 , 15 , 37 , 62 ] . However , when one moves the focus to modern CPS , the physicality ( of the machine , surrounding and material ) has become much more important [ 34 , 36 ] . Here , an adequate visual support for giving insights into the inner workings and the handling of technologies is still challenging , especially given the absence of alternative adequate instructional forms ( there is an extensive literature which deals with the difficulties that people have when dealing with manuals and other formal training material ; see for instance [ 25 , 50 , 73 ] . Through the design and evaluation of the Projection 3D - Printing tool , we were able to gain interesting insights into how to design projection - based appropriation support for using complex technologies in non - expert contexts . To reiterate , our point is that the absence of training , time and skill potentially problematizes practice in domains , which extend beyond the routine industrial . Instructions of whatever kind are better embedded directly in practice because they entail less or no overhead in relation to time taken or attention required . Based on the user feedback , we found evidence that the use of multimodal communication structures such as graphic , textual , and animated information projections in the form of in - situ videos , highlighting of objects , or audio guides supports appropriation . Projected videos recorded by other , more experienced , users that articulated and made sense of the highlighting of specific components were seen to have particular value . This speaks volumes regarding the scope for sociable technologies equipped in this way to use ostension to overstep the conventional view that non - propositional ( or tacit ) knowledge is hard to systematically convey [ 9 ] . By using projection mapping to interact with sociable technologies , we blur the boundaries between tacit knowledge and explicit knowledge . New technology affords new types of articulation about cyber - physical issues and therefore may foster new types of expertise sharing within hardware - dominated settings . Using projection mapping instead of AR smart glasses also allows a way of focusing on the collaborative nature of learning as it supports appropriation accompanied by other people . As all of our participants were able to perform a successful 3D print , our evaluation indicates several advantages of using projection mapping for appropriating complex CPS . However , the study was limited by not conducting a comparative usability study without support prior to using our system . In addition , we see a need to further investigate how our results might be applied to other physical machines with a more closed design . Here , one could examine how equipping the inner spaces of machines with several mini - projectors that project videos to its inner parts will perceived by its users . As our system is limited in terms of mobility , we will further explore approaches that combine projection mapping with smart glasses . With regard to interaction modes , one could think of using voice or gesture - based control systems or the 3D printer as an input device and depth - sensing cameras might make it possible to detect the movements of a user . In addition , by projecting e . g . digital buttons on the physical components of the printer , we could further deepen the immersiveness of the experience by avoiding the tablet . Finally , community aspects could be integrated into the machinery itself . This could include remote troubleshooting by experts and the exchange of information on printing projects , elaborating ideas first articulated by O’Neill et al [ 45 ] . These additional possibilities further facilitate communication between end users , reinforcing the sense of these machines becoming sociable technologies . As complex CPS are increasingly pushing into the everyday lives of many users , we contribute with innovative insights as to how to apply projection mapping as a new form of user interface for appropriating these technologies . Through our findings , we extend the knowledge of HCI and CSCW discourses around appropriation as well as the design of projection - based interfaces for sociable technologies . Making DIS ' 19 , June 23 – 28 , 2019 , San Diego , CA , USA 340 REFERENCES [ 1 ] Ronald T Azuma . 1997 . A Survey of Augmented Reality . Presence Teleoperators & Virtual Environments 4 , August : 355 – 385 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1162 [ 2 ] Ellen Balka and Ina Wagner . 2006 . Making things work : dimensions of configurability as appropriation work . In Proceedings of the 2006 20th anniversary conference on Computer supported cooperative work , 229 – 238 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1180875 . 1180912 [ 3 ] Rémi Barraqand . 2012 . Designing Sociable Technologies . Universtiy of Grenoble . [ 4 ] Amaury Belin and Yannick Prié . 2012 . DIAM : Towards a model for describing appropriation processes through the evolution of digital artifacts . In Proceedings of the Designing Interactive Systems Conference , 645 – 654 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2317956 . 2318053 [ 5 ] Daniel G . Bobrow and Jack Whalen . 2002 . Community Knowledge Sharing in Practice : The Eureka Story . Reflections : The SoL Journal 4 , 2 : 47 – 59 . [ 6 ] Sebastian Büttner , Markus Funk , Oliver Sand , and Carsten Röcker . 2016 . Using Head - Mounted Displays and In - Situ Projection for Assistive Systems . Proceedings of the 9th ACM International Conference on PErvasive Technologies Related to Assistive Environments - PETRA ’16 : 1 – 8 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2910674 . 2910679 [ 7 ] Sebastian Büttner , Henrik Mucha , Markus Funk , Thomas Kosch , Mario Aehnelt , Sebastian Robert , and Carsten Röcker . 2017 . The Design Space of Augmented and Virtual Reality Applications for Assistive Environments in Manufacturing . Proceedings of the 10th International Conference on PErvasive Technologies Related to Assistive Environments - PETRA ’17 : 433 – 440 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3056540 . 3076193 [ 8 ] Jennie Carroll . 2004 . Completing Design in Use : Closing the Appropriation Cycle . European Conference of Information Systems , January 2004 . [ 9 ] Aparecido Fabiano Pinatti de Carvalho , Sven Hoffmann , Darwin Abele , Marcus Schweitzer , Peter Tolmie , David Randall , and Volker Wulf . 2018 . Of Embodied Action and Sensors : Knowledge and Expertise Sharing in Industrial Set - Up . Computer Supported Cooperative Work : CSCW : An International Journal 27 , 3 – 4 : 1 – 42 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10606 - 018 - 9320 - 6 [ 10 ] Nick Dalton , Gordon MacKay , and Simon Holland . 2012 . Kolab : Appropriation & Improvisation in Mobile Tangible Collaborative Interaction . In Proceedings of the Designing Interactive Systems Conference ( DIS ’12 ) , 21 – 24 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2317956 . 2317960 [ 11 ] Gerardine DeSanctis and Marshall Scott Poole . 1994 . Capturing the Complexity in Advanced Technology Use : Adaptive Structuration Theory . Organization Science . https : / / doi . org / doi : 10 . 2307 / 2635011 [ 12 ] G . Dini and M . Dalle Mura . 2015 . Application of Augmented Reality Techniques in Through - life Engineering Services . In Procedia CIRP . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . procir . 2015 . 07 . 044 [ 13 ] Alan Dix . 2007 . Designing for Appropriation . In Proceedings of the 21st British HCI Group Annual Conference on People and Computers : HCI . . . But Not As We Know It - Volume 2 ( BCS - HCI ’07 ) , 27 – 30 . Retrieved from http : / / dl . acm . org / citation . cfm ? id = 1531407 . 1531415 [ 14 ] Dale Dougherty . 2013 . The maker mindset . In Design , make , play : Growing the next generation of STEM innovators , M . Honey and D . E . Kanter ( eds . ) . Routledge , 7 – 12 . Retrieved from http : / / books . google . com / books ? hl = en & lr = lang _ en & id = 4iAmadd3AJYC & oi = fnd & pg = PA7 & dq = maker , + mo vement , + education & ots = XKdqIimdoi & sig = LQDYY - S8UAdBmhY6OPn4ESfB2gw [ 15 ] Paul Dourish . 2003 . The Appropriation of Interactive Technologies : Some Lessons from Placeless Documents . Journal Computer Supported Cooperative Work 12 , 4 : 465 – 490 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1023 / A : 1026149119426 [ 16 ] Sebastian Draxler , Adrian Jung , Alexander Boden , and Gunnar Stevens . 2011 . Workplace Warriors : Identifying Team Practices of Appropriation in Software Ecosystems . In Proceeding of the 4th international workshop on Cooperative and human aspects of software engineering - CHASE ’11 , 57 . Retrieved February 10 , 2014 from http : / / dl . acm . org / citation . cfm ? id = 1984642 . 1984656 [ 17 ] Sebastian Draxler and Gunnar Stevens . 2011 . Supporting the collaborative appropriation of an open software ecosystem . Computer Supported Cooperative Work 20 , 4 – 5 : 403 – 448 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10606 - 011 - 9148 - 9 [ 18 ] Steven Feiner , Blair Macintyre , and Dorée Seligmann . 1993 . Knowledgebased augmented reality . Communications of the ACM 36 , 7 : 53 – 62 . [ 19 ] Sean Follmer , David Carr , Emily Lovell , and Hiroshi Ishii . 2010 . CopyCAD : Remixing Physical Objects With Copy and Paste From the Real World . In Adjunct proceedings of the 23nd annual ACM symposium on User interface software and technology . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1866218 . 1866230 [ 20 ] Jérémy Frey , Renaud Gervais , Stéphanie Fleck , Fabien Lotte , and Martin Hachet . 2014 . Teegi : Tangible EEG Interface . 301 – 308 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2642918 . 2647368 [ 21 ] Markus Funk , A . Bachler , L . Bachler , Thomas Kosch , Thomas Heidenreich , and Albrecht Schmidt . 2017 . Making DIS ' 19 , June 23 – 28 , 2019 , San Diego , CA , USA 341 Working with augmented reality ? A long - term analysis of in - situ instructions at the assembly workplace . ACM International Conference Proceeding Series Part F1285 : 222 – 229 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3056540 . 3056548 [ 22 ] Michelle Gantt and Ba Bonnie A . Nardi . 1992 . Gardeners and gurus : patterns of cooperation among CAD users . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 107 – 117 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 142750 . 142767 [ 23 ] Nirit Gavish , Teresa Gutiérrez , Sabine Webel , Jorge Rodríguez , Matteo Peveri , Uli Bockholt , and Franco Tecchia . 2015 . Evaluating virtual reality and augmented reality training for industrial maintenance and assembly tasks . Interactive Learning Environments . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 10494820 . 2013 . 815221 [ 24 ] Renaud Gervais , Joan Sol Roo , and Martin Hachet . 2016 . Tangible Viewports . Proceedings of the TEI ’16 : Tenth International Conference on Tangible , Embedded , and Embodied Interaction - TEI ’16 : 176 – 184 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2839462 . 2839468 [ 25 ] Kristina Groth and John Bowers . 2001 . On finding Things out : Situating Organizational Knowledge in CSCW . In roceedings of the 7th European Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( ECSCW’01 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 0 - 306 - 48019 - 0 _ 15 [ 26 ] J Höcherl , S Niedersteiner , S Haug , C Pohlt , T Schlegl , K Weber , and T Berlehner . 2016 . Smart Workbench : Ein multimodales und bidirektionales Assistenzsystem für den industriellen Einsatz . In Zweite transdisziplinäre Konferenz zum Thema “Technische Unterstützungssysteme , die die Menschen wirklich wollen , ” 49 – 58 . [ 27 ] Brett R . Jones , Hrvoje Benko , Eyal Ofek , and Andrew D . Wilson . 2013 . IllumiRoom : Peripheral Projected Illusions for Interactive Experiences . Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - CHI ’13 : 869 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2470654 . 2466112 [ 28 ] Brett Jones , Lior Shapira , Rajinder Sodhi , Michael Murdock , Ravish Mehra , Hrvoje Benko , Andrew Wilson , Eyal Ofek , Blair MacIntyre , and Nikunj Raghuvanshi . 2014 . RoomAlive : Magical Experiences Enabled by Scalable , Adaptive Projector - camera Units . Proceedings of the 27th annual ACM symposium on User interface software and technology - UIST ’14 : 637 – 644 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2642918 . 2647383 [ 29 ] W . Ju , L . Bonanni , R . Fletcher , R . Hurwitz , T . Judd , R . Post , M . Reynolds , and J . Yoon . 2002 . Origami Desk : integrating technological innovation and human - centric design . In Proceeding on Designing interactive systems , 399 – 405 . [ 30 ] Oliver Korn , Markus Funk , Stephan Abele , Thomas Hörz , and Albrecht Schmidt . 2014 . Context - aware assistive systems at the workplace . Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on PErvasive Technologies Related to Assistive Environments - PETRA ’14 : 1 – 8 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2674396 . 2674406 [ 31 ] Oliver Korn , Albrecht Schmidt , and Thomas Hörz . 2013 . Augmented manufacturing . Proceedings of the 6th International Conference on PErvasive Technologies Related to Assistive Environments - PETRA ’13 , March 2014 : 1 – 8 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2504335 . 2504356 [ 32 ] Oliver Korn , Albrecht Schmidt , and Thomas Hörz . 2013 . The Potentials of In - situ - projection for Augmented Workplaces in Production : A Study with Impaired Persons . In CHI ’13 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI EA ’13 ) , 979 – 984 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2468356 . 2468531 [ 33 ] Stacey Kuznetsov and Eric Paulos . 2010 . Rise of the Expert Amateur : DIY Projects , Communities , and Cultures . In Proceedings of the 6th Nordic Conference on Human - Computer Interaction : Extending Boundaries , 295 – 304 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1868914 . 1868950 [ 34 ] Thomas Ludwig , Alexander Boden , and Volkmar Pipek . 2017 . 3D Printers as Sociable Technologies : Taking Appropriation Infrastructures to the Internet of Things . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction ( TOCHI ) 24 , 2 . [ 35 ] Thomas Ludwig , Volkmar Pipek , and Peter Tolmie . 2018 . Designing for Collaborative Infrastructuring : Supporting Resonance Activities . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction - CSCW Volume 2 , CSCW : 113 . [ 36 ] Thomas Ludwig , Oliver Stickel , Alexander Boden , and Volkmar Pipek . 2014 . Towards Sociable Technologies : An Empirical Study on Designing Appropriation Infrastructures for 3D Printing . In Proceedings of DIS14 Designing Interactive Systems , 835 – 844 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2598510 . 2598528 [ 37 ] Wendy E . Mackay . 1990 . Patterns of sharing customizable software . In Proceedings of the 1990 ACM conference on Computer - supported cooperative work , 209 – 221 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 99332 . 99356 [ 38 ] Wendy March , Margot Jacobs , and Tony Salvador . 2005 . Designing technology for community appropriation . In CHI 05 extended abstracts on Human factors in computing systems CHI 05 , 2126 – 2127 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1056808 . 1057120 [ 39 ] David A . Mellis and Leah Buechley . 2012 . Case studies in the personal fabrication of electronic products . In Proceedings of the Designing Interactive Systems Conference , 268 – 277 . Making DIS ' 19 , June 23 – 28 , 2019 , San Diego , CA , USA 342 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2317956 . 2317998 [ 40 ] Paul Milgram and Fumio Kishino . 1994 . A Taxonomy of Mixed Reality Visual Displays . IEICE Transactions on Information Systems , 12 : 1 – 15 . [ 41 ] Mark R . Mine , Jeroen Van Baar , Anselm Grundhöfer , David Rose , and Bei Yang . 2012 . Projection - based augmented reality in Disney theme parks . Computer 45 , 7 : 32 – 40 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / MC . 2012 . 154 [ 42 ] Yoichi Motokawa and Hideo Saito . 2007 . Support system for guitar playing using augmented reality display . In Proceedings - ISMAR 2006 : Fifth IEEE and ACM International Symposium on Mixed and Augmented Reality . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / ISMAR . 2006 . 297825 [ 43 ] U . Neumann and A . Majoros . 1998 . Cognitive , Performance , and Systems Issues for Augmented Reality Applications in Manufacturing and Maintenance . Proceedings . IEEE the Virtual Reality Annual International Symposium ( VRAIS ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / VRAIS . 1998 . 658416 [ 44 ] Donald A Norman . 2008 . Sociable Design . Retrieved November 1 , 2016 from http : / / www . jnd . org / ms / 1 . 1 Sociable Design . pdf [ 45 ] Jacki O’Neill , Stefania Castellani , Antonietta Grasso , Frederic Roulland , and Peter Tolmie . 2005 . Representations Can be Good Enough . In Proceedings of the Ninth European Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work ( ECSCW ) , 267 – 286 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 1 - 4020 - 4023 - 7 _ 14 [ 46 ] Claudia Pinhanez . 2001 . The Everywhere Displays Projector : A Device to Create Ubiquitous Graphical Interfaces . In International Conference on Ubiquitous Computing , 315 – 331 . [ 47 ] Volkmar Pipek . 2005 . From Tailoring to Appropriation Support : Negotiating Groupware Usage . University of Oulu . [ 48 ] Volkmar Pipek and Helge Kahler . 2006 . Supporting Collaborative Tailoring . In End - User Development . Srpinger , 315 – 345 . [ 49 ] Ben Piper , Carlo Ratti , and Hiroshi Ishii . 2002 . Illuminating Clay : A 3 - D Tangible Interface for Landscape Analysis . Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - CHI ’02 , 1 : 355 – 362 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 503376 . 503439 [ 50 ] D Randall , J O’Brien , M Rouncefield , and J A Hughes . 1996 . Organisational memory and CSCW : supporting the “Mavis Phenomenon . ” In Proceedings Sixth Australian Conference on Computer - Human Interaction , 26 – 33 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / OZCHI . 1996 . 559984 [ 51 ] Ramesh Raskar , Greg Welch , Kok - Lim Low , and Deepak Bandyopadhyay . 2001 . Shader Lamps : Animating Real Objects With Image - Based Illumination . 89 – 102 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 7091 - 6242 - 2 _ 9 [ 52 ] Linsey Raymaekers , Jo Vermeulen , Kris Luyten , and Karin Coninx . 2014 . Game of Tones : Learning to Play Songs on a Piano Using Projected Instructions and Games . In CHI ’14 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI EA ’14 ) , 411 – 414 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2559206 . 2574799 [ 53 ] Alec Rivers , Andrew Adams , and Frédo Durand . 2012 . Sculpting by numbers . ACM Transactions on Graphics . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2366145 . 2366176 [ 54 ] Leonardo Rodriguez , Fabian Quint , Dominic Gorecky , David Romero , and Héctor R . Siller . 2015 . Developing a Mixed Reality Assistance System Based on Projection Mapping Technology for Manual Operations at Assembly Workstations . In Procedia Computer Science . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . procs . 2015 . 12 . 254 [ 55 ] Joan Sol Roo , Renaud Gervais , Jeremy Frey , and Martin Hachet . 2017 . Inner Garden . Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - CHI ’17 : 1459 – 1470 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3025453 . 3025743 [ 56 ] Stephanie Rosenthal , Shaun K Kane , Jacob O Wobbrock , and Daniel Avrahami . 2010 . Augmenting On - screen Instructions with Micro - projected Guides : When It Works , and when It Fails . In Proceedings of the 12th ACM International Conference on Ubiquitous Computing ( UbiComp ’10 ) , 203 – 212 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1864349 . 1864391 [ 57 ] Enrico Rukzio . 2014 . Using Scalable , Interactive Floor Projection for Production Planning Scenario . Proceedings of the Ninth ACM International Conference on Interactive Tabletops and Surfaces : 363 – 368 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2669485 . 2669547 [ 58 ] Stefan Rüther , Thomas Hermann , Maik Mracek , Stefan Kopp , and Jochen Steil . 2013 . An assistance system for guiding workers in central sterilization supply departments . Proceedings of the 6th International Conference on PErvasive Technologies Related to Assistive Environments - PETRA ’13 : 1 – 8 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2504335 . 2504338 [ 59 ] Gilbert Ryle . 1945 . Knowing How and Knowing That . Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2307 / 4544405 [ 60 ] D Schön . 1983 . The Reflective Practitioner : How professional think in action . Design . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1542 / peds . 2005 - 0209 [ 61 ] Susan Leigh Star and Karen Ruhleder . 1996 . Steps Toward an Ecology of Infrastructure : Design and Access for Large Information Spaces . Information Systems Research 7 , 1 : 111 – 134 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1287 / isre . 7 . 1 . 111 Making DIS ' 19 , June 23 – 28 , 2019 , San Diego , CA , USA 343 [ 62 ] Gunnar Stevens , Volkmar Pipek , and Volker Wulf . 2009 . Appropriation Infrastructure : Supporting the Design of Usages . In Proceedings of the 2nd International Symposium on End - User Development ( LNCS ) , 50 – 69 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 642 - 00427 - 8 [ 63 ] Anselm L . Strauss . 1987 . Qualitative analysis for social scientists . Cambridge University Press . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1017 / CBO9780511557842 [ 64 ] Lucy A Suchman . 1987 . Plans and Situated Actions : The Problem of Human - Machine Communication . Cambridge University Press . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1525 / aa . 1988 . 90 . 4 . 02a00320 [ 65 ] Joshua G Tanenbaum , Amanda M Williams , Audrey Desjardins , and Karen Tanenbaum . 2013 . Democratizing technology : pleasure , utility and expressiveness in { DIY } and maker practice . In Proceedings of the Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 2603 – 2612 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2470654 . 2481360 [ 66 ] John Underkoffler , Brygg Ullmer , and Hiroshi Ishii . 1999 . Emancipated Pixels : Real - World Graphics In The Luminous Room . 385 – 392 . [ 67 ] Antonio E . Uva , Michele Gattullo , Vito M . Manghisi , Daniele Spagnulo , Giuseppe L . Cascella , and Michele Fiorentino . 2018 . Evaluating the effectiveness of spatial augmented reality in smart manufacturing : a solution for manual working stations . International Journal of Advanced Manufacturing Technology 94 , 1 – 4 : 509 – 521 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s00170 - 017 - 0846 - 4 [ 68 ] Ron Wakkary and Leah Maestri . 2007 . The resourcefulness of everyday design . In Proceedings of the 6th ACM SIGCHI conference on Creativity & cognition - C & C ’07 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1254960 . 1254984 [ 69 ] Ron Wakkary and Leah Maestri . 2008 . Aspects of everyday design : Resourcefulness , adaptation , and emergence . International Journal of Human - Computer Interaction . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 10447310802142276 [ 70 ] Mark Weiser . 1991 . The Computer for the 21st Century . Scientific American : 1 – 9 . [ 71 ] B . T . Wittbrodt , A . G . Glover , J . Laureto , G . C . Anzalone , D . Oppliger , J . L . Irwin , and J . M . Pearce . 2013 . Life - cycle economic analysis of distributed manufacturing with open - source 3 - D printers . Mechatronics 23 : 713 – 726 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . mechatronics . 2013 . 06 . 002 [ 72 ] Fahri Yetim , Sebastian Draxler , Gunnar Stevens , and Volker Wulf . 2012 . Fostering Continuous User Participation by Embedding a Communication Support Tool in User Interfaces . AIS Transactions on Human - Computer Interaction 4 , 2 : 153 – 168 . [ 73 ] Herimanana Zafiharimalala , David Robin , and André Tricot . 2014 . Why Aircraft Maintenance Technicians Sometimes Do Not Use Their Maintenance Documents : Towards a New Qualitative Perspective . International Journal of Aviation Psychology . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 10508414 . 2014 . 918444 [ 74 ] Jianlong Zhou , Ivan Lee , Bruce Thomas , Roland Menassa , Anthony Farrant , and Andrew Sansome . 2011 . Applying spatial augmented reality to facilitate in - situ support for automotive spot welding inspection . Proceedings of the 10th International Conference on Virtual Reality Continuum and Its Applications in Industry - VRCAI ’11 1 , 212 : 195 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2087756 . 2087784 Making DIS ' 19 , June 23 – 28 , 2019 , San Diego , CA , USA 344