doi : 10 . 1101 / pdb . prot4989 Cold Spring Harb Protoc ; Andrew H . Fischer , Kenneth A . Jacobson , Jack Rose and Rolf Zeller Paraffin Embedding Tissue Samples for Sectioning Service Email Alerting click here . Receive free email alerts when new articles cite this article - CategoriesSubject Cold Spring Harbor Protocols . Browse articles on similar topics from ( 463 articles ) Visualization ( 6 articles ) Purifying Antibodies ( 56 articles ) Light Microscopy ( 538 articles ) Imaging / Microscopy , general ( 462 articles ) Cell Imaging ( 1037 articles ) Cell Biology , general http : / / cshprotocols . cshlp . org / subscriptions go to : Cold Spring Harbor Protocols To subscribe to Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press at UNIVERSITE LAVAL on June 24 , 2014 - Published by http : / / cshprotocols . cshlp . org / Downloaded from Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press at UNIVERSITE LAVAL on June 24 , 2014 - Published by http : / / cshprotocols . cshlp . org / Downloaded from Paraffin Embedding Tissue Samples for Sectioning Andrew H . Fischer , Kenneth A . Jacobson , Jack Rose , and Rolf Zeller This protocol was adapted from “Preparation of Cells and Tissues for Fluorescence Microscopy , ” Chapter 4 , in Basic Methods in Microscopy ( eds . Spector and Goldman ) . Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press , Cold Spring Harbor , NY , USA , 2006 . INTRODUCTION This protocol describes a method for embedding tissues in paraffin blocks for sectioning . Paraffin sec - tions require extensive fixation and processing steps , but provide superior morphology compared with other sectioning methods . RELATED INFORMATION Related procedures for preparing tissues are described in the following CSH Protocols articles : Decalcifying Tissues for Paraffin Embedding ( Fischer et al . 2008a ) and Cutting Sections of Paraffin Embedded Tissues ( Fischer et al . 2008b ) . © 2008 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press 1 Vol . 3 , Issue 5 , May 2008 Please cite as : CSH Protocols ; 2008 ; doi : 10 . 1101 / pdb . prot4989 www . cshprotocols . org Protocol MATERIALS CAUTIONS AND RECIPES : Please see Appendices for appropriate handling of materials marked with < ! > , and recipes for reagents marked with < R > . Reagents Alcohol for dehydration series ( e . g . , ethanol or Flex alcohols [ Richard - Allen Scientific ] ; see Step 3 ) Collodion ( EMD Chemicals ) or 2 % w / v agar ( for tiny tissue fragments or cell suspensions ; see Step 1 . ii ) < ! > Formalin ( 10 % [ v / v ] , neutral buffered ) or appropriate fixative Paraffin ( e . g . , Surgipath Medical Industries ) Tissue sample of interest < ! > Xylene Long - term exposure to xylene can lead to serious health problems . Xylene alternatives are available ( see Fisher Scientific ) . Equipment Centrifuge Heat - proof vessel ( for melting paraffin ) Hot plate Stir plate and stir bar Tissue cassette ( e . g . , Simport biopsy cassettes , Fisher Scientific ) Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press at UNIVERSITE LAVAL on June 24 , 2014 - Published by http : / / cshprotocols . cshlp . org / Downloaded from www . cshprotocols . org 2 CSH Protocols METHOD Automatic processors for paraffin embedding are also available . 1 . Prepare the tissue for embedding by one of the following methods , depending on tissue size : For larger tissue fragments i . Cut the tissue to ~ 2 mm in thickness and up to 2 cm in length and width , and place into a tissue cassette . For tiny tissue fragments or cell suspensions ii . Add a small amount of collodion solution to a glass 15 - mL centrifuge tube . Swirl the solu - tion to completely coat the inside of the tube . iii . Invert the tube and dry the collodion for 10 - 15 min . iv . Add the sample to the coated centrifuge tube and centrifuge at 500 g - 1000 g for 15 min . v . Pull the collodion coating containing the pellet from the tube ( as a thin sac ) and process as described for tissue ( Steps 2 - 6 ) . Alternatively , small samples can be concentrated and embedded in 2 % w / v agar . 2 . Fix the tissue by immersion in at least 10 volumes of fixative ( typically 10 % neutral buffered formalin ) . Typical fixation time is 2 h to overnight . For small pieces of tissue , 1 mm or less in thickness , all incubation times given can be cut in half . Fixation should be standardized for a given procedure , because increasing time in fixa - tive can alter immunoreactivity . 3 . Dehydrate the tissue in steps by stirring in at least 10 volumes of the following concentration series of alcohol at room temperature . Mix the alcohol ( e . g . , ethanol ) with H 2 O to achieve the desired concentration . Concentration Time 70 % 1 h 95 % 1 h 95 % 1 h 100 % 1 h 100 % 1 h 100 % 1 h If all H 2 O is not removed from the tissue , then subsequent processing steps will fail . 4 . “De - fat” the tissue in two changes of at least 10 volumes of xylene at room temperature for 1 h each , with stirring . This step is essential to remove all of the alcohol from the previous step and to remove the fat that would otherwise make the paraffin block soft and difficult to cut . 5 . Infiltrate the tissue with paraffin as follows : i . Melt the paraffin by heating in a heat - proof vessel to 58°C - 60°C . ii . Stir the cassette with the dehydrated , defatted tissue in 10 volumes of melted paraffin . Change the paraffin three times every hour . Monitor the temperature to be sure it is kept at 58°C - 60°C . 6 . Embed the tissue in paraffin as follows : Large cassettes are also available for whole mounts . Tissue mold ( stainless steel or vinyl , e . g . , HistoPrep Base molds , Fisher Scientific ) or matchbox Tube ( centrifuge , glass , 15 mL ) ( for tiny tissue fragments or cell suspensions ; see Step 1 . ii ) Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press at UNIVERSITE LAVAL on June 24 , 2014 - Published by http : / / cshprotocols . cshlp . org / Downloaded from i . Remove the tissue from the cassette . Place a small amount of melted paraffin into the bot - tom of a matchbox or tissue mold and push the tissue flat against the bottom of the box . ii . Invert the original tissue cassette over the matchbox or mold , and pour in paraffin to cover the base of the cassette . Make certain that the base of the cassette is parallel with the tissue , because the base of the tissue cassette will ultimately be held by the microtome . iii . After the paraffin hardens , remove the mold / box . Paraffin tissue blocks can be stored at room temperature with little degradation of immunoreactivity or nucleic acids for long periods of time . REFERENCES Fischer , A . H . , Jacobson , K . A . , Rose , J . , and Zeller , R . 2008a . Decalcifying tissues for paraffin embedding . CSH Protocols ( this issue ) doi : 10 . 1101 / pdb . prot4990 . Fischer , A . H . , Jacobson , K . A . , Rose , J . , and Zeller , R . 2008b . Cutting sections of paraffin embedded tissues . CSH Protocols ( this issue ) doi : 10 . 1101 / pdb . prot4987 . www . cshprotocols . org 3 CSH Protocols Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press at UNIVERSITE LAVAL on June 24 , 2014 - Published by http : / / cshprotocols . cshlp . org / Downloaded from