The dynamic polymerization of actin has a central role in several processes that reshape the plasma membrane . These processes include the protrusion of lamellipodia and filopodia during cell migration , and different forms of endocytic internalization — for example , phagocyto - sis , macropinocytosis , clathrin - mediated endocytosis and caveolae - mediated endocytosis ( FIG . 1 ) . In this review , we focus on the role of actin in clathrin - mediated endocytosis , which is the main pathway for receptor - mediated endocytosis in most eukaryotic cells 1 ( for other reviews on actin in clathrin - mediated endocyto - sis , see REFS 2 – 5 ) . We present recent findings on this topic with an emphasis on live - cell imaging studies in Saccharomyces cerevisiae , in which the analysis of actin dynamics and function has been most comprehensive . We also attempt to synthesize all of the findings into a mechanistic model of how actin functions during endocytic internalization . A basic scheme for the key events of clathrin - mediated endocytosis was established decades ago 6 – 8 . The first step in this pathway is the binding of extracellular cargo molecules to specific cell - surface receptors . These receptors and other membrane proteins that are destined for endocytosis are then sequestered by intracellular adaptor proteins to sites of endocytosis . The adaptors , together with clathrin , form an endocytic coat at the plasma membrane . The coated membrane bends to form an invagination that subsequently pinches off to form a cargo - filled vesicle . The protein coat that surrounds the newly formed endocytic vesi - cle is rapidly disassembled . The vesicles then deliver their cargoes to early endosomes by fusing with the endosomal membrane . From early endosomes , the cargo molecules can be recycled back to the plasma membrane or trafficked further to late endosomes and , finally , to lysosomal organelles for degradation . This classic model was based mainly on the results of electron - microscopy studies on fixed cells and on numerous biochemical assays . During recent years , live - cell fluorescence micro - scopy has provided several new mechanistic insights into clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Although the resolution of light microscopy cannot compete with that of electron microscopy , light microscopy has one important advan - tage — microscopy at visual wavelengths can be carried out on living cells , so cellular processes can be followed in real time . Owing to the transient and localized nature of endocytic actin structures , live - cell imaging has been crucial in showing that a dynamic actin cytoskeleton participates directly in membrane dynamics during clathrin - mediated endocytosis and in understanding the role of actin in endocytosis . The dynamic connec - tion between the actin cytoskeleton and sites of clathrin - mediated endocytosis in living cells was first shown in cultured mammalian cells 9 . As described below , the polymerization of actin seems to provide the force for the deformation and movement of a membrane at different steps along the endocytic pathway . Linking the endocytic and actin machineries One of the first hints that the actin cytoskeleton is involved in endocytosis came from the use of pharma - cological agents to interfere with actin turnover . In mammalian cells , actin poisons inhibit endocytic uptake and the formation of coated vesicles 10 – 13 . However , the block in endocytosis in mammalian cells seems to be partial 10 , 12 , 13 or restricted to only the apical surface of epi - thelial cells 11 . In S . cerevisiae , both latrunculin A , which binds to actin monomers and prevents their assembly into filaments , and jasplakinolide , which stabilizes actin filaments ( and prevents their depolymerization ) , block endocytosis completely 14 , 15 . Department of Molecular and Cell Biology , University of California , Berkeley , California 94720 - 3202 , USA . Correspondence to D . G . D . e - mail : drubin @ socrates . berkeley . edu doi : 10 . 1038 / nrm1940 Lamellipodia Sheet - like plasma - membrane protrusions at the leading edge of motile cells that are formed by actin polymerization . Filopodia Plasma - membrane spikes that are formed by actin polymerization . Phagocytosis A plasma - membrane - associated process in which a eukaryotic cell engulfs large particles , such as bacteria . Macropinocytosis A form of endocytosis in which extracellular fluid is taken up through the formation of large membrane vesicles . Clathrin - mediated endocytosis The uptake of receptors , membrane and cargo at the cell surface through a process that specifically involves the coat protein clathrin . Harnessing actin dynamics for clathrin - mediated endocytosis Marko Kaksonen , Christopher P . Toret and David G . Drubin Actin polymerization often occurs at the plasma membrane to drive the protrusion of lamellipodia and filopodia at the leading edge of migrating cells . A role for actin polymerization in another cellular process that involves the reshaping of the plasma membrane — namely endocytosis — has recently been established . Live - cell imaging studies are shedding light on the order and timing of the molecular events and mechanisms of actin function during endocytosis . R E V I E W S 404 | JUNE 2006 | VOLUME 7 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio Lamellipodia / ﬁlopodia Macropinocytosis Caveolae - mediated endocytosis Clathrin - mediated endocytosis Clathrin Clathrin - mediated endocytosis ( actin patch ) Nucleus Phagocytosis Actin cable Caveolin - 1 Vesicle Saccharomycescerevisiae cell Mammalian cell Actin Endosome Caveolae - mediated endocytosis A form of uptake at the plasma membrane that involves the protein caveolin . Cofilin A conserved actin - binding protein that is thought to be involved in actin - filament severing and disassembly . Another line of evidence for the involvement of actin in endocytosis came from genetic experiments that were carried out in S . cerevisiae . Using actin mutants , the Riezman laboratory showed that normal actin function is required for the internalization step of the endocyto - sis of mating pheromone α - factor 16 . The later trafficking steps along the endocytic pathway were not affected 16 . Similarly , mutations in several actin - binding proteins resulted in a block in endocytic internalization in S . cerevisiae . In cells in which the gene that encodes the actin - filament - crosslinking protein Sac6 ( also known as fimbrin ) was deleted , the internalization of α - factor was blocked 16 ( see TABLE 1 for descriptions and homologies of the S . cerevisiae and mammalian proteins that are dis - cussed in this article ) . Deletions of the genes that encode the S . cerevisiae type - I myosins Myo3 and Myo5 , which are actin - dependent motor proteins , also caused a strong defect in receptor - mediated endocytosis 17 . In addition , cofilin mutations and the actin Val159Asn mutation , which both cause defects in actin - filament turnover , blocked the endocytic uptake of Lucifer yellow . These results indicate that active actin - filament assembly and disassembly are required for endocytosis . The localization of actin also indicates that it might function in endocytosis . In S . cerevisiae cells , punc - tate cortical actin structures called actin patches were shown to colocalize , albeit only partially , with many endocytic proteins 2 . Also , electron - microscopy stud - ies on mammalian cells showed that actin filaments were often associated with coated pits 13 . In neuronal synapses , actin was also found to colocalize with sites of clathrin - mediated endocytosis 18 . Similarly , an immuno - electron - microscopy study found that S . cerevisiae actin patches localized to membrane invaginations that could be intermediates of endocytic vesicle formation 19 . How - ever , a follow - up study , which used double immuno - electron microscopy , failed to show the colocalization of endocytic cargo molecules with actin patches 20 . Finally , an abundance of studies have uncovered a large number of protein – protein interactions that are indicative of links between the endocytic machinery and the actin cytoskeleton . These studies of biochemical interactions show that many endocytic proteins can potentially be linked to the actin cytoskeleton , either directly or indirectly 2 , 5 , 21 . Taken together , these experi - ments clearly indicate a close functional link between the actin cytoskeleton and the internalization step of endocytosis . However , an understanding of how actin functions in endocytosis remained elusive . Glimpses of actin in living cells Live - cell imaging studies of both mammalian and S . cerevisiae cells have recently revealed a highly regular timeline of events at endocytic sites . Different endocytic proteins are recruited to and disassemble from endo - cytic sites in an ordered sequence 9 , 22 – 31 . Many features of this sequence are conserved between mammalian and S . cerevisiae cells , as are the proteins themselves ( FIG . 2 ; TABLE 1 ) . In mammalian cells , actin appears at clathrin - coated structures on the plasma membrane in transient bursts that occur near the end of the lifetime of the clathrin - coated pit and overlap with the internalization of clathrin - coated vesicles 9 , 32 ( FIG . 2 ) . The actin structures that are involved in these bursts have been visualized in mammalian cells by expressing green fluorescent protein ( GFP ) fusions of actin or by microinjecting fluorescently labelled actin , and using total internal reflection fluorescence ( TIRF ) microscopy ( BOX 1 ) . Internalization is marked by the movement of fluo - rescently labelled clathrin away from the cell surface and can be followed by comparing the signal intensi - ties in TIRF and epifluorescence images 9 . This ratio Figure 1 | Actin - polymerization - driven processes in eukaryotic cells . The dynamic polymerization of actin filaments ( red ) is involved in different processes that reshape or move cellular membranes . These processes include different forms of endocytic uptake at the plasma membrane — that is , clathrin - mediated endocytosis in Saccharomyces cerevisiae and mammalian cells , as well as caveolae - mediated endocytosis , macropinocytosis and phagocytosis in mammalian cells . In addition , actin assembly has a role in the movement of endosomes and / or endocytic vesicles . In mammalian cells , endosomes move by actin ‘rocketing’ , whereas in S . cerevisiae , endocytic vesicles move together with actin cables as they are being assembled by formin proteins . Finally , the protrusion of lamellipodia and filopodia in migrating mammalian cells is dependent on actin polymerization . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 7 | JUNE 2006 | 405 Lucifer yellow A fluorescent dye that enters cells by endocytosis and is often used as a marker for bulk endocytic uptake . ( intensity in TIRF / intensity in epifluorescence ) decre - ases when the fluorescent structures move into the cell and out of the zone of TIRF excitation 9 . The increase in the intensity of actin fluorescence correlates with the translocation of the clathrin signal away from the plasma membrane 9 . Merrifield and colleagues reported that bursts in actin polymerization occurred at 80 % of the internalizing clathrin - coated pits 9 . Internalization also coincides with the transient recruitment of dynamin - 1 , a GTPase that is involved in vesicle scis - sion 9 . Actin polymerization is therefore tightly coupled both spatially and temporally to the vesicle - budding step of endocytosis . A similar sequence of events takes place at endo - cytic sites in S . cerevisiae ( FIG . 2 ) . The two main actin cytoskeletal structures in S . cerevisiae are actin cables and actin patches ( FIG . 1 ) . The cables are orientated along the growth axis of the cell and are involved in the traf - ficking of many organelles to growing daughter cells 33 . Actin patches are punctate dynamic structures that are at or close to the plasma membrane 34 , 35 . The dynamics of actin patches have been followed using different fluorescently tagged actin - cytoskeleton proteins 23 – 25 , 34 – 39 . For a long time the role of actin patches remained unknown . However , it has recently become evident that they mark endocytic sites at the plasma membrane and newly formed primary endocytic vesicles 24 , 25 , 28 , 37 . Another long - standing issue in the studies of endo - cytosis in S . cerevisiae has been the unresolved role of clathrin . The question of whether clathrin localizes to endocytic sites at the plasma membrane in S . cerevisiae has been difficult to answer owing to technical chal - lenges . However , using TIRF microscopy , it has recently been shown that clathrin does localize to S . cerevisiae endocytic sites , as was expected from work in other species , and that actin polymerization bursts occur at the clathrin - containing endocytic sites during the vesicle - budding phase 25 , 28 . Actin patches are highly transient , with lifetimes of only about 15 seconds 24 , 39 . Similar to the case in mammalian cells , these transient actin structures form at the plasma membrane , where they colocalize with endocytic sites that are marked with clathrin and other endocytic proteins 25 , 28 . The short lifetime of the actin patches is divided into an initial phase of restricted motility followed by a phase of rapid motility during which the patch disassembles 24 . The initial phase probably coincides with the internalization movement of clathrin - coated endocytic structures 25 and the rapid motility phase probably corresponds to the movement of clathrin - uncoated , actin - filament - covered endocytic vesicles 37 , 40 . The localization and timing of the actin polymeriza - tion bursts are strikingly similar in both S . cerevisiae and mammalian cells ( FIG . 2 ) . Furthermore , the spatial and Table 1 | Saccharomyces cerevisiae and mammalian protein homologies * Saccharomyces cerevisiae proteins Mammalian proteins Functions Abp1 ABP1 Arp2 / 3 - complex activator in S . cerevisiae , actin - binding protein , scaffold protein Act1 Actin Cytoskeletal filaments Ark1 , Prk1 AAK1 , GAK Protein phosphorylation Bbc1 – WASP regulator Bzz1 Syndapin WASP - interacting protein Capping proteins ( Cap1 / 2 ) Capping proteins ( CAPZ - α , CAPZ - β ) Barbed - end actin - filament capping proteins Chc1 , Clc1 Clathrin Vesicle coat component Inp52 Synaptojanin PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 5 - phosphatase Las17 WASP , N - WASP Arp2 / 3 - complex activator Myo3 , Myo5 Type - I myosins Arp2 / 3 - complex activator in S . cerevisiae , motor protein Pan1 complex ( Pan1 , Sla1 , End3 ) Intersectin , EPS15 Adaptor protein , Arp2 / 3 - complex activator ( Pan1 in S . cerevisiae ) , WASP regulator ( Sla1 , Intersectin ) Rvs161 , Rvs167 Amphiphysin Membrane bending or curvature sensing Sac6 Fimbrin Actin - filament - crosslinking protein Sla2 HIP1R Actin - binding protein , PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 - binding protein Vrp1 WIP WASP - interacting protein – Cortactin Arp2 / 3 - complex activator – Dynamin - 1 , - 2 GTPase , vesicle scission * This table gives descriptions and homologies of the S . cerevisiae and mammalian proteins that are discussed in this article . The ‘ – ’ symbol indicates that there is no known homologue . AAK1 , adaptor - protein - complex - 2 - associated kinase - 1 ; Abp1 / ABP1 , actin - binding protein - 1 ; Ark1 , actin - regulating kinase - 1 ; Arp2 / 3 , actin - related protein - 2 / 3 ; Cap 1 / 2 , barbed - end capping proteins ; CAPZ , capping protein muscle Z - line ; Chc1 , clathrin heavy chain - 1 ; Clc1 , clathrin light chain - 1 ; EPS15 , epidermal - growth - factor - receptor - pathway substrate - 15 ; GAK , cyclin - G - associated kinase ; HIP1R , Huntingtin - interacting protein - 1 related ; Myo , myosin ; PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 , phosphati - dylinositol - 4 , 5 - bisphosphate ; Rvs , reduced viabililty upon starvation ; ( N - ) WASP , ( neuronal ) Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome protein ; WIP , WASP - interacting protein . R E V I E W S 406 | JUNE 2006 | VOLUME 7 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio Endocytic site initiation Invagination and scission Release b Saccharomyces cerevisiae cells a c Mammalian cells Coat Clathrin ( 1 – 2 min ) Clathrin Dynamin - 1 N - WASP Actin , Arp2 / 3 , Cortactin Sla1 , Pan1 , End3 , Sla2 ( 30 – 40 s ) Las17 ( 30 – 40 s ) Myo5 , Bbc1 ( 10 s ) WASP – myosin Actin , Arp2 / 3 complex , Abp1 Cap1 / 2 , Sac6 ( 15 s ) Actin Rvs161 , Rvs167 ( 10 s ) Amphiphysin Arp2 / 3 complex A protein complex that promotes the nucleation of actin filaments and creates a branched actin meshwork . Formin - family proteins A family of proteins that contain a formin homology - 2 domain and can promote actin - filament assembly . temporal localization of several endocytic and actin - cytoskeleton proteins has been determined in both S . cerevisiae and mammalian cells , and it is apparent that the endocytic internalization processes in these different organisms are variations on the same ancestral theme ( FIG . 2 ) . However , there are also striking differences , such as the importance of dynamin . In mammalian cells , dynamin is essential for the scission of clathrin - coated vesicles 41 , 42 . By contrast , dynamins do not seem to have a direct role in endocytic internalization in S . cerevisiae 43 , 44 . Also , the relative importance of clathrin and adaptor protein complex - 2 ( AP2 ) seems greater in mammalian than in S . cerevisiae cells . Dynamic actin filaments have also been observed to colocalize with endosomes in cells from various vertebrate species 45 – 49 ( FIG . 1 ) . Actin ‘comet tails’ form on one side of the endosomes and actin - filament assembly in the comet tails seems to push the endosomes along . The biological role of the actin rocketing of endocytic organelles is not clear . It might have a role in moving the endosomes so that they can make contact with micro - tubules , which are used as tracks for long - range traffick - ing , or it could aid in the fusion of endocytic organelles . A similar actin - comet - tail - propelled movement has also been proposed as a mechanism for endosome motility in S . cerevisiae cells 50 . However , no actin comet tails or actin - related protein - 2 / 3 ( Arp2 / 3 ) - complex activators have been observed to associate with S . cerevisiae endo - somes , so whether this mechanism exists in S . cerevisiae remains an open question . S . cerevisiae cells use a different actin - polymerization - dependent mechanism for endocytic vesicle motility . Actin cables are bundles of actin filaments that grow continuously by polymerization that is nucleated at the plasma membrane by formin - family proteins 51 . Endocytic vesicles become attached to the cables and move together with the growing cables 37 , 52 ( FIG . 1 ) . This process seems to improve the the efficiency of the trafficking of internalized cargo 52 . In summary , actin polymerization seems to have a direct role during at least two steps in the endocytic pathway . First , actin appears at the plasma membrane during the formation of the primary endocytic vesicles . Subsequently , in some vertebrate cells , dynamic actin structures associate with motile endosomes . The roles of actin in endocytic internalization Dynamic actin structures seem to associate with dif - ferent endocytic intermediates . But what are the func - tional roles of actin during endocytosis ? Actin could function during several different stages of clathrin - mediated endocytosis ( FIG . 2 ) . In both mammalian and S . cerevisiae cells , the first step of endocytosis in which dynamic actin structures has been visualized is just prior to the internalization of the endocytic coat 9 , 24 . This timing indicates possible roles for actin in membrane invagination , vesicle constriction , vesicle scission and vesicle movement . Actin might also have earlier , possibly indirect , roles in the spatial organiza - tion and lateral movement of clathrin - coated endocytic sites 32 , 53 , 54 . It was shown recently in mammalian cells that vesicle scission takes place when the actin poly - merization burst reaches its peak level 26 . Merrifield and colleagues used mouse fibroblast cells that were expressing a pH - sensitive form of GFP that was fused to the extracellular domain of the transferrin receptor . The cells were perfused with rapidly alternating media of neutral and low pH , and the surface - exposed recep - tors changed their fluorescence intensity depending on the pH of the medium . However , when the receptors were internalized they became protected from the pH changes . This method allowed vesicle scission events to be observed in relation to actin and clathrin dynamics at a time resolution of 2 seconds 26 . The exact timing of Figure 2 | The sequential assembly of proteins at endocytic sites . a | The different steps of endocytic internalization : endocytic site initiation , membrane invagination and scission , and vesicle release . The four protein modules that are involved in endocytic internalization in Saccharomyces cerevisiae are shown schematically — that is , the coat ( green ) , the Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome protein ( WASP ) – myosin complex ( yellow ) , the actin network ( red ) and the amphiphysin complex ( blue ) . Components of these different protein modules are assembled and disassembled dynamically . b | The temporal localization of the constituent proteins for each module in S . cerevisiae 23 – 25 . c | The approximate temporal localization of proteins during endocytic internalization in mammalian cells 9 , 27 . Dashed lines indicate ambiguity in the time frame of the protein dynamics . Endocytic protein modules have not been defined for mammalian cells . Abp1 , actin - binding protein - 1 ; Arp2 / 3 , actin - related protein - 2 / 3 ; Cap1 / 2 , barbed - end capping proteins ; Myo , myosin ; N - WASP , neuronal WASP ; Rvs , reduced viability upon starvation . For further information on the proteins involved , see TABLE 1 . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 7 | JUNE 2006 | 407 Endosome Evanescent wave Coverglass Laser beam T G N vesicle scission has not been determined in S . cerevisiae . However , the fact that the S . cerevisiae actin patches enter their phase of rapid motility briefly after maximal actin accumulation occurs indicates that the timing of vesicle scission in relation to actin - filament assembly is similar in both mammalian and S . cerevisiae cells 24 . Actin polymerization therefore seems to begin when the coat and the plasma membrane start to invaginate to form a coated pit , and net actin polymerization seems to stop when vesicle scission occurs . This timing indicates that actin polymerization could have roles in invagination , constriction and scission . Experimental perturbations of actin function pro - vide important insights into the endocytic roles of actin . In S . cerevisiae , when actin polymerization is blocked by latrunculin A , the clathrin coats and coat - associated proteins are stabilized at the plasma membrane and the internalization movement is completely blocked 24 , 25 , 28 . Similarly , coat internalization is blocked by certain Arp2 / 3 - complex mutants 55 . These results indicate that actin polymerization in S . cerevisiae is needed for the initial formation of invaginated coated pits . In mammalian cells , the scission of clathrin - coated vesicles from the plasma membrane was reduced by 82 % in cells that were treated with the inhibitor of actin polymerization latrunculin B ( REF . 26 ) . However , whether endocytic invaginations were formed was not deter - mined in this study . Using electron microscopy , Yarar and colleagues showed that although endocytosis was inhibited in cells that were treated with latrunculin A or jasplakinolide , the number of invaginated coated pits was actually higher in treated cells than in control cells 32 . This indicates that invaginations form without actin function in mammalian cells but that efficient vesicle scission requires actin . Also , constriction of the vesicle neck was impaired when actin function was perturbed 32 . By contrast , S . cerevisiae cells seem to need actin for membrane invagination preceding vesicle scission 24 . This apparent difference between S . cerevisiae and mammalian cells could be due to dif - ferences in membrane tension . S . cerevisiae might need more force to induce plasma - membrane invagination owing to the high osmotic pressure in these cells that results in high plasma - membrane tension . By contrast , in mammalian cells , vesicle scission might be the step that is most dependent on the forces that are provided by actin - filament assembly . One fact that might complicate the interpretation of results is that mammalian cells use the actin cytoskeleton to maintain plasma - membrane tension 56 . When the actin cytoskeleton is perturbed globally in the cell , reduced membrane tension might facilitate the formation of invaginations and explain the reduced need for actin during this step . Mechanics of actin - driven internalization Certain intracellular bacterial and viral pathogens such as Listeria , Shigella and Vaccinia spp . use an actin - rocketing mechanism for their motility inside mamma - lian host cells 57 , 58 . Brownian - ratchet models show that actin polymerization alone can generate force to move objects 59 ( BOX 2 ) . This kind of polymerization - driven mechanism has been proposed to be responsible for the motility of pathogens , such as those mentioned above , in the cytoplasm of infected mammalian cells ( FIG . 3a ) and for the protrusion of the leading edge of migrating cells ( FIG . 3b ) . The actin - polymerization - driven motility of bacteria , coated plastic microbeads and lipid vesicles has also been observed in cytoplasmic extracts 47 , 60 – 63 , and has been reconstituted using purified proteins 64 . Only actin , the Arp2 / 3 complex , cofilin and capping pro - tein are needed for this type of motility in vitro 64 . Proteins at the surface of the propelled object ( for example , the Listeria monocytogenes surface protein ActA ) activate the Arp2 / 3 complex . Activated Arp2 / 3 complexes bind to the sides of actin filaments and activate the nucleation of new filaments . This leads to the formation of comet - tail - like actin structures that are composed of branched actin - filament networks . The comet tail grows at the surface of the object and ‘rockets’ it forward . This actin - rocketing model can explain the motility of endosomes that have actin tails 45 – 49 . The requirements are simply that the organelle nucleates actin - filament assembly at its surface and that polymerization takes Box 1 | Total internal reflection fluorescence microscopy One of the common problems in imaging studies of membrane - trafficking events is that it is often difficult to resolve different structures . Typical mammalian cells contain many different kinds of actin structures that are used at various locations in a cell for structural support , motility and trafficking . Similarly , clathrin localizes to the plasma membrane and to internal organelles such as endosomes and the Golgi complex . Total internal reflection fluorescence ( TIRF ) microscopy has been useful in studies of endocytosis because it allows researchers to excite fluorescent molecules specifically at the interface between the sample and the coverglass . In TIRF microscopy , the fluorescent molecules are excited with a beam of light ( usually from a laser ) that is directed at the sample at an angle that is greater than the critical angle such that all of the light is reflected at the coverglass – sample interface . Although no light gets into the sample , an evanescent wave is created on the sample side . This wave dissipates rapidly as the distance from the surface of the coverglass increases . The evanescent wave excites fluorophores that are within ~ 200 nm of the coverglass surface ( the structures highlighted in red ( actin ) and green ( clathrin ) in the figure , but not those that are further away ( the structures with the same shape , but that are coloured grey ) ) . TIRF has been used to reveal the actin polymerization bursts at endocytic sites in mammalian cells 9 , 26 , 32 and the localization of clathrin at endocytic sites in Saccharomyces cerevisiae cells 25 , 28 . TGN , trans - Golgi network . R E V I E W S 408 | JUNE 2006 | VOLUME 7 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio Brownian motion a Brownian rachet b Elastic Brownian rachet 1 1 2 2 3 3 ADP – actin ATP – actin Load place asymmetrically on the organelle ( FIG . 3a ) . This asymmetry has been shown to arise spontaneously in an in vitro system that used plastic microbeads that were coated with an Arp2 / 3 - complex activator 65 . However , the rocketing model that has been seen in Listeria spp . might not be applicable at sites of vesicle formation at the plasma membrane . If actin filaments are nucleated at an endocytic site and form an actin tail , the resulting force would actually oppose membrane invagination ( FIG . 3c ) . The membrane would need to be significantly invaginated prior to the initiation of actin - filament assembly , and the actin filaments would need to be orientated so that the force would be directed into the cell ( FIG . 3d ) , or orientated to constrict the neck of the invagination to help the vesicle scission event . Different kinds of schematic models have been proposed 2 , 5 , but detailed information about the organization and polar - ity of the actin filaments at endocytic sites is lacking . Interestingly , an S . cerevisiae strain that carries deletion mutations in two genes that are linked to actin regulation has provided insights into actin organization . Cells that lack the genes BBC1 and SLA1 can still carry out endo - cytosis , but they have highly enlarged actin structures at endocytic sites 25 . The large size of the actin structures made it possible to use photobleaching studies to analyse the turnover of actin during endocytic internalization . These experiments showed that actin polymerizes at the plasma membrane , and that the clathrin coat and the invaginating membrane move into the cell at the same rate as the growing actin network 25 . On the basis of these findings and the dynamics of proteins in wild - type cells , a new model for actin - driven endocytosis has been proposed 24 , 25 ( FIGS 3e , 4 ) . In this model , the endocytic coat is initially surrounded by a complex of proteins ( including Myo5 and Las17 , a Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome protein ( WASP ) ; TABLE 1 ) that remains on the plasma membrane at the rim of the invaginating endocytic pit and efficiently activates the Arp2 / 3 complex to nucleate actin filaments . These fila - ments then bind to the endocytic coat and continued nucleation leads to the formation of a cone of crosslinked actin filaments that pulls the attached coat inwards and invaginates the underlying membrane 19 , 66 . This model is supported by both localization data and deletion phenotypes for many endocytic proteins . The model assumes that the vesicle coat can bind to actin filaments . Candidate proteins for linking the coat to the actin meshwork include S . cerevisiae Sla2 and its mammalian homologue HIP1R ( Huntingtin - interacting protein - 1 related ) . These proteins can bind directly to both actin filaments and clathrin , and they colocalize with the clathrin coat 67 – 69 . Deletion of the S . cerevisiae SLA2 gene and knockdown of HIP1R expression lead to a dramatic phenotype in which actin polymerization is uncoupled Box 2 | Brownian - ratchet models Brownian - ratchet models provide mechanisms by which actin polymerization can drive the motility of ‘loads’ such as the leading edge of migrating cells , endosomes or pathogenic bacteria that have invaded mammalian cells 59 , 102 , 103 . In the original Brownian - ratchet model ( see figure , part a ) , the actin filament ( red ) grows through the addition of ATP – actin monomers towards the load , until it is so close to the load that there is no more space for the addition of further monomers . However , if the load undergoes Brownian motion , it will occasionally move far enough away from the filament end to allow a new monomer to be added to the filament . The continuing growth of the actin filament biases the Brownian movement of the load in the direction of the filament growth . The elastic Brownian - ratchet model ( see figure , part b ) is a modification of the original model . In the elastic model , the random bending of the actin filament provides the space for monomer addition . The elastic energy that is stored in the bent filament then pushes the load forward . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 7 | JUNE 2006 | 409 Listeria or endosome bead Focal adhesion Focal adhesion a Listeria and endosome rocketing c Endocytic internalization : model 1 e Endocytic internalization : model 3 d Endocytic internalization : model 2 b Lamellipodium Actin Arp2 / 3 complex Movement Arp2 / 3 - complex activator Vesicle coat Leading edge Plasmamembrane Movement Movement No movement Movement from the internalization of the vesicle coat 24 , 70 . Another protein that can potentially link actin filaments to the coat is S . cerevisiae Pan1 , which shares homology with the mammalian endocytic proteins EPS15 ( epidermal - growth - factor - receptor - pathway substrate - 15 ) and inter - sectin . Pan1 binds to actin filaments and colocalizes with the clathrin coat 25 , 71 . Furthermore , Sac6 is essential for internalization , but not for actin polymerization 25 , which indicates that the integrity of the actin - filament network is important for force transduction ( FIG . 4 ) . In S . cerevisiae , the type - I myosins Myo3 and Myo5 are also important for endocytosis 17 , and actin - patch internalization is severely defective in mutants of these myosins 23 , 39 . The myosins remain localized at the plasma membrane with Las17 while the coat proteins are internalized ( FIG . 4 ) , and the timing of their appear - ance at endocytic sites corresponds to the onset of actin polymerization 23 . A similar sequence of recruit - ment of a type - I myosin and a WASP homologue has also recently been described in the fission yeast Figure 3 | Modelling actin - driven endocytic internalization . a | An actin - rocketing model can explain the motility of endosomes and intracellular pathogens such as Listeria species . Actin - related protein - 2 / 3 ( Arp2 / 3 ) - complex activators are asymmetrically associated with the surface of the object being moved . Arp2 / 3 - complex - nucleated filaments form an actin ‘comet tail’ that is composed of branched filaments . b | The protrusion of a lamellipodium is also driven by actin polymerization . Arp2 / 3 - complex activators , such as WAVE proteins ( Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome protein - family verprolin - homologous proteins ) , localize to the leading edge and activate the Arp2 / 3 complexes there . The growing branched network flows away from the leading edge . However , when the growing actin network is bound to focal - adhesion complexes that are connected to the extracellular matrix , the leading edge is pushed outwards . c | An actin - rocketing model in which the filaments are nucleated by the vesicle coat cannot explain endocytic internalization . If the vesicle coat contained Arp2 / 3 - complex activators , the forming actin comet tail would generate a force that would oppose internalization . d | An alternative model requires that the plasma membrane has been bent to form a coated pit before actin polymerization is initiated . Actin is polymerized at the rim of the coated pit to form a network of filaments that pushes the coat towards the cell centre . e | In a third model , actin polymerization is nucleated by Arp2 / 3 - complex activators that surround the coated membrane , and actin filaments form a cone that surrounds the coat . The coat binds to the filaments . The coat and the underlying membrane are pulled towards the interior of the cell by the movement of the growing actin network . R E V I E W S 410 | JUNE 2006 | VOLUME 7 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio ADP – actin ATP – actin Arp2 / 3 complex Las17 Myo5 Sac6 Cap1 / 2 Movement Vesicle coat Plasma membrane Schizosaccharomyces pombe 30 . The myosin motor domains could push the growing actin filaments away from the membrane , or they could transiently anchor the growing barbed ends to the plasma membrane . However , S . cerevisiae type - I myosins can also activate the Arp2 / 3 complex 72 , 73 . Further work is needed to clarify the relative contributions of myosin motor activity and actin polymerization to endocytic internalization . There is currently no evidence of a role for type - I myosins in the vesicle - budding step in mammalian cells . Controlling the actin engine The actin polymerization that is associated with endo - cytic processes seems to be tightly regulated . This is especially evident at endocytic sites on the plasma membrane , where transient bursts of actin polymeriza - tion are precisely coordinated with the recruitment of other endocytic proteins 9 , 23 – 28 , 30 . Actin polymerization is initiated at preformed clathrin - coated structures and stops rapidly after vesicle scission 26 . How is this regulation achieved ? The main control point for actin polymerization is the Arp2 / 3 - complex - mediated nucleation event , which is the rate - limiting step in actin polymerization 74 . In mammalian cells , the Arp2 / 3 - complex activators N - WASP and cortactin are known to localize to the sites of vesicle budding 27 , 75 . Interfering with N - WASP or cortactin function impairs receptor - mediated endocytosis 75 – 77 . In S . cerevisiae , there are up to five potential Arp2 / 3 - complex activators that localize to endocytic sites — Las17 , Pan1 , Myo3 , Myo5 and actin - binding protein - 1 ( Abp1 ) 23 , 24 , 30 . The dynamics of four of these proteins ( Las17 , Pan1 , Myo5 and Abp1 ) have been studied in detail in living cells . Surprisingly , each shows a different motile behaviour , which indicates that they might harness the force of actin polymerization at different stages of vesicle formation . Mutants of Las17 , Pan1 , Myo3 and Myo5 cause severe defects in actin organization and endocytosis 17 , 78 , 79 . Abp1 does not have a significant role in initiating actin polymerization , but seems to have an inhibitory role in that it turns off actin polymerization 25 , 80 . The regulatory complexity of endocytosis does not end here . The Arp2 / 3 - complex activators are themselves subject to regulation by many interacting proteins . Mammalian N - WASP might be regulated during the endocytic internalization process by ABI1 ( Abl - interacting protein - 1 ) , syndapins , intersectin and CDC42 ( REFS 77 , 81 – 83 ) . In S . cerevisiae , Las17 can be regulated by Sla1 , Bbc1 and Vrp1 ( REFS 78 , 84 ) . Vrp1 and Sla1 also interact with Myo5 and Pan1 , respectively 85 , 86 . Deletions of the genes that encode Sla1 , Bbc1 and Vrp1 cause different endocytic phenotypes 25 . First , the dele - tion of SLA1 leads to a delay in the initiation of actin polymerization at endocytic sites 25 . Second , the dele - tion of BBC1 causes an enhancement of the actin - driven internalization movement 25 . Third , the deletion of VRP1 uncouples actin polymerization from the internaliza - tion movement 25 . Protein phosphorylation also has a role in regulating the actin polymerization bursts at the internalization sites . The S . cerevisiae actin - regulating kinases Ark1 and Prk1 are involved in turning off the actin - polymerization machinery at the newly formed endocytic vesicles . Inhibiting the kinases Ark1 and Prk1 leads to the accumulation of clusters of actin - filament - covered endocytic vesicles in S . cerevisiae cells 25 , 40 , 87 . These kinases function at least in part by phosphorylating Pan1 and inhibiting its function 71 , 88 . Interestingly , Abp1 recruits the kinases Ark1 and Prk1 to endocytic sites 87 . In addition , Abp1 recruits the S . cerevisiae synaptojanin Inp52 , which is a phosphati - dylinositol - 4 , 5 - bisphosphate 5 - phosphatase that can also negatively regulate actin - filament assembly 89 . The localization of Abp1 depends on actin filaments 15 , so Abp1 might function in a negative feedback loop that is triggered by nascent actin filaments and functions to turn off actin polymerization . In mammalian cells , dynamin potentially has an important role in coordinating actin - filament assembly at endocytic sites . Dynamin is thought to oligomerize around the neck of an endocytic membrane invagination Figure 4 | Current model for actin - driven endocytic internalization . This schematic diagram illustrates putative functions of different actin - cytoskeleton proteins during endocytic internalization in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Las17 ( Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome protein ( WASP ) in mammals ) together with the myosins Myo3 ( not shown ) and Myo5 activate the actin - related protein - 2 / 3 ( Arp2 / 3 ) complex at the cell surface . Myosins might also generate force on the actin network or anchor the actin filaments to the plasma membrane through their motor domains . The activated Arp2 / 3 complexes form branched actin filaments that grow through the addition of ATP – actin monomers near the plasma membrane . Older filaments are capped at their barbed ends by capping proteins ( Cap1 / 2 ) . The branched filaments are further crosslinked by Sac6 . The crosslinked actin network is linked to the underlying vesicle coat by actin - binding proteins such as Sla2 and Pan1 , which are represented by green hand - like structures . The growth of the actin network leads to the invagination of the coated membrane . For further information on the proteins involved , see TABLE 1 . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 7 | JUNE 2006 | 411 and facilitate vesicle scission , and it has been proposed to function either by providing force for the constriction of the neck or by functioning as a regu latory GTPase 41 , 42 . The peak accumulation of dynamin - 1 at endocytic sites precedes peak actin accumulation 9 ( FIG . 2c ) . Dynamin can interact with the actin machinery through several linking proteins such as cortactin , intersectin and syn - dapin 90 – 92 . These proteins bind to dynamin , the Arp2 / 3 complex , actin filaments and N - WASP . Dynamin might regulate actin - filament assembly at endocytic sites , coordinating it with the vesicle scission event . Dynamin might also be linked to the actin cytoskeleton through a family of proteins that contain BAR or related F - BAR domains , which both bind to lipids and can tubulate membranes , potentially facilitating endocytosis 93 , 94 . In summary , actin polymerization by the Arp2 / 3 complex is regulated by several activator proteins and numerous proteins that control the activity of the acti - vators . Unravelling the complex regulation that initiates and turns off actin polymerization at endocytic sites will be an important challenge for future research . Many uses for the actin module The molecular machinery that is based on actin and the Arp2 / 3 complex is well conserved throughout eukaryotes . Interestingly , the same protein machinery has a central role in many different cellular processes . Actin and the Arp2 / 3 complex are involved in other forms of endo - cytic internalization including macropinocytosis 46 , phagocytosis 95 and caveolae - mediated endocytosis 96 ( FIG . 1 ) . Also , actin and the Arp2 / 3 complex are central components in the lamellipodia of motile cells 97 . The functional similarities between the actin mesh - work in lamellipodia and at endocytic sites are intriguing ( FIG . 3b , e ) . Each lamellipodium is composed of a dense Arp2 / 3 - complex - nucleated branched actin - filament meshwork 97 . Actin filaments are nucleated by the Arp2 / 3 complex at the leading edge of the lamellipodium , and actin filaments continuously flow from the leading edge towards the centre of the cell 97 . This actin meshwork is thought to be anchored to the extracellular matrix through adhesion sites , so that the growing filament ends can push the leading edge of the cell forward ( FIG . 3b ) . The proteins that regulate actin polymerization seem to have analogous localizations in both lamellipodia and at endocytic sites ( FIG . 3b , e ) . Actin nucleation in lamellipodia is regulated by Arp2 / 3 - complex activa - tors , such as WAVE proteins ( WASP - family verprolin - homologous proteins ) , that localize to the leading edge of lamellipodia 98 , 99 . Actin at endocytic sites seems to be regulated by WASP - family proteins , namely N - WASP in mammalian cells , Las17 in S . cerevisiae and Wsp1 in S . pombe , that are homologous to WAVE . Mammalian cortactin , which colocalizes with actin at clathrin - coated pits and endosomes 26 , 45 , 75 , is also localized throughout the actin - filament meshwork of lamellipodia 100 . Furthermore , capping protein and cofilin , which both regulate actin dynamics in lamellipodia 74 , also function at endocytic sites in S . cerevisiae 25 , 101 . The specific functions of these pro - teins are probably similar in these different processes , which indicates that they form a functional module that has retained its basic mechanism of forming a branched actin - filament meshwork . It also indicates that this module has been adapted for several different uses over the course of evolution . The regulation of the actin – Arp2 / 3 - complex module comes mostly through the activation or inhibition of the Arp2 / 3 complex . The force produced by this module can be harnessed by proteins ( such as endocytic coat proteins or adhesion proteins ) that bind to the actin - filament meshwork . Future directions Although live - cell imaging has provided answers to many of the questions about endocytosis , it has raised even more new questions . The endocytic machinery seems to be much more dynamic than had been previ - ously appreciated . The regularity with which different steps follow each other , and the precision with which numerous proteins assemble at endocytic sites signifies a remarkable level of molecular choreography . We can literally see order emerge from the apparent chaos of the random motions of soluble endocytic proteins as they assemble to form endocytic structures . How this ordered sequence of assembly and disassembly takes place is an important unanswered question . Many loops of positive and negative feedback are probably involved in creating the assembly – disassembly sequence . Other key questions concern the mechanism by which actin drives endocytosis at the plasma mem - brane . Is the energy for vesicle budding derived from actin polymerization , the motor proteins , or both ? How are actin filaments organized at an ultrastructural level at endocytic sites , and how is their nucleation regulated ? Why is actin more crucial for endocytosis in S . cerevisiae than in mammalian cells ? Does actin have a direct role in vesicle scission ? New quantitative live - cell imaging and image - analysis methods will have an important role in answering many of the remaining questions about the mechanisms of endocytosis . However , live - cell imaging will be most powerful when it is used in combination with electron microscopy and biochemical , pharmacological and genetics tools . 1 . Conner , S . D . & Schmid , S . L . Regulated portals of entry into the cell . Nature 422 , 37 – 44 ( 2003 ) . 2 . Engqvist - Goldstein , A . E . & Drubin , D . G . Actin assembly and endocytosis : from yeast to mammals . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 19 , 287 – 332 ( 2003 ) . 3 . Merrifield , C . J . Seeing is believing : imaging actin dynamics at single sites of endocytosis . Trends Cell Biol . 14 , 352 – 358 ( 2004 ) . 4 . Perrais , D . & Merrifield , C . J . Dynamics of endocytic vesicle creation . Dev . Cell 9 , 581 – 592 ( 2005 ) . 5 . Qualmann , B . , Kessels , M . M . & Kelly , R . B . Molecular links between endocytosis and the actin cytoskeleton . J . Cell Biol . 150 , F111 – F116 ( 2000 ) . 6 . Brodsky , F . M . , Chen , C . Y . , Knuehl , C . , Towler , M . C . & Wakeham , D . E . Biological basket weaving : formation and function of clathrin - coated vesicles . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 17 , 517 – 568 ( 2001 ) . 7 . Higgins , M . K . & McMahon , H . T . Snap - shots of clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Trends Biochem . Sci . 27 , 257 – 263 ( 2002 ) . 8 . Roth , T . F . & Porter , K . R . Yolk protein uptake in the oocyte of the mosquito Aedes aegypti . L . J . Cell Biol . 20 , 313 – 332 ( 1964 ) . 9 . Merrifield , C . J . , Feldman , M . E . , Wan , L . & Almers , W . Imaging actin and dynamin recruitment during invagination of single clathrin - coated pits . Nature Cell Biol . 4 , 691 – 698 ( 2002 ) . The first description of transient actin polymerization bursts at clathrin - coated pits in living cells . R E V I E W S 412 | JUNE 2006 | VOLUME 7 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio 10 . Fujimoto , L . M . , Roth , R . , Heuser , J . E . & Schmid , S . L . Actin assembly plays a variable , but not obligatory role in receptor - mediated endocytosis in mammalian cells . Traffic 1 , 161 – 171 ( 2000 ) . 11 . Gottlieb , T . A . , Ivanov , I . E . , Adesnik , M . & Sabatini , D . D . Actin microfilaments play a critical role in endocytosis at the apical but not the basolateral surface of polarized epithelial cells . J . Cell Biol . 120 , 695 – 710 ( 1993 ) . 12 . Lamaze , C . , Fujimoto , L . M . , Yin , H . L . & Schmid , S . L . The actin cytoskeleton is required for receptor - mediated endocytosis in mammalian cells . J . Biol . Chem . 272 , 20332 – 20335 ( 1997 ) . 13 . Salisbury , J . L . , Condeelis , J . S . & Satir , P . Role of coated vesicles , microfilaments , and calmodulin in receptor - mediated endocytosis by cultured B lymphoblastoid cells . J . Cell Biol . 87 , 132 – 141 ( 1980 ) . 14 . Ayscough , K . R . Endocytosis and the development of cell polarity in yeast require a dynamic F - actin cytoskeleton . Curr . Biol . 10 , 1587 – 1590 ( 2000 ) . 15 . Ayscough , K . R . et al . High rates of actin filament turnover in budding yeast and roles for actin in establishment and maintenance of cell polarity revealed using the actin inhibitor latrunculin - A . J . Cell Biol . 137 , 399 – 416 ( 1997 ) . 16 . Kubler , E . & Riezman , H . Actin and fimbrin are required for the internalization step of endocytosis in yeast . EMBO J . 12 , 2855 – 2862 ( 1993 ) . Provided the first evidence that actin is required for endocytic internalization in S . cerevisiae . 17 . Geli , M . I . & Riezman , H . Role of type I myosins in receptor - mediated endocytosis in yeast . Science 272 , 533 – 535 ( 1996 ) . 18 . Shupliakov , O . et al . Impaired recycling of synaptic vesicles after acute perturbation of the presynaptic actin cytoskeleton . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 99 , 14476 – 14481 ( 2002 ) . 19 . Mulholland , J . et al . Ultrastructure of the yeast actin cytoskeleton and its association with the plasma membrane . J . Cell Biol . 125 , 381 – 391 ( 1994 ) . 20 . Mulholland , J . , Konopka , J . , Singer - Kruger , B . , Zerial , M . & Botstein , D . Visualization of receptor - mediated endocytosis in yeast . Mol . Biol . Cell 10 , 799 – 817 ( 1999 ) . 21 . Jeng , R . L . & Welch , M . D . Cytoskeleton : actin and endocytosis — no longer the weakest link . Curr . Biol . 11 , R691 – R694 ( 2001 ) . 22 . Ehrlich , M . et al . Endocytosis by random initiation and stabilization of clathrin - coated pits . Cell 118 , 591 – 605 ( 2004 ) . 23 . Jonsdottir , G . A . & Li , R . Dynamics of yeast myosin I : evidence for a possible role in scission of endocytic vesicles . Curr . Biol . 14 , 1604 – 1609 ( 2004 ) . 24 . Kaksonen , M . , Sun , Y . & Drubin , D . G . A pathway for association of receptors , adaptors , and actin during endocytic internalization . Cell 115 , 475 – 487 ( 2003 ) . This paper showed that S . cerevisiae actin patches transiently colocalize with endocytic protein complexes and that actin polymerization is required for their internalization . 25 . Kaksonen , M . , Toret , C . P . & Drubin , D . G . A modular design for the clathrin - and actin - mediated endocytosis machinery . Cell 123 , 305 – 320 ( 2005 ) . This study revealed functions for 15 proteins during endocytic internalization in S . cerevisiae . 26 . Merrifield , C . J . , Perrais , D . & Zenisek , D . Coupling between clathrin - coated - pit invagination , cortactin recruitment , and membrane scission observed in live cells . Cell 121 , 593 – 606 ( 2005 ) . Describes a new method for visualizing vesicle scission in living cells and shows that scission is tightly coupled to actin - filament assembly . 27 . Merrifield , C . J . , Qualmann , B . , Kessels , M . M . & Almers , W . Neural Wiskott Aldrich Syndrome Protein ( N - WASP ) and the Arp2 / 3 complex are recruited to sites of clathrin - mediated endocytosis in cultured fibroblasts . Eur . J . Cell Biol . 83 , 13 – 18 ( 2004 ) . 28 . Newpher , T . M . , Smith , R . P . , Lemmon , V . & Lemmon , S . K . In vivo dynamics of clathrin and its adaptor - dependent recruitment to the actin - based endocytic machinery in yeast . Dev . Cell 9 , 87 – 98 ( 2005 ) . This paper provided the first direct visualization of clathrin at endocytic sites in S . cerevisiae . 29 . Rappoport , J . Z . , Taha , B . W . , Lemeer , S . , Benmerah , A . & Simon , S . M . The AP - 2 complex is excluded from the dynamic population of plasma membrane - associated clathrin . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 47357 – 47360 ( 2003 ) . 30 . Sirotkin , V . , Beltzner , C . C . , Marchand , J . B . & Pollard , T . D . Interactions of WASp , myosin - I , and verprolin with Arp2 / 3 complex during actin patch assembly in fission yeast . J . Cell Biol . 170 , 637 – 648 ( 2005 ) . An important study of regulators of actin polymerization at endocytic sites in S . pombe . 31 . Soulet , F . , Yarar , D . , Leonard , M . & Schmid , S . L . SNX9 regulates dynamin assembly and is required for efficient clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Mol . Biol . Cell 16 , 2058 – 2067 ( 2005 ) . 32 . Yarar , D . , Waterman - Storer , C . M . & Schmid , S . L . A dynamic actin cytoskeleton functions at multiple stages of clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Mol . Biol . Cell 16 , 964 – 975 ( 2005 ) . This work showed a functional requirement for dynamic actin at endocytic sites in mammalian cells . 33 . Pruyne , D . & Bretscher , A . Polarization of cell growth in yeast . J . Cell . Sci . 113 , 571 – 585 ( 2000 ) . 34 . Doyle , T . & Botstein , D . Movement of yeast cortical actin cytoskeleton visualized in vivo . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 93 , 3886 – 3891 ( 1996 ) . 35 . Waddle , J . A . , Karpova , T . S . , Waterston , R . H . & Cooper , J . A . Movement of cortical actin patches in yeast . J . Cell Biol . 132 , 861 – 870 ( 1996 ) . 36 . Carlsson , A . E . , Shah , A . D . , Elking , D . , Karpova , T . S . & Cooper , J . A . Quantitative analysis of actin patch movement in yeast . Biophys . J . 82 , 2333 – 2343 ( 2002 ) . 37 . Huckaba , T . M . , Gay , A . C . , Pantalena , L . F . , Yang , H . C . & Pon , L . A . Live cell imaging of the assembly , disassembly , and actin cable - dependent movement of endosomes and actin patches in the budding yeast , Saccharomyces cerevisiae . J . Cell Biol . 167 , 519 – 530 ( 2004 ) . The visualization of endocytic vesicles in actin patches and their movement along actin cables using a lipid dye in S . cerevisiae . 38 . Pelham , R . J . Jr & Chang , F . Role of actin polymerization and actin cables in actin - patch movement in Schizosaccharomyces pombe . Nature Cell Biol . 3 , 235 – 244 ( 2001 ) . 39 . Smith , M . G . , Swamy , S . R . & Pon , L . A . The life cycle of actin patches in mating yeast . J . Cell . Sci . 114 , 1505 – 1513 ( 2001 ) . 40 . Sekiya - Kawasaki , M . et al . Dynamic phosphoregulation of the cortical actin cytoskeleton and endocytic machinery revealed by real - time chemical genetic analysis . J . Cell Biol . 162 , 765 – 772 ( 2003 ) . 41 . Praefcke , G . J . & McMahon , H . T . The dynamin superfamily : universal membrane tubulation and fission molecules ? Nature Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 5 , 133 – 147 ( 2004 ) . 42 . Song , B . D . & Schmid , S . L . A molecular motor or a regulator ? Dynamin’s in a class of its own . Biochemistry 42 , 1369 – 1376 ( 2003 ) . 43 . Gammie , A . E . , Kurihara , L . J . , Vallee , R . B . & Rose , M . D . DNM1 , a dynamin - related gene , participates in endosomal trafficking in yeast . J . Cell Biol . 130 , 553 – 566 ( 1995 ) . 44 . Nothwehr , S . F . , Conibear , E . & Stevens , T . H . Golgi and vacuolar membrane proteins reach the vacuole in vps1 mutant yeast cells via the plasma membrane . J . Cell Biol . 129 , 35 – 46 ( 1995 ) . 45 . Kaksonen , M . , Peng , H . B . & Rauvala , H . Association of cortactin with dynamic actin in lamellipodia and on endosomal vesicles . J . Cell Sci . 113 , 4421 – 4426 ( 2000 ) . 46 . Merrifield , C . J . et al . Endocytic vesicles move at the tips of actin tails in cultured mast cells . Nature Cell Biol . 1 , 72 – 74 ( 1999 ) . 47 . Taunton , J . et al . Actin - dependent propulsion of endosomes and lysosomes by recruitment of N - WASP . J . Cell Biol . 148 , 519 – 530 ( 2000 ) . 48 . Orth , J . D . , Krueger , E . W . , Cao , H . & McNiven , M . A . The large GTPase dynamin regulates actin comet formation and movement in living cells . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 99 , 167 – 172 ( 2002 ) . 49 . Rozelle , A . L . et al . Phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate induces actin - based movement of raft - enriched vesicles through WASP – Arp2 / 3 . Curr . Biol . 10 , 311 – 320 ( 2000 ) . 50 . Chang , F . S . , Stefan , C . J . & Blumer , K . J . A WASp homolog powers actin polymerization - dependent motility of endosomes in vivo . Curr . Biol . 13 , 455 – 463 ( 2003 ) . 51 . Evangelista , M . , Pruyne , D . , Amberg , D . C . , Boone , C . & Bretscher , A . Formins direct Arp2 / 3 - independent actin filament assembly to polarize cell growth in yeast . Nature Cell Biol . 4 , 260 – 269 ( 2002 ) . 52 . Toshima , J . Y . et al . Spatial dynamics of receptor - mediated endocytic trafficking in budding yeast revealed by using fluorescent α - factor derivatives . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 103 , 5793 – 5798 ( 2006 ) . 53 . Bennett , E . M . , Chen , C . Y . , Engqvist - Goldstein , A . E . , Drubin , D . G . & Brodsky , F . M . Clathrin hub expression dissociates the actin - binding protein Hip1R from coated pits and disrupts their alignment with the actin cytoskeleton . Traffic 2 , 851 – 858 ( 2001 ) . 54 . Gaidarov , I . , Santini , F . , Warren , R . A . & Keen , J . H . Spatial control of coated - pit dynamics in living cells . Nature Cell Biol . 1 , 1 – 7 ( 1999 ) . The first study to observe endocytic clathrin dynamics in mammalian cells . 55 . Martin , A . C . et al . Effects of Arp2 and Arp3 nucleotide - binding pocket mutations on Arp2 / 3 complex function . J . Cell Biol . 168 , 315 – 328 ( 2005 ) . 56 . Dai , J . & Sheetz , M . P . Membrane tether formation from blebbing cells . Biophys . J . 77 , 3363 – 3370 ( 1999 ) . 57 . Frischknecht , F . & Way , M . Surfing pathogens and the lessons learned for actin polymerization . Trends Cell Biol . 11 , 30 – 38 ( 2001 ) . 58 . Gouin , E . , Welch , M . D . & Cossart , P . Actin - based motility of intracellular pathogens . Curr . Opin . Microbiol . 8 , 35 – 45 ( 2005 ) . 59 . Peskin , C . S . , Odell , G . M . & Oster , G . F . Cellular motions and thermal fluctuations : the Brownian ratchet . Biophys . J . 65 , 316 – 324 ( 1993 ) . 60 . Ma , L . , Cantley , L . C . , Janmey , P . A . & Kirschner , M . W . Corequirement of specific phosphoinositides and small GTP - binding protein Cdc42 in inducing actin assembly in Xenopus egg extracts . J . Cell Biol . 140 , 1125 – 1136 ( 1998 ) . 61 . Moreau , V . & Way , M . Cdc42 is required for membrane dependent actin polymerization in vitro . FEBS Lett . 427 , 353 – 356 ( 1998 ) . 62 . Giardini , P . A . , Fletcher , D . A . & Theriot , J . A . Compression forces generated by actin comet tails on lipid vesicles . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 100 , 6493 – 6498 ( 2003 ) . 63 . Upadhyaya , A . , Chabot , J . R . , Andreeva , A . , Samadani , A . & van Oudenaarden , A . Probing polymerization forces by using actin - propelled lipid vesicles . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 100 , 4521 – 4526 ( 2003 ) . 64 . Loisel , T . P . , Boujemaa , R . , Pantaloni , D . & Carlier , M . F . Reconstitution of actin - based motility of Listeria and Shigella using pure proteins . Nature 401 , 613 – 616 ( 1999 ) . 65 . van Oudenaarden , A . & Theriot , J . A . Cooperative symmetry - breaking by actin polymerization in a model for cell motility . Nature Cell Biol . 1 , 493 – 499 ( 1999 ) . 66 . Rodal , A . A . , Kozubowski , L . , Goode , B . L . , Drubin , D . G . & Hartwig , J . H . Actin and septin ultrastructures at the budding yeast cell cortex . Mol . Biol . Cell 16 , 372 – 384 ( 2005 ) . 67 . Engqvist - Goldstein , A . E . , Kessels , M . M . , Chopra , V . S . , Hayden , M . R . & Drubin , D . G . An actin - binding protein of the Sla2 / Huntingtin interacting protein 1 family is a novel component of clathrin - coated pits and vesicles . J . Cell Biol . 147 , 1503 – 1518 ( 1999 ) . 68 . Engqvist - Goldstein , A . E . et al . The actin - binding protein Hip1R associates with clathrin during early stages of endocytosis and promotes clathrin assembly in vitro . J . Cell Biol . 154 , 1209 – 1223 ( 2001 ) . 69 . Henry , K . R . et al . Scd5p and clathrin function are important for cortical actin organization , endocytosis , and localization of Sla2p in yeast . Mol . Biol . Cell 13 , 2607 – 2625 ( 2002 ) . 70 . Engqvist - Goldstein , A . E . et al . RNAi - mediated Hip1R silencing results in stable association between the endocytic machinery and the actin assembly machinery . Mol . Biol . Cell 15 , 1666 – 1679 ( 2004 ) . 71 . Toshima , J . , Toshima , J . Y . , Martin , A . C . & Drubin , D . G . Phosphoregulation of Arp2 / 3 - dependent actin assembly during receptor - mediated endocytosis . Nature Cell Biol . 7 , 246 – 254 ( 2005 ) . 72 . Evangelista , M . et al . A role for myosin - I in actin assembly through interactions with Vrp1p , Bee1p , and the Arp2 / 3 complex . J . Cell Biol . 148 , 353 – 362 ( 2000 ) . 73 . Lechler , T . , Shevchenko , A . & Li , R . Direct involvement of yeast type I myosins in Cdc42 - dependent actin polymerization . J . Cell Biol . 148 , 363 – 373 ( 2000 ) . 74 . Welch , M . D . & Mullins , R . D . Cellular control of actin nucleation . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 18 , 247 – 288 ( 2002 ) . 75 . Cao , H . et al . Cortactin is a component of clathrin - coated pits and participates in receptor - mediated endocytosis . Mol . Cell Biol . 23 , 2162 – 2170 ( 2003 ) . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 7 | JUNE 2006 | 413 76 . Benesch , S . et al . N - WASP deficiency impairs EGF internalization and actin assembly at clathrin - coated pits . J . Cell Sci . 118 , 3103 – 3115 ( 2005 ) . Showed a functional requirement for N - WASP in endocytic internalization in mammalian cells . 77 . Innocenti , M . et al . Abi1 regulates the activity of N - WASP and WAVE in distinct actin - based processes . Nature Cell Biol . 7 , 969 – 976 ( 2005 ) . 78 . Naqvi , S . N . , Zahn , R . , Mitchell , D . A . , Stevenson , B . J . & Munn , A . L . The WASp homologue Las17p functions with the WIP homologue End5p / verprolin and is essential for endocytosis in yeast . Curr . Biol . 8 , 959 – 962 ( 1998 ) . 79 . Wendland , B . , McCaffery , J . M . , Xiao , Q . & Emr , S . D . A novel fluorescence - activated cell sorter - based screen for yeast endocytosis mutants identifies a yeast homologue of mammalian eps15 . J . Cell Biol . 135 , 1485 – 1500 ( 1996 ) . 80 . D’Agostino , J . L . & Goode , B . L . Dissection of Arp2 / 3 complex actin nucleation mechanism and distinct roles for its nucleation - promoting factors in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Genetics 171 , 35 – 47 ( 2005 ) . 81 . Hussain , N . K . et al . Endocytic protein intersectin - l regulates actin assembly via Cdc42 and N - WASP . Nature Cell Biol . 3 , 927 – 932 ( 2001 ) . 82 . Kessels , M . M . & Qualmann , B . Syndapins integrate N - WASP in receptor - mediated endocytosis . EMBO J . 21 , 6083 – 6094 ( 2002 ) . 83 . McGavin , M . K . et al . The intersectin 2 adaptor links Wiskott Aldrich Syndrome protein ( WASp ) - mediated actin polymerization to T cell antigen receptor endocytosis . J . Exp . Med . 194 , 1777 – 1787 ( 2001 ) . 84 . Rodal , A . A . , Manning , A . L . , Goode , B . L . & Drubin , D . G . Negative regulation of yeast WASp by two SH3 domain - containing proteins . Curr . Biol . 13 , 1000 – 1008 ( 2003 ) . 85 . Anderson , B . L . et al . The Src homology domain 3 ( SH3 ) of a yeast type I myosin , Myo5p , binds to verprolin and is required for targeting to sites of actin polarization . J . Cell Biol . 141 , 1357 – 1370 ( 1998 ) . 86 . Tang , H . Y . , Xu , J . & Cai , M . Pan1p , End3p , and S1a1p , three yeast proteins required for normal cortical actin cytoskeleton organization , associate with each other and play essential roles in cell wall morphogenesis . Mol . Cell . Biol . 20 , 12 – 25 ( 2000 ) . 87 . Cope , M . J . , Yang , S . , Shang , C . & Drubin , D . G . Novel protein kinases Ark1p and Prk1p associate with and regulate the cortical actin cytoskeleton in budding yeast . J . Cell Biol . 144 , 1203 – 1218 ( 1999 ) . 88 . Zeng , G . , Yu , X . & Cai , M . Regulation of yeast actin cytoskeleton - regulatory complex Pan1p – Sla1p – End3p by serine / threonine kinase Prk1p . Mol . Biol . Cell 12 , 3759 – 3772 ( 2001 ) . 89 . Stefan , C . J . , Padilla , S . M . , Audhya , A . & Emr , S . D . The phosphoinositide phosphatase Sjl2 is recruited to cortical actin patches in the control of vesicle formation and fission during endocytosis . Mol . Cell . Biol . 25 , 2910 – 2923 ( 2005 ) . 90 . McNiven , M . A . et al . Regulated interactions between dynamin and the actin - binding protein cortactin modulate cell shape . J . Cell Biol . 151 , 187 – 198 ( 2000 ) . 91 . Qualmann , B . , Roos , J . , DiGregorio , P . J . & Kelly , R . B . Syndapin I , a synaptic dynamin - binding protein that associates with the neural Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome protein . Mol . Biol . Cell 10 , 501 – 513 ( 1999 ) . 92 . Yamabhai , M . et al . Intersectin , a novel adaptor protein with two Eps15 homology and five Src homology 3 domains . J . Biol . Chem . 273 , 31401 – 31407 ( 1998 ) . 93 . Itoh , T . et al . Dynamin and the actin cytoskeleton cooperatively regulate plasma membrane invagination by BAR and F - BAR proteins . Dev . Cell 9 , 791 – 804 ( 2005 ) . 94 . Tsujita , K . et al . Coordination between the actin cytoskeleton and membrane deformation by a novel membrane tubulation domain of PCH proteins is involved in endocytosis . J . Cell Biol . 172 , 269 – 279 ( 2006 ) . 95 . May , R . C . & Machesky , L . M . Phagocytosis and the actin cytoskeleton . J . Cell Sci . 114 , 1061 – 1077 ( 2001 ) . 96 . Pelkmans , L . , Puntener , D . & Helenius , A . Local actin polymerization and dynamin recruitment in SV40 - induced internalization of caveolae . Science 296 , 535 – 539 ( 2002 ) . 97 . Pollard , T . D . & Borisy , G . G . Cellular motility driven by assembly and disassembly of actin filaments . Cell 112 , 453 – 465 ( 2003 ) . 98 . Hahne , P . , Sechi , A . , Benesch , S . & Small , J . V . Scar / WAVE is localised at the tips of protruding lamellipodia in living cells . FEBS Lett . 492 , 215 – 220 ( 2001 ) . 99 . Nakagawa , H . et al . N - WASP , WAVE and Mena play different roles in the organization of actin cytoskeleton in lamellipodia . J . Cell Sci . 114 , 1555 – 1565 ( 2001 ) . 100 . Wu , H . & Parsons , J . T . Cortactin , an 80 / 85 - kilodalton pp60 src substrate , is a filamentous actin - binding protein enriched in the cell cortex . J . Cell Biol . 120 , 1417 – 1426 ( 1993 ) . 101 . Lappalainen , P . & Drubin , D . G . Cofilin promotes rapid actin filament turnover in vivo . Nature 388 , 78 – 82 ( 1997 ) . 102 . Mogilner , A . & Oster , G . Cell motility driven by actin polymerization . Biophys . J . 71 , 3030 – 3045 ( 1996 ) . 103 . Mogilner , A . & Oster , G . Force generation by actin polymerization II : the elastic ratchet and tethered filaments . Biophys . J . 84 , 1591 – 1605 ( 2003 ) . Acknowledgements We thank Y . Sun and V . Okreglak for critically reading the manuscript . Work in the laboratory of D . G . D . is supported by grants from the National Institutes of Health . Competing interests statement The authors declare no competing financial interests . DATABASES The following terms in this article are linked online to : Entrez Gene : http : / / www . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / entrez / query . fcgi ? db = gene BBC1 | SLA1 UniProtKB : http : / / ca . expasy . org / sprot Abp1 | Ark1 | HIP1R | Las17 | Myo3 | Myo5 | Pan1 | Prk1 | Sla2 | Vrp1 FURTHER INFORMATION David Drubin’s homepage : http : / / mcb . berkeley . edu / faculty / CDB / drubind . html Access to this links box is available online . R E V I E W S 414 | JUNE 2006 | VOLUME 7 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio