fcell - 08 - 573393 September 25 , 2020 Time : 11 : 24 # 1 ORIGINAL RESEARCH published : 25 September 2020 doi : 10 . 3389 / fcell . 2020 . 573393 Edited by : Maria Grazia Giansanti , Italian National Research Council , Italy Reviewed by : Charles Bradley Shuster , New Mexico State University , United States Giuliano Callaini , University of Siena , Italy * Correspondence : Ana X . Carvalho anacarvalho @ ibmc . up . pt † These authors have contributed equally to this work Specialty section : This article was submitted to Cell Growth and Division , a section of the journal Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology Received : 16 June 2020 Accepted : 03 September 2020 Published : 25 September 2020 Citation : Leite J , Chan F - Y , Osório DS , Saramago J , Sobral AF , Silva AM , Gassmann R and Carvalho AX ( 2020 ) Equatorial Non - muscle Myosin II and Plastin Cooperate to Align and Compact F - actin Bundles in the Cytokinetic Ring . Front . Cell Dev . Biol . 8 : 573393 . doi : 10 . 3389 / fcell . 2020 . 573393 Equatorial Non - muscle Myosin II and Plastin Cooperate to Align and Compact F - actin Bundles in the Cytokinetic Ring Joana Leite 1 , 2 , Fung - Yi Chan 1 , 2 , Daniel S . Osório 1 , 2 † , Joana Saramago 1 , 2 † , Ana F . Sobral 1 , 2 † , Ana M . Silva 1 , 2 , Reto Gassmann 1 , 2 and Ana X . Carvalho 1 , 2 * 1 Cytoskeletal Dynamics Lab , Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em Saúde ( i3S ) , Universidade do Porto , Porto , Portugal , 2 Cytoskeletal Dynamics Lab , Instituto de Biologia Molecular e Celular ( IBMC ) , Universidade do Porto , Porto , Portugal Cytokinesis is the last step of cell division that physically partitions the mother cell into two daughter cells . Cytokinesis requires the assembly and constriction of a contractile ring , a circumferential array of ﬁlamentous actin ( F - actin ) , non - muscle myosin II motors ( myosin ) , and actin - binding proteins that forms at the cell equator . Cytokinesis is accompanied by long - range cortical ﬂows from regions of relaxation toward regions of compression . In the C . elegans one - cell embryo , it has been suggested that anterior - directed cortical ﬂows are the main driver of contractile ring assembly . Here , we use embryos co - expressing motor - dead and wild - type myosin to show that cortical ﬂows can be severely reduced without major effects on contractile ring assembly and timely completion of cytokinesis . Fluorescence recovery after photobleaching in the ingressing furrow reveals that myosin recruitment kinetics are also unaffected by the absence of cortical ﬂows . We ﬁnd that myosin cooperates with the F - actin crosslinker plastin to align and compact F - actin bundles at the cell equator , and that this cross - talk is essential for cytokinesis . Our results thus argue against the idea that cortical ﬂows are a major determinant of contractile ring assembly . Instead , we propose that contractile ring assembly requires localized concerted action of motor - competent myosin and plastin at the cell equator . Keywords : actomyosin contractility , cytokinesis , non - muscle myosin II , contractile ring , C . elegans , cortical ﬂows , plastin / ﬁmbrin INTRODUCTION Animal cytokinesis relies on the assembly and constriction of an actomyosin contractile ring at the cell equator , which pinches the plasma membrane inwards , ultimately separating the two daughter cells ( reviewed in Leite et al . , 2019 ) . The contractile ring is a circumferential array of ﬁlamentous actin ( F - actin ) , non - muscle myosin II ( hereafter myosin ) and actin - binding proteins , including formins and F - actin crosslinkers , such as α - actinin , ﬁmbrin / plastin ( hereafter plastin ) , anillin and septins ( reviewed in Green et al . , 2012 ) . At cytokinesis onset , RhoA activation at the cell equator triggers the recruitment and activation of downstream eﬀectors to assemble the contractile ring , particularly diaphanous - related formins ( Prokopenko et al . , 2000 ; Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www . frontiersin . org 1 September 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 573393 fcell - 08 - 573393 September 25 , 2020 Time : 11 : 24 # 2 Leite et al . Plastin - Myosin Cooperation During Cytokinesis Großhans et al . , 2005 ; Watanabe et al . , 2010 ; Melak et al . , 2017 ) and Rho kinase , which promote the assembly of linear F - actin and the activation of myosin , respectively ( Matsumura , 2005 ; Vicente - Manzanares , 2009 ) . Experimental evidence from electron microscopy in marine invertebrate and newt eggs and cultured mammalian cells suggests that the contractile ring is a thin layer of closely packed F - actin of mixed polarities ( Schroeder , 1968 , 1970 , 1972 ; Arnold , 1969 ; Selman and Perry , 1970 ; Sanger and Sanger , 1980 ; Maupin and Pollard , 1986 ; Mabuchi et al . , 1988 ; Henson et al . , 2017 ) surrounded by a mostly branched network ( Henson et al . , 2017 ) . How F - actin and myosin accumulate and organize into a circumferential array at the cell equator to form the contractile ring is a central question that remains to be fully resolved . Two main mechanisms have been implicated : equatorial compression due to cortical ﬂows and local RhoA - dependent de novo assembly at the equator . According to the former , both F - actin and myosin are advected by ﬂow from the poles towards the equator due to a tension diﬀerential between these regions . The persistent convergence at the equator creates a region where ﬁlaments are constantly compressed and aligned ( White and Borisy , 1983 ; Salbreux et al . , 2009 ; Turlier et al . , 2014 ; Khaliullin et al . , 2018 ) . According to the latter , F - actin and myosin are directly recruited to the equatorial cortex from the cytoplasm , leading to local alignment of F - actin bundles ( Kimura et al . , 1996 ; Bement et al . , 2005 ; Vavylonis et al . , 2008 ; Uehara et al . , 2010 ; Spira et al . , 2017 ) . The relative contribution of these two mechanisms to cytokinesis has been diﬃcult to ascertain , because ﬂows are myosin - dependent ( Reymann et al . , 2016 ) yet myosin perturbations may prevent cytokinesis simply because myosin - dependent force generation at the equator is essential for equatorial deformation and continued furrow ingression ( Davies et al . , 2014 ; Osorio et al . , 2019 ) . While actomyosin cortical ﬂows towards the cell equator during cytokinesis have been described in several experimental systems , including C . elegans ( Reymann et al . , 2016 ; Khaliullin et al . , 2018 ; Singh et al . , 2019 ) , they are less evident in some mammalian cells and are absent in yeast ( Cao and Wang , 1990 ; Murthy and Wadsworth , 2005 ; Wu and Pollard , 2005 ; Vavylonis et al . , 2008 ; Laplante et al . , 2015 ) . It remains to be determined whether cortical ﬂows actually drive assembly of a contractile ring or whether they are simply a consequence of the tension diﬀerential that arises from equatorial stimulation and polar relaxation . The involvement of F - actin crosslinkers ( hereafter crosslinkers ) in contractile ring assembly remains poorly explored . Depending on their size and structure , crosslinkers can form tight and parallel F - actin bundles or loosely crosslinked F - actin networks with distinct architectures and mechanical properties ( Faix et al . , 1996 ; Mavrakis et al . , 2014 ; Srivastava and Robinson , 2015 ) . A common feature is that crosslinkers provide interconnectivity , which is important for contractility of actomyosin networks ( Ennomani et al . , 2016 ; Descovich et al . , 2017 ) . To date , the only crosslinker whose perturbation is known to negatively impact cytokinesis in C . elegans embryos is the plastin PLST - 1 . A plst - 1 loss - of - function mutant decreased F - actin network connectivity and resulted in short - range and erratic F - actin cortical ﬂows ( Ding et al . , 2017 ) . Plastin is a globular protein that can assemble F - actin into tightly packed bundles with uniform or mixed polarity ( Bretscher , 1981 ; Matsudaira et al . , 1983 ; Skau et al . , 2011 ) . Plastin localizes to dense F - actin bundles and is particularly abundant in the cytokinetic ring ( Ding et al . , 2017 ) , but whether it contributes to the organization and / or stabilization of F - actin bundles in this region is unknown . We previously generated C . elegans expressing motor - dead mutants of myosin ( NMY - 2 ) and showed that myosin motor activity is essential for cytokinesis in the one - cell embryo ( Osorio et al . , 2019 ) . In this study , we use these nmy - 2 mutants , as well as a plst - 1 mutant , to explore the role of cortical ﬂows during cytokinesis in the one - cell C . elegans embryo . Our data from quantitative live imaging assays for cortical F - actin and myosin ﬂows , contractile ring assembly and furrow ingression , myosin turnover dynamics , and F - actin bundle alignment at the cell equator , collectively support the idea that contractile ring assembly and furrow ingression requires the concerted action of motor - competent myosin and plastin at the cell equator and is largely independent of compressive cortical ﬂows . RESULTS Long - Range Cortical F - actin Flows Are Dispensable for Contractile Ring Formation and Furrow Ingression To investigate the importance of compressive cortical ﬂows for assembly and constriction of the contractile ring ( Figures 1A , B ) , we analyzed F - actin cortical ﬂow proﬁles in one - cell embryos co - expressing endogenous motor - dead NMY - 2 ( S251A ) or NMY - 2 ( R252A ) and a transgenic wild - type version of NMY - 2 that is mCherry - tagged and RNAi - sensitive ( NMY - 2 : : mCherry sen ; Figure 1C ) ( Osorio et al . , 2019 ) . NMY - 2 ( S251A ) and NMY - 2 ( R252A ) are unable to translocate F - actin but retain the ability to bind F - actin in vitro ( Osorio et al . , 2019 ) , and embryos expressing endogenous motor - dead myosins fail cytokinesis after penetrant RNAi - mediated depletion of NMY - 2 : : mCherry sen ( Osorio et al . , 2019 ) . Mild RNAi - mediated depletion of NMY - 2 : : mCherry sen slows but does not prevent cytokinesis . F - actin ﬂow analysis was performed using transgenic LifeAct : : GFP , whose cortical levels are unaﬀected by myosin inhibition ( Osorio et al . , 2019 ) . We chose LifeAct : : GFP ( Silva et al . , 2016 ; Chan et al . , 2019 ; Osorio et al . , 2019 ) rather than LifeAct : : mKate2 ( Reymann et al . , 2016 ) , because in our hands one - cell embryos expressing LifeAct : : mKate2 exhibited delayed furrow initiation and had a signiﬁcantly reduced contractile ring constriction rate when compared to embryos expressing other ﬂuorescent contractile ring components ( Supplementary Figure S1A ) . In contrast , cytokinesis kinetics were normal in embryos expressing LifeAct : : GFP . Moreover , the cortical distribution of LifeAct : : GFP , but not that of LifeAct : : mKate2 , was similar to the cortical distribution of endogenous PLST - 1 : : GFP ( Supplementary Figure S1B ) , which binds all F - actin pools during cytokinesis ( Ding et al . , 2017 ) . Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www . frontiersin . org 2 September 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 573393 fcell - 08 - 573393 September 25 , 2020 Time : 11 : 24 # 3 Leite et al . Plastin - Myosin Cooperation During Cytokinesis FIGURE 1 | Perturbation of myosin motor activity or reduction of myosin levels lead to signiﬁcantly reduced cortical F - actin ﬂows . ( A ) Schematic of cytokinesis . Reference points used for measurements of ring assembly and furrow initiation intervals are indicated . Ring assembly : time interval between anaphase onset and the formation of a shallow equatorial deformation , when contractile ring components are being recruited to the cell equator . Furrow initiation : time interval between shallow deformation and the folding of the plasma membrane into a back - to - back conﬁguration . Ring constriction : time interval between back - to - back membrane conﬁguration and full furrow ingression . ( B ) Stills of cortical images of an embryo expressing LifeAct : : GFP at shallow deformation and furrow initiation with a schematic illustrating the transition from unidirectional cortical ﬂows during ring assembly to bidirectional ﬂows starting at the onset of ring constriction . ( C ) Perturbations used and their effect on the levels of endogenous and transgenic NMY - 2 and LifeAct : : GFP relative to controls with no RNAi , as described in Osorio et al . ( 2019 ) . ( D ) Kymographs of LifeAct : : GFP cortical ﬂows along the longitudinal axis in one - cell embryos for the conditions indicated in ( C ) . Yellow and red bars correspond to ring assembly and furrow initiation time intervals , respectively . Curved arrows indicate posterior - anterior ﬂow direction . ( D’ ) Schematic illustrating the region of the embryo used for the kymographs in ( D ) . Scale bar , 5 µ m . Kymographs of the cortical region between the onset of anaphase and the establishment of a back - to - back plasma membrane conﬁguration revealed F - actin ﬂows directed from the posterior towards the anterior pole in control embryos ( Figures 1A – D ) . Even without depletion of transgenic NMY - 2 : : mCherry , ﬂows were barely detectable in nmy - 2 ( S251A ) and nmy - 2 ( R252A ) embryos , nor were they evident in embryos partially depleted of endogenous wild - type myosin Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www . frontiersin . org 3 September 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 573393 fcell - 08 - 573393 September 25 , 2020 Time : 11 : 24 # 4 Leite et al . Plastin - Myosin Cooperation During Cytokinesis ( Figures 1C , D ) . To quantitatively analyze cortical ﬂows , we performed particle image velocimetry ( PIV ) analysis ( Figure 2A ) . Flow velocity was calculated by averaging the X - or Y - components ( anterior - posterior and dorsal - ventral , respectively ) of the velocity vectors in two regions positioned over the anterior and posterior half of the embryo , for each time point between anaphase onset and back - to - back membrane conﬁguration ( Figures 2B , C ) . Like reported in Singh et al . ( 2019 ) , the Y - component was essentially absent when embryos were imaged without compression in an open chamber ( Supplementary Figures S2A , B ; Singh et al . , 2019 ) , yet these embryos completed cytokinesis with kinetics that were indistinguishable from those in embryos imaged under compression ( Supplementary Figure S2C ) . We therefore focused our attention on the X - component . Negative velocity values indicate posterior - anterior oriented ﬂows and positive velocity values indicate anterior - posterior oriented ﬂows ( Figure 2A ) . In agreement with a prior study ( Reymann et al . , 2016 ) , control embryos presented anterior - directed F - actin cortical ﬂows that started just prior to equatorial shallow deformation , peaked shortly thereafter , and remained high for approximately 50 seconds ( Figure 2B ) . In contrast to controls , most vectors detected in nmy - 2 ( S251A ) and nmy - 2 ( R252A ) embryos were extremely weak , had no coherent directionality , and did not increase in magnitude after equatorial shallow deformation ( Figures 2B , F ) . This ﬂow proﬁle was observed regardless of whether transgenic NMY - 2 : : mCherry sen was mildly depleted by RNAi or not ( Figures 2C , G ) . We further analyzed the ﬂow velocity proﬁles by averaging the X - component of the vectors for each position along the length of the embryo during the ﬁrst 50 seconds after equatorial shallow deformation , when ﬂows in control embryos showed coherent direction and velocity ( region highlighted in gray in Figure 2B ) . In control embryos , ﬂow velocity was higher in the posterior half of the embryo , reaching a maximum velocity of − 4 . 5 µ m / min and decreasing toward the anterior pole ( Figure 2D ) . In nmy - 2 ( S251A ) and nmy - 2 ( R252A ) embryos the ﬂow proﬁle was ﬂat with or without depletion of transgenic NMY - 2 : : mCherry sen , reaching a maximum velocity of − 1 µ m / min ( Figures 2D , E ) . We conclude that endogenous motor - dead myosin has a dominant inhibitory eﬀect on cortical ﬂows in embryos expressing transgenic NMY - 2 : : mCherry sen . Similarly weak ﬂow proﬁles were observed in embryos after partial depletion of endogenous wild - type NMY - 2 ( Figure 2E and Supplementary Figures S3C , S6C ) . Analysis of cytokinesis kinetics showed that in the presence of transgenic NMY - 2 : : mCherry sen , nmy - 2 ( S251A ) and nmy - 2 ( R252A ) embryos exhibited only minor delays in contractile ring assembly and furrow initiation despite severely impaired cortical ﬂows ( Figure 2F ) . In contrast , mild depletion of transgenic NMY - 2 : : mCherry sen in these embryos resulted in substantial delays in cytokinesis and occasional cytokinesis failure , while cortical ﬂows were similar to those observed in the absence of RNAi treatment ( Figure 2G ) . We conclude that there is no obvious correlation between perturbed cortical ﬂows and delayed cytokinesis . This argues against the idea that persistent , unidirectional actin cortical ﬂows are a major determinant of cytokinesis . Cortical Flows Are Dispensable for Accumulation of Myosin in the Ingressing Furrow To further probe the signiﬁcance of cortical ﬂows , we sought to evaluate the possibility that ﬂowing myosin generates tension that pushes F - actin to the equator . We ﬁrst compared cortical ﬂows of LifeAct : : GFP and NMY - 2 : : GFP using PIV analysis , which showed that F - actin and myosin ﬂow toward the equator in a concerted manner ( Supplementary Figures S3A , B ) : unidirectional cortical ﬂows from the posterior pole toward the anterior side of the embryo initiate shortly after anaphase , and ﬂow velocities increase linearly until a maximum velocity is reached and maintained for ∼ 50 seconds . This is followed by a period of bidirectional ﬂows starting at constriction onset , in which actin and myosin ﬂow from both poles towards the ingressing furrow ( positive ﬂow velocity in the anterior and negative ﬂow velocity in the posterior side of the embryo ) . Next , we determined myosin turnover at the cell cortex outside the equator . We reasoned that if ﬂowing myosin actively slides F - actin , myosin turnover should be relatively slow , since myosin is known to be stabilized at sites of increased tension such as the contractile ring ( Reichl et al . , 2008 ; Srivastava and Robinson , 2015 ) . We photobleached NMY - 2 : : GFP at the posterior polar region at shallow deformation and followed signal recovery during the period of contractile ring formation and compaction . By the time of shallow deformation , some myosin has already been cleared from the posterior pole ( Supplementary Figures S4A , B ) , and therefore confounding eﬀects of ﬂows on the measurement of signal recovery after photobleaching should be reduced . Fluorescence recovery data could be ﬁtted with a single exponential from which we extrapolated a half time of recovery ( τ half ) of 4 . 9 ± 2 . 4 seconds ( Figures 3A , A’ ) . As a control , we photobleached a region of identical size in the posterior cytoplasm , for which signal recovery was signiﬁcantly faster ( τ half of 2 . 6 ± 1 . 8 seconds ; P < 0 . 05 ; Supplementary Figures S5C , D ) . Assuming a diﬀusion - dominated recovery proﬁle for cortical myosin , we calculated a dissociation constant ( k oﬀ ) of 0 . 07 ± 0 . 03 s − 1 ( equation 1 in “Materials and Methods” section ) . Fast myosin turnover in the polar cortex indicates that ﬂowing myosin is in constant exchange with the cytoplasmic pool before reaching the cell equator . We next determined the rate at which cortical ﬂow compresses F - actin towards the equatorial region . We measured the ﬂow X - component as a function of the position along the anterior - posterior axis for 10 seconds intervals , from 25 seconds until 95 seconds after anaphase onset , and estimated the compression rate by ﬂow for each time interval by calculating the spatial derivative of the ﬂow velocity for each position ( Figure 3B ) . Compression was found to be uniform in the equatorial region ( 15 – 25 µ m ) . The average compression rate for the equatorial region increased over time , reaching a maximum of 0 . 012 ± 0 . 009 s − 1 85 seconds after anaphase onset ( Figure 3C ) . Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www . frontiersin . org 4 September 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 573393 fcell - 08 - 573393 September 25 , 2020 Time : 11 : 24 # 5 Leite et al . Plastin - Myosin Cooperation During Cytokinesis FIGURE 2 | Contractile rings assemble and cytokinesis completes in a timely manner when long - range cortical actin ﬂows are drastically reduced . ( A ) Schematic illustrating how cortical LifeAct : : GFP ﬂows were analyzed by particle image velocimetry ( PIV ; see more details in “Materials and Methods” section ) . ( B , C ) Longitudinal ( X - component ) ﬂow velocity ( mean ± SEM ) over time in the anterior or posterior half of embryos . Curves were aligned to the time of shallow deformation . N is the number of embryos analyzed . Period of consistently strong , posterior - anterior directed ﬂows is indicated in gray . ( D , E ) Longitudinal ( X - component ) velocity proﬁles of Lifeact : : GFP cortical ﬂows along anterior - posterior ( A - P ) axis averaged for a period of 50 seconds starting at shallow deformation . Flow proﬁles show mean X - component velocity ± SEM . N is the number of embryos analyzed . ( F , G ) The schematic on the left summarizes overall ﬂow intensity and directionality ( X - component ) . Ring assembly and furrow initiation time intervals ( mean ± SD ) are indicated . Statistical signiﬁcance in ( D ) , ( E ) was determined using two - way ANOVA for repeated measures , and in ( F ) , ( G ) using one - way ANOVA followed by Bonferroni’s multiple comparison test ; * P < 0 . 05 , * * * * P < 0 . 0001 , ns , not signiﬁcant . Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www . frontiersin . org 5 September 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 573393 fcell - 08 - 573393 September 25 , 2020 Time : 11 : 24 # 6 Leite et al . Plastin - Myosin Cooperation During Cytokinesis FIGURE 3 | Cortical myosin turnover and ﬂow - induced compression rates . ( A ) Schematic showing the photobleached region at the posterior pole of the embryo at shallow deformation ( top left ) and selected images from a time - lapse series showing NMY - 2 : : GFP ﬂuorescence over time pre - and post - bleaching . ( A’ ) Quantiﬁcation of NMY - 2 : : GFP ﬂuorescence recovery after photobleaching at the posterior pole . Data from individual embryos ( light green ) and the mean ± SD ( dark green ) are plotted . The black dashed line is the single exponential ﬁtting curve from which the half time of recovery and myosin k off were extrapolated . ( B ) Average compression rate by ﬂow calculated as the spatial derivative of the longitudinal ﬂow proﬁles for each position along the anterior - posterior ( A - P ) axis of the embryo from 25 to 95 seconds after anaphase onset ( AO ) . Compression is uniform in the equatorial region ( 15 – 25 µ m ) . Colors represent different time intervals as indicated . ( C ) Average compression rate by ﬂow over time after anaphase onset for the region of equatorial compression ( 15 – 25 µ m ) . Data from individual embryos ( gray ) and the mean ± SD ( black ) are plotted . ( D ) Schematic showing the photobleached region just behind the tip of the ingressing furrow after back - to - back membrane conﬁguration is achieved ( top left ) and selected images from a time - lapse series showing the NMY - 2 : : GFP ﬂuorescence over time pre - and post - bleaching . ( E ) Quantiﬁcation of NMY - 2 : : GFP ﬂuorescence recovery after photobleaching in the ingressing furrow in control and NMY - 2 depleted embryos . The mean ± SD is plotted . N is the number of embryos analyzed . Scale bars , 5 µ m . As the maximum compression rate is slower than the rate of myosin dissociation from the cortex , these data argue against the idea that ﬂowing myosin is responsible for F - actin bundle compression at the cell equator . To conﬁrm this , we assessed myosin turnover in the ingressing furrow . We photobleached a small region just behind the tip of the ingressing furrow and followed NMY - 2 : : GFP signal recovery in the moving region as the furrow continued to Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www . frontiersin . org 6 September 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 573393 fcell - 08 - 573393 September 25 , 2020 Time : 11 : 24 # 7 Leite et al . Plastin - Myosin Cooperation During Cytokinesis ingress . NMY - 2 : : GFP ﬂuorescence intensity in the bleached region increased until the end of ingression without reaching a plateau ( Figure 3E ) . Similar results were obtained when the entire division plane was photobleached at shallow deformation ( Supplementary Figures S5A , B ) . These demonstrate that myosin continues to accumulate in the contractile ring during furrow ingression . Myosin could accumulate by incoming ﬂow , by localized recruitment from the cytoplasm , or both . To distinguish between these possibilities , we examined embryos partially depleted of NMY - 2 , in which the initial unidirectional ﬂows are essentially absent , bidirectional ﬂows are signiﬁcantly decreased , and cytokinesis still completes ( Supplementary Figure S3C ) . Under these conditions , NMY - 2 : : GFP was still visible at the tip of the furrow , which allowed us to perform the photobleaching experiment . Normalized recovery proﬁles of NMY - 2 - depleted embryos were identical to those of non - depleted embryos ( Figure 3E ) . These results support the idea that the contribution of cortical ﬂows to myosin accumulation at the cell equator is minor and that equatorial myosin is therefore primarily recruited from the cytoplasm . Further support for this idea comes from the observation that the amount of myosin that accumulates at the cell equator after anaphase onset is much higher than the amount of myosin that leaves the polar regions ( Supplementary Figure S4B ) . The F - actin Crosslinker Plastin Cooperates With Myosin to Align F - actin Bundles at the Division Plane We previously found that nmy - 2 ( S251A ) and nmy - 2 ( R252A ) embryos depleted of transgenic NMY - 2 : : mCherry sen accumulated equatorial F - actin bundles with a tilted orientation ( Osorio et al . , 2019 ) . Based on this observation , we speculated that F - actin crosslinkers could also contribute to the organization of F - actin bundles at the cell equator . The plastin ortholog PLST - 1 was a promising candidate , as it localizes in the contractile ring and the surrounding cortex and has been implicated in cytokinesis ( Ding et al . , 2017 ) . To determine whether NMY - 2 and PLST - 1 cooperate to compact and align F - actin bundles at the cell equator , we used genome editing to generate a plst - 1 mutant , plst - 1 ( prt89 ) , which contains a premature stop codon in its open reading frame and is homozygous viable , like another previously described plst - 1 mutant ( Ding et al . , 2017 ) . Using LifeAct : : GFP , we quantiﬁed F - actin bundle alignment at the equatorial region over time , starting at anaphase onset ( Figures 4A , B and Supplementary Movie S1 ) . Analysis of F - actin bundle orientation in control embryos revealed fast bundle alignment perpendicular to the longitudinal axis of the embryo with bundles reaching maximum alignment shortly after shallow deformation ( deviation from vertical alignment close to 0 ◦ ) . In embryos partially depleted of NMY - 2 , F - actin bundle alignment was signiﬁcantly slower and continued throughout furrow initiation . In plst - 1 ( prt89 ) embryos , F - actin bundle alignment was also slower than in control embryos , with F - actin bundles becoming mostly aligned at shallow deformation and reaching maximum alignment just before furrow initiation . In nmy - 2 ( RNAi ) ; plst - 1 ( prt89 ) embryos , F - actin bundles became completely unstable and failed to align , exhibiting oscillating orientations between 20 ◦ and 50 ◦ relative to vertical alignment . In nmy - 2 ( RNAi ) embryos , median contractile ring assembly was delayed threefold ( 155 seconds versus 53 seconds in controls ) , but 92 % of embryos were able to complete cytokinesis ( Figures 4C , E ) . In plst - 1 ( prt89 ) embryos , contractile ring assembly was delayed twofold ( 110 seconds ) , and cytokinesis was successful in all embryos . Strikingly , contractile ring assembly was delayed sixfold ( 298 seconds ) in nmy - 2 ( RNAi ) ; plst - 1 ( prt89 ) embryos , and 89 % of embryos failed to initiate furrowing ( Figures 4C , E ) . We asked whether deﬁcient alignment of F - actin bundles at the cell equator and cytokinesis failure in nmy - 2 ( RNAi ) ; plst - 1 ( prt89 ) embryos could be due to aggravated cortical ﬂows ( Figures 4D , E and Supplementary Figure S6 ) . Using PIV analysis of LifeAct : : GFP , we determined ﬂow velocities from anaphase onset until the back - to - back membrane conﬁguration ( Supplementary Figure S6C ) . In plst - 1 ( prt89 ) embryos , cortical ﬂows were decreased and erratic compared to controls . There were no periods of unidirectional or bidirectional ﬂows , as the cortex was constantly moving back and forth in opposite directions ( Supplementary Figures S6A , C ) . In nmy - 2 ( RNAi ) ; plst - 1 ( prt89 ) embryos , there was no further aggravation of ﬂow proﬁles compared to the single perturbations . Analysis of ﬂow velocity along the anterior - posterior axis for the period of persistent unidirectional ﬂow , as deﬁned in control embryos ( 50 seconds starting at shallow deformation ) , revealed that plst - 1 ( prt89 ) embryos showed an intermediate proﬁle between that of control and nmy - 2 ( RNAi ) embryos , with a maximum ﬂow velocity at the posterior pole of − 2 . 5 µ m / min ( Figure 4D ) . In nmy - 2 ( RNAi ) ; plst - 1 ( prt89 ) embryos , ﬂow velocities were similar to those observed in nmy - 2 ( RNAi ) embryos . We further investigated the correlation between vectors as a function of the distance between them for the period of persistent unidirectional ﬂows ( Supplementary Figure S6B ; equation 2 in “Materials and Methods” section ) . The closer the cosine similarity is to 1 , the higher the correlation between vectors and the more coherent the ﬂow directionality . In control embryos , the cosine similarity was close to 1 for neighboring vectors and decayed gradually as the distance between vectors increased , approaching a minimum of 0 . 7 for vectors located on opposite poles . In nmy - 2 ( RNAi ) embryos , the cosine similarity decayed signiﬁcantly faster , reaching a minimum of approximately 0 . 2 for the maximum distance between vectors . The correlation was even worse for plst - 1 ( prt89 ) embryos , with minimum values approaching 0 , meaning that vectors were pointing in opposite directions . In nmy - 2 ( RNAi ) ; plst - 1 ( prt89 ) embryos , cosine similarity was identical to that in plst - 1 ( prt89 ) embryos , revealing similar problems in ﬂow directionality . We conclude that cytokinesis failure in nmy - 2 ( RNAi ) ; plst - 1 ( prt89 ) embryos is unlikely to be caused by an aggravation of cortical ﬂows . We also inspected the behavior of NMY - 2 : : mCherry signal in the single and double perturbations ( Supplementary Movie S1 ) . Interestingly , we observed that residual myosin in nmy - 2 ( RNAi ) ; plst - 1 ( prt89 ) embryos accumulates at the equator more Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www . frontiersin . org 7 September 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 573393 fcell - 08 - 573393 September 25 , 2020 Time : 11 : 24 # 8 Leite et al . Plastin - Myosin Cooperation During Cytokinesis FIGURE 4 | The F - actin crosslinker plastin cooperates with myosin to align F - actin bundles at the division plane . ( A ) Images of the cortical plane of embryos expressing LifeAct : : GFP showing the evolution of the equatorial F - actin band relative to anaphase onset . Also see Supplementary Movie S1 . ( B ) Deviation from vertical alignment of F - actin bundles at the equatorial cortex relative to anaphase onset ( mean ± SEM ) . ( C ) Boxplots showing the dispersion of contractile ring assembly times . In each box , the central line is the median , the boundaries of the box are the 25th and 75th percentiles ; the whiskers extend to include the maximum and minimum values . ( D ) Longitudinal ( X - component ) velocity proﬁles of Lifeact : : GFP cortical ﬂows along anterior - posterior ( A - P ) axis averaged for a period of 50 seconds starting at shallow deformation . Flow proﬁles show mean X - component velocity ± SEM . ( E ) Values on the left indicate percentage of embryos that completed cytokinesis successfully . On the right , a summary of F - actin bundle alignment at the equator and overall ﬂow intensity and directionality ( X - component ) . N is the number of embryos analyzed . Statistical signiﬁcance of ring assembly times in ( C ) was determined using one - way ANOVA followed by Bonferroni’s multiple comparison test . ∗∗∗∗ P < 0 . 0001 . Scale bar , 5 µ m . Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www . frontiersin . org 8 September 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 573393 fcell - 08 - 573393 September 25 , 2020 Time : 11 : 24 # 9 Leite et al . Plastin - Myosin Cooperation During Cytokinesis FIGURE 5 | Model : the combined synergistic action of plastin and myosin aligns and compacts F - actin at the division plane independently of actomyosin cortical ﬂows . ( A ) When both plastin and myosin accumulate at the equator , F - actin bundles are properly connected , and myosin is able to efﬁciently align and compact them into a circumferential array to maximize tension . Early actomyosin ﬂows are unidirectional and long - ranged . ( B ) In the absence of plastin - mediated bundling , myosin struggles to align and compact F - actin bundles , initially spending energy on ﬁlament sorting instead of ﬁlament sliding . Cortical ﬂows are reduced and erratic and cytokinesis completes with delays in F - actin alignment and contractile ring formation . ( C ) In the presence of plastin - mediated F - actin bundling and decreased myosin levels , F - actin bundles are connected to each other but tilt and struggle to orient along the division plane and to compact because of insufﬁcient motor - activity . Cortical ﬂows are severely reduced and erratic and cytokinesis completes with delays in F - actin alignment and contractile ring formation . ( D ) When both plastin - mediated bundling and myosin levels are decreased , equatorial actin ﬁlaments become unstable and start rotating and oscillating , adopting a quasi - horizontal orientation . Cortical ﬂows are reduced and erratic , as in the individual plastin and myosin perturbations . F - actin bundles never align to form the contractile ring and cytokinesis fails . slowly than in nmy - 2 ( RNAi ) embryos . These results suggest that PLST - 1 , in addition to its role in promoting connectivity throughout the cell cortex , has a localized role at the cell equator independently of cortical ﬂows . We conclude that localized synergistic action of NMY - 2 and PLST - 1 at the division plane is critical for F - actin alignment and compaction into a circumferential array that is capable of sustaining furrow ingression . Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www . frontiersin . org 9 September 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 573393 fcell - 08 - 573393 September 25 , 2020 Time : 11 : 24 # 10 Leite et al . Plastin - Myosin Cooperation During Cytokinesis DISCUSSION Unidirectional Long - Range Cortical Flows Play a Minor Role During Cytokinesis Several models have been proposed to explain how the cell shape changes that occur during cytokinesis are triggered . The ﬁrst theories date back to the 1950s and considered cleavage as an integrated process involving reorganization of the entire cell surface . While Mitchison ( 1952 ) ; Mitchison and Swann ( 1955 ) , and Swann and Mitchison ( 1958 ) proposed that cytokinetic furrow formation was a passive event resulting from an active expansion at the poles that would spread toward the equator , Marsland proposed that the furrow region was itself contractile , independently of the poles ( Marsland , 1950 , 1956a , b ) . Wolpert’s astral relaxation theory speciﬁcally proposed that a negative signal from the astral microtubules would make the poles relax , allowing the equator to contract ( Wolpert , 1960 ) . While the molecular mechanisms for polar relaxation have only recently started to be unraveled ( Mangal et al . , 2018 ; Chapa - y - lazo et al . , 2020 ) , it has become widely accepted that cytokinesis requires a positive signal from the central spindle that activates the small GTPase RhoA , which in turn promotes the accumulation of contractile ring components , F - actin and myosin , at the cell equator . F - actin alignment and accumulation via ﬂow - driven equatorial compression and RhoA - dependent local recruitment are the two main mechanisms thought to drive the assembly of a circumferentially aligned contractile ring . A recent study showed that F - actin cortical ﬂows are myosin - dependent and that compression by ﬂow , equatorial F - actin alignment , and furrow ingression show similar spatiotemporal dynamics in the one - cell C . elegans embryo ( Reymann et al . , 2016 ) . The authors proposed that persistent , unidirectional compressive ﬂows towards the cell equator dictate the timing of equatorial F - actin alignment and furrow formation . We ﬁnd that embryos co - expressing similar amounts of endogenous motor - dead and transgenic wild - type myosin have severely decreased F - actin cortical ﬂows , yet contractile ring assembly and furrow initiation still occur in a timely manner , and cytokinesis completes . Lowering the levels of transgenic wild - type myosin in these embryos results in substantial cytokinesis delays with no additional eﬀects on cortical ﬂows . While these results show that both long - range cortical ﬂows and cytokinesis require myosin motor activity , they suggest that cortical ﬂows are neither essential for cytokinesis nor a major determinant of cytokinesis kinetics . Apart from the cytokinetic furrow , C . elegans one - cell embryos also form a transient furrow , which partially ingresses and then regresses , during the period of polarity establishment that precedes the ﬁrst mitotic division . Unlike cytokinesis , pseudocleavage lacks equatorial accumulation of active RhoA , F - actin and myosin ( Mayer et al . , 2010 ; Reymann et al . , 2016 ) . Moreover , counter - rotating ﬂows in the two halves of the embryo occur during pseudocleavage initiation that do not occur during cytokinetic furrow initiation ( Naganathan et al . , 2014 ) . While our results argue that cortical ﬂows play a relatively minor role in furrow formation during cytokinesis , it remains possible that cortical ﬂows are essential for furrow formation during pseudocleavage , as proposed by Reymann et al . ( 2016 ) . Myosin Accumulation at the Cell Equator Occurs Primarily by Recruitment From the Cytoplasm There is evidence that myosin and other crosslinkers become stabilized and immobilized in regions of increased tension , such as the contractile ring ( Reichl et al . , 2008 ; Srivastava and Robinson , 2015 ) . Our experiments of ﬂuorescence recovery after photobleaching and measurements of ﬂow - driven equatorial F - actin compression suggest that the rate of myosin turnover at the cortex outside the cell equator is signiﬁcantly faster than the rate at which cortical ﬂow compresses the actomyosin network toward the equator . The results agree with ﬁndings in D . discoideum cells , where cortical myosin did not move all the way to the equator , but rather appeared and disappeared shortly after from the cortex ( Yumura et al . , 2008 ) . This indicates that ﬂowing myosin may not be able to generate substantial amounts of compressing force . Thus , tension generated by equatorial myosin activity is likely more relevant for the alignment and compaction of F - actin bundles , which is in agreement with sustained RhoA positive signaling at this location . It also indicates that compression and alignment of the equatorial F - actin bundles may occur independently of ﬂows . We show that unidirectional and bidirectional cortical ﬂows can be severely reduced without aﬀecting the recovery proﬁle of photobleached myosin in the ingressing furrow . This suggests that cortical ﬂows may not be the main source of myosin loading onto the contractile ring , in contrast to a previous model ( Khaliullin et al . , 2018 ) . We propose that myosin accumulates at the furrow primarily by direct recruitment from the cytoplasm to the cell equator and largely independently of cortical ﬂows . Plastin - Mediated Bundling and Myosin Motor Activity Are Locally Required for F - actin Alignment at the Division Plane and Deformation of the Equator The contractile ring must produce suﬃcient force to deform the plasma membrane against the overall cell shape . Actomyosin contractility must therefore be optimized at the cell equator , which involves the organization of F - actin in circumferentially aligned and compacted linear bundles . An F - actin network architecture composed of modules of antiparallel F - actin bundles is optimal for contraction , as ﬁlaments are already aligned and oriented such that myosin - dependent ﬁlament sliding is facilitated and tension can be readily propagated across the network ( Ennomani et al . , 2016 ) . It is still unclear , however , whether F - actin bundles in the contractile ring are organized in an antiparallel manner ( reviewed in Pinto et al . , 2013 ; Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www . frontiersin . org 10 September 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 573393 fcell - 08 - 573393 September 25 , 2020 Time : 11 : 24 # 11 Leite et al . Plastin - Myosin Cooperation During Cytokinesis Murrell et al . , 2015 ) and whether contractile modules exist ( Carvalho et al . , 2009 ; Silva et al . , 2016 ) . In fact , in vitro reconstituted circular actomyosin networks have been shown to contract in the absence of a modular organization , as long as F - actin crosslinkers are present ( Ennomani et al . , 2016 ; Wollrab et al . , 2019 ) . Our in vivo data show that myosin struggles to align and compact equatorial F - actin at the cell equator without the crosslinking activity of plastin in plst - 1 ( prt89 ) embryos . We envision that plastin facilitates myosin - driven alignment by organizing formin - nucleated linear F - actin into tight bundles , so that tension can be eﬃciently ampliﬁed and propagated throughout the network to rapidly compact it into a circumferential array ( Figure 5 ) . Without plastin , myosin may initially spend energy on sorting randomly oriented F - actin instead of productive ﬁlament sliding . When myosin levels are reduced in the presence of plastin ( partial depletion of NMY - 2 ) , F - actin bundles also struggle to align and compact , likely because of insuﬃcient motor activity to produce tension in the network . When both F - actin bundling and myosin levels are reduced in nmy - 2 ( RNAi ) ; plst - 1 ( prt89 ) embryos , equatorial F - actin bundles become unstable and never orient along the division plane . Consequently , contractile ring assembly fails altogether . The enhanced defects in the plastin / myosin double perturbation cannot be ascribed to aggravated cortical ﬂows , since these are already severely aﬀected in the single perturbations , in which a contractile ring assembles and cytokinesis completes . This strongly suggests that myosin and plastin cooperate locally at the cell equator . Interestingly , the observation that residual myosin in nmy - 2 ( RNAi ) ; plst - 1 ( prt89 ) embryos accumulates at the equator more slowly than in nmy - 2 ( RNAi ) embryos suggests that plastin - dependent F - actin bundling may stabilize myosin at the equatorial cortex . This is not the ﬁrst time cooperation between a passive and an active crosslinker has been observed . In C . elegans , a previous study demonstrated that plastin provides the connectivity for coalescence and maturation of myosin foci from distant nascent ﬁlaments in the cortex , amplifying the range of contractile domains during polarity establishment ( Ding et al . , 2017 ) . In D . discoideum , myosin and the crosslinker cortexillin have been proposed to stabilize each other at sites of increased mechanical load : cortexilin I , as a long - lived crosslinker , anchors F - actin in the network so that myosin can exert more tension , and this promotes accumulation of yet more myosin and cortexillin ( Ren et al . , 2009 ) . Whether a similar mechanosensing mechanism between myosin and plastin operates during cytokinesis in C . elegans embryos is an interesting hypothesis to test in the future . CONCLUSION In conclusion , while cortical ﬂows may help compress and align F - actin at the equator , our results argue that this is not the main mechanism that drives contractile ring assembly . Instead , we propose that contractile ring assembly requires the localized and concerted action of myosin and the F - actin bundler plastin . MATERIALS AND METHODS C . elegans Strains Strains used in this study are listed in Supplementary Table S1 and were maintained at 20 ◦ C on nematode growth medium ( NGM ) plates seeded with OP50 E . coli . NMY - 2 motor - dead mutants and the RNAi - sensitive wild - type nmy - 2 transgene fused to mCherry are described in a previous study ( Osorio et al . , 2019 ) . To generate the allele plst - 1 ( prt89 ) , the endogenous locus of plst - 1 was modiﬁed using CRISPR / Cas9 - mediated genome editing . An extra nucleotide and a Nhe I restriction site were introduced to cause a frameshift and premature stop at the beginning of the plst - 1 coding sequence . Note that the plst - 1 sequence in WormBase ( version WS276 ) lacks the ﬁrst part of the gene corresponding to the EF hands and CH1 domain of the PLST - 1 protein ( Ding et al . , 2017 ) . The premature stop codon that we introduced occurs after amino acid 262 in the CH2 domain of PLST - 1 ( Ding et al . , 2017 ) . The repair template for this modiﬁcation was the following : 5 (cid:48) ctctgaaaatccacaaatttccagactgctccgcgacggtgaaactcttgaagatctc aggcgtctgtccccagaagaaattctcatgAaga gctagc tgggttaattatcatttagaacg tgcta gaactcaacgtcgcctacacaatttcacatcagatattgtcgattcagagatttatac - 3 (cid:48) , where the extra nucleotide is in uppercase , the Nhe I restriction site for diagnostic PCR of the genomic edit is in bold , silent mutations introduced to avoid repair template recognition by Cas9 are underlined , and ﬂanking 58 bp homology regions are in italics . Three single guide RNAs ( sgRNAs ) were chosen using the online tool http : / / crispr . mit . edu and cloned into the pDD162 vector ( Dickinson et al . , 2013 ) : 5 (cid:48) - TTCTTCTGGGGACAGACGCCGG - 3 (cid:48) , 5 (cid:48) - ATTATCATTTGGAACGTGCTGG - 3 (cid:48) and 5 (cid:48) - AGATGGGTTAATTATCATTTGG - 3 (cid:48) . Underlined in the sgRNAs are the PAM sequences , which were not included in the pDD162 vector . The single - stranded repair template ( IDT ) and pDD162 were mixed together and injected into gonads of young adults N2 hermaphrodites . To facilitate the identiﬁcation of positive animals , the injection mix also contained a sgRNA and a repair template to generate the R92C mutation in DPY - 10 , which causes a dominant roller phenotype ( Levy et al . , 1993 ; Arribere et al . , 2014 ) . To screen for animals carrying the desired modiﬁcation in the plst - 1 locus , ampliﬁcation of a plst - 1 gene fragment was performed using the primers 5 (cid:48) CATGGCCTAGAAACCACTTT 3 (cid:48) and 5 (cid:48) GCTTCTCGGCTTCATCTAAC 3 (cid:48) , followed by digestion with the Nhe I restriction enzyme that recognizes the restriction site present in modiﬁed animals only . The modiﬁcation was conﬁrmed by DNA sequencing . To remove potential oﬀ - target mutations , the mutant was subjected to six rounds of outcrossing with N2 animals , before crossing with animals expressing LifeAct : : GFP or LifeAct : : GFP and NMY - 2 : : mCherry . Although expression of the PLST - 1 protein was not assessed by immunoblotting , the defects in plst - 1 ( prt89 ) embryos are similar to those observed for plst - 1 ( tm4255 ) , which is a null mutant ( Ding et al . , 2017 ) . Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www . frontiersin . org 11 September 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 573393 fcell - 08 - 573393 September 25 , 2020 Time : 11 : 24 # 12 Leite et al . Plastin - Myosin Cooperation During Cytokinesis RNA Interference RNAi - mediated NMY - 2 depletion was performed by feeding hermaphrodites with bacteria that express double stranded RNA ( dsRNA ) targeting nmy - 2 . The dsRNAs nmy - 2 _ RNA # 1 and nmy - 2 _ RNA # 2 ( Supplementary Table S2 ) are described in Osorio et al . ( 2019 ) . Expression of dsRNAs in transformed HT115 E . coli was induced with 1 mM IPTG and the bacteria were fed to hermaphrodites as described below . In experiments where speciﬁc depletion of transgenic NMY - 2 : : mCherry sen was desired [ labeled as nmy - 2 : : mCherry sen ( RNAi ) in Figures 1D , 2C , E , G ] , nmy - 2 _ RNA # 3 was used in GCP22 , GCP618 or GCP592 L4 hermaphrodites . Mild depletions ( 22 – 26 h of RNAi treatment at 20 ◦ C ) were used in Figures 1D , 2C , E , F . In experiments whose purpose was to deplete endogenous NMY - 2 to an extent that did not preclude cytokinesis [ labeled as partial nmy - 2 ( RNAi ) ] , nmy - 2 _ RNA # 1 ( 29 – 31 h of RNAi treatment at 20 ◦ C ) was used in GCP113 L4 hermaphrodites for Figures 3D , E and Supplementary Figure S3C , and nmy - 2 _ RNA # 2 ( 23 – 27 h of RNAi treatment at 20 ◦ C ) was used in GCP21 , GCP22 , and GCP927 L4 hermaphrodites for Figures 1D , 2E , 4A – E , and Supplementary Figure S6 . Live Imaging Gravid hermaphrodites were dissected and one - cell embryos were mounted in a drop of M9 ( 86 mM NaCl , 42 mM Na 2 HPO 4 , 22 mM KH 2 PO 4 , and 1 mM MgSO 4 ) on 2 % agarose pads overlaid with a coverslip . Live imaging of cytokinesis was performed at 20 ◦ C . Images were acquired on a spinning disk confocal system ( Andor Revolution XD Confocal System ; Andor Technology ) with a confocal scanner unit ( CSU - X1 ; Yokogawa Electric Corporation ) mounted on an inverted microscope ( Ti - E , Nikon ) equipped with a 60x NA 1 . 4 oil - immersion Plan - Apochromat objective , and solid - state lasers of 405 nm ( 60 mW ) , 488 nm ( 50 mW ) , and 561 nm ( 50 mW ) . For image acquisition , an electron multiplication back - thinned charge - coupled device camera ( iXon ; Andor Technology ) was used . For photobleaching experiments , a FRAPPA photobleaching module ( Andor Technology ) placed between the spinning disk head and the microscope was used . Photobleaching was performed by 3 sweeps of a 405 nm laser with 100 % power and 100 µ s dwell time in the posterior cortex , ingressing furrow and division plane ( Figure 3 and Supplementary Figures S5A , B ) or 10 sweeps and 40 µ s dwell time in the posterior cytoplasm ( Supplementary Figure S5C ) . Acquisition parameters , shutters , focus and photobleaching parameters and regions to be photobleached were controlled using Andor iQ3 software . For central plane imaging in one - cell embryos ( Figure 3 and Supplementary Figure S1A ) , 5 × 1 µ m z - stacks were collected in the 488 nm channel every 5 seconds for strains GCP113 , GCP21 , RZB213 and OD26 , and in the 561 nm channel every 5 seconds for strain SWG001 . For photobleaching experiments in the posterior cytoplasm ( Supplementary Figures S5C , D ) , 5 × 1 µ m z stacks were collected in the 488 nm channel every 0 . 78 seconds . For cortical dual - color imaging in one - cell embryos , 7 × 0 . 5 µ m z - stacks were collected every 5 seconds for strains GCP21 , GCP22 , GCP592 , and GCP618 ( Figures 1 , 2 and Supplementary Figures S1 , S2 ) , strains GCP21 and GCP113 ( Figure 3 and Supplementary Figures S3 – S5 ) , and strains GCP22 and GCP927 ( Figure 4 and Supplementary Figure S6 ) . For cortical imaging in one - cell embryos of strains RZB213 and SWG001 ( Supplementary Figure S1B ) , 7 × 0 . 5 µ m z - stacks were collected in the 488 nm or 561 nm channels every 5 seconds , respectively . Fluorescence Intensity Measurements Before quantiﬁcation , each time - lapse movie was corrected for ﬂuorescence intensity decay using the simple ratio method in ImageJ’s bleach correction tool . Quantiﬁcation of ﬂuorescence recovery after photobleaching in Figures 3A’ , E was performed using 3 diﬀerent ROIs to quantify mean ﬂuorescence intensity over time . ROI 1 is the bleached region ( 5 × 5 pixel for the posterior cortex and posterior cytoplasm ; 5 × 15 pixel for the ingressing furrow and 15 × 200 pixel for the whole division plane ) . ROI 2 is the whole embryo and corrects for overall photobleaching of the sample resulting from acquisition and photobleaching sweeps ( oval : 305 × 205 pixels ) . ROI 3 is the camera background , measured outside ﬂuorescent regions ( 20 × 20 pixels ) . After background subtraction and photobleaching correction , the data was normalized using the double normalization method , and curve ﬁtting was performed to extrapolate the half time of recovery . All operations were performed automatically using easyFRAP software ( see below ) . For quantiﬁcation of NMY - 2 : : GFP levels at the equator versus poles in Supplementary Figure S4B , images of the central plane of dividing one - cell embryos were used . A line was traced at the poles and at the equator and the mean intensity was determined after subtraction of the camera background . Calculation of Myosin Dissociation Rate Assuming a diﬀusion - dominated recovery proﬁle , the myosin dissociation rate ( k oﬀ ) in Figure 3A ’ was calculated from FRAP data using the following equation ( Bernetti et al . , 2019 ) : k oﬀ = log ( 2 ) τ 1 / 2 , ( 1 ) where τ 1 / 2 is the half time recovery measured from FRAP ﬁtting curves . Cortical Flows Quantiﬁcation Cortical ﬂow dynamics were analyzed in one - cell embryos of strains GCP21 , GCP22 , GCP113 , GCP562 , GCP618 , and GCP927 between anaphase onset and back - to - back membrane conﬁguration . In Figures 2B – E , 4D and Supplementary Figures S2B , S3B , C , S6C , magnitude and direction of cortical ﬂows were quantiﬁed using an Iterative Particle Image Velocimetry ( PIV ) plugin for ImageJ , https : / / sites . google . com / site / qingzongtseng / piv ( Tseng et al . , 2011 ) . A 192 × 128 pixel ( 34 . 1 × 22 . 8 µ m ) region of interest was applied to all embryos to standardize the cortex area and exclude cortical curved peripheries . To average the maximum particle displacement with better resolution , two iterations were performed , in which the application of a larger interrogation window of 64 × 64 pixels ( ﬁrst Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www . frontiersin . org 12 September 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 573393 fcell - 08 - 573393 September 25 , 2020 Time : 11 : 24 # 13 Leite et al . Plastin - Myosin Cooperation During Cytokinesis iteration ) was followed by a smaller interrogation window of 32 × 32 pixels ( second iteration ) . Consecutive interrogation windows overlapped by 50 % . After ﬂow ﬁeld generation , the 192 × 128 pixel region was divided in two adjacent sub - regions along the anterior - posterior axis of the embryo for quantiﬁcation : anterior cortex ( 1st - 108th pixel ; 0 . 2 – 19 . 2 µ m ) and posterior cortex ( 109th - 192nd pixel ; 19 . 4 – 34 . 1 µ m ) . Each velocity vector was resolved into components along the anterior - posterior axis , Vx , and the dorsal - ventral axis , Vy . The mean Vx and Vy were estimated for each time point and plotted as a function of time to trace the cortical ﬂow proﬁles in Figures 2B , C and Supplementary Figures S2B , S3B , C , S6C . To plot longitudinal ﬂow proﬁles ( Vx ) along the anterior - posterior axis in Figures 2D , E , 4D , all vectors along the dorsal - ventral axis with the same x - coordinate ( corresponding to the longitudinal position ) were averaged and plotted as a function of the position along the anterior - posterior axis . The cosine similarity analysis measures the correlation between every vector pair of the ﬂow ﬁelds as a function of the distance between them for the period of persistent unidirectional ﬂow . A cosine similarity of 1 means the vectors are totally correlated . Cosine similarities between two vectors shown in Supplementary Figure S6B was computed using a custom MATLAB script , according to the following formula : cosine similarity (cid:0) −→ w i , −→ w j (cid:1) = −→ w i · −→ w j | | −→ w i | | | | −→ w j | | ( 2 ) Calculation of Cortical Compression Rates Longitudinal cortical compression rates in Figures 3B , C were estimated from cortical ﬂow proﬁles along the anterior - posterior axis by approximating the spatial derivative for each position using a custom MATLAB script . Cortical compression rates were plotted as a function of both position along the anterior - posterior axis and time relative to anaphase onset in 10 seconds intervals , starting at 25 seconds ( when a noticeable region of compression could be identiﬁed ) and stopping at 95 seconds ( start of furrow ingression ) after anaphase onset . Analysis of Bundle Alignment at the Equatorial Cortex Deviation from vertical alignment over time in Figure 4B was measured using the Directionality plugin for ImageJ . A region of 30 × 70 pixels corresponding to the furrow region was selected for each movie . The average directionality ( angle α , in degrees ) , was calculated for every frame of each movie using the local gradient orientation method . Deviation from vertical alignment ( in degrees ) was calculated for each angle α by subtracting the value of this angle from 90 ◦ . Absolute numbers were plotted . Image Analysis , Quantiﬁcations , and Statistics Image processing and image analysis were performed using Fiji ( ImageJ ; National Institutes of Health ) ( Schindelin et al . , 2019 ) and MATLAB ( MathWorks ) . Z - stacks acquired on the cell cortex were projected using Fiji’s maximum intensity projection tool . Images within each panel were scaled equally . Flow kymographs shown in Figure 1D and Supplementary Figures S3A , S6A were created by tracing a 150 × 5 pixel rectangle positioned at the center of the embryo on the cortical plane and mounted using Fiji’s Make Montage tool , as illustrated in Figure 1D ’ . Graph plotting , linear regressions and statistical analyses were performed with Prism 6 . 0 ( GraphPad Software ) . Photobleaching experiments were analyzed using easyFRAP , https : / / easyfrap . vmnet . upatras . gr ( Koulouras et al . , 2018 ) . Measurements for cytokinetic analysis in Supplementary Figure S1A were performed as previously reported ( Chan et al . , 2019 ) . Error bars represent the standard - deviation ( SD ) , standard - error of the mean ( SEM ) , or 95 % conﬁdence interval ( 95 % CI ) , and statistical signiﬁcance tests were performed using one - way ANOVA with Bonferroni correction , as indicated in ﬁgure legends . Statistical signiﬁcance of ﬂow proﬁles was performed using two - way ANOVA for repeated measures . DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT The raw data supporting the conclusions of this article will be made available by the authors , without undue reservation . AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS AXC and JL : conceptualization . JL : methodology and software . JL , F - YC , DSO , JS , and AFS : validation . JL and F - YC : formal analysis . JL , F - YC , DSO , JS , AFS , and AMS : investigation . JL and AXC : writing – original draft . JL , F - YC , DSO , JS , AFS , AMS , RG , and AXC : writing – review and editing . JL , F - YC , DSO , and AXC : visualization . AXC and RG : supervision . AXC : funding acquisition . FUNDING The research leading to these results was funded by the European Research Council under the European Union’s Horizon 2020 Research and Innovation Programme ( grant agreement 640553 – ACTOMYO ) . AXC and RG hold Principal Investigator positions from the Portuguese Foundation for Science and Technology ( FCT ) ( CEECIND / 01967 / 2017 and CEECIND / 00333 / 2017 , respectively ) . F - YC and AMS hold FCT junior researcher positions ( DL 57 / 2016 / CP1355 / CT0013 and DL 57 / 2016 / CP1355 / CT0017 , respectively ) . AFS holds an FCT Ph . D . scholarship ( SFRH / BD / 121874 / 2016 ) . The funders had no role in study design , data collection and analysis , decision to publish , or preparation of the manuscript . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank Stephan Grill , Ronen Zaidel - Bar , and Karen Oegema for providing strains . Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www . frontiersin . org 13 September 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 573393 fcell - 08 - 573393 September 25 , 2020 Time : 11 : 24 # 14 Leite et al . Plastin - Myosin Cooperation During Cytokinesis SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL The Supplementary Material for this article can be found online at : https : / / www . frontiersin . org / articles / 10 . 3389 / fcell . 2020 . 573393 / full # supplementary - material SUPPLEMENTARY FIGURE S1 | Delayed cytokinesis in embryos expressing LifeAct : : mKate2 . ( A ) Intervals for ring assembly / furrow initiation and ring constriction rate ( mean ± 95 % CI ) . N is the number of embryos analyzed . Statistical signiﬁcance was determined using one - way ANOVA followed by Bonferroni’s multiple comparison test . ∗∗∗∗ P < 0 . 0001 , ns , not signiﬁcant . ( B ) Cortical images of embryos expressing different ﬂuorescent probes for actin . Scale bar , 10 µ m . SUPPLEMENTARY FIGURE S2 | Rotational ﬂows are a consequence of embryo compression . ( A ) Time projections of control embryos expressing LifeAct : : GFP imaged under compression ( top ) or without compression ( bottom ) . Rotational ( Y - component ) ﬂows are indicated by curved arrows . Scale bar , 10 µ m . ( B ) Rotational ( Y - component ) ﬂow velocity ( mean ± SEM ) in the anterior ( left ) or posterior ( right ) half of embryos imaged with ( black ) or without ( gray ) compression . ( C ) Intervals for ring assembly / furrow initiation and ring constriction rate ( mean ± 95 % CI ) measured in embryos imaged with ( black ) or without ( gray ) compression . N is the number of embryos analyzed . SUPPLEMENTARY FIGURE S3 | F - actin and myosin cortical ﬂow proﬁles are similar . ( A ) Kymographs depicting Lifeact : : GFP ( top ) and NMY - 2 : : GFP ( bottom ) longitudinal cortical ﬂows from anaphase onset until complete ingression . ( B ) Longitudinal ( X - component ) and rotational ( Y - component ) ﬂow velocities ( mean ± SEM ) for LifeAct : : GFP and NMY - 2 : : GFP in the anterior or posterior half of embryos , plotted over time starting at anaphase onset . The depicted interval covers both the period of unidirectional and the period of bidirectional ﬂows . ( C ) Longitudinal ( X - component ) LifeAct : : GFP ﬂow velocities ( mean ± SEM ) over time for control and NMY - 2 - depleted embryos from anaphase onset until complete ingression . Arrows indicate average time of shallow deformation ( darker tone ) or furrow initiation ( lighter tone ) . N is the number of embryos analyzed . SUPPLEMENTARY FIGURE S4 | The amount of myosin that accumulates at the cell equator is higher than the amount that leaves the cortical poles . ( A ) Images of the central and cortical planes of a dividing one - cell embryo expressing NMY - 2 : : GFP at different time points in cytokinesis , revealing a decrease of myosin levels at the cortical poles and an increase at the cell equator . Scale bar , 5 µ m . ( B ) Quantiﬁcation of NMY - 2 : : GFP levels ( mean ± SD ) on the anterior pole , posterior pole , and equator at the time points indicated in ( A ) , determined as indicated in the schematic on the right . N is the number of embryos analyzed . SUPPLEMENTARY FIGURE S5 | Fluorescence recovery after photobleaching of the entire division plane indicates that myosin continues to accumulate in the contractile ring during furrow ingression . ( A ) Schematic showing the photobleached region of the entire division plane at shallow deformation ( top left ) and selected images from a time - lapse series showing NMY - 2 : : GFP ﬂuorescence over time pre - and post - bleaching . ( B ) Quantiﬁcation of NMY - 2 : : GFP ﬂuorescence recovery after photobleaching the entire division plane at shallow deformation . Data from individual embryos ( light gray ) and the mean ± SD ( black ) are plotted . ( C ) Quantiﬁcation of NMY - 2 : : GFP ﬂuorescence recovery after photobleaching in the posterior cytoplasm . ( D ) Boxplots showing the dispersion of half - time recovery for the posterior cytoplasm and the posterior cortex . In each box , the central line is the median , the boundaries of the box are the 25th and 75th percentiles ; the whiskers extend to include the maximum and minimum values . N is the number of embryos analyzed . Statistical signiﬁcance of half - time recovery in ( D ) was determined using unpaired Student’s t - test : ∗ P < 0 . 05 . SUPPLEMENTARY FIGURE S6 | Cortical ﬂows are not aggravated in nmy - 2 ( RNAi ) ; plst - 1 ( prt89 ) embryos . ( A ) Kymographs of LifeAct : : GFP cortical ﬂow proﬁles along the longitudinal axis of the embryos . Yellow , red , and blue bars correspond to contractile ring assembly , furrow initiation , and ring constriction intervals , respectively . Kymographs were built as described in Figure 1D ’ . ( B ) Cosine similarity between two vectors as a function of the distance between them . ( C ) Longitudinal ( X - component ) average ﬂow velocity ( mean ± SEM ) over time after anaphase onset for LifeAct : : GFP in the anterior or posterior half of the embryos . Arrows indicate the time of shallow deformation . In panels ( B ) , ( C ) , N is the number of embryos analyzed . SUPPLEMENTARY TABLE S1 | List of C . elegans strains used in this study . SUPPLEMENTARY TABLE S2 | List of dsRNAs used in this study . SUPPLEMENTARY MOVIE S1 | Plastin and myosin cooperate to align F - actin bundles at the division plane . Time - lapse series of the cell cortex in dividing one - cell embryos of the indicated genotypes expressing LifeAct : : GFP and NMY - 2 : : mCherry . Cortical images are maximum intensity projections of seven z - sections 0 . 5 µ m apart acquired every 5 seconds from anaphase onset ( 0 : 00 ) . Frame rate is 6 frames per second , timestamp is minutes : seconds . Scale bar , 5 µ m . REFERENCES Arnold , J . M . ( 1969 ) . Cleavage furrow formation in a telolecithal egg ( Loligo Pealii ) : I . Filaments in early furrow formation . J . Cell Biol . 41 , 894 – 904 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 41 . 3 . 894 Arribere , J . A . , Bell , R . T . , Fu , B . X . H . , Artiles , K . L . , Hartman , P . S . , and Fire , A . Z . ( 2014 ) . Eﬃcient marker - free recovery of custom genetic modiﬁcations with CRISPR / Cas9 in Caenorhabditis elegans . Genetics 198 , 837 – 846 . doi : 10 . 1534 / genetics . 114 . 169730 Bement , W . M . , Benink , H . A . , and Von Dassow , G . ( 2005 ) . A microtubule - dependent zone of active RhoA during cleavage plane speciﬁcation . J . Cell Biol . 170 , 91 – 101 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200501131 Bernetti , M . , Masetti , M . , Rocchia , W . , and Cavalli , A . ( 2019 ) . Kinetics of Drug Binding and Residence Time . Annu . Rev . Phys . Chem . 70 , 143 – 171 . doi : 10 . 1146 / annurev - physchem - 042018 - 052340 Bretscher , A . ( 1981 ) . Fimbrin is a cytoskeletal protein that crosslinks F - actin in vitro . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 78 , 6849 – 6853 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 78 . 11 . 6849 Cao , L . G . , and Wang , Y . L . ( 1990 ) . Mechanism of the formation of contractile ring in dividing cultured animal cells . II . Cortical movement of microinjected actin ﬁlaments . J . Cell Biol . 111 , 1905 – 1911 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 111 . 5 . 1905 Carvalho , A . , Desai , A . , and Oegema , K . ( 2009 ) . Structural Memory in the Contractile Ring Makes the Duration of Cytokinesis Independent of Cell Size . Cell 137 , 926 – 937 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2009 . 03 . 021 Chan , F . , Silva , A . M . , Saramago , J . , Pereira - Sousa , J . , Brighton , H . E . , Pereira , M . , et al . ( 2019 ) . The ARP2 / 3 complex prevents excessive formin activity during cytokinesis . Mol . Biol . Cell 30 , 96 – 107 . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . E18 - 07 - 0471 Chapa - y - lazo , B . , Hamanaka , M . , Wray , A . , Balasubramanian , M . K . , andMishima , M . ( 2020 ) . Polar relaxation by dynein - mediated removal of cortical myosin II . J . Cell Biol . 219 : e201903080 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201903080 Davies , T . , Jordan , S . N . , Chand , V . , Sees , J . A . , Laband , K . , Carvalho , A . X . , et al . ( 2014 ) . High - Resolution temporal analysis reveals a functional timeline for the molecularregulationofcytokinesis . Dev . Cell 30 , 209 – 223 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2014 . 05 . 009 Descovich , C . P . , Cortes , D . B . , Ryan , S . , Nash , J . , Zhang , L . , Maddox , P . S . , et al . ( 2017 ) . Cross - linkers both drive and brake cytoskeletal remodeling and furrowing in cytokinesis . Mol . Biol . Cell 2 , 3 – 4 . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . E17 - 06 - 0392 Dickinson , D . J . , Ward , J . D . , Reiner , D . J . , and Goldstein , B . ( 2013 ) . Engineering the Caenorhabditis elegans genome using Cas9 - triggered homologous recombination . Nat . Methods 10 , 1028 – 1034 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nmeth . 2641 Ding , W . Y . , Ong , H . T . , Hara , Y . , Wongsantichon , J . , Toyama , Y . , Robinson , R . C . , et al . ( 2017 ) . Plastin increases cortical connectivity to facilitate robust polarization and timely cytokinesis . J . Cell Biol . 216 , 1371 – 1386 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201603070 Ennomani , H . , Letort , G . , Guérin , C . , Martiel , J . L . , Cao , W . , Nédeléc , F . , et al . ( 2016 ) . Architecture and Connectivity Govern Actin Network Architecture and Connectivity . Curr . Biol . 26 , 616 – 626 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2015 . 12 . 069 Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www . frontiersin . org 14 September 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 573393 fcell - 08 - 573393 September 25 , 2020 Time : 11 : 24 # 15 Leite et al . Plastin - Myosin Cooperation During Cytokinesis Faix , J . , Steinmetz , M . , Boves , H . , Kammerer , R . A . , Lottspeich , F . , Mintert , U . , et al . ( 1996 ) . Cortexillins , major determinants of cell shape and size , are actin - bundling proteins with a parallel coiled - coil tail . Cell 86 , 631 – 642 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0092 - 8674 ( 00 ) 80136 - 1 Green , R . A . , Paluch , E . K . , and Oegema , K . ( 2012 ) . Cytokinesis in Animal Cells . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 28 , 29 – 58 . doi : 10 . 1146 / annurev - cellbio - 101011 - 155718 Großhans , J . , Wenzl , C . , Herz , H . M . , Bartoszewski , S . , Schnorrer , F . , Vogt , N . , etal . ( 2005 ) . RhoGEF2 and the formin Dia control the formation of the furrow canal by directed actin assembly during Drosophila cellularisation . Development 132 , 1009 – 1020 . doi : 10 . 1242 / dev . 01669 Henson , J . H . , Ditzler , C . E . , Germain , A . , Irwin , P . M . , Vogt , E . T . , Yang , S . , et al . ( 2017 ) . The ultrastructural organization of actin and myosin II ﬁlaments in the contractile ring : new support for an old model of cytokinesis . Mol . Biol . Cell 28 , 613 – 623 . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . E16 - 06 - 0466 Khaliullin , R . N . , Green , R . A . , Shi , L . Z . , Gomez - Cavazos , J . S . , Berns , M . W . , Desai , A . , et al . ( 2018 ) . A positive - feedback - based mechanism for constriction rate acceleration during cytokinesis in Caenorhabditis elegans . eLife 7 : e36073 . doi : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 36073 Kimura , K . , Ito , M . , Amano , M . , Chihara , K . , Fukata , Y . , Nakafuku , M . , et al . ( 1996 ) . Regulation of myosin phosphatase by Rho and Rho - associated kinase ( Rho - kinase ) . Science 273 , 245 – 248 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 273 . 5272 . 245 Koulouras , G . , Panagopoulos , A . , Rapsomaniki , M . A . , Giakoumakis , N . N . , Taraviras , S . , and Lygerou , Z . ( 2018 ) . EasyFRAP - web : a web - based tool for the analysis of ﬂuorescence recovery after photobleaching data . Nucleic Acids Res . 46 , W467 – W472 . doi : 10 . 1093 / nar / gky508 Laplante , C . , Berro , J . , Karatekin , E . , Hernandez - Leyva , A . , Lee , R . , and Pollard , T . D . ( 2015 ) . Three myosins contribute uniquely to the assembly and constriction of the ﬁssion yeast cytokinetic contractile ring . Curr . Biol . 25 , 1955 – 1965 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2015 . 06 . 018 Leite , J . , Osorio , D . S . , Sobral , A . F . , Silva , A . M . , and Carvalho , A . X . ( 2019 ) . Network Contractility during Cytokinesis - From Molecular to Global Views . Biomolecules 9 : 194 . doi : 10 . 3390 / biom9050194 Levy , A . D . , Yang , J . , and Kramer , J . M . ( 1993 ) . Molecular and genetic analyses of the Caenorhabditis elegans dpy - 2 and dpy - 10 collagen genes : a variety of molecular alterations aﬀect organismal morphology . Mol . Biol . Cell 4 , 803 – 817 . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . 4 . 8 . 803 Mabuchi , I . , Tsukita , S . , Tsukita , S . , and Sawai , T . ( 1988 ) . Cleavage furrow isolated from newt eggs : contraction , organization of the actin ﬁlaments , and protein components of the furrow . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 85 , 5966 – 5970 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 85 . 16 . 5966 Mangal , S . , Sacher , J . , Kim , T . , Osório , D . S . , Motegi , F . , Carvalho , A . X . , et al . ( 2018 ) . TPXL - 1 activates Aurora A to clear contractile ring components from the polar cortex during cytokinesis . J . Cell Biol . 217 , 837 – 848 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201706021 Marsland , D . ( 1950 ) . The mechanisms of celldivision ; temperature - pressure experiments on the cleaving eggs of Arbacia punctulata . J . Cell Comp . Physiol . 36 , 205 – 227 . doi : 10 . 1002 / jcp . 1030360207 Marsland , D . ( 1956a ) . Protoplasmic contractility in relation to cytokinesis . Pubblicazioni Della Stazione Zoologica Di Napoli 28 , 182 – 203 . Marsland , D . ( 1956b ) . Protoplasmic contractility in relation to gel structure : temperature - pressure experiments on cytokinesis and amoeboid movement . Int . Rev . Cytol . 5 , 199 – 227 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0074 - 7696 ( 08 ) 62571 - 1 Matsudaira , P . , Mandelkow , E . , Renner , W . , Hesterberg , L . K . , and Weber , K . ( 1983 ) . Role of ﬁmbrin and villin in determining the interﬁlament distances of actin bundles . Nature 301 , 209 – 214 . doi : 10 . 1038 / 301209a0 Matsumura , F . ( 2005 ) . Regulation of myosin II during cytokinesis in higher eukaryotes . Trends Cell Biol . 15 , 371 – 377 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . tcb . 2005 . 05 . 004 Maupin , P . , and Pollard , T . D . ( 1986 ) . Arrangement of actin ﬁlaments and myosin - like ﬁlaments in the contractile ring and of actin - like ﬁlaments in the mitotic spindle of dividing HeLa cells . J . Ultrastruc . Mol . Struct . Res . 94 , 92 – 103 . doi : 10 . 1016 / 0889 - 1605 ( 86 ) 90055 - 8 Mavrakis , M . , Azou - gros , Y . , Tsai , F . , Alvarado , J . , Bertin , A . , Iv , F . , et al . ( 2014 ) . Septins promote F - actin ring formation by crosslinking actin ﬁlaments into curved bundles . Nat . Cell Biol . 16 , 322 – 334 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncb2921 Mayer , M . , Depken , M . , Bois , J . S . , Jülicher , F . , and Grill , S . W . ( 2010 ) . Anisotropies in cortical tension reveal the physical basis of polarizing cortical ﬂows . Nature 467 , 617 – 621 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nature09376 Melak , M . , Plessner , M . , andGrosse , R . ( 2017 ) . Actinvisualizationataglance . J . Cell Sci . 130 , 525 – 530 . doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 189068 Mitchison , J . ( 1952 ) . Cell membranes and cell division . Symp . Soc . Exp . Biol . 6 , 105 – 127 . Mitchison , J . M . , and Swann , M . ( 1955 ) . The mechanical properties of the cell surface : III . The sea - urchin egg from fertilization to cleavage . J . Exp . Biol . 32 , 734 – 750 . doi : 10 . 1016 / 0021 - 9290 ( 80 ) 90043 - 3 Murrell , M . , Oakes , P . W . , Lenz , M . , and Gardel , M . L . ( 2015 ) . Forcing cells into shape : the mechanics of actomyosin contractility . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 16 , 486 – 498 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nrm4012 Murthy , K . , and Wadsworth , P . ( 2005 ) . Myosin - II - dependent localization and dynamics of F - actin during cytokinesis . Curr . Biol . 15 , 724 – 731 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2005 . 02 . 055 Naganathan , S . , Fürthauer , S . , Rodriguez , J . , Fievet , B . T . , Ahringer , J . , Cannistraci , C . V . , et al . ( 2014 ) . Morphogenetic degeneracies in the actomyosin cortex . eLife 7 : e37677 . doi : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 37677 Osorio , D . S . , Chan , F . , Saramago , J . , Leite , J . , Silva , A . M . , Sobral , A . F . , etal . ( 2019 ) . Crosslinking activity of non - muscle myosin II is not suﬃcient for embryonic cytokinesisin C . elegans . Development 146 : dev179150 . doi : 10 . 1242 / dev . 179150 Pinto , I . M . , Rubinstein , B . , and Li , R . ( 2013 ) . Force to divide : structural and mechanical requirements for actomyosin ring contraction . Biophys . J . 105 , 547 – 554 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . bpj . 2013 . 06 . 033 Prokopenko , S . N . , Saint , R . , and Bellen , H . J . ( 2000 ) . Untying the Gordian Knot of Cytokinesis : role of Small G Proteins and Their Regulators . J . Cell Biol . 148 , 843 – 848 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 148 . 5 . 843 Reichl , E . M . , Ren , Y . , Morphew , M . K . , Delannoy , M . , Eﬄer , J . C . , Girard , K . D . , et al . ( 2008 ) . Interactions between myosin and actin crosslinkers control cytokinesis contractility dynamics and mechanics . Curr . Biol . 18 , 471 – 480 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2008 . 02 . 056 Ren , Y . , Eﬄer , J . C . , Norstrom , M . , Luo , T . , Firtel , R . A . , Iglesias , P . A . , et al . ( 2009 ) . Mechanosensing through cooperative interactions between myosin II and the actincrosslinkercortexillinI . Curr . Biol . 19 , 1421 – 1428 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2009 . 07 . 018 Reymann , A . C . , Staniscia , F . , Erzberger , A . , Salbreux , G . , and Grill , S . W . ( 2016 ) . Cortical ﬂow aligns actin ﬁlaments to form a furrow . eLife 5 , 1 – 25 . doi : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 17807 Salbreux , G . , Prost , J . , and Joanny , J . F . ( 2009 ) . Hydrodynamics of cellular cortical ﬂows and the formation of contractile rings . Phys . Rev . Lett . 103 : 058102 . doi : 10 . 1103 / PhysRevLett . 103 . 058102 Sanger , J . M . , and Sanger , J . W . ( 1980 ) . Banding and polarity of actin ﬁlaments in interphase and cleaving cells . J . Cell Biol . 86 , 568 – 575 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 86 . 2 . 568 Schindelin , J . , Arganda - Carreras , I . , Frise , E . , Kaynig , V . , Longair , M . , Pietzsch , T . , et al . ( 2019 ) . Fiji : an open - source platform for biological - image analysis . Nat . Methods 28 , 676 – 682 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nmeth . 2019 Schroeder , T . E . ( 1968 ) . Cytokinesis : ﬁlamentsinthecleavagefurrow . Exp . CellRes . 53 , 272 – 276 . doi : 10 . 1016 / 0014 - 4827 ( 68 ) 90373 - x Schroeder , T . E . ( 1970 ) . The contractile ring : I . Fine structure of dividing mammalian ( HeLa ) cells and the eﬀects of cytochalasin B . Z Zellforsch Mikrosk Anat . 109 , 431 – 449 . doi : 10 . 1007 / BF00343960 Schroeder , T . E . ( 1972 ) . The contractile ring : II . Determining its brief existence , volumetric changes , and vital role in cleaving arbacia eggs . J . Cell Biol . 53 , 419 – 434 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 53 . 2 . 419 Selman , G . G . , and Perry , M . M . ( 1970 ) . Ultrastructural changes in the surface layers of the newt’s egg in relation to the mechanism of its cleavage . J . Cell Sci . 6 , 207 – 227 . Silva , A . M . , Osório , D . , Pereira , A . J . , Maiato , H . , Pinto , I . M . , Rubinstein , B . , et al . ( 2016 ) . Robust gap repair in the contractile ring ensures timely completion of cytokinesis . J . Cell Biol . 215 , 789 – 799 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 20160 5080 Singh , D . , Odedra , D . , Dutta , P . , and Pohl , C . ( 2019 ) . Mechanical stress induces a scalable switch in cortical ﬂow polarization during cytokinesis . J . Cell Sci . 132 , jcs231357 . doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 231357 Skau , C . T . , Courson , D . S . , Bestul , A . J . , Winkelman , J . D . , Rock , R . S . , Sirotkin , V . , et al . ( 2011 ) . Actin ﬁlament bundling by ﬁmbrin is important for endocytosis , cytokinesis , and polarization in ﬁssion yeast . J . Biol . Chem . 286 , 26964 – 26977 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M111 . 239004 Spira , F . , Cuylen - haering , S . , Mehta , S . , Samwer , M . , Reversat , A . , Verma , A . , et al . ( 2017 ) . Cytokinesis in vertebrate cells initiates by contraction of an equatorial Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www . frontiersin . org 15 September 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 573393 fcell - 08 - 573393 September 25 , 2020 Time : 11 : 24 # 16 Leite et al . Plastin - Myosin Cooperation During Cytokinesis actomyosin network composed of randomly oriented ﬁlaments . eLife 6 : e30867 . doi : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 30867 Srivastava , V . , and Robinson , D . N . ( 2015 ) . Mechanical stress and network structure drive protein dynamics during cytokinesis . Curr . Biol . 25 , 663 – 670 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2015 . 01 . 025 Swann , M . M . , and Mitchison , J . M . ( 1958 ) . The mechanism of cleavage in animal cells . Biol . Rev . Camb . Philos . Soc . 33 , 103 – 135 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1469 - 185X . 1958 . tb01409 . x Tseng , Q . , Duchemin - Pelletier , E . , Deshiere , A . , Balland , M . , Guillou , H . , Filhol , O . , et al . ( 2011 ) . Spatial organization of the extracellular matrix regulates cell - cell junction positioning . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 109 , 1506 – 1511 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1106377109 Turlier , H . , Audoly , B . , Prost , J . , and Joanny , J . F . ( 2014 ) . Furrow constriction in animal cell cytokinesis . Biophys . J . 106 , 114 – 123 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . bpj . 2013 . 11 . 014 Uehara , R . , Goshima , G . , Mabuchi , I . , Vale , R . D . , Spudich , J . A . , and Griﬃs , E . R . ( 2010 ) . Determinants of Myosin II Cortical Localization during Cytokinesis . Curr . Biol . 20 , 1080 – 1085 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2010 . 04 . 058 Vavylonis , D . , Wu , J . Q . , Hao , S . , O’Shaughnessy , B . , and Pollard , T . D . ( 2008 ) . Assembly mechanism of the contractile ring for cytokinesis by ﬁssion yeast . Science 319 , 97 – 100 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 1151086 Vicente - Manzanares , M . ( 2009 ) . Non - muscle myosin II takes centre stage in cell adhesion and migration . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 10 , 778 – 790 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nrm2786 Watanabe , S . , Okawa , K . , Miki , T . , Sakamoto , S . , Morinaga , T . , Segawa , K . , et al . ( 2010 ) . Rho and Anillin - dependent Control of mDia2 Localization and Function in Cytokinesis . Mol . Biol . Cell 21 , 3193 – 3204 . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . e10 - 04 - 0324 White , J . G . , and Borisy , G . G . ( 1983 ) . On the mechanisms of cytokinesis in animal cells . J . Theor . Biol . 101 , 289 – 316 . doi : 10 . 1016 / 0022 - 5193 ( 83 ) 90 342 - 9 Wollrab , V . , Belmonte , J . M . , Baldauf , L . , Leptin , M . , Nédeléc , F . , and Koenderink , G . H . ( 2019 ) . Polarity sorting drives remodeling of actin - myosin networks . J . Cell Sci . 132 , 1 – 14 . doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 219717 Wolpert , L . ( 1960 ) . The mechanics and mechanism of cleavage . Int . Rev . Cytol . 10 , 163 – 216 . Wu , J . Q . , and Pollard , T . D . ( 2005 ) . Cell biology : counting cytokinesis proteins globally and locally in ﬁssion yeast . Science 310 , 310 – 314 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 1113230 Yumura , S . , Ueda , M . , Sako , Y . , Kitanishi - Yumura , T . , and Yanagida , T . ( 2008 ) . Multiple mechanisms for accumulation of myosin II ﬁlaments at the equator during cytokinesis . Traﬃc 9 , 2089 – 2099 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1600 - 0854 . 2008 . 00 837 . x Conﬂict of Interest : The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could be construed as a potential conﬂict of interest . Copyright © 2020 Leite , Chan , Osório , Saramago , Sobral , Silva , Gassmann and Carvalho . This is an open - access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License ( CC BY ) . The use , distribution or reproduction in otherforumsispermitted , providedtheoriginalauthor ( s ) andthecopyrightowner ( s ) are credited and that the original publication in this journal is cited , in accordance with accepted academic practice . No use , distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms . Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www . frontiersin . org 16 September 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 573393