Extracurricular Design - Based Learning : Preparing Students for Careers in Innovation * ELIZABETH M . GERBER Department of Mechanical School of Engineering , Northwestern University , Evanston , IL 60208 , USA . E - mail : egerber @ northwestern . edu JEANNE MARIE OLSON Department of Learning and Organizational Change , Northwestern University , Evanston , IL 60208 , USA . E - mail : jeanne - olson @ northwestern . edu REBECCA L . D . KOMAREK School of Continuing Studies , Northwestern University , Evanston , IL 60201 , USA . E - mail : rkomarek @ u . northwestern . edu Government and industry depend on educational institutions to play a pivotal role in preparing the future workforce for careers in innovation . Yet students learn how to innovate through practice , and opportunities for practice are limited in higher education . This paper addresses this challenge by presenting a new student - led approach to innovation education called Extracurricular Design - Based Learning . This model allows students to practice innovating solutions to authentic , pro - social , and local challenges in an extracurricular setting . This paper provides an overview of the model and its implementation in Design for America at Northwestern University . Findings from surveys , daily diaries , interviews , and observations suggest that students build innovation self - eﬃcacy through successful task completion , social persuasion , and vicarious learning in communities of practice with clients , peers , industry professionals , and faculty . Further , students report achievement in learning outcomes outlined by the Accreditation Board for Engineering and Technology . Keywords : innovation ; self - eﬃcacy ; extracurricular ; design - based learning 1 . Introduction Innovation supports economic and social prosper - ity . Government and industry depend on their employees to innovate solutions to complex chal - lenges [ 1 , 2 ] . But employees will not attempt such work if they do not believe in their abilities or do not know how to innovate . People gain conﬁdence in theirabilitiesandlearntoinnovatethroughpractice . Government and industry expect higher education to provide opportunities for practice to prepare students for careers in innovation [ 5 ] . To support these expectations , the Accreditation Board for Engineering and Technology ( ABET ) requires higher education to provide opportunities to prac - tice innovation related tasks such as solving real problems , understanding societal issues , and work - ing in multidisciplinary teams [ 3 ] . Yet , meeting ABET criteria creates signiﬁcant challenges for con - tent - richengineeringprograms , requiringcostlyand time consuming alterations of existing curricula [ 4 ] . Consequently , opportunities for authentic practice are limited in higher education and students are not prepared to create innovative solutions to complex challenges upon graduation [ 5 ] . In response to government and industry expecta - tions , we sought to develop a new approach to innovation education that provides students with hands - on practice and meets ABET criteria without major alterations to existing curriculum . Such hands on practice should increase students’ conﬁ - dence in their ability to innovate . Extracurricular Design - Based Learning ( EDBL ) is student initiated and student directed learning that occurs indepen - dently of classroom expectations and responsibil - ities . Interdisciplinary teams of students identify authentic , pro social and local community chal - lenges and apply the human - centered design and innovation process to develop and implement crea - tive solutions . In this paper , we begin by describing the nature of innovation work and the role of conﬁdence in learning innovation and related learn - ing models . We describe EDBL’s implementation in Design for America at Northwestern University and conclude with initial ﬁndings of the students’ experi - ences . 2 . Background Innovation is deﬁned astheintentional implementa - tion of novel and useful processes , products , or procedures designed to beneﬁt society applied to a new domain [ 1 ] . Examples range from technology for disaster relief to sustainable manufacturing processes . Despite anticipated beneﬁts , innovation work can be unpredictable , controversial , and in competition with current courses of action . Inno - vators must develop , modify , and implement ideas * Accepted 20 August 2011 . 317 InternationalJournalofEngineeringEducation Vol . 28 , No . 2 , pp . 317 – 324 , 2012 0949 - 149X / 91 $ 3 . 00 + 0 . 00 PrintedinGreat Britain # 2012TEMPUSPublications . while navigating ambiguous problem contexts , overcoming setbacks , and persisting through uncer - tainty [ 6 ] . Historically , managerial researchers have focused on the domain expertise , creative and analytical thinking and interpersonal skills neces - sary to develop creative ideas for innovation work [ 7 ] . However , researchers increasingly emphasize self - eﬃcacy , or belief in ability , as critical for innovation [ 8 ] . Self - eﬃcacy positively inﬂuences innovation by strengthening creative performance , tendency to engage in expended eﬀort , persistence through setbacks , and learning from failure [ 7 , 9 , 10 ] . Innovation self - eﬃcacy refers to an individual’s belief in his or her ability to accomplish tasks necessary to innovate . Task - speciﬁc self - eﬃcacy is primarily developed through successful task com - pletion or mastery experiences ; however , indivi - duals can build self - eﬃcacy through vicarious learning and social persuasion . Individuals vicar - iously learn about their ability through observation of the behaviors of others who are similar or those with perceived prestige and competence . The obser - vation becomes a guide for future action , promoting action over apprehension , and discouraging mimicking behaviors that receive negative results . Additionally , individuals build self - eﬃcacy when persuaded by others of their ability to succeed at a given task and given supports to perform success - fully [ 10 ] . Self - eﬃcacy not only supports innovation ; it supports academic motivation , retention , learning , and achievement [ 11 ] . Researchers suggest strate - gies for positively inﬂuencing self - eﬃcacy in the classroom , such as fostering successful experiences for students , using peers as role models , presenting students with choices , communicating recent suc - cesses , and lowering anxiety around exams or pre - sentations [ 12 ] . Such strategies assume an instructor - led learning environment and are included in project - based learning ( PBL ) and design - based learning ( DBL ) in the classroom . PBL is designed to prepare students for real - world work [ 13 ] and has shown considerable promise in enhancing and sustaining student motivation to learn as well as improving understanding and reten - tion of subject matter content [ 14 ] . Related , DBL uses the process of design to engage students in authentic inquiry , initiate the learning process according to their own preferences , and construct cognitive concepts as a result of participating in design activities [ 15 ] . DBL supplies a process guide - line for framing , researching , and testing solutions to novel problems . To meet ABET criteria , educational institutions nationwide have added project and design - based learning to their formal engineering curricula . First year and capstone design classes situate learning in real - world project work and encourage application of classroom taught engineering concepts [ 16 ] . PBL and DBL are often paired with service learning ( SL ) , or learning through community service , to expose students to contemporary issues and encourage civic responsibility [ 17 ] . These classes stand in con - trast to classes which are lecture - based and content - centered rather than process - centered . Despite the success of PBL and DBL , the innovation work is often artiﬁcially constrained by academic schedules and instructor evaluations , with the former poten - tially limiting implementation of solutions , and the latter possibly extrinsically motivating students to generate conservative rather than risky and inno - vative solutions with the intention of preserving a grade . The result may be mastery experiences in project - based work rather than innovation work , inadequately preparing students for careers in inno - vation . Increasingly , students themselves are demanding more real - world experience external to the class - room [ 18 ] . In response , educational institutions support situated learning through industry spon - sored internships and extracurricular initiatives such as robotics competitions , solar car teams , and Engineers For a Sustainable World [ 16 ] . Situated learning allows students to apply course content to complex problems in uncertain organiza - tional systems [ 19 ] . These initiatives are popular among students and initial assessment suggests that these initiatives positively impact skills and self - eﬃcacy in tasks related to engineering design [ 20 ] , applying technology to needs , and business venturing [ 21 ] . The authenticity of the work and ability to see how the work impacts society are critical to developing self - eﬃcacy [ 2 ] . By expanding opportunities for practice beyond the traditional structural and temporal boundaries of higher edu - cation , students can further prepare for careers in innovation . Extracurricular Design - Based Learning blends successful elements from project - based learning [ 14 ] , design - based learning [ 15 ] , service learning [ 17 ] , and situated learning [ 19 ] to provide hands on practice in innovation . Students apply the human - centered design and innovation process to authentic , pro social , local community challenges . Such practice is designed to increase conﬁdence and skills necessary for innovation work . Like PBL and DBL , EDBL leverages the student - centered ele - ments of student interest and self - direction to moti - vate learning [ 22 ] . Like DBL , EDBL relies on a design process of discovery including observation , idea generation , prototyping , and testing . EDBL emphasizes insight driven through empathy with human users ; however , it depends upon knowledge E . M . Gerber et al . 318 being co - created by the students , peer mentors , professionals , and faculty in a non - evaluative envir - onment over an extended timeframe . Like service learning , EDBL motivates awareness and interest in people with real needs and contemporary issues by focusing on innovating solutions to local commu - nity challenges . By working locally , students gain in - depth knowledge of complex societal challenges and regularly test prototypes in context , receiving authentic feedback from community partners . EDBL emphasizes innovative solution generation , testing , and implementation often deemed too chal - lenging to achieve in the 10 – 16 week time frame of course instruction . Through testing and implemen - tation , students engage in situated learning , apply - ing course content to complex problems in uncertain organizational systems . Unlike tradi - tional classroom learning , EDBL’s community of practice expands beyond the physical boundaries of the undergraduate engineering community to include local experienced professionals and local clients , as shown in Fig . 1 . The experience continues beyond the temporal boundaries of student life as they can remain participating in projects as alumni . Participation is voluntary and motivated by a pas - sion to solve a particular societal challenge . Due to the extracurricular nature of EDBL , projects con - clude when ideas are implemented , rather than when the academic term ends . Extracurricular Design - Based Learning was examined in the context of Design for America ( DFA ) at Northwestern University ( NU ) . DFA is a nationwide network of extracurricular and inter - disciplinary student - led studios anchored in univer - sities . DFA aims to foster students’ beliefs in their ability to use the human centered design and inno - vation process to create social impact through the implementation of innovative solutions . DFA at NU sponsors three studios : School Year Studio , Summer Studio , and Leadership Studio . Normally , students research and develop solutions during the intensive six - week Summer Studio and implement the solutions during the School Year Studio . An individual student typically commits approximately 150 hours to the School Year Studio and 240 hours to the Summer Studio per year . With the exception of approximately 24 hours of professional coaching during Summer Studio , student leaders manage and direct their own studio work addressing client - described needs . Faculty , staﬀ , and professional coaches are available for student - initiated consulta - tion during Summer and School Year Studios . Student leaders teach the human - centered design and innovation process to newer students by facil - itating the observation of users in context , ideating and prototyping solutions , and testing with real - world users . They work in teams to solve challenges such as healthcare , education , and the environment for local clients . Design challenges include reducing hospital - acquired infections and reducing water waste in institutional cafeterias . During the annual 4 - day Leadership Studio , experienced student lea - ders train new student leaders in studio manage - ment and leadership . 3 . Method To understand the experience of EDBL as imple - mented in DFA , we used a non - experimental , single group research design . Following Dunlap’s approach to examining changes in self - eﬃcacy during project - based learning [ 23 ] , we examined the process of change by collecting baseline data before the study began . We then took a time series approach to collecting data throughout the six week Summer Studio via daily questionnaires and obser - vations to changes in the experience over time . This combination of data was used to answer the follow - ing question : Does EDBL inﬂuence students’ beliefs in their ability to complete innovation related tasks and ABET outcomes and , if so , how ? 3 . 1 Data sources We focused our data collection on the 13 partici - pants ( ﬁve women ) intheDFA Summer Studio 2010 at Northwestern University that included nine stu - dents majoring in science , technology , engineering , and math related disciplines and four majoring in Extracurricular Design - Based Learning : Preparing Students for Careers in Innovation 319 Fig . 1 . EDBL’s Community of Practice Anchored by University Sponsor . the behavioral sciences . Grade level ranged from freshmen to senior . Data was collected from multi - ple sources to inform our inferences and to avoid the potential problem of construct validity within a single case [ 24 ] . The ﬁndings were supported by the convergence of multiple , independent sources . These sources can be divided into four categories : semi - structured interviews , daily questionnaires , pre - post surveys , and observations of day - to - day activities and client engagements . Semi - structured interviews . Students participated in a one - on - one 45 minute interview at the end of the program and were asked about their initial percep - tions of DFA ; which experiences were most inﬂuen - tial ; beliefs about their ability to innovate ; what beneﬁt , if any , was realized after participation ; how the experience aﬀected future plans , if at all ; and how DFA compared to their classroom experiences . Daily questionnaires . To obtain daily reports of the student experience , we employed an Electronic Event Sampling Methodology [ 25 ] that involved electronically administrating a daily questionnaire through the entire course of the program . Each student was asked to reﬂect on his beliefs about his ability to innovate and on the related events that inﬂuenced these beliefs . Twelve of thirteen students completed daily diary reﬂections for the six - week period . Average response rate was 72 % . Partici - pants were compensated 50 – 75 dollars based on their frequency of completion . The questionnaire served as both a means for data collection as well as a daily reﬂection tool . Pre and post surveys . Pre and post surveys captured self - reported data on innovation self - eﬃcacy and satisfaction with and eﬀort expended during Summer Studio . All students completed pre - post surveys , taking approximately 20 minutes to com - plete 112 discrete questions . On the pre - post sur - veys , we collected measures of innovation self - eﬃcacy , altering Carberry and colleagues’ measure of engineering design self - eﬃcacy to emphasize innovation [ 26 ] . One example of an altered task was ‘develop innovative design solutions’ instead of ‘develop design solutions . ’ Because innovation involves unique insight and implementation in a team and not just generation of the concept , tasks were added to the measure , such as these : take the perspective of the person ( s ) expressing the need , determine an implementation plan for the solution , use the design process to achieve a successful out - come , and work with a team to achieve a successful outcome . Additionally , surveys captured data on individual factors that could be expected to aﬀect innovation self - eﬃcacy and group interactions , such as gender , age , race , program satisfaction , personality type , and team satisfaction . For these factors , we found no diﬀerences among individuals on responses . Because the ﬁrst and second authors were involved in developing the DFA initiative , the third author ( who had no previous ties with DFA ) administered all interviews and daily question - naires . Data collection included 60 hours of obser - ving the day - to - day activity of the students and coaches ; 15 hours observing client engagements ; and ten hours of interviews resulting in 150 pages of verbal transcriptions . 3 . 2 Data analysis To understand if EDBL , as implemented in DFA , inﬂuenced students’ beliefs in their ability to com - plete innovation related tasks , we conducted paired t - tests of the diﬀerence ( D ) between normalized pre and post measures of innovation self - eﬃcacy . To understand how beliefs were fostered and whether ABET outcomes were achieved , we followed Miles and Huberman’s [ 27 ] recommendations for quali - tative data analysis . We reviewed all data and coded and clustered processes , events , and learning design elements in search of patterns and themes regarding participants’ emergent beliefs in their ability to innovate and ABET outcomes . Our initial ﬁndings result from our iterative process of moving between inductive and deductive thinking , using the strength of the evidence to inform whether we should main - tain , modify , or abandon our inferences . 4 . Findings Initial ﬁndings suggest that participation in EDBL , as implemented in DFA , strengthens self - eﬃcacy in innovation related tasks . Pre and post surveys showed statistically signiﬁcant gains in the follow - ing tasks : beliefs in their ability to identify a design need ( D = 12 . 3 , p < 0 . 01 ) ; research a design need ( D = 15 . 4 , p < 0 . 01 ) ; take the perspective of some - one expressing the need ( D = 6 . 1 , p < 0 . 10 ) ; conduct design work ( D = 16 . 9 , p < 0 . 01 ) ; develop innova - tive design solutions ( D = 12 . 3 , p < 0 . 01 ) ; construct a prototype ( D = 6 . 9 , p < 0 . 10 ) ; evaluate and test a design ( D = 13 . 1 , p < 0 . 10 ) ; select the best possible design ( D = 19 . 2 , p < 0 . 01 ) ; use the design process to achieve a successful outcome ( D = 15 . 0 , p < 0 . 01 ) ; and work with a team to achieve a successful out - come ( D = 6 . 6 , p < 0 . 05 ) . While beliefs in their ability to understand the systematic implications for the design solutions and determine an implementa - tion plan increased over time , the results were not statistically signiﬁcant . E . M . Gerber et al . 320 4 . 1 Sources of self - eﬃcacy Initial ﬁndings suggest that students who partici - pated in EDBL , as implemented in DFA , developed innovation self - eﬃcacy through mastery experi - ences , vicarious learning , and social persuasion [ 10 ] . Mastery experiences . Students gained hands on experience completing innovation tasks . Successful completion fostered innovation self - eﬃcacy . A stu - dent explains , ‘ [ Before my DFA experience ] I had very little hands on experience in terms of drafting ideas and getting them out there and putting them into action . . . [ now ] I feel more conﬁdent . ’ His teammate describes how hands on experience inﬂu - enced his conﬁdence , ability , and perspective on innovation . ‘ [ DFA has changed ] how I look at problems . . . you experience the act of creating a solution . Because of that , I now look at problems and want to create a solution for them because I know it’s possible . Whereas before I was always like complaining about something and never really thinking , wait , there could be a solution . I guess it’s automatic now . ’ This response suggests that mastery experiences supports beliefs in ability and motivates engagement in similar tasks in the future . Through DFA , students engaged in a diverse set of tasks related to innovation . Via brief weekly coaching sessions , professional coaches and student leaders taught students how to identify a design need ; research a need ; ideate and prototype solu - tions ; and evaluate and implement solutions . Stu - dents requested guidance when challenged to perform these tasks successfully . A student explains , ‘I learned to grasp a problem . . . enough to create a solution . It was the ﬁrst time I actually went about doing ﬁrst hand research . . . I analyzed a full system without any . . . well , there was guidance , but it was all us . So that’s why it was valuable . ’ By doing the work independently , he was able to attribute success to his own actions . Another student commented on how the extracurricular nature of DFA was intrin - sically motivating . ‘Learning how to do something when there’s not a teacher breathing down your neck telling you to get this report in . . . there’s no one breathing down your neck but it needs to get done so it’s a personal investment in the success or lack of . ’ From these responses , we can infer the importance of students feeling independent yet supported and intrinsically motivated when engaged in extracurri - cular innovation work . Vicarious learning . The data suggests that students developed innovation self - eﬃcacy in communities of practice of peers and professional designers as they engaged in innovation related tasks . One important characteristic of a community of practice is the involvement in a process of collective learning [ 19 ] . Students observed and listened to their peers as they engaged in think - aloud protocols about their reasoning , framing , and problem - solving . A student noted , ‘I think a lot of what I’ve learned through DFA is through other people . . . There are a lot of people who know stuﬀ that is not being taught in classes , and it’s almost more valuable than the stuﬀ being taught in classes . ’ A student cited seeing the success of her peers in creating and implementing hand hygiene solutions during the School Year Studio as a reason for joining DFA Summer Studio . ‘I see problems as being able to be solved . . . [ They ] inspired me because you do all your uncomfortable things here then you start to become more comfortable with your own skills , so I guess it inspires you just to go for things . ’ Consistent with prior research [ 10 ] , the similarity of the observer and model inﬂuences the extent to which students develop self - eﬃcacy through vicarious learning . While peer - to - peer learning was eﬀective , students also developed conﬁdence when observing design professionals engage in innovation related tasks such as understanding client constraints—an area in which the student leaders’ experiences were limited . A student describes her response to an advising session with a professional designer . ‘Yes - terday , we talked with [ George ] who gave us insights into the design process . What was especially helpful were the ways he mapped out the components and the picture of the problem , as well as how everything was broken down . ’ This and similar engagements were driven by a speciﬁc request for advice from a student at a given phase in the project . Students chose to use techniques that they felt were valuable and abandoned non - useful techni - ques . A student describes two demonstrations given by experienced professionals . ‘We started brain - storming and were given two diﬀerent approaches by two diﬀerent design coaches . [ Ben ] tried to organize our brainstorm by doing two - by - two’s . . . meanwhile , [ Claire ] had us make a list of potential audience targets , and then brainstorm ideas around them . . . we ended up going with [ Claire’s ] approach because it let us lay down our ideas faster . . . I’m conﬁdent we will be able to deliver something tangible by the end of six weeks . ’ Exposure to diﬀerent practices from working prac - titioners and development of one’s own innovation practice appears to contribute to beliefs in ability . From these examples , we can infer that students gained conﬁdence in their ability to innovate through vicarious learning from peers and profes - sionals in their community of practice . Social persuasion . Social persuasion occurred through regular feedback sessions . Such sessions regularly occurred because stakeholders were local Extracurricular Design - Based Learning : Preparing Students for Careers in Innovation 321 and students could regularly visit and share their recent work . The feedback not only provided useful information for revisions but also built conﬁdence in the student’s ability . A student reported , ‘Based on the results we are seeing , it [ our solution ] really has had an impact . . . it was nice to get positive feedback . It certainly made me more conﬁdent . . . I think part of it is just knowing that I am capable of things such as this . . . it is really cool to see it come to fruition . ’ A student reiterated the importance of client feedback , ‘ [ Our client ] really liked the game idea and gave us more conﬁdence that we would be able to move forward with it . ’ Consistent with previous research , feedback allows people to attri - bute success to their action and motivate future action—increasingly the likelihood of successful performance [ 10 ] . Once the project was underway , the student leaders encouraged their teams to share their pro - gress frequently with users , clients , design profes - sionals , and other teams . Frequent feedback allowed students to either adjust their approach or adapt the goals of the project to achieve the desired outcomes [ 28 ] . The intent was to allow them to realign their expectations with those of the stake - holders , and preserve their interest and positive orientation towards the project . A student reported the importance of talking to users . ‘Once the parents [ of the users of the client system ] heard about our project , they were incredibly excited and urged us to move forward . It is reciprocal . ’ A week later , the same student reported , ‘We had a phone call with [ Doug ] . . . he heads up User Experience at [ Fortune 500 company ] . A pretty big guy . He was like , ‘Guys , you’re still doing this , right ? It was a cool idea . I want to make sure that this is real . ’ Yeah , we still have believers . We can do this . ’ Students retained a realistic perspective about the feedback that they received during the process , however . A student reported , ‘Although our client was excited about the idea of making the school into a game , our client is a school . Of course they are going to be excited about an educational game . ’ Social persuasion was not limited to clients and professionals . Experienced students enforced guide - lines for group work based on professional practice . They modiﬁed the guidelines and posted them on the wall . The guidelines helped to promote mutually supportive intra - team behaviors as well . A student reported , ‘I love our brainstorming sessions where we build on each other’s ideas . It validates your design skills to have teammates build on your ideas . My biggest hurdle inbecoming a contributing factor for the team is getting over the fear of not having good contributions . They deﬁnitely help . . . [ team members ] would say , ‘yeah , that is a great idea’ and after that it continues to grow and you get more conﬁdence . ’ A student compared his DFA experi - ence with his traditional classes and how the lack of positive persuasion from non - DFA students inhi - bits his creativity outside of DFA . He commented , ‘ [ In class ] I was brainstorming with a group . . . you were always worried about what you were going to say . You say something and they’re like , ‘oh , that’s stupid’ or ‘that’s lame . ’ There is a lot of judgment in the system . It’s like we’re trying to get to a solution as quickly as possible . . . they just wanted to get it done already . ’ Extracurricular non - competitive learning appears to support a safe culture for students to share and develop ideas . Students reported being greatly aﬀected by praise , encour - agement , and feedback given to them by their teammates , professionals , and clients indicating an increase in student belief in their abilities to com - plete their projects suggesting an eﬀect of social persuasion on innovation self - eﬃcacy . 4 . 2 ABET outcomes Initial evidence suggests that EDBL as implemented in DFA supports the following ABET outcomes : identify , formulate , and solve engineering pro - blems ; function on a multidisciplinary team ; communicate eﬀectively ; and attain knowledge of contemporary issues . Solving engineering problems . Students learned how to identify , formulate , and solve problems by enga - ging in user - centered research at the beginning of the design process , by gaining knowledge / conﬁ - dence that ﬁnding a solution is possible , and by communicating to identify client needs . Comparing her PBL classroom experience to DFA , a student explained her active role in identifying , formulating , and solving the problem . ‘ [ The ﬁrst year design class ] handed us the problem on a platter and told us ‘here is what the problem is and you have to ﬁgure it out . ’ In DFA , you have to ﬁnd out what the problem is regardless of what the client says the problem is . ’ Multidisciplinary teamwork . Students learned about themselves and how to function on a team by work - ingwith students from diﬀerent majors and diﬀerent approaches to work . A student reported , ‘It’s been incredible working with very diﬀerent thinkers . . . I’m realizing more and more how much of a logical thinker I am and so to be confronted with people who are coming at it in a more visual or physical way . . . I think being aware of those diﬀerent approaches and being really frustrated by what feels like unpro - ductivity , but it’s just a diﬀerent timing , a diﬀerent speed . . . to trust that it will get done in a very diﬀerent way and , I think , in a rich and more well - rounded way . ’ Students learned not only about E . M . Gerber et al . 322 diﬀerent problem solving approaches but also about motivation . ‘This summer’s takeaway was that if you put the right people together , and you put them through the right process , you will have something interesting in the end . No problem can change that . ’ Communicate eﬀectively . By working with interdis - ciplinary teammates and clients , students learned to communicate eﬀectively . To understand the pro - blem and gain client support for solutions , students managed the client relationships , and learned to ask questions and present to clients . A student reported , ‘You’re put into a position where you have to deal with people . You don’t deal with people in the classroom , you deal with books . You’re actually interacting with the people . You’re prodding them with questions . ’ Students frequently requested advice from professional coaches about under - standing clients and how to communicate sensitive information . Attain knowledge of contemporary issues . Students developed knowledge of contemporary issues by working closely with local community partners . When meeting with a tour guide at a home for mentally challenged adults , a student reported , ‘Our tour guide told us an emotional story [ about the residents ] that brought her and us near to tears . That emotional response . . . is the light you see in both volunteers and worker’s eyes , which is some - thing we need to be able to capture somehow in the [ solution ] . ’ In addition to knowledge of contempor - ary issues , students also develop empathy for those who experience the issues ﬁrst hand . 5 . Discussion The National Academy of Engineering [ 29 ] and the National Science Board [ 5 ] have challenged engi - neering educators to transform engineering educa - tion to meet global demands for innovation . This study suggests that EDBL may help to meet those challenges by oﬀering learning opportunities out - side of the traditional classroom and designing learning experiences that foster both the skills and conﬁdence necessary for innovation work while reducing the need to overload existing engineering curricula . As implemented in DFA , EDBL posi - tively inﬂuenced students’ beliefs in their ability to innovate and achieve ABET outcomes through hands on practice . Such conﬁdence and skills inﬂu - ence the persistence , creativity , and self - directed learning necessary for innovation work . EDBL’s service - learning focus engages students in the investigation of authentic community needs and is an enhancement to , but not a replacement for , classroom experiences [ 17 ] . EDBL captures the beneﬁts of student - centered learning , such as increasing students’ interest as well as their motiva - tion to participate in self - directed learning , It encourages them to adapt to change , think criti - cally , and work collaboratively since students select and scope their own problems [ 14 , 15 , 22 ] . EDBL also takes advantage of the beneﬁts conferred by a community of practice , such as a sense of shared identity around the learning and joint enterprise , building relationships to assist in learning , and the development of a self - organizing capacity that sus - tains it in the absence of a formally - recognized instructor [ 19 ] . Finally , EDBL’s attraction to a diverse set of majors allows engineers to gain a multi - lens perspective on complex problems . This experience revises the perspective that non - engi - neers have of the engineering sciences and the impact of the engineering sciences on complex societal problems such as improving health and the environment . 6 . Conclusion In response to a call for new models of innovation education from industry , government , and stu - dents , this paper presented Extracurricular Design - Based Learning . Initial evidence suggests that the model positively inﬂuences students’ skills and beliefs in ability in innovation related tasks . Future work will consider how participation in a multi - year program inﬂuences innovation self - eﬃcacy , performance in innovation careers , and how self - selection inﬂuences learning outcomes in an extracurricular setting . Self - selection allows for participants with similar motivations for socially oriented project - based work to inﬂuence each other through social persuasion . The EDBL experience rewards those who seek out this development experience through higher visibility within the uni - versity community , with faculty , and with experi - enced design professionals , as well as access to challenging and interesting projects for portfolio building—elements that may also support students’ motivation to seek careers in innovation . References 1 . M . A . West andJ . L . Farr ( Eds ) , Innovation and Creativityat Work , Psychological and Organizational Strategies . New York : Wiley , 1990 . 2 . J . George , Creativity in Organizations , in Academy of Management Annals , vol . 1 , J . Walsh and A . Brief ( Eds ) . Routledge Taylor & Francis Group , 2007 , pp . 439 – 477 . 3 . CriteriaforAccreditingEngineering Programs . ABETEngi - neering Accreditation Commission , 2007 . 4 . R . M . Felder , ABET criteria 2000 : An Exercise in Engineer - ingProblemSolving , ChemicalEngineeringEducation , 32 ( 2 ) , Spring . 1998 , pp . 126 – 127 . Extracurricular Design - Based Learning : Preparing Students for Careers in Innovation 323 5 . NSB , National Science Board , Moving forward to improve engineering education , 2007 . 6 . S . ScottandR . Bruce , DeterminantsofInnovativeBehavior : A path model of Individual Innovation in the Workplace , Academy of Management Journal , 37 ( 3 ) , 1994 , pp . 580 – 607 . 7 . T . M . Amabile , Creativity in Context . Boulder , Colorado : Westview Press , 1996 . 8 . C . Shalley , J . Zhou and G . R . Oldham , The Eﬀects of Personal and Contextual Characteristics on Creativity : Where Should We Go from Here ? Journal of Management , 36 ( 6 ) , 2004 , pp . 933 – 958 . 9 . M . R . Redmond , M . D . Mumford and R . Teach , Putting creativity to work : Eﬀects of leader behavior on subordinate creativity , Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes , 55 ( 1 ) , 1993 , pp . 120 – 151 . 10 . A . BanduraandR . WaltersH . , Self - Eﬃcacy : TheExerciseof Control . W . H . Freeman , 1997 . 11 . F . Pajares , Self - eﬃcacybeliefsinacademicsettings , Reviewof Educational Research , 66 ( 4 ) , 1996 , pp . 543 – 578 . 12 . H . FenciandK . Scheel , EngagingStudents : AnExamination of the Eﬀects of Teaching Strategies on Self - Eﬃcacy and Course Climate in a Nonmajors Physics Course , Journal of College Science Teaching , 35 ( 1 ) , 2005 , pp . 20 – 24 . 13 . G . W . Clough ( Ed . ) , Educating the Engineer of 2020 : Adapting Engineering Education to the New Century , in National Academy of Engineering , 2005 . 14 . P . Blumenfeld , E . Soloway , R . Marx , J . Krajcik , M . Guzdial and A . Palincsar , Motivating Project - Based Learning : Sus - taining the Doing , Supporting the Learning , Educational Psychologist , 26 ( 3 ) , 1991 , pp . 369 – 398 . 15 . J . L . Kolodner , D . Crismond , J . Gray , J . Holbrook and S . Puntambekar , Learning by Design from Theory into Prac - tice , in Proceedings ofICLS98 , Atlanta , GA . , 1998 , pp . 230 – 236 . 16 . A . F . McKenna , E . Colgate , S . Carr and G . Olson , Creating the Foundation for an Engineering Design Education , Inter - national Journal of Engineering Education , 2006 , 22 ( 3 ) . 17 . A . Furco , Service - learning : A balanced approach to experi - entialeducation , in Expandingboundaries : Servingandlearn - ing , Washington , D . C . : National Service - Learning Clearinghouse , 1996 . 18 . C . Westerberg and C . Wickersham , Internships Have Value , Whether or Not Students Are Paid , The Chronicle of Higher Education , April 2011 . 19 . J . Lave and E . Wenger , Situated learning : Legitimate periph - eral participation . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press , 1991 . 20 . A . Carberry , Characterizing Learning - through - Service Stu - dentsinEngineeringbyGenderandAcademicYear . Unpub - lished Dissertation . Tufts University . August 2010 . 21 . N . PetermanandJ . Kennedy , EnterpriseEducation : Inﬂuen - cing Students’ Perceptions of Entrepreneurship , Entrepre - neurship Theory and Practice , 28 ( 2 ) , 2003 , pp . 129 – 144 . 22 . M . Knowles , Self - DirectedLearning : Aguideforlearnersand teachers . New York : Free Press , 1975 . 23 . J . Dunlap , Problem - based learning and self - eﬃcacy : How a capstone course prepares students for a profession , Educa - tional Technology Research and Development , 53 ( 1 ) , 2005 , pp . 65 – 83 . 24 . R . K . Yin , Case Study Research—Design and Method , 2nd ed . Newberry Park , CA : Sage , 1994 . 25 . T . M . Amabile , D . Whitney , J . Weinstock , L . Miller and C . Fallang , What Really Happens in Creative Projects : Event sampling through electronic data collection . President and Fellows of Harvard College , 1997 . 26 . A . Carberry , H . S . Lee and M . W . Ohland , Measuring Engineering Design Self - Eﬃcacy , Journal of Engineering Education , 99 ( 1 ) , 2010 , pp . 71 – 78 . 27 . M . B . MilesandA . M . Huberman , QualitativeDataAnalysis . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage Publications , 1994 . 28 . A . Van de Ven and D . Polley , Learning While Innovating , Organization Science , 3 ( 1 ) , 1992 , pp . 92 – 116 . 29 . Grand Challenges for Engineering , National Academy of Engineering , 2011 . Elizabeth M . Gerber is an assistant professor in the Mechanical Engineering Department and Segal Design Institute and the director of the Creative Action Lab where she researches design , innovation , technology , and organization . She is the Faculty Founder of Design for America . Jeanne Marie Olson is a lecturer in the graduate program for Learning & Organizational Change in the School of Education and Social Policy , and an adjunct lecturer at Segal Design Institute . She is a Faculty Advisor for Design for America . She has been a consultant / practitioner since 1988 in OD , learning strategy , research , and design . Rebecca L . D . Komarek is currently the Academic Counselor for the math and science students at the Northwestern University School of Continuing Studies . Her interests include engineering education and service learning . E . M . Gerber et al . 324