A case - based method for service - oriented value chain and sustainable network design Yu - Ting Chen , Ming - Chuan Chiu ⇑ Department of Industrial Engineering and Engineering Management , National Tsing - Hua University , Hsinchu , Taiwan a r t i c l e i n f o Article history : Received 13 October 2014 Received in revised form 30 April 2015 Accepted 22 June 2015 Available online 17 July 2015 Keywords : Value chain design Sustainable network design Case - based reasoning a b s t r a c t Purpose : The purpose of this research is to present a case - based analytic method for a service - oriented value chain and a sustainable network design considering customer , environmental and social values . Enterprises can enhance competitive advantage by providing more values to all stakeholders in the net - work . Design / methodology / approach : Our model employs a stylized database to identify successful cases of value chain application under similar company marketing conditions , illustrating potential value chains and sustainable networks as references . This work ﬁrst identiﬁes economic beneﬁts , environmental friendliness and social contribution values based on prior studies . Next , a search engine which is devel - oped based on the rough set theory will search and map similarities to ﬁnd similar or parallel cases in the database . Finally , a visualized network mapping will be automatically generated to possible value chains . Findings : This study applies a case - based methodology to assist enterprises in developing a service - oriented value chain design . For decision makers , this can reduce survey time and inspire inno - vative works based on previous successful experience . Besides , successful ideas from prior cases can be reused . In addition to customer values , this methodology incorporates environment and social values that may encourage a company to build their value chain in a more comprehensive and sustainable man - ner . Research implications : This is a pilot study which attempts to utilize computer - aided methodology to assist in service or value - related design . The pertinent existing solutions can be ﬁltered from an array of cases to engage the advantages from both product - oriented and service - oriented companies . Finally , the visualized display of value network is formed to illustrate the results . Practical implications : A customized service - oriented value chains which incorporates environment and social values can be designed according to different conditions . Also , this system engages the advantages from both product - oriented and service - oriented companies to build a more comprehensive value net - work . Apart from this , the system can be utilized as a benchmarking tool , and it could remind the decision makers to consider potential value from a more multifaceted perspective . Originality / value : This is the ﬁrst paper that applied a computer - aided method to design service - oriented value chains . This work also can serve as a decision support and benchmarking system because decision makers can develop different value networks according to various emphasized values . Finally , the visu - alized display of value network can improve the communication among stakeholders . (cid:2) 2015 Elsevier Ltd . All rights reserved . 1 . Introduction Nowadays , many companies are confronted with ﬁerce market competition . Some companies adopt a low - price or a high - quality strategy to remain competitive , while others endeavor to extract a proﬁt through cost reduction . However , the beneﬁts derived from these approaches have certain limits since around 70 % of product cost [ 1 ] and 80 % of quality are determined in the design stage [ 2 ] , and there is often no resulting signiﬁcant difference in cus - tomer perception or purchase intention . When entrepreneurs recognize that internal improvements might not help them achieve success , they begin to look outward . As early as 1954 , Drucker [ 3 ] pointed out that what customers buy is not the product itself , but rather the value that customers per - ceive with that purchase . Shifting the business mindset from being http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . aei . 2015 . 06 . 005 1474 - 0346 / (cid:2) 2015 Elsevier Ltd . All rights reserved . ⇑ Corresponding author at : No . 101 , Section 2 , Kuang - Fu Road , Hsinchu 30013 , Taiwan . Tel . : + 886 3 5742699 ; fax : + 886 3 5722204 . E - mail addresses : i94pig @ hotmail . com ( Y . - T . Chen ) , mcchiu @ ie . nthu . edu . tw ( M . - C . Chiu ) . Advanced Engineering Informatics 29 ( 2015 ) 269 – 294 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Advanced Engineering Informatics journal homepage : www . elsevier . com / locate / aei product - oriented to being service - oriented has become the main - stream . The concepts of servitization and the service - oriented value chain have evolved as a direct result of that shift . Apart from the customer value , environmental and social values are also taken into consideration in the concepts of servitization and the service - oriented value chain . With these three perspectives , a sus - tainable value system can be constructed . Using Manzini and Vezzoli [ 4 ] as an example , consider an AMG solar heat selling service . This is a service about selling heat instead of selling water heaters as the ﬁnal product . With this service , cus - tomers no longer need to deal with any maintenance problem , because the service provider will take care of those chores . The company can attract interesting suppliers or partners to build a network , while also looking for efﬁcient ways to properly manage existing resources and reduce any of the environmental impacts . However , while servitization , service - orientation concepts , and their relations to sustainability have been introduced , many com - panies still have difﬁculty in identifying , creating and delivering the sought - after value to their customers and partners . Besides , there are too many ill - deﬁned variables such as comfort , equity , and health involved in the sustainable value system . The way for companies to achieve sustainability is unknown and the most of variables are hard to precisely deﬁne . Therefore , the purpose of this research is to create a case - based system that can be used to inform and instruct decision makers to help them with developing a sustainable network ( including both environmental and social sustainability ) linked by a value chain . Case - based system is a decision - making procedure which can sug - gest a decision based on past experience . Case - based reasoning is a fundamental problem solving paradigm which can utilize the speciﬁc experience to generate solutions . With this system , funda - mental and repetitive search work is executed automatically . The decision makers can capture and employ solutions from previous successful cases as guideline to inspire value creation and innova - tion through a case - based system . This paper includes a visualized network display framework that shows the results of ﬁnal deci - sions , allowing the value network design process to interactively use a what - if analysis . The organization of the paper is as follows : Section 2 presents a literature review of three main topics : Section 2 . 1 describes case - based reasoning , its background , supported methodology and applications ; Section 2 . 2 addresses value chain and value net - work analysis ; and Section 2 . 3 introduces values identiﬁcation . Section 3 proposes a case - based method illustrating how to devise a service - oriented value chain design , while taking environmental and social values into consideration . In Section 4 , data from a car rental business is used to demonstrate the system’s operation . In the last Section , conclusions and contributions are addressed . 2 . Literature review 2 . 1 . Case - based reasoning When people learn how to do something new , they may rely on previous knowledge or experience [ 5 ] . Case - based reasoning ( CBR ) is a decision - making procedure that mimics the human decision - making process . It is based on the premise that although people can make a decision based on experience , they cannot always access the most appropriate information they need to make that decision . CBR is applied to solve a new problem based on pre - vious similar situation , and to reuse the knowledge and experience from that situation [ 6 ] . Its deﬁnition was stated by Watson [ 7 ] , ‘ A case - based reasoner solves problems by using or adapting solutions to old problems . ’ A CBR - cycle is often used to describe the system framework and features with active elements : retrieve , reuse , revise and retain [ 6 ] . Fig . 1 illustrates the typical CBR process . After entering the problem description of a new case , a CBR system retrieves cases from a database and screens out the relevant cases according to their similarity to the new concept . Second , it reuses the solution or relevant information from the most similar screened - out cases , and third , it revises the provided solution if necessary . Fourth and the last , the CBR system retains the experi - ence related to the new cases to increase the system’s knowledge base as the reference for future problem solving . While there are various types of AI decision - making methodol - ogy , CBR is appropriate when knowledge is incomplete or sparse . In contrast to a traditional AI system that provides a deterministic solution , a CBR system attempts to provide users with solutions based on past experience . Regardless of whether the solutions are always optimal or even correct , the CBR system provides users with answers in a simple and straightforward way [ 5 ] . CBR systems have been widely applied in many areas , and in medical ﬁeld , CBR system is recognized to solve the tasks by previ - ous studies . Numerous studies have utilized CBR to support the diagnosis process . Garrell i Guiu et al . [ 8 ] combined CBR and Genetic Algorithms to diagnose breast cancer automatically . Huang et al . [ 9 ] integrated CBR with data mining techniques to develop a model of chronic disease prognosis and diagnosis . Begum et al . [ 10 ] summarized 34 CBR systems or projects in the health science , and revealed the recent trend that multiple - purpose CBR has become necessary . Besides , AI techniques and other methods should be combined to improve the system , such as Artiﬁcial Neural Networks , Genetic Algorithms , and Fuzzy . Furthermore , in innovative design domain , CBR can serve as a con - sulting system to assist users . Yang and Chen [ 11 ] integrated CBR system and TRIZ inventive principles to accelerate eco - innovation Fig . 1 . Case - based reasoning ( CBR ) cycle [ 6 ] . 270 Y . - T . Chen , M . - C . Chiu / Advanced Engineering Informatics 29 ( 2015 ) 269 – 294