The Role Definition Matrix : Creating a Shared Understanding of Children’s Participation in the Design Process Abstract In this paper we propose the Role Definition Matrix that helps authors to describe more precisely the involvement of children in the design process . Although the previously defined roles for children ( user , tester , informant , and design partner ) have had a positive impact on researchers’ and designers’ awareness of the different ways to involve children in the design process , the Role Definition Matrix clarifies what was exactly done during a project , enables the reader to understand the credibility of the design decisions presented , avoids the misuse of certain terminology , and enables the consideration of trade - offs between the different roles . We pro pose to describe children’s involvement in terms of the phases in design ( Requirements , Design and Evaluation ) and activity in relation to designer ( Indirect , Feedback , Dialogue , Elaboration ) during these phases . We present the Role Definition Matrix , including examples , and invite other researchers to use it as a tool to present their work . Author Keywords Participatory design ; children ; roles . ACM Classification Keywords H . 5 . 2 . Information interfaces and presentation : User Interfaces – Theory and Methods , UCD Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for third - party components of this work must be honored . For all other uses , contact the Owner / Author . Copyright is held by the owner / author ( s ) . IDC ' 16 , June 21 - 24 , 2016 , Manchester , United Kingdom ACM 978 - 1 - 4503 - 4313 - 8 / 16 / 06 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2930674 . 2935999 . Wolmet Barendregt Department of Applied IT University of Gothenburg Gothenburg , Sweden wolmet . barendregt @ ait . gu . se Mathilde M . Bekker Dept . of Industrial Design Eindhoven University of Technology The Netherlands m . m . bekker @ tue . nl Peter Börjesson Department of Applied IT University of Gothenburg Gothenburg , Sweden peter . borjesson @ ait . gu . se Eva Eriksson Department of Applied IT Chalmers University of Technology Gothenburg , Sweden eva . eriksson @ chalmers . se Olof Torgersson Department of Applied IT University of Gothenburg Gothenburg , Sweden olof . torgersson @ ait . gu . se 577 Introduction In 2002 Druin described her influential framework of four different roles ( user , tester , informant and design partner ) for understanding how children can participate in the technology design process [ 3 ] . These roles differ in how the adults in the project relate to the children , the relationship to the technology and the goals for inquiry . The roles are hierarchical , from least to most participation ; the role as a tester includes elements from the role of a user , the informant role includes elements from the tester and user role etc . This model has been widely adopted and has played an important role in increasing children’s involvement in the design of new technologies . However , several researchers have experienced a need to add some additional nuances to this framework , e . g . [ 6 ] proposed “Bonded Design” to indicate that children are involved during a shorter but intense design period . To better understand how children are actually involved in a project we propose an extension to Druin’s framework . In the remainder of this paper , we will first present the original framework by Druin . Thereafter , we discuss additional roles proposed by others , as well as examples of papers that indicate the need for a more fine - grained description of children’s involvement that goes beyond defining additional roles . Based on this analysis we propose a model for description of children’s involvement using both the stages of the design process and activity in relation to designers , positioned in a Role Definition Matrix . The matrix is also the main contribution of this paper . We suggest that it can be used as a tool for researchers to better understand and describe children’s participation . D ruin’s Framework of Children’s Roles Druin originally defined four different roles for children in the design process , user , tester , informant and design partner [ 3 ] :  In the role of a user , the children participate as users of technology while adults observe their behavior with the technology . This role is used to understand how existing technologies work and how this technology impacts the children . Methods for the involvement for children as users are e . g . observation , video recording , qualitative surveys and diary keeping .  In the role of a tester , the children test prototypes of not yet released technology ( in contrast , as a user the children test a released technology . ) . Children are again observed using prototypes and are queried about the experience of using the technology . Results gathered from this activity can be used to make informed decisions regarding future iterations of the technology . The methods used for children as testers and users are often quite similar . However , as a tester more emphasis is put on usability issues . When children are involved as testers , observation methods or interviews with the children might be appropriate .  As an informant , the children are involved in a number of different stages throughout the design process , based on when the designers think the children can contribute . The children can be involved by discussing existing design sketches or low - tech prototypes , or by being observed while using existing technology . The children are further involved in the process as new iterations of the technology are being developed . As informants the children are exposed to more low - tech prototypes than as testers , so methods from the two previous Figure 1 : The framework for child participation in design as defined by Druin [ 3 ] . 578 roles are still used but might have to be adapted in order to work with the low - tech prototypes . Asking children to sketch their own ideas , brainstorming and ideation methods might be appropriate to use as the children are involved sometimes even before there is an actual design idea .  Finally , as a design partner , the children are considered to be " equal stakeholders " in the design of the new technology being developed . As a design partner the children contribute throughout the whole process in different ways deemed appropriate for the children . The methods are similar to those used when the child is an informant . According to Druin , a crucial goal of partnership is to strive for elaboration . This happens when a team member ( adult or child ) shares an idea with the team which leads to new thoughts or directions from other team members , both adults and children . According to Druin these different levels of involvement have three dimensions : 1 ) The relationship of the children to the developers means the way in which the children and the developers interact during the design process . This can range from children having an indirect influence by being observed , to giving active feedback , to having a dialogue about their own design ideas , or engaging in elaboration by building upon other people’s ideas . 2 ) The relationship to technology dimension means roughly in which stage of development of a product the children are involved : do they interact with or contribute to ideas , prototypes , or products ? 3 ) The goals for inquiry may range from better understanding usability issues , to understanding the impact of the technology , or to investigate a larger issue and develop theory . The position of any group of participants in the process is affected by the cultural and physical environment , their previous knowledge , skills , and comfort factors , such as emotional stability and stress [ 11 ] . Discussion of the Roles for Children Druin’s framework of children’s roles has had a large impact on the involvement of children in the design process . However , many researchers have felt that the three remaining roles ( tester , informant , or design partner ) do not cover all different ways children can be involved in the design process of new technologies . In a recent overview of methods and techniques for involving children in the design process , Fails , Guha and Druin [ 4 ] acknowledged that “ new types of design have emerged which do not fit neatly into the schema above [ the four roles ] ” . Here we will discuss the roles in more detail , focusing on alternative roles proposed in the literature , as well as different instantiations of the roles , leading us to propose a more fine - grained classification of children’s involvement . Design Partner The design partner role is hard to live up to . Many researchers are unable to connect children to their lab for several years , allowing them to become equal stakeholders in the design process . Large et al . [ 6 ] questioned the nature of cooperation between children and adults design experts , and argued that there is no true equality in these intergenerational design teams . However , they do see an active role for children during the whole design process where they can be full team members . They thus proposed “Bonded Design” where they positioned the role of the children somewhere 579 between Informants and Design Partners . The problem of equality becomes especially prominent when involving children with special needs in the design . For example , according to a recent literature review focusing on papers describing the involvement of children with special needs in the design process [ 2 ] , only three of 88 papers explicitly mentioned that the children were involved as Design Partners , while in many cases children were actively involved in several phases of the design . Informant Of all roles , the informant role is the least clearly defined . Druin acknowledges that the informant role is very broad , and gives in her paper two examples of children as informants that are quite different from each other . The first example is from a project at the University of Michigan [ 10 ] , where children were observed when using web search engines and browsers , and where the researchers based on these observations developed software to support learning with digital information . The other example is where Scaife and Rogers [ 8 ] involved children in the redesign of an application , using sketching materials and artefacts , after the children had indicated that the present application was dull . What we see is that while both types of involvement can be categorized as informant design , the activities that the children performed were very different , especially in relation to how active they contributed to the design . By using the overarching term ‘Informant’ we miss the nuance needed to understand the kind of involvement in the design process . Interestingly , while the hierarchical structure of the framework would suggest that the design partner role entails the most intense involvement for children , not all researchers see it in this way . For example , Nissinen et al . [ 7 ] wrote the following about involving children with special needs in their project : " There was a little participation of children as design partners [ … ] , they could introduce enhancements to both usability and functionality of the technologies . The fourth role Druin introduces , the informant role [ . . ] was more challenging because the children in our study used very little technologies before the clubs . ” It thus seems that the informant role gives rise to confusion , which is likely to be related to the broadness of the definition ; it can either be translated to very limited participation or to very extensive participation . Tester While the tester role might be the easiest one to define , because it covers all kinds of activities to improve initial prototypes of products , it can also be done with more or less direct influence from the children . For example , in [ 12 ] children were observed and videoed when testing a prototype for a tangible game , and they filled out a questionnaire about their preferences , while in [ 1 ] children were observed , filled out a post - task questionnaire , and participated in an interview . As Frauenberger et al [ 5 ] has pointed out , children might even go from one role to the other because they behave differently in different kinds of activities : Using Druin’s basic categorization [ … ] , we saw children drifting in and out different roles during the design critique activity , being mere testers or informants when expressing preferences , but becoming full design partners when they contributed ideas and directly or indirectly provided the researchers a window into their life - worlds . ” 580 Suggestion for a Role Definition Matrix Based on the finding presented above that researchers have felt the need to define additional roles , use the roles in different ways , and feel that children might change roles during a project , we argue that there are actually two underlying dimensions when defining children’s participation : the phases of the design in which they are involved and the way in which they are involved during each phase . While Druin’s user and tester role mainly describe the phases of the design in which the children are involved , the design partner role assumes involvement in all phases , but adds a certain way in which children and designers work together . We therefore propose to use a matrix that uses those two dimensions : The phases in which the children are involved in the design ( roughly , Requirements , Design , and Evaluation ) and the activities in relation to adult designers ( Indirect , Feedback , Dialogue , Elaboration ) as described by Druin [ 3 ] . Using this matrix we can define children as design partners as participating in elaboration activities in all phases of the design . Children as informants can take many different forms in this table . The two examples of informants as described by Druin are presented in figure 2 and figure 3 respectively . These figures clearly show that there is a difference in how actively the children were involved in the design process . Children as testers are involved in the evaluation phase . However , the involvement in testing can take different forms . Children can be observed , but they can also give feedback , e . g . by filling out a questionnaire , participating in an interview or focus group to create a dialogue , or working together with the adults to propose further developments . Finally , users are not involved in any of these phases . Defining Participation of Children in General versus Specific Children When using this matrix , we have to consider whether children’s involve ment is defined from the perspective of the designer or from the perspective of the individual child . From a designer’s perspective , involving one group of children in the requirements phase , another group in the design phase , and yet another group of children in the evaluation phase , can be a way of including children throughout the design process . For example , in the paper by Sim et al . [ 9 ] a group of 50 children in the UK participated in the design of a game to promote hand washing for children in Uganda . Based on the drawings that those children created , a game was implemented and evaluated with 25 children in Uganda . If we use our matrix to describe the whole project , we would say that children were both involved in the design and evaluation phase . However , from the perspective of a specific child the involvement is rather limited , especially for the children in Uganda . When using this matrix to define children’s participation from the child’s perspective it is thus essential to indicate whether the same group or different groups of children were involved in each of the phases by using a notation that marks the group , e . g . G1 and G2 . Conclusions We have proposed a Role Definition Matrix to describe children’s involvement in the design based on Druin’s original definition of roles as well as a review of the literature . The proposed matrix has two dimensions : phases in design ( Requirements , Design and Evaluation ) and activity in relation to designer ( Indirect , Feedback , Dialogue , Elaboration ) . We propose this matrix as a first step and invite the IDC community to use , comment , critique , and improve it . Activity in relation to designer Design Phases R D E Elaboration Dialogue Feedback Indirect x Figure 2 : Example of children as informants being observed in the requirements phase Activity in relation to designer Design Phases R D E Elaboration x Dialogue Feedback x Indirect Figure 3 : Example of children as informants providing active feedback on prototypes and suggesting alternative designs 581 Acknowledgements Authors 1 , 3 , 4 and 5 gratefully acknowledge the grant from the Marcus and Amalia Wallenberg Foundation ( # MAW 2013 . 0063 ) . References 1 . David Bertolo , Robert Vivia , and Jérome Dinet , 2013 . A set of interactions to rotate solids in 3D geometry context . In Proceedings of the CHI ' 13 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( 2013 ) , ACM New York , USA , 625 - 630 . 2 . Peter Börjesson , Wolmet Barendregt , Eriksson Eva , and Olof Torgersson , 2015 . Designing Technology for and with Developmentally Diverse Children – A Systematic Literature Review . In Proceedings of the 14th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ' 15 ) ( Boston USA2015 ) , ACM Press , NY , USA . 3 . Allison Druin , 2002 . The role of children in the design of new technology . Behaviour & Information Technology 21 , 1 - 25 . 4 . Jerry Alan Fails , Mona Leigh Guha , and Allison Druin , 2013 . Methods and Techniques for Involving Children in the Design of New Technology for Children . Foundations and Trends® in Human – Computer Interaction 6 , 2 , 85 - 166 . 5 . Christopher Frauenberger , Judith Good , Alyssa Alcorn , and Helen Pain , 2013 . Conversing through and about technologies : Design critique as an opportunity to engage children with autism and broaden research ( er ) perspectives . International Journal of Child - Computer Interaction 1 , 2 , 38 - 49 . 6 . Andrew Large , Valerie Nesset , Jamshid Beheshti , and Leanne Bowler , 2006 . " Bonded design " : A novel approach to intergenerational information technology design . Library & Information Science Research 28 , 64 - 82 . 7 . Eila Nissinen , Pekka Korhonen , Virpi Vellonen , Eija Kärnä , and Markku Tukiainen , 2012 . Children with Special Needs as Evaluators of Technologies . In Proceedings of the EdMedia : World Conference on Educational Media and Technology ( Denver , Colorado2012 ) , Associattion for the Advancement of Computing in Education , 1365 - 1365 . 8 . Michael Scaife and Yvonne Rogers , 1999 . Kids as informants : Telling us what we didn’t know or confirming what we knew already . In The design of children ' s technology , A . DRUIN Ed . Morgan Kaufmann , San Francisco , CA , 29 - 50 . 9 . Gavin Sim , Janet C . Read , Peggy Gregory , and Diana Xu , 2015 . From England to Uganda : Children Designing and Evaluating Serious Games . Human – Computer Interaction 30 , 3 - 4 , 263 - 293 . DOI = http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 07370024 . 2014 . 984034 . 10 . Raven Wallace , Elliot Soloway , Joseph Krajcik , Nathan Bos , Joseph Hoffman , Heather Eccleston Hunter , Dan Kiskis , Elisabeth Klann , Greg Peters , David Richardson , and Ofer Ronen , 1998 . ARTEMIS : Learner - Centered Design of an information seeking environment for K - 12 education . In Proceedings of the Human Factors in Computing Systems : CHI 98 ( 1998 ) , ACM Press , 195 - 202 . DOI = http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 274644 . 274673 . 11 . Fenne Van Doorn , Mathieu Gielen , and Pieter Jan Stappers , 2014 . Children as coresearchers : more than just a roleplay . In Proceedings of the 2014 conference on Interaction design and children ( IDC ' 14 ) . ( 2014 ) , ACM , New York , NY , USA , 237 - 240 . 12 . Diana Xu , Janet C . Read , Emanuela Mazzone , and Martin Brown , 2007 . Designing and testing a tangible interface prototype . In Proceedings of the 6th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ' 07 ) ( 2007 ) , ACM New York , USA , 25 - 28 . DOI = http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1297277 . 1297282 . 582