APPUED THEORY SUMMARY • Provides the historical and methodological grounding for understanding participatory design as a methodology • Describes its research designs , methods , criteria , and limitations • Provides guidance for applying it to technical communication research The Methodology of Participatory Design CLAY SPINUZZI INTRODUCTION T echnical communicators have begun writing quite a bit about participatory design , sometimes with a fervor that rivals that with which we used to write about T - units or think - aloud protocols . The terms participatory design and user - centered design are being broadly applied in the philosophical and peda - gogical work of technical communication ( Blythe 2001 ; Henry 1998 ; Johnson 1998 ; Salvo 2001 ; Spinuzzi 2003 ) ; methods associated with those terms are being applied in technical communication research ( Mirel 1988 , 2003 ; Smart 2003 ; Smart and Whiting 2002 ; Smart , Whiting , and DeTienne 2002 ; Spinuzzi 2002a , 2002c , in press ; Wixon and Ramey 1996 ) ; and prototypes in particular are often pre - sented as a vital part of iterative usability ( see , for example , Barnum 2002 , Chapter 4 ; Smart and Whiting 2002 ) . But that breadth of application has often come at the price of imprecision . It ' s hard to find a good methodological expU - nation of participatory design . That lack of a strong methodological explanation is not just technical communication ' s problem , though . Participa - tory design is often discussed in human - computer interac - tion , computer - supported cooperative work , and related fields as a research orientation or even a field ( see Muller 2002 , p . 1 , 052 ) rather than a methodology . The distinction may be important in principle , but in practice , it has be - come an escape hatch that allows practitioners to label their work " participatory design " without being account - able to established , grounded prece ( dent . By looking at that established precedent , I argue , we can define participatory design as a methodology , even if it ' s a loose one . And I believe it ' s time we did : Without such a definition , we can ' t hold ourselves accountable to partic - ipatory design or build on a coherent body of knowledge . Consequently , we have trouble applying participatory de - sign rigorously to our technical communication projects , and we tend to think of participatory design as an approach to design rather than a rigorous research methodology . In this article , I discuss participatory design as a re - search methodology , characterizing it as a way to under - stand knowledge by doing , the traditional , tacit , and often invisible ( in the sense of Nardi and Engestrom 1999 ; Muller 1999 ) ways that people perform their everyday activities and how those activities might be shaped prociuctively . I first define and describe if ^ af participatory design research is . I describe participatory design research in terms of its paradigm , methodology , research design , and methods . With this definition and description as a framework , I next discuss why we should pursue participatory design studies . In this section , I discuss the benefits of knowledge by doing and provide evaluative criteria to use as guidelines for creating and assessing participatory ( design research . Finally , I explore the implications of understanding partic - ipatory design as a research methodology , and I discuss some practical applications . WHAT IS PARTICIPATORY DESIGN RESEARCH ? Participatory design is research . Although it has sometimes been seen as a design approach characterized by user involvement Qohnson 1998 ) , participatory design has its own highly articulated methodological orientation , meth - ods , and techniques , just as does participatory action re - search , the approach on which it is based ( Glesne 1998 ) . Implementations of participatory design do vary in their attention to rigor and validity ( Spinuzzi in press ) , but they all reflect a commitment to sustained , methodical investi - gation according to grounded methodological principles , as we ' ll see below . Participatory design is rather different from most re - search conducted by technical communicators , though it Manuscript received 11 August 2004 ; reviseci 24 November 2004 ; accepted 28 November 2004 . Volume 52 , Number 2 , May 2005 • TechnicalCOMAlNCATION 1 63 APPLIED RESEARCH The Methodology of Partioipatory Design Spinuzzi turns out to be a good match for the work we do . As the name implies , the approach is just as much about design — producing artifacts , systems , work organizations , and prac - tical or tacit knowledge—as it is about research . In this methodology , design is research . That is , although partici - patory design draws on various research methods ( such as ethnographic observations , interviews , analysis of artifacts , and sometimes protocol analysis ) , these methods are al - ways used to iteratively construct the emerging design , which itself simultaneously constitutes and elicits the re - search results as co - interpreted by the designer - researchers and the participants who will use the design . Like member checks in ethnographic research , partic - ipatory design ' s many methods ensure that participants ' interpretations are taken into account in the research . Un - like member checks , however , these methods are shot through the entire research project ; the goal is not just to empirically understand the activity , but also to simulta - neously envision , shape , and transcend it in ways the workers find to be positive . In participatory design , partic - ipants ' cointerpretation of the research is not just confirma - tory but an essential part of the process . Participatory design started in Scandinavia through a partnership between academics and trade unions . Since that time it has worked its way across the Atlantic , becom - ing an important approach for researchers interested in human - computer interaction , computer - supported cooper - ative work , and related fields . From there , it has begun to influence writing studies , particularly through technical communication as well as computers and composition ( for example , Sullivan and Porter 1997 ; Johnson 1998 ; see Spinuzzi 2002b for an overview ) . Participatory design has undergone many changes— for instance , later variations have moved away from the Marxist underpinnings of the earlier work—but its core has remained more or less constant . It attempts to examine the tacit , invisible aspects of human activity ; assumes that these aspects can be productively and ethically examined through design partnerships with participants , partnerships in which researcher - designers and participants coopera - tively design artifacts , workflow , and work environments ; and argues that this partnership must be conducted itera - tively so that researcher - designers and participants can develop and refine their understanding of the activity . The result of the research typically consists of designed artifacts , work arrangements , or work environments . As Pelle Ehn suggests , participatory design attempts to steer a course " between tradition and transcendence " ( 1989 , p . 28 ) —that is , between participants ' tacit knowl - edge and researchers ' more abstract , analytical knowledge . The developers of participatory design believed that polit - ically and ethically , the two types of knowledge must be bridged , with each being valued by all involved in the research . That ' s especially true in studies of workers , for which participatory design was initially designed , but also in studies of end users and students . History Participatory design originated in Scandinavia in the 1970s and 1980s . This early Scandinavian work was motivated by a Marxist commitment to democratically empowering workers and fostering democracy in the workplace . This avowedly political research aimed to form partnerships with labor unions that would allow workers to determine the shape and scope of new technologies introduced into the workplace . Up to that point , labor unions had little experience with computer technologies and had been forced to accept systems developed by management , sys - tems that represented a sharp break from workers ' tradi - tional ways of working ; exerted a greater and greater con - trol over increasingly fine details of their work ; and automated large swathes of the workflow , putting people out of work ( see Ehn , 1990 ; Zuboff , 1989 ) . Since they did not know how to design computer technologies themselves , workers were put into the posi - tion of accepting these disempowering technologies or simply rejecting them . Some Scandinavian researchers set out to develop a third way , an approach that provided a set of " language games " ( Ehn and Kyng 1991 , pp . 176 - 177 ) that would allow software developers and workers to col - laboratively develop and refine new technologies—allow - ing workers to retain control over their work . These researchers turned to action research , in which ethnographic methods are linked to positive change for the research participants ( see Glesne 1998 for an overview ) . Clement and van den Besselaar explain that Untike conventional research , which is directedprimar - ity at producing resutts of interest to those heyond the immediate research site , an essential goat of action research is to achieve practical or political improve - ments in the participants ' Hves ( e . g . , less routine work , greater autonomy , more effective tools ) . The researcher hecomes directly involved in the ongoing work and feeds results back to the participants . ( 1993 , p - 33 ) Action research involves alternating between practical work to support changes ( such as design activities ) on one hand , and systematic data collection and analysis on the other hand ( p . 33 ; see also Bertelsen 2000 ) . In early par - ticipatory design studies , workers tried to describe com - puter systems that could automate work while still valuing their craft skills and upholding their autonomy . But be - cause workers had no experience in systems design , they could not begin to speculate on how to build such a system . So in the UTOPIA project , researchers joined with 1 64 TechnicalCOMMtNCATION • Volume 52 , Number 2 , May 2005 APPUED RESEARCH spinuzzi The Methodology of Participatory Design a workers ' union to experiment with a range of research techniques , inclu ( Jing mockups and other low - fidelity pro - totypes , future workshops , and organizational toolkits ( B0dker and colleagues 1987 ) . Although the project failed to produce a working system , it did produce a design approach and a range of techniques for participatory de - sign work . Based on UTOPIA and other projects that came after it , the Scandinavians issued the " Scandinavian chal - lenge " : to develop and use design approaches that encour - age industrial democracy ( Bjerknes , Ehn , and Kyng 1987 ) . This call resulted in many approaches and techniques un - der the umbrella of participatory design , such as CARD , PICTIVE , cooperative interactive storyboard prototyping , and contextual design ( see Muller , Wildman , and White 1993 for an exhaustive taxonomy ) . Some of these , such as contextual design , have become complex enough to be categorized on their own and , arguably , differentiated enough that they are no longer participatory design in the strictest sense of the term ( see Spinuzzi 2002c ) . In the United States , because of relatively weak labor unions and a focus on functionality rather than workplace democracy ( see Spinuzzi in press ) , participatory design has tended to be implemented through nonintmsive methods : work - place microethnographies rather than walkthroughs and workshops ( Blomberg and colleagues 1993 ; Blomberg , Suchman , and Trigg 1997 ) , small - scale card - matching ex - ercises rather than large - scale organizational games ( Muller and Carr 1996 ) , and one - on - one prototyping sessions that focus on confirming developed ideas rather than group prototyping sessions that emphasize exploration ( Beyer and Holtzblatt 1998 ; Spinuzzi 2005 ) . But the basic method - ological principles of participatory design remained . What distinguishes participatory design from related approaches such as user - centered design is that the latter supposes only that the research and design work is done on behalf oi the users ; in participatory design , this work must be done with the users ( Iivari 2004 ) . Defining users ' knowiedge Participatory design ' s object of study is the tacit knowl - edge developed and used by those who work with tech - nologies . It ' s important to understand this focus because tacit knowledge , which is typically difficult to formalize and describe , has tended to be ignored by the theory of cognition that has tended to dominate human - computer interaction : information processing cognitive science ( Winograd and Flores 1986 ; Nardi 1996 ; Nardi and En - gestrom 1999 ) . In practice , this theory tends to lead to a rationalist approach to design , which generally assumes that there is one best way to perform any activity—an assumption it shares with Taylorism . This rationalist approach was some - thing to which early participatory designers reacted strongly . They were heavily influenced by Marxist critiques of Taylorism , such as Harry Braverman ' s argument that Taylorism seeks to effect managerial control through " the dictation to the worker of the precise manner in which work is to be performed ' ( 1974 , p . 90 , emphasis his ) . That is , rather than allowing workers to determine how to ac - complish their tasks—and develop their own tacit craft skills and knowledge not possessed by management—the Taylorist manager examines the work , then breaks it into discrete , formal tasks that can be optimized , regulated , and taught to new workers . All discretion and all decisions are taken away from the workers . Knowledge is made explicit , formalized , and regulated ; workers ' craft traditions are judged inferior . ( See Muller 1997 , 1999 for discussions of this tendency in U . S . corporations and a response from the perspective of participatory design . ) Participatory design opposes this notion of knowledge on both political and theoretical grounds . Politically , this notion of knowledge as wholly consisting of optimized tasks spells the death of workplace democracy : if it is accepted , workers cannot have a say in their own work because only trained researchers can determine the best way of performing that work . Theoretically , participatory design is founded on constructivism , a theory that explicitly resists the notion that knowledge can be completely for - malized and classified . ( For overviews of the constructivist argument in writing studies , see Mirel 1998 ; Spinuzzi 2003 ) . Knowledge is situated in a complex of artifacts , prac - tices , and interactions ; it is essentially interpretive , and therefore it cannot be decontextualized and broken into discrete tasks , nor totally described and optimized . In the constructivist view , participants ' knowledge is valorized rather than deprecated , and their perspectives therefore become invaluable when researching their activity and designing new ways to enact that activity . " Knowing and learning , " as Barbara Mirel says , " take place in a dynamic system of people , practices , artifacts , communities , and institutional practices " ( 1998 , p . 13 ) . When we think of knowledge , we often think of ex - plicit forms of knowledge : things that are written down , defined , categorized , systematized , or quantified . But to understand knowledge - making in participatory design , we have to understand that much knowledge tends to be tacit . Tacit knowledge is implicit rather than explicit , holistic rather than bounded and systematized ; it is what people know without being able to articulate . As Ehn argues , participatory design takes a Heideggerian approach to knowledge in which " the fundamental difference between involved , practical understanding and detached theoreti - cal reflection is stressed " ( 1989 , p . 28 ) . This pragmatic approach involves alternating between the two by discov - ering tacit knowledge , then critically reflecting on it . Since practical tacit knowledge was a main goal of early participatory design research , researchers adopted Volume 52 , Number 2 , May 2005 • TechuicalCONMUNCATION 1 65 APPUED RESEARCH The Methodology of Participatory Design Spinuzzi the tool perspective , the idea that " computer support is designed as a collection of tools for the skilled worker to use . The tool perspective takes the work process as its origin rather than data or information flow . This means : not detailed analysis , description , and formalization of qualifi - cations , but the development of professional education based on the skills of professionals ; not information flow analysis and systems description but specification of tools " ( Bodker and colleagues 1987 , p . 26l ) . The tool perspective allowed researchers to recognize and leverage the workers ' craft knowledge , allowing them to develop new tools that would support rather than dis - rupt that work : " a tool is developed as an extension of the accumulated knowledge of tools and materials within a domain " ( Bodker and colleagues 1987 , p . 26l ; see also Ehn 1989 , pp . 339 - 40 ) . In contrast to design approaches fa - vored by management that served Tayloristic goals ( deskill - ing , work intensification ) , the tool perspective involved building " computer - based tools by which the craftsman can still apply and develop original skills " ( p . 26l ; see Ehn 1989 , p . 34 ; Ehn and Kyng 1987 , pp . 34 - 38 ) . This tacit or craft knowledge is linked to metis : " Metis , or what is also called cunning intelligence , is the ability to act quickly , effectively , and prudently within ever - changing contexts " ( Johnson 1998 , p . 53 ) . These ever - changing contexts are what Mirel points to when she talks about complex tasks ( 1998 , 2004 ) . In participatory design , tacit knowledge is not only explored , it is in many cases made material , as we saw with the tool perspective that participatory designers adopted . Workers find unconven - tional ways to use the tools that have been supplied to them , learn how to construct their own ad hoc tools ( Spinuzzi 2003 ) , and—if they are allowed the time and freedom to do so—eventually stabilize new tools and the ways they interact with them . One goal of participatory design is to preserve tacit knowledge so that technologies can fit into the existing web of tacit knowledge , workflow , and work tools , rather than doing away with them . In contrast to rationalist stud - ies that assume workers ' tasks can be broken down into their components , formalized , and made more efficient , participatory design assumes that tacit knowledge cannot be completely formalized ; the task - and - efficiency orienta - tion typical in many user - centered design methods such as GOMS ( Card , Moran , and Newell 1983 ; Muller 1999 ) and usability testing ( Barnum 2002 ; Rubin 1994 ) can actually get in the way of the holistic activity . Certainly , some tacit knowledge can be made explicit and formalized , but attempts at explication of such tacit knowledge must always be incomplete . The knowledge is too layered and subtle to be fully articulated . That is why action - centered skill has always been learned through experi - ence ( on - the - job training , apprenticeships , sports prac - tice , and so forth ) . Actions work better than words when it comes to learning and communicating these skills . ( Zuboff 1988 , p . 188 ) So tacit knowledge often remains invisible , since it is not made systematic or quantifiable , it passes unnoticed and often undervalued . ( See Nardi and Engestrom 1999 for a collection of essays on this theme . ) In particular , low - level workers are often not valued by management because their skills are invisible : the complexity , difficulty , and intercon - nectedness of their work are not recognized . One example is Blomberg , Suchman , and Trigg ' s ( 1994 ) study in which document analysts ( temporary workers who coded legal documents ) were found to perform complex interpretive work . The attorneys who employed these workers did not recognize the work as being complex or interpretive , and consequently planned to outsource the work to lower paid workers in another country . Like others working in the participatory design tradition , Blomberg , Suchman , and Trigg attempted to demonstrate to management the tacit knowledge that workers brought to the activity , knowledge that had remained invisible up to that point , yet was vital to the continued success of the activity . Describing users ' knowledge Since users ' tacit knowledge is highly valued , participatory design focuses on exploring that tacit knowledge and tak - ing it into account when building new systems . This task is accomplished with a strong political or ethical orientation : users ' knowledge is described so that it can be used to design new tools and workflows that empower the users . ( What is meant by empowerment is sometimes different in the different strands of participatory design . ) In this sec - tion , I describe the paradigm that underpins participatory design , its methodology , research design , and methods . Paradigm Participatory design ' s paradigm is construc - tivist in Mirel ' s sense ( 1998 ) . That is , it sees knowledge - making as occurring through the interaction among peo - ple , practices , and artifacts—knowledge doesn ' t just reside in the head ; it ' s a condition of a certain context . One of the most distinct and influential notions of participatory design is that of the language game ( ^ hn 1989 , p . 17 ) : bridging the worlds of researcher - designers and users by finding a com - mon " language " or mode of interaction with which both parties feel comfortable . Methodology Participatory design ' s methodology is de - rived from participatory action research or , as Ehn calls it , " practice research " : " Practical interventionistic investiga - tions ( as opposed to gathering of data ) and parallel theo - 1 66 TechnicalCOIVMlNCATION • Volume 52 , Number 2 , May 2005 APPUED RESEARCH spinuzzi The Methodology of Participatory Design retical reflection ( as opposed to detached theoretical re - flections a posteriori ) " ( Ehn 1989 , p . 13 ) . As discussed above , this activist brand of research has an explicit political - ethical orientation : to empower workers to take control over their work . Unlike Donald Norman—who argues that the designer should be a dictator ( Grossman 2002 ) —participatory designers see themselves as facilita - tors who attempt to empower users in making their own decisions ( Clement 1994 ) . To achieve that goal , participatory design emphasizes co - research and co - design : researcher - designers must come to conclusions in conjunction with users . So partici - patory design involves redesigning workplaces and work organization as well as work tools . And it is iterative , allowing workers and researchers to critically examine the impacts of these incremental redesigns in progress . Research design Participatory design is still develop - ing and consequently its research design tends to be quite flexible . For instance , the early Scandinavian work tended to rely on union - sponsored workshops and games involving heavy direct interaction between de - signers and users , while later work in the U . S . has tended to supplement targeted interaction with less intrusive methods such as observation and artifact analysis . But three basic stages are present in almost all participatory design research : • Stage 1 : Initial exploration of work In this stage , designers meet the users and familiar - ize themselves with the ways in which the users work together . This exploration includes the tech - nologies used , but also includes workflow and work procedures , routines , teamwork , and other aspects of the work . • Stage 2 : Discovery processes In this stage , designers and users employ various techniques to understand and prioritize work organi - zation and envision the future workplace . This stage allows designers and users to clarify the users ' goals and values and to agree on the desired outcome of the project . This stage is often conducted on site or in a conference room , and usually involves several users . • Stage 3 : Prototyping In this stage , designers and users iteratively shape technological artifacts to fit into the workplace envi - sioned in Stage 2 . Prototyping can be conducted on site or in a lab ; involves one or more users ; and can be conducted on - the - job if the prototype is a work - ing prototype . The stages can be ( and usually should be ) iterated several times . Together , they provide an iterative co - exploration by designers and users . Methods Methods are grouped by stage . • Stage 1 : Initial exploration of work Since initial exploration tends to involve examining technology use on site . Stage 1 draws from ethno - graphic methods such as observations , interviews , walkthroughs and organizational visits , and examina - tions of artifacts . This stage is typically conducted on site , during the normal work day . In the earlier Scan - dinavian iterations , this initial exploration tended to be highly interactive and intrusive : the researchers generally aligned themselves with relatively powerful workers ' unions that believed in the projects and could insist on the sorts of disruptions caused by walkthroughs and organizational visits ( see B0dker , Gr0nbaek , and Kyng 1993 for an overview ) . In North America , unions were much weaker and workers were not in a position to force participation , nor were they terribly interested in such projects . So researchers turned to less intrusive ethnographic and ethnomethodological techniques such as observa - tions and interviews ( see Wall and Mosher 1994 for an overview ) . Although the methods draw from eth - nography , they are oriented toward design as well as description , so they tend to be focused and en - acted differently , with more interaction in mind ( see Beyer and Holtzblatt 1998 for one example , and Spinuzzi 2002c and in press for critiques ) . Much of that interaction takes place during the second stage , in discovery processes . • Stage 2 : Discovery processes Stage 2 is where researchers and users interact most heavily , and it also typically involves group interac - tions . Again , discovery processes tended to be more interactive and intrusive in the earlier Scandinavian iterations than in the later North American iterations , but in all implementations they are more interactive than traditional ethnographies . Because of participa - tory design ' s orientation toward design , the goal is to cooperatively make meaning out of the work rather than to simply describe it . Methods used dur - ing this stage include organizational games ( Bodker , Gronbaek , and Kyng 1993 , pp . 166 - 167 ) , role - play - ing games ( Iacucci , Kuutti and Ranta 2000 ) , organi - zational toolkits ( Tudor , Muller , and Dayton 1993 ; Ehn and Sjogren 1991 ; B0dker and colleagues 1987 ) , future workshops ( B0dker , Gr0nbaek , and Kyng 1993 , p . 164 ; Bertelsen 1996 ) , storyboarding ( Madsen and Aiken 1993 ) , and workflow models and inter - pretation sessions ( Beyer and Holtzblatt 1998 ) . • Stage 3 : Prototyping Finally , this stage involves a variety of techniques for iteratively shaping artifacts . These techniques include mockups ( Ehn 1989 ; Ehn and Kyng 1991 ; B0dker Volume 52 , Number 2 , May 2005 • TechnicalCOMMlNCATION 1 67 APPUED RESEARCH The Methodology of Participatory Design Spinuzzi and colleagues 1987 ) , paper prototyping ( Novick 2000 ) , cooperative prototyping ( B0dker and Gr0nbaek 1991 ; Gr0nbaek and Mogensen 1994 ) ; and PICTIVE ( Muller 1991b , 1993 ) , among many others . Finally , and just as importantly , results are dissemi - nated in forms that users can understand and share—a continuation of the " language games " that allow research - ers and users to collaborate , and a way to continue to support the empowerment and participation of users . The tone for this dissemination was set early on , in the UTOPIA project : results were discussed in everyday language in a union publication called Graffitti ( Ehn 1989 , pp . 350 - 352 ) . Another example is contextual design ' s practice of " walk - ing " through affinity diagrams and consolidated models with participants and of providing a room with diagrams and prototypes posted on the walls so that workers , man - agers , engineers , marketing people , and customers can see the state of the project in progress ( Beyer and Holtzblatt 1998 , chapter 10 ) . CRITICALLY EXAMINING PARTICIPATORY DESIGN STUDIES Despite its advantages , participatory design has some rather sharp limitations as well as some criteria for success that are not immediately obvious . Below , I review some of the limitations of participatory design and discuss criteria for evaluating participatory design studies . Limitations of participatory design Participatory design has strengths , but as with other re - search approaches , those strengths come with tradeoffs . Lunitations of methodology Since participatory de - sign aims to ground changes in traditional craft skills as a way of empowering workers , some argue that participatory design does not lend itself to radical change of the sort that sometimes must characterize new systems ( Beyer and Holtzblatt 1998 ) . In fact , participatory designers have been cautioned to think of their work as " evolution , not revolu - tion " ( Sumner and Stolze 1997 ) . This gradualist tendency can lead to tunnel vision , in which particular stakeholders are served while others are left to fend for themselves ( Bjerknes and Bratteteig 1995 ; Bodker 1996 ) . In response , some participatory designers have worked to bring in new accounts of stakeholders that can support more complex projects ( B0dker 1996 ; Muller 2003 ) . Another limitation is that some strains of participatory design—particularly later work that emphasizes functional empowerment over democratic empowerment , such as co - operative prototyping ( B0dker and Gr0nbaek 1991 ) —have a tendency to focus too narrowly on artifacts rather than overall workflow , presuming that fine - tuning the artifact will necessarily result in empowering changes to the over - all work activity ( Spinuzzi 2002c ) . Finally , as participatory design has migrated across socioeconomic borders , from Scandinavia to North America , researchers have had diffi - culty maintaining its methodological tenets , particularly its focus on democratic empowerment ( Muller 1991a ; Spinuzzi 2002b , in press ) . Iiinltations of method If more rigorous methods can be described as " measure twice , cut once , " participatory design methods can be described as " explore , approxi - mate , then refine . " This essentially dissimilar methodolog - ical orientation—related to action research ' s juggling act between the traditional researcher ' s role of collecting and analyzing data versus the activist ' s role of initiating and sustaining significant change at the research site—tends to alter how researcher - designers apply established methods . For instance , participatory design researchers often draw on ethnographic methods to develop knowledge about the participants ' work , tools , and craft traditions . But these researchers , who often come from backgrounds in systems design , human - computer interaction , or technical commu - nication , tend to apply these methods quite loosely in the eyes of trained ethnographers . Diana Forsythe , for instance , scathingly critiques these applications as " do - it - yourself ethnography " and complains that " superficial social research may confer the illusion of increased understanding when in fact no such understand - ing has been achieved . " She specifically takes to task a contextual design project " in which brief exercises in shad - owing , observation , and interviewing have been under - taken from a common sense stance without engaging the questions that define ethnography as anthropologists un - derstand it , " and warns that " such an exercise can result in a cognitive hall of mirrors . Without addressing basic issues such as the problem of perspective , researchers have no way of knowing whether they have really understood any - thing of their informants ' world view or have simply pro - jected and then ' discovered ' their own assumptions in the data " ( 1999 , p . 136 ; see also Cooper and colleagues 1995 ; Nyce and Lowgren , 1995 ) . Forsythe ' s critique is valid if the aim of research is to extract knowledge in the mode of traditional research , pulling the data into another domain where it can be abstracted , analyzed , and used apart from the site . But participatory design research , properly done , continually brings the analysis back to the domain and shares it with the participants , who cointerpret it , co - analyze it , and co - design responses to it . That is , the traditional methods are—at least in the best examples—re - networked or recon - figured to meet the design orientation . The " same " methods can be enacted differently and take rather different shapes as they are attached to different methodologies and paradigms . In this case , the resulting research and designs do give up traditional research rigor . 1 68 TechnicalCOMMlNCATION • Volume 52 , Number 2 , May 2005 APPLIED RESEARCH spinuzzi The Methodology of Participatory Design but they do so to gain reflexivity and agreement . ( In the earlier , highly politicized Scandinavian work , that agree - ment took the shape of political representation ; in later work , the focus shifted to ethical concerns in giving work - ers the tools needed to do their jobs , and agreement took the shape of consensus among representative users . ) This tradeoff resembles " rolling " member checks . For example , Muller ( 1999 ) describes using the partic - ipatory design technique CARD to study the work of tele - phone operators . CARD , he says , has less rigor and predic - tive power than more narrowly defined analytical techniques such as GOMS , but on the other hand it brings in benefits that are more important to participatory design - ers : . Its strengths lie in its ability to capture diverse informa - tion . . . , its openness to the disconfirmation of assump - tions . . . , and its extensibility in the face of new infor - mation . Underlying all of these attributes is CARD ' S enfranchisement of multiple stakeholders with differing disciplines , perspectives , and positions , ( p . 54 ; see also Bertelsen 2000 ) Rigor is difficult to achieve because researchers cede con - siderable control to their participants and share a " design language " with those participants which must by its nature be imprecise . On the other hand , the proof is in the pud - ding , so to speak—the design artifact both encapsulates the research results ( as the material trace left by the design efforts ) and elicits them ( both during design sessions and afterwards , as it is introduced into the environment to be used as a stable work artifact ) . Wall and Mosher demon - strate that the same design artifacts can be used as records of a field study ; tools for analysis ; communication tools for a language game in which researcher - designers and users participate ; and focal artifacts for co - design and co - development ( 1994 ) . Rigor becomes something different in participatory design research ; a desirable goal , but subor - dinated to users ' control and aims . Practical limitations In addition to the methodological and methodical critiques is the practical one : participatory design research takes an enormous amount of time , re - sources , and institutional commitment to pull off . That institutional commitment in particular can be hard to come by . From the standpoint of a profit - oriented business , par - ticipatory design seems to provide little structure and no deadlines ( Wood and Silver 1995 , pp . 322 - 323 ) . Research - ers find that they have to cede considerable control to workers , who must be committed to the process and can - not be coerced . For example , Bertelsen ( 1996 ) ruefully recounts how some of his participants simply failed to show up for a future workshop , compromising the design developed in the workshop . Finally , unlike ethnographic studies , participatory design studies typically require con - tinuous critical participation by workers . Later participatory design variants such as contextual design ( Beyer and Holtzblatt 1998 ) and customer partnering ( Hackos , Hammar , and Elser 1997 ) have compromised by sharply limiting users ' participation . Evaluating participatory design Participatory design is usually brought in at major turning points when work is to be automated and tools and work - flows are to be changed . Since participatory design projects by definition involve design as well as research , the object of the research tends to be expressed in a purpose state - ment rather than a research question . The purpose of this project . . . is to design a number of computer applications for [ an organization ] and to de - velop a long - term strategy for decentralizing develop - ment and maintenance . ( Bodker , Gronbaek and Kyng 1993 , p . 161 ) The overall object of the project has been to contribute to the development of skill - enhancing tools for graphic workers . ( Bodkerand colleagues 1987 , p . 254 ) The work - oriented design project was originally con - ceived to explore bringing together the worlds of corpo - rate research , product development , and specific work - sites . . . in an effort to design more useful new technologies . ( Blomberg , Suchman , and Trigg 1997 , p . 269 ) In concert with these types of research statements , participatory design has developed criteria that are also oriented toward development . Participatory design is still a relatively young approach , and at present it is more of a movement or research orientation than a coherent meth - odology , so it hasn ' t developed evaluative criteria to the same level that , say , experimental studies have . But we can draw nascent criteria from the methodological principles discussed earlier . They are often difficult to meet . As Blomberg and Henderson ( 1990 ) illustrate , it ' s easy to pro - duce a study that looks like participatory design but that fails at all three of the criteria listed here . Participatory design projects , despite their ceding of power and analysis to users , still must rigorously apply these criteria to have internal integrity . Criterion # 1 : Quality of life for workers Most par - ticipatory designers would point to this criterion as the most important one . Participatory design is meant to improve workers ' quality of life both in terms of demo - Volume 52 , Number 2 , May 2005 • TechnicalCOMMLNCATION 1 69 APPUED RESEARCH The Methodology of Participatory Design Spinuzzi cratic empowerment ( that is , workers ' control over their own work organization , tools , and processes ) and func - tional empowerment ( that is , workers ' ability to perform their given tasks with ease ; see Blomberg , Suchman , and Trigg 1997 ; Spinuzzi and colleagues 2003 ; Spinuzzi in press ) . In a participatory design study , workers critically reflect on their own practices , work organization , and tools . In the earlier Scandinavian iterations , this critical re - flection usually involved examining ways that workers could better control the terms of their work ; in later U . S . - based iterations , critical reflection turned to an examination of tacit knowledge to more effectively meet the goals of the work . Either way , this methodological principle translates into an exploration of tacit knowledge , invisible work , and unstated individual and organizational goals . To meet this criterion , participatory design studies strive for • Reflexivity and agreement between researchers and users . The two groups interact closely through interviews , focus groups , workshops , organizational games , prototyping sessions , and other techniques to continually reassess the activity under investigation and to synchronize their interpretations . • Codetermination of the project by researchers and users . Specific project criteria are codetermined by researchers and users during the project . This way , researchers do not take total ownership of the project ; users are also able to shape the project to reflect their values , goals , and ends . Criterion # 2 : Collaborative development Collabora - tive development is a key part of the effort to improve workers ' quality of life . As noted earlier , users ' work is often invisible and their knowledge is often tacit . Thus designers of information systems , educational Web sites , and documentation often assume that the work is simple , easily formalized , and ( sometimes ) easily automated . Col - laborative development allows researcher - designers to avoid that trap by inviting participants to be co - researchers and co - developers . Doing so allows researcher - designers to elicit and explore the tacit knowledge and invisible practices that might otherwise have been lost , and simul - taneously encourages workers to participate in their own empowerment . In terms of a study criterion , this methodological principle translates into a requirement for mechanisms to ensure that data collection and analysis be done in con - junction with participants . In ethnographical terms , partic - ipatory design uses member checks—but in participatory design , the member checks are continuous since the project is co - owned and co - enacted by the participants . To meet this criterion , participatory design studies strive for • Involvement The successful study will provide mechanisms for participation and produce verifiable changes based on them . Participatory design studies are not a " listening tour " in which researchers hear the concerns of users , then go away and design a solution ; they are participatory top to bottom and must include verifiable , regular avenues for group interaction and definite routines for ensuring that users ' concerns are methodically addressed in the resulting design . ^ Mechanisms for consensus / agreement and rep - resentation In most cases , not every user can be involved in a participatory design study . For in - stance , if a participatory ( design study involved rede - signing an interface used by 2000 workers , it ' s sim - ply not practical or manageable to involve every worker in workshops and prototyping sessions . In - stead , workers must be represented in the same way that politicians are elected to represent the interests and views of their constituencies . In the earlier Scandinavian iterations of participatory design , representatives were assigned to projects by their unions , making them explicitly political represen - tatives . In North America , however , unions hold consid - erably less power and no other ready - made mechanisms for political representation of workers exist ; rather , workers are typically selected by management and are seen as functionally representative ( that is , " average users " ) . In any case , users must be given the opportunity to be broadly represented in the study , and the repre - sentatives should have a way to settle disagreements or come to consensus . Common language games such as contextual design ' s work diagrams and PICITVE ' s pictures . To collaboratively develop solutions , users should be able to interact with researchers in a neutral " language " understood by both sides . It ' s not enough to offer such a language game ; re - searchers must also confirm that users are comfortable with the language game , able to understand it , and able to use it both to critique solutions and to express their own solu - tions . Common aims codetermined by researchers and users in advance . Near the beginning of the project , researchers and users should be able to settle on a list of common aims that represent the users ' interests . That list must be flexible , as users will continue to critically evaluate their own aims . Criterion # 3 . Iterative process But to enact collabo - rative development , researcher - designers and participants must follow an iterative process . Tacit knowledge and invisible practices are by their nature difficult to tease out . 1 70 TechnicalCONMLNCATION • Volume 52 . Number 2 . May 2005 APPLIED RESEARCH spinuzzi The Methodology of Participatory Design A crude caricature of participatory design might involve gathering workers ' comments on current practice and their responses to a prototype , but without sustained , iterative reflection on and use of a designed artifact , workers may not be able to comment critically or respond effectively ( see Hackos , Hammar , and Elser 1997 ) . Each change in a prototype tends to unearth other invisible work practices and other tacit knowledge . In terms of a criterion for a study , this methodological principle translates into a requirement for a series of op - portunities to sustain the continuous member check . To meet this criterion , participatory design studies strive for Continual participation Users should be involved re - peatedly or continually and offered mechanisms for co - design at multiple stages . Revisiting stages Rarely is one sweep through the stages enough because the stages are designed to inspire critical reflection on the work and turn up tacit knowledge . So a successful participatory design project should be flex - ible enough to revisit stages repeatedly and cyclically . Sustained reflection Finally , the continuous member check must go beyond simply reacting to the function - ality of designs—a danger especially in the later stages of a project , when functioning prototypes take on the ap - pearance of completeness and participants ' attention of - ten turns to minor details . At all points , participants should be encouraged and given avenues to critically reflect on the implication of the research results for their own work . CONCLUSION Although participatory design is often portrayed as a re - search orientation or a field , understanding it as a method - ology leads us to better understand its promises and con - straints , its limitations and its criteria—and , I think , also leads us to greater respect for the careful work that goes into developing a participatory design study . That ' s espe - cially important for technical communicators . We are , after all , in a design - oriented field ( Kaufer and Butler 1993 ) and we have drawn heavily on design - oriented research meth - odologies , methods , and techniques such as usability testing . If we understand participatory design as an orienta - tion , we are tempted to articulate a few general princi - ples and retrofit our existing techniques to accommodate them . But if we understand it as a methodology , we are able to draw on a coherent body of methods and tech - niques operating within a general research design under common methodological premises . That is , we are able to conduct studies that have a great deal in common with other studies ; we are able to draw from and contribute to a coherent , common body of knowledge . Our work becomes relevant to others working in human - computer interaction , computer - supported cooperative work , and similar fields . TC REFERENCES Barnum , C . M . 2002 . Usability testing and research . New York , NY : Longman . Bertelsen , O . W . 1996 . The festival checklist : Design as the transformation of artifacts . In PDC ' 96 Proceedings of the Participatory Design Conference , pp . 93 - 101 . Palo Alto , CA : Computer Professionals for Social Responsibility . - . 2000 . Design artifacts : Toward a design - oriented epistemology . Scandinavian journal of information systems 12 : 15 - 27 . Beyer , H . , and K . Holtzblatt . 1998 . Contextual design : Defining customer - centered systems . San Francisco : Morgan Kaufmann Publishers , Inc . Bjerknes , G . 1992 . Shared responsibility : A field of tension . In Software development and reality construction , ed . C . Floyd , H . Zullighoven , R . Budde , and R . Keil - Slawik . New York , NY : Springer - Verlag , pp . 295 - 301 . and T . Bratteteig . 1995 . User participation and democracy : A discussion of Scandinavian research on system development . Scandinavian journal of information systems 7 : 73 - 98 . Bjerknes , G . , P . Ehn , and M . Kyng , eds . 1987 . Computers and democracy ^ A Scandinavian challenge . Aldershot , UK : Avebury . Blomberg , J . , J . Giacomi , A . Mosher , and P . Swenton - Wall . 1993 . Ethnographic field methods and their relation to design . In Participatory design : Principles and practices , ed . D . Schuler and A . Namioka . Hillsdale , NJ : Lawrence Eribaum Associates , pp . 123 - 156 . Blomberg , J . and A . Henderson . 1990 . Reflections on participatory design : Lessons from the trillium experience . In CHI ' 90 Human Factors in Computing Systems . Seattle , Washington : ACM , pp . 353 - 359 . Blomberg , J . , L . Suchman , and R . Trigg . 1994 . Reflections on a work - oriented design project . In Participatory Design Conference ( PDC ' 94 ) , ed . R . Trigg , S . I . Anderson , and E . Dykstra - Erickson . Palo Alto , CA : Computer Professionals for Social Responsibility , pp . 99 - 109 . Volume 32 , Number 2 , May 2005 • TechnicalCCMMlNCATION 1 71 APPUED RESEARCH The Methodology of Participatory Design Spinuzzi Blomberg , J . , L . Suchman , and R . Trigg . 1997 . Back to work : Renewing oid agendas for cooperative design . In Computers and design in context , ed . M . Kyng and L . Mathiassen . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press , pp . 267 - 288 . Bodker , S . 1996 . Creating conditions for participation : Conflicts and resources in systems development . Human - computer interaction 11 : 215 - 236 . Bodker , S . , P . Ehn , J . Kammersgaard , M . Kyng , and Y . Sundblad . 1987 . A Utopian experience : On design of powerful computer - based tools for skilled graphical workers . In Computers and democracy—A Scandinavian challenge , ed . G . Bjerknes , P . Ehn , and M . Kyng . Aldershot , England : UK , pp . 251 - 278 . Bodker , S . and K . Gronbaek . 1991a . Cooperative prototyping : Users and designers in mutual activity . International journal of man - machine studies 34 : 453 - 478 . . 1991 b . Design in action : From prototyping by demonstration to cooperative prototyping . In Design at work : Cooperative design of computer systems , ed . J . Greenbaum and M . Kyng . Hillsdale , NJ : Lawrence Eribaum Associates , pp . 197 - 218 . , and M . Kyng . 1993 . Cooperative design : Techniques and experiences from the Scandinavian scene . In Participatory design : Principles and practices , ed . D . Schuler and A . Namioka . Hillsdale , NJ : Lawrence Eribaum Associates , pp . 157 - 176 . Braverman , H . 1974 . Labor and monopoly capital . New York , NY : Monthly Review Press . Card , S . K . , T . P . Moran , and A . Newell . 1983 . The psychology of human - computer interaction . Hillsdale , NJ : Lawrence Eribaum Associates . Clement , A . 1994 . Computing at work : Empowering action by " low - level " users . Communications of the ACM 37 ( 1 ) : 52 - 63 . , and P . van den Besselaar . 1993 . A retrospective look at PD projects . Communications of the ACM 36 ( 4 ) : 29 - 37 . Cooper , G . , C . Hine , J . Rachel , and S . Woolgar . 1995 . Ethnography and human - computer interaction . In The social and interactional dimensions of human - computer interfaces , ed . P . J . Thomas . New York , NY : Cambridge University Press , pp . 11 - 36 . Ehn , P . 1989 . Work - oriented design of computer artifacts . Hillsdale , NJ : Lawrence Eribaum Associates . Ehn , P . , and M . Kyng . 1987 . The collective resource approach to systems design . In Computers and democracy - A Scandinavian challenge , ed . G . Bjerknes , P . Ehn , and M . Kyng . Brookfield , VT : Gower , pp . 17 - 58 . Ehn , P . , and M . Kyng . 1991 . Cardboard computers : Mocking - it - up or hands - on the future . In Design at work : Cooperative design of computer systems , ed . J . Greenbaum and M . Kyng . Hillsdale , NJ : Lawrence Eribaum Associates , pp . 169 - 196 . Ehn , P . and D . Sjogren ( 1991 ) . From system descriptions to scripts for action . In Design at work : Cooperative design of computer systems , ed . J . Greenbaum and M . Kyng . Hillsdale , NJ : Lawrence Eribaum Associates , pp . 241 - 268 . Forsythe , D . E . 1999 . " It ' s just a matter of common sense " : Ethnography as invisible work . Computer supported cooperative work 8 : 127 - 145 . Glesne , C . 1998 . Becoming qualitative researchers : An introduction , vol . 2 . New York , NY : Allyn and Bacon . Gronbaek , K . , and P . Mogensen . 1994 . Specific cooperative analysis and design of general hypermedia development . In Participatory Design Conference ( PDC ' 94 ) , ed . R . Trigg , S . I . Anderson , and E . Dykstra - Erickson . Palo Alto , CA : Computer Professionals for Social Responsibility , pp . 159 - 171 . Grossman , W . M . 2002 . Interview : Designed for life . New sc / enf / st 176 : 46 - 49 . Hackos , J . T . , M . Hammar , and A . Elser . 1997 . Customer partnering : Data gathering for complex on - line documentation . IEEE transactions on professional communication 40 : 102 - 110 . lacucci , G . , K . Kuutti , and M . Ranta . 2000 . On the move with a magic thing : Role playing in concept design of mobile services and devices . In DIS ' 00 . Brooklyn , NY : ACM , Inc . , pp . 193 - 202 . Iivari , N . 2004 . Enculturation of user involvement in software development organizations : An interpretive case study in the product development context . In Proceedings of the third Nordic conference on Human - computer interaction , pp . 287 - 296 . New York , NY : ACM Press . Johnson , R . R . 1998 . User - centered technology : A rhetorical theory for computers and other mundane artifacts . New York , NY : SUNY Press . 1 72 TechnicalCOMVHNGATION • Volume 52 , Number 2 , May 2005 APPUED RESEARCH spinuzzi The Methodoiogy of Participatory Design Kaufer , D . S . , and B . S . Butler . 1996 . Rhetoric and the arts of design . Mahwah , NJ : Lawrence Eribaum Associates . Madsen , K . H . and P . H . Aiken . 1993 . Experiences using cooperative interactive storyboard prototyping . Communications of the ACM 36 ( 4 ) : 57 - 66 . Mirel , B . 1998 . " Applied constructivism " for user documentation . Journal of business and technical communication 12 : 7 - 49 . . 2004 . Interaction desigr ) for complex problem solving : Developing usable and useful software . San Francisco , CA : Morgan Kauffman . Muller , M . J . 1991a No mechanization without representation : Who participates in participatory design of large software products ? In CHI ' 91 . New Orleans , LA : ACM , pp . 391 . Muller , M . J . 1991b . PICTIVE : An exploration in participatory design . In CHI ' 91 . New Crieans , LA : ACM , pp . 225 - 231 . Muller , M . J . 1993 . PICTIVE : Democratizing the dynamics of the design session . In Participatory design : Principles arid practices , ed . A . Namioka and D . Schuler . Hillsdale , NJ : Lawrence Eribaum Associates , pp . 211 - 237 . Muller , M . J . 1997 . Ethnocritical heuristics for reflecting on work with users and other interested parties . In Computers and design in context , ed . M . Kyng and L . Mathiassen . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press , pp . 349 - 380 . Muller , M . J . 1999 . Invisible work of telephone operators : An ethnocritical analysis . Computer supported cooperative work 8 : 31 - 61 . Muller , M . J . 2003 . Participatory design : the third space in HCI . In The human - computer interaction handbook : Fundamentals , evolving technologies and emerging applications . Hillsdale , NJ : Lawrence Eribaum Associates , Inc . , pp . 1051 - 1068 . Muller , M . J . , and R . Carr . 1996 . Using the card and pictive participatory design methods for collaborative analysis . In Field methods casebook for software design , ed . D . Wixon and J . Ramey . New York , NY : John Wiley and Sons , pp . 17 - 34 . Muller , M . J . , D . M . Wildman , and E . A . White . 1993 . Taxonomy of PD practices : A brief practicioner ' s guide . Communications of the ACM 36 ( 4 ) : 26 - 27 . Nardi , B . A . , ed . 1996 . Context and consciousness : Activity theory and human - computer interaction . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Nardi , B . A . and Y . Engestrom . 1999 . A web on the wind : The structure of invisible work . Computer supported cooperative work 8 : 1 - 8 . Novick , D . G . 2000 . Testing documentation with " low - tech " simulation . In SIGDCC 2000 . Cambridge , MA : ACM , pp . 55 - 68 . Nyce , J . M . and J . Lowgren . 1995 . Toward foundational analysis in human - computer interaction . In The social and interactional dimensions of human - computer interfaces , ed . P . J Thomas . New York , NY : Cambridge University Press , pp . 37 - 47 . Rubin , J . 1994 . Handbook of usability testing . New York , NY : John Wiley and Sons . Smart , K . L . and M . E . Whiting 2002 . Using customer data to drive documentation design decisions . Journal of business and technical communication 16 : 115 - 169 . Spinuzzi , C . 2002a . Documentation , participatory citizenship , and the Web : The potential of open systems . Proceedings of the 20th Annual International Conference on Computer Documentation . Chapel Hill , NC : ACM Press , pp . 194 - 199 . . 2002b . A Scandinavian challenge , a US response : Methodological assumptions in Scandinavian and US prototyping approaches . Proceedmgs of the 20th Annual International Conference on Computer Documentation . Chapel Hill , NC : ACM Press , pp . 208 - 215 . . 2002c . Toward integrating our research scope : A sociocultural field methodology . Journal of business and technical communication 16 : 3 - 32 . 2003 . Tracing genres through organizations : A sociocultural approach to information design . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . . In press . Lost in the translation : Shifting claims in the migration of a research technique . Technical communication quarterly 14 . , J . Bowie , I . Rogers , and X . Li . 2003 . Open systems and citizenship : Developing a departmental website as a civic forum . Computers and composition 20 : 168 - 193 . Sullivan , P . , and J . E . Porter . 1997 . Cpening spaces : Writing technologies arid critical research practices . New directions in computers and composition studies . Greenwich , CT : Ablex Pub . Corp . Volume 52 , Number 2 , May 2005 • TechnicalCOMMUNCATION 1 73 APPUED RESEARCH The Methodoiogy of Participatory Design Spinuzzi Sumner , T . , and M . Stolze . 1997 . Evolution , not revolution : Participatory design in the toolbelt era . In Computers and design in context , eds . M . Kyng and L . Mathiassen . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press , pp . 1 - 26 . Tudor , L . , M . Muller , and J . Dayton . 1993 . A C . A . R . D . game for participatory task analysis and redesign : Macroscopic complement to PICTIVE . In INTERCHI ' 93 . Amsterdam , Netherlands : ACM , Inc . Wall , P . and A . Mosher . 1994 . Representations of work : Bringing designers and users together . In PDC ' 94 : Proceedings of the Participatory Design Coriference , eds . R . Trigg , S . I . Anderson , and E . Dykstra - Erickson . Palo Alto , CA , pp . 87 - 98 . Zuboff , S . 1988 . In the age of the smart machine : The future of work and power . New York . NY : Basic Books . CLAY SPINUZZI is an an assistant professor of rhetoric at The University of Texas at Austin , where he directs the Com - puter Writing and Research Lab . His interests include research and design methodologies ; his book on the subject . Tracing genres through organizations , was published by MIT Press in 2003 - Contact : clay . spinuzzi @ mail . utexas . edu . 1 74 TechnicalCOMMUNCATION • Volume 52 , Number 2 , May 2005