This article was downloaded by : [ 131 . 94 . 16 . 10 ] On : 26 September 2015 , At : 21 : 16 Publisher : Institute for Operations Research and the Management Sciences ( INFORMS ) INFORMS is located in Maryland , USA Information Systems Research Publication details , including instructions for authors and subscription information : http : / / pubsonline . informs . org Facilitation , GSS , and Training as Sources of Process Restrictiveness and Guidance for Structured Group Decision Making : An Empirical Assessment Bradley C . Wheeler , Joseph S . Valacich , To cite this article : Bradley C . Wheeler , Joseph S . Valacich , ( 1996 ) Facilitation , GSS , and Training as Sources of Process Restrictiveness and Guidance for Structured Group Decision Making : An Empirical Assessment . Information Systems Research 7 ( 4 ) : 429 - 450 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1287 / isre . 7 . 4 . 429 Full terms and conditions of use : http : / / pubsonline . informs . org / page / terms - and - conditions This article may be used only for the purposes of research , teaching , and / or private study . Commercial use or systematic downloading ( by robots or other automatic processes ) is prohibited without explicit Publisher approval , unless otherwise noted . For more information , contact permissions @ informs . org . The Publisher does not warrant or guarantee the article’s accuracy , completeness , merchantability , fitness for a particular purpose , or non - infringement . Descriptions of , or references to , products or publications , or inclusion of an advertisement in this article , neither constitutes nor implies a guarantee , endorsement , or support of claims made of that product , publication , or service . © 1996 INFORMS Please scroll down for article—it is on subsequent pages INFORMS is the largest professional society in the world for professionals in the fields of operations research , management science , and analytics . For more information on INFORMS , its publications , membership , or meetings visit http : / / www . informs . org Facilitation , GSS , and Training as Sources of Process Restrictiveness and Guidance for Structured Group Decision Making : An Empirical Assessment Bradley C . Wheeler • Joseph S . Valacich Accounting and Information Systems Department , Graduate School of Business , Indiana University , Bloomington , Indiana 47405 bwheeler @ indiana . edu Department of Management Systems , College of Business and Economics , Washington State University , Pullman , Washington 99164 jsv @ maiLwsu . edu S tructured decision techniques have been a mainstay of prescriptive decision theory for de - cades . Group Support Systems ( GSSs ) automate many of the features found in decision techniques , yet groups often choose to ignore both the technique and the technology in favor of more familiar decision processes . This research empirically tests propositions and hypotheses for a specific instantiation of Adaptive Structuration Theory . A controlled laboratory experiment tests the ability of three appropriation mediators ( e . g . , facilitation , GSS configuration , and train - ing ) to directively affect group decision making through guidance and restrictiveness . The ex - periment used a hidden - profile task and structured decision technique which directed group members to reach a decision by identifying the problem , choosing criteria , and selecting a so - lution . The results supported the proposition that appropriation mediators can increase the faithful use of structured decision techniques and that faithful use can improve decision quality . ( Group Decision Support Systems ; Group Decision Making ; Facilitation ; Structuration Theory ; Restric - tiveness ) The processes and outcomes of group decision making have been the focus of decades of research . Since groups are the basis for much organizational decision making , organizations have a vested interest in promoting effective group decisions . Information systems researchers have joined this effort by developing technologies to assist with group decision making ( Wagner et al . 1993 ) . Specifically , Group Support Systems ( GSSs ) have been developed to enhance group communication and the structuring of de - cision processes ( DeSanctis and Gallupe 1987 , Dennis et al . 1988 ) . These systems largely enable and expand many of the decision - making approaches ( e . g . , parallel com - mimication , sequenced decision structure ) advanced by 1047 - 7047 / 96 / 0704 / 0429 $ 01 . 25 Copyright © 1996 , Institute for Operations Research and the Management Sciences group decision theorists prior to GSSs . Some evidence supports the efficacy of GSSs to improve decision pro - cesses and outcomes in specific contexts ( Dermis and Gal - lupe 1993 ) ; however , other research has reported varied support ( Pinsonneault and Kraemer 1988 , McLeod 1992 , Benbasat and Lim 1993 ) . This has prompted researchers to examine a host of contingency factors as possible mod - erators of GSS efficacy ( e . g . , Nunamaker et al . 1989 , Men - necke et al . 1992 ) . Much prior GSS research has adopted a contin - gency approach where certain GSS or situational factors are believed to mediate group decision out - comes . Other perspectives have focused on the INFORMATION SYSTEMS RESEARCH Vol . 7 , No . 4 , December 1996 429 D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 131 . 94 . 16 . 10 ] on 26 S e p t e m b e r 2015 , a t 21 : 16 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . WHEELER AND VALACICH Structured Group Decision Making : An Empirical Assessment process of how a system is used as the mediator of outcomes . Poole and DeSanctis ( 1990 ) have observed that " no matter what features are designed into a sys - tem [ GSS ] , users mediate technological effects , adapt - ing systems to their needs , resisting them , or refusing to use them at all " ( p . 177 ) . Thus , some GSS research - ers are looking beyond input - output based contin - gency theories to other process - oriented theoretical lenses aimed at better understanding the factors that mediate the manner in which groups use these sys - tems . In this research we use a controlled laboratory exper - iment to test propositions drawn from structuration the - ory . Specifically , we examine how facilitation , GSS con - figuration , and user training mediate the use of struc - tured group decision techniques ( heuristics ) and group decision outcomes . The increased role of teams and re - liance on group decision - making in modem organiza - tional life presents a significant dilemma . Various de - cision techniques and technologies purport to offer a means for improving the quality of group decision ac - tivities , yet the manner in which these techniques or systems are used is believed to mediate their impacts . How then can organizations bridge the gap between the availability of decision - aiding techniques and technolo - gies and helpful use of these to improve group decision outcomes ? Silver ( 1990 , 1991 ) addressed this issue for single - user DSSs through the forces of restrictiveness and guidance . We build on the work of Silver and others to define and empirically evaluate the idea of process re - strictiveness for GSSs . In the group decision - making con - text , we define the term process restrictiveness as the man - ner of limiting a group ' s interaction to the activities , se - quences , and philosophies specified by a heuristic . ^ Process restrictiveness offers a means for organizationally di - rected change in group decision making through the prescription of structures mandated by facilitation , a GSS , or user training . The article begins with a review of relevant group decision - making and technology lit - erature . We then set forth a theory with broad propo - sitions and specific testable hypotheses related to group decision quality . This is followed by the experimental ' Similar to Silver ' s ( 1990 ) defiiution , a heuristic describes the " subset of possible activities " to which the group ' s interaction will be restricted . design and procedures . The results and a discussion of their implications for future GSS research and practice conclude the article . Group Decision Making , Heuristics , and Technology Support It is widely believed that groups have the potential to make more effective decisions ^ than individuals . Groups often possess a greater variety of task - relevant knowledge , facts , and insight than individuals , and the pooling of these resources can lead to emergent knowl - edge or insight ( Maier and Colleagues 1957 , 1960 , 1969 ; see Bettenhausen 1991 for a review ) . Yet groups often fail to reach their potential ( Hall and Williams 1970 ) . For example , " process losses , " such as production blocking , mismatching group resources to task de - mands , and faulty information processing , have been advanced as impediments to effective group decision making ( Steiner 1972 ) . Similarly , communication - based reasons , such as failing to systematically distinguish be - tween fact and opinion or failing to engage in the vigi - lant use of decision criteria are also associated with in - . effective decisions ( Hirokawa and Pace 1983 , Hirokawa 1987 ) . Solution - oriented decision processes may be an - other impediment to effective group decisions . Field studies have demonstrated that groups often have a predisposition for solution - oriented decision behavior which can restrict innovation , limit the number of alter - natives considered , and perpetuate the use of question - able tactics ( Mintzberg et al . 1976 ; Nutt 1984 ; see also Poole and Roth 1988a , 1988b ; c . f . Weick and Meader 1993 ) . Numerous techniques or heuristics have been de - vised in an attempt to help groups avoid these presum - ably faulty processes ( Hackman and Kaplan 1974 , VanGundy 1988 ) . Heuristics provide rules to pattern a group ' s decision process by prescribing and proscribing how group members should communicate and se - ^ Many terms have been used to differentiate between desirable ( e . g . , high quality , good , correct ) and less desirable ( e . g . , low quality , poor , faulty , wrong ) decisions . Each of these evaluative terms may be more or less appropriate to a particular type of group task . For consistency , the term " effective " will be used to refer to a desirable group decision based on the most applicable evaluation criterion for a particular task . 430 INFORMATION SYSTEMS RESEARCH Vol . 7 , No . 4 , December 1996 D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 131 . 94 . 16 . 10 ] on 26 S e p t e m b e r 2015 , a t 21 : 16 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . WHEELER AND VALACICH Structured Group Decision Making : An Empirical Assessment quence their interactions towards some objective ( e . g . , concisely defining the decision problem ) . Heuristics consist of structures which describe a particular activity , specify a sequence of activities , or describe a philosophy for communication . An example of an activity is to write ideas anonymously on note cards or to rank order a list of ideas . Sequence mandates that a particular activity must precede some other activity ( e . g . , idea generation precedes idea evaluation ) . A heuristic ' s sequence often implies separation ( e . g . , idea generation activities and idea evaluation activities should not be happening si - multaneously lest neither activity reach its potential ) . A philosophical structure describes the general spirit or advice for patterning communication content , such as fostering an atmosphere of participation and tolerance . Each structure in a heuristic has been designed to over - come some believed deficiency in human information processing . Both the academic and popular press con - tain hundreds of heuristic prescriptions for improving group decision making ( Doyle and Straus 1976 , Van - Gundy 1988 ) . The procedural and philosophical guidance of heu - ristics has traditionally been delivered to groups via training or by a process facilitator . Training seeks to in - struct group members in how to implement a heuristic ' s structures and why these structures are useful . Training may take the form of formal seminars , written instruc - tions in books and pamphlets , or word of mouth among colleagues . Such training , however , only provides an awareness of the heuristic among the individual group members and in no way ensures that the heuristic ' s structures will be used by a group . Another method for delivering heuristics is through a third - party process facilitator ( or a group member who assumes this role ) . The presence of a process facil - itator helps to separate the process and content aspects of group decision making . A facilitator devotes his or her full mental resources to constructively aiding the group ' s decision process while the group members fo - cus on the content of the decision ( Maier and Maier 1957 , Hoffman and Maier 1959 , Hall and Williams 1970 ) . Since facilitation is an active intervention during the de - dsion process , it is viewed as a more potent delivery mecharusm than training ( Bostrom et al . 1993 ) . Other fa - cilitator activities can include assisting with between - member relational behaviors and conflict resSlution . Once heuristics are made available to groups , two questions naturally follow : ( 1 ) to what extent are the heuristics actually used , and ( 2 ) do groups that use these heuristics produce more effective decisions than groups that are left to their own devices ? Results to date neither conclusively support nor deny the relationship between the availability of heuristics , use of the heuris - tics , and group decision effectiveness . Most studies have supported the relationship between availability and effectiveness ( e . g . , Maier and Maier 1957 , Maier and Hoffman 1960 , Maier and Thurber 1969 , Hall and Wat - son 1970 , Hall and Williams 1970 , Hackman and Kaplan 1974 , Janis 1982 ) while others have not supported it ( Maier and Thurber 1969 , Hirokawa et al . 1988 ) . One caveat for interpreting this stream of research , however , results from the inconsistent methods used by various researchers to deliver and mandate a heuristic ' s struc - tures to a group . Few prior studies report reliable as - sessments regarding the degree to which group mem - bers really understood the objectives or structures of the heuristic , or more importantly , the degree to which the group actually engaged the heuristic ' s structiires rather than alternative decision processes . In much of this prior research , groups in one treatment were directed to use the heuristic with only minimal or no process restrictiveness ( i . e . , the groups were free to fully use , partially use , or ignore the heuristic ) during the decision process while others were left to choose their own de - cision procedures . In reviewing this research , Gouran ( 1982 ) observed that the benefits of heuristics can only be realized if a group adequately incorporates the " qualities of mind " represented by a heuristic . This view is supported by other research which documents that groups often abandon or only halfheartedly use heuristics ( Poole 1991 ) . Thus , a causal linkage between the availability of a heuristic and its use nor heuristic use and effective de - cision outcomes has not been clearly established . GSSs may be one way of improving the delivery and group of heuristics ( see DeSanctis and Gallupe 1987 , Dennis et al . 1988 , or Nunamaker et al . 1991 for exten - sive descriptions of these systems ) . Dennis and Gallupe ( 1993 ) report that some studies have found the struc - turing and facilitation aspects of GSSs to improve de - cision outcomes , though these findings have not been universal . Huber ( 1984 ) observed that the designers of INFORMATION SYSTEMS RESEARCH Vol . 7 , No . 4 , December 1996 431 D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 131 . 94 . 16 . 10 ] on 26 S e p t e m b e r 2015 , a t 21 : 16 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . WHEELER AND VALACICH Structured Group Decision Making : An Empirical Assessment GSSs seemed to approach their design task with a decision - aiding approach already in mind and implicitly created software tools which automated the activities found in manual heuristics . ^ GSS features ( re - ferred to as tools ) embodied in current systems can be used to parallel the heuristic structures of activities and sequence . Thus , heuristic structures represent a set of rules ( i . e . , an informed set of guidelines ) for using a GSS ' s tools in a group decision process . GSSs vary in the marmer in which group members gain access to the tools . Some systems ( e . g . , SAMM * ) are user driven , thus the users can control the sequence and selection of tools . In other systems ( e . g . , Group - Systems ^ ) a technical chauffeur—often in conjunction with a process facilitator—controls the sequence of ac - cess and selection of the tools . The number of tools and their level of malleability ( e . g . , anonymity switches , data transfer between tools ) to various group decision situations has increased in recent years . Skillful config - uration of the GSS tools and sequencing features offers a powerful way to deliver and impose the use of heu - ristic structures . In some cases , GSS implementation of heuristics has been much more effective than manual use of the same heuristic ( Valacich et al . 1994 ) . In summary , some evidence supports the notion that heuristics can help groups improve decision making . Training , facilitation , and various configurations of GSS have been the primary means of delivering and imple - menting heuristics . Guidance , Restrictiveness , and Appropriation Mediators Much GSS research to date has been conducted in the decision - making school tradition ( DeSanctis and Poole 1994 ) . This perspective espouses either hard - line de - terminism ( i . e . , a certain effect follows the introduc - tion of a technology ) or more often a moderate contingency - deterministic view ( i . e . , certain situa - ' GSSs can be cor \ figured to provide level 1 ( communication ) or level 2 ( decision modeling ) support ( DeSanctis and Gallupe 1987 ) . " Software - Aided Meeting Management ( SAMM ) , Uruversity of Min - nesota . ' GroupSystems is a registered trademark of Ventana , Inc . , Tucson , Arizona . tional factors interact with technology to mediate out - comes ; see also Orlikowski and Baroudi 1991 ) . The decision - making school sees heuristics , training , fa - cilitation , and technology as input factors that can be manipulated to engineer remedies for human defi - ciencies in communication and information process - ing . It treats the group interaction process as blackbox ( Sambamurthy and Poole 1992 ) . Results to date from research in this tradition have produced some solid conclusions ( e . g . , electronic brainstorming groups outperform manual groups ; Valacich et al . 1994 ) and numerous contradictions ( see Benbasat and Lim 1993 , Dennis and Gallupe 1993 ) . DeSanctis and Poole ( 1994 ) argue that theories from the contingency - deterministic view fail to recognize how groups may choose use the input factors in ways that differ from their intended use . Thus , marupulation of input factors alone cannot adequately account for variance in group outcome variables . DeSanctis and Pool further argue that the social - technical perspective , a different theoretical tradition , can simultaneously ac - count for the deterministic effects of GSSs on group out - comes while recognizing that the process of technology use is a key determinant of technology effects ( 1994 , p . 143 ) . They have proposed Adaptive Structuration The - ory ( AST ) which posits that advanced information tech - nologies , such as GSSs , are potential sources of social structures ( Poole and DeSanctis 1990 ) . Likewise , tasks , group norms , and heuristics are also potential sources of social structures . Groups may use these structures in a faithful ( i . e . , use is consistent with a structure ' s de - sign ) or an unfaithful manner ( i . e . , use is inconsistent with a structure ' s design ) . The effects of these structures on group decision making are mediated by social inter - action through which groups selectively choose and faithfully or unfaithfully use these structures ( AST re - fers to this as the appropriation process ) . A variety of fac - tors have been suggested as mediators of structure se - lection and use ( see DeSanctis and Poole 1994 , for an extensive explanation of AST ) . In the following subsections we draw on AST and the social - technical tradition to theorize how facilitation , GSS configuration , and training may act as appropriation mediators through the forces of guidance and restrictive - ness to influence specific procedural dimensions of the so - cial interaction process , and ultimately , decision outcomes 432 INFORMATION SYSTEMS RESEARCH Vol . 7 , No . 4 , December 1996 D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 131 . 94 . 16 . 10 ] on 26 S e p t e m b e r 2015 , a t 21 : 16 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . WHEELER AND VALACICH Structured Group Decision Making : An Empirical Assessment Figure 1 Process Restricted Adaptive Structuration Theory ( PRAST ) Proposition J Appropriation Mediators Facilitation GSS Configuration Training ^ 1 Guidance [ 1 Communication Modes | — ^ t ^ 1 Resfrictivenessl Proposition 2 Social Interaction • PfocedyralDimensions : Sequence ConienlCommunication Mode VigilanceSupport Structures •• Outcomes Quality ( Figure 1 ) . We refer to this theory as Process Restricted Adaptive Structuration Theory ( PRAST ) , which is a specific instantiation of AST . Our objective is to under - stand how these appropriation mediators may be able to selectively bias the social interaction process toward faithful use of heuristic structures . Each component of the theory is described below . We begin with the forces of guidance and restrictiveness since they are the ex - pression of efforts to directively influence the social in - teraction process , then we proceed to describe the other constructs of the theory . Process Guidance During a decision process groups intentionally and unintentionally make choices about their communi - cation procedures and sequence of the decision activ - ities . Silver ( 1991 ) defined decisional guidance for DSS as " how a decision support system enlightens or sways its users as they structure [ make procedural choices for ] . . . their decision processes " ( p . 107 ) . Similarly , Limayem ( 1992 ) extended this to the group decision arena as " the enrichment of decision models with cues that direct decision makers toward success - ful structuring and execution of model [ heuristic ] components " ( p . 6 ) . Guidance can take the form of forward guidance , which informs a group of what to do next during the normal progression of decision activ - ity , backward guidance to help a group go back and resolve unfinished business from a prior activity , or preventive guidance to prevent disruption breakpoints that impede a group ' s decision progress ( Limayem 1992 , Poole 1983 ) . The purpose of guidance then , is to lead a group through procedural obstacles in faith - fully using a heuristic ' s structures . Process Restrictiveness In contrast to guidance , process restrictiveness focuses on preventing both unfaithful uses of a heuristic ' s struc - tures and the choosing of alternate structures . The term restrictiveness has appeared with varied meanings in the IS literature . One view holds that restrictiveness is an attribute of the technology . In the context of a single - user DSS , Silver ( 1988 , 1990 ) argued that a system is highly restrictive if the number of system - supported processes is small relative to the number of possible pro - cesses . He defined restrictiveness as " the degree to which and the manner in which a decision support sys - tem limits its user ' s decision - making processes to a sub - set of all possible processes " ( 1990 , p . 53 ) . Sin \ ilarly , Nunamaker et al . ( 1991 ) describe the GroupSystems GSS as locally restrictive at the tool level . This perspec - tive views the degree of restrictiveness as innate to the technology and is valid to the extent that a system is ca - pable of impeding the use of other processes not sup - ported by the system . Silver later notes that actual re - strictiveness is a function of the interaction process be - tween the system and the user . Another view of restrictiveness is based on a partic - ular heuristic . DeSanctis et al . ( 1989 ; see also Poole and DeSanctis 1992 ) extended Silver ' s definition of restric - tiveness to the GSS arena . They defined restrictiveness as " the extent that the heuristic limits or channels the group ' s use of the resources inherent in the heuristic " ( p . 132 ) . Their definition assumes that restrictiveness is innate to the heuristic and that the heuristic has the ability to impede the use of other structures not pre - scribed in the heuristic . These authors also note that actual restrictiveness is more a characteristic of the manner in which the heuristic is used than a descrip - tion of the heuristic itself . They conducted an experi - ment which varied restrictiveness by instructing groups to " adhere to the activities , sequences , and phi - losophy of the heuristic " ( high restrictiveness ) or to " select and use any of the heuristic ' s features in any manner or sequence " ( low restrictiveness ) . They found increased decision consensus under the high re - strictiveness treatment using a highly structured heu - ristic which contained both a philosophy and a se - quenced set of decision activities . No actual measures of heuristic use were reported . They concluded that restrictiveness may only provide a meaningful INFORMATION SYSTEMS RESEARCH Vol . 7 , No . 4 , December 1996 433 D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 131 . 94 . 16 . 10 ] on 26 S e p t e m b e r 2015 , a t 21 : 16 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . WHEELER AND VALACICH Structured Group Decision Making : An Empirical Assessment advantage for group consensus when the complexity of the heuristic is overwhelming to a group . The complex nature of group interaction suggests that neither definition of restrictiveness is sufficiently comprehensive for group decision making . For exam - ple , by Silver ' s notion of restrictiveness a DSS could en - force the assumptions of a regression model by disal - lowing the user access to the regression calculations when the data show evidence of multicolinearity . While a user might be able to circumvent this restriction by downloading the data and doing the regression on an - other computer or even by hand , the system could re - strict access to the data . Either way , circumventing the system ' s restrictiveness is not easy because all interac - tions with the DSS occur via a computer - mediated com - munication mode ( e . g . , input and output devices ) . In the group context , however , information exchange be - tween group members is one of the primary reasons for group decisions ( DeSanctis and Gallupe 1987 ) and mul - tiple communication modes are available for these ex - changes . Both GSSs and heuristics lack the ability to re - strict the information exchange process in all commu - nication modes . Communication Modes The preserice of multiple communication modes com - plicates the application of DSS research to GSSs . In the GSS context , a group ' s decision activities in the form of information exchanges may occur via three modes : ver - bal , gestural , and computer - mediated . The efficacy of guidance or process restrictiveness in the group context is dependent upon its ability to discern and to affect a group ' s decision process through these three commu - nication modes . For example , consider a GSS - based meeting which had been designed to use the heuristic structures of specific activities in a specific sequence to - wards the goal of reaching group consensus . The de - signed activities might be a period of anonymous idea generation , followed by a verbal discussion to clarify and examine the assumptions of the ideas , and finally a cycle of anonymous voting and verbal discussion until consensus is reached . The sequence implies that evalu - ation is separated from generation and that an anony - mous vote follows the discussion . The GSS could im - pose the sequence structure by disallowing access to the anonymous voting tool until after the brainstorming ideas had been discussed . However , a group has the ability to effortlessly switch to the verbal communica - tion mode and take a verbal vote at any time—even during the idea generation activity . In doing so , the pre - sumed benefits of the heuristic have been undermined . Consequently , the divergent activity of brainstorming may have been truncated , thus yielding fewer ideas for consideration . The assumptions which underlie those ideas were not examined via discussion , and group peer pressure was in no way impeded from possibly rail - roading the vote . Therefore , for maximal effect , we sus - pect that guidance and restrictiveness must be able to act on a group ' s decision process in the same communi - cation mode used for a group ' s information exchanges . Procedural Dimensions The forces of guidance and process restrictiveness act on a group ' s decision process through their influence on six procedural dimensions . Procedural dimensions represent a subset of AST ' s social interaction process that is directly relevant to the use of heuristics . These dimensions are the sequence of the activities ( e . g . , choos - ing to generate ideas and then evaluate or engaging in concurrent generation and evaluation , etc . ) ; the pace of the communication activities ( i . e . , how much time is spent generating ideas or discussing a vote before tran - sitioning to another activity ) , which usually involves trade - offs in allocating a constrained quantity of time among activities ; the content of the communication mes - sages ( e . g . , faithful or unfaithful with current activity of the heuristic such as generating solution criteria , etc . ) ; the communication mode ( e . g . , verbal , gestural , or computer - mediated ) ; vigilance of engagement in the ac - tivity ( e . g . , degree of critical thinking in exploring as - sumptions , challenging assertions , proposing novel ideas , etc . ) ; and selection of process support structures ( e . g . , flip chart , GSS brainstorming tool , voting tool , etc . ( Nunamaker et al . 1991 ) . ) . In the absence of guidance or process restrictiveness , a group has complete discre - tion in making its own choices for each of these proce - dural dimensions . Through these choices groups may fully use , partially use , or ignore the social structures made available through a heuristic or GSS . We now turn to identifying the sources from which the forces of guid - ance and process restrictiveness act on the six proce - dural dimensions . 434 INFORMATION SYSTEMS RESEARCH Vol . 7 , No . 4 , December 1996 D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 131 . 94 . 16 . 10 ] on 26 S e p t e m b e r 2015 , a t 21 : 16 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . WHEELER AND VALACICH Structured Group Decision Making : An Empirical Assessment Appropriation Mediators We theorize that facilitation , the configuration of a GSS ( e . g . , level 1 or level 2 ) , and training may serve as ap - propriation mediators to guide and restrict groups as they make appropriation choices regarding the use of the se - quence and activity structures in heuristics and intrinsic to GSSs . Appropriation mediators attempt to system - atically reduce the appropriation choices available to a group along the six procedural dimensions . In relation to AST , they " tilt " or bias a group ' s choices and use of potential social structures towards those that represent faithful appropriation and away from those that would be unfaithful relative to the objectives a heuristic . Ap - propriation mediators are the means through which meeting designers can create guidance and process re - strictiveness . Each appropriation mediator differs in its ability to affect the six procedural dimensions through the forces of guidance and restrictiveness . A mediator is active when it can intervene to direct or limit a group ' s procedural choices in the same communication mode in which those choices are carried out . For example , facil - itation is an active mediator since a facilitator can mon - itor all three comnnunication modes and can act to pro - vide guidance or restrictiveness through verbal , computer - mediated , or even gestural communication . A mediator is passive when its guidance and / or restric - tiveness advice is available to a group , but it cannot effectively intervene or Umit the procedural choices due to its inability to act in the same communication mode in which those choices are carried out . GSSs and train - ing are both passive mediators , though there are im - portant differences between them . Through the use of decision modeling ( e . g . , sequenced agenda ) displayed on a screen , a level 2 GSS offers a visually persistent form of passive guidance and restrictiveness that is al - ways in front of a group . In contrast , training is a cog - nitive activity that is subject to the individual and col - lective recall of group members . Beyond formal instruc - tion in decision techniques , organizational norms and other successful or unsuccessful historical experiences may affect the extent to which training is recalled and applied by group members . While both sources are pas - sive in their ability to intervene in some communication modes , the uniform visual persistence among all group members of a level 2 GSS ' s guidance and restrictiveness argues that it would be a more influential mediator than training . In the following section we turn our attention to specific propositions for testing PRAST . Propositions and Hypotheses The following propositions and hypotheses assume the context of a group convened for the purpose of making a decision with access to a task - relevant heuristic and GSS . As depicted in Figure 1 , PRAST contends that appropri - ation mediators act through guidance and process restric - tiveness to signal groups with what to do next and to Umit groups ' options among the procedural dimensions . Each mediator can only guide and restrict the procedural di - mensions based on the extent to which it can discern and act in the same communication modes as the social inter - action process . The presence of any appropriation medi - ator is expected to bias the group ' s procedural choices in favor of faithful use of the heuristics ' structures . PROPOSITION 1 . The presence of an appropriation medi - ator { s ) will increase groups ' faithful use of a heuristic . Based on this general proposition from the model , we advance specific hypotheses for each appropriation me - diator . Facilitation . Facilitation can monitor and act through all three communication modes . A facilitator ' s verbal instructions can serve as an active form of both guidance and process restrictiveness should the group begin to make procedural choices that are inconsistent with a heuristic . For example , a facilitator can monitor the con - tent of both the verbal and computer - mediated com - munication modes for any messages which are incom - patible with the current activity ( e . g . , evaluation during idea generation , roll call voting rather anonymous vot - ing , etc . ) . A facilitator can also draw on his or her ex - pertise to interpret how a particular group action may or may not be consistent with the rules of a heuristic . We hypothesize : HIA . Facilitated groups will more closely follow a heu - ristic ' s structures { activities , sequences ) than will unfadli - tated groups . GSS Configuration . AST refers to a GSS ' s tools as its set of structural features . It also recognizes that these structural features have a spirit or " general intent " un - derlying their purpose . For example , the structural feature of anonymous voting is premised on the spirit that INFORMATION SYSTEMS RESEARCH Vol . 7 , No . 4 , December 1996 435 D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 131 . 94 . 16 . 10 ] on 26 S e p t e m b e r 2015 , a t 21 : 16 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . WHEELER AND VALACICH Structured Croup Decision Making : An Empirical Assessment anonymity can minimize sodal pressures that suppress effective information sharing . We theorize that the config - uration of a GSS ' s structural features can mediate the ap - propriation of a heuristic ' s activities and sequence struc - tures . For example , the structures in a level 1 GSS are con - figured to provide communication support , while in a level 2 GSS these same structures can be configured to provide dedsion modeling via a heuristic ( DeSanctis and Gallupe 1987 ) . In both a level 1 and a level 2 GSS an anon - ymous idea sharing tool can be made available to a group for conunimication , but a level 2 system could also display an on - screen agenda of GSS tools . This agenda could re - strict the sequence of activities and a group ' s ability to choose other process support structures ( e . g . , anonymous voting tabulation ) . A level 2 GSS , however , is capable of passive guidance and process restrictiveness only when groups choose to interact via the GSS ' s tools . For example , the pace of a group ' s interaction via a GSS can be guided by on - screen timers , but a GSS cannot restrict a group from continuing to interact in the verbal commimication mode when the timer expires—effectively making the GSS ' s attempted restrictiveness impotent . Thus , level 2 GSSs have the potential to act as an appropriation medi - ator on the activities and sequences in the computer - mediated mode ( Poole and DeSanctis 1992 ) , but they have no ability to affect the verbal or gestural commxmication modes . Since the availability of a GSS often results in par - tial or full use of it and a heuristic , we hypothesize : HlB . Groups using a level 2 GSS configuration will more closely follow a heuristic ' s structures ( activities , sequences ) than will groups using a level 1 GSS configuration . Training . AST also contends that the use of struc - tures will vary based on members ' degree of knowledge and experience in using the structures , degree to which members believe that other members know and accept the use of the structure , and the degree to which mem - bers agree on appropriation choices ( DeSanctis and Poole 1994 , p . 130 - 131 ) . Training in the faithful use of heuristics can be used to create knowledge and experi - ence in the use of a structures . A shared training expe - rience among group members can ensure that all mem - bers are aware that other members know how to use the heuristic . It can also provide a shared basis of common knowledge for agreement on appropriation choices . Ideally , training moves users from ignorance or simple awareness of a heuristic to an understanding a heuris - tic ' s structures . Training can only provide a passive form of guidance and process restrictiveness to a group through knowledge of a heuristic . It has no abihty to actively restrict the use of a heuristic ' s activities and se - quence structures during the actual decision process but enables the group members to self - impose process re - strictiveness ( i . e . , limit their own process choices to those prescribed by a heuristic ) . In the absence of train - ing , group members would lack common knowledge in applying the heuristic and would have less shared basis for agreement on appropriation choices . Assuming that individuals within groups will recall training and act on it in shaping their decisions among the procedural dimensions , we hypothesize : Hlc . Trained groups will more closely follow a heuris - tic ' s structures ( activities , sequences ) than will untrained groups . Multiple Mediators . Thus far , the hypotheses have only addressed the presence or absence of a particular appropriation mediator , but multiple appropriation me - diators could be used concurrently . For example , a trained group could use a level 2 GSS configuration or be facilitated . We believe the effects of two appropria - tion mediators will be additive , not in a linear way where 2 + 2 = 4 , but in a directional way such that combining sources will increase faithful use over only one mediator . However , all mediators are not created equal . We believe that an active mediator alone will al - ways be more effective than any single or combination of passive mediators . Likewise , an active mediator plus other active or passive mediators will be more effective any single or combination of passive mediators . This is expressed in the following pair of hypotheses for com - bining two and three mediators : HlD . Groups with an active mediator alone will more closely follow a heuristic ' s structures ( activities , sequences ) than will groups with one or more passive mediators . HlE . Groups with an active mediator and any other me - diator will more closely follow a heuristic ' s structures ( activ - ities , sequences ) than will groups with one or more passive mediators . The second proposition in the model tests the relevant influence of the first proposition . Assuming that groups 436 INFORMATION SYSTEMS RESEARCH Vol . 7 , No . 4 , December 1996 D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 131 . 94 . 16 . 10 ] on 26 S e p t e m b e r 2015 , a t 21 : 16 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . WHEELER AND VALACICH Structured Group Decision Making : An Empirical Assessment with appropriation mediators will more faithfully use a heuristic , then the real question of interest examines the relationship between actual use of a heuristic and de - cision quality . The previously reviewed literature doc - umented some of the common pitfalls or faulty pro - cesses associated with group decision - making . The pur - pose of heuristic ' s activities , sequences , and philosophy structures is to help groups avoid the common pitfalls . While no heuristic structure can provide a certain path to effective decisions , sufficient empirical evidence was reviewed to posit a relationship between the availability of a task - relevant heuristic and decision quality . Given an assessment of the degree to which the structures were faithfully appropriated , we expect a positive re - lationship between use and decision quality in Propo - sition 2 : PROPOSITION 2 . Faithful use of heuristics should improve decision quality . This proposition is tested in relation to both the faith - ful and unfaithful uses of a heuristic . H2A . Faithful use of a heuristic ' s structures will be pos - itively related to decision quality . H2B . Unfaithful use of a heuristic ' s structures will be negatively related to decision quality . In summary , this section has set forth propositions from a new theory , PRAST , drawn from the social - technical perspective of Adaptive Structuration Theory . Specific , testable hypotheses were also advanced . The next section outlines an experiment to assess the pre - dictive abilities of the theory . Research Design A controlled laboratory experiment employing a 2 X 2 X 2 full factorial design was conducted to test the hy - potheses . The three factors were the appropriation mediators—facilitation , GSS configuration , and train - ing . Each factor was operationalized at two levels , re - sulting in eight experimental treatments . Independent Variables Half of the groups were facilitated and the other half did not have a facilitator ( " unfacilitated " ) . Facilitated groups used a third - party process facilitator to enforce the structures of the heuristic . Since guidance and re - strictiveness were the topics of investigation , the facili - tator ' s actions were limited to these functions . He did not engage in adaptive facilitation to help groups over - come procedural or relational obstacles ( see Anson et al . 1995 , Bostrom et al . 1993 ) , nor were his comments rigidly scripted . Instead , he provided guidance though pointing the group back to the printed version of the heuristic and reading the directions for the activities as groups began each new activity ( see procedures section below ) . He was essentially a verbal version of the printed heuristic who also had the ability to actively recognize when the group ' s communication exchanges deviated from the heuristic . The facilitator provided re - strictiveness by interjecting verbal comments when the group tried to unfaithfully appropriate the heuristic , GSS , or choose an alternate social structure . The restric - tive comments were typically in the form of " remember , the purpose of this activity is to generate problem state - ments not solutions " or " step B of the heuristic requires you to discuss the list of ideas before voting on them . " The same facilitator was used for all groups to reduce variability from personality styles . The facilitator did not give guidance nor process restrictive comments re - garding the procedural dimensions of pace or vigilance . Similarly , half of the groups used a level 2 GSS con - figuration that displayed a sequenced agenda on each participant ' s screeri . The agenda items exactly matched the activities in the heuristic and were enabled in a se - quential manner as the group requested them , but only one item at a time . The other half of the groups used a level 1 GSS configuration and did not receive a meeting agenda on their screen . They were free to employ the GSS features in any manner they chose ( i . e . , they could use the GSS in faithful or unfaithful execution of the heuristic ) . Training was manipulated at two levels . All groups received the same introduction to the heuristic identi - fying its five goals and sequenced activities ( low train - ing ) . Additionally , half of the groups also received training in how and why to use the activities , sequences , and philosophy of the heuristic , and they practiced us - ing these structures on a training case ( high training ) . TaskThe task for all groups was the hidden - profile School of Business Policy Task ( SOB ) by Wheeler and Mennecke INFORMATION SYSTEMS RESEARCH Vol . 7 , No . 4 , December 1996 437 D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 131 . 94 . 16 . 10 ] on 26 S e p t e m b e r 2015 , a t 21 : 16 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . WHEELER AND VALACICH Structured Group Decision Making : An Empirical Assessment ( 1992 ) , which has five unique roles . Hidden - profile tasks distribute unique information among group members and are thought to more closely simulate many real - world settings in which task - relevant infor - mation is uniquely held by each group member . This type of task is called a hidden - profile task because " in - dividuals in the group cannot see that the collective pro - file of information favors an alternative that to each in - dividual appears to be inferior " ( Stasser 1992 , p . 56 ) . The task possesses two important characteristics which make it relatively unique among GSS research : First , the distribution of information facilitates manipulation of the logical group size * to more closely approximate the physical group size . This has been identified as a major difference between the fii \ dings of laboratory - and field - based GSS research ( Dennis et al . 1991 , Mennecke and Wheeler 1993 ) . Second , the task is conjunctive and therefore requires that all group members participate and share ideas for the group to identify and select a feasible solution . Free - riding by one or more partici - pants is likely to deprive the group of important infor - mation and perspectives . Heuristics and GSSs are es - pecially well - suited to supporting the requirements of conjunctive tasks . Additionally , as an ill - structured task , the SOB task does not explicitly state the problem for the group to solve ( as is common with many tasks used for laboratory experiments ) . In fact , there are multiple problems in the case , though there is supporting evi - dence for the dominant problem in each of the roles . Groups needed to determine the nature of the prob - lem ( s ) , appropriate decision criteria , and a solution from the information contained in the five roles . All groups received the same task instructions and objective which was to write a recommendation memo to address possible problems at the business school . ' The logical group size refers to the degree of overlap of task - relevant domair \ knowledge among group members . Nunamaker et al . ( 1989 ) note that " a physically large group from a common culture . . . may have a high degree of overlapping domain knowledge that results in the group being logically small . Conversely , a physically small multi - cultural group exhibits characteristics of a much larger group because its members have multiple and often conflicting perspectives , points of view , diverse knowledge domains , and opinions that make it logi - cally large " ( p . 147 ) . For a test of this see Valacich et al . 1994 . HeuristicThe heuristic was a five - step , multiple - activity group decision - making procedure that had been specifically tailored to the demands of the task through pilot testing . It incorporated the best literature - derived advice for how various heuristic structures help groups to over - come well - documented obstacles to effective decision - making . This included separation of divergent ( idea generation ) and convergent ( choice ) phases of group activity , a requirement to write out an agreed upon problem statement before working on solutions , and prioritizatidn of specific criteria . The hidden - profile na - ture of the task necessitated much information exchange and convergence for a group solution since each person started with only a limited view of the problem space . The heuristic is summarized in Figure 2 . While the task can be performed without acting on each requirement , pilot testing of the task and heuristic demonstrated that groups which did not first build consensus about the problem had greater difficulty in selecting a solution . The heuristic described the major goal for each step , described the activities to use in reaching that goal , and graphically depicted the divergent and convergent phases . Figure 2 Heuristic Goals and Specific Sequenced Activities Five Major Goals Sequenced Activities 1 ) Identify the real problenn 2 ) Identify many possible solutions 3 ) Identify and weight inn - portant constraints or opportunities 4 ) Reduce the list of po - tential solutions to : s5 5 ) Select the best solution Generate problem statements ( BW ) , discuss and clarify , reduce the list by voting ( Vote ) , choose the best problem state - ment ( Rank ) , write the problem statement Generate solutions ( BW ) , discuss and clarify Generate opportunities and constraints ( BW ) , discuss and clarify , reduce the list by voting ( Vote ) , assign relative weights ( Rate ) Review the list of possible solutions , reduce the list by voting ( Vote ) Compare the reduced list of possible solu - tions to the weighted opportunities and constraints ( Score ) Note : GSS Tool Abreviations : BW = Brainwriting , Vote = Voting , Rank = Ranking , Rate = Rating , Score = Multicriteria Scoring . 438 INFORMATION SYSTEMS RESEARCH Vol . 7 , No . 4 , December 1996 D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 131 . 94 . 16 . 10 ] on 26 S e p t e m b e r 2015 , a t 21 : 16 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . WHEELER AND VALACICH Structured Group Decision Making : An Empirical Assessment GSS Technology The GSS for the experiment , VisionQuest ^ " ^ from Col - laborative Technologies , was a commercially available software package . It was selected for its flexibility in manipulating the level 1 and level 2 configurations . The Brainwriting , Voting , Ranking , Rating , Scoring , and Noncomputer - based ( i . e . , an agenda item with direc - tions for a verbal activity such as discussion ) tools were used in this experiment . All groups were trained in how to use the GSS tools and practiced using them . During the sessions , a chauffeur or technical facilitator enabled and disabled the sequenced GSS tools for the level 2 configuration groups and achvated any tool which was requested by the level 1 configuration groups . Subjects The subjects were students enrolled in an introduc - tory business school computer course at a large state university in the United States . Participation in an ex - periment was one way to complete a course require - ment . Pilot testing of ten groups demonstrated that the students possessed sufficient domain knowledge , understanding , and motivation to perform the re - search task . Four hundred and eighty subjects participated in 96 five member , ad hoc groups . A group size of five was selected to match the number of roles in the SOB task and because groups of this size have been sufficiently large enough to benefit from the parallelism and process support in GSSs ( Nunamaker et al . 1991 ) . Each group participated only one time . Separate chi - square tests were conducted for academic standing , gender , age , and major to check for possible demographic differ - ences among the treatment groups . The results of these tests found no demographic differences between the treatments . Additional subject motivation included gift certificates to a favorite local restaurant for the groups that reached the best decisions . Procedures Subjects were recruited and randomly assigned to a group . These groups were randomly assigned to one of the eight treatments . The experimental procedures var - ied depending on the treatment to which a group was assigned . All instructions to the groups throughout the study followed a written script . The subjects reported to the behavioral lab at their appointed time and read a brief orientation to the experiment . The researcher an - swered any questions and then distributed the task . The five roles in the task were randomly assigned to the par - ticipants . The subjects had 10 minutes to individually read the task . All subjects received the handout intro - ducing the heuristic and read through it . Subjects who were in treatments with high training additionally worked through a training case using the heuristic with a flip chart ( no technology ) . Subjects who were in treat - ments with only introductory ( low ) training did not practice using the heuristic . The researcher answered any questions regarding how to use the heuristic . Following either the high or low heuristic training , the groups moved to an adjacent cluster of personal computers ( PCs ) . All groups received the a second ver - sion of the heuristic handout which added the name of a specific GSS tool beside each of the heuristic ' s activi - ties ( e . g . , generate ideas was linked to the Brainwriting tool ) . The GSS tool familiarization was designed to con - vey operational keystrokes and the function of the GSS tool ( i . e . , to rank order a list of ideas ) . Tool familiari - zation was careful not to replicate the sequences man - dated by the heuristic nor the agenda presentation of a level 2 system . The researcher paused for questions and answers after each tool . The subjects then reread the case . The researcher then directed each group member to introduce his or her role in the SOB task to the others and this information was recorded on a chalkboard . This process served to set the tone for the meeting and to remind the group of their varied perspectives on the case . The group was in - structed that they would have up to 55 minutes to use the heuristic to reach a group decision . The instructions to the group members stressed that their objective was to use the heuristic to reach a group recommendation and to write this recommendation on a reply memo . The groups began to solve the case and received guid - ance and process restrictiveness from the various sources associated with each treatment . The researcher served as the system chauffeur for all groups and an - swered questions related to using the GSS . He did not give any process advice nor guidance . After the group had completed its reply memo , the subjects were de - briefed , thanked for participating in the experiment , and dismissed . The entire experimental session usually lasted between 135 and 150 minutes . INFORMATION SYSTEMS RESEARCH Vol . 7 , No . 4 , December 1996 439 D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 131 . 94 . 16 . 10 ] on 26 S e p t e m b e r 2015 , a t 21 : 16 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . WHEELER AND VALACICH Structured Group Decision Making : An Empirical Assessment Dependent Variables Faithful and unfaithful appropriations of the heuristic ' s activity and sequence structures were assessed by transcribing and analyzing a large random sample of the GSS transcripts and the researcher ' s lab notes . The random sample for coding consisted of 50 % of the groups from each of the eight treatments ( 48 groups ) . The GSS transcripts listed the tools in sequence that were used by each group and the content of commu - nication entered into the GSS . The lab notes recorded the beginning and ending time for each GSS tool and general real - time observations regarding what the group was doing . The coding scheme constructed a map of the group ' s decision process that included each activ - ity in which the group engaged ( e . g . , voting , discussion , etc . ) , the sequence of activities , and the outcomes of GSS tool usage ( e . g . , number of ideas generated , tabulations of voting , ranking , etc . ) . These maps were compared to the activity and sequence structures prescribed by the heuristic to derive two measures of appropriation : faith - ful uses and unfaithful uses ( Table 1 ) . It should be noted that we used a narrower definition of faithful appro - priation than advanced by DeSanctis and Poole ( 1994 ) . Whereas they would see the choice of any voting tool to be faithful with the spirit of the heuristic or technology , here we view choices of tools that differ from the heu - ristic to be unfaithful . While various preference elicita - tion methods may yield similar outcomes , each type of method has certain advantages ( e . g . , point allocations express magnitude and allow ties where ranking does not ) that may be important to the goals of a particular heuristic . Decision quality was measured by scoring the groups ' solutions on the two decision quality indices of the SOB task . Two coders , who were blind to both the hypotheses and treatments of the experiment , indepen - dently read each group ' s solution memo and identified the actionable solutions ( i . e . , a policy suggestion or mandate that could be implemented irrespective of quality or feasibility ) . These solutions were matched to the 289 known solutions from the SOB Policy Task Man - ual . The coders met and reconciled any coding dis - agreements . Thirty - seven new solutions were added to the SOB task and were scored in the same manner as the original 289 ( see Wheeler and Mennecke 1992 for a description of the multi - criteria scoring procedures ) . 440 Table 1 Measures of Heuristic Appropriation iMoves Heuristic Unfaithfui Appropriation Structures Faithfui Appropriation iVIoves Moves Activities + Using a prescribed activity + Using a novei activity , + Omitting a specified activ - ity Sequence + Using the next prescribed + Using an activity other activity than the next prescribed activity = Faithfui Uses = Unfaithfui Uses Note : Novel activities counted activities that were not part of the heuristic ( e . g . , rani < ing the iist of solutions , or choosing to invoke a round - robin verbal idea generating activity ) , whereas omitted a specified activity counted the number of prescribed activities that were not used during a group ' s decision process . * • Each solution to the SOB task is scored on two indices . The first index assesses the degree to which a solution solves the multiple problems in the case on a scale of 0 to 100 . A second and separate index scores the extent to which a solution is feasible within the multiple con - straints of the case ( also on a 0 to 100 scale ) . The two indices were added to produce a single measure of qual - ity . Many groups ' solution memos contained multiple , actionable solutions in the form of compound sentences . The decision quality score represented the average when multiple solutions were listed ( range 1 - 6 , aver - age 2 . 1 ) . Manipulation Checks Since the physical presence or absence of a facilitator can be taken at face value , the manipulation concern becomes the consistency of behavior from the facilitator for all facilitated groups . The facilitator was given very specific instructions about how and when to interject process restrictive comments . A single facilitator was used for all groups and the researcher monitored the consistency of his comments to the groups . The manip - ulation for GSS configuration was also self - evident with the level 1 groups receiving no on - screen agenda ( al - most blank screen ) and free to engage any tool and the level 2 groups unable to alter the selection or sequence of tools from the on - screen agenda . Since the intent of training was to cognitively increase the subjects ' under - INFORMATION SYSTEMS RESEARCH Vol . 7 , No . 4 , December 1996 D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 131 . 94 . 16 . 10 ] on 26 S e p t e m b e r 2015 , a t 21 : 16 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . WHEELER AND VALACICH Structured Group Decision Making : An Empirical Assessment Standing of the heuristic , assessment of the manipula - tion was based on the subjects ' displayed behaviors in actually using the heuristic . Both trained and untrained groups were equally free to fully follow , abandon , or partially use the heuristic . Groups with high training did follow the heuristic more closely than groups with low training ( statistical tests are reported with Hlc be - low ) . Additionally , the baseline and training only con - ditions represented an opportunity to assess the effect of training on faithful and unfaithful appropriation without the influence of other appropriation mediators . T - tests confirmed that trained groups exhibited more faithful appropriation moves and fewer unfaithful moves than did untrained groups ( p = 0 . 034 , p = 0 . 005 , respectively ) . Thus , the manipulation is believed to have successfully created two different groups in rela - tion to their familiarity with and ability to use the heu - ristic . Results Descriptive statistics and hypotheses testing are re - ported below . Proposition 1 : Mediators Increase Faithful Use Proposition 1 and , its derivative hypotheses predicted that the presence of one or more appropriation mediator sources would increase faithful use of a heuristic ' s ac - tivities and sequences structures . As one would expect , there was a significant negative correlation between faithful and unfaithful uses . ^ Therefore , both appropri - ation moves variables were included in a three level , factorial design MANOVA . Table 2 presents the means and standard deviations for all dependent variables and Table 3 summarizes the significant MANOVA effects for the use of heuristics tests . There were two significant , two - way interactions . Fa - cilitation and GSS configuration interacted ( f ( 2 , 39 ) = 4 . 88 , p = 0 . 013 ) for both variables . Post - hoc compar - isons using Tukey ' s Honestly Significant Difference test revealed that groups with facilitation , a level 2 GSS , or ' Given n number of heuristic use appropriation moves during a par - ticular group ' s decision process , each use is either faithful or unfaithful . Thus , as the number of faithful moves increases the number of un - faithful moves decreases and vice - versa . Table 2 Means ( Std . Deviations ) for Dependent Measures Appropriation Mediators in Treatment Baseline ( none ) Training Only Facilitation Only Level 2 GSS Config . Only Facilitation + Training Facilitation + Level 2 GSS Training + Level 2 GSS All Three Mediators Faithful Moves 4 . 00 ( 2 . 53 ) 7 . 67 ( 2 . 66 ) 17 . 67 ( 6 . 50 ) 12 . 67 ( 9 . 00 ) 20 . 00 ( 2 . 53 ) 18 . 30 ( 7 . 42 ) 16 . 67 ( 6 . 77 ) 21 . 67 ( 1 . 97 ) Unfaithful Moves 19 . 67 ( 5 . 16 ) 11 . 17 ( 2 . 64 ) 2 . 50 ( 2 . 26 ) 9 . 17 ( 8 . 91 ) 1 . 83 ( 1 . 47 ) 2 . 33 ( 3 . 01 ) 4 . 00 ( 5 . 06 ) 0 . 33 ( 0 . 82 ) Decision Ouality 145 . 37 ( 9 . 52 ) 133 . 38 ( 19 . 49 ) 148 . 18 ( 11 . 93 ) 136 . 50 ( 20 . 63 ) 144 . 92 ( 22 . 62 ) 145 . 04 ( 21 . 07 ) 143 . 58 ( 13 . 95 ) 155 . 11 ( 23 . 32 ) both of these had significantly more faithful uses than unfacilitated groups with a level 1 GSS . Similarly , un - facilitated groups with a level 1 GSS had significantly more unfaithful uses than those groups with either or both mediators . Facilitation also interacted with train - ing ( F ( 2 , 39 ) = 5 . 605 , p = 0 . 007 ) , though only for the unfaithful measure . The Tukey test found that unfacil - itated and low training groups had significantly more unfaithful uses than those with facilitation , high train - ing , or both mediators . Additionally , groups with high training had significantly more unfaithful uses than those with both training and facilitation . There were multivariate main effects for facilitation ( f ( 2 , 39 ) = 25 . 871 , p = 0 . 000 ) , GSS configuration ( f ( 2 , 39 ) = 7 . 027 , p = 0 . 002 ) , and training ( F ( 2 , 39 ) = 5 . 523 , p = 0 . 008 ) . In each case , the presence of the mediator increased faithful uses of the heuristic ' s activities and sequence structures and reduced the number of unfaith - ful uses . These findings provide support for hypotheses Hla , Hlb , and Hlc . While the previous two - way interactions reported with the full factorial model lend some support for Hid , planned comparisons were used to test the hypotheses that mediator effects are additive subject to the recog - nition that active mediators are expected to be more ef - fective than passive mediators . The planned compari - sons contrasted the single active mediator treatment of facilitafion with both the single and dual passive me - diator treatments ( i . e . , level 2 GSS , training , or both ) and found significant effects for both faithful use ( f ( 40 ) = - 2 . 032 , p = 0 . 049 ) and unfaithhil use ( t ( 40 ) = 2 . 699 , p = 0 . 01 ) in the expected direction . These findings pro - vide support for Hid . INFORMATION SYSTEMS RESEARCH Vol . 7 , No . 4 , December 1996 441 D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 131 . 94 . 16 . 10 ] on 26 S e p t e m b e r 2015 , a t 21 : 16 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . WHEELER AND VALACICH Structured Group Decision Making : An Empirical Assessment , Table 3 MANOVA Significant Effects for Heuristic Use Type Main Effects 2 - Way Interactions Source Facilitator GSS Configuration Training Facilitator x GSS Configuration Facilitator x Training Variable Faithful Unfaithful Faithful Unfaithful Faithful Unfaithful Faithful Unfaithfui Unfaithful Univariate f ( 1 , 40 ) 32 , 527 52 , 79 9 , 677 14 , 413 4 , 301 10 , 287 5 , 688 9 , 872 4 , 67 Signif , 0 , 000 . 0 , 000 0 , 003 0 , 000 0 , 045 0 , 003 0 , 022 0 , 003 0 , 037 Hie was also tested with planned comparisons which contrasted the dual mediator treatments involving facilitation and one or more other mediators ( i . e . , facil - . itation and level 2 GSS , training , or all three ) with the single or dual passive mediator treatments ( i . e . , level 2 GSS , training , or both ) . There were significant effects for both faithful use ( f ( 40 ) = - 4 , 131 , p = 0 . 00 ) and unfaith - ful use ( f ( 40 ) = 4 . 497 , p = 0 . 00 ) in the expected direc - tion . Hie is also supported . Thus , the five supported hypotheses give substantial support for proposi - tion one . Proposition 2 : Use Improves Decision Quality Proposition 2 and its hypotheses expected that faithful use would be positively related to decision quality and that unfaithful use would be negatively related to de - cision quality . The hypotheses were tested by partition - ing the data into three groups based on the mean of the faithful use score plus or minus one standard deviation ( 14 . 8 ± 7 . 8 ) . A f - test of decision quality was conducted between the groups with the higher and lower faithful appropriation scores . The test supported the idea that groups with more faithful appropriation moves did in fact have higher decision quality ( f ( 22 ) = —2 . 46 , p = 0 . 022 ) . The same procedure was used to partition the unfaithful scores ( mean = 6 . 83 ± 7 . 4 ) into three groups . Again , a f - test of decision quality demonstrated that groups with more unfaithful appropriations had lower decision quality than those with fewer unfaithful ap - propriations ( f ( 22 ) = 2 , 2 , p = 0 . 038 ) . These results give statistical support for H2a , H2b , and Proposition 2 . Discussion This research conducted an experiment for the purpose of assessing the predictive ability of a new theory , PRAST , that was drawn from the social - technical theo - retical perspective . Specific hypotheses for the theory were advanced . A discussion of the experimental results for each proposition and the implications of these re - sults are presented below . This is followed by a reflec - tion on each type of appropriation mediator and the additive effects of multiple mediators . Proposition 1 : Mediators Increase Faithful Use The proposition that the presence of an appropriation mediator ( s ) should increase groups ' faithful use of heu - ristics is clearly supported . The main effects and two - way interactions demonstrate that appropriation me - diators effectively increase faithful use and reduce un - faithful use in relation to heuristic ' s activities and sequences . It is also clear that the three appropriation mediators vary in their efficacy to influence faithful ap - propriation . Facilitation had the largest effect of the three media - tors and it had significant interactions with the other two . This is particularly interesting given the relatively weak form of facilitation used in this experiment . The type of facilitation common in organizational settings involves an adaptive response to a group ' s emerging needs . Clawson et al . ( 1993 ) surveyed organizations and identified the three most important dimensions for fa - cilitation as planning the meeting ; listening to , clarify - ing , and integrating information ; and demonstrating 442 INFORMATION SYSTEMS RESEARCH Vol . 7 , No , 4 , December 1996 D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 131 . 94 . 16 . 10 ] on 26 S e p t e m b e r 2015 , a t 21 : 16 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . WHEELER AND VALACICH Structured Group Decision Making : An Empirical Assessment flexibility . In this experiment the subjects likely attrib - uted planning the meeting to the facilitator , but he clearly did r \ ot engage in Clawson ' s other two dimen - sions . Anson et al . ( 1995 ) doubted the effectiveness of scripted facilitatior \ as used in some prior research and argued that adaptive facilitation is necessary to reap fa - cilitation ' s benefits . In contrast , our research found that facilitation that is somev ^ ^ hat better thar \ a scripted ap - proach , but much less capable than an adaptive ap - proach , can be effective at increasing faithful use of a heuristic . As theorized in the model , a facilitator ' s ability to ac - tively monitor and act in all three communication modes is believed to be the best explanation for these results . The guidance provided by the facilitator was largely reading the heuristic instructions to the group at the beginning of each activity—the very same printed instructions that each group member had in front of him or her . Process restrictiveness was also provided through verbal interventions . Since group interaction involves collective procedural choices , most of a group ' s procedural dimension choices were deliberated via the verbal communication mode . Thus , with facili - tation there was a congruence between the mode of group procedural choice and the mode where the guid - ance and process restrictiveness were delivered . To a relatively lesser degree , both the GSS configu - ration and high training also improved faithful use . Both of these appropriation mediators operated in dif - ferent communication modes than the procedural delib - erations of the group . For example , the level 2 GSS pro - vided a passive form of guidance though on - screen ac - tivity instructions ( same as the printed heuristic ) as the first screen for each tool . Sequence was visible in the on - screen agenda which listed the previous , current ( in bold ) , and future activities . Like the printed heuristic itself , these were passive directions that operated in a different communication mode from a group ' s verbal discussions of procedural choices . Similarly , training also was entirely passive and had to be recalled from memory to influence a group ' s procedural choices . We believe it was the active nature of facilitation versus the passive nature of GSS configuration and training that accounted for the larger effect for facilitation . In fact , the researchers observed that the printed heuristic ( avail - able to all groups ) , the level 2 GSS , or high training often influenced the group ' s procedural choices only after a group member verbally read the instructions or specifl - cally recalled and then verbalized some aspect of the training . In sum , this evidence confirms that meeting designers can manipulate appropriation mediators to increase faithful use of heuristics . The effects of combin - ing multiple mediators are discussed below . Proposition 2 : Use Improves Decision Quality Heuristics have been designed to help groups overcome limitations in human information processing or to avoid communication processes which tend to impede infor - mation sharing and critical thinking . While a determin - istic relationship between heuristic use and decision ef - fectiveness would ignore too many other important group variables ( e . g . , task difficulty , group capabilities ) , the bulk of prior research does support a relationship— though not causality—between heuristic availability and decision quality . Through the use of appropriation mediators , we expected the current experiment to pro - vide new insight regarding the relationship between measured heuristic use and decision quality . Partition - ing the groups based on their degree of faithful or un - faithful appropriation demonstrated that greater faith - ful heuristic use did yield higher decision quality . Sim - ilarly , groups with frequent urifaithful appropriations of the heuristic had lower decision effectiveness . Thus , the proposition that faithful use of a heuristic improves decision quality is supported . Groups that used the ac - tivities and sequence structures of the heuristic made better decisions than those that did not . Likewise , groups that frequently deviated from the prescribed ac - tivities and sequences in the heuristic ( i . e . , unfaithful appropriation ) had lower quality decisions than groups with fewer deviations . Other Explanations A rival explanation for these results could be asserted from the contingency - deterministic theoretical perspec - tive . This perspective would argue that the presence of input factors , such as facilitation , GSS configuration , and training , would improve decision quality . Such a view assumes that presence of an input factor can be equated with use . Therefore , one would expect to find significant main and possibly interaction effects on de - cision quality between the input factors without respect to measured appropriation . To test this assertion , we INFORMATION SYSTEMS RESEARCH Vol . 7 , No . 4 , December 1996 443 D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 131 . 94 . 16 . 10 ] on 26 S e p t e m b e r 2015 , a t 21 : 16 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . WHEELER AND VALACtCH Structured Group Decision Making : An Empirical Assessment conducted a supplemental analysis that examined de - cision quality for all 96 groups in a three - level factorial ANOVA design . There were no significant effects at the 0 . 05 level . * Thus , in this experiment we find no support for the contingency - deterministic perspective that meet - ing inputs can , in and of themselves , be used to engineer quality group decisions ( i . e . , one important meeting outcome ) . Limitations Research design choices for this experiment may have also influenced these results . There are important dif - ferences between the current and prior research in terms of the task , heuristic , and context of using the heuristic . The hidden - profile task was created to induce some of the task complexity that is common in organizational settings and for which heuristics are advocated . Rather than beginning with a stated problem , as is common in many prior laboratory group tasks , there were multiple problems with a variety of confirming and refuting ev - idence presented in text and tables among the five unique roles . The task contained number of political and resource constraints ( known only to each particular role until that subject shared it with the group ) that bounded the feasible solutions to the problem . We also point out that the familiar context of the task for busi - ness school students allowed them to bring their own personal perspectives to bear on the group ' s delibera ^ tions . Like in real organizational settings , such perspec - tives could be noise to cloud the factual data available in the task . Thus , the task is both complex and communication - intensive , which may have made it es - pecially suitable to a structured heuristic . As listed in Figure 2 , the heuristic was design to pro - mote divergent periods of idea generation and infor - mation sharing and convergent periods toward consen - sus around five goals . This heuristic is more compre - hensive than many used in prior research ( i . e . , has more steps to address the problem diagnosis , criteria and so - lution development , and selection than other heuristics ; ' To ensure consistency with the coded subset of data used to test PI and P2 , the same statistical tests were conducted on the 48 - group ran - dom subsample used for testing the previous hypotheses . This test also found no statistical support for the contingency - deterministic expla - nation . DeSanctis et al . 1989 ) . This comprehensiveness required the subjects to use five different GSS tools with their work being passed between the tools . There were peri - ods of GSS use and periods of verbal interaction . Thus , the use of a variety of GSS tools and a mix of both elec - tronic and verbal communication periods differs from some prior GSS research . It is possible that the task , heu - ristic , and context of use combined to create a situation where faithful use of the heuristic and GSS structures were especially efficacious . Finally , the manipulation of appropriation mediators for the purpose of restrictive - ness and guidance differs from research that manipu - lated only the availability of a heuristic . Thus , these im - portant differences in research design should be consid - ered when interpreting these results and making comparisons to other research . While the controls and experimental procedures were designed to control for rival explanations , we cannot completely rule out the possibility that subject expertise with regard to the SOB task or other individual differ - ences were disproportionately represented in the statis - tically significant treatments . We did not assess subject skill level with this task prior to random assignment , thus it is possible that varying skills with the task con - centrated in some treatments and could be a rival ex - planation for the results . This concern is tempered by the fact that there were no demographic differences be - tween treatments regarding academic standing , age , gender or major . There are obvious limitations to generalizations from this research . This experiment employed ad hoc groups which were engaged in making a decision with no di - rect consequence to them . While the students appeared to understand the task and to actively participate , they are not typical of organizational decision makers . Fur - thermore , these students were novice users of this tech - nology and this particular heuristic . As recognized in AST , additional experience with structures will likely influence the skill with which they are appropriated during a group decision process . By strict interpreta - tion , the implications from this experiment should be limited to decisions made by technology - supported groups using some form of a heuristic . Our experience with many real , organizational groups , however , sug - gests that the lessons from these results are more appli - cable than strict interpretation would allow . 444 INFORMATION SYSTEMS RESEARCH Vol . 7 , No . 4 , December 1996 D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 131 . 94 . 16 . 10 ] on 26 S e p t e m b e r 2015 , a t 21 : 16 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . WHEELER AND VALACICH Structured Group Decision Making : An Empirical Assessment Appropriation Mediators PRAST theorized the relationship between appropria - tion mediators and procedural dimensions in terms of their ability to provide guidance or process restrictive - ness . In terms of improving faithful use , passive appro - priation mediators appear to meet the threshold for in - fluencing groups ' procedural choices . We believe the level 2 GSS , as a passive appropriation mediator , was effective in increasing faithful appropri - ation by providing procedural focus for a group ' s activi - ties conducted in the computer - mediated mode . It ef - fectively restricted the sequence of access to the tools for the computer - mediated mode , but was ineffectual in re - stricting the content of the activities and philosophy of the heuristic in either the verbal or computer - mediated mode . This may account for its effect on faithful use of the heuristic ' s structures ( Hlb ) and lack of a direct effect for decision quality ( as was tested in the supplementary analysis ) . Thus , as a passive appropriation mediator , GSS configuration contributed to improving faithful choices in the electronic communication mode that it could affect . Likewise , training also increased faithful use ( Hlc ) . Trained subjects practiced using the activities , se - quences , and philosophical structures of the heuristic with the goal of activating self - directed guidance and process restrictiveness . As with the other appropriation mediators , the intent was to bias a group ' s selection of appropriation moves to favor those consistent with the heuristic . The training approach used in this experiment appeared to create an awareness of a group ' s procedural choices for selecting the activities and sequences advo - cated by the heuristic . The supplemental analysis , how - ever , found no support for a direct effect between train - ing and better decisions . As the other passive appropri - ation mediator , training appeared to be less effective than the level 2 GSS configuration at improving faithful appropriation . It is also worthwhile to note that the faithful and un - faithful moves scores ( Table 2 ) for both passive medi - ators are in a middle range between the baseline and multiple mediator treatments . Thus , we speculate that these passive mediators alone may have left the group in a most undesirable middle ground . These groups were caught between sufficient restrictiveness and guidance to preclude their abandonment of the heuristic for alternate decision processes and insufficient restric - tiveness and guidance to adequately bias their appro - priation choices . In contrast to the passive appropriation mediators , facilitation was an active appropriation mediator that both increased faithful appropriation and reduced un - faithful appropriation . Facilitation was the only single source capable of restricfing the activities and sequences of the heuristic in a consistent manner across all com - munication modes and therefore had the greatest infiu - ence on the group ' s procedural dimension choices . The results from facilitation in this experiment confirm the conventional wisdom that facilitation improves group processes ( and ultimately outcomes ) , but quite surpris - ingly , runs counter to other empirical investigations of facilitation . Three prior empirical studies have em - ployed various forms of facilitation ( e . g . , scripted , adap - tive ) in GSS environments and all failed to find strong evidence that facilitation improved decision quality ( Dickson et al . 1993 , George et al . 1992 , Anson et al . 1995 ) . There are numerous differences between these experiments which preclude direct comparison , but we argue that facilitation ' s strong effect on the variables of faithful and unfaithful appropriation gives new insight as to how facilitation can actually influence group out - comes . We see two strong features of facilitation that likely explain its efficacy . The first is the facilitator ' s role to discern in real time the congruence of a group ' s proce - dural choices relafive to the prescribed structures in a heuristic . A facilitator can then apply his or her skills in deciding whether or not to interject a process restric - tiveness or guidance comment . Group members who are burdened with the content obligations of the dis - cussion have fewer mental resources available for con - tributing to a group ' s decision process . Furthermore , group members are usually less skilled at process facil - itation than a nongroup member who has been trained for the facilitation process . The second , again , is that both the facilitator ' s guidance or process restrictiveness comments and the group ' s procedural deliberations oc - curred in the same ( verbal ) communication mode . Multiple Appropriation Mediators As expected , the active mediator of facilitation alone or in combination with other mediators was more effective INFORMATION SYSTEMS RESEARCH Vol . 7 , No . 4 , December 1996 445 D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 131 . 94 . 16 . 10 ] on 26 S e p t e m b e r 2015 , a t 21 : 16 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . WHEELER AND VALACICH Structured Group Decision Making : An Empirical Assessment at promoting faithful use and reducing unfaithful use than any single or combination of passive mediators . We view this as confLrming evidence that all mediators are not created equal and that active mediators have greater ability to affect a group ' s decision process than do passive mediators . As depicted in Figure 1 , this points to the role of communication modes as a key is - sue in the relationship between appropriation media - tors and group ' s procedural dimension choices . While additivity among the mediators did increase faithful and decrease faithful appropriation moves , the supple - mentary analysis found no evidence that more input factors ( e . g . , facilitation and a level 2 GSS ) could im - prove decision quality . This is consistent with the de - cision quality findings of Anson et al . ( 1995 ) . Thus , when choosing among appropriation media - tors , one conclusion is clear : choose an active mediator whenever possible since it did the best for promoting faithful use . The costs of providing additional appro - priation mediators , however , must be carefully consid - ered relative to their marginal contributions . While not part of the formal hypothesis testing , it appears that the combination of two passive mediators ( high training and a level 2 GSS ) is the best second choice to an active mediator ( see Table 2 ) . Thus , if cost or implementation issues require the use of passive mediators then multi - ple sources are advantageous in promoting faithful use which was related to higher decision quality in this ex - periment . Social - technical Theories The evidence from this experiment sheds new light on the problem of contradictory findings in GSS research ( Dennis and Gallupe 1993 ) . Much of that research has been designed in the contingency - deterministic theo - retical tradition that attempted to engineer group out - comes by manipulating input factors . Our supplemen - tary analysis did not find any support for this perspec - tive . In contrast , PRAST draws on the social - techrucal theoretical perspective to recognize that groups make choices regarding their use of social structures ( e . g . , GSSs , heuristics ) and may choose to use them in a man - ner which differs from a structure ' s intended purpose . PRAST is a specific instantiation of DeSanctis and Poole ' s ( 1994 ) AST . It predicts how appropriation me - diators can be used to bias a group ' s interaction process toward faithful use of the social structures . The signifi - cant role of the faithful use variable supports Samba - murthy and Poole ' s ( 1992 ) assertion that contradictions in prior GSS research should be investigated by includ - ing mediating variables in process - level analyses ( p . 247 ) . While the evidence here supports the idea that ap - propriation mediators increase faithful use of heuristics and that faithful use improves decision quality , it also demonstrates that an absence of these effects is not a deterministic impediment to reaching quality decisions . The curious relationship between decision processes and decision quality is illustrated in the following ac - count of how one of the baseline groups conducted its decision process—recall that the baseline groups were free to fully use , partially use , or ignore the heuristic and GSS . The group requested the following sequence of GSS tools : Brainwriting , Voting , Brainwriting , Voting , Rating , and Rank - ing ( compare this to the heuristic in Figure 2 ) . The first Brain - writing transcript reveals that the subjects began the decision process by considering possible solutions . All 25 entries in the Brainwriting transcript were proposed solutions . The re - searcher ' s notes recorded that the group spent five minutes generating these solutions and then 10 minutes verbally dis - cussing them . They voted on each idea ( a binary yes or no vote ) and then spent 15 minutes discussing the vote . The notes com - mented that it was a " very vigilant discussion " with some members correcting assertions by other members . The group then spent about six rrunutes in a procedural discussion re - garding what to do next . They requested a second Brainwriting tool , but directed each person to verbally share their ideas while one person was designated as the group ' s scribe to enter these ideas in the second Brainwriting tool . Two solutions and the word " faculty " were entered . The group requested a second Voting tool , but did not use it . They requested a Rating tool , but canceled the request before the chauffeur activated it . The group finally used the RarOcing tool to rank the three entries from the second Brainwriting tool . They ranked , viewed , and discussed the results , and then ranked again . This group did not explicitly engage in problem def - inition , in criteria definition , or in comparing potential solutions to predetermined criteria as prescribed by the heuristic . The challenge to GSS researchers is in under - standing how this group ' s decision process ultimately yielded one of the best solutions in the list and placed the group among the top ten groups based on decision 446 INFORMATION SYSTEMS RESEARCH Vol . 7 , No . 4 , December 1996 D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 131 . 94 . 16 . 10 ] on 26 S e p t e m b e r 2015 , a t 21 : 16 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . WHEELER AND VALACICH Structured Group Decision Making : An Empirical Assessment quality . Clearly , this decision was not a product of fol - lowing the heuristic nor of faithfully using the GSS tools . In fact , the group ' s decision process was almost the antithesis of the activity and sequence structures ad - vocated by the heuristic and enabled by the GSS . Conclusion Implications for Research From the social - technical perspective of PRAST , the three appropriation mediators operated as anticipated and improved faithful appropriation of heuristics . In re - viewing prior research on heuristics and decision qual - ity , we questioned the relationship between heuristic availability , actual use , and decision quality . In this ex - periment , we demonstrated that appropriation media - tors can improve faithful use and that use can improve decision quality . We believe that while the appropria - tion mediators were effective in guiding groups down well structured decision paths for making decisions ( e . g . , agree on the problem , select criteria , choose a so - lution ) and restricting them away from known group pitfalls ( e . g . , solution - focus , ignoring decision criteria ) , the means of doing the heuristic right ( i . e . , activities and sequences ) may sometimes overwhelm the intended process improvements of doing the right things ( i . e . , vig - ilant information processing and critical thinking ; see Hirokawa and Rost 1992 , Gouran and Hirokawa 1983 for a discussion of vigilance in decision - making groups ) . Thus , future GSS research would likely benefit from a more holistic approach to the six procedural di - mensions rather than focusing solely on activities and sequences . Adaptive facilitation that addresses the substantive , procedural , and relational obstacles encountered by groups ( Hirokawa and Gouran 1989 ) would likely in - crease the strength of the facilitator effect ( see Anson et al . 1995 as one example ) . But providing skilled facili - tators can be expensive , impractical for ad - hoc meet - ings , and difficult for different time or different place meetings . Current GSSs provide efficient task and pro - cess support for the information exchange process ( Nunamaker et al . 1991 ) and provide valuable tools in the hands of skilled meeting designers . But the fact of modem organizational life is that many decision - oriented meetings are ad - hoc and will not have the lux - ury of skilled design . Therefore , GSS researchers should consider how GSSs can move beyond providing process support structures to process enabling cues to promote vig - ilance in information processing . One example would be embedding facilitation - like expertise into the system itself . At present , we are likely many years away from machine intelligence capable of reproducing and apply - ing the expertise of a skilled facilitator . The results from this experiment , however , point out that even a weak and relatively structured form of facilitation can have positive effects on both heuristic use and decision quality . Just as Connolly et al . ( 1990 ) argued for GSS design - ers to include an " electronic carper " to " inject a hostile comment or critical question whenever it detected some number of consecutive agreements " ( p . 701 ) , future GSSs with multimedia workstations might include au - dio messages that replicate the guidance and process restrictiveness comments from a facilitator . For exam - ple , switches in a GSS idea - generating tool might inform the GSS of the intended purpose for the activity such as generating statements of the problem or proposing ac - tionable solutions . The GSS could periodically make an - nouncements such as " remember to propose your ideas as statements of the problem " or " remember to link your solutions to the problem statement . " These mes - sages could be triggered via simple timers or more so - phisticated algorithms which respond to the pace of new ideas being entered or which recognize specific words as cues for certain comments . Another switch might turn off the audio and direct these comments to a textual window on each participant ' s screen , though the results of this experiment more strongly support the effects of active audio versus passive on - screen text . As specified in the model ( Figure 1 ) , we believe that the appropriation mediators work through the forces of guidance and process restrictiveness to inform and con - strain groups ' procedural choices . Future research could also include measurements of perceived guidance and perceived process restrictiveness to help discern how these forces shape groups ' procedural choices . Other sources of social structures in the AST model might also be identified and tested as possible appro - priation mediators of faithful use . Hidden - profile tasks are useful for simulating some real types of organizational decision - making INFORMATION SYSTEMS RESEARCH Vol . 7 , No . 4 , December 1996 447 D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 131 . 94 . 16 . 10 ] on 26 S e p t e m b e r 2015 , a t 21 : 16 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . WHEELER AND VALACICH Structured Group Decision Making : An Empirical Assessment meetings . Other types of tasks , for example where most information is commonly known to all group members , will likely have different communication requirements . Future research on other types of tasks may yield a different efficacy for each of the appro - priation mediators . Implications for Practice While the relationship between heuristics and decision quality is not deterministic , evidence from prior re - search attests to their ability to help groups avoid com - mon decision making pitfalls ( see Van Gundy 1988 for a review ) . When meeting designers plan a meeting , they can know that the use a level 2 GSS , training , or espe - cially facilitation can help the group faithfully use and minimize unfaithful use of a chosen heuristic . Meeting planners should plan for addressing the full range of procedural dimensions as they design a meeting . Meet - ing designers should be consciously aware of the mul - tiple communication modes in which groups exchange information and not limit their designs by primarily thinking about only one of the communication modes . Finally , meeting designers should also be aware of how prior group or organizational norms may be a powerful , though less visible , source of guidance and process re - strictiveness as groups make choices among the six pro - cedural dimensions . PRAST , with its focus on appropriation mediators , did predict directed improvement in decision quality through faithful use . Future investigations of the role of process restrictiveness and guidance may give new in - sights regarding how GSS can help to directively im - prove group decision making . Future research on tech - nology support for group decision making may also benefit from other process - oriented theoretical lenses such as vigilance ( Gouran 1982 ) or sensemaking ( Weick and Meader 1993 ) . If the goal is to directively improve the use of heuris - tics and their positive effect on decision quality , facilitation—even the weak form of facilitation used in this experiment—is without a challenger . We must con - tinue to refine our theories of technology - supported group decision - making as we further untangle how the forces of guidance and process restrictiveness , appro - priation mediators , heuristic structures , and communi - cation modes interact to impede and promote directed change in group decision - making activities . References Anson , R . , R . Bostrom , and B , Wynne , " An Experiment Assessing Group Support System and Facilitator Effects on Meeting Out - comes , " Management Sci . , 41 , 2 ( 1995 ) , 189 - 208 , Benbasat , I , and L , Lim , " The Effects of Group , Task , Context , and Technology Variables on the Usefulness of Group Support Sys - tems : A Meta - analysis of Experimental Studies , " Small Group Res . , 24 , 4 ( 1993 ) , 430 - 462 , Bettenhausen , K , L , , " Five Years of Groups Research : What We Have Learned and What Needs To Be Addressed , " / , Management , 17 ( 1991 ) , 345 - 381 , Bostrom , R , P , , R , Anson , and V , K , Clawson , " Group Facilitation and Group Support Systems , " in L , Jessup and J , Valacich ( Eds , ) , Group Support Systems : New Perspectives , Macmillan , New York , Clawson , V , R , , R , Bostrom , and R , Anson , " The Role of the Facilitator in Computer Supported Meetings , " Small Group Res . , 24 , 4 ( 1993 ) , 547 - 565 , CormoUy , T , M , , L , M , Jessup , and J , S , Valacich , " Effects of Anonymity and Evaluative Tone on Idea Generation in Computer - mediated Groups , Management Sci . , 36 , 6 ( 1990 ) , 689 - 703 , Dennis , A , R , , J , F , George , L , M , Jessup , J , F , Nunamaker Jr , , and D , R , Vogel , " Information Technology To Support Electronic Meetings , " MIS Quarterly , 12 ( 1988 ) , 591 - 624 , and R , B , Gallupe , " A History of GSS Empirical Research : Lessons Learned and Future Directions , in L , Jessup and J , Valacich ( Eds , ) , Group Support Systems : New Perspectives . Macmillan , New York , 1993 , , J , F , Nunamaker Jr , , and D , R , Vogel , " A Comparison of Lab - oratory and Field Research in the Study of Electronic Meeting Systems , " / , Management Information Systems , 7 , 2 ( 1991 ) , 107 - 135 , DeSanctis , G , R , , Shifting Foundations in Group Support System Re - search , in L , Jessup and J , Valacich ( Eds , ) , Group Support Systems : New Perspectives , Macmillan , New York , 1993 , , M , J , D ' Onofrio , V , Sambamurthy , and M , S , Poole , " Com - prehensiveness and Restrictiveness in Group Decision Heuris - tics : Effects of Computer Support on Consensus Decision Mak - ing , " in Proc . Tenth Annual International Conf . on Information Systems , Boston , MA , 1989 , and R , B , Gallupe , " A Foundation for the Study of Group Decision Support Systems , " Management Sci . , 33 , 5 ( 1987 ) , 589 - 609 , and M , S , Poole , " Microlevel Structuration in Computer - supported Group Decision Making , " Human Communications Res . , 19 , 1 ( 1992 ) , 5 - 49 , and , " Capturing the Complexity in Advanced Technology Use : Adaptive Structuration Theory , " Organization Sci . , 5 , 2 ( 1994 ) , 121 - 147 , Dickson , G , W , , J , Partridge , and L , H , Robinson , " Exploring Modes of Facilitative Support for GDSS Technology , " MIS Quarterly , 17 , 2 ( 1993 ) , 173 - 194 , Doyle , M , , and D , Straus , How to Make Meetings Work , Wyden , New York , 1976 , 448 INFORMATION SYSTEMS RESEARCH Vol , 7 , No , 4 , December 1996 D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 131 . 94 . 16 . 10 ] on 26 S e p t e m b e r 2015 , a t 21 : 16 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . WHEELER AND VALACICH Structured Group Decision Making : An Empirical Assessment George , J . F . , A . R . Dennis , and J . F . Nunamaker Jr . , " An Experimental Investigation of Facilitation in an EMS Decision Room , " Group Decision and Negotiation , 1 ( 1992 ) , 57 - 70 . Gouran , D . S . , Making Decisions in Groups : Choices and Consequences , Waveland , Prospect Heights , IL , 1982 . and R . Y . Hirokawa , " The Role of Communication in Decision Making Groups : A Functional Perspective , " in M . S . Mander ( Ed . ) , Communications in Transition , Praeger , New York , 1983 . Hackman , J . R . and R . E . Kaplan , " Interventions into Group Process : An Approach to Improving the Effectiveness of Groups , " Decision Sci . , 5 ( 1974 ) , 459 - 480 . Hall , J . and W . H . Watson , " The Effects of a Normative Intervention on Group Decision - making Performance , " Human Relations , 23 ( 1970 ) , 299 - 317 . and M . Williams , " Group Dynamics Training and Improved De - cision Making , " / . Applied Behavioral Sci . , 6 ( 1970 ) , 39 - 68 . Hirokawa , R . Y . , " Why Informed Groups Make Faulty Decisions : An Investigation of Possible Interaction - based Explanations , " Small Group Behavior , 18 ( 1987 ) , 3 - 29 . , R . Ice , and J . Cook , " Preference for Procedural Order , Discussion Structure and Group Decision Performance , " Communication Quarterly , 36 ( 1988 ) , 217 - 226 . and D . S . Gouran , " Facilitation of Group Communication , " Man - agement Communication Quarterly , 3 , 1 ( 1989 ) , 71 - 93 . and R . C . Pace , " A Descriptive Investigation of the Possible Communication Based Reasons for Effective and Ineffective Group Decision Making , " Communication Monographs , 50 ( 1983 ) , 363 - 379 . and K . M . Rost , " Effective Group Decision Making in Organiza - tions , " Management Communication Quarterly , 5 , 3 ( 1992 ) , 267 - 288 . Hoffman , L . and N . Maier , " The Use of a Group Decision to Resolve a Problem of Fairness , " Personnel Psychology , 12 ( 1959 ) , 545 - 559 . Huber , G . P . , " Issues in the Design of Group Decision Support Sys - tems , " MS Quarterly ( 1984 ) , 195 - 204 . Janis , I . L . , Groupthink ( 2nd ed . ) , Houghton Mifflin , Boston , MA , 1982 . Limayem , M . , Automating decision guidance : Design and Impacts in a Group Decision Support Environment , unpublished doctoral disser - tation . University of Minnesota , 1992 . Maier , N . R . F . and R . A . Maier , " An Experimental Test of the Effects of " Developmental " vs . " Free " Discussions on the Quality of Group Decisions , " / . Applied Psychology , 41 ( 1957 ) , 320 - 323 . and L . Hoffman , " Using Trained ' Developmental ' Discussion Leaders to Improve Further the Quality of Group Decisions , " / . Applied Psychology , 44 ( 1960 ) , 247 - 251 . and J . A . Thurber , " limitations of Procedures for Improving Group Problem Solving , " Psychological Reports , 25 ( 1969 ) , 639 - 656 . McLeod , P . L . , " An Assessment of the Experimental Literature on Elec - tronic Support of Group Work : Results of a Meta - analysis , " Human - Computer Interaction , 7 , 3 ( 1992 ) , 257 - 280 . Mennecke , B . E . and B . C . Wheeler , " Task Matters : Modeling Group Task Processes in Experimental CSCW Research , " in J . F . Nuna - maker , Jr . and R . H . Sprague , Jr . , Proc . Twenty - Sixth Annual Ha - waii International Conf . on System Sciences , Volume IV , IEEE So - ciety Press , Los Alamos , CA , 1993 . Mennecke , B . E . , J . A . Hoffer , and B . E . Wynne , " The Implications of Group Development and Group History for GSS Theory and Practice , " Small Group Res . , 23 , 4 ( 1992 ) , 524 - 572 . Mintzberg , H . , D . Raisinghani , and A . Theoret , " The Structure of " Un - structured " Decision Processes , " Admin . Sci . Quarterly , 21 ( 1976 ) , 246 - 275 . Nunamaker , Jr . , J . F . , A . R . Dennis , J . S . Valacich , D . R . Vogel , and J . F . George , " Electronic Meeting Systems to Support Group Work , " Comm . ACM , 34 ( 1991 ) , 41 - 61 . , D . R . Vogel , and B . Konsynski , " Interaction of Task and Tech - nology to Support Large Groups , " Decision Support Systems , 5 , 2 ( 1989 ) , 139 - 152 . Nutt , P . C , " Types of Organizational Decision Processes , " Admin . Sci . Quarterly , 29 ( 1984 ) , 414 - 450 . Orlikowski , W . J . and J . J . Baroudi , " Studying Information Technology in Organizations : Research Approaches and Assumptions , " Infor - mation Systems Res . , 2 , 1 ( 1991 ) , 1 - 28 . Pinsonneault , A . and K . L . Kraemer , " The Impact of Technological Support on Groups : An Assessment of the Empirical Research , " Decision Support Systems , 5 , 2 ( 1989 ) , 197 - 216 . Poole , M . S . , " Decision Development in Small Groups : III . A Multiple Sequence Model of Group Decision Development , " Communica - tion Monographs , 50 , 4 ( 1983 ) , 321 - 341 . , " Procedures for Managing Meetings : Social and Technological Innovation , " in R . A . Swar \ son and B . O . Knapp ( Eds . ) , Innovative Meeting Management , 3M Meeting Mgt . Inst . , Austin , TX , 1991 , 53 - 110 . and G . R . DeSanctis , " Understanding the Use of Group Decision Support Systems : The Theory of Adaptive Structuration , " in C . Steinfield and J . Fulk ( Eds . ) , Theoretical Approaches to Information Technologies in Organizations , Sage , Beverly Hills , CA , 1990 . and , " Microlevel Structuration in Gomputer - supported Group Decision Making , " Human Communication Res . , 19 , 1 ( 1992 ) , 5 - 49 . and J . Roth , " Decision Development in Small Groups : IV . A Ty - pology of Group Decision Paths , " Human Communication Res . , 15 ( 1988a ) , 323 - 356 . and , " Decision Development in Small Groups : V . Test of a Contingency Model , " Human Communication Res . , 15 ( 1988b ) , 549 - 589 . Sambamurthy , V . and M . S . Poole , " The Effects of Variations in Ca - pabilities of GDSS Designs on Management of Cognitive Conflict in Groups , " Information Systems Res . , 3 , 3 ( 1992 ) , 224 - 251 . Silver , M . S . , " On the Restrictiveness of Decision Support Systems , " in R . M . Lee , A . M . McCosh , and P . Migliaresse ( Eds . ) , Organizational Decision Support Systems , Elsevier Science , North - Holland , 1988 . , " Decision Support Systems : Directed and Nondirected Change , " Information Systems Res . , 1 ( 1990 ) , 47 - 70 . , Systems that Support Decision Makers , Wiley , New York , 1991 . Stasser , G . , Information Salience and the Discovery of Hidden Profiles by Decision - making Groups : A Thought Experiment , Organiza - tional Behavior and Human Decision Processes , 52 ( 1992 ) , 156 - 181 . Steiner , I . D . , Group Process and Productivity , Academic Press , New York , 1972 . INFORMATION SYSTEMS RESEARCH Vol . 7 , No . 4 , December 1996 449 D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 131 . 94 . 16 . 10 ] on 26 S e p t e m b e r 2015 , a t 21 : 16 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . WHEELER AND VALACICH Structured Group Decision Making : An Empirical Assessment Valacich , J , S , , A , R , Dennis , and T , M , ConnoUy , " Idea Generation in Computer - based Groups : A New Ending to an Old Story , " Or - ganizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes , 57 ( 1972 ) , 448 - 467 , , B , C , Wheeler , B , E , Mennecke , and R , Wachter , " The Effects of Numerical and Logical Group Size on Computer - mediated Idea Generation , " Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes , 62 , 3 ( 1995 ) , 318 - 329 , VanGundy , A , B , , Techniques of Structured Problem Solving . Van Nos - trand Reinhold , New York , 1988 , Wagner , G , R , , B , E , Wynne , and B , E , Mennecke , " Group Support Systems Facilities and Sbftware , " in L , Jessup and ] , Valacich ( Eds , ) , Group Support Systems : New Perspectives , Macmillan , New York , 1993 , Weick , K , E , , and D , K , Meader , " Sensemaking and Group Support Systems , " in L , Jessup and J , Valacich ( Eds , ) , Group Support Sys - tems : New Perspectives , Macmillan , New York , 1993 , Wheeler , B , C , and B , E , Mennecke , ' The School of Business Policy Task Manual , " Working Paper # 92 - 524c , Indiana University Graduate School of Business , Bloomington , IN , 1992 , Marshall Scott Poole , Associate Editor . This paper was received on August 18 , 1994 , and has been with the authors 7 months for 2 revisions . 450 INFORMATION SYSTEMS RESEARCH Vol , 7 , No . 4 , December 1996 D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 131 . 94 . 16 . 10 ] on 26 S e p t e m b e r 2015 , a t 21 : 16 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 131 . 94 . 16 . 10 ] on 26 S e p t e m b e r 2015 , a t 21 : 16 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d .