Mechanism of the Formation of Contractile Ring in Dividing Cultured Animal Cells . I . Recruitment of Preexisting Actin Filaments into the Cleavage Furrow Long - guang Cao and Yu - li Wang Cell Biology Group , Worcester Foundation for Experimental Biology , Shrewsbury , Massachusetts 01545 Abstract . Cytokinesis of animal cells involves the for - mation of the circumferential actin filament bundle ( contractile ring ) along the equatorial plane . To ana - lyze the assembly mechanism of the contractile ring , we microinjected a small amount of rhodamine - labeled phalloidin ( rh - pha ) or rhodamine - labeled actin ( rh - actin ) into dividing normal rat kidney cells , rh - pha was microinjected during prometaphase or metaphase to label actin filaments that were present at that stage . As mitosis proceeded into anaphase , the labeled ilia - merits became associated with the cortex of the cell . During cytokinesis , rh - pha was depleted from polar regions and became highly concentrated into the equatorial region . The distribution of total actin illa - ments , as revealed by staining the whole cell with fluorescein phaUoidin , showed a much less pronounced difference between the polar and the equatorial re - gions . The sites of de novo assembly of actin filaments during the formation of the contractile ring were deter - mined by microinjecting rh - actin shortly before cytoki - nesis , and then extracting and fixing the cell during mid - cytokinesis . Injected rhodamine actin was only slightly concentrated in the contractile ring , as com - pared to the distribution of total actin filaments . Our results indicate that preexisting actin filaments , proba - bly through movement and reorganization , are used preferentially for the formation of the contractile ring . De novo assembly of filaments , on the other hand , ap - pears to take place preferentially outside the cleavage furrow . C YTOKINESIS of animal cells has attracted the attention of cell biologists for more than a century ( for recent reviews see Rappaport , 1986 ; Mabuchi , 1986 ) . How - ever , its mechanism still remains unclear . Studies over the past twenty years have indicated that actin and myosin II are likely to be involved in this process . For example , actin fila - ments show a parallel , bundle - like arrangement in the cleav - age furrow , forming a " contractile ring " ( Perry et al . , 1971 ; Forer and Behnke , 1972 ; Schroeder , 1973 ) . Myosin II mole - cules exist as minifilaments in this region , and appear more concentrated than in other regions of the cell ( Fujiwara and Pollard , 1976 ; Yumura and Fukui , 1985 ; Maupin and Pol - lard , 1986 ) . Various observations indicate that the integrity of actin and myosin structures is crucial for cytokinesis . Cytochalasin B , which binds to the ends of actin filaments and may also induce filament breakage , inhibits cytokinesis with a concomitant disappearance of the contractile ring ( Schroeder , 1970 , 1972 ) . The involvement of myosin II has been convincingly demonstrated with the microinjection of antibodies against myosin II ( Mabuchi and Okuno , 1977 ; Kiehart et al . , 1982 ) , and with the disruption of myosin II expression after genetic manipulations ( De Lozanne and Spudich , 1987 ; Knecht and Loomis , 1987 ) . These treat - ments effectively inhibited cytokinesis while allowing karyo - kinesis to proceed . However , many critical questions concerning the roles of actin and myosin in cytokinesis need to be clarified . Because the contractile ring is a transient structure , it is important to determine how actin and myosin filaments become organized and subsequently dissociated . One possibility for the forma - tion of the contractile ring involves the de novo assembly of unpolymerized subunits onto nucleation sites along the equatorial plane . Alternatively , existing filaments may con - gregate into the cleavage furrow during cytokinesis . Informa - tion on the formation of contractile ring may also shed light on the mechanism of cell division . For example , cortical flow of actin filaments has been proposed in a model where con - traction occurs throughout most cortical regions while relax - ation takes place at the two poles ( White and Borisy , 1983 ; Bray and White , 1988 ) . The purpose of this study is to identify the source of actin that becomes incorporated into the contractile ring . Normal rat kidney ( NRK ) t cells were microinjected during prometa - phase or metaphase with rhodamine - labeled phalloidin ( rh - pha ) , which became tightly associated with actin filaments present at that time . The distribution of rh - pha - labeled actin 1 . Abbreviations used in this paper : fl - pha and rh - pha , fluorescein - and tetramethylrhodamine - labelexi phalioidin , respectively ; NRK , normal rat kidney ; rh - actin , tctramethylrhodamine - labeled actin . © The Rockefeller University Press , 0021 - 9525 / 90 / 04 / 1089 / 7 $ 2 . 00 The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 110 , April 1990 1089 - 1095 1089 filaments was then followed until cytokinesis and was com - pared to the distribution of the total actin filaments as re - vealed by staining with fluorescein - labeled phailoidin ( fl - pha ) . In a complementary experiment , the sites of de novo assem - bly were determined by microinjecting fluorescently labeled actin into cells shortly before the formation of the contractile ring , and extracting cells during mid - cytokinesis . Our results indicate that preexisting actin filaments are used preferen - tially for the formation of the contractile ring . Materials and Methods Fluorescent PhaUoidin and Actin rh - pha and fl - pha were purchased from Molecular Probes Inc . ( Eugene , OR ) as a 3 . 3 - t ~ M stock solution in methanol . In a typical experiment , 400 # l of the stock solution was removed and dried under N2 and redissolved in 40 / ~ 1 of 5 mM Tris - acetate buffer , pH 6 . 95 . Thus the final concentration is 33 # M . The solution is clarified at 25 , 000 rpm for 20 rain in a rotor ( type 42 . 2 Ti ; Beckman Instruments , Inc . , Palo Alto , CA ) before microinjection . G - actin was purified and fluorescently labeled with tetramethylrhoda - mine as described previously ( Wang , 1984 ) . Tetramethylrhodamine - labeled actin ( rh - actin ) was microinjected at a concentration of 4 - 5 mg / ml . Cells Culture and Microinjection NRK epithelial cells ( NRK - 52E ; American " l ~ ypo Culture Collection , Rock - ville , MD ) were maintained in the FI2K medium ( Hazleton Systems , Inc . , Lenexa , KS ) containing 10 % Nu - serum ( Collaborative Research , Bedford , MA ) , 50 tLg / ml streptomycin , and 50 / tg / ml penicillin . Cells were plated onto special coverslip dishes for 36 - 48 h before microinjection ( McKenna et al . , 1989 ) . Culturing of cells on the microscope stage during microinjec - tion and observation was performed as described previously ( McKenna et al . , 1989 ) . Cells at various stages of mitosis were identified and microinjected . A tank of compressed air was used as the source of pressure for microinjec - tion . The pressure was regulated with a custom - designed electronic control system . The solutions were microinjected conservatively , and the volume delivered was estimated to be < 5 % of the cell volume . No cell damage was visible under the phase optics , and microinjected cells divided normally , following a similar time course as did neighboring uninjected cells . Staining of CeUs with Fluorescent PhaUoidin Cells were rinsed twice with warm PHEM buffer ( 60 mM Pipes , 25 mM Hepes , pH 6 . 9 , 10 mM EGTA , 2 mM MgCI2 ; Schliwa and van Blerkom , 1981 ) , and then extracted and fixed in two steps . The first step involved treat - ment with 1 % formaldehyde ( 16 % stock , EM grade ; Electron Microscopy Sciences , Fort Washington , PAL 0 . 36 % Triton X - 100 in PHEM buffer , pH 6 . 1 , for 2 rain . This was followed by a 10 - min treatment with 3 . 2 % formal - dehyde , 0 . 5 % Triton X - 100 in the same buffer . The dishes were then rinsed twice with the PHEM buffer , pH 6 . 9 , and stained for 10 min with fluorescent phalloidin in the PHEM buffer at a concentration of 220 nM . Fluorescence Microscopy and Image Processing All observations were made with an inverted microscope ( IM35 ; Carl Zeiss , Inc . , Thornwood , NY ) equipped with a 100× / NA 1 . 30 Neofluar objective and a 63× / NA 1 . 25 Neofluar objective . A 100 - W quartz - halogen lamp , operated at 7 V or less , was used as the light source for epiillumination . This level of light , when applied intermittently , had no detectable effect on cell division . Fluorescent images were detected with an ISIT low - light - level video camera ( Dage - MTI Inc . , Michigan City , IN ) , which was operated at a level far below saturation . Time - lapse sequences were recorded every 2 - 3 rain . Images were processed by frame averaging and background subtraction . Ban @ ass filters were used for fluorescence observations , and no crossover between fluorescein and rhodamine was detectable . Paired video images were adjusted for registration by rapidly alternating the display between the two images . Misregistration appears as flickering . The position of one of the images was changed until no flickering was visible . For pseudocolor dis - play , images were scaled to obtain a similar gray value at either the equatorial cortex ( see Figs . 3 - 7 ) or the polar cortex ( see Fig . 2 ) . This facili - tates the comparison of different images . Black - and - white images were pho - tographed off a video monitor as described previously ( McKenna et al . , 1989 ) . Color images were photographed offa monitor ( model PVM - 1271Q ; Sony Corp . of America , New York ) with film ( Gold 400 ; Eastman Kodak Co . , Rochester , NY ) and processed in a commercial studio . Results Changes in the Distribution of Rh - pha - labeled Actin Filaments during Cell Division To observe the distribution of actin filaments during cell divi - sion , we microinjected a trace amount of rh - pha into pro - metaphase or metaphase NRK cells , an epithelial cell line that remains well spread during mitosis . The microinjection induced no detectable changes in cellular morphology or in the time course of mitosis . A series of rh - pha images from a cell typical of over 30 cells observed was shown in Fig . 1 . Rh - pha was initially con - centrated as a spot near the site of microinjection , but gradu - ally spread throughout the cell over 10 - 20 min , suggesting that it associated rapidly with actin filaments and was not freely diffusible in the cytoplasm . Moreover , the intensity and distribution of rh - pha showed no detectable change after extraction and fixation . During metaphase , rh - pha assumed a relatively uniform distribution except for the site of injec - tion and the regions of chromosomes ( Fig . 1 a ) . During anaphase , when sister chromosomes were moving toward opposite poles , rh - pha became concentrated onto the cell cortex ( Fig . 1 b ) . However , no consistent difference between the polar and equatorial cortices was observed at this point . A gradual concentration of rh - pha along the equatorial plane was observed 2 - 5 min before the onset of cytokinesis . The equatorial fluorescence intensity reached a peak during mid - cytokinesis ( Fig . 1 c ) , such that all microinjected cells showed a dramatic concentration of fluorescence . Intensity near the poles underwent a concomitant decrease during cytokinesis , and the polar edge of the cell often became unde - tectable in the fluorescence images . Upon the completion of cytokinesis , rh - pha became gradually relocated to nascent stress fibers and the polar cortex ( not shown ) . Comparison of the Distribution of Preexisting Actin Filaments and Total Actin Filaments during Cytokinesis To compare the distribution of rh - pha - labeled filaments with that of total actin filaments , uninjected cells undergoing cytokinesis were fixed and stained with rh - pha to reveal the distribution of total actin filaments . Fluorescence at the polar and the equatorial cortices was compared after normalizing the average intensity at the polar regions of different cells . Pseudocolor display was used to facilitate the visualization of differences . The cells were categorized according to the color in the cleavage furrow . 34 % of the ceils showed unde - tectable or only a slight increase in fluorescence on the equatorial plane relative to the poles ( no difference in color , Fig . 2 a ; Fig . 7 b also belongs to this category ) . More than half of the cells ( 52 % ) showed a moderate increase in equatorial fluorescence relative to the polar fluorescence ( slight difference in color display , Fig . 2 b ; Figs . 3 b , 5 b , and 6 b also belong to this category ) , and only about 14 % The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 110 , 1990 1090 Figure L Changes in the distribution of microinjected rh - pha in a living NRK cell during cell division . 2 min after micminjection into a metaphase cell ( a ) , rh - pha is concentrated at the site of microinjection ( arrow ) and depleted from the region where chromosomes are located . Otherwise , the distribution of fluorescence appears uniform in the cell . 7 min later , at early anaphase ( b ) , the membrane cortex starts to show an increase in fluorescence intensity . During mid - cytokinesis ( c ) , rh - pha becomes highly concentrated along the equatorial plane . Cytokinesis is essentially completed 3 min later ( d ) , and rh - pha slowly spreads out from the equatorial plane . Bar , 5 / ~ m . showed a dramatic concentration of fluorescence ( Fig . 2 c ; Fig . 4 b also belongs to this category ) . However , when microinjected rh - pha was viewed in this fashion , all cells showed a dramatic concentration at the cleavage furrow rela - tive to the poles ( Fig . 2 d ) . The polar cortex was clearly visi - ble in all stained cells ( Fig . 2 , a - c ) but not in microinjected cells ( Figs . 1 c and 2 d ) . Direct comparison between the distribution of rh - pha - labeled filaments and that of total actin filaments was achieved by microinjecting cells with rh - pha at prometaphase , and then fixing , extracting , and staining the microinjected ceils with fl - pha during cytokinesis ( after > 1 h incubation ) . The ratio image between the rhodamine and fluorescein images revealed , to a first approximation , the percentage of actin filaments that were labeled with injected rh - pha in different regions of the cell . As shown in Fig . 3 , injected rh - pha showed a striking difference between the polar and equatorial regions ( Fig . 3 a ) . A more uniform distribution along the cortex was ob - served in the image of fl - pha staining ( Fig . 3 b ) . The ratio image ( Fig . 3 c ) showed a higher value in the cleavage fur - row , suggesting that the cleavage furrow contained a higher percentage of preexisting filaments that were labeled im - mediately after microinjection at prometaphase . The pattern and level of fl - pha staining of injected cells were similar to those of uninjected cells as shown in Fig . 2 , a - c , indicating that the injection of rh - pha did not induce a change in the overall distribution of actin filaments . To ensure that the results were not caused by instrumental artifacts , such as the limited linearity of the ISIT camera , cells were stained with a mixture of fl - pha and rh - pha . The images of the two fluorophores were indistinguishable ( Fig . 4 ) , and the ratio images showed a uniform distribution over the entire cell . As a second control , cells were microinjected with rh - pha during cytokinesis , and then fixed and stained within 2 - 3 min of microinjection . In this case rh - pha should label actin filaments that were already organized for cytokinesis and should show a similar distribution to that of fl - pha staining . As shown in Fig . 5 , there is little difference between the equatorial region and polar region in the lower half of the cell where rh - pha was microinjected . The upper half showed lit - fie fluorescence of rh - pha because of the limited diffusion within the short period of incubation . Localization of the Site of Incorporation of Actin Subunits during Cytokinesis We microinjected NRK cells with rhodamine - labeled actin subunits at anaphase , shortly before the onset of cytokinesis . Cao and Wang Actin Filament Recruitment during Cytokinesis 1091 Figure 2 . Difference between the distribution of micminject - ed rh - pha and rh - pha applied to fixed and extracted cells . Uninjected NRK cells during mid - cytokinesis were fixed , extracted , and stained with rh - pha ( a - c ) . The extent of con - centration of rh - pha on the equatorial plane relative to the poles varies from cell to cell . Many cells ( , ~ 34 % ) show ei - ther no detectable or a very slight concentration of rh - pha in the cleavage furrow ( a ) . About 52 % show a clear , but limited concentration of rh - pha ( b ) . Only ' ~ 14 % of the cells show a dramatic concen - tration of rh - pha ( c ) . Rh - pha microinjected during pro - metaphase or metaphase , on the other hand , shows a dra - matic concentration in the cleavage furrow in 100 % of the cells ( d ) . The cortex in the polar region is clearly detect - able in all fixed cells stained with rh - pha , but not in living cells microinjected with rh - pha . The range of gray scale is adjusted proportionally to obtain a similar level at the pole . The categorization of cells is based on pseudocolor display . The color changes in the order of blue - green - yeUow - orange - red - blue with increasing intensities . Bar , 5 ~ m . Injected cells were incubated ( for 10 - 15 min ) until mid - cytokinesis and were extracted , fixed , and stained with fl - pha to reveal the distribution of total actin filaments . The rhoda - mine fluorescence revealed the distribution of injected actin subunits that became incorporated into Triton - resistant struc - tures during the formation of the contractile ring . Before extraction and fixation , the distribution of rh - actin was relatively uniform , with no discernible concentration along the cortex ( not shown ) . This is most likely due to the presence of a high concentration of unpolymerized actin in the cytoplasm . After extraction , a concentration of injected actin along the cortex became discernible ( Fig . 6 a ) . The equatorial region showed a slightly higher level of fluores - cence . However , after normalizing against total actin fila - ments , the equatorial region had a lower ratio than other regions of the cell ( Fig . 6 c ) , indicating that the cleavage fur - row contained a lower percentage of newly assembled actin filaments . When rhodamine actin was microinjected at Figure 3 . Concentration of rh - pha into the cleavage furrow after microinjection into prometaphase cells . An NRK cell was microinjected with rh - pha away from the equatorial plane during prometaphase and then incubated until mid - cytokinesis . The cell was extracted , fixed , and stained with fl - pha ( b ) . In the image of rh - pha ( a ) , the extent of concentration on the equatorial plane is much more pronounced whereas the polar regions are almost undetectable . The ratio image between rh - pha and fl - pha shows a higher value in the cleavage furrow ( c ) . Pseudocolor display is performed as in Fig . 2 . The ratio is scaled to obtain green color in the cortex of cleavage furrow . A similar procedure is used for the pseudocolor display in Figs . 4 - 7 . Bar , 5 ftm . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 110 , 1990 1092 Figure 4 . Identical distribution of rh - pha ( a ) and fl - pha ( b ) when the two were applied simultaneously to extracted , fixed NRK cells . The ratio image ( c ) shows no difference between the polar and equatorial regions . Bar , 5 ttm . Figure 5 . Distribution of rh - pha microinjected during eytokinesis . A telophase NRK cell was microinjected with rh - pha and , after 3 min , was extracted , fixed , and stained with fl - pha ( b ) . Image of rh - pha ( a ) shows labeling of the cortex and concentration in the cleavage furrow . The upper polar region , Which is far away from the site of microinjection , shows little fluorescence because of the slow spreading of rh - pha . The ratio image between a and b indicates similar values in the cleavage furrow and near the lower pole c . A higher ratio is seen at the site of microinjection ( arrow ) . Bar , 5 # tin . Figure 6 . Sites of incorporation of rh - actin microinjected shortly before cytokinesis . Mid - cytokinesis was reached 15 min after microinjec - tion . The cell was extracted , fixed , and stained with fl - pha ( b ) . Rh - actin shows a slight concentration in the cleavage furrow ( a ) . However , after normalizing against the image of fl - pha by taking the ratio , the extent of incorporation in the equatorial region appears lower than that in polar regions ( c ) . Bar , 5 t ~ m . Cao and Wang Actin Filament Recruitment during Cytokinesis 1093 Figure 7 . Distribution of microinjected rh - actin during cytokinesis after an extended period of incubation . An NRK cell was micminjected with rh - actin during metaphase and was incubated until mid - cytokinesis ( > 1 h ) . The cell was extracted , fixed , and stained with fl - pha ( b ) . The distribution of rh - actin and fl - pha is very similar , and the ratio image ( c ) shows no difference between the poles and the cleavage furrow . Bar , 5 # m . prometaphase and cells incubated until cytokinesis ( > 1 h ) , the distribution of rhodamine became very similar to that of fl - pha staining ( Fig . 7 ) . Discussion One of the central questions about cytokinesis is the mecha - nism of the formation of the contractile ring . So far little in - formation is available to allow the distinction between two possible models : de novo polymerization of actin filaments , and reorganization of existing actin filaments . We have microinjected rh - pha and rh - actin into mitotic cells to label actin filaments , rh - pha should bind to actin fila - ments that are present at the time of microinjection , allowing us to follow the fate of these preexisting actin filaments through cytokinesis . On the other hand , rh - actin should be - come associated with actin filaments that are assembled after microinjection or with filaments that undergo active subunit exchange . Thus , if de novo assembly is the primary mecha - nism for the formation of the contractile ring , rh - actin micro - injected shortly before cytokinesis should become concen - trated into the contractile ring ( relative to the distribution of total actin filaments ) , but rh - pha microinjected during meta - phase should not be concentrated . On the other hand , if the contractile ring is formed by the reorganization of existing filaments , then opposite results should be obtained . One important assumption in our experiment is that the in - jection of rh - pha does not affect the mechanism of cytokine - sis . This is supported by the normal morphology of injected cells and their normal progression through mitosis . In addi - tion , previous studies indicated no detectable perturbation when a tracer amount of phalloidin was microinjected into interphase cultured cells ( Wehland and Weber , 1981 ; Wang , 1987 ) . In the present study , the final concentration of the in - jected rh - pha is estimated to be 1 - 2 # M . Thus , only a small percentage of actin subunits in the filaments could be la - beled , assuming that a cell contains , , o100 # M actin in the filamentous form . This level of labeling should also have lit - tle effect on the subsequent staining of the cells with fl - pha . It is possible that some filaments or segments of filaments could be stabilized by the injected rh - pha ( Wieland , 1977 ) , and undergo reduced subunit on - off reactions . However , whether this is the case or not , both the time course of cytoki - nesis and the distribution of total actin filaments appear unaffected by the microinjection . Thus , it is unlikely that the observed concentration of rh - pha - labeled filaments into the cleavage furrow represents a phaUoidin - induced event . The simplest explanation of our results is that the contrac - tile ring is formed primarily by the reorganization of existing actin filaments , although it is difficult to rule out entirely the involvement of de novo assembly . According to the time course shown in Fig . 1 , it is likely that actin filaments are uniformly distributed in the cytoplasm during metaphase . At anaphase , some filaments become associated with the cell cortex , as has been observed for both actin and myosin II in fixed and stained Dictyostelium cells ( Kitanishi - Yumura and Fukui , 1989 ) . During cytokinesis , existing actin filaments are concentrated into the equatorial plane ( Fig . 1 ) , while new actin filaments may be assembled in other areas such as polar regions . The behavior of actin during cytokinesis described here is in sharp contrast to that observed at the leading lamellipodia . Labeled G - actin becomes rapidly concentrated into the la - mellipodia after microinjection ( Glacy , 1983 ) , whereas microinjected rh - pha fails to label this region ( Wehland and Weber , 1981 ; Wang , 1987 ) . These observations are consis - tent with the constant formation of new actin filaments in the lamellipodia ( Wang , 1985 ) . Thus , it is likely that there are two different pathways for the formation of actin - rich struc - tures : one involving de novo assembly and the other involv - ing reorganization of existing filaments . While preexisting filaments are consistently depleted from the polar regions and highly concentrated in the cleavage fur - row , the distribution of total filamentous actin appears much more uniform along the cortex ( Fig . 2 ) . In cells microin - jected with fluorescent actin , the concentration of actin fila - ments within the cleavage furrow cannot be discerned until cells are extracted ( Wang and Taylor , 1979 ; Fig . 7 ) , most likely because of the presence of a high concentration of soluble subunits in the cytoplasm . The extent of actin con - The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 110 , 1990 1094 centration in the cleavage furrow has been a matter of con - troversy . Although some studies indicated a high degree of concentration ( e . g . , Sanger , 1975 ; Aubin et al . , 1979 ) , others reported no consistent concentration ( Herman and Pollard , 1979 ; Hamaguchi and Mabuchi , 1982 ) . The results were no doubt affected by the methods of sample preparation and the specificity of the staining agents ( recognizing F - actin only or both G - and F - actin ) . Our results indicate that the distribution of total actin filaments , as indicated by staining fixed cells with fluorescent phalloidin , varies considerably among dividing cells . While some cells ( , o14 % ) show a dra - matic concentration of actin filaments in the cleavage furrow relative to the poles ( Fig . 2 c ) , others ( , 034 % ) exhibit either undetectable or only a slight difference between the equa - torial and polar cortices ( Fig . 2 a ) . However , most cells show a moderate extent of concentration of rh - pha in the cleavage furrow , while the polar cortex remains detectable throughout cytokinesis ( Fig . 2 b ) . Because similar distributions are ob - served with live cells microinjected with rh - pha during cytokinesis , the results are unlikely to represent artifacts of extraction and fixation . In addition , the pattern of phalloidin staining in most cells is similar to that observed in dividing Dictyostelium cells ( Kitanishi - Yumura and Fukui , 1989 ) . Several other proteins , including filamin and alpha - actinin , also show a variable degree of concentration in the cleavage furrow ( Nunnally et al . , 1980 ) , indicating that a high degree of concentration of these contractile proteins is not required for cytokinesis . At least two mechanisms should be considered for the con - centration of existing actin filaments into the cleavage fur - row . First , actin filaments in the contractile ring may be recruited from the cytoplasm . During cytokinesis , the affin - ity or the number of binding sites for actin filaments may in - crease in the equatorial region . The depletion of rh - pha from polar areas may be explained if actin filaments undergo con - stant on - off reactions along the membrane , and are thus capable of rapid redistribution according to the distribution or affinity of binding sites . In the second mechanism , mem - brane - associated filaments may move toward the cleavage furrow as part of the " cortical flow " as suggested previously ( White and Borisy , 1983 ; Bray and White , 1988 ) . Such a flow may originate at the polar region , resulting in a severe depletion of preexisting filaments from poles . One interest - ing question would then be the relative movement of actin and myosin II molecules , which have also been observed to concentrate in the cleavage furrow ( Fujiwara and Pollard , 1976 ; Mittal et al . , 1987 ; Sanger et al . , 1989 ) . If the mecha - nism of flow involves actin - myosin interactions , one might expect myosin and actin filaments to move relative to each other in opposite directions . To distinguish between the two models , it would be impor - tant to observe directly the movement of actin filaments be - fore and during cytokinesis . Because there are few discrete actin - containing structures in mitotic cells to allow direct tracking of filaments , approaches such as fluorescence pho - tobleaching may be useful in marking specific spots whose translocation can then be studied . We would like to thank M . C . Sanders and Dr . Richard Vallee for reading this manuscript . The research is supported by National Institutes of Health grant GM - 32476 . Received for publication 2 October 1989 and in revised form 1 December 1989 . References Aubin , J . E . , K . Weber , and M . Osborn . 1979 . Analysis of actin and micro - filament - associated proteins in the mitotic spindle and cleavage furrow of PtK2 cells by immunofluorescence microscopy . Exp . Cell Res . 124 : 93 - 109 . Bray , D . , and J . G . White . 1988 . Cortical flow in animal cells . Science ( Wash . DC ) . 239 : 883 - 888 . De Lozanne , A . , and J . A . Spudich . 1987 . Disruption of Dictyostelium myosin heavy chain gene by homologous recombination . Science ( Wash . DC ) . 236 : 1086 - 1091 . Forer , A . , and O . Behnke . 1972 . An actin - like component in spermatocytes of a crane fly ( Nephrotoma suturalis Loew ) . II . The cell cortex . Chromosoma ( Berl . ) . 39 : 175 - 190 . Fujiwara , K . , and T . D . Pollard . 1976 . Fluorescent antibody localization of my - osin in the cytoplasm , cleavage furrow , and mitotic spindle of human cells . J . Cell Biol . 71 : 848 - 875 . Glacy , S . D . 1983 . Subcellular distribution of rhodamine - actin microinjected into living fibroblastic cells . J . Cell Biol . 97 : 1207 - 1213 . Hamaguchi , Y . , and I . Mabuchi . 1982 . Effects ofphalloidin microinjection and localization of fluorescein - labeled phalloidin in living sand dollar eggs . Cell Motil . 2 : 103 - 113 . Herman , I . M . , and T . D . Pollard . 1979 . Comparison of purified anti - actin and fluorescent - heavy meromyosin staining patterns in dividing cells . J . Cell Biol . 80 : 509 - 520 . Kiehart , D . P . , 1 . Mabuchi , and S . Inoue . 1982 . Evidence that myosin does not contribute to force production in chromosome movement . J . Cell Biol . 94 : 165 - 178 . Kitanishi - Yumura , T . , and Y . Fukui . 1989 . Actomyosin organization during cytokinesis : reversible translocation and differential redistribution in Dic - tyostelium . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton . 12 : 78 - 89 . Knecht , D . A . , and W . F . Loomis . 1987 . Antisense RNA inactivation of myosin heavy chain gane expression in Dictyostelium discoideum . Science ( Wash . DC ) . 236 : 1081 - 1086 . Mabuchi , I . 1986 . Biochemical aspects of cytokinesis . Int . Rev . CytoL 101 : 175 - 213 . Mabuchi , I . , and M . Okuno . 1977 . The effect of myosin antibody on the divi - sion of starfish blastomeres . J . Cell BioL 74 : 251 - 263 . Maupin , P . , and T . D . Pollard . 1986 . Arrangement of actin filaments and myosin - like filaments in the contractile ring and of actin - like filaments in the mitotic spindle of dividing HeLa cells . J . Ultrastruct . Mol . Struct . Res . 94 : 92 - 103 . McKenna , N . M . , Y . rL . Wang , and M . E . Konkel . 1989 . Formation and move - ment of myosin - containing structures in living fibroblasts . J . Cell Biol . 109 : 1163 - 1172 . Mittal , B . , J . M . Sanger , and J . W . Sanger . 1987 . Visualization of myosin in living cells . J . Cell Biol . 105 : 1753 - 1760 . Nunnally , M . H . , J . M . D ' angelo , and S . W . Craig . 1980 . Filamin concentra - tion in cleavage furrow and midbody region : frequency of occurrence com - pared with that of alpha - actinin and myosin . J . Cell Biol . 87 : 219 - 226 . Perry , M . M . , H . A . John , and N . S . T . Thomas . 1971 . Actin - like filaments in the cleavage furrow of newt egg . Exp . Cell Res . 65 : 249 - 253 . Rappaport , R . 1986 . Establishment of the mechanism of cytokinesis in animal cells . Int . Rev . CytoL 105 : 245 - 281 . Sanger , J . W . 1975 . Changing patterns of actin localization during cell division . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 72 : 1913 - 1916 . Sanger , J . M . , B . Mittal , J . S . Dome , and J . W . Sanger . 1989 . Analysis of cell division using fluorescently labeled actin and myosin in living PtK2 cells . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton . 14 : 201 - 219 . Schliwa , M . , and J . van Blerkom . 1981 . Structural interaction of cytoskeletal components . J . Cell Biol . 90 : 222 - 235 . Schroeder , T . E . 1970 . The contractile ring . I . Fine structure of dividing mam - malian ( HeLa ) cells and the effects of cytochalasin B . Z . Zellforsch . Mikrosk . Anat . 109 : 431 - - 449 . Schroeder , T . E . 1972 . The contractile ring . II . Determining its brief existence , volumetric changes , and vital role in cleaving Arbacia eggs . J . Cell Biol . 53 : 419 - 434 . Schroeder , T . E . 1973 . Actin in dividing cells : contractile ring filaments bind heavy meromyosin . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 70 : 1688 - 1692 . Wang , Y . - L . 1984 . Reorganization of actin filament bundle in living fibroblasts . J . Cell Biol . 99 : 1478 - 1485 . Wang , Y . - L . 1985 . Exchange of actin subunits at the leading edge of living fibroblasts : possible role of treadmilling . J . Cell Biol . 101 : 597 - 602 . Wang , Y . - L . 1987 . Mobility of filamentous actin in living cytoplasm . J . Cell Biol . 105 : 2811 - 2816 . Wang , Y . L . , and D . L . Taylor . 1979 . Distribution of fluorescently labeled ac - tin in living sea urchin eggs during early development . J . Cell Biol . 82 : 672 - 679 . Wehland , J . , and K . Weber . 1981 . Aetin rearrangement in living cells revealed by microinjection of fluorescent phalloidin derivative . Eur . J . Cell Biol . 24 : 176 - 183 . White , J . G . , and G . G . Borisy . 1983 . On the mechanisms of cytokinesis in animal cells . J . Theor . Biol . 101 : 289 - 316 . Wieland , T . 1977 . Modification of actins by phallotoxins . Namrwissenschaj ~ en . 64 : 303 - 309 . Yumura , S . , and Y . Fukui . 1985 . Reversible cyclic AMP - dependent change in distribution of myosin thick filaments in Dictyostelium . Nature ( Lond . ) . 314 : 194 - 196 . Cao and Wang Actin Filament Recruitment during Cytokinesis 1095