FREE UNIVERSITY OF BOZEN - BOLZANO Research Doctorate in Computer Science Ph . D . Thesis ( Revised version dated April 26 , 2016 ) Participatory Game Design and Children A lessandra M elonio Advisor : Prof . Gabriella Dodero Co - Advisor : Dr . Rosella Gennari A B S T R A C T This Ph . D . thesis revolves around participatory design with children for the early design of games for them . The Ph . D . research aimed at developing a method and guidelines for participatory game design with children . The Ph . D . work adopted an empirical research approach for developing the method and guidelines . The method draws from prior work , from different research areas , to propose new ideas or relationships between existing constructs . Specif - ically , different research areas from design and education were cross - fertilized in the method in order to sustain engagement , learning and collaboration during a participatory game design experience , prolonged and fragmented in time . Principles of gamiﬁcation of learning and gamiﬁed probes were used for sustaining engagement throughout the experience , and cooperative learning was introduced for fostering demo - cratic collaboration . The method emerged iteratively through ﬁeld stud - ies , gathering both qualitative and quantitative data , and it matured through an iterative learning process . This Ph . D . thesis presents ﬁrstly the relevant work on which the method breeds , secondly the method itself , and subsequently the ma - jor ﬁeld studies . Finally , the thesis presents guidelines for conducting a participatory game design experience with children , and resulting from ﬁndings of ﬁeld studies . iii A C K N O W L E D G M E N T S This work was made possible thanks to many people who supported ( and support ) me . I would like to thank all of them . First of all , I am grateful to my advisor Gabriella Dodero , for the trust she put in me , for her suggestions , and notes ( many many notes : - ) ) on my thesis . Moreover , I would like to thank my co - advisor Rosella Gennari , for her friendship and for all the things she taught me ; noth - ing would have been possible without her help . I am also thankful to Santina Torello , a colleague and special friend of mine , with whom I worked side by side for three long years . A special thank goes to Elisa Marengo , one of my smartest friends , for her precious sugges - tions and for reading all the chapters of this thesis . A special thank is due to Marc Marschark ( CERP - RIT , USA ) for giving me the opportu - nity to visit him at RIT , for making me feel “at home” while at RIT , for involving me in a research project with deaf students of RIT , and , more generally , for his precious advice . I am also grateful to all the people I had the pleasure to work with , for their competence , patience , support and for their friendship . Many thanks to Alex Tomasi and Naomi Mastachi , Francesco Vet - toretti , Julian Sanin and Angelo Ventura from the MakerSpace of the Free University of Bozen - Bolzano , Daniela Raccanello , Margherita Bron - dino and Margherita Pasini ( University of Verona ) . I am also in debt with several wonderful teachers of schools of the Province of Bozen - Bolzano and of the Province of l’Aquila , such as Stefania Marsich ( King School , Bolzano ) , Anna Santon ( Galilei School , Brunico ) , Markus Endrizzi and Daniela De Metri ( Dante School , Bolzano ) , Birgit Daniel , Stefano Rento , Paolo Soldani , Ambra Tarter ( Negrelli School , Merano ) , Paolo Lorenzi , Andrea Bonani , for their availability and for the time they devoted to my thesis work . I would also like to thank the external reviewers of the PhD thesis , Rilla Khaled ( Concordia University , Canada ) and Barbara Demo ( Uni - versity of Torino ) , as well as the members of the defence committee , namely , the external members , Monica Divitini ( University of Science and Technology of Trondheim , Norway ) and Daniela Fogli ( University of Brescia ) , and the internal member , Claus Pahl , for their time , sug - gestions and helpful observations . Finally , many many thanks to the people who helped , supported and trusted me the most : my father , Henry , my mother , Ettorina , my sisters with their children , my soon - to - be husband , Mario , Nonna Iva , v Nonna Rosa ( as well as my grandfathers who are always proud of me ) , and , more generally , all my extended family . I would also like to say “thanks ! ” to all to all the people whom I met and I had the pleasure to work with during my time as Ph . D . student , and whom I surely forgot to mention here ! Last but not least I would like to thank my dog , Osvaldo , for touch - ing tongues when returning home from work and I needed a sweet cuddle . Sincerely , thanks . Alessandra vi P U B L I C A T I O N S O F T H E A U T H O R publications related to the topic of the thesis In the following is reported the list of the author’s publications that are related to the topics discussed in the thesis ( updated to April 2016 ) . International Journals • Brondino M . , Dodero G . , Gennari R . , Melonio A . , Raccanello D and Torello , S . “I am Happy , I am Social , I’ve Realized Quality Games” or Why Children’s Emotions Matter in Co - Design . Sub - mitted to Special Issues of the International Journal of Human - Computer Studies . Elsevier . ( Second round revision ) . • Gennari R . , Melonio A . , and Torello , S . From Gamiﬁed Probes to Gamiﬁed Tangibles for Cooperative Learning : A Case Study . Special Issue of the International Journal of Multimedia Tools and Applications , Springer , IF = 1 . 346 . Guest editors : M . De Mar - sico and D . Fogli . DOI : 10 . 1007 / s 11042 - 016 - 3543 - 7 . Forthcoming in 2016 . • Brondino , M . , Dodero , G . , Gennari , R . , Melonio , A . , Raccanello , D . , and Torello , S . ( 2014 ) . Achievement Emotions and Peer Ac - ceptance Get Together in Game Design at School . ADCAIJ : Ad - vances In Distributed Computing And Artiﬁcial Intelligence Jour - nal , 3 ( 4 ) , 1 - 12 . DOI : 10 . 14201 / ADCAIJ 201434112 . • Di Mascio , T . , Gennari , R . , Melonio , A . and Vittorini , P . Designing Games for Deaf Children : First Guidelines . In International Jour - nal of Technology Enhanced Learning ( IJTEL ) , Vol . 5 , Nos . 3 / 4 , pp . 223 – 239 , Inderscience Enterprise Ltd . , 2013 . International Conferences and Lecture Notes • Dodero G . , Gennari R . Guidelines for Participatory Design of Dig - ital Games in Primary School . 6 th International Conference in Methodologies and intelligent Systems for Techhnology Enhanced Learning ( MIS 4 TEL’ 16 ) . Spain , Sevilla , June 2016 . Siviglia . vii • Dodero G . , Gennari R . , Melonio A . , and Torello , S . “There Is No Rose Without A Thorn” : An Assessment of a Game Design Ex - perience for Children . In Proceedings of the 11 th Biannual Con - ference on Italian SIGCHI Chapter ( CHItaly 2015 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 10 - 17 . • Corral , L . , Fronza , I . , Gennari , R . and Melonio , A . From Game Design with Children to Game Development with University Students : What Issues Come Up ? . In Proceedings of the 11 th Biannual Conference on Italian SIGCHI Chapter ( CHItaly 2015 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 30 - 33 . • Dodero G . , Brondino , M . , Gennari R . , Melonio A . , Pasini , M . , Rac - canello , D . and Torello , S . Emotions and Inclusion in Co - Design at School : Let’s Measure Them ! . In Proceeding of the Methodolo - gies and Intelligent Systems for Technology Enhanced Learning . Volume 374 of the series Advances in Intelligent Systems and Computing pp 1 - 8 . Salamanca , Spain , June 2015 . • Dodero G . , Gennari R . , Melonio A . , and Torello , S . Towards tangible gamiﬁed co - design at school : two studies in primary schools . In Proceedings of the ﬁrst ACM SIGCHI annual sym - posium on Computer - human interaction in play ( CHI PLAY ’ 14 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 77 - 86 . • Melonio A . Gamiﬁed co - design with cooperative learning at school . In Proceedings of the ﬁrst ACM SIGCHI annual symposium on Computer - human interaction in play ( CHI PLAY ’ 14 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 295 - 298 . • Del Fatto , V . G . Dodero , R . Gennari , A . Melonio , Montali , M . , Razniewski , Torello , S . , Wang , X . and Zini , F . Gamiﬁed children universities : an exploratory study . In Proceedings of the ﬁrst ACM SIGCHI annual symposium on Computer - human interaction in play ( CHI PLAY ’ 14 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 409 - 410 . • Dodero G . , Gennari R . , Melonio A . , and Torello , S . A Lean Expe - rience of Game Fabrication : From School to University and Back . In Technical Proc . of the FabLabs in Educational Context Work - shop , part of Fablearn Europe 2014 , co - located with IDC 2014 . • Dodero G . , Gennari R . , Melonio A . , and Torello , S . Gamiﬁed co - design with cooperative learning . In CHI ’ 14 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI EA ’ 14 ) . Accep - tance rate : 37 . 5 % . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 707 - 718 . viii • Di Mascio , T . , Gennari , R . and Melonio , A . Gamify your Field Studies for Learning about Your Learners . In Proc . of 3 rd Inter - national Workshop on Evidence Based and User centred Technol - ogy Enhanced Learning . September 2013 . Springer , 135 - 142 • Di Mascio , T . , Gennari , R . , Melonio , A . and Vittorini , P . Play and Learn about Your Learners to Early Form your TEL Design . In Technology - enhanced Formative Assessment Workshop ( TEFA ) . September 2013 . • Melonio A . . Game - based Co - design of Games for Learning with Children and Teachers : Research Goals and a Study . In Proceed - ings of the CHItaly 2013 Doctoral Consortium co - located with the 10 th International Conference of the Italian SIGCHI Chap - ter ( CHItaly 2013 ) , Trento , Italy , September 16 , 2013 . http : / / ceur - ws . org / Vol - 1065 / paper 3 . pdf • Melonio , A . and Gennari , R . How to Design Games for Deaf Children : Evidence - based Guidelines . In proceedings of 2 nd In - ternational Workshop on Evidence - based Technology Enhanced Learning ( Salamanca , Spain , May 2013 ) , Vol . 218 ( Advances in Intelligent Systems and Computing ) . Springer , pp 83 - 92 . publications not related to the topic of the thesis List of the author’s publications that are not related or that are marginally related to the topics discussed in the thesis . International Journals • Di Mascio , T . , Gennari , R . and Melonio , A . and Tarantino , L . and Vittorini , P . Supporting Children in Mastering Temporal Rela - tions of Stories : the TERENCE Learning Approach . In Special Is - sue of the International Journal of Distance Education Technolo - gies ( IJDET ) on Visual Aspects in Technology Enhanced Learn - ing , Vol . 1 , in press in 2016 . International Conferences • Cecilia , M . R . , Di Mascio , T . and Melonio , A . The 1 st Release of the TERENCE Learner GUI : the User - based Usability Evalua - tion . In proceedings of 2 nd International Workshop on Evidence - based Technology Enhanced Learning ( Salamanca , Spain , May ix 2013 ) , vol . 218 ( Advances in Intelligent Systems and Computing ) . Springer , 1 - 8 . • Di Mascio T , Gennari R , Melonio A , Vittorini P . The User Classes Building Process in a TEL project . In proceedings of International Workshop on evidenced - based Technology Enhanced Learning ( Salamanca , March 28 - 30 2012 ) , vol . 152 , ( Advances in Intelligent Systems and Computing ) . Springer . 107 - 114 . • Alrifai , M . , Di Mascio T , Gennari R , Melonio A , Vittorini P . and De la Prieta , F . The Learners’ User Classes in the TERENCE Adaptive Learning System . In proceedings of Advanced Learn - ing Technologies ( ICALT ) , 2012 IEEE 12 th International Confer - ence on , vol . , no . , pp . 572 - 576 , 4 - 6 July 2012 . • Di Mascio , T . , Gennari , R . , Melonio , A . , Vittorini , P . Visual rep - resentations of narratives for Poor comprehenders . In proceed - ings of the International Workshop on evidenced - based Technol - ogy Enhanced Learning . ( Salamanca , March 28 - 30 2012 ) . Vol . 152 , ( Advances in Intelligent and Soft Computing ) . Sringer , pp . 91 - 98 . • Melonio , A . , Tarantino , L . and Di Mascio , T . Towards ICT sup - port for elderly displaced people : looking for natural gestures . In proceedings of the 8 th Conference of the Italian Chapter of AIS conference ( ITAIS 2011 , Rome ) ( Information Systems : Cross - roads for Organization , Management , Accounting and Engineer - ing ) . Springer , 135 - 143 . x C O N T E N T S 1 introduction 1 1 . 1 Research Motivation and Context 1 1 . 2 Research Contributions 2 1 . 2 . 1 Research Goal 3 1 . 2 . 2 Objectives and Research Questions 3 1 . 3 The Empirical Research Approach and its Evolution 4 1 . 4 Outline of the Thesis 6 2 background 7 2 . 1 Approach to the Literature Review 8 2 . 2 From Designing for People to Designing with People 9 2 . 2 . 1 UCD Main Ideas 9 2 . 2 . 2 The UCD Process 10 2 . 3 Participatory Design ( PD ) 11 2 . 3 . 1 PD : Main Ideas 11 2 . 3 . 2 PD : How to Use It 12 2 . 3 . 3 PD : What to Use or Not to Use 13 2 . 3 . 4 PD and Children 15 2 . 4 Game Design 23 2 . 4 . 1 What a Game Is and Why Playing It 23 2 . 4 . 2 Game Design in a Nutshell 24 2 . 4 . 3 Game Design Process 25 2 . 4 . 4 Game Design with Children 26 2 . 5 Open Challenges 29 2 . 5 . 1 Collaboration 30 2 . 5 . 2 Empowerment of Children 30 2 . 5 . 3 Empowerment of Adults 31 2 . 6 Relevant Education Theories for Tackling Challenges 32 2 . 6 . 1 Collaboration : Cooperative Learning 32 2 . 6 . 2 Empowerment : Gamiﬁcation and Engagement and Learning Asessment 32 3 the gacoco method 37 3 . 1 The GaCoCo Method 37 3 . 2 Epistemology 39 3 . 2 . 1 Cooperative Learning Contributions 39 3 . 2 . 2 Gamiﬁcaton Contributions 41 3 . 3 Values 42 xi Contents 3 . 4 Participant Stakeholders and Their Roles 43 3 . 5 Outcomes 43 3 . 6 Lifecycle 45 4 the gacoco 2014 study 47 4 . 1 Study 48 4 . 1 . 1 Goals 48 4 . 1 . 2 Participants and Roles 51 4 . 1 . 3 Design 52 4 . 2 GaCoCo Design Activity 54 4 . 2 . 1 Gamiﬁed Environment and Gamiﬁed Material 55 4 . 2 . 2 Cooperative Learning Rules , Roles and Strate - gies 59 4 . 2 . 3 Protocol Mission by Mission 63 4 . 3 Analysis and Results 70 4 . 3 . 1 Data Collection and Instruments 70 4 . 3 . 2 Study Results 76 4 . 4 Discussion 86 4 . 4 . 1 Quality of Products for Learning 86 4 . 4 . 2 Children’s Achievement Emotions for Engagement 87 4 . 4 . 3 Children’s Achievement Emotions and Quality of Products 89 4 . 5 Conclusion 90 5 in - between 2014 and 2015 : the development stage 93 5 . 1 Study 94 5 . 1 . 1 Goals 94 5 . 1 . 2 Participant and Roles 94 5 . 2 Study Design Activity 95 5 . 2 . 1 Development Approach with Students 95 5 . 2 . 2 Development Activity with Students 95 5 . 3 Analysis and Results 97 5 . 3 . 1 Game Development Issues 98 5 . 3 . 2 Results 99 5 . 4 Discussion 99 5 . 5 Conclusions 100 6 the gacoco 2015 study 103 6 . 1 Study 104 6 . 1 . 1 Goals 104 6 . 1 . 2 Participants and Roles 104 6 . 1 . 3 Design 106 6 . 2 GaCoCo Design Activity 106 6 . 2 . 1 Gamiﬁed Environment and Material 109 xii Contents 6 . 2 . 2 Cooperative Learning Rules , Roles and Strate - gies 113 6 . 2 . 3 Protocol Mission by Mission 115 6 . 3 Analysis and Results 127 6 . 3 . 1 Data Collection and Instruments 127 6 . 3 . 2 Study Results 129 6 . 4 Discussion 140 6 . 4 . 1 Quality of Products for Learning 141 6 . 4 . 2 Children’s Achievement Emotions for Engagement 142 6 . 4 . 3 Engagement with Material 143 6 . 4 . 4 Children’s Achievement Emotions and Quality of Products 145 6 . 5 Conclusion 145 7 guidelines 149 7 . 1 Towards Guidelines for Participatory Game Design 149 7 . 2 Research Method 150 7 . 3 How To Organize a Design Activity 151 7 . 4 Game Design Tasks 152 7 . 5 Game Design Material 153 7 . 5 . 1 Gamiﬁed Probes 153 7 . 5 . 2 Game Design Generative Toolkits 154 7 . 6 What to Track in a Design Activity 154 7 . 7 Participants’ Roles During the Design Activity 155 7 . 7 . 1 Design Expert’s Role 155 7 . 7 . 2 Teachers’ Role 155 7 . 7 . 3 Education Expert’s Role 156 8 conclusions 157 8 . 1 Summary of the Research 157 8 . 2 Answers to Research Questions 158 8 . 3 Research Contributions 161 8 . 3 . 1 The GaCoCo Method 162 8 . 3 . 2 Protocols for Replicating Studies 163 8 . 3 . 3 A Set of Guidelines 164 8 . 4 Research Limitations 165 8 . 4 . 1 The GaCoCo Method 165 8 . 4 . 2 Protocols 165 8 . 5 Ongoing Research Stemming from This Thesis 167 8 . 5 . 1 Replicating GaCoCo 167 8 . 5 . 2 Gamiﬁed Experience 168 Bibliography 171 xiii L I S T O F F I G U R E S Figure 1 Design lifecycle from ISO 19240 - 210 11 Figure 2 GaCoCo under the focus of ﬁve lenses 38 Figure 3 Product GaCoCo lifecycle stages 44 Figure 4 The form for organizing groups and collecting data concerning children 54 Figure 5 The progression map ( on the left ) and the tree map ( on the right ) . 57 Figure 6 The signalling disk and the scepter in use ( on the left ) ; the shop ( on the right ) . 57 Figure 7 Forms for releasing the game design document ( on the left ) and the ad hoc frame for game pro - totype ( on the right ) . 58 Figure 8 Steps and material mission by mission of the 2014 study 62 Figure 9 Form for choosing the group name ( on the left ) and the group badge prototyped ( on the right ) 65 Figure 10 The form for the Game Idea ( on the left ) ; a char - acter prototyped by a group ( on the right ) . 66 Figure 11 The ﬁlled form for the core mechanics docu - ment ( on the left ) ; two game levels prototyped by a group ( on the right ) . 67 Figure 12 Passage conditions form ( on the left ) ; the ﬁnal prototyped game with the winning and losing conditions and passage conditions ( on the right ) 68 Figure 13 The panel with the assembled game on the poster frame . On the right , each game had a space for comments and feedback ; at the bottom the panel had the voting box for voting the preferred game . 69 Figure 14 A page of GR - AES concerning enjoyment for males 73 Figure 15 A ranking survey for engagement with gami - ﬁed probes used in the activity 75 Figure 16 Mean intensity of emotions per mission ( M 1 – M 5 ) 78 xv List of Figures Figure 17 Correlations for intensity of negative emotions per mission ( M 1 – M 5 ) , and quality of product per mission ( M 2 – M 5 ) , at the individual ( n = 35 ) and group level ( n = 9 ) . Pearson r ( individual ) is before the slash , Spearman rho ( group ) is after the slash . * p < . 05 , * * p < . 01 , * * * p < . 001 84 Figure 18 Correlations for intensity of negative emotions per mission ( M 1 – M 5 ) , and quality of product per mission ( M 2 – M 5 ) , at the individual ( n = 35 ) and group level ( n = 9 ) . Pearson r ( individual ) is before the slash , Spearman rho ( group ) is after the slash . * p < . 05 , * * p < . 01 , * * * p < . 001 85 Figure 19 Students inspecting children’s prototypes 96 Figure 20 A game design document ( at the left ) and the related low - ﬁdelity prototype ( at the right ) . 97 Figure 21 Screenshots of a game developed by university students . 97 Figure 22 Number of issues found by students per cate - gory , in total . 100 Figure 23 The progression map with Arduino sensor and controllers . 110 Figure 24 The control box of a group and the NFC card in action . 112 Figure 25 The speaking cup used during the brainstorm - ing session . 112 Figure 26 Steps and material mission by mission of the 2015 study 116 Figure 27 Form for choosing the group name and the group logo prototyped . 119 Figure 28 The brainstorming panel ( on the upper part ) and the stimulus cards ( on the bottom part ) . 120 Figure 29 The class storyline form ﬁlled in by a group . 122 Figure 30 A form for the Game Idea ( on the left ) ; the char - acter prototyped by a group ( on the right ) . 123 Figure 31 A form for a Game Idea ( on the left ) ; a proto - typed character by a group ( on the right ) . 124 Figure 32 A ﬁlled form for the core mechanics documents ( on the left ) ; a prototyped game level ( on the right ) . 124 Figure 33 A passage conditions form ( on the left ) ; a ﬁnal prototyped game with the winning and losing effects ( on the right ) . 126 xvi List of Figures Figure 34 The gallery tour during the Mission at univer - sity . 127 Figure 35 Mean intensity of emotions per mission ( M 1 – M 5 ) 132 Figure 36 Correlations for intensity of positive emotions per mission ( M 1 – M 5 ) , and quality of product per mission ( M 2 – M 5 ) , at the individual ( n = 35 ) and group level ( n = 9 ) . Pearson r ( individual ) and Spearman rho ( group ) are shown in table . * p < . 05 , * * p < . 01 , * * * p < . 001 138 Figure 37 Correlations for intensity of negative emotions per mission ( M 1 – M 5 ) , and quality of product per mission ( M 2 – M 5 ) , at the individual ( n = 35 ) and group level ( n = 9 ) . Pearson r ( individual ) and Spearman rho ( group ) are shown in table . . * p < . 05 , * * p < . 01 , * * * p < . 001 139 Figure 38 Representation of the guidelines categories and the participants involved in a participatory game design , as in GacoCo 150 xvii L I S T O F T A B L E S Table 1 Groups with quality score equal to 1 ( positive result ) for an issue in a mission 77 Table 2 Quality of product for each group and mission ( M 2 - M 5 ) ; means ( M ) and standard deviations ( SD ) across groups 77 Table 3 Goals of the study with the related hypotheses . See Section 4 . 1 . 1 for more details . 105 Table 4 The ﬁrst column contains the type of data col - lected during the study . For each data we pro - vide a description , the instrument used so as to gather such data , and the analyses executed with the gathered data . Further details have been given in Section 4 . 3 . 1 . 128 Table 5 Issues applicable ( A ) or not applicable ( N / A ) across Mission ( M 3 – M 5 ) 129 Table 6 Groups with quality score equal to 1 ( positive result ) for an issue in a mission . 130 Table 7 Quality of product for each group and mission ( M 3 – M 5 ) ; mean ( M ) and standard deviation ( SD ) across groups . 130 Table 8 Descriptive statistics for intensity of emotions per mission : M 1 – M 5 131 Table 9 Major changes in 2015 146 xix 1 I N T R O D U C T I O N contents 1 . 1 Research Motivation and Context 1 1 . 2 Research Contributions 2 1 . 2 . 1 Research Goal 3 1 . 2 . 2 Objectives and Research Questions 3 1 . 3 The Empirical Research Approach and its Evolution 4 1 . 4 Outline of the Thesis 6 1 . 1 research motivation and context The topic of my thesis has grown out of my previous experiences as a university student . During my university studies , I gathered some experiences in Human Computer Interaction ( HCI ) . In particular , I was attracted by the idea of designing products for people , with people at the center of the design process , so as to improve the quality of the product and to maximize the user satisfaction . After graduating , I spent one year as junior researcher in Child Cen - tered Interaction ( CCI ) , a sub - area of HCI , since I was involved in the European FP 7 TERENCE research project . TERENCE aimed at de - veloping an adaptive learning system , for improving reading skills of children aged 7 – 11 ( hearing and deaf ) who also were considered poor comprehenders . TERENCE devised learning material and a pedagog - ical plan adapted to need of such learners ( TERENCE consortium , 2010 ) . The TERENCE material consisted on stories , and educational games for reasoning about stories . I was involved in several stages of the project : ( 1 ) analyses of the context of use , using HCI data gath - ering methods for children and with children , for specifying their re - quirements ; ( 2 ) ( early ) design of games with game design experts ; ( 3 ) evaluation of games with children . During the context of use , data gathering and evaluation sessions with children , I witnessed how children were willing to express their ideas for creating “their” own educational games . This fact was very stimulating for me , so I shifted my attention to the possible involve - ment of children in the early - game design process itself , instead of 1 introduction letting designers develop games starting from children requirements as in traditional HCI . This is why I decided to enroll in the Ph . D . pro - gramme at the Free University of Bozen - Bolzano , at the end of my activity within TERENCE , and to pursue a research topic in such area . The research aim of my Ph . D . thesis became designing games with and for children . My Ph . D . activity started considering the various variables and issues to face when children are involved in the game design process . After a thorough literature review and discussions with CCI ex - perts , participatory design ( PD ) stood out as the HCI comprehensive method that allows designers to work with any end - user . In case prod - ucts are games for children , having children as co - designers should help in producing more playable games , meeting the requirements of nowadays children . More generally , PD brings advantages in terms of innovation and appropriateness of design , which can outweigh the fact that PD is time consuming and requires several resources ( Nesset and Large , 2004 ) . My Ph . D . work adopts PD of digital games for children , with chil - dren , and in learning contexts . PD in learning contexts counts several studies , but a uniform reading of co - design for nowadays learning contexts , e . g . , school , was missing . Several open questions and chal - lenges emerge when adapting PD in learning contexts , such as how to empower all participants , children and designers , bringing learning beneﬁts and engagement , and including all children in early design activities . Due to the complexity and the constraints of learning contexts , the need to design and conduct exploratory ﬁeld studies emerged . These studies gave me the opportunity to highlight the factors to explore , and the criteria to use , in order to effectively include all children , and to empower all participants . Moreover , working in the school context required to acquire knowledge of instructional design , as well as to actively work with researchers and practitioners in the education ﬁeld . The analysis of a multitude of studies reported in literature , together with my own experience in the ﬁeld , created the basis for designing games with children in learning contexts , so as to empower children and designers , and include all children . 1 . 2 research contributions This section overviews the research contributions of this Ph . D . thesis It describes the main research goal and objectives , as well as the main research contributions of this thesis . 2 1 . 2 research contributions 1 . 2 . 1 Research Goal The overall goal of this thesis is to adapt and reﬁne PD methods and techniques for ( early ) designing games with children and for chil - dren in learning contexts , so as to empower children and designers , including all children in the design process . 1 . 2 . 2 Objectives and Research Questions The main research question related to the thesis goal is as follows : rq . How to co - design games with children in learning contexts , so as to empower and include all ? In order to answer the above question , this was split into the following more speciﬁc questions : rq . 1 How to include all learners’ game design ideas ? In other words , how to foster democratic collaboration among children and with adults so that all children “have a voice” in the design process ? rq . 2 How to empower children in terms of engagement in game de - sign ? rq . 3 How to empower children in terms of learning , about of early game design ? rq . 4 How to empower designers in terms of learning about children’s game design ideas ? To answer these questions , this thesis addresses different objectives : 1 . PD and game design literature review . The ﬁrst objective was to gain an in - depth understanding of PD and game design meth - ods used with children for involving them in the game design process . This objective was addressed through the review of the related literature . 2 . Analysis of the learning context . The second objective was in - vestigating challenges and constraints that learning contexts im - pose on participatory game design with children . This objective was addressed through an empirical research approach via ex - ploratory studies . 3 . Specifying the method . Abstracting from lessons learnt by tack - ling the above objectives , this Ph . D . work aimed at specifying the method for co - designing games with and for children in learn - ing contexts . This objective was addressed using an empirical research approach for iteratively reﬁning the method . 3 introduction 4 . Set of guidelines . Finally , drawing upon the results of ﬁeld stud - ies , this Ph . D . work aimed at compiling a set of guidelines for conducting participatory game design studies so as to include and empower all participants . 1 . 3 the empirical research approach and its evolution My Ph . D . work adopted an empirical research approach aimed at generating a participatory game design method . The method is generated as “intermediate theories” are generated ( Ed - mondson and McManus , 2007 ) : it draws from prior work , from dif - ferent research areas , to propose new ideas or relationships between existing constructs . It emerges through ﬁeld studies , appropriate for exploratory endeavors to stimulate new ideas . In this thesis , data gath - ered in ﬁeld studies are hybrid : qualitative and quantitative . The de - sign method matures through an iterative learning process that re - quires a mindset in which feedback , rethinking , and revising are em - braced as valued activities . How the method was developed is ex - plained in details in the following . The ﬁrst step was a review of participatory design and game design literature studies , focusing on working with children . The second step required an investigation of learning contexts where to conduct participatory game design studies . For gaining a deep un - derstanding of learning contexts ( participants , tasks , environment ) , we conducted exploratory ﬁeld research studies with children in different settings , namely , university children laboratories and summer schools . In parallel we also did brainstorming meetings and inquiries with do - main experts of educational psychology and pedagogy researchers , in - teraction design and children , and game design . The knowledge acquired from the analysis of learning contexts al - lowed us to move towards a ﬁrst instance of a new participatory game design method . This required to actively involve education researchers and education practitioners , such as primary - school deans and teach - ers . Studies conducted in 2013 in primary and middle schools allowed us to test the preliminary version of the method . Speciﬁcally in 2013 , two primary school classes were involved in co - designing game starting from a story 1 read in class . The activity was concentred in a short - time ( 2 hours per class ) , and teams of children co - designed prototypes of games , by resolving missions . The design 1 A story can be deﬁned as a narrative , either true or ﬁctitious , in prose or verse , designed to interest , amuse , or instruct the hearer or reader ; tale . 4 1 . 3 the empirical research approach and its evolution activity was conceived as a game in itself , i . e . , it was gamiﬁed . Dur - ing the co - design activity , each team of children was supported by a designer , with a scaffolding role ( Dodero et al . , 2014 b ) . Then design - ers observed , tracked and analysed game elements that children un - derstood and frequently inserted in their game design , e . g . , rewards , levels , characters . Such knowledge as well as literature ﬁndings ( other studies conducting game design with children ) led a revision of the method and protocols for the subsequent studies . The third step , in fact , was deriving from this ﬁeld study a more ma - ture version of the participatory game design method . The new version of the method better speciﬁed roles of designers and teachers . Teach - ers , as experts of education and of school contexts , became responsible for coaching and scaffolding group work . As for experts , the new ver - sion of the method reduced their presence in the design team . The aim was to improve the quality experience of children , by allowing them to fully express their ideas , as independently as possible from designers . The new version was suited for developing game design activities spanning across several school days , so as to bring children learning beneﬁts . Maintaining participants’ long - term engagement became im - portant and challenging . To this end , a step further by mixing together gamiﬁcation and co - design was done : gamiﬁed probes were used for creating engagement throughout the experience , stimulating positive activating emotions , such as enjoyment and relaxation . Cooperative learning was also introduced for fostering democratic collaboration during participatory game design . A ﬁeld study was thus conducted in two primary schools during 2014 . In the fourth and ﬁnal step , the method was further reﬁned through a second ﬁeld study , run in 2015 . The goal was to enhance children’s engagement towards the end of game design because this turned out to be cognitively demanding and created a certain degree of anxiety in the 2014 study . In particular , the gamiﬁed probes that supported children’s teamwork were made interactive in a non - intrusive manner , and capable of storing data concerning children’s progression through game design and their collaboration . In between the third and second step , and the related ﬁeld studies in 2014 and 2015 , we executed another study with the aim of develop - ing children’s products . Speciﬁcally , children’s products , namely game design documents with low - ﬁdelity prototypes released at the end of the 2014 study , were picked up as - is by university students so as to de - velop children’s ideas into high - ﬁdelity interactive game prototypes . This research process resulted in the deﬁnition of guidelines for con - ducting participatory game design studies so as to include and em - power all participants . 5 introduction 1 . 4 outline of the thesis The Thesis is structured as follow : Chapter 2 presents an overview of PD and game design , and a lit - erature review of related methods and studies in the area of design for and with children . The chapter ends with open challenges found in literature about how children are involved in co - design of games , and recaps related theories that help us in tackling such challenges . The challenges are related to the research questions presented in this chapter . Chapter 3 presents the participatory game design method ( GaCoCo ) for tackling the emerged challenges , and guiding children to conceive and create prototypes of games for children at school . The method is developed as a PD method that a designer can use to plan , conduct and assess an early game design experience with children . Chapter 4 describes the ﬁeld study executed in two primary schools in 2014 and the lessons learnt from them . The study adopts the method with children at school , and focuses on empowering both children and designers , including all children . Chapter 5 describes the ﬁeld study executed after the 2014 study . The chapter explains how children’s products , namely game design documents with the related low - ﬁdelity prototypes released at the end of the 2014 study , were picked up as - is and developed by computer - science university students . Chapter 6 , drawing from knowledge acquired by the 2014 study , presents the 2015 study , with its last reﬁnement of the participatory game design method . In particular , building on top of the 2014 study results , it presents changes and new outcomes . Chapter 7 develops a set guidelines , emerged from the experience gained through ﬁeld studies , and that should guide researchers and professionals to early game design with children in learning contexts . Chapter 8 recaps the research work reported in this thesis , with our answers to the research questions , a discussion of the achievement of research objectives set in this introduction , and a summary of the re - search contributions . The chapter and the entire thesis , concludes with considerations of the limitations of the research work , and directions for further research . 6 2 B A C K G R O U N D contents 2 . 1 Approach to the Literature Review 8 2 . 2 From Designing for People to Designing with People 9 2 . 2 . 1 UCD Main Ideas 9 2 . 2 . 2 The UCD Process 10 2 . 3 Participatory Design ( PD ) 11 2 . 3 . 1 PD : Main Ideas 11 2 . 3 . 2 PD : How to Use It 12 2 . 3 . 3 PD : What to Use or Not to Use 13 2 . 3 . 4 PD and Children 15 2 . 4 Game Design 23 2 . 4 . 1 What a Game Is and Why Playing It 23 2 . 4 . 2 Game Design in a Nutshell 24 2 . 4 . 3 Game Design Process 25 2 . 4 . 4 Game Design with Children 26 2 . 5 Open Challenges 29 2 . 5 . 1 Collaboration 30 2 . 5 . 2 Empowerment of Children 30 2 . 5 . 3 Empowerment of Adults 31 2 . 6 Relevant Education Theories for Tackling Challenges 32 2 . 6 . 1 Collaboration : Cooperative Learning 32 2 . 6 . 2 Empowerment : Gamiﬁcation and Engagement and Learn - ing Asessment 32 In order to clarify the scientiﬁc background of this work , this chapter presents a review of related research in HCI and Game design , with and for children . Section 2 . 2 deals with the User Centred Design ( UCD ) methodology as the evolution over time of the Interaction Design dis - cipline and its process , in order to provide the rationale behind the PD approach , presented in Section 2 . 3 . Section 2 . 4 includes an overview of game design , and how to design games with and for children . The chapter ends with Section 2 . 5 , that describes open challenges when children are involved in co - design of games , and the related theories that help us in tackling them , in Section 2 . 6 . 7 background 2 . 1 approach to the literature review In order to determine the background for the thesis research , we proceeded with a literature review in two main steps . In the ﬁrst step , we conducted an exploratory review of the literature concerning PD and game design with children . In order to conduct this review , we searched through general databases , such as Scopus , ACM Digital Li - brary , Google Scholar , Science Direct and IEEE Xplore Digital Library . The majority of relevant papers were found in proceedings of con - ferences or workshops related to HCI , with a focus on CCI , and Inter - action Design ( ID ) . A few studies were found in journals , conferences , workshops or symposia concerning Game Based Learning ( GBL ) , Tech - nology Enhanced Learning ( TEL ) , PD . We analyzed the retrieved pa - pers and retained only those relevant for the thesis research . Then , we investigated the references of the retained papers to enrich our litera - ture review . Afterwards , we clustered papers into two main category : PD with children and game design with children . The relevant work concerning PD with children is presented in Section 2 . 3 , and it is placed in the more general context of user centred design ( Section 2 . 2 ) . Game design work with children is presented in Section 2 . 4 . Literature analysis highlighted potential challenges for participatory game design with children . They were for the ﬁrst time published in ( Dodero et al . , 2014 a ) . In the second step , we extended our liter - ature search for tackling the aforementioned challenges . To this end , we searched again through general databases and conferences consid - ering the following keywords : PD with children , co - design with chil - dren , game design and children , game design engagement , co - design engagement , co - design game collaboration , performance PD children , PD learning and children . Moreover , as introduced in Chapter 1 , we or - ganized brainstorming meetings with domain experts and researchers of ID and children , game design , educational psychology and peda - gogy . The result of this second step were revised open challenges , pre - sented in Section 2 . 5 , as well as speciﬁc theories that can help in tack - ling the open challenges , presented in Section 2 . 6 . These challenges and theories inform the participatory game design method presented in Chapter 3 . 8 2 . 2 from designing for people to designing with people 2 . 2 from designing for people to de - signing with people 2 . 2 . 1 UCD Main Ideas In the 1970 s , UCD emerged as an HCI approach characterized by the reproduction or translation of user knowledge into principles and prescriptions that designers may work with . According to Preece et al ( Preece et al . , 2002 ) , in UCD users are central information sources . UCD aims at “ . . . ﬁnding out a lot about the users and their tasks , and using this information to inform design” . In UCD , during the process lifecycle , designers should focus on what is being designed ( e . g . , prod - uct , interface , service ) , looking for ways to ensure that it meets the user needs ( Sanders , 2002 ) . The ultimate goal of UCD is to optimize a user’s experience with a system , product or process . UCD aims at realizing this goal , by con - sidering the user perspective and cognitive factors , during all phases of the design process—users are placed at the center of the design and development lifecycle . Moreover , considering users’ perspectives and requirements from the beginning , users become an essential part in the design process . In ( Nisbett and Wilson , 1977 ) , the authors claims that more useful and relevant design ideas might emerge by giving an active central role to users . In addition , by this approach it is possible to eliminate the gap between the way the system actually works and the way users perceive and interact with it . Over the years , several research ﬁelds and disciplines adopted the UCD approach in the design process : education , architecture , business , visual design , interaction design and usability . UCD became a mul - tidisciplinary approach that includes application of knowledge and techniques on human factors and ergonomics . This application to the design of interactive systems enhances their effectiveness , improves the human labor conditions , and contrasts the possible adverse effects of theit use on health , safety and performance . The presence of differ - ent types of expertise in design teams becomes fundamental for the creation of usable products : experts of different ﬁelds sit together with designers , and collaboratively create products , so that the role of a de - signer “begins to evolve towards design facilitation [ . . . ] [ so as to work ] on the best solutions in an ongoing way” ( Gothelf , 2013 ) . At present , UCD is not a speciﬁc design methodology , but a gen - eral approach to design . It can be concretely developed in many ways , depending on the nature of the products to be made , and the charac - teristics of the organization that realizes the project . 9 background 2 . 2 . 2 The UCD Process UCD was deﬁned by a standard ISO in 1999 . This standard , num - bered 13407 , speciﬁed the fundamental principles at the basis of UCD — “The goal of the standard is to ensure that the development and use of interactive systems take account of the needs of the user as well as the needs of the developer and owner . . . to name but a few stakehold - ers . ” ( ISO 9241 - 210 , 2010 ) . The standard ISO 13407 was updated and re - issued as ISO 9241 − 210 : “Ergonomics of human - system interaction , Part 210 : Human - centred design for interactive systems” . This is a process standard , aimed at holding people responsible for managing design processes . It presents a high level overview of activities that are recommended for human centered design . The standard describes 6 key principles that will ensure that a given design process is user centered : ( 1 ) the design is based upon an ex - plicit understanding of users , tasks and environments ; ( 2 ) users are involved throughout design and development ; ( 3 ) the design is driven and reﬁned by user - centered evaluation ; ( 4 ) the process is iterative ; ( 5 ) the design addresses the whole user experience ; ( 6 ) the design team includes multidisciplinary skills and perspectives . The rationale for following UCD principles is that a UCD process delivers products that are easier to understand and use ( ISO 9241 - 210 , 2010 ) . The UCD process implementing those six principles , and it can be summarized into four main general phases ( see Figure 1 ) : ( 1 ) analy - sis : identify people involved and the context of use ; ( 2 ) speciﬁcation : identify requirements or user goals ( 3 ) design and prototype : create design solutions through stages , from a rough concept to a complete design ; ( 4 ) evaluation : user feedback , ideally through usability testing . There are many variations of the UCD process . Depending on the needs , the UCD process can become waterfall , agile , lean . Designers can select among many different methods and techniques , and regard - less if they are exploring requirements or testing a solution , the same method can be adopted in many different design situations ( Wester - lund et al . , 2003 ; Bevan , 2009 ) in a design process . In a traditional UCD engineering process , users were mainly involved in the system requirement phase and in the usability testing . They were not involved in the design phase and in the prototype realization , phases that were mainly carried out by designers and professionals . Growing attention has been given to the Lean User eXperience ( Lean UX ) approach , a branch of UCD . Lean UX design makes a heavy use of the notion of minimum - value products , such as low - ﬁdelity proto - 10 2 . 3 participatory design ( pd ) Figure 1 : Design lifecycle from ISO 19240 - 210 types . These are used to create or evaluate alternative ideas with users , as quickly as possible , and as often as possible . 2 . 3 participatory design ( pd ) 2 . 3 . 1 PD : Main Ideas Participatory experience is not simply a method or set of method - ologies , it is a mindset and an attitude about people . It is the belief that all people have something to offer to the design process and that they can be both articulate and creative when given appro - priate tools with which to express themselves ( Sanders , 2002 ) . The idea of PD appeared in Scandinavia in the 1970 s partly due to the labor union push for workers to have more democratic control over changes in their work ( Ehn and Kyng , 1987 ) . In PD , the user involve - ment reaches a deeper level : users are actively involved in the design process and might also be a component of the design team ( Ehn and Kyng , 1987 ; Greenbaum and Kyng , 1992 ; Schuler and Namioka , 1993 ) . Sanders deﬁned PD as a new attitude to design that requires new ways of thinking and working . Moreover , she introduced the term co - design , intended as people that design together . In this way , people 11 background have the opportunities to collect and expand a larger set of ideas ( Sanders , 2002 ) . Nowadays , PD is deﬁned as a set of theories and practices that em - phasize the role of the end - users as full participants in the design pro - cess ; in essence , users are co - designers . The term co - design has begun to be increasingly used , considered as a step forward from UCD , and closely associated with PD . The consequence is that the co - design term is overloaded . In a recent work ( Mattelmäki and Visser , 2011 ) , the authors addressed the termi - nological challenge of identifying the relationship among co - design and several other related terms , including co - creation and PD . They summarized the various uses of co - design and co - creation as follows : “Co - design is a process , and the planning , adjusting tools and facili - tation is built on a mindset based on collaboration . . . Co - creation can take place within co - design processes but focuses much more on the collective creativity of involved users and stakeholders” ( Mattelmäki and Visser , 2011 ) . In this dissertation , co - design builds on PD , and it is used in the sense of ( Sanders and Stappers , 2008 ) : collective creativity during a design process . 2 . 3 . 2 PD : How to Use It Over the years , research into PD and co - design has attracted in - creasing interest . PD has been explored in several contexts and car - ried out within different projects . Examples include education ( Guha et al . , 2005 ; Alborzi et al . , 2000 ; Könings et al . , 2014 ) , home ( Westerlund et al . , 2003 ) , public environments ( Fosh et al . , 2014 ; Derboven et al . , 2015 ; Vines et al . , 2013 ) , healthcare ( Sjöberg and Timpka , 1998 ) , social science , action research ( Foth and Axup , 2006 ; Greenwood and Levin , 2007 ) , design and art ( Muller and Loke , 2010 ) , open source platforms and social media ( Ehn , 2008 ; DiSalvo et al . , 2014 ) . During the latest ten years , PD has gained momentum for designing novel systems . There is no single way of doing co - design with users , but there are numerous methods and activities which can be carried out in all stages of PD lifecycle . The methods used depend on the design purpose and on the speciﬁc context where the designer will adapt the methods and techniques . Already in the early ’ 90 s , Muller et al . presented a brief guide for designers and practitioners that includes the ﬁrst taxonomy of all the practices involved in PD ( Muller et al . , 1993 ) . It focuses on the use of PD in different stages of the design process , and with different de - grees in user involvement . In ( Muller et al . , 1993 ) , Muller et al . survey 12 2 . 3 participatory design ( pd ) methods and techniques of PD that can lead to hybrid experiences . The hybrid experiences is deﬁned in ( Muller , 2003 ) as “a fertile environ - ment in which participants can combine diverse knowledges into new insights and plans for action” . This environment creates the optimal conditions for reducing power relations , and allows everyone to feel in an equal position and free to express oneself . In 2008 , Lee and Bichard ( 2008 ) proposed a framework for support - ing designers during PD , focusing on the level of involvement of the different stakeholders , and on their role in the design process . By in - creasing involvement , roles of users change from passive to active . Dur - ing this changing , designers and users work together as partners in a “design collaboration stage” . Subsequently , in 2010 , Sanders et al . in ( Sanders et al . , 2010 ) pro - posed a practical and useful framework that organizes several tools , techniques and methods for PD . This framework helps the PD com - munity to decide which tools and techniques are most relevant for a speciﬁc situation . Recently , Frauenberger et al . in ( Frauenberger et al . , 2015 ) proposed a conceptual framework namely a “tool - to - think - with” , which guides designers , researchers and practitioners in incorporating PD in their work in a reﬂective way , more focussed into knowledge construction . The tool proposes four lenses to critically reﬂect on the nature of a PD effort : epistemology , values , stakeholders and outcomes . “This tool aims to provide a language that enables us to have a debate about what works when and why . . . and avoids PD being judged against positivistic standards it was not designed to meet . ” 2 . 3 . 3 PD : What to Use or Not to Use As reported in ( Kujala , 2003 , 2008 ) , PD can bring beneﬁts to de - signer , the product under design and its users . Design with users , as experts in their own work context , can only be effective within that context , and if these experts are allowed to contribute actively to the design ( Dix et al . , 1997 ) . The involvement of users , in discussing prob - lems and solutions together , assures that the product will be suitable for its intended purpose in the environment in which it will be used . In the reminder , positive and negative aspects of using PD are pre - sented . Positive Aspects PD has several key advantages . It might promote constructive re - ﬂection and dialogue when all users work together towards shared 13 background goals . PD forces designers to look at things from another point of view and to respect others’ opinions —co - design requires everyone to be creative : researchers , designers , clients , stakeholders and ﬁnal cus - tomers . Moreover , PD might help designers to gather several other facts about design situations they may not have been aware of . For instance , co - design forces designers to confront with the realities of customer emotions , and the motivations behind their behavior . When people take part in the creation of a product they develop a sense of personal ownership in the success of the project . This is strictly related to the sustainability of the project itself . A co - design process brings potential for sustainability if people’s involvement in design contributes to foster a sense of project ownership ( Ramirez , 2009 ) . Moreover , as reported in ( Sanders and Stappers , 2008 ) , co - design promotes and relies on social and mutual learning , due to the collab - orative nature of the co - design process . Learning takes place through participation in group settings , and through exchange and sharing of ideas ( Sanders and Stappers , 2008 ) . Negative Aspects A disadvantage of PD is that , during PD , users’ thinking can be constrained by what they know ( Preece et al . , 1994 , 2002 ) , limiting them to focus on what they have already experienced . Kujala ( 2008 ) reported that involving users is not an easy task for designers , and demonstrated the importance for product developers to early involve users , under the condition that the user and its roles are carefully con - sidered . When users are involved in the design of a product , they have expectation about the product . If the product cannot be realised as ex - pected by the user , the designer should take it into account in order to avoid higher expectations and subsequent frustration . Due to the involvement of different users from widely different do - mains and disciplines , another difﬁculty for a successful experience of PD is the communication between participants . Members of the team have to learn to communicate effectively and to respect each other’s contributions and expertise . This can be time - consuming , it adds costs to the process and cannot guarantee high quality of the end products . In ( Ehn , 1992 ) , Ehn reported that “ . . . in the beginning all you can un - derstand is what you already have understood” and how it is difﬁ - cult to create a design language that makes sense to all participants . Due to the fact that different perceptions and situations might arise between involved users , use of low - ﬁdelity material , e . g . , mock - ups or paper - based prototypes , is recommended ; not because they mirror “real things” , but because they support interaction and reﬂection . 14 2 . 3 participatory design ( pd ) Therefore , PD can be quite costly and it requires both ﬁnancial and human resources . Additionally , it needs of time to gather data from and about users . In addition to the several contexts and domains in which PD is ap - plied , PD has also considered different users , such as children , and different roles , depending on the project purpose and the contexts . In the remainder , we focused on PD and children . 2 . 3 . 4 PD and Children This part focuses on work concerning PD with children . Firstly it ex - plains why involve children in PD process . Secondly it overviews the theories related to the children’s development and their needs . Thirdly , it describes different children’s degree of participation in PD , and the PD methods and techniques found in literature . Finally , it focuses on what aspects ( advantages and disadvantages ) to take into account dur - ing PD with children . Why PD with Children Co - designing with children is an area of research that grew in par - allel with co - designing with adult users . Since the 1990 s , children , as a growing target group in terms of number and economic poten - tial ( Bekker and Markopoulos , 2003 ; Markopoulos et al . , 2008 ; Guha et al . , 2005 ) , are one of the speciﬁc groups of technology users that de - signers have started to focus on . Different PD methods and techniques for different purposes foresee the involvement of children as design - ers , with different degrees of participation ( Fails et al . , 2013 ; Nesset and Large , 2004 ; Read and Markopoulos , 2013 ) . In spite of its several success stories , PD with non - designers in general , and with children in particular can be challenging to conduct ( Mazzone , 2012 ) and difﬁcult to communicate ( Frauenberger et al . , 2015 ) . When children become active “users” in a design process , design - ers must shift their focus on children needs and their context of use . An important gift of a child is his or her creativity . Children have un - conventional viewpoints , regardless of the topic , even for the most complicated matters , and are always ready to share their thoughts . Young people , compared to other generations , are more skilled about technologies , and have differing abilities to express their ideas and to follow structured tasks . For this reason , methods for collecting infor - mation and generating solutions should be sensitive to their skills . The younger ones are interactive , information active , socially and interna - 15 background tionally aware , and highly mobile : “children are natural partners for co - design” ( Guha et al . , 2013 ) . In the literature , there are several theories and guidelines useful for designers to get oriented on children needs , and to understand how to involve them in a proper way in the design process . Although PD with children can be challenging to manage ( Mazzone , 2012 ; Van Mechelen et al . , 2014 , 2015 ; Frauenberger et al . , 2015 ) , children as co - designers , with their creativity and different perspective , become a valuable re - source for interaction design . Children’s Cognitive Development One of the ﬁrst aspect to consider when designing for children , is that they differ from adults in cognitive development . Cognitive devel - opment theories offer important guidelines to designers . The theories we focuses for this thesis are in the following . As reported in ( Piaget , 1952 ) , Piaget considered different stages of development , in relation to age . At each stage , a child is “constantly creating and re - creating his own model of reality , achieving mental growth by integrating simpler concepts into higher - level concepts” . The stages go from the sensory - motor stage ( until 2 years ) to the last stage , the formal operational one ( from 12 to 15 years old ) when the child’s thinking involves abstract reasoning . Piaget highlights the im - portance of individual and subjective repetitive experiences in order to develop an understanding of the world and to move from stage to stage . His goal was to persuade the educational system to adapt its activities to this new thinking . In our research we focus on children between 8 and 11 year old , that is , they belong to the concrete oper - ational stage , when intelligence starts to be logical but still refers to concrete things . Moreover , Druin in ( Druin , 1999 ) reported that , chil - dren in the age 7 – 11 belong to the best suited development stage as young partners in co - design . Also r related to cognitive development of children is the Vygotsky ’s theory ( Vygotski ˇ ı , 1978 ) . Vygotsky supports a view of development as more domain - speciﬁc : he regarded development as highly “situated” , and believed that , to understand cognitive development , the time and place where skills are acquired should be considered as well . Accord - ing to Vygotsky , learning happens through interaction with adults , and it is based on two concepts : the zone of proximal development , a char - acteristic of a speciﬁc relationship between learner and tutor ; scaffold - ing , a type of assistance to help learners accomplish a task that they would not have been able to do on their own ( Vygotskiˇı , 1978 ) . 16 2 . 3 participatory design ( pd ) Several researchers stressed the importance to consider children’s cognitive development in PD studies that involve children and wrote speciﬁc guidelines for designers . In ( Chiasson and Gutwin , 2005 ) authors presented a catalogue of design principles for children’s technology , oriented towards the de - signer needs . The catalogue is based on the analysis of a wide range of research into children’s technology and it is organized following the three categories of children development : cognitive , physical , and so - cial / emotional . The authors found the addressing of emotional needs especially problematic , due the strict relationship between motivations and engagement . Other guidelines for designers , aiming at involving children in the design process , were provided by Gelderblom ( 2014 ) . In ( Gelderblom , 2014 ) , Gelderblom , throughout a literature investigation , reported about 300 guidelines for the design of technology for children aged 5 – 8 years . The guidelines were organised in six categories , that integrate the rele - vant theoretical ﬁelds and provide practical support for designers . More general guidelines , concerning involvement of children in a co - design project , were provided by Mazzone . ( Mazzone , 2012 ) outlines elements , such as children’s roles and space , that are crucial in co - design sessions with children . Mazzone adopted six dimensions for deﬁning a theoretical framework aiming at supporting practitioners in their decisions when coordinating co - design sessions . Each dimension , outlined as wh / hw questions ( what , who , when , where and how ) , focused on a speciﬁc element : ( 1 ) the involvement of users and their roles , ( 2 ) space location features and ( 3 ) time management in terms of duration of co - design practice . In addition , the framework presents a list of the ( 4 ) most common techniques used in co - designs sessions , and ( 5 ) issues concerning ethics and security . The last dimension refers to the ( 6 ) design scope and session’s objectives . Children’s Degree of Participation in PD During the design process , children can be involved with different degrees of participation ( Fails et al . , 2013 ; Nesset and Large , 2004 ; Druin , 2002 ) . Druin considered different roles for children : users ( Ka - plan et al . , 2006 ) , testers ( Hanna et al . , 2004 ) , informant ( Scaife and Rogers , 1998 ) and design partners ( Druin , 2002 ; Guha et al . , 2005 ) . Moreover , Garzotto in ( Garzotto , 2008 ) outlined another role for chil - dren , that is the role of experience design innovators in discovering creative ways of interacting with digital artifacts . At different stages in a product development cycle , co - designing with children may include some combination of these roles . This the - sis focuses mainly on including children in the design process as in - 17 background formants and design partners . It is critical to support children in the design process , because adults do not experience the world as children , and they do not have the same insights into the world as a child . In the role of informant ( Scaife and Rogers , 1998 ) , the child plays a part in informing the design process and s / he is not involved in the whole process . For instance , before a product is developed , designers may observe how a child behaves / interacts with existing technologies . Children may be asked to give input as paper sketches . Once a technol - ogy is developed , a child may again offer input and feedback . Within this role , a child plays a part in the design process at various stages , namely those where researchers believe they need information from children . In the role of design partner , children are involved in creating de - sign solutions . They guide design decisions and evaluate intermediate results . For instance , in the design of a new technology ( Guha et al . , 2005 ; Garzotto , 2008 ) , a child is an equal stakeholder , and when s / he has this role , experimenters collect data and initiate children’s ideas . Druin found that , when children accept their role as design partners , they perform better their role in evaluating and redesigning computer - related technologies ( Druin , 2002 ) . Methods and Techniques for Co - designing with Children In a co - design session all design partners ( children and adults ) estab - lish common goals and participate in collaborative development activi - ties . Different co - design methods have been devised for designing with children . In the majority of such methods , intergenerational teams are created , with children and adult researchers . A method that involves children as equal members is the coopera - tive inquiry method , developed by Allison Druin and her team at the University of Maryland ( Druin , 1999 ; Guha et al . , 2013 ) . It involves working with groups of children over long term period — usually for a long time , once or twice a week , in out - of - school contexts . Cooper - ative inquiry ( based on PD and contextual inquiry ) for co - designing with children ( Druin , 1999 ) offers a chance for in - depth involvement of children in the ( early ) design process . Cooperative inquiry can be used to create , in principle , any type of technology with children . It largely focuses on the importance of creating a long - term partnership between adults and children working in group for creating together . Cooperative inquiry includes several tangible material to use during the project : bags of stuff ( splices or low tech prototyping ) that chil - dren and adults use together in order to “sketch” ideas for designing new technology or enhancing current technologies ; layered elaboration that allows small design groups to expand on each other’s ideas by 18 2 . 3 participatory design ( pd ) layering transparent sheets over initial concepts to add extensions and new ideas to designs without affecting the original . ( Walsh et al . , 2010 ) . Over the years , cooperative inquiry was adapted in a more challenging context , such as the school context ( Rode et al . , 2003 ) . Another method , developed by Kafai ( 1996 , 2003 ) involves Children as Software Designers and developers . Teams are formed only by chil - dren and adults intervene minimally during the design process , that is , are not intergenerational . An essential component of this kind of de - sign is that children are programmers of software for their peers ( Kafai , 2003 ) which is different from design partnerships where adults and children work together . In Blueballs children are involved in speciﬁc design stages , whereas adults are responsible for analyzing the result of children’s work and implementing it as an interactive prototype ( Kelly et al . , 2006 ) . More precisely , Blueballs has two design stages with children : a brainstorm - ing for starting the topic ; a prototyping stage using paper for creating the product ( a web site ) . Playful activities , such as hide - and - seek tig , are used to engage children in prototyping with paper - based material , and these activities tend to be carried on at school so as to include the entire class . Each class gets involved in short - term activities and chil - dren assess , as evaluators , interactive prototypes which are developed by adults . In Bonded Design , children bond with adults on the design team play - ing the roles of informants and design partners ( Large et al . , 2006 ) . Children participate for an intense short period of time , and utilize techniques typical of informants or design partners , e . g . , brainstorm - ing . Bonded Design often takes place in schools , but the intergenera - tional teams work on a product outside the classroom , and teachers are not involved in the design process . The rationale behind these choices is that the presence of teachers may recreate a teacher - student relation - ship , and working in classroom could suggest that the design activity is school activity . Moreover , Bonded Design is carried on during a time that is not traditionally reserved for instruction . Bridge adopts different techniques for different design purposes , and relies heavily on PD ( Iversen and Brodersen , 2008 ) . It considers not only the cognitive development of children but also the social one , making children work in groups of four in a playful manner . Vaajakallio and colleagues applied co - design methods in two design studies : Design Game and MakeTools ( Vaajakallio et al . , 2009 ) . Their de - sign sessions were organized with a game - like structure , with turn - talking and rules for supporting equal participation . Both in Design Game and MakeTools , researchers made children work in small groups 19 background in relation to an instructional school activity . Moreover , they used tan - gible objects for prototyping so as to engage children . What To Do and What Not To Do Including children in the design process has interesting advantages but it is also challenging and it presents some disadvantages ( Read and Markopoulos , 2013 ) . As reported in ( Nesset and Large , 2004 ) , co - design with children requires to establish a range of roles that children will be required to fulﬁll , and to manage their contributions . Children can come up with ideas that adults cannot envisage of Druin et al . ( 1998 ) . As a downside , they might design things that are impossible to realize . Communication , as reported in Section 2 . 3 . 3 , becomes important when different types of users are involved . Certainly , it becomes more challenging when co - design partners are children . The use of termi - nology that children do not understand could isolate children from the process , and their creativity may be inhibited by wrong communi - cation , for instance by constantly reminding them that certain things cannot be built . It is important to use a multidisciplinary team ap - proach , in which to provide opportunities for creativity and to manage expectations of participants . In this way participants understand the constraints but , at the same time , they have freedom to innovate . There are ongoing debates in the literature about issues related to power rela - tions between adults and children in co - design . Child - adult relations , and the environment created by adults for children , have a direct im - pact on which children the adults listen to , what they can talk about and what effect their opinions will have ( Gelderblom , 2014 ) . Moreover , when children are actively and continuously involved in the design process , they grow ownership and responsibility for the tasks they perform ( Iversen and Smith , 2012 ) . Therefore , it is very im - portant to develop effective working relationships with well - deﬁned key decision makers and well - deﬁned roles . For instance , if decisions of children are overruled by the ( development ) team , the situation is frustrating for children . Another point to be stressed is the context where to involve children . While Druin , in ( Druin , 2002 ) , suggests to arrange extra - scholar activ - ities , the school system , intended as a learning context , is the most direct way to access children aged 7 – 10 ( Rode et al . , 2003 ; Read and Mazzone , 2008 ) . Co - design at school poses its own challenges , listed also in ( Dodero et al . , 2014 a ) , which can affect the experience of co - design participants . Schools pose logistic and practical constraints which designer should take into account when organizing the learning space and equipment . 20 2 . 3 participatory design ( pd ) For instance . they have limitations due to rigid time schedule and space arrangement ( Vaajakallio et al . , 2010 ) . Moreover , the school con - text tends to be associated to boring rote by learners , who are used to more entertaining digital interaction . Extra efforts are related to the phases before , during and after the co - design activity : making arrange - ments with parents , teachers and carers ; running design session in a school with its time and space constraints ; interpretating data gathered from children . When co - design happens in learning contexts , another dimension needs to be explored : the learning beneﬁts , in terms of how co - design can foster learning , how can it be evaluated , and how much it en - gages children ( Garzotto , 2008 ; Dodero et al . , 2014 a ) . Typically , co - design studies explore the satisfaction of children with co - design ac - tivities ( Guha et al . , 2005 ) and , often , the investigated skills are related to collaboration and discussion . Assessment of such skills is left to the evaluation of teachers alone , e . g . , see ( Garzotto , 2008 ) . Different stud - ies ( Cavallo et al . , 2004 ; Garzotto , 2008 ) involve children in learning projects , with learning goals for children , in terms of learning achieve - ments and personal motivation . Since design activities with children can provide meaningful contexts for learning , children collect a rich learning experience , also in terms of developing collaboration skills or critical thinking capability ( Garzotto , 2008 ) . When co - design is applied in learning contexts , another important role , often neglected , is that of teachers . Roles and requirements of teachers vary across co - design studies , and are not always clearly speciﬁed ( Garzotto and Gonella , 2011 ; Mazzone , 2012 ) . Mazzone recommends involving education ex - perts , e . g . , teachers , when working with children , so as to ensure in the planning phase that the selected approaches are suitable for children , and for the setting they are applied into ( Mazzone , 2012 ) . Moreover , when groups of children are involved in co - design activ - ities , another relevant issue is how to organize collaborative groups with balanced skills . Children , having diverse learning styles and so - cial skills , should be grouped together thus potentially enabling a fruit - ful collaboration and cooperation , but such collaboration can be difﬁ - cult to achieve . The management of dynamics within groups of chil - dren and , more generally , the management of social relations among children is another important factor to consider when co - designing at school ( Van Mechelen et al . , 2014 ; Vaajakallio et al . , 2009 ; Santos et al . , 2014 b , a ) . The more diversiﬁed are children , the harder the task , as a general rule . This diversity is intrinsic in the public school system in countries like Italy , and it is ampliﬁed by unavoidable globalization trends of todays’ society . 21 background Engagement of children and its general deﬁnition are important and debated . A comprehensive deﬁnition of engagement considers it as an integrated user experience ( Reeve et al . , 2004 ; McCarthy and Wright , 2004 ) —“the emotional , cognitive and behavioral connection that exists at any point in time and possibly over time , between a user and a resource” ( Attﬁeld et al . , 2011 ) . Engaging children , with fun , in a co - design activity in learning con - texts meets the same challenges as any learning activity proposed by teachers . Including diverse children and positively engaging them in co - design at school might be difﬁcult , and might be determinant for the success of ( co - ) design in such a setting ( Prensky , 2005 ) . The de - sign material , such as paper - based material or prototypes , should al - low both children and adults to clearly express their ideas and share opinions ( Mazzone , 2012 ) . Moreover , Iversen et al . ( Iversen et al . , 2010 , 2013 ) describe how the participation of children in the design process can be used as a mean to engage with values . Children with Special Needs At present numerous designers have included children with special needs in technology design processes , and children with a wide range of disabilities have participated in design processes , to different de - grees ( Guha et al . , 2008 ; Brederode et al . , 2005 ; Tarrin et al . , 2006 ; Maz - zone et al . , 2008 ; Garzotto and Gelsomini , 2015 ) . Children with special needs , who have been involved with designing technologies , include children who are blind or visually impaired ( McEl - ligott and van Leeuwen , 2004 ) , children with physical or learning dis - abilities ( Brederode et al . , 2005 ; Walsh , 2009 ) , children who are deaf or have hearing issues ( Henderson et al . , 2005 ; Iversen et al . , 2007 ; Pot - ter et al . , 2014 ) , children who are on the autistic spectrum ( Barry and Pitt , 2006 ; Benton et al . , 2014 ; Weiss et al . , 2013 ) , and children with behavioral issues ( Jones et al . , 2003 ; Mazzone et al . , 2008 ) . Co - design of technology with children with special needs is always challenging and at the same time the life , worlds , and lived experi - ences of children with disabilities are way remote from the experiences of typical designers or researchers ; giving children with disabilities a stake in the design of technology gives them an even greater sense of ownership and empowerment Garzotto and Gelsomini ( 2015 ) . Inclusion of children with disabilities in the design process of inter - active technologies , however , does not come without further risks and challenges ( Guha et al . , 2008 ; Mazzone et al . , 2008 ) . When designing technologies for children with disabilities , the focus is to alleviate the burden of the disability , and either enable children with disabilities to learn , or perform actions they would not be able to do without the tech - 22 2 . 4 game design nology . In ( Guha et al . , 2008 ) , the author suggests an inclusive model for involving children with special needs as design partners in technol - ogy design process . According to Guha et al . , ( Guha et al . , 2008 ) , it is possible to involve children with disabilities as full design partners , as long as the researchers take into account both the nature and severity of the disability as well as the availability and intensity of support to the child . To successfully ground design , during the design process , it is neces - sary to consider theories related to the speciﬁc disability , developmen - tal theories from both cognitive and social perspectives , HCI theories , and learning theories . When the design process involves children with special needs , it is better to introduce technology as late as possible so as to free users from conforming to existing probes . The use of low - tech tools , such as pen and paper is more accessible and versa - tile , and low - tech prototyping material must provide natural means of communication and expression . Similarly , relationships and ethical issues require particular sensitivity to ensure that participants feel safe and able to contribute meaningfully to the design process . 2 . 4 game design Game design has made great progress in HCI . HCI researchers have considered games since the 1980 s , when Malone ( 1982 ) , basing on the concept of fun in a games , proposed some guidelines for designing enjoyable user interfaces . This section overviews research in HCI and game design . It is organized as follows . It presents what games are , and beneﬁts that playing games can bring . Then this section overviews what game design is , and the main stages of game design . Then the section changes track , and focuses on game design with children . 2 . 4 . 1 What a Game Is and Why Playing It Over the years researchers in game design attempted to deﬁne the word “game” . In ( Salen and Zimmerman , 2003 ) , the authors examine several of these deﬁnitions and most make reference to rules , goals and play . The deﬁnition of Adams ( 2013 ) refers to a game as “a type of play activity , conducted in the context of a pretended reality , in which the participant ( s ) try to achieve at least one arbitrary , nontrivial goal by acting in accordance with rules . ” By deﬁnition , a game is an activity involving one or more players . Such an activity can be deﬁned by either a goal that the players try to reach , or by some sets of rules that determine what the players can or 23 background cannot do . Games are played primarily for entertainment or enjoyment , but may also serve as exercise or have an educational , simulative or psychological role . Games and video games have become an integral part of the “human cultures” , and an essential part of childhood and adolescence ( Green - berg et al . , 2010 ) . Several researchers explore what children can gain from video games ( Egenfeldt - Nielsen , 2005 ; Olson , 2010 ; Tan et al . , 2011 ; Akbal et al . , 2014 ) . They started to look at the positive impact of games both in a general way and for learning in particular . Several beneﬁts , and positive and negative aspects , can be identiﬁed when kids play video game : promotion of a wide range of cognitive skills , e . g . , spatial skills ; promotion of an effective motivational style and positive emotions ; and acquisition of social skills ( Granic et al . , 2014 ) . Other reason would be , for example , challenge , expression of creativity , cu - riosity , discovery , or learning ( Olson , 2010 ) . In relation to education , several studies supported the principle that games , if properly designed , can provide powerful affordances for motivation and learning . Studies have shown , for example , that well designed games can promote conceptual understanding and process skills ( Annetta et al . , 2009 ; Clark et al . , 2013 ; Hickey et al . , 2009 ; Klopfer et al . , 2009 ) , can foster a deeper epistemological understanding of the nature and processes through which scientiﬁc knowledge is de - veloped ( Barab et al . , 2009 ; Neulight et al . , 2007 ) , and can increase in players’ willingness and ability to engage in scientiﬁc practices and discourses ( Barab et al . , 2009 ; Galas , 2006 ; Clark et al . , 2013 ) . The work of McClarty et al . ( 2012 ) reported an overview of the theoretical and empirical evidence concerning game play , claiming that the use of digi - tal games in education can provide : ( 1 ) learning principles , ( 2 ) engage - ment of the learner , ( 3 ) personalized learning opportunities , ( 4 ) 21 st century skills , and ( 5 ) an environment for authentic and relevant as - sessment . In ( Gee , 2003 ) the author argues that games are fun because people can learn and grow as they play . 2 . 4 . 2 Game Design in a Nutshell Game design is a craft , combining both aesthetic and func - tional elements . Craftsmanship of a high quality produces elegance ( Adams , 2013 ) . Designing or making games is a more complex activity than simply playing with them . It requires not only creativity but also several cog - nitive skills . Designing a game is a rich task and it has the potential to create a powerful learning environment ( Smeets , 2005 ) . It offers several 24 2 . 4 game design opportunities to exercise a wide spectrum of skills ( e . g . , devising game rules , creating characters and dialogues in order to create a complex artifact ) . Game design is deﬁned as a subset of game development . Brieﬂy , game design is the process of creating and designing content and rules of a game ( Schell , 2008 ) . Schell deﬁnes game design as the act of de - ciding what a game should be and what determines the form of the gameplay . According to Prensky ( 2001 ) , a game designer must , at ﬁrst , understand the simplest forms of games and when designing a game s / he has to take into account some fundamental elements . A game should be fun and engaging so as to allow players to reach a ﬂow state 1 . Moreover it is important that a game has a deﬁned structure with rules , and a story so as to elicit emotions . Other elements are important : outcomes and feedback , that give the player learning and engagement ; conﬂict , challenge or competition , that give player grati - ﬁcation and adrenaline to continue to play ; problem solving so as to spark the player creativity . Adams in ( Adams , 2013 ) deﬁnes the work of a Game Designer as a complex set of tasks to perform so as to produce a “good” game design that transmits information to game developers and allows the reﬁnement of the game during development and testing . 2 . 4 . 3 Game Design Process There are different approaches to game design . Some designers pre - fer to work with their self - perceived unlimited creativity when design - ing games ( Vanden Abeele and Van Rompaey , 2006 ) . This approach has been called I - methodology ( Oudshoorn and Pinch , 2003 ) . Instead Adams , in ( Adams , 2013 ) , suggests designers use player centered game design , which follows UCD and places players at the center of the game design process ( Sykes and Federoff , 2006 ) . This approach is de - ﬁned as a “philosophy of design in which the designer envisions a representative player of a game the designer wants to create” ( Adams , 2013 ) . Following the player centred game design approach , a game designer should focus on two game functions : entertainment of the player , and feeling empathy with the player . Designers also often re - lease proof - of - concept prototypes with game design documents for play - testing ( e . g . , ( Moser , 2013 ) ) . In general , designing a game goes through the following main stages : ( 1 ) the analysis of the goal of the game and a ﬁrst ideation of the high 1 With “ﬂow” the psychologist Csikszentmihalyi in ( Csikszentmihalyi , 1997 ) names the feeling of complete and energized focus in an activity , with a high level of enjoyment and fulﬁllment . 25 background level concept of the game , ( 2 ) the conceptualization of the game , and ( 3 ) its prototyping ( Adams , 2013 ) . Game designers could start with the analysis of the goal of the game , and with the conceptualization of the game idea . This requires think - ing of actions for reaching the goal of the game . In case the game is structured into levels , designers have to ideate the core mechanics 2 . for the rules and for progressing across levels , besides the aesthetics for the interface and interaction , including feedbacks . In case the game re - quires a storyline , designers have to make it consistent with the overall game mechanics and aesthetics ( Adams , 2013 ) . The related game design documents are the following . The high - level concept document for the game concept that records the key ideas of the game . Depending on the game , other documents can be implemented and included in the high - level concept document : the character design document , that records the design of one character who appears in the game , and the world design document , that is a sort of background information about what the world contains . If the game has more than one level , the storyline and progression level doc - ument is necessary to give a general outline of the player’s experience from the beginning to the end . Another important document is the core mechanics document , specifying the game rules and challenges . 2 . 4 . 4 Game Design with Children Whereas the previous part of this section concentrates on the de - sign and on effects of playing , the following part overviews work con - cerning game design with children . First it explains why game design can be beneﬁcial with children . Then it overviews the founding work of ( Harel , 1991 ; Kafai , 1996 , 2006 ) . Finally it zooms on more recent approaches to designing games with children . Why Game Design with Children Designing even early prototypes of games with children means step - ping through the aforementioned game design stages ( see Section 2 . 4 . 2 ) . That means planning for a sustained experience , possibly across sev - eral days . It also means planning the associated design tasks for chil - dren , and to take care of children’s cognitive abilities . Moreover , as claimed by Druin , in Druin ( 2002 ) , it is crucial to consider knowledge 2 The core mechanics are at the heart of any game because they generate the game - play . They deﬁne the challenges that the game can offer and the actions that the player can take to meet those challenges . The core mechanics also determine the effect of the player’s actions upon the game world . The mechanics state the conditions for achiev - ing the goals of the game and what consequences follow from succeeding or failing to achieve them ( Adams , 2013 ) 26 2 . 4 game design and experience of involved children , due to the fact that children are able to contribute on “what excites and bores them , what helps them learn , and what can be used in their homes or schools” . The involvement of children in game design may have different con - texts and expected beneﬁts : for educational computer games ( Daniels - son and Wiberg , 2006 ; Kafai and Vasudevan , 2015 ) , on a narrative - driven design approach ( Duh et al . , 2010 ; Benton et al . , 2014 ) , or on child - centered interaction in the design of a game ( Mazzone et al . , 2008 ; Tan et al . , 2011 ; Moser , 2013 ) . Since children are the ﬁrst audience of most digital games , after the constructionist theory has been established in game design research , researchers moved their attention into learning contexts , e . g . , school , and into how to involve children in designing games ( Kafai , 2006 ) . Several studies showed that designing games can have learning ben - eﬁts ( Baytak et al . , 2011 ) : designing games allows learners to repre - sent their understanding in concrete and personally meaningful ways , moreover learners can learn to ask and to provide help . Game design not only encourages diversity of ideas in a classroom community , and enhances a sense of classroom community , but it also support the no - tion that learning by designing computer games promotes engagement during learning , regardless of gender , and also can lead to productive social interaction . Steiner et al . , in ( Steiner et al . , 2006 ) , concurred with this constructionism view and also claimed that , “children as design partners improve the technologies they consume as well as gain ed - ucational beneﬁts from the experience” ( p . 137 ) . In their studies , the authors conﬁrmed that with sufﬁciently accessible tools , children can build satisfyingly complex and playable games ( Steiner et al . , 2006 ) . The Constructionist Approach Designing and developing video games , rather than playing them , applies a constructionist approach to learning with games ( Robertson and Good , 2005 ) . Rather than embedding lessons directly into games , the constructionist approach promotes the idea that learners can ac - tively construct their own learning . The constructionist approach to learning involves two activities : the construction of knowledge through experience , and the creation of personally relevant products or arti - facts . Moreover , the authors stressed the use of appropriate tools , ob - jects and materials sufﬁciently accessible and easy to learn so to ade - quately allow children to realize their design . Making a game actively engages learners , because they construct their own game rather than experiencing them passively . Construction - ism also emphasizes the social nature of learning . Learners can learn autonomously and they can embody their creative ideas in a testable 27 background way in their game : by trying the game they evaluate their ideas . Fur - thermore peer collaboration is a necessary component . The purpose of making a game is to create an artifact which somebody else will enjoy . Thus , inviting others to play test the game is a natural part of the pro - cess . Hence , artifact development should entail exposure to activities that promote collaboration and sharing . Recent Approaches to Game Design with Children When designing games with children as game designers would do , methods involving children or their ideas in design work are often used ( Nesset and Large , 2004 ; Danielsson and Wiberg , 2006 ) . Tradi - tionally , children were treated solely as testers , who give developers feedback on prototypes . Other researchers focused on obtaining chil - dren’s input only on speciﬁc game design feature such as storylines or characters , leaving out important knowledge about children’s experi - ences , e . g . , cultural values ( Duh et al . , 2010 ) . However , a growing body of research looks at ways to better incorporate children’s ideas into the design process . In recent years , usage of PD for game designing has been receiv - ing an increasing attention ( Danielsson and Wiberg , 2006 ; Vaajakallio et al . , 2009 ; Walz , 2010 ; Giaccardi et al . , 2012 ; Lange - Nielsen et al . , 2012 ; Walsh et al . , 2013 ; Garde , 2013 ; Moser , 2013 ; Vasalou et al . , 2012 ; Khaled and Vasalou , 2014 ; Perry and Aragon , 2014 ) , also with children with special needs ( Brederode et al . , 2005 ; Walsh , 2009 ; TERENCE con - sortium , 2010 ; Potter et al . , 2014 ) . The PD approach to game design spouses the theory of constructionism and offers opportunities for con - structivism , and for problem - based learning within the game design process . As described in the previous Section 2 . 3 , actively including stakeholders in the design process has several beneﬁts , such as expe - riences in interdisciplinary team work that is essential for designing a game . When PD methods are used for designing game with children , chil - dren can have different roles in the process : from users to testers , to informants and ﬁnally design partners ( Druin , 2002 ) . In any case , chil - dren are critically contributing to the design with their ideas , as experts of their experience . In ( Khaled and Vasalou , 2014 ) , children were involved in PD of a serious game . They concluded that children were most effectively able to participate as co - designers during middle stages of the game de - sign process . Moreover , they stressed the fact that to maximise the 28 2 . 5 open challenges chances of successful ideation from participants , it is necessary to de - vise boundary objects 3 that relate to children expertise . In a recent work , ( Moser , 2013 ) outlines several methods of CCI that can be applied when children co - design games . Her approach follows a Child - Centred - Game - Design framework , using PD in several case studies , and requires an active user involvement , where researchers and developers give children a more responsible role ( Scaife et al . , 1997 ) . Her framework is designed so as to inspire game researchers , designers , or developers on how to involve children through different design stages . Children in ( Moser , 2015 ) are not equal design partners , as in the end game researchers , designers , and developers take the ﬁnal decisions . Another framework for designing games with children was pre - sented in Tan et al . ( 2011 ) . In this study the authors presented the CAL - SIUM framework for CCI in game design . The framework serves to as - similate tenets of UCD , concept of meaningful play , and pedagogical principle into PD from children . Children in their study were involved in the early part of the design process : they play - tested the game pro - totype , suing story - boarding and low - tech prototype , and participated in focus group discussion . In conclusion , there is a variety of approaches for the different game design and development phases ( Moser , 2013 ; Walsh et al . , 2013 ) . De - spite the proliferation of design studies with children , at present , the “number of studies that provide a deeper understanding of the com - plex process of the design of games [ with children ] is limited . ” ( Moser et al . , 2014 b ) . In practice children are often brought into the game de - sign process just as informants in the analysis phase or for conducting early - design choices of games . 2 . 5 open challenges As widely reported in Section 2 . 4 . 4 , conducting a participatory game design activity with children at school means dealing with several chal - lenges related to different factors , such as their long - term engagement in their traditional learning environment , learning beneﬁts or other constraints due to game design per se ( Fredericks et al . , 2004 ; Freder - icks and McColskey , 2012 ; Dodero et al . , 2014 a ; Brondino et al . , 2015 ; Van Mechelen et al . , 2014 ) . Open challenges for conducting participa - 3 Boundary objects are those objects that both inhabit several communities of practice and satisfy the informational requirements of each of them . Boundary objects are thus both plastic enough to adapt to local needs and constraints of the several parties employ - ing them , yet robust enough to maintain a common identity across sites . They may be abstract or concrete . Bowker ( 2000 ) 29 background tory game design , which are relevant for this thesis , are recapped and deepened in this section . 2 . 5 . 1 Collaboration In PD , children are expected to critically contribute to design with their ideas , as expert of their experience , while adults are expected to turn into reﬂective practitioners , so that design becomes an act of knowledge construction or negotiation of values , through scaffolding dialogues ( Frauenberger et al . , 2015 ) , see Section 2 . 3 . A key value of PD is then democratic collaboration for co - creating knowledge and mutual learning . To this end , PD researchers usually divide children in teams for conducting design work , and typically there is also an adult per team or one adult for all teams ( Druin , 1999 ; Moser , 2013 ; Vaajakallio et al . , 2009 ) . However democratic collaboration , among chil - dren and with adults , is challenging to achieve due to the difﬁculty of managing social relations and especially of balancing power struc - tures , as recently recognized in ( Dodero et al . , 2014 a ; Van Mechelen et al . , 2014 ) . Social theories are needed to support true democratic col - laboration for mutual learning . 2 . 5 . 2 Empowerment of Children PD researchers embark on a co - design “journey” or “experience” with potential users , which aims at empowering all participants ( Frauen - berger et al . , 2015 ) . When co - design involves children , empowering them also means that children are given the opportunity to learn about early design through the design practice itself ( e . g . , ( Sanders and Stappers , 2014 ) ) . Then co - design becomes a competence - relevant activity , with learning goals , besides bring a design activity with its own product design goals . Engagement is another empowerment opportunity . In PD stud - ies , engagement is usually considered in relation to products under de - sign or used for designing ( Dindler et al . , 2010 ; Robertson and Good , 2005 ; Read , 2008 ) . Few PD studies investigate participants’ engage - ment in the design activity itself , e . g . , ( Garzotto , 2008 ; Mazzone et al . , 2011 ) . With children with special - needs , engagement in the PD activity is considered “a form of learning per se” , e . g . , ( Garzotto and Gelso - mini , 2015 ) , see Section 2 . 3 . 4 . However children’s empowerment , as their engagement and learn - ing through the design experience , can be challenging to achieve : when design requests are cognitively complex , and they can be perceived as tasks threatening children’s self - efﬁcacy ; or when design work is frag - 30 2 . 5 open challenges mented over extended periods , they are hampering the promotion of focused attention on tasks ( Schmidt and Vanderwater , 2008 ) . That is of - ten the case with game design . Designing a game requires not only cre - ativity but also several cognitive skills , ranging from working memory to logic and problem solving , the maturity of which vary according to children’s age and skills , see Section 2 . 3 . 4 . Co - designing prototypes of games with children means stepping through different design stages— ideation , conceptualization , prototyping ( see Section 2 . 4 . 3 ) . That means planning for a prolonged , possibly fragmented , game design experi - ence . This is a further requirement to consider , with special attention to learning beneﬁts for children if co - design is conducted at school during regular classes . Moreover , engagement and learning are challenging to evaluate . They are complex constructs , which need to be operationalized for being properly assessed . PD studies are usually context - bound ( Frauenberger et al . , 2015 ) , and hence engagement or learning are often qualitatively evaluated by PD researchers ( Duh et al . , 2010 ; Karimi and Lim , 2010 ) . 2 . 5 . 3 Empowerment of Adults In PD , empowering adults means bringing them knowledge of chil - dren’s design ideas ( see Section 2 . 3 . 3 ) . It is thus crucial to give children design means for expressing their ideas so that adults learn from chil - dren , and so that children’s “design products” can be carried over in the development process , independently of whether products are con - sidered as “sources of inspiration” , user requirements or early design conceptualizations ( Nesset and Large , 2004 ) . In case of games , PD is differently inserted into the lifecycle of games , and failure development stories are also reported , e . g . , due to the innate complexity of conducting game design with children ( Moser et al . , 2014 b ) . Some PD studies did not aim at carrying to develop - ment children’s design ideas ( Vaajakallio et al . , 2009 ; Walsh et al . , 2010 ; Moser , 2013 ) . In some other cases , children were involved in the design of parts of the game , such as the storyline ( Duh et al . , 2010 ; Benton et al . , 2014 ; Tan et al . , 2011 ) , recorded by adult with photos and videos , then games were realized by adults ( Khaled and Vasalou , 2014 ) . In other PD studies , instead , children’s game design ideas were regarded as expressions of children’s expectations , they were recorded in video - formats and then realized by adults ( Moser et al . , 2014 a ) . There is thus a variety of approaches to designing parts of games with children , however the majority of PD work tend to let adults de - velop children’s game design products . It is thus worth investigating how far game design can be carried over with children , and speciﬁ - 31 background cally which design means can promote children’s expression of game design ideas . It is also worth assessing how their game design prod - ucts can be inserted into the game lifecycle , and possibly developed by adults not participating in game design work with children . 2 . 6 relevant education theories for tack - ling challenges By treating a PD activity with children as a competence - relevant ac - tivity for children , we have the advantage of exploiting several educa - tion theories that help in supporting collaboration and empowerment of children through the activity . Such theories are brieﬂy overviewed below in relation to collaboration and empowerment . 2 . 6 . 1 Collaboration : Cooperative Learning Cooperative learning can help in achieving democratic collabora - tion , for learning by doing , together . Cooperative learning is a learning methodology based on constructivism , in which knowledge is shaped through experience ( Slavin , 1991 ) . In cooperative learning , classes are structured into small groups of learners , working together and mutu - ally helping each other , towards a common goal . Teachers become re - ﬂective teachers and have the role of directors of the learning process , mainly through scaffolding dialogues . Cooperation is not just that : it requires teachers ( or the domain ex - pert ) to structure the learning context through speciﬁc cooperative learning strategies ( also known as techniques ) , roles and rules . Strate - gies , rules and roles for groups involve ﬁve key elements of coopera - tive learning : ( 1 ) clearly perceived positive interdependence ; ( 2 ) consid - erable promotive face - to - face interaction ; ( 3 ) clearly perceived individ - ual accountability and personal responsibility to achieve the group’s goal ; ( 4 ) frequent use of relevant interpersonal and small - group skills ; ( 5 ) frequent and regular group processing of current functioning to improve the group’s future effectiveness , see ( Johnson and Johnson , 2002 ) . 2 . 6 . 2 Empowerment : Gamiﬁcation and Engagement and Learning Asessment Engagement and learning are both complex constructs . According to the underlying theory and activity , they are differently deﬁned . Some 32 2 . 6 relevant education theories for tackling challenges deﬁnitions emphasize a single dimension , e . g . , such as attention ( Chen et al . , 2011 ) or enjoyment for engagement Garzotto ( 2008 ) . Others are more comprehensive . For example , learning can be measured directly , in relation to the subject topic , or indirectly , e . g . , by considering learn - ers’ self - efﬁcacy . That can be done through : formative assessment , pos - sibly provided in a timely way , so that students receive input and guiding feedback on their relative performance to help them improve ; summative assessment , such as surveys used for measuring learners’ performances , considering what students have learned at the end of a task or activity . As for engagement , Fredericks et al . ( 2004 ) posited that early studies deﬁned student engagement primarily by observable be - haviors ; lately research focusses on emotional or affective aspects , e . g . , enjoyment , or cognitive engagement , such as students’ perseverance in facing challenges . In traditional educational activities , engagement is considered as a facilitator of learning ( Fredericks et al . , 2004 ; Fredericks and Mc - Colskey , 2012 ) . In the remainder , we survey relevant recent approaches or theories for promoting and assessing engagement , as well as learn - ing , in educational contexts . Promotion : Gamiﬁcation Education theories differently promote learners’ engagement . Gami - ﬁcation of learning has recently emerged in the education literature as a means for making learning activities more enjoyable and engaging , thus favouring learning and retention through tasks . Gamiﬁcation , broadly deﬁned , is the process of deﬁning the ele - ments which comprise games , make games fun and motivate players to continue playing ( Deterding et al . , 2011 ) . Gamiﬁcation uses game el - ements in a non - game context to inﬂuence behaviour ( Deterding et al . , 2011 ) . Such a deﬁnition implies that gamiﬁed products are not full - ﬂedged games : they use only some elements of game design ( e . g . , pro - gression maps ) , outside of a game context , so as to engage people . Typically gamiﬁcation use the competition instinct to motivate and en - courage “productive“” behaviours and discourage the “unproductive” ones . However , the same mechanisms can be used to encourage collab - orative and cooperative behaviours ( Glover , 2013 ) . The rationale behind gamiﬁcation is that games are “a form of partic - ipatory , or interactive , entertainment” , and learning as a participatory process can beneﬁt from incorporating game concepts within it ( Adams , 2013 ) . Educational gamiﬁcation or gamiﬁcation of learning , speciﬁcally , em - beds game design or game - like concepts into learning processes so as to actively engage learners , in relation to their natural learning con - 33 background texts ( Kapp , 2012 ; Glover , 2013 ) . The goal of gamiﬁcation of learning is thus to “maximize enjoyment and engagement through capturing the interest of learners and inspiring them to continue learning” in their contexts ( Huang and Soman , 2013 ) . Gamiﬁcation has the poten - tial to be a “disruptive innovation” in education , with the prospects of altering practices in a positive way ( Christensen and Raynor , 2003 ; Glover , 2013 ) . The literature review by ( Hamari et al . , 2014 ) shows that , depending on the context and types of players , gamiﬁed activities can empower players by engaging them . Contexts , in fact , can determine whether the usage of speciﬁc game elements will engage or disengage . For in - stance , Deterding et al . ( 2011 ) argued how a leaderboard used in in a work context could easily lead to competitive dynamics . The percep - tion of performance comparison at work could augment the sense of being controlled “thwarting experienced autonomy and hence , intrin - sic motivation” , creating disengagement instead of engagement . Gamiﬁcation of learning is based on incorporating game - mechanics within an educational activity or process . Speciﬁcally , three basic game components should be taken into account ( Dickey , 2005 ) : ( 1 ) goal - focussed activity : the shared focus on achieving speciﬁc goals , is a mean to increase the amount of time dedicated to learning tasks , and consequently it increases engagement and motivation ; ( 2 ) reward mech - anisms : the use of leaderboards , and prizes for powerful motivation , and ( 3 ) progress tracking : it is important to have ways for identifying the steps to take in order to to improve or advance in the future . However incorporating basic game elements in a learning process cannot replace good learning design . It is crucial that the level of the activity as well the pedagogy be suitable before adding extra layers of complexity through gamiﬁcation ( Glover , 2013 ) . For instance , a goal - focused activity works at best when there are clear checkpoints in such activity . These checkpoints can be used by the learner as wayﬁnding so as to establish own progress and identify remaining tasks . Moreover , as mentioned before , it is important that gamiﬁcation elements , such as leaderboards , are completely disconnected from formal assessment of learning : gamiﬁcation should only be used to increase motivation and should not be yet another mechanism to grade learners . The most famous example of the implementation of the gamiﬁcation strategies within a learning process is a public school Quest to Learn , in New York City . In such school , students in grades 6 through 12 use narrative , problem - solving , and the structure of game design systems to inform its pedagogy , school culture , and curriculum ( Q 2 L School , 2006 ) . 34 2 . 6 relevant education theories for tackling challenges Assessment : Authentic Assessment engagement of children Learners’ engagement is related to con - structs such as interest , concentration , and emotions in traditional school activities . According to ( Hamari et al . , 2016 ; Shernoff et al . , 2003 ) , learn - ers are highly engaged in an activity when they show high levels of enjoyment , concentration and interest . There are different methods for assessing such constructs , such as self - reports or observations , e . g . , ( Fredericks and McColskey , 2012 ) . In learning contexts or , more gener - ally , in competence - relevant activities , engagement has been correlated also to achievement emotions , e . g . , engagement has been positively correlated to enjoyment and negatively correlated to anxiety and bore - dom ( Kahu et al . , 2015 ) . Achievement emotions can be classiﬁed us - ing Pekrun’s control - value theory ( Pekrun , 2006 ; Pekrun and Perry , 2014 ) and assessed with self - report surveys for children , e . g . , ( Rac - canello and Bianchetti , 2016 ) , along two orthogonal dimensions : va - lence , distinguishing positive emotions from negative emotions ; acti - vation , distinguishing activating emotions from deactivating emotions . In Pekrun’s theory , enjoyment is classiﬁed as positive and activating , relaxation as positive and deactivating , anxiety as negative and activat - ing , boredom as negative and deactivating . Therefore , in co - design as a competence - relevant activity , engagement can be correlated to and assessed by asking children about their achievement emotions as well , this way complementing the observation of their behaviors denoting interest , concentration and enjoyment . learning of children and adults There are different theories concerning how to evaluate children’s learning , and the assessment of children’s learning performances depends also on the learning ac - tivity . In case of game design , there are no standardized measures . However , authentic assessment seems a viable approach to judging if children are learning about early game design ; this is possible if the game design activity is done in “an authentic manner” . According to ( Wiggins , 1998 ) , a learning activity is authentic if : it is realistic ; it requires judgment and innovation ; it asks learners to “do” tasks ; it replicates or simulates the contexts in which adults work ; it assesses learners’ ability to efﬁciently and effectively use a repertoire of knowl - edge and skills to conduct tasks ; it allows appropriate opportunities to rehearse , practice , consult resources , and get feedback on and reﬁne performances and products . In such case , learning can be assessed as “authentic” , using adults’ criteria as far as possible . Moreover , chil - dren’s progress through tasks should also be evaluated as an authentic assessment ( Grisham - Brown et al . , 2006 ) . 35 background Approaching children’s products with authentic assessment can also help designers in evaluating whether children’s game design products can be taken as - is in the game lifecycle , and brought to maturity by adult game developers , who thus learn about children’s ideas . 36 3 T H E G A C O C O M E T H O D contents 3 . 1 The GaCoCo Method 37 3 . 2 Epistemology 39 3 . 2 . 1 Cooperative Learning Contributions 39 3 . 2 . 2 Gamiﬁcaton Contributions 41 3 . 3 Values 42 3 . 4 Participant Stakeholders and Their Roles 43 3 . 5 Outcomes 43 3 . 6 Lifecycle 45 In principles PD approaches help designers create game concepts , using contributions from children and collecting them via design ses - sions at school . As reported in Chapter 2 , working with children in learning contexts , such as schools , poses several challenges to co - design , which can affect its success . This section presents a participatory game design method for guiding children and adults to conceive and create prototypes of games for children at school . The method is presented using as reference the framework of ( Frauenberger et al . , 2015 ) . More - over , the method combines gamiﬁcation , see Section 3 . 2 . 2 , and coop - erative learning , see Section 3 . 2 . 1 , to support democratic collaboration and empowrment . The participatory game design method is baptized GAmiﬁed CO - design with COoperative Learning ( GaCoCo ) . 3 . 1 the gacoco method As reported in Section 2 . 5 , conducting a design activity with chil - dren at school means dealing with several challenges . Several meth - ods and techniques , reported in Chapter 2 , can be applied when re - searchers aim to involve children as design partners in a research project . In addition , when a project is developed in learning contexts , new aims are triggered , which researchers must take into account . GaCoCo is a PD method that a designer can use to plan , conduct and assess an early game design experience with children , as well as to investigate their expectations for games for children . It was ﬁrst described in ( Dodero et al . , 2014 a ) , and was later reﬁned incrementally 37 the gacoco method GACOCO Epistemology Values Stakeholders Outcomes Lifecycle Figure 2 : GaCoCo under the focus of ﬁve lenses across studies for co - designing games at school . The transition from the ﬁrst exploratory study done with GaCoCo , in 2013 , to the second GaCoCo , that was performed in 2014 , is reported in ( Dodero et al . , 2014 a ) . The 2014 and 2015 GaCoCo studies are reported in Chapters 4 and 6 , respectively . This section presents GaCoCo using the “lenses” of ( Frauenberger et al . , 2015 ) : • epistemology , as knowledge construction underpinning partici - patory design values , stakeholders’ roles and outcomes ; • stakeholders participation in design : they negotiate decisions with design experts and , “while power sharing is at the heart” of participatory design , a decision - making result “relies on the underlying power structure which deﬁnes how much scope for change each participant has” ( Frauenberger et al . , 2015 , p . 101 ) ; • values , conceived broadly as ideas or qualities which are land - marks of a participatory design approach ; • outcomes , which are related to the effectiveness of participatory design , and which tend to be “the most important way to jus - tify participatory approaches” to the design community ( Frauen - berger et al . , 2015 , p . 102 ) . Moreover , this section adds a further overarching “lens” , important for understanding how the participatory design method can be inserted into the design lifecycle : • lifecycle of designed products , and speciﬁcally how design and evaluation of products are related . Such lenses serve to communicate : GaCoCo pillars , and what might vary across GaCoCo activities ; how GaCoCo positions itself with re - spect to the challenges examined in Chapter 2 for collaboration , and 38 3 . 2 epistemology for empowerment focusing on learning and engagement , and for the effectiveness of the method itself—can children’s design products be used by game developers in order to develop end products ( digital games ) , and how ? 3 . 2 epistemology As in other participatory design methods , overviewed in Chapter 2 , in GaCoCo knowledge is co - constructed through practice , it is context bound and it belongs to different sorts . Cooperative learning and gamiﬁcation of learning contexts both spouse such a view of knowledge . They are the two major strands of research that contribute to the GaCoCo epistemology and to the framing of its values , its stakeholders’ roles and its outcomes . Contributions are brieﬂy overviewed in the following , and then exempliﬁed in the stud - ies reported in this thesis . 3 . 2 . 1 Cooperative Learning Contributions GaCoCo relies on cooperative learning for achieving collaboration among children and with adults , which is a key value of PD . Small groups of children are created to work on co - design tasks . Groups are heterogeneous so as to foster the visibility of all children , and to take advantage of the different learning and social skills of group mem - bers ( Cohen et al . , 1999 ) . Heterogeneity becomes an empowerment op - portunity at diverse levels . In particular , heterogeneity serves to elicit group creativity in design : design ideas are triggered by different per - spectives , which allow group members to build on various alterna - tives ( Paulus and Nijstad , 2003 ) . Cooperative learning comes with a variety of strategies , rules and roles for promoting collaboration in het - erogeneous groups . Cooperative learning strategies for heterogeneous groups , rules and roles are all important contributions that GaCoCo adapts to the purpose of design in group . Strategies Cooperative learning strategies can be loosely differentiated accord - ing to what they mainly promote : discussion , reciprocal teaching , us - age of graphical materials , writing , problem solving . Each strategy in - cludes a number of potential structures to guide the development of a cooperative learning activity . 39 the gacoco method One of the most important strategies for activating students in their learning process is employing the “study groups” in the class and provide group with opportunities for discussion , exchanges of views , and question and answer session ( Payne and Whittaker , 2000 ; Lavasani et al . , 2011 ) . Many researchers have shown that cooperative learning strategies can be used to promote deeper understanding . Researchers and ed - ucators can use various strategies of cooperative learning along their work to enhance learning in a classroom . Moreover , the instruction and activities based on cooperative learning are creative and can be used to enhance and promote higher student achievement ( Johnson et al . , 1990 ; Slavin , 1996 ; Iyer , 2013 ) . Example of strategies used in GaCoCo studies , reported in Chap - ters 4 and 6 are : three - step - interview , Jigsaw , gallery tour ( Barnes and O’Farrell , 1990 ) . Roles In GaCoCo , as in cooperative learning , roles for design are not ﬁxed , they rotate among members , so as to train different skills in each child over time . Assigning roles to students encourages interaction and group work - ing . Roles might help especially students to overcome communication difﬁculties to get the project done and done well . Random selection of roles also combat stereotypes associated with roles - for example , teachers might want to avoid allowing males to serve as leaders , while females serve as “secretaries . ” Appropriate roles will depend on group size and the nature of the cooperative learning task . General roles used in cooperative learning are : secretary , checker , time keeper . Speciﬁc roles used in GaCoCo studies are reported in 4 . 2 . 2 Rules Besides strategies and roles , and in support of them , cooperative learning considers a set of rules needed for group work , and for in - cluding all in an act of true collaboration . Rules are concerned with social skills , such as reciprocal listening and respect of different views . Examples of cooperative learning rules used across GaCoCo studies are : taking turns in voicing opinions ; rules for reconciling different views , e . g . , concerning game design documents or prototypes . GaCoCo has developed gamiﬁed objects acting as probes ( Hutchin - son et al . , 2003 a ) for making roles and rules for relating to others tan - gible . The following section explains such probes and , more generally , how gamiﬁcation is used in GaCoCo . 40 3 . 2 epistemology 3 . 2 . 2 Gamiﬁcaton Contributions In its most general acceptation , gamiﬁcation means properly using game elements , such as storylines and progression bars , for a non - game goal and in a non - game activity ( Seaborn and Fels , 2015 ) in order to promote engagement with positive activating emotions in the activ - ity . The literature review by ( Hamari et al . , 2014 ) show that , depending on the context and types of players , gamiﬁed activities can empower players by engaging them . Diverse motivation theories are invoked to explain why and how gamiﬁcation can engage players ( Kapp , 2012 ) . Using self determination theory as the reference framework ( Deci and Ryan , 1985 ; R . M . and Deci , 2000 ) , in order to sustain engagement in time , a gamiﬁed activity should nourish three universal needs : a sense of progression and competence , control and social relatedness ( R . M . and Deci , 2000 ) . In GaCoCo , social relatedness means promoting col - laboration as in cooperative learning . To satisfy such needs , GaCoCo uses gamiﬁcation to organize design tasks as in games , and to present them with ad - hoc gamiﬁed probes for making tangible cooperative groups’ progression , control and relat - edness throughout tasks . Progression Speciﬁcally , co - design tasks are presented as missions with clear and valuable goals for children . The ﬁrst mission must be easy to take up by all , creating a relaxed atmosphere for exploring the activity and material , besides mutual trust between researchers and children . Mis - sions should then build one upon the other so as to sustain children’s progression in time . According to its complexity for children , a mis - sion can be chunked into progressive challenges . A progression bar , typically used in a game , shows groups their progression through the co - design activity , to remind them such progression and to share it with others , giving children a sense of control over it , without increas - ing competition . Control and Autonomy A co - design context that invites children’s free exploration and choice , like an unexplored game world , can even more tangibly promote a sense of autonomy and control over their co - design work . Rewards , part of the feedback system in gamiﬁcation , are gamiﬁed objects de - signed with special care in GaCoCo . According to cooperative learn - ing , if rewards are seen as a mean for controlling , or not valuable to work , they can cause people to feel less competent and in less control , which decreases engagement and also interferes with creativity ( Deci 41 the gacoco method and Ryan , 1985 ) . Therefore GaCoCo considers only rewards that are symbolic and contingent to the design work . They are controlled by children , customizable , surprising , and achievable on completion of a mission or challenge , in line with cooperative learning recommenda - tions in ( Graves , 1991 ) . Relatedness Gamiﬁcation of the learning contexts should be done fostering coop - eration , so as to be faithful to the co - design partnership principle , e . g . , without increasing competition within groups . Such a constraint can be met by providing rewards that only mildly favor inter - group com - petition so as to promote “intra - group positive interdependence” and cooperation , and still satisfy relatedness needs . Gamiﬁed probes can be designed so as to make it tangible cooperative learning rules and roles for connecting with others . Examples of such objects are scepters for sharing with others , presented in Chapter 4 . A scepter is used for sharing and organizing the cooperative learning rule of taking turns in speaking in a group discussion . Progression maps can also be used to connect with others and satisfy relatedness needs . Shared maps can show other learners that a group or an individual could overcome a mission , and are available for sharing their experience and acquired expertise . 3 . 3 values Challenges and values of participatory design are collaboration and empowerment of all participants . In GaCoCo , collaboration means cooperation in the sense of coop - erative learning as explained above , and the heterogeneity in groups of children is taken from cooperative learning as an additional value for GaCoCo co - design , e . g . , for creating alternative ideas . In GaCoCo , positive interdependence and individual accountability in group work , as well as promoting face - to - face interaction , are further important co - operative learning values for promoting collaboration . They are sup - ported through cooperative learning strategies , rules and roles . Empowering children means engaging them in a design activity , elic - iting positive activating emotions . Empowering children also means promoting children’s own expression of ideas and creativity . Not only children are empowered ; empowerment is achieved for adults involved in GaCoCo as well . Empowering adults means pro - moting their learning by doing : through dialogues with children dur - 42 3 . 4 participant stakeholders and their roles ing a GaCoCo activity , and through the GaCoCo outcomes . Speciﬁcally , game design products should transmit adults , acting as game develop - ers , children’s game design ideas . Assigning stakeholders speciﬁc roles helps in supporting collabora - tion and empowering all , as explained in the following . 3 . 4 participant stakeholders and their roles In GaCoCo , while children mainly work on early design in coop - erative groups , with gamiﬁed tasks and material , researchers support children’s empowerment in designing , possibly with the help of teach - ers . In GaCoCo studies , presented in details in Chapters 4 and 6 , at least two researchers are present in class together with children , with differ - ent expertise and roles . One researcher , experienced of child development studies , acts as observer during the design activity , and is referred to as observer henceforth . She or he gathers data according to the activity goals , and maintains a constant dialogue with teachers and the other researcher concerning the class behavior and children’s well - being . The other researcher is the design expert , collaborating with chil - dren in the following ways . During a design activity , possibly assisted by teachers , this expert follows each group and conducts a formative evaluation of their work , asking clariﬁcations and giving rapid feed - back about speciﬁc design choices through dialogue . Moreover , at the end of a design session or at the end of the entire activity , this expert , and at least another , not presented at school , should conduct a sum - mative evaluation of groups’ products . Results of such evaluation must be returned to children , possibly across design sessions , so as to allow children to further self - reﬂect on their design products and promote their learning . 3 . 5 outcomes Generally in a participatory design experience , the outcome is the actual artifact or design delivered at the end of the experience ; then the outcome embodies decisions and considerations and , as such , it brings researchers epistemology insights as design knowledge , e . g . , what genre of games 8 – 10 years old children prefer . GaCoCo as well 43 the gacoco method considers tangible outcomes , that is , children’s early game design prod - ucts . Then epistemology is design knowledge concerning such prod - ucts , which empowers adult designers . The challenge that GaCoCo picks up is whether such design products can be delivered ( as - is ) to game developers and brought by developers into design maturity . This thesis considers this challenge , and turns it into a research question . However , GaCoCo goes beyond that : it values knowledge coming from GaCoCo products and related to the empowerment of children participating in the GaCoCo activity . Examples of such knowledge are : what speciﬁc game elements children could design at the end of their design experience , as in ( Dodero et al . , 2014 a ) ; quality of children’s game products assessed and discussed with children throughout the experience , and regarded as a measure of whether children are learn - ing about design , by doing it together . Last but not least , GaCoCo considers in tangible outcomes in addi - tion to design products by children , still related to their empowerment : their engagement in a GaCoCo activity , and their learning an attitude on social inclusion . By treating them as outcomes , GaCoCo has to de - vise a way to assess them . In particular , engagement in an activity can be assessed considering children’s concentration , interest and enjoy - ment , e . g . , see ( Shernoff et al . , 2003 ; Hamari et al . , 2016 ) . It can also be assessed considering achievement emotions , being positively corre - lated to enjoyment and negatively to anxiety and boredom , e . g . , ( Kahu et al . , 2015 ) . Given that knowledge in participatory design is often co - created and context bound , GaCoCo tends to use a mixed - method research to assess them : quantitative data are collected and analyzed ; qualitative data are then used to explain quantitative ﬁndings . This is the approach followed in the studies reported in Chapter 4 and in Chapter 6 of this thesis . Figure 3 : Product GaCoCo lifecycle stages 44 3 . 6 lifecycle 3 . 6 lifecycle In line with a lean approach to UCD ( Gothelf , 2013 ) , GaCoCo design sessions alternate and intertwine with evaluation sessions . Evaluation can be with experts of the domain under consideration , e . g . , by using discount inspection methods , or with the end users of product . In this thesis , the domain experts are game designers , whereas the end users are primary - school children . See Figure 3 . Speciﬁcally , all GaCoCo studies reported in this thesis start with the preliminary deﬁnition of the design goal and of a protocol to achieve it . This is done with experts of child development , game design and school stakeholders , speciﬁcally school teachers and deans . GaCoCo studies then move into schools , and game design sessions start . Each design session takes place at a week’s distance from the previous one , and is broken into three progressive stages : ideation , conceptualiza - tion of ideas into structured documents and prototyping of these . Internal evaluation , done by design participants themselves , is of three different types , delivered at different moments : peer evaluation among children during design sessions , with discussions at the pair , at group or at class level ; formative evaluation by experts of children’ products at speciﬁc moments during design sessions , with rapid feed - back for validating or clarifying design decisions by children ; summa - tive evaluation by experts of children’s products in between design sessions , giving constructive elaborate feedback on design choices by children . External evaluation is also important for GaCoCo but is not part of the method itself . In one of the GaCoCo studies , it was done with children with interactive prototypes of games designed by chil - dren with GaCoCo . See Chapter 5 . Iteration , incremental work , and the interleaving of design and ( in - ternal ) evaluation are thus cornerstones of GaCoCo . 45 4 T H E G A C O C O 2 0 1 4 S T U D Y contents 4 . 1 Study 48 4 . 1 . 1 Goals 48 4 . 1 . 2 Participants and Roles 51 4 . 1 . 3 Design 52 4 . 2 GaCoCo Design Activity 54 4 . 2 . 1 Gamiﬁed Environment and Gamiﬁed Material 55 4 . 2 . 2 Cooperative Learning Rules , Roles and Strategies 59 4 . 2 . 3 Protocol Mission by Mission 63 4 . 3 Analysis and Results 70 4 . 3 . 1 Data Collection and Instruments 70 4 . 3 . 2 Study Results 76 4 . 4 Discussion 86 4 . 4 . 1 Quality of Products for Learning 86 4 . 4 . 2 Children’s Achievement Emotions for Engagement 87 4 . 4 . 3 Children’s Achievement Emotions and Quality of Prod - ucts 89 4 . 5 Conclusion 90 In this chapter we present the case study executed during the Spring 2014 in two primary schools in Italy . The chapter is organized as fol - lows . In Section 4 . 1 the main goals of the study , with the related hy - potheses , the participants involved , and the study design organization are presented . Section 4 . 2 details the material , namely generative toolk - its and gamiﬁed probes , used in the study , the design protocol , with the strategies used , and the design session outcomes . Analyses and results are detailed in Section 4 . 3 . At the end of the chapter , in Section 4 . 4 , we discuss results obtained during the study , considering whether the study worked or not , and what requires a re - design . 47 the gacoco 2014 study 4 . 1 study The study of 2014 revolves around GaCoCo , with its learning goals and with the related product design goals . As explained in Chapter 3 , collaboration and engagement are GaCoCo key values and challenges . Therefore , the GaCoCo acitvity aims at empowering children by en - gaging them and by promoting their learning of early game design . In this GaCoCo study , prototypes of digital games were designed with 35 children in two classes of two primary schools in the area of Bolzano , north of Italy . During the game design children were split in groups , where each group worked on designing and prototyping a game . All games are based on a story , namely storyline of the game . The game design activity per se took 5 days per school . Each day was named as mission ( as in a game ) and it was executed during the time - frame of the daily school activity . At the end of the game design activ - ity , each group of children had developed a paper - based prototype of their own game . In the remainder , we report details on the goals of the study , the participants involved and their roles , the study design and its organization . 4 . 1 . 1 Goals The study aims at empowering children by engaging them and pro - moting their learning of early game design . Children’s learning of design can be related to their performances in the design activity and to the quality of their design products . Children’s engagement can be correlated to their achievement emo - tions , e . g . , engagement has been positively correlated to enjoyment and negatively correlated to anxiety and boredom , and can be qual - itatively assessed in terms of interest , concentration and enjoyment , in line with ( Shernoff et al . , 2003 ) . Moreover , children’s performances with gamiﬁed probes as measure of children’s engagement during the GaCoCo game design experience can be qualitatively assessed . The study inspects and evaluates the following goals : ( Goal 1 ) moni - toring and assessing children’s performances in GaCoCo design ; ( Goal 2 ) assessing engagement by : ( Goal 2 . 1 ) monitoring and assessing the intensity of children’s achievement emotions along the GaCoCo de - sign , ( Goal 2 . 2 ) assessing the engagement along the GaCoCo activity and with GaCoCo gamiﬁed material ; ( Goal 3 ) assessing possible rela - tionships between performance and emotions . Each goal and the associated hypotheses are speciﬁed in details in the following . 48 4 . 1 study Goal 1 : Monitoring and Assessing Children’s Performances Group performance in the GaCoCo activity was operationalized by considering the quality of the group product , for each group . The study aimed at monitoring the quality of products released by groups of children during GaCoCo , and whether the quality of products was increasing over time at the group level . Such increase would suggest that children were learning , by doing design together . A single hypoth - esis was formulated : g1 . h1 Quality of products changes in time ( alternative hypothesis , H 1 ) against the null hypothesis of no differences ( null hypothesis , HO ) . This hy - pothesis was based on the organization of game design missions with GaCoCo , and it is not backed up by ﬁndings in the literature . Therefore it is of an exploratory nature only . Goal 2 : Monitoring and Assessing Children’s Engagement goal 2 . 1 : monitoring the intensity of children’s achievement emotions . The study aimed at describing the intensity of children’s achievement emotions during GaCoCo missions , and how intensity of emotions changed over time at the individual level . More in details , we focus on four emotions , quite frequent in learning contexts , also for Italian primary school children ( Raccanello et al . , 2013 , 2014 ) , and representing quadrants of Pekrun’s model ( Pekrun , 2006 ) , which re - sult from intersecting the valence and activation dimensions : enjoy - ment , an activating positive emotion ; relaxation , a deactivating posi - tive emotion ; anxiety , an activating negative emotion ; and boredom , a deactivating negative emotion . The hypotheses we formulated were : g2 . h1 Positive emotions more intense than negative emotions ( H 1 ) against the null hypothesis of no differences ( HO ) . Along the line of the data on Italian learners concerning learning activity in other do - mains ( Raccanello and Bianchetti , 2016 ) , we hypothesized posi - tive emotions to be more intense than negative ones . g2 . h2 Higher intensity for activating emotions than deactivating emotions ( H 1 ) against the null hypothesis of no differences ( HO ) , given the ac - tive role of the learner involved in the GaCoCo Activity . This hy - pothesis is not backed up by ﬁndings in the literature . Therefore it is of an exploratory nature ; g2 . h3 Intensity of negative and positive emotions changes over time ( H 1 ) against the null hypothesis of no differences ( HO ) . This hypothesis 49 the gacoco 2014 study was based on the possibility of diminished novelty and increas - ing demands in complexity of game design missions , and falsiﬁ - cation of the null hypotheses could enable to extend similar data emerged for long - term competence - relevant traditional activities in regular classes ( Raccanello et al . , 2013 ) . goal 2 . 2 : assessing engagement along the gacoco activity and with the gacoco gamified material . The study considered ex - ploratory qualitative observations of students’ engagement during the GaCoCo activity . In order to qualitatively assess the GaCoCo game design experience , we monitored the engagement of children’s group design activities in terms of concentration , interest and enjoyment , as stated in ( Shernoff et al . , 2003 ) . The authors in ( Shernoff et al . , 2003 ) refer the aforementioned variables as important components of the ﬂow theory ( Csikszentmihalyi , 1997 ) that can be used as a measure of learner engagement in an activity . Moreover , we assessed engagement of the whole class with the Ga - CoCo gamiﬁed material : the frequency of the usage of the gamiﬁed probes , and whether the usage was or was not distracting children from their activity . In addition , we assessed preferences of children for gamiﬁed probes for designing , besides their usage of such probes . Goal 3 : Assessing Relationship between Performances and Emotions We aim at exploring possible relationships between children’s achieve - ment emotions and quality of products . In light of literature ﬁnd - ings ( Pekrun and Perry , 2014 ) , we focussed on formulating hypotheses only for the activating positive emotions of enjoyment and deactivat - ing negative emotion of boredom , while no speciﬁc hypotheses were formulated for relaxation and anxiety , for both of which inconsistent results are frequently reported . Correlational analyses were run both at the individual and at the group level , given that quality of products was conceptualized as a measure of group performances , while emotions were investigated in - dividually per child . The hypotheses we formulated were : g3 . h1 Quality of products are positively correlated to enjoyment ( H 1 ) against the null hypothesis of absence of relations ( H 0 ) . g3 . h2 Quality of products are negatively correlated to boredom ( H 1 ) against the null hypothesis of absence of relations ( H 0 ) . 50 4 . 1 study 4 . 1 . 2 Participants and Roles The study involved two classes of 35 children , two teachers and two design experts . Each participant , from children to teachers as well as researchers , had a speciﬁc role . Roles for participants were speciﬁed in detail below . Teachers Two teachers were involved in the study . Both were teaching Italian Language and Literacy 1 . At the start of a design session , teachers illus - trated the work organization and material to be used , according to the GaCoCo protocol for the mission . Moreover , they were in classroom together with GaCoCo researchers during the entire design activity : teachers assisted the GaCoCo researcher in the communication with children , and in scaffolding of group work , following the GaCoCo pro - tocol . Researchers Two researchers were involved in the study . As reported in Chapter 3 they had different types of expertise and roles . Below we brieﬂy recap their roles . The ﬁrst research is the design expert : she has expertise in both game design and interaction design . During the design activity , she followed each group and conducted quick formative evaluation of their work ( formative feedback ) , asking clariﬁcations and giving feedback about design choices . For instance : “what are points for” ; “you stated that characters lose lifes but did not explain how” . She used the heuris - tics of ( Desurvire et al . , 2004 ) for informing her evaluation as well as work expertise in game and interaction design . The choice of having just one design expert per class , interacting with children at speciﬁc moments , is due to resource constraints . In addition , the expert avoids the risk that adults lead discussions among children , e . g . , see ( Nes - set and Large , 2004 ) . Moreover , at the end of a design session , or of the entire activity , this expert conducted a summative evaluation of groups’ products . Product evaluation is also performed by an inde - pendent design expert , who never works with children . Speciﬁcally , during the evaluation , the design experts used again the heuristics of ( Desurvire et al . , 2004 ) , revised for the released game design docu - ments and paper - based prototype . Such heuristics were used as guide - lines for the expert review—experts used heuristics for informing their 1 In the Italian primary school , the Italian Language and Literacy subjects employ the most of the daily school timetable , therefore teachers spend in class most hours during the school week 51 the gacoco 2014 study evaluation , but they also relied on their game and interaction design expertise . Products of children were than evaluated against emerged issues , which were thematically analysed by the experts . Results of this evaluation must be returned to children , possibly across design sessions , so as to allow children to further self - reﬂect on their design products , and to promote their learning . The second researcher , experienced in child development studies , named education expert , acted as observer during the design activity , and was referred to as observer henceforth . She gathered data according to the activity goals , and maintained a constant dialogue with teachers and the design expert concerning the class behavior and children’s well - being . Children Children were 35 in total ( 59 % females ) , coming from a variety of socio - economic backgrounds . Classes were of different ages and sizes . The younger class was of n = 15 children , in grade 3 , with mean age = 8 . 85 years , SD = . 44 . The class had two children diagnosed with an attention deﬁcit hyperactivity disorder ( ADHD ) . The older class was of n = 20 children , in grade 4 , with mean age = 9 . 72 years , SD = . 47 . The class had a child with autism and a cochlear implant who was involved in the whole activity . All children participated on a volun - tary basis , and their parents authorized their participation through a written consent form . Children were the main game designers , mainly working in groups of 3 – 5 members . In line with GaCoCo protocol , their work was orga - nized ﬁnto small groups , in pairs or with the entire class . 4 . 1 . 3 Design This section speciﬁes the study design organization into a pre - activity , the core GaCoCo activity for realizing early game prototypes , and a post - activity . Pre - activity . During the pre - activity , researchers organized a meeting with all po - tentially interested teachers and school deans , in order to explain and discuss the GaCoCo activity . A week after this , a six - hour open work - shop was organized for teachers . During the workshop , the GaCoCo Training for teachers design protocol was explained by researchers , as well as the main ideas of gamiﬁcation and cooperative learning . Teachers worked in group and experimented the co - design protocol for children by prototyping 52 4 . 1 study games themselves . During the workshop , teachers of the participating schools gave researchers feedback on the GaCoCo activity protocol , e . g . , concerning timings of feedback , and researchers revised the pro - tocol accordingly . Moreover , teachers were also administered a form for : collecting Group Formation speciﬁc data ; creating co - design groups of children , heterogeneous in terms of learning and social styles , in line with cooperative learning values acquired by GaCoCo , see Chapter 3 . The education expert ex - plained the form to teachers , who compiled it with her assistance . For instance , the education expert explained that relevant social skills were related to inter - personal relations , such as : taking decisions ; resolving problems ; communicating in an assertive manner ; managing emotions . For each learner , teachers annotated : ( 1 ) gender ; ( 2 ) age ; ( 3 ) social skills , assessed with a 3 - level scale , in which 1 is the minimum and 3 the maximum ; ( 4 ) work attitude , namely , whether a learner prefers working alone to working in group , or to something else ; ( 5 ) learn - ing style , namely , whether a learner is global - creative , or deductive - analytic , or something else ; ( 6 ) school skills , namely , whether a learner is highly proﬁcient , proﬁcient or lowly proﬁcient at school , or some - thing else . The form is shown in Figure 4 . The form also contained a ﬁeld for additional observations , concerning power relations or whether a learner had special needs , and which ones . Such information was also speciﬁcally used to reﬁne the GaCoCo activity protocol for man - aging group dynamics with cooperative learning , e . g . , emphasizing rules for listening in silence to all group members’ ideas . GaCoCo activity . The activity aimed at enabling groups of children to work on the Main Game Design Activity early design of games , with GaCoCo . Groups started their work from a story for children , acting as game storyline . Since children are familiar with narratives , using a story as starting point , on the one hand , may increase children’s conﬁdence and engagement in the game design activity , on the other hand it allows teachers and researchers to frame game design as a continuation of a traditional school activity . The story , chosen by teachers , was " The edgeless village " ( Il paese senza punta ) by Gianni Rodari . It tells the adventure of a teenager in a village , where all objects are edgeless , e . g . , roses without thorns . The story was read and discussed in class before starting the GaCoCo activity . The GaCoCo design activity was long , thus it was fragmented and conducted during regular classes . Design sessions , of progressive com - plexity , were presented as missions to children . Missions and their or - ganization with GaCoCo are illustrated in details in Section 4 . 2 . 3 . 53 the gacoco 2014 study Child … Child … Child … Child … Age Social skill ( min 1 - max 3 ) 1 2 3 1 2 3 1 2 3 1 2 3 Work attitude - in group - alone - something else … - in group - alone - something else … - in group - alone - something else … - in group - alone - something else … Learning style - global ded . - ded . analytic - something else … - global ded . - ded . analytic - something else … - global ded . - ded . analytic - something else … - global ded . - ded . analytic - something else … School skills - lowly proficient - proficient - highly proficient - something else … - lowly proficient - proficient - highly proficient - something else … - lowly proficient - proficient - highly proficient - something else … - lowly proficient - proficient - highly proficient - something else … Write here any additional observations , e . g . , friendships , special needs and which : Figure 4 : The form for organizing groups and collecting data concerning chil - dren Post - activity . In the post - activity , debrieﬁng interviews with children were run by Debrieﬁng and Feedback teachers with the help of researchers to know about their experience with GaCoCo . Children were asked about their experience with the GaCoCo activity , e . g . , they were asked to rank their preferred gami - ﬁed probes used for co - designing at school . Moreover , children of the participating school were invited to our university , see Section 4 . 2 . 3 4 . 2 gacoco design activity The activity took a total of ﬁve missions per school . Each mission was organized the same day in different weeks , and lasted circa two hours and a half . All missions employed gamiﬁed probes for two main purposes . The ﬁrst purpose was conveying a sense of progression and control , over game design work split across weeks . The second purpose was mak - ing cooperative learning rules , roles and strategies tangible . Subsec - tion 4 . 2 . 1 details the gamiﬁed probes of the activity . Subsection 4 . 2 . 2 outlines the cooperative learning contributions used in missions . Each mission follows the game lifecycle as introduced in Section 3 . 6 . In each mission , by moving from one stage to another ( ideation , con - 54 4 . 2 gacoco design activity ceptualization , prototyping ) , each group of children released speciﬁc design outcomes : a speciﬁc game design document , organized as a form and a speciﬁc paper - based prototype . Such products were pro - gressively building one upon the other , releasing a ﬁnal game design document and prototype per group . Section 4 . 2 . 3 explains the protocol common to all the activity’s mis - sions and details each mission with its speciﬁc outcomes , and the pro - cedure followed for releasing each outcome . 4 . 2 . 1 Gamiﬁed Environment and Gamiﬁed Material In line with ( Sanders and Stappers , 2008 ) , GaCoCo uses speciﬁc ma - terial , namely generative toolkits and gamiﬁed probes for children so as to organize and make tangible , for them , the cooperative learning contributions to design , and the design tasks themselves , as well as the school environment . Generative toolkits were made of game de - sign document forms and prototype frames ; gamiﬁed probes acted as early design versions of gamiﬁed tangibles . The material were de - signed ad - hoc for the GaCoCo studies , considering several aspects , and also whether the material would distract children from their tasks . The design of such material was discussed with child development experts , and it followed general and speciﬁc design principle , e . g . , by ( Hutchinson et al . , 2003 b ) : a well - designed probe should be dis - tinguished from other design prototypes or products for the following reasons : ( 1 ) design - phase : probes should be introduced in early design stages ; ( 2 ) functionality : each probe should have few clear function - alities for its users ; ( 3 ) ﬂexibility : probes should be designed to be open - ended with respect to their functionalities , and users should be allowed to reinterpret and use them in unexpected ways for inspiring designers . During the game design activity , children worked in their class - rooms . At the start of a mission , each group arranged classroom tables in groups of four . On such tables , each group was given a jute basket to store the different objects of each mission , and generative toolkits needed for the game design activity . The design expert hanged two A0 format posters on the wall : one was a paper - version of a progression bar , called progression map , and the other , called tree map , showed a tree , which was growing with the growth of groups’ game prototypes . Speciﬁc generative toolkits and gamiﬁed probes with its purposes are explained in the following . The main reference point in class for each group was the progres - Progression Map sion map , see Figure 5 . Its main functionality is enabling wayﬁnding through the process : what I have done so far , where I am now , where 55 the gacoco 2014 study I can go next ( Lynch and Horton , 2015 ) . In that manner it helps make tangible children’s progression through the process , and hence pro - mote children’s feeling of control over it . The progression map used in this study is designed as follows . It showed missions vertically , and groups horizontally . Each mission was divided into challenges , one per design task . For tracking their position in a mission , each group had their badge to move across mission’s challenges . Each badge showed the group logo . On completion of each challenge children found a tan - gible reward , in the form of a removable wood coin . Those coins were completion - contingent rewards , that is , a group earned a coin only af - ter completing a challenge . In addition , when a group grabbed their coin , they found a positive feedback behind it , e . g . , good work ! . The progression map showed the end of a mission with a door , Tree Map which was hiding a surprise symbolic reward : sticker for the group’s tree to position in the tree map , showing the group’s progression through missions . That is the tree would grow as the group’s game design would grow through missions . Children used these rewards in the tree map , showed in Figure 5 , for assembling their tree . Each group had a dedicated portion of land where to stick their stickers . Firstly each group had to plant the seed into the soil , secondly they had to water the seed and then to grow their tree , piece by piece , across mis - sions . Besides maps , other gamiﬁed probes was created for tangibly pro - moting cooperative learning rules and roles for collaborating and re - lating to others . For tangibly promoting taking - turns in speaking for cooperation in groups , each group was endowed with a scepter . When a child held the scepter he or she could speak and other group members should be lis - tening without interrupting . Moreover in challenges , each group mem - Scepters and Signalling Disks ber could vote the proposal of other group members using wooden signalling disks : on their signalling disks , children drew smileys or wrote their feedback , positive or not , in relation to the voting task . See Figure 6 . At the end of each mission , groups used their coins , found in the pro - Shop gression bar : with coins each group could buy objects for their proto - types they were designing . Groups had to move to the shopping point , where they found the wood fabric shop with 20 jute pockets , contain - ing different objects for prototyping , e . g . , potion , wings . Groups could buy objects for their daily mission by inserting their coin into the shop ﬁssure . There were 20 objects on sale , including a special card , the “help of the expert card” . This card gave each group the right to ask the game designer for extra - help concerning their prototype . See Fig - ure 6 . 56 4 . 2 gacoco design activity Figure 5 : The progression map ( on the left ) and the tree map ( on the right ) . the expert card Figure 6 : The signalling disk and the scepter in use ( on the left ) ; the shop ( on the right ) . 57 the gacoco 2014 study Figure 7 : Forms for releasing the game design document ( on the left ) and the ad hoc frame for game prototype ( on the right ) . In order to design and prototype their game , children were provided Game Design Document Forms with different forms to ﬁll in . These forms were referred to as the game design documents and represented game design stage . In line with the game lifecycle explained in 3 . 6 and the related stages , each design session provided different forms to ﬁll in that represented parts of the game design document . Each form was related to a speciﬁc stage of the game lifecycle : from ideation and conceptualization to prototyping . These forms were A 4 printed on papers . They were structured with simple questions related to the game design documents and dedicated space to answer the questions . See Figure 7 . Overall each group had ﬁve forms to ﬁll in , one per mission . They are described in Section 4 . 2 . 3 . Game design forms and prototype frames are available with English translations at the following link : GaCoCo Mission Forms 2014 . Each group had two A3 frame with a tablet shape for prototyping Tablet Frame their game level . The last mission was centered on a presentation of the co - designed Ad Hoc Game Frame prototypes . For this , each group had an A0 poster frame with col - ored shapes where to insert pieces of information about their paper - based prototype , in a structured manner . See Figure 7 . More in de - tail , the upper part was dedicated to the game title . Below there were two dedicated spaces for glueing the two prototyped game levels . For each level , two balloons represented the winning and losing conditions ; e . g . , what appears when the player loses or wins . At the center of the poster there was a star representing the passage conditions ; e . g . , what appears when the player pass from the ﬁrst level to the second . The bottom part was dedicated to the end of the game , e . g . , what appears when the game was completed . 58 4 . 2 gacoco design activity 4 . 2 . 2 Cooperative Learning Rules , Roles and Strategies Roles and rules Different cooperative learning roles were considered and adapted according to the game design protocol . Roles for children in group work recurred across missions . Such rotated among group members across missions , so that all children had a chance to train different skills . The group roles used in each mission were the following . • Secretary : she / he collected and recorded data in mission speciﬁc forms , concerning design choices . • Ambassador : she / he was responsible of exchanging information with teachers and the design expert . • Materials Manager : she / he was the only one who could stand up for collecting material for the activity , making sure that each members of his / her group had equal access to it . • Time Keeper : she / he encouraged the group to stay on task and announced when time was halfway through and when time was nearly up . • Participation Checker : she / he checked that all group members par - ticipated and gave their contribution , e . g . , if some member was distracted , the participation checker would recall his or her atten - tion If group members were less than ﬁve , the teacher chose who would take up more than one role per mission . Alternatively , she did not assign some of the least relevant roles , e . g . , the time keeper or partici - pation checker . Besides group roles , pair roles were assigned when group members were split in pairs for speciﬁc missions . According to the protocol of each mission , if group members were three , the group was divided into a pair and a single member . Otherwise , if necessary , the three members would work together . If a group had ﬁve members , the group was divided into a pair and a trio . The pair roles were as follows . • Pair - Speaker : she / he could speak for both members of the pair , describing the pair’s work to others . • Pair - Checker : using game design documents , she / he controlled whether the pair - speaker had given all necessary details or not . She / he could ask clariﬁcation questions to others . 59 the gacoco 2014 study In a ﬁve - member group , two members of a trio would execute the pair checker role ; whereas in a three members group , two member execute the checker role . Besides roles , and in support of them , cooperative learning consid - ers a set of rules , necessary for working in group and for involving all members . Rules for managing group work were explained to the class by their teacher during the ﬁrst mission , and were recalled at the start of each mission . More in details , rules were concerned with social skills such as reciprocal listening and respecting different views . Exam - ples of cooperative learning rules that GaCoCo employed were : taking turns in voicing opinions , reconciling different views , e . g . , concern - ing game concepts or prototypes , helping peers or listening in silence to the other group members ideas . GaCoCo studies made such rules clear and easy to recognize by using ad - hoc gamiﬁed probes , as intro - duced in Section 4 . 2 . 1 . For example , each group was endowed with the scepter for organizing turns in speaking , and each child could vote on different views by drawing smileys on signaling - disks . Strategies There are many cooperative learning strategies for organizing group work . This subsection describes the main strategies adapted to the GaCoCo activity . These strategies , adapted to the GaCoCo study and made tangible with gamiﬁed probes , recurred across missions and are related to speciﬁc mission’s challenges that include group work , pair - ing and sharing informations . sharing for ideating and conceptualizing . When children had to ﬁll in a game design document , structured as a form , they were asked to proceed in a speciﬁc manner . In case of group work , the group secretary read aloud the information required , ﬁeld by ﬁeld . In turn , each group member shared his or her own ideas with the group , and the secretary reported it . Group members shared ideas and gave their own opinions on others members’ ideas using scepters for taking turns . Once all members had given their opinions , within the allotted time , the group had to converge on a single design choice : to do so , they voted using signalling - disks . In case of pair work , one member read the form questions , the other member ﬁlled in the form , and both shared ideas . think pair share . In case of pair and group work , the think - pair - share strategy of cooperative learning was employed and adapted in order to share with the group the pair’s outcome , whether this was a game design document or a prototype . The strategy had three distinct 60 4 . 2 gacoco design activity steps . In the “think step " , each member reﬂected or worked individu - ally on the proposed challenge . In the “pair step” , groups were split in pairs to discuss about their work , and to listen to the other pairs’ ideas , releasing a game design document or prototype . In the “share step " , group were recomposed ; in turn , pairs shared their document or prototype , using the roles of pair speaker and pair checker . 61 the gacoco 2014 study G a C o C o % 2014 % S t ud y % % M i ss i o n % 1 % M i ss i o n % 2 % M i ss i o n % 3 % M i ss i o n % 4 % M i ss i o n % 5 % ! G O A L % T r a i n i n g ! a n d ! g r o u p ! i d e n t i t y ! C o n c e p t u a l i z i n g ! ! t h e ! g a m e ! i d ea ! a n d ! g a m e ! c h a r a c t e r s ! P r o t o t y p i n g ! t h e ! g a m e ! l e v e l s ! ! P r o t o t y p i n g ! t h e ! g a m e ! l e v e l s ! ! F i n a l i s a t i o n ! o f ! ea c h ! g r o u p ! g a m e ! l e v e l s , ! a n d ! i t s ! p r e s e n t a t i o n ! t o ! t h e ! e n t i r e ! c l a ss . ! ! ! % % % C H A LL E N G E S ! C h oo s i n g ! t h e ! g r o u p ! n a m e ! a n d ! p r o t o t y p i n g ! t h e ! g r o u p ! b a d g e . ! ! ! G a m e ! ! ! I d ea ! ! G a m e ! c h a r a c t e r ! S h a r i n g ! a n d ! r e v i s i n g ! C o r e ! m e c h a n i c s ! ( p a r t ! 1 ) ! S h a r i n g ! a n d ! r e v i s i n g ! C o r e ! m e c h a n i c s ! ( p a r t ! 2 ) ! ! S h a r i n g ! a n d ! r e v i s i n g ! P r o g r e ss i o n ! t h r o u g h ! l e v e l s ! + ! W i nn i n g ! a n d ! l o s i n g ! E ff e c t s ! G a m e ! T i t l e ! P r e s e n t a t i o n ! C OO P E R A T I V E % L E A R N I N G % S T R A T E G I E S % G r o u p ! w o r k ! G r o u p ! w o r k ! G r o u p ! w o r k ! T h i n k ! P a i r ! S h a r e ! P a i r ! w o r k ! T h i n k ! P a i r ! S h a r e ! P a i r ! w o r k ! T h i n k ! P a i r ! S h a r e ! P a i r ! w o r k ! G r o u p ! w o r k ! G r o u p ! w o r k ! % G E N E R A T I V E % T OO L K I T S % T h e ! g r o u p ! n a m e ! f o r m ! w i t h ! t h e ! s t i c k e r ! b a d g e ! ! ! G a m e ! I d ea ! F o r m ! G a m e ! C h a r a c t e r ! F o r m ! ! L e v e l ! f r a m e s ! ! C o r e ! m e c h a n i c s ! f o r m ! ( p a r t ! 1 ) ! L e v e l ! f r a m e s ! ! C o r e ! m e c h a n i c s ! f o r m ! ( p a r t ! 2 ) ! ! G a m e ! f r a m e ! ! P r o g r e ss i o n ! f o r m ! G a m e ! F r a m e ! % G A M I F I E D % P R O B E S % P e r ! c l a ss : ! P r o g r e ss i o n ! M a p ; ! T r ee ! M a p ! P e r ! g r o u p : ! S c e p t e r s , ! ! P e r ! c h i l d : ! R o l e s ! b a d g e , ! S i g n a l i n g ! d i s k s ! ! P e r ! c l a ss : ! s h o p ! ! ! ! ! ! ! F i g u r e 8 : S t e p s a n d m a t e r i a l m i ss i o n b y m i ss i o n o f t h e 2014 s t u d y 62 4 . 2 gacoco design activity 4 . 2 . 3 Protocol Mission by Mission This subsection details the protocol mission by mission . Firstly it details the common protocol to all the activity’s missions in the Across Missions paragraph . Secondly , it outlines each mission in the Mission by Mission paragraph , detailing the outcomes and the procedure for tackling the related outcomes . Figure 8 summarizes the main steps for each mission , detailing the goal of each mission , its speciﬁc challenges and the cooperative learn - ing strategies and material ( generative toolkits and gamiﬁed probes ) to use . Across Missions Missions followed a recurring pattern . at the start of a mission . The teacher and the researcher re - Recap and Mission Goal capped what children had produced at the end of the previous mission ( if any ) , and outlined the goal of the daily mission . Teachers explained or reminded rules , assigned and explained roles of cooperative learn - ing to each child . Then the design expert explained the organization of the mission into challenges , using the progression map and the rel - evant gamiﬁed probes . during the mission . Each group worked at their tables , arranged Formative Evaluation so as to promote face - to - face interaction . The time - keeper tracked time and the progression of groups in the map . In all missions , the secretary was responsible for his or her group’s game design documents . At the end of each mission challenge , the group ambassador asked the expert to validate their challenge’s outcomes . During this formative evalua - tion , the expert gave rapid feedbacks , for validating the challenge or for clarifying design decisions . Only when the challenge resulted tack - Rewards System led and hence validated by the expert , the group could move their badge on the progression map , awarding the coin related to the chal - lenge . at the end of the mission . The material manager earned the group’s sticker to place in the tree map on behalf of his or her group . Subsequently , groups could use their coins for buying prototyping ob - jects at the shop . Teachers and researchers gathered feedback from children , administering a questionnaire concerning their emotions . after a mission . A summative evaluation is an expert evaluation Summative Evaluation used as a discount inspection method conducted by experts , against 63 the gacoco 2014 study given heuristics or principles ( Maceﬁeld , 2014 ) . Starting from the sec - ond mission until the ﬁfth mission , two game design experts evalu - ated game products , released at the end of a mission ; one of them was the expert present at school . They used heuristics by Desurvire et al . ( Desurvire et al . , 2004 ) concerning the game storyline , game play and game mechanics . Evaluation results were tracked in a structured format ( Albert and Tullis , 2013 ) . The expert that wen back to school used the evaluation results as summative feedback for children during the next mission . outcomes . The ﬁrst mission aimed at : ( 1 ) training all children to cooperative learning rules and group roles as well as to the use of gamiﬁed probes ; ( 2 ) creating the identity of each group ; ( 3 ) introducing the game design activity with its design goal . Its outcome products were the group badges and brand names , speciﬁed in the related forms . The Figure 9 shows the ﬁrst mission outcomes for a group . procedure per challenge . The mission started with the teacher explaining the design activity goal , rules and group roles . Then the design expert explained children how game design would work us - ing metaphors related to the tree map in Figure 5 : each game would be rooted into a game idea ( seeds ) , would build on game mechanics ( trunk ) and would ﬂourish with aesthetics ( leaves and fruit ) . Gamiﬁed probes was unveiled on a need - to - use basis . After the explanation , the teacher assembled groups who started working together . The ﬁrst mission had one challenge , namely choosing the group name and prototyping the group badge . This was done in two steps . In the ﬁrst step , each group was provided with a form for choosing the group name , see Figure 9 . Each group ﬁlled in their form by us - ing the sharing strategy and the related gamiﬁed probes . Each group started to practice their roles and rules , as explained before in Subsec - tion 4 . 2 . 2 . In the second step , each group developed their own badge . The badge served to track their progression on the map in Figure 5 . The design expert validated badge completion , and the material manager then placed the group badge on the mission challenge in the progres - sion map . rewards . At the end of the mission each group gained one coin and a ( paper ) seed , to be planted on their group soil on the tree map ( see Figure 5 ) . 64 4 . 2 gacoco design activity Figure 9 : Form for choosing the group name ( on the left ) and the group badge prototyped ( on the right ) Second Mission . Group Game Idea and Characters outcomes . The second mission aimed at conceptualizing the game idea . The game idea is related to the game world ; e . g . , setting , charac - ters . The outcome products of the second mission were the high - level con - cept document with the game idea of each group , and a prototype game character per child . See Figure 10 procedure per challenge . Before starting the mission , the class re - read the story chosen by the teacher . Next , the expert researcher , helped by teachers , explained that each group had to create a game to continue the story ; games would have to include story characters , or other elements related to the story . The second mission had three challenges . In the ﬁrst challenge , starting from the story read in class , each group had to create their game idea for continuing the story and to report it by ﬁlling in the high - concept document form . In order to ﬁll in the high - level concept document , each group used the sharing strategy ( see Subsection 4 . 2 . 2 ) . This was structured as a form with simple ques - tions , e . g . , where does the game take place ? In the second and third challenges , groups were split into pairs and the think - pair - share strategy was used as follows . In the second challenge , each member was given a form ( see Figure 10 ) for prototyping his or her own game character . The character form re - quired to specify physical characteristic , speciﬁc powers and character 65 the gacoco 2014 study Figure 10 : The form for the Game Idea ( on the left ) ; a character prototyped by a group ( on the right ) . traits e . g . , courageous , funny , and the character’s objects . At the end of the challenge each member had their character prototyped . In the third challenge , each group was again split into pairs . Each pair shared each member’s character prototype , and enriched their characters together , orally or graphically , according to their skills . Then groups were reunited to share the pairs’ prototypes and reﬁne them again ; each pair speaker described the prototyped characters , whereas the pair checker reported if the pair - speaker had forgotten something . rewards . At the end of the mission , each group gained three coins , one per challenge , and a watering to water the seed and to make it grow . On the tree map there was a dedicated space for glueing the watering , see Figure 5 . Third and Fourth Missions . Group Levels . outcomes . The third and fourth missions aimed at prototyping the game levels , completing the core game mechanics documents . Starting from the high - concept document , the outcome products of the third and fourth missions were prototypes of two game levels per group , and their core mechanics documents . See Figure 32 . procedure per challenge . In the third and fourth missions , groups worked in pairs , and the think - pair - share strategy was used in order to prototype two levels of the group game , one per pair . The third mission had two challenges . In the ﬁrst challenge , after re - vising their high - level concept document in group , each pair worked 66 4 . 2 gacoco design activity Figure 11 : The ﬁlled form for the core mechanics document ( on the left ) ; two game levels prototyped by a group ( on the right ) . on the core mechanics document for their level . In the second challenge , each pair used this document for prototyping their level using the sec - ond mission’s characters . Results were then shared in group . The fourth mission had three challenges . In the ﬁrst and second chal - lenge the same pairs of the third mission worked on continuing the core mechanics document and prototype of their level . The form con - tained questions concerning the core mechanics , e . g . , rules . In the third challenge pairs shared results with their group . rewards . At the end of the mission each group gained a coin per challenge , and parts of a tree ( tree roots , trunk and frond ) like stickers to glue on the dedicated space on the tree map , see Figure 5 . Fifth Mission . Passage Conditions and Game Finalisation outcomes . The ﬁfth mission aimed at the ﬁnalisation of each group game levels , and its presentation to the entire class . The outcome prod - ucts of the ﬁfth mission per group were : the conceptualization of ( 1 ) passage conditions from one level to the other , as in the accompanying progression document , ( 2 ) the assembled game prototype and ( 3 ) the presentation , namely play , for showing player’s interaction using the prototype . See Figure 12 . procedure per challenge . The ﬁfth mission had four challenges . In the ﬁrst challenge , each group used the sharing strategy for revis - ing their levels together and for ﬁlling in the progression document 67 the gacoco 2014 study Figure 12 : Passage conditions form ( on the left ) ; the ﬁnal prototyped game with the winning and losing conditions and passage conditions ( on the right ) concerning the passage between levels , e . g . , “what happens when the player wins at the ﬁrst level ? " . In the second and third challenges , using an ad - hoc frame , groups as - sembled their level prototypes into a single game and chose the game title . Firstly , each pair inserted their level in the frame . Secondly , all group members worked on prototyping passage between levels , in a dedicated area of the frame , following the progression document . See Figure 12 . Thirdly , the group had to choose the winning and losing effects that appeared when the player won or lost . In the fourth challenge , each group presented their game prototype to the entire class , simulating a game activity ( play testing ) and showing the player’s interaction with it , so as to gather feedback from peers . In line with cooperative learning , each group member was responsible for presenting a speciﬁc part of the group’s game . rewards . At the end of the mission , each group gained four coins and won a wooden star that allowed each group to receive a special prize . The special prize was a certiﬁcate , signed by the game designer responsible for the project . Each group would receive this prize during a dedicated mission at the university , as explained in section 4 . 2 . 3 . Mission at University . The mission at the Free University of Bozen - Bolzano was organized at the end of the GaCoCo design activity . The mission lasted circa 4 68 4 . 2 gacoco design activity hours . The two classes with their teachers were invited to present their prototyped game . outcomes . The mission at the University aimed at ( 1 ) presenting the prototyped games by each group to the other class , ( 2 ) receiving feedback from all children about the games . Moreover , each child was ask to vote the preferred game . The product outcomes of the mission at Game presentations the university were the feedback given by children to each game , and the preferred game chosen by voting . VOTING BOX GAME DESIGN DOCUMENT PROTOTYPE FRAME EVALUATION SURFACE FIRST LEVEL Figure 13 : The panel with the assembled game on the poster frame . On the right , each game had a space for comments and feedback ; at the bottom the panel had the voting box for voting the preferred game . procedure per challenge . Since each group had to show and present their game , the gallery tour strategy ( Barnes and O’Farrell , 1990 ) of cooperative learning was used . The premise of the strategy is that classes are divided into groups , each one delivering own prod - ucts . Groups’ products are then displayed as in a gallery . Each prod - uct comes with an allocated space for other groups to ask questions or write comments using colored post - it , see Figure 13 . Each group pre - sented their game , and then answered any questions and comments with other teams concerning their product . After the presentation , each child was asked to vote on of the group’s prototypes , expressing their preferences . In order to vote , each child was provided with gamiﬁed 69 the gacoco 2014 study probes to the purpose , e . g . , banknotes and voting boxes for voting the preferred game . See Figure 13 rewards . At the end of the vote , each group delivered the reward ( wooden star ) gained at the end of the ﬁve mission , and each child received a certiﬁcate of game designer . 4 . 3 analysis and results This GaCoCo study collected three main types of data , respectively concerning : ( 1 ) quality of game products , released at the end of ev - ery GaCoCo mission , and assessed via heuristics by two game design experts ; ( 2 ) children’s achievement emotions , gathered with the GR - AED questionnaire , and engagement in the activity and with gamiﬁed probes , assessed via observations during the activity . This section presents and analyses all such data along several per - spectives using descriptive and inferential statistics . Section 4 . 3 . 1 de - tails the collected data and the used instruments . Section 4 . 3 . 2 presents results from executed data analyses . 4 . 3 . 1 Data Collection and Instruments Data concerning quality of products , emotions and engagement were gathered with different instruments , at speciﬁc moments , as explained in details below . expert evaluation of children’s products Theoretical underpinnings . As reported in Chapter 2 , learning can be assessed as “authentic” and children’s progress through tasks should be evaluated as an authentic assessment using adults’ criteria as far as possible ( Grisham - Brown et al . , 2006 ) . An heuristic evaluation is an Quality of Products inspection method conducted by experts against given sets of heuris - tics or principles ( Nielsen and Molich , 1990 ) . Speciﬁcally , the Heuris - tic Evaluation for Playability ( HEP ) aims at assessing how playable a game ( prototype ) is ( Desurvire et al . , 2004 ) . Playability evaluators per - form a heuristic evaluation , while focusing on how each heuristic was supported or violated , and then deﬁne the playability issue . Format and Coding Starting from the second mission until the ﬁfth mission , two game design experts evaluated the game product of each group as released at the end of a mission . One of them was present 70 4 . 3 analysis and results at school and the other was not involved with school activities . The quality of product was operationalized in terms of playability follow - ing the heuristics by ( Desurvire et al . , 2004 ) as guidelines ( see Sec - tion 4 . 1 . 2 ) . The used heuristics related to the gameplay and game me - chanics , the game storyline and the coherence between the documents released each mission . At the end of the GaCoCo activity , the game design expert had been at school , created categories of issues found in products , brieﬂy , issues , by analyzing products by children and summative evaluation results delivered at the end of missions , from Mission 2 to Mission 5 ( M 2 – M 5 ) . Issues were then discussed and reﬁned with another game - design ex - pert , not working with schools . The distinct issues detected in products across missions are explained as follows . issues • Gameplay and mechanics inconsistencies and unclear function - alities . Game products presented issues concerning inconsisten - cies or unclear functionalities in gameplay or mechanics . Specif - ically , children reported a number of elements or challenges in documents , without specifying their functionality in the game - play or mechanics of their game products . • Goals . The goal of the game idea or players’ objectives in game levels are unclear or not consistently aligned in the ﬁnal game product . • Storyline . Children started creating their game idea from a given story , acting as the game storyline , and could use story elements in their game . The interplay between the gameplay and the story was not always maintained , in particular , consistency between the game and the story was not always maintained . • Player . In children’s work , it was often unclear the player’s role and how the player interacts with the game , e . g . , if the player is pretending to be one of the characters and , in case so , which . • Gameplay and mechanics incompleteness . Gameplay or mechan - ics information was missing in game products , which was re - quested explicitly , e . g . , in game design documents . Speciﬁcally , children often did not specify how characters tackled challenges for winning or losing , or how characters passed between levels . • Documentation . Children delivered game design documents , one extending the other . It happened that design choices were not consistently reported across documents . 71 the gacoco 2014 study All the above issues are applicable to products of missions starting with the second , except for documentation and game play and mechan - ics , which are applicable from the third mission onwards . The udder of two experts providef inter - judge reliability . The design expert work - ing with schools classiﬁed all products against issues , while the expert not working with schools classiﬁed 33 , 33 % of them , that is , 12 out of 36 products . The mean agreement percentage between the two experts was 87 , 50 % . The lowest agreement between experts was scored for “el - ements” ( 66 , 67 % ) . However , debate arose between experts concerning Documentation : the expert not working with children at school was not convinced that Documentation was a severe issue if the design process is incremental and iterative . Experts resolved disagreements through discussions to revise the products’ classiﬁcation . Starting from the aforementioned issues , the quality score of a group for an issue in a mission is deﬁned as follows : at the end of the mission , if the product of the group does not present the issue , then the quality score of the group is equal to 1 for that issue and that mission ( a posi - tive result ) ; else the score is equal to 0 ( a negative result ) . This scoring was used later to calculate descriptive statistics and intercorrelations , using STATA 12 . 1 for Windows ( Stata Corp . , 2013 ) . achievement emotion questionnaire Theoretical underpinnings . At the end of each mission , researchers Emotions administered the Graduated Achievement Emotion Set ( GR - AES ) ( Rac - canello and Bianchetti , 2016 , 2014 ) , in order to investigate children’s achievement emotions during the GaCoCo activity . The GR - AES is a preliminary version of a verbal - pictorial instrument enabling to as - sess the intensity of achievement emotions , based on Pekrun’s control - value theory ( Pekrun , 2006 ; Pekrun and Perry , 2014 ) . The study adapted GR - AES instructions so as to guide children to refer speciﬁcally to the emotions emerged during the daily design activity . The emotions we focused on enjoyment , relaxation , anxiety , and boredom . Format . GR - AES is presented on booklets , with a page per emotion . A question is at the top of each page , concerning the intensity of the emo - tion in the activity , e . g . , How much did you enjoy it ? . For answering , the page displays ﬁve faces in a row , corresponding to ﬁve increasing levels of emotion intensity ; each face is also labeled by a verbal cap - tion , i . e . , “not at all " , “slightly " , “moderately " , “very much " , and “ex - tremely " . Such a dual - code representation , verbal and pictorial , favors a more direct access to the semantic network in which emotional in - formation is stored ( Paivio , 1971 ; Goeleven et al . , 2008 ) . There are two 72 4 . 3 analysis and results versions of GR - AES , differentiated by gender , so as to support chil - dren’s identiﬁcation ( Lichtenfeld et al . , 2012 ) . Boys ﬁlled in GR - AES with boy faces , girls ﬁlled it in with girl faces . The page for enjoyment , for males , is presented in Figure 14 . Administrating and Coding . In the ﬁrst mission the presentation order of emotions in GR - AES was randomized ; subsequently , each child was administered GR - AES with emotions in the same order as in the ﬁrst mission . The administration of GR - AES was preceded by a familiariza - tion phase , aiming at exemplifying how to answer . Then each child had to indicate how much she or he had felt , in relation to each emotion , during a mission ( e . g . , “Think about how you felt during today’s mis - sion . . . for each emotion , displayed as follows , indicate how you felt " ) . A score ranging from 1 to 5 was used for coding the intensity of each emotion , using a 5 - point Likert - type scale : 1 = not at all ; 5 = extremely . GR # AED ' ( Raccanello , * Bianchetti * & * Bressanini , * non * pubblicato ) ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! Quanto * CONTENTO * ti * sei * sentito ? * ! ! ! ! ! ! * PER * NIENTE * ! POCO ! ABBASTANZA ! MOLTO ! MOLTISSIMO ! ! ! How much did you ENJOY yourself ? not at all slightly moderately very much extremely Figure 14 : A page of GR - AES concerning enjoyment for males For achievement emotions analyses we used SPSS version 21 . 0 for Windows , to calculate descriptive and inferential statistics . The level of signiﬁcance was set at p < . 05 . We used Mplus version 5 . 2 ( Muthén and Copyright , 2007 ) to run path analyses to test some mediational models . A maximum - likelihood ( ML ) estimation was performed , and a bootstrapping method with a conﬁdence interval was used to test indirect effects . No missing data were present in the dataset . Moreover , in order to calculate correlation between the quality of products and emotions , we used again SPSS version 21 . 0 for Windows to calculate descriptive statistics and intercorrelations . observations and video recording . Theoretical underpinnings . In line with ( Shernoff et al . , 2003 ; Biklen Engagement and Bogdan , 2007 ; Hamari et al . , 2016 ) , engagement is evidenced by be - haviors in mission challenges that denote : ( 1 ) positive emotions , such as enjoyment , amusement or negative emotions , such as an increase 73 the gacoco 2014 study in anxiety or boredom , shown with facial expressions or body pos - tures ; ( 2 ) interest , or its absence , such as frequently asking questions or not , engaging in conversations with teachers , experts or peers ; ( 3 ) concentration , or its absence , such as showing attention in listening to instructions , remaining in one’s group and on task . Format . The education expert acting as passive observer was present in each mission at schools . She observed the class without interfering . In the ﬁrst mission she identiﬁed herself as a researcher and explained the overall purpose of her observations . While in the classroom , she tracked class behavior , reporting in a daily diary all those situations which potentially indicated engagement or disengagement . A diary al - lows an observer to collect data as events unfold and to leave room for the emergence of unforeseen categories . In addition , a video camera was positioned in a corner of the classroom ; at the end of the mis - sion , the observer integrated her diary by analyzing visible behaviors in videos . Coding . At the end of the GaCoCO activity , diaries were analyzed the - matically against the considered categories of behaviors : enjoyment , interest and concentration . To provide inter - judge reliability , the ob - server classiﬁed behaviors in diaries against the three categories , while another education researcher , not present in class , classiﬁed 40 % of diaries , that is , 4 diaries out of 10 . In line with the typical coding scheme of qualitative data by ( Ocumpaugh et al . , 2012 ) , namely ob - servations on behaviour ( e . g . , on and off task conversation ) and af - fect ( e . g . , engaged concentration , boredom ) of students in ﬁeld setting , they proceeded as follows : they agreed on colors for categories ; each of them , separately , colored segments of texts in diaries , according to the related category ; then they reported segments per category in electronic format , marking whether a segment of text was related to engagement or disengagement ; at the end of their coding , they com - pared results . The mean agreement percentage between researchers was 85 , 67 % , distributed as follows per category : 95 , 16 % for enjoyment behaviors ; 85 , 12 % for interest behaviors ; 76 , 73 % for concentration be - haviors . Disagreements were solved through discussion between re - searchers and were used to revise the observer’s classiﬁcation of be - haviors in diaries , as well as to reﬁne the list of behavior categories to observe . As reﬁnement , another category was added : engagement behaviour with gamiﬁed probes ( Dodero et al . , 2015 ) . More in detail , we analysed the usage of gamiﬁed probes : whether probes were used with functionalities diffrent than the planned ones , and whether the usage was ( or was not ) distracting children from their activity . 74 4 . 3 analysis and results preferences for gamified probes—self - report survey Theoretical underpinnings . Children’s preferences for gamiﬁed probes Engagement recurring in every mission were investigated via self report survey . There is a large body of literature regarding tools for measuring fun that children have when using technology ( Read , 2008 ) , e . g . , the Fun Sorter in which children are asked to rank the relative fun of a variety of activities . We adapted the Fun Sorter tool and created a survey for ranking the preferred gamiﬁed probes of the study . Format . The survey is on A 4 page , see Figure 15 . A question is at the top of the page , e . g . , what objects did you like more ? and there are ﬁve spaces representing the preference positions from 1 ( the pre - ferred gamiﬁed probes ) to 5 ( the less preferred gamiﬁed probes ) . Each child had some “stickers " with pictures and captions of the gamiﬁed probes used during the GaCoCo activity , e . g . , progression map , and had to rank pictures by sticking them in the related space position , see ﬁgure 15 . Administration and Coding The teacher administered the survey dur - ing the post - activity . A score ranging from 1 to 5 was used for cod - ing the preference of each gamiﬁed probes , using a 5 - point Liker - type scale : 5 = the ﬁrst place and 1 = the last place among the preferred gamiﬁed probes . Quali oggetti ti sono piaciuti di più ? 1 o posto : 2 o posto : 3 o posto : 4 o posto : 5 o posto : scettro passaparola mappa delle missioni mappa delle sfide bottega palette Figure 15 : A ranking survey for engagement with gamiﬁed probes used in the activity 75 the gacoco 2014 study 4 . 3 . 2 Study Results This section reports on results concerning the main data collected , concerning quality of products , emotions and engagement . Firstly , it analyses the evolution of the quality of products in time in relation to Goal 1 . Secondly , it presents results concerning the emotion in time ( Goal 2 . 1 ) and it presents qualitative results reported in narra - tive form concerning the mission engagement of children with design work and material , as well as their preferences on gamiﬁed probes ( Goal 2 . 2 ) . Finally , the section inspects relationships between emotions and quality of products ( Goal 4 ) . Quality of Products This section focuses on the ﬁrst research goal , G 1 , concerning chil - dren’s performances in GaCoCo design . At the end of missions M 2 – M 5 , groups released products consisting of game design documents and prototypes , as speciﬁed in Section 4 . 2 . 3 . Table 1 shows , for each issue and mission , groups with quality score 1 for the issue and in the mission . In order to assess the evolution in time of children’s products , qual - ity scores of a group in a mission were added across issues , and then divided by the number of issues applicable in the mission ( 4 issues in M 2 ; 6 issues in all other missions ) . The result for a group product is referred to as the quality of the product of the group or of group mem - bers . Table 2 reports the quality of product per group and per mission , mean ( M ) and standard deviation ( SD ) across groups . A non - parametric Friedman’s test of differences among repeated G 1 . H 1 Quality of product change in time . Partially supported . measures was then conducted on the quality of products , and it was signiﬁcant , χ 2 ( 3 ) = 16 . 737 , p = . 001 . A post - hoc comparison with Wilcoxon indicated that quality of products were signiﬁcantly differ - ent in all cases except between M 4 and M 5 : z = - 2 . 084 , p = . 037 , com - paring M 2 ( M = 0 . 25 , SD = 0 . 35 ) and M 3 ( M = 0 . 54 , SD = 0 . 28 ) ; z = - 2 . 375 , p = . 018 , comparing M 2 and M 4 ( M = 0 . 59 , SD = 0 . 34 ) ; z = - 2 . 388 , p = . 017 , comparing M 3 and M 5 ( M = 0 . 81 , SD = 0 . 19 ) ; most importantly , z = - 2 . 565 , p = . 010 , comparing M 2 and M 5 , starting and concluding the design of game products . These results partially support the rejection of the null hypothesis on the effect of time ( G 1 . H 1 ) . Children’s Achievement Emotions This section focuses on Goal 2 . 1 , and it analyses the four emotions gathered with GR - AES . It analyzes them at an individual level , in or - der to verify the hypotheses concerning possible intensity differences related to valence ( G 2 . H 1 ) , activation ( G 2 . H 2 ) and time ( G 2 . H 3 ) . 76 4 . 3 analysis and results Category Mission 2 Mission 3 Mission 4 Mission 5 Gameplay and mechanics in - consistenciesandunclearfunctionalities . 3 , 4 1 , 2 , 3 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 7 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 7 , 8 Goals 1 , 4 1 , 2 , 4 , 7 , 8 , 2 , 4 , 7 , 8 1 , 2 , 4 , 5 , 6 , 7 , 8 Storyline 2 , 4 , 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 , 7 , 8 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 , 7 , 8 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 , 7 , 8 Player 1 , 2 , 4 , 1 , 2 , 4 , 5 , 7 , 8 , 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 7 , 8 1 , 2 , 4 , 5 , 6 , 7 , 8 Gameplay and mechanics in - completeness - 2 2 , 3 , 4 , 7 1 , 2 , 4 , 5 , 9 Documentation - 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 7 1 , 2 , 4 , 5 , 7 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 , 7 , 8 , 9 Table 1 : Groups with quality score equal to 1 ( positive result ) for an issue in a mission Groups Mission 2 Mission 3 Mission 4 Mission 5 Group 1 0 . 50 0 . 83 0 . 50 1 . 00 Group 2 0 . 50 1 . 00 1 . 00 1 . 00 Group 3 0 . 25 0 . 50 0 . 67 0 . 50 Group 4 1 . 00 0 . 67 1 . 00 1 . 00 Group 5 0 . 00 0 . 33 0 . 33 0 . 83 Group 6 0 . 00 0 . 17 0 . 17 0 . 50 Group 7 0 . 00 0 . 67 1 . 00 0 . 83 Group 8 0 . 00 0 . 50 0 . 50 0 . 83 Group 9 0 . 00 0 . 17 0 . 17 0 . 83 M 0 . 25 0 . 54 0 . 59 0 . 81 SD 0 . 35 0 . 29 0 . 34 0 . 19 Table 2 : Quality of product for each group and mission ( M 2 - M 5 ) ; means ( M ) and standard deviations ( SD ) across groups To check for normality of variables , we veriﬁed that mean values of skewness ( M = . 74 , SE = . 78 ) and kurtosis ( M = . 85 , SE = . 40 ) did not exceed | 2 . 0 | and | 7 . 0 | , respectively , supporting normality assump - tions ( Curran et al . , 1996 ) . We carried out a 2 x 2 x 5 ( Valence [ positive emotions , negative emotions ] x Activation [ activating emotions , deac - tivating emotions ] x Mission [ ﬁrst , second , third , fourth , ﬁfth mission ] ) repeated - measure ANOVA on the intensity of the four emotions , with Valence , Activation , and Mission as within - subjects factors . A grafﬁto main effect of Valence was found , F ( 1 , 34 ) = 38 . 07 , p < . 001 , G 2 . H 1 : positive emotions more intense than negative ones . Supported . η 2p = . 53 , indicating higher intensity for positive emotions ( M = 2 . 97 , SE = . 12 ) compared to negative emotions ( M = 1 . 88 , SE = . 09 ) , falsifying the null hypothesis on the effect of valence ( G 2 . H 1 ) . 77 the gacoco 2014 study In addition , a signiﬁcant two - way interaction Valence x Activation G 2 . H 2 : higher intensity for activating emotions . Partially supported . emerged , F ( 1 , 34 ) = 9 . 81 , p = . 004 , η 2p = . 22 . Speciﬁcally , the activating emotion was more intense than the deactivating emotion only for pos - itive emotions ( enjoyment : M = 3 . 23 , SE = . 17 ; relaxation : M = 2 . 70 , SE = . 12 ) but not for negative emotions ( anxiety : M = 1 . 83 , SD = . 13 ; bore - dom : M = 1 . 93 , SD = . 12 ) , partially falsifying the null hypothesis on the effect of activation ( G 2 . H 2 ) . Concerning hypothesis G 2 . H 3 , Mission F ( 4 , 136 ) = 2 . 55 , p = . 042 , η 2p = . 07 , Mission X Valence , F ( 4 , 136 ) = 5 . 62 , p < . 001 , η 2p = . 14 , and Mis - sion X Activation , F ( 4 , 136 ) = 4 . 23 , p = . 003 , η 2p = . 11 , resulted as signif - icant . To further explore these ﬁndings , we carried out four repeated - measure ANOVA , with Mission as the within - subjects factor , on the intensity of emotions , separately for the four emotions . For each emo - tion , a signiﬁcant effect of Mission emerged ( enjoyment : F ( 4 , 136 ) = 3 . 87 , p = . 005 , η 2p = . 10 ; relaxation : F ( 4 , 136 ) = 6 . 45 , p < . 001 , η 2p = . 16 ; anx - iety : F ( 4 , 136 ) = 3 . 12 , p = . 017 , η 2p = . 08 ; boredom : F ( 4 , 136 ) = 3 . 59 , p = . 008 , η 2p = . 10 ) . Pair comparisons revealed that intensity was higher for G 2 . H 3 : intensity of negative and positive emotions change in time . Supported . the third mission compared to the ﬁfth mission for enjoyment , and for the ﬁrst and the second missions , compared to the fourth mission for relaxation ; in addition , it was lower for the third mission compared to the fourth mission for anxiety , and for the third mission compared to the ﬁfth mission for boredom . Figure 16 reports descriptive statistics of the intensity of four emotions , across missions . These results enabled to falsify the null hypothesis on the effect of time ( G 2 . H 3 ) . Figure 16 : Mean intensity of emotions per mission ( M 1 – M 5 ) 78 4 . 3 analysis and results Children’s Engagement This section focuses on Goal 2 . 2 . Relevant results due to engage - ment observations are reported in narrative form , in a manner that facilitates comparisons with statistical analysis results , that is mission per mission , emphasizing whether differences were observed among groups or not . Firstly we present the mission per mission engagement in terms of interest , concentration and enjoyment . Secondly , the section presents the engagement of children with the gamiﬁed probes used during the activity . The section ends with results of the survey about the prefer - ences of each child of gamiﬁed probes . engagement in missions The engagement in terms of interest , concentration and enjoyment during the missions was analysed mis - sion per mission . The results were as follows . M1 . All groups , in younger and older classes alike , listened with at - tention to the game design overview and to the explanation of rules and roles . A child cheerfully exclaimed “Wow” when teacher assigned him the role . During the ﬁrst challenge ( creating badges ) , groups of the younger class generally worked in an orderly manner , respecting rules and roles and showing interest for the activity . In the older class , two groups were concentrated and enjoying their tasks . Younger children showed more excitement for the activity . For instance , in the younger class , when a group completed the challenge , one member stoods up for showing proudly their work ( badge ) to the other groups . A group had two members working together concentrated on the task , whereas the other two were isolated . Two groups were noticed for the behaviour of one member : one group had a dominant member , creating confu - sion ; another had an isolated member with lack of concentration : she sat with her arms folded , often yawned and did not interact with the other members . In general the younger class was engaged in the ﬁrst mission whereas only half of the older class was engaged . M2 . During the recap time , children answered teacher’s questions , interacting with her positively , and showing interest in the activity . All children played “guess who gets that role in this mission” . All listened to the story intensely and worked on their group challenge ( ﬁrst ) , in - dividual challenge ( second ) , pair and group challenge ( third ) , except for the group with the dominant member , who was creating confusion . During the ﬁrst challenge , a group member scolded her ( dominant ) peer to be distracted , e . g . “Stop playing with your pencil and work” . The majority of groups showed difﬁculties in conceptualizing the game 79 the gacoco 2014 study idea . They asked several time help to teachers and expert , especially for compiling the related forms of the game idea . In particular , younger class was more neatly and groups showed enjoyment in listening their group members’ ideas . In general both classes were engaged in the second mission . M3 . During the recap time , children positively behaved as in the other missions . During pair - work ( second challenge ) , all children , in - cluding those least involved in group work in previous missions , tended to work and stay on task . Younger groups worked neatly , calmly and with the smiling faces . In general engagement shown in the second mission was maintained in the third mission . M4 . In the younger class , children showed interest , interacting dur - ing the recap time . During challenges , some younger groups alternated distraction and concentration moments . When a group member draw their character , a child said aloud “Yes , we’ve drawn a 3 d character” , and all the other groups came near the child to see the 3 D character . In the older class , across the entire mission , there was more evident confusion and signs of anxiety or boredom , e . g . , children frequently raised their hands asking for the expert’s feedback on their game de - sign challenge , showing nervousness while waiting . In some cases , chil - dren played with prototyping material , e . g . , a member used the post - it as accordion . One group of the older class tried to remain concentrated , but its members were distracted by the general confusion . In particu - lar , during the mission the teacher was very distracted and did not notice and stop some “wrong” behaviours . However , all groups man - aged to conclude their challenges and , as in the third mission , pair work tended to activate both members . In this mission , with respect to the previous mission , engagement decreased . The younger class was more engaged of the older class . M5 . During challenges , in both classes , there was some confusion but children showed to enjoy their game design , and to see the ﬁnally as - sembled game . When the expert explained the ﬁnal challenge ( present their game ) children showed fear and anxiety . Moreover , they asked several questions about their roles during the presentation and their work distribution . In both classes , when a group presented their work , and played testing it , all others listened and asked many appropri - ate questions , e . g . , about game elements functionality ( how does your player gain life ? , how does the player get the coins , and what I can buy 80 4 . 3 analysis and results with coins ? Both younger and older classes were engaged during the mission , especially during games’ presentations . Engagement with material Engagement with material was analysed mission per mission . The results were as follows . M1 . Children showed curiosity , interest and enthusiasm towards all material . For instance , all material checker queued up before fetching material was called . Signalling disks got soon very popular and were also creatively used for tasks designers had not planned , e . g . , for show - ing an example logo to other groups . M2 . In the ﬁrst challenge , when creating the game idea , several chil - dren played with signalling disks when not expected to be used in the protocol . The usage of scepters for the taking - turn rule of cooperative learning was not immediate , and it required some training . In the sec - ond challenge when creating characters , all children were concentrated on the individual task . All children showed enthusiasm for the shop for acquiring prototyping objects . In this mission , objects tended to be chosen for their aesthetic appeal and not so much for their functional - ity in the game . Maps were also a great source of curiosity for ﬁnding out rewards . At the end of the mission children showed enjoyment for the gained coins , e . g . , two children exclaimed “Yuuuuh , we gained 3 gold coins ! ” . M3 and M4 . At the start of both missions , children asked for their signalling disk . In the challenge for prototyping levels they showed enthusiasm for generative toolkits , e . g . , tablet frames and transparen - cies . Once more the shop was source of strong interest , however ob - jects were chosen according to their game functionality ; discussions were observed in front of the shop concerning the usage of objects in games . Moreover , every time children ﬁnished a challenge , they were very solicit in asking the expert’s feedback on their work in order to be allowed to go to the progression bar , move their place card , and hence collect their coin . An extreme case happened when a ﬁre alarm sounded for training purposes . Knowing that it was for training , a child asked to be allowed to progress on the bar and get his coin , be - cause the group was approaching the end of the challenge and the training would take too long a time , so the child wished to have his coin as soon as possible . 81 the gacoco 2014 study M5 . Albeit the A 0 frame for assembling levels created curiosity and enthusiasm , matching it against the passage document required effort on the side of younger learners . Preferences for Gamiﬁed Probes Preferences for gamiﬁed probes are as follows . As for younger learn - ers , 12 out of 15 completed the survey . At the ﬁrst place of the survey , 50 % of them chose the shop , and 34 % chose the signalling disk . More - over , 33 % of them chose the signalling disk as second . The progression map for challenges was the third object for 42 % of younger learners . As for the older learners , 19 out of 21 completed the survey . At the ﬁrst place of the survey , 37 % chose the shop , and circa 32 % chose the progression map for missions . Moreover , 32 % of them chose the progression map for challenges as second , 50 % chose the signalling disk as second or third , and 21 % chose the scepter as third . Emotions and Quality of Products This section focuses on the third goal , G 3 : the relationships between performance and the four emotions of enjoyment , boredom , anxiety , relaxation . Tables 17 and 18 show descriptive statistics ( mean , M ; stan - dard deviation , SD ) computed at the individual level ( before the slash ) and at the group level ( after the slash ) for the following variables : in - tensity of positive emotions in each mission ( M 1 – M 5 ) ; intensity of neg - ative emotions in each mission ( M 1 – M 5 ) ; quality of group products in each mission ( M 2 – M 5 ) . Correlations among intensity of emotions per mission and quality of product per mission were again computed separately for the individual level ( for which parametric Pearson corre - lations were run ) and the group level ( for which non - parametric Spear - man correlations were run ) . Correlation coefﬁcients are thus r for the individual level , and rho for the group level . Both coefﬁcients range from − 1 to 1 : the greater the absolute value of the coefﬁcient , the stronger the correlation . A positive correlation means that if one vari - able increase , the other variable tends to increase . A negative correla - tion means that , if one variable gets bigger , the other variable tends to decrease . Table 17 displays the correlation coefﬁcients among intensity of positive emotions per mission and quality of product per mission : r is displayed before the slash ; rho is displayed after the slash . Table 18 does the same with negative emotions . Concerning hypotheses 3 a and 3 b , there are signiﬁcant correlations between intensity of emotions and quality of product , for the same mission , for enjoyment and boredom , similarly at the individual level and at the group level . For enjoyment , the mentioned correlation was 82 4 . 3 analysis and results positive for M 2 ( individual level : r = . 42 , p = . 012 ; group level : rho = . 77 , p = . 015 ) , while for boredom it was negative for both M 2 ( r = . 41 , p = . 013 ; rho = - . 76 , p = . 017 , respectively ) and M 3 ( r = . 35 , p = . 037 ; rho = - . 72 , p = . 029 ) . These ﬁndings enabled to partially falsify the null G 3 . H 1 , 2 : quality of products is positively - negatively correlated to enjoyment . Partially supported . hypothesis on the relationship between the two emotions and quality of product . Always considering the same mission , no signiﬁcant corre - lations emerged between relaxation and anxiety , on the one hand , and quality of product , on the other hand . Frequently , the quality of product of a mission correlated signiﬁ - cantly and positively with those of subsequent missions , indicating a certain level of coherence in children’s quality of product over time , again at the individual and group levels ( Tables 6 and 7 ) , with only a few exceptions . Speciﬁcally , the quality of product of M 2 correlated positively with those of M 3 ( r = . 62 , p < . 001 ; rho = . 72 , p = . 027 ) , M 4 ( r = . 60 , p < . 001 ) , and M 5 ( r = . 55 , p = . 001 ; rho = . 68 , p = . 045 ) . The quality of product of M 3 correlated positively with those of M 4 ( r = . 81 , p < . 001 ; rho = . 83 , p = . 006 ) and M 5 ( r = . 65 , p < . 001 ; rho = . 75 , p = . 019 ) . The quality of product of M 4 correlated positively with the quality of M 5 ( r = . 47 , p = . 005 ) . In addition , intensity of emotions in a mission was frequently corre - lated , and signiﬁcantly so , with the quality of products of subsequent missions , suggesting a sort of delayed effect of emotions creating ex - pectations for later performance , with slight differences between the individual and the group level ( Tables 17 and 18 ) . Speciﬁcally , enjoy - ment in M 2 correlated positively with quality of product of M 3 ( r = . 59 , p < . 001 ; rho = . 84 , p = . 005 ) and M 4 ( r = . 52 , p = . 001 ; rho = . 76 , p = . 017 ) , and enjoyment measured in M 3 correlated positively with quality of M 4 ( r = . 36 , p = . 036 ) . Anxiety measured in M 1 correlated positively with quality of product of M 4 ( r = . 40 , p = . 018 ; rho = . 77 , p = . 016 ) . Boredom measured in M 1 correlated negatively with quality of product of M 2 ( r = . 61 , p < . 001 ; rho = - . 78 , p = . 012 ) and M 3 ( r = . 47 , p = . 005 ) . Boredom measured in M 2 correlated negatively with quality of product of M 3 ( r = . 47 , p = . 004 ; rho = - . 72 , p = . 027 ) and M 4 ( r = . 52 , p = . 001 ; rho = - . 89 , p = . 001 ) . Boredom measured in M 3 correlated negatively with quality of product of M 4 ( r = . 45 , p = . 007 ; rho = - . 90 , p = . 001 ) . 83 the gacoco 2014 study F i g u r e 17 : C o rr e l a t i o n s f o r i n t e n s i t y o f n e g a t i v e e m o t i o n s p e r m i ss i o n ( M 1 – M 5 ) , a n d q u a li t y o f p r o d u c t p e r m i ss i o n ( M 2 – M 5 ) , a t t h e i n d i v i d u a l ( n = 35 ) a n d g r o u p l e v e l ( n = 9 ) . P e a r s o n r ( i n d i v i d u a l ) i s b e f o r e t h e s l a s h , S p e a r m a n r h o ( g r o u p ) i s a f t e r t h e s l a s h . * p < . 05 , * * p < . 01 , * * * p < . 001 84 4 . 3 analysis and results F i g u r e 18 : C o rr e l a t i o n s f o r i n t e n s i t y o f n e g a t i v e e m o t i o n s p e r m i ss i o n ( M 1 – M 5 ) , a n d q u a li t y o f p r o d u c t p e r m i ss i o n ( M 2 – M 5 ) , a t t h e i n d i v i d u a l ( n = 35 ) a n d g r o u p l e v e l ( n = 9 ) . P e a r s o n r ( i n d i v i d u a l ) i s b e f o r e t h e s l a s h , S p e a r m a n r h o ( g r o u p ) i s a f t e r t h e s l a s h . * p < . 05 , * * p < . 01 , * * * p < . 001 85 the gacoco 2014 study 4 . 4 discussion This study statistically analyzed different aspects of GaCoCo : evo - lution of quality of products in time ; evolution of emotions in time ; relationships between emotions and quality of products . This section discusses each of them in relation to the Goals of Section 4 . 1 . 1 , and it uses engagement observations to complement and reﬂect on statistics results . Moreover , this section discusses what aspects of the study worked smoothly , and what require a re - design of the protocol or material for engaging all children in game design at school . In particular , the reader can ﬁnd some aspects of the study that should be taken into account . In order to replicate the study , these aspects are named , and they are identiﬁed as MH with a brief description ( e . g . , MH : use of signalling disks for voting ) . 4 . 4 . 1 Quality of Products for Learning Quality of products tended to increase across missions , with signif - icant differences between M 2 , when the ﬁrst game products were cre - ated , and M 5 , when the ﬁnal game design document and prototypes were released in time . This result suggests that children were learning MH : splitting the ( game ) design activity into progressive missions with progressive challenges , with its own clear valuable goal . about game design through the activity itself . The organization of the GaCoCo design activity , split into progressive missions for cooperative learning groups assisted by an expert , seems work in term of learning for children , as indicated by the increase in quality of products . An ex - planation lies in the presence of multiple types of feedback , that could have helped children to reﬂect on their products . There was the expert feedback resulting from the expert evaluation of their products , dur - MH : providing multiple feedback opportunities mission per missions : from domain experts and from peers . ing missions and across missions ; but also , peer feedback , promoted through pair or group discussions with cooperative learning strategies , rules and roles . Such considerations are partially supported by engage - ment observations during missions . Speciﬁcally the engagement obser - vations highlight that all group could complete their challenges and in time using their roles and rules . In addition , pair work activate also those members that during the group work were more isolated . The process of conducting , with experts , a formative evaluation of MH : providing summative feedback across missions and in each mission . children’s products , mission per mission , seems promising for improv - ing their quality , and should be maintained in future game design experience at school . During the evaluation , issues concerning the usage of game ele - ments , as well as game play and mechanics occurred with the high - est relative frequency across group products and missions . In general , 86 4 . 4 discussion children tended to insert many elements , without considering their overall coherence or functionality in the game . This is especially ev - ident in M 4 when , according to engagement observations , children asked frequently for the expert’s feedback when ﬁlling in the related core mechanics document . Therefore the design expert should take MH : providing more formative design feedback in critical design stage . speciﬁc care of such an issue ( game elements and its functionality in the gameplay ) when working in classroom . More formative feedback during speciﬁc stage , e . g . , choosing characters and elements , could positively inﬂuence on the quality of products . The evaluation could even be more severe in the third mission , when levels are for the ﬁrst time conceived , in view of the criticality of the fourth mission in terms of emotions . 4 . 4 . 2 Children’s Achievement Emotions for Engagement Results concerning emotions , indicate that , on average , missions en - gaged children : they triggered positive emotions more than negative emotions , in line with results concerning traditional Italian Language and Mathematics activities in Italian primary schools , reported by ( Rac - canello et al . , 2013 ) . Concerning the dimension of activation , activating emotions were more intense than deactivating emotions , and this hap - pened only for positive emotions . It is interesting to observe that intensity of relaxation was signiﬁ - MH : avoiding a bottleneck of request inserting more formative feedback during a mission . cantly higher for missions M 1 and M 2 , compared to M 4 , conﬁrming the role that GaCoCo envisions for the ﬁrst mission , that is , creating a relaxed atmosphere for building mutual trust . In addition , M 4 shows a change in the growing trend of emotions , e . g . , anxiety was lower for the third mission compared to the fourth mission . According to the engagement observations , children globally showed engagement with the game design activity . Lack of concentration and a peak of feedback and help requests was observed during the fourth mission only . Mission 4 consisted on a completion of the previous mission’s work , concerning game levels , and more often than the other missions it required the expert’s feedback for evaluating children’s work . This happened in particular with older children . Such a situation suggests for the future a redesign of the fourth mission for avoiding a bottleneck of requests for the single game design expert in classroom . Moreover , our interpretation of the increased children’s anxiety is that the each group had to ﬁnalize , and hence complete , their game levels . For completing the game , each group needs the expert’s and teachers’ help , more than in other missions . An explanation for the growth in anxiety , self - reported by children , is related to the increase in complexity of design demands across missions , as asserted in ( Sh - 87 the gacoco 2014 study ernoff et al . , 2003 ) . During the mission 4 , children may have perceived design tasks to be more challenging for their skills , and yet they had better game design performances , releasing products showing increas - ingly higher quality over time . Finally , a similar trend characterized emotions across missions , stim - MH : differentiating as much as possible the missions for improving children’s engagement over time . ulating reﬂections on how the GaCoCo game design method should take into account the effect of time on children’s engagement . More in details , children could be beneﬁt on acquiring familiarity with routines typical of the missions as the game design activity at school proceeds . Results from observations , showed another important aspect , that is the engagement within the group using speciﬁc cooperative learn - ing roles . Roles within a group provided a right distribution of work MH : assigning a role for each member with rotation system . in group and an equal participation of all member . In addition , the roles rotated among members for each mission and each member of a group with its speciﬁc roles had a chance to train different skills . It MH : Using cooperative learning strategies within a group—subgroups with speciﬁc roles , e . g . pairs . was observed that children who were not involved in group work got instead engaged after being paired with an engaged child . Strategies such as think - pair - share and three - step - interview should then be used in situations where engagement of all in design work is critical so as to involve all group members . In this study each group interacted with others only in the last mis - MH : using cooperative learning strategies at class level . sion that was the group work presentation . In according to the engage - ment observation , the sharing of ideas and feedbacks among groups during the last mission allows children to express interest and curiosity about others group products . In light of the many questions concern - ing the functionality of elements reported in the last mission though observations , GaCoCo could also foster the exchange of ideas at the class level to promote peer discussions concerning games and their el - ements . Moreover , children working with the class felt as part of a big common task and can be more engaged . Engagement with Material Material was generally received with curiosity . Speciﬁc gamiﬁed MH : using gamiﬁed probes for making tangible rules and roles . probes , e . g . , scepters and signalling disks , was properly used , taking into account cooperative learning rules or roles that the probes em - bodies . In particular , scepters for taking turns in speaking and frames for prototyping passage conditions , required more explanations than other material . This issues can be interpreted as follows : the cooper - ative learning rule of taking turns in speaking requires per se more training ; maintaining consistency across game design documents and prototypes was cognitively demanding , above all for younger learn - MH : training by expert about the usage of gamiﬁed probes and generative toolkits . ers , and requires more guidance of the expert in class . Signalling disks were often creatively used , albeit they became source of distraction at 88 4 . 4 discussion points , showing on the other hand the desire of children of expressing and sharing their perceptions . All children showed a marked prefer - MH : providing a sense of autonomy and control in missions and challenges . ence for buying objects in the shop for customizing their games . Specif - ically , the objects in the shop served for prototyping games , so that children perceive that coins , earned at the end of each challenge , could have a tangible effect on their design work and they were in control of choosing parts of this . These refers to a sense of control and autonomy that the gamiﬁcation should nourish ( Deci and Ryan , 1985 ) . As second MH : using rewards systems or gamiﬁed probes for a customization of the game . or third choices , children tended to prefer signalling disks or progres - sion maps : younger learners tended to prefer signalling disks , whereas older learners tended to prefer maps . Moreover , referring to the use of maps , it was observed that the progression map was properly used and it was quite functional for its purpose : groups often turned their attention to the map to ﬁgure out their progression within the whole activity . In addition , the metaphor of the tree to show progress in MH : providing a sense of progression to missions and challenges . game design stages was properly interpreted , yet the tree map per se was less successful : the tree map was used only at the end of a mission , when there was not enough time to enhance it in a right way . We noticed that the use of two maps was demanding in terms of cost and time . Additionally , it decomposed artiﬁcially missions pro - gression , while progression was naturally considered as unique . 4 . 4 . 3 Children’s Achievement Emotions and Quality of Products The study also inspected the nature of the relationships between emotions and quality of products as a measure of group performance , in a context only rarely investigated in the literature . Our hypotheses G 2 . H 1 and G 2 . H 1 were mainly conﬁrmed for enjoyment and boredom , which correlated , respectively , positively and negatively with perfor - mance . In other terms , as assumed by the control - value theory ( Pekrun and Perry , 2014 ; Pekrun , 2006 ) , the more children enjoyed the GaCoCo mission , the better the quality of the released product was ; the more children were bored , the worse the quality of their product was . It is interesting to note that such links emerged both between emotions and quality of products related to the same mission , and frequently between emotions of a mission and the quality of products of the sub - sequent missions , indicating a sort of expectation effect created by emo - tions on future performances . MH : tracking and taking into account children’s emotions in relation to a better quality of product over time . Such results could inform professionals aiming at projecting and monitoring participatory design game experiences with children , work - ing in group , with indications for conducting such type of study in relation to the key emotions and quality of products , by tracing their evolution across design sessions . 89 the gacoco 2014 study 4 . 5 conclusion This chapter reported the 2014 GaCoCo study , its organization and results . The study focused on a GaCoCo experience for designing low - ﬁdelity game prototypes with and for children . Children’s empower - ment is a key of GaCoCo and the analyses reported in this chapter focused on it , and precisely on : ( G 1 ) children’s performance in the GaCoCo experience , via an evaluation of the quality of children’s prod - ucts across the experience ; ( G 2 ) assessing engagement by ( G 2 . 1 ) by assessing achievement emotions ( enjoyment , boredom , relaxation and anxiety ) relevant for children’s performance , across the GaCoCo ex - perience , and by ( G 2 . 2 ) assessing engagement via observations ; ( G 3 ) the relationships between emotions and performance across the expe - rience . g1 : quality of product for learning . In relation to G 1 , the study results show that the quality of products tended to improve in time , suggesting that children were learning by doing design together . In line with GaCoCo , empowerment was supported by progressive de - sign challenges , and through multiple feedback opportunities for chil - dren : from peers and by expert through formative and summative feed - back . Speciﬁc issues emerged across missions and game design products . Thereby the design expert should take speciﬁc care of them when providing feedback to children . For instance , future GaCoCo activi - ties could extend the time of feedback moments during the activity , and the design expert should ask children explicitly about their game elements ; in light of the many questions concerning the functional - ity of elements reported in the last mission through observations , fu - ture GaCoCo activities could also foster the exchange of ideas at the class level to promote peer discussions concerning games and their el - ements . Alternatively , as suggested by an anonymous reviewer , such issues may well be due to the cognitive maturity of children in the considered age range . g2 . 1 and g2 . 2 : engagement through achievement emotions and observations . With respect to these goal , the study results con - ﬁrmed the higher salience of the positive emotions of enjoyment and relaxation compared to the negative emotions of anxiety and boredom , highlighting changes during the GaCoCo activity as time progresses . However , it is worth nothing that mission M 4 , with a peak of feedback requests , had an increase of anxiety intensity . Also in light of engage - ment observations , such a result suggests that a single design expert 90 4 . 5 conclusion for delivering formative feedback may not be sufﬁcient in such a mis - sion , contrary to what suggested by GaCoCo . If GaCoCo is used as - is , then a re - design of M 4 is necessary for avoiding a bottleneck of re - quests for the design expert . For instance , the core mechanics forms of M 4 could be simpliﬁed . g3 : achievement emotions and quality of products . In rela - tion to G 3 , the quality of products , as assessed by experts , was also pos - itively related to enjoyment and negatively related to boredom , with a sort of expectation effect created by emotions on future performances . GaCoCo 2014 Study : Success and Failures In order to point out what worked during the main game design activity , and what is a Must - Have in future studies , all missions were analysed in details . In the remainder , we list for each mission success and failures . across missions . The recap phase was an important stage for each MH : recapping phase and link across missions . mission because , considering the age of the involved children , it was difﬁcult for them to maintain a thread across missions . Moreover , the summarization of rules , roles and of the main phase of the activity helped the children during the game design activity . It was also noted that children needed the link across missions , in terms both of the activity in general and of game design stages . first mission The ﬁst mission , with its easy goal and structured MH : providing an easy mission for training working in group . as a training , was an important means for creating the identity of each group , for fostering teamwork and for introducing children with the proper usage of materials . second mission In the second mission the concept of game design was introduced . The objective , that is , to continue a narrative story that teachers read before in . class , was clear . However issues emerged in re - MH : basing game design on a storyline that children are interested in , possibly related to a school subject . lation to the usage of the story during game design—few groups used story elements in their game . That was interpred as a sign of lack of interest in the story , assigned by adults . Although that story may have not been sufﬁciently appealing to children , as claimed in ( Tan et al . , 2011 ) , the integration of narrative elements may increase children’s engagement in an activity : elaborating a storytelling component for a game is stimulating and is often a topic of fascination for children . Moreover using a game storyline ensured that games were related with the class topic into which the activity was inserted . All this suggests 91 the gacoco 2014 study that stories can be used in game design but children need to develop a sense of affection for them . Moreover , in relation to the story of the game , children should had a precise player interaction perspective for choosing among the characters of the storyline who acted as player in their game . MH : setting a player interaction model for the game ( e . g . , third person perspective , with the main character of the storyline that acts as the player of the game ) . Another important aspect was the idea of the game . This part was the most demanding and it was observed that the form for expressing the game idea limited the creativity of the children . Indeed , children ﬁlled in the form , question by question without thinking of a general idea of the game . We thus realized that stimulus sentences or less struc - MH : using stimulus card or sentences for a better expression of children creativity . tured forms could be better for children , in order to express their ideas and to encourage them better on sharing their opinions . In addition , too speciﬁc questions are limiting , because questions could be misin - terpreted . MH : making generative toolkits , e . g . , paper - based forms , captivating and functional for group work . third and fourth mission The third and the fourth missions were MH : Using simple and clear forms , which should be as different as possible between missions . similar . For children , activities in these missions were repetitive and had the effect of decreasing group engagement . In addition , forms related to these missions , were too repetitive and created confusion within groups and the whole class . Moreover , the study comprised the design of two game levels per MH : considering a design of a single game level per group . group . This often resulted in the design of two similar levels , or on the opposite , in totally disconnected levels which provided no progression . As reported in the discussion , the division of work into subgroups , like pairs , improved the collaboration and the engagement but did not improve the quality of products and the overall consistency of game design . For this purpose , the creation of a unique game level per group could be a good alternative , able to favor the quality of products and their coherence . fifth mission As introduced before , designing two levels per group resulted in two levels either not properly linked , or too similar . The level passage conditions was a challenging task ; the group found by difﬁculties in designing a unique passage level for levels designed by pairs . The last challenge was presentation of each game by the groups . It MH : creating an ad - hoc structured frames for the prototyped games so as to better allow children to present their products and interact with them . was important in terms of engagement of the entire class and of shar - ing opinions by feedbacks . Moreover , having a structured ad - hoc frame ( see Figure 12 ) was important for allowing children to better present their game , and for showing the interaction among game elements they designed . 92 5 I N - B E T W E E N 2 0 1 4 A N D 2 0 1 5 : T H E D E V E L O P M E N T S T A G E contents 5 . 1 Study 94 5 . 1 . 1 Goals 94 5 . 1 . 2 Participant and Roles 94 5 . 2 Study Design Activity 95 5 . 2 . 1 Development Approach with Students 95 5 . 2 . 2 Development Activity with Students 95 5 . 3 Analysis and Results 97 5 . 3 . 1 Game Development Issues 98 5 . 3 . 2 Results 99 5 . 4 Discussion 99 5 . 5 Conclusions 100 This chapter reports on the follow - up session of the 2014 game de - sign experience with children . After this experience we posited the following question : can the resulting game design be taken as - is in the hands of game developers ? Speciﬁcally , in the study reported in this chapter , university students were challenged to develop children’s ideas into high - ﬁdelity interactive game prototypes , starting from game design documents with low - ﬁdelity prototypes , released at the end of the 2014 study , see Section 4 . 2 . 3 , and assessed by design experts , see Section 4 . 3 . The chapter explains how children’s products were picked up and developed by computer - science university students . Firstly it outlines the goal of the study and the participants involved , in Section 5 . 1 . Then it details the study design organization , in Section 5 . 2 , focusing on the development approach followed by university students and on the de - velopment activity itself . Finally , the analyses and results are discussed in Section 5 . 3 . 2 . 93 in - between 2014 and 2015 : the development stage 5 . 1 study Students from the software engineering course of the second year of the Bachelor programme in Applied Computer Science were asked to develop high - ﬁdelity interactive prototypes of games conceived by children , starting from the game design documents and the accompa - nying low - ﬁdelity prototypes released in the last mission of the 2014 study ( reported in Section 4 . 2 . 3 ) —children’s game products . Since the course enrolled ﬁve groups of students , the design expert of the 2014 study and the course teacher chose ﬁve products to develop , selecting those which minimized the number of issues and satisﬁed technical constraints of the course , e . g . , the need to develop 2 D games in C + + . 5 . 1 . 1 Goals The study aimed at developing interactive games starting from chil - dren’s products , released at the end of the 2014 study and reported in Chapter 4 . At the end of the 2014 study we posed ourselves different questions concerning the development of children’s products . Speciﬁcally , ques - tions that this chapter tackles are concerned with children’s products , released after receiving the experts’ feedback : were such products suf - ﬁcient speciﬁcations for computer science students to develop games ? More generally , what issues did students ﬁnd in developing games from children’s products ? Were they different from those found by de - sign experts ? Therefore , the goal of the study was answering those questions by investigating what issues would emerge during development . 5 . 1 . 2 Participant and Roles Students involved were 15 . The development team was formed by ﬁve groups , each one with three students . All participating students had already passed courses on advanced programming , data struc - tures and algorithms . Even though they were not seasoned program - mers , they were judged to have sufﬁcient expertise to understand , an - alyze , design and develop a working software solution . As the groups had three members each one , students were requested to take a role ( coordinator , recorder , checker ) , and to take care of the tasks and re - sponsibilities associated for each role . In class , besides instructors , the design expert , working with chil - dren in 2014 , was also present every two week . This acted as the me - 94 5 . 2 study design activity diator between the game products by children and their development by university students , collecting questions and remarks by these , an - swering questions in case children’s speciﬁcations were unclear . 5 . 2 study design activity This section speciﬁes the principles of the approach followed in or - ganizing the course at university , and then the development activity itself . 5 . 2 . 1 Development Approach with Students Following the guidelines by Oakley et al . ( Oakley et al . , 2004 ) and in line with cooperative learning principles used in designing games with children , the course instructors formed heterogeneous groups with members who were diverse in programming skills but had common blocks of time to meet outside class . Each group had three different roles : coordinator , recorder and checker . As with children , also roles rotated among students of a group . Instructors assigned a ( game ) de - velopment task to each group . Each group decided their own name , thereby creating their identity , and wrote a sort - of expectations agreement , which was then signed by each member of the group and delivered to the instructors . The expectations agreement had two purposes : it joined the team with a common set of realistic expectations , and it served as a “quasi - legal document” to prevent students from making invalid claims about what they were supposed to do , binding them to a common shared goal . 5 . 2 . 2 Development Activity with Students Groups had about three months of time to deliver their implemen - tation . In such time frame , an iterative approach was adopted . Groups submitted a weekly brief report , which described the state of the project and future plans . The report was used as a basis for twelve meetings with instructors . In the kick - off meeting , groups were formed and the structure of the activity was explained by one of the instructors . Then each group decided their own name , read the so - called policies state - ment provided by instructors , and wrote their expectations agreement . In six of such meetings with instructors , students also met the ( game ) design expert working at school with children . The ﬁrst time students got to know the game - design project with children . In the second and 95 in - between 2014 and 2015 : the development stage third meetings students read documents and inspect low - ﬁdelity pro - totypes by children , as shown in Figure 19 . In the fourth and ﬁfth meet - ing , students commented on children’s products and , in case needed , asked the design expert clariﬁcation questions . During all such meet - ings questions by students were added in their reports . In the sixth meeting , held towards the middle of the course , students delivered a presentation in front of the other development groups , instructors and the design expert . Goals of this presentation were : ( 1 ) to share rele - vant information with other groups , for sharing similar game design or development issues ; ( 2 ) to share the progress of their work with the design expert , and getting feedback on their development before presenting their work to children in a ﬁnal conclusive meeting , where student products get evaluated by children . Student groups concentrated on the implementation of the game . High - level requirements of the game progressively evolved into low - level requirements and implementation constraints . Rules of the game evolved into business logic , whereas the storyline , game core mechan - ics and gameplay evolved into an execution ﬂow . For the product development , the resources at hand were a programming Integrated Development Environment ( IDE ) , and a collection of pre - furnished graphic elements ( e . g . , sprites and backgrounds ) . Figure 19 : Students inspecting children’s prototypes Figure 20 shows the starting point for university students , namely a game design document and the low - ﬁdelity prototype released by a group at the end of the 2014 study . The related game developed is shown in Figure 21 . The game developed , with the related game design documents and prototype are available at GaCoCo 2014 Game Developed . 96 5 . 3 analysis and results Figure 20 : A game design document ( at the left ) and the related low - ﬁdelity prototype ( at the right ) . Figure 21 : Screenshots of a game developed by university students . 5 . 3 analysis and results Students reported issues in their game development . A thematic analysis was conducted on the issues reported by students by the course instructors and the two design experts who had evaluated chil - dren’s products . Evaluators ﬁrst worked separately and then together . Issues for the game development by students were ﬁnally categorized as explained in Section 5 . 3 . 1 . Results of students were also presented and qualitatively compared with those by design experts , in Section 5 . 3 . 2 . 97 in - between 2014 and 2015 : the development stage 5 . 3 . 1 Game Development Issues Issues that students found in developing games were clustered into ﬁve main categories : gameplay and mechanics inconsistencies or un - clear functionalities ; gameplay and mechanics incompleteness ; devel - opment ; audience ; game design understanding . The ﬁrst two categories were the same used by design experts to classify issues found in chil - dren products , see Chapter 4 . The other categories were novel . All are explained in details in the following . Gameplay and mechanics inconsistencies or unclear functionalities Students noticed issues concerning inconsistencies or unclear func - tionalities in gameplay or mechanics . Students remarked them or ad - vanced proposals . Issues in this category include what follows : What are powers for ? What is the function of objects ? —They are only men - tioned without giving further details . Gameplay and mechanics incompleteness Students advanced solutions concerning gameplay and mechanics , missing in children’s game design . Issues in this category include : How long is the game expected to last ? Should we also create an intro - duction video to the game ? Development Students sometimes asked instructors questions concerning imple - mentation details . Issues in this category include what follows : Where do we get graphics elements and sound ? For which platform should we implement the game ? Audience Students sometimes wondered about speciﬁc requirements of the intended players with respect to games . Issues in this category include what follows : Our idea was to provide children a very nice , easy to understand game ; by considering also the current trend , is it possible to implement a 2 D game ? Which should be the ofﬁcial language of our game ? English ? Or the native language of children ? Game Design understanding Students also asked the design expert questions concerning design choices already speciﬁed in documents or in prototypes . Issues in this category include what follows : Is it ok if we interpret slaps to guards 98 5 . 4 discussion as scored questions that have to be answered by the player ? ( This is inconsistent with the game design document ) . How do you complete the ﬁrst level ? ( This was speciﬁed in the game design document ) . 5 . 3 . 2 Results A total of 39 issues were tracked , distributed among the 5 cate - gories in Figure 22 . One third of issues ( 33 % ) were concerned with game design understanding questions , whereas 23 % were concerned with development issues . A qualitative analysis of issues concerning game design understanding revealed that they were mainly related to animatable objects or interaction elements which were present in pro - totypes and were not fully speciﬁed in game design documents . Let us consider issues pertaining to inconsistency , incompleteness and unclear functionalities of gameplay and mechanics in the chil - dren’s game products . Issues found by design experts in the last mis - sion of the design activity were found by students , who also found other issues in the same categories , see Figure 22 . This plot shows if there is an issue in a category . A qualitative analysis and comparison of these issues , across students and across experts , revealed what follows : • unclear functionalities concerning the role of characters were found in a game product ( by the children of Group 9 ) by experts and students alike ; • the incompleteness reported by students and experts in a game product ( by the children of Group 7 ) was concerned with the termination of the game , which was not speciﬁed ; • issues concerning unclear functionalities of objects , e . g . , powers , were found by students in products by children ( in Groups 1 and 2 ) , which were not classiﬁed as issues by the design experts ; these issues were solved by talking with the game designer working with children ; • issues concerning incompleteness , e . g . , a tutorial video for show - ing the gameplay , were found by students in a product ( by the children in Group 4 ) , but were not classiﬁed as issues by the design expert design experts . 5 . 4 discussion According to the above analyses , issues concerning gameplay and mechanics , left by design experts as requirements of children , were 99 in - between 2014 and 2015 : the development stage Figure 22 : Number of issues found by students per category , in total . also detected as issues by students . The incompleteness of gameplay and mechanics in children’s products was also detected , and students proposed design solutions , e . g . , tutorial video for the gameplay . Other issues concerning unclear functionalities of elements for game - play and mechanics were found by students . These issues were gener - ally related to powers and roles of characters , but were not classiﬁed as issues by design experts . According to the explanation given to stu - dents by the design expert working with children , children had speciﬁc functionalities in mind for powers and roles of characters , but were un - able to realize them properly in paper - based prototypes or to specify their functionalities in documents . Game design understanding issues were also high in number . Ac - cording to their qualitative analysis , these issues were related to the interaction and animation , which were not rendered in low - ﬁdelity prototypes nor always fully explained in game design documents . 5 . 5 conclusions This chapter reported how the game design experience evolved into a game development experience with university students . During this study , university students from computer science were challenged to develop children’s products into high - ﬁdelity prototypes of games , starting from products released by children in their last de - sign day , in 2014 . Issues that students found in developing games were also tracked and categorized . According to the conducted analy - ses , children’s products were in general clear but not sufﬁcient as spec - iﬁcations for university students , in particular due to incompleteness or unclear functionalities of gameplay and mechanics elements . 100 5 . 5 conclusions Such results give feedback to game designers . Most importantly , de - sign issues in children’s products reported in this work could be due also to the choice of design material : for instance , paper - based proto - types should be well structured and re - elaborated for convey interac - tion , and game design documents by children , alone , were not sufﬁ - cient in that respect as speciﬁcations for university students . Another important lesson is that , if the game design experience with children continues , their game design documents could require a com - pletion with adult game designers , so as to ﬁx remaining issues con - cerning unclear functionalities and incompleteness of gameplay and mechanics elements . The design expert , sitting in class with children , seems a promising candidate for completing game design documents before passing them on to developers , in an act of collaboration across design experience participants . 101 6 T H E G A C O C O 2 0 1 5 S T U D Y contents 6 . 1 Study 104 6 . 1 . 1 Goals 104 6 . 1 . 2 Participants and Roles 104 6 . 1 . 3 Design 106 6 . 2 GaCoCo Design Activity 106 6 . 2 . 1 Gamiﬁed Environment and Material 109 6 . 2 . 2 Cooperative Learning Rules , Roles and Strategies 113 6 . 2 . 3 Protocol Mission by Mission 115 6 . 3 Analysis and Results 127 6 . 3 . 1 Data Collection and Instruments 127 6 . 3 . 2 Study Results 129 6 . 4 Discussion 140 6 . 4 . 1 Quality of Products for Learning 141 6 . 4 . 2 Children’s Achievement Emotions for Engagement 142 6 . 4 . 3 Engagement with Material 143 6 . 4 . 4 Children’s Achievement Emotions and Quality of Prod - ucts 145 6 . 5 Conclusion 145 In this chapter , we present the case study carried out during Spring 2015 in two classes of a primary school in Italy . The structure of the chapter follows the organization of the 2014 study . Section 6 . 1 presents the main goals of the study with the related hypotheses , the participants involved and the study design organiza - tion . Section 6 . 2 details the material , namely generative toolkits and gamiﬁed probes , used in the study and the design protocol , with the strategies used and the design session outcomes . Analyses and results are detailed in Section 6 . 3 . Finally , in Section 6 . 4 , we discuss results . 103 the gacoco 2015 study 6 . 1 study This GaCoCo study was run during Spring 2015 in two fourth grade classes in a primary school . During the GaCoCo game design activity , each class prototyped a single game per class ( class game ) . In line with the GaCoCo approach , a class was divided into small groups and each group worked on a game level . The outcome of the GaCoCo game design activity was a game per class . In the remainder of this section , we report details on the goals of the study , the participants involved , the study design and its organization . 6 . 1 . 1 Goals The goals of the 2015 study are identical to those of the 2014 study . They are related to the empowerment of children : engaging them and promoting their learning of early game design . In short , the 2015 study inspects and evaluates the following goals : ( Goal 1 ) monitoring and assessing children’s performances in GaCoCo design ; ( Goal 2 ) assessing engagement by : ( Goal 2 . 1 ) monitoring and assessing the intensity of children’s achievement emotions , ( Goal 2 . 2 ) assessing the engagement along the GaCoCo activity and with GaCoCo gamiﬁed probes ; ( Goal 3 ) assessing possible relationships between per - formances and emotions . Table 3 outlines each goal with the related hypotheses . Given the similarities with the 2014 study , further details can be found in Sec - tion 4 . 1 . 1 . 6 . 1 . 2 Participants and Roles The study involved two classes , two teachers and two expert design - ers . teachers . The two teachers involved in the study were present in the two classes . They were teaching in both classes the same subjects , that is , Science and History 1 . Teachers had the same roles as in the 2014 study : in brief , during the game design activity they assisted in scaffolding group work , following the given GaCoCo protocol . 1 In some Italian primary schools , more than one teacher can be present in class . In this case study , the two teachers were teaching together an interdisciplinary topic , namely , eating habits in ancient cultures . 104 6 . 1 study Goals Hypotheses Goal 1 . Assessing children perfor - mances G 1 . H 1 : Quality of products changes over time . Goal 2 . 1 Assessing the Intensity of children’sachievementemotions G 2 . H 1 . Positive emotions more intense than negative emotions . G 2 . H 2 . Higher intensity for activating emo - tions than for deactivating emotions . G 2 . H 3 . Intensity of negative and positive emotions changes over time . Goal 2 . 2 . Assess - ing children’s engagement along GaCoCo and with its material G 2 . H 4 . Children’s engagement changes over time . Goal 3 Assessing relationshipsbetweenperformances and emotions G 3 . H 1 . Quality of products is positively cor - related to enjoyment . G 3 . H 2 . Quality of products is negatively cor - related to boredom . Table 3 : Goals of the study with the related hypotheses . See Section 4 . 1 . 1 for more details . researchers . The GaCoCo activity involved the same researchers of the 2014 study : a design expert and an education expert ( called also observer ) . The researchers’ roles are detailed in Section 4 . 1 . 2 . children . The game design experience of 2015 involved two classes from a primary school in the North - East of Italy , different from the school involved in the 2014 study . Children were , in total , 42 ( 45 % girls ) , coming from a variety of socio - economic backgrounds . Classes were in grade 4 : one class was composed of 19 children ; among them there was one child diagnosed with an attention deﬁcit hyperactivity disorder ( ADHD ) and one with autism . The other class was composed of 23 children ; among them there were three children diagnosed with ADHD , and one child with a mental retardation or intellectual disabil - ity , ( MR / ID ) 2 . The mean age at the start of the activity was 9 . 75 years , with a standard deviation SD = 0 . 35 . As in the 2014 study , children were the main game designers , mainly working in groups of 3 – 5 members . 2 Italian schools by law must include children with special needs within regular classes , until 10 th grade . 105 the gacoco 2015 study 6 . 1 . 3 Design The 2015 study design organization followed that of the 2014 study : a pre , core and a post GaCoCo game design activity . Pre - GaCoCo activity . During the pre - activity , a workshop for training teachers on the GaCoCo game design activity was organized . During this workshop , teachers tested the GaCoCo approach acting as game designers , and gave feedback and suggestions to the researchers about complexity of the tasks , times of execution and the usage of materials . After the work - shop , teachers were asked to create balanced and heterogenous work groups , ﬁlling in the form which is detailed in Section 4 . 1 . 3 . Core - GaCoCo activity During the core GaCoCo activity ( GaCoCo game design activity ) , each class released one class game . Within a class , each group worked on a game level of the class game . The class game was based on a storyline created directly by the class , in one of the missions , and not assigned by teachers as in 2014 . However , the starting topic was as - signed by the teachers and researchers , that is , the subject taught by teachers : eating habits in ancient cultures . The core GaCoCo activity was fragmented into missions as in 2014 , and conducted during regular classes . Missions and its organization are illustrated in detail in Section 6 . 2 . 3 . Post - activity As in the 2014 study , during the post - GaCoCo activity , debrieﬁng interviews with children were run by the teachers to gather more information on children’s experience with GaCoCo . Children were also asked to rank their preferred gamiﬁed probes used during the GaCoCo activity . Moreover , children were invited to the Free Univer - sity of Bozen - Bolzano for a ﬁnal mission , see Section 6 . 2 . 3 for details . 6 . 2 gacoco design activity The 2015 GaCoCo activity was improved by considering the lessons learned in the 2014 study . In particular , this latter study allowed us to identify a set of must - have with a label . At the beginning of this sec - tion and for the subsequent sections , we report the must have of 2014 with the related label in a box . Later in the text we refer to them to 106 6 . 2 gacoco design activity explain the design choices of the 2015 study . Must - Have 2014 —Game Design Activity with Children mh - d1 Splitting the game design activity into progressive mis - sions with progressive challenges , with its own clear valu - able goal . mh - d2 Tracking and taking into account children’s emotions in relation to the quality of product over time . mh - d3 Differentiating as much as possible missions for improv - ing children’s engagement over time . mh - d4 Providing multiple feedback opportunities mission per mission : from domain experts and from peers . mh - d5 Providing summative feedback across missions and in each mission . mh - d6 Providing more formative design feedback in critical de - sign stages , so as to avoid a bottleneck of requests ( by chil - dren to expert ) . Must - Have 2014 —Group Formation and Cooperative learning contributions mh - g1 Having groups formed by teachers respecting relation - ship between peers . mh - g2 Forming heterogeneous small groups ( 3 – 5 members ) . mh - g3 Assigning a role to each member with a rotation system . mh - g4 Using cooperative learning strategies within a group— subgroups with speciﬁc roles , e . g . pairs . mh - g5 Using cooperative learning strategies at the class level . The overall aim of the core GaCoCo activity in 2015 was a class game composed by game levels designed by group within a class . Game de - sign work was organized in line with the GaCoCo protocol . Based on the results of 2014 , in order to empower children and sustain children’s engagement , the GaCoCo activity took into account children’ emotion trend of 2014 for organizing groups work in different missions and for improving the quality of products ( according to must - have MH - D 2 ) . Moreover , cooperative learning strategies for small heterogeneous groups were used in the GaCoCo protocol for children . As suggested by the results of 2014 , empowerment was also supported through mul - 107 the gacoco 2015 study tiple feedback opportunities for children : from peers , with cooperative learning for sharing ideas and for sustaining discussions at the pair , at group or at class level ; from domain experts , with dedicated evaluative moments : rapid formative evaluation feedback for validating or clarifying design decisions by children during a mission , and summative evalua - tion of children’s products after and across missions for a more con - structive elaborate feedback on design choices ( MH - D 4 ; MH - G 4 , G 5 ) . The design work took ﬁve missions ( M 1 – M 5 ) per class at school GaCoCo Organization and lasted circa two hours per mission . Taking into account the results of the 2014 study results , each mission was organized as a gamiﬁed mission with its own design goal and each mission were split into pro - gressive challenges ( MH - D 3 ) . In light of the results of 2014 , the ﬁrst mission ( M 1 ) , the easiest one , served as training for children and for creating group identities ( MH - P 2 ) . Then , from the second ( M 2 ) to the ﬁfth mission ( M 5 ) , each mission was built in progression one upon the other ( MH - D 1 ) . Firstly , each group created the storyline at the class level ( M 2 ) ( MH - P 3 ) . Secondly , each group conceptualized the game idea for their game level and released the main character prototype ( the player for their game ) ( M 3 ) . Thirdly , each group conceptualized their game level by prototyping it in a paper based format ( M 4 ) . Fi - nally , ( M 5 ) each group completed the game level with the winning and losing effects and presented their game level to the class ( MH - D 3 ) . Also in this study , the core GaCoCo activity used tangible gami - Gamiﬁed Probes and Strategies ﬁed probes for conveying a sense of progression , control and relat - edness to children . Section 6 . 2 . 1 details the gamiﬁed probes used in the study . Moreover , the gamiﬁed probes made tangible for children cooperative learning strategies , rules and roles . These are detailed in Section 6 . 2 . 2 . The protocol of each mission ( M 1 – M 5 ) is widely detailed in Section 6 . 2 . 3 . 108 6 . 2 gacoco design activity 6 . 2 . 1 Gamiﬁed Environment and Material Must - Have 2014 mh - t1 Training by expert about the usage of gamiﬁed probes and generative toolkits . mh - t2 Providing a sense of progression across missions and challenges . mh - t3 Using gamiﬁed probes for making tangibles roles , rules or strategies . mh - t4 Using rewards systems or gamiﬁed probes for a cus - tomization of the game . mh - t5 Providing a sense of autonomy and control in missions and challenges According to results on children’s engagement with material from the 2014 study , see Section 4 . 3 . 2 , children were generally engaged , showing curiosity and enthusiasm towards all generative toolkits and gamiﬁed probes . In particular , the survey for the preferred gamiﬁed probes showed a marked preference for the shop and the signaling disks . Moreover , the progression map was properly used , and it re - sulted a necessary tool for giving a sense of progression during a mis - sion ( MH - T 2 ) . As in 2014 study , the ad - hoc designed gamiﬁed probes followed gen - eral and speciﬁc design principles , e . g . , by ( Hutchinson et al . , 2003 b ) , speciﬁcally those concerning with the technology probes , which differ from design probes and , more generally , from low - ﬁdelity prototypes in that technology probes collect data about users according to their functionalities ( logging ) . In light of the 2014 results , some gamiﬁed probes of the 2014 study was reused in the 2015 study namely , the Signaling disk and the Shop . The remaining was changed or enhanced , possibly enhanced with Ar - duino controllers and sensors or it was new . Speciﬁcally , the progres - sion map and the tree map were uniﬁed into a unique and clearer progression map . New gamiﬁed probes were : control box connected with the progression map , cards for each member for the speaking turn , and a speaking cup to manage the speaking turn during a brain - storming at class level . As in 2014 , children worked in their classrooms , and at the start of each mission , groups arranged classroom tables in groups . During the core GaCoCo activity , researchers gave materials needed for design - 109 the gacoco 2015 study Figure 23 : The progression map with Arduino sensor and controllers . ing and prototyping their game , e . g . , generative toolkits , and gamiﬁed probes . New and modiﬁed gamiﬁed probes used in this study are the fol - lowing ones . progression map . The progression map in Figure 23 was a gami - ﬁed technology probe . It showed children that the design learning pro - cess was progressively structured ; its main functionality was enabling wayﬁnding through the process—what I have done so far , where I am now , where I can go next ( Lynch and Horton , 2015 ) . In that manner it helped make tangible children’s progression through the process , and hence promote children’s feeling of control over it . The expert , at the start of each mission , positioned the progression map in front of the class as a reference point for each group . See Fig - ure 23 . The progression map used in the study is designed as follows . It showed ﬁve fruits corresponded to one of groups . Each fruit was con - tained ﬁve rows , one for each mission . Each mission ( row ) was divided into challenges , each challenge represented as an icon and a led . For tracking their position , each group had to move across all challenges a group icon , represented by a wooden farmer . When a challenge was tackled by a group , the corresponding led lit up . As in 2014 , we inserted completion - contingent rewards represented by removable wooden coins that children collected at each challenge . Coins acted as symbolic rewards for sustaining children’s sense of pro - gression and control . Moreover , coins could be spent at the wooden shop for acquiring objects , e . g . , paper based drawings , in order to cus - tomize their prototypes ( MH - T 3 , T 4 , T 5 ) . They could be acquired dur - ing mission relaxing game prototypes . Children could also personalize prototyping objects and hence reinforce their perception of being in control of their design work . 110 6 . 2 gacoco design activity On top of each fruit , there was a big led indicating that such group asked the expert feedback ( group led ) . Within each fruit , at the end of each mission , a wooden small box was placed , to indicate the end of the corresponding mission . The small box was hiding a mission reward , that is a set of stickers . Each mission had a different reward : a seed ( M 1 ) , ﬁve different tools for gar - dening ( M 2 ) , ﬁve pieces of a tree ( M 3 ) , a scarecrow ( M 4 ) , a star ( M 5 ) . Rewards earned after each mission could be used by each group for growing their tree , and for conveying to children the idea of growth through accomplishment of game design tasks . The back of the progression map had Arduino micro - electronics sen - sors and controllers , which are open - source rapid prototyping solu - tions . In addition , Arduino components enabled connection between the map and the control box , and the management of led switching on and off . group control box and card . For tangibly promoting coopera - tive learning rules and roles for collaboration , each group was given a wooden control box , positioned at the centre of their tables . The control box , shown in Figure 24 , was shaped as a pentagon ( since the largest allowed membership for a group was 5 children ) . It showed on its top ( up to ) 5 children names with a led , corresponding to group members . The control box was completed by one slot for a NFC card , one big button , and a money slot to keep the gained coins . Inside the box there was a NFC card reader , whose purpose was recording the speaking turn , and an Arduino board that connected the control box to the progression map . Each group member had NFC card , showing his or her name , and the fruit on the progression map that represented the group . This card organized turns in speaking . In order to speak , the child had to put his or her card on the dedicated slot ( the card reader ) of the control box . As a result , the led near the name of the child who was using the card , lit up , indicating that the child was speaking . Moreover , control boxes served also to enable the connection between groups and the design experts supervising their design work . By pressing the big button on the box , a group requested the expert’s feedback . The corresponding group led on the progression map lit up . For instance , the button was pressed when a group completed a challenge , for getting a rapid feedback and challenge validation from the expert . speaking cup . The speaking cup , shown in Figure 25 , was used in the brainstorming sessions , and when the design expert required feed - back at the class level . The speaking cup contained an Arduino board 111 the gacoco 2015 study Figure 24 : The control box of a group and the NFC card in action . Figure 25 : The speaking cup used during the brainstorming session . with a touch sensor inside . This board connected the speaking cup to the progression bar . When a child held the cup in his or her hands , a led strip on the map lit up , indicating that someone was speaking , and hence others should have been listening without interrupting . ad hoc game frame . Following the 2014 study organization , in the last mission ( M 5 ) children had to present their game . Each group had an A 1 poster with colored shapes where to add pieces of informa - tion about their game prototypes : a dedicated space for the prototyped level , two balloons for describing what appears when the player loses or wins , a dedicated space for sticking the group logo . game design document forms . As in 2014 , for each mission chil - dren were provided with different forms to ﬁll in , namely game de - sign documents . More details on game design documents are in Sec - 112 6 . 2 gacoco design activity tion 2 . 4 . 3 . The forms followed the same structure as in the 2014 study : they were A 4 papers with simple questions related to game design , and dedicated spaces for answering . However , with respect to the 2014 study , some forms were modiﬁed , and new forms were added , e . g . , a storyline form . 6 . 2 . 2 Cooperative Learning Rules , Roles and Strategies Must - Have 2014 mh - g1 Having groups work formed by teachers respecting re - lationship between peers . mh - g2 Forming heterogeneous small groups ( 3 – 5 members ) by teachers . mh - g3 Assigning a role for each members with rotation system . mh - g4 Using cooperative learning strategies within a group— subgroups with speciﬁc roles . mh - g5 Using cooperative learning strategies at class level . During the pre - GaCoCo activity teachers , using the speciﬁc form ( see Section 4 . 1 . 3 ) , formed heterogeneous work groups of 3 – 5 member ( MH - G 1 , G 2 ) . The cooperative learning strategies for organizing work in group , as well as rules and roles for children , were all important means that GaCoCo adopted throughout the game design activity . Ac - cording to the GaCoCo approach , such means are made tangible via the gamiﬁed probes described above . roles and rules . Different cooperative learning roles were con - sidered and adapted according to the GaCoCo protocol . As in 2014 , children rotated their roles among group members , across missions , so that all children had a chance to train different skills ( MH - G 3 ) . Group roles used in each mission were the same as in the 2014 , namely ( 1 ) Secretary , ( 2 ) Ambassador , ( 3 ) Materials Manager , ( 4 ) Time Keeper and ( 5 ) Participation Checker . To support group roles , coopera - tive learning considers a set of rules , necessary for working in a group , and for involving all members . More details about rules and roles have been given in Section 4 . 2 . 2 . strategies . As in 2014 , the sharing for ideating and conceptualizing strategy , detailed in 4 . 2 . 2 , recurred across missions and was related to 113 the gacoco 2015 study speciﬁc mission challenges , that included group work and information sharing . Additionally , we introduced new strategies to be used in speciﬁc missions , for working at class level ( MH - G 5 ) . These strategies are the following ones . JIGSAW . Jigsaw ( Barnes and O’Farrell , 1990 ) is a group strategy where learners are responsible for teaching to one another . In the ﬁrst phase of the strategy , each group is assigned some subject material , this way becoming the group expert of a subject . In the second phase , experts from different groups meet together to discuss their areas , and learn about the other materials . This new group composed by all experts of each area . Then experts return to their respective groups , to share their learning . In this way , the work of the expert group is quickly dissemi - nated throughout the class , with each person taking responsibility for sharing a piece of the “puzzle” . We adapted the JIGSAW strategy for creating the main character of the class game ( M 3 ) . One stay other stray . The one stay , other stray strategy ( Barnes and O’Farrell , 1990 ) is used as a means for sharing information and gath - ering feedback about a task , such as the description of the game level , designed and prototyped by each group ( M 4 ) . During this strategy , all members of a group take a break from their work : members who leave the group visit other groups to share their results and collect informa - tion about their tasks ( visitors ) . The group member that stays in his or her group ( at home member ) , receives members from other groups ( visitors ) to share the result and information from the mission task . Then visitors return to their own group and report on their results . This way , each group compares and discusses its result . We adapted the one stay other stray strategy for sharing the game levels prototyped in M 4 . 114 6 . 2 gacoco design activity 6 . 2 . 3 Protocol Mission by Mission Must - Have 2014 mh - p1 Recapping phases and links across missions . mh - p2 Providing an easy mission for training work in group . mh - p3 Basing game design on a storyline that children are in - terested in , possibly related to a school subject . mh - p4 Using stimulus cards or sentences to better express of children’s creativity . mh - p5 Making generative toolkits , e . g . , paper - based forms , cap - tivating and functional for group work . mh - p6 Using simple and clear forms , which should be as dif - ferent as possible between missions . mh - p7 Creating ad - hoc structured frames for prototyped games , so as to better allow children to present their prod - ucts and to interact with them . mh - p8 Setting a player interaction model for the game ( e . g . , third person perspective , with the main character of the storyline that acts as the player of the game ) . mh - p9 Considering a design of a single game level per group . 115 the gacoco 2015 study ! ! G a C o C o % 2015 % S t ud y % % M i s s i o n % 1 % M i ss i o n % 2 % M i ss i o n % 3 % M i ss i o n % 4 % M i ss i o n % 5 % ! G O A L % T r a i n i n g ! a n d ! g r o u p ! i d e n t i t y ! C o n c e p t u a l i z i n g ! ! t h e ! s t o r y l i n e ! o f ! t h e ! c l a ss ! g a m e ! C on ce p t u a li z i ng ( 1 ) t h e g a m e l e v e l i d ea , a nd ( 2 ) t h e m a i n c h a r ac t e r r e l a t e d t o t h e s t o r y li n e P r o t o t y p i n g ! t h e ! g a m e ! l e v e l ! ! F i n a l i s a t i o n ! o f ! ea c h ! g r o u p ! l e v e l ! % % % C H A LL E N G E S ! C h oo s i n g ! t h e ! g r o u p ! n a m e ! a n d ! p r o t o t y p i n g ! t h e ! g r o u p ! b a d g e . ! ! ! G r o u p ! s t o r y l i n e ! ! C l a ss ! s t o r y l i n e ! S t o r y l i n e ! C h a r a c t e r ! ! ( p l a y e r ) ! G a m e ! I d ea ! C o r e ! m e c h a n i c s ! ! S h a r i n g ! a n d ! r e v i s i n g ! W i nn i n g ! a n d ! l o s i n g ! E ff e c t s ! A ss e m b l i n g ! f i n a l ! g a m e ! l e v e l ! P r e s e n t a t i o n ! C OO P E R A T I V E % L E A R N I N G % S T R A T E G I E S % G r o u p ! w o r k ! G r o u p ! w o r k ! O ! S t i m u l u s ! c a r d s ! ! C l a ss ! w o r k ! ( F o c u s ! G r o u p ) ! J I G S A W ! G r o u p ! W o r k ! O ! S t i m u l u s ! S e n t e n c e s ! G r o u p ! W o r k ! O n e ! S t a y ! O t h e r ! S t r a y ! G r o u p ! w o r k ! G r o u p ! w o r k ! G r o u p ! w o r k ! % G E N E R A T I V E % T OO L K I T S % G r o u p ! n a m e ! f o r m ! w i t h ! t h e ! s t i c k e r ! b a d g e ! ! ! G r o u p ! s t o r y l i n e ! f o r m ! C l a ss ! S t o r y l i n e ! f o r m ! C h a r a c t e r ! F o r m ! G a m e ! I d ea ! F o r m ! L e v e l ! f r a m e s ! ! C o r e ! m e c h a n i c s ! f o r m ! G a m e ! L e v e l ! f r a m e ! ! F ee d b a c k ! f o r m ! G a m e ! F r a m e ! % G A M I F I E D % P R O B E S % P e r ! c l a ss : ! P r o g r e ss i o n ! M a p , ! C o i n s ! P e r ! g r o u p : ! C o n t r o l ! B o x ! P e r ! c h i l d : ! R o l e ! C a r d s , ! S i g n a l i n g ! d i s k s ! + ! P e r ! c l a ss : ! s h o p ! ! F i g u r e 26 : S t e p s a n d m a t e r i a l m i ss i o n b y m i ss i o n o f t h e 2015 s t u d y 116 6 . 2 gacoco design activity In this section , Across Missions paragraph details those parts of pro - tocol that are common among all missions . Then , each mission is out - lined in the Mission by Mission paragraph , detailing the outcomes and the procedure for tackling these outcomes . In addition , Figure 26 summarizes the main steps for each mission , detailing the goal of each mission , its speciﬁc challenges and the coop - erative learning strategies and material ( generative toolkits and gami - ﬁed probes ) a practitioners could use in each mission . Across Missions at the start of a mission . Teachers , together with the design ex - pert , recapped what children had produced at the end of the previous mission ( if any ) , and outlined the goal of the daily mission . Teach - ers explained or reminded rules , and assigned and explained roles of cooperative learning to each child ( MH - P 1 ) . Then , the design ex - pert explained the organization of the mission in challenges , using the progression map and the relevant gamiﬁed probes ( MH - P 5 , MH - P 7 ) . Moreover , with the aim of sustaining links across missions in term of game design stages , a training to game design was organized at the start of every mission ( MH - P 1 ) . This training was executed by the de - sign expert , and it consisted of presentations of about 10 minutes . In these presentations , the design expert showed the mission game de - sign stage , and the related game design goal , showing existing games as an example , such as “The frozen game” by Disney ( Disney , 2015 ) . Speciﬁcally the ﬁve training topics were : the storyline creation ( M 2 ) , the character ( player ) design with its prototype , the game idea and player conceptualization ( M 3 ) , gameplay and mechanics setting ( M 4 ) , game ﬁnalization with aesthetics ( M 5 ) . during the mission . Following the organization of the 2014 study , each group worked at their table , respecting rules and roles . At the end of each challenge , the group ambassador , by pressing the button , asked the design expert to validate their challenge outcomes . The de - sign expert gave rapid feedback for validating the challenge , or else for clarifying design decisions ( formative evaluation ) . After a positive validation by the design expert , the group moved their farmer on the progression map , awarding the coin related to the challenge . at the end of the mission . The material manager collected the group’s rewards to be placed on the map , on behalf of his or her group . Subsequently , groups could use coins for buying prototyping objects at the shop . Teachers and researchers administered children with the questionnaire concerning their emotions . 117 the gacoco 2015 study after a mission . From the second mission until the ﬁfth mission , following the 2014 GaCoCo organization , two experts ( the one at school and another one not present at school ) , evaluated game products , us - ing heuristics ( Desurvire et al . , 2004 ) as in the 2014 study , see Chapter 4 . Back to school , the ﬁrst expert used the evaluation results as summa - tive feedback to children in the next mission ( summative evaluation ) . First Mission . Group Identity and Logo outcomes . As in the 2014 study , ﬁrst mission ( M 1 ) aimed at : ( 1 ) training all children into cooperative learning rules and group roles as well as to the use of gamiﬁed material ; ( 2 ) creating the identity of each group ; ( 3 ) introducing the game design activity with its design goal ( MH - P 2 ) . Moreover , M 1 ended with a brainstorming session , aiming at ( 4 ) eliciting ideas , about the chosen subject , i . e . , eating habits in ancient cultures . Its outcome products were group logo with the group names , speciﬁed in the related forms . Figure 27 shows M 1 outcomes for a group . procedure per challenge . The mission followed the same proce - dure as in 2014 . The single challenge of the mission allowed choosing the group name , this was done by ﬁlling in the related form , and pro - totyping the group logo . For this purpose , groups used the sharing for ideating and conceptualizing strategy . Differently than in 2014 , after the challenge , the entire class was en - gaged into a brainstorming session . This concerned the topic chosen by teachers : eating habits in ancient cultures . It aimed at eliciting a large variety of ideas at the class level . These ideas acted as starting point for the subsequent mission , when children had to create the sto - ryline of the class game . The speaking turn during the brainstorming session was regulated by the speaking cup shown in Figure 25 . Each child held it when he / she was talking and handed it to another child for giving him or her the speaking turn . During the brainstorming session , teachers were responsible for guid - ing and moderating the class in the brainstorming process ; the design expert collected and showed children’s ideas on the blackboard . To make sure all ideas were duly collected , also the observer too notes about ideas , and later compared them with the design expert’s list . After the mission , the expert and the observer categorized children’s ideas , e . g . , places ( desert , pyramids ) , foods ( junk food , healthy food ) , characters ( pharaoh , greek gods ) . As a result , the expert produced sev - eral stimulus cards ( MH - P 4 ) as A 6 - sized pictures with labels . These cards acted as stimuli encouraging children to write simple captions , 118 6 . 2 gacoco design activity Figure 27 : Form for choosing the group name and the group logo prototyped . and stimulating their creativity in the follow - up mission ( MH - P 4 ) . See Figure 28 for details . rewards . At the end of the mission , each group collected one coin and a seed to plant in their group soil on the progression map ( see Figure 23 ) . Second Mission . Class Game Storyline outcomes . The second mission aimed at conceptualizing the story - line of the class game ( MH - P 3 ) . The outcome product was a storyline form . See Figure 30 procedure per challenge . The second mission had two challenges . In the ﬁrst challenge , each group selected some cards from the stim - ulus cards released at the end of the ﬁrst mission . The selected cards were used for creating a group storyline form ( MH - P 3 ) . This was struc - tured as an A 3 - sized form with ﬁve removable cards . Each card had a label and a space in which children could write ( MH - P 4 ) . The card la - bels were as follows : ( 1 ) All started in . . . ( Setting ) , ( 2 ) where there is . . . ( Ma - in character ) . . . that . . . ( What does the character ) , ( 3 ) suddenly it hap - pens . . . ( main event or problem ) ( 4 ) for . . . so as to . . . ( action of the char - acter for solving the problem ) , ( 6 ) Finally . . . ( resolution of the story ) . ( MH - P 4 ) See Figure 30 for details . The ﬁve cards of the form corre - sponded to the main structures of narratives ( Stein and Glenn , 1979 ) : setting and main character ; a problem , leading the story forward and making the character act ; resolution , when the problem in the story it resolved ; conclusion . The group ﬁlled in the form as in 2014 , using the sharing for ideating and conceptualizing strategy . 119 the gacoco 2015 study Figure 28 : The brainstorming panel ( on the upper part ) and the stimulus cards ( on the bottom part ) . 120 6 . 2 gacoco design activity In the second challenge , starting from the group storylines , the class worked under the direction of the design expert , as in a focus group , in order to create a single storyline for the class game . See Figure 30 . Firstly , the expert pinned ( or drew ) the storyline labels on the black - board . In turn , the ambassador of each group read aloud the ﬁve cards of his or her group storyline form . Meanwhile , the material checker of the group pinned each card in the appropriate ﬁeld on the blackboard . If appropriate , the teacher asked the group for clariﬁcations . When all ambassadors ended their presentations , the blackboard showed each group storyline ( ﬁve boxes per group ) . Then the design expert took the lead : she asked the class to “break all stories apart and recreate a single storyline” . The design expert changed the positions of the boxes on the blackboard and mixed the group storyline . The design expert moderates the ﬂow of ideas and rapidly evaluates them according to the speciﬁc game heuristics for storylines . In particular , as main aspect the expert focused on game design elements consistency ( Desurvire et al . , 2004 ) . In the end , the design expert assembled the result in a single story - line form , which determined the storyline that each group in the class should use to create their game level idea . A class storyline form ﬁlled in by a group is shown in Figure 29 rewards . At the end of the mission , each group earned two coins , one per challenge , and ﬁve wooden pieces representing gardening tools . These were kept in their dedicated box on the progression map . See Figure 23 . The gardening tools were the following : shears , gloves , weakened , fertilizers and shovels . Third Mission . Game Idea and Character outcomes . The third mission aimed at conceptualizing ( 1 ) the game level idea , and ( 2 ) the main character related to the storyline . The main character of the storyline acts as player in the class game . The outcome products of the third mission were prototypes of the class game character , shown in Figure 32 , and the high - level concept document , with the game level idea of each group . procedure per challenge . The third mission had three challenges . In the ﬁrst and second challenges , each group worked on ideating and prototyping the character of the class game . The character acted as the player for the class game . Each group was given a form for pro - totyping the class game character . The form had 5 removable cards to ﬁll in , representing different aspects of the character : demographic information ; physical characteristics ; speciﬁc powers ; character traits ; 121 the gacoco 2015 study Figure 29 : The class storyline form ﬁlled in by a group . 122 6 . 2 gacoco design activity Figure 30 : A form for the Game Idea ( on the left ) ; the character prototyped by a group ( on the right ) . personal objects and tools . Using the JIGSAW strategy , each group had their character cards ﬁlled in , and could complete the character form by drawing the character , to be used as a player in their game level . See Figure 32 . In the third challenge , each group , using the sharing strategy as in 2014 , had to create their game idea ﬁlling in the high - level concept document form . In order to stimulate the creativity of children and to tackle a demanding task , such as the conceptualization of a game idea , stimulus sentences were given to children ( MH - P 4 ) . The stimulus sen - tence were simple sentences printed on a sheet of paper that recalled the main elements of a game . The sentences were the following : ( 1 ) I would like to have a game ; ( 2 ) the character of the story is in . . . ( choose the setting and location ) ; ( 3 ) and the character had to . . . ( actions of the player ) ; ( 4 ) for . . . so as to . . . ( objective ) ; ( 6 ) during the game the char - acter encountered . . . ( other characters or objects ) . rewards . At the end of the mission each group collected a coin per challenge and parts of a tree ( tree roots , trunk and frond ) to stick on the appropriate space on the progression map , see Figure 5 . 123 the gacoco 2015 study Figure 31 : A form for a Game Idea ( on the left ) ; a prototyped character by a group ( on the right ) . Figure 32 : A ﬁlled form for the core mechanics documents ( on the left ) ; a pro - totyped game level ( on the right ) . 124 6 . 2 gacoco design activity Fourth Mission . Group Game Levels . outcomes . The fourth mission aimed at prototyping the game lev - els , completing the core mechanics documents . Starting from the high - concept document , the outcome products were prototypes of a game level per group , and the related core mechanics documents . See Fig - ure 32 . procedure per challenge . The fourth mission had 4 challenges . In the ﬁrst and second challenges , after revising their high - level concept document , each group worked on the core mechanics documents for their level . Groups ﬁlled in the documents , and started to prototype their level using the paper - based material . In the third challenge , group had to share their game level with the class . The strategy One stay Other stray was used : each group knew and learnt about the work of the other groups . In the fourth challenge , each reunited group worked on completing their game level based on the received feedback from the other groups . rewards . At the end of the mission each group earned four coins and a scarecrow for protecting their tree , to be used on the progression map . Fifth Mission . Game Finalization outcomes . The ﬁfth mission aimed at ﬁnalizing each group game levels and presenting it to the entire class . The outcome product of the ﬁfth mission per group was made of the completed game levels with the losing and winning effects . procedure per challenge . The ﬁfth mission had four challenges . In the ﬁrst challenge , each group used the sharing strategy for revising their levels together , and ﬁlling in the forms for the winning and losing effects , e . g . , “what happens when the player wins or loses this level ? " . In the second and third challenges , using the ad - hoc frame , groups assembled their game level prototypes . Firstly , groups inserted their level in a part of the frame . Secondly , each group had to choose the winning and losing effect that appeared when the player wins or loses . In the fourth challenge , each group presented their game prototype to the entire class , so as to gather feedback from peers . rewards . At the end of the mission , each group collected four coins , and won a wooden star that allowed each group to receive a special prize . The special prize was a certiﬁcate , signed by the game designer 125 the gacoco 2015 study Figure 33 : A passage conditions form ( on the left ) ; a ﬁnal prototyped game with the winning and losing effects ( on the right ) . in charge of the project . As in 2014 , each group received this prize dur - ing a dedicated mission at the university , as explained in Section 4 . 2 . 3 . Mission at University . The mission at the Free University of Bozen - Bolzano was organized after the core GaCoCo design activity . The mission lasted circa 4 hours . The two classes with their teachers were invited to present their proto - typed games . outcomes . The mission aimed at ( 1 ) presenting the prototyped games by each group to the other class , ( 2 ) receiving feedback from all chil - dren about the games and voting the preferred game . In addition , chil - dren was asked to ( 3 ) complete each class game inserting the passage conditions between levels , as in 2014 study ( M 5 ) . Besides the feedback given by children and the preferred game chosen by voting , the prod - ucts outcomes of this mission were the passage conditions forms for the class games . procedure per challenge . Since each group had to show and present their game , the gallery tour strategy ( Barnes and O’Farrell , 1990 ) of cooperative learning was used . Presentations were organized as in 126 6 . 3 analysis and results Figure 34 : The gallery tour during the Mission at university . 2014 , see Section 4 . 2 . 3 . Each group presented their game , and then an - swered any questions and comments by other teams concerning their product . After the presentation , groups worked on the passage con - ditions forms for the class game . They ﬁlled in the related form for conceptualising the passage conditions and prototype the passage lev - els . See Figure 33 At the end of the mission , each child was asked to vote one of the group’s prototypes , expressing their preferences . rewards . At the end of the vote , all children received a certiﬁcate of game designer . 6 . 3 analysis and results As in 2014 study , two main types of data were collected and ana - lyzed : the quality of game products , assessed via expert evaluation , and the children’s engagement , assessed via GR - AED emotion ques - tionnaires and via observations . Section 6 . 3 . 1 summarized the data collected and the instruments used in 2014 , focusing on the differences about 2015 data collection and instruments . Section 6 . 3 . 2 presents the results of the data analyses executed . 6 . 3 . 1 Data Collection and Instruments Data concerning quality of products and engagement were gathered with different instruments , at speciﬁc moments . For the sake of read - ability , the data collected , its description and the instrument used for gathering it , are summarized in Table 4 . Further details have been given in Section 4 . 3 . 1 . 127 the gacoco 2015 study Data Quality of product Description The quality of product is deﬁned as the quality scores of a group in a mis - sion summed across issues , and then divided by the number of issues appli - cable in the mission . Instrument Expert evaluation of products against issues , deﬁned starting from playabil - ity heurstics of ( Desurvire et al . , 2004 ) . Analysis Descriptive statistic and intercorrela - tions , using SPSS version 21 . 0 for Win - dows . Children’sAchievementEmotions Description Children’s achievement emotions and their intensity is investigated at the end of the GaCoCo activity . The emo - tions we focussed are : enjoyment , re - laxation , anxiety and boredom . Instrument The Graduated Achievement Emotion Set ( GRA - ES ) : verbal - pictorial ques - tionnaire administered at the end of the GaCoCo activity . It enables to as - sess the intensity of ten achievement emotions ( Raccanello and Bianchetti , 2016 ) . Analysis Descriptive and inferential statistic , using SPSS version 21 . 0 for Windows . Children’sengagementinmission Description Children’s engagement is evidenced by those behaviours in mission chal - lenges that denote enjoyment , interest and concentration . Instrument Observations . The observer used di - aries to collect observations during the missions , moreover observations were integrated with video recorded by video - cameras set in class . Analysis Relevant results on engagement obser - vations are reported in narrative form , in a manner that facilitates compar - isons with statistical analysis results . Children’sengagement with material Description Engagement with material is evinced by the observer by tracking the chil - dren’s behavior with gamiﬁed probes ( e . g . , frequency of usage of the mate - rial ) . Instrument Observations and video recordings . In addition , at the end of the GaCoCo ac - tivity , children were given a survey for rating the preferred gamiﬁed probes . Analysis Narrative form for the observations of the engagement with gamiﬁed probes and quantitative results from the data gathered from the survey . Table 4 : The ﬁrst column contains the type of data collected during the study . For each data we provide a description , the instrument used so as to gather such data , and the analyses executed with the gathered data . Further details have been given in Section 4 . 3 . 1 . 128 6 . 3 analysis and results Issues Mission 3 Mission 4 Mission 5 Gameplay and mechanics in - consistencies or unclear function - alities A A A Goals A N / A N / A Gameplay and mechanics in - completeness N / A A A Documentation N / A A A Table 5 : Issues applicable ( A ) or not applicable ( N / A ) across Mission ( M 3 – M 5 ) 6 . 3 . 2 Study Results This section reports on results concerning the main data collected , that is the quality of products , children’s achievement emotions and their relationships with the quality of products , and ﬁnally children’s engagement . We quickly recap our goals , which are listed in Table 3 . Goal 1 , refers to the evolution of the quality of products over time . Goal 2 deals with children’s emotions over time ( Goal 2 . 1 ) and with qualitative results concerning the engagement of children with design work , as well as their preferences on materials ( Goal 2 . 2 ) . Finally , Goal 3 relates the relationships between emotions and quality of products . Quality of Products This section focuses on the ﬁrst research goal , G . 1 , concerning chil - dren’s performances in GaCoCo design . At the end of missions M 3 – M 5 , groups released products consisting of game design documents and prototypes , as speciﬁed in Section 6 . 2 . 3 . Issues applicable from the third mission onwards are those related to gameplay and mechanics inconsistencies or unclear functionalities . The goal issues are applicable only in the third mission ; whereas , issues of gameplay and mechanics incompleteness and documentation are applica - ble from the fourth mission onwards . See Section 4 . 3 . 1 for details on product issues . To provide inter - judge reliability , the design expert working with schools classiﬁed all products against issues , while the other expert classiﬁed just 33 , 33 % of them . The mean agreement percentage be - tween experts was 87 , 50 % . The lowest agreement between experts was for “gameplay and mechanics Inconsistencies or unclear functionali - ties” ( 75 , 00 % ) . Experts resolved disagreements through discussions to revise the products’ classiﬁcation . 129 the gacoco 2015 study Issues Mission 3 Mission 4 Mission 5 Gameplay and mechanics in - consistencies or unclear function - alities 2 , 4 , 6 , 7 2 , 4 , 7 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 6 , 7 , 8 , 9 , 10 Goals 2 , 4 , 6 N / A N / A Gameplay and mechanics in - completeness N / A 1 , 2 , 4 , 6 , 7 , 8 , 9 , 10 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 , 7 , 8 , 9 , 10 Documentation N / A 2 , 4 , 6 , 8 1 , 2 , 4 , 5 , 6 , 7 , 8 , 9 , 10 Table 6 : Groups with quality score equal to 1 ( positive result ) for an issue in a mission . Groups Mission 3 Mission 4 Mission 5 Group 1 0 . 00 0 , 33 1 . 00 Group 2 1 . 00 1 . 00 1 . 00 Group 3 0 . 00 0 . 00 0 . 67 Group 4 1 . 00 1 . 00 1 . 00 Group 5 0 . 00 0 . 00 0 . 67 Group 6 1 . 00 0 . 67 1 . 00 Group 7 1 . 00 0 . 67 1 . 00 Group 8 0 . 00 0 . 67 1 . 00 Group 9 0 . 00 0 , 33 1 . 00 Group 10 0 . 00 0 , 33 1 . 00 M 0 . 40 0 . 50 0 . 93 SD 0 . 52 0 . 36 0 . 14 Table 7 : Quality of product for each group and mission ( M 3 – M 5 ) ; mean ( M ) and standard deviation ( SD ) across groups . Table 6 shows , for each issue and mission , groups with quality score 1 for the issue and in the mission . Quality scores of a group in a mission were added across issues , and then divided by the number of issues applicable in the mission ( two in M 3 ; three in M 4 , M 5 ) . See Table 5 for details . Table 7 reports the quality of product per group and per mission , mean ( M ) and standard deviation ( SD ) across groups . A non - parametric Friedman test of differences among repeated mea - G 1 . H 1 Quality of products changes over time . Supported . sures was then conducted on the quality of products , and it was sta - tistically signiﬁcant , χ 2 ( 2 ) = 42 . 471 , p < 0 . 001 . A post - hoc comparison with Wilcoxon test indicated that quality of products was signiﬁcantly different in all cases : z = - 1 . 796 , p = 0 . 073 , comparing M 3 ( M = 0 . 40 , SD = 0 . 52 ) and M 4 ( M = 0 . 50 , SD = 0 . 36 ) ; z = - 5 . 261 , p < 0 . 001 , comparing M 4 and M 5 ( M = 0 . 93 , SD = 0 . 14 ) ; most importantly , z = - 4 . 490 , p < 0 . 001 , comparing M 3 and M 5 , the mission that started and concluded the de - 130 6 . 3 analysis and results Enjoyment Relaxation Anxiety Boredom Means ( M ) M 1 4 , 76 3 , 58 1 , 33 1 , 25 M 2 4 , 08 3 , 03 1 , 54 1 , 68 M 3 3 , 87 2 , 90 1 , 90 2 , 05 M 4 4 , 20 2 , 79 1 , 74 1 , 71 M 5 4 , 51 3 , 17 1 , 84 1 , 62 Standard errors ( SE ) M 1 0 , 11 0 , 20 0 , 08 0 , 10 M 2 0 , 20 0 , 22 0 , 14 0 , 13 M 3 0 , 22 0 , 23 0 , 20 0 , 19 M 4 0 , 21 0 , 21 0 , 16 0 , 20 M 5 0 , 16 0 , 23 0 , 20 0 , 17 Table 8 : Descriptive statistics for intensity of emotions per mission : M 1 – M 5 sign of game products . These results support the rejection of the null hypothesis on the effect of time ( G 1 . H 1 ) . Children’s Achievement Emotions This section focuses on Goal 2 . 1 , and it analyses the four emotions gathered with GR - AES . It analyses them at individual level , in order to verify the hypotheses concerning possible intensity differences related to valence ( G 2 . H 1 ) , activation ( G 2 . H 2 ) and time ( G 2 . H 3 ) . Speciﬁcally , we carried out a 2 x 2 x 5 ( Valence [ positive emotions , neg - ative emotions ] x Activation [ activating emotions , deactivating emo - tions ] x Mission [ ﬁrst , second , third , fourth , ﬁfth mission ] ) repeated - measure ANOVA on the intensity of the four emotions , with Valence , Activation , and Mission as within - subjects factors . Table 8 reports de - scriptive statistics for intensity of emotions per missions : M 1 – M 5 . In , relation to G 2 . H 1 , a main effect of Valence was found , F ( 1 , 39 ) = G 2 . H 1 : positive emotions more intense than negative ones . Supported . 158 . 09 , p < . 001 , η 2p = . 80 , indicating higher intensity for positive emotions ( M = 3 . 69 , SE = . 10 ) compared to negative emotions ( M = 1 . 67 , SE = . 09 ) . In relation to G 2 . H 2 , a main effect of Activation emerged , F ( 1 , 39 ) = 30 . 37 , p < . 001 , with higher intensity for activating emotions ( M = 2 . 98 , SE = . 06 ) compared to deactivating emotions ( M = 2 . 38 , SE = . 08 ) . In addition , a signiﬁcant two - way interaction Valence x Activation G 2 . H 2 : higher intensity for activating emotions than deactivating emotions . Partially supported . emerged , F ( 1 , 39 ) = 48 . 26 , p < . 001 , η 2p = . 55 . Speciﬁcally , the ac - tivating emotion was more intense than the deactivating emotion ( en - joyment : M = 4 . 28 , SE = . 11 ; relaxation : M = 3 . 09 , SE = . 15 ) for positive emotions , and not more intense for negative emotions ( anxi - ety : M = 1 . 67 , SE = . 11 ; boredom : M = 1 . 66 , SE = . 09 ) . On the whole , these data supported the falsiﬁcation of the null hypothesis on 131 the gacoco 2015 study the effect of valence ( G 2 . H 1 ) , with positive emotions more intense than negative emotions , and the partial falsiﬁcation of the null hypothesis on the effect of activation ( G 2 . H 2 ) , with activating emotions more in - tense than deactivating emotions true only for positive emotions . Concerning hypothesis G 2 . H 3 , a signiﬁcant two - way interaction Mis - G 2 . H 3 : intensity of negative and positive emotions changes over time . Partially supported . sion X Activation , F ( 4 , 156 ) = 5 . 60 , p = . 001 , η 2p = . 13 , emerged . To further explore these ﬁndings , we carried out four repeated - measure ANOVAs with Mission as the within - subjects factors . They revealed a signiﬁcant effect of Mission for enjoyment , F ( 4 , 156 ) = 4 . 04 , p = . 002 , η 2p = . 10 , and boredom , F ( 4 , 156 ) = 3 . 73 , p = . 006 , η 2p = . 09 . Figure 35 : Mean intensity of emotions per mission ( M 1 – M 5 ) Pair - wise comparison revealed that intensity of enjoyment was higher for M 1 compared to M 2 and M 3 , while boredom was higher for M 3 compared to M 1 . However , even if the other comparisons were not sta - tistically signiﬁcant , on the whole positive emotions tended to decrease from M 1 to M 3 , and then to increase again , and vice versa for negative emotions . Such results enabled to partially falsify the null hypothesis on the effect of time ( G 2 . H 3 ) . Figure 35 and Table 8 report descriptive statistics of the intensity of four emotions , across missions . Children’s Engagement This section focuses on Goal 2 . 2 . and aims at reporting results con - cerning children’s engagement in their overall activity , via observa - tions . Relevant results are reported in narrative form . Firstly we present children’s engagement in missions , in terms of interest , concentration and enjoyment . Secondly , we report on the en - gagement of children with the gamiﬁed probes used during the activ - ity . In addition , this section ends with results from the survey about each child preferences of gamiﬁed probes . 132 6 . 3 analysis and results engagement in missions . In this section , children’s engagement , evidenced by those behaviours in mission that denote enjoyment , in - terest and concentration , was analyzed . In order to provide inter - judge reliability , diaries were analyzed the - matically against the considered categories of behaviors ( interest , con - centration and enjoyment ) , while another education researcher not in class , classiﬁed 40 % of diaries , that is , 4 diaries out of 10 . The mean agreement percentage between researchers was 90 , 37 % , distributed as follows per category : 96 , 25 % for enjoyment behaviors ; 88 , 40 % for inter - est behaviors ; 86 , 47 % for concentration behaviors . Disagreements were solved through discussion between researchers and used to revise the observer’s classiﬁcation of behaviors in diaries . We report the observations , mission by mission , in a narrative form in the following . M1 . Children were interested and showed concentration during the explanation of the activity by the design expert . When the expert started the training showing examples of video games , children showed cu - riosity and interest interacting more with the expert , asking questions about the games . Moreover , children showed enjoyment and excite - ment when the expert presented the training showing example of games by Frozen ( e . g . , when a child recognized some characters , she ( he ) shouted the name and drew attention of his peers . ) . During the challenge for choosing the group name , all groups seemed to be amused , and worked with concentration . During the brainstorming , both classes were concentrated and showed interest . Children respected the speak - ing turn and worked neatly . Moreover , after the initial embarrassment , all children showed engagement in listening and proposing new ideas . In general both classes were engaged , and showed interest and en - joyment for the activity . M2 . During the recap and the training by the design expert , children answered questions , interacting with the expert , and showed interest for the activity , e . g . , on the goal of the mission , and showed interest for the proposed mission and for their roles . During the creation of the storyline , all groups were concentrated and showed interest in using the stimulus cards . Children in just one class were noisy and teachers often recalled their attention . The problem was not so frequent in the other class ; but , at the end of the ﬁrst challenge , all groups were noisy . All children were happy for the earned coin and soon asked the expert how to use it . During the second challenge , when groups worked together for cre - ating the class storyline , all groups were very interested , interacting 133 the gacoco 2015 study with the design expert and with their peers . They were keen to partici - pate to the storyline reconstruction starting from group storylines , and were amused and satisﬁed for the obtained result , e . g . , a child proudly exclaimed that the chosen main character was the character she cre - ated with their group . Once more , all were enthusiastic to receive the reward on the map at the end of the mission . In general , during the training and the recap , both classes were concentrated showing interest and interacting with the design expert . During the ﬁrst part of the mission both classes were noisy and often showed lack of concentration . During the challenge at the class level , each group was again interested , concentrated and enjoyed the task . M3 . During the recap and the training by the design expert , children behaved as in the other missions . They showed interest and enjoyment when listening for the expert and watching the video games demon - stration . During character creation , with the JIGSAW strategy ( at class level ) , most groups worked with concentration and enjoyment . Several groups asked questions about the procedure showing interest for the task . Sev - eral children showed enthusiasm to work with other group of children . In a class , two groups showed lack of concentration , and within these groups some members were isolated and did not work with the others . At the end of the challenge , both classes were noisy and were often recalled by teachers . Several children stood up from their table and reached other groups showing their character . Although with low con - centration , in the end , children gave their contribution showing fun and interest . During the third challenge , when children started to conceptualize their game idea , several groups were distracted and only one group per class worked with attention on its task . A member was isolated and did not cooperate with his group . In particular , he was lying down on his chair without keeping attention to his group members . When the expert asked him what he had done until now , he replied “I didn’t understand the task” . The expert drew children’s attention several times and , during the execution of the challenge , often repeated the procedure for conceptualizing the game idea . In particular , the expert pointed out to several groups as they were replicating ( and re - writing ) the storyline in the game design idea form , instead of creating a game ( idea ) inspired by the storyline . In general , there were many gaps in concentration and children of - ten left their group tables . More engagement was showed by children during the challenge at the class level , when the player was designed and prototyped . 134 6 . 3 analysis and results M4 . During game level design , all children worked concentrated show - ing interest and enjoyment . Groups seemed to be relaxed , and also those members that were less engaged during the third mission showed more interest and concentration . All children were engaged in personalizing their game , with objects bought from the shop , and showed satisfaction for their work . Besides the typical noise that occurs when groups of children work together , all children worked concentrated in order to ﬁnish their prototype . Within a group , a member recalled his group attention exclaiming “stop jok - ing , our time is running out” . During the challenges at the class level , when children had to share their game level , all children showed inter - est and curiosity in listening their peers work . In general , children were globally engaged showing interest , concen - tration and enjoyment during M 4 . M5 . During challenges of M 5 , in both classes , all children worked tidily showing concentration and interest . When time for the ﬁrst chal - lenge was over , several groups were noisy and showed less concentra - tion . In both classes , when a group presented their work , their peers listened and asked many appropriate questions ( e . g . , about the func - tionality of game elements ) . In general , both classes were engaged during the mission , especially during the game presentations . engagement with material . The children’s engagement with ma - terial was analysed mission per mission . The results are described nar - ratively in the following . M1 . Children showed curiosity , interest and enthusiasm towards all material . Initially , one class showed some difﬁculties in using the cards for taking turn before speaking , but , at the end of the mission , each member used the cards in a proper way . The progression map was a great source of curiosity for ﬁnding out rewards at the end of the mis - sion . Signaling disks got soon very popular , all children were enthusi - astic and amused of using them for communicating their opinions . During the brainstorming , all children were initially embarrassed and had difﬁculty in using the speaking cup ; whereas , at the end , all children used the speaking cup in a proper way . M2 . During the second mission , children created the storyline for their game . At mission start , all children were enthusiastic to receive materials for starting a new mission . Children also used gamiﬁed probes , such as signalling disks and the control box , in a creative way , still func - 135 the gacoco 2015 study tional for the purpose of the work . However , a group created confusion using cards , e . g . , children laughed and played with cards and their con - trol box . For instance , the big button of the control box was thought to be used for asking the expert the challenge validation . Children began to use it also for calling the expert and for asking questions , explana - tions or help . In one class , children often forgot to use the cards for the speaking turn . In the other class , the use of cards for speaking was more constant . It emerged also that shy children were using the cards for gaining the possibility to speak : they were holding the card on the box and then patiently wait for someone to notice it and to let them talk . During the second challenge , when children worked at the class level , several children played with the signalling disks , even in way not included in the protocol , e . g . , children were drawing on the signalling disk while the expert were working on the class storyline creation . At the end of the challenges and of the mission , children were enthusias - tic and amused to collect their rewards ( coins and mission completion rewards ) . M3 . At the start of the mission children showed enthusiasm for the received materials , as in the other missions . The signalling disks were used in the proper way only and when required by the protocol . The use of cards was more regular and functional , but someone tended to forget it . For instance , a group started using their cards and control boxes without waiting for the design expert to tell children that the discussion session had started . Children continued to show curiosity and interest for the progression map , e . g . , often children left their table to see what was the new mission reward . M4 . Children showed enthusiasm for new generative toolkits intro - duced in this mission , used for prototyping the level ( such as tablet frames , transparencies and colors , and objects in the shop ) . The shop , with its objects , was source of strong interest and curiosity . Groups were discussing in front of the shop , the possible usage of the objects in their game . However objects were not always chosen taking into ac - count their functionality for the game . Some children complained that they would like the shop to have more probes of a certain type , e / g / a child said “The hearts are ﬁnished , but we need two of them for our games ! ” . At the end of the mission children said “it was good to buy objects at the shop” . Material functional for the mission such as cards and signalling disks were used in a naturally and properly way . 136 6 . 3 analysis and results M5 . The A 1 frame for assembling levels rose curiosity and all chil - dren showed interest when listening to the related instructions . Sev - eral children asked whether they were allowed to buy objects from the shop . During the presentation of their game , all children showed enthusiasm and satisfaction in showing their game and how to inter - act with it . At the end of M 5 , the ﬁfth and ﬁnal mission , many chil - dren asked the design expert whether they were allowed to keep for themselves coins earned in the map as tokens for ? remembering the experience ? of game design . preferences for gamified probes . In both classes , all children completed the survey for assessing gamiﬁed probes preferences . Re - sults are as follows . The most preferred gamiﬁed probes was the shop : 40 . 47 % of the children put it at the ﬁrst place . As for the second pref - erences , the control box , the progression map and the shop all scored identical preferences ( 21 , 42 % ) Children’s Achievement Emotions and Quality of Products This section focuses on the third goal , G 3 , i . e . , the relationships be - tween performance and the four emotions of enjoyment , boredom , anx - iety , relaxation . Tables 36 and 37 show descriptive statistics computed at the indi - vidual level ( before the slash ) and at the group level ( after the slash ) for the following variables : intensity of positive emotions in each mis - sion ( M 1 – M 5 ) ; intensity of negative emotions in each mission ( M 1 – M 5 ) ; quality of group products in each mission , starting from the third ( M 3 – M 5 ) . Correlations among intensity of emotions per mission and quality of product per mission were again computed separately for the indi - vidual level ( for which parametric Pearson correlations were run ) and the group level ( for which non - parametric Spearman correlations were run ) . Correlation coefﬁcients are thus r for the individual level , and rho for the group level . Table 36 displays the correlation coefﬁcients among intensity of pos - itive emotions per mission and quality of product per mission ( r and rho ) . Table 37 does the same with negative emotions . 137 the gacoco 2015 study C o rr e l a ti on s P er f M 3 P er f M 4 P er f M 5 E n j oy m e n t 1 R e l axa t i o n 1 E n j oy m e n t 2 R e l axa t i o n 2 E n j oy m e n t 3 R e l axa t i o n 3 E n j oy m e n t 4 R e l axa t i o n 4 E n j oy m e n t 5 R e l axa t i o n 5 P e a r s o n ( r ) M 3 1 . 794 * * . 387 * . 206 - . 013 - . 009 - . 015 . 045 . 347 * . 291 . 482 * * . 067 . 081 M 4 . 794 * * 1 . 703 * * . 056 - . 155 - . 050 - . 102 . 068 . 217 . 334 * . 405 * * . 122 . 076 M 5 . 387 * . 703 * * 1 - . 113 . 078 - . 076 . 058 . 192 . 335 * . 359 * . 391 * . 278 . 181 Sp e a r m a n ( r h o ) M 3 1 . 000 . 779 * * . 373 * - . 087 . 288 - . 025 - . 025 . 304 . 109 . 404 * * . 286 . 080 . 086 M 4 . 779 * * 1 . 000 . 672 * * - . 188 . 198 - . 091 - . 063 . 214 . 106 . 370 * . 363 * . 081 . 079 M 5 373 * . 672 * * 1 . 000 . 059 - . 018 . 067 - . 035 . 334 * . 164 . 391 * . 351 * . 186 . 282 M 0 . 4286 0 . 516 0 . 945 4 . 76 3 . 58 4 . 077 3 . 03 3 . 87 2 . 89 4 . 20 2 . 79 4 . 51 3 . 17 S D . 5008 . 3320 . 1244 . 717 1 . 289 12 . 887 1 . 368 1 . 417 1 . 446 1 . 336 1 . 316 . 977 1 . 476 ! ! C o rr e l a ti on s P er f M 3 P er f M 4 P er f M 5 B o re d o m 1 A n x i e t y 1 B o re d o m 2 A n x i e t y n 2 B o re d o m 3 A n x i e t y 3 B o re d o m 4 A n x i e t y 4 B o re d o m 5 A n x i e t y 5 P e a r s o n ( r ) M 3 1 . 794 * * . 387 * . 000 . 070 - . 266 - . 149 . 088 - . 009 - . 214 - . 082 . 116 . 030 M 4 . 794 * * 1 . 703 * * . 063 . 120 - . 125 - . 246 . 060 . 006 - . 242 - . 133 . 079 . 031 M 5 . 387 * . 703 * * 1 . 054 - . 045 . 064 - . 461 * * - . 144 - . 094 - . 309 - . 166 - . 204 - . 153 Sp e a r m a n ( r h o ) B o re d o m 1 1 . 000 . 779 * * . 373 * - . 047 - . 040 - . 252 - . 111 . 081 . 091 - . 268 - . 010 . 091 - . 047 A n x i e t y 1 . 779 * * 1 . 000 . 672 * * - . 052 - . 024 - . 153 - . 085 . 086 . 085 - . 265 - . 063 . 129 . 059 B o re d o m 2 . 373 * . 672 * * 1 . 000 - . 023 - . 106 . 065 - . 288 - . 006 - . 040 - . 233 - . 098 - . 085 - . 041 ! F i g u r e 36 : C o rr e l a t i o n s f o r i n t e n s i t y o f p o s i t i v e e m o t i o n s p e r m i ss i o n ( M 1 – M 5 ) , a n d q u a li t y o f p r o d u c t p e r m i ss i o n ( M 2 – M 5 ) , a t t h e i n d i v i d u a l ( n = 35 ) a n d g r o u p l e v e l ( n = 9 ) . P e a r s o n r ( i n d i v i d u a l ) a n d S p e a r m a n r h o ( g r o u p ) a r e s h o w n i n t a b l e . * p < . 05 , * * p < . 01 , * * * p < . 001 138 6 . 3 analysis and results C o rr e l a ti on s P er f M 3 P er f M 4 P er f M 5 E n j oy m e n t 1 R e l axa t i o n 1 E n j oy m e n t 2 R e l axa t i o n 2 E n j oy m e n t 3 R e l axa t i o n 3 E n j oy m e n t 4 R e l axa t i o n 4 E n j oy m e n t 5 R e l axa t i o n 5 P e a r s o n ( r ) M 3 1 . 794 * * . 387 * . 206 - . 013 - . 009 - . 015 . 045 . 347 * . 291 . 482 * * . 067 . 081 M 4 . 794 * * 1 . 703 * * . 056 - . 155 - . 050 - . 102 . 068 . 217 . 334 * . 405 * * . 122 . 076 M 5 . 387 * . 703 * * 1 - . 113 . 078 - . 076 . 058 . 192 . 335 * . 359 * . 391 * . 278 . 181 Sp e a r m a n ( r h o ) M 3 1 . 000 . 779 * * . 373 * - . 087 . 288 - . 025 - . 025 . 304 . 109 . 404 * * . 286 . 080 . 086 M 4 . 779 * * 1 . 000 . 672 * * - . 188 . 198 - . 091 - . 063 . 214 . 106 . 370 * . 363 * . 081 . 079 M 5 373 * . 672 * * 1 . 000 . 059 - . 018 . 067 - . 035 . 334 * . 164 . 391 * . 351 * . 186 . 282 M 0 . 4286 0 . 516 0 . 945 4 . 76 3 . 58 4 . 077 3 . 03 3 . 87 2 . 89 4 . 20 2 . 79 4 . 51 3 . 17 S D . 5008 . 3320 . 1244 . 717 1 . 289 12 . 887 1 . 368 1 . 417 1 . 446 1 . 336 1 . 316 . 977 1 . 476 ! ! C o rr e l a ti on s P er f M 3 P er f M 4 P er f M 5 B o re d o m 1 A n x i e t y 1 B o re d o m 2 A n x i e t y n 2 B o re d o m 3 A n x i e t y 3 B o re d o m 4 A n x i e t y 4 B o re d o m 5 A n x i e t y 5 P e a r s o n ( r ) M 3 1 . 794 * * . 387 * . 000 . 070 - . 266 - . 149 . 088 - . 009 - . 214 - . 082 . 116 . 030 M 4 . 794 * * 1 . 703 * * . 063 . 120 - . 125 - . 246 . 060 . 006 - . 242 - . 133 . 079 . 031 M 5 . 387 * . 703 * * 1 . 054 - . 045 . 064 - . 461 * * - . 144 - . 094 - . 309 - . 166 - . 204 - . 153 Sp e a r m a n ( r h o ) B o re d o m 1 1 . 000 . 779 * * . 373 * - . 047 - . 040 - . 252 - . 111 . 081 . 091 - . 268 - . 010 . 091 - . 047 A n x i e t y 1 . 779 * * 1 . 000 . 672 * * - . 052 - . 024 - . 153 - . 085 . 086 . 085 - . 265 - . 063 . 129 . 059 B o re d o m 2 . 373 * . 672 * * 1 . 000 - . 023 - . 106 . 065 - . 288 - . 006 - . 040 - . 233 - . 098 - . 085 - . 041 ! F i g u r e 37 : C o rr e l a t i o n s f o r i n t e n s i t y o f n e g a t i v e e m o t i o n s p e r m i ss i o n ( M 1 – M 5 ) , a n d q u a li t y o f p r o d u c t p e r m i ss i o n ( M 2 – M 5 ) , a t t h e i n d i v i d u a l ( n = 35 ) a n d g r o u p l e v e l ( n = 9 ) . P e a r s o n r ( i n d i v i d u a l ) a n d S p e a r m a n r h o ( g r o u p ) a r e s h o w n i n t a b l e . . * p < . 05 , * * p < . 01 , * * * p < . 001 139 the gacoco 2015 study Concerning hypotheses G 3 . H 1 and G 3 . H 2 , there are signiﬁcant cor - relations between intensity of emotions and quality of product , for the same mission , for enjoyment and relaxation . The correlation holds both at individual and at group level ( Table 36 and Table 37 ) . For relaxation , the mentioned correlation was positive for M 3 ( individual level : r = . 347 , p = . 028 ; group level : rho = . 344 , p = . 030 ) and M 4 ( individual level : r = . 405 , p = . 010 ; group level : rho = . 370 , p = . 019 ) , while for en - joyment it was signiﬁcantly positive only for M 4 ( individual level : r = . 334 , p = . 035 ; group level : rho = . 363 , p = . 021 ) . Always considering the same mission , no signiﬁcant correlations emerged between negative emotions ( relaxation and anxiety ) and quality of product . These ﬁnd - G 3 . H 1 , 2 : quality of products is positively correlated - negatively correlated to enjoyment . Partially supported . ings enabled to partially falsify the null hypothesis on the relationship between the two emotions and quality of product . Moreover , the quality of products of each mission correlates signiﬁ - cantly and positively with quality of products of subsequent missions . These results indicate a certain level of coherence in children’s quality of products over time , both at the individual and at group levels ( Ta - ble 36 and Table 37 ) . Speciﬁcally , the quality of product of M 3 correlated positively with those of M 4 ( r = . 794 , p < . 001 ; rho = . 810 , p < . 001 ) and M 5 ( r = . 387 , p = 0 . 011 ; rho = . 432 , p = . 11 ) . The quality of product of M 4 correlated positively with those of M 5 ( r = . 703 , p < . 001 ; rho = . 672 , p < . 001 ) . The 2015 study results show a signiﬁcant correlations between inten - sity of positive emotions in a mission and the quality of products of subsequent missions , with slight differences with the individual and the group level . Therefore , the delayed effect estimated in the 2014 study is again present in the 2015 study . Speciﬁcally , enjoyment in M 4 correlated positively with quality of product of M 5 ( r = . 359 , p < . 023 ; rho = . 351 , p = . 026 ) , and relaxation measured in M 3 correlated posi - tively with quality of M 5 ( r = . 335 , p = . 036 and r = . 335 , p = . 036 ) . 6 . 4 discussion We again recap that the novel 2015 study had the following goals , presented in Section 6 . 1 . 1 : G . 1 assessing children’s design performance , as in the 2014 study , considering issues affecting the quality of children’s game design products over time ; G . 2 . 1 assessing children’s engagement through their achievement emo - tions via a questionnaire , G 2 . 2 assessing children’s engagement via observations ; 140 6 . 4 discussion G . 3 assessing correlations between quality of children’s products and intensity of their achievement emotions . This section discusses results related to such goals : Subsection 6 . 4 . 1 in relation to G . 1 ; Subsection 6 . 4 . 2 in relation to G . 2 . 1 ; Subsection 6 . 4 . 3 in relation to G . 2 . 1 ; Subsection 6 . 4 . 4 in relation to G . 3 . 6 . 4 . 1 Quality of Products for Learning In order to compare results across the two studies , quality of prod - ucts was assessed in the 2014 study as in the 2015 study . Quality of products tended to increase in time in both studies ; speciﬁcally , in the newer study , there are signiﬁcant differences between M 3 , when the ﬁrst game products were created , and M 5 , when the ﬁnal game design document and prototypes were released . Such results suggest that both studies were empowering children : they were learning about early game design “by doing” game design together . The newer study products presented a subset of issues with respect to the older study products : as reported in Section 4 . 4 , only four is - sues were found across game design products in the 2015 study , with respect to six as in the 2014 study . Such differences can be due to the novel organization of the 2015 study . In order to improve on the quality of products , the 2015 study reserved longer time to formative feedback on game products ( MH - D 5 , D 6 ) , and it divided the training to game design across missions ( MH - P 2 ) . Moreover , only in the 2015 study , each class created together their game storyline , and all groups had to use the same character , acting as player , in their game levels , which was the storyline main character ( MH - P 3 ) . Such organizational choices may have contributed to removing issues concerning storyline and player in the 2015 study . The organization of both studies considered cognitive skill of partic - ipants 3 , and created gamiﬁed probes and tasks for designing accord - ingly to their maturity . However children’s products in 2015 still pre - sented some issues affecting their quality , which had also emerged in the 2014 study : in both studies , issues pertaining to gameplay and me - chanics inconsistencies or unclear functionalities were the most prob - lematic , affecting the highest number of products . Such a result seems to suggest that maintaining coherence among design choices over time is a cognitively demanding task for 8 – 10 year old children . 3 Children 7 – 11 years old are in the concrete operational stage , have no mature formal operational skills , but they can solve logical problems with concrete objects , e . g . , game elements 141 the gacoco 2015 study 6 . 4 . 2 Children’s Achievement Emotions for Engagement According to the 2015 study results , intensity of relaxation was sig - niﬁcantly higher for missions M 1 and M 5 , compared to the others . The same trend was observed for enjoyment . In line with 2014 ﬁndings , the 2015 study results conﬁrms that the ﬁrst mission created a relaxed atmosphere , which enables building mutual trust along the GaCoCo activity . In the 2015 study , M 3 shows a change in the growing trend of in - tensity of emotions . Speciﬁcally , compared with the other missions , during M 3 , the intensity of enjoyment was lowest and the intensity of anxiety was highest . According to engagement observations , lack of concentration and lack of interaction among group peers were ob - served in M 3 when groups had to conceptualize their game idea . In particular , the observer reported that the game design expert had to draw children’s attention several times , and , upon request by several groups , the expert had to explain how to carry on the game idea con - ceptualization , to the entire class . Conceptualization of the game idea from the game storyline is a challenge that resulted complex also in the 2014 study . That may be due to the cognitive skills of 8 – 10 year old children , who are in the concrete operational stage ( Piaget , 1952 ) . From M 3 onwards , intensity of enjoyment increased and intensity of anxiety and boredom decreased , differently than in the 2014 study . According to engagement observations , all children were concentrated and showed interest and enjoyment in prototyping their game level in M 4 , and in presenting it to the entire class in M 5 . The novel organiza - tion of the 2015 study , done in line with MH - D 6 and MH - D 3 , allowed children to ﬁnalize their game without anxiety and with relaxation so to ﬁnish their work . Albeit the decrease of positive emotions and decrease of anxiety in M 3 , the intensity of positive emotions was higher for M 1 and M 5 com - pared to the other missions , and the intensity of enjoyment was , on average across missions , above the middle intensity value ( M = 3 . 688 , SE = 0 . 19 where 1 is the lowest value and 5 the highest value for in - tensity , the middle value being 3 ) . As in the 2014 study , the 2015 study results concerning children’s achievement emotions conﬁrmed the higher salience of positive emotions of enjoyment and relaxation compared to negative emotions of anxiety and boredom , highlighting changes during the GaCoCo activity as time progresses . Moreover , ac - cording to engagement observations , all children always showed en - joyment and interest when involved in class activities , as opposed to group activities . Speciﬁcally , children were concentrated and inter - ested , and showed curiosity in listening and knowing about work of 142 6 . 4 discussion their peers . All children made an effort on explaining their work to others , showing satisfaction for their work . Therefore also engagement observations indicate that children enjoyed the 2015 activity , speak - ing positively of its organization—the strictly necessary training for a mission was given at its start ( MH - P 2 ) ; each mission delivered a speciﬁc product and had its own design goal ( MH - D 3 ) ; lengthy feed - back was given by the game design expert on complex game design challenges , requiring more abstract thinking , e . g . , game idea concep - tualization ( MH - D 6 ) ; the storyline had a main character acting as the player of the game ( avatar based interaction mode ) ( MH - P 3 ) and it was created by children using speciﬁc strategies for working at class level , e . g . cooperative learning strategy ( MH - G 4 , G 5 ) . 6 . 4 . 3 Engagement with Material Differently than in the 2014 study , the 2015 study enhanced gamiﬁed probes with interaction technology . In general ( MH - T 4 ) , materials were received with enthusiasm and curiosity . However , technical problems often caused at certain moments lack of concentration , especially in the initial missions . From M 3 on - wards , all children showed concentration and interest , and they worked without considering technical problems ( sometimes a connection be - tween the control box and the map did not work ( the led di not light up when a children pressed a button , due to the distance between group tables and the map ) , or sometimes the progression map ringed albeit nobody ones pressed a big button . Control box with cards and signalling disks , after the training and instructions given at the ﬁrst mission , were properly used , taking into account the related cooperative learning rules and roles . Speciﬁcally , cards for taking turns in speaking by placing them on the control box MH : providing an affordable object or tool for allowing children to ask help to the expert when they needed . were rarely used in M 1 and M 2 . From M 3 onwards , children started using cards more frequently , after the expert recalled the importance of the associated rule : all members within a group had to participate by giving their contribution , and to listen others’ opinions with respect ( social skill training ) . Our interpretation of the initial modest use of cards is that the rule of turn - speaking is per se difﬁcult to internalize , which conﬁrms observations of 2014 . Moreover , cards presented other negative and positive aspects : the dominant member tended to remove forcefully other members’ cards , and to place his / her own cards for speaking up ; whereas , shy members used their cards for gaining space for speaking within their group . Such observations indicate that cards were used for the functionality they were designed for : an affordable 143 the gacoco 2015 study tool for allowing members to claim their right to speak and take turn in speaking . The control box was received with enthusiasm and generally was used as designed for : for taking turn in speaking with the help of cards and for calling the expert with the big button , which triggered a sound and a LED turning to on the progression map . In particular , the big button was frequently creatively used : besides using it for asking for the expert validation , several groups started using the button for calling the expert and asking clariﬁcation questions on their work . This behaviour was especially observed in M 3 . Such a result suggests that children felt reassured and related to the expert if they could call the expert when they needed . Signalling disks were often source of distraction albeit to a lesser extent than in the 2014 study . Again , as in the 2014 study , all children showed a marked prefer - ence for the shop . Children showed enthusiasm and curiosity when the shop was presented , in M 4 , albeit the shop was also source of dis - traction for children . All children were excited at the idea of buying objects for prototyping , paying at the shop with coins . In such a man - ner , coins , earned at the end of each challenge , had a tangible effect on children’s design work , which gave given them a sense of control in choosing parts of their game ( MH - T 3 , T 4 , T 5 ) . Albeit , in M 4 , objects tended to be chosen for their aesthetic appeal and not so much for their functionality in the game , afterwards children started to argue on which objects could be most useful for their game . Children showed enjoyment and satisfaction in collecting coins as rewards for ﬁnishing challenges from the very ﬁrst mission , M 1 . In line with cooperative learning ﬁndings ( Graves , 1991 ) , coins as symbolic tangible rewards seem to have given children a sense of effectiveness and control over their work . The progression map received high praise , especially in the early missions . Often children went near the map , watched it and wanted to touch it . In addition , during a mission , the expert often referred to the map to reﬂect on the work done and to help children to predict the next steps , giving them a sense of progression . In the early mis - sions , children showed difﬁculty in interpreting the map , but , helped by the expert’s explanation , quickly learned how to interpret it . Re - wards gained at the end of a mission were source of curiosity and enjoyment for children , who happily wondered how to use them to complete their work . 144 6 . 5 conclusion 6 . 4 . 4 Children’s Achievement Emotions and Quality of Products Both studies , of 2014 and 2015 , inspected the nature of the rela - tionships between emotions and quality of products . Our hypotheses G 3 . H 1 and G 3 . H 2 were partially conﬁrmed for positive emotions , en - joyment and relaxation , which correlated positively with performance . As in the 2014 study , in the 2015 study the quality of products , as assessed by experts , correlated signiﬁcantly and positively with those of subsequent missions , indicating a certain level of coherence in chil - dren’s quality of product over time . Moreover , quality of products , cor - related positively to enjoyment in the same mission , and frequently there was a positive correlation between positive emotions of a mis - sion and the quality of products of the subsequent missions , indicat - ing a sort of expectation effect created by emotions on future perfor - mances . Such results seem to indicate that the more children enjoyed the GaCoCo mission , the better was quality of the released products . 6 . 5 conclusion This chapter reported the 2015 GaCoCo study organization and re - sults . As in the 2014 study , the 2015 study aimed at empowering chil - dren by engaging them and by promoting their learning of game de - sign . To achieve such aims , the novel 2015 study had the following goals : G 1 , assessing children’s design performances , considering is - sues affecting the quality of children’s products ( game design doc - uments and prototype ) ; G 2 . 1 , assessing children’s emotional engage - ment , considering achievement emotions and their intensity ; G 2 . 2 , as - sessing the overall engagement of children , considering children’s be - haviors ; G 3 , assessing the relationship between children’s achievement emotions and the quality of children’s game design products . There are similarities and differences between results from the two studies , recapped in the following . Speciﬁcally , Table 9 lists the major changes in the 2015 study organization with respect to the 2014 study organi - zation , which may explain the reported differences . MH : giving more feedback to children on speciﬁc game design stage , by expert or by teachers — provide a training to teachers on such critical game design stage ( e . g . , deﬁning rules and game elements for a game . ) g1 : quality of product for learning . In relation to the ﬁrst re - search goal of this paper , G 1 , the study results are in line with the 2014 study ﬁndings but with some differences . As in the 2014 study , in 2015 , the quality of children’s products tended to improve in time , suggesting that children were learning by doing design together . Such improvement was also due to the new GaCoCo study organization . In particular , in 2015 , we aimed at improving the quality of products , 145 the gacoco 2015 study Changes in 2015 Training In each mission , before starting the activity , the game design expert had a training on the re - lated game design stage TechnologicalProbes Gamiﬁed probes were enhanced with low - technology ( e . g . , Arduino ) Mission differ - entiation Each mission had a clear and valuable goal , each one was different from the others A class game Each group prototyped a level of a unique class game Storyline Storyline was created by children during a mis - sion Avatar - based Game The player interaction model was set by the ex - pert ; the player was the main character of the storyline Work at class level Several cooperative learning strategies included working at class level More formative feedback In general , and during critical stages , the design expert provide more feedback to groups Table 9 : Major changes in 2015 and removing some issues present in the 2014 products . In spite of that , some issues still remained , e . g . , issues related to gameplay and mechanics inconsistencies or unclear functionalities . Such issues may well be due to the limited cognitive maturity of children in the consid - ered age range . For this reason , the expert should take speciﬁc care of the remaining issues for a future GaCoCo study , for instance , feedback should be focussed on such issues . g2 . 1 and g2 . 2 : achievement emotions and engagement . In re - lation to G 2 . 1 and G 2 . 2 , the 2015 study results are in line with the 2014 study results , albeit with some differences . Also in 2015 , the whole GaCoCo activity engaged children , and their engagement changed in time . Positive emotions of enjoyment and relaxation were signiﬁcantly higher in intensity compared to negative emotions of anxiety and bore - MH : giving concrete examples or forms for abstract game design stage , e . g . , conceptualization of the game idea—instruction on how to pass from the game storyline to a game idea by showing examples from existing video games . dom . Like in 2014 , also in 2015 enjoyment and relaxation decreased in intensity , whereas anxiety increased when children conceptualized their game ideas , possibly due to the complexity of this challenge . Thereby , when professionals conduct game design with children , they should take into account that game design stages which are more ab - stract in nature , such as the game idea conceptualization , can be cog - nitively taxing over children , creating anxiety states . Children who are 7 – 11 years old are in a concrete operational stage ( Piaget , 1952 ) and hence they may not be able to think abstractly or hypothetically , but they can apply logic to physical objects and concrete examples . How - 146 6 . 5 conclusion ever , in 2014 , enjoyment decreased and anxiety decreased towards the end of the study . This is not the case in the 2015 study , in which enjoy - ment intensity is signiﬁcantly above average and tends to signiﬁcantly increase towards the end of the study . g3 : achievement emotions and quality of products . With re - spect to ( G 3 ) , results of the 2015 study conﬁrm those of the 2014 study : quality of products was positively related to enjoyment and negatively related to boredom , with a sort of expectation effect created by emo - tions on future performances of children . GaCoCo 2015 Study : Success and Failures The 2015 study results shed light on what worked ( successes ) and what still requires adjustments ( failures ) . Successes and failures are MH : training by expert on game design focusing on concrete examples for more abstract concepts , e . g . , game idea from a storyline . analyzed in the following , ﬁrst across missions , and then mission by mission . across missions . In line with MH - P 1 resulting from the 2014 study , the 2015 study split the training to game design across missions . At the start of a mission , the game design expert always did the train - ing necessary for the mission . Engagement observations reported that MH : allowing children a self - conﬁdence in using probes and tackling the challenge — giving to them a tool / objects with an immediate effect for ensuring their scaffolding . children showed high engagement during the training by expert : chil - dren were interested and interacted with expert asking questions and clariﬁcations . first mission . In line with engagement results of studies of 2014 MH : providing brainstorming sessions for eliciting children ideas on speciﬁc subjects . and 2015 , the ﬁrst mission has to create mutual trust , making children feel relaxed , in general activating positive emotions , and should enable children to practice working in group , creating their group identities . Moreover , results of the 2015 study , which had a brainstorming activity at the class level in the ﬁrst mission , suggests that class brainstorming is important for promoting children’s engagement and for involving MH : creating storylines using an engaging strategy for designing a class game . the entire class in designing a class game in subsequent missions . second mission . In the second mission of 2015 , each group of chil - MH : setting the payer interaction mode — a third person perspective with an avatar interaction model , e . g . , the main character of the storyline . dren ﬁrst created a group storyline using stimulus cards created by them , and then those stories were used for creating a ﬁnal class game storyline . The latter was more engaging for children and should be repeated in future studies . Moreover , it is worth noting that creating a class storyline may have brought beneﬁts in terms of quality of prod - ucts ( see Section 6 . 4 . 1 ) . 147 the gacoco 2015 study third mission . In line with results of the second mission , also the creation of the player done at the class level was perceived as highly engaging . Therefore cooperative learning work in group and then at the class level should be maintained in future studies also for creating the game player . Moreover , M 3 also demanded children to conceptual - ize their game idea starting from the game storyline , a challenge which seems to have been cognitively too complex , conﬁrming results of the 2014 study . To overcome that , future game design studies may : ( 1 ) give MH : creating sub - levels of the storyline with the expert so as to facilitate the game idea for each game level . children gamiﬁed concrete objects or more examples , speciﬁc for assist - ing children in moving from the storyline to the creation of their game design ideas ; ( 2 ) alternate the conceptualization work with feedback moments , and feedback should come both from the expert and peers , e . g . , through sharing preliminary game ideas at the class level . fourth mission . During the fourth mission , each group prototyped MH : a single game level per group — a class game composed by several game level designed by groups . their single game level , considering its mechanics , e . g . rules , points . Realizing one game level allowed children to spend more time on it , which may have contributed to keep anxiety intensity low , contrary to what happened in the 2014 study , when groups had to work on two game levels . However , group members did not always succeed in MH : giving speciﬁc roles for designing the game level within a group , e . g . one member manages static setting , another the dynamic characters . equally distributing work . In line with with results of the 2014 study ( MH - G 4 ) , also in the 2015 study , children became more engaged in group work when they were explicitly assigned tasks for group work . fifth mission . In both the 2014 and 2015 studies , children play tested the interaction with their game in the last mission , presenting their prototypes to the class . That is an important step that helps chil - dren in further explaining their design decisions , and reﬂecting specif - ically on the functionalities of game design elements . Moreover , pre - sentations of games allows game design expert to further understand how children expect to interact with their game , because interaction is otherwise difﬁcult to explain in paper format ( such as the low - ﬁdelity prototypes and the game design documents ) . 148 7 G U I D E L I N E S contents 7 . 1 Towards Guidelines for Participatory Game Design 149 7 . 2 Research Method 150 7 . 3 How To Organize a Design Activity 151 7 . 4 Game Design Tasks 152 7 . 5 Game Design Material 153 7 . 5 . 1 Gamiﬁed Probes 153 7 . 5 . 2 Game Design Generative Toolkits 154 7 . 6 What to Track in a Design Activity 154 7 . 7 Participants’ Roles During the Design Activity 155 7 . 7 . 1 Design Expert’s Role 155 7 . 7 . 2 Teachers’ Role 155 7 . 7 . 3 Education Expert’s Role 156 7 . 1 towards guidelines for participatory game design Driven by the analysis of the literature , inquiries with experts , and the experience cumulated through ﬁeld studies , this section collects a set of guidelines for organizing , planning and executing participatory design studies with primary - school children , with a focus on game design . These guidelines are a re - elaborated version of the “must - have” rec - ommendations ( i . e . , those written as MH ) resulting from the GaCoCo experiences in 2014 and 2015 . Recommendations were presented re - spectively in Chapters 4 and 6 . Speciﬁcally , in 2014 we highlighted those fundamental aspects that a designer should take into account when designing games with chil - dren . Then , the 2015 design activity was improved by considering the lessons learned in the 2014 study and what was listed as MH’s . In particular , MH’s were used in 2015 to explain the novel design choices of the 2015 study . A further set of MH’s was extracted from the 2015 experience . 149 guidelines The guidelines , presented in this chapter , are a collection of all the components for conducting participatory game design with primary school children . They were created through a thematic analysis of the MH’s conducted by three design exerts , who worked ﬁrst indepen - dently and then discussed the emerged categories together . The ﬁve main categories are : ( 1 ) research method ; ( 2 ) how to orga - nize a design activity ; ( 3 ) game design tasks ; ( 4 ) game design material ; ( 4 ) what to track in a design activity ; and ( 5 ) participants’ roles during the design activity . Figure 38 summarizes the contents of the categories , and speciﬁes the roles of adults involved during a participatory game design experience with children . In the reminder of this chapter , we report each category with the related guidelines . Figure 38 : Representation of the guidelines categories and the participants in - volved in a participatory game design , as in GacoCo 7 . 2 research method As reported in Chapter 3 , knowledge in participatory methods is co - constructed through practice : it is context bound , and it belongs to different sorts . As a consequence , a participatory game design , should use a mixed - method research approach to assess its outcomes ( see Sec - tion 3 ) , as done in the GaCoCo studies reported in this thesis . Specif - ically , in those studies , quantitative data were collected and analyzed ; 150 7 . 3 how to organize a design activity qualitative data were then used to explain quantitative ﬁndings . The related general guideline is as follows : ( RM - 1 ) A participatory ( game ) design should follow a mixed - method research approach : quantitative and qualitative data should be collected in order to assess outcomes of the activity . 7 . 3 how to organize a design activity The following guidelines focus on how a designer should organize a participatory game design activity with children so as to empower children , and to enable their cooperation . ( DA - 1 ) Brainstorming sessions should be organized in the ideation stage , for eliciting children’s ideas . ( DA - 2 ) The design activity should be split into progressive missions with progressive challenges in order to empower children . ( DA - 3 ) Each mission or challenge should be organized with its own clear goal , and such goal should be valuable for participants . ( DA - 4 ) Each challenge should have a speciﬁc design task—ideation task , conceptualization task or prototyping task . ( DA - 5 Each mission should be differentiated as much as possible w . r . t . other missions , for improving children’s engagement over time . ( DA - 6 ) Missions should interleave challenges with conceptualization or ideation tasks with challenges with prototyping tasks , so as to re - quire and train different skills , thereby fostering the participation of all children and the growth of alternative design ideas . ( DA - 7 ) Each mission should start with a recap of previous work , so as to orientate children in the design activity , creating links across missions and promoting coherence in design products . ( DA - 8 ) The ﬁrst mission should be easy to take up by all , so to create a positive relaxing atmosphere , to promote mutual trust and en - gagement in the activity , and to allow designers to train children to the design work . ( DA - 9 ) The design activity should provide multiple feedback opportuni - ties , from domain experts and from peers , mainly through scaf - folding dialogues at the end of challenges / design tasks— forma - tive feedback during missions ; summative feedback across mis - sions . 151 guidelines ( DA - 10 ) The design activity should include cooperative learning strate - gies for individual work , for pair , group , or for class work , within the design protocol , e . g . subgroup work ( pair work ) , so as to en - gage more those members that otherwise would be less engaged or isolated . ( DA - 11 ) When design activity is split into missions over different work - days , and hence it is fragmented in time , gamiﬁed probes can be designed so as to visibly and tangibly sustain children’s engage - ment and , speciﬁcally , to : convey a sense of progression across missions and challenges and help in orienting children in the de - sign activity or tasks ; support relatedness needs in group and cooperation ; sustain a sense of control over their design work . 7 . 4 game design tasks These guidelines are concerned with speciﬁc details and tasks on how to design games with children . ( GD - 1 ) Game design training should be given at each mission , explain - ing the mission goal and using concrete examples , clear and al - ready familiar for children . ( GD - 2 ) In the ﬁrst missions , children can ideate and conceptualize the game storyline and use it to conceptualize their game design ideas . If game design takes place at school , the story can be re - lated to a school topic . ( GD - 3 ) When game design is carried on cooperatively at school , each group should be assigned just a single game level , and the class should prototype an entire class game by using a common story as storyline . ( GD - 4 ) The conceptualization of the game idea requires speciﬁc scaffold - ing by the game design expert , as the game - idea conceptualiza - tion seems to be a cognitively demanding task at least for 8 – 11 olds . ( GD - 5 ) Each game level should correspond to a speciﬁc episode in the game storyline , and children should elaborate on the episode before ideating their game level . ( GD - 6 ) Designers should assign speciﬁc game design roles to group mem - bers , and such roles should rotate across missions , e . g . , one mem - ber manages the static setting , another the dynamic characters . 152 7 . 5 game design material ( GD - 7 ) When design is carried on with primary schools , designers should establish an interaction model for game ( e . g . , avatar based ) and the form factor , posture and input methods ( e . g . , small games for tablet ) . 7 . 5 game design material These guidelines focus on material , namely gamiﬁed probes and generative toolkits , to be used in participatory game design with chil - dren . 7 . 5 . 1 Gamiﬁed Probes The guidelines explain the usage of the gamiﬁed probes and its main functionalities . ( GM - 1 ) Designers should train children to the usage of gamiﬁed probes . ( GM - 2 ) Gamiﬁed probes for children should be affordable for them , each should have its own clear functionality , yet it should be open to different usages , even unforeseen by designers . ( GM - 3 ) Gamiﬁed probes can be enhanced with technology , e . g . , micro - electronics , so as to interact with children , and to enhance their engagement in the design activity , as well as to track relevant interaction data . ( GM - 4 ) Gamiﬁed probes should tangibly convey and support coopera - tive learning roles , rules and strategies . ( GM - 5 ) Gamiﬁed probes should convey a tangible sense of progression across missions and challenges . ( GM - 6 ) Progression maps or leaderboards should convey a sense of pro - gression and control by enabling way - ﬁnding across missions and challenges . ( GM - 7 ) Symbolic rewards , for conveying a sense of progression and con - trol , should be customizable , contingent and perceived valuable for children’s design work , e . g . , rewards might be objects useful for customizing design prototypes . ( GM - 8 ) A speciﬁc gamiﬁed probe should allow children to ask for help from the design expert , when they feel in need of him / her , so as to give children the feeling of being socially related to him / her throughout the activity , and not being left on their own . 153 guidelines 7 . 5 . 2 Game Design Generative Toolkits The guidelines explain the usage of the generative toolkits and its main purposes . ( GM - 9 ) Generative toolkits and tools should be distinguished per mis - sion goal and challenges / tasks , and designed so as to be usable by the involved children ; e . g . , it should be designed by game design experts and education experts and revised with teacher - s / adults familiar with the participant children . ( GM - 10 ) Generative toolkits should allow children to easily prototype their game ( e . g , using reference frames for the device under consider - ation ) , and prototype material that children are familiar with , or that allows immediate use for prototyping . ( GM - 11 ) Game design documents should be provided as forms to ﬁll in for children , using a language for scaffolding children’s ideas and a visual layout adequate to their age and skills—using exam - ples from popular video games . ( GM - 12 ) Children should have different opportunities to share , at the class level , their early game design results , in the form of high - level concept documents , core mechanics documents or prototypes , so as to evaluate them and improve on them through peer feedback . ( GM - 13 ) The game design documents should be divided into smaller units ( e . g . , game idea , game mechanics , game aesthetics ) , each one cast as a form usable for the participant children . ( GM - 14 ) Game design should use stimulus cards ( e . g . , the lenses of Schell ( 2008 ) ) for stimulating children’s ideation or reﬂections over spe - ciﬁc game elements . 7 . 6 what to track in a design activity The following guidelines focus on what should be assessed and tracked in participatory game design , and why . ( TA - 1 ) Children’s engagement , and their experience with the material used for designing ( e . g . , gamiﬁed probes ) , should be tracked dur - ing the activity . ( TA - 2 ) Children’s emotional engagement should be tracked in relation to key challenges or missions , given its relations with perfor - mances of children . 154 7 . 7 participants’ roles during the design activity ( TA - 3 ) Children’s performance should be assessed during each mission and across missions , so as to track the progression of children’s work over time . 7 . 7 participants’ roles during the de - sign activity The following participants , besides children , should be present in participatory game design : ( 1 ) a designer , expert of the considered de - sign domain ; ( 2 ) an education expert , skilled in child - development , and ( 3 ) teachers . This section inspects the main roles and tasks of those adults . 7 . 7 . 1 Design Expert’s Role ( DR - 1 ) Designers should provide formative design feedback during mis - sion , and summative feedback across missions . ( DR - 2 ) Designers should provide more feedback in design stages which are being critical for children . ( DR - 3 ) Designers should train teachers into the design activity prior to its execution with children ; this would allow teachers to be in - volved as active researchers , to manage the activity according to their role , and it would allow the expert to assist teachers during critical design missions . 7 . 7 . 2 Teachers’ Role ( TR - 1 ) In order to create balanced cooperative groups , teachers should form small groups of 3 – 5 children , heterogeneous in terms of social and learning skills ; this task is very important because the teacher is the expert of the class . ( TR - 2 ) In order to use cooperative learning effectively in their class , teachers should assign cooperative learning roles to group mem - bers , and rotate roles across missions , according to children’s skills and to missions . ( TR - 3 ) Teachers should illustrate the organisation and material to be used according to the protocol for each mission . ( TR - 4 ) Teachers should assist the design expert in the communication with children to scaffold group work . 155 guidelines 7 . 7 . 3 Education Expert’s Role ( ER - 1 ) The education expert should be present during the whole activity in class , possibly acting as passive observer . ( ER - 2 ) The education expert should gather data according to the activity goals . In particular , he / she should record data ( e . g . , by taking notes ) on class behavior and interaction with design material , as well as children’s engagement during the activity itself . ( ER - 3 ) The education expert should maintain a constant dialogue with teachers and the design expert , concerning class behavior and children’s well being . ( ER - 4 ) The education expert should assist the teachers during group for - mation , so as to create groups respecting children’s relationships and social and learning skills . 156 8 C O N C L U S I O N S contents 8 . 1 Summary of the Research 157 8 . 2 Answers to Research Questions 158 8 . 3 Research Contributions 161 8 . 3 . 1 The GaCoCo Method 162 8 . 3 . 2 Protocols for Replicating Studies 163 8 . 3 . 3 A Set of Guidelines 164 8 . 4 Research Limitations 165 8 . 4 . 1 The GaCoCo Method 165 8 . 4 . 2 Protocols 165 8 . 5 Ongoing Research Stemming from This Thesis 167 8 . 5 . 1 Replicating GaCoCo 167 8 . 5 . 2 Gamiﬁed Experience 168 This chapter draws conclusions on the research reported in this the - sis . Firstly , Section 8 . 1 recaps the research and its whole process . Sec - ondly , Section 8 . 2 details the answers to the research questions posed in Chapter 1 . Thirdly , Section 8 . 3 outlines the major contributions of my research . Finally , in Sections 8 . 4 and 8 . 5 , the limitations and the future directions are presented . 8 . 1 summary of the research The research reported in this thesis revolves around participatory game design with children . As discussed in Chapter 2 , participatory game design poses several challenges . The main challenges and re - search questions investigated in this thesis are related to : ( 1 ) demo - cratic collaboration in design groups , which is threatened by the difﬁ - culty of managing social relations and , especially , of balancing power structures in participatory work with children ; ( 2 ) children’s empow - erment as learning and engagement , which are challenging to achieve if the design activity is fragmented over extended periods of time or is cognitively demanding for children , thus hampering the promotion of focused attention on tasks and their enjoyment ; ( 3 ) adults’ learning 157 conclusions of children’s ideas through the participatory game design activity and its products . Challenges emerged through an analysis of the literature and through inquiries with experts . In particular , the analysis of the education lit - erature and education experts’ feedback highlighted relevant theories for tackling such challenges , reported in Section 2 . 6 . Starting from the analysis , Chapter 3 presented a PD method for designing games with primary - school children : GaCoCo . This chap - ter analyzed GaCoCo through ﬁve lenses , explaining its pillars and positioning it in the overviewed literature : epistemology ; values ; stake - holders and their roles ; outcomes , tangible and not ; game lifecycle . GaCoCo epistemology relies on cooperative learning and gamiﬁcation of learning , taking from them its views on collaboration , engagement and learning . In GaCoCo , children’s engagement , learning and col - laboration are in fact key values , treated as outcomes to measure . In addition , stakeholders of GaCoCo have two different types of exper - tise : one is the design expert , skilled in interaction design and game design ; the other is the expert of child - development . The design ex - pert conducts evaluations of children’s products , so that design and evaluation are interleaved in the GaCoCo lifecycle . The method itself was tested and reﬁned through ﬁeld studies in different learning contexts , speciﬁcally , in diverse primary schools . These contexts include the presence of other stakeholders , namely , class teachers . Chapters 4 and 6 reported the two main GaCoCo stud - ies , executed in 2014 and 2015 , for designing low - ﬁdelity game proto - types with and for children in primary schools . The values of engage - ment , learning and collaboration were assessed throughout the ﬁeld studies . Results concerning collaboration , learning and engagement were positive . The experience cumulated through ﬁeld studies as well as the anal - ysis of the literature and experts’ feedback were distilled into a set of guidelines for organizing , planning and executing participatory game design studies with primary - school children . 8 . 2 answers to research questions The research reported in this thesis considered the aforementioned challenges and the associated research questions , listed in Chapter 1 : ( RQ . 1 ) how to include all learners’ game design ideas , that is , how to foster democratic collaboration among children and with adults , so that all children “have a voice” in the design process ; ( RQ . 2 ) how to empower children in terms of engagement in participatory game 158 8 . 2 answers to research questions design ; ( RQ . 3 ) how to empower children in terms of learning , e . g . , of early game design ; ( RQ . 4 ) how to empower designers in terms of learning of children’s game design ideas . The thesis devised a method , namely GaCoCo , reported in Chap - ter 3 , for tackling those questions , and tested it in the ﬁeld with empir - ical studies . In relation to the ﬁrst research question ( RQ . 1 ) , GaCoCo mainly re - RQ . 1 : how to foster democratic collaboration among children and adults lies on cooperative learning to promote collaboration and inclusion of all children’s ideas . Speciﬁcally , GaCoCo used speciﬁc strategies , rules and roles of cooperative learning ; these are supported in GaCoCo via tangible gamiﬁed probes . GaCoCo studies indicate which cooper - ative learning rules , roles and strategies were used in participatory game design and promoted collaboration . In particular , children with low - levels of engagement participated more when working in pairs with pair - work strategies . Participation increased also when members within a group were assigned a precise design task . Tangible gamiﬁed probes allowed to observe their usage in relation to collaboration . For instance , it was observed that the use of tangible gamiﬁed probes for speciﬁc rules ( e . g . , taking turns ) helped in supporting concretely the rules , and promoting collaboration . In relation to the second research question ( RQ . 2 ) , different cooper - RQ . 2 : how to engage children in participatory game design ative learning roles , and gamiﬁed probes to make them tangible were used to increase children’s engagement , by giving each child the feel - ing that his or her contribution is as important as the other children’s contribution . More generally , GaCoCo uses gamiﬁcation to organize design tasks as missions of a game , with clear and valuable goals , so as to sustain : ( 1 ) a sense of progression , achieved by progressive mis - sions and challenges built one upon the others , and made tangible through gamiﬁed probes ( e . g . , progression map ) ; ( 2 ) a sense of con - trol and autonomy , by using completion contingent rewards useful for customizing children’s design products ; ( 3 ) relatedness , sustained by using gamiﬁed probes for enabling connection and interaction among children . Results of the 2014 and 2015 studies reported in the thesis conﬁrmed the overall engagement of children : their positive activating emotions were generally higher in intensity than their negative deactivating emo - tions ; high levels of interest , concentration and enjoyment were ob - served by the education expert . However , in both 2014 and 2015 , children’s anxiety grew when chil - dren were asked to conceptualize their game ideas , which may be due to the intrinsic complexity of this task . A difference was also noted between the 2014 and 2015 studies : whereas enjoyment decreased to - wards the end of the design activity in 2014 , enjoyment remained sig - 159 conclusions niﬁcantly above average and it even increased towards the end of the activity in 2015 . That may be due to a different organization of de - sign sessions in 2015 , which , in particular , reserved longer times for formative feedback . In 2015 , groups worked towards a common goal , that is prototyping a class game , to which each group contributed by designing one level . In 2014 each group worked on their own game , composed of two levels . It is also interesting to observe that intensity of relaxation was signiﬁcantly higher in the ﬁrst design sessions , con - ﬁrming the role that GaCoCo envisions for them , that is , creating a relaxed atmosphere for building mutual trust . Moreover , when chil - dren worked strategies at class level , engagement was always high for all . This result conﬁrmed the fact the working with a common goal fosters not only collaboration but also engagement within groups . In relation to the third research question ( RQ . 3 ) , in line with Ga - RQ . 3 : how to empower children in terms of learning CoCo , learning of early game design was supported by progressive design challenges , which built one upon the other , and were made “tangible” via ad - hoc gamiﬁed probes . Moreover , learning was also supported through multiple feedback opportunities for children , as recommended by GaCoCo : from peers , with cooperative learning for sustaining discussions and sharing ideas ; from domain experts , with rapid feedback conducted through scaffolding dialogues during de - sign sessions , and with feedback on missions’ products , resulting from the summative evaluation conducted in between missions . In fact , the 2014 and 2015 studies showed that the quality of prod - ucts ( game design documents and prototypes ) tended to improve over time , suggesting that children were learning by doing early design together . Such results , of an exploratory nature , are positive for the GaCoCo method , which recommends that design should empower its participants . It is interesting to notice that quality of products , as as - sessed by experts , was also correlated to children’s achievement emo - tions , assessed via a questionnaire for children . Such results conﬁrm and extend previous ﬁndings in the education literature , which con - sidered the role of achievement emotions for traditional activities in learning domains ( Pekrun and Perry , 2014 ) . More importantly , they provide professionals with indications for conducting a participatory ( game ) design experience with children when the activity is prolonged in time , and is related to key emotions to be monitored in relation to quality of products , by tracing their evolution across design sessions . As for empowerment of adults , GaCoCo relies on the presence of dif - RQ . 4 : how to empower adults ferent adult stakeholders for planning and executing studies . In partic - ular , the design expert must be always present during a participatory game design . In line with GaCoCo , the empowerment of the designer means empowering her with knowledge of children’s ideas and expec - 160 8 . 3 research contributions tations . The design expert learns by interacting with children : scaffold - ing each design group through formative feedback during missions , and summative feedback across missions . Moreover , it is important that the design expert learns how to “read” children’s game design ideas , so that children’s design products , i . e . , games , can be developed . Speciﬁcally , after the 2014 study , children’s products ( i . e . , a game with two level , per each group ) were carried a step forward in the game lifecycle : they were actually developed by adults programmers , not previously involved in participatory game design sessions with children . In such cases , the role of the design expert becomes important for carrying over the ideas of children . The related experience was reported in Chapter 5 . In particular , computer - science university students took children’s game design products , released at the end of the 2014 study , and then developed children’s products into interactive game prototypes . Issues that students found in developing games were tracked and catego - rized . According to the conducted analyses , children’s products were considered to be in general clear but were not always sufﬁcient as “early design speciﬁcations” for university students , mostly due to in - completeness or unclear functionalities of gameplay and mechanics elements designed by children . This result indicated that the game de - sign expert , present during participatory game design sessions , should be also present during the initial development of children’s early game design products : he or she should explain or resolve what is unclear in children’s products to game developers , based on the scaffolding dialogues she conducted with children during design sessions , and on her domain expertise . 8 . 3 research contributions The speciﬁc results of the research of this thesis are : • the method for conducting participatory game design studies in learning contexts , so as to tackle the aforementioned challenges emerged from the analysis of the participatory game design liter - ature ; • replicable protocols for organizing , executing and assessing par - ticipatory game design with children , with an emphasis on the assessment of the experience ; in fact , according to our literature review , the evaluation of the experience tends to be a week point in several game design studies with children , e . g . , engagement 161 conclusions tends to be only qualitatively assessed and not quantitatively evaluated ; • a collection of modular guidelines for the early design of inter - active products with children , in particular , early game design products , which game design practitioners can easily pick up and adapt to their needs . Each contribution is described in the reminder of this section . 8 . 3 . 1 The GaCoCo Method GaCoCo was developed as an intermediate theory , where ﬁeld stud - ies are used to propose relationships between constructs from different research areas , as explained in details in Chapter 1 . In such a manner , ﬁeld studies allowed us to move GaCoCo one step further towards be - coming a mature theory . The ideas upon which the method is based are analyzed in Chapter 3 , thereby clarifying what can vary across GaCoCo activities and what on the other hand would represent funda - mental aspects of GaCoCo , in particular : its epistemology and values , and its measurable outcomes , tangible or not . Epistemology and values . Children’s empowerment , as well as demo - cratic collaboration , are key values of GaCoCo . In order to promote them , its epistemology integrates cooperative learning and gamiﬁca - tion of learning within PD and game design . As far as we know , this is the ﬁrst time that such research areas are brought together . Specif - ically , GaCoCo uses gamiﬁcation and gamiﬁed probes to promote en - gagement by creating a sense of progression , control and satisfying relatedness needs . GaCoCo also recommends that children learn of interaction design through the design process . In such a manner , GaCoCo fosters com - puter science education 1 . GaCoCo is a problem - solving process that includes several skills ( Stephenson and Barr , 2011 ) : from the most obvi - ous of creativity , ability to explain and team work , to the more speciﬁc ones , such as analyzing and logically organizing data ; data abstrac - tions and simulations ; identifying , testing , and implementing possible solutions . These are those skills that are promoted through computa - tional thinking , a problem solving activity “involved in formulating problems and their solutions so that the solutions are represented in a form that can be effectively carried out by an information - processing agent” ( Wing , 2006 ) . However , GaCoCo is not a speciﬁc instance of computational thinking in that it does not consider a relevant char - 1 Note that interaction design has been recently included in the new release of CS Un - plugged activities for teaching computer science , without computers ( Bell et al . , 2015 ) . 162 8 . 3 research contributions acteristic of computational thinking , namely automating design solu - tions through algorithmic thinking . Outcomes . GaCoCo treats the aforementioned values as outcomes , and therefore GaCoCo researchers have to assess them . GaCoCo stud - ies use a mixed - method research approach to assess their outcomes , gathering and analyzing quantitative and qualitative data . A mixed - method approach with triangulation allows us to increase validity of ﬁndings , and to generate greater understanding of the mechanisms un - derlying quantitative results , in ﬁeld studies such as these , where not all factors are controllable . GaCoCo studies of 2014 and 2015 showed positive results in terms of their outcomes . GaCoCo can thus be adopted by professionals and researchers in PD with children , so as to foster adults’ learning of chil - dren’s ideas , to promote collaboration and to engage children through learning of early game design . To the best of our knowledge , children’s learning via co - design has been rarely systematically investigated , e . g . , see ( Holbert et al . , 2014 ) . Moreover , according to ( Hamari et al . , 2016 ) , most studies concerning gamiﬁcation or game based learning , fall into two categories . The ﬁrst category investigated the relationship between game design features and learning directly , without measuring medi - ating factors such as emotions . The second category investigated the relationship between game design features and psychological factors , without extending the measurement to further learning outcomes . The empirical study by ( Hamari et al . , 2016 ) is an exception , in that it showed how engagement in game - based learning had positive effects on learners’ perceived learning . The studies reported in this thesis in - vestigated the correlation among emotions and an expert - based assess - ment of learning , considering children’s products and their evolution in time . 8 . 3 . 2 Protocols for Replicating Studies Game design protocols are reported in Chapters 4 and 6 in relation to the 2014 and 2015 studies . Protocols can be used by professionals and researchers for conducting participatory game design with chil - dren , using cooperative learning and gamiﬁed probes . In fact , protocols are presented in a uniform manner using a recur - ring structure , which speciﬁes : ( 1 ) speciﬁc roles and rules for all par - ticipants , adults or children , and their level of expertise ; ( 2 ) for each session , its design material and tasks ; ( 3 ) for each session , its gamiﬁed probes , how to use them , and cooperative learning strategies ; ( 4 ) for each session , its outcomes and how to assess them . In such a manner , 163 conclusions protocols can be used and adapted according to researchers’ or profes - sionals’ needs , considering the aforementioned dimensions . Protocols are meant for repeated - measure studies , fragmented across weeks of work . However , parts of the protocols can be re - used in short - term design activities . For instance , children may only design the game storyline using the related part of the protocol of the 2015 study . Other children may then be involved in continuing the game design starting from the storyline as prescribed in the same protocol . 8 . 3 . 3 A Set of Guidelines The insight derived form direct ﬁeld research with GaCoCo allowed us to gain a deeper understanding of how to conduct PD with children , and how to conduct early game design activities with children . The acquired knowledge was used as a starting point for the development of the guidelines reported in Chapter 7 . Guidelines are more general in scope than the method and the study protocols . They were compiled for assisting researchers and profes - sionals in conducting participatory game design with children , with a speciﬁc focus on learning contexts . Guidelines inspect ﬁve main cate - gory : ( 1 ) the research method to adopt when researchers aim to use participatory design with children ; ( 2 ) how to organize a participatory design activity , and ( 3 ) what researchers should track during it ; ( 4 ) the roles of adults involved , such as the design expert , education expert , and teachers in case the activity is at school ; ( 5 ) gamiﬁed probes , such as objects and tools for the activity , and ( 6 ) game design recommenda - tions and speciﬁc tasks for early prototyping games with children . The categories from 1 to 5 were related to a general participatory design activity using cooperative learning and gamiﬁcation contributions as in GaCoCo . The last category instead is more focused , and it is related to early game design only . Therefore professionals or researchers in PD or in game design can differently read and use the guidelines . For instance , PD researchers or professionals , interested in interaction design but not in game design , will ﬁnd useful indications in the guidelines for conducting PD ac - tivities using cooperative learning and gamiﬁed probes . Professionals or researchers of game design can ﬁnd useful information concerning how to design games with children , e . g . , with or without cooperative learning , with or without gamiﬁed probes . 164 8 . 4 research limitations 8 . 4 research limitations 8 . 4 . 1 The GaCoCo Method GaCoCo is a participatory game design method , for the early de - sign of games with groups of children . The method is context bound , conducted through ﬁeld studies , and hence it suffers from limitations typical of context - bound research ( Frauenberger et al . , 2015 ) . The Role of Experts . Firstly , it requires researchers with specialized skills . GaCoCo and the studies reported in the thesis envisage the pres - ence of two researchers : one expert of interaction design and game design ; another who is expert of child development and is trained to qualitative research . The presence of two researchers might inﬂuence and affect both the conduct and the outcomes of participatory game design with children . However , the participation of researchers in ﬁeld studies allows them to gather important insights concerning the con - text . With the scaffolding support of the design expert , in GaCoCo stud - ies of 2014 and 2015 , children released game design documents and prototypes , some of which were developed in 2014 by university stu - dents . When design decisions by children were unclear or incoherent for developers , the game design expert acted as mediator . On the one hand , the studies suggest that the same design expert working with children should also be working with developers to pass on relevant information which is missing on unclear in children’s products . On the other hand , the double role of the design expert may create biases in results . Generalizing and Extending GaCoCo . The studies reported in the thesis were conducted in different primary schools . However the same game design expert was present in each school . Moreover , studies allowed for correlational analyses only . Further studies are therefore needed , e . g . , with larger samples or control groups , to determine causal - ity relationships , e . g . , concerning the inﬂuence of gamiﬁcation on en - gagement . Extending the studies to other schools , involving other teach - ers as well as new design experts , will also allow to transfer the ap - proach used in the thesis to further contexts . 8 . 4 . 2 Protocols Game Types . A limitation of the studies is concerned with the types of games children can design using the protocols of the GaCoCo stud - ies . With the exploratory studies of 2013 and through an analysis of the literature ( see Chapter 1 ) , we aimed at understanding what game 165 conclusions design tasks we could assign to children working in groups : in 2013 , we focused on what game genres and elements emerged frequently in children’s products ( Melonio , 2013 ; Dodero et al . , 2014 b ) . Such knowl - edge served to create the protocols of the studies reported in the thesis , which ask children to work on third - person action - adventure games . On one hand , the study protocols ﬁxed the “forms” that games can take in terms of storylines , characters and levels but , on the other hand , protocols gave children an adequate structure to work within . More - over , the studies reported in the thesis were conducted within schools and therefore the game design activity had to be framed within a learning activity . Firstly , starting from stories allows teachers and re - searchers to frame game design as a continuation of a school tradi - tional activity , which is centered around a story . Secondly , children are familiar with narratives , and hence using a story as starting point may increase children’s conﬁdence and engagement in the game design ac - tivity itself ; as claimed in Tan et al . ( 2011 ) , elaborating a storytelling component for a game is stimulating and it is often a fascinating topic for children . Evaluation . Other limitations of the studies reported in this thesis are concerned with the evaluation of the quality of children’s products . The evaluation approached children’s products as “adult’s work” so as to carry on an authentic assessment , as done in the education lit - erature when children’s ( design ) tasks resemble adult’s work ( Meyer , 1992 ) . Children’s game design products were assessed with expert re - views , based on game heuristics by ( Desurvire et al . , 2004 ) . Speciﬁcally , the studies in this thesis traced how the quality of children’s products evolved in time , according to adult game design experts , who assessed products along the following lines : What playability issues emerged in products ? Did products improve in time , with respect to issues ? Two design experts , both with knowledge of interaction design and game design , classiﬁed products against issues . Inter - rater agreement was computed . Generally game design experts agreed on evaluating products by children against issues . The most debated issue among game designers was the consistency of game design documents : one of the experts was not agreeing on it being an issue in an iterative incremental game design process . In spite of that , the evaluation of children’s game design products was exploratory and limited in scope . The main problem was the lack of adequate game design heuristics . Firstly , Desuervire et al . ’s heuristics were compiled using interactive games developed by adults , which limits their applicability to the game design products of this thesis , which were developed by children . Secondly , as highlighted in ( Desurvire and Wiberg , 2009 ) , contemporary successful games have 166 8 . 5 ongoing research stemming from this thesis been recently developed ( e . g . , Kentucky Route Zero ( Carboard Com - puter , 2014 ) ) that would not have been rated excellent using the heuris - tics by ( Desurvire et al . , 2004 ) . Had the studies in this thesis used such heuristics as heuristics evaluation , then the evaluation concerning the quality of children’s products would have a very limited generality . Such limitations indicate routes for future work concerning guidelines for expert reviews of early game design products , in general , and of children’s game design products , in particular , possibly starting from the issues emerged in this thesis . Moreover , due to resource limitations and time constraints , the num - ber of design experts assessing children’s products was limited to just two in the 2014 and 2015 studies . That may have hampered the uncov - ering of less frequent issues , e . g . , ( Sauro and Lewis , 2012 ) . Qualitative Data . The education expert used diares and videos for behavior observations with target behaviors related to engagement so as to allow for the emergence of unforeseen categories . Diaries and videos gave a large amount of data to analyze , and their subsequent thematic analysis was long and difﬁcult . Future studies , on the other hand , will build on the studies’ observations , considering the emerged categories of behaviors relevant for a GaCoCo experience . Observations with one observer and videos were limited to visi - ble behaviors . Important information passing verbally through groups may not have been noticed , except when groups explicitly asked the expert to validate design choices . If verbal information is important for a design experience with children , the one observer employed by our studies may be insufﬁcient , and additional observation means , such as positioning a video camera per group , will have to be considered . 8 . 5 ongoing research stemming from this thesis The research contributions of the thesis generated also new research directions , which we brieﬂy discuss in the following . 8 . 5 . 1 Replicating GaCoCo Different Subjects . The studies in the thesis inserted game design within two traditional learning activities : one concerning literature ; the other concerning science . Future work might adopt GaCoCo and our guidelines in other learning activities within primary schools , e . g . , con - cerning history . That should be facilitated by the fact that both GaCoCo 167 conclusions studies started from a storyline , and their protocols can the be adapted easily to different subjects . Different Contexts . Furthermore GaCoCo could be used in other contexts that the Italian school contexts , the only one explored in this thesis . Children with Special Needs . The work reported in the thesis in - cluded children with special needs , one one of whom was deaf ; proto - cols were adapted to their needs with the help of their teachers , sup - port teachers , and the child development expert . The literature of par - ticipatory design for children with special needs was also investigated , see Chapter 2 . Starting from the experience thus acquired , we are spe - cializing GaCoCo and its guidelines for working with deaf children . To this end , we are also using the guidelines for designing games for children published in ( Di Mascio et al . , 2013 ) , as well as the results of a study conducted at the Rochester Institute of Technology , USA , under the supervision of Professor Marc Marschark , during a research visit . 8 . 5 . 2 Gamiﬁed Experience In the PhD work of this thesis , we chose to design and assess the ex - perience of participants over the technology or the material used in the experience . As reported in ( Soegaard and , Eds . ) , studies show that ex - periential choices ( i . e . , the acquisition of an event to live through , such as a design journey ) make people happier than material choices of the same value . However the study results indicated how future research might design non - invasive technology solutions for engaging children in a cooperative learning process , and speciﬁcally , for supporting a sense of progression and control over the process , as well as their co - operation . Gamiﬁed Probes for Cooperation . The thesis studies designed and partly assessed ( through observations only ) gamiﬁed probes for en - gaging children . Some probes were designed for supporting speciﬁc rules of cooperative learning in groups , interacting synchronously— face - to - face , in - presence , same time . ( DiMicco et al . , 2007 ) investigated the impact of different visualizations of participation for sustaining post - task reﬂections in synchronous interactions in group : visualiza - tions were projected on large screens according to participants’ speak - ing times . However , to the best of our knowledge , there are no tech - nology enhanced solutions , not mediated by screens , for synchronous cooperative learning processes , based on gamiﬁcation . A possible re - search direction is then concerned with the design and assessment of gamiﬁed technology - enhanced probes for supporting cooperation in synchronous interactions . 168 8 . 5 ongoing research stemming from this thesis Gamiﬁed Probes for Progression and Control . Other gamiﬁed so - lutions could be designed for supporting participants’ sense of pro - gression and control , as well as tracking relevant data for assessing progression and control . The gamiﬁed solutions might be designed considering the study results reported in this thesis concerning pro - gression maps , the shop and their rewards . 169 B I B L I O G R A P H Y Adams , E . ( 2013 ) . Fundamentals of Game Design , Third Edition . Pearson , Allyn and Bacon . ( Cited on pages 23 , 24 , 25 , 26 , and 33 . ) Akbal , M . , Zehle , S . , and Schmitz , M . ( 2014 ) . From technomania to the school of things : Taking control of your own game . In Proceedings of the 2014 Workshops on Advances in Computer Entertainment Conference , ACE ’ 14 Workshops , pages 12 : 1 – 12 : 8 , New York , NY , USA . ACM . ( Cited on page 24 . ) Albert , W . and Tullis , T . ( 2013 ) . Measuring the User Experience . Morgan Kaufmann . ( Cited on page 64 . ) Alborzi , H . , Druin , A . , Montemayor , J . , Platner , M . , Porteous , J . , Sher - man , L . , Boltman , A . , Taxén , G . , Best , J . , Hammer , J . , Kruskal , A . , Lal , A . , Schwenn , T . P . , Sumida , L . , Wagner , R . , and Hendler , J . ( 2000 ) . De - signing storyrooms : Interactive storytelling spaces for children . In Proceedings of the 3 rd Conference on Designing Interactive Systems : Pro - cesses , Practices , Methods , and Techniques , DIS ’ 00 , pages 95 – 104 , New York , NY , USA . ACM . ( Cited on page 12 . ) Annetta , L . , Minogue , J . , Holmes , S . , and Cheng , M . ( 2009 ) . Investi - gating the impact of video games on high school students’ engage - ment and learning about genetics . Computers & Education , 53 ( 1 ) : 74 – 85 . ( Cited on page 24 . ) Attﬁeld , S . , Kazai , G . , Lalmas , M . , and Piwowarski , B . ( 2011 ) . Towards a science of user engagement . In WSDM Workshop on User Modelling for Web Applications . ACM International Conference on Web Search And Data Mining . ( Cited on page 22 . ) Barab , S . , Scott , B . , Siyahhan , S . , Goldstone , R . , Ingram - Goble , A . , Zuiker , S . , and Warren , S . ( 2009 ) . Transformational play as a curricu - lar scaffold : Using videogames to support science education . Journal of Science Education and Technology , 18 ( 4 ) : 305 – 320 . ( Cited on page 24 . ) Barnes , B . and O’Farrell , G . ( 1990 ) . Cooperative learning strategies . Social Studies and the Young Learner , 2 ( 3 ) . ( Cited on pages 40 , 69 , 114 , and 126 . ) Barry , M . and Pitt , I . ( 2006 ) . Interaction design : A multidimensional ap - proach for learners with autism . In Proceedings of the 2006 Conference 171 Bibliography on Interaction Design and Children , IDC ’ 06 , pages 33 – 36 , New York , NY , USA . ACM . ( Cited on page 22 . ) Baytak , A . , Land , S . , and Smith , B . K . ( 2011 ) . Children as educational computer game designers : An exploratory study . The Turkish Online Journal of Educational Technology , 10 ( 4 ) . ( Cited on page 27 . ) Bekker , M . and Markopoulos , P . ( 2003 ) . Interaction design and chil - dren : ( idc 2002 ) . SIGCHI Bull . : suppl . < i > interactions < / i > , 2003 : 6 – 6 . ( Cited on page 15 . ) Bell , T . , Witten , I . , Fellows , M . , Adams , R . , and McKenzie , J . ( 2015 ) . CS Unplugged : An enrichment and extension programme for primary - aged students . Creative Commons Attribution . ( Cited on page 162 . ) Benton , L . , Vasalou , A . , Gooch , D . , and Khaled , R . ( 2014 ) . Understand - ing and fostering children’s storytelling during game narrative de - sign . In Proceedings of the 2014 Conference on Interaction Design and Children , IDC ’ 14 , pages 301 – 304 , New York , NY , USA . ACM . ( Cited on pages 22 , 27 , and 31 . ) Bevan , N . ( 2009 ) . Criteria for selecting methods in user - centred design . I - USED 2009 workshop . ( Cited on page 10 . ) Biklen , S . K . and Bogdan , R . ( 2007 ) . Qualitative Research for Education : An Introduction to Theories and Methods . Boston , MA : Pearson A & B . ( Cited on page 73 . ) Bowker , G . C . adn Sta , S . ( 2000 ) . Sorting Things Out . Classiﬁcation and its consequences . The MIT Press . ( Cited on page 29 . ) Brederode , B . , Markopoulos , P . , Gielen , M . , Vermeeren , A . , and De Rid - der , H . ( 2005 ) . pOwerball : The design of a novel mixed - reality game for children with mixed abilities . In Proc . of IDC 2005 . ( Cited on pages 22 and 28 . ) Brondino , M . , Dodero , G . , Gennari , R . , Melonio , A . , Pasini , M . , Rac - canello , D . , and Torello , S . ( 2015 ) . Emotions and Inclusion in Co - Design at School : Let’s Measure Them ! In Proc . of Methods and Intelli - gent Systems for Technology Enhanced Learning ( MIS 4 TEL’ 14 ) . Springer . ( Cited on page 29 . ) Carboard Computer , L . ( 2014 ) . Kentucky route zero . www . kentuckyroutezero . com . ( Cited on page 167 . ) Cavallo , D . , Papert , S . , and Stager , G . ( 2004 ) . Climbing to understand - ing : Lessons from an experimental learning environment for adjudi - cated youth . In Proceedings of the 6 th international conference on Learn - ing sciences , pages 113 – 120 . International Society of the Learning Sci - ences . ( Cited on page 21 . ) 172 Bibliography Chen , M . , Kolko , B . E . , Cuddihy , E . , and Medina , E . ( 2011 ) . Modeling but not measuring engagement in computer games . In Proceedings of the 7 th International Conference on Games + Learning + Society Confer - ence , GLS’ 11 , pages 55 – 63 , Pittsburgh , PA , USA . ETC Press . ( Cited on page 33 . ) Chiasson , S . and Gutwin , C . ( 2005 ) . Design Principles for Children’s Technology . ( Cited on page 17 . ) Christensen , C . M . and Raynor , M . E . ( 2003 ) . The Innovator’s Solution : Creating and Sustaining Successful Growth . Harvard University Press , Cambridge MA . ( Cited on page 34 . ) Clark , D . , Tanner - Smith , E . , Killingsworth , S . , and Bellamy , S . ( 2013 ) . Digital games for learning : A systematic review and meta - analysis , ( executive summary ) . Technical report , Menlo Park , CA : SRI Inter - national . ( Cited on page 24 . ) Cohen , E . G . , Lotan , R . A . , Scarloss , B . A . , and Arellano , A . R . ( 1999 ) . Complex Instruction : Equity in Cooperative Learning Classrooms . Theory into Practice . ( Cited on page 39 . ) Csikszentmihalyi , M . ( 1997 ) . Finding ﬂow . The psychology of engagement with everyday life . New York : Basic Books . ( Cited on pages 25 and 50 . ) Curran , P . J . , West , S . G . , and Finch , J . F . ( 1996 ) . The robustness of test statistics to nonnormality and speciﬁcation error in conﬁrma - tory factor analysis . Psychological Methods , pages 16 – 29 . ( Cited on page 77 . ) Danielsson , K . and Wiberg , C . ( 2006 ) . Participatory design of learn - ing media : Designing educational computer games with and for teenagers . Interactive Technology and Smart Education , 3 ( 4 ) : 275 – 291 . ( Cited on pages 27 and 28 . ) Deci , E . L . and Ryan , R . M . ( 1985 ) . Intrinsic Motivation and Self - determination in Human Behavior . Plenum . ( Cited on pages 41 and 89 . ) Derboven , J . , Van Mechelen , M . , and Slegers , K . ( 2015 ) . Multimodal Analysis in Participatory Design with Children : A Primary School Case Study . In Proceedings of the 33 rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , CHI ’ 15 , pages 2825 – 2828 , New York , NY , USA . ACM . ( Cited on page 12 . ) Desurvire , H . , Caplan , M . , and Toth , J . ( 2004 ) . Using Heuristics to Evaluate the Playability of Games . In CHI ’ 04 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pages 1509 – 1512 , New York , NY , USA . ACM . ( Cited on pages 51 , 64 , 70 , 71 , 118 , 121 , 128 , 166 , and 167 . ) 173 Bibliography Desurvire , H . and Wiberg , C . ( 2009 ) . Game usability heuristics ( play ) for evaluating and designing better games : The next iteration . In Proceedings of the 3 D International Conference on Online Communities and Social Computing : Held As Part of HCI International 2009 , OCSC ’ 09 , pages 557 – 566 , Berlin , Heidelberg . Springer - Verlag . ( Cited on page 166 . ) Deterding , S . , Sicart , M . , Nacke , L . , O’Hara , K . , and Dixon , D . ( 2011 ) . Gamiﬁcation . using game - design elements in non - gaming contexts . In CHI ’ 11 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems , CHI EA ’ 11 , pages 2425 – 2428 , New York , NY , USA . ACM . ( Cited on pages 33 and 34 . ) Di Mascio , T . , Gennari , R . , Melonio , A . , and Vittorini , P . ( 2013 ) . Design - ing games for deaf children : First guidelines . Int . J . Technol . Enhanc . Learn . , 5 ( 3 / 4 ) : 223 – 239 . ( Cited on page 168 . ) Dickey , M . D . ( 2005 ) . Engaging by design : How engagement strate - gies in popular computer and video games and inform instructional design . Educational Technology Research and Development , 53 : 67 – 83 . ( Cited on page 34 . ) DiMicco , J . M . , Hollenbach , K . J . , Pandolfo , A . , and Bender , W . ( 2007 ) . The impact of increased awareness while face - to - face . Hum . - Comput . Interact . , 22 ( 1 ) : 47 – 96 . ( Cited on page 168 . ) Dindler , C . , Iversen , O . S . , Smith , R . , and Veerasawmy , R . ( 2010 ) . Par - ticipatory design at the museum : Inquiring into children’s everyday engagement in cultural heritage . In Proceedings of the 22 Nd Conference of the Computer - Human Interaction Special Interest Group of Australia on Computer - Human Interaction , OZCHI ’ 10 , pages 72 – 79 , New York , NY , USA . ACM . ( Cited on page 30 . ) DiSalvo , C . , Lukens , J . , Lodato , T . , Jenkins , T . , and Kim , T . ( 2014 ) . Mak - ing public things : How hci design can express matters of concern . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Comput - ing Systems , CHI ’ 14 , pages 2397 – 2406 , New York , NY , USA . ACM . ( Cited on page 12 . ) Disney ( 2015 ) . Frozen games online . http : / / frozen . disney . com / games - activities . ( Cited on page 117 . ) Dix , A . , Finlay , J . , Abowd , G . , and Beale , R . ( 1997 ) . Human - computer Interaction . Prentice - Hall , Inc . , Upper Saddle River , NJ , USA . ( Cited on page 13 . ) 174 Bibliography Dodero , G . , Gennari , R . , A . , M . , and Torello , S . ( 2015 ) . “There is No Rose Without A Thorn " : An Assessment of a Game Design Ex - pereience for Children . In 11 th Edition of CHItaly , the biannual Confer - ence of the Italian SIGCHI Chapter . ( Cited on page 74 . ) Dodero , G . , Gennari , R . , Melonio , A . , and Torello , S . ( 2014 a ) . Gamiﬁed Co - design with Cooperative Learning . In In Proceedings of In CHI ’ 14 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pages 707 – 718 , New York , NY , USA . ACM . ( Cited on pages 8 , 20 , 21 , 29 , 30 , 37 , 38 , and 44 . ) Dodero , G . , Gennari , R . , Melonio , A . , and Torello , S . ( 2014 b ) . To - wards tangible gamiﬁed co - design at school : Two studies in primary schools . In Proceedings of the First ACM SIGCHI Annual Symposium on Computer - human Interaction in Play , CHI PLAY ’ 14 , pages 77 – 86 , New York , NY , USA . ACM . ( Cited on pages 5 and 166 . ) Druin , A . ( 1999 ) . Cooperative Inquiry : Developing New Technologies for Children with Children . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , CHI ’ 99 , pages 592 – 599 , New York , NY , USA . ACM . ( Cited on pages 16 , 18 , and 30 . ) Druin , A . ( 2002 ) . The Role of Children in the Design of new Technol - ogy . Behaviour and Information Technology , 21 : 1 – 25 . ( Cited on pages 17 , 18 , 20 , 26 , and 28 . ) Druin , A . , Bederson , B . , Boltman , A . , Miura , A . , Knotts - Callahan , D . , and Platt , M . ( 1998 ) . The Design of Children’s Technology . Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc . , San Francisco , CA , USA . ( Cited on page 20 . ) Duh , H . B . - L . , Yew Yee , S . L . C . , Gu , Y . X . , and Chen , V . H . - H . ( 2010 ) . A narrative - driven design approach for casual games with children . In Proceedings of the 5 th ACM SIGGRAPH Symposium on Video Games , Sandbox ’ 10 , pages 19 – 24 , New York , NY , USA . ACM . ( Cited on pages 27 , 28 , and 31 . ) Edmondson , A . C . and McManus , S . E . ( 2007 ) . Methodological Fit in Management Field Research , volume 32 . Academy of Management Review . ( Cited on page 4 . ) Egenfeldt - Nielsen , S . ( 2005 ) . Beyond Edutainment Exploring the Edu - cational Potential of Computer Games . PhD thesis , IT - University of Copenhagen . ( Cited on page 24 . ) Ehn , P . ( 1992 ) . Scandinavian design : On participation and skill . In Greenbaum , J . and Kyng , M . , editors , Participatory Design : Princi - 175 Bibliography ples and Practices , pages 41 – 78 . Douglas Schuler and Aki Namioka , Lawrence Erlbaum , Ltd . ( Cited on page 14 . ) Ehn , P . ( 2008 ) . Participation in design things . In Proceedings of the Tenth Anniversary Conference on Participatory Design 2008 , PDC ’ 08 , pages 92 – 101 , Indianapolis , IN , USA . Indiana University . ( Cited on page 12 . ) Ehn , P . and Kyng , M . ( 1987 ) . The collective resource approach to system design . Bjerknes et al . ( Cited on page 11 . ) Fails , J . A . , Guha , M . L . , and Druin , A . ( 2013 ) . Methods and Techniques for Involving Children in the Design of New Technology for Children . Now Publishers Inc . , Hanover , MA , USA . ( Cited on pages 15 and 17 . ) Fosh , L . , Lorenz , K . , Benford , S . , and Koleva , B . ( 2014 ) . Personal and Social ? Designing Personalised Experiences for Groups in Museums . ( Cited on page 12 . ) Foth , M . and Axup , J . ( 2006 ) . Participatory design and action research : Identical twins or synergetic pair ? In Jacucci , G . , Kensing , F . , Wag - ner , I . , and Blomberg , J . , editors , Participatory Design Conference 2006 : Expanding Boundaries in Design , pages 93 – 96 , Trento , Italy . ( Cited on page 12 . ) Frauenberger , C . , Good , J . , Fitzpatrick , G . , and Iversen , O . S . ( 2015 ) . In pursuit of rigour and accountability in participatory design . Inter - national Journal of Human - Computer Studies , 74 : 93 – 106 . ( Cited on pages 13 , 15 , 16 , 30 , 31 , 37 , 38 , and 165 . ) Fredericks , J . , Blumenfeld , P . , and Paris , A . ( 2004 ) . School Engagement : Potential of the Concept , State of the Evidence . Review of Educational Research . ( Cited on pages 29 and 33 . ) Fredericks , J . and McColskey , W . ( 2012 ) . The Measurement of Student Engagement : a Comparative Analysis of Various Methods and Stu - dent Selfâ ˘A ˇRreport Instruments . In Christenson , S . , Reschly , A . , and Wylie , C . , editors , Handbook of Research on Student Engagement , pages 763 – 782 . Springer . ( Cited on pages 29 , 33 , and 35 . ) Galas , C . ( 2006 ) . Why whyville ? Learning and Leading with Technology , 34 ( 6 ) : 30 – 33 . ( Cited on page 24 . ) Garde , J . ( 2013 ) . Everyone has a part to play : games and participatory design in healthcare . PhD thesis , University of Twente . ( Cited on page 28 . ) Garzotto , F . ( 2008 ) . Broadening Children’s Involvement as Design Part - ners : from Technology to “Experience” . In Proceedings of the 7 th 176 Bibliography Conference on Interaction Design and Children , IDC ’ 08 , pages 186 – 193 , New York , NY , USA . ACM . ( Cited on pages 17 , 18 , 21 , 30 , and 33 . ) Garzotto , F . and Gelsomini , M . ( 2015 ) . Playful learning in smart spaces for children with intellectual disability . PALX workshop . Co - located in CHItaly Conference . ( Cited on pages 22 and 30 . ) Garzotto , F . and Gonella , R . ( 2011 ) . Children’s Co - design and Inclu - sive Education . In Proceedings of the 10 th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children , IDC ’ 11 , pages 260 – 263 , New York , NY , USA . ACM . ( Cited on page 21 . ) Gee , J . P . ( 2003 ) . What video games have to teach us about learning and literacy . Comput . Entertain . , 1 ( 1 ) : 20 – 20 . ( Cited on page 24 . ) Gelderblom , H . ( 2014 ) . Giving children voice in the design of technol - ogy for education in the developing world . South African Computer Journal , 54 : 34 – 42 . ( Cited on pages 17 and 20 . ) Giaccardi , E . , Paredes , P . , Díaz , P . , and Alvarado , D . ( 2012 ) . Embodied Narratives : a Performative Co - design Technique . In Proceedings of the Designing Interactive Systems Conference , DIS ’ 12 , pages 1 – 10 , New York , NY , USA . ACM . ( Cited on page 28 . ) Glover , I . ( 2013 ) . Play as you learn : gamiﬁcation as a technique for motivating learners . In World Conference on Educational Multimedia , Hypermedia and Telecommunications 2013 . ( Cited on pages 33 and 34 . ) Goeleven , E . , Raedt , R . D . , Leyman , L . , and Verschuere , B . ( 2008 ) . The karolinska directed emotional faces : A validation study . Cognition and Emotion , 22 ( 6 ) : 1094 – 1118 . ( Cited on page 72 . ) Gothelf , J . ( 2013 ) . Lean UX . O’Reilly Media . ( Cited on pages 9 and 45 . ) Granic , I . , Lobel , A . , and Engels , R . C . M . E . ( 2014 ) . The beneﬁts of playing video games . American Psychologist , 69 ( 1 ) : 66 – 78 . ( Cited on page 24 . ) Graves , T . ( 1991 ) . The controversy over group rewards in coopera - tive classrooms . Educational Leadership , 48 : 77 – 79 . ( Cited on pages 42 and 144 . ) Greenbaum , J . and Kyng , M . , editors ( 1992 ) . Design at Work : Cooperative Design of Computer Systems . L . Erlbaum Associates Inc . , Hillsdale , NJ , USA . ( Cited on page 11 . ) Greenberg , B . S . , Sherry , J . , Lachlan , K . , Lucas , K . , and Holmstrom , A . ( 2010 ) . Orientations to video games among gender and age groups . Simul . Gaming , 41 ( 2 ) : 238 – 259 . ( Cited on page 24 . ) 177 Bibliography Greenwood , D . and Levin , M . ( 2007 ) . Introduction to Action Research . Social Research for Social Change . ( Cited on page 12 . ) Grisham - Brown , J . , Hallam , R . , and Brookshire , R . ( 2006 ) . Using authentic assessment to evidence children’s progress toward early learning standards . Early Childhood Education Journal , 34 ( 1 ) : 45 – 51 . ( Cited on pages 35 and 70 . ) Guha , M . L . , Druin , A . , Chipman , G . , Fails , J . A . , Simms , S . , and Farber , A . ( 2005 ) . Working with Young Children as Technology Design Part - ners . Communications of the ACM , 48 ( 1 ) : 39 – 42 . ( Cited on pages 12 , 15 , 17 , 18 , and 21 . ) Guha , M . L . , Druin , A . , and Fails , J . A . ( 2008 ) . Designing with and for children with special needs : An inclusionary model . In Proceedings of the 7 th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children , IDC ’ 08 , pages 61 – 64 , New York , NY , USA . ACM . ( Cited on pages 22 and 23 . ) Guha , M . L . , Druin , A . , and Fails , J . A . ( 2013 ) . Cooperative inquiry revisited : Reﬂections of the past and guidelines for the future of intergenerational co - design . ( Cited on pages 16 and 18 . ) Hamari , J . , Koivisto , J . , and Sarsa , H . ( 2014 ) . Does Gamiﬁcation Work ? : A Literature Review of Empirical Studies on Gamiﬁcation . In Pro - ceedings of 47 th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences . ( Cited on pages 34 and 41 . ) Hamari , J . , Shernoff , D . J . , Rowe , E . , Coller , B . , Asbell - Clarke , J . , and Ed - wards , T . ( 2016 ) . Challenging games help students learn : An empiri - cal study on engagement , ﬂow and immersion in game - based learn - ing . Computers in Human Behavior , 54 : 170 – 179 . ( Cited on pages 35 , 44 , 73 , and 163 . ) Hanna , L . , Neapolitan , D . , and Risden , K . ( 2004 ) . Evaluating computer game concepts with children . In Proceedings of the 2004 Conference on Interaction Design and Children : Building a Community , IDC ’ 04 , pages 49 – 56 , New York , NY , USA . ACM . ( Cited on page 17 . ) Harel , I . ( 1991 ) . Children designers : Interdisciplinary constructions for learn - ing and knowing mathematics in a computer - rich school . Ablex Publish - ing . ( Cited on page 26 . ) Henderson , V . , Lee , S . , Brashear , H . , Hamilton , H . , Starner , T . , and Hamilton , S . ( 2005 ) . Development of an american sign language game for deaf children . In Proceedings of the 2005 Conference on In - teraction Design and Children , IDC ’ 05 , pages 70 – 79 , New York , NY , USA . ACM . ( Cited on page 22 . ) 178 Bibliography Hickey , D . , Ingram - Goble , A . , and Jameson , E . ( 2009 ) . Designing assess - ments and assessing designs in virtual educational environments . Journal of Science Education and Technology , 18 ( 2 ) : 187 – 208 . ( Cited on page 24 . ) Holbert , N . , Weintrop , D . , Wilensky , U . , Sengupta , P . , Killingsworth , S . , Krinks , K . , Brady , C . , Clark , D . , Klopfer , E . , Shapiro , R . B . , and Russ , R . , editors ( 2014 ) . Combining Video Games and Constructionist Design to Support Deep Learning in Play . ( Cited on page 163 . ) Huang , W . and Soman , D . ( 2013 ) . A practitioner’s guide to gamiﬁca - tion of education . Research Report Series Behavioural Economics in Action . ( Cited on page 34 . ) Hutchinson , H . , Mackay , W . , Westerlund , B . , Bederson , B . B . , Druin , A . , Plaisant , C . , Beaudouin - Lafon , M . , Conversy , S . , Evans , H . , Hansen , H . , Roussel , N . , and Eiderbäck , B . ( 2003 a ) . Technology probes : In - spiring design for and with families . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , CHI ’ 03 , pages 17 – 24 , New York , NY , USA . ACM . ( Cited on page 40 . ) Hutchinson , H . , Mackay , W . , Westerlund , B . , Bederson , B . B . , Druin , A . , Plaisant , C . , Beaudouin - Lafon , M . , Conversy , S . , Evans , H . , Hansen , H . , Roussel , N . , and Eiderbäck , B . ( 2003 b ) . Technology probes : In - spiring design for and with families . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , CHI ’ 03 , pages 17 – 24 , New York , NY , USA . ACM . ( Cited on pages 55 and 109 . ) ISO 9241 - 210 ( 2010 ) . Ergonomics of human - system interaction - human - centred design for interactive systems , international stan - dards organization . ( Cited on page 10 . ) Iversen , O . and Brodersen , C . ( 2008 ) . Building a BRIDGE between Children and Users : a Socio - Cultural Approach to Child - Computer Interaction . Cogn . Tech . Work , 10 : 83 – 93 . ( Cited on page 19 . ) Iversen , O . S . , Dindler , C . , and Hansen , E . I . K . ( 2013 ) . Understanding teenagers’ motivation in participatory design . International Journal of Child - Computer Interaction , 1 ( 3 – 4 ) : 82 – 87 . ( Cited on page 22 . ) Iversen , O . S . , Halskov , K . , and Leong , T . W . ( 2010 ) . Rekindling values in participatory design . In Proceedings of the 11 th Biennial Participatory Design Conference , PDC ’ 10 , pages 91 – 100 , New York , NY , USA . ACM . ( Cited on page 22 . ) Iversen , O . S . , Kortbek , K . J . , Nielsen , K . R . , and Aagaard , L . ( 2007 ) . Stepstone : An interactive ﬂoor application for hearing impaired chil - dren with a cochlear implant . In Proceedings of the 6 th International 179 Bibliography Conference on Interaction Design and Children , IDC ’ 07 , pages 117 – 124 , New York , NY , USA . ACM . ( Cited on page 22 . ) Iversen , O . S . and Smith , R . C . ( 2012 ) . Scandinavian participatory de - sign : Dialogic curation with teenagers . In Proceedings of the 11 th Inter - national Conference on Interaction Design and Children , IDC ’ 12 , pages 106 – 115 , New York , NY , USA . ACM . ( Cited on page 20 . ) Iyer , R . B . ( 2013 ) . Relation between cooperative learning and student achievement . International Journal of Education and Information Studies , 3 ( 1 ) : 21 – 25 . ( Cited on page 40 . ) Johnson , D . and Johnson , R . ( 2002 ) . An Overview of Cooperative Learning . Creativity and Collaborative Learning . ( Cited on page 32 . ) Johnson , U . , Johnson , H . , Stanne , M . , and Garibaldi , A . ( 1990 ) . Impact of Group Processing on Achievement in Cooperative Groups . Journal of Social Psychology , 130 : 507 – 516 . ( Cited on page 40 . ) Jones , C . , McIver , L . , Gibson , L . , and Gregor , P . ( 2003 ) . Experiences obtained from designing with children . In Proceedings of the 2003 Conference on Interaction Design and Children , IDC ’ 03 , pages 69 – 74 , New York , NY , USA . ACM . ( Cited on page 22 . ) Kafai , Y . ( 1996 ) . Software by Kids for Kids . Communications of the ACM , 39 ( 4 ) : 38 – 39 . ( Cited on pages 19 and 26 . ) Kafai , Y . ( 2003 ) . Children Designing Software for Children : What Can We Learn ? In ACM , editor , Proceedings of Interaction Design and Chil - dren 2003 , IDC’ 2003 , pages 11 – 12 . ( Cited on page 19 . ) Kafai , Y . ( 2006 ) . Playing and making games for learning instructionist and constructionist perspectives for game studies . Games and Cul - tures , 1 ( 1 ) : 36 – 40 . ( Cited on pages 26 and 27 . ) Kafai , Y . and Vasudevan , V . ( 2015 ) . Hi - lo tech games : Crafting , coding and collaboration of augmented board games by high school youth . In Proceedings of the 14 th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children , IDC ’ 15 , pages 130 – 139 , New York , NY , USA . ACM . ( Cited on page 27 . ) Kahu , E . , Stephens , C . , Leach , L . , and Zepke , N . ( 2015 ) . Linking aca - demic emotions and student engagement : mature - aged distance stu - dents’ transition to university . Journal of Further and Higher Education , 39 ( 4 ) : 481 – 497 . ( Cited on pages 35 and 44 . ) Kaplan , N . , Chisik , Y . , and Levy , D . ( 2006 ) . Reading in the wild : Socia - ble literacy in practice . In Proceedings of the 2006 Conference on Interac - tion Design and Children , IDC ’ 06 , pages 97 – 104 , New York , NY , USA . ACM . ( Cited on page 17 . ) 180 Bibliography Kapp , K . M . ( 2012 ) . The Gamiﬁcation of Learning and Instruction . San Francisco : Pfeiffer . ( Cited on pages 34 and 41 . ) Karimi , A . and Lim , Y . ( 2010 ) . Children , engagement and enjoyment in digital narrative . In ASCILITE - Australian Society for Computers in Learning in Tertiary Education , pages 475 – 483 . ( Cited on page 31 . ) Kelly , S . , Mazzone , E . , Horton , M . , and Read , J . ( 2006 ) . Bluebells : A Design Method for Child - centered product Development . In Pro - ceedings of NordiCHI 2006 , Oslo , Norway . ( Cited on page 19 . ) Khaled , R . and Vasalou , A . ( 2014 ) . Bridging serious games and par - ticipatory design . International Journal of Child - Computer Interaction . ( Cited on pages 28 and 31 . ) Klopfer , E . , Osterweil , S . , and Salen , K . ( 2009 ) . Moving learning games forward : Obstacles , opportunities and openness . ( Cited on page 24 . ) Könings , K . , Seidel , T . , and van Merriënboer , J . ( 2014 ) . Participatory de - sign of learning environments : integrating perspectives of students , teachers , and designers . Instructional Science , 42 ( 1 ) : 1 – 9 . ( Cited on page 12 . ) Kujala , S . ( 2003 ) . User involvement : A review of the beneﬁts and chal - lenges . Behaviour and Information Technology , 22 ( 1 ) : 1 – 16 . ( Cited on page 13 . ) Kujala , S . ( 2008 ) . Effective user involvement in product develop - ment by improving the analysis of user needs . Behav . Inf . Technol . , 27 ( 6 ) : 457 – 473 . ( Cited on pages 13 and 14 . ) Lange - Nielsen , F . , Lafont , X . V . , Cassar , B . , and Khaled , R . ( 2012 ) . In - volving players earlier in the game design process using cultural probes . In Proceedings of the 4 th International Conference on Fun and Games , FnG ’ 12 , pages 45 – 54 , New York , NY , USA . ACM . ( Cited on page 28 . ) Large , A . , Nesset , V . , Beheshti , J . , and Bowler , L . ( 2006 ) . Bonded De - sign : A Novel Approach to Intergenerational Information Technol - ogy Design . Library & Information Science Research , 28 : 64 – 82 . ( Cited on page 19 . ) Lavasani , M . , Afzali , L . , and Afzali , F . ( 2011 ) . Cooperative learning and social skills . Cypriot Journal of Educational Sciences , Vol 6 , No 4 ( 2012 ) , 6 ( 4 ) . ( Cited on page 40 . ) Lee , Y . and Bichard , J . - A . ( 2008 ) . ’teen - scape’ : Designing participations for the design excluded . In Proceedings of the Tenth Anniversary Confer - ence on Participatory Design 2008 , PDC ’ 08 , pages 128 – 137 , Indianapo - lis , IN , USA . Indiana University . ( Cited on page 13 . ) 181 Bibliography Lichtenfeld , S . , Pekrun , R . , Stupnisky , R . H . , Reiss , K . , and Murayama , K . ( 2012 ) . Measuring students’ emotions in the early years : The Achievement Emotions Questionnaire - Elementary School ( AEQ - ES ) . Learning and Individual Differences , 22 ( 2 ) : 190 – 201 . Noncognitive Skills in Education : Emerging Research and Applications in a Va - riety of International Contexts . ( Cited on page 73 . ) Lynch , P . and Horton , S . ( 2015 ) . Web style guide online . http : / / webstyleguide . com / wsg 3 / index . htmlfgv . ( Cited on pages 56 and 110 . ) Maceﬁeld , R . ( 2014 ) . An Overview of Expert Heuristic Evaluations . ( Cited on page 64 . ) Malone , T . W . ( 1982 ) . Heuristics for designing enjoyable user interfaces : Lessons from computer games . In Proceedings of the 1982 Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , CHI ’ 82 , pages 63 – 68 , New York , NY , USA . ACM . ( Cited on page 23 . ) Markopoulos , P . , Read , J . , Ho & # x 00 ff ; sniemi , J . , and MacFarlane , S . ( 2008 ) . Child computer interaction : Advances in methodological re - search : Introduction to the special issue of cognition technology and work . Cogn . Technol . Work , 10 ( 2 ) : 79 – 81 . ( Cited on page 15 . ) Mattelmäki , T . and Visser , F . ( 2011 ) . Lost in co - x : Interpretations of co - design and co - creation . Diversity and Unity , Proceedings of IASDR 2011 , the 4 th World Conference on Design Research . ( Cited on page 12 . ) Mazzone , E . ( 2012 ) . Designing with Children : Reﬂections on Effective In - volvement of Children in the Interaction Design Process . Phd thesis , Uni - versity of Central Lancashire . ( Cited on pages 15 , 16 , 17 , 21 , and 22 . ) Mazzone , E . , Read , C . , and Beale , R . ( 2011 ) . Towards a Framework of Co - design Sessions with Children . In Springer , editor , Procedings of INTERACT 2011 , pages 632 – 635 . ( Cited on page 30 . ) Mazzone , E . , Read , J . C . , and Beale , R . ( 2008 ) . Design with and for disaf - fected teenagers . In Proceedings of the 5 th Nordic Conference on Human - computer Interaction : Building Bridges , NordiCHI ’ 08 , pages 290 – 297 , New York , NY , USA . ACM . ( Cited on pages 22 and 27 . ) McCarthy , J . and Wright , P . ( 2004 ) . Technology as experience . interac - tions , 11 ( 5 ) : 42 – 43 . ( Cited on page 22 . ) McClarty , K . , Orr , A . , Frey , P . , Dolan , R . , Vassileva , V . , and McVay , A . ( 2012 ) . A literature review of gaming in education . Research Report . ( Cited on page 24 . ) 182 Bibliography McElligott , J . and van Leeuwen , L . ( 2004 ) . Designing sound tools and toys for blind and visually impaired children . In Proceedings of the 2004 Conference on Interaction Design and Children : Building a Commu - nity , IDC ’ 04 , pages 65 – 72 , New York , NY , USA . ACM . ( Cited on page 22 . ) Melonio , A . ( 2013 ) . Game - based Co - design of Games for Learning with Children and Teachers : Research Goals and a Study . In CEUR Proc . of the Doctoral Consortium of CHItaly 2013 . ( Cited on page 166 . ) Meyer , C . ( 1992 ) . What’s the difference between authentic and per - formance assessment ? Educational Leadership , 49 : 39 – 40 . ( Cited on page 166 . ) Moser , C . ( 2013 ) . Child - centered game development ( ccgd ) : develop - ing games with children at school . In Personal and ubiquitous comput - ing , volume 17 , pages 1647 – 1661 . ( Cited on pages 25 , 27 , 28 , 29 , 30 , and 31 . ) Moser , C . ( 2015 ) . Child - Centered Game Development . PhD thesis , Faculty of Natural Science , University of Salzburg . ( Cited on page 29 . ) Moser , C . , Chisik , Y . , and Tscheligi , M . ( 2014 a ) . Around the world in 8 workshops : investigating anticipated player experiences of children . In Proc . of CHI - Play 2014 . ( Cited on page 31 . ) Moser , C . , Tscheligi , M . , Zaman , B . , Abeele , V . V . , Geurts , L . , Vande - waetere , M . , Markopoulos , P . , and Wyeth , P . ( 2014 b ) . Editorial : Learn - ing from failures in game design for children . International Journal of Child - Computer Interaction , 2 ( 2 ) : 73 – 75 . Special Issue : Learning from Failures in Game Design for Children . ( Cited on pages 29 and 31 . ) Muller , L . and Loke , L . ( 2010 ) . Take part : Participatory methods in art and design . In Proceedings of the 11 th Biennial Participatory Design Con - ference , PDC ’ 10 , pages 283 – 284 , New York , NY , USA . ACM . ( Cited on page 12 . ) Muller , M . J . ( 2003 ) . The human - computer interaction handbook . In Jacko , J . A . and Sears , A . , editors , Human Computer Interaction Hand - book : Fundamentals , Evolving Technologies , and Emerging Applications , Third Edition , chapter Participatory Design : The Third Space in HCI , pages 1051 – 1068 . L . Erlbaum Associates Inc . , Hillsdale , NJ , USA . ( Cited on page 13 . ) Muller , M . J . , Wildman , D . M . , and White , E . A . ( 1993 ) . Taxonomy of pd practices : A brief practitioner’s guide . Commun . ACM , 36 ( 6 ) : 26 – 28 . ( Cited on page 12 . ) 183 Bibliography Muthén , L . K . and Copyright , M . ( 2007 ) . Mplus : Statistical analysis with latent variables ( version 5 . 2 ) . ( Cited on page 73 . ) Nesset , V . and Large , A . ( 2004 ) . Children in the Information Technol - ogy Design Process : A Review of Theories and Their Applications . Library & Information Science Research . ( Cited on pages 2 , 15 , 17 , 20 , 28 , 31 , and 51 . ) Neulight , N . , Kafai , Y . , Kao , L . , Foley , B . , and Galas , C . ( 2007 ) . Chil - dren’s participation in a virtual epidemic in the science classroom : Making connections to natural infectious diseases . Journal of Science Education and Technology , 16 ( 1 ) : 47 – 58 . ( Cited on page 24 . ) Nielsen , J . and Molich , R . ( 1990 ) . Heuristic evaluation of user interfaces . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , CHI ’ 90 , pages 249 – 256 , New York , NY , USA . ACM . ( Cited on page 70 . ) Nisbett , R . E . and Wilson , T . D . ( 1977 ) . Telling More Than We Can Know : Verbal Reports on Mental Processes . Psychological Review , 84 ( 3 ) . ( Cited on page 9 . ) Oakley , B . , Brent . R . and Felder , R . , and Elhajj , I . ( 2004 ) . Turning Student Groups into Effective Teams . Journal of Student Centered Learning , pages 9 – 34 . ( Cited on page 95 . ) Ocumpaugh , J . , Baker , R . , and Rodrigo , M . M . T . ( 2012 ) . Baker - rodrigo observation method protocol ( bromp ) 1 . 0 training manual version 1 . 0 . Technical report , Columbia University Teachers College . ( Cited on page 74 . ) Olson , C . K . ( 2010 ) . Children’s motivations for video game play in the context of normal development . children’s motivations for video game play in the context of normal development . Review of General Psychology , 14 ( 2 ) . ( Cited on page 24 . ) Oudshoorn , N . and Pinch , T . ( 2003 ) . How Users Matter : The Co - Construction of Users and Technology ( Inside Technology ) . The MIT Press . ( Cited on page 25 . ) Paivio , A . ( 1971 ) . Imagery and verbal processes . Holt , Rinehart and Win - ston . ( Cited on page 72 . ) Paulus , P . and Nijstad , B . ( 2003 ) . Group Creativity : Innovation through Collaboration . Oxford University Press . ( Cited on page 39 . ) Payne , E . and Whittaker , L . ( 2000 ) . Developing essential study skills . Prentice - Hall , Englewood Cliffs , NJ . ( Cited on page 40 . ) 184 Bibliography Pekrun , R . ( 2006 ) . The Control – value Theory of Achievement Emo - tions : Assumptions , Corollaries , and Implications for Educational Research and Practice . Educational Psychology Review , 18 ( 315 – 341 ) . ( Cited on pages 35 , 49 , 72 , and 89 . ) Pekrun , R . and Perry , P . ( 2014 ) . Control - value Theory of Achievement Emotions . In International Handbook of Emotions in Education . Taylor and Francis . ( Cited on pages 35 , 50 , 72 , 89 , and 160 . ) Perry , D . and Aragon , C . ( 2014 ) . Game co - design for bioinformatics and cyber learning . Participatory serious game desing workshop . In ChiPlay 2014 . ( Cited on page 28 . ) Piaget , J . ( 1952 ) . The Origins of Intelligence in Children . University Press , New York , NY , USA . ( Cited on pages 16 , 142 , and 146 . ) Potter , L . E . , Korte , J . , and Nielsen , S . ( 2014 ) . Design with the deaf : Do deaf children need their own approach when designing technol - ogy ? In Proceedings of the 2014 Conference on Interaction Design and Children , IDC ’ 14 , pages 249 – 252 , New York , NY , USA . ACM . ( Cited on pages 22 and 28 . ) Preece , J . , Rogers , Y . , and Sharp , H . ( 2002 ) . Interaction Design . John Wiley & amp ; Sons , Inc . , New York , NY , USA , 1 st edition . ( Cited on pages 9 and 14 . ) Preece , J . , Rogers , Y . , Sharp , H . , Benyon , D . , Holland , S . , and Carey , T . ( 1994 ) . Human - Computer Interaction . Addison - Wesley Longman Ltd . , Essex , UK , UK . ( Cited on page 14 . ) Prensky , M . ( 2001 ) . Fun , Play and Games : What Makes Games Engaging . In Digital Game - Based Learing . ( Cited on page 25 . ) Prensky , M . ( 2005 ) . Engage Me or Enrage Me : What Today’s Learners Demand . Educause Review , 40 ( 5 ) . ( Cited on page 22 . ) Q 2 L School ( 2006 ) . Quest to learn school . ( Cited on page 34 . ) Raccanello , D . and Bianchetti , C . ( 2014 ) . Pictorial Representations of Achievement Emotions : Preliminary Data with Children and Adults . In Proceedings of Methods and Intelligent Systems for Technology En - hanced Learning , volume 292 , pages 127 – 134 . cited By 0 . ( Cited on page 72 . ) Raccanello , D . and Bianchetti , C . ( 2016 ) . Achievement Emotions in Technology Enhanced Learning : Development and Validation of Self - report Instruments in the Italian Context . Interaction Design and Ar - chitecture . ( Cited on pages 35 , 49 , 72 , and 128 . ) 185 Bibliography Raccanello , D . , Brondino , M . , and De Bernardi , B . ( 2013 ) . Achievement Emotions in Elementary , Middle and High - School : How Do Stu - dents Feel About Speciﬁc Contexts in Terms of Settings and Subject - Domains ? Scandinavian Journal of Psychology , 54 ( 6 ) : 477 – 484 . ( Cited on pages 49 , 50 , and 87 . ) Raccanello , D . , Hall , R . , and De Bernardi , B . ( 2014 ) . Emozioni di Rius - cita : Uno Studio Qualitativo con Studenti di Scuola Primaria e Sec - ondaria ( Achievement Emotions : a Qualitative Study with Primary and Secondary School Students ) . In Abstract in XXVII Congresso AIP , Sezione di Psicologia dello Sviluppo e dell’Educazione . ( Cited on page 49 . ) Ramirez , R . ( 2009 ) . A ’meditation’ on meaningful participation . The Journal of Community Informatics , 4 ( 3 ) . ( Cited on page 14 . ) Read , J . and Markopoulos , P . ( 2013 ) . Child - computer interaction . In - ternational Journal of Child - Computer Interaction . ( Cited on pages 15 and 20 . ) Read , J . and Mazzone , E . ( 2008 ) . MESS - Mad Evaluation Session with Schoolchildren i . Interfaces , British HCI Group ( 74 ) : 8 – 10 . ( Cited on page 20 . ) Read , J . C . ( 2008 ) . Validating the fun toolkit : An instrument for measur - ing children & # x 2019 ; s opinions of technology . Cogn . Technol . Work , 10 ( 2 ) : 119 – 128 . ( Cited on pages 30 and 75 . ) Reeve , J . , Jang , H . , Carrell , D . , Jeon , S . , and Barch , J . ( 2004 ) . Enhancing Students’ Engagement by Increasing Teachers’ Autonomy Support . Motivation and Emotion , 28 ( 2 ) : 147 – 169 . ( Cited on page 22 . ) R . M . and Deci , E . ( 2000 ) . Self - determination theory and the facilitation of intrinsic motivation , social development , and well - being . Ameri - can Psychologist , 55 : 68 – 78 . ( Cited on page 41 . ) Robertson , J . and Good , J . ( 2005 ) . Story creation in virtual game worlds . Commun . ACM , 48 ( 1 ) : 61 – 65 . ( Cited on pages 27 and 30 . ) Rode , J . A . , Stringer , M . , Toye , E . F . , Simpson , A . R . , and Blackwell , A . F . ( 2003 ) . Curriculum - focused design . In Proceedings of the 2003 Conference on Interaction Design and Children , IDC ’ 03 , pages 119 – 126 , New York , NY , USA . ACM . ( Cited on pages 19 and 20 . ) Salen , K . and Zimmerman , E . ( 2003 ) . Rules of Play : Game Design Funda - mentals . MIT Press . ( Cited on page 23 . ) Sanders , E . B . ( 2002 ) . From User - Centered to Participatory Design Ap - proaches . In design and social science . ( Cited on pages 9 , 11 , and 12 . ) 186 Bibliography Sanders , E . B . and Stappers , P . J . ( 2008 ) . Co - creation and the New Landscapes of Design . CoDesign : International Journal of CoCreation in Design and the Arts , 4 ( 1 ) : 5 – 18 . ( Cited on pages 12 , 14 , and 55 . ) Sanders , E . B . - N . , Brandt , E . , and Binder , T . ( 2010 ) . A framework for organizing the tools and techniques of participatory design . In Pro - ceedings of the 11 th Biennial Participatory Design Conference , PDC ’ 10 , pages 195 – 198 , New York , NY , USA . ACM . ( Cited on page 13 . ) Sanders , L . and Stappers , P . ( 2014 ) . Designing to Co - Designing to Collective Dreaming : Three Slices in Time . Interactions , 21 ( 6 ) : 24 – 33 . ( Cited on page 30 . ) Santos , A . , Vaughn , B . , Peceguina , I . , and Daniel , J . ( 2014 a ) . Longi - tudinal Stability of Social Competence Indicators in a Portuguese Sample : Q - sort Proﬁles of Social Competence , Measures of Social Engagement , and Peer Sociometric Acceptance . Developmental Psy - chology , 50 ( 3 ) : 968 – 978 . ( Cited on page 21 . ) Santos , A . , Vaughn , B . , Peceguina , I . , Daniel , J . , and Shin , N . ( 2014 b ) . Growth of Social Competence During the Preschool Years : A 3 - Year Longitudinal Study . Child Development , 85 ( 5 ) : 2062 – 2073 . ( Cited on page 21 . ) Sauro , J . and Lewis , J . ( 2012 ) . Quantifying the User Experience . Morgan Kaufmann . ( Cited on page 167 . ) Scaife , M . and Rogers , Y . ( 1998 ) . The design of children’s technology . In Druin , A . , editor , Proceedings of the ACM SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , chapter Kids As Informants : Telling Us What We Didn’T Know or Conﬁrming What We Knew Already ? , pages 27 – 50 . Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc . , San Francisco , CA , USA . ( Cited on pages 17 and 18 . ) Scaife , M . , Rogers , Y . , Aldrich , F . , and Davies , M . ( 1997 ) . Designing for or Designing with ? Informant Design for Interactive Learning Environments . In Proc . of CHI’ 97 , pages 343 – 350 . ACM . ( Cited on page 29 . ) Schell , J . ( 2008 ) . The Art of Game Design : A Book of Lenses . Morgan Kauf - mann Publishers Inc . , San Francisco , CA , USA . ( Cited on pages 25 and 154 . ) Schmidt , M . E . and Vanderwater , E . A . ( 2008 ) . Media Attention , Cogni - tion , and School Achievement . The Future of Children , 63 - 85 . The Future of Children . ( Cited on page 31 . ) 187 Bibliography Schuler , D . and Namioka , A . , editors ( 1993 ) . Participatory Design : Prin - ciples and Practices . L . Erlbaum Associates Inc . , Hillsdale , NJ , USA . ( Cited on page 11 . ) Seaborn , K . and Fels , D . ( 2015 ) . Gamiﬁcation in Theory and Action : A Survey . International Journal of Human - Computer Studies , 74 : 14 – 31 . ( Cited on page 41 . ) Shernoff , D . , Csikszentmihalyi , M . , Schneider , B . , and Shernoff , E . S . ( 2003 ) . Student engagement in high school classrooms from the perspective of ﬂow theory . School Psychology Quarterly , 18 : 158 – 176 . ( Cited on pages 35 , 44 , 48 , 50 , 73 , and 87 . ) Sjöberg , C . and Timpka , T . ( 1998 ) . Participatory design of information systems in health care . Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association : JAMIA , 5 ( 2 ) : 177 – 183 . ( Cited on page 12 . ) Slavin , R . E . ( 1991 ) . Student Team Learning : a Practical Guide to Coop - erative Learning . DC : National Education Association of the United States . ( Cited on page 32 . ) Slavin , R . E . ( 1996 ) . Research on Cooperative Learning and Achieve - ment : What We Know , What We Need to Know . Conteporary Educa - tional Psychology , 21 : 43 – 49 . ( Cited on page 40 . ) Smeets , E . ( 2005 ) . Does ict contribute to powerful learning environ - ments in primary education ? Comput . Educ . , 44 ( 3 ) : 343 – 355 . ( Cited on page 24 . ) Soegaard , M . and ( Eds . ) , R . F . D . ( 2015 ) . The Encyclopedia of Human - Computer Interaction , 2 nd Ed . . Interaction Design Foundations . ( Cited on page 168 . ) Stata Corp . ( 2013 ) . Stata statistical software : Release 13 . College Station , TX : StataCorp LP . ( Cited on page 72 . ) Stein , N . L . and Glenn , C . G . ( 1979 ) . An Analysis of Story Comprehen - sion In Elementary School Children . In Freedle , R . , editor , Discourse Processing : Multidisciplinary Perspectives . Norwood , NJ : Ablex . ( Cited on page 119 . ) Steiner , B . , Kaplan , N . , and Moulthrop , S . ( 2006 ) . When play works : Turning game - playing into learning . In Proceedings of the 2006 Confer - ence on Interaction Design and Children , IDC ’ 06 , pages 137 – 140 , New York , NY , USA . ACM . ( Cited on page 27 . ) Stephenson , C . and Barr , V . ( 2011 ) . Deﬁning computational thinking for k - 12 . CSTA Voice , 7 ( 2 ) : 3 – 4 . ( Cited on page 162 . ) 188 Bibliography Sykes , J . and Federoff , M . ( 2006 ) . Player - centred game design . In CHI ’ 06 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems , CHI EA ’ 06 , pages 1731 – 1734 , New York , NY , USA . ACM . ( Cited on page 25 . ) Tan , J . L . , Goh , D . H . - L . , Ang , R . P . , and Huan , V . S . ( 2011 ) . Child - centered interaction in the design of a game for social skills inter - vention . Comput . Entertain . , 9 ( 1 ) : 2 : 1 – 2 : 17 . ( Cited on pages 24 , 27 , 29 , 31 , 91 , and 166 . ) Tarrin , N . , Petit , G . , and Chêne , D . ( 2006 ) . Network force - feedback ap - plications for hospitalized children in sterile room . In Proceedings of the 2006 Conference on Interaction Design and Children , IDC ’ 06 , pages 157 – 160 , New York , NY , USA . ACM . ( Cited on page 22 . ) TERENCE consortium ( 2010 ) . Terence fp 7 . http : / / www . terenceproject . eu . ( Cited on pages 1 and 28 . ) Vaajakallio , K . , Lee , J . , and Mattelmäki , T . ( 2009 ) . " It Has to Be a Group Work ! " : Co - design With Children . In Proceedings of the 8 th Conference on Interaction Design and Children , IDC ’ 09 , pages 246 – 249 , New York , NY , USA . ACM . ( Cited on pages 19 , 21 , 28 , 30 , and 31 . ) Vaajakallio , K . , Mattelmäki , T . , and Lee , J . ( 2010 ) . Co - design Lessons with Children . Interactions , 17 ( 4 ) : 26 – 29 . ( Cited on page 21 . ) Van Mechelen , M . , Gielen , M . , vanden Abeele , V . , Laenen , A . , and Za - man , B . ( 2014 ) . Exploring Challenging Group Dynamics in Partic - ipatory Design with Children . In Proceedings of the 2014 Conference on Interaction Design and Children , IDC ’ 14 , pages 269 – 272 , New York , NY , USA . ACM . ( Cited on pages 16 , 21 , 29 , and 30 . ) Van Mechelen , M . , Zaman , B . , Laenen , A . , and Abeele , V . V . ( 2015 ) . Challenging group dynamics in participatory design with children : Lessons from social interdependence theory . In Proceedings of the 14 th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children , IDC ’ 15 , pages 219 – 228 , New York , NY , USA . ACM . ( Cited on page 16 . ) Vanden Abeele , V . A . and Van Rompaey , V . ( 2006 ) . Introducing human - centered research to game design : Designing game concepts for and with senior citizens . In CHI ’ 06 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems , CHI EA ’ 06 , pages 1469 – 1474 , New York , NY , USA . ACM . ( Cited on page 25 . ) Vasalou , A . , Ingram , G . , and Khaled , R . ( 2012 ) . User - centered research in the early stages of a learning game . In Proceedings of the Designing Interactive Systems Conference , DIS ’ 12 , pages 116 – 125 , New York , NY , USA . ACM . ( Cited on page 28 . ) 189 Bibliography Vines , J . , Clarke , R . , Wright , P . , McCarthy , J . , and Olivier , P . ( 2013 ) . Con - ﬁguring participation : On how we involve people in design . In Pro - ceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Sys - tems , CHI ’ 13 , pages 429 – 438 , New York , NY , USA . ACM . ( Cited on page 12 . ) Vygotskiˇı , L . ( 1978 ) . Mind in Society : the Development of Higher Psycho - logical Processes . Harvard University Press . ( Cited on page 16 . ) Walsh , G . ( 2009 ) . Wii can do it : Using co - design for creating an in - structional game . In CHI ’ 09 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems , CHI EA ’ 09 , pages 4693 – 4698 , New York , NY , USA . ACM . ( Cited on pages 22 and 28 . ) Walsh , G . , Druin , A . , Guha , M . , Foss , E . , Golub , E . , Hatley , L . , Bon - signore , E . , and Franckel , S . ( 2010 ) . Layered Elaboration : a New Technique for Co - design with Children . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , CHI ’ 10 , pages 1237 – 1240 , New York , NY , USA . ACM . ( Cited on pages 19 and 31 . ) Walsh , G . , Foss , E . , Yip , J . , and Druin , A . ( 2013 ) . Facit pd : A framework for analysis and creation of intergenerational techniques for partic - ipatory design . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , CHI ’ 13 , pages 2893 – 2902 , New York , NY , USA . ACM . ( Cited on pages 28 and 29 . ) Walz , S . P . , editor ( 2010 ) . Toward a Ludic Architecture : The Space of Play and Games . ETC Press , Pittsburgh , PA , USA . ( Cited on page 28 . ) Weiss , P . , Gal , E . , Eden , S . , Bauminger , and N . , Zancanaro , M . ( 2013 ) . Increasing social engagement in children with high - functioning autism spectrum disorder using collaborative technologies in the school environment . Autism . , 17 ( 3 ) . ( Cited on page 22 . ) Westerlund , B . , Westerlund , B . , Lindqvist , S . , Lindqvist , S . , Mackay , W . , Mackay , W . , Sundblad , Y . , Sundblad , Y . , and Sinna , L . ( 2003 ) . Co - design methods for designing with and for families . In Proceedings from the European Academy of Design 5 . ( Cited on pages 10 and 12 . ) Wiggins , G . ( 1998 ) . Educative Assessment : Designing Assessments to Inform and Improve Student Performance . Jossey - Bass , ﬁrst edition . ( Cited on page 35 . ) Wing , J . M . ( 2006 ) . Computational thinking . Commun . ACM , 49 ( 3 ) : 33 – 35 . ( Cited on page 162 . ) 190