AN ANALYSIS OF THE STRUCTURAL VARIABLES THAT DETERMINE PROBLEM - SOLVING DIFFICULTY ON A COMPUTER - BASED TELETYPE by Elizabeth Jane Fishman Loftus TECHNICAL REFORT NO . 162 December 18 , 1970 PSYCHOLOGY SERIES Reproduction in Whole or in Part is Permitted for any Purpose of the United States Government INSTITUTE FOR MATHEMATICAL STUDIES IN THE SOCIAL SCIENCES STANFORD UNIVERSITY STANFORD , CALIFORNIA ACKNOWLEDGMENTS I would like to express my thanks to Dr . Patrick Suppes , the chairman of my committee , for his advice , support and encouragement throughout all stages of this research . I would also like to thank Dr . Richard Atkinson for years of patience . I am grateful , finally , to Geoffrey , to whom lowe much more than I can acknowledge . This research was conducted during the author ' s tenure as a Public Health Service Predoctoral Fellow , Fellowship No . I - FOl - MH - 46479 - 01 . This research was supported by National Science Foundation Grant No . G - 18709 to Patrick Suppes . i TABLE OF CONTENTS Page Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . f ' • • • • i Chapter I . Introduction . . . . • . . . . . . . • II . Traditions in Problem - solving ResearGh UI . The Theory . . . . . . . . • . • . IV . Design and Experimental Procedure V . Results VI . Discussion VII . Summary References Appeljdix A Appendix B ii • • 1 4 15 26 35 52 56 58 68 91 AN ANALYSIS OF THE STRUCTURAL VARIABLES THAT DETERMINE PROBLEM - SOLVING DIFFICULTY ON A COMPUTER - BASED TELETYPE Elizabeth Jane Fishman Loftus Stanford University Stanford , California 94305 Chapter I . INTRODUCTION There exists a great diversity of approaches to the investigation of human problem solving . A wide range of materials , techniques , and " problems " has been used for such study . Subjects have been required to solve an anagram , a matchstick problem , a water - jar problem , a pendUlum problem , a concept - identification problem , an analogy problem , a number - series problem , or an arithmetical word problem , to name a few . Some of these problems require the student to restructure a patterned situation to achieve a novel result ( Duncker , 1945 ; Wertheimer , 1945 ) , while others require him to find the commonality in a group of disparate situations ( Heidbreder , 1947 ; Bruner , Goodnow , and Austin , 1956 ) . Some problems are solved in a sequence of well - defined steps ( Hayes , 1965 ) , while others are solved suddenly in a single step ( Maier , 1931 ) . Several theoretical formulations have been offered and many facts have been discovered , but there is still no single adequate theory into which they can be integrated . In addition , there is very little analysis of why arithmetic word problems , specifically , are difficult for students . We know that students have notorious difficulty in solving word problems . The present study is an attempt to find out why . It is an attempt to explore the notion that in solving a set of word problems , certain items are more difficult to solve than others . It is an attempt to understand what variables cause some word problems to be hard to solve while others are easy . Once we have a grip on these variables , we can attempt to organize a set of word problems in terms of them . It is assumed that understanding the variables relevant to problem solving is a worthwhile and scientifically important goal , for only then can we hope to be able to formulate a coherent theory of problem solving . 1 The purpose of the present study is to examine the relative influence of structural factors in word problems to be solved . The use of the term " structural " indicates that the focus of attention is on the variables which characterize the specific problems themselves ( for example , the number of words in the problem ) and on the variables which characterize the relationship between individual problems ( for example , the structural similarity of two adjacent problems ) . The emphasis , then , is on the problems themselves and the relationship between problems , rather than on variables which characterize the students ( student variables ) or variables which characterize the . experimental methods used to present the problems ( presentation variables ) . Presentation variables which have been examined in previous research include such ones as massed vs . distributed practice , immediate vs . delayed reinforcement , etc . They are generally thought to be independent of the student ' s past learning history . Student variables which have been . studied previously include such ones as the chronological age , sex , training , reading ability , and capacity for mathematics of the student . Problem - solving ability has been shown to depend on all of these ( Lazerte , 1933 ) . Possible inter relationships between the structural , presentation , and student variables are not denied he ~ e . However , a number of experiments suggest that the effects of most presentation variables ( massed vs . distributed practice , for example ) hold in diverse student populations and over a wide range of experimental materials ( Underwood , 1961 ; Mednick , 1964 , pp . 84 - 87 ) . In this study , therefore , we feel justified in having restricted ourselves to an analysis of structural variables alone . One aspect of this research is unique to investigations of problem solving . It was conducted in the context of a computer - assisted instruc tional system . At Stanford , the Institute for Mathematical Studies in the Social Sciences ( IMSSS ) has been developing over the last six years a working computer - assisted instruction ( CAI ) system for classroom use . This research is a small part of an investigation of the potential use and value of such systems . This study , in conjunction with Suppes , Loftus , and Jerman ( 19691 demonstrates a new use . for such systems . 2 A computer program was used to teach sixth - grade students the mechanics of how to solve arithmetic word problems on a canputer - based teletype . The assumption was made that the students had a basic under· standing of the four arithmetical operations : addition , subtraction , multiplication , and division . The students were required to know which operation ( s ) should be performed for problem solution , and to tell the computer which . one ( s ) ; however , the actual computations were done by the computer . Following the initial instruction set , a series of 100 word problems WaS presented to the students . For each problem , the students were required to find a quantitative answer . The arithmetical operations were not explicitly indicated . An example of a problem in arithmetic providing the pupil with an opportunity to use his knowledge of multi plication is the following : A bushel of corn weighs 56 pounds . How much do 44 bushels weigh ? The solutions of these problems were analyzed to determine the structural variables related to problem difficulty . The length of a problem and the . number of steps required to reach the correct solution are examples of what we mean by factors related to problem difficulty . It is quite probable that a problem containing a large number of words or one requiring a large number of steps is harder to solve than one containing fewer words or requiring fewer steps . 3 Chapter II . TRADITIONS IN PROBLEM - SOLVING RESEARCH There has been a great deal of writing , speculating , and research on problem solving . Although much of this work is not directly relevant to the investigation of word problem solving , it did provide a numberbf important hints and suggestions as to which variables might be influencing problem - solving performance . It would be neither practical nor useful to present a canprehensive survey of all remotely relevant research . We refer interested readers to the following excellent reviews : Johnson , 1955 ; Gagne , 1959 ; Duncan , 1959 ; Davis , 1966 ; Kleinmuntz , 1966 . In this section , we instead describe the types of work that have been done and attempt to give the flavor of these previous approaches to the investi gation of problem solving . Research On problem solving has evolved within two main . traditions . One tradition has its roots in Gestalt psychology . The Gestalt psychol ogists used many different kinds of problems , ranging from mechanical puzzles to abstract mathematical problems . Many of the problems they chose for study were selected from a " true life " situation such as troubleshooting electronic equipment . Others tried to capture the flavor , if only partially , of problems we meet in everyday life . The Gestalt approach , in remaining devoted to the analysis of internal processes , emphasized the tendency of the mind to organize and integrate and to perceive situations , including problems , as total structures . They emphasized the structure of the problem , then , and the process of reorganization of the perceptual field which leads to insight . This insight leads to a solution of the problem . This emphasis on perceptual phenomena dominated their research on problem solving . Working within the Gestalt tradition , Maier ( 1931 ) demonstrated how the perception of the solution of his famous pendulum problem was like perceiving a hidden figure in a puzzle picture - - the solution appeared 4 suddenly and as a complete idea . In this problem , two strings are hanging from the ceiling and the sUbject is required to tie the ends together . However , the strings are too far apart for the subject to grasp one , walk to the other , and tie them . The solution is to tie a weight On one string and set it in motion as a pendulum , then hold the other string and wait until the swinging string comes within reach . The only object in the room available to serve as a weight is a pair of pliers . Because the pliers normally function as a tool rather than as a weight , they are not easily seen as a pendulum bob . This has been called func tionalfixedness . In order to solve the problem , the pliers must be seen as a weight . Maier pictured the solution of this problem as the sudden combination and organization of elements . This characterization of problem solving , in terms of changes in organization and meaning , is typical of the Gestalt view . However , these results can easily be interpreted in terms of an all - or - none comJ . itioning model . If the phrase " sudden com bination and organization of elements " is replaced by " all - or - none con ditioning , " the underlying formal model is unchanged . Whereas Maier emphasized the perceptual aspects of constructional problems , Duncker ( 1945 ) emphasized the structural aspects of practical and mathematical ones . He used clearly· defined problems requiring the discovery of a novel relationship . For example , how can rays which destroy organic tissues at sufficient intensity be used to treat an inoperable stomach tumor ? Or , why are all six - place numbers of the formabc , abc , such as 276 , 276 , divisible by 13 ? His interesting experi ments with such problems were designed to evoke general facts about reasoning and problem solving . They were meant to open up the field and supply data for further investigation rather than to answer questions or confirm theories . From a number of diverse experiments he drew general conclusions , suggesting that in solving a problem , a subject usually applies previous experience to the present situation by means of cognitive - perceptual responses . These cognitive - perceptual responses are set off through reactions to some signals from the immediate environ - ment in which the problem is set . and he reacts to present stimuli . The subject perceives in the present , Whether he solves the problem correctly 5 depends more or less on chance reformulations and changes in those presented stimuli . The solution itself emerges from a particular reorganization of the entire " psychological field . " Max Wertheimer ( 1945 ) , a founder of Gestalt . psychology and one time teacher of Duncker , completed a whole series of problem - solving experiments . From this series he arrived at several notions which could comprise his theory of problem solving ; It is a good statement of the Gestalt position . For Wertheimer , problem solving depended on a grasping of the structural and functional relationships of the problem situation . The key to solving a problem was discovering the " inner relations " of the situation and reorganizing the situation in light of that discovery . For example , suppose a child who is capable of finding the area of a rectangle is asked to get the area of a parallelogram . Wertheimer claimed that if the child thinks about it he will notice that a parallelogram differs from a rectangle in that the former has a " protuberance " on one side and a " gap " on the other . ( See Figure 1 . ) Then , he realizes that Insert Figure 1 about here the " protuberance " and the " gap " are equivalent ( discovering " inner relations " of the situation ) . If he moves the " protuberance " to f : tll in the gap , the parallelogram is converted into a rectangle of the same base and altitude . He has essentially reorganized the situation in light of his discovery . Now he knows that the formula for the area of a parallelogram is the same as it is for a rectangle . Problem solving , then , involved striving and struggling with a configuration the structure of which changed with the effort . Problem solving was not the automatic application of established habits or behavior patterns to stereotyped situations . It was a dynamic process growing out of , and shaped by , each specific situation . Hoffman ' s ( 1961 ) theory of problem solving was essentially a statement of the conditions which stimulate creative problem solving . The following conditions appear to be necessary : 6 I . " I· ' " • • • I I Ii I ' L ' , ·• • . . • , . _ , , _ , : _ _ ~ . ; . . . _ _ . ; . . . _ _ . . . . . . : " ' " " . . . . . ; . ~ . . 2 . . Fig . . T . Werthe ' imer ' s paral : reldgram ; . The parallelogram ( Iii ' S " equal in area to , a rectangle of the same . base and altitude ' because the " protuberance " at one end is " , qual toj ; he " gap " at the other end ( 2 ) ( adapted ) from Scheerer , . 1963 ) . ' · ' . 7 1 . Differing , but comparable , cognitions must coexist . Examples of such cognitions are solutions , or approaches to the problem . 2 . At least 2 differing cognitions must acquire approximately equal positive valence , so that none of the alternatives can be accepted and an impasse is reached . 3 . Problem solving must occur in a situation in which the individual or group which is solving the problem is required to arrive at the best possible decision . Thus , the possibility of leaving the problem or accepting ~ quick solution just " to get it over with " is omitted . 4 . The points of conflict between the alternatives should be recognized . Hoffman cites some examples from research literature which illustrate the usefulness of viewing problem solving in terms of these conditions . The work of Sheerer ( 1963 ) centered on the phenomenon of fixation . Sheerer observed that . insight . into many different problems and puzzles is often delayed or thwarted by " fixation " on an inappropriate solution . The problems he discussed ill ' : ! ~ trated ~ everll . l causes of fixation . A person may start with an incorrect premise or fail tc perceive a required novel use of a familiar qbject , or be unwilling to accept a detour that delays the achievement . of his goal . Too much motivation can amplify any type of fixation and is detrimental to a solution . Fixation can often be overcome and insight attained through a sudden " recentering " or shift in the ways the problem or objects are perceived . Cognitive considerations have entered into the studies reported by Bruner , Goodnow , and Austin ( 1956 ) . Following in the tradition of Wertheimer and Duncker , they report nine new experiments on the phenomenon of categorizing or conceptualizing , a type of problem solving . In a typical task , S has to select stimuli , one by one , from a whole set of stimuli , beipg told each . time whether the instance selected was a . member of the concept whichE had in mind . The authors claim , rightlY , that if we are to analyze the sequences of behavior invol ' ved in su ~ h a prol ) lem solving activity , we must externalize the components of those sequences . As their unit of analysis , they have used " cognitive strategy , " a tem porarily extended segment of behavior . The sequence of choices enables E 8 to make inferences about the particular strategy which S has adopted . But these cognitive strategies are little more than descriptive terms ; analysis of such strategies may be useful for understanding concept formation , but it does not provide any sort of framework for estimating parameters for the prediction of differential difficulty of concept formation items or any other stimulus items ( Suppes , . Jerman , and Brian , 1968 ) . Nor can any predictions be derived within the framework of Wer . theimer ' . s " inner relations , " Hoffman ' s " differing cognitions , " or Sheerer ' s " fixation " on an inappropriate solution . It is our conviction that until such predictions can be derived from well ~ developed theoretical ideas , we are not even close to having a deep understanding about cognitive processes . . A mOre recent . development within this tradition , the information processingapproach , has been due to the impact of computer technology . Computer simulation is a method for investigating human behavior that useS a computer program as a precise , well - defined theoretical model of the behavior being simulated . Some of the computer models directly concerned with problem solving are reported by Neisser ( 1963a ) , Feigenbaum and Feldman ( 1963 ) , Newell , Shaw , and Simon ( 1958a ) , Newell and Simon ( 1963a ) , and Paige and Simon ( 1966 ) . The computer program serves as a useful notation and the computer itself serves as a helpful mechanism for testing the implications of the models and for dealing with the complexities involved . The basic notion behind the computer simulation approach is that complex thinking proceases are built of elementary symbol manipulation processes ; human subjects are thought to solve problems in a manner very similar to the symbol manipulations carried out by a computer . The general strategy of these information - processing psychologists , then , is to develop a computer program which produces a sequence of rules for manipulating symbols ( i . e . , solving problems ) in a manner which closely matches the behavior of human subjects . Often information gained in comparing computer program sequences and human protocols is used to modify the program and make it a more accurate simulation of human performance . When the program can produce a protocol which closely 9 resembles human behavior in terms of the sequence of steps used in solving ~ ~ a problem then that program constitutes a theory of how subjects solve problems ( Newell and Simon , 1963b ) . Computer simulation is a difficult process . Among other things , prior information , possible solutions , and the sequence of steps in problem solving must all be specified ( HOVland , 1960 ) . Yet it has been done with reasonable success . Newell , Shaw , and Simon ( 1958a ; 1958b ; 1959 ; 1963a ; 1963b ) have developed programs that solve logic problems , prove theorems , and play chess in a manner much like that of humans : traces of the moves considered by the computer compare line by line with human protocols . Newell , Shaw , and Simon have elaborated their research into a theory of problem solving which emphasizes the discovery and understanding of systems of heuristics . Their work has significantly influenced recent research on higher mental processes , but their programs can be considered only tentative theories ) additional evidence is still needed to determine the extent to which the problem - solving processes used in the theory resemble , or differ from , processes used by humans on the same tasks . One difficulty with this approach is that , frdm the examination of a computer program alone , is often very hard to understand just what the theory is . Because discussions of the internal structure of a program typically involve pages and pages of very technical informa tion , a high level of sophistication is usually necessary to understand the program . Another major problem associated with computer simulation models lies in evaluating the goodness of fit of the model to the data . Hilgard and Bower ( 1966 , p . 421 ) point out two drawbacks to the typical method for testing the validity of such models ( i . e . , direct comparison of computer output and human performance ) . One drawback is that the content of the SUbject ' s protocol ~ ay be influenced by incidental , selective reinforcements by the experimenter . The effects of certain facial expressions , tones of voice and other casual reinforcement upon behavior , whether intentional or not , are well - established ( Krasner , 1958 ; Verplanck , 1962 ) . A second drawback is that in many cases the standard statistical data analysis techniques carmot be applied . Because 10 of these technical complexities and other practical problems , some researchers feel that computer simulation may be as much a hinderance as a help in theory construction ( Scandura , 1968 ) . The other main tradition in problem - solving research has its roots in Behaviorism . Behaviorism is an approach which conside ~ s the relations between observable stimuli and responses . Proponents of behaviorism are concerned not with what people think and feel , but with what people do . They maintain that the phenomena termed " problem solving " can be accounted for most efficiently by means of elementary relationships among stimuli and responses . The laboratory study of learning has been successful in establishing these elementary principles ; these can then be used to explain problem solving and other complex processes . Since problem solving itself is concerned with mental pro cessesand thus is often not observable , psychologists working in this tradition have been forced to assume implicit or internal stimuli and responses which mediate the overt response indicating the solution of the problem . This attempt ' to broaden the theoretical system typically results in one ' s predictions being applicable to more situations , but not closely to any . Atypical experiment on problem solving within this tradition is one by Judson , Cofer , and Gelfand ( 1956 ) . Their subjects learned lists of words prior to working on Maier ' s two - string pendulum problem . The list learned by one group included names of objects relevant to the solution of the problem ( e . g . , rope , swing , pendulum , weight ) . This group subsequently did better in solving the problem than control groups exposed to lists containing no " key words . " These key words referred to different uses of the problem material , and learning them was assumed to mediate the overt responses which constituted solution of the problem . Along these same lines , Saugstad ( 1952 ) showed that Ss tended to solve problems more readily when verbal response sequences concerning the function of problem - solving objects were present . Gagne and Smith ( 1962 ) found that Ss who are required to verbalize while practicing in a problem - solving situation perform significantly better than Ss who are not required to verbalize . 11 A series of experiments by Kendler and his associates ( Keniiiior : and Vineberg , 1954 ; Kendler and D ' Amato ) 195 ' 5 ; KendleI ' and Mayzner , i956 ; Kendler and Karasik ) 1958 ) have demonstrated that problein . soiving seems to depend . lIpon the prior establishment of verba . l discriJri . inations . Two specifi , c ' findings . were ( 1 ) the proportion of children who respond most effectively in vrobleplSIOiLving increased with age , and ( 2 ) younger children who were required to tact the stimuli to which they were responding solvedproblep16 . , more quickly . These suggest that problem solution . is dependent upon ' the availability of verbal responses ( tacts ) to the objects involve . d· in . the problem . A stronger position suggested by these studies is ' that some verbal mediation must be assumed to occur between the external , s , tdmulus ; : and the overt responses if we are to account adequately . . , for , j : luman ' concept learning . Other behavii0riisttl , . , arguing that complex . behavior·can be explained . ' . by the : . same , elementar , y . pninciple , s that explain simple disoriminat ion learning , have attempted , to . . artalyze prOblem solving in the language of operants , habitfam ! ily ' hie ~ ar : chies , and chains of association . Osgood ' s ( 1953 ) model of , problem·solv . ing ) , f0r example " emphasizes . the role of meaning responses , . . < Briefly , , ani . opject involved in a problem elicits in the subject a hierarchy , , 6f meaning responses ( ways of perceiving the object Or its significance ) . Each meaning response itself elicits a hierarchy of problem - solving behaviors . Chains of these meaning responses constitute the mechanism controlling problem - sOlving behavior . The problem solving models of· Maltzman ( 1955 ) , Staats ( 1961 ) , and Cofer ( 1954 ) provide additional examples " of , well ~ developed models with which the present dis cussion is congruent . We will not review the pros and cons of the Gestalt or Behaviorist viewpoints ; for the interested reader , such reviews exist in several places ( see , for example , Hebb , 1949 ; Estes et al . , 1954 ; or Hilgard , 1956 ) • It is difficult to find crucial differences between the predi ' ctions which follow from the theoretical notions of these two traditions , and it is not Our purpose here to try to do thiS ~ It is , however , in the context of the latter tradition that we have chosen to experiment . We believe 12 that problem solving is compounded of elementary behavioral processes , and thus we have devised some simple problems in which the relationships of fundamental variables to problem solving are highlighted . We believe that in order to fully understand problem ~ solving behavior , we must discover new variables or new relationships between old variables . Like Duncker , however , we hope to evoke some general facts about problem solving and to supply data for further investigation , rather than to put forward a neat theory which , once submitted to scrvtiny , turns out to be unsound . For clearly an all - inclusive theory which seeks to explain a wide range of behavior in terms of a few simple principles is open to some question . Although problem solving is not a total mystery , the facts available at present , as the result of experimental studies , are scanty . What is needed are : muchmore empirical data , not more abstract , empty theory . This can only be undertaken through a large number of separate investi gations , each concerned with a highly specific situation in which one type of problem is studied . Each type of problem situation has to be investigated separately and related to the others only if connections are revealed . Until this has been done , we believe it is unwise to attempt to put forth an all - encompassing theory of problem solving . Let us turn briefly to the specific problem situation with which we are dealing , that is , the solving of arithmetic word problems . According to Davis ( 1966 ) there are no systematic investigations of variables which may determine some sources of difficulty in solving various types of arithmetic problems . There are studies on problem solving which are concerned with the effects of stress ( Kurz , 1964 ; Woodhead , 1964 ) , the effects of hypoxia ( Phillips , Griswold , and Pace , 1963 ) , and the effects of sleep deprivation ( Orr , 1964 ) . These experiments seem to suggest that minor stresses do not particularly disturb problem - solving performance . Numerous experiments are concerned with problem - solving ability . Most of these examine the relationship between an individual ' s success in problem solving and same other characteristics of his personality . Klausmeier and Loughlin ( 1961 ) analyzed the problem - solving behaviors of ll - year - olds as a function of IQ . They found that the high - IQ Ss 13 made significantly fewer errors , were more persistent and more efficient than low - IQ Ss . Martin ( 1963 ) found that problem solving as measured by the Arithmetic Problem - solving Test of the Iowa Tests of Basic Skills given to fourth and eighth graders was correlated with the following factors : reading comprehension , computation , abstract verbal reasoning , and arithmetic concepts . In addition , problem - solving ability has been reported to be related to arithmetic reading ability ( Stevens , 1932 ) , ability to note details in reading ( Chase , 1960 ) , and a General Reasoning factor ( Werdelin , 1966 ) . Although it is evident that there is some rela tionship between a number of abilities and success in problem solving , the nature of the relatiOnship and the relative contribution of each of these factors is still unclear . From the standpoint of a deeper scientific view of either what determines problem difficulty or how problems should be organized in order to optimize student learning , the existing research has been disappointing . One reason is that few of the studies purporting to show evidence of variables affecting problem - solving performance can be accepted without considerable reservation . Many of them are faulty , either ' in design or interpretation . Very few of these experiments have dealt with the specific structural variables in word problems or in the sequence of word problems . A search of the literature reveals a few studies on the effects of content of word problems ( Washburne and Morphett , 1928 ; Travers , 1967 ) , a few on the effect of language used in the problem ( Hydle and Clapp , 1927 ; Steffe , 1967 ) , and a few On the effects of readability ( Thompson , 1967 ) . A handful of others that have been particularly relevant to our choice of variables are discussed in Chapter III . However ; these , are pitifully few . Many mOre detailed studies dealing with specific structural variables are needed as an important step to the development of a general theory of word - problem solving . The present study is meant to be a modest contribution toward the development of such a theory ; to attempt to put forth such a theory now is far beyong the theoretical reach of this study . 14 Chapter IlL THE THEORY ' For the word problems analyzed in this paper , the main task was to identify the factors that contributed to the difficulty of the item . Examples of factors that we examined are the number of words in the prob lem and the minimum number of steps required to solve that problem . Exactly how each factor was defined is a matter that we take up in detail below . We would like to attach weights to the various factors , and then to use estimates of the weights to predict the relative difficulty of each of a large number of items . Before we can formulate any linear structural models from which parametric predictions of relative difficulty can be made , some notation is needed . Let the jth factor of problem i in the set of problems be denoted by X ij • The statistical parameters estlmated from the data are the weights attached to the factors . We denote the weight assigned to the jth factor by a , . We emphasize that the factors identified and J used in the model presented in this paper are always objective factors identifiable by the experimenter in the problems themselves . The response data themselves never influence the decision as to what is the numerical value of a factor for a given word problem . The definitions of all the factors used in the analyses presented here are quite straightforward ; each factor has an intuitive and direct relevance to commonsense ideas of difficulty . Consider the analysis of the response data . For a given problem i , let Pi be the observed proportion of correct responses for a group of students . The main task of a model is to predict the observed proportion The natural linear - regression model in terms of the factors the weights is 15 In order to guarantee preservation of probability , that is , to insure that predicted p . I s will always lie between 0 and 1 , we make the ~ 1 following transformation and define a new variable Z . : ~ ( 1 ) We then use as the regression model ( 2 ) The rest of this section is devoted to the discussion of how each variable used in the regression analysis is defined . We consider two types of variables . Variables of the first type are O , l - variables . A O , l - variable would be appropriate if , for example , we were dealing with a problem that required a conversion of units , such as from days to weeks . If a problem requires such a conversion , the conversion variable for that problem would receive a value of 1 . If no conversion is required , the conversion variable is given a value of O . Variables of the second type assume a finite set of values , with the set being greater than 2 . Such a variable would be appropriate , for example , if we were concerned with the length of a problem ; the length variable is given a value which is equal to the numper of words in the problem . Three other variables of the second type are the operations variable , the steps variable , and the depth variable . The operations variable refers to the minimum number of different operations required ITo take care of the case when the observed we use the following transformation log ( 2ni - 1 ) for Pi 0 z ~ 1 log 2n . 1 for Pi ~ 1 - ~ is either 0 ' or 1 , It should in the where n . ~ the total number of subjects responding to item i . ~ be noted that the reason for putting 1 - p . rather than p . ~ ~ numerator of equation ( 1 ) is that it is desirable to make the variables z . increase monotonically in difficulty . For example , if the length of a ~ problem or the number of steps needed to solve a problem increases with the difficulty of the problem , it is desirable that the model reflect this increase directly rather than inversely . 16 to solve a problem . For any given problem , this variablecbuld take on a value of 1 , 2 , 3 , or 4 . The steps variable refers to the minimum number of steps required to reach the correct solution . 2 These ~ wo variables may be distinguished more clearly if we consider a problem that asks the student to find the average of 8 numbers . Such a problem would give a value of 8 to the steps variable and a value of 2 to the operations variable . Seven steps of addition and one step of division are required to solve this problem . Before discussing the depth variable , a few words must be said about the length variable . Sentence length is frequently proposed as the most obvious and plausible factor contributing to sentence difficulty . This factor is e ~ enerally determined by the total count of the number of words in the sentence . Studies in language acquisition ( Miller and Ervin , 1963 ; Ervin , 1964 ) giVe evidence : of ' agradual progression of children f s languagedeveloprnent from one - word sentences , holophrases , to ' two ~ word pivot sentences , to sentences consisting of greater n " lllnbers of words . When children first begin to ' cornbine words , and when they bEigin to imitate adult sentences , they tend to use a " telegraphic code , " a grammatically incomplete sentence which is a shortening of adult sentences that retains only content words ( Brown and Fraser , 1963 ) . Many other developmental studies have shown similar increases in chronological age ( McCarthy , 1930 ; Davis , 1937 ; Loban , 1963 ; Menyuk , 1963 ) . For Menyuk , mean sentence length is taken to be a valid and quantitative measure of increased verban maturity . Deutsch and Cherry - Peisach ( 1966 ) found sentence length to be a significant variable in distinguishing the speech of first - grade children of different socio - economic groups . Braun - Lamesch ( 1962 ) found that younger children cannot recall whole sentences easily . Because this evidence indicates that younger children in early language development lack the ability to process long sentences , it seems safe ' to say that long sentences are more difficult for children to comprehend than shorter sentences . For the present , we shall generalize these results and assume they imply that longer word problems will be more difficult than shorter ones . 2 To avoid any ambiguity , we always first minimize the number of steps and then the number of operations . ' 17 Modern linguists agree that total comprehension of a sentence ihclud ~ ~ rec9gnizing , and , understanding the structural relationships in the sentence . Factors , , which , focus on element counts ( e . g . , n1JInberof words , nUlUber of pronouns , nUlUber of syllables perone hundred words ) ! : J . ave been successful in accounting for only , 26 to 51 percent of the variance incomprehension scores ( Ruddell , 1964 ) . This 10w , Percentage makes obvious the need for more attention to be given to , the organiza , tion of language structure . The measure of structural complexity that we , will use , is baSed on the depth hypothesis of Yngve ( 1960 ) . Yngve describes a procedure which assigns a nUlUber to each word of a sentence . The nUlUber reflects how embedded the word is in the sentence ; the more embedded in the sentence the word is , the higher the nUlUber assigned to the word . Yngve ' s procedure for determining the characterizing set of nUlUbers for anY sentence consists of drawing a phrase , structure , tree diagram of the sentence in question and then counting the nUlUber of , left branches leading to each , word . The nUlUberofleft branches which terminates the longest string of left branches : t " epresents the lIlaximUlU depth , dmax ' , of the sentence . Figure 2 illustrates the constituent structure tree represented by the sentence THE MAN SAW THE BOY . The sentence can be characterized by the following set of nUlUbers : 2 , 1 , 1 , 1 , 0 ; these are the respective nUlUber of , left branches leading to each word in the sentence . Insert Figure 2 about here " The first occurrence of THE terminates the longest string of left branches . Since THE terminates two left branches , the maximUlU depth for this sentence is , two . Yngve ( 1964 ) , claims that the depth hypothesis explains many of the complexities of language in terms of their function in allowing a maximUlU depth of about seven , but no more . Martin . and Roberts ( 1966 ) have modified Yngve I s depth measure by using the averagenUlUberofleft branches per word , in a sentence a $ their measure of structural complexity . The depth of the , sentence THE MAN , SAW THE BOY is equal to the mean of its Yngve nUlUbers , or ( 2 + 1 + 1 + 1 + 0 ) / 5 ~ 1 . 33 . Martin and Roberts presented to subjects sentences which differed 18 S , NP VP NP N v TI T THE SAW THE N BOY Fig . 2 . The constituent - structure tree represented by THE MAN SAW THE BOY . This constituent - structure tree is based on the following grammar and vocabulary : 1 - Grammar a . The whole sentence is b . S . . . . . , NP + VP c . NP . . . . . , T + N 9 , . . VP . . . . . , V + NP 2 . Vocabulary a . N ; : : man b . N = boy c . T = the d . , V = saw symbolized by S . S can be rewritten as noun phrase , NP , plus verb phrase , VP . The noun phrase is rewritten as an ' article , T , and a noun , N . The verb phrase is rewritten as a verb , V , and a noun phrase , NP . 19 in depth . Out of 6 " low - depth " sentences , subjects correctly recalled an average of 3 . 9 sentences ; recall for " high - depth " sentences was 3 . 1 sentences . Martin , Roberts , and Collins ( 1968 ) demonstrated additional support for the depth hypothesis in a task of recall of single sentences . Other investigators ( Rohrman , 1968 ; Perfetti , 1969 ) have found no support for the depth hypothesis in recall tasks . The conflicting reports cast some doubt on the general value of the Yngve hypothesis in recall tasks . However , the hypothesis may have some value for our understariding of word problem difficulty . The notion of ' luantifying the structu : ra . l comp : ) , exij : ; y of ' . a yord w : qblem and relating that complexity to pr9blem difficulty is appealing . For . a given problem , then , let its structural complexity , or depth , be formally defined by the fol : ) , owing procedure : 1 . Compute the mean of the Yngire numbers for each sentence in the problem• . 2 . The highest value of this set of what might be called Yngve means is taken as a measure : ( ) f the structural complexity of the pr·bblem as a whole . In other words , we assume that a problem is as complex as its most complex sentence . The procedure is illustrated by the following simple example . Suppose the problem . is : Jim hes 40 bottles . Ken has 30 bottles . They have how many bottles together ? Sentence 1 can be characterized by the following numbers : 1 , 1 , 1 , 0 , with a mean of . 75 . Sentence 2 can be characterized by the numbers 1 , 1 , 3 , 2 , 1 , 0 , . witha mean of 1 . 33 . 1 . 33 is the structural complexity , or depth , of the problem . At this point , . it ia important to mention that coding the depth of a sentence objectively is not an easy matter . Any discussion of the Yngve metric that does not consider this difficulty is ' luite naive . The coding problem has been hinted at recently by Rohrman ( 1968 ) in his attack on Martin and Roberts ( 1966 ) . Martin and Roberts characterized the sen tence " children are not allowed out after dark " by the numbers : 1 , . 4 , 3 , 2 , 1 , 1 , 0 ; " are " was assigned a 4 . Rohrman claims that it is very dif ficult to see what kind of tree could possibly give more than two branches 20 leading to the auxiliary verb , " are . " It is certainly possible for a given sentence to have more than one derivation tree , in which case there would be a different mean depth for each of the trees . 1his is often the case with ambiguous sentences ; typically they have more than one tree and a different mean depth for each . However , in the context of a complete word problem , none of the sentences used in the study is ambiguous . The problem of coding still exists , however , because Yngve has failed to pro vide an explicit set of rules for assigning numbers to words in a sentence . To assess the degree of reliability between two people coding these prob lems independently , a graduate student in psycholinguistics was given the job of coding a sample of 20 of the problems . His results correlate ex tremely well with those obtained by the author on that 20 - item sample . Further discussion of this procedure is presented in Chapter V . The first O , l - variable is the , sequential variable . This is the only variable in this study which concernS the relationship between individual problems rather then emphasizing the structure of the indi vidual problems themselves . If a problem cannot be solved by the same operation ( s ) , in the same order , as the problem that preceded it , the sequential variable for that problem is assigned the value of L If a problem is of the same type as the preceding problem , the value for this variable is O . Successful use of a sequential variable has been made in the analysis of fractions ( Suppes , Jerman , and Brian , 1968 , Chapter 7 ) and in the analysis of arithmetic word problems ( Suppes , Loftus , and Jerman , 1969 ) . The emphasis on such a sequential varia ' ble is very much in the spirit of recent work on ' verbal learning . In free recall , for example , the importance of the relationship between items in a list is well documented . Underwood and Schulz ( 1960 ) and Postman ( 1964 ) have stated quite explicitly that recall may be facilitated by associations among items in the list . In other words , recall of a particular item depends not only on the item qua item but also on the relationship between the item and other items in the list . Other psychologists have postulated the relationship between list - items and the general experimental context to account for the response - learning stage in paired - associate learning 21 ( Keppel , 1964 ; McGovern , 1964 ; Underwood , 1964 ) . Using a reaction - time techni ~ ue , Carey , Mehler , and Bever ( 1970 ) presented § ~ with a picture , then with a sentence , and asked them to judge the sentence true or false with respect to the picture . Results showed that the response latency for an ambiguous sentence clearly depended upon the particular syntactic structure of prior sentences that the Ss had heard . This abundance in the literature of evidence for the effects of inter - item relationships indicates that this matter is of psychologically great importance . The verbal ~ clue variable is the second O , l - variable . Brownell and Stretch ( 1931 ) felt that a problem could be analyzed into several elements or factors , one of which was a verbal clue to the operations . This factor was not varied systematically , and so no conclusions could be drawn about it . Kendler and Kendler ( 1962 ) , who discuss problem solving in S - R terms , claim that verbal behavior is necessary for problem solving . Furthermore , they say , problem - solving ability depends on the development of verbal behavior which mediates between the problem stimulus and the problem - solving behavior . At one point they suggest that investigation of the cue function of words might prove fruitful ( p . 10 ) . The work of Kendler and associates , discussed in Chapter II , has demonstrated the critical role of verbal discriminative responses in problem solving . These findings suggest that the provision of a verbal clue to the opera tion ( s ) re ~ uired to solve a word problem may facilitate solution . In the following problem , A wooden box contains 23 red beads and 83 blue beads . How many beads does it contain in all ? the word " and " should help the person to discriminate between the four operations he could use , and to choose the one ( addition ) that he should use " In a sense , the word " and " is a cue or a label for the operation of addition . The importance of the verbal responses of labeling in a multitude of situations is very well known ( Miller , 1948 ) . 22 We have defined the verbal - clue variable as follOws : L The verbal clue for problems , re ' luiring a single a , ddition is the word " and " ; if the problem does nqt contain this word , the verbal - clue variable for that problem is to be assigned a value of 1 , and a otherwise , 2 , The corresponding verbal clues for the other operations are : ( a ) " left " or a comparative for subtraction ; ( b ) " each " for multiplication ; ( c ) , " average " or " each " appearing in thequestionsentenceof " the problem for division . 3 . PrOblems re ' luiring multiple operations must contain all of the verbal clues pertaining to the re ' luired operations in order that the verbal - clue variable be assigned a value of a , The order variable is the third a , l - variable . Burns and Yonally ( 1964 ) a , sked the ' luestion , " does the order of presentation of numerical data in multi - step problems affect their difficulty ? " In other ' words , if problems are stated with numerical data not given in the order needed to solve the problem , will students solvea , s many of them successfully as problems stated with numericardata ' given in an order in which they could be used to solve the problems ? Their results indicated that students were less successful in getting the correct answer to word problems when the numerical data were presented in some order other than an order in which they could be used to solve the problem . These results suggest a new factor , the order variable , assigned a value of a if the problem can be solved by using the numerical data in the order given in the verbal statement of the problem , Note that the numerical data need not necessarily be so used , but if it can be used in the order presented , the value for the order variable is a , If the order of the numerical data must be reversed , then the value of the order variable is L The conversion variable is the last a , l - variable , If a problem re ' luires a couversion of units ( such as from months to weeks ) , the con version variable for that problem is assigned a value of 1 , and a other wise , The importance of this variable was suggested by the results of Suppes , Loftus , and Jerman ( 1969 ) , 23 = = = In summ ~ , y , the va , iableswe i ~ vestigateda , e : the ope , ations va , iable , that ' is , the minimum number of different ope , ations required to reach the correct solution ; the steps variable , that is , the minimum number of steps required to reach the correct solution ; the length va , iable , that is , the number of words in the problem ; the depth variable , that is , the ' Yng " V " emean for the most complex sentence in the problem ; X 5 = the sequential variable , assigned a value of 1 if the problem is not of the same type i e . , cannot be solved by the same operation ( s ) ) as the problem that preceded it , and o otherwise ; X 6 = the verbal - clue variable , assigned a value of lif the problem does not contain a verbal clue to the operation ( s ) required to solve the problem , and 0 otherwise ; X7 the order variable , assigned a value ofl if the nume . rical data are presellted in same order othyr . than an order . in which they could be used to solve the problem , and 0 otherwise ; = the conversion variable , ' assigned a value of·l if a conversion of units is required to solve the problem , ' and 0 otherwise . It should be noted that the higher the value assigned to a variable , the mOre difficult the problem is assumed to be . To illustrate how a word problem is coded on each of the 8 variables , consider the following example : A truck and its load ofcoal , reighed 14 , 875 pounds . The empty truck weighed 5 , 996 pounds . Find the weight , oftheco ~ l . The operations variable receives a value of 1 because the minimum number of operations required to reach the correct solution is one . The problem can be solved by using only subtraction . The steps variable receives a value of 1 because the minimum number of steps required to reach the cOrrect solution is one . One step of subtracting will do it . 24 The length variable receives a value of 22 because there are 22 words in the problem . Each number was counted as one word . The depth variable receives a value of 1 . 60 . The Yngve means for the three sentences in the problem are 1 . 60 , 1 . 17 , and . 83 , respectively . The first sentence yields the highest Yngve mean and the depth variable receives that number as its value . TheseguentialvaJ ; ' iable receives a value of 1 . The prQblems were arranged sequentially such that this problem never followed a problem of the same type . A value of 1 is thus appropriate here . 3 The verbal - clue variable receives a value of 1 . The problem does not contain a verbaJ . . clue to the operation required for solution ; it does not contain either the word " left " or a comparative for subtraction . The order variable receives a vaJ . . ue of O . The numerical data are presented in an order in which they can be used to solve the problem . No rearranging is required . The conversion variable receives a value of 0 because a conversion of units is nQt required to sQlve the problem , 3Therandomization and sequencing of problems will be explained further on in the next ehapter . ChapterIVo DESIGN AND EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURE Subjects The 16 sUbjects who compi ~ tedthe pfoblem - solving progfam were seven sixth - grade· stud ' ; nt ~ : i . ti one eleirt , mtary school ( School A ) and nine sixth - grade students ate second elementary school ( School B ) o Both schools are in the Ravenswood City - School District in California 0 The district , in which 35 , 000 people ! : i ' ; ' ' ; in a 17 - square ~ mile area , comprises 5 percent of the tot ~ l cOUl1tyscllool population . Thirty - three percent of the county welfare families livew : ithin this school districto Both schools are essentially " Ciepres ! leCi area " schools 0 In School A , 82 percent· of· the children are blacko The average sixth - grade IQ is 930 In School Bj 59 percent of the children are blacko The average sixth ~ grade IQ is 990 Because these children are slow learners , the generality of the statements that can be made from the results of this investigation is limited . However , this investigation potentially contributes information about the disadvantaged student who has been neglected in previous research , Equipment The student terminals used in this project were commercially available teletype machines , connected by private telephone lines to a computer at the Institute for Mathematical Studies in the Social Sciences at Stanford 0 There were five teletypes at School A and four at School Bo All teletypes at a particular school operated in a single classroom at that schooL The control functions for the entire system were handled by the PDP - I , a medium - sized computer with a 32 , 000 - word core and a 4 , 000 - word core interchangeable with any of 32 bands of a magnetic drum , together with two large IBM - 1301 disc files 0 All input - outputa , evices were processed through a time - sharing systemo Two high - speed data channels permitted simultaneous computation and servicing of peripheral deviceso 26 Instructional Program Initial instruction on the teletype consisted of explaining to each student the general procedure of taking turns on the machine and the general programlogic ' ~ ' , , ' Each ' , stUdent was given assistance in finding the letters to type his name for the first two lessons . No student had any trouble learning how to type his name or answer the ~ uestions on the teletype . The program began each day by asking the student to type his assigned number and his name . If the student made an error or ga ' me ' a fictitious name , such as Napoleon , he was asked to try again . If he correctly typed his number and name , the computer consulted his file and began with the item following the last one completed . The items were divided into two parts , with the set of instructions presented before the set of problems . The set of instructions . The students were taught how to cCllllllland the computer to perform operations on given numbers by a set of instruc tions presented via computer . The complete set of instructions is given in ' J \ . ppsndix " A . . We will briefly list and give an example of each of the abbreviated operation names that the student learned in the instruction set . Student , entries are underlined . 1 . X is the answer key . Suppose the student seeS on the printout sheet before him : G 1 ) 21 He would indicate that 21 was his answer by typing lX , which says to the computer " my answer is on line 1 . " The line number followed by X indicates what line the final answer is on . 4 4 " G " stands for " given number . " Whenever a student is given a word problem to solve , all the numbers in the problem are typed out as given numbers just after the word problem itself has been typed out . The reason for designing the program in this way was to reduce the time re ~ uired for students to input large numbers themselves . Re ~ uiring students to input very large numbers slows down the learning ' and can be relatively demanding , especially during early stages of learning . Instead we ask the child to input on the keyboard what rule he wishes to apply to what given numbers . All he has to input , then , is the rule and the lines to which that rule is to be applied . 27 2 . A is the abbreviation for ADD . An example of how a student might use the A rule is : G ~ . 2A 1 ) 36 2 ) 41 3 ) 77 By typing " 1 . 2A , " the student tells the computer to add the number on line 1 to the number on line 2 . The computer then prints the result of doing the addition operation . 3 . S is the abbreviation for SUBTRACT . An example is : G 1 ) 500 G 2 ) 48 1 . 2S 3 ) 452 4 . M . is the abbreviation for MULTIPLY . An example is : G G 102M 1 ) . ' 59 2»4 3 ) 236 5 . Q is the abbreviation for DIVIDE . Q rather than D was used for divide because D was used for something else in the system . An example is : G G 1 . 2Q 1 ) 77 2 ) 7 3 ) 11 6 . E means ENTER , and is used to enter a number that is not entered by the computer program . For example , in a problem that asks the student to find the number of days in 8 weeks , the student would be required to enter the number 7 , the number of days in one week . The number 8 would be entered by the computer as a " given number . " An example is : G 1 ) 8 E 2 ) 1 28 The following sequence of interactions between the student and the computer illustrates how a word problem is solved in this context . Again , student " entries are underlined . The computer first types out the problem , and then types out the numbers ; in that problem . The student sees on the printout sheet before him : At the tree nursery , Tom counted 28 rows of pine trees . The . forester said that there were 575 trees in each row . How many trees were there at the nursery ••• G 1 ) 28 G 2 ) 575 At " this point , the student tells the computer the operation he wants the computer to perform , and the line numbers to which the operation should apply . For this problem , the student typically types· out " 1 . 2M , " meaning " multiply the number online 1 by tlle number on line 2 . " The computer J ; ' esponds by typing the result of apPlying the operation , or by typing an error message if the operation could not be applied validly . The student is still not finished with the problem . He must also indicate where his final answer is by typing the line number on which the answer appears followed by an X . The complete protocol for a correct response in the above example , then , might be : At the tree nursery , TOm counted 28 J ; ' ows of pine tJ ; ' ees . The forester said that there were 575 trees in each row . How many trees were there at the nursery . •• G 1 ) G 2 ) l . 2M 3 ) 3X COJ ; ' rect 28 575 16100 If the answer is incorrect , " answer is wrong " appears in p1eace of " coJ ; ' rect . " If the student has not yet indicated his final answer by using " X , " and if he asks the computer to perform an operation that cannot be applied validlY , he receives an error message . In the above example , if instead of typing " l - 2M " the student had typed " l . 2MT , " the computer would J ; ' espond by typing " There is no rule name ' Mr . ' " If the student had erroneously typed " 1 . 2 , " the computer would respond by 29 typing " No rule name given . " A flow chart of the program logic is shown in Figure 3 . Insert Figure 3 ' about here A given word problem can often be solved in many ways . The students own eXperience and ingenuity determines which rule he uses and what strategy he takes . The computer allows any valid step , regard ~ less of whether it helps reach the solution . Any combination of steps reaching a solution , valid within the rules , is entirely acceptable . A problem such as the following could be solved in several ways : For aneJ \ periment , Susan miJ \ ed 7 ounces of glycerin and 14 ounces ' of alcohol with some water . The resultingmiJ \ ture contained 45 ounce . s . ! I0w many ounces of water were used ? It could be solved : 45 - ( 7 + 14 ) or ( 45 - 7 ) ' - 14 . A more idiosyncratic solution , such as 45 ~ ( 7 x 3 ) , is equally acceptable • In the instruction set , students solved easier problems before being presented with more difficult . ones . On several of the problems , the student was invited to ask for a hint after a certain time lapse by the message , " Type H and a space if you want a hint . " If the student asked for a hint on the pro ~ iem " What is ( 486 + 390 ) + 707 ? " he was told " First find 486 + 390 . Then add that sum to 707 . " No hints were avail able on multiple - choice problems ; the student had to guess until he got the problem correct . While the student was trying to reach a solution , the computer did four things . 1 . Every student command was eJ \ amined to see if it was a . valid step and if the syntaJ \ was correct . If incorrect , the computer printed out an errOr message . 2 . If valid , the computer performed whatever step the student commanded . 30 x . . . . . . . - . . . rule used ? NO NO PRINT : error messoge YES YES error ? YES PRINT : answeriswrong PRINT RESULT OF PERFORMINGOPERATIONCOMMANDED NO PRINT : correct Fig . 3 . Flow·chart of the program logic for presentation of problems and classification of responses . 31 3 , The desired solution was compared to the final answer indicated by " X , " If the two were identical , the computer terminated the problem after typing " correct , " If they were not identical , the computer typed " answer is Wrong 0 11 4 , After a fixed time lapse , the computer offered a hintpn certain problems . Hints were available only for certain problems in the instruc tion set , not for those in the problem set . The . ~ ord - problem set , The 100 word problems used in this study were designed to be of ' appropriate difficulty for sixth - grade students , The word problems are li < : ted in Appendix B , These 100 problems were divided into 50 pairs ; a pair consisted of two problems both of which could be solved by the same operation 01 ' seQuence of operations , The 50 pairs were then randomly permuted with the following restriction : no two pairs whose problems reQuired the identical operation ( s ) for solution could be presented adjacent to each other . Five randomizations were obtained , and each § . < was assigned tOone of the five randem seQuences . The purpose of creating seQuences of problems in this way is that for a given pair of problems , the first problem never followed a problem of the same type and the seQuential variable for that problem always received a value of 1 . The second problem in the pair always followed a problem of the same type ; the seQuential variable for that problem always : received a value of 0 , Since the study was designed to permit investigation of factors that might contribute to problem difficulty , the problem set . was designed so that there would be as many different combinations of variable values as possible , To solve the set of problema , students used the rules they learned in the instruction set . As before , the cemputer first typed out ' theprob lem , and then typed out the numbers in that problem . Then , Using any of the rules mentioned above , the student told the computer what to do ' ffith these numbers , Figure 4 < illustrates how a student could have gone about solving a word problem in this way . Insert Figure 4 about here 32 IN ITS FIRST 3 GAMES A FOOTBALL tEAM SCOt < ED 14 POINTS , 35 POINTS , AND 20 POINTS . LAST YEAR THE TEAM AVERAGED 20 POINI5 PER GAME . THIS YEAR ' S AVERAGE SCORF . : IS Hm ! MUCH ABOVE LASI YEAR ' S AVERAGE . GG GG 2 . 3A 4 . 5A . 6 ' IQ 7 . 45 AX CORRECT Fig . 4 . ( I ) 3 ( 2 ) J 4 ( 3 ) 35 ( 4 ) 20 ( 5 ) 49 ( 6 ) 69 ( 1 ) 23 ( A ) 3 Sample solution of a word problem . 33 After the computer typed out all the numbers in the problem as " given numbers , " the . type wheel of the teletype was positioned at the left - hand side of the paper . The student made his response , and then the computer positioned the type wheel at the center of the page , typed the line number , and finally typed the result of the operation the student had commanded the computer to perform . If the final answer was correct , the computer typed the message " correct " and went to the next problem . If the final answer was incorrect , the computer typed " answer is wrong " and went to the next problem . When worki " g9n . the , teletype , the s . tudents were not allowed to use pencil or paper . Drery problem w8 . sworkedorithe machine , so that all responses could be recorded . Following the " goodbye " message the student was told " please tear off on dotted line . " A dotted line was printed , and the student tore off his printout and gave it to the experimenter . TYpically , it takes about 8 weeks to complete both the instruction set and the word - problem set . Each portion takes 4 weeks . Howev < ; r , the students at School A had such initial difficulty with the program that they were allowed to repeat portions of the instruction set before beginning the problem set . The notion was that we wanted them to learn the rules as well as possible before beginning to solve the test prob lems . The School A group took a mean of 12 weeks to finish the program : 8 weeks for the instruction set and 4 weeks for the word - problem set . The School B group took a total of 8 weeks to complete both portions of the project . Chapter V . RESULTS Before reporting the results , a few words are in order . about the measure of depth based on Yngve . The problem with the measure of depth discussed in Chapter III arises when we attempt to find the Yngve numbers for a particular sentence . It is not an easy matter to ascertain the precise tree structure to be associate . d with a given sentence . Since there exists no agreed - upon , explicit set of grammatical rules to which you can refer , it follows that there is no . absolute , agreed - upon way to assign Yngve . numbers to words in a sentence . What is needed is a system of generative rules of such a kind that they will explicitly assign the correct constituent - structure to sentences . In the absence of such a system , and because ·Yngve has not completely formalized the rules of structvral assignment , we have had to make some arbitrary decisions on the assignment of structure . When Yngve offers no basis for a particular decision , we have based the decision on Hockett ( 1958 ) , or Wells ' ( 1947 ) methods for determining immediate constituents , or on our own best judgment of linguistic notions . To get an estimate of . reliability , a random sample of 20 word problems was given to J . Dexter Fletcher , a gradllate student concentrating in psycholinguistics . For each problem , he computed the mean of the Yngve numbers for each sentence . The complexity of a problem was taken . to be the highest value of the set of Yngve means . for that . problem . The Pearson correlation was . 84 ( r2 ~ . 71 ) between the values we obtained and those obtained by Mr . Fletcher for the sample of 20 problems . The correlationc : is sufficiently high to give us reasonable confidence that our methods of structural assignment were well - founded . In this chapter , the main task is to report the predictive worth of the eight variables described earlier . The objective is successfully to predict the probability of a correct response for each item . The first ' 35 step in analysis was to obtain regression coefficients for each of the factors . A stepwise , multiple linear regression analysis program , BMD 02R , adapted for Stanford University ' s IBM 360 computer , was used to obtain regression coefficients , multiple correlation Rand R2• For purposes of analysis , we have initially combined the data from both School A and School B into one group composed of 16 £s . We will present the results of the combined data first , and then present the results of the two groups taken separately . Combined Group The mean percentage of correct solutions for 16 Ss was 47 . 09 percent . The regression equation was ( * indicates p < . 05 ; * * indicates p < . 01 ; * * * indicates p < . 001 ) with a multiple R of . 83 , a standard . error of estimate of . 52 , and an 2 R of . 70 . The reason that X i3 is significant in spite of the fact that its regression coefficient is so small is because the standard error of the regression coefficient is . 006 . The T - value is computed by dividing the regression coefficient by its standard error . Table 1 presents the regression coefficients , standard errors of the regression coefficients , computer T - values , and partial correlation coefficients for each of the eight independent variables . Table 2 presents the inde pend . ent variables in order , as introduced in the stepwise regression , with corresponding multiple correlations . Table 3 presents the analysis of variance for the multiple regression . Insert Tables 1 , 2 , and . 3 about here 36 TABLE 1 Regression Coefficients , Standard Errors of Regression Coefficients , Computed T - values , and Partial Correlation Coefficients ( 8 Variables ; 16 SUbjects ) . : i ' legrespion . Standard ComJ ; mted Partial Variable . correlation coefficient ~ " error T - value coefficient . . . Xl operations . 48329 . 10251 4 . 714 ' 79 . 44308 X 2 steps . 04135 . 05431 . 76137 . 07956 X 3 length . 01740 . 00611 2 . 84970 . 28623 X 4 depth . 87853 . 22884 3 . 83898 . 37334 X 5 sequential . 61081 . 10617 5 . 75318 . 51644 X 6 verbal - clue . 19603 . 11872 1 . 65125 . 17056 X 7 order . 13303 . 12467 , 1 . p67 0 3 . 11116 . X 8 conversion . 49446 •21960 2 . 25165 . 22972 37 . TABLE . 8 Order of Introduction of the Variables in the Regression with Corresponding Correlations ( 8 Variables , 16 Subjects ) . . . ••• . . . . . Variable MultipleRegression L Xl = operations . 67 . 2 . X2 = seguential . 77 3 . X 3 = length ·79 4 . X 4 : : ; : depth . 81 5· X5 = c onv ~ rosion . 83 6 . X 6 = verbal· clue . 83 7 . X 7 = order . 85 8 . X 8 = steps . 85 38 TABLE 3 Analys ~ s of Variance for Multiple Linear Regression ( 8 Variables , 16 SUbjects ) Source of variation d . f . Sum of Mean F squares ~ quares value Due to regression 8 56 . 92740 7 . 11592 26 . 0892 * Deviation about regression 91 24 . 82055 0 . 27275 Total 99 81 . 74795 . * p < . 001 39 Consideration of the partial correlation coefficients indicates that X5 , the sequential variable is the most important of the eight variables . The operations variable , . Xl ' the depth variable , X 4 , and the length variable , X3 , are also valuable predictors of the probability of a correct response for each item . The conversion variable , X S ' . is moderately valuable . A rough indication of the . goodnessoffit of the regression line is given by the multiple correlation coefficient , R , and its square , R2 , which is an estimate of the amount of variance accounted for by the regression modeL In this case , 70 percent of the variance in probability of a correct response is accounted for by the modeL Figure 5 presents a graph of the predicted and observed propor ~ tions of correct responses for each of the 100 items . The probabilities are plotted as a function of the rank of observed proportion of correct responses . Consequently , the curve of the observed probabilities is Insert Figure 5 about here monotonically decreasing and smoother than the predicted curve . An inspection of the two curves shows a reasonable fit for the regression model , especially in view of the heterogeneity of problem types . The model does not fit for very difficult or for very easy items as well as it does for items in the middle range of difficulty . For an analysis of goodness of fit of the probability of a correct response predicted from the regression model and the observed probability of a correct response , the predicted probability , p . , of a correct response for ~ problem i , was first calculated for each item . As a measure of fit , X2 was then calculated , where 2 2 / X = E ( f . - p . N ) [ p . ( l - i· l 1 . J . and f i For the = observed frequency of correct 2 above model , X = 206 . 74 . This rather high value for X2 response , N = number of students . is an indication that the correspon - dence between the observed and expected frequencies is not very close . A 40 - - - - Predicted 10 m ~ ~ ~ w m 00 00 PROPORTION CORRECT RANKED ACCORDING TO OBSERVED DIFFICULTY 1 . 0 . 9 . 8 . 7 . . . < . J lJJ a : . 6 a : 8 z . 5 o f = a : ~ . 4 o a : Q . . 3 . 2 • 1 o , I , , , • , I \ t , " 1 \ . . . " " : ' ' ' ' ' ' : , : " " " f : " " " : : 1 : : " I I a II I : ~ : ~ : : , . . " , , " , : \ " t 1 ' : ' , \ : I I t , , , l ~ : \ ~ ' \ " ' " , , , " , • 100 Fig , 5 , Problem Rank Order according to proportion correct , problem , for example , contributed 6 . 3 percent to the total made extremely large contributions to the total that a few problems following X2 obtained : The however , closer look at the components of " A school playground is rectangular , 273 feet long and 21 feet wide . What is the total length of the fence around the playground••• " The observed proportion of correct responses for this item was . 06 , while the predicted proportion was . 50 ; clearly , this is a very poor fit . As a second example , the following problem contributed 5 . 3 percent to the total X2 obtained : " Mary is twice as old as Betty was 2 years ago . Mary is 40 years old . How old is Betty••• " None of the 16 ES solved this problem correctly , although . 39 was the predicted proportion of correct responses . The large deviations between the observed and predicted results for certain problems , such as the two just mentioned , emphasize the need for a more elaborate theory . Often , most of the prediction achieved can be attributed to a small number of variables , and the inclusion of additional variables contributes only small amounts to prediction . In this case , most of the variance c " , n be " , ccounted for by v " , riables Xl ' X3 ' X 4 , and we reduce the number of variables in the regression equation to only these , the reduction in multiple Rand R2 is very slight . only these four variables , the regression equation becomes X 5• If include Considering with a multiple R of . 81 , a standard error of estimate of . 54 , and R2 of . 66 . The standard errors of the regression coefficients are Xl ' . 081 ; X3 , . 006 ; X 4 , . 225 ; and X5 , . 109 . All four variables are significant . T " , ble 4 presents the analysis of variance for the multiple linear regression using these four variables . - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - ~ . Insert Table 4 about here 42 TABLE 4 Analysis of Variance for Multiple Linear Regression ( 4 Variaoles , 16 SUOjects ) Source of variation d . f . Sum of Mean F squares squares value . Due to regression 4 53 . 900 13 . 475 45 . 969 * Deviation about regression 95 27 , 848 0 . 293 Total 99 81 . 748 * p < . 001 School ! ' : . Group The mean percentage of correct solutions for 7 ~ s was 50 . 30 percent . The regression equation was Zi = - 3 . 74 + . 52X ~ ~ * + 0 . OXi2 + . 02X ~ ; + 1 . 03X ~ 4 * + . 72X ~ ; * ( * * indicates p < . 01 ; * * * indicates p < . 001 ) with a multiple R of . 80 , a standard error of estimate of . 66 , and an R 2 of . 64 . Table 5 presents the regression coefficients , standard errors of regression coefficients , computed T - values , and partial correlation coefficients for each of the eight independent variables . Table 6 presents the independent variables in order , as introduced in the stepwise regression , with corresponding multiple correlations . Table 7 presents the analysis of variance fOr the multiple linear regression . Insert Tables 5 , 6 , and 7 about here - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - ~ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - School l ! Group The mean percentage of correct solutions for these 9 ~ s was 43 . 58 percent . The regression equation was ( * * indicates p < . 01 ; * * * indicates p < . 001 ) with a multiple R of . 83 , Of . 70 . Table 8 presents 2 a standard error of estimate of . 51 , and an R the regression coefficients , standard errors of the regression coefficients , computed T - values , and partial correlation coefficients for each of the eight independent variables . Table 9 presents 44 TABLE 5 Regression Coefficients , Standard Errors of Regression Coefficients , Computed T - values , and Partial Correlation Coefficients ( 8 Variables , School A ) Regression Standard Computed Partial Variable correlation coefficient error T - value coefficient . Xl operations . 51821 . 11039 4 . 69438 . 44154 x 2 steps . 00014 . 00009 1 . 63630 . 16906 X3 length . 02064 . 00740 2 . 79040 . 28075 X4 depth 1 . 03102 . 28891 3 . 56865 . 35038 , X5 sequential . 72709 . . 13450 5 . 40597 . 49303 X6 verbal - clue . 21291 . 14790 1 . 43956 . 14922 X7 order . 28089 . 15877 1 . 76918 . 18235 X8 conversion . 26669 . 29792 . 89518 . 09343 TABLE 6 Order of Introduction of the Variables in the Regression with Corresponding Correlations ( 8 Variables , School A ) Variable Multiple r 1 - operations ·57 2 . sequential . 69 3 . depth . 75 4 . length . 77 5 . order . . 78 6 . steps . 79 7 . verbal - clue . 80 8 . conversion . 80 . . 46 TABLE 7 Analysis ofVarianoe for Multiple Linear Regression ( 8 Variables , School A ) Source of variatior ) d . L Sum of Mean F squares squares value . Due to regrel3sion 8 69 . 80213 8 . 72527 20 . 0795 * Deviation about regression 91 39 . 54274 , 43454 Total 99 109 . 34487 * p < . 001 the independent variables in order , as introduced in the stepwise regression , with corresponding multiple correlations . Table lO presents the analysis of variance for the m ~ ltiple linear regression . - - - - - - ~ - - - - - - - - - - - - ~ - - - - - - - - ~ - - - - - - - - Insert Tables 8 , 9 , . and lO about here - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 48 TABLE 8 Regression Coefficients , Standard Errors of Regression Coefficients , Computed T - values , and Partial Correlation Coefficients ( 8 Variables , School B ) Regression Standard Computed Partial Variable correlation coefficient error T - value coefficient Xl operations . 50698 . 10098 5 . 02084 . 46575 X2 steps . 03171 . 05350 ·59272 . 06201 X3 length . 01756 . 00602 2 . 91922 . 29262 X4 depth . 76093 . 22543 3 . 37547 . 33358 X5 sequential . 61000 . 10458 5·83262 . 52164 X6 verbal - clue . 19509 . 11695 1 . 66822 . 17226 X7 order . 06686 . 12281 . 54443 . 05698 X8 conversion . 59629 . 21632 2 . 75652 . 27760 TABLE 9 Order of Introduction of the Variables in the Regression with Corresponding Correlations ( 8 Variables , School B ) . . . ' . . Variable Multiple r . 1 . operations . 67 2 . sequential . 77 : ) . length . 79 4 . depth . 81 5· conversion . 8 : ) 6 . verbal - clue . 8 : ) 7 . steps . 8 : ) 8 . order . 8 : ) 50 TABLE 10 Analysis of Variance for Multiple Linear Regression ( 8 Variables , School B ) Source of variation d . f . Sum of Mean F squares squares value Due to regression 8 55 . 09598 6 . 88700 26 . 0210 * Deviation about regression 91 24 . 08506 . 26467 Total 99 79 . 18104 * P < . 001 51 Chapter VI . DISCUSSION The results reported in Chapter V indicate the following variables to be significant determinants of word problem diffiC1l1ty : sequential , operations , depth , length , and conversion . These findings imply that a word problem . will be difficult to solve if it is of a different type than the problem that preceded it , if its solution requires a large number of different operations , if its surface structure is complex , if it has a large number of words , or if it requires a conversion of units . The multiple correlations and thus the predictive results of this analysis of the data are rather impressive . There . isconsideraple difficulty in intuitively rank - ordering the expected proportions of correct responses obtained in word problems . We believe that our results give a sense of the real possibility of analyzing and predicting in terms of meaningful variables , the response performance of children who are solving arithmetical word problems . At first glance , the problem set appears to be quite complex . Yet , with a few variables we have brought a considerable amount of order to it . In view of the intrinsic complexity of this type of problem solving , the fit obtained is excellent . It is interesting and potentially instructive to compare the results of performance of this " disadvantaged " group with the results of a similar study using bright £s ( Suppes , Loftus , and Jerman , 1969 ) . The important variables reported by Suppes et al . , were the sequential , operations , and conversion variables . Depth and order were not inves tigated in that study . The most important variables in the present study were operations , sequential , ~ epth , and length ; conversion was of secondary , although SUbstantial , importance . The findings regarding the conversion variable are extremely interesting . For School A ( average IQ ~ 93 ) , the conversion variable was the last variable to be introduced into the stepwise regression . It had the lowest partial 52 correlation coefficient . For School B ( average IQ = 99 ) , the conversion variable was the fourth most important variable . For the bright group ( average IQ > 120 ) , the conversion variable was the second most important variable in terms of predictive worth . It appears that there may be some relationship between mental ability and the importance of the conversion variable . No attempt has been made to estimate parameters ' that would reflect mental ability , or to explore the relationship between mental ability and the conversion variable , because accounting for differential mental ability is beyond the scope of this research . The most suggestive finding in all the analyses is the importance of the sequential and operations variables . These two variables are highly significant determinants of difficulty for bright as well as disadvantaged students . Whether : one i : s a bright or a dull student , one is more likely to solve a problem correctly if it is similar to the problem that preceded it or if its solution requires a small number of different operations . The implication is that many aspects of the processing done internally by the students when they solve problems do not differ for children of differing mental ability . The next step is to acquire a better understanding of these variables and to use this understanding to develop better predictive models . Recall that in Chapter V two problems were mentioned as having contributed most heavily to the total x 2 obtained . The two problems are : 1 . A school playground is rectangular , 273 feet long and 21 feet wide . What is the total length of the fence around the playground ? 2 . Mary is twice as old as Betty was 2 years ago . Mary is 40 years old . How old is Betty ? The discrepancies between the observed and predicted proportions of correct responses for these two problems were quite large . In the first problem , . § S typical ] . y multiplied the two numbers together , or added the two numbers together only once . The difficulty here seems to be due to the confusion about what a perimeter is , as distinguished from an area , and how to find a perimeter . In problem 2 , the word " ago " 53 seemed to worry all of the Ss . They tended to subtract two years at the beginning of the problem . Suppes et al . , report that the very same two problems contributed most heavily to the total X2 obtained in their study with bright ~ s . It appears that the regression models investigated cannot account for performance on these two types of problems , for either above or below average ~ s . A more elaborate theory is needed to handle them . That theory should be able to handle problems which require additional knowledge ( such as the formula for finding the perimeter ) as well as problems which involve a change in tense . An interesting side result is revealed by comparison of the percentage of correct responses for School B vs . ( 3chool A group . Recall that the B group , drawn from a class with an average IQ of 99 , and in which 59 percent of the children were black , solved 43 . 58 percent of the problems correctly . The A group ( 82 percent black , average IQ = 93 ) solved 50 . 9 percent of the problems correctly . We assume that the reason for the superior performance of the A Ss was the ) r they were allowed to repeat portions of the instruction set before beginning the problem set . They may have learned the rules better than the B group . In addition , their motivation seemed to be elevated by the mere successful solving of a problem , regardless of whether that problem had been missed the first time . It appears that if a student has failed to solve a problem correctly , to allow him a second chance at the problem is a better procedure than to force him to go on to a new problem . A disadvantage of the data reported in this study is that even though the students did participate in the program for a number of weeks , the number of students completing the program was smalL A main objective for the future is to increase considerably the number of students involved in order to provide the quantity of data required for meaningful inferences about problem - solving processes . The results obtained in this study give a clear indication of the difficulty in constructing an explanatory theory that is adequate to account for all the difficulties students encounter in solving word problems . We have just scratched the surface of the complete syntactic and semantic analysis that will be required to predict all the details that muat be accounted for in the behavior of atudents . The present study represents only a tentative , preliminary effort at the construction of a more mature theory . Further development of such a theory , as well as any discussion of the implications of the various predictive analyses for the teaching of problem solving , muat await much needed additional research . In particular , more refined analysis with data from larger numbers of students is needed . Weare convinced that deeper investiga tions in th1adirection are esse " ntial to a better underatandingof problem solVing . 55 Chapter VII SUMMARY ~ e research reported here examines the problem - solving performance of 16 sixth - grade students . ~ ese students were taken from two " depressed area " schools . ~ e students were first taught the mechanics of how to use a computer - based teletype to solve arithmetic word problems . The assumption was made that all students had a basic understanding of the four arith ~ metical operations : addition , subtraction , multiplication , and division . The students were required to know which operation ( s ) should be performed for problem solution , and to tell the computer which one ( s ) . The actual computations were done by the computer . Following the initial instruction set , a series of 100 word problems was presented to the students . For each problem the students were required to find a quantitative answer . The arithmetical operation ( s ) required were not explicitly indicated . An example of a problem in arithmetic providing the pupil with an opportunity to use his knowledge of multiplication is the following : A bushel of corn weighs 56 pounds . How much does 44 bushels weigh ? The solution of these problems were analyzed to determine the variables related to problem difficulty . A linear regression analysis revealed the vollowing variables to be significant : 1 . The operations variable , that is , the minimum number of different operations required to reach the correct solution . The larger the required minimum , the harder the problem was to solve . 2 . The sequential variable . A problem was easier to solve if it was of the same type ( i . e . , could be solved by the same operation ( s» as the problem that preceded it . 3 . The depth variable , that is , the mean number of left branches per word in the constituent - structure tree for the most complex sentence in the word problem . This mean , sometimes called the Yngve mean , is a measure of the structura ~ complexity of a sentence , Problems of lesser indexed complexity were easier to solve than problems of greater complexity . 4 . The length variable , that is , the . number of words in the problem . The larger the number of words in a problem , the harder the problem was to solve . 5 . The conversion variable . Problems Which required a conversion of units ( SUCh as from days to wee ~ s ) were harder to solve than problems which did not . Three additional variables did not make a significant contribution to the regression analysis ; L The verbal - c ~ ue variab ~ e . A prob : Lem that contained a verbal ~ clue to the operation ( s ) required for solution was pot easier to solve than a problem which did pot contain such a clue . 2 , The order variable . A problem which contained the numerical data ~ . , in an order in which they could be used to so ~ ve the problem was not easier to solve than a problem Which did not . ) . The steps variable , that is , the minimum number of steps required to reach the correct solution . No relationship was found between the minimum number of stePs and problem difficulty . 57 Braun - Lamesche , M . chez L ' enfant . REFERENCES . La role du contexte dans la comprehension du langage Psychologie Francaise , 1962 , 7 , 18o ~ 189 . Davis , E . A . Mean sentence length compared with long and short sentences as a reliable measure of language development . 1937 , . § , 69 - 79 . Child Development , - - - . Davis , G . A . Current status of research and theory inhuman problem solving . Psychological Blllletin , 1966 , 66 , 36 - 54 • . Deutsch , M . , and Cherry - Peisach , E . A study of language patterns . The Instructor , 1966 , 75 ( No . 7 ) ; 95 . Duncan , C . P . Recent research on human problem ·sqlving . PsYchological Dunc ~ er , K . On problem - solving . Psychological Monographs , . 1945 , 58 , No . 5 ( Whole No . 270 ) . ErVin , S , Imitation and structural change in children I s language . In E . Lenneberg ( Ed . ) ~ Directions . in th ~ study Of language . Cambridge , Massachusetts : M . I . T . Press , 1964 . Pp . 163 - 189 . Feigenbaum , E . A . , and Feldman , J . ( Ed ; ; . ) Computers and thought . New York : McGraw - Hill , 1963 . Gagne , R . M . Problem solving and· thinking . Annual Review of Psychology , Gagne , R• . M . Humanprobl " m soJ . ving : internal and external events . In Kleinmuntz , B . ( Ed . ) Problem solving : research , method , . and theory . New York : Wiley , 1966 . Gagne , R . M . , and Smith , E . Q . " Jr ~ A study of the effects of verbalization on problem solving . Journgl of Experimental Psychology , 1962 , 63 , 12 - 18 . Hayes , J . R . Problem topOlOgy and the solution process . Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior , 1965 , ~ , 371 - 379 . 59 lIeidbreder , E . The attainment o : ( ' coI ) cept : > : Ill . Theproce @ . Journal 0 : ( ' Psychology , 1947 , 24 , 93 - 138 . . . . . . . . , . . . , . . , . . ' - lIi3 , gard , E . R . , and Bower , G . H . Theories of learniI ) g . New York : Appleton - century - crofts , 3 , 966 . lIockett , C . F . A course . in modern lingu , istics , J ' ! ewYo : rk : The MacmiJ , lan Co " 1958 . lIoffman , L . R . Conditions for creativ ~ d : > roblemsQlving . JournaJ , of PSychol ( ) gy , 196J " g ~ 429 . 444 , Hovland , C . I . Comp1lter sim1l1ation of thinking , AmericanPsYcbologist , 1960 , } 2 , 682 - 693 - lIydle , L . L . , and Clapp , F . L . Elements of di ; f ; fic1llty in the interpre - tationof concrete problemrl in arithm $ tic . Burea1l of Ed1lcational ResearchB1l11etin , No ; 9 , Madison , Wisconsin : Univer : > ity of Wisconsin , 1927 . Johnson , D . M ; ~ psycJ : ) olo ( 5 ; Y 0 : ( ' tho1lght and j1ldgment . New York : Harper and Row , 1955 . Ju , dsonL A . J . , Cofer " C ; N . , and Gelfand , S . I ( easoning as an associative process : II . " Direction " in problem solving as a f ) . lIlction of prior reinforcement of relevant responses ; . . PsycPOlogicalReports , 1956 , Kendler , H . H . , and D ' Amato , M . F . A comparirlon of reversal shifts and non - reversal shifts in h \ lillan cOncept formation bepavior . Jownal of ExperirnentalPrlychOlogy , 1955 , 49 , 165 - 174 . KendJ , er , H . H . , and Kararlik , . A . D . Concept formation as a f1lnction of competition between response produced cuerl . J01lrnal of Experimental Kendler , H , H " and Kendler , . T . S . Vertical and horizontal processes in problem solving . Psychological Review , 196 ~ , 69 , 1 - 16 . Kendler , H , . H . , . and Mayzner , M . S . Reversal and non - reversal shifts in cardsorting tests with two or four sorting categories . Journal of Experimental Psychology , 1956 , 51 , 244 - 248 . Kendler , H . H . , and Vineberg , R . The acquisition of compound concepts as a function of previous training . Journal of Experimental Psychology , 1954 , 48 , 252 - 258 . Kendler , T . S . Development of mediating responses in children . Monograph of Society for Research in Child Development , 1963 , 28 ( Whole No . 86 ) , 33 - 48 . Keppel , G . Facilitation in short - and long - term retention of paired associates following distributed practice in learning . Journal of Verbal Learning and ! erbal Behavior , 1964 , 2 , 91 - 11L Klausmeier , H . J . , and Loughlin , L . J . Behaviors during problem solving among children of lOW , average , and high intelligence . Journal of Educational Psychology , 1961 , 52 , 148 - 152 . Kleinmuntz , B . ( Ed . ) . Problem solving : . research , method , and theory . New York : Wiley , 1966 . Krasner , L . Studies of the conditioning of verbal behavior . Psychological Bulletin , 1958 , ] 2 , 148 - 170 . Kurz , R . B . Effects of three kinds of stressors on human learning and performance . Psychological Reports , 1964 , 14 , 161 - 162 . Lazerte , M . E . ~ development of problem solving ability in arithmetic . Toronto : Clarke , Irwin and Company , 1933 . 61 Loban , W . The language of elementary school children . National Councn of Teachers of English Research Bulletin No . 1 , 1963 . Luce , R . D . , Bush , R . R . , and Galanter , E . ( Eds . ) Handbook of mathematical psychology , Vol . 1 , New York : Wiley , 1963 . Maier , N . R . F . Reasoning in humans : II . The solution of a problem and its appearance in consciousness . Journal 0 : ( ' Comparative PsychQlogy , 1931 , 12 , 181 - 194 . Maltzman , I . Thinking : : ( ' rom a behavioristic point of view . Psychological Review , 1955 , 62 , 275 - 286 . Martin , E . , and Roberts , K . H . Grammatical factors in sentence retention . Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior , 1966 , 2 , 375 - 380 . Martin , E . , Roberts , K . H . , and Collins , A . M . Short - term memory for sentences . Journal Of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior , 1968 , 1 , 560 - 566 . Martin , M . D . Reading comprehension , abstract verbal reasoning , and computation as factors in arithmetic problem solving . UnpUblished doctoral thesis . Iowa City : State University 0 : ( ' Iowa , 1963 . McCarthy , D . A . The language development of the pre - school chnd . Minneapolis : The University of Minnesota Press , 1930 . McGovern , J . B . Extinction of associations in four transfer paradigms . Psychological Monographs , Vol . 78 , No . 16 , 1964 . Mednick , S . A . Learning . Englewood Cliffs , New Jersey : Prentice Hall , 1964 . Menyyk , P . SYntactic structures in the language of children . Child Development , 1963 , 34 , 407 - 422 . 62 Miller , N . E . Theory and exper ~ ent relating psychoanalytic displacement to stimulus response generalization . Journal of Abnormal and Social - - . - Psychology , 1948 , 43 , 155 - 178 . Miller , W . , and Ervin , S . Language development . Child PsycholOgy , 1963 , 62nd Yearbook for the National Society for the Study of Education . Pp . 108 - 143 . Moore , E . F . ( Ed . ) Sequential machines . Addison - Wesley , 1964 . Neisser , U . The multiplicity of thought . British Journal of Psychology , Neisser , U . The imitation of man by machine . Science , 1963 , 139 , 193 - 197 . ( b ) Newell , A . Discussion Of papers by Dr . Gagne and Dr . Hayes . In Kleinmuntz , B . ( Ed . ) Problem solving : research , method , and theory . New York : Wiley , 1966 . Newell , A . , Shaw , J . C . , and Simon , H . A . Elements of a theory of 4uman problem solving . Psychological Review , 1958 , 65 , 151 - 166 . ( a ) Newell , A . , Shaw , J . C . , and Simon , H . A . The processes of creative thinking . Paper P - 1320 . Santa Monica : Rand Corporation , 1958 . ( b ) Newell , A . , Shaw , J . C . , and Simon , H . A . Report on a general problem - solving program . In Proceedings of the International Conference on Information Processing . Paris : UNESCO House , 1959 . Pp . 256 - 264 . Newell , A . , Shaw , J . C . , and Simon , H . A . Chess - playing programs and the problem of complexity . In E . A . Feigenbaum and J . Feldman ( Eds . ) Computers and thought . New York : McGraw - Hill , 1963 . Pp . 39 - 70 . ( a ) 63 Newell , A . , Shaw , J . C . , and Simon , H . A . Empirical explorations with the Logic Theory Machine : a case study in heuristics . In E . A . Feigenbaum and J . Feldman ( Eds . ) , Computers and thought . New York : McGraw - Hill , 1963 . Pp . 109 - 133 . ( b ) Newell , A . , and Simon , H . A . GPS , a program that simulates human thought . In E . A . Feigenbaum and J . Feldman ( Eds . ) , Computers and thought . New York : McGraw . - Hill , 1963 . ( a ) Newell , A . , and Simon , H . A . Computers in psychology . In Luce , R . D . , Bush , R . R . , and Galanter , E . ( Eds . ) , HandbOOk of mathematical psychology , Vol . I , New York : Wiley , 1963 . Pp . 361 - 428 . ( b ) Orr , D . B . Research on behavior impairment due to stress : an experiment in long - - term performance . Journal of Experimental PsychOlogy , 1964 , 68 , 94 - 102 . Osgood , C . E . Method and theory in experimental psychology . New York : Oxford University Press , 1953 . Paige , J . M . , and Simon , H . A . Cognitive processes in solving algebra word problems . In B . Kleinmuntz ( Ed . ) , Problem - solving : research , methods , and theory , New York : Wiley and Sons , 1966 . Perfetti , C . A . Lexical density and phrase structure depth as variables in sentence retention . Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior , 1969 , § , 719 - 724 . Post , R . A study of certain factors affecting the understanding of verbal problems in arithmetic . Unpublished doctoral dissertation , Teacher ' s College , Columbia University , New York , 1958 . Postman , L . Short - term memory and incidental learning . In A . W . Melton ( Ed . ) , Categories of Human Learning . New York : Academic Press , 1964 . Pp . 145 - 201 . 64 Reitman , W . R . Cognition and thought . New York : Wiley . and Sons , 1965 . Rohrman , N . L . The role of syntactic structure in the recall of English nominalizations . Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior , 1968 , 1 , 904 - 912 . RUddell , R . B . The effect of oral and written patterns of language structure on reading comprehension . The Reading Teacher , 1964 , 18 , 270 - 275 . Russell , D . H . Children ' s thinking . Boston : Ginn and Co . , 1956 . Russell , D . H . Higher mental processes . In C ; W . Harris ( Ed . ) , Encyclopedia of Educational Research . New York : Macmillan , 1960 . Saugstad , P . Problem solving as dependent upon availability of functions . Unpublished d . octoral thesis , Univer " sity of Chicago , 1952 . Scandura , J . M . New directions for theory and research on rule learning : 1 , A set - function language . Acta Psychologica , 1968 , 28 , 301 - 321 . Schultz , R . W . Problem solving bahavior and transfer . Harvard Educational Review , 1960 , 30 , 61 - 77 . Sheerer , M . Problem - solving . Scientific American , 1963 , 208 ( 4 ) , ll8 - 128 . Staats , A . W . Verbal habit " families , concepts , and the operant condi tioning of word classes . Psychological Review , 1961 , 68 , 190 - 204 . Steffe , L . P . The effects of two variables on the problem - solving abilities of first - grade children . Technical Report No . 21 . Madison : Wisconsin Research and Development Center for Cognitive Learning , University of Wisconsin , March 1967 . Stevens , B . A . Problem solving in arithmetic . Journal of Educational Research , 1932 , 25 , 253 - 260 . 65 SuppeE / , P . , Jerman , M . , and Brian , P . Computer - assisted instruction : the 1965 - 66 Stanford arithmetic program , ~ ewYork : Academic Press , 1968 . Suppes , P . , Loftus , E . F . , and Jerman , M . Problem - solving on a computer based teletype . Educational Studies in Mathematics , 1969 , 2 , 1 , 15 . - . . . - Travers , K . , r . A test of pupil preference for problem - solving E / ituations in junior high E / chool mathematics . Journal of ~ perimental Education , 1967 , . 35 , 9 - 18 . Thompson , E . N . Eeadability and accesE / oJ ; ' y remaJ ; ' ks : factors in problem solVing in arithmetic . UnpUblished doctoJ ; ' al thesis . Stanford : Stanford University , 1967 . Underwood , B• . 1 . . Ten years of maE / sed practicecm distributed practice . Psychological Review , 1961 , 68 , 229 - 247 . Underwood , B . J . The representativeness of rete verbal learning . InA . W . Melton ( Ed . ) , Categories of human learning . New York : Academic Press , 1964 . Pp . 47 - 87 . UndeJ ; ' wood , B . . 1 . , and SchUltz , E . W . MeaningfulnesE / and verbal learning . Chicago : J . B . Lippincott Co . , 1960 . Verplanck , W . S . Unaware of where ' E / awaJ ; ' eneE / s : E / ome verbal opeJ ; ' ants notateE / , monentE / , and notants . In C . W . Eriksen ( Ed . ) , Behavior and awareneSE / . Durham : Duke UniverE / ity Press , 1962 . Washburne , C . W . , and Morphett , M . V . UnfamiliaJ ; ' situations as a difficulty in E / olvingarithmetic problems . Journal of Educational ReE / earch , 1928 , 18 , 220 - 224 . Wendelin , I . . A synthesis of two factor analyses of problem solving in mathematics . Didakometary , No . 8 . Malmo , Sweden : MalmoSchool of Education , 1966 . 66 Wells , R , G . Immedi ~ te constituents . L ~ ngu ~ ge , 1947 , 23 , 81 - 117 . Wertheimer , M . Productive thinking . New York : H ~ rper ~ nd Row , 1945 . Woodhe ~ d , M . M . The effect of bursts of noise on ~ n ~ rithmetic t ~ sk . An1eric ~ n Journ ~ l of Psychology , 1964 , 77 , 627 - 633 . Yngve , V . H . A model ~ nd ~ n hypothesis for l ~ ngu ~ ge structure . Proceedings . 2 ! ~ An1eric ~ n Philosophic ~ lSociety . , 1960 , 104 , 444 - 466 . Yngve , V . H . Implic ~ tions of mech ~ nic ~ l tr ~ nsl ~ tion rese ~ rch . Proceedings of the An1eric ~ n PJ ; t : ilosophic ~ l Society , . 1964 , 108 , 275 - 281 . 67 APPENDXX A Problem - Solving Program Xnstruction Set 570 . 1 HELLO . WELCOME W PROBLEM SOLVXl ' lG : . . T : HESE LESSOl , ' lS V [ [ J ; ' L SHOW YOU A NEW , FUN WAY TO SOLVE PROBLEMS . TlUS PROBLEM ENDS WXTH CHOXCE A ) , : 8 ) I OR C ) . TYPE THE LETTER OF THE CORRECT CHOXCE , THEN PRESS THE SPACE BAR . THE LETTEBALONE XS NOT ENOUGH , YOU MUST ALSO ••• A ) WXNK AN EYE B ) PRESS THE SPACE BAR C ) CROSS YOUR FXNGERS B 570 . 2 WHAT D ? ES A ) B ) C ) C 2 + : 3 EQUAL••• 2 : 35 HOW MUCH XS A ) B ) C ) B 14 MXNUS 8 ••• 14 6 8 68 570 . 4 NOW YOU WILL LEARN A NEW WAY TO TELL THE COMPUTER WHAT YOU . THINK THE ANSWER : I : S . WHEN THE COMPUTER STOPS TYPINQ DO THESE TH : I : NQS : 1 . F : I : ND THE ANSWER TO THE PROBLEM . 2 . F : I : ND THE L : I : NE NUMBEB THAT THE ANSWER : I : S ON . 3 . TYPE THE L : I : NE NUMBER , THEN TYPE ' X ' , THEN PRESS THE SPACEBAR . NOW , LET ' S TRY : I : T••• THE PROBLEM : I : S : WHAT > IS 2 + 3 ••• Q Q 2X ( 1 ) 4 ( 2 ) 5 , x ' : I : S THE ANSWER KEY . ' 2X ' TELLS THE COMPUTER , ' MY F : I : NAL ANSWER : I : S ON L : I : NE 2 ' . HOW DO YOU TELL THE COMPUTER YOUR ANSWER· : I : SON L : I : NE cp••• A ) 3 B ) X C ) 3X C 571 . 1 TO DO THIS PROBLEM TYPE ' 3X ' AND THEN A SPACE . 2 + 3· •• G G G 3X 571 . 2 ( 1 ) 2 ( 2 ) 3 ( 3 ) 5 ' 3X ' MEANT THAT ON L : I : NE 3 : I : S THE ANSWER TO . . . A ) 2 + 3 B ) 3 + 5 A 69 571 . 3 USE A LINE NUMBER AND X TO TELL THE COMPUTER . WHERE THE ANSWEE IS . 4 + 7 ~ . " . G G G 2X ( 1 ) 10 ( 2 ) 11 ( 3 ) 12 IN PROBLEM SOLVING , WE CAN USE THE COMPUTER TO APD NUMBERS . TO ADD THE NUMBERS ON LINES 1 AND 2 , TYPE ' 1 . 2A ' , THEN SPACE . ADD 48 AND· 37 . G ( 1 . ) 48 G ( 2 ) 37 TYPE H AND SPACE· IF YOU WANT A HINT . H PID YOU TYPE ' 1 . 2A ' AS THE COMPUTER SAID . 1 . 2A ( 3 ) 85 TYPE HAND SPACE IF YOU WANT A HINT , H IF YOU TYPEP ' 1 . 2A ' , NOW USE I X ' TO TELL THE COMPUTER WHERE YOUR ANSWER lS . 3X 571 . 5 TO ADD THE NUMBERS ON LlNES 2 AND 3 , YOU TYPE ••• A ) A2 . 3 B ) 2 . 3A B 571 , 6 THE COMMAND FOR ADDITION IS ••• A ) A B ) ADD A 70 571 . 7 TO TELL THE COMPUTER THAT YOUR ANSWER IS ONLINE 4 , YOU TYPE••• A ) 4 B ) 4x C ) x4 B 571 . 10 ADD 491 AND 510 . G ( 1 ) G ( 2 ) H 1 . 2A 3X 571 . 11 ' G ' STANDS FOR GIVEN NUMBER . IN PROBLEM 571 . 10 ~ FIRST G SHOWS lHAT 491 IS A ••• A ) GRAND TOTAL B ) GREEDY NUMBER C ) GIVEN NUMBER c 571 . 12 IN THIS PROBLEM TRY 1 . 2A AND THEN TRY 2 . 1A TO SEE IF YOU GET THE SAME ANSWER . 4587 + 3089 = ••• G ( 1 ) 4587 G ( 2 ) 3089 1 . 2A ( 3 ) 7676 2 . 1A ( 4 ) 7676 3X 71 571 . 13 YOU GET THE SAME RESULT IF YOU ADD TWO NUMB : E ; j \ S 11 ' 1 THE OTEER ORDER BECAUSE ••• A ) ADDITION IS COI \ 1MUTATIV : E ; B ) ADDITION IS ASSOCIATIVE A 571 . 14 THE NUMBERS BEFORE THE COMMAND ARE ••• A ) LINE NUMBERS B ) THE NUMBERS TO ADD A 571 . 15 TO ADD TEE NUMBER ON LINE 2 TO TEE NUMBER ON : LIJIIE 3 rou WOU : LD TYPE••• A ) 1 . 2A B ) A3 . 2 C ) 3 . 2A C 571 . 16 SOMETIMES THERE ARE EXTRA NUMB : EE \ S GIVEN . FIND 486 + 390 . G ( 1 ) 707 G ( 2 ) 486 G ( : : 3 ) 390 2 . 3A ( 4 ) 876 4x 571 . 17 WITH I A ' YOU CAN ONLY ADD TWO NUMBERS AT A TIME . TO FIND THE SUM ( 5 + 7 ) + 4 , FIRST ADD 5 A @ 7 TO GET 12 , THEN . . . A ) ADD 4 TO 7 . B ) ADD 4 TO TEE 12 . C ) ADD 4 TO 5 . B 72 571 . 20 FIND ( 486 + 390 ) + 707 . G ( 1 ) 486 G ( 2 ) 390 G ( 3 ) 707 mE H Al ' lD SfACE If YOU WANT A HIl ' l ' l ' . H FIRST FIND 486 + 390 . THEN ADD THAT SUM TO 707 . 1 . 2A ( 4 ) 876 3 . 4A ( 5 ) 1583 5x 571 . 21 FIND 523 + ( 341 + 56 ) . G ( 1 ) 523 G ( 2 ) 341 G ( 3 ) 56 2 . 3A ( 4 ) 397 1 . 4A ( 5 ) 920 5X 571 . 22 ADD 947 , G G G G 1 . 2A 3 . 4A 5 . 6A 7X 382 , 410 , AND 523 . ( 1 ) 947 ( 2 ) 382 ( 3 ) 410 ( 4 ) 523 ( 5 ) 1329 ( 6 ) 933 ( 7 ) 2262 571 . 23 WHAT IS THE SUM OF 450 , 301 , 271 , AND 638 . G ( 1 ) 450 G ( 2 ) 301 G ( 3 ) 271 G ( 4 ) 638 1 . 2A ( 5 ) 751 3 . 4A ( 6 ) 909 5 . 6A ( 7 ) 1660 7X 73 571 . 24 ADD 4 , AND 43 . G ( 1 ) 43 mE H AND SPACE IF YOU WAN ' l ' A HIN ' J ; ' . H mE ' l . : l . A ' . 1 . lA ( 2 ) 86 2X 571 . 25 ADDING A NUMBER ' l ' 0 l ' l ' SEU " I $ . . . f ; ) TRIPLING THE NUMBER . : Il ) DOUBLING THE NUMBER . c ) SQUARING THE : NUMBER . B 571 . 26 DOUBLE 577 . G ( 1 ) 577 1 . lA ( 2 ) 1154 ex 57 1 •27 JOHN HAD 55 APPLES . TOM GAVE HIM ANO ~ 39 APPLES . HOW MANr APli ' LES DOES JOHN HAVE NOW••• G ( 1 ) 55 G ( 2 ) . 39 1 . 2A ( , ) 94 3X 571 . 30 A TANK HAD 957 GN < LONS OF WATER IN IT . 1188 GALLON [ ) ME ADDEP . HOW MANr GALLONS DOE $ THE TANK HAVE NOW••• G ( 1 ) 957 G ( 2 ) 1188 1 . 2A ( , ) 2145 3X 74 5TL . 31 DURING ONE WEEK , MISS BROWN ' S CLASS USED 120 CARTONS OF MILK A ' S } LUNCH TIME . MRS . SMITH ' S CLASS USED 132 CAR ' S } ONS AND MRS . GUGGENHEIMER ' S USED 143 CARTONS . HOW MANY CARTONS OF MILK DID THE 3 CLASSES USE : DURING THE WEEK ••• G ( 1 ) 120 G ( 2 ) 132 G ( 3 ) 143 G ( 4 ) 3 1 . 2A ( 5 ) 252 3 . 5A ( 6 ) 395 6x 571 . 32 A WOODEN BOX CONTAINS 23 RED BEADS , 5 GREEN BEADS , 30 YELLOW BEADS , AND 83 BLUE BEADS . HOW MANY BEADS DOES IT CONTAIN IN ALL••• G ( 1 ) 23 G ( 2 ) 5 G ( 3 ) 30 G ( 4 ) 83 1 . 2A ( 5 ) 28 3 . 4A ( 6 ) 113 5 . 6A ( 7 ) 141 7X 572 . 1 WE CAN SUBTRACT TWO NUMBERS USING THE ' S ' COMMAND . IN THIS PROBLEM , TYPE ' 1 . 2S ' , SPACE . REMEMBER X . FIND 4258 - 256 . G ( 1 ) 4258 G ( 2 ) 256 1 . 2S ( 3 ) 4002 3X 572 . 2 THE ' 1 ' IN ' l . 2S ' IS ••• A ) THE LINE NUMBER OF THE LARGER NUMBER . B ) THE NUMBER YOU WANT TO SUBTRACT . A 75 H 2 . 1S ; 5X THE ' 2 ' ~ N ' l . 2S ' IS ••• A ) THE NUMBER WHICH IS LARGER . B ) THE LINE NUMBER OF THE SMALLER NUMBER . B 512 . 4 FIND THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN 961 ; 5 AND 91 ~ , G ( 1 ) 96 : 1 , ; 5 G ( 2 ) 912 1 . 2S ( ; 5 ) 8701 ; 5X 572 . 5 CAREFUL HERE . SUBTRACT 9 : 1 , 2 FROM 961 ; 5 . G ( 1 ) 912 G ( 2 ) 9613 TYJ ? E H AND SPACE IF YOU WANT A HINT . TYPE ' 2 . 1S ' , . SPACE . ( ; 5 ) 8701 572 . 6 BE CAREFUL OF EXTRA GIVEN NUMBERS . SUBTRACT 1 ; 596 FROM 6054 . G ( : I , ) 1396 G ( 2 ) 4890 G ( 3 ) 6054 ; 5 . 1S ( 4 ) lj - 658 4x 76 H 1 . 2S 4 . 3S 5X 572 . 7 USE S TWICE . HERE . DO WHAT IS IN THE PARENTHESES FIRS ' i1 . FIND ( 8376 - 649 ) - 700 . G ( 1 ) 8376 G ( 2 ) 649 G ( 3 ) 700 TYPE H AND SPACE IF YOU WANT A HINT , TYPE ' 1 . 2S ' FIRST . THEN SUBTRACT 700 FROM WHAT IS INSIDE THE PARENTHESES . ( 4 ) 7727 ( 5 ) 7027 572 . 10 USE A AND S HERE . DO WHAT IS IN THE PARENTHESES FIRST . WHAT IS ( 320 + 168 ) - 167 ••• G ( 1 ) 320 G ( 2 ) 168 G ( 3 ) 167 1 . 2A ( 4 ) 488 4 . 3S ( 5 ) 321 5X 572 . 11 WHAT IS G G G 1 . 2S 3 . 4A 5X ( 9131 - 4275 ) + 25 ••• ( 1 ) 9131 ( 2 ) 4275 ( 3 ) 25 ( 4 ) 4856 ( 5 ) 4881 572 . 12 WORD PROBLEMS ARE EASY NOW . READ EACH PROBLEM . THE COMPUTER WILL PRINT THE GIVEN NUMBERS . DECIDE WHICH OPERATIONS TO USE . USE THEM . REMEMBER X . AFTER THE COMPUTER PRINTS THE GIVEN NlJMBERS , YOU SHOULD ••• A ) STAND UP AND SMILE . B ) DECIDE WHICH OPERATIONS ro USE . C ) DESTROY THE TELETYPE MACHINE B 77 572 . 13 TOM COLLECTED 500 SEASHELLS AND PLACED 48 OF THEM IN ASHOWCASE . HOW MANY SHELLS WERE NOT PLACED IN THE SHOWCASE ••• G ( 1 ) 500 G ( 2 ) 48 1 . 2S ( 3 ) 452 3X 572 . 14 USE TWO OPERATIONS HERE . MARY HAD 128 POSTCARDS . HER MOTHBR GAVE HER 17 MORE . HBR BROTHER TOOK AWAY 10 POSTCARDS . HOW MANY POSTCARDS DID SHE HAVE LEFT••• G ( 1 ) 128 G ( 2 ) 17 G ( 3 ) 10 1 . 2A ( 4 ) 145 4 . 3S ( 5 ) 135 5X 573 . 1 USE M TO MULTIPLY TWO NUMBERS . MULTIPLY 19 BY 46 . G ( 1 ) 19 G ( 2 ) 46 TYPE H AND SPACE IF YOU WANT A HINT . H TYPE ' 102M ' , SPACE . REMEMBER X . 102M ( 3 ) 874 3X 573 . 2 FIND 72X21 . G G 102M 3X ( 1 ) 72 ( 2 ) 2l ( 3 ) 1512 78 573 . 3 ' 102M ' MEANS ••• A ) MULTIPLY THE NUMBEE ' I ' BY THE NUMBEE ' 2 ' . B ) TAKE THENUMBEES ON LIN ) ] ; 1 AND LINE 2 AND MULTIPLY THEM . B 573 . 4 2 . 1M GIVES THE SAME RESULT AS 10 2M BECAUSE . . . A ) MULTIPLICATION IS COMMUTATIVE . B ) MULTIPLICATION IS ASSOCIATIVE . C ) ADDITION IS COMMUTATIVE . A MULTIPLY 34 BY 32 . TEY MULTIPLYING BOTH WAYS BEFOEE USINGX . G ( 1 ) 34 G ( 2 ) 32 102M ( 3 ) 1088 2 , lM ( 4 ) 1088 3X 573 . 6 TO FIND THE PEODUCT OF THREE NUMBEES , USE M TWICE . FIND ( 6X9 ) JQO . G ( 1 ) 6 G ( 2 ) 9 G ( 3 ) 10 102M ( 4 ) 54 3 . 4M ( 5 ) 540 5X 573 , 7 MULTIPLY 15X ( 2Xl003 ) . G ( 1 ) 15 G ( 2 ) 2 G ( 3 ) 1003 2 . 3M ( 4 ) 2006 1 . 4M ( 5 ) 30090 5X 79 573·10 MULTIPLY 43 BY 43 . G ( 1 ) 43 H LlM2X 573 . 11 WHAT IS G G LIM2 . 3M 4x TYl ' E H AND S : ? ACE lFYOUWANT A HIm ' . TYl ' E ' ~ . lM ' , SPACE , ( 2 ) 1849 ( 68x68 ) X7 . , • ( 1 ) 68 ( 2 ) 7 ( 3 ) 4624 ( 4 ) 32368 573 . 12 THE GIRL SCOUTS SOLD 54 BOXES OF COOKIES ; EACH BOX HAD 12 COOKIES IN IT . HOW MANY COOKIES DID THE GIRL ' SCOUTSSELL••• G ( 1 ) 54 G ( 2 ) 12 L2M ( : ~ ) 648 3X 575 . 13 EACH WEEK HAS 7 DAYS IN IT . EACH DAY HAS 24 HOURS IN IT . HOW MANY HOURS ARE THERE IN 6 WEEKS . G ( 1 ) 7 G ( 2 ) 24 G ( 3 ) 6 1 . 2M ( 4 ) 168 3 . 4M ( 5 ) 1008 5X 80 573 - 14 FIND ( 214x122 ) + 36 . G ( 1 ) 214 G ( 2 ) 122 G ( 3 ) 36 1 . 2M ( 4 ) 26108 3 . 4A ( 5 ) 26144 5X 573·15 JOHN HAD 25 PACKS OF BASEBALL CARDS . WITH 4 CARDS IN EACH PACK . ROGER GAVE HIM 29 MORE BASEBALL CARDS . HOW MANY BASEBALL CARDS DID JOHN HAVE THEN••• G ( 1 ) 25 G ( 2 ) 4 G ( 3 ) 29 TYPE H AND SPACE IF YOU WANT A HINT . H THIS PROBLEM IS WORKED JUST LIKE 573 . 14 . FIRST USE M , THEN USE A , 1 . 2M ( 4 ) lQO 3 . 4A ( 5 ) 129 5X 573 . 16 TO SEE HOW TO MULTIPLY BY A NUMBER THAT IS NOT GIVEN , STUDY THIS PROBLEM . MULTIPLY 8 BY 12 . G ( 1 ) 8 E ( 2 ) 12 1 . 2M ( 3 ) 96 3X YOU MAY TELL THE COMPUTER . YOU WANT TO ENTER A NUMBER BY TYPING••• A ) ' X ' , SPACE . B ) ' E ' , SPACE . B 81 573 . 17 AFTER TYPING ' E ' , SPACE , WAIT UNTIL TIlE MACHINE STOPS . THEN TYPE . . . . A ) THE NUMBER YOU WANT TO ENTER , SPACE . B ) A LINE NUMBEB , SPACE . A 573 . 20 HOW MUCH IS 51X32••• G ( 1 ) 51 TYPE H AND . SPACE IF YOU WANT A HINT . H TO ENTER A NUMBER THAT IS NOT GIVEN , TYPE ' E ' , SPACE . . E ( 2 ) 32 102M ( 3 ) 1632 3X 573 . 21 HOW MANY DAYS ARE THERE IN 3 WEEKS ••• G ( 1 ) 3 E ( 2 ) 7 102M ( 3 ) 21 3X 573 . 22 HOW MANY MONTHS ARE THERE IN 7 YEARS ••• G ( 1 ) 7 E ( 2 ) 12 102M ( 3 ) 84 3X 573 . 23 PAT HAD TO WAIT 14 WEEKS AND 3 DAYS UNTIL HIS BIRTHDAY . HOW MANY DAYS DID HE HAVE TO WAIT ALTOGETHER ••• G ( 1 ) 14 G ( 2 ) 3 H E 103M 2 . 4A 5X TYPE H AND SPACE IF YOU WANT A HINT . YOU MUST ENTER 7 , THE NUMBER OF DAYS IN A WEEK . ( 3 ) 7 ( 4 ) 98 ( 5 ) 101 82 574 . 1 THE RESULT OF DIVIDING ONE NUMBER BY ANOTIJER IS CALLED THEIR ••• A ) SUM B ) DIFFERENCE C ) QUOTIENT C 574 . 2 WHEN WE DIVIDE TWO NUMBERS , WE USE ' Q ' BECAUSE ' D ' ALREADY MEANS SOMETHING ELSE . TO DIVIDE ONE NUMBER BY ANO ' I ' HER , USE •• ; A ) Q B ) DIV C ) D A DIVIDE 91 BY 13 BY TYPING ' 1 . 2Q ' , SPACE , G ( 1 ) 91 G ( 2 ) 13 L2Q ( 3 ) 7 3X 574 . 4 WHAT IS 1750 DrII ; rDED BY 50••• G ( 1 ) 1750 G ( 2 ) 50 1 , 2Q , ( 3 ) 35 3X 574·5 DIVIDE 3750 BY 30 . G ( 1 ) 3750 G ( 2 ) 25 G ( 3 ) 30 L3Q ( 4 ) 125 4x 83 574 . 6 WATCH OUT HERE . DIVIDE 75 INTO 2625 . G ' ( 1 ) 75 G ( 2 ) 2625 TYPE H AND SPACE IF YOU WANT A HINT . H WHEN YOU USE Q , PUT THE LINE NUMBER OF THE LARGER NUMBER FIRST . 2 . 1Q ( 3 ) 35 3X 574 . 7 DICK ' S FATHER DROVE 96 MILES IN 3 HOURS . WHAT WAS HIS AVERAGE SPEED PER HOUR• . •• G ( 1 ) 96 . G ( 2 ) 3 1 . 20 ( 3 ) 32 3X 574 . 10 JIM HAS 78 CENTS . HOW MANY 6 - CENT STAMPS CAN HE BUY . . . G ( 1 ) 78 G ( 2 ) 6 L2Q ( 3 ) 13 3X 574 . 11 SUBTRACT 205 FROM 268 . THEN DIVIDE THE RESULT BY 7 . G ( 1 ) 205 G ( 2 ) 268 G ( 3 ) 7 2 . 1S ( 4 ) 63 4 . 3Q ( 5 ) 9 6x THERE J ; S NO LINE 6 . 5X 84 574 . 12 USE E . DIVIDE THE NUMBER OF MONTHS ' IN 13 YEARS BY 6 . G ( 1 ) 13 G ( 2 ) 6 TYPE H AND SPACE IF YOU WANT A HINT . H YOU MUST ENTER 12 , TIm NUMBER OF MONTHS IN A YEAR . MULTIPLY 12 BY 13 , DIVIDE THE RESULT BY 6 . E ( 3 ) 12 1 . 3M ( 4 ) 156 4 . 2Q ( 5 ) 26 5X 574 . 13 FIND TIm NUMBER OF WEEKS IN 77 DAYS . G ( 1 ) 77 E ( 2 ) 7 1 . 2Q ( 3 ) 11 3X 574 . 14 FIND 3844 / 4 . G E 1 . 2Q 3X ·574 . 15 ( 1 ) 3844 ( 2 ) 4 ( 3 ) 961 IN ; 1 - 3 DAYS , TIm JONES FAMlLY TRAVELED 4212 MILES ON A VACATION TRIP . HOW MANY MILES A DAY DID THEY AVERAGE••• G ( 1 ) 13 G ( 2 ) 4212 2 . 1Q ( 3 ) 324 3X 574 . 16 WATCH HOW WE SOLVE AVERAGE PROBLEMS . WHAT IS THE AVERAGE OF 5 AND 15 . . . G ( 1 ) 5 G ( 2 ) 15 1 . 2A ( 3 ) 20 E ( 4 ) 2 3 . 4Q ( 5 ) 10 5X WHICH OPERATION DID WE DO FIRST ••• A ) ADD B ) DIVIDE A 574 . 17 IN 574 . 16 WE ENTERED THE NUMBER OF ' THINGS WE WANT TO AVERAGE . IT WAS ••• A ) 10 B ) 2 B 574 . 20 WHAT IS THE AVERAGE OF 23 , 14 , AND 8 . . . G ( 1 ) 23 G ( 2 ) 14 G ( 3 ) 8 TYPE H AND SPACE IF YOU WANT A HINT . H ADD THE THREE NUMBERS . THEN DIVIDE BY 3 . 1 . 2A ( 4 ) 37 3 . 4A ( 5 ) 45 E ( 6 ) 3 5 . 6Q ( 7 ) 15 7X . . • 86 574 . 21 RUTH HAD 37 STAMPS , MARY HAD 58 , . AND JUDY HAD 310 WHAT WAS THE AVERAGE NUMBER OF STAMPS AMONG THE GIRLS ••• G ( 1 ) 37 G ( 2 ) 58 G ( 3 ) 31 102A ( 4 ) 95 3 . 4A ( 5 ) 126 E ( 6 ) 3 5 . 6Q ( 7 ) 42 7X 574 . 22 FIND ( 10620 / 45 ) + 33 . G ( 1 ) 10620 G ( 2 ) 45 G ( 3 ) 33 TYPE HAND SPACE IF YOU WANT . A HINT . H REMEMBER TO DO WHAT IS IN THE PARENTHESES FIRST . 102Q ( 4 ) 236 3 . 4A ( 5 ) 269 5X 574 . 23 WHAT IS G G G G 102M 103M5 . 6A 7X ( 7Xl2 ) + ( 7X3 ) . . . ( 1 ) 7 ( 2 ) 12 ( 3 ) 3 ( 4 ) 5 ( 5 ) 84 ( 6 ) 21 ( 7 ) 105 87 574 . 24 DO WHAT IS INSlDE TEE INNER PARENTBESESFIRST . FIND ( 34 - ( ( 486 / 162 ) + 6 ) ) X58 . G ( 1 ) 34 G ( 2 ) 486 G ( 3 ) 162 G ( 4 ) 6 G ( 5 ) 58 2 . 3Q ( 6 ) 3 1 . 6s ( 7 ) 31 4 . 7A ( 8 ) 37 4 . 6A ( 9 ) 9 1 . 9S ( 10 ) 25 5 . 10M ( 11 ) 1450 11X 575 . 1 TRY THESE WORD PROBLEMS . HARROLD WEJIIT FISHING . HE CAUGH ? , ) . 12 . : F : J : SHIJ11 THE MORNING AND : 1 . 27 IN THE AFTERNOON . : a : OW MA ) . ' IT . FISH DlD BE CATCH ; THAT DAY ••• G ( 1 ) 112 G ( 2 ) 127 1 . 2A ( 3 ) : : : ; 39 3X 575·2 HENRY SAW 291 WILD DUCKS ON THE LAK ~ . 120 OF THE DUCKS FLEW AWAY . HOW MANY DUCKS WERE LEFT ••• G ( : 1 . ) 291 G ( 2 ) 120 1 . 2S ( 3 ) 171 3X 575·3 BILL HAS 16 BANAJIj " AS , 34 APPLEs , AND 28 ORANGES . : a : OW MANY PIECES OF FRUIT DOES HE HAVE ••• G ( 1 ) 16 G ( 2 ) 34 G ( 3 ) 28 1 . 2A ( 4 ) 50 3 . 4A ( 5 ) 78 5 x 88 575 . 4 CHICKEN LITTLE LAYS 98 EGGS A DAY . HOW MANY EGGS DOES SHE LAY IN 2 WEEKS ••• G ( 1 ) 98 G ( 2 ) 2 E ( 3 ) 7 2 . 3M ( 4 ) 14 L4M ( 5 ) 1372 5 x 575 ·5 FOR THANKSGIVING THE BAKER MADE 3405 LITTLE PUMPKIN PIES . HE DIVIDED THEM EQUALLY AMONG EACH OF HIS 5 CHILDREN . HOW MANY PUMPKIN PIES DID EACH CHILO GET ••• G ( 1 ) 3405 G ( 2 ) 5 L2Q ( 3 ) 681 3x 575·6 ONE MAASMAN HAS 71 GOLLOPS , ANOTHER HAS 24 GOLLOPS , AND A THIRD HAS 35 GOLLOPS . WHEN THEY ARE ALL HERDED TOGETHER , 20 OF THE GOLLOPS ESCAPE . HOW MANY ARE LEFT••• G ( 1 ) 71 G ( 2 ) 24 G ( 3 ) 35 G ( 4 ) 20 L2A ( 5 ) 95 3 . 5A ( 6 ) 130 6 . 4s ( 7 ) 110 7X 89 575·7 ; I : N 1 DAY , FAT ALBERT EATS 4 STRAWBERRY , . 3 VANILLA , 2 RASPBERRY , AND 8 CHQCOLATE ICE CREJ \ M CONES • ! iE WJLL GAIN WEIGHT IF ; HE EATS MORE THAN 20 ICE CREJ \ M CONES A DAY . HOW MANY MORE MAY HE EAT THAT DAY WITHOUT BEING SICK••• G ( 1 ) 1 G ( 2 ) 4 G ( 3 ) 3 G ( 4 ) 2 G ( 5 ) 8 G ( 6 ) 20 2 . 3A ( 7 ) 7 7 . 4A ( 8 ) 9 8·5 A ( 9 ) 17 6 . 9S ( 10 ) 3 lOX 575·10 27 CHILDREN GQT 13 PIECES OF CANDY EACH . GENEROUS GEOBGIA GAVE AWAY 9 PIECES . HOW MANY PIECES DID SHE HAVE BEM . AJ : NING••• G ( 1 ) 27 G ( 2 ) 13 G ( 3 ) 9 1 . 2M ( 4 ) 351 4 . 3S ( 5 ) 342 5X 90 APPENDIX B Word Problem Set 1 . Row much larger is 456 than 402 . 2 . The number 301 is how much smaller than 586 . 3 . A bushel of corn weighs 56 lb . How much will 44 bushels weigh . 4 . Dick ' s uncle weighed 161 pounds . Dick weighed 87 pounds . How much less did Dick weigh than his uncle . 5 . A school superintendent transferred 275 pupils out of a school having an enrollment of 1080 pupils . How many pupils were left . 6 . A trailer was loaded with 4 automobiles weighing 3185 pounds each . What was the total weight of the load . 7 . Mr . Jackson drove 12 , 903 miles in 11 months . On an average , how many miles did he drive each month . 8 . Miss Allen had 789 books in the library and added 350 books during the summer . How many books were then in the library . 9 . Pike ' s Peak is 14 , 110 feet high . How high above the peak would an airplane fly , if it flew at an altitude of 30 , 000 feet . 10 . A truck and its load of coal weighed 14 , 875 pounds . The empty truck weighed 5996 pounds . Find the weight of the coaL lL The driver of a school bus drove the bus 38 miles each day . How many mileS would he drive the bus in 9 days . 12 . As an advertising stunt a new car was driven 2880 miles in 24 hours . What was its average speed per hour . 13 . A driver estimated that he averaged 16 miles per gallcm of gasoline . How many gallons of gasoline would he use in driving 10 , 000 miles . 14 . In one city , there were 1737 pupils enrolled in elementary school and 713 pupils enrolled in high school . How many pupils were enrolled in the schools . 15 . Ruth bought 200 Mexican stamps . She traded some of them for United States stamps . Then she had 163 Mexican stamps . How many Mexican stamps had she traded . 16 . The Castle School has 6 new bicy ' cle racks . Each rack holds 54 bicycles . There is room for how many bicycles in the 6 new racks . 91 17 . Jerry counted 444 names listed on there were 55 pages in the book . telephone book . a page in the telephone book , and How many names were listed in his 18 . A car traveled 391 miles in 1 day and used 23 gallons of gasoline . About how many miles did the car travel on 1 gallon of gasoline . 19 . The estimated September school enrollment of a city was 12 , 404 pupils and there was to be an average of 28 pupils per classroom . How many classrooms were needed . 20 . In March the number of bicycles produced in the United States was 4084 the first week and 1370 the second week . How many bicycles were produced during the 2 weeks . 21 . At the equator the diameter of Mercury is 3100 miles and that of the Earth is 7927 miles . How much greater is the diameter of the Earth than that of Mercury . 22 . At the tree nursery , Tom counted 28 rows of pine trees . The forester said that there were 575 trees in each row . How many trees were in the 28 rows of trees . 23 . David ' s older brother built a ham radio station . He said that he spent about 60 hours working on the station and that he finished it : in 5 weeks . On the average , he spent how mahy hours per week working on the station . 24 . Mr . Andrews can drive to work in about 35 minutes less than the time it takes when he rides the bus . He can drive to work in about 45 minutes . How long does it take Mr . Andrews to get to work when he rides on the bus . 25 . Mr . Phillips averaged 800 miles of driving a month . About how far did he drive in 3 years . 26 . A school playground is rectangular , 273 feet long and 21 feet wide . What is the total length of the fence around the playground . 27 . A football team gained 215 yards rushing , lost 12 yards passing , and lost 25 yards on penalties . What was their net gain in yards . 28 . One day the girls gathered leaves for a science project . 23 different leaves , Susan found 31 , and Marie fOund 29 . leaves did the girls gather . Ann found How many 29 . A dramatics club had 109 guests at its first play , 129 guests at its second play , and 135 guests at its third play . How many guests came altogether . 92 30 . Some empty crates were stacked outside a shed . There were 13 rows of stacks , with 15 stacks in a row , and there were 9 crates in each stack . How many crates were there . 31 . For an experiment , Susan mixed 7 ounces of glycerin and 12 ounces of alcohol with some water . The resulting mixture contained 45 ounces . How many ounces of water were used . 32 . It is 713 miles by airplane from New York to Chicago , 1858 miles from Chicago to San Francisco , and 2407 miles from there to Honolulu . What is the distance between New York and Honolulu by this route . 33 . Ranger VlI transmitted 4304 pictures of the moon to Earth . Ranger VIII transmitted 7137 pictures df the moon and Ranger IX transmitted 5814 pictures of the moon back to Earth . How many pictures of the moon have these space probes sent back to Earth altogether . 34 . Bob had 75 stamps . He gave 18 to Dan and 23 to John and 12 to Mike . How many stamps did Bob have left . 35 . John scored 21 points in the first football game , 7 in the second , and 9in the third . He was 12 points short of the school record . What was the school record for 3 gsmes . 36 . A homeowner paid 90 dollars for a specially made front door . The carpenter charged 18 dollars for installing the new door . Hardware cost 13 dollars , and the man who weather - striPPed the door charged 24 dollars . What was the total cost of the door . 37 . Don bought 15 dozen cookies . He ate 3 cookies . Then how many cookies were left in the box . 38 . Janice is 14 years of age . Her brother is 5 years less than twice Janice ' s age . How old is her brother . 39 . Mary is twice as old as Betty was 2 years ago . Mary is 40 years old . How old is Betty . 40 . David read 2 books in other had 119 pages . per day . 11 days . One book had 266 pages , and the David read an average of about how many pages 41 . Paul delivered 140 papers . 58 on Garfield Avenue , and deliver on York Road . Of these he delivered the rest on York Road . 61 on Poplar Street , How many did he 42 . John and his father drove average 45 miles an hour . guess . 387 miles in 9 hours . They had hoped to By how many miles did they miss their 93 43 . Mr . Ellis bought a car for 2768 dollars . He made a payment of 950 dollars and agreed to pay the rest in 18 payments . If there were no additional charges , how much would each payment be . 44 . At one place in the warehouse there are 23 stacks of canned peaches in cases , with 16 cases in each stack . At another - place there are 27 stacks with 16 cases of peaches in each stack . How many cases of canned peaches are there in all . 45 . Steve has 13 toy soldiers , Tom has 18 , and Richard has 41 . What is the average number of toy soldiers . 46 . An airplane flying at 14 , 000 feet climbs 3000 feet to avoid a storm . Then it drops 6000 feet and finally climbs 2000 feet . What is its final altitude . 47 . There were 1500 textbooks to be stored on shelves . 48 of them were sent to the library . 28 shelves have been filled with 34 books on each shelf . How many books remain to be stored . 48 . A ship sailed 746 miles . Then it sailed 9 days at 287 miles per day . The total distance planned for the voy ? ge is 3765 miles . How 49 . A football team had the ball on its own 15 - yard line . On three successive plays the team made a gain of 7 yards , a loss of 12 yards , and then a gain of 21 yards . On what yard line was the football then . 50 . John and his brothers weighed 74 pounds , 83 pounds , 69 pounds , and 70 pounds . What was their average weight . 51 , June helped her mother with the housework for 50 min . on Monday , 35 min . on Tuesday , 4o min . on Thursday , and 55 min . on Saturday . She helped with the housework for how many hours that week . 52 . There are 638 sixth - grade pupils , 395 fifth - grade pupils , and 205 fourth - grade pupils in the Crystal Lake schools . Last year each sixth - grade pupil wrote 4 book reports . Each fifth - grade pupil and each fourth - grade pupil wrote 3 book reports . What is the total number of book reports written by these pupils last year . 53 . Mr . Taylor was making a 700 - mile trip . Before lunch he drove for 5 hours at an average speed of 42 miles per hour . Before dinner he drove for 3 hours at an average speed of 39 miles per hour . How many more miles did he have to drive after dinner . 54 . In 5 months , a dealer sold 165 tons , 206 tons , 210 tons , 274 tons , and 115 tons of coal . What was the average amount of coal sold each month . 55 . The sixth graders sold 264 children ' s tickets at 1 dollar each , 53 student tickets at 2 dollars each , and 72 adult tickets at 3 dollars each . How much money did the sixth graders receive for all of the tickets . 56 . Find the average of the following scores ana bicycle safety test : 12 , 23 , 15 , 30 , 8 , 6 , 18 . 57 . Mark has test grades of 79 and 86 on 2 tests . What score must he make on the next test in order to have an average of 85 on all 3 tests . 58 . John and Alice were the only candidates for class president . received 75 votes more than John . There were 519 votes cast . many votes did Alice receive all together . AliceHow Bob had 1 gross , or 144 , pencils to sell . Wednesday . On Thursday and Friday he sold ing pencils . How many pencils did he sell together . He sold 5 dozen on all but 15 of the remain on Thursday and Friday 60 . A square - shaped school playground is 87 feet on a side . One third of the playground is used for basketball courts . The rest is used for football fields . How much land is used for football . Give your answer in square feet . 61 . Judy bought 3 pounds of steak at 98 cents a pound and 24 oranges at 45 cents a dozen . If 4 girls shared the cost , what did each girl pay . 62 . In its first 3 games a football team scored 14 points , 35 points , and 20 points . Last year the team averaged 20 points per game . This year ' s average score is how much above last year ' s average . 63 . Alice practiced on the piano for 20 min . on Monday , 35 min . on Tuesday , and 15 min . on Wednesday . Her sister Ruth practiced 40 min . a day on these 3 days . Ruth practiced how much longer than Alice . 64 . Committee members bought 3 jars of candy with 14 ounces in each jar , and 2 boxes of candy with 27 ounces in each box . They put the candy into bags that contained 4 ounces each . How many bags of candy did they fill . 65 . 3 classes of 32 pupils each , 1 class of 34 pupils , 4 teachers , and 7 parents took a trip on 3 buses . Each bus took the same number of riders . How many riders were on each bus . 66 . A pump has a capacity for pumping water at the rate of 57 gallons per minute . 95 67 . Mrs . Tulip ' s flower garden is 507 feet long and 39 feet wide . Every day she walks along the perimeter of the flower garden once . How far does Mrs • Tulip walk each day . 68 . Gordon bought 140 guinea pigs , and his sister gave him 28 more . He gave away 19 of the guinea pigs • How many did he have left . 69 . If a book has 95 names per column , and 5 columns per page , how many names does it have on 64 pages . 70 . Mr . Dumpty bought a new home costing $ 28 , 000 . He used $ 6500 which he had in the bank and $ 2876 from the sale of some land . The rest of the money he borrowed . It cost him $ 175 to have a lawyer , make out the necessary papers to buy the house . What amount did he have to borrow in order to pay for everything . 71 . The aviary at the zoo has 3584 birds . 224 birds eat at each outdoor feeding station . There are 7 indoor feeding stations where no birds eat . How many feeding stations does the aviary have altogether . 72 . 124 Girl Scouts have 100 boxes of mint cookies and 260 boxes of chocolate chip cookies to sell . If each girl sells the same number of boxes of cookies , how many ~ oxes will each girl have to sell . 73 . The Jolly Green Giant weighed 16 , 000 pounds . He had hoped to weigh 95 times as much as a man weighing 200 pounds . What is the difference between how many times heavier he wanted to be and how many times heavier he actually was . 74 . The sixth graders were decorating the gym for a party . Although they bought a 606 foot roll of crepe paper ribbon , they lost 30 feet of it . How many 24 foot lengths could they get from the remainder of the roll . 75 . Yesterday Willy the whale drank 16 gallons of water in the morning and 17 gallons of water in the afternoon . Water weighs 8 pounds per gallon . How many pounds of water did Willy drink yesterday . 76 . Mr . Daniels drove 295 miles on Monday , 330 miles on Tuesday , and 395 miles on Wednesday . On the average , how many miles did he drive each day . 77 . In the beginning of June , Dr . Pill deposited 56 5 - dollar bills and 27 10 - dollar bills into the bank . At the end of June , he deposited 37 more 5 - dollar bills . How much money did Dr . Pill , deposit in the bank in June . 78 . A boat and its contents weigh 17 , 000 pounds . Its contents consist of 130 gallons of gasoline and 12 gallons of oil . Gasoline weighs 6 pounds per gallon and oil weighs 7 pounds per gallon . What is the weight of the boat without its contents . 96 790 During one week Mr 0 Loaderman reported the number of pounds of freight loaded for each of five days as follows : 1294 , 2010 , 2413 , 1999 , and 10790 What was the average number of pounds loaded per day 0 80 0 Mrso Sewer had a new spool of ribbono From it she cut 8 pieces each 4 yards long and 6 pieces each 3 yards longo She had 2 yards of ribbon lefto HQwmanYYards of ribbon did the spool hold . 81 . The Swiggle family went south for its vacation . Mr , Swiggle drove 35 miles the first day of the trip , 41 miles the second day , 59 the third day , 53 the fourth day , 39 the fifth day , 44 the sixth day , and 65 the seventh day . Find the average number of miles that Mr . SWiggle drove per day . 82 . Sound travels at a speed of about 1100 feet per second . A blast from a whistle travels for 5 seconds . Then it travels another 1000 feeto How much further will it have to go to pass 9990 feet . 830 My uncle weighs 70 pounds more than John ( computers also have relatives ) . John and Jim are identical twins who together weigh 4 pounds less than L I weigh 130 poundso How much does my uncle weigh . 84 . Tom has 331 toy cars . George has twice as many as Tom . Bill has 28 fewer cars than George . John has 188 fewer cars than Bill . How many toy cars does John have . 85 . At the beginning of the year there were 1620 people registered at the employment office . At the end of the year there were 6 times as many people registered , one third of whom were under 25 years old . How many people were over 25 years old . 86 . There are 2 computers that teach children how to solve problems . One computer breaks down 4 times a day . The other one breaks down 12 times a week . What is the average number of breakdowns per computer in 21 days . 87 . The Podunk Daily Post had an average daily circulation of 9305 papers the first week , 8000 papers the second week , and 10 , 127 papers the third weeko The average SlL ~ day circulation for those 3 weeks was 13 , 455 papers . By how much did the average Sunday circulation exceed the average daily circulation . 88 . If a student ' s grades on the first 3 tests were 70 , 80 , and 95 , and his average on the 4 tests was 75 , what was his grade on the fourth test . 89 . A fast snail averaged 35 inches per hour for 6 hours and 40 inches per hour for 4 hours . What was his average speed per hour on his 10 - hour trip . 90 . Every day the Greasy Spoon Restaurant makes 37 poached eggs , 46 fried eggs , i5 cheese omelettes with 3 eggs in each omelette , and 43 scrambled eggs . If 57 people eat in the Greasy Spoon , and each person eats the same number of eggs , how many eggs does each person eat . 91 . Euclid wanted to measure the area of his back yard . Since it was L - shaped he could break it up into 2 rectangles - - one measuring 42 feet by 13 feet , the other 13 feet by 23 feet . What was the total area . 92 . The Hob - by Club decided to have a party one Saturday night . There were 40 members in the club - - 24 ·boys and 16 girls . If each boy brought 4 guests and each girl brought 5 guests , how many guests came to the party . 93 . Vtr . Larsen used 396 pounds of apples to fill ·baskets with 44 pounds in each . He sold the baskets . for 2 dollars each . How much did he receive for his apples . 94 . If a man can bind 124 sets of books in 4 days and there are 17 books in a set , how many books does the man bind in a day . 95 . Sam had enough books to pack 13 boxes with 28 books in each box . He had 5 books left over . How many books did he have in all . 96 . An old pad of paper had 47 sheets of paper left in it . 21 new pads of paper each had 151 sheets of paper . How many sheets of paper were there in all the pads . 97 . Someone has yelled at me once every day for the last 69 days , except for 5 days while . 1 was gone on vacation . If ' my 9 aunts and 7 uncles each yelled at me an equal number of times , how many times did each person yell at me . 98 . There were 154 popcorn balls on a table where 8 boys and 4 girls were seated . A dog came along and ate 10 of the popcorn balls . If the children shared the rest equally , how many popcorn balls were left for each person . 99 . An empty airplane weighs 2600 pounds . Each pilot and passenger weighs 170 pounds . If the plane has 2 pilots and 10 passengers , what will be the total weight of the airplane , pilots , and passengers . 100 . A milk can that weighed 18 pounds when empty was filled with 7 gallons of water in the morning , and 6 gallons were added in the afternoon . Water weighs 8 pounds per gallon . How much did the can full of water weigh . 98