Matrices with Compliance Comparable to that of Brain Tissue Select Neuronal over Glial Growth in Mixed Cortical Cultures Penelope C . Georges , * y William J . Miller , * yz David F . Meaney , * yz Evelyn S . Sawyer , § and Paul A . Janmey * y { * Institute for Medicine and Engineering , and Departments of y Bioengineering , and z Neurosurgery , § Sea Run Holdings Inc . , Freeport , Maine ; and { Physiology and Physics , University of Pennsylvania , Philadelphia , Pennsylvania ABSTRACT Cortical neurons and astrocytes respond strongly to changes in matrix rigidity when cultured on ﬂexible substrates . Inthisstudy , existingpolyacrylamidegelpolymerization methodsweremodiﬁedintoanovelmethodformakingsubstratescapable of engaging speciﬁc cell - adhesion receptors . Embryonic cortical dissociations were cultured on polyacrylamide or ﬁbrin gel scaffolds of varying compliance . On soft gels , astrocytes do not spread and have disorganized F - actin compared to the cyto - skeletons of astrocytes on hard surfaces . Neurons , however , extend long neurites and polymerize actin ﬁlaments on both soft and hard gels . Compared to tissue culture plastic or stiff gel substrates coated with laminin , on which astrocytes overgrow neurons in mixed cultures , laminin - coated soft gels encourage attachment and growth of neurons while suppressing astrocyte growth . The number of astrocytes on soft gels is lower than on hard even in the absence of mitotic inhibitors normally used to temper the astrocyte population . Dissociated embryonic rat cortices grown on ﬂexible ﬁbrin gels , a biomaterial with potential use as an implant material , displayasimilarmechano - dependentdifferenceincellpopulation . Thestiffnessofmaterialsrequiredforoptimalneuronal growth , characterized by an elastic modulus of several hundred Pa , is in the range measured for intact rat brain . Together , these data emphasize the potential importance of material substrate stiffness as a design feature in the next generation of biomaterials intended to promote neuronal regeneration across a lesion in the central nervous system while simultaneously minimizing the ingrowth of astrocytes into the lesion area . INTRODUCTION Injury to the central nervous system ( CNS ) is characterized by a lesion cavity surrounded by a glial scar composed pri - marily of hypertrophic astrocytes , potentially as a means to seal off the damaged area from still healthy tissue ( 1 ) . Neu - ronal regeneration through the lesion cavity is only margin - ally feasible , perhaps due to many obstacles including a severe injury environment ﬁlled with deleterious factors and the mechanical barrier caused by the glial scar ( 2 ) . Less well known , though , is the mechanical inﬂuence of the glial scar on the regenerative response across the lesion site . Cells are subject not only to chemical signals but also to mechanical signals ( 3 – 6 ) . Numerous systems developed to deﬁne how cultured cells respond when grown on materials of physiologically realistic elastic moduli show that me - chanical inputs matter to cells and that their response varies with cell type ( 7 – 9 ) . Plating cells on hydrogels with con - trollable stiffness has identiﬁed how mechanical parameters affect cell behavior ( 3 ) . Endothelial cells , ﬁbroblasts , myo - tubes , smooth muscle cells , as well as neurons all show a morphological dependence on matrix stiffness ( 3 , 7 , 8 , 10 – 12 ) . Neurons of the dorsal root ganglion and motor neurons of the spinal cord exhibit a preference for growth on soft materials by increased neurite length and increased branching , respec - tively ( 8 , 10 ) . Furthermore , implanting soft hydrogels into the CNS injury cavity has beneﬁcial effects including modest neuronal ingrowth as well as reduction of the glial scar ( 13 ) . The beneﬁt provided by hydrogels may partly be attributable to their mechanical properties ( 14 – 16 ) . Whether extracellular compliance affects speciﬁc aspects of neuronal growth in culture with other CNS cell types such as astrocytes has not yet been determined . The work presented here attempts to link matrix compli - ance to growth behavior , adhesion , and morphology of pri - mary cortical neurons and astrocytes . In normal culture conditions on hard polystyrene , dissociation of brain or spinal cord yields a mixed culture of both glia and neurons . Most efforts to maximize neuronal growth have focused on identifying growth - promoting or inhibitory chemical signals , but the mechanical properties of plastic substrates with elas - tic moduli in the GPa range also contrasts with the me - chanical properties of the brain , which has elastic moduli in the few hundred Pa range ( 17 , 18 ) . Altering the matrix stiff - ness to values above and below physiological levels shifts the resulting cell populations on the gel surface . Our data indicate that neurons show a bias for growth on soft ma - terials , whereas astrocytes spread and adhere better to stiff materials . Appreciating the effects of matrix mechanics on CNS cell growth could help characterize factors regulating neuronal growth and the development of biomaterial scaf - folds used to bridge the lesion gap that occurs after traumatic CNS injury . Submitted August 24 , 2005 , and accepted for publication January 10 , 2006 . Address reprint requests to Paul A . Janmey , 1010 Vagelos Research Laboratories , 3340 Smith Walk , Philadelphia , PA 19104 . E - mail : janmey @ mail . med . upenn . edu . (cid:1) 2006 by the Biophysical Society 0006 - 3495 / 06 / 04 / 3012 / 07 $ 2 . 00 doi : 10 . 1529 / biophysj . 105 . 073114 3012 Biophysical Journal Volume 90 April 2006 3012 – 3018 EXPERIMENTAL METHODS Preparation of substrates Acrylamide and bis - acrylamide ( Fisher Biotech , Loughborough , Leicester - shire , UK ) solutions are prepared to contain a constant polymer mass of 7 . 5 % and bis - acrylamide concentrations of 0 . 01 % , 0 . 03 % or 0 . 3 % to alter stiffness . Acrylamide , bis - acrylamide , ammonium persulfate , and N , N , N 9 , N 9 - tetramethylethylenediamine ( TEMED ) under a nonaqueous layer of toluene containing 0 . 5 % acrylic acid N - hydroxy succinimide ester ( Sigma , St . Louis , MS ) was polymerized between two coverslips , chemically mod - iﬁed as described ( 12 ) . The N - succinimidyl acrylate incorporated at the surface of the gel was reacted with 0 . 2 mg / ml laminin ( Collaborative Bio - medical , Bedford , MA ) to produce a uniform coating of adhesive ligands . After washing with HEPES buffer to remove traces of unpolymerized sol - vent , wells containing the polyacrylamide ( PA ) gels were ﬁlled with culture medium and allowed to equilibrate overnight at 37 (cid:2) C . Although the PA gels represent a well - controlled experimental system to vary both matrix compliance and surface coatings , the PA polymerization process prevents its use as an implantable biomaterial . An alternative choice with potential as an implant material is ﬁbrin , which was polymerized using standard methods ( 19 ) . Salmon ﬁbrinogen ( Searun Holdings , Freeport , ME ) was rehydrated in dH 2 O and diluted to 2 or 18 mg / mL in 50 mM Tris , 150 mM NaCl , pH 7 . 4 , and 400 m L aliquots were polymerized with 2 units / mL of ﬁsh thrombin in tissue culture wells . Viscoelastic characterization of material scaffolds The dynamic shear moduli of PA and ﬁbrin gels were measured on a strain - controlled rheometrics ﬂuids spectrometer III ( Rheometrics , Piscataway , NJ ) . A 500 - m L sample was polymerized between two steel plates , and the shearmodulus G 9 ( v ) , whichdescribes elastic resistance , was calculated from the shear stress in phase with a 2 % oscillatory ( 1 rad / s ) shear strain . The dynamic shear modulus of adult rat brain was similarly measured . An 8 - mm diameter sample was cut using a stainless steel punch and placed between the plates . Short - term G 9 ( v ) was measured by oscillation at 2 % strain and the long - term shear modulus G ( t ) was measured by applying a 10 % steady strain and allowing the sample to relax for 30 s . Fluorescent labeling of adhesive proteins Fibrinogen and laminin ( 1 mg / mL ) were conjugatedto rhodamine - succinimide or ﬂuorescein isothiocyanate ( FITC ) for ﬂuorescence visualization . Rhoda - mine - succinimide was added at a ratio of four rhodamine molecules per ﬁbrinogen ( pH 8 . 2 ) . FITC dissolved in dimethyl sulfoxide was added at a ratio of 10 m g per mg of protein in phosphate buffered saline ( PBS pH ¼ 7 . 4 ) and incubated for 1 h at room temperature . Unreacted rhodamine - succinimide and FITC were removed by dialysis in PBS . Quantiﬁcation of gel surface ﬂuorescence intensity was performed using NIH Image J soft - ware . Five arbitrary ﬂuorescent images of each gel were captured with a Hamamatsu camera ( Hamamatsu , Japan ) and ﬂuorescence histograms were averaged for statistical analysis . Cell culture and microscopy Neuronal and glial cells were derived from prenatal rat embryos and maintained in an incubator at 37 (cid:2) C and 5 % CO 2 . Embryos ( E17 – E19 ) were removed by caesarean section from a timed - pregnant Sprague - Dawley rat and the cortices were removed . Tissue was digested in trypsin / DNase at 37 (cid:2) C , centrifuged ( 1000 g 3 5 min ) , and ﬁltered to derive a cell suspension . For cultures containing both neurons and glial cells , cells were plated di - rectly onto substrates . For rat primary astrocyte cultures , cells were main - tained for 14 days in culture with a series of trypsinizations to remove neurons . Cultures used for experiments were . 98 % astrocytes as assessed by GFAP immunocytochemistry . Cells were grown in an incubator at 37 (cid:2) C and 5 % CO 2 in Dulbecco’s modiﬁed Eagle’s medium ( BioWhittaker , East Rutherford , NJ ) supplemented with Ham’s F12 ( Sigma ) and 5 % fetal bovine serum ( Hyclone , Logan , UT ) for 7 days followed by an additional 5 days culture in Neurobasal ( Gibco , Carlsbad , CA ) also supplemented with 5 % fetal bovine serum , 2 mM l - glutamine , 50 m g / mL streptomycin , and 50 units / mL penicillin . Astrocytes were plated on 18 mm diameter gels . At 48 h , the cells were examined using a Leica ( Wetzlar , Germany ) inverted microscope , and images were acquired with a Hamamatsu camera . Neuron and astrocyte cocultures were plated on gels and , at 6 days the cultures were examined . Individual cell morphology was assessed using NIH Image J software . Immunocytochemistry Cultures were ﬁxed with 4 % paraformaldehyde at 37 (cid:2) C for 30 min . Samples were blocked and permeabilized in 5 % bovine serum albumin and 0 . 2 % Triton X - 100 . The following primary antibodies and stains were used : glial ﬁbrillary acidic protein ( GFAP ) ( 1 : 150 , Chemicon , Temecula , CA ) , b III - tubulin ( 1 : 1000 , Chemicon ) , rhodamine - phalloidin ( Molecular Probes , Eugene , OR ) , and 4 9 - 6 - diamidino - 2 - phenylindole ( DAPI ) ( Sigma ) . The cell nuclei were counted after separating the red and green channels of the triple - stained images . Cell type was assigned by examining what color stain surrounded the nucleus . RESULTS Characterization of protein attachment to gel surface by ﬂuorescence intensity PA gels were prepared as substrates for primary cortical neurons and astrocytes by modifying the method most com - monly used to covalently link extracellular matrix ligands to the PA gels ( 3 , 21 ) . Acrylic acid N - hydroxy succinimide ester ( NHS ) monomer incorporated into the polymerizing gel only at the water / toluene interface . The reactive gel surface was covered with a solution of the extracellular matrix protein , which bound the gel by an amide bond . The coupling efﬁciency was veriﬁed by incubating FITC - labeled ﬁbrinogen with PA gels formed with NHS acrylate at their surface ( Fig . 1 A ) . The FITC - ﬁbrinogen was also incubated on plastic as a control for ﬂuorescence ( Fig . 1 B ) . The ﬂuo - rescence image of the activated gel surface appears uniform compared to plastic typically used in vitro , demonstrating that the density of adhesion sites is without surface irregularities that could inﬂuence the structure of adherent cells . To verify that binding an initial protein to the gel surface effectively prevents a second protein from attaching , rhoda - mine - labeled ﬁbrinogen or FITC - labeled laminin was incu - bated on an active gel followed by a second incubation with the protein labeled with the other ﬂuorophore . Fluorescence micrographs were captured , and the intensity of each ﬂuoro - phore was calculated . Fluorescence of the primary protein conjugated to the gel was considerably higher than the sec - ondary protein , showing that reactive groups for ligand attachment were quenched after the initial incubation step ( Fig . 1 C , Gel 1 ) . Experiments were repeated using 1 mg / mL FITC - labeled laminin as the primary ligand and as in Gel 1 , Neurons and Astrocytes on Soft Substrate 3013 Biophysical Journal 90 ( 8 ) 3012 – 3018 rhodamine intensity was lower than when ﬁbrinogen was the primary ligand ( Fig . 1 C , Gel 2 ) . Therefore , an additional beneﬁt of the PA gel method is that ligand - cell interaction can be studied with few additional adhesion sites created by protein in the serum or released by cells . Finally , varying the % bis ( cross - linker ) concentration had no discernible effect on protein conjugation to the gel surface after incubation with equal concentrations of FITC - laminin . Therefore soft and hard gels have an equivalent protein coat - ing ( Fig . 1 C , Gel 2 and Gel 3 ) , ensuring that any change in cell behavior on different compliances will be due to mech - anical and not chemical stimuli . Elastic properties of gels and CNS tissues Viscoelastic measurements using a strain - controlled rheom - eter veriﬁed that shear moduli ( G 9 ) of PA gels and ﬁbrin gels increase with cross - linking density or protein concentration , respectively , as has been previously reported ( 12 , 22 ) over a range that spans the elastic moduli reported for brain and spinal cord ( 17 , 18 , 23 ) . Whole brain from adult rat was also measured by rheology and compared with previous reports . Both oscillatory shear and stress relaxation tests were per - formed to attain short - term and long - term shear modulus values . Short - term ( oscillatory ) G 9 ( v ) of adult rat brain aver - aged ; 330 Pa , not far from G 9 ( v ) of the softest PA and ﬁbrin gels , which were 200 Pa and 250 Pa , respectively . Long - term G ( t ) of rat brain , reported a lower value whose average was 125 Pa , demonstrating the brain’s stress relaxation response that has been previously reported ( 24 ) . Stiffest gels have G 9 ( v ) that are above physiological values for normal brain but sim - ilar to those of other tissues and far below that of polystyrene typically used in vitro , with stiff PA and ﬁbrin gels having moduli of 9000 Pa and 2100 Pa , respectively . The results are reported in Table 1 . Morphology and cytoskeleton of neurons and astrocytes on ﬂexible substrates Astrocytes and neurons from dissociated embryonic rat cor - tices were plated on PA gels and imaged within 7 days . Sim - ilar to previous studies of ﬁbroblasts and endothelial cells ( 3 , 11 , 12 , 25 ) , astrocytes were small and round on soft gels . In comparison , astrocytes on hard gels displayed highly spread morphologies more typical of reactive cultured glia ( Fig . 2 , A and B ) . Neurons , in contrast , extended long neurites on both soft and hard substrates , and morphology differences due to compliance change were not obvious in the presence of glia ( Fig . 2 , C and D ) . Examination of neuron and astrocyte F - actin structure by rhodamine - phalloidin staining showed differences in cyto - skeleton assembly due to substrate compliance . Astrocytes lacked well - articulated F - actin structures on soft gels ; phalloidin staining revealed no stress ﬁbers running through the cell body , whereas stress ﬁbers were readily seen for astrocytes grown on hard gels ( Fig . 3 , A and B ) . In contrast to the weakly ﬁlamentous structure of actin in astrocytes on soft gels , neurons on soft gels had strong F - actin spikes in their FIGURE 1 Micrographs and quantiﬁcation of ﬂuores - cence intensity of bound rhodamine and FITC - labeled ﬁbrinogen ( fgn ) and laminin ( LN ) to PA gels . ( A ) Micro - graph of PA gels polymerized with N - hydroxy succinimide linker and polystyrene ( B ) coated with FITC - labeled fgn . PA gel with linker is a uniformly coated matrix . ( C ) Quantiﬁcation of total ﬂuorescence intensity of protein coating on PA gel surface shows that attaching 1 mg / mL rhodamine - labeled fgn ( 1 ) to the gel saturates its surface binding sites and prevents a second protein , 1 mg / mL FITC - LN , from attaching . As a control , the order of attached proteins was reversed with FITC - LN ﬁrst and rhodamine - fgn second ( 2 ) . Also , protein density on gel surface is not related to gel stiffness ( 3 ) . TABLE 1 Shear modulus of central nervous system tissue dissected from normal adult rat brain , PA gels , and ﬁbrin gels ( mean 6 SD ) , measured by strain oscillation Tissue or gel Mean shear modulus ( Pa ) Adult rat brain ( 2 % oscillatory strain ) , G 9 ( v ) 330 6 100 Adult rat brain ( 10 s of constant 10 % strain ) , G ( t ) 125 6 40 0 . 01 % bis - acrylamide 7 . 5 % acrylamide ( soft ) gel , G 9 ( v ) 200 6 50 0 . 3 % bis - acrylamide 7 . 5 % acrylamide ( hard ) gel , G 9 ( v ) 9000 6 200 3 mg / mL salmon ﬁbrin gel , G 9 ( v ) 250 18 mg / mL salmon ﬁbrin gel , G 9 ( v ) 2150 3014 Georges et al . Biophysical Journal 90 ( 8 ) 3012 – 3018 growth cones and many actin - rich structures protruding off neurites . The neuronal growth cone appeared branched and ﬁlamentous on both soft and hard gels ( Fig . 3 , C and D ) . Quantiﬁcation of F - actin staining ( Fig . 3 E ) showed that neurons on soft gels have 30 % more F - actin structures extending off the length of the neurite , a difference that was statistically signiﬁcant ( t - value ¼ 3 . 27 ) . Since these ﬁla - mentous structures eventually result in increased branches and neurites , these results are consistent with previous ﬁndings of increased neurite branching on soft substrates ( 8 , 10 ) . Astrocyte morphology was quantiﬁed , and the projected cell area on soft gels was found to be signiﬁcantly smaller than the area on hard gels as expected from the phase and ﬂuorescent micrographs ( Fig . 4 A ) . There was no statistically signiﬁcant effect on the projected area of cells bound to either hard or soft gels as the concentration of ligand added to the gel surface was varied from 0 . 05 mg / mL to 0 . 2 mg / mL . This result is consistent with the data in Fig . 1 , suggesting that the limited number of reactive sites on the gel are mostly saturated with adhesive protein on both hard and soft gels . To test for differences in adhesion on hard and soft sur - faces , cortical astrocytes were plated at low density ( ; 3 3 10 5 cells ) on 18 mm gels coated with laminin . At 4 and 24 h , the cells were ﬁxed and stained with DAPI and the cell number was counted for soft and hard PA gels ( Fig . 4 B ) . Astrocyte adhesion decreased with shear modulus of the gels , and the number of astrocytes on soft gels was slightly higher at 4 h after plating compared to gels examined at 24 h , suggesting that cells might detach from soft gels with time . Cells from whole cortical dissociations were plated ( 1 3 10 6 cells ) on laminin - coated gels and ﬁxed and immunostained with antibodies against the neuron - speciﬁc marker b III - tubulin and the astrocyte - speciﬁc GFAP at 6 days after plating . Whereas astrocyte adhesion increased with shear modulus as in the pure cultures , neuronal adhesion was the same for both soft and hard gels ( Fig . 4 C ) . Evaluation of cocultures of astrocytes and neurons on ﬂexible substrates Mixed cultures of cortical neurons and astrocytes were im - aged 7 days after plating on laminin - coated PA gels . Cultures were immunostained with antibodies against b III - tubulin and GFAP ( Fig . 5 , A and B ) . Neurons grew independently of astrocytes only on soft gels . On hard gels , cells reactive with astrocyte markers were the most abundant cell type , and neurons appeared only to grow over glia . Results show that ; 80 % of cells on soft gels were b III - tubulin positive , whereas on hard gels neurons made up , 45 % of the pop - ulation ( Fig . 5 C ) ; the remaining cells were nearly all GFAP positive , a signiﬁcant difference at the 99 % conﬁdence level ( t - value ¼ 8 . 02 ) . Fig . 4 shows that astrocyte adhesion was decreased on soft gels , either due to migration off the soft gel or detachment , possibly explaining the lower population of astrocytes on soft gels in the mixed culture . To compare the selective growth of neurons on soft PA gels with the response of cells on biologically compatible soft gels , cocultures were also grown on ﬁbrin gels . Similar to the effect of PA gel surfaces , cocultures of neurons and astrocytes on ﬁbrin gels of varying concentration showed a striking difference in the number and type of adherent cells ( Fig . 5 , D and E ) . Gels with a ﬁbrinogen concentration of 2 mg / mL had an approximate shear modulus of 250 Pa , whereas increasing the ﬁbrinogen concentration to 18 mg / mL produced a signiﬁcant increase in the shear modulus to 2100 Pa ( Table 1 ) . The number of neurons was determined after 3 days in culture . As conﬁrmed by immunocytochemistry , cortical cell preparations seeded on soft ﬁbrin gels yielded mostly neurons , with ; 80 % of total cells staining positive for b III - tubulin . In contrast , a signiﬁcantly smaller fraction of cells were neurons on harder ﬁbrin gels at the same time point ( Fig . 5 F ) . DISCUSSION By varying the elastic modulus of materials on which CNS cells are grown , we can maximize either neuronal cell sur - vival and extension with minimal attachment of glial cells or else robust growth of astrocytes alongside neurons that are presumably being supported by either the mechanical pres - ence of astrocytes , a soluble factor released by the astrocytes , or a combination of the two . FIGURE 2 Phase images of astrocytes on soft ( A ) and hard ( B ) LN - coated PA gels 2 days after plating on gels . Astrocytes on soft gels are smaller and less spread than on hard gels . Cultures of dissociated embryonic cortices at 2 days in vitro on soft ( C ) and hard ( D ) gels show insigniﬁcant differences between neurons on the two gels . Scale bars , 50 m m ( A , B ) and 25 m m ( C , D ) . Neurons and Astrocytes on Soft Substrate 3015 Biophysical Journal 90 ( 8 ) 3012 – 3018 PA gels are controllable , optically ideal hydrogels , but toxic before polymerization , limiting these polymers to two - dimensional in vitro studies . In contrast , ﬁbrin gels are a natural material that could transition from in vitro studies to in vivo as well as provide three - dimensional matrices for culture studies . Mammalian ﬁbrin has been successfully used as a neuronal substrate in culture ( 26 ) , and ﬁsh ﬁbrin has nearly identical polymerization activity with the added ben - eﬁt of having been derived from a cold - blooded animal , therefore , potentially lowering the incident of infectious disease transfer ( 19 ) . Soft tissues in vertebrates maintain mechanical properties , quantiﬁed by an elastic modulus , within a speciﬁc range that varies according to tissue type , development , and disease . Brain is a soft tissue and has an elastic modulus ; 10 times softer than liver and nearly 50 times softer than muscle ( P . C . Georges , unpublished data ; ( 6 ) ) . As with nearly all soft tissues , brain tissue shows stress relaxation , with the shear modulus decreasing to a few hundred Pa in several seconds , consistent with previous reports ( 24 ) . Historically , most of the focus on brain material properties was for short duration loading , where the brain shows a considerably stiffer compliance . However , for cellular processes such as growth cone advance , the long - term response of brain tissue may be more applicable . Past studies show that neurite motility occurs over the course of seconds to minutes , within the timescale where the brain is considerably softer . On soft gels astrocytes show fewer stress ﬁbers , consistent with previous ﬁndings in ﬁbroblasts where stress ﬁbers fail to form ( 11 ) . Whether the polymerization machinery of actin is altered or whether lack of focal adhesions to anchor the actin and create stress ﬁbers is the cause is unclear . Like ﬁbro - blasts , astrocytes have a large spread area on hard compared to soft substrates , but the stiffness range over which they undergo the transition from round to well spread is lower than that of ﬁbroblasts , beginning below 1 kPa ( data not shown ) and saturating above 2 kPa on ﬁbrin gels ( Fig . 5 E ) . Fibroblasts would perceive 1 kPa as indistinguishable from 100 Pa , and a soft matrix on which no stress ﬁbers form ( 10 , 11 ) and would see a 2 kPa as an intermediate stiffness . The stiffness sensing of astrocytes has not yet been reported , to our knowledge , and it is noteworthy that astrocytes have dissimilar stiffness sensing from neurons . Neurons are able to polymerize F - actin on soft and hard gels alike , a sur - prising ﬁnding since most cell types have disordered F - actin structures on soft materials . Neurons on the softest gels show FIGURE 3 Staining for F - actin with phalloidin was used to demonstrate the difference in effect of gel stiffness on actin assembly in both cell types . Astrocytes ( A , B ) and neurons in mixed culture ( C , D ) were plated on soft ( 200 Pa ) ( A , C ) and hard ( 9 kPa ) ( B , D ) LN - coated PA gels . Actin assembly is disrupted in astrocytes on soft gels as compared to hard , whereas neurons on soft gels have robust actin ﬁlaments and enhanced F - actin protrusions ( inset ) . Scale bars , 15 m m ( A , B ) and 10 m m ( C , D ) . FIGURE 4 The projected cell area on soft gels was smaller than on hard gels ( A ) . There was no statistically signiﬁcant effect on projected area of cells both to hard and soft gels as the concentration of ligand added to the gel surface was varied from 0 . 05 mg / mL to 0 . 2 mg / mL ( A ) . Astrocyte adhesion decreased with gel stiffness , and the number of astrocytes on soft gels was higher at 4 h after plating compared to 24 h after ( B ) . In mixed cultures , astrocyte adhesion increased with shear modulus , but neuronal adhesion was the same for both soft and hard gels ( C ) . 3016 Georges et al . Biophysical Journal 90 ( 8 ) 3012 – 3018 increased neurite sprouting , paving the way for an increased number of dendrites and axons and potentially functional connections . The enhanced protrusion of neurites on soft gels together with the increase in branching probability ( 7 ) suggests that , despite the similarities between the neuronal growth cone and the lamellapodium of other cell types , the actin - dependent contraction of neurons may not be the motor that drives neurites forward . Previous studies of traction forces exerted by neurons and ﬁbroblasts on PA gels report that whereas ﬁbroblast lamellae can strongly deform gels with elastic moduli near 10 , 000 Pa , neurons can deform gels only when they are as soft as 50 – 200 Pa , even though the actin and myosin content of ﬁbroblast lamellae and neuronal growth cones are similar and the traction forces are myosin II dependent ( 27 ) . The primary force for neurite extension may be due to microtubule or actin dynamics , whereas the con - tractile forces of the growth cone may serve to guide the neurite and enhance the persistence of its motion . In this study , neurons grown with astrocytes develop well in both hard and soft cultures . This result does not counter previous ﬁndings where neurons have different growth trends on hard materials ( 8 , 10 ) —in this work neurons on hard substrates are making cellular contact with astrocytes . Neu - rons on soft materials sense a soft substrate of nearly 250 Pa with negligible glial interaction due to a remarkably low number of astrocytes . On hard gels , however , neurons are not purely sensing the kPa matrix they occupy ; the inherent mechanical properties of the astrocytes with which they make cell - cell contact must be considered . Furthermore , it is known that astrocytes release soluble factors that support neuronal growth , which could also contribute to neuronal growth on hard gels ( 1 ) . The main result of these experiments is the distribution and population sorting of CNS cells that occurs based on the mechanical properties of the substrate . The selectivity of cell adhesion and growth is attributed to external compliance presented to the cells by the extracellular matrix . Neurons grow into hydrogels in injury cavities , whereas astrocytes avoid the same material ( 13 ) . The results in this study may partly explain how the hydrogel is advantageous postinjury , simultaneously promoting neurite regeneration and suppress - ing glial ingrowth . In a larger context , this work suggests that the mechanical properties of a biomaterial used for CNS implantation strategies—a largely overlooked characteristic of the implant—may have considerable inﬂuence on the form and type of regeneration observed across a CNS ma - terial construct . We thank Taylor Cohen of U Penn for providing adult rat brains and Margaret McCormick for her expertise utilizing ﬁbrin gels . This work was supported by National Science Foundation grant DMR - 00 - 79909 , National Institutes of Health grant HL64388 , and Department of Defense Small Business Technology Transfer A023 - 0028 . REFERENCES 1 . Fawcett , J . W . , and R . A . Asher . 1999 . The glial scar and central nervous system repair . Brain Res . Bull . 49 : 377 – 391 . 2 . Horner , P . J . , and F . H . Gage . 2000 . Regenerating the damaged central nervous system . Nature . 407 : 963 – 970 . 3 . Pelham , R . J . Jr . , and Y . Wang . 1997 . Cell locomotion and focal adhesions are regulated by substrate ﬂexibility . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 94 : 13661 – 13665 . 4 . Bischofs , I . B . , and U . S . Schwarz . 2003 . Cell organization in soft media due to active mechanosensing . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 100 : 9274 – 9279 . 5 . Janmey , P . A . , and D . A . Weitz . 2004 . Dealing with mechanics : mechanisms of force transduction in cells . Trends Biochem . Sci . 29 : 364 – 370 . 6 . Discher , D . E . , P . Janmey , and Y . L . Wang . 2005 . Tissue cells feel and respond to the stiffness of their substrate . Science . 310 : 1139 – 1143 . 7 . Engler , A . J . , M . A . Grifﬁn , S . Sen , C . G . Bonnemann , H . L . Sweeney , and D . E . Discher . 2004 . Myotubes differentiate optimally on sub - strates with tissue - like stiffness : pathological implications for soft or stiff microenvironments . J . Cell Biol . 166 : 877 – 887 . FIGURE 5 Cultures of dissociated embryonic cortices at 1 week in vitro on soft ( A ) and hard ( B ) PA gels and soft ( 250 Pa ) ( D ) and hard ( 2 . 1 kPa ) ( E ) ﬁbrin gels . Neurons were labeled for b III - tubulin ( red ) and astrocytes for GFAP ( green ) . All cell nuclei on PA gels were labeled with DAPI ( blue ) . The prevalence of astrocytes is apparent on hard PA gels and to a lesser extent on hard ﬁbrin gels , which are still much softer than the hardest PA gels . The per - centage of total cells on soft PA gels ( C ) and ﬁbrin gels ( F ) that were neurons ( b III - tubulin positive ) was signiﬁcantly higher than on hard gels ( p , 0 . 01 ) . Neurons and Astrocytes on Soft Substrate 3017 Biophysical Journal 90 ( 8 ) 3012 – 3018 8 . Flanagan , L . A . , Y . E . Ju , B . Marg , M . Osterﬁeld , and P . A . Janmey . 2002 . Neurite branching on deformable substrates . Neuroreport . 13 : 2411 – 2415 . 9 . Georges , P . C . , and P . A . Janmey . 2005 . Cell type - speciﬁc response to growth on soft materials . J . Appl . Physiol . 98 : 1547 – 1553 . 10 . Balgude , A . P . , X . Yu , A . Szymanski , and R . V . Bellamkonda . 2001 . Agarose gel stiffness determines rate of DRG neurite extension in 3D cultures . Biomaterials . 22 : 1077 – 1084 . 11 . Engler , A . , L . Bacakova , C . Newman , A . Hategan , M . Grifﬁn , and D . Discher . 2004 . Substrate compliance versus ligand density in cell on gel responses . Biophys . J . 86 : 617 – 628 . 12 . Yeung , T . , P . C . Georges , L . A . Flanagan , B . Marg , M . Ortiz , M . Funaki , N . Zahir , W . Ming , V . Weaver , and P . A . Janmey . 2005 . Effects of substrate stiffness on cell morphology , cytoskeletal structure , and adhesion . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton . 60 : 24 – 34 . 13 . Woerly , S . , V . D . Doan , N . Sosa , J . de Vellis , and A . Espinosa - Jeffrey . 2004 . Prevention of gliotic scar formation by NeuroGel allows partial endogenous repair of transected cat spinal cord . J . Neurosci . Res . 75 : 262 – 272 . 14 . Lesny , P . , J . De Croos , M . Pradny , J . Vacik , J . Michalek , S . Woerly , and E . Sykova . 2002 . Polymer hydrogels usable for nervous tissue repair . J . Chem . Neuroanat . 23 : 243 – 247 . 15 . Loh , N . K . , S . Woerly , S . M . Bunt , S . D . Wilton , and A . R . Harvey . 2001 . The regrowth of axons within tissue defects in the CNS is pro - moted by implanted hydrogel matrices that contain BDNF and CNTF producing ﬁbroblasts . Exp . Neurol . 170 : 72 – 84 . 16 . Teng , Y . D . , E . B . Lavik , X . Qu , K . I . Park , J . Ourednik , D . Zurakowski , R . Langer , and E . Y . Snyder . 2002 . Functional recovery following traumatic spinal cord injury mediated by a unique polymer scaffold seeded with neural stem cells . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 99 : 3024 – 3029 . 17 . Hirakawa , K . , K . Hashizume , and T . Hayashi . 1981 . Viscoelastic property of human brain—for the analysis of impact injury . No To Shinkei . 33 : 1057 – 1065 . 18 . Miller , K . , K . Chinzei , G . Orssengo , and P . Bednarz . 2000 . Mechanical properties of brain tissue in - vivo : experiment and computer simulation . J . Biomech . 33 : 1369 – 1376 . 19 . Michaud , S . E . , L . Z . Wang , N . Korde , R . Bucki , P . K . Randhawa , J . J . Pastore , H . Falet , K . Hoffmeister , R . Kuuse , R . Uibo , J . Herod , E . Sawyer , and P . A . Janmey . 2002 . Puriﬁcation of salmon thrombin and its potential as an alternative to mammalian thrombins in ﬁbrin sealants . Thromb . Res . 107 : 245 – 254 . 20 . Fitch , M . T . , C . Doller , C . K . Combs , G . E . Landreth , and J . Silver . 1999 . Cellular and molecular mechanisms of glial scarring and progressive cavitation : in vivo and in vitro analysis of inﬂammation - induced secondary injury after CNS trauma . J . Neurosci . 19 : 8182 – 8198 . 21 . Brandley , B . K . , O . A . Weisz , and R . L . Schnaar . 1987 . Cell attachment and long - term growth on derivatizable polyacrylamide surfaces . J . Biol . Chem . 262 : 6431 – 6437 . 22 . Carr , M . E . Jr . , and S . L . Carr . 1995 . Fibrin structure and concentration alter clot elastic modulus but do not alter platelet mediated force devel - opment . Blood Coagul . Fibrinolysis . 6 : 79 – 86 . 23 . Gefen , A . , N . Gefen , Q . Zhu , R . Raghupathi , and S . S . Margulies . 2003 . Age - dependent changes in material properties of the brain and brain - case of the rat . J . Neurotrauma . 20 : 1163 – 1177 . 24 . Bilston , L . E . , Z . Liu , and N . Phan - Thien . 1997 . Linear visco - elastic properties of bovine brain tissue in shear . Biorheology . 34 : 377 – 385 . 25 . Dembo , M . , and Y . L . Wang . 1999 . Stresses at the cell - to - substrate interface during locomotion of ﬁbroblasts . Biophys . J . 76 : 2307 – 2316 . 26 . Pittier , R . , F . Sauthier , J . A . Hubbell , and H . Hall . 2004 . Neurite extension and in vitro myelination within three - dimensional modiﬁed ﬁbrin matrices . J . Neurobiol . 63 : 1 – 14 . 27 . Bridgman , P . C . , S . Dave , C . F . Asnes , A . N . Tullio , and R . S . Adelstein . 2001 . Myosin IIB is required for growth cone motility . J . Neurosci . 21 : 6159 – 6169 . 3018 Georges et al . Biophysical Journal 90 ( 8 ) 3012 – 3018