NZISDC 2013 End User Creativity : A Critical Realist Perspective Gregory Baker , University of Canterbury . gregory . baker @ pg . canterbury . ac . nz 1 Paul Cragg 2 Christoph Bartneck , Stefan Seidel Abstract There has been a recent trend in the IS literature toward viewing IT systems less as material artifacts and more as imbricated , socio - technical assemblages . This suggests that greater attention must be paid to the detailed processes behind the interaction of users with systems . In this thesis , I explored the creative process that occurs when end users discover or develop novel and useful ways to appropriate IT systems . I used Eisenhardt ( 1989 ) ’s framework for inducting theory from case studies , and conducted an embedded multiple - case study of users who have implemented creative ways to apply existing IT systems . I applied Critical Realist assumptions and employed theoretical lenses drawn from cognitive science ( distributed cognition ) , cognitive psychology ( dual - process theory ) and Markus and Silver ( 2008 ) ’s variant of Adaptive Structuration Theory ( AST ) . I addressed the research question : What are the causal mechanisms that explain the creative appropriation of IT systems by end users ? Using AST as a foundation , I developed a theoretical framework to represent the problem space that must be traversed by users making appropriation moves , which I have named Affordance Field Theory . I employed Narrative Networks ( Pentland & Feldman , 2007 ) for my primary retroductive analysis , then re - analysed the data using Framework Matrices ( Ritchie & Lewis , 2003 ) . The complementary logical forms ( processual and thematic , respectively ) of the analytical tools provide empirical corroboration for the findings . I have derived a set of cognitive mechanisms that describe the information - processing operations involved in end user creativity . Using metaphors provided by distributed cognition , I have demonstrated how these mechanisms can be used to explain information processing at both the individual and collective levels . I have also developed an integrative model to explain how the mechanisms work together to explain creative action at the individual level . I have maintained my primary case study database in NVivo 10 . Keywords Affordance Field Theory , Creativity , Critical Realism , Cognitive Science , Dual - Process Theory . Introduction One of the most frequently - cited priorities for modern organizations is fostering creativity and innovation ( Nambisan et al . 1999 ) . Despite this , the topic of creativity has been consistently understudied in the IS discipline ( Couger et al . 1993 ) . In addition , there has been a strong bias in the IS literature toward a focus on creativity on the part of system developers and implementers , rather than end users ( see Seidel et al . 2010 ) . This is anomalous , as end users can be an important source of creative innovations ( Zhou and George 2003 ) . In this thesis , I address this gap in the literature by investigating end user creativity in the appropriation of IT systems . Research Method Given the understudied nature of the topic , I chose an exploratory , theory - building approach : an embedded multiple - case design , guided by Eisenhardt ( 1989 ) . A priori constructs drawn from the work of Amabile ( 1996 ) were used . A theoretical sampling strategy was applied , and a wide variety of Baker , G . , Cragg , P . , Bartneck , C . , & Seidel , S . ( 2013 ) . End User Creativity : A Critical Realist Perspective . Proceedings of the 4th annual New Zealand Information Systems Doctoral Consortium ( NZISDC ) , Auckland . NZISDC 2013 2 cases involving different types of systems , users , and contexts , were investigated . As an illustration , I will briefly summarize one case : “Delta” , a medical device manufacturing company , needs to keep detailed test records for their products for certification purposes . Test documentation was initially kept in flat files , which became unwieldy . The product engineers evaluated several potential solutions , and selected “Tracker” , a requirements management tool . However , Delta’s products contained shared components . If a component was modified , test documents for all the products that contained ( or ‘owned’ ) that component had to be updated at the same time . The concept of ‘ownership’ did not exist in Tracker . Engineers at Delta worked on the problem for several weeks , and finally devised a way to use a data visualization feature in Tracker to functionally simulate ownership . In the next section , I will review the paradigmatic assumptions and theoretical lenses being applied . Theoretical Framing Critical Realism Critical Realism is a philosophical paradigm that is designed to support in - depth causal explanations for complex chains of events ( Wynn and Williams 2012 ) . It focuses on identifying and describing causal mechanisms , which consist of structures : internally related physical , social or conceptual objects ; powers : capacities for action ; and tendencies : typical actions . The mechanisms involved in events under study are identified through a process of retroduction ( Bhaskar 1975 ) . Distributed Cognition Cognitive science holds that human cognition is , fundamentally , a computational activity involving the transformation of inputs and outputs , in the form of mental representations . Hutchins ( 1995 ) demonstrated that these representations are not necessarily restricted to the mind of a single individual . Cognitive representations , and the operations that transform them , can be held in both neuronal ( brain ) and non - neuronal ( paper , objects , spreadsheets ) media , and can be shared across individuals ( Perry 2003 ) . The field of distributed cognition studies this activity . Dual Process Theory The human mind is best conceptualized as being composed of two parallel but distinct reasoning systems ( Osman 2004 ) . Stanovich ( 1999 ) coined the labels System 1 and System 2 for these systems . System 1 is associative , automatic , fast and non - conscious ; System 2 is rule - based , volitionally controlled , relatively slow , and conscious . Human behaviour is driven by both systems , but conscious awareness is only capable of monitoring System 2 ( Sloman 1996 ) . Affordance Field Theory In Adaptive Structuration Theory ( AST ) , DeSanctis and Poole ( 1994 ) proposed that task contexts contain structures which are encoded into technologies , and can be analysed in terms of structural features – rules and resources offered by the IT , and spirit – the intents , values and goals underlying the features . The features can be appropriated by users , either faithfully ( in accordance with the spirit ) , or unfaithfully ( not in accordance with the spirit ) . In response to critiques of DeSanctis and Poole ( 1994 ) ’s conceptualization , ( see Jones and Karsten 2008 ) , Markus and Silver ( 2008 ) proposed a reformulation of AST . They replaced the concepts of Spirit and Structural Features with three new concepts : • Technical Objects —IT artifacts and their component parts . • Functional Affordances —A type of relationship linking a user to a TO that determines what the user can do with the object , given the users’ capabilities and goals ( Gibson 1977 ; Gibson 1979 ) . • Symbolic Expressions —Messages to the user ( from design processes , cultural symbols , etc . ) about how to interpret and use the TO ( De Souza 2005 ) . Baker , G . , Cragg , P . , Bartneck , C . , & Seidel , S . ( 2013 ) . End User Creativity : A Critical Realist Perspective . Proceedings of the 4th annual New Zealand Information Systems Doctoral Consortium ( NZISDC ) , Auckland . NZISDC 2013 The goal of this reformulation of AST was to enable researchers to create better hypotheses about IT effects ( Markus and Silver 2008p . 627 - 628 ) . However , since my study was about exploring possible causal paths rather than testing hypotheses , it was necessary to extend Markus and Silver’s model in order to represent the full problem space of user interaction with systems . After reviewing the source literatures that they cited for their concepts , I extended Markus & Silver’s AST with the following further concepts . • Affordance Types— Gaver ( 1991 ) proposed that since affordances are separate concepts from perceptual information about the affordances , the following types of affordances can exist : Correctly Perceived ; False ; Hidden and Correctly Rejected . Affordances can also be Serial ( in time ) and Nested ( in space ) . These types can be used to increase the granularity of the concept . • User Effectivities —The specific capabilities of a user that create affordances given a technical object’s properties ( Chemero 2003 ; Shaw et al . 1982 ) . • System Representations —The mental representation of the system held by the user at a given time ( Davern et al . 2012 ) . Symbolic expressions may influence them , but are a distinct concept . It is possible to combine these extension to ( Markus and Silver 2008 ) and the new concepts into an integrative framework that enables us to conceptualize and visualize how users identify and enact appropriation moves at a conceptual level . I borrow Gibson ( 1979 ) ’s metaphor of a visual field as the context in which affordances are perceived . The field represents the domain of all tasks – that is , all possible ways in which a technical object ( TO ) can be used . A technical object has properties which create action potentials , the scope of which are large , but finite . We can therefore represent all the tasks that can be performed with a given TO by a bounded area : an Action Potential Field ( APF ) . When a user accesses the TO and decides to use it , the user and the TO form a sociotechnical construct , which we may label a Technology - in - Practice ( TIP ) , after Orlikowski ( 2000 ) . The user side of the TIP has effectivities , which together with the properties of the TO create affordances . We can represent them with an elliptical area—an Affordance Field ( AF ) —which represents all tasks that this user can perform with this TO . For most TOs an AF will always be a subset of the APF since no user will have all possible effectivities . Although the AF is determined by the intersection of user effectivities and TO action potentials , the user will not necessarily have perfect information about either of those constructs . The user will be guided by Symbolic Expressions ( SE ) to form a mental System Representation ( SR ) which will determine her Perceived Affordance Field ( PAF ) . The PAF may extend beyond the AF , creating False Affordances ( FA ) or fail to cover part of the AF , creating Hidden Affordances ( HA ) . Every TO will have a typical range of uses , which we represent with a Normative Affordance Field ( NAF ) . Affordance fields are dynamic , and can be stretched ( developing or discovering new properties ) or widened ( applying existing properties in new ways ) in orthogonal axes . Creative appropriation will typically involve making an Available Affordance Space Search ( AASS ) for available Appropriation Moves . These concepts are visualized in Figure 1 . Figure 1 : Affordance Field Theory Baker , G . , Cragg , P . , Bartneck , C . , & Seidel , S . ( 2013 ) . End User Creativity : A Critical Realist Perspective . Proceedings of the 4th annual New Zealand Information Systems Doctoral Consortium ( NZISDC ) , Auckland . NZISDC 2013 4 Affordance Field Theory ( AFT ) provides a non - deterministic framework for representing the myriad ideational , collaborational , and enactment activities that are involved in the appropriation of IT systems . It also facilitates structural analysis ( Wynn and Williams 2012 , p . 799 ) across the diverse case contexts . Data Analysis Recordings , transcripts and research notes were imported into NVivo 10 and coded using the a priori constructs . Preliminary analysis of the data led to the adoption of the paradigmatic positions and theoretical lenses that have been outlined . Selected cases were then reduced to a Narrative Network ( Pentland and Feldman 2007 ) . The researcher’s point - of - view was used , and the nodes of the narrative networks were coded using concepts from AFT . For example , in the Delta case , the vendors of Tracker gave the engineers at Delta documentation that communicated Symbolic Expressions consistent with Tracker’s Normative Affordance Field . However , one of the Appropriation Moves that Delta needed to meet its requirements—representing ownership—was not within the NAF of Tracker . They therefore engaged mechanisms , which will be described in the following section , to modify their System Representation and stretch the Perceived Affordance Field of Tracker , then to modify the System Properties of Tracker to stretch its Affordance Field . This modification enabled them to make the necessary Appropriation Moves that would meet their goals . The coded narrative networks formed the basis of the initial retroductive analysis . After deriving the mechanisms that will be described in the next section , the raw data was recoded using AFT , and reanalysed using Framework Matrices ( Ritchie and Lewis 2003 ) . The complementary logical forms of the techniques ( processual and thematic , respectively ) , help to provide empirical corroboration ( Wynn and Williams 2012 ) for the findings . Preliminary Findings The findings comprise a set of information processing mechanisms which operate at both the individual and collective levels . The mechanisms are revealed in patterns of information flows which are observed across cases . Evidence for the existence of the mechanisms is also drawn from extensive findings in the literature on cognitive science which confirm the patterns of information processing that the mechanisms explain ( Kahneman 2011 ; Leslie 1987 ; Morewedge and Kahneman 2010 ; Stanovich 2010 ) . Although the mechanisms operate at both the individual and collective levels , the scope of the thesis requires an explanation of user creativity at the individual level . Figure 2 visualizes the operation of the mechanisms at the individual level . Figure 2 : Mechanisms – individual - level integrative model The model explains the creative process as follows . Baker , G . , Cragg , P . , Bartneck , C . , & Seidel , S . ( 2013 ) . End User Creativity : A Critical Realist Perspective . Proceedings of the 4th annual New Zealand Information Systems Doctoral Consortium ( NZISDC ) , Auckland . NZISDC 2013 Sensory inputs AND prototypical information from memory structures are combined to form a Primary Representation ( PR ) of the external world by the Representation Construction Mechanism ( RCM ) . Within the PR , routine and habitual behaviours and stimulus responses are handled by the Serial Associative Mechanism ( SAM ) . When a stimulus is encountered that requires conditional processing , the Decoupling Mechanism ( DM ) is triggered . The DM carries out two operations : Copy —to create a Secondary Representation ( SR ) ; and Decouple —to keep the SR separate from the PR . Within the SR , a process of Simulation takes place , in order to evaluate the expected outcomes of alternate stimulus responses . The simulation process is enabled by the Representation Transformation Mechanism ( RTM ) and the Attribute Substitution Mechanism ( ASM ) . The SR is necessary to prevent representation abuse ( Leslie 1987 ) : the corruption of the PR so that it becomes impossible to differentiate between the simulation and the representation of reality . When the simulation process generates an acceptable outcome , the Concrete Transformation Mechanism ( CTM ) copies the output of the simulation process over to the Primary Representation , and initiates external actions designed to change the state of the real world to match the state of the simulation output . This action may succeed , or it may fail . If it fails , the state of the real world—along with any new information gained during the failed attempt—will be added to the primary representation by the RCM . This will be copied to the secondary representation by the DM , and the process will continue cyclically until it succeeds or is terminated . While this is happening , information about the creative process is also being fed back into the system . However , this information is always incomplete . An associatively coherent—but not necessarily true—constructed narrative about the process is formed by the Retrospective Reframing Mechanism ( RRM ) , using the incomplete information AND prototypical information about creative processes as inputs . The fact that distributed cognition extends metaphors from cognitive science to teams and objects does not mean it holds that they are analogous to the human mind . Distributed cognitive systems are architecturally and functionally different from neuronal systems . However , both types of systems must perform the basic tasks of processing information and solving problems , and the same basic information - processing mechanisms that can be observed in the mind can be seen in DC systems . In the Delta example : Tracker was chosen after an evaluation that indicated it would handle the firm’s routine data - handling needs ( Representation Construction Mechanism ) . After it was implemented , it was discovered that it lacked a critical property ( Decoupling Mechanism triggered ) . Different solutions were developed and tested ( Simulation ) . Eventually , they realized that it was possible to use a viewing function to simulate the necessary property ( Simulation output ) . They modified the properties of Tracker to make the viewing function perform ‘ownership tracking’ ( Concrete Transformation Mechanism ) . Afterward , Tracker was rolled out to the product development teams ( Simulation Terminated ; Serial Associative Mechanism activated ) . This model is not a deterministic model that describes all possible incidents of user creativity . Simulation outputs need not be ‘creative’ , and routine operations may generate novel and useful outputs ( Feldman and Pentland 2003 ) . However , our case data suggests that creative appropriations tend to result from decoupled simulation processes as described here . It also must emphasized that – while all the mechanisms described here have been shown to operate in distributed cognitive systems , the integrative model describes only individual systems . Distributed cognitive systems have different architectures from neuronal systems and are variable in ways that individual cognitive systems are not . This thesis makes a number of contributions . It contributes to the literature on IS - related creativity . It presents a new framework for modelling the interactions between users and IT systems , and it presents a model of how information - processing mechanisms in the mind , and in distributed systems , can explain the process of creative appropriation of IT . This has several potential applications . Critical realist analysis is a parallel , iterative process ( Wynn and Williams 2012 ) , and does not proceed through traditional stages . However , this project is now focused on empirical corroboration deep description of the mechanisms identified . Baker , G . , Cragg , P . , Bartneck , C . , & Seidel , S . ( 2013 ) . End User Creativity : A Critical Realist Perspective . Proceedings of the 4th annual New Zealand Information Systems Doctoral Consortium ( NZISDC ) , Auckland . NZISDC 2013 6 References Amabile , T . 1996 . Creativity in context , ( Westview Pr . Bhaskar , R . 1975 . " A realist theory of science ( Leeds , " Leeds Books Ltd ( 8 : 334 ) , p 10 . Chemero , A . 2003 . " An outline of a theory of affordances , " Ecological Psychology ( 15 : 2 ) , pp 181 - 195 . Couger , J . D . , Higgins , L . F . , and McIntyre , S . C . 1993 . " ( Un ) Structured Creativity in Information Systems Organizations , " MIS Quarterly ( 17 : 4 ) , pp 375 - 397 . Davern , M . , Shaft , T . , and Te ' eni , D . 2012 . " Cognition matters : Enduring questions in cognitive IS research , " Journal of the Association for Information Systems ( 13 : 4 ) , p 1 . De Souza , C . S . 2005 . The semiotic engineering of human - computer interaction , ( The MIT press . DeSanctis , G . , and Poole , M . S . 1994 . " Capturing the complexity in advanced technology use : Adaptive structuration theory , " Organization Science ( 5 : 2 ) , pp 121 - 147 . Eisenhardt , K . M . 1989 . " Building theories from case study research , " Academy of Management Review ) , pp 532 - 550 . Feldman , M . S . , and Pentland , B . T . 2003 . " Reconceptualizing organizational routines as a source of flexibility and change , " Administrative Science Quarterly ( 48 : 1 ) , pp 94 - 118 . Gaver , W . W . Year . " Technology affordances , " SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM , New Orleans , Louisiana , United States , 1991 , pp . 79 - 84 . Gibson , J . 1977 . " The theory of affordances , " Perceiving , Acting and Knowing . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum ) . Gibson , J . 1979 . The ecological approach to visual perception , ( Houghton Mifflin Co . Hutchins , E . 1995 . Cognition in the Wild , ( MIT press Cambridge , MA : London . Jones , M . R . , and Karsten , H . 2008 . " Giddens ' s structuration theory and information systems research , " MIS Quarterly ( 32 : 1 ) , pp 127 - 157 . Kahneman , D . 2011 . Thinking , Fast and Slow , ( Farrar Straus & Giroux . Leslie , A . M . 1987 . " Pretense and representation : The origins of “theory of mind . ” , " Psychological review ( 94 : 4 ) , pp 412 - 426 . Markus , M . L . , and Silver , M . S . 2008 . " A foundation for the study of IT effects : A new look at DeSanctis and Poole ' s concepts of structural features and spirit , " Journal of the Association for Information Systems ( 9 : 10 ) , pp 609 - 632 . Morewedge , C . K . , and Kahneman , D . 2010 . " Associative processes in intuitive judgment , " Trends in cognitive sciences ( 14 : 10 ) , pp 435 - 440 . Nambisan , S . , Agarwal , R . , and Tanniru , M . 1999 . " Organizational mechanisms for enhancing user innovation in information technology , " MIS Quarterly ( 23 : 3 ) , pp 365 - 395 . Orlikowski , W . J . 2000 . " Using technology and constituting structures : A practice lens for studying technology in organizations , " Resources , Co - Evolution and Artifacts ) , pp 255 - 305 . Osman , M . 2004 . " An evaluation of dual - process theories of reasoning , " Psychonomic Bulletin & Review ( 11 : 6 ) , pp 988 - 1010 . Pentland , B . T . , and Feldman , M . S . 2007 . " Narrative networks : Patterns of technology and organization , " Organization Science ( 18 : 5 ) , pp 781 - 795 . Perry , M . 2003 . " Distributed cognition , " HCI , Models , Theories , and Frameworks , London : Morgan Kaufman ) . Ritchie , J . , and Lewis , J . 2003 . Qualitative research practice : A guide for social science students and researchers , ( Sage Publications Ltd . Seidel , S . , Müller - Wienbergen , F . , and Becker , J . 2010 . " The Concept of Creativity in the Information Systems Discipline : Past , Present , and Prospects , " Communications of the Association for Information Systems ( 27 : 1 ) , pp 217 - 242 . Shaw , R . , Turvey , M . T . , and Mace , W . 1982 . " Ecological psychology : The consequence of a commitment to realism , " Cognition and the symbolic processes ( 2 ) , pp 159 - 226 . Sloman , S . A . 1996 . " The empirical case for two systems of reasoning , " Psychological Bulletin ( 119 : 1 ) , p 3 . Stanovich , K . E . 1999 . Who is rational ? : Studies of individual differences in reasoning , ( Lawrence Erlbaum . Stanovich , K . E . 2010 . Rationality and the reflective mind , ( Oxford University Press , USA . Wynn , D . , and Williams , C . K . 2012 . " Principles for Conducting Critical Realist Case Study Research in Information Systems , " Management Information Systems Quarterly ( 36 : 3 ) , pp 787 - 810 . Zhou , J . , and George , J . M . 2003 . " Awakening employee creativity : The role of leader emotional intelligence , " The Leadership Quarterly ( 14 : 4 ) , pp 545 - 568 . Baker , G . , Cragg , P . , Bartneck , C . , & Seidel , S . ( 2013 ) . End User Creativity : A Critical Realist Perspective . Proceedings of the 4th annual New Zealand Information Systems Doctoral Consortium ( NZISDC ) , Auckland .