Designing Trust into Online Experiences A ncient social traditions were designed to elicit trust during uncertain encounters . Handshak - ing demonstrated the absence of weapons . Clinking of glasses evolved from pouring wine back and forth to prove it was not poisoned . Now , new social traditions are needed to enhance cooperative behaviors in electronic environments supporting e - commerce , e - services , and online communities . Since users of online systems can’t savor a cup of tea with an elec - tronic rug merchant , designers must develop strategies for facilitat - ing e - commerce and auctions . Since users can’t make eye contact and judge intonations with an online lawyer or physician , design - ers must create new social norms for professional services . Since users can’t stroll through online commu - nities encountering neighbors with their children , designers must facil - itate the trust that enables collective action . In parallel , consumer groups must be vigor - ous in monitoring and reporting deceptions and dis - reputable business practices . Political scientist Eric Uslaner of the University of Maryland calls trust “the chicken soup of the social sciences . It brings us all sorts of good things—from a willingness to get involved in our communities to higher rates of economic growth … to making daily life more pleasant . Yet , like chicken soup , it appears to work somewhat mysteriously” [ 5 ] . He tries to sort out the mystery by distinguishing between moral trust , or the durable optimistic view that strangers are well - intentioned , and strategic trust , or the will - ingness of two people to participate in a specific exchange ( see Uslaner’s “Social Capital and the Net” in this section ) . Trust facilitates cooperative behavior . It is a com - plex term that has generated dozens of doctoral dis - sertations , not only in sociology and political science , but now in information sys - tems research as well . There are enough dimensions to trust and its failures to keep scholars and philoso - phers busy for some time , but e - commerce , e - services , and online community designers need a guide to practical action [ 4 ] . The designer’s goal is to engage users quickly and establish and pre - serve strategic trust under challeng - ing situations . But for many users , strategic trust is difficult to generate , shaken easily , and once shaken extremely difficult to rebuild . Strategic trust is fragile . The extensive literature on trust offers multiple perspectives . In his politically oriented book Trust , Francis Fukuyama , a former U . S . State Department analyst , claims : “Trust is the expectation that arises within a community of regular , honest , and cooper - ative behavior , based on commonly shared norms , on the part of the members of that community” [ 2 ] . This compact definition embodies several key con - COMMUNICATIONSOF THE ACM December 2000 / Vol . 43 , No . 12 57 Ben Shneiderman These principles and their guidelines enhance cooperative behaviors and win user / customer loyalty by giving assurances , references , certifications from third parties , and guarantees of privacy and security . T E RR Y W I D E N E R cepts—mostly that trust is about the future and con - cerned with cooperative behavior . In shifting to electronic environments , B . J . Fogg and Hsiang Tseng of Stanford University focus on trust among individuals mediated by technology , writing that “trust indicates a positive belief about the perceived reliability of , dependability of , and confi - dence in a person , object , or process” [ 1 ] . To separate out the trust for a person from expectations about an object or process , I use the term , “rely on” ( or “depend on” ) for the positive expectations about an object ( such as computers , networks , and software ) and process ( such as credit card transactions and airline e - ticket reservations ) . Computer scientists have concentrated on building reliable equipment ; more recently , e - commerce and e - service providers have sought to encourage cus - tomers willing to use computer networks but who may be reluctant to type in their credit card numbers . To provide a framework for online developers , I offer this definition of trust : The positive expec - tation a person has for another person or an organi - zation based on past performance and truthful guarantees . Trust is about expectations of the future . It accrues to individuals and organizations due to their previous good works and clear promises . It implies responsibility for behavior and willingness to make good for failures . It is stronger than reliance , due to the responsibility and guarantee that only peo - ple and organizations can offer . If users rely on a com - puter and it fails , they may get frustrated or vent their anger by smashing a keyboard , but there is no rela - tionship of trust with a computer . If users depend on a network and it breaks , they cannot get compensa - tion from the network . However , they can seek com - pensation from people or organizations they trusted to supply a correctly functioning computer or com - munication service . Understanding the explicit and contract - like nature of trust between people and orga - nizations leads to clearer guidelines for developers and monitors of e - commerce , e - services , online commu - nities , and other Web sites . Principle 1 . Invite participation by ensuring trust . Users are more likely to participate in Web transac - tions and relationships if they receive strong assur - ances that they are engaging in a trusting relationship . They seek reliable reports about past performance and truthful statements of future guarantees . The branding process generates trust by using familiar logos and names of companies whose integrity is respected . Therefore , success is more likely if Web site developers apply the following guidelines . Guideline 1 . 1 . Disclose patterns of past perfor - mance . Airlines report on - time percentages for flights , and realtors advertise how many homes they’ve sold . Reliable periodic self - reports of performance may attract users and inspire trust in future perfor - mance , as does information about the organization and its management , employees , and history . Open - ness about performance and personnel may engage and assure skeptical users Guideline 1 . 2 . Provide references from past and current users . Most people choose medical doctors by asking friends for references , but Web - based medical services are likely chosen by reading online comments from patients . One reason for eBay’s ( www . ebay . com ) success with online auctions is its thoughtfully designed reputation manager ( called Feedback Forum ) enabling purchasers to record extensive com - ments on sellers ( see Resnick et al . ’s “Reputation Sys - tems” in this section ) . Guideline 1 . 3 . Get certifications from third par - ties . Lawyers , doctors , and other professionals are cer - tified by appropriate review boards , which may soon begin certifying certain online services . Seals of 58 December 2000 / Vol . 43 , No . 12 COMMUNICATIONSOF THE ACM Understanding the explicit and contract - like nature of trust between people and organizations leads to clearer guidelines for e - developers . approval from consumer and professional groups , including the American Medical Association and American Bar Association , help establish trust through third - party reports . Logos from TRUSTe ( www . truste . com ) and BBBOnLine ( www . bbbon - line . org ) and other third - party services that review online privacy practices may also inspire consumer trust , though only if they develop adequate enforcement . Guideline 1 . 4 . Make it easy to locate , read , and enforce policies involving privacy and security . Although privacy policies are widespread , some are so difficult to find and incomprehensible to read that they only undermine trust . Good policies are enforce - able and verifiable , so consumers can be assured that the implementation matches the promise . Expecta - tions are rising rapidly as consumers become informed . Therefore , well - designed policy statements accompanied by reports on effective enforcement will distinguish some Web sites . When violations occur , prompt action is expected . Principle 2 . Accelerate action by clarifying respon - sibility . As soon as users begin the process of investi - gating a product or establishing a relationship , their emerging resistance can be reduced by clarifying responsibilities and obligations . A well - designed Web site should have orderly structure with convenient navigation , meaningful descriptions of products , and comprehensible processes for transactions . Good design can inspire trust . Simple statements of who - does - what - by - when are likely to speed coop - eration . For example , a seller who wants to inspire trust might promise to ship orders within 24 hours of receipt of payment or grant a 50 % discount . An auc - tion service that includes dispute - resolution policies and provides mediation services reduces the number of its potentially unhappy users . Restaurateurs who offer free desserts when meals are late know that prompt apologies and sincere efforts to repair prob - lems ( plus compensation for failures ) can win cus - tomers for life . Since shallow commitments and broken promises are dangerously explosive , diligent attention to emerging problems is vital . Guideline 2 . 1 . Clarify each participant’s responsi - bilities . As with any contract or agreement , full dis - closure in comprehensible and compact terms builds confidence and trust . When terms for transactions , such as price , delivery time , cost , taxes , fees , and return policies , are spelled out , users know what to expect and are not shaken by unpleasant surprises . Similarly , policies for online communities , such as how long logs are maintained , who has access to archives , and the limitations for threats or libel , gen - erate feelings of safety and promote open discussion . Guideline 2 . 2 . Provide clear guarantees with com - pensation . Since all Web providers are relative new - comers , they must overcome resistance to change and specific fears about credit card abuse , privacy invasion , security risks , and interface failures . Guaranteed pro - tection from credit card fraud is a necessary , though not sufficient , starting point . Compensation for delayed delivery is relatively easy to specify , but repu - tation records , authentication , and escrow—all parts of eBay’s Safe Harbor procedures—could facilitate successful transactions . Guideline 2 . 3 . Support dispute resolution and mediation services . Inevitably , a product or service disappoints some users , and when the standard response fails to satisfy them , there is a problem . A crushed delivery box , a delayed medical lab report , or a breach of privacy can each make for unhappy users who are not placated with an apology or some free ser - vice . Customer service managers earn their salaries by handling unhappy users with an appropriate response , but innovative strategies are needed on the Web to avoid litigation or better still to satisfy users and win their loyalty . Organized customer services are neces - sary , but third - party facilitators and mediators are becoming advisable . These prinicipals and guidelines are merely a start - ing point for designers and a challenge to researchers . They need to be refined and validated in field trials and carefully controlled empirical studies in order to better understand the costs and benefits associated with different user groups . References 1 . Fogg , B . and Tseng , H . The elements of computer credibility . In Proceed - ings of CHI’99 ( Pittsburgh , May 15 – 20 ) . ACM Press , New York , 1999 , 80 – 87 . 2 . Fukuyama , F . Trust : The Social Virtues and the Creation of Prosperity . Free Press , New York , 1995 . 3 . Kollock , P . The production of trust in online markets . In Advances in Group Processes , vol . 16 , E . Lawler , M . Macy , S . Thyne , and H . Walker , Eds . JAI Press , Greenwich , CT , 1999 . 4 . Preece , J . Online Communities : Supporting Sociability and Designing Usabil - ity . John Wiley & Sons , Inc . , Chicester , UK , 2000 . 5 . Uslaner , E . The moral foundations of trust ; see www . bsos . umd . edu / gvpt / uslaner / research . htm . Ben Shneiderman ( ben @ cs . umd . edu ) is a professor in the Department of Computer Science , founding director of the Human - Computer Interaction Laboratory , and member of the Institutes for Advanced Computer Studies and for Systems Research at the University of Maryland in College Park . © 2000 ACM 0002 - 0782 / 00 / 1200 $ 5 . 00 c COMMUNICATIONSOF THE ACM December 2000 / Vol . 43 , No . 12 59