Digital Fit ( ness ) – is ‘being in a fit with’ enough ? Erich Heumüller Center for Digital Transformation BW Cooperative State University Stuttgart , Germany erich . heumueller @ dhbw - stuttgart . de Julia Kossowski HPE GreenLake Hewlett Packard Enterprise Boeblingen , Germany julia . kossowski @ hpe . com Sebastian Richter Business Information Management BW Cooperative State University Stuttgart , Germany sebastian . richter @ dhbw - stuttgart . de Abstract — Researchers struggle to understand the nature of digital transformation and approach the conceptualization from various research perspectives . Concurringly , digital transformation is seen as an evolutionary change process with an increasing digitalization at its heart . Although a process requires a target state , a target state for digital transformation has not been discussed satisfactorily so far . Consequently , it is difficult for managers to steer with an eye on the goals in this change process . To provide guidance in this change endeavor for managers , researchers have developed different digital transformation maturity models . These models typically suggest a linear development for organizations but neglect idiosyncratic development paths for digital transformation . They combine aspects of matching current stakeholder demands with being prepared for future demands regarding digitalization . However , they typically design an end state or a best stage , which seems to be contradicting as digital transformation as an evolution has no target or end . To address this challenge of evolutionary change , a concept of digital fitness is introduced in this contribution , which reflects the ability of organizations to cope with current and future expectations of external stakeholders . A digital fitness model is presented that claims to conceptualize how a responsible management – focusing on the Chief Digital Officer and the Chief Information Officer – can decide for an appropriate level of digital fitness according to present and future external expectations . Building on that , a digital fitness matrix with implications for management strategies is presented . Keywords— digital transformation , digital fitness , maturity models I . I NTRODUCTION Several researchers have tried to understand the nature of digital transformation ( DT ) and to conceptualize what DT is about ( e . g . , [ 1 ] – [ 4 ] ) . It seems to be common ground to consider DT as a process : Vial conceptualizes DT as a process of significant change due to the impacts of information , computing , communication , and connectivity technologies [ 3 ] . The aim of this process is to improve an entity ( e . g . , an organization ) [ 3 ] . Further , Morakanyane et al . emphasize the processual character of DT [ 2 ] . In their conceptualization , DT “leverages digital capabilities and technologies to enable business models , operational processes and customer experiences to create value” [ 2 ] . Bockshecker et al . differentiate the terms digitization , digitalization , and digital transformation and emphasize the processual character in the sense of organizational or societal changes of DT as well [ 4 ] . Wessel et al . have a different view on DT . Although they characterize DT as a process , they focus on the character of the value proposition and the organizational identity [ 1 ] . DT’s main transformation activity is to ( re ) define the value proposition , and DT’s main outcome is the emergence of a new organizational identity [ 1 ] . All these scientific conceptualizations stimulate scientists and practitioners to think about DT . However , although most researchers consider DT as a process , and although a process requires a target state [ 5 ] , a target state for DT has not been discussed satisfactorily so far ( cf . [ 6 ] ) . Instead , according to Vial it is an ongoing change [ 3 ] . Morakanyane et al . even conceptualize the process as evolutionary [ 2 ] , which neglects a target state . This is disappointing from a manager’s viewpoint as an evolutionary process is more the product of chance instead of goal - oriented management interventions . To target the emergence of a new organizational identity as the main outcome of DT [ 1 ] is rather difficult as well . Maybe it is possible for managers to realize that an organization has a new identity in a certain point of time . However , it is very difficult to intervene in a goal - oriented manner so that exactly such a new identity will emerge . Thus , management often lacks a structured approach to manage their company’s DT [ 7 ] and therefore it is challenging for management to guide the change with consistency and stability [ 8 ] . To support this practice - oriented view , we initially modeled a desirable target state [ 6 ] , [ 8 ] . We call this model Digital Fitness ( Fig . 1 ) . Fig . 1 : Digital Fitness – Initial Model [ 8 ] The idea behind our model is the ambidextrous problem of organizations that are in a fit with the needs of their market . These organizations have to be adapted to customer demands and can exploit their market opportunities [ 9 ] – [ 12 ] . On the other hand , these organizations are able to adapt to future demands quickly [ 10 ] , [ 11 ] , [ 13 ] . The left - hand side of the model reflects the organization’s ambidextrous internal fitness with the adaptedness and the adaptability . Adaptedness describes how well an organization is currently adapted to the expectations of its external stakeholders . Adaptability describes how well an organization is able to organize change to meet future ( currently not fully known ) expectations of its external stakeholders in an agile manner . Digital fitness conceptualizes that both aspects ( adaptedness and adaptability ) are in a fit with the market’s expectations to enable an organization to survive in the long run . However , the concept of a fit in our model is a static concept . It is a kind of state that has to be reached . This was the original goal of the model . The problem with this conceptualization is that the market needs and the possibilities Fit Market Customer Society Expected Digitalization Level Digital Fitness Digital Expertise Digital Adoption Adoption Rate of Digital Innovations A dap t edne ss A dap t ab ili t y 2022 I EEE 28 t h I n t e r n a t i o n a l C o n f e r e n c e o n E n g i n ee r i n g , T e c hn o l o g y a nd I nn o v a t i o n ( I C E / I T M C ) & 31 s t I n t e r n a t i o n a l A ss o c i a t i o n F o r M a n a g e m e n t o f T e c hn o l o g y ( I A M O T ) J o i n t C o n f e r e n c e | 978 - 1 - 6654 - 8817 - 4 / 22 / $ 31 . 00 © 2022 I EEE | D O I : 10 . 1109 / I C E / I T M C - I A M O T 55089 . 2022 . 10033163 imposed by digital technologies imply fast market changes and it is therefore hardly clear what the state of being “in a fit with” means . In other words , the dynamics of the concepts shown in the right - hand side of the model requires a more dynamic fitness relation between the organization and its environment . Even if the concept of adaptability is supposed to indicate an initial dynamic , its conceptualization is not mature . Therefore , we raise the following research questions : RQ 1 : How can the interaction of being adapted ( being in a fit with ) and being able to adapt ( being adaptive ) according to an organization’s environment be conceptualized ? RQ 2 : How should the digital fitness model be adjusted to capture both concepts – being in a fit with and being adaptive ? The contribution of this paper is the revised digital fitness model . The model considers the dynamic relationship between an organization and its environment by detailing the concept of fitness into 1 ) being in a fit with the expectations of society , markets , and customers regarding digitalization and 2 ) having the capabilities to adapt flexibly to external expectations of society , markets , and customer . To master this challenge of ambidexterity , organizations require internal and external fitness . Digital fitness results from the dimensions of digital adoption , digital expertise , and the adoption rate of digital innovations . Our digital fitness model claims to conceptualize how a responsible management can find a target state of DT . We thereby focus on strategic management positions in IT like Chief Digital Officer ( CDO ) and Chief Information Officer [ 56 ] and finally for their strategies on the base of the digital fitness matrix . Hence , we follow an argumentative - deductive development process [ 14 ] . In section two , we reflect DT in the context of digital fitness , shed light on relevant fit ( ness ) theories , and reflect the role of DT maturity models w . r . t . a target state of DT . In section three , we revise and discuss the digital fitness model and develop strategic paths on the basis of digital fitness . Concluding remarks ( section five ) finalize our contribution . II . D IGITAL T RANSFORMATION , THE C ONCEPT OF F ITNESS AND M ATURITY M ODELS OF D IGITAL T RANSFORMATION This section sheds light on the concept of DT in the context of digital fitness . It argues for a new perspective on DT and separating the DT of the environment from the DT of an organization . Following that , the concept of fit ( ness ) is discussed . The section concludes with a short review of maturity models for DT as they promise to illustrate target states of DT . A . Digital Transformation in the Context of Digital Fitness The conceptual term DT links to a social phenomenon of change triggered by emerging digital technologies and its solution potential ( e . g . , [ 1 ] , [ 4 ] , [ 15 ] ) . Several scholars conceptualize DT by using metaphoric terms such as evolutionary ( e . g . , [ 2 ] , [ 3 ] , [ 16 ] ) . In this context , evolutionary is a useful term to emphasize the dynamic nature of the ongoing development of digital technologies , evolving digital infrastructures and its impact on business models , products , and services ( e . g . , [ 17 ] , [ 18 ] ) . From a managerial point of view , however , evolutionary is useful as a descriptive but less as an explanatory term . Evolution is not controllable and even not explainable from the contemporary perspective of parts of any system that evolves [ 19 ] . This means that it is understandable that if insiders of an organization ( e . g . , managers ) are taking a look at the outside and try to describe it , they become aware of organizations changing in a way that looks like evolutionary progress . But this perspective is not helpful for an insider’s view on its own DT . To differentiate the views , Fig . 2 depicts a conceptualization of DT that reflects the trade - off between digital transformation as internal change and digital evolution as external change . Fig . 2 : External vs . Internal Change ( adapted from [ 6 ] , [ 8 ] ) We assume that at any point in time an organization can predict an optimal state of digitalization regarding present digital technologies and the circumstances of the organization . Bockshecker et al . define digitalization as “the state of an organization [ … ] to its current digital developments and usage of ICT [ information and communication technologies ] ” , taking into account social as well as technical elements [ 4 ] . This might trigger a DT endeavor . However , with the speed of digital innovations this optimum state will change quickly [ 20 ] . Therefore , the definition of a target state of DT from a technical point of view seems desperate . We call this technical and external view ‘digital evolution’ as a manager of an organization has limited to no impact to that change and can and will only understand and describe it in retrospective . For the internal change , however , we propose a different view . The goal of DT should be digital fitness ( DF 1 ) . DF defines a state when organizations are able to handle technically induced changes smoothly without being disturbed radically . We call this change ‘technological DT’ or optimization . To handle such technological changes , an organization has to transform organizationally to reach that state of DF . We call this kind of internal change ‘organizational DT’ and argue that this transformation endeavor focuses more on organizational issues [ 6 ] , [ 8 ] . We preliminary defined DF as the balance of the adaptedness and adaptability of an organization according to digitalization in relation to the organization’s environment ( with societal , market , and customer expectations ) . Later , we will detail this definition . Referring to RQ 1 , it is necessary to 1 This view can be compared to the distinction between the process of natural selection ( population ecology theory ) and the intentional formation by a rationally thinking designer . The latter take more consideration of organizational theory [ 44 ] . External Change ( Digital Evolution ) Internal Change ( Digital Transformation ) A Unfreezing Refreezing Moving Trigger Organizational DT Technological DT ( Optimization ) Digital Fitness Present Digitalization Future Digitalization emphasize that digital fitness ( in the initial model ) is a relation to present digitalization ( regarding Fig . 2 ) . However , the requisite fitness 2 , in particular the dimension of adaptability , must relate to future potentially unknown scenarios as well . This long - term aspect of fitness is not modeled sufficiently in our initial concept . The next section examines how other concepts of being in a fit or of fitness in the area of management and information systems research are conceptualized . This review is not exhaustive but represents prominent examples of theory . B . An Overview of the Concept of Fit ( ness ) Analogies help to learn and transfer knowledge from various domains ( e . g . , [ 21 ] , [ 22 ] ) . The use of biological theory for organizational theory or management theory has a long history ( e . g . , [ 22 ] , [ 23 ] ) . We use the analogy of biological fitness [ 24 ] , [ 25 ] for transferring ideas to our concept of DF . Biological fitness is an predictor for the success of a unit of evolution and quantifies the probability of such unit to survive for a longer time - period and to produce offspring ( cf . [ 24 , p . 33 ] , [ 26 , p . 97 ] ) . Fitness estimates the effects of phenotypes on a lifetime within a generation and the effects of genotypes on a lifetime across generations [ 24 ] , [ 25 ] . Consequently , fitter or the fittest qualifies a relative advantage compared to other units . This concept is descriptive but does not explain what the advantage is . Fitness differentiates between a short - term advantage ( within one generation ) and a long - term advantage ( across generations ) . A short - term advantage means that an unit of evolution is better adapted to its surrounding in the present and the near future [ 25 ] . A long - term advantage means that a unit of evolution is adaptable to the dynamics of the surroundings through the variance of genotypes [ 25 ] . Therefore , we learn three aspects for DF : 1 . Fitter expresses a relation to other units that strive for DF according to the expectations of the organizational environment . 2 . Being fit or fitter describes a relative advantage w . r . t . the adaptedness of the digitalization state to the present and near future expectations of the organizational environment . As such , fit in the sense of the organization means ‘being in a fit with’ the external expectations . 3 . Being fit or fitter means a relative advantage w . r . t . the adaptability of the digitalization state to the longer future expectations of the organizational environment . As such , organizations also require adaption in the sense of having the capabilities to adapt flexibly to the external expectations ( ‘being adaptive’ ) . We learn from 2 and 3 that a difference exists between being in a fit with and being adaptive . Both characteristics are required for long - term success and both form fitness and are therefore required for being fit . The difference between being in a fit with and being adaptive was also conceptualized in strategic management . Teece popularized the concept of dynamic capabilities [ 27 ] , [ 28 ] that has been widely adopted in strategic management literature ( e . g . , [ 29 ] – [ 32 ] ) . Dynamic capabilities enable a 2 We use the term requisite fitness analogously to the concept of requisite variety [ 74 ] , [ 75 ] . This means that an organization not having the requisite fitness in comparison to its environment will have competitive disadvantages . business to renew ( e . g . , to renew a business model ) and adapt to the future market expectations [ 33 ] . Ordinary capabilities on the other side enable a business to be in a fit with the expectations of the current market expectations [ 34 ] . Ordinary capabilities focus on efficiency in the sense of doing the things right [ 34 ] and target on “technical fitness ( efficiency ) ” [ 34 ] , whereas dynamic capabilities target on “evolutionary fitness ( innovation ) ” [ 34 ] . This ambidextrous concept of being able to exploit capabilities with the current business and seize opportunities by exploring the environment to renew the business capabilities captured a lot of attention in strategic management ( e . g . , [ 12 ] , [ 35 ] – [ 37 ] ) . To ‘be in a fit with’ as the more static aspect of fitness is at the heart of the ‘strategic fit’ concept of strategy research in management ( e . g . , [ 38 ] , [ 39 ] ) . This concept assumes that management is responsible for bringing the internal resources in a fit with the expectations of the environment . ( Strategic ) fit defines a state of achieving optimal ( financial ) performance through the alignment of corporate strategy , culture , structure , capabilities , and resources with the external context based on environmental assessments by the top management [ 40 ] . The static aspect of that concept was criticized early ( e . g . , [ 41 ] – [ 44 ] ) and a more dynamic perspective was developed . However , a clear distinction of current perspectives and future perspectives and of adaptation and adaptability was not developed . Auster et al . developed the concept further and accentuate the dynamics of change . As a consequence , they named their concept strategic fitness [ 45 ] . Although the fit ( ness ) concepts and ambidexterity share a partial common understanding in matching with environmental factors , both approaches can recommend different courses of action . While the one approach recommends the perfect fit between strategy and structure with a clear focus on either efficiency or innovation , the other approach postulates the design of exploitative and explorative activities to maintain performance in the long term [ 46 ] . With these contradictions , managers facing the turbulences of DT might look for guidance and try to find orientation in maturity models ( MMs ) for DT . One would expect that MMs examine concepts as being in fit with and being adaptive . Thus , we expected to learn from MMs how the relationship of both concepts can be modeled . The next section reflects the current findings about MMs that reflect DT or digitalization . C . Maturity Models of Digital Transformation MMs are very popular in management and academia [ 47 ] . They describe representative patterns of the development of organizational capabilities [ 48 ] . As such , they typically offer a sequence of stages ( such as a development path ) from an initial to a target state [ 47 ] , [ 49 ] . Maturity in that sense means to enter ‘the next level’ and , therefore , a higher level means improvement [ 47 ] . In recent years , several MMs for DT assessment were developed . Teichert provides a valuable overview of MMs for the assessment of digital maturity , reviewing 22 MMs – ten developed by practitioners and twelve developed by academia [ 50 ] . Digital MMs reflect the maturity of either digital transformation or digitalization . However , the scientific foundation of the construct of digital maturity remains vague [ 51 ] . One definition of digital maturity focuses on the degree of adoption and application of digital technologies in corporate business models ( e . g . , [ 51 ] , [ 52 ] ) . As such , digital maturity is a descriptive measure [ 48 ] that assesses the current status of DT with aspects of adoption of digitalization opportunities . Another conceptualization of digital maturity focuses on the ability and method for adapting to the ongoing digital change ( e . g . , [ 50 ] , [ 53 ] ) . Thus , MMs using digital maturity as a degree of adoption rather measure adaptedness or being in a fit with . Maturity in the sense of the ability to adapt is a conceptualization of MMs that measure the adaptability or the adaption ability w . r . t . digitalization purposes of the organization . Typically , the foundations of digital maturity as a measure of adaptedness or adaptability are rather separated [ 20 ] . Most MMs suggest a linear development of the unit under consideration , neglecting idiosyncratic development paths for DT [ 20 ] . Thus , MMs that integrate both perspectives of being in a fit with the environment and being able to handle the future change are rare . Remane et al . criticize the one best level of current MMs and suggest a two - scale model to conceptualize digital maturity , taking into consideration the impact of DT to the company and its readiness [ 20 ] . The problem is that what is best for one business is not best for another , especially regarding transformation projects that are change endeavors with an unclear result per definition . It might be possible that customers will not reward a digitalization development to the next level , insofar the required development of digitalization as a pair of balances between the possibilities of optimization by digitization and the expectations of customers and other stakeholders must be found . With the discussion ( section 2A ) of DT as an evolutionary endeavor in mind , it is hardly imaginable how a “best level” can be defined as one that fits all . We summarize that both the management theories of fitness and the MMs do not sufficiently cover aspects of fitness in the sense of being in a fit with and being adaptive w . r . t . DT endeavors . Both aspects are important for the strategic management of DT and depend on the expectations of internal and external stakeholders . The digital fitness model claims to conceptualize how a responsible management can find a target state of DT . This target state should be determined by the management of an organization and not by a one - that - fits - all MM . Furthermore , this target state must determine whether the organization meets the expectations of its customers and other stakeholders in a certain moment ( being in a fit with ) . This target state furthermore has to determine whether the organization is adaptable enough to meet possible future expectations ( being adaptive ) . Both aspects in combination measure the digital fitness , always compared to other peers of an organization . III . T HE D IGITAL F ITNESS M ODEL – A R EVISION The initial DF model ( Fig . 1 ) has several limitations which we discuss in that section . We reconceptualize the DF model to cover these limitations . A . Revision of the Digital Fitness Model Fig . 1 shows the graphical representation of the initial model . The dimensions digital adoption ( DA ) , digital expertise ( DE ) , und adoption rate of digital innovations ( ARDI ) explain the DF of an organization [ 6 ] , [ 8 ] . DA measures the number and variety of digital technologies adopted by an organization to leverage capabilities with strategic impact . This dimension is connected to the past because the technologies are already adopted and the capabilities developed . DA reflects the digital adaptedness of an organization and , as such , the current fit with the expectations of the ( external ) stakeholders . DE is a complex construct . On the one hand it measures the ability to manage the current digitalization infrastructure . Digitalization infrastructure management is traditionally the central task of the CIO [ 54 ] . As such , DE reflects adaptedness and the fit with the current expectations of the ( external ) stakeholders . On the other hand , DE measures the abilities necessary to handle change . That means DE describes how adaptable an organization is . This ability to explore future opportunities and the ability to seize these opportunities – these dynamic capabilities [ 55 ] – are the playing field and responsibility of the CDO [ 54 ] , [ 56 ] . This ability serves to cope with the externally driven transformation and development of new technologies and represents a potential of handling change in a strategic manner . This aspect of DE reflects an organization’s capability to adapt . With that aspect of DE , it can be measured how adaptive an organization is for future expectations of the stakeholders . ARDI measures how fast an organization is able to adopt digital innovations . Rate consists of the time per innovation necessary to be adopted and the number of innovation projects an organization can handle concurrently . A digital innovation is “a product , process , or business model that is perceived as new , requires some significant changes on the part of adopters , and is embodied in or enabled by IT” [ 57 ] . It is important to note that a digital innovation does not necessarily mean that a new digital technology is adopted . It can also mean that a well - known digital technology ( from the organization’s point of view ) is embodied in a process innovatively or at the heart of a new service or product . ARDI reflects how adaptive an organization is . To measure this adaptiveness , benchmarks with other companies are sufficient , especially from one’s own market and adjacent markets . At the cornerstone of the digital fitness model ( Fig . 1 ) is the central ellipse that symbolizes a scale to emphasize the requisite digital fitness an organization should have . This means that management is able to decide about the digital fitness of their organization . Maybe management focuses on digital innovations and decides that the digital fitness ( left side of the model ) should be a little higher than expected ( right side of the model ) . This might be fine as long as the stakeholders reward that decision . If the gap to the requisite level is too large , the customers will not be willing to pay . The same holds true for the opposite . If the management decides to accept that the DF is a little below the requisite , it might be acceptable for the stakeholders . If the gap is too large , stakeholders ( e . g . , customers ) might turn their backs . The given explanations of the components of the DF model hold true . However , our ( initial ) model allows some misinterpretations and encloses some shortcomings . Fig . 3 depicts the revised model that we explain following . Fig . 3 : Digital Fitness – Revised Model First , we introduce various symbols for graphical representation . The role of CIO and CDO , now incorporated into the model , are represented by ellipses . The relations among fitness , fit , and adaption are depicted by parallelograms . Furthermore , we renamed the left side of our model . The left side of the initial model was named digital fitness . This is confusing as DF results from the relationship of the potential of the organization with the expectations of the environment and , as such , comprises the entire model . We rename the left - hand side and now call it “digitalization” potential . This means that , on the basis of the adopted digital infrastructure , digitalized capabilities are actually available and , with the given expertise , new capabilities can actually be adopted . This results in the actual digital potential of the organization . Again , on the left - hand side , the rectangle DE was split into digital adoption expertise ( DAE ) and digital innovation expertise ( DIE ) . This split emphasizes that expertise is a twofold construct . It enables adaptation ( DAE ) and is closely connected to the management activities of the CIO . DIE enables the adaption and is closely connected to the management activities of the CDO . The roles of CIO and CDO can conflict in organizations [ 54 ] , [ 56 ] . However , to manage DT successfully , both roles have to work together in tight connection and collaboratively [ 54 ] . The CIO as ‘Head of IT’ is responsible for stability and efficiency . The CDO as ‘Head of DT’ is responsible for exploring new digital business opportunities and implementing them in close connection to the CIO [ 56 ] . Therefore , it requires internal fitness [ 38 ] to handle the ambidextrous problem of exploitation and exploration [ 58 ] . The organization and foremost the CIO and CDO require a good balance of stability and change to enable the fit with current expectations and the adaption to future expectations . A fundamental change of the model is reflected by the middle parallelograms ( fit and adaption ) which both replace the fit - ellipse of the initial model . With this replacement we want to emphasize both aspects of fitness – to be in a fit with and to be adaptive for future changes . This decision solves the dynamic interdependency of the concept of digital evolution vs . digital transformation depicted by Fig . 2 . An organization must be in a fit with current expectations of the ( external ) stakeholders as far as possible . This is meant by fit . This fit refers to the present digitalization ( environment ) . Adaption refers to future digitalization and captures the evolutionary aspect of the change of the environment . It is more of a potential ability to change and includes culture , free resources , and will . The right - hand side of the model is more detailed than it was in the initial model . We argue that the three dimensions on the left - hand side ( DA , DE , and ARDI ) require counterparts on the other side of the scales . The present digitalization ( upper rectangle on the right - hand side ) as well as the future digitalization ( lower rectangle on the right - hand side ) is embedded in the broader society , the market of a business or the business’ customers . We separate the market from customers as the customer’s digitalization expectations arise from experiences in different contexts and are transferred in other contexts [ 59 ] . First , we discuss the upper rectangle and thus the fit of an organization with the present digitalization . We argue that the broader environment coined as society is portrayed by digital innovations that are adopted by relevant user groups . Relevant user groups are those that affect the organization in a direct or indirect manner . Digital innovations can be found by analyzing common market research such as the Gartner Hype Cycle [ 60 ] . Additionally , the present digitalization on the societal level is characterized by standards . This means that the digital adoption of an organization is to relate to the digital innovations and standards of the society . The DE of an organization – DAE as well as DIE – is to compare with the digital expertise of the market a business acts in . This means that the competitors of a business are to observe w . r . t . digitalization projects and offerings . Furthermore , it is important to be aware of the offerings of the digitalization partners of the competitors . However , not only the core market of a business is important but also adjacent markets [ 61 , p . 41 ] . The ARDI of a business should fit to the adoption rate of digital innovations of its customers . This means that it is important to understand if the customers are willing to innovate or to accept change and which speed is appropriate . Renewal is not an end in itself . Renewal should solve problems – at best the problems of the customers . A business should not innovate faster than the customers accept it . To recap , we argue that the digitalization of a business should be in a fit with the present environmental digitalization . This present digitalization is embodied in the broader society – recognizable by digital innovations and standards , the market where the DE of competitors and its digitalization partners is to observe , and by customers and their ARDI . To analyze this fit , an organization requires sensing capabilities [ 28 ] and an absorptive capacity [ 62 ] , [ 63 ] . The lower rectangle covers the future digitalization . On the societal level , the future is announced by ideas or conceptions of solutions and also by the formulation of problems and solutions that might be searched for . Fictions formulated by novels or films are also a source of ideas about the future . DE and sources on the market level can be observed by analyzing the concepts of start - ups and university transfers . Another source of information is formed by public or private funding programs . Limited strategic experiments by competitors and organizations of adjacent markets are a valuable source of information [ 61 ] . On the customer side , we call innovation readiness the predictor of the future digitalization : Are the customers avid to learn about disruptive innovations or to change ideas , or are they rather satisfied by the last waves of innovation and change . Maybe the customers are interested in interactive value co - creation for future innovations [ 64 ] – [ 66 ] . Fit Adaption CIO Actual„Digitalization“ Potential Digital Adoption Adoption Rate of Digital Innovations CDO Fitness D i g i t a l E x pe r t i s e Digital Innovation Expertise Digital Adoption Expertise Present Digitalization Market Customer Society Digital Expertise & Sources Adoption Rate of Digital Innovations Digital Innovations & Standards Future Digitalization Market Customer Society Digital Expertise & Sources Innovation Readiness Digital Technology Ideas & Fictions The concept of future digitalization shall help to analyze whether the organization is adaptable enough to cope with the waves of change . An indicator for this ability of adaption is the culture of the organization . It is helpful that an organization is ready and willing to pursue limited strategic experiments to learn future capabilities [ 61 ] , [ 67 ] . To be adaptable it is important to have free resources able to deploy and support the change . Free resources can be the result of the redeployment of slack resources [ 68 ] . Such resources are financial resources as well as personnel with cognitive and organizational abilities . B . Recapitulation of the Digital Fitness Model and Impact on Strategy Our journey to think about DF began by becoming aware that a target state for DT is hard to conceptualize . DT is an evolutionary endeavor driven by new digital technologies . These technologies are continuously developed and find their ways in innovative products , services , and business models . This is the DT on the societal level that each organization is part of ( cf . Fig . 2 ) . However , an evolution has no goal . It just happens . Transformation without a goal is not manageable . We therefore propose a conceptualization of a target state of DT and argue that organizational DT must be a transformation that brings an organization in the state of being digitally fit . This state is conceptualized by the DF model ( Fig . 3 ) . The DF of an organization means that the organization is in a fit with the expectations of ( external ) stakeholders of the organization w . r . t . digitalization and that the organization is adaptable enough to meet future requirements of ( external ) stakeholders w . r . t . digitalization . When an organization has reached such a state , then that organization is fit . Our model is conceptualized as a complex scale with the organizational digitalization potential on the left side and the expectations and requirements of the environment on the right side ( short - term on the top for adaptedness , long - term on the bottom for adaptability ) . This scale ‘weighs’ how severe the discrepancies between the potential of the organization and the current expectations of the environment ( short term – ‘fit’ ) are and how well it is able to adapt to future expectations ( long term – ‘adaption’ ) . It is important to note that both aspects of the scales – fit ( ness ) and adaption – are not static . To be in a fit with the present expectations does not mean a static state . Rather , it is important to continually adjust to emergences of new standards or industrial best practices in an agile manner . This kind of agility is called adaptive agility [ 69 ] , [ 70 ] . Adaption is to develop the necessary capabilities to be adaptive to future , at the time ( at least partially ) unknown expectations in an agile way . This kind of agility is called entrepreneurial agility [ 69 ] , [ 71 ] . We argue that the management decides how the scale is adjusted . It might be that the organization attaches value to the fitness scales and overemphasize the adaptation of the digitalization slightly . An example would be hiring new programmers to revamp a banking app to better handle real - time transactions , rather than hiring experts to integrate a blockchain . It is also possible that the adaption is slightly overemphasized . Therefore , different possible strategies arise . Fig . 4 depicts these strategic paths in a matrix . The axis of ordinates maps the fit with the environmental expectations or how adapted the digitalization of the organization is . The axis of abscissas maps the adaption of the digitalization of the organization or how adaptable the organization is . The matrix depicts four quadrants . The bottom left quadrant is called mis - fit . Organizations classified as such are not ( yet ) well adapted to the current expectations of their customers and other external stakeholders . They are also not adaptive and lack entrepreneurial agility . The lack of adaptability is reflected by market share losses as more and more customers look for and find alternatives that meet their digitalization expectations . To escape the fierce competition of the mature or shrinking market , the organization needs digital innovation projects to enter new markets ( entrepreneurial agility ) . Instead , the organization has only some digital innovation projects ( from the viewpoint of the organization ) that enhance the service or product pipeline and are directed to shorten the distance of the expectations of the customers . One result is a lack of resources to foster the agility of the organization . Such an organization is not fit and has to think about how to leave that quadrant . Fig . 4 : Digital Fitness Matrix The upper left quadrant classifies organizations that enhance the fit and thus the adaptedness with the present digitalization expectations of their external stakeholders . These organizations attach less value to be the first mover to future digitalization innovations but want to meet their customers’ expectations in the present . Such organizations focus on fit and as such ‘being in a fit with . ’ They are strong in adaptive agility and develop best practices for their markets or copy them quickly . Digitalization projects cope with questions of efficiency or are selective to enhance the service or product pipeline . Such incumbents often do not develop digital innovations by themselves but incorporate innovations developed by partners or start - ups . To fuel the change to stay adapted , a steady cash - flow from the business is generated . The bottom right quadrant maps organizations that focus on adaptability and adaption . Such organizations are full of entrepreneurial spirit and create innovative , oftentimes ambitious ideas steadily . In many cases , these organizations cannot achieve profits as they are not ( yet ) adapted to their markets sufficiently enough . The exploitation of their ideas is immature , but market share begins to rise . The endeavor of such organizations is often fueled by external financial support of private and public investors . The upper right quadrant covers organizations that are fit . Both dimensions of fitness are balanced and focused by strategy - makers . Such organizations are able to cope with a high bandwidth of digital innovations ( in relation to their competitors ) . Some of these innovations are targeted on efficiency gains and customer satisfaction and thus to adapting to the current needs of the external stakeholders . Some other digital innovations foster the entrepreneurial advancement and contribute to the adaption to the future expectations of the Adaptability A dap t edne ss Fitness - Organization is adapted to its market . - Organization has free resources . - Organization has a selective set of digital innovation projects – some for enhancing the service / product pipeline ; some for entrepreneurial developments . Mis - Fit - Organization is adapted to a shrinking market and looses market share . - Organization has scarce free resources . - Organization has a rare set of digital innovation projects – only for enhancing the service / product pipeline . Focus on Fit - Organization is adapted to a mature market and wins market share slowly . - Organization has some free resources . - Organization has a selective set of digital innovation projects – especially for enhancing the service / product pipeline . Focus on Adaption - Organization is currently adapted to its market inefficiently but wins market share . - Organization has some free resources . - Organization has a rich set of incoherent digital innovation projects – especially for entrepreneurial developments . external stakeholders . Due to the well - developed exploitation capabilities , these organizations benefit from steady and high cashflows that finance the entrepreneurial innovations . All quadrants , except the one on the bottom left , are valid strategic positions . However , organizations from the fitness quadrant will perform best compared to their competitors in other quadrants . The positioning , or better the management decisions that result in the position , have their roots in a plethora of reasons . How agile an organization can be is a question of culture , structure , strategy , and resources . IV . C ONCLUSION This contribution revises the digital fitness model ( cf . [ 6 ] , [ 8 ] ) and asks whether it is enough for an organization to be in a fit with the present expectations of its external stakeholders w . r . t . the digitalization of the organization . We argue that it is not only important to be in a fit with these expectations but also to be able to adapt to future expectations which are ( at least partly ) invisible at time . We argue on the basis of the findings of fit ( ness ) theories and digital transformation MM . Especially the digital transformation MM suffer from the theoretical problem that DT is often conceptualized as an evolutionary process . Evolution , however , has no target and no end . The MM typically design an end state or a best stage . This seems to be contradicting . The idea behind our model is that an organization requires fitness , which means to be able to cope with current environmental expectations and with future environmental changes in a structured , methodological , and agile manner . To enable the capabilities to do so , an organization has to go through a DT to end in a state that enables future changes smoothly . We call this kind of DT an organizational digital transformation and the ongoing changes due to technically induced opportunities a technical digital transformation as a kind of ongoing optimization ( Fig . 2 ) . The digital fitness model is conceptualized as scales to emphasize the idea of requisite DF . CIO and CDO decide the level of DF that is requisite to the external expectations . Therefore , four strategic positions for an organization are possible . An organization can be in a mis - fit situation with limited adaptability and a limited fit with present expectations of their external stakeholders . An organization can focus on being fit , emphasizing the match with the current stakeholder’s expectation . The third position is focusing on adaption , where an organization emphasizes digital innovations in an aggressive manner without focusing on exploitation . The last position is fitness and , as such , being fit – a balanced relation between being in a fit with and adaption . A . Limitations Our contribution has several limitations . First , the improved model is only based on a theory - driven reasoning . Although we initiated a first discussion of our arguments and theory with practitioners in workshops , the findings are neither yet empirically grounded nor validated . The dimensions of the model are rather abstract and concise measurement scales are missing . One starting point of our work was the recognition that , although a lot of knowledge about DT was accumulated , science lacks to some extent a contribution with methods and tools for practitioners [ 72 ] , [ 73 ] . However , even though our model lays the ground for developing a measurement concept , it is not yet normative . B . Contribution Our findings help scholars to deepen their knowledge about the target state of DT . It clarifies the theoretical problem ( or contradiction ) that although DT is commonly perceived as a kind of evolution [ 1 ] – [ 3 ] , managers and especially CIOs and CDOs require a target state for their DT endeavors . Our contribution helps to understand the balancing of the short - term changes that are necessary to be in a fit with the present expectations ( adaptive agility ) and future changes to stay adaptive ( entrepreneurial agility ) . Both kinds of agility entail explorational as well as exploitational aspects with different priority ( cf . [ 69 ] , [ 70 ] ) . Practitioners participate in our findings as our model conceptualizes the tension of being in a fit with and being adaptive , resulting in a state of being fit . It makes clear that being in a fit with customers’ expectations is important for exploiting products and services but might not help in being able to have the right innovations tomorrow . The digital fitness matrix clarifies strategic positions that managers can strive for . However , the model does not yet help to measure the positions as the development of measures is part of the future work . C . Future Work It is necessary to falsify the model empirically . It is planned to examine the model’s statements in an in - depth case study to learn whether the model is helpful for practitioners . To enhance the model , it is further planned to combine the findings with the measurement options of DT maturity models . These maturity models offer specific questionnaire items that are valuable and offer the potential to be integrated into a methodological artefact guided by our model . This endeavor is intended to provide the CIO and CDO with an actionable model in the long term . R EFERENCES [ 1 ] L . Wessel , A . Baiyere , R . Ologeanu - Taddei , J . Cha , and T . B . Jensen , “Unpacking the Difference Between Digital Transformation and IT - Enabled Organizational Transformation , ” J . Assoc . Inf . Syst . , vol . 22 , no . 1 , pp . 102 – 129 , 2021 . [ 2 ] R . Morakanyane , A . Grace , and P . O’Reilly , “Conceptualizing Digital Transformation in Business Organizations : A Systematic Review of Literature , ” in Proceedings of the 30th Bled eConference , Bled , Slovenia , 18 . - 21 . 06 . , 2017 . [ 3 ] G . Vial , “Understanding digital transformation : A review and a research agenda , ” J . Strateg . Inf . Syst . , vol . 28 , no . 2 , pp . 118 – 144 , 2019 . [ 4 ] A . Bockshecker , S . Hackstein , and U . Baumöl , “Systematization of the Term Digital Transformation and Its Phenomena From a Socio - Technical Perspective – a Literature Review , ” in Proceedings of the 26th European Conference on Information Systems ( ECIS ) , Portsmouth , UK , 23 . - 28 . 06 . , 2018 . [ 5 ] J . Becker and D . Kahn , “Der Prozess im Fokus , ” in Prozessmanagement . Ein Leitfaden zur prozessorientierten Organisationsgestaltung , 5th ed . , J . Becker , M . Kugeler , and M . Rosemann , Eds . Berlin , Heidelberg , New York : Springer , 2005 , pp . 3 – 16 . [ 6 ] Kossowski , J . , Lenz , A . , Heumüller , E . , & Richter , S . , Digital Fitness – The Goal of Digital Transformation . Proceedings of the 25th UK Academy for Information Systems International Conference , Online , 2020 . [ 7 ] M . Anding , “Fachkräftemangel : Zur Lösung eines greifbaren Problems in digitalen Zeiten , ” Wirtschaftsinformatik Manag . , vol . 10 , no . 1 , pp . 14 – 21 , Feb . 2018 . [ 8 ] Kossowski , J . , Heumüller , E . , & Richter , S . , Digital Fitness - Goal for the Chief Digital Officer . Proceedings - 2020 IEEE International Conference on Engineering , Technology and Innovation , ICE / ITMC Online , 2020 . [ 9 ] A . Bharadwaj , O . A . El Sawy , P . A . Pavlou , and N . Venkatraman , “Digital Business Strategy : Toward a Next Generation of Insights , ” MIS Ouarterly , vol . 37 , no . 2 , pp . 471 – 482 , 2013 . [ 10 ] C . J . Woodard , N . Ramasubbu , F . T . Tschang , and V . Sambamurthy , “Design Capital and Design Moves : The Logic of Digital Business Strategy , ” MIS Q . , vol . 37 , no . 2 , pp . 537 – 564 , 2013 . [ 11 ] S . Raisch , J . Birkinshaw , G . Probst , and M . L . Tushman , “Organizational ambidexterity : Balancing exploitation and exploration for sustained performance , ” Organ . Sci . , vol . 20 , no . 4 , pp . 685 – 695 , 2009 . [ 12 ] S . Raisch and J . Birkinshaw , “Organizational ambidexterity : Antecedents , outcomes , and moderators , ” J . Manage . , vol . 34 , no . 3 , pp . 375 – 409 , 2008 . [ 13 ] J . Birkinshaw , A . Zimmermann , and S . Raisch , “How do firms adapt to discontinuous change ? Bridging the dynamic capabilities and ambidexterity perspectives , ” Calif . Manage . Rev . , vol . 58 , no . 4 , pp . 36 – 58 , 2016 . [ 14 ] T . Wilde and T . Hess , “Forschungsmethoden der Wirtschaftsinformatik . Eine empirische Untersuchung , ” Wirtschaftsinformatik , vol . 49 , no . 4 , pp . 280 – 287 , 2007 . [ 15 ] T . Saarikko , U . H . Westergren , and T . Blomquist , “Digital transformation : Five recommendations for the digitally conscious firm , ” Bus . Horiz . , vol . 63 , no . 6 , pp . 825 – 839 , 2020 . [ 16 ] E . Henriette , M . Feki , and I . Boughzala , “Digital Transformation Challenges , ” in Proceedings of the 10th Mediterranean Conference on Information Systems ( MCIS ) , Paphos , Cyprus , 04 . - 06 . 09 . , 2016 , p . 33 . [ 17 ] S . Berger , M . - S . Denner , and M . Röglinger , “The Nature of Digital Technologies - Development of a Multi - Layer Taxonomy , ” in Proceedings of the 26th European Conference on Information Systems ( ECIS ) , Portsmouth , UK , 23 . - 28 . 06 . , 2018 . [ 18 ] O . Hanseth and K . Lyytinen , “Design theory for dynamic complexity in information infrastructures : the case of building internet , ” J . Inf . Technol . , vol . 25 , no . 1 , pp . 1 – 19 , 2010 . [ 19 ] E . Mitleton - Kelly , “Ten Principles of Complexity and Enabling Infrastructures , ” in Complex systems and Evolutionary Perspectives on Organisations . The Application of Complexity Theory to Organisations , no . May , E . Mitleton - Kelly , Ed . Bingley , UK : Emerald , 2003 , pp . 23 – 50 . [ 20 ] G . Remane , A . Hanelt , F . Wiesboeck , and K . Lutz , “Digital Maturity in Traditional Industries – An Exploratory Analysis , ” in Proceedings of the 25th European Conference on Information Systems ( ECIS 2017 ) , Guimarães , June 05 - 10 , 2017 . [ 21 ] R . Dreistadt , “An Analysis of the Use of Analogies and Metaphors in Science , ” J . Psychol . , vol . 68 , no . 1 , pp . 97 – 116 , 1968 . [ 22 ] S . K . Reed , G . W . Ernst , and R . Banerji , “The role of analogy in transfer between similar problem states , ” Cogn . Psychol . , vol . 6 , no . 3 , pp . 436 – 450 , 1974 . [ 23 ] E . T . Penrose , “Biological Analogies in the Theory of the Firm , ” Am . Econ . Rev . , vol . 42 , no . 5 , pp . 804 – 819 , 1952 . [ 24 ] J . A . Endler , Natural Selection in the Wild . Princeton : Princeton University Press , 1986 . [ 25 ] J . S . F . ( Stuart ) Barker , “Defining Fitness in Natural and Domesticated Populations , ” in Adaptation and Fitness in Animal Populations . Evolutionary and Breeding Perspectives on Genetic Resource Management , J . van der Werf , H . - U . Graser , R . Frankham , and C . Gondro , Eds . Amsterdam : Springer , 2009 , pp . 3 – 14 . [ 26 ] J . M . Thoday , “Components of Fitness , ” in Symposia of the Society for Experimental Biology , No . VII : Evolution , R . Brown and J . F . Danielli , Eds . New York : Academic Press , 1953 , pp . 96 – 113 . [ 27 ] D . J . Teece , G . Pisano , and A . Shuen , “Dynamic Capabilities and Strategic Management , ” Strateg . Manag . J . , vol . 18 , no . 7 , pp . 509 – 533 , 1997 . [ 28 ] D . J . Teece , “Explicating Dynamic Capabilities : The Nature and Microfoundations of ( Sustainable ) Enterprise Performance . , ” Strateg . Manag . J . , vol . 28 , no . 13 , pp . 1319 – 1350 , 2007 . [ 29 ] K . M . Eisenhardt and J . A . Martin , “Dynamic capabilities - What are they ? , ” Strateg . Manag . J . , vol . 21 , no . 10 – 11 , pp . 1105 – 1121 , 2000 . [ 30 ] C . E . Helfat and M . A . Peteraf , “Understanding Dynamic Capabilities : Progress Along a Developmental Path , ” Strateg . Organ . , vol . 7 , no . 1 , pp . 91 – 102 , 2009 . [ 31 ] S . A . Zahra , H . J . Sapienza , and P . Davidsson , “Entrepreneurship and Dynamic Capabilities : A Review , Model and Research Agenda , ” J . Manag . Stud . , vol . 43 , no . 4 , pp . 917 – 955 , 2006 . [ 32 ] G . Di Stefano , M . Peteraf , and G . Verona , “The Organizational Drivetrain : A Road to Integration of Dynamic Capabilities Research , ” Acad . Manag . Perspect . , vol . 28 , no . 4 , pp . 307 – 327 , 2014 . [ 33 ] D . J . Teece , “Business models and dynamic capabilities , ” Long Range Plann . , vol . 51 , no . 1 , pp . 40 – 49 , 2018 . [ 34 ] D . J . Teece , “The Foundations of Enterprise Performance : Dynamic and Ordinary Capabilities in an ( Economic ) Theory of Firms , ” Acad . Manag . Perspect . , vol . 28 , no . 4 , pp . 328 – 352 , 2014 . [ 35 ] A . K . Gupta , K . G . Smith , and C . E . Shalley , “The Interplay between Exploration and Exploitation , ” Acad . Manag . J . , vol . 49 , no . 4 , pp . 693 – 706 , 2006 . [ 36 ] C . B . Gibson and J . Birkinshaw , “The antecedents , consequences , and mediating role of organizational ambidexterity , ” Acad . Manag . J . , vol . 47 , no . 2 , pp . 209 – 226 , 2004 . [ 37 ] J . Birkinshaw and C . Gibson , “Building ambidexterity into an organization , ” MIT Sloan Manag . Rev . , vol . 45 , no . 4 , pp . 47 – 55 , 2004 . [ 38 ] D . Miller , “Environmental Fit Versus Internal Fit , ” Organ . Sci . , vol . 3 , no . 2 , pp . 159 – 178 , 1992 . [ 39 ] N . Venkatraman , “The Concept of Fit in Strategy Research : Toward Verbal and Statistical Correspondence , ” Acad . Manag . Rev . , vol . 14 , no . 3 , pp . 423 – 444 , 1989 . [ 40 ] E . Auster , N . Basir , and T . Ruebottom , “Strategic Fit ( ness ) , ” in The Palgrave Encyclopedia of Strategic Management , M . Augier and D . J . Teece , Eds . London : Palgrave Macmillan , 2016 . [ 41 ] E . J . Zajac , M . S . Kraatz , and R . K . F . Bresser , “Modeling the Dynamics of Strategic Fit : A Normative Approach to Strategic Change , ” Strateg . Manag . J . , vol . 21 , no . 4 , pp . 429 – 453 , 2000 . [ 42 ] S . C . Voelpel , M . Leibold , and K . M . Mahmoud , “The organizational fitness navigator : enabling and measuring organizational fitness for rapid change , ” J . Chang . Manag . , vol . 4 , no . 2 , pp . 123 – 140 , 2004 . [ 43 ] M . Beer , “Building Organizational Fitness , ” in Organization 21C : Someday All Organizations Will Lead this Way , S . Chowshury , Ed . Upper Saddle River , u . a . : Financial Times Prentice Hall , 2003 , pp . 311 – 328 . [ 44 ] P . Klaas , “Towards a concept of dynamic fit in contingency theory , ” in Proceedings of the 22Nd International Conference of the System Dynamics Society , July 25 - 29 , Oxford , 2004 . [ 45 ] E . R . Auster , E . Sullivan , and P . Meredith , “Strategic fitness : an exploratory conceptualisation , ” Int . J . Strateg . Chang . Manag . , vol . 3 , no . 3 , pp . 188 – 210 , 2011 . [ 46 ] W . H . Blarr , Organizational Ambidexterity . Implications for the Strategy - Performance Linkage . Wiesbaden : Springer Fachmedien Wiesbaden , 2012 . [ 47 ] J . Pöppelbuß , B . Niehaves , A . Simons , and J . Becker , “Maturity Models in Information Systems Research : Literature Search and Analysis , ” Commun . Assoc . Inf . Syst . , vol . 29 , no . 27 , pp . 505 – 532 , 2011 . [ 48 ] T . de Bruin , M . Rosemann , R . Freeze , and U . Kulkarni , “Understanding the Main Phases of Developing a Maturity Assessment Model , ” in Proceedings of the 16th Australasian Conference on Information Systems ( ACIS 2005 ) , Sydney , 29 . 11 . - 02 . 12 . , 2005 . [ 49 ] J . Becker , B . Niehaves , J . Pöppelbuß , and A . Simons , “Maturity Models in IS Research , ” in Proceedings of the 18th European Conference on Information Systems ( ECIS 2010 , June 07 - 09 , Pretoria , 2010 . [ 50 ] R . Teichert , “Digital Transformation Maturity : A Systematic Review of Literature , ” Acta Univ . Agric . Silvic . Mendelianae Brun . , vol . 67 , no . 6 , pp . 1673 – 1687 , 2019 . [ 51 ] A . Rossmann , “Digital Maturity : Conceptualization and Measurement Model , ” in Proceedings of the 39th International Conference on Information Systems ( ICIS 2018 ) , San Francisco , December 13 - 16 , 2018 . [ 52 ] B . P . Hie , “Impact of Transforming Organizational Culture and Digital Transformation Governance toward Digital Maturity in Indonesian Banks , ” Int . Rev . Manag . Mark . , vol . 9 , no . 6 , pp . 51 – 57 , 2019 . [ 53 ] G . Salviotti , A . Gaur , and F . Pennarola , “Strategic Factors Enabling Digital Maturity : an Extended Survey , ” in Proceedings of the 13th Mediterranean Conference on Information Systems ( MCIS 2019 ) , Naples , September 27 - 28 , 2019 . [ 54 ] I . Haffke , B . Kalgovas , and A . Benlian , “The Role of the CIO and the CDO in an Organization’s Digital Transformation , ” Proc . 37th Int . Conf . Inf . Syst . ( ICIS 2016 ) , Dublin , December 11 - 14 , 2016 . [ 55 ] K . S . R . Warner and M . Wäger , “Building Dynamic Capabilities for Digital Transformation : An Ongoing Process of Strategic Renewal , ” Long Range Plann . , vol . 52 , no . 3 , pp . 326 – 349 , 2019 . [ 56 ] A . Singh and T . Hess , “How Chief Digital Officers Promote the Digital Transformation of their Companies , ” MIS Q . Exec . , vol . 16 , no . 1 , pp . 31 – 44 , 2017 . [ 57 ] R . G . Fichman , B . L . Dos Santos , and Z . ( Eric ) Zheng , “Digital Innovation as a Fundamental and Powerful Concept in the Information Systems Curriculum , ” MIS Ouarterly , vol . 38 , no . 2 , pp . 329 – 353 , 2014 . [ 58 ] M . L . Tushman and C . A . O’Reilly III , “Ambidextrous Organizations : Managing Evolutionary and Revolutionary Change , ” Calif . Manage . Rev . , vol . 38 , no . 4 , pp . 8 – 30 , 1996 . [ 59 ] S . Chanias , M . D . Myers , and T . Hess , “Digital transformation strategy making in pre - digital organizations : The case of a financial services provider , ” J . Strateg . Inf . Syst . , vol . 28 , no . 1 , pp . 17 – 33 , 2019 . [ 60 ] A . Linden and J . Fenn , “Understanding Gartner’s Hype Cycles , ” Strategic Analysis Report Gartner Research . http : / / www . ask - force . org / web / Discourse / Linden - HypeCycle - 2003 . pdf , accessed : 02 - 03 - 2022 , 2003 . [ 61 ] V . Sambamurthy and R . W . Zmud , Guiding the Digital Transformation of Organizations , 2nd ed . Legerity Digital Press , 2017 . [ 62 ] W . M . Cohen and D . A . Levinthal , “Absorptive Capacity : A New Perspective on Learning and Innovation , ” Adm . Sci . Q . , vol . 35 , no . 1 , pp . 128 – 152 , 1990 . [ 63 ] N . Roberts , “Absorptive capacity , organizational antecedents , and environmental dynamism , ” J . Bus . Res . , vol . 68 , no . 11 , pp . 2426 – 2433 , 2015 . [ 64 ] H . W . Chesbrough , Open Innovation . The New Imperative for Creating and Profiting from Technology . Boston : Harvard Business School Press , 2003 . [ 65 ] D . Schlagwein and N . Bjørn - Andersen , “Organizational Learning with Crowdsourcing : The Revelatory Case of LEGO , ” J . Assoc . Inf . Syst . , vol . 15 , no . 11 , pp . 754 – 778 , 2014 . [ 66 ] R . Reichwald and F . T . Piller , Interaktive Wertschöpfung . Open Innovation , Individualisierung und neue Formen der Arbeitsteilung . Wiesbaden : Gabler , 2009 . [ 67 ] V . Venkatraman , The Digital Matrix . New Rules for Business Transformation through Technology . LifeTreeMedia , 2017 . [ 68 ] W . Du , S . L . Pan , and J . Huang , “How a Latecomer Company Used IT to Redeploy Slack Resources , ” MIS Q . Exec . , vol . 15 , no . 3 , pp . 195 – 213 , 2016 . [ 69 ] O . - K . Lee , K . H . Lim , V . Sambamurthy , and K . K . Wei , “IT - Enabled Organizational Agility and Firm’s Sustainable Competitive Advantage , ” in Proceedings of the 28th International Conference on Information Systems ( ICIS 2007 ) , Montreal , December 09 - 12 , 2007 . [ 70 ] N . Röder , M . Schermann , and H . Krcmar , “IT Enabled Agility in Organizational Ambidexterity , ” Proc . 20th Am . Conf . Inf . Syst . ( AMCIS 2014 ) , Savannah , August 07 - 09 , 2014 . [ 71 ] R . D . Ireland , M . A . Hitt , and D . G . Sirmon , “A Model of Strategic Entrepreneurship : The Construct and its Dimensions , ” J . Manage . , vol . 29 , no . 6 , pp . 963 – 989 , 2003 . [ 72 ] E . Henriette , M . Feki , and I . Boughzala , “The Shape of Digital Transformation : A Systematic Literature Review , ” in Proceedings of the 9th Mediterranean Conference on Information Systems ( MCIS ) , Samos , Greece , 03 . - 05 . 10 . , 2015 . [ 73 ] K . Kutzner , T . Schoormann , and R . Knackstedt , “Digital transformation in information systems research : A taxonomy - based approach to structure the field , ” in Proceedings of the 26th European Conference on Information Systems ( ECIS ) , Portsmouth , UK , 23 . - 28 . 06 . , 2018 . [ 74 ] W . R . Ashby , “Principles of the self - organizing system , ” Complex . Organ . , vol . 6 , no . 1 – 2 , pp . 102 – 126 , 2004 . [ 75 ] W . R . Ashby , An Introduction to Cybernetics , 2nd ed . London : Chapmann & Hall , 1957 .