Maryland Law Review Volume 42 | Issue 2 Article 4 Apartheid Baltimore Style : the Residential Segregation Ordinances of 1910 - 1913 Garrett Power Follow this and additional works at : http : / / digitalcommons . law . umaryland . edu / mlr Part of the Property Law and Real Estate Commons This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Academic Journals at DigitalCommons @ UM Carey Law . It has been accepted for inclusion in Maryland Law Review by an authorized administrator of DigitalCommons @ UM Carey Law . For more information , please contact smccarty @ law . umaryland . edu . Recommended Citation Garrett Power , Apartheid Baltimore Style : the Residential Segregation Ordinances of 1910 - 1913 , 42 Md . L . Rev . 289 ( 1983 ) Available at : http : / / digitalcommons . law . umaryland . edu / mlr / vol42 / iss2 / 4 APARTHEID BALTIMORE STYLE : THE RESIDENTIAL SEGREGATION ORDINANCES OF 1910 - 1913 * GARRETT POWER * * On May 15 , 1911 , Baltimore Mayor J . Barry Mahool , who was known as an earnest advocate of good government , women ' s sufferage , and social justice , signed into law " lain ordinance for preserving peace , preventing conflict and ill feeling between the white and colored races in Baltimore city , and promoting the general welfare of the city by pro - viding , so far as practicable , for the use of separate blocks by white and colored people for residences , churches and schools . " ' Baltimore ' s seg - regation law was the first such law to be aimed at blacks in the United States , but it was not the last . Various southern cities in Georgia , South Carolina , Virginia , North Carolina , and Kentucky enacted similar laws . 2 The legal significance of housing segregation laws in the United States was shortlived . In 1917 the United States Supreme Court struck down the Louisville , Kentucky ordinance ' and thereby constitutionally eviscerated the ordinances of other cities as well . But the historical sig - nificance of Baltimore ' s segregation ordinances remains . History remembers the Mahool administration for having placed Baltimore in the forefront of municipal reform . The story of how the Mahool government earnestly proposed and enacted an apartheid stat - ute as a progressive social reform has a contemporary message : It cau - tions us to discount the righteous rhetoric of reform ; it reminds us of the racist propensities of democratic rule ; and it sets the stage for un - derstanding the development of a covert conspiracy to enforce housing segregation , the vestiges of which persist in Baltimore yet today . Throughout the early nineteenth century Baltimore housing was not racially segregated , and even following the Civil War , blacks lived © Copyright 1982 , Garrett Power * This article is the second chapter of a book in progress , A Chronicle of Twentieth Century Land Controls in Greater Baltimore . It was funded in part by a grant from Resources for the Future . * * Professor of Law , University of Maryland School of Law . 1 . Baltimore , Md . , Ordinance 692 ( May 15 , 1911 ) . 2 . C . JOHNSON , PATTERNS OF NEGRO SEGREGATION 173 - 75 ( 1943 ) ; Rice , Residential Segregation by Law , 1910 - 1917 , 34 J . S . HIST . 179 , 181 - 82 ( 1968 ) . The cities were : Atlanta , Ga . ; Greenville , S . C . ; Ashland , Roanoke , Richmond , Norfolk , and Portsmouth , Va . ; Win - ston - Salem , N . C . ; and Louisville , Ky . 3 . Buchanan v . Warley , 245 U . S . 60 ( 1917 ) . MARYLAND LAW REVIEW in all of Baltimore ' s twenty wards . Although the majority of blacks resided in the city ' s central , southern , and eastern sections , there was no Negro quarter or ghetto . Blacks were scattered throughout the north - ern reaches of the town , clustering together in narrow , two - story alley houses and working nearby in domestic service while more affluent whites lived on the main thoroughfares . Urbanization was to modify this fluid mixture . In 1860 only 4 . 2 % of all Negroes in the United States were city dwellers ; by 1890 it had risen to almost 20 % , ' as blacks joined whites in a rush to the cities . Between 1880 and 1900 Baltimore ' s black population increased 47 % from 54 , 000 to 79 , 000 . During this same period , the city ' s white popu - lation was increasing by 54 % . Hence , while the black population was increasing by 25 , 000 people , the proportion of blacks in the population was on a slight decline . 6 Negro newcomers with little money and limited job opportunities sought out the cheapest housing in town . They rented shanties and doubled up in small houses , resulting in Baltimore ' s first sizeable slums . The first slum to reach maturity was " Pigtown " in Southwest Baltimore . A contemporaneous account from 1892 describes it as follows : Open drains , great lots filled with high weeds , ashes and garbage accumulated in the alleyways , cellars filled with filthy black water , houses that are total strangers to the touch of whitewash or scrub - bing brush , human bodies that have been strangers for months to soap and water , villainous looking negroes who loiter and sleep around the street corners and never work ; vile and vicious women , with but a smock to cover their black nakedness , lounging in the doorways or squatting upon the steps , hurling foul epithets at every passerby ; foul streets , foul people , in foul tenements filled with foul air ; that ' s " Pigtown . " 7 As neighbors who could afford to do so moved away from this squalor , Pigtown ripened into a ghetto . ' Whites were not the only resi - dents to take flight . In this time of relative permissiveness in race rela - tions , blacks also were free to buy houses elsewhere in the city . 4 . Hawkins , A Year of Segregation in Baltimore , 3 CRISIS 17 , 17 ( 1911 ) . Cf . W . Paul , The Shadow of Equality : The Negro in Baltimore 1864 - 1911 388 - 90 ( 1972 ) ( unpublished Ph . D . dissertation , University of Wisconsin ) . 5 . Haynes , Conditions Among Negroes in the Cities , 49 ANNALS 105 , 108 ( 1913 ) . 6 . A Social Problem in Baltimore , 77 NATION 497 , 497 ( 1903 ) [ hereinafter cited as A Social Problem ] . 7 . Baltimore News , September 20 , 1892 , quoted in J . CROOKS , POLITICS & PROGRESS : THE RISE OF URBAN PROGRESSIVISM IN BALTIMORE 1895 TO 1911 20 ( 1968 ) . 8 . S . OLSON , BALTIMORE 233 ( 1980 ) ; A Social Problem , supra note 6 , at 497 . [ VOL . 42 RESIDENTIAL SEGREGATION ORDINANCES Baltimore ' s black bourgeoisie , then perhaps 250 in number , sought to remove themselves from the " disreputable and vicious neighborhoods of their own race . " 9 Thus a first wave of blacks relocated in the north - western part of the city as those blacks that could afford to do so purchased second - hand housing around St . Mary ' s Orchard and Biddle Streets , in what was to become the 17th Ward . ( A street map of the 11 th , 14th , and 17th Wards as they existed in 1904 appears at the end of this article . ) Their neighborhood began in the alleys and then moved out to the wider streets , displacing Bohemians and Germans . The Negro migration to Northwest Baltimore accelerated as whites abandoned their homes there and fled to newly opened subur - ban tracts . For example , when the B & 0 Railroad displaced 100 black families to expand its yards , ' 0 they sought alternative housing in the northwest ' s 17th Ward . The second wave of black arrivals was poorer and doubled up to pay the rent ; slum conditions similar to those in some of the city ' s southwestern sections began to develop . " By 1903 the Negro population was perhaps the majority in the 17th Ward ; ' 2 the slum that had developed in the Biddle Alley neighborhood in the lower portions of the ward had replaced Pigtown as the worst in the city . 1 3 Blacks were not the only slum dwellers . In the 1880 ' s Russian Jews and Poles were immigrating to Baltimore in large numbers . These immigrants faced the same problems as Negroes - little money and few jobs . As a result , their housing conditions were similar to those in the black slums : the houses were overcrowded , poorly venti - lated , and lacked water and sewerage . The major difference between these immigrant ghettos and the black ghettos was in the type of hous - ing they contained : Immigrants converted once - substantial three - and four - story row houses into tenements for up to ten families . The black alley districts consisted of smaller ill - built structures . Another differ - ence was that the immigrant ghettos tended to locate on the east side of town . Thus the growing immigrant population exacerbated black housing conditions by displacing Negroes from that area . " These slums were but a symptom of the social chaos in turn - of - 9 . Haynes , supra note 5 at Ill ( discussing consequences of segregation in cities generally ) . 10 . Hawkins , supra note 4 , at 27 ; transcript of interview with Dr . J . O . Spencer , Record Group [ R . G . ] 102 , Box 121 , National Archives ( June 20 , 1916 ) . I1 . U . S . CHILDREN ' S BUREAU , REPORT ON CONDITIONS AFFECTING BALTIMORE NE - GROES 32 , R . G . 102 , Boxes 120 - 21 , National Archives ( 1923 ) ( Bureau Publication 119 , part of a study of infant mortality in Baltimore ) [ hereinafter cited as CHILDREN ' S BUREAU STUDY ] . 12 . A Social Problem , supra note 6 , at 497 . 13 . W . Paul , supra note 4 , at 392 . 14 . Hawkins , supra note 4 , at 27 . 19831 MARYLAND LAW REVIEW the - century Baltimore . Between 1870 and 1900 , the city ' s population grew from 250 , 000 to 500 , 000 , as ex - Confederates , Negroes , and Euro - pean refugees crowded into the city . The year 1890 was the beginning of a severe slump in the economy . Families could not afford even the cheapest housing so they doubled and tripled up . Unemployment was rampant ; women and children worked for minuscule wages under hor - rendous conditions in an effort to make ends meet . Services proved inadequate or nonexistent - police , fire protection , water supply , and schools were deficient and the city had not yet constructed a sanitary sewer system . 1 5 Urbanization , industrialization , and depression had concentrated in Baltimore a growing population of the poor , the sick , and the ignorant . The crisis in Baltimore and other cities produced a movement for social reform . Social reformers joined the already established Progres - sive Movement in opposing political machines such as the Rasin - Gorman Ring in Baltimore , and in advocating civil service reform , the merit system , streamlined government , home rule , and corrupt - prac - tices legislation . 6 But the social reformers who came from the univer - sities and churches had greater ambitions . They advocated initiatives designed to remedy the fundamental ills of society - illiteracy , pes - tilence , crime , and poverty . ' 1 The first leader of the organized Social Reform Movement in Bal - timore was Daniel Coit Gilman , President of the Johns Hopkins Uni - versity . In 1881 , he founded the Charity Organization Society and modeled it after similar groups in London , Buffalo , Boston , and New York . It provided the poor with gifts of food , clothing , and coal , along with " friendly visitors " who volunteered to help on a one - to - one ba - sis . 1 8 In addition , Jane Addams ' s pioneer settlement house in Chicago was soon copied by Baltimore clergyman Edward H . Lawrence . ' 9 Fur - ther , Baltimore philanthropists Robert Garrett and Henry Walters cop - ied projects undertaken elsewhere in sponsoring playgrounds and public baths . 2 " Social reformers found support for their efforts among Baltimore ' s medical community . Recent discoveries in bacteriology led prominent 15 . J . CROOKS , supra note 7 , at 155 - 56 . 16 . See generally J . CROOKS , supra note 7 ; R . HOFSTADTER , THE AGE OF REFORM : FROM BRYAN TO F . D . R . ( 1955 ) ; Crane , The Origins of Progressivism , in THE PROGRESSIVE ERA 11 - 34 ( L . Gould ed . 1974 ) . 17 . S . HUBER , EFFICIENCY AND UPLIFT : SCIENTIFIC MANAGEMENT AND THE PROGRES - SIVE ERA 1890 - 1920 77 ( 1964 ) . 18 . J . CROOKS , supra note 7 , at 158 - 59 . 19 . Id . at 162 . 20 . Id . at 180 - 83 . [ VOL . 42 RESIDENTIAL SEGREGATION ORDINANCES physicians to identify the need for public health programs . For exam - ple , in the 1890 ' s Dr . William Osler , physician - in - chief at the Johns Hopkins Hospital , called public attention to the social implications of typhoid and tuberculosis and supported efforts to establish a pure water system . His colleague , Dr . William Henry Welch , in a speech in 1892 , estimated that better sanitation in American cities could save 100 , 000 lives each year . 2 ' In 1897 , Dr . John S . Fulton , along with Osler and Welch , founded the Maryland Public Health Association . 22 It dis - cussed proposals for construction of a sanitary sewer system ( Baltimore then had none ) and for establishment of a city hospital for infectious diseases . 23 The proposal for a hospital , however , was poorly received . The City Council resisted creation of a " pest house , " because it would reduce property values and spread disease to the surrounding neighborhood . In 1902 , on the other hand , the state government began a city - wide campaign against tuberculosis . Tuberculosis was then the most wide - spread and fatal of the infectious diseases : it killed 1 , 000 Baltimoreans each year . 24 This campaign stressed the relationship between over - crowded housing , lack of open space , tainted food , and a high inci - dence of TB . It lobbied for laws requiring registration of persons infected with TB , prohibiting spitting , and providing for construction of hospitals . 25 Not surprisingly , these first efforts at social reform proved unequal to the task . Self - help , friendly visiting , volunteerism , and timid gov - ernment initiatives failed to abolish poverty , to prevent crime , and to cure tuberculosis and other infectious diseases . Among the reformers ' greatest shortcomings was their failure to do more for blacks . The half - dozen privately financed settlement houses reached at most several hundred Baltimoreans ; Negroes never saw a settlement . As initially established , public baths and playgrounds designed to humanize the urban environment were for whites only . These facilities were not available to blacks until 1905 and 1908 , and then only to a limited ex - tent . 26 Fledgling public health efforts had made no discernable impact on the black communities - the Negro death rate from both smallpox and tuberculosis was twice that of the white average . 27 21 . Id . at 164 - 65 . 22 . Id . at 171 - 72 . 23 . Id . at 182 - 83 . 24 . Id . at 184 . 25 . Id . at 187 . 26 . Id . at 181 , 183 . 27 . Id . at 188 ; S . Olson , supra note 8 , at 236 . 19831 MARYLAND LAW REVIEW Notwithstanding their failures , social reformers remained un - daunted . Unable to treat or to cure the fundamental ills from which the urbanizing , industrializing society suffered - illiteracy , morbidity , crime , and poverty - their response was to focus on a symptom rather than the disease . Slum housing came to the forefront of the reformers ' concerns ; environmentalism came to be an article of faith . 28 In Balti - more of 1903 , progressive Mayor Thomas Hayes expressed this faith as follows : debasing environments like these are the ones from which creep forth the pinched bodies and pinched souls which make our criminals and disturbing elements . These wretched abodes are menacing to both health and morals . They are the breeding spots from which issue the discontents and heartburnings that some - times spread like a contagion through certain ranks of our labor - ing element . 29 Because city slums were to blame for vice , crime , pauperism , and anar - chy , improved housing conditions would cure society ' s ills . Not long after Mayor Hayes ' s remark , Gilman ' s Charity Organi - zation Society commissioned an investigation entitled Housing Condi - tions in Baltimore . 3 This study was aimed at the alleys that housed Baltimore ' s blacks and at the sections occupied by rapidly increasing foreign populations , on the assumption that " conditions existed in those neighborhoods that could not but be detrimental to the welfare of their residents . " ' " Its preliminary concerns were that : houses covered so much of the lot - space as to diminish the supply of light and air ; large numbers of families were crowding into dwellings originally designed for single - family occupancy ; many rooms were gloomy and ill - venti - lated ; alley houses were damp and dilapidated ; and sanitation was de - fective . The Society intended the investigation " to secure accurate and reliable information " and thereby to take " the first step towards the removal of these evils . " 32 The investigation selected four districts for detailed field study . Two districts were described as " tenement districts " and included a large number of houses occupied by three or more families . One tene - ment district was occupied largely by Russian Jews , and the other was occupied almost exclusively by Poles . Two districts were described as 28 . See generally Moore , Directions of Thought in Progressive America , in THE PROGRES - SIVE ERA 35 - 55 ( L . Gould ed . 1974 ) . 29 . S . OLSON , supra note 8 , at 270 . 30 . J . KEMP , HOUSING CONDITIONS IN BALTIMORE ( 1907 ) . 31 . Id . at 12 . 32 . Id . [ VOL . 42 RESIDENTIAL SEGREGATION ORDINANCES " alley districts " because they illustrated conditions prevailing in inte - rior alleys and minor streets . These districts were occupied largely by Negroes along with a few native white families and Germans . In real - ity , the housing stock in the tenement and alley districts was not mutu - ally exclusive - tenement districts included houses on interior streets , and alley districts included some tenements . One of the districts studied , Biddle Alley , was the same neighbor - hood to which middle - class blacks had escaped in the 1880 ' s . By 1903 it had fallen on hard times . The area investigated by the Society was bounded by Biddle and Preston Streets and Druid Hill and Penn - sylvania Avenues . Two hundred and fifteen overcrowded houses , con - taining 270 apartments ( seventeen percent of which were one room ) , were crammed into the alleys and minor streets within the block . Typi - cally , the houses were two or three stories high and two rooms deep with a basement kitchen and living room . The most common problem was the " dirty , dark , damp and dilapidated " basements . 33 The investi - gation did not determine the number of residents in Biddle Alley ; the Society felt that tabulating the information concerning the number of people living in alley houses was a " waste of time " because of the un - trustworthiness of the tenants . 34 The Biddle Alley neighborhood was literally and figuratively at the bottom of what was becoming the black section of Baltimore . In 1903 the section with a majority Negro population was described as " bounded on the south by Biddle Street , on the west by Argyle Avenue , on the east by Druid Hill Avenue , and on the north by North Avenue . This region extends about a quarter of a mile from east to west and a mile north and south . " 35 It consisted of the 17th Ward to the south and a portion of the 14th Ward to the north . The Negro district was highly stratified , both economically and so - cially . The lower portion of the district , found in the 17th Ward , which embraced the Biddle Alley neighborhood , was a filthy slum . Animal excrement and garbage lay in the streets . Privy faults and cesspools overflowed into the alleys and oozed into the basement , kitchen , and living areas . 36 Cholera and typhoid were a constant threat , and the district was the tuberculosis center for the city : According to one health department official , " there is not a house on Biddle Alley , in which there has not been at least one case of tuberculosis . 37 Biddle 33 . Id . at 45 . 34 . Id . at 43 . 35 . A Social Problem , supra note 6 , at 498 . 36 . W . Paul , supra note 4 , at 393 - 94 . 37 . J . KEMP , supra note 30 , at 19 . 1983 ] MARYLAND LAW REVIEW Alley was the " lung block . " The value of property in the 17th Ward was in a precipitous decline . 3 " The upper portion of the district , found in the 14th Ward , con - tained the houses of the Negro community ' s business and professional people . A quiet residential neighborhood , properties sold for higher prices than in equivalent white neighborhoods . Middle - class white res - idents still lived in the area . The best black dwellings bounded along upper Druid Hill Avenue . 39 The Housing Conditions in Baltimore report , interrupted by the Baltimore Fire of 1904 , was finished in 1907 , under the direction of Janet E . Kemp . Its statistics and photographs vividly display the hor - rors of the slums and the plight of the slum - dwellers , but it was less compelling when suggesting solutions . The report ' s text observed : " Nothing but enlightened public sentiment crystallized into legislative requirements can ever guarantee sanitary surroundings to the small wage earner who cannot afford to pay a high rent . " 40 The report suggested legislative requirements that differed for ten - ements and alley houses . The report proposed an inexpensive " mar - ket " solution for tenement districts . It sought to force landlords to improve existing tenements , and to require builders to construct model tenements , by proposing regulations setting height limits , requirements of separate toilets for each apartment , and annual inspections . The proposal was plausible . In the early twentieth century , tenements were profitable ventures . Commerical developers were building new flats for the " dollar - a - day " man . 41 Together , housing codes and building re - strictions might eliminate all substandard tenements by forcing entre - preneurs to pay the cost of improving them . The solution also was consistent with the classic concept of the state ' s police power . The re - port proposed regulations protecting health , safety , and morals which businessmen might not transgress in the pursuit of profit , but otherwise did not interfere with the economic order . The report ' s recommendations for alley districts differed . It pro - posed to reduce the density in existing alley houses , to condemn those that were uninhabitable , to ban sleeping in basements , and to prohibit erection of additional alley houses . 4 2 Although these measures would improve the quality of housing , they necessarily would reduce the 38 . S . OLSON , supra note 8 , at 276 . 39 . W . Paul , supra note 4 , at 391 - 92 . 40 . J . KEMP , supra note 30 , at 93 . 41 . R . LUBOVE , THE PROGRESSIVES AND THE SLUMS : TENEMENT HOUSE REFORM IN NEW YORK CITY 1890 - 1917 182 ( 1962 ) . 42 . J . KEMP , supra note 30 , at 87 - 92 . [ VOL . 42 RESIDENTIAL SEGREGATION ORDINANCES quantity . Thus the report ' s recommendations would work a particular hardship on blacks , who lived in the alleys , for whom no new houses were being built , and who encountered resistance when attempting to move into white neighborhoods . In effect , the report relegated the growing Negro population to a shrinking number of houses . The report also distinguished between the inhabitants of tene - ments and alley - houses . Negroes were singled out for criticism : " This is not a study of social conditions , but it is impossible to observe these gregarious , light - hearted , shiftless , irresponsible alley dwellers without wondering to what extent their failings are a result of their surround - ings , and to what extent the inhabitants , in turn , react for evil upon their environment . " 43 The " low standards and absence of ideals " among Negroes was " held to some degree accountable for the squalor and wretchedness " which characterized the alley neighborhoods . 44 Despite the plausibility of its proposals and the prestige of its sponsors , the city took no action on the Housing Conditions in Balti - more report . In the northwest the Negro district continued to grow both in population and size . By 1910 , 12 , 738 blacks had crowded into the 17th Ward , 45 constituting over fifteen percent of the city ' s overall Negro population and sixty - one percent of the ward ' s overall popula - tion . 46 The few remaining whites were rapidly leaving . It was the worst slum in the city . 4 7 Not surprisingly , those in the black community who could afford to do so also sought to move away from the squalor and disease . Mid - dle - class blacks began to look covetously at quiet residential houses to the west and north . Between 1903 and 1910 , the western boundary of the Negro district moved six or seven blocks from Argyle Avenue to Gilmore Street in the 15th and 16th Wards . 48 To the north , the black population in the 14th Ward continued to grow . By 1910 , 8 , 392 Ne - groes resided there , the second highest number . Negroes were distrib - uted fairly evenly over the remainder of the city , excepting five wards where their numbers were negligible . 49 Expansion of the Negro district to the west and north was not without incident . White residents struggled against the " black sea " for years . 50 For example , a protest convinced the School Board to reverse 43 . Id . at 16 . 44 . Id . at 18 . 45 . CHILDREN ' S BUREAU STUDY , supra note 11 , at 5 . 46 . W . Paul , supra note 4 , at 391 . 47 . Id . at 392 ; see also supra text accompanying note 13 . 48 . A Social Problem , supra note 6 , at 497 ; Hawkins , supra note 4 , at 27 . 49 . CHILDREN ' S BUREAU STUDY , supra note Ii , at 5 . 50 . . 4 Social Problem , supra note 6 , at 498 . 19831 MARYLAND LAW REVIEW a decision converting a white school to a black one . " ' Windows were broken and black tar was smeared on white marble steps . 5 2 And when a black family moved into a house on Stricker Street they were at - tacked and the house was stoned . 53 But white terrorism was no match for the combined purchasing power of housing - hungry blacks . Money talked . In their effort to move eastward , on the other hand , blacks had been unsuccessful . Druid Hill Avenue had remained the eastern boundary of the Negro district . In its 1600 block , residences of the " best " Negro families were directly across the street from Western High School , the " best " public girl ' s school - which was for whites only . 4 This barrier was reinforced by the affluence of the white neigh - borhood to the east . Eutaw Place was a broad , landscaped boulevard which had been designed to encourage residential development and to enhance property values in the vicinity . The plan was a success and the Eutaw Place neighborhood had become one of the most fashionable residential sections of Baltimore . 55 It had spread three blocks west of the boulevard itself with Druid Hill Avenue serving as its western boundary . In the summer of 1910 , George W . F . McMechen purchased a house at 1834 McCulloh Street . McMechen , a Yale law graduate and a practicing attorney , moved with his wife and children from his former house on Prestman Street , ten blocks to the west . McMechen was cele - brating his professional success by moving into one of the most fash - ionable neighborhoods in Baltimore . 6 The move is memorable only because McMechen and his family were black . He had crossed the eastern boundary of the Negro district and purchased a house in the Eutaw Place neighborhood . This violation of the color line provoked considerable agitation . Police were necessary to protect the McMechen house from young ruf - fians . 57 A mass meeting was held on July 5 , 1910 and a petition pre - pared requesting that the Mayor and City Council : " take some measures to restrain the colored people from locating in a white com - munity , and proscribe a limit beyond which it shall be unlawful for 51 . Id . 52 . Hawkins , supra note 4 , at 27 . 53 . Transcript of interview with Dr . J . O . Spencer , R . G . 102 , Box 121 , National Archives ( June 20 , 1916 ) . 54 . S . OLSON , supra note 8 , at 277 . 55 . J . DORSEY & J . DILTS , A GUIDE TO BALTIMORE ARCHITECTURE 187 ( 2d ed . 1981 ) . 56 . George W . F . McMechen , Md . Vertical File , Enoch Pratt Free Library ; Hawkins , supra note 4 , at 28 . 57 . Hawkins , supra note 4 , at 28 . [ VOL . 42 RESIDENTIAL SEGREGATION ORDINANCES them to go . . . . " I The petitioners were concerned that Negroes in - tended to " plant themselves on Madison Street and Eutaw Place " as well . 59 Milton Dashiell was George W . F . McMechen ' s brother at the Maryland Bar . Dashiell had been born in Dorchester County , Mary - land in 1859 ; he attended St . John ' s College in Annapolis , read law , and was admitted to practice in 1882 . For a time , he practiced in Ken - tucky before he returned to his home state . 6 " According to all reports , his career was undistinguished ; he was a " briefless lawyer . " 61 Dashiell resided on the southern fringe of the 11 th Ward at 1110 McCulloh Street . The neighborhood was all white , but it was located just a block away from the Biddle Alley district , the infamous " lung block . " The " Negro invasion " of Eutaw Place inspired Dashiell to draft a law designed to prevent blacks from further encroaching on white neighborhoods . The bill was introduced into the City Council by Councilman Samuel L . West . 62 The bill took a long and tedious course . Public hearings were held at which the primary spokesmen against the ordinance were Negroes . Both branches of the City Council finally passed the ordinance , by a strict party vote - all Democrats voted in favor and all Republicans voted against . 63 The Baltimore Sun summarized the ordinance ' s provisions as follows : That no negro can move into a block in which more than half of the residents are white . That no white person can move into a block in which more than half of the residents are colored . That a violator of the law is punishable by a fine of not more than $ 100 or imprisonment of from 30 days to 1 year , or both . That existing conditions shall not be disturbed . No white person will be compelled to move away from his house because the block in which he lives has more negroes than whites , and no negro can be forced to move from his house if his block has more whites than negroes . That no section of the city is exempted from the conditions of the 58 . Petition to the Mayor and City Council , Baltimore City Archives , Mahool Files , File 406 ( July 5 , 1910 ) . 59 . Id . 60 . Baltimore Sun , December 18 , 1910 , at 7 , col . 6 . 61 . Hawkins , supra note 4 , at 28 . 62 . Baltimore Sun , December 20 , 1910 , at 7 , col . 7 . 63 . Id . 19831 MARYLAND LAW REVIEW ordinance . It applies to every house . " In addition , the ordinance prohibited negroes from using residences on white blocks as a place of public assembly and vice versa . 65 On December 17 , 1910 , City Solicitor Edgar Allan Poe issued an opinion declaring the ordinance constitutional . He opined that the or - dinance was within the state ' s police power " because of irrefutable facts , well - known conditions , inherent personal characteristics and in - eradicable traits of character perculiar [ sic ] to the races , close associa - tion on a footing of absolute equality is utterly impossible between them , wherever negroes exist in large numbers in a white community , and invariably leads to irritation , friction , disorder and strife . " 66 He determined that this ordinance was permissible under the fourteenth amendment to the U . S . Constitution because " a State has the right under its police power to require the separation of the two races wher - ever the failure to so separate then [ sic ] injuriously affects the good order and welfare of the community . " 67 Mayor J . Barry Mahool signed the ordinance into law on Decem - ber 20 , 1910 . The occasion was a ceremonial one . Two pens were used in the signing - one was given to Dashiell and one to Councilman West . The pen was a " favor " which Dashiell announced he would " treasure . . . from every point of view . " 68 West got into the spirit of the occasion by announcing that he would have a copy of the ordinance framed and hung in his home . 69 It is easy to understand racist Dashiell ' s pride of authorship , but from today ' s perspective , Mayor Mahool ' s support is enigmatic . This experiment in apartheid is at best a sell - out to Baltimore plutocracy , and at worst an invidious denial of housing to Baltimore ' s blacks . Yet Mahool , who is remembered as a champion of social justice , 7 0 eagerly signed the ordinance without apology . At first it seems anomalous that a member in good standing of the Progressive Movement - which advocated the elimination of slums as the breeding ground for crime , disease , and poverty - would enthusi - astically support a law designed to worsen Negro housing conditions . But in a broader historic context it makes sense . Progressive reformers 64 . Id . at cols . 5 - 6 . 65 . Baltimore , Md . , Ordinance 610 ( Dec . 19 , 1910 ) . 66 . Memo from Edgar Allan Poe to Mayor J . Barry Mahool , Baltimore City Archives , Mahool Files , File 451 ( Dec . 17 , 1910 ) . 67 . Id . 68 . Letter from Milton Dashiell to Mayor J . Barry Mahool , Baltimore City Archives , Mahool Files , File 406 ( Nov . 26 , 1910 ) . 69 . Baltimore Sun , December 20 , 1910 , at 7 , col . 7 . 70 . J . CROOKS , supra note 7 , at 102 . [ VOL . 42 RESIDENTIAL SEGREGATION ORDINANCES like Mahool found themselves faced with social chaos . Their efforts had failed to cure the fundamental ills - illiteracy , morbidity , crime , and poverty - from which the urbanizing , industrializing society suf - fered . Thus defeated , they resolved to treat two of the most bother - some and visible symptoms of society ' s ailments : riots and epidemic disease . 7 ' Because the riots were often racial in nature , and because the black slums were viewed as the source of contagion , the reformers fo - cused on the black neighborhoods . The ultimate goals of the Progres - sives , however , were not directed to improving the living conditions of black slum families . Progressive reformers were not concerned with the plight of Negroes ; as C . Van Woodward observed : " The blind spot in the . . . progressive record . . . was the Negro . . . . " " " Victim blaming " was much less costly than attempting to solve the underlying social problems . 7 3 Social Darwinism provided the ideological basis for this view , and some reformers used it to posit a basic inferiority of black people . ' For example , the campaign rhetoric of the Disenfranchisement Move - ment ( a nationwide effort to deny Negroes of their right to vote ) de - picted blacks as slovenly and corrupt brutes . 7 5 Turn - of - the - century census data supported the view that Negroes were a dying race : blacks showed a higher mortality rate and a lower birth rate than whites . 76 Viewed in this context , Mahool ' s support for the first segregation ordinance is less surprising . Similarly , the Baltimore Sun , which by 1911 had good credentials as a reform newspaper , editorially apolo - gized for the segregation ordinance as follows : " Baltimore has to deal with the condition as it exists and not with the abstract theories of theo - rists and those who are not personally concerned . " ' " Many Progressives thus agreed that poor blacks should be quaran - tined in isolated slums in order to reduce the incidents of civil distur - bance , to prevent the spread of communicable disease into the nearby white neighborhoods , and to protect property values among the white majority . Historian George M . Frederickson tied these strands together : 71 . R . LUBOVE , supra note 41 , at I1 - 12 . 72 . C . VANN WOODWARD , THE STRANGE CAREER OF JIM CROW 91 ( 3d rev . ed . 1974 ) . 73 . J . LEVIN & W . LEVIN , THE FUNCTIONS OF DISCRIMINATION AND PREJUDICE 41 - 42 ( 2d ed . 1982 ) . 74 . Schmidt , Principle and Prejudice : The Supreme Court and Race in the Progressive Era . Part . " The Heyday of Jim Crow 82 COLUM . L . REV . 444 , 453 - 54 ( 1982 ) . 75 . M . CALLCOTT , THE NEGRO IN MARYLAND POLITICS 1870 - 1912 101 - 38 ( 1969 ) . 76 . Schmidt , supra note 74 , at 453 . 77 . Baltimore Sun , April 7 , 1911 , at 6 , col . 3 . 1983 ] MARYLAND LAW REVIEW If blacks were a degenerating race with no future , the problem ceased to be one of how to prepare them for citizenship or even how to make them more productive and useful members of the community . The new prognosis pointed rather to the need to seg - regate or quarantine a race liable to be a source of contamination and social danger to the white community , as it sank even deeper into the slough of disease , vice and criminality . 7 " The first segregation ordinance proved to be politically and legally deficient . It was a foregone conclusion that the ordinance would be vehemently opposed by the Negro community . But blacks were not alone in opposing the ordinance : they were joined in opposition by real estate brokers and white owners of property located in mixed neighborhoods . Objections arose before the ordinance was signed . For example , on December 10 , 1910 , a broker wrote Mayor Mahool expres - sing concern that the ordinance would preclude rental to Negroes in a block in which Negroes already lived but were in the minority . The writer said : the property owners of this city who will lose thousands of dollars through the too strict terms of this ordinance , rely upon you to carefully raise such facts as are here presented before signing this ordinance , a serious effect of which will probably not be fully real - ized until some of us come face - to - face with some of our property vacant and in a mixed neighborhood . 79 On December 12 , 1910 , a property owner less gramatically , but more poignantly , made the same point : I am also a property owner and I have a house i [ sic ] south Balti - more where one of the owners have rented the next two houses from mine to colored . My tenants are white . They tell me in spring they will move , now that this ordinance becomes a law and if white people don ' t move in my house I will have to pay expenses on property that does not pay my [ sic ] in return . I approve in keeping colored people to themselves and this ordinance as it is will work a hardship on property owners all over the city . I would approve of a law where there is no colored people in the block . " Hence , the ordinance was politically flawed in that it worked at cross purposes to the economic well - being of a significant white constituency . 78 . G . FREDERICKSON , THE BLACK IMAGE IN THE WHITE MIND : THE DEBATE ON AFRO - AMERICAN CHARACTER AND DESTINY 1817 - 1914 255 ( 1971 ) . 79 . Letter to 1 . Barry Mahool , Baltimore City Archives , Mahool Files , File 451 ( Dec . 10 , 1910 ) . 80 . Letter from Charles S . Otto to J . Barry Mahool , Baltimore City Archives , Mahool Files , File 406 ( Jan . 16 , 1911 ) . [ VOL . 42 RESIDENTIAL SEGREGATION ORDINANCES In addition to its political flaws , literal application of the ordi - nance produced some unlikely incidents . One story is told of a white person who temporarily vacated his house while it was under repair , thereby making the block fifty - one percent black . Return to his own home would have made him a criminal . 8 In the same vein , Daniel W . Shaw , a black Methodist preacher , wrote Mayor Mahool and asked the following question : In reference to the operation of the . . . ordinance , I beg to ask : when colored Methodist preachers living in parsonages owned by their churches , located in blocks where the majority of the resi - dences are white , are ordered by their bishops to move , and a new colored preacher is sent to take the charge , will the . . . ordinance prohibit the new colored preacher from moving into the house owned by his church located in the white block . 82 Mayor Mahool referred the question to Milton Dashiell , who righ - teously replied : I am only able to say that the colored parson , considered to repre - sent the most enlightened of the negro race , should have estab - lished his home in the midst of his race , and that he should have encouraged others of his race to do likewise . . . . The inquiry seems to me like a hypothetical one , and can be answered by the parson , unaided , save by the ordinance itself . 8 3 A legal challenge to the ordinance was not long in coming . In less than a month , twenty - six criminal cases were sent to court . In the first one to go to trial , Judges Harland and Duffy of the Supreme Bench of Baltimore , without going into the merits of the legislation , declared the ordinance ineffective and void because it was " inaccurately drawn . " 84 There is no published report of their opinion , but presumably the inac - curacy was in the ordinance ' s title . Section 221 of the City Charter of Baltimore provided : " Every ordinance enacted by the City shall em - brace but one subject which shall be described in its title . . . . , 85 The title of the first segregation ordinance was nondescriptive ; it grandly declared that the provision was " [ an ordinance for preserving order , securing property values and promoting the great interests and insuring 8 1 . Hawkins , supra note 4 , at 29 . 82 . Letter from Daniel W . Shaw to J . Barry Mahool , Baltimore City Archives , Mahool Files , File 406 ( Jan . 16 , 1911 ) . 83 . Letter from Milton Dashiell to Daniel W . Shaw , Baltimore City Archives , Mahool Files , File 406 ( Jan . 17 , 1911 ) . 84 . Hawkins , supra note 4 , at 29 . 85 . BALTIMORE CITY CHARTER § 221 ( 1898 ) ( emphasis added ) . 1983 ] MARYLAND LAW REVIEW the good government of Baltimore City , " 86 without mentioning racial segregation of housing . Partisans of the segregation ordinance were undaunted . Indeed , they viewed the court ' s decision as an encouragement " to push further their war into Africa . " 87 Councilman West decided to drop lawyer Da - shiell , however , and to seek the assistance of more eminent counsel . He turned to William L . Marbury , whose credentials as a segregationist were well established by his role in the Disenfranchisement Movement . 88 The second segregation ordinance corrected the legal flaws of the first . Further , in a major substantive change , Marbury drafted the or - dinance to be inapplicable to " mixed " blocks . All black blocks were to remain all black , all white blocks were to remain all white , and inte - grated blocks were left to pursue their market destiny . Marbury designed this change to quiet opposition from white landowners and real estate professionals . He also changed the ordinance ' s style , replac - ing Dashiell ' s reasonably straightforward prose with redundant legalese . For example , the most important sentence in the second ordi - nance read as follows : [ I ] t shall be unlawful for any colored person to move into or use as a residence or place of abode any house , building or structure , sit - uated or located on any block . . . the houses , buildings and struc - tures on which block , so far as the same are occupied or used as residences or places of abode , in whole or in part , shall be occu - pied or used as residences or places of abode by white persons 89 Not everyone was pleased with the second segregation ordinance . A delegation of black property owners urged its veto , 90 and some bro - kers reiterated their concern that the ordinance would depress real es - tate values in mixed neighborhoods . Milton Dashiell wrote to Mayor Mahool from his sick room both to reaffirm his authorship of " the plan of segregation " and to object to some features of the Marbury version which were too liberal in permitting mixed occupancy . 9 ' These objec - tions notwithstanding , Mahool signed the ordinance on April 7 , 1911 . 92 86 . Baltimore , Md . , Ordinance 610 ( Dec . 19 , 1910 ) . 87 . Hawkins , supra note 4 , at 29 . 88 . Id . at 30 . 89 . Baltimore , Md . , Ordinance 654 , § 2 ( April 7 , 1911 ) . 90 . Baltimore Sun , April 8 , 1911 , at 9 , col . 5 . 91 . Letter from Milton Dashiell to J . Barry Mahool , Baltimore City Archives , Mahool Files , File 475 ( April 6 , 1911 ) . 92 . Baltimore , Md . , Ordinance 654 ( Apr . 7 , 1911 ) . [ VOL . 42 304 RESIDENTIAL SEGREGATION ORDINANCES Approximately a month after its adoption , the City Council re - pealed the second segregation ordinance and reenacted it with amend - ments . The text of the ordinance remained essentially the same ; the purpose of the reenactment was to cure a technical flaw in enactment . The Council added two new provisions : neither black schools nor black churches could be established in white blocks and vice versa . 93 Mahool signed the third segregation ordinance on May 15 , 1911 , as his last offi - cial act . The next day he was replaced in office by regular Democrat James H . Preston , who had defeated Mahool ' s bid for reelection in the 1911 Democratic primary . A challenge to Baltimore ' s third segregation ordinance was two years in coming . A criminal indictment was filed against John E . Gurry , " a colored person , " charging that he had unlawfully moved into a residence on an all - white block . Gurry was defended in the Criminal Court of Baltimore City by W . Ashbie Hawkins , 94 a Negro , who was to play an active role in legally attacking the segregation ordinances . 95 At trial the court dismissed the indictment against Gurry , finding the ordinance nonsensical . Judge Elliott focused on sections 1 and 2 of the ordinance . According to his interpretation , section 1 excluded whites from blocks " in whole or in part " black , and section 2 excluded blacks from blocks " in whole or in part " white . 96 Hence , he concluded , the ordinance would depopulate mixed blocks by precluding whites and blacks alike from moving there . Therefore , the ordinance must fail because of its own unreasonableness . 97 The ordinance , of course , could be interpreted another way . Law - yer Marbury intended for it to exclude blacks from blocks " in whole or in part " residential , where all the residences are occupied by whites . The Maryland Court of Appeals rescued Marbury from his circumlo - cution by adopting this interpretation , which permits either blacks or whites to move onto mixed blocks . 9 " The Maryland high court had a substantive quarrel with the ordinance , however . It found the ordi - nance unconstitutional because it took away the vested rights of the 93 . Baltimore , Md . , Ordinance 692 ( May 15 , 1911 ) . 94 . State v . Gurry , 3 Baltimore City Ct . 262 ( 1913 ) . 95 . Hawkins came to Baltimore to attend Morgan College . Thereafter he attended the University of Maryland Law School for a year before he transferred to Howard University Law School . He later was associated in the practice of law with George W . F . McMechen , who had broken the color line on McCulloh Street . See W . Ashbie Hawkins , Baltimore Newspost , April 7 , 1941 ( Biography File , Enoch Pratt Free Library ) ; 7 MORGAN ST . C . BULL . 24 , May 1941 . For a contemporaneous account of these events , see Hawkins , supra note 4 , at 28 - 30 . 96 . Baltimore , Md . , Ordinance 692 ( May 15 , 1911 ) . 97 . State v . Gurry , 3 Baltimore City Ct . at 263 . 98 . State v . Gurry , 121 Md . 534 , 539 , 88 A . 546 , 548 ( 1913 ) . 19831 MARYLAND LAW REVIEW owner of a dwelling to move into it if he happened to be white and the block was all black , or vice versa . 99 There was no lapse in coverage , however : a week before the Maryland Court of Appeals struck down the third segregation ordi - nance , the Baltimore City Council had enacted a fourth . The fourth segregation ordinance cured the constitutional infirmity of its predeces - sor by making its application prospective only ; it provided " that noth - ing herein contained shall be construed or operate to prevent any person , who at the date of the passage of this ordinance , shall have acquired a legal right to occupy , as a residence any building or portion thereof . . from exercising such legal right . . . . o In the short run the segregation ordinances served the goal of their proponents - the protection of Eutaw Place from a " Negro Inva - sion ' " 01 - while presenting blacks with few problems . To the con - trary , blacks at first were able to buy or to rent at distress prices as whites fled mixed blocks . " i 2 The ordinances failed to accomplish the more long term goals of the white majority , however , and eventually worked a positive hardship on blacks , the effects of which are apparent even today . The ordinances did not succeed in protecting against crime and contagion , the more general objectives of the white middle class . For example , the ordinances had targeted the 17th Ward for degradation . Its streets and alleys were " honeycombed with saloons and gambling dens , as well as numerous billiard halls , dance halls and several broth - els . " 0 3 In the making was what modem sociologist Kenneth Clark was to call the " pathologies of the ghetto . " ' " Blacks formed a self - help organization , the Baltimore Colored Law and Order League , to pres - sure municipal government to enforce liquor laws , but to little avail . 0 5 Rowdyism and theft increased in frequency and spread to surrounding 99 . Id . at 550 - 51 , 88 A . at 553 ( holding that the state legislature had never authorized the city to pass such an unreasonable ordinance ) . 100 . Baltimore , Md . Ordinance 339 ( Sept . 25 , 1913 ) . 101 . A black real estate dealer described this development as follows : The crowding among the colored people , especially in the 17th Ward is greatly on the increase . . . . They have been moving rapidly into the 17th Ward and packing it . Normally they would have spread over all of McCulloh Streets [ sic ] and the larger streets in this Ward and the district to the northwest . This movement has been pre - vented by the artificial pressure of the Segregation Act . Transcript of interview with William L . Fitzgerald , R . G . 102 , Box 121 , National Archives ( June 28 , 1916 ) . 102 . Hawkins , supra note 4 , at 30 . 103 . W . Paul , supra note 4 , at 393 . 104 . K . CLARK , DARK GHETTO DILEMMAS OF SOCIAL POWER 12 - 20 ( 1965 ) . 105 . W . Paul , supra note 4 , at 397 . 306 [ VOL . 42 RESIDENTIAL SEGREGATION ORDINANCES areas , both as a product of and a reaction against this environment . , 0 6 Thus , creation of a black ghetto increased crime in the contiguous white neighborhoods . Housing segregation also failed to protect the white community from contagion . The mortality rate among Negroes from tuberculosis remained 260 % higher than that of whites and the death rate from all diseases ninety - six percent higher than that of whites . ' 7 H . L . Mencken directly commented on the segregation ordinance ' s negative effect on public health : But who ever heard of a plan for decent housing for negroes in Baltimore ? Most of them live in filthy hovels , crowded together in the winter , breeding diseases in themselves and constantly com - municating these diseases to the rest of us . The persons who gov - ern us have never thought to look to this matter . When the darky tries to move out of his sty and into human habitation a policeman now stops him . The law practically insists that he keep on incu - bating typhoid and tuberculosis - that he keep these infections alive . . . for the delight and benefit of the whole town . ' 08 Even Mayor James H . Preston , who after replacing Mayor Mahool be - came a great proponent of the segregation ordinance , conceded that it failed to protect the public health of the white middle - class : [ T ] he evil effects of the unhealthy state of the negro race are not confined within their own numbers . With little if any knowledge of their home surrounding we call upon these people to serve us in our households , prepare our food , tend our children and perform countless other services wherein personal contact is a matter of course . Regardless of our efforts to maintain [ a ] sanitary and healthful environment for ourselves and families the insidious in - fluence of slum conditions is carried into our very midst to defile and destroy . ' ° 9 In short , the ordinances failed to segregate germs in the 17th Ward . The ordinances also were disastrous for Baltimore ' s black commu - nity because their effect was to limit further the overall housing supply available to an increasing black population . An economist asked to guess the likely impact of a law which limited the supply of housing for which there was an increasing demand would make two prophecies - 106 . Id . 107 . Preston , What Can Be Done to Improve the Living Conditions of Baltimore ' s Negro Population ? 5 BALTIMORE MUN . J . 1 , I ( March 16 , 1917 ) . 108 . H . L . Mencken , I The Free Lance 137 ( 1911 - 1915 ) ( unpublished collection found in Mencken Room , Enoch Pratt Free Library , Baltimore ) . 109 . Preston , supra note 107 , at 1 . 19831 MARYLAND LAW REVIEW the price of Negro housing would increase , and the quality of Negro housing would decline . Both came to pass . Although the ordinances at first made some housing available to blacks as whites abandoned their homes on mixed blocks , only a limited number of mixed blocks existed and the pressure for additional Negro housing was unrelenting . The Negro population in Baltimore was 85 , 000 in 1910 . It had been in - creasing by approximately 600 per year during the previous decade , " 1 0 yet the additional housing available to blacks was being exhausted . A growing population was " bottled - up " into a limited number of houses . I I On the surface the segregation ordinances do not seem designed to shrink black housing opportunities . Indeed , the ordinances permitted the creation of new all - black subdivisions . But circumstances con - spired to foreclose this possibility . New housing was financed largely by building and loan associations created by ethnic groups and labor unions that refused to extend credit to Negroes . By 1900 there was only one black building and loan association . 1 2 Even if a black family could find the capital , few blacks could afford new housing . According to census figures from 1910 , which show home ownership among Ne - groes in seventy - three southern cities with a black population of 5 , 000 or over , Baltimore ranked seventy - second . Only 933 of the city ' s 85 , 000 blacks owned their homes . " 3 Finally , even if a group of mid - dle - class blacks could be found who could afford new housing on the outskirts of town , they were likely to receive a hostile reception from white neighbors . 1 " 4 For example , a move of Morgan College to the northeast suburbs encountered great opposition . Residents resisted the plan to create a community of " scientifically sanitary " housing for the black faculty ; the president of the local community association declared his prefer - ence to live near a community of " ignorant and tractable negroes " rather than one of " educated negroes . " ' ' I During this period " Patap - sco Park " was advertised in the Afro - American newspaper as " the only suburb strictly for colored people . " " ' 6 But for most blacks , second - 110 . CHILDREN ' S BUREAU STUDY , supra note II , at 2 - 3 . Il1 . Transcript of interview with S . C . Fernandez , R . G . 102 , Box 121 , National Archives ( June 19 , 1916 ) . 112 . S . OLSON , supra note 8 , at 234 - 35 . 113 . CHILDREN ' S BUREAU STUDY , supra note It , at 33 . 114 . Transcript of interview with Dr . J . 0 . Spencer , R . G . 102 , Box 12 1 , National Archives ( June 20 , 1916 ) . 115 . S . OLSON , supra note 8 , at 278 ; transcript of interview with William L . Fitzgerald , R . G . 102 , Box 121 , National Archives ( June 28 , 1916 ) . 116 . CHILDREN ' S BUREAU STUDY , supra note 1l , at 33 . [ VOL . 42 RESIDENTIAL SEGREGATION ORDINANCES hand houses were the only option . Increased demand and a limited supply naturally results in rising prices . By 1916 various observers noted , and three different studies confirmed , ' " that blacks were forced to pay more than whites for hous - ing . As blacks dispossessed whites on mixed blocks , the rents went up . Dr . J . O . Spencer , President of Morgan College , tells of a case where a black family moved into a house that previously had been rented to whites for $ 27 . 50 per month and were charged $ 32 . 00 . ' " 1 As the price went up , the quality of housing in black neighbor - hoods was inexorably declining . In a market characterized by in - creased demand , a limited housing stock , and rising cost , Negroes had no choice but to crowd together in order to make the rent . ' 9 Even the small alley houses were turned into tenements for three or more fami - lies . In 1913 , the director of the National League on Urban Conditions Among Negroes described what was happening in the picturesque slang of that period : " For the poorer and less thrifty element . . . loose building regulations allow greedy landlords to profit by ' gun - barrel ' shanties and cottages , by ' arks ' of which the typical pigeon - house would be a construction model , and by small houses crowded upon the same lot . " 12 0 Baltimore ' s middle - class black neighborhood also was under seige . Established in the 14th Ward along upper Druid Hill Avenue , it had been " mixed " when the segregation ordinances went into effect . A quiet residential neighborhood with stately three - story town houses , W . E . B . DuBois described Druid Hill Avenue as " one of the best colored streets in America . " ' 2 1 Its middle - class inhabitants had the same aspirations as their white neighbors - they sought to distance themselves from the crime , contagion , and squalor of the slums . But the segregation ordinances fated the neighborhood eventually to be - come a slum . Speculators outbid homeowners for the houses and con - verted them into tenements for three or more families . A familiar pattern repeated itself : As the lower - class population grew , entreprenu - ers established saloons , gambling places , and brothels . The black bour - geoisie resisted through such self - help organizations as the Baltimore Colored Law and Order League , but it was at best a holding action . 1 22 117 . See S . OLSON , supra note 8 , at 277 , and authorities cited therein . 118 . Transcript of interview with Dr . J . 0 . Spencer , R . G . 102 , Box 121 National Archives ( June 20 , 1916 ) . 119 . CHILDREN ' S BUREAU STUDY , supra note 11 , at 32 ; Transcript of interview with Wil - liam L . Fitzgerald , R . G . 102 , Box 121 , National Archives ( June 28 , 1916 ) . 120 . Haynes , supra note 5 , at I 1 ! . 121 . S . OLSON , supra note 8 , at 277 . 122 . W . Paul , supra note 4 , at 397 . 1983 ] MARYLAND LAW REVIEW Notwithstanding this negative assessment of the effects of the seg - regation ordinances , they were popular with white citizenry . Dollars dictated this positive response . In a letter to Mayor Preston in 1916 , Reverend W . J . McMillian , the pastor of the Maryland Avenue Presby - terian Church , expressed the views of the white majority : Personally I believe that the segregation matter is one of the great - est problems of the modem municipality . The proximity of the negro race to good property means its undoing . This is the fact with which we must deal rather than concerning ourselves with the theories that race prejudice ought not to be . Personally I believe that the property of the church which I serve has been injured $ 5 , 000 in the last twelve months by the negroes ' getting the block on Oak Street between 24th and 25th Streets . 23 Mayor Preston summed up the official attitude in a letter to the Presi - dent of the New York Title and Mortgage Company : " Our segregation ordinance is acting admirably in Baltimore , in operation and effect - and has very great influence on property values and on the condition of both races . " 1 24 The " Baltimore idea " for promoting residential segregation was quickly adopted in other southern and border cities . In 1912 Moores - ville and Winston - Salem , North Carolina enacted segregation ordi - nances . One year later Asheville , North Carolina ; Richmond , Norfolk , and Roanoke , Virginia ; Atlanta , Georgia ; Madisonville , Kentucky ; and Greenville , South Carolina passed similar legislation . And in 1914 Louisville , Kentucky ; Birmingham , Alabama ; and St . Louis , Missouri followed suit . 1 25 Indeed the success of residential segregation ordinances was the catalyst for the emergence of the National Association for the Ad - vancement of Colored People as an effective counterforce to segrega - tion . The NAACP had been founded in 1909 . 126 But its membership and political power grew as it established local branches to press court challenges to the segregation ordinances . 1 27 The success of these chal - lenges varied : The North Carolina Supreme Court had struck down an ordinance as a violation of property rights ; 128 Georgia ' s Supreme Court 123 . Letter from the Rev . W . J . McMillan to Mayor Preston , Baltimore City Archives , Preston Files , File 506 ( Jan . 18 , 1916 ) . 124 . Letter from Mayor Preston , Baltimore City Archives , Preston Files , File 506 ( Mar . 17 , 1917 ) . 125 . Schmidt , supra note 74 , at 499 - 500 . 126 . Rice , supra note 2 , at 182 . 127 . Schmidt , supra note 74 , at 503 . 128 . State v . Darnell , 166 N . C . 300 , 81 S . E . 338 ( 1914 ) ; ( city charter authorized aldermen to enact any ordinance they deem proper for city ' s good order and general welfare so long as [ VOL . 42 RESIDENTIAL SEGREGATION ORDINANCES vacillated , first rejecting , 29 then approving , 13 0 different versions of At - lanta ' s ordinance ; and the Virginia Court of Appeals sustained its ordi - nances with some qualifications . ' 3 ' As we have already seen , the Baltimore branch of the NAACP , under the leadership of W . Ashbie Hawkins , had successfully attacked an early version of Baltimore ' s segregation ordinance . 32 Hawkins ' plan to take a constitutional challenge to the United States Supreme Court had been postponed by this success . But in 1915 , Hawkins again started up the judicial ladder when he challenged , before the Maryland Court of Appeals , the constitutionality of Thomas S . Jackson ' s criminal conviction for violation of Baltimore ' s fourth segregation ordinance . 33 At the request of Mayor Preston , William L . Marbury filed a brief in support of the city ' s position . Preston remained apprehensive ; he wrote to Marbury : " In this brief there is a page and a half of argument . It seems to me that this is too important a matter to be ' kissed down the wind ' so lightly . " ' 34 Mayor Preston went on to request his City Solici - tor , S . S . Field , to file an additional brief in support of the constitution - ality of the segregation ordinance . The Maryland Court of Appeals postponed its decision in the case pending a decision by the United States Supreme Court in a closely related case . In 1914 , the City of Louisville , Kentucky had passed a segregation ordinance of its own . The text of the Louisville ordinance closely resembled the text of the first segregation ordinance which Milton Dashiell had drafted for Baltimore . The ordinance made it un - lawful for blacks to reside in residential blocks more than fifty percent white and vice versa . ' 35 The Supreme Court case was a product of the efforts of the NAACP ' s national headquarters . The NAACP had formed a Louis - the ordinance did not contravene state constitution and its laws , and did not authorize enact - ment of racial segregation ordinance ) . 129 . Carey v . City of Atlanta , 143 Ga . 192 , 84 S . E . 456 ( 1915 ) ; ( city ' s racial segregation ordinance violated due process clauses of both the state constitution and the fourteenth amendment to the federal constitution , because it denied a person ' s inherent right to ac - quire , to enjoy , and to dispose of property ) . 130 . Harden v . City of Atlanta , 147 Ga . 248 , 93 S . E . 401 ( 1917 ) ; ( city ' s racial segregation ordinance , by its terms applicable only prospectively , did not violate due process ) . 131 . Hopkins v . City of Richmond , 117 Va . 692 , 86 S . E . 139 ( 1915 ) ; ( enactment of racial segregation ordinance is within the city ' s police power to promote peace and good order , and ordinance is constitutional insofar as it is applied only to persons whose property rights accrued after its enactment ) . 132 . See supra text accompanying notes 94 - 95 . 133 . Jackson v . State , 132 Md . 311 , 103 A . 910 ( 1918 ) . 134 . Letter from Mayor Preston to William L . Marbury ( Nov . 29 , 1915 ) , Baltimore City Archives , Preston Files , File 506 . 135 . Buchanan v . Warley , 245 U . S . 60 ( 1917 ) . 19831 MARYLAND LAW REVIEW ville branch and had recruited prominent local counsel , but orchestrat - ed the litigation from its New York office . With the assistance of the local black leaders and white members of the Louisville Real Estate Exchange , it created a test case in the context least favorable to the ordinance ' s unconstitutionality . 36 The scenario had William Warley , president of the Louisville branch of the NAACP , contract to buy a comer lot from Charles Buchanan , a white real estate agent . The lot in question was in a " white block " but was surrounded by black residences . The contract provided that Warley was not required to perform " unless I have the right under the laws of the State of Kentucky and the City of Louisville to occupy said property as a residence . " ' ' 37 Buchanan sought specific performance of the contract in the state courts and Warley set up the ordinance as his excuse for not performing . The state courts held the Louisville ordinance constitutional and therefore a complete defense to Warley . 1 38 Hence the case of Buchanan v . Warley had been staged to work a role reversal . Buchanan , the plaintiff challenging the constitutionality of the ordinance , was a white real estate agent . Warley , the defendant defending the ordinance , was the black president of the Louisville branch of the NAACP . The explanation of this litigation strategy is straightforward . At the turn of the twentieth century the U . S . Supreme Court had come to accept Jim Crow laws : in Plessy v . Ferguson , 39 decided in 1896 , the Court found state law requiring racial segregation on railroads consistent with the fourteenth amendment ; and in Berea College v . Kentucky , 4 ' decided in 1908 , it found that the state of Ken - tucky had the power to require racial segregation in a private college . But during this same era the Court had actively embraced the credo of " economic laissez - faire . " In 1905 , in Lochner v . New York , ' 4 ' the Court constitutionally protected freedom of contract in the baking business from maximum - hour legislation . In Buchanan , the NAACP hoped to convince the Court to protect Buchanan ' s constitutional right to engage in the real estate business without meddlesome interference from the City of Louisville ( and thereby incidentally to protect blacks from residential housing segregation ) . 136 . See generally Rice , supra note 2 , at 183 - 88 ( a detailed discussion of Buchanan ' s his - torical background ) . See also Schmidt , supra note 74 , at 498 ( summary of the decision ) . 137 . Buchanan v . Warley , 245 U . S . at 70 ( quoting contract ) . 138 . Schmidt , supra note 74 , at 498 . 139 . 163 U . S . 537 ( 1896 ) . 140 . 211 U . S . 45 ( 1908 ) . 141 . 198 U . S . 45 ( 1905 ) . [ VOL . 42 RESIDENTIAL SEGREGATION ORDINANCES Buchanan v . Warley was first argued before the Supreme Court in April of 1916 before seven justices . The Court then ordered reargu - ment before a full bench . The significance of the case was well recog - nized ; twelve amicus briefs were filed on both sides . From Baltimore , City Solicitor Field filed a brief defending the ordinance , while W . Ashbie Hawkins ( who had hoped himself to argue a case challenging the Baltimore ordinance before the Supreme Court ) filed a brief on behalf of the Baltimore NAACP . 4 2 The case was reargued and the Court finally rendered a decision in November of 1917 . The NAACP ' s litigation strategy almost back - fired . Justice Holmes prepared a dissent in which he argued that the case should be dismissed because of its collusive nature . Holmes said : " The contract sounds so very like a wager upon the constitutionality of the ordinance that I cannot but feel a doubt whether the suit should be entertained without some evidence that this is not a manufactured case . ' 43 But Holmes decided not to deliver his dissent and a unanimous Court held the Louisville housing segregation ordinance unconstitutional . ' 44 The NAACP ' s tactic had worked . Justice Day ' s opinion empha - sized Buchanan ' s property right to dispose of his lot as he saw fit . 1 45 Also in the opinion , however , were expressions of concern for the rights of Negroes . Day found " the difficult problem arising from a feeling of race hostility " an insufficient basis for depriving citizens of their consti - tutional rights to acquire and to use property without state legislation discriminating against them on the sole basis of color . 1 46 From today ' s perspective the opinion seems analytically imprecise . The Court inter - twined Buchanan ' s right to substantive due process with Warley ' s right to equal protection . 47 But the opinion served perfectly the NAACP ' s purpose . The Supreme Court was afforded a mechanism through which it could squelch residential segregation laws without overruling recent precedents that had sustained racial segregation in transporta - tion and schools . Nationwide , the black press exulted in the Buchanan decision . ' 4 1 The BaltimoreAfro - American editorialized : " The joy in Bunkville [ sic ] when home run Casey came to bat in the final inning of a famous game with the bases loaded is nothing compared with the rejoicing in Balti - 142 . Buchanan v . Warley , 245 U . S . at 68 - 69 . 143 . Schmidt , supra note 74 , at 512 . 144 . Buchanan v . Warley , 245 U . S . 60 ( 1917 ) . 145 . Id . at 79 . 146 . Id . at 80 - 82 . 147 . Schmidt , supra note 74 , at 517 - 23 . 148 . Id . at 508 . 19831 MARYLAND LAW REVIEW more , Richmond , St . Louis and other Southern towns over the outcome of the Louisville Segregation decision . " ' ' 49 Law reviews from all parts of the country generally were critical of the decision . The critics were unable to see how segregation could be reasonable in transportation and education but not in housing . ' t 5 An interested observer , Baltimore City Solicitor Field , lamented in the Virginia Law Review the " modern tendency to look upon property rights as more sacred than personal rights " ' ' ( i . e . , the property right of blacks to acquire and use property free from racial discrimination versus the personal right of whites to discriminate on the basis of race ) . The Maryland Court of Appeals responded promptly . Just three months after the Supreme Court decision , it rendered an opinion in Jackson v . State , striking down the Baltimore segregation ordinance on the grounds that it and the Louisville ordinance were " essentially alike in theory and purpose . " ' 11 2 The court concluded : " It is thus definitely settled , upon highest authority , that the right of the individual citizen to acquire or use property can not be validly restricted , by State or munic - ipality , on the ground of his color . " ' ' 53 Black Baltimoreans seized the opportunity to renew their move - ment into white neighborhoods . Two black families moved into the 1100 block of Bolton Street , one of the oldest middle - class residential sections of the city ; another family moved into the 1200 block of Mc - Culloh Street . ' 54 White Baltimoreans responded with petulance and frustration . Miss Alice J . Reilley asked , " What is the use of trying to beautify a city or put in any civic improvements if Negroes are to ac - quire all of the property ? " 55 Mayor Preston was undaunted . He sought the advice of Dr . A . K . Warner of Chicago , where plans for keeping Negroes out of white terri - tory were in effect . ' 56 In addition to pursuing the Chicago Plan , Mayor Preston conceived of another " radical measure " to complement his plan for segregation . He proposed " the elimination of certain conjested sections , populated by Negroes , in which has been noted a very high 149 . Baltimore Afro - American , November 10 , 1917 , quoted in Rice , supra note 2 , at 194 . 150 . Schmidt , supra note 74 , at 509 - 11 ; Rice , supra note 2 , at 195 - 96 . 151 . Field , The Constitutionaliiy 0fSegregation Ordinances , 5 VA . L . REv . 81 , 84 ( 1917 ) . 152 . 132 Md . at 312 , 103 A . at 910 . 153 . Id . at 316 , 103 A . at 911 . 154 . Undated newspaper clippings , Baltimore City Archives , Preston Files , File 506 . 155 . Letter from Alice J . Reilly to James H . Preston , Baltimore City Archives , Preston Files , File 506 . 156 . Letter from Real Estate Bd . to James H . Preston ( July 20 , 1918 ) , Baltimore City Archives , Preston Files , File 106 . [ VOL . 42 RESIDENTIAL SEGREGATION ORDINANCES percentage of deaths from . . . communicable diseases . " ' 57 It is doubtful that Preston appreciated the irony of his requesting advice from Dr . Warner . Chicago was then undergoing widespread ri - oting in response to Negro movement into white neighborhoods . Before it was over there would be fifty - eight bomb explosions , two Ne - groes dead , many people of both races injured , and property damage in excess of $ 100 , 000 . 158 Chicago was a peculiar place to seek advice for one whose avowed purpose was improving race relations . Nevertheless , Preston determined to implement the Chicago Plan . It was a simple one . The plan was " to forc [ e ] out the blacks already residing in [ white ] neighborhoods and [ to ensure ] that no others en - tered . The activities of [ the white property owners ' association ] con - sisted both of mass meetings to arouse the neighborhood residents against the blacks and the publication in white journals of scathing de - nunciations of the race . " ' 59 The auspices of the Real Estate Board of Baltimore , the City Building Inspector , and the Health Department also would be employed to discourage " block busting . " In essence , Preston proposed to replace de jure segregation with de facto segrega - tion , enforced by a conspiracy in restraint of rental or sale to Negroes . The plan for segregation passed its first test . In August of 1918 Mayor Preston became aware that Louis Buckner , owner of the house at 649 Lee Street , proposed to rent to Negroes the second floor flat of his three - story house in an all - white neighborhood . When asked if he did not feel he was being inconsiderate to others in the block , Buckner responded : " They do not pay my way , I must look out for myself . " ' 16 1 He was visited by the Secretary of the Real Estate Board of Baltimore and at the Mayor ' s behest , by the Inspector of Buildings for Baltimore . Buckner was counselled against the rental and that if the rental went through he would be cited for any code violations . Finally , at a meet - ing between Buckner and the Real Estate Board , Buckner assured the Board ' s members that he would not rent to blacks . 16 1 Slum clearance - Mayor Preston ' s own " radical measure " - was not a new idea . Years before , the Baltimore & Ohio Railroad had used its condemnation powers to dispossess one hundred black families 157 . Needfor Better Housingfor Negroes Revealed in Tuberculosis Statistics , 5 BALTI - MORE MUN . J . 5 ( Aug . 10 , 1917 ) . 158 . CHICAGO COMM ' N ON RACE RELATIONS , THE NEGRO IN CHICAGO 122 - 23 ( 1922 ) , quoted in Johnson , supra note 2 , at 178 . 159 . W . TuT - rLE , JR . , RACE RIOT - CHICAGO IN THE RED SUMMER OF 1919 171 ( 1972 ) . 160 . Letter from Real Estate Bd . of Baltimore to James H . Preston ( Aug . 16 , 1918 ) , Balti - more City Archives , Preston Files , File 106 . 161 . Letter from Real Estate Bd . of Baltimore to James H . Preston ( Aug . 22 , 1918 ) , Balti - more City Archives , Preston Files , File 106 . 19831 MARYLAND LAW REVIEW when expanding its railyard in South Baltimore . 1 62 But Preston pro - posed to use the strategy in a more calculated fashion . The Commis - sion on Housing Conditions would convert " the worst infected blocks " into parks . 163 The first public slum clearance project provided for " the parking of St . Paul and Courtland Streets " between Lexington and Centre Streets . The city began in 1914 to buy up properties that were used as third - rate rooming houses and cheap flats . ' I Eventually , in 1917 , pro - ceeds from a harbor loan were used to hire landscape architect Thomas Hastings , who replaced Courtland Street with a sunken garden and widened St . Paul Street . The project was intended to improve the traf - fic flow , as well as to eliminate a downtown slum . 65 When completed in 1919 , some Baltimoreans called it Preston ' s Folly , others called it Preston Gardens . 1 66 Hence , in the aftermath of Buchanan v . Warley , the Baltimore plan for segregation had come to consist of two discrete strategies - clear - ance and containment . Clearance was used to remove Negro slums from areas where they were not wanted ; containment was used to pre - vent the spread of black residential districts . The plan for segregation went into operation at a tumultuous time . Following World War I , Baltimore was undergoing dramatic growth . In 1918 the city had added a new annex which tripled its area . Be - tween 1920 and 1930 the city ' s population rose from 730 , 000 to one million . In that period , housing starts peaked at 6 , 000 per year , most of them in the new area . Along with this growth came a redefinition of " race spaces . " Ne - groes continued to pour into Baltimore from the countryside , but re - strictive immigration laws had stopped the influx of Europeans . Population in the new annex doubled . ' 67 Although the white middle class was in the vanguard of the exodus to the suburbs , by 1930 they had been joined by the foreign - born . The Negro population in the old city increased from fifteen percent to thirty percent , while white popu - lation in the old city decreased by one - half . 1 68 Baltimore was becom - ing a black center surrounded by a white ring . The racial Social 162 . See supra note 10 . 163 . See Need / or Better Housingfor Negroes Revealed in Tuberculosis Statistics , 5 BALTI - MORE MUN . J . 5 ( Aug . 10 , 1917 ) . 164 . Kelly , " The Birth of Preston Gardens , " Baltimore Sun , May 9 , 1954 ( found in verti - cal file Parks , Baltimore , Preston Gardens , in Enoch Pratt Free Library ) . 165 . The Parking of St . Paul and Courtland Streets , 7 BALTIMORE MUN . J . 5 ( May 23 , 1919 ) ; see also 5 BALTIMORE MUN . J . 4 ( Oct . 5 , 1917 ) . 166 . Kelly , supra note 164 . 167 . S . OLSON , supra note 8 , at 302 - 03 . 168 . Id . at 324 - 25 . [ VOL . 42 RESIDENTIAL SEGREGATION ORDINANCES Darwinists who had been instrumental in proposing residential segre - gation had assumed that Negroes would constitute a declining percent - age of the population . 6 9 In the old Baltimore City the opposite was proving to be the case . The exodus of whites to the new annex ameliorated crowding in black housing . Most families lived in a separate house with less than one person per room . 1 70 In the short run the problem was quality , not quantity . A 1933 study found that Baltimore ' s " blighted " areas - ar - eas in which the physical condition of dwellings is below the standard for rehabilitation , and with substantial health and sanitary problems - were predominantly populated by blacks . 17 These districts received few municipal services . Garbage and refuse went uncollected . Alleys were infested with rats . The sewer system had been completed in 1914 , but many houses in the 17th Ward were still not connected ; it is said that building inspectors were bribed . 1 72 When toilets were installed , in some small houses there was so little space they were placed next to the front door . ' 73 The vast majority of the Negro population continued to live under unsanitary conditions , to infect one another , and to spread communicable diseases to the broader community . It was in this setting that the city undertook to clear " pest holes . " One such effort was the construction of a Negro school on one - half of the Biddle Alley district - the old " lung block . " The black commu - nity objected that because substitute housing was not provided , such projects merely removed poor blacks from one slum to another . 1 74 Although improved public health continued to be used as a justifi - cation for slum clearance projects , this justification was not taken too seriously . Knowledgeable observers recognized that clearance projects merely crowded the displaced population into other blighted areas . A 1934 study prepared for Mayor Howard W . Jackson provided a more candid rationalization : blighted black areas close to the downtown commercial district and white neighborhoods yield declining tax reserves and are a nuisance . Therefore , the public interest would be served by their replacement with white housing or industry . 17 169 . See supra text accompanying notes 74 - 76 . 170 . S . OLSON , supra note 8 , at 325 - 26 . 17 1 . IRA DEA . REID , SUMMARY REPORT : THE NEGRO COMMUNITY OF BALTIMORE 27 - 28 ( 1934 ) . 172 . Interview with Mrs . Eugene R . Smith , instructor at Morgan College , R . G . 102 , Box 121 , National Archives ( June 20 , 1916 ) . 173 . Id . 174 . S . OLSON , supra note 8 , at 326 . 175 . W . W . EMMART , REPORT ON HOUSING AND COMMERCIAL CONDITIONS IN BALTI - MORE , CONSTITUTING A STUDY PREPARED FOR MAYOR HOWARD W . JACKSON ( 1934 ) . 19831 MARYLAND LAW REVIEW Another study , prepared under the auspices of the Joint Commit - tee on Housing created by the State Advisory Board of the Federal Emergency Administration of Public Works , considered the feasibility of the rehabilitation for six particular blighted areas . 1 76 The planners selected these six areas because they were close to better areas , served by an adequate transportation system , and would contribute to the cost of existing streets , schools , sewers , and utilities . ' 77 The study recom - mended restoration and modernization for white habitation of three of the areas , even though all six were primarily populated by blacks . 78 In two areas found suitable for black housing , the buildings had decayed " beyond the point of even low level Negro occupancy , " ' 79 the sites had " no other value except for Negro residence and never will have , " ' 8 ° and were " certainly only usable for Negro habitation unless commerce and industry can absorb it , which seems doubtful . . . " lI The study was criticized by an Urban League analyst as promoting " newer , bigger and better slums . ' 1 82 In any case , the removal of blacks from areas where they proved inconvenient or expensive to the white majority had become part of the plan for segregation . Containment was the other strategy . We have already discussed how , when de jure segregation failed , de facto segregation was imple - mented through a conspiracy which restrained residential sales or rent - als to Negroes in white neighborhoods . Once the conspiracy was in place it grew and formalized . Originally it was enforced through peer pressure from neighbors , administrative harassment by housing and health inspectors , and by the suasion of the Baltimore Real Estate Board . Later this conspiracy came to be institutionalized . In 1922 the National Association of Real Estate Brokers ( NAREB ) , of which the Baltimore Board was a member , published a textbook entitled Principles of Real Estate Practice . The textbook em - phasized that " the purchase of property by certain racial types is very likely to diminish the value of other property . " ' 1 83 It was deemed un - ethical to sell blacks property that was located in white neighborhoods . As recently as 1950 the NAREB ' s code of ethics provided : 176 . Report ofthe Joint Committee on Housing in Baltimore , THE BALTIMORE ENGINEER 6 ( Jan . 1934 ) . 177 . Id . at 6 - 7 . 178 . Id . at 8 - 10 . 179 . Id . at 8 . 180 . ld . 181 . Id . at 9 . 182 . Reid , supra note 171 , at 32 . 183 . U . S . COMM ' N ON CIVIL RIGHTS , UNDERSTANDING FAIR HOUSING 3 ( Clearinghouse Pub . No . 42 , 1973 ) . [ VOL . 42 RESIDENTIAL SEGREGATION ORDINANCES The realtor should not be instrumental in introducing into a neigh - borhood a character of property or occupancy , members of any race or nationality or any individual whose presence will clearly be detrimental to property values in the neighborhood . 8 4 In the 1930 ' s the new housing market was in Baltimore ' s annex where row houses were being built . These houses were sold to whites only . It would have been considered foolhardy to sell to blacks and whites in the same row . Some builders perpetuated this restriction by placing restrictive covenants in the deeds prohibiting resale to blacks . ' 85 The Maryland Court of Appeals upheld the enforcement of racial restrictions under the fourteenth amendment , because the dis - crimination was private rather than public . 8 6 Mortgage lenders joined in the conspiracy . Traditionally in Balti - more , most house purchases were financed by mutual savings and loan associations , which discriminated against blacks . Credit unions for ethnic and white church groups , and for work organizations ( e . g . , B & O ) , also excluded blacks from participating . 8 7 And when general banking institutions began to extend mortgage credit they " redlined " black and integrated neighborhoods as unstable and risky . Later , in the 1930 ' s when the federal government became active in housing fields , it denied Federal Housing Administration support in neighbor - hoods with " inharmonious racial groups . " ' ' 88 In Baltimore in 1934 the 3 , 800 middle - class black families who could afford to own a house were those most immediately affected by the conspiracy of containment . If they already owned a home it was likely to be in the upper Druid Hill Avenue district , which still was " the best that Negroes could get in the city proper . " ' 8 9 Yet the neigh - borhood was in some respects unsatisfactory : it was noisy as a result of street cars , lacked recreational facilities , was removed from shopping facilities , and had areas of improper sanitation . Moreover , it was un - dergoing change . The neighborhood had been encroached upon by brothels and saloons . Landlords were outbidding individuals for some of its large houses with a view toward creation of tenements . Black homeowners attempting to escape these problems had no place to go . 19 0 Those Negroes attempting to buy their first house were similarly 184 . Id . 185 . S . OLSON , supra note 8 , at 325 . 186 . Meade v . Dennistone , 173 Md . 295 , 301 , 196 A . 330 , 333 ( 1938 ) . 187 . S . OLSON , supra note 8 , at 325 . 188 . U . S . COMM ' N ON CIVIL RIGHTS , UNDERSTANDING FAIR HOUSING 4 - 5 ( Clearing - house Pub . No . 42 , 1973 ) . 189 . Reid , supra note 171 , at 33 . 190 . Id . at 33 - 34 . 19831 MARYLAND LAW REVIEW frustrated . The housing boom of the mid - 20 ' s had been for whites only . The economic depression had brought the housing industry to a standstill - during 1934 only 119 houses were built in Baltimore . 9 ' The only recent development for blacks had been Morgan Park , for the faculty of Morgan College next to its new campus . Conventional financing likewise was nonexistent . One nonconventional response was known as the Homemakers ' Building and Loan Association . It was a cooperative organized in the 1930 ' s by the Interracial Commission with power to buy , sell , lease , manage , and build . It invested $ 35 , 000 con - verting one house into modern apartments and selling other houses to stockholders before disappearing from the pages of history . ' 92 But by - in - large , the plan for segregation denied the black bourgeoisie a spa - cious house on a quiet street . Hence , once the plan for segregation was in effect , Baltimore ' s housing market had achieved a dynamic equilibrium of two markets - one white and the other black . " Respectable " real estate dealers and financing institutions were active only in the white market . ' 93 Balti - more was among the nation ' s leaders in white ownership . The black market ( except for the 300 houses built in Morgan Park ) was second - hand houses . Negro houses were in the older portion of the city in " blighted districts . " The city from time to time demolished black slums if they became a nuisance . It proposed construction of public housing for the poor , but never carried through with the proposals . 94 Baltimore ' s housing market was to retain most of these character - istics for the next 30 years . But one inexorable force for change re - mained : between 1930 and 1960 Baltimore ' s black population grew from 142 , 000 to 326 , 000 . " 9 The market described above made no al - lowance for increasing the number of black housing units . This gap was widened by actions of the city government . Between 1930 and 1960 programs of school building , slum clearance , urban renewal , and expressway construction displaced large numbers of households . 1 96 Be - tween 1951 and 1971 alone , 75 , 000 people were removed , and eighty to ninety percent of them were Negroes . During this same period the city had various public housing programs , but by 1976 only 15 , 000 public 191 . S . OLSON , supra note 8 , at 303 . 192 . Reid , supra note 171 , at 34 . 193 . See S . OLSON , supra note 8 , at 325 . 194 . Id . at 326 . 195 . BUREAU OF THE CENSUS , U . S . DEP ' T OF COMMERCE , ABSTRACT OF THE FIFTEENTH CENSUS OF THE UNITED STATES 104 ( 1933 ed . reprint 1976 ) ; BUREAU OF THE CENSUS , U . S . DEP ' T OF COMMERCE , CENSUS OF POPULATION : 1960 , PART 22 , MARYLAND 178 ( 1961 ) . 196 . S . OLSON , supra note 8 , at 377 . [ VOL . 42 RESIDENTIAL SEGREGATION ORDINANCES housing units were available . 1 97 Hence , the city exaggerated the shortage by demolishing many more houses than it created . " Blockbusting " was the answer . Economists have commented upon the difficulty of enforcing multi - party agreements in restraint of trade . The problem is simple : " The temptation of members to cheat is strong . . . because the returns from cheating are substantial . . . . . " 919 This certainly proved to be true in Baltimore ' s housing industry . The treaty between white homeowners , the real estate industry , financiers , and the Federal Housing Administration had left unmet the demand for black housing . A house could be sold at a premium to a black buyer by a seller willing to violate the treaty . Moreover , this premium could be multiplied by real estate speculators who capitalized on the panic in white neighborhoods that had begun to change in racial make - up . Brokers bought whole blocks at a distress price from nervous white sellers , and sold at a premium to housing - hungry black buyers . ' 99 Later , speculators broadened their market . They used their credit to borrow money from financial institutions . Turned - over houses were then sold on easy terms to low - income , high - risk black buyers pursuant to " buy - like - rent " contracts . The sales were often illusory ; foreclosure was the rule rather than the exception . The speculator would sell and resell the same house to a series of buyers . By this technique the block - busters took a profit from the under - class as well as the middle - class Negroes . Blockbusting transferred tens of thousands of houses from the white market to the black market . 2 00 Blockbusting poses an ethical enigma . Its practitioners were out - laws , violating the real estate industry ' s code of ethics and cheating on the cartel between white homeowners , real estate dealers , mortgage lenders , city government , and the FHA , which restrained the sale or rental of housing to blacks in white neighborhoods . Speculators em - ployed a psychology designed to scare white homeowners out of their accumulated equities . They sold to black purchasers for whatever the market would bear , sometimes exacting exorbitant profits . Conversely , its practitioners were providing housing opportunities otherwise un - available to Negroes . And the " ethical " precept which they violated was part of a racist conspiracy . Speculators provided financing and housing when mortgage lenders and " ethical " real estate brokers re - 197 . Id at 53 - 54 . 198 . R . POSNER , ECONOMIC ANALYSIS OF LAW 115 ( 1972 ) . 199 . Douglas Connah , Jr . , Run Baby , Run : Study of Blockbusting in Baltimore ( Nov . 22 , 1968 ) ( unpublished manucript ) . 200 . See S . OLSON , supra note 8 , at 378 - 79 ( discussing career of Morris Goldseker ) . 19831 MARYLAND LAW REVIEW fused to do so . The unsavory blockbuster or the respectable conspira - tors : Who is to blame ? Although apartheid , Baltimore style , was doomed to failure , the white body politic refused to accept defeat gracefully . It fought for the city ' s territory district - by - district , neighborhood - by - neighborhood , and block - by - block . In an effort to maintain de facto segregation in hous - ing , it used the whole bag of tricks : Negro removal through slum clear - ance , public works projects , and urban renewal ; restrictive covenants denying blacks access to " exclusive " white neighborhoods ; refusal of financing for black or integrated housing ; and professional sanctions against real estate brokers dealing with blacks in white neighborhoods . But unrelenting demographic forces were increasing the black popula - tion of Baltimore from fifteen to seventy percent . Over the long term the dwindling white majority lacked both the political and economic power to keep a restrictive cordon around the black community . Once again it was the United States Supreme Court that cut the knot . In 1948 the Court took the first step in Shelley v . Kraemer . 20 It ruled that the legal enforcement of private , racially restrictive cove - nants was unconstitutional under the equal protection clause of the fourteenth amendment . The Court conceded that the amendment was directed only against state action and not private conduct , but found that state judicial enforcement of private agreements brought them within the amendment ' s purview . Shelley was a setback for segregated housing , but for twenty years the conspirators fought on , using the other tools of de facto segregation - peer pressure , " redlining " of mortgages , and professional sanctions . Finally , in 1968 , the Supreme Court decided in Jones v . Mayer 2 " 2 that the 1866 Civil Rights law passed pursuant to the thirteenth amendment bars all housing discrimination , private as well as public . This deci - sion , taken along with the 1968 Federal Housing Law 2 " 3 - which pro - hibited discriminatory practices by real estate brokers , builders , and lenders - dismantled the dual housing market . In Baltimore and in the other urban areas that share much of this housing history , the white market and the black market merged into one housing market . Disappearance of the dual housing market does not mean that housing is desegregated , that racial discrimination has been eliminated , or that good housing is available for the poor . Residential housing in Baltimore remains by - in - large segregated . In part this segregation is a 201 . 334 U . S . 1 ( 1948 ) . 202 . 392 U . S . 409 ( 1968 ) . 203 . Civil Rights Act of 1968 , Title VIII , § § 801 - 819 , 42 U . S . C . § § 3601 - 3619 ( 1976 ) ( as amended ) . [ VOL . 42 RESIDENTIAL SEGREGATION ORDINANCES result of preference : Blacks and whites alike may prefer to live in their old neighborhoods that developed in the days of de facto segregation . Segregation also results from economics : The median black family in - come is lower than that of whites , creating an economic barrier to entry into more affluent areas . But the notion that blacks need only a larger income to gain an equal choice of housing is inaccurate . Old practices die hard ; muted voices of discrimination persist in the real estate and financing fields . Black buyers are steered to black neighborhoods , and mortgage money is more readily available to whites . Studies show that black families have less access to suburban housing than do white fam - ilies of equivalent income . 2° Moreover , the power of local governments to select the site for public projects may be used to perpetuate racial segregation . In the 1960 ' s , expressways in Baltimore sought out the routes of least resist - ance - black ghettos . When the roads were built , displaced residents lacked reasonable relocation opportunities ; when the roads were not built , whole neighborhoods , such as Rosemont , were left desolate and abandoned . In one instance the city took the houses in what had been a working - class black neighborhood , condemned them for a highway which was never built , and then created the fashionable Otterbein dis - trict for the affluent professionals returning to reside in the gentrified city . Class distinction , if not racial discrimination , influences the loca - tion of public projects . Finally , elimination of the dual housing market has done little to improve the quality of housing available to low - income blacks . When Baltimore ' s plan for segregation was first conceived , the building in - dustry was providing low - income housing . Commercial builders ca - tered to the dollar - a - day man . Tenements and flats were profitable speculative ventures . 20 5 Negroes were excluded from these buildings on racial grounds . Today the free market no longer produces low - and moderate - income housing . Increased costs of energy , financing , and construction price housing beyond the reach of the poor and near - poor . Public and federally subsidized housing partially fill the void . But Bal - timore ' s 15 , 000 public units , along with the various federally subsidized units , fall far short of meeting the demand . And it is impossible to locate a new subsidized low - income housing project without encounter - ing outraged community opposition . Thus most of Baltimore ' s poor ( both black and white ) continue to live under slum conditions . 204 . U . S . COMM ' N ON CIVIL RIGHTS , UNDERSTANDING FAIR HOUSING 15 ( Clearing - house No . 42 , 1973 ) . 205 . See supra note 41 and accompanying text . 19831 MARYLAND LAW REVIEW CONCLUSION Historian Samuel P . Hays has said : " Local history if purely fac - tual and descriptive , advances knowledge only in a rudimentary fash - ion ; but if local history can illuminate broad processes of social change concretely , then it adds a dimension unobtainable through an emphasis on top - level , nationwide personalities and events . ' 2°6 The preceding account of the Baltimore segregation ordinances and their aftermath is intended to achieve the latter goal . Baltimore ' s experience with resi - dential housing segregation is by no means unique ; with only minor variation in scenario and cast it was played out in other cities that came of age in the early twentieth century . If this article ' s objective is attained , the details of the Baltimore story will provide insight and lessons with broader implications . In - deed , several aspects of Baltimore ' s history of housing segregation chal - lenge conventional explanations of not only housing segregation itself , but also , on a broader level , democracy , reform , and social change . First , the facts and descriptions in this history call into question free - market economic analysis of the causes of racial segregation . Much of Baltimore ' s housing history follows the economist ' s script . Economic theory would have predicted the development of slums as a market response to the demand for inexpensive housing by a growing population of low - income city dwellers . Moreover , fear of crime and contagion predictably provided economic incentives for self - segrega - tion by middle - and upper - income residents who responded with a willingness to pay a premium to locate in - neighborhoods remote from slums . Finally , separation by income level naturally will tend to result in separation by race because blacks have lower average incomes than whites and spend less on housing . 2 °7 But some analyses go a step further and attempt to explain all resi - dential segregation by race as individually motivated . For example , economist Richard Muth argues that segregation is the natural result of whites having a greater preference for segregation than blacks have for integration . To make his model work , Muth must assume that middle - class blacks are less averse to living in proximity to slums than middle - class whites ; 20 8 otherwise one would expect to find middle - class black families sprinkled throughout neighborhoods remote from slums . The details of this study belie his assumption . We have documented the 206 . Hays , Forward to R . LUBOVE , supra note 41 , at ix - x . 207 . See R . MUTH , URBAN ECONOMIC PROBLEMS 86 - 110 ( 1975 ) . 208 . Id . at 87 , 94 - 100 . [ VOL . 42 RESIDENTIAL SEGREGATION ORDINANCES efforts of the black bourgeoisis ( e . g . , George W . F . McMechen , the Morgan College faculty , the Baltimore Colored Law and Order League ) , to remove themselves from the vicinity of slums . In Balti - more , the aversion to crime and contagion knew no color line . Muth also rejects the possibility that a conspiracy between home owners , real estate agents , mortgage lenders , and local government offi - cials limited the availability of housing to blacks . The conspiracy argu - ment cannot be taken " very seriously " he says , because each individual in the urban housing market would have a profit incentive not to join it : " [ b ] y not doing so he avoids his share of the costs of the conspiracy , but , having a negligible effect on the outcome , shares in its benefits . " 2 " 9 Notwithstanding Muth ' s rejection , our study shows that a dual housing market in fact was created . The white majority , first through the segre - gation ordinances and then through a publicly sponsored conspiracy , enforced racial segregation in the city . The shared incentives of the white majority ( isolation of crime , quarantining of disease , and mainte - nance of property values at black - white boundaries ) proved collectively powerful enough to support a loose treaty which stifled sales to blacks . This treaty was violated from time to time by outcast blockbusters will - ing to buy from white sellers and to sell to black buyers , but ironically these blockbusters became political partisans of the dual housing mar - ket because it afforded them an opportunity for profit - taking . Blockbusting vented the pressure and permitted the treaty to endure . In rejecting the possibility of a conspiracy , Muth errs by assuming that behavior in the aggregate is nothing more than a summation of individual behaviors . Political economist Thomas C . Schelling pro - vides a more sophisticated view in his book Micromotives and Macrobehavior . 2 10 Therein he opines that housing segregation is at once individually motivated , collectively enforced , and economically induced . 2 1 ' Baltimore ' s history of residential segregation supports Schelling ' s thesis . Second , the Baltimore segregation ordinances remind us of forgot - ten fears and false forecasts ; they caution us of the perils of social plan - ning . At the turn of the century the threat of contagion was a mortal concern . With the acceptance of the germ theory came the recognition 209 . Id . at 96 . Muth also thinks it problematic that racial segregation results in blacks paying markedly higher prices for housing of a given quality than do whites . But his ques - tions are based on the assumption of a single housing market . Actually , Baltimore had a dual housing market in which a growing black population was crowded into a more - or - less fixed number of houses . If Muth were to accept the findings of this history , his model would also predict higher housing prices for blacks . Id . at 100 - 02 . 210 . T . SCHELLING , MICROMOTIVES AND MACROBEHAVIOR 137 - 66 ( 1978 ) . 211 . Id . at 139 . 1983 ] MARYLAND LAW REVIEW that the poor were carriers of tuberculosis , typhus , and other diseases ( all of which poor blacks had in disportionate numbers ) . The simplest single explanation for segregation is that it represented an effort by the healthy white majority to quarantine the unhealthy black minority . When the segregation ordinances were conceived , racial Social Darwinism was in vogue . This false teaching made the quarantine seem an effective strategy . Blacks were viewed as a degenerating race with a high mortality rate , low birth rate , and no future . Left to them - selves , the Social Darwinists argued , Negroes would die out and with them the threat of epidemic disease . Advances in public health , how - ever , not racial quarantines , finally reduced the threat of contagion . The black population , rather than disappearing , came to outnumber whites in Baltimore City . The social engineers who propounded the segregation ordinances were on the wrong track moving in the wrong direction . A third lesson we have gained from Baltimore ' s history of housing segregation is that we must discount the righteous rhetoric of reform . Since the early twentieth century the Progressive Reform Movement has advocated government intervention into the residential housing market . But , if we observe closely the motives of the self - appointed promoters of the public interest , the reformers plainly were not inter - ested in improving the living conditions of those who suffered most from the industrializing , urbanizing society . Instead , the reformers supported housing segregation as a means for preventing contagion and civil disturbance as it affected the white community . Similarly , these reformers earnestly proposed and implemented slum clearance without providing substitute housing opportunities for those whose homes were destroyed . In their efforts to impose a quarantine on dis - ease and crime , and to protect the value of their property , reformers conveniently overlooked the devastating effect slum clearance and ra - cial segregation had on black housing opportunities . Instead , reform - ers salved their guilt by " blaming the victims " for the slum conditions in which they lived . Finally , this history of residential segregation in Baltimore docu - ments the racist propensity of democratic rule . In an opinion sus - taining the constitutionality of a law that required a majority vote at a local referendum as a prerequisite to the siting of a low - income hous - ing project , U . S . Supreme Court Justice Hugo Black said : " Provisions for referendums demonstrate devotion to democracy , not to bias , dis - crimination , or prejudice . " ' 2 12 Our history suggests that Black ' s dichot - 212 . James v . Valtierra , 402 U . S . 137 , 141 ( 1971 ) . [ VOL . 42 RESIDENTIAL SEGREGATION ORDINANCES omy is a false one . In Baltimore ' s housing market , democracy and discrimination were inclusive , not exclusive . Democratic institutions conceived , promoted , and implemented racial prejudice and bias . Jus - tice Black ' s idealized notion of democracy presupposes that " govern - ment of the people , by the people , and for the people " promotes the welfare of all the people . More often under democratic rule , a majority of the people form a coalition that takes political , economic , and so - cial advantage of a minority of the people . While Baltimore ' s democratic institutions were unrelenting in their anti - black bias , the United States Supreme Court thrice inter - vened to abrogate discrimination in the housing market . Buchanan v . Warley , 213 decided in 1917 , held de jure segregation of residential housing unconstitutional ; Shelley v . Kraemer 2 " 4 decided in 1948 , held judicial enforcement of private racial restrictions unconstitutional ; and , Jones v . Mayer , 2 ' decided in 1968 , found all public and private racial discrimination in housing unlawful on statutory grounds . In a grand sense the Court was living up to its role as a protector of minorities from majority oppression . Mr . Justice Jackson best described this need : " The very purpose of a Bill of Rights was to withdraw certain subjects from the vicissitudes of political controversy , to place them be - yond the reach of majorities and officials and to establish them as legal principles to be applied by the courts . ' 2 1 6 But in historic and legal con - text each of these decisions was a surprise . Buchanan v . Warley was soundly criticized in the law reviews of its day for the cavalier manner in which the opinion ignored precedents that had upheld de jure segre - gation in education and transportation . 17 Leading legal scholars have questioned whether in Shelley v . Kraemer " the state may have properly been charged with discrimination when it does no more than give effect to an agreement that the individual involved is , by hypothesis , entirely free to make . " 2 8 And in Jones v . Mayer the Court breathed a new meaning into a statutory provision that had been construed for 100 years as applicable only to governmental action . 2 " 9 Taken together , 213 . 245 U . S . 60 ( 1917 ) . 214 . 334 U . S . 1 ( 1948 ) . 215 . 392 U . S . 409 ( 1968 ) . 216 . Bd . of Educ . v . Barnette , 319 U . S . 624 , 639 ( 1943 ) . 217 . See supra text accompanying note 150 . 218 . Wechsler , Toward Neutral Principles of Constitutional Law , 73 HARV . L . REV . 1 , 29 ( 1959 ) . 219 . See A . BICKEL , THE LEAST DANGEROUS BRANCH 148 - 56 ( 1962 ) ( discussing the con - cept of desuetude as it relates to an analogous situation in Poe v . Ullman , 376 U . S . 497 ( 1961 ) : " The question is whether a statute that has never been enforced and that has not been obeyed for three quarters of a century may suddenly be resurrected and applied . " A . BICKEL at 148 ) . 19831 MARYLAND LAW REVIEW these three cases support the hypothesis that racial restrictions on land use are peculiarly vulnerable to judicial challenge . A realpolitik explanation suggests itself . Land use and politics make strange bedfellows . For example , in Construction Industry Associ - ation v . City of Petaluma , 22 ° a 1975 federal case , the NAACP found itself sleeping with the builders and the brokers in opposing land use controls that curtailed the growth rate of a California town . This me - nage d trois favored growth as a means not only of expanding housing opportunity , but also of turning a profit . The plaintiffs alleged that limitations on growth violated both " personal " and " property " rights under the fourteenth amendment . In Baltimore ' s history of housing segregation , the line - up of par - ties was not quite so anomalous . Most respectable bankers , builders , and brokers acquiesced in the creation of a dual real estate market . But others - property owners and brokers who found their holdings deval - ued by the segregation laws - yelled loud and hard . Significantly , in Buchanan v . Warley the court struck down the segregation ordinance because it deprived landowners of their property without due process of law , while in Shelley v . Kraemer the Court voided restrictive cove - nants because they deprived blacks of equal protection of the law . Hence , the ultimate rejection of housing segregation in Jones v . Mayer afforded the Court an opportunity to strike a blow for the sanctity of property and against racial discrimination , with a single stroke . 220 . 522 F . 2d 897 ( 9th Cir . 1975 ) , cert . denied , 424 U . S . 934 ( 1976 ) . [ VOL . 42 CI ~ ~ ~ o - o00