INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON ENGINEERING DESIGN ICED 05 MELBOURNE , AUGUST 15 - 18 , 2005 DESIGN SPACE BLENDING - A KEY FOR CREATIVE DESIGN Toshiharu Taura , Yukari Nagai and Shinji Tanaka Keywords : Similarity , Creativity , Conceptual design , Design Space Blending 1 Introduction In this paper , a method for conceptual synthesis in design is proposed . Conceptual synthesis is useful for creative design ; however , the possibilities for selecting two different concepts to synthesize may be unlimited . The problem of conceptual synthesis stems from the difficulty in selecting two different concepts that are appropriate for creative design . In this study , the authors attempt to determine the conditions for successful conceptual synthesis , focusing on the dissimilarity ( distance ) between the two selected concepts . A design experiment was performed in order to inspect the results of creativity , which depend on the dissimilarity between the two given concepts . From the results of the design experiment , we found that higher creativity could be obtained in the case based on two concepts of high dissimilarity compared with the case based on those of low dissimilarity . 1 . 1 Background " Where do concepts come from ? " is a perennial question in design [ 1 ] . It has been pointed out that conceptual synthesis is a key answer to this question , particularly for steering design toward creativity . This has been reported in both empirical example and scientific research result . Empirically , the invention of the art knife – the first snap - off blade cutter – is a good example . The inspiration for this incredible idea came from breaking off segments of chocolate bars and analyzing the sharp edges of broken glass [ 2 ] . Figure 1 . Example of invention from synthesizing concepts It can be interpreted that this invention was realized by synthesizing a concept ( function ) abstracted from existing things . Conceptual synthesis also has been studied in the field of cognitive science . Finke et al . [ 3 ] described conceptual synthesis as an efficient means of developing creative insights into new inventions , and carried out experiments on creative concepts by imagery synthesis in mind . Kokotovich and Purcell [ 4 ] investigated various issues related to mental synthesis and creativity in design and compared the features of creativity in 2D designers , 3D designers and non - designers . Yoshida et al . [ 5 ] are conducting a living thing generation experiment , which combines two or more parts prepared beforehand . They have reported that unexpectedness and creativity have a positive correlation . Thus , conceptual synthesis is closely associated with creativity in design . However , the following problems remain to be solved . • Compared with the situation in actual designs , such as the case of the cutter knife , the experiments of Finke et al . , which allowed only a few operations , such as expansion , reduction and rotation , were much more restricted than real design work . It is more realistic to ease restrictions by saying , " As long as it has inherited a certain feature , the original form may change , " from the viewpoint of creativity . Therefore , it is necessary to conduct an experiment that imitates real design work . • Although it is clear that a new creative concept can be generated by synthesizing two different base concepts , it is still unknown what type of base concept is valid for realizing high creativity . From the viewpoint of supporting creative design , it is necessary to clarify what type of relationship between the base concepts is effective in promoting highly creative designs . In this research , our goal is to elucidate the mechanism of conceptual synthesis . From the viewpoint of creativity , we are interested in the design space blending , because not only the concepts but also design spaces which are constructed by abstracting the concepts seem to be blended in the process of more real - world creative design work . Fauconnier and Turner [ 6 ] have focused on the construction process of meaning in ordinary discourse . They have analyzed how conceptual integration creates mental products and how to deploy systems of mapping and blending between mental spaces . From the viewpoint of mental space theory , they have shown that conceptual integration operates on two input mental spaces to yield a third space which is called the blend . That blended space inherits a partial structure from the input spaces and has an emergent structure of its own . We consider that in the case of designing , the blended design space has more schematic and abstract information than the input spaces of two concepts . Therefore , design space blending produces a specifically emergent structure to create a novel design concept . This research focuses on the following two processes : a process that abstracts a concept , and another process that show the dissimilarity between concepts . The reason for focusing on the former is that in design space blending , an abstract concept seems to be more closely associated with a high - creativity design rather than a concrete concept , such as form . The reason for focusing on the latter is that we can infer that the dissimilarity between the entities used as the basis of the design source is associated with the creativity of the design result . 1 . 2 Assumption The assumption in this study is that for blending the design spaces in the process of composing , the concept abstracted from existing entities by a designer affects the design results . Figure 2 shows the difference between the two design processes , one that was performed at the form generation level and the other at the conceptual generation level . In this case , the two base entities were a ‘chalk’ and a ‘clock’ . The idea for ‘chalk with a clock’ ( left ) is an outcome of the form generation level of the design process and the ‘color - changing pen’ ( right ) is an outcome of the conceptual generation level of the design process . The latter is an innovative idea for a new type of pen , the colors of which change with writing speed . It is inferred that the latter idea needs a higher abstract level of thinking in the design process and shows a higher creativity than the former . This chalk has a clock to show time . Figure 2 . Difference between design process Although a good result , to some extent , is also obtained in the case of shape creation by the form generation level as shown in Figure 2 , ‘color changing pen’ actually indicates more feasibility in the direction of functional creation by abstract thinking at the conceptual generation level , which leads to higher creativity in the design outcome . On the other hand , we propose in this research that there may be a relationship between the dissimilarity between base entities and the creativity of a design result . In the case of low dissimilarity between two base entities , although concept generation is easy , the creativity of the result is not high . On the other hand , when there is high dissimilarity between two entities , concept generation is difficult , but the result show high creativity . This is because the designer must construct more abstract design spaces in order to blend them . ‘chalk with a clock’ Ink color changes with writing speed . ‘color - changing pen’ 2 . Aims and hypotheses 2 . 1 Aims In this research , we aim to clarify the relationship between design space blending and creativity in design by focusing on the dissimilarity between the base concepts . 2 . 2 Design spaces and hypothesis Analysis progresses by paying attention to the conceptual distance between two entities for synthesis . According to the research of Yoshida et al . , the distance between concepts is described as unexpectedness . Generally , the distance between concepts is indicative of the degree of similarity between two entities , or their dissimilarity [ 7 ] [ 8 ] . In this research , the term ‘dissimilarity’ is used because it is the difference between the entities that is significant for conceptual synthesis . The conceptual dissimilarity between entities has an individual difference , and it is measured for every subject at the beginning of an experiment . In this research , it is inferred that there is a relationship between the dissimilarity among the base entities synthesized and the creativity in the design outcome , which will be described as follows . Table 1 . Relationship among distance between entities , difficulty of design and abstract level Dissimilarity between entities Difficulty of design Abstract level of design space Creativity of designed object Low Low Low Low High High High High In this research , the following hypotheses are proposed regarding the dissimilarity between entities , the degree of abstract level of a designer ' s thinking , and the creativity in the design outcome . • HYPOTHESIS 1 In design creation which has been carried out by synthesizing two entities , the abstract level of design spaces increases proportionally to the dissimilarity between the base entities . • HYPOTHESIS 2 The design result generated from base entities which are more dissimilar shows higher creativity . 3 . Methods 3 . 1 Outline of experiments One of the design experiments , which focused on the image creation of artificial objects by synthesizing existing knowledge , was carried out by Finke et al [ 9 ] . In this experimental study , which aimed to draw some general principles of creative cognition , the subjects were given stimulus sets – formed by fifteen basic object parts , to create an invention . The subjects were asked to combine three basic object parts in their mind to invent a new object that might be useful , name it , and represent it in an illustration . Under the conditions of Finke’s research , the subjects were allowed to vary the size , position , or orientation of any part but they were not allowed to bend or deform most of the basic object parts . As mentioned above , our research differs from the experiment of Finke et al . in the following points . • The base object is not a simple form but an entity • Regarding generation , the new entity is required to inherit at least a certain feature of the base entities but its form can be changed 3 . 2 Evaluation of creativity The design results are evaluated based on Finke et al . ’s method , which evaluates them from the viewpoint of ‘practicality’ and ‘creativity’ , on a five - point scale . 4 . Experiment procedure 4 . 1 Investigation of subjects’ concept space At the start of the experiments , the subjects were required to arrange nine objects : a plastic bottle , charcoal , a fish , a bird , a star , a flower , a thermometer , scissors and wind according to their dissimilarity in function and form , from a glass , which was the standard entity in this experiment . The nine objects were divided into three groups by their dissimilarity with respect to function and form : low - dissimilarity , intermediate - dissimilarity , and high - dissimilarity groups . Given this result , the base entities that were used in the design session were determined as follows . The three base entities for each subject were selected from the three groups respectively so that each entity belonged to the group of the same dissimilarity level from the viewpoint of both function and form . 4 . 2 Design session Before the design session , a preliminary experiment ( 10 min ) was carried out . The task involved designing a new entity by synthesizing two different entities , namely , a car and a dolphin . After the preliminary experiment , three design tasks ( 10 min each ) were assigned to each subject in turn . To explain how to synthesize the entities correctly , the subjects were told they could abstract the entities as long as the final result inherited a certain feature from each . Figure 3 shows examples of the sketches produced during the design session by two subjects . During these design sessions , the subjects were required to verbalize their thoughts . These three tasks were designed as follows . • 1st design session ( 10 min ) Task : design a new object by synthesizing the glass and an entity selected from the low - dissimilarity group • 2nd design session ( 10 min ) Task : design a new object by synthesizing the glass and an entity selected from the intermediate - dissimilarity group • 3rd design session ( 10 min ) Task : design a new object by synthesizing the glass and an entity selected from the high - dissimilarity group Intermediate dissimilarity Low dissimilarity High dissimilarity S1 : a glass and a plastic bottle ‘glass type mobile phone’ S2 : a glass and charcoal ‘wind - bell makes negative ion’ S3 : a glass and a bird ‘flying camera’ F1 : a glass and a plastic bottle ‘joint - ball bottle’ F3 : a glass and a bird ‘shiny bird’ F2 : a glass and a fish ‘soft glass’ Figure 3 . Sketches from the design session 4 . 3 Evaluation of design results The design results were evaluated by 10 people along two dimensions ; ‘practicality’ and ‘creativity’ , using a five - point scale for each . 5 . Results of experiments Table 2 shows the result for each subject’s concept space . Given this result , the experimenter selected ‘a plastic bottle’ for its low dissimilarity with a glass and ‘a bird’ for high dissimilarity , which are the same choices made by the two subjects . The entity of intermediate dissimilarity was different between the two subjects , and the experimenter selected ‘charcoal’ and ‘fish’ for each . Therefore , the idea from the synthesis of a glass and a plastic bottle was the case of low dissimilarity and that of a glass and a bird was the case of high dissimilarity . Figure 4 shows six sketches drawn by the two subjects . Each sketch represented a new idea for the designed object . For example , S3 is called ‘the flying glass camera’ and it can fly up to the sky to send us pictures from above . Table 2 . Dissimilarity from a glass on two viewpoints Dissimilarity from ‘Glass’ Subject viewpoint Low Intermediate High Plastic bottle Star Fish Flower Wind Bird Form Thermometer Charcoal Scissors Plastic bottle Star Fish Flower Charcoal Scissors S Function Wind Thermometer Bird Flower Fish Charcoal Plastic bottle Thermometer Scissors Form Star Wind Bird Plastic bottle Fish Bird Flower Scissors Scissors F Function Thermometer Star Charcoal S 1 S 2 S 3 F 1 F 2 F 3 d i ss i m il a r it y l o w m i dd l e h i gh l o w m i dd l e h i gh n a m e M ob il e phon e W i nd b e ll F l y i ng ca m e r a J o i n t bo ttl e S o f t g l a ss S h i ny b i r d e n tit y P l a s ti c bo ttl e C h a r c o a l B i r d P l a s ti c bo ttl e f i s h b i r d it e m s p r ac ti ca lit y c r ea ti v it y p r ac ti ca lit y c r ea ti v it y p r ac ti ca lit y c r ea ti v it y p r ac ti ca lit y c r ea ti v it y p r ac ti ca lit y c r ea ti v it y p r ac ti ca lit y c r ea ti v it y r a t e 3 . 3 3 . 5 3 . 2 1 . 8 3 . 2 4 2 . 7 3 . 5 3 . 5 3 . 5 1 . 7 4 . 3 S 1 S 2 S 3 F 1 F 2 F 3 d i ss i m il a r it y l o w m i dd l e h i gh l o w m i dd l e h i gh r a t e 3 . 3 3 . 5 3 . 2 1 . 8 3 . 2 4 2 . 7 3 . 5 3 . 5 3 . 5 1 . 7 4 . 3 it e m s p r ac ti ca lit y c r ea ti v it y p r ac ti ca lit y c r ea ti v it y p r ac ti ca lit y c r ea ti v it y p r ac ti ca lit y c r ea ti v it y p r ac ti ca lit y c r ea ti v it y p r ac ti ca lit y c r ea ti v it y n a m e M ob il e phon e W i nd b e ll F l y i ng ca m e r a J o i n t bo ttl e S o f t g l a ss S h i ny b i r d e n tit y P l a s ti c bo ttl e C h a r c o a l B i r d P l a s ti c bo ttl e f i s h b i r d Table 3 shows the average rating for each sketch . The highest rate of ‘practicality’ is shown in F2 ( 3 . 5 ) , which is synthesis of a glass and a fish . The highest rate of ‘creativity’ is shown in F3 ( 4 . 3 ) , which is the result of a synthesis between a glass and a bird . The lowest rate of ‘practicality’ is also shown in F3 ( 1 . 7 ) . The lowest rate of ‘creativity’ is shown in S3 ( 1 . 8 ) , the synthesis of a glass and charcoal . The highest creativity was realized by both subjects during the third design session . The results revealed that the highest creativity is obtained in the case of conceptual synthesis from two base entities of high dissimilarity . 6 . Conclusion In this study , the highest creativity was obtained in the case of synthesizing two base entities of high dissimilarity . This result shows that probably we can determine the conditions for successful conceptual synthesis . That is , to obtain a highly creative synthesis more dissimilar entities should be selected . It also shows the blend of design spaces which , structured by the integration of two highly dissimilar input design spaces , have an emergence structure with the features of a highly abstract notion and highly creative situations . This investigation develops the study on relationships between the design knowledge to select the original input concepts and the dissimilarity of two input concepts , which yields a design space blending that , is rich in creativity . However , to determine the validity of the hypothesis proposed in this study , we must analyze our data more closely and perform further studies . Currently , we are analyzing the relationships between the high abstract conceptual level in the creative design process and design space blending . References [ 1 ] Gero , JS . , Concept Formation in Design , International Conference on Strategic Knowledge and Concept Formation held in Loughborough , UK , 1997 [ 2 ] Manufacturers and Exporters of OLFA brand hand cutting tools . http : / / www . olfa . co . jp / english / story / index . html [ 3 ] Finke , R . , Ward , T . and Smith , S . , Creative Cognition : Theory , Research , and Applications , Cambridge , the MIT Press , 1992 [ 4 ] Kokotovich , V . and Purcell , T . , Mental synthesis and creativity in design : an experimental examination , Design Studies , Vol . 21 Number 5 , pp . 437 - 450 , 2000 [ 5 ] Yoshida , Y . , Hattori , M . and Oda , M . Evaluation of Creativity and the Area of Search Space . Proceedings of 2003 international symposium on cognitive approaches to creative process , SIGLAL , 2003 [ 6 ] Fauconnier , G . and Turner , M . , The Way We Think : Conceptual Blending and the Mind’s Hidden Complexities , Basic Book , 2002 [ 7 ] Hahn , U . Similarity , Encyclopedia of Cognitive Science , Vol . 4 . pp . 1 - 4 , 2003 [ 8 ] Kusumi , T . , Similarity and Contiguity : Fundamental characteristics of human cognitive processes , Special Issues of Japanese Society for Artificial Intelligence , Vol . 17 , No . 1 pp . 2 - 7 , 2002 [ 9 ] Finke , R . A . , Cognitive imagery : Discoveries and inventions in visualization , Hillsdale , NJ , Erlbaum , 1990 Toshiharu Taura Kobe University Graduate School of Science and Technology 1 - 1 Rokkodai , Nada , Kobe Japan Phone : 81 . 78 . 803 . 6503 Fax : 81 . 78 . 803 . 6503 E - mail : taura @ mech . kobe - u . ac . jp Yukari Nagai Japan Advanced Institute of Science and Technology School of Knowledge Science 1 - 1 Asahidai , Nomi , Ishikawa Japan Phone : 81 . 761 . 51 . 1706 Fax : 81 . 761 . 51 . 1149 E - mail : ynagai @ jaist . ac . jp Shinji Tanaka Kobe University Graduate School of Science and Technology 1 - 1 Rokkodai , Nada , Kobe Japan Phone : 81 . 78 . 803 . 6503 Fax : 81 . 78 . 803 . 6503 E - mail : s - tanaka @ mi - 5 . scitec . kobe - u . ac . jp