Creativity : A key link to entrepreneurial behavior Stephen Ko a , ⁎ , John E . Butler b a Department of Management and Marketing , The Hong Kong Polytechnic University , Hung Hom , Hong Kong SAR , China b Shidler College of Business , University of Hawaii at Manoa , Honolulu , HI 96822 , USA Abstract While entrepreneurial creativity is a desired behavior in most firms , it is difficult to understand both how this complex phenomenon occurs and how to increase its rate of occurrence . Understanding and increasing managerial creativity is important not only in developed economies , but also in developing economies , where the research discussed herein was conducted . This article argues that a solid knowledge base , a well - developed social network , and a strong focus on identifying opportunities are all necessary inputs toward entrepreneurial behavior . High - technology entrepreneurs that we interviewed in Hong Kong , however , indicated that creativity also plays a critical and important role in the entrepreneurial process . Attesting to this , they credited the competence with their being able to make the associations and bisociations needed to develop new products , which led to their entrepreneurial success . © 2007 Kelley School of Business , Indiana University . All rights reserved . KEYWORDS Creativity ; Entrepreneurial behavior ; Alertness to opportunities ; Bisociative thinking 1 . Why is creativity important ? Creativity is what separates humans from other species , a fact which probably accounts for a great deal of our interest in the subject at a general level . Additionally , Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi ( 1996 ) , former chair of the psychology department at the Univer - sity of Chicago , points out that “ when we are involved in [ a creative activity ] , we feel that we are living more fully than during the rest of life ” ( p . 2 ) . More than simply enjoying feeling good when putting the principle into practice , however , busi - ness managers have a much more specific interest in creativity because they see it as a link to innovation , which in turn leads to new businesses , better ⁎ Corresponding author . E - mail addresses : stephen . ko @ polyu . edu . hk ( S . Ko ) , jebutler @ hawaii . edu ( J . E . Butler ) . www . elsevier . com / locate / bushor products , and a stronger competitive position for existing businesses . Many firms have been lauded in the business press for designing company policies to foster employee creativity . One such firm , 3M , has employed this tactic and has enjoyed a steady flow of new products as a result . In addition to being associated with new product development , creativity is also seen as important to entrepreneurial behavior because it is linked with identification of opportunities that lead to new firms ( and , in some cases , even new industries ) . US job growth in recent years has been tied to entrepre - neurial activity ( Baumol , 2002 ) . Moreover , many other countries are beginning to encourage innova - tion and entrepreneurial behavior , rather than just be content to serve as component manufacturers or assemblers for firms in industrialized countries , as has historically been the case to date . 0007 - 6813 / $ - see front matter © 2007 Kelley School of Business , Indiana University . All rights reserved . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . bushor . 2007 . 03 . 002 Business Horizons ( 2007 ) 50 , 365 – 372 While many scholars ( e . g . , Ward , 2004 ) acknowl - edge that creativity is an essential aspect of entrepreneurship and most managers encourage creativity , very little is known about how the pro - cess works , especially with respect to recognizing entrepreneurial opportunities . As firms in less developed and newly developing economies at - tempt to move from product imitation toward product development and innovation , creativity is likely to become an increasingly important mainte - nance key to those who already hold a competitive advantage . Such developmental momentum is being displayed by China and Hong Kong , both of which are investing increasingly in invention and product development , and from where we draw many of our conclusions about the role of creativity . Tony Yu ( 2004 ) characterized Hong Kong ' s managers as “ guerilla entrepreneurs ” because they “ are largely involved in ordinary discoveries , attempting to fill the gaps brought about by the extraordinary discoveries from industrialized economies ” ( p . 171 ) . Our research in the region indicates that this is changing , in part because both managers and entrepreneurs are being more creative regarding the products they develop and the businesses they start . As entrepreneurs in developing economies transition from being engaged exclusively in “ ordinary discov - eries ” to higher involvement in “ extraordinary discoveries , ” firms in countries with developed economies will have to become more creative if they want to maintain their competitive edge . There are also side benefits associated with countries developing their high - technology sectors because these types of firms have spillover effects which often increase the productivity of other companies that purchase their products , technolo - gies , or services . Because governments see high - technology firms as a buffer to economic down - turns , as well as critical to future economic growth , they have uniformly been very supportive of this sector . High - technology firms are faced with the difficult task of continuously identifying entrepre - neurial opportunities , and must do so to remain competitive ( Zaheer & Zaheer , 1997 ) . To complicate matters , they must perform this feat in a highly uncertain environment , in which they are never likely to have all the information they desire ( West & Meyer , 1997 ) . Sternberg ( 2004 ) suggests the amount of relevant knowledge individuals have at their disposal is one of the most important links to creativity . Interest - ingly , our research revealed that the way in which managers link apparently unrelated bits of informa - tion is also extremely important to creativity . Specifically , we found that Chinese managers obtained information from individuals in their social networks , built on knowledge gained through past work experiences , read published information sources , and were creative to the degree that they could link disconnected pieces of information from these different sources in ways that led to new products or businesses ( Ko & Butler , 2006 ) . If , indeed , part of the creative process involves linking formally unassociated bits of information into new combinations , this knowledge can serve as a potentially useful avenue for training entrepreneurs and students to be more creative in ways that make entrepreneurial behavior more likely . 2 . How entrepreneurial creativity works Finding that owners of high - technology firms often described their new ideas as coming from discon - nected pieces of information , we were eager to investigate whether the creativity literature con - tained references regarding this process . Upon doing so , we discovered that Arthur Koestler ( 1964 ) , a controversial 20th century writer , journalist , and social commentator , presented a theory that ac - curately described what we were seeing in our research . For his part , Koestler used the term biso - ciation to characterize this creative capability . Interested in proving that individuals ' behaviors were not driven in the same way as the learned responses of animals ( such as the Russian scientist Pavlov made popular by training his dog to salivate at the sound of a bell ) , Koestler viewed explaining creativity as a means of making the counter argu - ment . He believed bisociation occurred as the result of people taking two unrelated frames of reference and connecting them in a new way . Koestler made clear a “ distinction between the routine skills of thinking on a single plane , as it were , and the creative act , which … always operates on more than one plane ” ( Koestler , 1964 , pp . 35 – 36 ) . An example of this from his own personal life was uncovered by David Cesarani ( 1998 ) , Koestler ' s most objective biographer . Suffering from a widespread soap shortage in Hungary during World War I , Koestler ' s father discovered a way to manufacture soap from local clay , which happened to have a mild radioac - tive content . Scientific views of radioactivity were obviously very different in those days , as Koestler ' s father advertised his soap as offering related “ positive ” side benefits of radioactivity ; in turn , this actually acted to spur sales . Koestler expended considerable effort on the speaker circuit and in his books trying to popularize his view of how creativity occurs . Nonetheless , he made little headway with the scientific community . Although interested in creativity in general , 366 S . Ko , J . E . Butler