Digital Documents in Organizational Communities of Practice : A First Look Lisa D . Murphy Ourso College of Business Administration , Louisiana State University , Baton Rouge , LA 70803 ldmurph @ lsu . edu Abstract Digital documents are a frequent part of everyday work in business and government of which we know little . Using Wegner’s community of practice ( COP ) [ 26 ] lens , two cases of ad hoc digital document interactions in organiza - tions are presented and analyzed . Digital documents are found to play roles as objects of practice , reifications of practice , and boundary objects ; indeed , one document may take on all of these roles . Documents – digital or oth - erwise – are important for accomplishing , coordinating , and learning in today’s complex , knowledge - based work . COPs prove useful for studying these technologically - dependent phenomena , while their dependence on an opaque infrastructure becomes most visible when the that infrastructure fails . Providing document - supportive in - formation technology is complicated by the need to re - spond to a technology of practice experiencing an inde - pendent trajectory of development . Further , linkages be - tween COPs such as boundary practices highlight the complex organizational work ( digital ) documents are called on to perform . 1 . Introduction Digital documents are an important and common as - pect of organizational work [ 13 ] [ 15 ] [ 17 ] [ 21 ] [ 22 ] [ 30 ] . As both means and ends to organizational goals , digital document work is central to conventional document - oriented occupations such as technical writers and secre - taries , and part of the daily activities of the jobs of man - agers , marketers , engineers , administrators , accountants , auditors , technicians , and others . And , their digital form is not just a temporary condition or a holding place until the documents can be printed ; today ' s documents are routinely created , reused , and shared without ever assuming a non - digital form [ 15 ] [ 17 ] . A digital document is defined as electronically re - corded information flexibly structured for human con - sumption [ 13 ] [ 16 ] . While many of us prefer to do certain kinds of activities with digital documents rendered onto paper , we nonetheless benefit from the affordances of digital representations such as ease of reproduction and modification and reduced physical storage . These capa - bilities vary by the specific characteristics of the digital form , e . g . , paper documents that are scanned have less af - fordances for modification than ones created natively in digital form using a word processor . Natively - digital documents also differ in their capabilities for multiple rep - resentations , e . g . , we more frequently see charts in spread - sheets than in email messages . And , as for a paper docu - ment , digital document may be composed of multiple content elements ( files ) from multiple sources ( applica - tions ) . Digital documents , like non - digital ones , vary in their persistence ; the transitory nature of most post - it - notes and many emails render them closer to conversation than to documents . Not just recordings , documents must be in - tended for human consumption even if they are dependent upon a machine for that consumption ; thus we can distin - guish a computer program’s source code file as a digital document from its executable form [ 16 ] . Both digital and non - digital documents are characterized by genres— persistent and socially recognized combinations of form and content [ 17 ] [ 30 ] . Yet , each instance of a genre may vary significantly not only in content , but in ordering and other structural elements . Indeed , it is this variability , par - ticularly in the nature and amount of structure , that pro - vides much of the value of documents over databases with their invariant structure . As yet , our understanding of digital documents per se in organizational contexts is weak . The traditional Infor - mation Systems ( IS ) approaches have focused on systema - tizing documents into work flow applications and Elec - tronic Document Management Systems ( EDMS ) [ 3 ] [ 22 ] ; however , much document work is not suitable for such application - or technology - centric approaches . In organ - izational communications literature , documents often have been marginalized compared to the faster , more respon - sive modes such as face - to - face or email , and thus ren - dered less worthy of our attention , ( e . g . , [ 31 ] ) . The digital library has become a focus of digital document research ( e . g . , [ 1 ] ) ; but the work of organizations is not the work of a library , as Paepcke found [ 19 ] . Otherwise , much of cur - rent literature reflects a technology - centric focus in which the tool itself takes center stage such as Lotus Notes ( e . g . , [ 11 ] reviews seventeen Notes studies ) and HTML - based Intranets and the World Wide Web ( Web ) [ 8 ] [ 10 ] . Even Knowledge Management has tended to consider docu - ments as containers in need of custodians and repositories ( e . g . , [ 6 ] ) , rather than as dynamic and active agents of or - ganizational work . Thus , much of our prior research 0 - 7695 - 0981 - 9 / 01 $ 10 . 00 ( c ) 2001 IEEE 1 seems preoccupied with the tools rather than with the document , its uses , or its contexts . There is a tendency to dichotomize digital documents . At one extreme , documents are seen as passive , informal , isolated objects principally of individual concern ( e . g . , a word processing file ) ; their ad hoc nature , lack of struc - ture , and the expectation that they will end their digital life at the printer perhaps explains the limited attention from IS practitioners and IS researchers . At another extreme , digital documents are portrayed as complex , cooperative , collective , multimedia , authorings waiting to bloom with the right application of advanced tools and systemization efforts ( e . g . , [ 3 ] [ 7 ] [ 10 ] [ 14 ] ) . Little is heard from the mid - dle of what is really a continuum . This paper takes a document - centric focus to address this gap by recounting and analyzing cases of two digital documents in their richly textured organizational work contexts . The documents — somewhere in that middle ground — are examined in situ for what they can teach us about their use in practice and the effect of practice on their use . My goal is to surface assumptions and expand the roles that we understand digital documents to take in organizational environments not associated with Notes or Web - based technologies . I do this by taking a communi - ties of practice lens [ 26 ] in which the role of information technology ( IT ) is addressed but not foregrounded . 2 . Social Lives and Negotiated Meanings Brown and Duguid did much to energize the topic of digital documents by pointing out that documents are more than containers or conduits for content , they are so - cial objects , " a powerful resource for constructing and ne - gotiating social space " [ 5 ] . In particular , these authors identify the importance of documents in creating and sup - porting communities ; Web - based ' zines ' are offered as an example of how digital documents have connected small numbers of remotely located people with very specific shared interests into lively communities of shared under - standing . We are moved to ask if digital documents play a similar role in supporting and developing communities in organizations . And if so , what types of communities , and what roles do documents play ? In business and government agencies , people are not free to create , access , or evolve any sort of document they please . Traditionally , documents are a means of asserting control , creating identity , and enforcing hierarchy [ 29 ] . Both tools for work and products of work , documents can simultaneously enable activity and thought , and constrain them . Many of the documents we see in organizations are formally - defined interfaces with the external world : con - tracts , requests for proposal , job advertisements , product brochures , users manuals , business letters , government reports , to name several . Internally in organizations , for - malized documents often are used to systematize practices — assigning both authority and responsibility , and assert - ing control on both processes of work and their outcomes [ 29 ] . Documents such as these ( e . g . , standard operating procedures , policies , product specifications ) generally have a long life expectancy . Informal internal documents are both more varied and more restricted as they help co - ordinate means and negotiate ends within a finite world of specialized vocabulary and bounded focus ( much like the ' zines ' according to [ 5 ] ) ; the life expectancies of informal documents may vary from many years to the end of the meeting . Documents of internal organizational control such as time cards , procedures , work orders , expense reports , req - uisitions , job descriptions , tend to be more formalized and would seem to offer little in the way of community devel - opment or maintenance ; filling out a time card distin - guishes one as a member of the organization , and perhaps one ' s rank in the hierarchy , but generally not one ' s mem - bership in a community . Metaphors such as document - as - container [ 18 ] or document - as - conduit [ 5 ] are a good fit here , as we often say the information is " on the form " or " in the procedure " ; however , deployed this way , docu - ments are less likely to support the negotiation meaning central to developing communities . Other digital documents in organizations have a richer , more social life as they take on multiple roles within and across work groups , time , and space . Paepcke [ 19 ] found that workers combined information from sources with both high and low structure , actively seeking an under - standing of the document ' s context , and repackaging it for new purposes and new audiences . Genres also play a role in document use in organiza - tions . Those studying organizational genres have noted that in use genres drift ; some groups start with familiar forms and structures and evolve them over time ( e . g . , [ 30 ] ) while others begin with " softer " genres and add more structure ( " harder " ) as they gain experience [ 21 ] . For many of today ' s workers , " the genres through which information is shaped and shared for particular purposes ( reports , spreadsheets , meetings , or teleconferences ) are no longer merely an aspect of organizational work ; rather they are the organizational work " ( [ 17 ] , p . 72 ) . Thus we see that documents – digital and otherwise - - are important modes of organizational work , playing both functional and social roles . 3 . Documents in Communities of Practice An important way to accomplish work and transmit knowledge in organizations is via communities of practice ( COPs ) [ 4 ] [ 27 ] . COPs are defined as people , not neces - sarily in a formal group , who mutually engage in a joint enterprise with a shared repertoire [ 26 ] . Many COPs can be identified in businesses , government agencies , and in - stitutions [ 5 ] [ 20 ] [ 26 ] [ 27 ] . COPs serve to align interests and competency around the ongoing execution of complex tasks . This is true even when workers belong to different formal groups , when membership is heterogeneous , and when there is dis - agreement on aspects of practice . And , because people come and go in communities , all members will not share the same repertoire or knowledge . Key to the concept and performance of COPs is the idea of situated learning , that is , how people learn to be members of the community through limited and peripheral participation in daily work [ 4 ] [ 12 ] [ 26 ] [ 27 ] . COP membership ( and identity ) is asso - ciated with movement from peripheral ( edge ) locations to more central locations in the community by legitimatiza - tion of their role as observers and participants located in doing , that is , situated in practice . COPs are particularly effective at transmitting hard - to - express tacit knowledge which describes and defines the routine and expected , ( i . e . , canonical ) aspects of practice [ 4 ] [ . As such , more explicit knowledge ( with which docu - ments are usually identified ) may be seen as less central to knowledge transmission . However , we see documents in COPs , and in fact may use them to identify the communi - ties as in the Web - based ' zines ' . But is the role of documents that of a carrier of information [ 5 ] [ 28 ] , a mechanism of control [ 29 ] , a way to negotiate meanings [ 5 ] , or something else entirely ? And what , if any , effect does IT have on these roles ? Wegner [ 26 ] [ 27 ] sees documents as having three key roles in COPs : as objects of practice , as reifications of the practice , and as mechanisms to bridge between COPs , other constituencies , and constellations ( many interacting COPs , which may characterize many organizations ) . COPs need instruments to carry out practice , to capture the meaning and identity of practice , and to interact with outside entities ; digital documents are likely candidates . 3 . 1 Documents as Objects of Practice Documents bring information necessary for practice into the COP and structure the flow of the work and in - formation , as the medical claim forms do for the claims processors at Alinsu in Wegner ' s ethnography [ 26 ] . Yet , their variability in structure allows documents to do more than carry or deliver content ; they can support rich , tex - tured , and ambiguous conceptions of the world and its phenomena . With their greater interpretive flexibility , documents help members negotiate sustainable adapta - tions of messy reality to the artificially clean and ordered structure of codes , classifications , databases , work flows , and forms . To this extent , documents may both structure practice as objects that demand attention of a certain na - ture , and de - structure practice when they don ' t match the canonical reality assumed in the work [ 5 ] [ 26 ] . 3 . 2 Documents as Reifications of Practice As reifications , documents serve to anchor practice and to make the work of practice visible ; in so doing , docu - ments also clarify boundaries and reinforce the identity of COP members [ 5 ] [ 12 ] [ 26 ] [ 27 ] . Documents created by a COP are significant for the learning because by reifying practice , they communicate to new participants what is important ( e . g . , what is in the document ) and what is not ( e . g . , what is left out ) . As reifications , documents present the practice to the COP and to the outside world . In this way , they illuminate the negotiation of externality reality into practice – into what is normal , what is quality , what is attended to , and what is not . Documents created outside the community that assert authority over practice ( e . g . , policies and procedures ) are not necessarily reifications of practice . Julian Orr , in his ethnography of Xerox repair technicians , illustrates what may be a common gap between documents that assert or - thodoxy of practice and the experiences of actual practice [ 18 ] . In the field , technicians encountered ambiguous conditions and outright failures in the machines that were not covered or explained in their corporate - proscribed training or manuals . While technicians relied on narra - tives to span this gap , to the extent that a community re - cords its own narratives , interpretations , and work - arounds , these new documents would become reifications of practice . Brown and Duguid [ 5 ] argue that while the meaning of documents is internal to a community , we should not as - sume that the meaning is held by everyone , but that by " providing a shared context for constructing meaning , documents are the beginning rather than the end of the process of negotiation . " That the documents are digital increases the speed at which they can be shared , revised , and retrieved , but at the price of losing some of the con - text - linking mechanisms such as margin notes , routing slips , verbal comments , and turned - down pages which en - able documents to serve in this meaning - transmitting - and - negotiating role . Hopefully , richer media with new capa - bilities for navigation , linking , or annotating can compen - sate for these lost context cues [ 5 ] . Documents that reify practice may also determine what is presented about the practice to the outside world , how - ever incompletely . For the Alinsu medical claims proces - sors case , Wegner [ 26 ] notes that the Daily Completed Claims Report is a very incomplete description of the work he observed . Nonetheless , the report reifies the practice of claims processing to the processors ( and to others ) as being ' about ' completing claims . 3 . 4 Documents as Boundary Objects An important role for documents is as boundary ob - jects—inanimate brokers and translators between con - stituencies and between COPs [ 5 ] [ 23 ] [ 24 ] [ 26 ] . Boundary objects as conceived by Star and her colleagues are " ob - jects which are both plastic enough to adapt to local needs and the constraints of the several parties employing them , yet robust enough to maintain a common identity across sites " ( [ 24 ] , p . 393 ) . The Alinsu Daily Completed Claims report [ 26 ] is a boundary object when it passes to management and ac - counting . These other constituencies interpret the content a certain way , and in so doing adapt it to different needs ( e . g . , summarizing and analyzing the collective perform - ance of groups of claims processors ) . Documents traveling between COPs and constituent groups are not only information conduits but means to coordinate practice . When documents link to other COPs in ways that increase the alignment of interacting groups , documents ' stand in ' for people , IT applications , and other artifacts that translate and broker knowledge and practice [ 20 ] [ 23 ] [ 24 ] . The claim forms coming into Alinsu are boundary objects ; what is requested and permitted on the form structures the acts of the claimants to align with the work of the claims processors , even while the claims mean something different to each party [ 26 ] . Knowing that the document will be crossing bounda - ries , document creators may be aware of the interpretive strategies [ 5 ] and divergent , even antagonistic perspec - tives of the ' other ' document users as described by Bern - hardt and McCulley for New Drug Application ( NDA ) dossiers in the pharmaceutical industry [ 2 ] . In other cases , the documents be used by a group that did not exist when the document was created ; Paepcke [ 19 ] tells of a newly formed computer printer design team seeking con - text information to interpret an engineering design note - book from a similar long - completed project . Boundary objects are " weakly structured in common use , and become strongly structured in individual site use " ( [ 24 ] , p . 393 ) . As specific instances ( i . e . , individual site uses ) of a NDA dossier for a specific drug and an engi - neering notebook for a specific printer design , each document becomes more defined as its creators choose what to leave in , what to take out , where to articulate , and where to equivocate . By this conception , a genre is con - verted into an object of practice , and then into an tool for translation and brokering . Brown and Duguid [ 5 ] note another way in which documents can relate to boundaries . Rather than cross boundaries , documents can " patrol and control "  rein - forcing the community ' s edge and identity by features such as odd formats and conventions , jargon and unex - plained abbreviations , and other ways that " documents keep people out as much as bringing them in " [ 5 ] . In - creasing mastery of the secret codes of certain documents are a sign of community membership [ 12 ] while the power to change the norm in regard to document content , format , and other elements , is a sign of the centrality of one ' s membership [ 26 ] . 4 . Technology and Document Work The phrase ' document technologies ' invokes for many the sophisticated document - based applications developed using traditional IS approaches such as work flow man - agement systems , EDMS , and document repository sys - tems [ 3 ] [ 14 ] [ 22 ] . For others , document technologies are familiar to us as the personal productivity tools of our desktops : word processing , spreadsheets , and electronic presentations , etc . Fewer of us are likely to think of col - laborative authoring or writing tools such as CoAuthor and GroupWriter . But for many , the term invokes two specific technologies : Lotus Notes and the Web ( HTML ) . Practically speaking , document applications such as EDMS are most suitable to work that is principally asso - ciated with conduit types of documents . Also , relatively few groups use collaborative authoring software , or even invoke the collaborative features of desktop software [ 7 ] . And , while there is no denying the importance of Lotus Notes and the Web in making documents more accessible and document work more adaptable , a recent survey of document workers shows conventional desktop applica - tion - based documents ( reports , spreadsheets , correspon - dence ) as foremost in organizations [ 15 ] . A risk in using the lens of any particular technology with digital document work is to neglect its invisible as - pects  those technological elements not related to a spe - cific application , but to the overall work context and therefore recede into the background . Examples include network infrastructure , standards for desktop systems , and security policies and practices [ 16 ] . Document workers do not experience an application in isolation , but interact with a complex web of technology in the process of creat - ing , reusing , and sharing documents . 5 . Data Sources & Analytical Approach 5 . 1 Data Sources Preliminary investigations for a recent extensive field study included several semi - structured interviews con - ducted with document users , document creators , and IS personnel from a variety of business functions . To learn in depth about the way people work with documents in organizations , subjects were asked to describe a recent experience with a digital document . Due to space limita - tions , only two cases are presented ; they were chosen be - cause : ( 1 ) each represents complex document interactions that are clearly not suitable for more systematic ap - proaches such as EDMS and workflow system , and ( 2 ) in response to an interview question , both narrators ( who are unknown to each other and work at different companies ) reported that they were engaged in the same task – they were “coordinating . ” The difference in the cases made their shared perspective on the role of these documents provocative and highlighted the equifinality of much knowledge work not easily addressed by traditional IT approaches . The complexity of these documents and the richness of their context means that a verbatim replay of the interview would require extensive interpretation by someone with depth knowledge of the industry ( e . g . , of the regulatory environment , the patterns of allocating authority , etc . ) . Therefore , otherwise unstated context information was interpolated into the respondents’ stories and the discus - sion to aid understanding . The narrators are men between ages of 40 and 60 with a bachelor ' s degree and ten - plus years tenure in their re - spective aircraft / aerospace manufacturing firms , an indus - try chosen because of the author ' s extensive experience in it . Further , this industry is characterized by a wide variety of complex documents that support intricate business processes and must persist over time ; these characteristics provide a rich foundation for learning about digital docu - ment work in organizations . Details that would identify the companies or the individuals are altered or missing , and pseudonyms are used . 5 . 2 Analytical Approach Two distinct lens are used for the analysis of the cases . 5 . 2 . 1 COP Lens . Using Wegner ' s [ 26 ] definition , we will ask if there a community of practice ( or more than one ) associated with each case . The discussion will ad - dress whether the focal documents are objects of practice , reifications of practice , or boundary objects . 5 . 2 . 2 Information Technology Lens . Because the IT information in the case was provided by the narrators themselves , this discussion should be read more as a re - flection on the role of IT rather than an authoritative ac - count . No particular theoretical approach is adopted , but the instances in which technology interacts , supports , and interferes with document work will be discussed . 6 . Document Work Cases This presentation attempts to preserve the sense of dis - covery the author experienced upon first hearing these sto - ries . To animate the telling , some content has been recon - structed into conversational form and the narratives edited or re - ordered for compact presentation . To distinguish them from the editorial content , the cases are in a san - serif font . 6 . 1 Adam and the Engineering Technical Report 6 . 1 . 1 Adam’s Setting : A project engineering team at a US company developing a new aircraft . “Life used to be simpler , " Adam said , meaning things were easier before new technology made his technical report so complex . Adam supervises the creation of certain technical re - ports as a part of the regulatory process for certifying an aircraft with the US Federal Aviation Administration ( FAA ) . His reports — about a dozen of the 150 or so needed for final certification — describe the company ' s the determi - nations of , and justifications for , different elements of the aircraft design , materials , and processes , and the engi - neering analysis and testing to prove its structural strength , durability , and safety . Traditionally , after com - pleting internal reviews , the final report is made available to the FAA and a copy placed in the company ' s vault as the official and permanent record of how the company met certification requirements . " How so ? " I asked . " It was simpler when the word processing group typed the reports and the tables , the graphics group drew up the charts and took the 8x10 glossy photos , and the blueprint group made nice clean copies of the engineering draw - ings , " Adam said . " Today , I ' ve got all the right pieces , " Adam said , " but it doesn ' t seem as real somehow . " He described a docu - ment in which the text was in MS Word , the photos were digital . tiff files , and the charts and tables his intern made came mostly , he thought , from MS Excel . There was also a data dump from the VAX analytical program and a three - dimensional solid model engineering drawing document from the Unix - based CAD system . To stay on schedule , Adam needed to have the technical report re - viewed soon by about a dozen other senior engineers and managers from his and other project groups . As a lifetime VAX user with only a few years experi - ence on PCs , Adam confessed that he wasn ' t sure that he understood the differences in PC operating systems , or the best way to deal with the . tiff and Unix files , but he did know how to copy files to the " public " drive from the team ' s directory . H is team , on the newest project , was the pilot group for Windows 95 ; most of the company ( and the rest of Engineering ) were still using Windows 3 . 1 . " Do your think that will be a problem ? " Adam asked . 6 . 2 Adam’s Case : Discussion 6 . 2 . 1 Adam through the COP lens . Adam’s report has the hallmarks of a document that is both a ‘working arti - fact’ in a COP and boundary object . The primary COP of interest is those with FAA delegation authority to certify structural elements of the aircraft . Adam is both the au - thor and reviewer of technical reports within his company ( and this COP ) ; yet , he does not see all technical reports even for his own aircraft ( e . g . , he does not see those on propulsion matters ) . He is aware of the existence of re - ports and key issues in his own and other aircraft projects related to structural integrity . His role for technical re - ports received from his peers appears to be a mirror of what he expects from them . However , he also advises and mentors other engineers , particularly junior ones , on the content and purpose of technical reports , how to think about , write about , and solve thorny technical problems , and on the process of obtaining agreement from the FAA . And , he may disagree with a peer’s approach to a particu - lar certification issue . The technical reports create and affirm this COP by reification and participation . Their obvious role is to reify both the practices of structural analysis and testing and the fact of having met the certification requirements for the FAA . This reification is not a recounting of the practice in the sense of narrative of a series of investigations , data collection events , and analyses . As a constructed artifact rather than a description of a sequence of activities it has much in common with the pharmaceutical industry ' s NDA dossiers [ 2 ] . While clearly a boundary object , each tech - nical report also aligns efforts toward the joint enterprise of certification and therefore reinforces the identity and boundary of the ' structures ' COP . Another role of his technical report is one of enabling participation by supporting the creation of meaning and the development of competence [ 26 ] . Not only do the ma - terials and processes of aircraft manufacture continue to advance , the methodologies of design , analysis , and test - ing also move forward . However , before the new design , material , and processes can be enacted into a new aircraft , the evidence must be gathered—by analysis or by empiri - cal data collection , or both—and must pass muster ( i . e . , be certifiable ) . Technical reports bridge old engineering to new within the practice of aircraft certification by showing how the materials , processes , and designs can be tested and analyzed in a way that leads to certification and by showing how a case is made to the FAA . Thus techni - cal reports are objects around which participation occurs within the COP ; this participation serves to define mem - bership , develop competence , and create a shared reper - toire . As a document that is defined by Federal Aviation Regulations and subject to review by certain FAA person - nel ( a candidate COP in its own right ) , technical reports are clearly boundary objects . They coordinate the behav - iors of the two communities even if each community at - tends more to some aspects than others [ 5 ] [ 24 ] , including reading " against the text " ( [ 2 ] , p . 23 ) . Thus , the engineering technical reports are party to all three elements that define a COP : mutual engagement in a joint enterprise through a shared repertoire [ 26 ] . The competence and expertise to certify an airplane is mani - fested in the technical report ; each technical report is a sub - goal of the joint enterprise , because , as Adam says " you can ' t certify the airplane without them . " Each is also a direct mechanism of mutual engagement because the content ( and the intent , assumptions , approaches , meth - ods , etc . , the content represents ) set ( or break ) precedent for other aircraft certification projects , both those under - way today and those to come in the future . And , each is a boundary object , negotiating meaning ( e . g . , what it means to say that aircraft is strong enough ) between communi - ties . 6 . 2 . 2 Adam’s Information Technology . IT impinges upon Adam ' s technical report as a document in two ways : through the practice of engineering and through the prac - tice of document creation . The design and certification process itself takes four to six years with the aircraft manufactured for fifteen or so years , and operational in the fleet for twice that . During this time , the aircraft will undergo continuous minor and discontinuous major revisions to design , materials , and methods , including changes after production has stopped . Technical reports play an important role in maintaining continuity not just between aircraft development projects , but in the definition of what the aircraft is . Not only does the technology of documents and docu - ment work change during the technical reports’ indefinite but long life expectancy , the technology of engineering does as well . More has changed than typing pools and drafting boards since Adam’s “good old days” ; today the work of aircraft engineering is inseparably bound up with IT such as CAD systems and advanced analysis tools ( e . g . , [ 9 ] ) . Not only do faster computers afford a greater dependence on analysis over testing and empirical data collection , the new generation of engineers depend upon these tools in ways that prior generations of engineers did not . Also , the adoption of newer IT for the practice of en - gineering reflects its value in exploiting the new technolo - gies of materials and processes . Changes in manufacturing and engineering technolo - gies proceed at an uneven pace across parts of the aircraft and the project . For example , the structures group may need technical reports that can deal with stress simulations ( e . g . , animated three dimensional drawings ) which may not have affected propulsion , aerodynamics , or other en - gineering groups . The technology of document work thus intersects at the electronic traces left by the technology of engineering work the engineers desk . And , engineers must negotiate this transformation without the people infrastructure of typists or draftsmen . Further , it seems unlikely that the IS group conceives of the role of digital documents or engi - neering work this way when they specify Adam’s desktop computer , set the purge date for online calendars , or de - fine security for team directories . 6 . 3 Zane ' s Chemical Presentation 6 . 3 . 1 Zane’s Setting : The Industrial Hygiene and Safety ( IHS ) office of a division of a major aerospace company . “Tell me about a recent experience you’ve had with a digital document , ” I asked Zane , the Industrial Hygiene manager . “It started with a voice mail message , ” Zane said . Coming back from a late lunch on Tuesday , he heard a message that chemical audit team leader would arrive Wednesday evening and was expecting a site briefing Thursday morning . While this was short notice , Zane wasn’t going to reschedule because he had asked for a planning session before the internal chemical usage audit commenced later that summer . Internal audit teams are assembled from a pool of envi - ronmental , health , and safety personnel from corporate and divisions other than the one being audited ; Zane had been on one himself last year . Few audit team members would be familiar with his plant  a large facility ( > 20 , 000 employees ) but remotely located and doing not - very - glamorous fabrication and subassembly work . A problem with scheduling had surfaced in the last two audits ( when he ' s been lead but not manager ) ; they seemed to have been planned with a simpler , smaller fa - cility in mind . Now that chemical usage was under his watch , he didn’t want a frustrated , overwhelmed bunch of auditors on his hands . After hearing about the call , his boss promptly sched - uled a " dry run " of Zane ' s presentation to the audit team leader for 4 p . m . Wednesday . Now approaching 2 p . m . Tuesday , he had just over 24 hours to pull together a high - credibility presentation about the volume and variety of chemical usage at his plant . His own audit training told him that the best approach would use data from other sources to validate his own material . Thinking about his options—and his deadline—Zane recalled a presentation he’d seen a few months ago . If he remembered correctly , a presenter showed charts com - paring chemical use by the different company divisions based on production measures rather than number of employees . He knew he could get local production infor - mation together in time , but it would take days he didn ' t have to get original data from the other divisions . “Finding that presentation would be a big help , ” he said . Trying to recall the details of the meeting , Zane real - ized that it probably wasn ' t an on - going group because he ' d never attended a session before — in fact , he now remembered that he was there because his colleague Hoyt ' s basement had flooded the night before . In his mind ' s eye he could remember walking into the darkened conference room  one of the fancy ones which indicated director - or - higher sponsorship . And it was a Friday morn - ing , he was pretty sure , because he ' d been teased about being late for a regular meeting he had across the plant . Zane hadn ' t known the presenter , but the guy had been too uncomfortable in his suit to be a manager , the color of his badge made him a local , and based on the tone of the presentation , he was probably from a process improve - ment team in Fabrication somewhere , or perhaps Manu - facturing Research & Development ( MR & D ) . At this point in the interview , Zane revealed that he had indeed , located the document in time for his presentation and asked me if I wanted to know how . The basic model of his search is as follows : • Leaning out his office door , asked his lead Hoyt when had his basement flooded . Hoyt said , " Last Tuesday . " Zane said , " No , the big flood . " Hoyt replied with a date closer to four months ago ; when Zane checked the date , it was indeed a Thursday . Zane : " Bingo ! " • After finding out that Hoyt didn ' t know who had called the meeting , Zane checked the online calendar for all the rooms on the third floor . None displayed anything for the date he wanted ; just to be safe he tried the Fri - days before and after the date Hoyt gave him ; every - thing was blank . He calls the contact phone number to learn that the secretary was on maternity leave and that the conference room schedules are purged after 90 days . The temporary secretary had no idea who might have called the meeting . " No dice on the easy way " , said Zane . • Zane was back to his clues about " someone local , not a manager , from fabrication or MR & D . " A complication : most of those guys work an early shift , leaving between 2 : 30 and 3 : 30 p . m . ; its about 2 : 15 now . Quickly , he searches the online organizational chart to identify likely departments . He also calls the IHS administrator for Fabrication and MR & D to see if she knows of any proc - ess improvement team or group working on chemical usage . " Nothing comes to mind , but I ' ll ask around , " she says . • Using department identifiers in Fabrication and MR & D that might have something to do with chemicals , Zane searches the online directory for names he recognizes . He starts calling people , mostly getting pagers . ( “Those guys don ' t have voice mail , ” he tells me . ) He punches in Hoyt ' s number to the pagers and shouts to Hoyt to expect some pager call - backs . • He also starts sending email to the people he knows who work in likely departments . That is fast  he can do one short email to everyone asking for information about projects or teams " working on chemical stuff " a few months ago . He clearly states that he ' d like to re - use some information from a presentation that he saw at a meeting . • However , there are some departments in which he doesn ' t know anyone ; for those he goes back to the online directory to figure out who is the lead ( not the manager . ( “Shop managers don’t answer pages they don ' t know and have their secretaries read and print their email which would be too slow , ” he reveals . ) A few return pager calls come in while he ' s writing the emails . No answers , but most said they ' d check on it in the morning and let him know . • By 4 p . m . he ' s made a dozen phone calls and sent twice as many emails . He leaves for his daughter ' s soccer practice and plans to come in early Wednesday to catch people before they go to meetings . By 10 a . m . Wednesday , Zane had the file in his pos - session . Two email replies and one returned pager call all named a fabrication team working on cost reduction that had spent some time on chemical usage . While the per - son who made the presentation wasn ' t in that morning , Zane was able to track down a co - worker who knew in which shared directory the presentation files were proba - bly stored . His luck held ; for some reason the security controls for that shared directory were not in force and he could copy the four . ppt files from the month of March . " Bingo ! " Zane said . 6 . 4 Zane’s Case : Discussion 6 . 4 . 1 Zane’s COPs . On the surface , Zane ' s search for an electronic presentation file seems to be a more orthodox case of digital document work than Adam ' s need to share a complex compound report document . However , there are two documents in his frame : the one Zane is seeking , and the one he is creating . The COP in Zane ' s case is harder to identify , perhaps because Zane ' s permanent position is at a connection point of two constituencies , chemical users and external regula - tors and monitors ( e . g . , biennial auditors ) . Zane ' s role is one of permanent translator and broker between communi - ties and / or constituencies , and documents he creates also are likely to play those roles [ 20 ] [ 26 ] . For the chemical users , Zane translates industrial hy - giene standards and regulations into interpretations , be - haviors , and objects  that is , part of a repertoire  hat the chemical users in the shop can practice . The chemical user community is not a single community of practice . However , a closer inspection identifies communities around chemical reduction task forces and shop chemical safety teams  what Wegner calls a constellation of prac - tices [ 26 ]  for whom Zane is a member of authority due to his specialized knowledge and his organizationally sanctioned role . This is reflected in his extensive contex - tual knowledge as well as the credibility with which his inquiries about the document were met . The other candidate COP is an interesting one : the community of environmental health and safety internal auditing . Audit team participation is episodic and mem - bership is fluid but derived from a restricted set ( e . g . , pro - fessionals of certain training , job rank and tenure ) who share a repertoire and mutually engage in the practice of assuring compliance ( their joint enterprise ) . Zane’s presentation could be either a translation ( boundary object ) or an object of practice . The translation role of the document supports Zane ' s boundary role and is a means to deliver interpretations across the border be - tween constellations of chemical user practices and the COP of auditors . The object of practice role for his pres - entation would place him within the auditing COP using the document to align practice and coordinate meaning between practices . The presentation that Zane is seeking may originally have been a boundary object . However , in this current context it is not directly a boundary object , but is rather an object of practice within a chemical user community that is crossing an unexpected boundary . The IHS organization that Zane leads appears to be what Wegner [ 26 ] calls a boundary practice ( Figure 1 ) . Boundary practices are the most complex form of connec - tion between COPs ; they come into existence to deal with complex practices and relations . Common in organiza - tions , boundary practices combine participation and reifi - cation that becomes a form of " collective brokering " ( [ 26 ] , p . 114 ) It would be natural to identify Zane ' s presentation as a document within the boundary practice of IHS , but let us do the analysis . While the document will likely contain evidence of the ongoing work of the IHS organization , that in itself it is not sufficient to make it a reification of practice as its purpose is to persuade an outsider of a real - ity , not create one . Just because Zane’s boss requests a run - through doesn’t make it an object of practice within IHS ; it is not organizing the work of IHS—it is meant to negotiate and organize the audit COP’s work . While the IHS practice itself will also be audited , the presentation is not a boundary object between the practice of IHS and the audit COP because its purpose is to represent the practice that is on IHS ' s other boundary ( i . e . , the constellation of several chemical user COPs ) . Thus a reification another group’s practice ( the presen - tation he ' s seeking ) is translated into an object of practice for the audit COP ( the presentation he ' s creating ) by virtue of Zane ' s position in a boundary practice . 6 . 4 . 2 IT and Zane’s presentation . The role of IT in Zane ' s case is less than many technologists might propose it could or should be . Functionally , IT serves as a simple substrate enabling the creation of a PowerPoint presenta - tion by combining information from another document of the same application and platform . It is the lack of func - tional use of IT that gets our attention : The non - use of the automated search capabilities of the operating system and the absence of security on the subdirectory where the can - didate files for the first presentation were stored . The search tools available to Zane via the operating system are quite capable of finding content , yet , Zane doesn’t use them . If Zane needs to locate its author ( s ) to locate the document , then the tools for searching need to support context discovery and tracing . Calendaring and organizational online directories do support a limited form of context searching . The limits of calendaring are tempo - ral ( 90 days past ) ; the limits of online directories include not being able to learn which managers reply to pages and not being able to associate formal department boundaries with less formal mechanisms of organization such as task forces and ad hoc teams ( e . g . , [ 27 ] ) . For such context - based document locating , the most useful tool may be an organizational memory system [ 26 ] rather than a full - text , expanded thesaurus search engine [ 1 ] . What are the technological insights from the missing security on the subdirectory ? There is no reason to be - lieve that the documents in the subdirectory are either ac - cessible by people outside the company or likely to con - tain information that would be particularly sensitive . Fur - ther , it seems likely that if the security was in place Zane ' s access would have been delayed by no more than a few hours . If we can speculate a moment , the policies for se - curity based on teams ( e . g . , the cost improvement team ) may contribute to a range of poor security practices that aren ' t really practiced because they do not readily support the roles documents play in and between COPs . 7 . Conclusions While both cases of digital documents presented here appear to suffer from failures of technology or support , each in its own way resists being neatly classified as an IT problem with an attendant IT solution . While more training would be helpful , a solution for Adam would need to overcome historically thorny barriers of disparate applications and heterogeneous platforms and somehow link multiple parts into a single complex docu - ment that can be shared with outsiders and persist for dec - ades . This is more than a document - centric IT challenge as the practice of engineering and its technologies changes on its own trajectory , and through that mechanism , prac - tice changes both the document in practice and the docu - ment as a boundary object . At first glance , Zane ' s case is amenable to new tools for full - text and expanded thesauri - based indexing and searching ( e . g . , [ 1 ] ) . There are clues , however , that a per - fect search engine based on document content would not be as useful as one that allowed Zane to tap into his local contextual knowledge , specifically , his knowledge of practice , of communities and their boundaries , and of en - acted translations between them . Adam’s difficulty reminds us of the importance of in - visible , opaque technologies , of infrastructure and support that fill in the holes around the applications , carrying documents as conduits and as social objects to where the practice needs them . IS organizations themselves are con - stellations of nested and interlocking COPs [ 20 ] [ 26 ] that imperfectly interpret the practice of constituencies that are on its periphery ( e . g . , the likelihood of documents being composed of files from several platforms ) . Meanwhile , peripheral constituencies imperfectly interpret the practice of IS which the users experience as the infrastructure and other choices made on their behalf ( e . g . , the capabilities provided by an operating system ) . Ironically , technolo - gies conventionally thought by IS to be document - centric may do little to facilitate the type of work illustrated here . Finally , a communities of practice lens has proved a rich and productive way of looking at digital documents in organizations . COPs bring the work of documents per se and their infrastructures out of the shadows by showing that digital documents play multiple roles as boundary ob - jects , objects of practice , and reifications of practice even in the face of inhibiting technologies . In particular , boundary practices are likely to be fruitful site for investi - gation of the intersection between complex practice , documents , and IT . 8 . References [ 1 ] Arms , W . , C . Blanchi & E . Overly , “An architecture for information in digital libraries , ” D - Lib Magazine , Feb , 1997 , URL : http : / / www . dlib . org / dlib / February97 / 02arms . html . [ 2 ] Bernhardt , S . & G . McCulley , “Knowledge management and pharmaceutical development teams : Using writing to guide science , ” IEEE Transactions on Professional Communication , February / March , 2000 , pp . 22 - 34 . [ 3 ] Boyle , J . , “A blueprint for managing documents , ” Byte , May , 1997 , pp . 75 + . [ 4 ] Brown , J . S . & P . Duguid , “Organizational learning and communities of practice : Toward a unified view of working , learning , and innovation , ” Organization Science , 2 ( 1 ) , 1991 , pp . 40 - 57 . [ 5 ] Brown , J . S . & P . Duguid , “The social life of documents . ” First Monday , 1 ( 1 ) , 1996 , http : / / www . firstmonday . dk / issues / issue1 / documents / . [ 6 ] Davenport , T . & L . Prusak , Working Knowledge : How Or - ganizations Manage What They Know , Boston , MA : Harvard Business School Press , 1998 . [ 7 ] Dillon , A . & S . Maynard , “’Don ' t forget to put the cat out’ - or why collaborative authoring software and everyday writing pass one another by ! ” New Review of Hypermedia and Multime - dia , 1 , 1995 , pp . 135 - 154 . [ 8 ] Fisher , L . , “The wired enterprise : Here comes the Intra - nets , ” Strategy & Business . 6 ( first qtr ) , 1997 , pp . 84 - 90 . [ 9 ] Henderson , K . , “The visual culture of engineers , ’ in Star , S . L . , ed . , The Cultures of Computing , Oxford , UK : Blackwell Publishers , 1995 , pp . 196 - 218 . [ 10 ] Hills , M . , Intranet business strategies . New York : John Wiley & Son , 1997 . [ 11 ] Karsten , H . , “Collaboration and collaborative information technologies : What is the nature of their relationship , ” Proceed - ings of IFIP 8 . 2 , Helsinki , Finland , 1998 , p . 231 . [ 12 ] Lave , J . & E . Wegner , Situated Learning : Legitimate Pe - ripheral Participation , Cambridge , UK : Cambridge University Press , 1991 . [ 13 ] Meier , J . & R . Sprague , “Towards a Better Understanding of Electronic Document Management , Proceedings of Thirtieth Annual Hawaii International Conference on Systems Sciences , Washington , DC : IEEE Comp Soc Press , 1996 . [ 14 ] Meyer , M . & M . Zack , “The design and development of information products , “ Sloan Management Review , Spring , 1996 , pp . 43 - 59 . [ 15 ] Murphy , L . , “Digital document interactions : What knowl - edge workers do every day , ” Proceedings of Americas Confer - ence on Information Systems , 1999 . [ 16 ] Murphy , L . , Digital Documents In The Workplace : An Empirical Investigation Of Document Use And Information Technology Infrastructure , doctoral dissertation , Bloomington , IN : Indiana University , 2000 . [ 17 ] Orlikowski , W . & J . Yates , “Genre repertoire : The struc - turing of communicative practices in organizations , ” Adminis - trative Science Quarterly , 39 , 1994 , pp . 541 - 574 . [ 18 ] Orr , J . , Talking about machines : An ethnography of a mod - ern job , Ithaca , NY : ILR Press , 1996 . [ 19 ] Paepcke , A . “Information needs in technical work settings and their implications for the design of computer tools , ” Com - puter Supported Cooperative Work , 5 , 1996 , pp . 63 - 92 . [ 20 ] Pawlowski , S . , “IS professionals as brokers and translators of knowledge between communities of practice : A research framework , ” Proceedings of Academy of Management Annual Meeting , 1999 . [ 21 ] Schultze , U . & R . Boland , Jr . , “Hard and soft information genres : An analysis of two Notes databases , ” Proceedings of Thirtieth Annual Hawaii International Conference on Systems Sciences , Washington , DC : IEEE Comp Soc Press , 1997 . [ 22 ] Sprague , R . , “Electronic document management : Chal - lenges and opportunities for Information Systems managers , ” MIS Quarterly , 19 ( 1 ) , 1995 , pp . 29 - 49 . [ 23 ] Star , S . L . , “The structure of ill - structured solutions : Boundary objects and heterogeneous distributed problem solv - ing , ” in L . Gasser . & M . Huhns , eds . , Distributed Artificial In - telligence II , Menlo Park , CA : Morgan Kauffmann , 1989 . [ 24 ] Star , S . L . & J . Griesemer , “Institutional ecology , ' transla - tions ' and boundary objects : Amateurs and professionals in Berkeley ' s museum of vertebrate zoology , ” Social Studies of Science , 19 , 1989 , pp . 387 - 420 . [ 25 ] Stein , E . & V . Zwass , “Actualizing Organizational Memory with Information Systems , ” Information Systems Research , 6 ( 2 ) , 1995 , pp . 85 - 117 . [ 26 ] Wegner , E . , Communities of Practice : Learning , Meaning and Identity , New York , NY : Cambridge Univ . Press , 1998 . [ 27 ] Wegner , E . & W . Snyder , “Communities of Practice : The Organizational Frontier , ” Harvard Business Review , January - February , 2000 , pp . 139 - 145 . [ 28 ] Weibel , S . & E . Miller , “ Image Description on the Internet . A Summary of the CNI / OCLC Image Metadata Workshop Sep - tember 24 - 25 , 1996 , Dublin , OH , ” D - Lib Magazine , January , 1997 . URL : http : / / www . dlib . org / dlib / january97 / oclc / 01weibel . html . [ 29 ] Yates , J . , Control Through Communication : The Rise of System in American Management , Baltimore , MD : The Johns Hopkins University Press , 1989 . [ 30 ] Yates , J . , W . Orlikowski , & J . Rennecker , “Collaborative genres for collaboration : Genre systems in digital media , ” Proceedings of Thirtieth Annual Hawaii International Confer - ence on Systems Sciences , Washington , DC : IEEE Comp Soc Press , 1997 . [ 31 ] Zmud , R . , M . Lind , & F . Young , “An attribute space for organizational communication channels , ” Information Systems Research , 1 ( 4 ) , 1990 , pp . 440 - 457 . Figure 1 . Three ways practices connect ( From [ 26 ] , Figure 4 . 3 , p . 114 ) . boundary practices overlaps peripheries