Transfer of Mathematical Knowledge : The Portability of Generic Instantiations Jennifer A . Kaminski , Vladimir M . Sloutsky , and Andrew Heckler The Ohio State University ABSTRACT —Mathematical concepts are often difﬁcult to acquire . This difﬁculty is evidenced by failure of knowl - edge to transfer to novel analogous situations . One approach to this challenge is to present the learner with a concrete instantiation of the to - be - learned concept . Con - crete instantiations communicate more information than their abstract , generic counterparts and , in doing so , they may facilitate initial learning . However , this article argues that extraneous information in concrete instantiations may distract the learner from the relevant mathematical structure and , as a result , hinder transfer . At the same time , generic instantiations , such as traditional mathemat - ical notation , can be learned by both children and adults and can , in turn , allow for transfer , suggesting that gen - eric instantiations result in a portable knowledge represen - tation . KEYWORDS— mathematics ; child development ; communica - tion Mathematical concepts are often difﬁcult to acquire . One approach to this challenge is to present such concepts to the learner via concrete instantiations such as physical manipula - tives or contextualized examples . As noted by other authors in this issue ( e . g . , Martin , 2009 ; Uttal & McNeil , 2009 ) , there is a widespread belief in the education community that concrete instantiations beneﬁt the learning of abstract concepts . Some researchers ( e . g . , Martin , 2009 ; Sarama & Clements , 2009 ; Wearne & Hiebert , 1988 ) have demonstrated successful use of concrete instantiations for children’s acquisition of some mathe - matical concepts . At the same time , the evidence of the effec - tiveness of concrete instantiations is not unequivocal ( see Sarama & Clements , 2004 ; Sowell , 1989 ; Uttal , O’Doherty , New - land , Hand , & DeLoache , 2009 ) . Concrete instantiations commu - nicate more extraneous information than do their abstract counterparts , and as a result , they may interfere with learning and ⁄ or transfer . In what follows , we present this argument in greater detail . Acquiring mathematical concepts is different from acquiring everyday concepts . Everyday concepts , such as ‘‘chair’’ or ‘‘cat , ’’ are grounded in perceptual similarity and are acquired with little effort through encounters with instances of a concept ( Kloos & Sloutsky , 2008 ) . Mathematical concepts , however , have precise deﬁnitions based on their relational structure , and superﬁcial similarity of instances is irrelevant . Therefore , instances of the same concept can be vastly dissimilar , sharing little or no obser - vable similarities . For example , the same mathematical function can describe the metabolism of medication in the body or the temperature of a cooling cup of coffee . Because superﬁcial fea - tures can vary widely , it is often difﬁcult to spontaneously recog - nize instances of the same concept . As a result , the acquisition of such concepts is often difﬁcult for both children and adults and typically requires some supervision ( e . g . , Kloos & Sloutsky , 2008 ) , which may take a form of explicit instruction that begins with an initial instantiation . What is the best way to instantiate a concept to promote recog - nition of novel isomorphs and successful transfer ? One view is that concrete instantiations may have an advantage over abstract instantiations . An instantiation is concrete to the extent that it communicates more extraneous , concept - irrelevant information than an abstract , generic counterpart . For example , consider the increase in information in the following possible symbols for the concept ‘‘person’’ : a black dot , a stick ﬁgure , a detailed drawing , a real person . Added information can be perceptual—what we can actually sense—or conceptual—what other information we may know about the representation . By this interpretation , con - crete instantiations include contextualized examples as well as Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Jennifer A . Kaminski , Center for Cognitive Science , The Ohio State University , Ohio Stadium East , 208A , 1961 Tuttle Park Place , Columbus , OH 43210 ; e - mail : kaminski . 16 @ osu . edu . ª 2009 , Copyright the Author ( s ) Journal Compilation ª 2009 , Society for Research in Child Development Volume 3 , Number 3 , Pages 151 – 155 CHILD DEVELOPMENT PERSPECTIVES physical objects . It is possible that some concrete instantiations may facilitate initial learning by tapping prior knowledge that communicates relevant structural aspects of the to - be - learned concept . For example , children are familiar with equal sharing of items prior to formally knowing the operation of division . In addition , concrete instantiations may better facilitate learning by being more engaging than abstract instantiations . While some concrete instantiations may assist initial learn - ing , successful learning does not necessarily result in suc - cessful transfer ( Gick & Holyoak , 1980 , 1983 ; Goswami , 1991 ; Novick , 1988 ; Reed , Dempster , & Ettinger , 1985 ; Reed , Ernst , & Banerji , 1974 ; Simon & Reed , 1976 ) . There are a number of reasons to be skeptical of the effectiveness of concrete instantiations for transfer that stem from the notion that concrete instantiations convey extraneous informa - tion . First , transfer is inﬂuenced by superﬁcial similarities across domains , with transfer to similar instances being more likely than transfer to dissimilar instances ( Holyoak & Koh , 1987 ; Holyoak & Thagard , 1997 ; Ross , 1987 , 1989 ) . Extrane - ous information of the learning domain may limit transfer only to isomorphs with common superﬁcial features . In addi - tion , transfer may require alignment of the common structure between the learned and novel domains ( Gentner , 1983 , 1989 ; Holyoak & Thagard , 1989 , 1997 ) , and there is evi - dence suggesting that extraneous information may hinder structural recognition and alignment . Superﬁcial features of an instantiation may also compete with relational structure for attention ( Goldstone & Sakamoto , 2003 ) , possibly making the detection of relations more difﬁcult than it would be in an abstract , generic format . Another potential difﬁculty for trans - fer is that irrelevant information may be misinterpreted as part of the relevant structure ( Bassok & Olseth , 1995 ; Bas - sok , Wu , & Olseth , 1995 ) . Also , even for simple relations such as the relation of monotonic increase , relational structure common to two situations is less likely to be noticed when the situations are represented in a concrete , perceptually rich manner than when represented in a more generic form ( Gent - ner & Medina , 1998 ; Markman & Gentner , 1993 ) . Finally , concrete objects make poor symbols : Both children and adults tend to reason about them as objects themselves , not as signs denoting other entities ( DeLoache , 2000 ; Schwartz , 1995 ; Uttal , Liu , & DeLoache , 1999 ; Uttal , Scudder , & DeLoache , 1997 ) . If concreteness hinders transfer of simple relations involved in symbol use , it is likely to create an obstacle to transfer of more complex relations such as mathematical concepts . In a series of experiments , we investigated the effect of con - creteness on initial learning and analogical transfer of a simple mathematical concept of a commutative mathematical group of order 3 . This concept is a set of three elements , or equivalence classes , and an associated operation that has the properties of associativity and commutativity . In addition , the group has an identity element and inverses for each element ( see Table 1 for properties ) . We instantiated this structure with different degrees of concreteness , where levels of concreteness were varied across participants . Training was presented via computer and consisted of explicit presentation of the group rules using the elements of the given instantiation , questions with feedback , and examples . After training , participants received a multiple - choice test of novel questions . In our ﬁrst experiment , undergraduate students were trained and tested with either an abstract , generic instantiation or a per - ceptually rich , concrete instantiation ( Sloutsky , Kaminski , & Heckler , 2005 ) . The generic instantiation was described as a written language involving three symbols in which combinations of two or more symbols yield a predictable resulting symbol . Statements were expressed as symbol 1 , symbol 2 ﬁ resulting symbol . The concrete condition presented an artiﬁcial phenome - non involving images of three colorful , three - dimensional shapes . Participants in this condition watched movies of two or more shapes coming into contact , then disappearing , and a resulting shape appearing . In both conditions , the resulting symbol or shape was speciﬁed by the mathematical structure . After training and testing of one instantiation , participants were trained and tested with the other instantiation . We found that participants successfully learned both instantiations , with no difference in average test score on the generic instantiation no matter which instantiation they learned ﬁrst . However , there was a marked difference in average test score on the concrete instantiation , with participants who were initially trained with the generic instantiation scoring higher on the concrete test than participants who were initially trained with the concrete instantiation . In other words , learning the concrete instantiation resulted in no improved learning of the generic instantiation . On the other hand , learning the generic instantiation resulted in better perfor - mance on the concrete instantiation , suggesting that participants were able to transfer their knowledge from the generic to the concrete instantiation . In a second experiment , we considered Table 1 Principles of a Commutative Mathematical Group A commutative group of order 3 is a closed set of three elements and a binary operation ( denoted + ) with the following properties : Associative For any elements x , y , z : ( ( x + y ) + z ) = ( x + ( y + z ) ) Commutative For any elements x , y : x + y = y + x Identity There is an element , I , such that for any element , x : x + I = x Inverses For any element , x , there exists another element , y , such that x + y = I Child Development Perspectives , Volume 3 , Number 3 , Pages 151 – 155 152 Jennifer A . Kaminski , Vladimir M . Sloutsky , and Andrew Heckler the effects of perceptual richness on initial learning . Participants learned an instantiation of a group that had different levels of concreteness : ( a ) generic black symbols ; ( b ) colorful , patterned symbols ; ( c ) classes of colorful , patterned symbols ; or ( d ) classes of real objects . While all participants learned the rules , those who learned with the generic symbols scored signiﬁcantly higher than did the other participants , with no differences across these three conditions . Therefore , the mere addition of color lowered learning . The results of these experiments demonstrated that percep - tual richness that is irrelevant to the to - be - learned concept hindered both learning and transfer . However , not all concrete - ness is irrelevant perceptual richness . As noted above , some concreteness may help to communicate relevant structure by tapping prior knowledge or by presenting perceptual informa - tion that is correlated with structure . This ‘‘relevant concrete - ness’’ would most likely facilitate learning and possibly , in turn , facilitate transfer . To investigate the effects of such rele - vant concreteness , we instantiated the concept of a mathemati - cal group in a context involving familiar objects that might facilitate learning of the group rules ( Kaminski , Sloutsky , & Heckler , 2005 ) . In this case , the elements of the group were three measuring cups ( see Table 2 ) . Instead of learning arbi - trary rules of symbol combinations , participants were told that they needed to determine a leftover amount of liquid when dif - ferent measuring cups were combined ( see Table 2 ) . For exam - ple , combining and resulted in leftover . We compared learning this instantiation with learning a gen - eric instantiation and found that with minimal training ( i . e . , explicit statement of the rules and one example ) , both instanti - ations were successfully learned , but the relevantly concrete instantiation did have an advantage over the generic ( 81 % vs . 63 % correct , chance = 38 % ) . To test whether this advantage would exist for transfer , we gave participants slightly more detailed training ( questions with feedback and examples ) and then presented them with a novel instantiation of an isomorphic group . This novel domain was intentionally concrete and contextually rich , as are many real - world instantiations of mathematics . Participants were asked to ﬁgure out the rules of a children’s game . In the game , children point to a series of objects , then the child who is ‘‘it’’ points to a ﬁnal object . This child wins if he or she points to the correct object according to the rules ( see Table 3 ) . Participants were told that the rules of the game were like the rules of the system they had just learned ( i . e . , either the concrete or the generic instantia - tion ) . Then participants were shown a series of examples from which the rules could be deduced . The results revealed that with the slightly protracted training , there was no difference in learn - ing scores across the two conditions ( 78 % vs . 75 % ) . However , there was a striking difference in transfer : Participants in the concrete condition had an average test score of approximately 54 % correct , while the average score in the generic condition was approximately 79 % ( chance was 38 % ) . We replicated these results in another experiment and further found that when asked to match analogous elements across learning and transfer domains , 100 % of participants in the generic condition were able to do so , while only 25 % of participants in the concrete con - dition made the correct match , a rate no better than that of chance guessing . These reported results involved undergraduate college stu - dents . Perhaps concreteness is helpful , but only for younger learners . That is , if children under 12 years of age are in a Table 2 Concrete and Generic Instantiations of Commutative Group Concrete Generic Elements Specific Rules : is the identity is the identity Operands Result ( Remainder ) Operands Result Table 3 Stimuli for Transfer Domain Elements : Operands Result ( winning object ) Child Development Perspectives , Volume 3 , Number 3 , Pages 151 – 155 Transfer of Mathematical Knowledge 153 concrete operational stage of development in which their think - ing and problem solving are limited to concrete contexts , they may need a concrete instantiation to begin to grasp an abstract concept . In this case , we may see an advantage for the con - crete . However , if the difﬁculty with concrete instantiation stems from the effect of extraneous information on attentional focus , then concreteness may be at least as detrimental for chil - dren’s transfer as it is for adults’ , since children are less able to control their focus of attention ( Dempster & Corkill , 1999 ; Napolitano & Sloutsky , 2004 ) . To test this possibility , we taught 11 - year - old children either the concrete or the generic instanti - ation and presented them with the transfer domain , as in our earlier experiments . The concrete instantiation did result in better learning than did the generic ( 82 % vs . 66 % correct ) . However , for the concrete learners , transfer scores were only marginally above the chance score of 38 % ( 47 % correct ) , whereas scores were signiﬁcantly above chance for the generic learners ( 61 % correct ) . These ﬁndings make several important points . First , successful learning does not necessarily translate into successful transfer . Second , irrelevant perceptual richness of some concrete instanti - ations can potentially hinder both learning and transfer . Third , while some concreteness may give a leg - up in the learning pro - cess , this advantage comes at the cost of transfer because the learner has difﬁculty recognizing learned structure in novel con - texts . Structure is learned but is bound to the initial learning sce - nario . Generic instantiations , on the other hand , do allow spontaneous recognition of learned structure and successful transfer . Finally , the advantage of generic instantiations is not limited to adults . Children can learn a generic instantiation and successfully transfer their knowledge . We suggest that a mechanistic component that underlies the effect of concreteness on transfer is , in fact , attentional focus . Successful analogical transfer is dependent on the ability to focus on the common relation , while ignoring irrelevant informa - tion , whether it is a simple relation such as ‘‘bigger than’’ or a more complex relation , or set of relations , of a mathematical deﬁ - nition . Transfer fails if a common relation is undetected . Con - crete instantiations present extraneous information that can compete for attention with the relevant relational structure . With development , the ability to ignore irrelevant information is likely strengthened , which may explain improved performance with age on simple symbolic tasks ( e . g . , DeLoache , 2000 ; Uttal et al . , 2009 ) . At the same time , our studies demonstrate that even adults can be distracted by irrelevant superﬁcial informa - tion . However , it is possible that with the development of exper - tise , people learn ( depending on the task demands ) to deliberately shift attention between superﬁcial and deep struc - tural information . If a primary goal of learning abstract concepts such as mathe - matical concepts is the ability to recognize novel instantiations and successfully transfer knowledge , then educational material should maximize the likelihood of attending to relational structure and minimize the likelihood of diverting attention pri - marily to the superﬁcial . One way of achieving this is to present mathematical concepts via generic formats , such as traditional symbolic notation . Learning a generic instantiation can result in portable knowledge that can be spontaneously transferred to novel isomorphic domains . In addition , because generic instanti - ations may help learners focus attention on relevant structure , we would expect that learning generic instantiations may also beneﬁt transfer to nonisomorphic tasks such as those involving problem solving , estimation , and comparison . We do not suggest that concrete instantiations should never be used in the teaching of mathematics . Rather , we suggest that if they are used , measures need to be taken to help the learner extract the relevant structure from the learning context and recognize it in novel contexts . REFERENCES Bassok , M . , & Olseth , K . L . ( 1995 ) . Object - based representations : Transfer between cases of continuous and discrete models of change . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory and Cognition , 21 , 1522 – 1538 . Bassok , M . , Wu , L . , & Olseth , K . L . ( 1995 ) . Judging a book by its cover : Interpretative effects of context on problem - solving transfer . Memory & Cognition , 23 , 354 – 367 . DeLoache , J . S . ( 2000 ) . Dual representation and young children’s use of scale models . Child Development , 71 , 329 – 338 . Dempster , F . N . , & Corkill , A . J . ( 1999 ) . Inference and inhibition in cognition and behavior : Unifying themes for educational psychology . Educational Psychology Review , 11 , 1 – 88 . Gentner , D . ( 1983 ) . Structure - mapping : A theoretical framework for analogy . Cognitive Science , 7 , 155 – 170 . Gentner , D . ( 1989 ) . The mechanisms of analogical learning . In S . Vosniadou & A . Ortony ( Eds . ) , Similarity and analogical reasoning ( pp . 199 – 241 ) . Cambridge , UK : Cambridge University Press . Gentner , D . , & Medina , J . ( 1998 ) . Similarity and the development of rules . Cognition , 65 , 263 – 297 . Gick , M . L . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 1980 ) . Analogical problem solving . Cognitive Psychology , 12 , 306 – 355 . Gick , M . L . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 1983 ) . Schema induction and analogical transfer . Cognitive Psychology , 15 , 1 – 38 . Goldstone , R . L . , & Sakamoto , Y . ( 2003 ) . The transfer of abstract principles governing complex adaptive systems . Cognitive Psychology , 46 , 414 – 466 . Goswami , U . ( 1991 ) . Analogical reasoning : What develops ? A review of research and theory . Child Development , 62 , 1 – 22 . Holyoak , K . J . , & Koh , K . ( 1987 ) . Surface and structural similarity in analogical transfer . Memory & Cognition , 15 , 332 – 340 . Holyoak , K . J . , & Thagard , P . ( 1989 ) . Analogical mapping by constraint satisfaction . Cognitive Science , 13 , 295 – 355 . Holyoak , K . J . , & Thagard , P . ( 1997 ) . The analogical mind . American Psychologist , 52 , 35 – 44 . Kaminski , J . A . , Sloutsky , V . M . , & Heckler , A . F . ( 2005 ) . Relevant concreteness and its effects on learning and transfer . In B . Bara , L . Barsalou , & M . Bucciarelli ( Eds . ) , Proceedings of the XXVII annual conference of the Cognitive Science Society ( pp . 1090 – 1095 ) . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . Kloos , H . , & Sloutsky , V . M . ( 2008 ) . What’s behind different kinds of kinds : Effects of statistical density on learning and representation Child Development Perspectives , Volume 3 , Number 3 , Pages 151 – 155 154 Jennifer A . Kaminski , Vladimir M . Sloutsky , and Andrew Heckler of categories . Journal of Experimental Psychology : General , 137 , 52 – 72 . Markman , A . B . , & Gentner , D . ( 1993 ) . Structural alignment during similarity comparisons . Cognitive Psychology , 25 , 431 – 467 . Martin , T . ( 2009 ) . A theory of physically distributed learning : How external environments and internal states interact in mathematics learning . Child Development Perspectives , 3 , 140 – 144 . McNeil , N . M . , & Uttal , D . H . ( 2009 ) . Rethinking the use of concrete materials in learning : Perspectives from development and education . Child Development Perspectives , 3 , 137 – 139 . Napolitano , A . C . , & Sloutsky , V . M . ( 2004 ) . Is a picture worth a thousand words ? Part II : The ﬂexible nature of modality dominance in young children . Child Development , 75 , 1850 – 1870 . Novick , L . R . ( 1988 ) . Analogical transfer , problem similarity , and expertise . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 14 , 510 – 520 . Reed , S . K . , Dempster , A . , & Ettinger , M . ( 1985 ) . Usefulness of analogous solutions for solving algebra word problems . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 11 , 106 – 125 . Reed , S . K . , Ernst , G . W . , & Banerji , R . ( 1974 ) . The role of analogy in transfer between similar problem states . Cognitive Psychology , 6 , 436 – 450 . Ross , B . H . ( 1987 ) . This is like that : The use of earlier problems and the separation of similarity effects . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , & Cognition , 13 , 629 – 639 . Ross , B . H . ( 1989 ) . Distinguishing types of superﬁcial similarities : Different effects on the access and use of earlier problems . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 15 , 456 – 468 . Sarama , J . , & Clements , D . H . ( 2004 ) . Building blocks for early childhood mathematics . Early Childhood Research Quarterly , 19 , 181 – 189 . Sarama , J . , & Clements , D . H . ( 2009 ) . ‘‘Concrete’’ computer mani - pulatives in mathematics education . Child Development Perspectives , 3 , 145 – 150 . Schwartz , D . L . ( 1995 ) . Reasoning about the referent of a picture versus reasoning about the picture as the referent : An effect of visual realism . Memory & Cognition , 23 , 709 – 722 . Simon , H . A . , & Reed , S . K . ( 1976 ) . Modeling strategy shifts in a problem solving task . Cognitive Psychology , 8 , 86 – 97 . Sloutsky , V . M . , Kaminski , J . A . , & Heckler , A . F . ( 2005 ) . The advantage of simple symbols for learning and transfer . Psychonomic Bulletin & Review , 12 , 508 – 513 . Sowell , E . ( 1989 ) . Effects of manipulative materials in mathematics instruction . Journal for Research in Mathematics Education , 20 , 498 – 505 . Uttal , D . H . , Liu , L . L . , & DeLoache , J . S . ( 1999 ) . Taking a hard look at concreteness : Do concrete objects help young children learn symbolic relations ? In L . Balter & C . S . Tamis - LeMonda ( Eds . ) , Child psychology : A handbook of contemporary issues ( pp . 177 – 192 ) . New York : Psychology Press . Uttal , D . , O’Doherty , K . , Newland , R . , Hand , L . , & DeLoache , J . ( 2009 ) . Dual representation and the linking of concrete and symbolic representations . Child Development Perspectives , 3 , 156 – 159 . Uttal , D . H . , Scudder , K . V . , & DeLoache , J . S . ( 1997 ) . Manipulatives as symbols : A new perspective on the use of concrete objects to teach mathematics . Journal of Applied Developmental Psychology , 18 , 37 – 54 . Wearne , D . , & Hiebert , J . ( 1988 ) . A cognitive approach to meaningful mathematics instruction : Testing a local theory using decimal numbers . Journal for Research in Mathematics Education , 19 , 371 – 384 . Child Development Perspectives , Volume 3 , Number 3 , Pages 151 – 155 Transfer of Mathematical Knowledge 155