INTRODUCTION The cortical cytoskeleton is a meshwork of ﬁlamentous actin ( F - actin ) and spectrin ( Bennett et al . , 1982 ; Bray et al . , 1986 ; Bretschler , 1999 ) . On the cytoplasmic side the membrane cytoskeleton associates with actin microﬁlaments in the cytoplasm ( Hartwig , 1992 ) . Assembly and disassembly of the actin network is a pivotal process for growth cone steering , neurite elongation , and neuronal migration ( Marsh and Letourneau , 1984 ; Bradke and Dotti , 1999 ) . Several depletion studies using antisense oligonucleotides or micro - CALI have shown that the F - actin binding cortical cytoskeleton proteins vinculin , talin , ezrin , radixin , and moesin ( ERM ) have roles in neurite and growth cone phenotypes ( Varnum - Finney and Reichardt , 1994 ; Paglini et al . , 1998 ; Castelo and Jay , 1999 ) . Moreover , genetic analysis of families with periventricular heterotopia revealed that mutations in the cortical cytoskeleton protein ﬁlamin cause abnormal migration in neurons , which is the cause of epilepsy in this disease ( Fox et al . , 1998 ) . Speciﬁc axonal and dendritic phenotypes are tightly coupled to neurotransmitter expression . Thus , cortical neurons are classiﬁed morphologically and functionally into excitatory neurons , which project outside the cortex , and inhibitory interneurons . Projectional excitatory neurons have a large pyramidal or stellate cell body , spiny dendritic trees , and a glutamatergic neurotransmitter phenotype . Interneurons have smaller cell bodies , no spines , shorter axons , and are GABAergic ( DeFelipe and Jones , 1988 ) . However , the mechanism of progression of postmitotic telencephalic neurons toward these two major cell fates remains unknown and the role of any of the cortical cytoskeleton proteins in the expression of neurotransmitter phenotype has not yet been investigated . In the chick embryo telencephalon GABAergic neurons 3161 Journal of Cell Science 113 , 3161 - 3172 ( 2000 ) Printed in Great Britain © The Company of Biologists Limited 2000 JCS1307 Excitatory and inhibitory neuronal cell fates require speciﬁc expression of both neurotransmitter and morphological phenotypes . The role of the F - actin cytoskeleton in morphological phenotypes has been well documented , but its role in neurotransmitter phenotype expression remains unknown . Here we present evidence that the F - actin binding protein cortactin participates in determining both aspects of cell fate in large telencephalic neurons . We show that the expression of cortactin was upregulated early in development just prior to appearance of GABAergic neurons in the chick telencephalon at embryonic day 6 . This program was faithfully maintained in primary neuronal cultures derived from E6 telencephalon , where immature neurons differentiate either to large pyramidal and large stellate excitatory neurons or to small inhibitory GABAergic neurons . Immunostaining revealed that cortactin was enriched in areas of membrane budding , growth cones , and in the cell cortex of immature neurons . With differentiation , intense punctate staining was also observed in an extraction - resistant cytosolic compartment of the soma and processes . More importantly , suppression of cortactin by inhibition of cortactin mRNA translation with antisense oligonucleotides caused permanent phenotypic changes . Speciﬁcally , a transient suppression of cortactin was achieved in immature neurons with a single exposure to antisense oligonucleotides . This inhibition ﬁrst induced both the expression of mRNA and the enzymatic activity of GAD signiﬁcantly earlier than in control neurons . Second , cortactin - suppressed large projectional neurons exhibited signiﬁcantly shorter processes and growth cones with protrusive ﬁlopodia and an enlarged lamellipodia veil . Most importantly , this remodeling of neuritic outgrowth in projectional somata was accompanied by the ectopic induction of GABA ( g - aminobutyric acid ) expression . Considering this data altogether , it appears that cortactin may function to suppress concurrently several parameters of the GABAergic program in large developing neurons . Key words : Csk , Anti - sense , Cell fate , Vinculin , Src , Neurotransmitter phenotype , Growth cone SUMMARY Transient suppression of cortactin ectopically induces large telencephalic neurons towards a GABAergic phenotype Yu Cheng 1 , * , Soyan Leung 1 , ‡ and Dimitra Mangoura 1 , 2 , 3 , § 1 Department of Pediatrics , 2 Committee on Neurobiology and 3 Committee on Cell Physiology , 5841 S . Maryland , Chicago , IL 60637 , USA * Present address : Abbott Laboratories , 100 Abbott Park Rd , Abbott Park , IL 60064 - 6102 , USA ‡ Present address : Department of Neurobiology , Harvard Medical School , 220 Longwood Avenue , Boston , MA 02115 , USA § Author for correspondence ( e - mail : dm36 @ midway . uchicago . edu ) Accepted 4 July ; published on WWW 22 August 2000 3162 appear in bulk later in development than the excitatory phenotypes ( Palacios , 1980 ; DeFelipe and Jones , 1988 ; Mangoura and Vernadakis , 1988 ; Ahman et al . , 1996 ) . The timetables of differentiation for both types are retained in E6 telencephalic neurons grown in culture . Observed within hours are the typical cortical phenotypes of GABAergic , small stellate or fusiform neurons , and cholinergic or glutamergic long projecting neurons with pyramidal or large stellate somata ( Mangoura and Vernadakis , 1988 ; Mangoura et al . , 1988 , 1990 ; Mangoura 1997 ; Tokioka et al . , 1993 ; Baumgartner et al . , 1994 ; Kudoh et al . , 1997 ) . The formation of synapses occurs later , after culture day 10 ( Lewin et al . , 1994 ; Tokioka et al . , 1993 ) . Using this system , we have identiﬁed enkephalins , NGF ( nerve growth factor ) , and NCAM ( neuronal cell adhesion molecule ) as agonists that induce GABAergic phenotypes in E6 neurons ( Mangoura et al . , 1990 , 1997 ) . A concurrent event is the mobilization and transient downregulation of the cortical cytoskeleton protein cortactin ( Mangoura , 1997 ; Hauser and Mangoura , 1998 ) . Cortactin occurs as two isoforms , 80 kDa and 85 kDa , with 5 or 6 tandem F - actin binding repeats , respectively ( Wu et al . , 1991 ; Wu and Parsons , 1994 ) . A third cortactin isoform with 4 such repeats appears postnatal ( Ohoka and Takai , 1998 ) . Cortactin was discovered as an aberrantly regulated substrate for Src , a tyrosine kinase known to regulate cell shape , fate , and process formation ( Bishop , 1985 ; Ignelzi et al . , 1994 ) . In addition , cortactin may be the mediator for the morphological effects of activated Rac1 ( Weed et al . , 1998 ) , a small GTPase involved in dendrite formation and growth cone guidance ( Luo et al . , 1996 ; Threadgill et al . , 1997 ) . Recognizing the high expression of cortactin in E6 neurons ( Mangoura , 1997 ) , we examined an apparent role of cortactin in neuronal cell fate . MATERIALS AND METHODS Tissue cell culture Primary cultures of E6 telencephalic neurons were prepared by mechanical dissociation as previously described ( e . g . Mangoura et al . , 1988 , 1990 ; Mangoura , 1997 ) . Neurons were plated on poly - L - lysine - coated dishes in Dulbecco’s modiﬁed Eagle medium ( DMEM , Mediatech ) , containing 1 % fetal bovine serum , and maintained at 37°C under 10 % CO 2 / air . Low or regular plating densities was used to accommodate the experimental needs of imaging or biochemistry , respectively : low density or 1 telencephalon per 59 mm 2 ; regular density or 1 telencephalon per 27 mm 2 . The independence of the results from cell density was conﬁrmed for each experimental procedure . Tissue and tissue cell culture fractionation , immunoprecipitation and western blotting analysis Cerebral hemispheres were dissected from chick embryos on indicated embryonic days , the diencephalon removed by incision and the meninges by gentle separation . Tissue from 4 embryos was pooled for each sample , instantly frozen in liquid nitrogen , and stored at - 80°C , until thawed in cold lysis RIPA buffer ( 1 % Triton X - 100 , 1 % sodium deoxycholate , 0 . 1 % SDS , 158 mM NaCl , 10 mM Tris - HCl , pH 7 . 2 , 1 mM EGTA , 1 mM benzamidine , 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl ﬂuoride , 1 m M sodium orthovanadate , 1 m M leupeptin , 1 m M aprotinin ) . Five different embryonic series were obtained and analyzed . After mechanical homogenization ( Teﬂon on glass ) , 30 m g of cell protein from each sample was separated by SDS - PAGE , and transferred to nitrocellulose membranes , which were stained with Ponceau S ( Sigma , St Louis , MO ) to assure equal loading . Membranes were then western blotted with monoclonal antibodies against chicken cortactin ( 4F11 from UBI , Lake Placid , NY ; Wu et al . , 1991 ) and reblotted with monoclonal antibodies against vinculin , tubulin , actin , ( from Sigma , Israel ) , chicken p60 - Src ( UBI ) , b - catenin , or a polyclonal antibody against Csk ( Santa Cruz Biotech . , Santa Cruz , CA ) as described ( Mangoura , 1997 ; Mangoura et al . , 2000 ) . For subcellular fractionation , neurons were harvested in a 10 mM Tris - HCl , pH 7 . 4 , buffer , containing 30 mM sodium pyrophosphate , 5 mM EDTA , 50 mM NaCl , 50 mM NaF , 1 % Triton X - 100 , 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl ﬂuoride , 1 m M sodium orthovanadate , 1 m M leupeptin , and 1 m M aprotinin . This homogenate was centrifuged at 15 , 000 rpm for 5 minutes at 4°C and separated into supernatant and pellet , or Triton - soluble and Triton - insoluble fractions , respectively . The pellet was resuspended and sonicated in RIPA buffer . Samples were processed for western blot analysis as described above . For cortactin immunoprecipitation , neurons were lysed directly in RIPA and 200 m g of the lysate was immunoprecipitated with 4F11 ( Mangoura , 1997 ) and subsequently western blotted also with 4F11 . Antibody binding was visualized with the chemiluminescence detection system . Blots were scanned using Ofoto ( scanning program ) and densitometry analysis was performed with NIH Image 1 . 62 . Numerical data were then plotted with Microsoft Excel 4 . 0 . Increases in density were linear from 10 to 50 m g of protein / lane for 10 seconds of ﬁlm exposure . Immunocytochemistry Neurons grown on glass coverslips were either cross - linked with 1 mM disuccinimidyl propionate ( DSP ) in Hanks’ balanced salt solution ( pH 7 . 2 ) for 10 minutes at 25 (cid:176) C and extracted with 0 . 5 % Triton X - 100 in a 1 mM EGTA , 4 % polyethylene glycol 8000 , 100 mM Pipes buffer , pH 6 . 9 , for 10 minutes at 37 (cid:176) C before being ﬁxed with 4 % paraformaldehyde for 30 minutes ( Saﬁejko - Mroczka and Bell ( 1996 ) , or directly ﬁxed in 4 % paraformaldehyde ( PFA ) and permeabilized with 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 for 2 minutes ( Mangoura , 1997 ) . Non - speciﬁc sites were blocked with 5 % normal goat serum in microtubule - stabilizing buffer 30 minutes . Neurons were incubated overnight with mAb 4F11 and , after several rinses , with a goat - anti - mouse secondary antibody conjugated to ﬂuorescein , as described . For double staining for F - actin , 0 . 2 units / ml of phalloidin - rhodamine ( Molecular probes , Eugene , OR ) was added with the secondary antibody for 2 hours at 37°C . After three rinses with PBS , coverslips were mounted with Vectashield ( Vector Lab , Burlingame , CA ) and sealed with Crystal / Mount ( Biomeda , Foster city , CA ) . Cells were viewed under a Zeiss Axioplan microscope equipped with a · 63 Zeiss Plan Apochromat NA 1 . 40 oil DIC objective lens , a motorized stage and a Photometrics PXL cooled CCD Camera ( Microscopy Facility , Dept of Pathology ) . Images from double staining or for the montage in Fig . 2F experiments were obtained at the same focal planes . Image capture analysis was performed using Openlab 2 . 1 . 1 ( Improvision , Coventry , England ) run on a Power Macintosh 9600 / 300 . Images were saved in TIFF format and printed by dye sublimation . Morphometry Neurons plated at low density were ﬁxed at culture day 6 ( C6 ) and stained overnight with the lipophilic membrane marker DiI ( Molecular Probes ) . Cells in randomly selected ﬁelds were photographed through an upright Leitz microscope with an epiﬂuorescence unit , using a Neoﬂuar · 40 lens , an Olympus OM - 4 camera , and 200 ASA Kodak Ectachrom slide ﬁlms . The Ectachrom slides were scanned in and the size and shape of neuronal somata were analyzed in the acquired images , using the NIH Image 1 . 62 software . Neurons at early differentiation stages ( C1 - C3 ) were classiﬁed according to cell body diameter into large ( diameter > 15 m m ) or small ( diameter < 15 m m ) ; from C3 to C5 , the shape and length of major processes were also recorded . For morphological classiﬁcation as a Y . Cheng , S . Leung and D . Mangoura 3163 Cortactin regulates GABAergic phenotypes short axon phenotype the criteria applied were the shape of pericaryon , a pericaryal diameter of less than 15 m m , and an < 100 m m length of any process . For classiﬁcation as a long axon phenotype neuron , three criteria had to apply : one pericaryal diameter of more than 15 m m , a triangular shape of pericaryon for the pyramidal cell or a polygonal shape for the large stellate cell , and at least one process with a length > 100 m m . The same criteria were used for morphometry in phase or confocal images . For morphometry of GABA - positive neurons , neurons were stained using a polyclonal antibody against GABA ( Dr Bruce Wainer , Emory University ) with a peroxidase - antiperoxidase ( PAP ) secondary antibody , as previously described ( Mangoura and Vernadakis , 1988 ; Mangoura et al . , 1990 ) . Images from ten random ﬁelds per dish ( 4 dishes per experimental condition / per experiment ) were acquired ﬁrst under light and then under phase with a Zeiss Axiovert microscope and a ZVS – 3C75DE three - chip video camera , using the KS300 3 . 0 imaging software ( Imaging Core Facility , the Department of Pediatrics ) . Numbers of GABA - positive neurons were analyzed in the images obtained under light , where neurons with a 3 - fold intensity over control ( no primary antibody ) were scored as positive . On the other hand , morphometry was done in the paired phase images , and neuronal somata were phenotypically classiﬁed using the criteria described above . Cell counting Neurons were plated on poly - L - lysine coated Corning plates engraved with a 2 · 2 mm grid . Ten ﬁelds per dish were chosen randomly ( four dishes per experimental group per experiment ) , charted on the grid , and followed up at 12 - hour intervals with time lapse photography , using the Zeiss Axiovert imaging system described above . Cell numbers were counted in the captured images and plotted against time . In addition , at the same time points , sister cultures were ﬁxed and stained with bis benzimide ( Hoechst 33258 , Sigma ) to identify normal ( intact ) and apoptotic ( fragmented ) nuclei . Ten randomly chosen ﬁelds from each of four dishes per experimental group were imaged ﬁrst through phase and then with an UV optical ﬁlter ( for Hoechst ) as described ( Cheng et al . , 2000 ) . The size and shape of neuronal somata along with nucleus morphology were analyzed in each pair of images . Design of oligonucleotides ( ODNs ) and treatments From the chicken cortactin DNA sequence ( Wu et al . , 1991 ) , several partially overlapping 25mer antisense oligonucleotides were designed to bracket the initiation site , i . e . the ﬁrst methionine codon , but starting at a different codon in the translated region and extending different lengths into the untranslated region . Two more ODNs were designed against the repeat domain of cortactin . For each antisense ODN , a sense and a scrambled ODN version was designed ; all were tested and found unmatched with any GenBank DNA sequence . All ODNs were synthesized in the Howard Hughes Facility , The University of Chicago . Pilot experiments included addition of S - modiﬁed ( phosphorothioate ) and non - modiﬁed oligonucleotides at various concentrations ( 0 . 1 - 50 m g ) and at various time points , which covered the ﬁrst ﬁve days in culture at 12 - hour designated intervals . At each of the 12 - hour intervals , cultures started receiving ODN treatments either every 12 hours or just once . To investigate possible toxic effects of ODNs , we ﬁrst used a combination of two independent techniques namely time lapse photography with cell counting and Hoechst 33258 staining of nuclei in sister cultures ( described above ) . These experiments showed that there was no toxicity ( cell loss , cell membrane blebbing , or nuclei fragmentation ) , with any ODN treatment at any of the tested concentrations . In most of the experiments the following ODNs were used : antisense oligonucleotide ODN - A ( ACCAGAAGCAGCACCGTCATGCTCC ) , a sense - strand oligonucleotide to ODN - A ( ODN - D ) , antisense ODN - B , and a scrambled version of ODN - A ( ODN - C ) , added once at 5 m g / ml 30 - 60 minutes after plating . Reverse transcriptase ( RT ) - PCR analysis Total RNA was isolated from tissue or neuronal tissue cultures at C2 using the Rneasy Mini Kit ( Qiagen ) . Messenger RNA was puriﬁed from total RNA using magnetic spheres according to the manufacturer’s instructions ( Promega ) . Total RNA , 5 mg per sample , or 100 ng of isolated mRNA per sample was processed for RT - PCR . The primers used , sense primer , 5 ¢ - TACCTCCCAGCTTGCGCGGCA - 3 ¢ and antisense primer , 5 ¢ - TGCTGGGTTTGAGATGACCAT - 3 ¢ , were designed to ﬂank the only known chick GAD nucleotide sequence , which has an 82 % nucleotide homology with the rat GAD65 ( Ahman et al . , 1996 ) . The reverse transcription reaction was carried out at 42°C for 1 hour ( Titan One , Boehringer Mannheim ) . DNA in two microliters of this reaction was ampliﬁed by 40 cycles of PCR ( 94°C · 1 minute , 54°C · 1 minute , 72°C · 1 minute ) in a Perkin Elmer PE 2400 . PCR products were separated on a 2 % agarose gel and visualized by ethidium bromide staining . Sizes were calculated relative to a 100 bp ladder standard ( Gibco ) . Ampliﬁed fragments were cloned into a TA cloning vector , pCR2 . 1 ( Invitrogen ) and the nucleotide sequence was determined using an ABI 377 sequencer ( Howard Hughes Institute , The University of Chicago ) . The sequence matched the sequence of GAD65 as reported by Ahman et al . ( 1996 ) . Glutamic acid decarboxylase activity GAD activity was determined as previously described ( Mangoura et al . , 1990 ) . Activity was measured as nmoles of 14 CO 2 produced per hour per mg protein from L - [ 1 - 14 C ] glutamate . Protein analysis Protein content was determined using the Bio - Rad DC kit . Statistical analysis All experiments were performed over 10 times and data were analyzed by ANOVA . RESULTS Cortactin expression correlates with differentiation of telencephalic neurons in vivo and in culture To gain an understanding of cortactin function in neurons we examined its developmental patterns of expression . Cortactin levels in homogenized telencephalic tissue from embryonic day ( E5 ) to post hatching day 1 ( PH1 ) were determined by western blot analysis ( a typical blot is shown in Fig . 1A ) . The two forms of cortactin , p80 and p85 , were developmentally regulated during telencephalic histogenesis , with the p80 form established at E6 and the p85 ﬁrst detected a few hours later ( Fig . 1A ) . The level of p80 peaked at E14 and plateaued thereafter , while the level of p85 reached a plateau at E18 . This was a 4 - fold increase in p80 and a 7 - fold increase in the level of p85 from E6 to E18 as quantitated by densitometry . Therefore , in the chick telencephalon cortactin is distinctly upregulated at E6 when neuronal differentiation commences . To assess the differential regulation of the two isoforms in relation to other proteins , we obtained additional developmental proﬁles of the actin - binding cortical cytoskeleton protein vinculin , Src ( a tyrosine kinase which phosphorylates cortactin ) , and Csk ( the tyrosine kinase that phosphorylates Src to inactivate it ) . Proteins were resolved in 10 % SDS gels to accommodate all different molecular masses and western blot analyses was done sequentially with respective speciﬁc antibodies ( a typical blot is shown in Fig . 3164 1B ) . In ﬁve different developmental series , these proteins appeared to have speciﬁc timetables of expression . This facilitated their use as internal references ( Fig . 1B ) . Vinculin expression , detected at very low levels at E6 , was sharply upregulated between E8 and E12 ( Fig . 1B ) ; it then plateaued with no more signiﬁcant ﬂuctuations until E18 . Towards the end of embryogenesis vinculin expression stabilized at lower levels , equal to E12 expression . Src was clearly detected at E7 and reached its maximal expression at E12 . In contrast , Csk expression was established earlier and ceased at E18 , before the end of embryogenesis . To further investigate this increase in cortactin abundance at E6 , we analyzed neuronal cultures derived from the same chick brain area and time point . The E6 neuronal culture system is an established model , where early postmitotic undifferentiated neurons attach rapidly and fully differentiate to long or short axon phenotypes ( Mangoura and Vernadakis , 1988 ; Mangoura et al . , 1988 , 1990 ; Tokioka et al . , 1993 ; Baumgartner et al . , 1994 ; Chada et al . , 1997 ) . At culture days indicated in Fig . 1C , neurons were fractionated into Triton - soluble and Triton - insoluble fractions and normalized amounts of protein were analyzed for cortactin content . p80 was expressed in acutely dissociated neurons , culture day 0 ( C0 ) in the Triton - soluble fraction , while p85 was clearly detectable by C1 ( Fig . 1C , lane C1 , Triton - soluble fraction ) . As neurons began to differentiate , cortactin appeared in both fractions . Hyperphosphorylated forms of cortactin , as evident by their elimination after preincubation with phosphatases ( data not shown ) , were observed only in the Triton fraction ( Fig . 1C , white arrow ) . A cortactin - immunoreactive band of lower mass is most likely nascent or a proteolytic fragment of cortactin , since cortactin C appears weeks postnatal in other vertebrates ( Ohoka and Takai , 1998 ) . Vinculin was sharply upregulated in spurts ( Fig . 1C , arrowhead ) , suggesting that the program for cortical cytoskeleton formation in telencephalic neurons is retained in culture . Immunostaining of neurons with monoclonal antibodies against cortactin at major stages of differentiation further elucidated the targeting of cortactin in telencephalic neurons . Neurites in large somata undergo a stereotyped development ( Mangoura et al . , 1993 ; Chada et al . , 1997 ) similar to that described for rat hippocampal neurons ( Dotti et al . , 1988 ) . Typically , 18 hours after plating , large neuronal somata have multiple processes and polarity ( Fig . 2A - C ) . At this neurite forming stage , intense cortactin immunostaining was observed in growth cones ( arrows in A ) and neuritic spikes ( arrowhead ) . Cortactin staining was also seen in association with the cell cortex ( arrow in B , a medial transverse focus of the same ﬁeld ) and somatic , non adhering processes ( arrow in C , focus is on a higher plane ) . At C2 , cortactin was prominent in growth cones ( arrows in D ) and cell body cortex , in addition to a punctate intracellular staining in the soma ( arrowheads in D and E ) . By C5 , as neurons developed to stage 4 , cortactin staining remained prominent in the cytosol and in neuritic growth cones ( arrows in F ) ; higher concentration in neuritic enlargements or bifurcation points was also apparent ( arrowheads in F ) . When cells were treated with the crosslinker DSP , a process which preserves both soluble and ﬁlamentous cytoskeleton proteins , cortactin staining appeared primarily punctate , dotting along all processes , while expression in the growth cones remained strong ( Fig . 2G ) . The F - actin staining in growth cones strongly resembled that of cortactin , while punctate staining in the soma was observed in focus with the adhering surface ( Fig . 2H ) . However , superimposing the two patterns ( Fig . 2I ) revealed that while cortactin colocalized with the F - actin dots at the adhering surface , several of the cortactin endosomatic concentrations as well as those along the neurites did not colocalize with F - actin . Suppression of cortactin expression in telencephalic neurons with antisense oligonucleotides Cortactin knockout models have not yet been generated , because deletion of one allele of cortactin leads to premature differentiation of embryonic stem cells ( personal Y . Cheng , S . Leung and D . Mangoura Fig . 1 . Developmental regulation of p80 and p85 cortactin levels during differentiation of telencephalic neurons in vivo . ( A ) The temporal expression of cortactin in the telencephalon as detected by western blot analysis in an embryonic series . Frame contains the scan of a typical western blot with the monoclonal 4F11 against cortactin from an 8 % SDS polyacrylamide gel ( 30 m g tissue protein / lane ; total cell homogenates were derived from indicated embryonic days and post - hatching day 1 ) . Cortactin appears at E6 with the onset of neuronal differentiation in the telencephalon and levels of expression increase with further telencephalic development . ( B ) Temporal expression in the chick embryonic telencephalon of vinculin ( 116 kDa ) , cortactin isoforms p80 and p85 ( 80 / 85 kDa ) , Src ( 60 kDa ) , and Csk ( 52 kDa ) , as seen in a typical western blot using whole telencephalic tissue homogenates ( 30 m g of protein / lane resolved on a 10 % SDS - polyacrylamide gel ) as described in Materials and Methods . ( C ) Expression of cortactin ( 80 / 85 ) in telencephalic neurons in culture from C0 to C5 . Neuronal lysate were collected at indicated days in culture , fractionated into Triton - soluble and Triton - insoluble , and analyzed by western blotting with the monoclonal 4F11 against cortactin . White arrow indicates hyperphosphorylated forms of cortactin . Vinculin expression was developmentally regulated as also seen in vivo and was detected only as Triton - soluble ( arrowhead ) . 3165 Cortactin regulates GABAergic phenotypes communication , Dr Akira Imamoto , The University of Chicago ) . At the cellular level , the use of antisense oligonucleotides has been a successful approach for dose - dependent reversible depression of protein expression and the method of choice for postmitotic neurons ( Ferreira et al . , 1994 ; DiTella et al . , 1996 ; Mundigl et al . , 1998 ; Paglini et al . , 1998 ) . Therefore , to explore the function of cortactin we inhibited cortactin translation with S - modiﬁed ( phosphorothioate ) Fig . 2 . Subcellular targeting of cortactin with differentiation in telencephalic neurons . Neurons ﬁxed with 4 % PFA and immunostained for cortactin were viewed at 18 hour ( A - C ) , 2 days ( D and E ) , or 5 days in culture ( F ) , as described in Materials and Methods . ( A - C ) Three different focal planes in the z dimension of a random ﬁeld . Cortactin staining can be seen concentrated in growth cones ( A , arrows ) , neuritic spikes ( A , arrowhead ) and in the cell cortex ( arrows in B and C ) . ( D and E ) Cortactin staining remains intense in growth cones ( D , arrows ) ; however , it now appears stronger in the cytoplasm with a punctate pattern , arrowheads in D and in E ( a higher focal plane of D ) . ( F ) In this montage of images from neurons stained for cortactin at C5 arrows point to growth cones and arrowheads to intensely stained areas at curvatures or bifurcations along neuritic processes . ( G - H ) C3 neurons were treated with DSP , extracted , ﬁxed and then double stained for cortactin ( G ) or rhodamine - phalloidin , as described in Materials and Methods . Cortactin staining remained in the growth cones and colocalized with F - actin resembled that of cortactin . However , superimposing the two images ( I ) of the same focal plane ( G and H ) revealed that while cortactin colocalized with the F - actin at the adhering surface dots , several of the cortactin endosomatic concentrations as well as those along the neurites did not colocalize with F - actin . 3166 antisense oligodeoxynucleotides ( ODN ) in E6 telencephalic neurons in culture . A number of ODNs were designed and tested for effectiveness or cell toxicity , as described in Materials and Methods . Western blot analysis or immunoprecipitation of total cell homogenates with 4F11 showed no effect on cortactin abundance with any of the ODNs used , except with the antisense ODN - A ( Fig . 3A ) . This fragment covers the ﬁrst four amino acids and extends the rest of its length into the untranslated region ( the sequence of ODNs and treatment schedule are described in Materials and Methods ) . Moreover , the suppression was possible only when ODN - A was added one hour after plating , before the normal increase in cortactin expression was established at C1 ( Fig . 1C ) . Cortactin suppression was clearly apparent 18 hours later ( Fig . 3B , C1 ) and maximal by 36 hours ( Fig . 3B , C2 ) , when an 80 % and 50 % reduction of p85 and p80 abundance was achieved respectively , as estimated by densitometry in several separate immunoprecipitation or whole cell lysate experiments . The inhibition of cortactin synthesis by antisense ODN - A was completely reversible . Levels of cortactin resumed a control level at C3 and remained normal thereafter ( Fig . 3B , C5 ) . The expression and developmental proﬁle of other proteins was not altered , as shown in Fig . 3C . Speciﬁcally , expression of beta - catenin remain steady as in all controls , while tubulin and actin showed no abnormality for date in culture ﬂuctuation due to antisense treatments ( Fig . 3C ) . Transient suppression of cortactin synthesis in immature neurons leads to permanent neuritic remodeling in large telencephalic neurons Our previous studies on the effects of enkephalins have indicated that a single exposure may control long - term phenotypes , including both the morphology and the neurotransmitter expression . Thus , we investigated whether the transient suppression of cortactin with antisense oligonucleotides could have possibly induced a similar sequence of events . ODN - A treatment greatly remodeled the patterns of neuritic outgrowth in large projectional neurons but did not affect their somatic size or shape . Large ( > 15 m m ) somata , either pyramidal with prominent apical dendrites ( Fig . 4A , lower arrowhead ; also Fig . 2F ) , or stellate ( 4A , upper arrowhead ) comprise the majority in the E6 neuronal culture system ( 60 % ; Table 1 ; Mangoura et al . , 1990 ) . Almost exclusively these large neurons extend one major often bifurcated process ( 4A , open arrow ) with axonal properties , as suggested by its ultramicroscopic features and GAP43 staining ( Mangoura et al . , 1993 ; Chada et al . , 1997 ) . Interneurons with smaller size ( < 15 m m ) , stellate or oval somata , and short processes ( underlined in Fig . 4A ) constitute 38 % of the neuronal count ( Table 1 ) . About 2 % of neurons could not be classiﬁed . Reﬂecting in vivo events , astroblasts constitute less than 1 % of the total cell count for up to 9 days in culture ( Mangoura , 1997 ; Chada et al . , 1997 ) . In sharp contrast to controls , large pyramidal and large stellate neuronal somata treated with antisense oligonucleotide ODN - A no longer exhibited a process of prominent length ( Fig . 4B ) . The length of this major process was signiﬁcantly reduced from an average of 196±13 m m in vehicle or sense - treated cultures to an average of 65±5 m m in ODN - A treated neurons ( P < 0 . 01 ) . The neuritic remodeling included a reduction in dendrite outgrowth ( Fig . 4A versus B ; Fig . 5A versus B ) . The morphology and occurrence of growth cones was also greatly altered by antisense ODN - A treatment . In contrast to the usual modest growth cones in controls ( Fig . 3A , arrow ) , cortactin ODN - A - treated large soma neurons exhibited a signiﬁcantly enlarged lamellipodial veil surface in growth cones ( > 5 - fold ) ( Fig . 4B , Y . Cheng , S . Leung and D . Mangoura Fig . 3 . Inhibition of cortactin translation by antisense oligonucleotides . ( A ) Speciﬁcity of antisense inhibition on cortactin expression at C2 . 20 m g of cell lysate protein were loaded from cultures treated with cortactin antisense ODN - A and ODN - B , or ODN - C ( scrambled ODN - A ) and ODN - D ( sense ODN - A ) ; proteins were resolved on an 8 % polyacrylamide gel and further analyzed with western blotting as described in Materials and Methods . ( B ) Reversible inhibition of p80 and p85 cortactin . The frame contains a typical western blot of immunoprecipitated cortactin from 200 m g total cell homogenate protein from control ( vehicle ) - or antisense oligonucleotide - A ( ODN - A ) - treated neurons at indicated days in culture . ODN - A was introduced into the medium at C0 at 5 m g / ml ; maximal suppression of cortactin p80 and p85 expression by a 50 % and 80 % , respectively , was achieved by C2 . ( C ) ODN - A treatment speciﬁcally suppressed cortactin . 10 m g of protein from control ( vehicle ) or ODN - A at C2 and C4 were resolved on an 8 % polyacrylamide gel and further analyzed with western blotting as described in Materials and Methods . ODN - A did not have any effect on the expression or developmental regulation of the cytoskeleton proteins actin and tubulin , or the membrane protein b - catenin . 3167 Cortactin regulates GABAergic phenotypes arrows ; Fig . 5B , arrowheads ) . Moreover , antisense - treated large neurons exhibited supernumerary growth cones , as each of their major neurites was led by a growth cone with numerous and signiﬁcantly elongated ﬁlopodia ( Fig . 4B and small arrows in Fig . 5D ) . Analysis of vehicle , sense ODN - D - treated neurons ( n = 1 , 000 cells each group over 40 separate experiments ) , ODN - A - treated ( n = 2 , 000 ) and samples of 100 neurons for each of ODN - B and ODN - C treatments revealed that these ﬁndings were speciﬁc to antisense ODN - A . However , no morphological irregularities in small neurons with any ODN treatment were identiﬁed ( underlined neurons in Fig . 3 ; nicked arrowheads in Fig . 5A and B ) . Antisense treatment does not select neuron type or induce proliferation To examine whether the observed morphologies were due to modiﬁcation of the original neuronal population or whether a new subtype had been fostered , we assessed the ratio of small ( < 15 m m ) to large ( > 15 m m ) neurons , from C1 to C5 ( described in Materials and Methods ) . These experiments revealed that the normal 40 : 60 ratio of small to large somata was maintained in antisense ODN - A treated cultures at all time points ( Table 1 ) . We also found that there was no statistically signiﬁcant difference between the number of neurons in the controls ( vehicle and sense ODN - treated ) and in the antisense treated cultures or with different plating densities shown in Figs 4 and 5 , respectively . Therefore , large neurons were not preferentially eliminated with the antisense treatment . Furthermore , the possibility of regression of the E6 postmitotic neurons to a proliferative state and preferential proliferation of a rare phenotype was excluded after BrdU uptake assays ( Cheng et al . , 2000 ; Mangoura et al . , 2000 ) . This assay performed at 18 hour intervals from C0 to C5 showed no BrdU - positive nuclei ( not shown ) , therefore negligible mitotic activity . Taken together this data implies that the antisense treatment did not cause any type of preferential survival or proliferation and that a true modiﬁcation of the original large neuronal population had occurred . Transient suppression of cortactin induces a GABAergic phenotype in differentiated large telencephalic neurons Lowering the level of cortactin at a critical developmental time point for higher expression appeared to shift the morphology of large neurons towards that of GABAergic interneurons . The precise genetic program that constitutes a GABAergic interneuron is not known , with the exception of some speciﬁc markers namely the expression of GABA itself and the expression and speciﬁc activity of the GABA synthesizing enzyme glutamic acid decarboxylase ( GAD ) . Expression of GABA at the single cell level was established by quantitation of GABA - immunostained neurons , as described in Materials and Methods and in Mangoura et al . , 1988 , 1990 . We found a signiﬁcant increase in GABA - positive Fig . 4 . Remodeling of major process in projectional telencephalic neurons after inhibition of cortactin translation . E6 neurons were plated at low density , ﬁxed at C6 , stained with DiI , and analyzed for differences in cell body size and major process length , as described in Materials and Methods : Control ( A ) and antisense ODN - A - treated long projection neurons ( B ) differ signiﬁcantly , in the length of their major process ( arrowheads ) , in dendritic morphologies , and in growth cone development ( arrows ) , but not in cell body size and shape , or cell numbers per ﬁeld ( Results and Table 1 ) ; in contrast short axon phenotypes have not been affected ( double arrows ) . 3168 neurons in the antisense - treated cultures from a 22 . 9±3 % to 71 . 6±5 % ( Table 1 ) . Morphometry of GABA - positive neurons revealed that the percentage and GABA expression in short axon neurons was maintained in the cortactin - suppressed neurons , making the contribution of GABA - positive neurons by small neuronal minimal ( nicked arrowheads in Fig . 5A versus B ; Table 1 ) . The observed 3 - fold increase in GABA - positive neurons was the result of the novel ectopic expression of GABA in large pyramidal and large stellate neuronal somata ( arrows in Fig . 5D ) . Similar soma morphologies did not express GABA in control cultures ( Fig . 5C , arrow ) . Comparative analysis of all treatment groups and the vehicle control showed that only antisense ODN - A induced this speciﬁc ectopic induction of GABA expression . In telencephalic development , increases in GAD activity correspond closely to GAD mRNA increases , ﬁrst seen at E8 . Similarly , in E8 telencephalic neurons in culture , GAD65 mRNA is detected after 24 - 48 hours in culture , when GAD activity can also be assayed ( Mangoura and Vernadakis , 1988 ; Ahman et al . , 1996 ; Lundgren et al . , 1997 ) . However , GAD activity is barely detected in whole embryos prior to E6 and undetectable in E6 cultures prior to C4 ( Mangoura et al . , 1988 ; Lundgren et al . , 1997 ) . Thus , to start addressing the mechanism of the observed phenotypic shift , we ﬁrst analyzed GAD Y . Cheng , S . Leung and D . Mangoura Fig . 5 . Remodeling of the major process in large projectional telencephalic neurons after cortactin suppression is coupled to ectopic expression of GABA . Differences in morphology ( phase microphotograph A versus B ) and numbers of GABA - positive somata ( C and D light images of A and B , respectively ) between optical ﬁelds with equal numbers of neurons in control , A and C , and in antisense ODN - A - treated cultures , B and D , at C6 ( cultures were plated at regular density ) . Small oval or stellate but not large pyramidal or stellate phenotype neurons express GABA in control cultures ( A and C , nicked arrowhead ) . Both the expression of GABA and the morphology of interneurons are not altered by treatment with cortactin antisense ODN - A ( B and D , nicked arrowhead ) . ( D ) Induction of GABA expression in large pyramidal and large stellate neuronal somata after an earlier transient suppression of cortactin with antisense ODN - A . This de novo , ectopic expression of GABA in large neurons ( arrows ) was quantitated as described in Materials and Methods and is presented in Table 1 . Features of the neuritic remodeling in large telencephalic neurons are described in detail in results . ( E ) The control for the primary antibody to GABA . Bar , 36 m m . Table 1 . Effects of cortactin suppression on GABA expression in E6 telencephalic neurons in culture Long axon phenotype Short axon phenotype Pyramidal Large stellate Basket Bitufted , fusiform Neuronal phenotypes C / S AS C / S AS C / S AS C / S AS % Total neuronal population 25 25 35 32 25 28 13 13 GABA - ( + ) , % per phenotype 1 75 * 2 85 * 40 50 90 90 For classiﬁcation as a short axon phenotype the criteria applied were the shape of pericaryon , a pericaryal diameter of less than 15 m m , and an < 100 m m length of any process . For classiﬁcation as a long axon phenotype neuron , three criteria had to apply : one pericaryal diameter of more than 15 m m , a triangular shape of pericaryon for the pyramidal or a polygonal for the large stellate , and an > 100 m m length of at least one process . In antisense ( AS ) ODN - A - treated cultures , the length requirement was omitted ; hence , percentages of morphological phenotypes as measured by pericarya shape and size did not differ between control ( C ) , sense ( S ) - and antisense ODN - A - treated cultures . GABA expression was identiﬁed on a single - cell basis by immunocytochemistry , as described in Results . Percentages were calculated from mean values from 50 separate dissociations ( n = 1000 cells for sense ODN - D - and vehicle - treated neurons , and 2 , 000 for antisense ODN - A - treated ) ( s . e . m . ≤ 1 ) . Asterisk indicated statistical signiﬁcance at P < 0 . 001 . 3169 Cortactin regulates GABAergic phenotypes expression at the mRNA level with RT - PCR at C2 , when E6 cultures have yet to express GAD65 mRNA or GAD activity . Fig . 6 shows a typical agarose gel with the ampliﬁed products from 50 ng of mRNA per experimental group . While there is no expression in either the control ( lane 1 ) , sense - treated ( lane 2 ) , or ODN - B - treated ( lane 3 ) cultures at C2 , the primers recognized a fragment of 100 bp in antisense ODN - A - treated cultures ( lane 4 ) . The fragment was subsequently cloned and sequenced ( as described in Materials and Methods ) to conﬁrm the nucleotide sequence , which was identical with the reported chicken GAD . The level of expression in antisense - treated cultures was also 2 - fold higher than the corresponding E8 telencephalon level ( lane 5 ) , or whole brain ( lane 6 ) . Therefore , cortactin suppression in telencephalic neurons in culture induced a signiﬁcantly earlier expression of GAD message . To conﬁrm both expression of GAD protein and proper enzyme activity , GAD enzymatic assays were performed also at C2 ( commercially available antibodies do not recognize chicken GAD ) . While the speciﬁc activity of GAD was negligible in the vehicle - treated cultures at C2 ( 0 . 53±0 . 2 nmol / hour / mg protein ) , GAD activity was detected at 3 . 41±0 . 26 nmol / hour / mg protein ( P < 0 . 001 ) in ODN - A - treated cultures . These ﬁndings postulate that cortactin suppression was tightly coupled to a signiﬁcantly earlier , functional expression of GAD . DISCUSSION The role of the actin - binding protein cortactin in growth factor - induced signaling events has been well documented . In this study we demonstrate for the ﬁrst time that cortactin regulates the morphology and neurotransmitter expression in large developing neurons . Developmental regulation and subcellular localization of cortactin in developing neurons At embryonic day 6 of telencephalic development , expression of cortactin was sharply upregulated ( Fig . 1 ) . At E6 , over 70 % of all telencephalic neurons and 90 % of cortical neurons have been generated and have begun to differentiate ; astrocytes are mostly generated after E10 ( Tsai et al . , 1981 ) . Therefore , the upregulation of cortactin reﬂected primarily a neuronal event . Vinculin , was upregulated at E8 and E12 , two embryonic days marking the differentiation of massive cell numbers of neurons and astrocytes , respectively . Increases in Src expression appeared later than cortactin and correlated closer with the vinculin expression . Expression of Csk , the Src regulatory tyrosine kinase , was initiated earlier than Src and declined before the end of embryogenesis ( Fig . 1A ) . A similar pattern is seen in the mouse , where Csk is a determinant of neural tube formation ( Imamoto and Soriano , 1993 ) . Thus , cortactin expression correlates closely with neuronal differentiation . Analysis of telencephalic neurons in culture yielded similar proﬁles of expression of vinculin and cortactin to those in vivo ( Fig . 1 ) , as previously shown for a number of other developmental programs ( Mangoura et al . , 1993 , 1988 ; Mangoura and Vernadakis , 1988 ; Schwartz et al . , 1996 ) . Vinculin was found mostly in the Triton - soluble fraction , as reported in other cell types ( Simcha et al . , 1998 ) , and was ﬁrst upregulated after C1 which corresponds to E7 in vivo . Vinculin was expressed later than cortactin only after the initiation of neurites , supporting a previously proposed secondary role of vinculin in neuritic formation ( Varnum - Finney and Reichardt , 1994 ) . In contrast , the increase in cortactin p80 and p85 expression was tightly coupled to cell differentiation in culture ( Fig . 1C and Fig . 2 ) . Both the in vivo and the in culture proﬁle of cortactin expression suggest a neuronal differentiation role for the protein during the period of phenotype acquisition . The developmental pattern of expression shows that the subcellular localization of cortactin was not random . In Triton - lysed cells , hydrophobic protein complexes and polymerized actin are sedimented in the Triton - insoluble fraction ( Hartwig , 1992 ) . Cortactin appeared steadily in both fractions as the total abundance increased with differentiation ( Fig . 1B ) . Cortactin mobilization is driven by activated signaling molecules in neurons and non - neuronal cells , where it serves distinct functions such as cell aggregation and process formation ( Wu et al . , 1991 ; Huang et al . , 1997 ; Mangoura , 1997 ; Kinnunen et al . , 1998 ; Weed et al . , 1998 ) . Therefore , cortactin is actively targeted by signaling events into distinct subcellular compartments during neurite outgrowth . The immunostaining pattern of cortactin further shows that cortactin may participate in specialized functions . In early neurons cortactin was primarily targeted to the cell cortex , which supports the idea that cortactin participates in neuronal membrane budding events . However , as neuronal processes began to extend , cortactin appeared concentrated in areas with a high rate of membrane recycling , such as growing tips ( Cremona et al . , 1999 ) . With differentiation , cortactin was also observed concentrated in points of process bifurcation and in some Triton - resistant intracellular compartment , particularly when neurons were treated with DSP . Lipid - soluble DSP crosslinks and stabilizes macromolecular cytoskeleton structures ( Saﬁejko - Mroczka and Bell , 1996 ) , while it retains kinase activities in preformed signaling complexes ( Dorahy et al . , 1995 ) . Translocation of cortactin , essential for cell motility , has been shown in 3T3 ﬁbroblasts , when growth factor activated Rac1 or the constitutively active Rac1L61 cause cortactin to colocalize with F - actin ( Weed et al . , 1998 ) . Given that Rac1 is also involved in dendrite formation and growth cone guidance ( Luo et al . , 1996 ; Threadgill et al . , 1997 ) , our data suggest that cortactin interacts with small GTPases . It is Fig . 6 . Inhibition of cortactin translation induces premature expression of GAD . A typical gel of RT - PCR analysis of GAD transcripts in control ( lane 1 ) , sense ODN - D ( lane 2 ) , antisense ODN - B ( lane 3 ) , and cortactin antisense ODN - A - treated cultures ( lane 4 ) . Each lane contains the product of 50 ng mRNA per sample after it was reverse transcribed and ampliﬁed with GAD primers , as described in Materials and Methods . The 170 - bp fragment was sequenced and veriﬁed to match the known chick GAD65 . At C2 , GAD message was undetectable in all controls , but its expression in antisense ODN - A - treated cultures was prematurely induced to levels higher than in the corresponding E8 telencephalic tissue ( lane 5 ) or whole brain tissue ( lane 6 ) ( S = 100 base pair ladder ) . 3170 tempting to speculate that these ﬂuorescent concentrations may reﬂect association of cortactin with some vesicular population ( s ) known to interact with the cytoskeleton , as seen in the rat ( Ohoka and Takai , 1998 ) . Cortactin suppression in immature neurons leads to long term phenotypic changes in large telencephalic neurons When neurons differentiated in culture , several aspects of the large neuron phenotype were affected by the ODN - A - treatment , whereas interneuron - like phenotypes were unaffected . Morphology While the soma polarity was maintained , the neuritic pattern was signiﬁcantly modiﬁed by the appearance of supernumerary growth cones with elongated ﬁlopodia and enlarged lamellipodia veil as well as signiﬁcant shortening of the major axon - like process ( Figs 4 and 5 ) . Microtubules and microtubule - associated proteins ( MAPs ) are essential for axonal elongation ( i . e . Sharp et al . , 1996 ) and antisense depletion of MAPs leads to inhibition of axonal elongation ( Caceres et al . , 1992 ; DiTella et al . , 1996 ) . However , phenotypes that emerged from treatment with the microtubule - disrupting agent nocodazole did not resemble the ODN - A phenotype ( not shown ) . The effect of cortactin suppression was as dramatic as with constant antisense inhibition of two microtubule - associated proteins Tau and MAP1 - b ( DiTella et al . , 1996 ) . In contrast , axonal inhibition was maintained days after the suppression of cortactin was relieved , indicating a permanent modulation of the axonal phenotype . Besides microtubules , F - actin plays an important role in axonal elongation ( Marsh and Letourneau , 1984 ; Bradke and Dotti , 1999 ) . Microtubules do not randomly invade the growth cone , but rather follow cues from F - actin structures ( Hely and Willshaw , 1999 ) , while vesicular transport , necessary for elongation , requires ‘crosstalk’ between the axonal microtubular and the growth cone actin network ( Huang et al . , 1999 ) . Moreover and in addition to actin - depolymerizing and Rho family GTPase - inactivating toxins , inhibition of elongation has also been achieved with antisense depletion of amphiphysin I which colocalizes with F - actin in the growth cone ( Mundigl et al . , 1998 ) . Therefore , depletion of cortactin , a protein known to bind F - actin ( Wu et al . , 1994 ; Huang et al . , 1997 ) , could have affected the F - actin networks and subsequently vesicular transport or microtubule organization . However , the disruption of the F - actin network alone could not account for the observed increases in the ﬁlopodial protrusive activity and lamellipodial veil size , or the appearance of growth cones in virtually all neurites . On the contrary , disruption of F - actin is most often associated with decreased growth cone size . Filopodial protrusive activity was signiﬁcantly induced with concomitant antisense suppression of radixin and moesin ( Paglini et al . , 1998 ) . These proteins bind F - actin under certain conditions ( Bretscher , 1999 ) , and in that sense their deprivation may produce similar phenotypes to those observed with cortactin deprivation . The opposing results in lamellipodial size of ERM suppression ( Paglini et al . , 1998 ; Castello and Jay , 1999 ) and cortactin suppression indicate that cortactin may counterbalance ERM protein action for growth cone size . The effect appears speciﬁc to cortactin as neither long - or short - term disruption of the actin network with cytochalasin D ( not shown ) induced similar phenotypes with ODN - A . Our data thus indicates that depletion of cortactin in immature neurons modiﬁed the program for growth cone formation and neuritic elongation . Neurotransmitter expression Suppression of cortactin led also to an earlier expression of GAD65 , namely at C2 ( 36 hours ) , compared to control cultures which do not express GAD65 message at this point . In fact , GAD activity or message is undetectable prior to C4 from E6 telencephalon , but prominent in cultures derived from E8 by C2 ( Mangoura and Vernadakis , 1988 ; Ahman et al . , 1996 ) , several days before synapse formation ( Lewin et al . , 1992 ) . The induction of GAD65 transcription occurred in the immature neurons within a few hours after cortactin suppression and resulted in high GAD enzymatic activity . More importantly , morphometry of the immunostained neurons revealed that increases in GABA - positive neurons in ODN - A treated cultures were due to the ectopic expression of GABA in large neurons ( Fig . 5 ; Table 1 ) . The combined effects of cortactin suppression on the axon - like process length and the induction of GABA in large neurons , suggests that the earlier appearance of GAD65 message in ODN - A treated cultures was also due to GAD expression in the same set of large neurons . Cortactin has been previously implicated as a developmental switch , for example , it disengages the FGF signaling from mitosis in senescent ﬁbroblast ( Garﬁnkel et al . , 1996 ) . Such switches would appear necessary in development to coordinate neurotransmitter expression with the projectional ability of neurons prior to synapse formation . The simultaneous regulation of multiple genes by cortactin implies involvment of transcription factors , an established mechanism for several other cytoskeleton proteins which act by binding transcription factor ( s ) ( protein or mRNA ) ( Crepieux et al . , 1997 ; Simcha et al . , 1998 ) . For example , vinculin resides in the cortical cytoskeleton and in focal adhesions , but it may bind to b - catenin when b - catenin is upregulated . Beta - catenin binds speciﬁcally to lymphoid - enhancing binding factor / T cell factor ( LEF / TCF ) transcription factor . The trimeric vinculin - — catenin - LEF complex translocates into the nucleus to regulate LEF / TCF - responsive genes ( Behrens et al . , 1996 ; Simcha et al . , 1998 ) . This is a ﬁne example of a protein complex with a role in acute cellular events and in long - term phenotypic regulation . Cortactin is also acutely phosphorylated after activation of membrane receptors coupled to Src activation and its phosphorylation causes drastic changes in intracellular targeting , but the function of these drastic changes is not yet clear ( Garﬁnkel et al . , 1996 ; Mangoura et al . , 1997 ; Kinnunen , 1998 ; Weed et al . , 1998 ) . Thus , it remains to be determined whether the mechanism of induction of GAD65 mRNA by cortactin in neurons is similar to that of vinculin in non - neuronal cells . The possibility that the observed phenotype results from the action of cortactin - binding proteins is unlikely , since the currently known such proteins appear later in development ( i . e . CBP90 ; Ohoka and Takai , 1998 ) . In conclusion , our results show that in large telencephalic neurons about to assume their functional phenotypes , the abundance of cortactin plays a signiﬁcant role in silencing genes from the GABAergic program . Regulation of cortactin may be achieved through signal transduction cascades , generated by Y . Cheng , S . Leung and D . Mangoura 3171 Cortactin regulates GABAergic phenotypes receptors with distinct temporal and spatial expression patterns during telencephalic histogenesis ( Heuer et al . , 1990 ) . Thus , cortactin regulation may be part of the mechanism for generating distinct neuronal phenotypes within cohorts of neurons . We thank Drs P . Huttenlocher , A . P . Fox , and R . L . Perlman for their critical reviews of this paper and G . Burrel for editioral help . Supported by the National Institutes Grant HD - 09402 and Brain Research Foundation to D . M . REFERENCES Ahman , A . - K . , Wagberg , F . and Mattsson , M . - O . ( 1996 ) . Two glutamate decarboxylase forms corresponding to the mammalian GAD65 and GAD67 are expressed during development of the chick telencephalon . Eur . J . Neurosci . 8 , 2111 - 2117 . Baumgartner , B . J . , Harvey , R . J . , Darlison , M . G . and Barnes , E . M . Jr ( 1994 ) . Developmental up - regulation and agonist - dependent down - regulation of GABAA receptor subunit mRNAs in chick cortical neurons . Mol . Brain Res . 26 , 9 - 17 . Behrens , J . , von Kries , J . P . , Kuhl , M . , Bruhn , L . , Wedlich , D . , Grosschedl , R . and Birchmeier , W . ( 1996 ) . Functional interaction of beta - catenin with the transcription factor LEF - 1 Nature 382 , 638 - 642 . Bennett , V . , Davis , J . and Fowler , W . E . ( 1982 ) . Brain spectrin , a membrane - associated protein related in structure and function to erythrocyte spectrin . Nature 299 , 126 - 131 . Bishop , J . M . ( 1985 ) . Viral oncogenes Cell 42 , 23 - 28 . Bradke , F . and Dotti , C . G . ( 1999 ) . The role of local actin instability in axon formation . Science 283 , 1931 - 1934 . Bray , D . , Heath , J . and Moss , D . J . ( 1986 ) . The membrane - associated ‘cortex’ of animal cells : its structure and mechanical properties . J . Cell Sci . Suppl . 4 , 71 - 88 . Bretscher , A . ( 1999 ) . Regulation of cortical structure by the ezrin - radixin - moesin protein family . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 11 , 109 - 116 . Caceres , A . , Mautino , J . and Kosik , K . S . ( 1992 ) . Suppression of MAP2 in cultured cerebellar macroneurons inhibits minor neurite formation . Neuron 9 , 607 - 618 . Castelo , L . and Jay , D . G . ( 1999 ) . Radixin is involved in lamellipodial stability during nerve growth cone motility . Mol . Biol . Cell 10 , 1511 - 1520 . Chada , S . , Lamoureux , P . , Buxbaum , R . E . and Heidemann , S . R . ( 1997 ) . Cytomechanics of neurite outgrowth from chick brain neurons . J . Cell Sci . 110 , 1179 - 1186 . Cheng , Y . , Zhizhin , I . , Perlman , R . L . , Mangoura , D . ( 2000 ) . Prolactin - induced cell proliferation in PC12 cells depends on JNK but not ERK1 / 2 activation . http : / / www . jbc . org / cgi / reprint / M001837200v1 ( in press ) . Cremona , O . , Di Paolo , G . , Wenk , M . R . , Luthi , A . , Kim , W . T . , Takei , K . , Daniell , L . , Nemoto , Y . , Shears , S . B . , Flavell , R . A . , McCormick , D . A . , De Camilli , P . ( 1999 ) . Essential role of phosphoinositide metabolism in synaptic vesicle recycling . Cell 99 , 179 - 188 . Crepieux , P . , Kwon , H . , Leclerc , N . , Spencer , W . , Richard , S . , Lin , R . and Hiscott , J . ( 1997 ) . I kappaB alpha physically interacts with a cytoskeleton - associated protein through its signal response domain . Mol . Cell Biol . 17 , 7375 - 7385 . DeFelipe , J . and Jones , E . G . ( 1988 ) . Cahal on the Cerebral Cortex . Oxford University Press , New York . DiTella , M . C . , Feiguin , F . , Carri , N . , Kosik , K . S . and Caceres , A . ( 1996 ) . MAP - 1B / TAU functional redundancy during laminin - enhanced axonal growth . J . Cell Sci . 109 , 467 - 477 . Dorahy , D . J . , Berndt , M . C . and Burns , G . F . ( 1995 ) Capture by chemical crosslinkers provides evidence that integrin alpha IIb beta 3 forms a complex with protein tyrosine kinases in intact platelets . Biochem . J . 309 , 481 - 490 . Dotti , C . G . , Sullivan , C . A . and Banker , G . A . ( 1988 ) . The establishment of polarity by hippocampal neurons in culture . J . Neurosci . 8 , 1454 - 1468 . Ferreira , A . , Kosik , K . S . , Greengard , P . and Han , H . Q . ( 1994 ) . Aberrant neurites and synaptic vesicle protein deﬁciency in synapsin II - depleted neurons . Science 264 , 977 - 979 . Fox , J . W . , Lamperti , E . D . , Eksioglu , Y . Z . , Hong , S . E . , Feng , Y . , Graham , D . A . , Scheffer , I . E . , Dobyns , W . B . , Hirsch , B . A . , Radtke , R . A . , Berkovic , S . F . , Huttenlocher , P . R . and Walsh , C . A . ( 1998 ) . Mutations in ﬁlamin 1 prevent migration of cerebral cortical neurons in human periventricular heterotopia . Neuron 21 , 1315 - 1325 . Garﬁnkel , S . , Hu , X . , Prudovsky , I . A . , McMahon , G . A . , Kapnik , E . M . , McDowell , S . D . and Maciag , T . ( 1996 ) . FGF - 1 - dependent proliferative and migratory responses are impaired in senescent human umbilical vein endothelial cells and correlate with the inability to signal tyrosine phosphorylation of ﬁbroblast growth factor receptor - substrates . J . Cell Biol . 134 , 783 - 791 . Hartwig , J . H . ( 1992 ) . Mechanisms of actin rearrangements mediating platelet activation . J . Cell Biol . 118 , 1421 - 1442 . Hauser , K . and Mangoura , D . ( 1998 ) . Diversity of the endogenous opioid system in development : novel signal transduction translates multiple extracellular signals into neural cell growth and differentiation . Prosp . Dev . Neurobiol . 5 , 437 - 449 . Hely , T . A . and Willshaw , D . J . ( 1998 ) . Short - term interactions between microtubules and actin ﬁlaments underlie long - term behaviour in neuronal growth cones . Proc . R Soc . Lond . B Biol . Sci . 265 , 1801 - 1807 . Heuer , J . G . , von Bartheld , C . S . , Kinoshita , Y . , Evers , P . C . and Bothwell , M . ( 1990 ) . Alternating phases of FGF receptor and NGF receptor expression in the developing chicken nervous system . Neuron 5 , 283 - 296 . Huang , C . , Ni , Y . , Wang , T . , Gao , Y . , Haudenschild , C . C . and Zhan , X . ( 1997 ) . Down - regulation of the ﬁlamentous actin cross - linking activity of cortactin by Src - mediated tyrosine phosphorylation . J . Biol . Chem . 272 , 13911 - 13915 . Huang , J . D . , Brady , S . T . , Richards , B . W . , Stenolen , D . , Resau , J . H . , Copeland , N . G . and Jenkins , N . A . ( 1999 ) . Direct interaction of microtubule - and actin - based transport motors . Nature 397 , 267 - 270 . Ignelzi , M . A . , Miller , D . R . , Soriano , P . and Maness , P . F . ( 1994 ) . Impaired neurite outgrowth of src - minus cerebellar neurons on the cell adhesion molecule L1 . Neuron 12 , 873 - 884 . Imamoto , A . and Soriano , P . ( 1993 ) . Disruption of the Csk gene , encoding a negative regulator of Src family tyrosine kinases , leads to neural tube defects and embryonic lethality in mice . Cell 73 , 1117 - 1124 . Kinnunen , T . , Kaksonen , M . , Saarinen , J . , Kalkkinen , N . , Peng , H . B . and Rauvala , H . ( 1998 ) . Cortactin - Src kinase signaling pathway is involved in N - syndecan - dependent neurite outgrowth . J . Biol . Chem . 273 , 10702 - 10708 . Kudoh , S . N . , Matsuo , A . , Kiyosue , K . , Kasai , M . and Taguchi , T . ( 1997 ) . Long - lasting enhancement of synaptic activity in dissociated cerebral neurons induced by brief exposure to Mg 2 + - free conditions . Neurosci . Res . 28 , 337 - 344 . Lewin , L . , Mattsson , M . O . , Grahn , B . , Sellstrom , A . ( 1994 ) . Inhibition of SKF 89976 - A of the gamma - aminobutyric acid release from primary neuronal chick cultures . Acta Physiol . Scand . 152 , 173 - 179 . Lundgren , P . , Johansson , L . , Englund , C . , Sellstrom , A . and Mattsson , M . O . ( 1997 ) . Expression pattern of glutamate decarboxylase ( GAD ) in the developing cortex of the embryonic chick brain . Int . J . Dev . Neurosci . 15 , 127 - 137 . Luo , L . , Hensch , T . K . , Ackerman , L . , Barbel , S . , Jan , L . Y . and Jan , Y . N . ( 1996 ) . Differential effects of the Rac GTPase on Purkinje cell axons and dendritic trunks and spines . Nature 379 , 837 - 840 . Mangoura , D . and Vernadakis , A . ( 1988 ) . GABAergic neurons in cultures derived from three six or eight - day - old chick embryos : a biochemical and immunocytochemical study . Brain Res . 40 , 37 - 46 . Mangoura , D . , Sakellaridis , N . and Vernadakis , A . ( 1988 ) . Cholinergic neurons in cultures derived from three six or eight - day - old chick embryos : a biochemical and immunocytochemical study . Brain Res . 40 , 25 - 36 . Mangoura , D . , Sakellaridis , N . and Vernadakis , A . ( 1990 ) . Evidence for plasticity in phenotypic neurotransmitter expression in culture . Brain Res . 51 , 93 - 101 . Mangoura , D . , Sogos , V . and Dawson , G . ( 1993 ) . PKC - e is a developmentally regulated , neuronal isoform in the chick embryo CNS chick embryo . J . Neurosci . Res . 35 , 488 - 498 . Mangoura , D . ( 1997 ) . m - Opioid peptides activate FAK and cortical cytoskeleton proteins cortactin and vinculin in chick embryonic neurons . J . Neurosci . Res . 50 , 391 - 401 . Mangoura , D . , Cheng , Y . , Sakellaridis , N . and Leung , S . ( 1997 ) . EGF activates FAK and ERK2 to regulate the cytoskeleton in cortical neuroblasts and neurons . Soc . Neurosci . 23 , 1706 . Mangoura , D . , Pelletiere , C . , Leung , S . , Sakellaridis , N . and Wang , D . ( 2000 ) . Prolactin activates the JAK / Stat and Src - PLD signaling pathways to concurrently promote differentiation and mitosis in embryonic astrocytes . Int . J . Dev . Neurosc . ( in press ) . Marsh , L . and Letourneau , P . C . ( 1984 ) . Growth of neurites without ﬁlopodial or lamellipodial activity in the presence of cytochalasin B . J . Cell Biol . 99 , 2041 - 2047 . Mundigl , O . , Ochoa , G . C . , David , C . , Slepnev , V . I . , Kabanov , A . and De 3172 Camilli , P . ( 1998 ) . Amphiphysin I antisense oligonucleotides inhibit neurite outgrowth in cultured hippocampal neurons . J . Neurosci . 18 , 93 - 103 . Ohoka , Y . and Takai , Y . ( 1998 ) . Isolation and characterization of cortactin isoforms and a novel cortactin - binding protein , CBP90 . Genes Cells 3 , 603 - 612 . Paglini , G . , Kunda , P . , Quiroga , S . , Kosik , K . and Cáceres , A . ( 1998 ) . Suppression of radixin and moesin alters growth cone morphology , motility , and process formation in primary cultured neurons . J . Cell Biol . 143 , 443 - 455 . Palacios , G . ( 1980 ) . Dissertation Thesis , The University of Chicago . Saﬁejko - Mroczka , B . and Bell , P . B . Jr ( 1996 ) . Bifunctional protein cross - linking reagents improve labeling of cytoskeletal proteins for qualitative and quantitative ﬂuorescence microscopy . J . Histochem . Cytochem . 44 , 641 - 656 . Schwartz , N . B . , Domowicz , M . , Krueger , R . C . , Li , H . and Mangoura , D . ( 1996 ) . Brain aggrecan . Persp . Dev . Neurobiol . 3 , 291 - 306 . Sharp , D . J . , Kuriyama , R . and Baas , P . W . ( 1996 ) . Expression of a kinesin - related motor protein induces Sf9 cells to form dendrite - like processes with nonuniform microtubule polarity orientation . J . Neurosci . 16 , 4370 - 4375 . Simcha , I . , Shtutman , M . , Salomon , D . , Zhurinsky , J . , Sadot , E . , Geiger , B . and Ben - Ze’ev , A . ( 1998 ) . Differential nuclear translocation and transactivation potential of beta - catenin and plakoglobin . J . Cell Biol . 141 , 1433 - 1448 . Threadgill , R . , Bobb , K . and Ghosh , A . ( 1997 ) . Regulation of dendritic growth and remodeling by Rho , Rac , and Cdc42 . Neuron 19 , 625 - 634 . Tokioka , R . , Matsuo , A . , Kiyosue , K . , Kasai , M . and Taguchi , T . ( 1993 ) . Synapse formation in dissociated cell cultures of embryonic chick cerebral neurons . Brain Res . 74 , 146 - 150 . Tsai , H . M . , Garber , B . B . and Larramenti , L . M . H . ( 1981 ) . 3 H - thymidine autoradiographic analysis of telencephalic histogenesis in the chick embryo : I neuronal birthdates of telencephalic compartments in situ . J . Comp . Neurol . 198 , 275 - 292 . Varnum - Finney , B . and Reichardt , L . F . ( 1994 ) . Vinculin - deﬁcient PC12 cell lines extend unstable lamellipodia and ﬁlopodia and have a reduced rate of neurite outgrowth . J . Cell Biol . 127 , 1071 - 1084 . Weed , S . A . , Du , Y . and Parsons , J . T . ( 1998 ) . Translocation of cortactin to the cell periphery is mediated by the small GTPase Rac1 . J . Cell Sci . 111 , 2433 - 2443 . Wu , H . , Reynolds , A . B . , Kanner , S . B . , Vines , R . R . and Parsons , J . T . ( 1991 ) . Identiﬁcation of a novel cytoskeleton associated pp60src substrate . Mol . Cell Biol . 11 , 5113 - 5124 . Wu , H . and Parsons , J . T . ( 1994 ) . Cortactin , an 80 / 85 - kilodalton pp60src substrate , is a ﬁlamentous actin - binding protein enriched in the cell cortex . J . Cell Biol . 120 , 1417 - 1426 . Y . Cheng , S . Leung and D . Mangoura