Toward Identifying the Inventive Templates of New Products : A Channeled Ideation Approach Author ( s ) : Jacob Goldenberg , David Mazursky and Sorin Solomon Source : Journal of Marketing Research , Vol . 36 , No . 2 ( May , 1999 ) , pp . 200 - 210 Published by : American Marketing Association Stable URL : http : / / www . jstor . org / stable / 3152093 . Accessed : 20 / 10 / 2013 16 : 55 Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use , available at . http : / / www . jstor . org / page / info / about / policies / terms . jsp . JSTOR is a not - for - profit service that helps scholars , researchers , and students discover , use , and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive . We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship . For more information about JSTOR , please contact support @ jstor . org . . American Marketing Association is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize , preserve and extend access to Journal of Marketing Research . http : / / www . jstor . org This content downloaded from 132 . 64 . 30 . 143 on Sun , 20 Oct 2013 16 : 55 : 42 PM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions JACOB GOLDENBERG , DAVID MAZURSKY , and SORIN SOLOMON * New product ideation might be improved by identifying and applying certain well - defined schemes derived from an historical analysis of product - based trends , termed " templates . " These templates might con - tribute to the understanding and prediction of new product emergence . The authors derive templates in a study that maps the evolution of prod - uct changes by adapting a set of intrinsic operations originally designed to uncover hidden logical patterns in technological inventions . They find that the majority of new product versions can be accounted for by as few as five templates . The authors define the five templates and show that they derive from six elementary ( first principle ) operators . A procedure for using the dominant template , termed " Attribute Dependency , " is outlined , followed by a report of two experiments examining its usefulness in the context of product ideation . Toward Identifying the Inventive Templates of New Products : A Channeled Ideation Approach The invention of new products traditionally has involved methods that encourage the generation of large numbers of ideas . The notion that the rewards of generating a large num - ber of ideas outweigh its costs can be traced back to early studies in the field ( e . g . , Marschak , Glennan , and Summers 1967 ) . Because this process tends to be highly complex and unformalized ( e . g . , De Bono 1992 ; Klein 1990 ; Woodman , Sawyer , and Griffin 1993 ) , those involved in generating new ideas may seek ways to become more productive as they progress from one ideation task to another . Some succeed in identifying patterns of invention that are common to differ - ent contexts ( e . g . , Boden 1992 ; Dasgupta 1994 ; Weisberg 1992 ) and apply them to a certain product category , or even to other product categories . People who adopt such a cogni - * Jacob Goldenberg is a lecturer , School of Business Administration ( e - mail : msgolden @ mscc . huji . ac . il ) , David Mazursky is a senior lecturer , School of Business Administration ( e - mail : msmazur @ mscc . huji . ac . il ) , and Sorin Solomon is a professor , Racah Institute of Physics ( e - mail : sorin @ vms . huji . ac . il ) , Hebrew University , Jerusalem . This research was supported by grants from the K - mart International Center of Marketing and Retailing and the Davidson Center . The authors thank Josh Eliashberg , Zvi Gilula , Gita V . Johar , Mike Kamins , John Kearon , Amnon Levav , Eyal Maoz , and Bob Shoemaker for helpful comments on a previous draft and especially Don Lehmann for suggestions in various stages of this research . The authors also thank Russ Winer and the three anonymous JMR review - ers for their support and direction . The article has benefited from presenta - tions at the Columbia , Stanford , and Wharton business schools . To interact with colleagues on specific articles in this issue , see " Feedback " on the JMR Web site at www . ama . org / pubs / jmr . Journal of Marketing Research Vol . XXXVI ( May 1999 ) , 200 - 210 tive strategy may expect to gain an advantage over others who treat every task as new and unrelated to prior ideation . However , even if they prove productive , the patterns are likely to be idiosyncratic and , quite often , not even verbally definable ( Weisberg 1992 ) . As such , they lack permanence and generalizability . The main thesis of this article is that certain patterns are identifiable , objectively verifiable , widely applied , and learnable and that these patterns , termed " templates , " can serve as a facilitative tool that channels the ideation process , enabling the person to be more productive and focused . We illustrate these notions with an example . Analysis of Domino ' s Pizza ' s promotion strategy , in which it offered a discount for any delivery exceeding a 30 - minute time limit , shows that the company created a dependency between two previously unrelated variables , namely , price and delivery time . The dependency was created by introducing a step function between the two variables : Within the first 30 min - utes following the order , the price remains constant ; imme - diately thereafter , it is discounted . This specific dependency could be applied in other contexts as well . Similar discounts could be offered , for example , in supermarket or laundry delivery services when a predetermined delivery time limit is exceeded . Thus , we can note that a replicable pattern has been identified . TEMPLATES AS PRODUCT - BASED TRENDS We can now extend the notion of replicable patterns to the notion of templates . Templates represent replicable patterns 200 1 This content downloaded from 132 . 64 . 30 . 143 on Sun , 20 Oct 2013 16 : 55 : 42 PM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions Inventive Templates that are generalizable across variables and products . We exem - plify this extension by illustrating how one of the five tem - plates identified in this study , namely , the Attribute Dependency template , is derived . Note that , in the Domino ' s Pizza example , a replicable pattern is obtained by duplicating the dependency between the two specific independent vari - ables ( price and time ) through a step function . New product ideas can be generated by introducing a dependency between two previously independent variables through a step function . This rule is far more general than the mere duplication of a pat - tern , as was suggested in the cases of the supermarket or laun - dry delivery services . The template and its generalizability across products can be illustrated with an example drawn from a recent study by Andrews and Smith ( 1996 ) . Hungry Jack syrup bottles are designed for microwave oven use . The bottle labels change color on reaching a certain temperature , thereby informing consumers that the syrup is ready . Although , at first glance , the analogy may appear remote , this example contains the key features of the same template . The two independent variables in this case are temperature and label color . A depen - dency is created by a step function between these two vari - ables . Up to a critical temperature , the label color is not acti - vated , and on reaching it , the color changes . The generalized form no longer involves the specific variables of the pizza example , nor does it necessarily involve the same product ( or service ) . Yet it is identifiable and general across products and services , and thus , it is defined as a template . Because the operation of templates involves manipulating product attributes rather than market parameters , they can be used in considering new market needs in currently underde - veloped product markets . For example , the aforementioned template might be applied to generate a new idea in pizza delivery services by creating a meaningful dependency between two different attributes , such as price and tempera - ture . Accordingly , a company might offer a price discount if the temperature of the pizza falls below a predetermined level at the time of delivery . The added value of the template approach is that it draws on the identification of similar structures in former product changes and provides a different angle and sometimes more accessible resource for ideation compared with the information obtained from analysis of current market needs . For example , the idea of creating a dependency between pizza temperature and price might originate from market - based information ( i . e . , information derived from the current market environment ; Griffin and Hauser 1993 ) , such as that implied by research indicating that temperature at delivery is a crucial factor in the choice of pizza service . Alternatively , it might be derived from product - based information ( i . e . , information that is inferred from inspecting the internal dynamics of the product ) , such as the incidence of dependencies between variables among new food - delivery services . Although the price - temperature idea might evolve both from market - and / or product - based infor - mation , the template approach may be more accessible because it specifies a structured framework for obtaining such an idea . The added value of product - based information is espe - cially apparent in more complex ideation contexts , such as in the following example : A new idea in the category of drinking glasses might be a glass with a dual insulation capability . When the temperature of the content is high , the insulation is low ; when the normal drinking temperature is reached , the insulation is high . The advantage of such a glass would be that the content would reach the optimal drinking temperature rapidly , which then would be main - tained for an extended period of time . Market - based infor - mation that suggests that the two factors - rapid cooling and heat preservation - are important for consumers could lead to such an idea . However , relying on product - based infor - mation by adopting the Attribute Dependency template might be even more useful . The information about these rel - evant parameters and the desired dependencies is contained in changes in products over time . Other examples of an Attribute Dependency in this category are a drinking glass with a colored lower section to camouflage residual juices or extracts and a transparent top , the dependency between height and diameter as manifested in cone - shaped cups that enable compact storage ( in stacks ) , or a glass with base wider than its rim to reduce the danger of spilling when car - ried around . This information , and thus the template , should be valuable especially when market - based information is less accessible or invalid . Many important product inventions have been derived from market - based information using a variety of marketing research methods . However , the value of these methods in offering a rich and exhaustive set of tools for ideation has been criticized ( e . g . , Petroski 1994 ) . Durgee , O ' Connor , and Veryzer ( 1996 ) note that many wants lie beneath the surface and that current product users are not able to express wants and needs for nonexistant products . Referring to the com - mon method of asking buyers to describe problems with current products ( e . g . , Crawford 1991 ) , they note that big leaps to new product ideas might not be uncovered when respondents describe problems in terms of current products . One possible outcome of excessive reliance on market - based information is the disproportionate effort that cur - rently is devoted to " me - too " products , namely , products that mainly involve product line extensions , improvement of current products , and cost reduction ( Wind and Mahajan 1997 ) . In contrast , product - based information has been shown to be effective in various other decision - making con - texts ( e . g . , reverse engineering in Srinivasan , Lovejoy , and Beach 1997 ; product archaeology in Ulrich and Pearson 1993 ) . It is our contention that such information will be sim - ilarly effective in the context of ideation . DERIVING AND FORMULATING THE TEMPLATES An approach for analyzing the dynamics of evolution of technological innovations was developed by Altschuler ( 1985 ) . We examined it for suitability in the context of prod - uct evolution . Altschuler conducted a backward analysis of problem - solution relationships and succeeded in identifying approximately 200 common phenomenological patterns , which he termed " standards . " Although Altschuler ' s approach was aimed at inventive problem solving of tech - nological systems rather than inventing new products , it is conceptually consistent with our template approach , in the sense that it focuses on internal operations . Here , only those operations that are relevant to the context of products are examined and adapted . We obtained the initial identification of templates in our study by mapping structural changes in the soap category . A preliminary condition for inferring templates is knowledge of the chronological development of products . We used existing data on the evolution of soap - related products in 201 This content downloaded from 132 . 64 . 30 . 143 on Sun , 20 Oct 2013 16 : 55 : 42 PM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions JOURNAL OF MARKETING RESEARCH , MAY 1999 Figure 1 LINKS IN A CHAIR 2 Link 1 : Legs support the seat and hold it at the desired height . Link 2 : The seat holds the legs in place . describing the original product in each stage , as well as the transition to the new product in the following stage . ' We classified the commonalties identified in the transition between products in relation to Altschuler ' s ( 1985 ) typology and considered candidate product templates . We then repli - cated this procedure for three other product classes , namely , hygiene products , bank accounts , and sneakers . In these mapping studies , five major templates were revealed . In the following section , we formulate the template taxonomy . We provide several basic definitions required for the develop - ment of the template taxonomy subsequently . Definitions The characteristics of a product can be divided into com - ponents ( objects such as the legs or seat of a chair ) and attributes ( variables of the product , such as the color or height ) . At the stage of template construction , we consider only attributes that consist of factual information . Abstractions and inferences ( e . g . , aesthetics ; Chattopadhyay and Alba 1988 ) are considered only at a subsequent stage . In addition , we make a distinction between internal attrib - utes and components , which are under the manufacturer ' s control , and external attributes and components , which are not controllable by the manufacturer but present in the neighboring environment of the product in its common usage . Thus , the legs and seat of a chair are internal compo - nents , whereas color and height are internal attributes . Floor and table are external components , and the height and weight of the person sitting on the chair are external attrib - utes . Because these components and attributes belong to the product and its neighboring environment , they are consid - ered legitimate product - based information . The relations between two given characteristics ( either between two components or two attributes ) are defined by links . In the case of attributes , the links are defined as depen - dency . In the case of links between components , two require - ments must be met : ( 1 ) direct influence , for which a change in one component is directly responsible for changing para - meters in the other , and ( 2 ) assignment of function , for which the influence has been designated by the manufacturer . The links between the seat and legs of a chair are illus - trated in Figure 1 . In this example , there are two links between the legs and the seat : Link 1 , the legs support the seat , and Link 2 , the seat holds the legs in place . Note also that the seat has a buckling effect on the legs . However , the latter is not defined as a link because it does not comply with the second requirement ( assignment of function ) . The complete set of links , along with the internal and external components , defines the product configuration and its boundaries ( see Figure 2 ) . Note that the configuration depends on both the product structure and its usage context . TEMPLATES AS MACRO OPERATORS The configuration of a product is similar to a snapshot of the product - based information . To create a new product , the dynamics of change must be defined as well . We define tem - plates as systematic changes between an early configuration ( i . e . , previous product version ) and the one that follows it ( i . e . , the next product version ) . The changes between con - figurations can be expressed as combinations of elementary steps , termed " operators . " Figure 3 presents six elementary Figure 2 THE CONFIGURATION OF AN ORDINARY CHAIR ( ORIENTED GRAPH ) 6 IThe description of the development of the soap - related category is based on a research project conducted by Brand Genetics Inc . ( Research Report No . 96 - 01 ) and presented here by permission from the company . 202 This content downloaded from 132 . 64 . 30 . 143 on Sun , 20 Oct 2013 16 : 55 : 42 PM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions Inventive Templates ( first principle ) operators that underlie the construction of the templates . 2 Transition from an existing product to a new idea can be accomplished by applying these fundamental operators in a defined sequence . These macro operators , when applied to both the internal and external attributes and components , constitute the template . Note that external attributes and components are drawn from objectively measurable factual information about the product and its immediate environ - ment . Although the template initially draws solely on product - based information , market - based information is examined subsequently to complete the formulation of the product idea . In the following section , we define and describe the five templates identified in the mapping study . 2Note that these six operators are three operators and their inverse coun - terparts . For ease of comprehension , all the examples analyzed per - tain to the automobile category . The first template ( described previously , see the Domino ' s Pizza and glass examples ) operates in the context of product attributes . Links in this case pertain to dependen - cies between product attributes . Therefore , the Attribute Dependency template is obtained by applying inclusion and linking operators sequentially . For example , on April 1 , 1995 , as part of a promotion campaign , the Volkswagen Motor Company announced a new car model , the " Polo Harlequin , " that featured differ - ently colored parts . The announcement was not intended by the company and was inserted merely as an April Fool ' s Day joke . However , massive response by customers calling in to place orders convinced the manufacturer to go ahead and produce it . It seems that neither the customers nor the researchers could foresee the demand for such a car . The car became quite popular in Europe and the concept of differ - Figure 3 THE OPERATORS UNDERLYING THE TEMPLATES Operator Definition Illustration ( 1 ) Exclusion The exclusion operator removes an unlinked / " N component from the configuration boundaries . 6 ( 2 ) Inclusion The inclusion operator introduces an external component into the configuration boundaries . An unlinking operator eliminates a link . ) A linking operator connects two unlinked components or attributes . A splitting operator removes an internal component from the link . The link maintains the original functions . - A joining operator adds a ( new ) component to a dangling link . 0 0 ( 3 ) Unlinking ( 4 ) Linking ( 5 ) Splitting ( 6 ) Joining O 203 C K This content downloaded from 132 . 64 . 30 . 143 on Sun , 20 Oct 2013 16 : 55 : 42 PM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions JOURNAL OF MARKETING RESEARCH , MAY 1999 ently colored parts even has been adopted since by some of Volkswagen ' s competitors . The concept of Polo Harlequin is consistent with the Attribute Dependency template and can be obtained by cre - ating a dependency between color and the specific location of a car ' s parts ( e . g . , door , roof ) . It is analogous to the already existing dependency in this category between color and climate . Lighter colors long have been used in warmer climates to avoid overheating and paint damage . Unlike the Attribute Dependency template , which oper - ates in the context of product attributes , the other four tem - plates revealed in the mapping studies operate in the context of product components . They are the following : Component Control , Replacement , Displacement , and Division . The for - mulation , examples , and their sequence of operators are described in Table 1 . Overall , the mapping studies con - ducted among several product classes ( soaps , hygiene prod - ucts , bank accounts , and sneakers ) indicate that , despite some variation , the five templates account for almost 70 % of new product emergence . 3 THE TEMPLATE APPROACH AND IDEATION RESEARCH The preceding taxonomy of templates can be used to approach the ideation task from a perspective based on product rather than market information . Such a perspective is particularly useful , given the traditional view of ideation as " ill - defined " ( Simon 1979 ) or " ill - structured " ( Tauber 1972 ) . The ill - defined nature of ideation stands in contrast to other important new product activities ( such as screening , diffusion , and various marketing assessment tools ; e . g . , Narasimhan and Sen 1983 ) , which are characterized as well - defined because they lend themselves to specific definitions in terms of numerical variables and well - defined solution plans . Most widely used ideation methods ( e . g . , brainstorming and Random Stimulation ) do not transform the ill - defined nature of the problem into a defined and channeled process . Their validity has been questioned in many experimental studies regarding creativity and effectiveness ( e . g . , Bouchard 1969 ; Diehl and Stroebe 1987 , 1991 ; Weisberg 1992 ) . The main conclusion from these studies is that such methods lead to an excess of ideas and analogies , which actually obstructs the ideation process . It has been found that the source of satisfaction from this kind of ideation ses - sion is the process of ideation itself , rather than the quality of the ideas ( note the " illusion of group productivity " ; Paulus et al . 1993 ) . In addition , Tauber ( 1972 ) has pointed out that the search for new ideas typically suffers from a 3The distribution of templates in the soap study , based on brand - template matching of 1508 facings that appeared in two large department stores by two trained judges , who achieved 97 % agreement , was as follows : Attribute Dependency 43 % , Component Control 13 % , Replacement 1 . 5 % , Displacement 6 % , and Division 1 . 5 % . Additional mapping studies were conducted on other product classes ( hygiene products , bank accounts , and sneakers ) , following the same procedure as in the study of the soap cate - gory . They produced the same template typology and a similar order of pro - portions of template - matched product versions . In the three categories , the explanation of templates ranged as follows : Attribute Dependency 40 % - 68 % , Component Control 10 % - 30 % , Replacement < 1 % - 19 % , Displacement 1 % - 3 % , and Division 2 % - 4 % . These distributions indicate recurrence of templates among both tangible products and services used by segments that do not necessarily overlap . lack of synchronization between the two different activi - ties - screening , which is well - defined , versus ideation , which tends to be ill - defined . Coping with the ill - defined nature of ideation tasks may be made easier by using an approach that is consistent with two principles . The first , which originates in cognitive psy - chology , predicts that restricting the scope of an issue enhances inventive productivity . Perkins ( 1981 ) indicates that thinking within a frame of reference requires sensitivity to the rules of the game and that , by functioning within such a frame , a person is better able to notice or recognize the unexpected . Finke ( Finke , Ward , and Smith 1992 , p . 32 ) , whose research focuses on the impact of visual information ( e . g . , Finke and Pinker 1981 , 1982 ) , notes that restricting the ways in which creative cognitions are in - terpreted encourages creative exploration and discovery and further reduces the likelihood that the person will fall back on conventional lines of thought . Restricting the categories , for example , forces people to think about conceptual implications in more atypical ways , which tends to promote creative discovery . . . and can force one to consider novel interpretations of those concepts . The second principle recommends the adoption of a struc - tured ideation process that best mimics the thinking pattern that people follow when engaged in inventive thinking . Introspective reports in experiments conducted by Finke , Ward , and Smith ( 1992 ) indicate that subjects often search for emergent features in the forms ( e . g . , images and objects ) , then contemplate their functional properties , imagine them - selves actually using these forms , and finally , mentally elab - orate on the context in which the forms should be found . This sequence of events underlies the notion of function fol - lowing form . Accordingly , people are more likely to make creative discoveries when they analyze novel forms and then assess what benefits they might project , rather than when they try to create the optimal form solely on the basis of the desired benefits . Compliance with these two principles should enhance the efficiency and productivity of inventive thinking . It trans - forms the ideation process from ill - defined to more well - defined . Some techniques specifically tailored for ideation tasks , such as morphological analysis ( cf . Urban and Hauser 1993 ; also note the Heuristic Ideation Technique [ HIT ] pro - cedure , Tauber 1972 ) , attempt to cope with the ill - defined nature of ideation by manipulating both market - and product - based information . Morphological analysis initiates the ideation process by referring to existing rather than to imaginary product features . It calls for identifying the dimensions of the problem or the product ( e . g . , type of igni - tion in cars , packaging in food categories ) , listing all possi - ble combinations of dimensions , examining the feasibility of the alternatives , and selecting the best one . However , one drawback of this method , relative to the template approach , is that it does not define specific guidelines regarding which dimensions should be used and how they are to be com - bined . Furthermore , because the meaning of dimensions is defined broadly and potentially could lead to the generation of high order working matrices , a large number of ideas can be generated . In the absence of a prescribed reduction mech - anism , the selection process for the best ideas may be com - promised ( see the discussion of limitations in Tauber 1972 ) . 204 This content downloaded from 132 . 64 . 30 . 143 on Sun , 20 Oct 2013 16 : 55 : 42 PM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions Inventive Templates Table 1 THE OTHER FOUR REVEALED TEMPLATES Sequence of Template Description Example Operators Component The template involves the creation of a link in A new electronic device connects the battery of a Inclusion and linking Control the form of control of one internal component car to the car body to inhibit corrosion and rust . over another internal or external component . The control is obtained by providing an excess of electrons to the cathode , thus enabling regulation of the electrostatic charge , because positive charge hinders electrochemical corrosion . Replacement Application of this template involves the Consider a car radio . The internal component , in Splitting , excluding , removal of an essential internal component this case the car antenna , is removed , but its including , and joining from the configuration while maintaining the associated intrinsic function ( reception of broadcast link between the removed component and the waves ) is maintained . The resultant intermediate remaining components . This operation creates a configuration is a necessary step in the replacement temporarily inconsistent abstract structure . procedure , even though it represents an incomplete Because of the dangling link , the operation is product structure . The unsaturated function can be completed only when the missing component is fulfilled by a component that is external to the car replaced by another existing component . The radio , in this case a defroster . Finally , the external replacement must be an external component component is incorporated by applying the joining that can perform a function similar to that operator , and the configuration of a new product is provided by the one removed . obtained - a car radio that does not require an external antenna . Displacement An essential internal component is removed Excluding the car roof and its function , and the Splitting , excluding , from the configuration . However , in contrast to new product is a convertible car . a and unlinking the Replacement template , its associated link is removed as well . In this case , a new idea for the product must be based on a new appeal , one that the former product did not provide . Division Splitting one component into several Dividing a shock - absorbing system into a four - way Splitting and linking components that either contribute individually suspension to improve smooth driving and balance . to the accomplishment of its function or become responsible for differential subfunctions . aSome convertible cars have a folding roof , whereas in others , the roof is attachable but not an integral part of the car . The latter is a case of displacement . In summary , the template approach integrates three major invention - enabling perspectives . The first stems from the proposition that several identified templates underlying the internal dynamics of product evolution can predict new can - didate products by providing guidelines for ideation . The second is the " restricted scope " principle , which is embod - ied in the template approach by channeling thinking along predefined inventive routes . The third perspective is the function follows form principle , which is manifested in the sequence of first proposing new configurations of the prod - uct ( which are template - based ) and then considering the benefits , aesthetic values , and other market parameters . The initial configuration and the consideration of consumer ben - efits jointly form the product idea . Structures resembling product templates that were devel - oped and applied in other fields have been valued as creative ( e . g . , Koestler 1964 ) . Creativity perception may be enhanced because these structures match certain attractors , namely , paths that the self - organized mind tends to follow ( Kelso 1997 ) , and because they preserve the original level of complexity ( i . e . , no new attributes or components are intro - duced beyond those that exist in the product or in its neigh - boring environment ) while adding new utilities ( Altschuler 1986 ) . The perception of linking previously unlinked phe - nomena as a creative act first was reported by Koestler ( 1964 ) . Koestler performed such linking in a multidimen - sional matrix of unlinked parameters regarding other phe - nomena . The Attribute Dependency template is a reduction of his multidimensional matrix to a more simplified , two - dimensional structure , recurring in the context of new prod - ucts . We therefore expect that ideas matching the Attribute Dependency template will be perceived as creative in the context of new product ideation . The procedure for using the dominant template ( Attribute Dependency ) is outlined subsequently , followed by a report of two experiments that examine its usefulness . THE ATTRIBUTE DEPENDENCY TEMPLATE : A PROCEDURAL FRAMEWORK Construct a Dependency Matrix Following the identification of a product ' s internal and external attributes , a matrix of attributes is constructed in which the columns list internal attributes and the rows list both internal and external attributes . The task at this stage is to identify potential new dependencies between attributes that appear on the two axes . In Figure 4 , we show a submatrix of the dependency matrix constructed for the case of drinking glasses , a cate - gory used in Experiment 2 . The dependency matrix cell receives a zero if the attributes are independent ( e . g . , color versus sugar concentration ) and a nonzero value if the col - 205 This content downloaded from 132 . 64 . 30 . 143 on Sun , 20 Oct 2013 16 : 55 : 42 PM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions JOURNAL OF MARKETING RESEARCH , MAY 1999 Figure 4 DEPENDENCY SUBMATRIX FOR THE CASE OF A DRINKING GLASS . Height Heat of glass Diameter Color conductivity Thickness of base 1 Height of glass b c Temperature a % Sugar d umn variable depends on the row variable ( e . g . , capacity depends on height ) . For illustrative purposes , assume that four cases of zero cells ( i . e . , cells that are initially independent ) can be identi - fied . These are denoted as a - d in this submatrix . One case ( marked as 1 ) represents a natural dependency . For conve - nience , other zero cells are not marked , though they too might be relevant . Introduce the Attribute Dependencies The Attribute Dependency procedure is performed at this stage by introducing a dependency between previously inde - pendent attributes . In terms of the dependency matrix , this entails changing the value of a zero cell . For example , the color of the glass could be made dependent on the tempera - ture of the content ( Case a in Figure 4 ) . This dependency may be created by introducing a color change ( e . g . , from green to red ) at a critical temperature . This task is best per - formed by people who belong to the operating environment or those with high levels of macroenvironmental knowledge ( Lehmann and Winer 1994 ) , because they will be more effi - cient in acquiring new information and eliciting related knowledge ( Alba and Hutchinson 1987 ; for a detailed review , see Andrews and Smith 1996 ) . Obtain a Candidate New Idea The objective at this stage is to scan the potential benefits of the ideas using the function follows form principle . Consider the dependency created in Case a between color and temperature . By examining the potential benefits , at least three product ideas can be generated . First , the thresh - old for color change could be made dependent on the risk of breakage due to overheating . The resulting idea may be a glass that changes color when it reaches a certain tempera - ture in a microwave oven . Second , we could maximize the benefit for the user of the glass . In this case , the purpose of the color change may be to avoid overheating the content of the glass . This might be particularly suitable in the case of use by children . Third , the dependency may be applicable in a related product domain , for example , a baby bottle that changes color when the contents reach a certain temperature . If we treat the marked zero cells ( b - d ) of the dependency matrix in Figure 4 similarly to Case a , we may produce addi - tional new product ideas , such as a coned - shaped glass that could be inserted easily into the sand at the beach ( by mak - ing the diameter of the glass proportional to height ) or a glass with an insulation strip ( by making the heat insulation of the glass dependent on its height ) . The two experiments reported subsequently were designed to examine whether training in the Attribute Dependency template improves outcomes compared with two widely used unstructured methods , Lateral Thinking and Random Stimulation ( Experiment 1 ) , and with a struc - tured method , HIT ( Experiment 2 ) . EXPERIMENT 1 Overview . The experiment was composed of two phases . In the first phase , the idea - generation setting was manipu - lated between groups . Participants were trained in the tem - plate approach , Lateral Thinking , or Random Stimulation . Following training , they were asked to generate ideas regarding either baby ointment or mattresses . In the second phase , the ideas were rated by senior marketing profession - als . All subjects participating in idea generation were uni - versity graduates or close to graduation . Their age range was 23 to 40 years , with a mean age of 30 years . Preliminary analysis showed that the groups did not differ significantly in age , education , or occupation . Design and procedure . One hundred twenty subjects were assigned randomly to six groups that were generated by crossing the training factor ( template , lateral thinking , ran - dom stimulation ) with the product category factory ( baby ointment , mattresses ) . Comprehension of the techniques was verified , and explanation ceased only when participants indicated that they could implement them in ideation . The template training involved approximately four hours , including practice tasks . Training time in the competing methods was approximately two hours , including practice tasks . The efficacy of the template approach was assessed by comparing outcomes of the template training group ( here - after , the TT group ) with those of the lateral thinking ( TL ) and random stimulation ( TR ) training groups . The time framework for generating ideas ( 30 minutes ) was identical in all three groups . Overall , the three groups generated 277 ideas , 132 for baby ointment and 145 for mattresses . The ideas generated by the TT group for the ointment cat - egory included an ointment that issues a specific odor upon urination by the baby ; a series of ointments that differ in their concentration of active ingredients , depending on the sensitivity of the baby ' s skin ; and introduction of two types of ointment , one for day use and one for night use ( higher consistency for increased protection at night by isolating the skin from the urine and lower consistency to allow skin to breathe during the day ) . Among the ideas generated by the TL group were an ointment made of natural ingredients and an ointment with scent . The TR ideas included long - lasting ointment and a colored ( instead of the traditional white ) ointment . Three senior marketing professionals were invited to par - ticipate as judges in the evaluation procedure . All three pro - fessionals held MBAs , had a record of at least ten years of experience in the marketing of consumer goods , and held high ranking marketing positions ( at least vice president or equivalent ) . These professionals were asked to rate the ideas on two scales , chosen in accordance with Finke ' s ( 1990 ) suggestion to assess ideas by their originality level and prac - tical value . These scales are also compatible with the origi - nality and usefulness measures recently adopted in the con - text of new product design by Dahl , Chattopadhyay , and 206 This content downloaded from 132 . 64 . 30 . 143 on Sun , 20 Oct 2013 16 : 55 : 42 PM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions Inventive Templates Gorn ( 1999 ) . Accordingly , one scale measured originality with scale anchors ( 1 ) " Not original at all " and ( 7 ) " Very original . " The second scale measured the overall value of the ideas . The judges were asked to indicate whether they would recommend investment in implementing the idea on a scale ranging from ( 1 ) " Not recommend at all " to ( 7 ) " Highly recommend . " The judges were blind to the identity of the group members , to one another , to the notion of tem - plates , and to the purpose of the experiment . Results In Table 2 , we display the mean originality and value rat - ings for the three training groups . In the ointment category , significant differences were obtained among the three groups for both the originality of the ideas ( F ( 2 , 129 ) = 52 . 13 , p < . 0001 ) and the value ratings ( F ( 2 , 129 ) = 97 . 46 , p < . 0001 ) . Comparison between the TT group and the TL and TR groups combined indicated that ideas produced by the TT group were superior both in originality ( t ( 129 ) = 10 . 10 , p < . 001 ) and value ( t ( 129 ) = 13 . 85 , p < . 001 ) . Comparison between the TL and TR groups showed no significant dif - ferences in terms of originality ( t ( 129 ) = 1 . 34 , p > . 15 ) or value ( t ( 129 ) = 1 . 25 , p > . 20 ) . In planning the analysis , we recognized that unstructured techniques are geared to the production of a large number of ideas that vary widely in quality and value , whereas struc - tured methods are prescreened and more focused ( Perkins 1981 ) . Accordingly , the smallest number of ideas produced by the TT group was selected and compared with a match - ing number of the highest ranking ideas obtained in the TL and TR groups . The ideas were sorted in descending order of rating . On the basis of this procedure , the top 20 ideas were selected from each group . The second panel of Table 2 summarizes the results of this analysis . Significant differ - ences were obtained among the three groups , both when originality was the dependent measure ( F ( 2 , 57 ) = 50 . 50 , p < . 0001 ) and when value served as the dependent measure ( F ( 2 , 57 ) = 69 . 64 , p < . 0001 ) . The comparison between the TT group and the TL and TR groups indicated the superior - ity of the TT group ideas in both originality ( t ( 57 ) = 10 . 04 , p < . 001 ) and value ( t ( 57 ) = 11 . 79 , p < . 001 ) . No significant difference was obtained between TL and TR in either origi - nality ( t ( 57 ) < 1 , n . s . ) or value ( t ( 57 ) < 1 , n . s . ) . This pattern of results was replicated for the mattress cat - egory ( Table 2 ) . As in the ointment task , the analysis first focused on the raw ideas . Significant differences were observed among the three groups when both originality and value were the dependent measures ( F ( 2 , 142 ) = 45 . 94 , p < . 0001 for originality ; F ( 2 , 142 ) = 147 . 82 , p < . 0001 for value ) . Similarly , dominance of the TT group over the TL and TR groups was obtained for both originality ( t ( 142 ) = 9 . 48 , p < . 001 ) and value ( t ( 142 ) = 17 . 17 , p < . 001 ) . There was no significant difference between the two nontemplate training techniques ( t ( 142 ) = 1 . 27 , p > . 20 for originality ; t ( 142 ) < 1 , n . s . for value ) . The procedure comparing the best ideas was performed subsequently and resulted in significant differences for the originality ( F ( 2 , 57 ) = 28 . 61 , p < . 0001 ) and the value ( F ( 2 , 57 ) = 140 . 18 , p < . 0001 ) ratings . Similarly , dominance of the TT group over the TL and TR groups was obtained for both originality ( t ( 57 ) = 7 . 47 , p < . 001 ) and value ( t ( 57 ) = 16 . 74 , p < . 001 ) . However , between the TL and TR ideas , there was no significant difference ( t ( 57 ) = 1 . 18 , p > . 20 for originality ; t ( 57 ) < 1 , n . s . for value ) . 4 In addition to the advantage of the template approach , as manifested in both the analysis of the total set of ideas and the " best ideas , " the highest ranking idea was an outcome of the TT in both the ointment and the mattress categories . Discussion The comparison between TT and training in competing unstructured techniques demonstrates the added value of incorporating the template approach in ideation . It should be noted that a major component of the costs involved in using the TT technique is the relatively longer training time 4Examination of the ideas generated by all three groups in both Experiment I and Experiment 2 indicated that template - matched ideas were used almost exclusively by the TF participants . Because the division between the TT and the remaining groups also dichotomizes the use or nonuse of the templates , it can be concluded that templates are learnable and that they lead to more productive ideation . Table 2 EXPERIMENT 1 : MEAN ORIGINALITY AND VALUE RATINGS Originality Value TL TL TR TT Trained in TR TT Trained in Trained in Trained in Lateral Random Trained in Lateral Random Templates Thinking Stimulation Templates Thinking Stimulation Raw Ideas Ointment 5 . 47a 3 . 57 3 . 36 5 . 97a 3 . 09 2 . 82 ( . 31 ) ( . 82 ) ( . 93 ) ( . 43 ) ( . 93 ) ( . 97 ) Mattress 5 . 83a 3 . 47 3 . 22 5 . 79a 2 . 71 2 . 64 ( . 50 ) ( 1 . 19 ) ( . 51 ) ( . 42 ) ( . 75 ) ( . 83 ) Best Ideas Ointment 5 . 47a 4 . 27 4 . 22 5 . 97a 3 . 75 3 . 68 ( . 31 ) ( . 45 ) ( . 55 ) ( . 43 ) ( . 76 ) ( . 83 ) Mattress 5 . 83a 4 . 86 4 . 66 5 . 79a 3 . 27 3 . 21 ( . 50 ) ( . 55 ) ( . 51 ) ( . 42 ) ( . 55 ) ( . 67 ) aRepresents significance ( at least at p < . 05 level ) in the contrast between TT and the combined TL and TR groups . 207 This content downloaded from 132 . 64 . 30 . 143 on Sun , 20 Oct 2013 16 : 55 : 42 PM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions JOURNAL OF MARKETING RESEARCH , MAY 1999 required . However , the high ranking of the ideas generated by the TT group suggests a self - screening effect . Moreover , the TT group generated fewer ideas , which suggests that the next step of new product ( screening followed by concept testing ) should require reduced resources and time . The effect due to training technique in Experiment 1 may be confounded by the required training time that differs between the techniques , and therefore , difference in training time might account for the results . In addition , Experiment I did not use subjects who were not trained at all prior to idea generation . Such subjects might serve as a benchmark for assessing the added value of training in templates . Experiment 2 was devised to address these issues . The technique taught to the control group in Experiment 2 was HIT ( Tauber 1972 , presented previously ) , which requires equivalent training time and is deemed to be the closest " rival " technique to the template approach . In addition , in Experiment 2 , the template approach was compared with a " no training " ( hereafter NT ) group . EXPERIMENT 2 Overview . Experiment 2 used a different product cate - gory , drinking glasses . Similar to Experiment 1 , this experi - ment was composed of two phases . In the first phase , the idea - generation setting was manipulated between groups by training in the TT approach , the HIT technique , or no train - ing at all . In the second phase , the ideas were rated by three senior marketing professionals . Design and procedure . One group consisted of 18 sub - jects who were trained specifically to use the Attribute Dependency template ( the TT group ) . The second group was composed of 19 subjects who were trained to apply the HIT procedure ( the HIT group ) . The training in the TI and HIT groups lasted four hours , including practice tasks . The third group consisted of 18 subjects who received no training at all ( the NT group ) . As in Experiment 1 , the efficacy of the template approach was assessed by comparing outcomes of the TT group with those of the HIT and NT groups . The time framework for generating ideas ( 30 minutes ) was the same for all three groups . Overall , the three groups generated a total of 82 ideas . Among the ideas generated by applying the TT group were a drinking glass for babies for which the color varied according to the temperature of the milk ( when the milk is ready for drinking , the color of the glass changes from red to blue ) and a tea cup with varying insulation capabilities according to the temperature of the tea ( when the tea is too hot , the glass enables fast cooling off , and upon reaching an optimal drinking temperature , the glass maintains the desired heat for an extended period of time ) . Among the out - come ideas generated by applying HIT were a glass that is purchased with a ready mixture of coffee and milk , one that automatically cools the fluid content when it is poured in , and a glass that glows in the dark for night feeding . The NT group generated ideas that included glasses that have exotic shapes and a unique combination of colors for a set . Three senior marketing professionals were invited to par - ticipate as judges in the evaluation procedure . Two of the judges were owners of marketing consulting agencies and one was a senior product manager . All three judges ( who did not participate in Experiment 1 ) had at least seven years of experience in marketing positions . The evaluation procedure and scales were identical to those used in Experiment 1 . Results In analyzing the total set of ideas , a significant difference was obtained among the three groups for both the original - ity of ideas ( F ( 2 , 79 ) = 7 . 5 , p < . 001 ) and their value ratings ( F ( 2 , 79 ) = 29 . 8 , p < . 0001 ) . The results appear in Table 3 . Comparison between the TT group and the combination of the HIT and NT groups indicated that the TT group pro - duced superior ideas in both originality ( t ( 79 ) = 3 . 3 , p < . 005 ) and value ( t ( 79 ) = 7 . 6 , p < . 001 ) . A comparison between the HIT and NT groups showed no advantage in terms of originality ( t ( 79 ) = 1 . 1 , n . s . ) or value ( t ( 79 ) < 1 , n . s . ) . Because Tauber ' s ( 1972 ) HIT does not limit the number of ideas , the more stringent analysis performed in Experi - ment 1 , which focused only on the better ideas , was repeated in Experiment 2 . Accordingly , the ideas were sorted in descending order of rating , and the top 17 ideas were selected from each group , which matches the lowest number of ideas generated by the TT and NT groups . The results appear in the second panel of Table 3 . Significant differ - ences were obtained among the three groups for originality ( F ( 2 , 48 ) = 5 . 44 , p < . 001 ) and value ( F ( 2 , 48 ) = 32 . 3 , p < . 0001 ) . The comparison between the TT and the HIT and NT groups combined indicated that the TT group ideas domi - Table 3 EXPERIMENT 2 : MEAN ORIGINALITY AND VALUE RATINGS Originality Value HIT HIT 77 Trained in NT 7TT Trained in NT Trained in HIT No training Trained in HIT No training Templates procedure at all Templates procedure at all Raw Ideas Glass 5 . 20a 3 . 83 4 . 15 4 . 82a 2 . 99 2 . 91 ( 1 . 02 ) ( 1 . 35 ) ( 1 . 15 ) ( . 90 ) ( . 99 ) ( . 36 ) Best Ideas Glass 5 . 20a 3 . 94 4 . 15 4 . 82a 3 . 59b 2 . 91 ( 1 . 02 ) ( 1 . 48 ) ( 1 . 15 ) ( . 90 ) ( . 65 ) ( . 36 ) aRepresents significance ( at least at p < . 05 level ) in the contrast between TT and the combined HIT and NT groups . bRepresents significance ( at least at p < . 05 level ) in the contrast between HIT and NT . 208 This content downloaded from 132 . 64 . 30 . 143 on Sun , 20 Oct 2013 16 : 55 : 42 PM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions Inventive Templates nated in both originality ( t ( 48 ) = 3 . 2 , p < . 005 ) and value ( t ( 48 ) = 7 . 6 , p < . 001 ) . The HIT training outperformed NT in value ( t ( 48 ) = 2 . 78 , p < . 01 ) , though not in originality ( t ( 48 ) < 1 , n . s . ) . In addition to the observed superiority of the TT approach , both in the analysis of the total set of ideas and the " best ideas , " the highest ranking idea was also template - based . CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS The advantages of the template approach lie in both its consistency with related theories on ideation and its practi - cal usefulness . On the theoretical level , the templates are obtained by analyzing the trends in the evolutionary process of successful products at their mature stage and applying them in nonmature situations . This process is analogous to stepping back in time . By learning the regu - larities of product evolution through their internal dynam - ics , the uncertainty associated with innovative ideas is reduced . The template taxonomy represents a step toward model - ing the dynamics of product ideation . If the parameters of such a model are based on product - based trends , the tem - plates may have the capacity to facilitate the generation of new ideas using limited external information ( e . g . , consumer needs ) . In addition , the template approach removes thought barriers that might hinder ideation when traditional methods are used . Consider , for example , the car radio with its antenna removed . On first examination , this situation would appear inconsistent and unrealistic . It provides no immedi - ate cues as to how to resolve the inconsistency other than reinstating the antenna . The template scheme opens routes for taking advantage of and resolving such inconsistencies . With regard to its practical usefulness , several key advan - tages are worth noting . First , as demonstrated in the map - ping studies , the majority of product versions can be described by as few as five templates . Furthermore , analysis within each of the categories supports the template frame - work . Second , the learning of the procedure facilitates com - mon understanding regarding how to cope with the creativ - ity task . Third , the template approach has a technological advantage , in that the ideation task begins with existing ( and therefore available ) products . With regard to generalizability , two important issues must be taken into account . First , whereas the majority of prod - ucts lend themselves to natural decomposition into compo - nents and assignment of functions , others do not . This does not preclude the use of the template approach , but it requires consideration of other assumptions that are specific to the product and its environment . Second , because of the sim - plicity and the prescribed method sequence , people from heterogeneous backgrounds ( e . g . , different product lines , departments ) can apply the template approach and share a common language of design ( Mahajan , Rao , and Srivastava 1994 ; Wagner and Hayashi 1994 ) . REFERENCES Alba , Joseph W . and Wesley J . Hutchinson ( 1987 ) , " Dimensions of Consumer Expertise , " Journal of Consumer Research , 13 ( March ) , 411 - 54 . Altschuler , Genrich S . ( 1985 ) , Creativity as an Exact Science . New York : Gordon and Breach . ( 1986 ) , To Find an Idea : Introduction to the Theory of Solving Problems of Inventions . Novosibirsk , USSR : Nauka . Andrews , Jonlee and Daniel C . Smith ( 1996 ) , " In Search of the Marketing Imagination : Factors Affecting the Creativity of Mar - keting Programs for Mature Products , " Journal of Marketing Research , 33 ( May ) , 174 - 87 . Boden , Margaret ( 1992 ) , The Creative Mind . London : Abacus . Bouchard , Thomas J . ( 1969 ) , " Personality , Problem Solving Pro - cedure and Performance in Small Groups , " Journal of Applied Psychology , 53 ( 1 ) , 1 - 29 . Chattopadhyay , A . and Joseph W . Alba ( 1988 ) , " The Situational Importance of Recall and Inference in Consumer Decision Mak - ing , " Journal of Consumer Research , 15 ( June ) , 1 - 12 . Cooper , G . Robert ( 1979 ) , " The Dimensions of Industrial New Prod - uct Success and Failure , " Journal of Marketing , 43 ( 3 ) , 93 - 103 . Crawford , C . M . ( 1991 ) , New Products Management . Boston , MA : Richard D . Irwin . Dahl , W . D . , Amitava Chattopadhyay , and Gerald J . Gorn ( 1999 ) , " The Use of Visual Mental Imagery in New Product Design , " Journal of Marketing Research , 36 ( February ) , 000 - 000 . Dasgupta , Subrata ( 1994 ) , Creativity in Invention and Design - Computational and Cognitive Explorations of Technological Originality . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . De Bono , Edward ( 1992 ) , Serious Creativity . New York : Harper - Collins Publishers . Diehl , Michael and Wolfgang Stroebe ( 1987 ) , " Productivity Loss in Brainstorming Groups : Toward the Solution of the Riddle , " Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 53 ( 3 ) , 497 - 509 . and ( 1991 ) , " Productivity Loss in Idea - Generation Groups : Tracking Down the Blocking Effects , " Journal of Per - sonality and Social Psychology , 61 ( 3 ) , 392 - 403 . Durgee , Jeffrey F . , Gina C . O ' Connor , and Robert W . Veryzer ( 1996 ) , " Using Mini - Concepts to Identify Opportunities for Really New Product Functions , " MSI Report No . 96 - 105 . Cam - bridge , MA : Marketing Science Institute . Finke , Ronald A . ( 1990 ) , Creative Imagery : Discoveries and Inventions in Visualization . Hillsdale , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates . and S . Pinker ( 1981 ) , " Mapping the Visual Field in Mental Imagery , " Journal of Experimental Psychology : General , 110 , 501 - 17 . and ( 1982 ) , " Spontaneous Imagery Scanning in Mental Extrapolation , " Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 8 ( 2 ) , 142 - 47 . , Thomas B . Ward , and Steven M . Smith ( 1992 ) , Creative Cognition . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Griffin , Abbie and John R . Hauser ( 1993 ) , " The Voice of the Cus - tomer , " Marketing Science , 12 ( Winter ) , 63 - 73 . and Albert L . Page ( 1996 ) , " PDMA Success Measurement Project : Recommended Measures for Product Development Success and Failure , " Journal of Product Innovation Manage - ment , 13 ( November ) , 478 - 96 . Klein , Arthur R . ( 1990 ) , " Organizational Barriers to Creativity . . . and How to Knock Them Down , " The Journal of Consumer Marketing , 7 , 65 - 66 . Kelso , J . A . Scott ( 1997 ) , Dynamic Patterns : The Self - Organization of Brain and Behavior . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Koestler , Arthur ( 1964 ) , The Act of Creation . New York : McMillan . Lehmann , Donald R . and Russell Winer ( 1994 ) , Product Manage - ment . Homewood , IL : Richard D . Irwin . Mahajan , Vijay , Vithala R . Rao , and Rajendra K . Srivastava ( 1994 ) , " An Approach to Assess the Importance of Brand Equity in Acquisition Decisions , " Journal of Product Innovation Man - agement , 11 ( June ) , 221 - 35 . Marschak , T . , T . K . Glennan , and R . Summers ( 1967 ) , Strategy for R & D Studies in Microeconomics of Development . New York : Springer - Verlag . Myers , James H . ( 1976 ) , " Benefit Structure Analysis : A New Tool for Product Planing , " Journal of Marketing , 40 ( October ) , 23 - 32 . 209 This content downloaded from 132 . 64 . 30 . 143 on Sun , 20 Oct 2013 16 : 55 : 42 PM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions JOURNAL OF MARKETING RESEARCH , MAY 1999 Narasimhan , Chakravarthi and Subrata K . Sen ( 1983 ) , " New Prod - uct Models for Test Market Data , " Journal of Marketing , 47 ( Winter ) , 11 - 24 . Paulus , Paul , Mary T . Dzindolet , George Poletes , and Mabel L . Camacho ( 1993 ) , " Perception of Performance in Group Brain - storming : The Illusion of Group Productivity , " Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin , 19 ( February ) , 78 - 89 . Perkins , David N . ( 1981 ) , The Minds Best Work . Boston , MA : Harvard University Press . Petroski , Henry ( 1994 ) , The Evolution of Useful Things . New York : Vintage Books . Simon , Herbert A . ( 1979 ) , Models of Thoughts . New Haven , CT : Yale University Press . Srinivasan , V . , William S . Lovejoy , and David Beach ( 1997 ) , " Inte - grated Product Design for Marketability and Manufacturing , " Journal of Marketing Research , 34 ( February ) , 154 - 63 . Tauber , Edward M . ( 1972 ) , " HIT : Heuristic Ideation Technique - A Systematic Procedure for New Product Search , " Journal of Marketing , 36 ( January ) , 58 - 61 . Ulrich , Karl T . and S . Pearson ( 1993 ) , " Does Product Design Really Determine 80 % of Manufacturing Cost ? " Working Paper 3601 - 93 - MSA . Sloan School of Management , MIT . Urban , Glen L . and John R . Hauser ( 1993 ) , Design and Marketing of New Products . Englewood Cliffs , NJ : Prentice Hall . von Hippel , Eric ( 1984 ) , " Novel Product Concepts from Lead User : Segmenting Users By Experience , " MSI Report No . 84 - 109 . Cambridge , MA : Marketing Science Institute . Wagner , Christian and Albert Hayashi ( 1994 ) , " A New Way to Cre - ate Winning Product Ideas , " Journal of Product Innovation Management , 11 ( March ) , 146 - 55 . Weisberg , Robert W . ( 1992 ) , Creativity Beyond the Myth of Genius . New York : W . H . Freeman Company . Wind , Jerry and Vijay Mahajan ( 1997 ) , " Issues and Opportunities in New Product Development : An Introduction to the Special Issue , " Journal of Marketing Research , 34 ( February ) , 1 - 12 . Woodman , Richard W . , John E . Sawyer , and Ricky W . Griffin ( 1993 ) , " Towards a Theory of Organizational Creativity , " Acad - emy of Management Review , 18 ( 2 ) , 293 - 321 . ii ; ii ~ : ~ : i : RESEARCH POSITIONS Phoenix Group , a unit of Moore Corporation Limited , currently has outstanding career opportunities in our Research Department at our Farmington Hills , Michigan headquarters . Phoenix Group is a premier supplier of relationship marketing and strategic consulting services to major corporations around the world . Statistical Research Analyst This position will be responsible for database analysis and statistical modeling , executing ad hoc queries , writing executive - style reports and client consultation . Additional responsibilities include exploring application of methods and new product development . Requirements for this position include : statistical techniques for audience segmentation ( multiple regression , loq linear analysis , CHaid ) , statistical techniques for data investigation ( t - test , z - test , A - nova ) , statistical packages ( PC SAS or SPSS ) . Candidates for this position will have minimum 3 - 4 years ' consumer market research experience , familiarity with direct marketing applications , and Master ' s degree and Ph . D . Research Database Consultant This position will involve internal and external client consultation to determine project objectives , recommend solutions and develop database strategy as well as writing and presenting proposals including developing concept and pricing . Additional responsibilities include heavy quantitative design and analysis , database extraction and analysis and statistical modeling . Requirements for this position are : experience in all phases of consumer database market research from project conception through completion experience , statistical techniques for audience segmentation , statistical techniques for data investigation and strong skills with SAS or SPSS . Candidates for this position will have 3 - 4 years ' database marketing research experience , strong analytical skills , with application within direct marketing business and Bachelor ' s degree in marketing , economics , mathematics , or statistics . Research Analyst The emphasis of this position will be on survey development and execution , research analysis , drawing conclusions and writing , and results . Requirements for this position include experience in all phases of consumer market survey research from project conception through completion experience . Candidates will have experience with survey development , sample management , pre - testing , monitoring interviews and converting data and verifying validity of cross - tab data . Candidates will also have strong SAS or SPSS experience , 3 years ' consumer market research experience and a Bachelor ' s degree in marketing , economics , mathematics , or statistics . In return for your expertise , we offer an excellent compensation package and significant growth potential . For confidential consideration , please send resume , cover letter , and salary history to : Director of Recruiting Phoenix Group 34115 W . Twelve Mile Road , Suite 200 Farmington Hills , Ml 48331 Fax : ( 248 ) 488 - 3736 * I ! Call : ( 248 ) 488 - 3693 Email : jobs @ phoenixgroup . com b ^ Jx Website : www . phoenixgroup . com An Equal Opportunity Employer . GROUP . INC . GROUP ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ . IC . . . . . . . . . . . I , . I , , . , . . . . . . . . . . . . I . . . . . . - . . 1 . . 1 . . I . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 . - - . . . . . . . 1 . 210 This content downloaded from 132 . 64 . 30 . 143 on Sun , 20 Oct 2013 16 : 55 : 42 PM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions