The Politics of Interpretation : Rationality , Culture , and Transition . by ROBERT H . BATES , RUI J . P . JR . DE FIGUEIREDO and BARRY R . WEINGAST Rational choice theory , especially game theory , should be seen as complementary to interpretivist approaches rather than as their rivals . Rational choice analysis is most useful when applied to political mechanisms , yet has limited application to belief structures that originate outside the political system . Strategic manipulation of beliefs is best understood through interpretivist means . © COPYRIGHT 1998 Sage Publications , Inc . I . INTRODUCTION Rational choice theory constitutes a vigorous and contentious voice within political science . Recent political trends suggest its limitations , however , as well as the utility of alternative approaches to the study of politics . This article explores the ability of rational choice theory to address these forms of politics and the possibility of combining it with alternative approaches . Our goal is twofold . First , we provide insight into rational choice theory’s relationship with cultural modes of analysis and the former approach’s limitations . Second - - and contrary to much of the literature - - we suggest that rational choice and cultural analysis approaches are complementary rather than mutually exclusive and antagonistic . A . The Challenge Game - theoretic forms of rational choice theory have , in recent years , been most successful in the study of highly institutionalized settings in the developed world . ( 1 ) Judged by the lion’s share of its applications , rational choice theory appears most powerfully to be applied to the study of politics when it is rule governed . Major areas of concentration include the following : Democracies . Game - and decision - theoretic approaches have largely been applied to the various institutions that involve voting : elections and legislatures . ( 2 ) Rule - governed political systems . Institutionalized procedures specify the set of relevant players , the alternatives available to them , and the sequence of play . A wide range of institutions have been studied in this way , including the bureaucracy , ( 3 ) the courts , ( 4 ) and interactions in the separation of powers system . ( 5 ) Instrumental rationality . The application of rational choice methodology appears to be most successful when people focus on the value of outcomes and evaluate alternatives in terms of their capacity to yield them . ( 6 ) Most game - theoretic analyses assume that actors dispassionately weigh the costs against benefits of specific alternatives and the trade - offs among them . This seems to point toward applications such as well - developed markets , stable legislatures , and voting in consolidated democracies . When rational choice theory penetrated political science in the 1970s , its practitioners largely focused on democratic politics in the United States . In recent years , applications have been extended outside American politics to that of Europe and Japan . ( 7 ) Nonetheless , a large range of phenomena outside of the developed world have received little attention from rational choice theorists , including revolutions , democratization , riots , ethnic conflict , coups , political transition , and other forms of unstable politics and political transformation prevalent in many areas of the developing world . Moreover , events in the 1980s and 1990s have posed powerful challenges to rational choice theory . Among them number the following . The rise of " cultural politics . " Politics in the Middle East , North Africa , and Asia highlight the significance of religious fundamentalism . ( 8 ) Events in Africa , central Asia , and the Balkans emphasize the power of ethnicity . ( 9 ) As identity politics inflicts costs that appear to outweigh any reasonable estimate of the gains , the politics of culture appears to challenge the premise of rationality . Scholars such as Weiner and Huntington , at least , therefore see reason for rejecting " political economy " - - including , presumably , rational choice theory - - and call for a return to approaches more attuned to the significance of noninstrumental forms of behavior . ( 10 ) The politics of transition . The greatest achievement of rational choice theory has been to provide tools for studying political outcomes in stable institutional settings . But in moments of transition , rules are ill - defined and symbols , emotions , and rhetoric seem to count for more than do interests , calculations , and guile . ( 11 ) As stressed by Przeworski , moments of transition constitute moments of maximal uncertainty ; in moments of transition , people may therefore " not know " where their interests lie . ( 12 ) Political transitions seem to defy rational forms of analysis . Such considerations suggest a potentially significant limitation to rational choice approaches : while useful for the study of the relatively stable , relatively rule - governed politics of advanced industrial democracies , rational choice Politics & Society Dec 1998 v26 i4 p603 ( 1 ) Page 1 - Reprinted with permission . Additional copying is prohibited . - G A L E G R O U P Information Integrity The Politics of Interpretation : Rationality , Culture , and Transition . theory may face significant limitations when applied to the less - settled politics of other regions , where ethnic and religious identities play a greater role in politics . Many scholars conclude that rational choice theory is therefore less useful in some fields of comparative politics and thus less useful , overall , in the study of comparative politics than in the study of politics in the United States . B . An Alternative Several of the attributes that suggest possible limitations to the use of rational choice theory suggest as well possible strengths of a major alternative : what we call interpretivist theory . ( 13 ) Interpretivists focus on the politics of culture . They study the political construction of identities , be they of race , ( 14 ) nationality , ( 15 ) or ethnicity . ( 16 ) Interpretivists also focus on the forging of communities , ( 17 ) the definition of boundaries , ( 18 ) and the invention of tradition . ( 19 ) By focusing on the role of culture and the creation of political communities , they address the kinds of issues that pose challenges to rational choice analysis . In seeking to explain the transformation of politics through the mobilization of cultural materials , interpretivists stress the power of rhetoric , gesture , and metaphor . ( 20 ) They focus on communicative acts and their power to imbue moments with political meaning . Many therefore view politics as a form of theater in which bonds are forged , expectations formed , and direction given by expressive acts . ( 21 ) C . Toward Complementarity Recent political events therefore pose challenges to rational choice analysis and suggest the relevance of a significant alternative . Bhabha speaks for many , of course , when he counterpoises the interpretivists’ vision of the wellsprings of political action - - emotion , identity , and the search for meaning - - with those of rational choice theory - - reason , interest , and the pursuit of personal gain . ( 22 ) Acknowledging the gap that divides the two traditions , we nonetheless devote this paper to the search for complementarities . In doing so , we join Goffman , Edelman , Gusfield , and others in exploring the strategic manipulation of political symbols and mobilization of cultural differences ( 23 ) and , more recently , that of Ferejohn and Laitin in exploring the deep connections between culture and rational choice theory . ( 24 ) We develop our argument in stages . We first meet the challenge facing rational choice theory by studying phenomena outside the highly institutionalized polities of the developed West . Toward that end , sections II and II explore two cases of political transformation : one in Zambia and the other in the former Yugoslavia . The first analyzes an act of political theater in which popular protest redefined what seemed possible politically , thereby leading to the overthrow of an incumbent regime and the restoration of democracy . The second centers on the transformation of the political space from one defined in terms of " rational " economic reform to one defined in terms of the seemingly " irrational " ethnification of politics . Sections II and III demonstrate that rational choice theory is readily adapted to contexts outside its traditional areas . Section IV turns to the broader issue of the relationship between rational choice and interpretive approaches . To suggest the complementarities between these approaches , we discuss the role of ideas and the politics of discontinuous change . In this section , we explore the limitations of current rational choice models to handle the politics of transition and culture . We then explore the possibilities for theoretical integration by suggesting how some of the fundamental concepts used by interpretivists can be incorporated into rational choice theory . In contrast to the idea that rational choice models supplant more traditional approaches , our discussion suggests a two - way street between the approaches . II . THE CASE STUDIES : AN INTRODUCTION A . Zambia The overthrow of the United National Independence Party ( UNIP ) in Zambia in 1991 represented the first electoral defeat of an incumbent political party in an Anglophone state in Africa in the period since independence . The UNIP’s defeat also marked the toppling of one of modern Africa’s founding fathers , Kenneth David Kaunda , and placed Zambia in the " third wave " of democratic transitions . ( 25 ) Political Background Led by Kenneth David Kaunda , the UNIP had triumphed in the preindependence elections of 1963 , winning a majority of votes in all but two of Zambia’s eight provinces . Shortly thereafter , the party was racked by internal conflicts ; dissidents withdrew , taking their backers with them , and by aligning their factions with opposition parties , the dissidents threatened to convert the UNIP into a minority party . Before it could be defeated at the polls , however , the UNIP used its legislative majority to transform Zambia into a single - party government . ( 26 ) As Zambia moved to a single - party system , it also shifted to socialist policies . In a wave of " economic reforms , " the government nationalized retail firms , financial services , Politics & Society Dec 1998 v26 i4 p603 ( 1 ) Page 2 - Reprinted with permission . Additional copying is prohibited . - G A L E G R O U P Information Integrity The Politics of Interpretation : Rationality , Culture , and Transition . and even the massive mining companies , whose production made Zambia the world’s third largest exporter of copper . ( 27 ) Although Zambia had a single - party system , its president stood for periodic reelection . To intimidate political rivals and to deter political entry , he sought large electoral majorities ; he thereby sought to demonstrate to political rivals that challenges would fail . Driven by the president’s need for exceptional majorities , party workers elicited high turnouts ; votes of 90 % or more in presidential elections became commonplace in the post - independence period . Zambia is one of the most urbanized nations in black Africa ; over 40 % of its population lives in cities . ( 28 ) In seeking electoral victories , the governing party found it less costly to organize the densely settled townships than the small homesteads scattered throughout the countryside . One of the issues of greatest concern to urban dwellers is the purchasing power of their incomes , and the UNIP therefore pledged itself to interventionist forms of economic management : overvaluing the currency to reduce the price of imports , subsidizing credit to promote investment and thereby create jobs , imposing price controls on consumption goods , and subsidizing urban housing and the costs of transportation . Above all , the UNIP subsidized the production and consumption of maize , the staple food of Zambia’s urban consumers . ( 29 ) Parliament became a center of opposition to the president and to his government’s socialist policies . In elections to parliament , the government allowed , and indeed encouraged , rival candidates to compete for votes , albeit all under the UNIP label . Parliamentary candidates had to secure the approval of the UNIP’s central committee . Having satisfied the criterion of party loyalty , they competed on other political dimensions , such as their ability to criticize the government or to serve the interests of constituents . Once it chose the candidates for parliament , the UNIP refrained from financing or staffing the campaigns of particular aspirants for office . More than others , businessmen possessed the resources with which to build their own electoral machines . Businessmen found positions in parliament useful in securing contracts , licenses , and favorable rulings from the government and its bureaucracy and parliamentary immunity a useful form of protection when criticizing the government’s socialist policies and when pressing for market - oriented reforms . More than others , they also possessed the resources by which to provide constituency services and thereby to build a political base independent of the ruling party . To a degree that surprised , indeed alarmed , the leaders of the UNIP , prominent businessmen therefore gained a major portion of the seats in parliament , from which they mounted increasingly harsh criticisms of the government and its program . ( 30 ) Using the political protection afforded by parliament , several of the leading dissidents offered a conservative alternative to the Kaunda regime . Economic Background At the time of independence , Zambia was one of Africa’s most prosperous economies . In the late 1970s , the situation abruptly changed . With the collapse of copper prices and the rise in the price of oil in the late 1970s , the index of Zambia’s real exchange rate fell from 124 . 4 in 1978 to 50 . 9 in 1987 ( 1985 = 100 ) . The party had promoted government management of the economy in part to consolidate its electoral support in the urban constituencies . With the collapse of the economy , its financial base weakened , however , and so too its grasp on political power . As economic conditions worsened , the government came under increased pressure to curtail its consumer subsidies , especially those on maize . The reduction of the maize subsidy struck the poorer urban consumers particularly hard . ( 31 ) When maize prices were cut , urban dwellers rioted . In December 1986 , they stormed out of the townships , burned cars , attacked police , and looted stores and offices . In response , the government of Zambia nationalized the maize mills and reinstated massive subsidies for the consumer price of maize . So great were these subsidies , amounting to over 10 % of the government’s total expenditures , that they were not economically sustainable . The government therefore reduced them . Once again , the urban dwellers rioted and , once again , the government reaffirmed its commitment to controlling the consumer price of maize . Following the elections of 1988 , seeking to comply with the dictates of the International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) , World Bank , and donor community , the government attempted once again to reduce its subsidies to urban consumers . The township residents again rioted . In this instance , however , they not only protested against the government’s economic policies but conspicuously and persuasively dramatized their disaffection with the UNIP and its president . Upon seizing power from the British and achieving independence for Zambia , the UNIP had turned its old Lusaka offices into a museum . A small dwelling located in a high - density township , the offices contained memorabilia from the days of the political struggle : a typewriter , a set of files , and personal possessions of the party’s national secretary , Kenneth David Kaunda , who following independence became Zambia’s first president . Parked outside stood a vintage Land Rover that had been used by Kaunda when touring local party branches . In its fury , the mob that rioted in June 1990 set fire to the offices and burned the Land Rover . It thereby desecrated the UNIP’s national shrine . ( 32 ) Politics & Society Dec 1998 v26 i4 p603 ( 1 ) Page 3 - Reprinted with permission . Additional copying is prohibited . - G A L E G R O U P Information Integrity The Politics of Interpretation : Rationality , Culture , and Transition . After the rioters set ablaze the party offices , the political dissidents , many from parliament , moved to center stage . Forming a National Interim Committee for Multiparty Democracy , they launched a campaign for a return to multiparty democracy . The urban masses that once had formed the core of the UNIP’s constituency now joined in the parliamentary opposition . Confronted by having either to repress this popular movement or to retreat politically , President Kaunda chose the latter course . In October 1991 , Zambia held the first competitive party election in over 29 years , and the UNIP and its president were swept from power . Students of cultural politics often focus on the politics of those who have been marginalized . ( 33 ) Among the most emotionally charged issues , they argue , is the price of food . ( 34 ) The urban poor and the rural peasantry , denied access to wealth and power , nonetheless make their preferences known and affect political outcomes , these scholars argue , by transforming public festivals into political theater , engaging in politically charged acts of symbolic protest , and infusing day - to - day life with " hidden transcripts " of political dissent . In doing so , they make possible political transitions : overthrows of governments and revolutionary redistributions of power . Popular protests , symbolic actions , and vivid and dangerous acts that communicate intensely held but hitherto unknown convictions - - these forms of politics also mark the case of Zambia . As analysis of these aspects of transitional politics features prominently in interpretivist studies of politics , the downfall of the UNIP provides a useful vehicle for advancing an understanding of the complementarities between interpretivism and rational choice . B . The Former Yugoslavia The outbreak of war and ethnic violence in the former Yugoslavia appears to constitute a breakdown of rationality . ( 35 ) Standard accounts emphasize the strength and durability of primordial identities . According to this view , the current conflict bears striking parallels with earlier battles . The Balkans , as Kaplan asserts , are inhabited by " ghosts . " ( 36 ) Despite the surface plausibility of the primordial interpretation of Balkan politics , the reality appears far more complex . Not only did the 45 years between the end of World War II and the outbreak of the recent war remain remarkably peaceful , but also , during that era , high rates of intermarriage took place among ethnic groups . ( 37 ) It is simply implausible that groups experiencing hatreds , even if " submerged " by a repressive regime , would behave in this way . Memories of past events are not irrelevant to the current situation , but neither are they determinative . The recent comparative literature on ethnicity offers an alternative to the primordial explanation . ( 38 ) Although ethnic groups may be taken as given in the short run , their political significance cannot . The role and meaning of ethnicity , in this view , are politically constructed . Ethnic identity thus emerges in part as a result of interaction among competing political elites . ( 39 ) Historical Background In the years following the death of Marshal Tito in 1980 , a majority within the Yugoslav Communist Party seemed to support both democratic and economic reform . ( 40 ) Reform was opposed by the conservatives . Slobodan Milosevic , a former communist and leader of Yugoslavia in the ! ate 1980s , stood at the center of the conservative faction . Milosevic rejected democratic and economic reform in large part because he and his supporters could not dominate the process . By exploiting and creating ethnic tensions , Milosevic was able to derail economic reforms and emerge on top of postcommunist Serbia . This was not a straightforward process . While it might have been in Milosevic’s interests to exploit ethnic tensions , what must be explained is why so many Serbians followed his lead . ( 41 ) A number of institutions and practices under the ancien regime created by Tito served to blunt ethnic tensions . ( 42 ) First , Tito created a balance among groups and regions , notably between Slovenia and Croatia , on one hand , and Serbia , on the other . Second , he decentralized many decisions and resources to areas roughly corresponding to groups , thus giving each group control over the distribution of some state resources . Decentralization not only reduced the power of the central state but also reduced the central state’s capacity to be used by one group against another . Third , Tito enforced an explicit prohibition against political appeals to one group against another . And fourth , he created a series of national institutions to limit the ability of particular groups to capture the state for their own narrow purposes ; for example , he created a governing council composed of representatives of the " republics " and two others , requiring a high degree of consensus for national decisions . Thus , not only did the ancien regime help maintain the Yugoslav Communist Party’s lock on national political power and control over the economy , as most accounts emphasize , but it also provided the institutional basis for trust among ethnic groups by making it difficult for any group to use national power against another . In the words of Burg and Berbaum , " The stability of the communist political order in Yugoslavia rests in large part on the party’s ability to maintain social and political peace among nationalities . " ( 43 ) Politics & Society Dec 1998 v26 i4 p603 ( 1 ) Page 4 - Reprinted with permission . Additional copying is prohibited . - G A L E G R O U P Information Integrity The Politics of Interpretation : Rationality , Culture , and Transition . During the 1980s , Woodward suggests , two factors helped erode the institutions providing group protection . First , international events revolving around the negotiations to reschedule Yugoslavia’s international debts forced reform . International donor agencies , such as the IMF and World Bank , required regulatory reform , drastic reductions in budgets ( including redistributive payments ) and greater central control over the economy . These had the unintended effect of reducing the resources provided to the regions and squelching the decentralized protections limiting the authority of - - and hence risk from - - the central state . Second , Slovenia and Serbia , for very different reasons , sought to undermine these institutions to maximize their autonomy . Slovene leaders wanted less central control so they could break free of Yugoslavia and enter the European Community . Serbia wanted to dismantle the institutional restraints on its power to afford it greater control over the other regions of Yugoslavia . In combination , these two factors undermined the institutional basis for political stability . They eliminated the restrictions inherent in the ancien regime , increasing the possibility that one region or the central state might take advantage of another . These fears were reinforced as Milosevic announced that Yugoslavia was no longer a pan - Southern Slavic state but a Serbian state . Simultaneously , he began making outrageous claims about the Croatians . Finally , he took steps to gain control over the Yugoslav army and began strengthening it . Slovenia left as quickly as . possible . ( 44 ) In the late 1980s , in the institutional vacuum , several campaigns emerged that raised ethnic tensions in Yugoslavia . In Croatia , ethnification was fanned by its leader , Franjo Tudjman , and in Serbia by its leader , Slobodan Milosevic . In what follows , we focus on the dynamics of ethnification within Serbia . Milosevic’s campaign of ethnification emphasized the possibility of genocidal - minded Croats . ( 45 ) Although not totally unlikely given the long history of episodic violence in the Balkans , this portrait at first appeared improbable , even to most Serbians . Most Yugoslav citizens had lived in harmony , trusting their neighbors , and Milosevic’s claims did not fit with their experiences . What must be explained about the emergence of ethnic politics in Yugoslavia is how ethnic issues moved from the periphery of politics to become its dominating force . In particular , how were large numbers of Serbs transformed from a focus on reform in combination with indifference about ethnic issues to a focus on the aggressive ethnification of politics ? As part of his campaign of ethnification , Milosevic heralded the primacy of Serbia in the Yugoslav state , making aggressive and threatening speeches about other groups . He also used his control over the army in ways that threatened Serbia’s neighbors . In this environment , other groups sought to protect themselves . Both the Slovenes and Croatians moved toward independence , in part propelled by historic and immediate problems in Yugoslavia and in part by the encouragement of Europeans . ( 46 ) Two sets of events then strengthened Milosevic’s hand , lending considerable credence to his claims , both involving Croatia and its Serb minority . First , Croatia’s movement toward independence threatened to render the Serbians a permanent political minority . ( 47 ) Serb fears were intensified by Croatia’s choice of a national symbol , the Sahovnica , which had been used by of the Ustashe regime that had launched the ethnic cleansing of the 1940s . Second , ethnic identification and the fears it raised were reinforced by the dismissal , in 1990 , of Serbs holding positions in Croatian police departments and as local magistrates . The Croats’ action generated fears among Croatian Serbs that worse could easily occur . Many Croatian Serbs , particularly those in rural areas , reacted by initiating guerilla warfare . ( 48 ) With the outbreak of violence , many Croats and Serbs were murdered , including many innocents . Regardless of who initiated this process , the importance for Milosevic was that these events provided vivid proof that the old system had collapsed : Serbians were being killed by Croatians . Although the events did not prove his views correct , the events did increase their credibility . Within Serbia , Croatia’s behavior provoked fears of a return to the mass violence and genocide of an earlier era . Although Croatian violence directed at Croatian Serbs might be a limited program that would not spread elsewhere , Serbians could not be assured of this . Such violence contained the seeds of a much larger conflict . Croatian leader Franjo Tudjman’s calls for a " greater Croatia " hardly suggested moderate or limited ambitions : According to Silber and Little , Tudjman also made clear his total disregard for Bosnia - Herzegovina , calling the central Yugoslav republic a " national state of the Croatian nation . " . . . [ Extremist Croatians ] openly advocated the annexation of Herzegovina , the Southern part of Bosnia - Herzegovina . Extremist ambitions to extend Croatian territory as far as Zemun , a town just north of the Serbian capital Belgrade , even entered the popular humor at the time . One joke said HDZ stood for Hrvatska do Zemuna , which means Croatia all the way to Zemun . ( 49 ) Politics & Society Dec 1998 v26 i4 p603 ( 1 ) Page 5 - Reprinted with permission . Additional copying is prohibited . - G A L E G R O U P Information Integrity The Politics of Interpretation : Rationality , Culture , and Transition . Thus , Croatia might use its mobilization to move into Bosnia - Herzegovina , granting it significant geostrategic advantages from which to force concessions from Serbia . Having moved into Bosnia - Herzegovina , Croatia might next form an alliance with disgruntled elements in Kosovo and Vojvodina , attempting to dominate Serbia from all directions . Macedonia , Yugoslavia’s southern province , might also side with Croatia , using the opportunity to assert its independence and reduce the risk from Serbia . Croatia’s immediate threat was to its domestic Serbs , but nothing limited Croatia’s threat to its borders . Croatia’s ambitions could have easily exploded into a wider conflict , one that might dominate Serbia . If Croatia undertook these steps , an unprepared Serbia could easily become more than a mythical victim . Ultimately , these fears generated greater support for Milosevic’s hard - line position . For if Croatia in fact became violently anti - Serbian , a hard - liner such as Milosevic would provide greater security than could a government focusing on reform . These effects were strengthened by the outbreak of ethnic conflict within Croatia . When reformist movements mounted anti - Milosevic demonstrations within Serbia , Milosevic conceded limited reforms , on one hand , while fostering the escalation of guerrilla violence , on the other . When Milosevic , under the guise of restoring order , involved the Yugoslav army , full - scale warfare resulted . Once at war , Serbia pushed aside economic reform . The war led to a state of emergency that allowed the regime to repress the reformist opposition . The government first drafted individuals residing in areas that supported the opposition and targeted , in particular , members of the reformist movement . Many reformers fled the country . In addition , the war enabled Milosevic to redefine the basic cleavage in politics in ethnic terms by focusing government propaganda on atrocities committed in Croatia . At the same time that Milosevic used the ethnic issue to strengthen his position within Serbia , Tudjman took similar actions within Croatia . Strong parallels existed between the politics within Serbia and Croatia , and the interaction between the two unleashed hatred and mistrust . ( 50 ) A central factor underlying Milosevic’s successful transformation of domestic Serbian politics from reform to ethnic issues was Croatia’s seeming confirmation of Milosevic’s claims . Rather than acting in a manner that would disconfirm Milosevic’s claims , Croatia pursued actions that reinforced them . As Glenny among others argues , in the context of the general collapse of authority in the region , each side’s paranoia fed upon the other’s . ( 51 ) Reciprocal paranoia , history , and symbols all marked the transformation of a peaceful region into one characterized by mutual hatred and mass murder . These are not the kinds of events typically studied by rational choice theorists . III . INTERPRETING THE CASES : A GAME - THEORETIC ANALYSIS In this section , we investigate the politics of the two cases using the tools of rational choice theory . In both instances , we begin by using spatial theory , a standard tool of political analysis . In dealing with the two cases , spatial models prove too limited , however . Political transition lies at the core of both . The cases demonstrate that , as interpretivists have long stressed , the very structure of politics is itself subject to redefinition and the space itself subject to change . To deal with this reality and to absorb the insights of interpretivist accounts , we are therefore compelled to change our choice of tools . We are driven from spatial theory to games of incomplete information . We are also driven to deeper insights into the limitations of rational choice theory and into its relationship with intepretivism - - themes that we address in section IV . A . The Case of Zambia We begin our analysis of Zambia’s political transition using a spatial framework ( see Figure 1 ) . The dimension suggests the degree of political loyalty to the UNIP regime . Figuratively , the political opposition is mounted from the right . The ideal point of the ( parliamentary ) dissidents is labeled D and that of the government is labeled K ( for Kaunda ) . Neither the militants nor the dissidents , acting alone , are politically decisive , however . The urban constituents’ ideal point , labeled U , is located between D and K . The urban dwellers constitute the political pivot : should they support the dissidents , the opposition could unseat the government . [ Figure 1 ILLUSTRATION OMITTED ] Figure 1 depicts two political periods in Zambia . In period 1 ( i . e . , before the collapse of the economy ) , the ideal point of the urban constituents lay closer to that of Kaunda than to that of its critics ( panel 1 ) . As the economy eroded , however , so too did the loyalty of the urban dwellers . As suggested in panel 2 , the collapse of the economy changed urban dwellers’ preferences over policy ; the ideal point of those who became alienated ( U = A ) shifted rightward , away from that of Kaunda and toward that of the dissidents . With the collapse of the economy , then , the government became politically vulnerable . The government’s opponents faced a dilemma . The dissidents would have liked to have unseated Kaunda by forcing the government to hold multiparty elections ; without the backing of the urban dwellers , however , they could not Politics & Society Dec 1998 v26 i4 p603 ( 1 ) Page 6 - Reprinted with permission . Additional copying is prohibited . - G A L E G R O U P Information Integrity The Politics of Interpretation : Rationality , Culture , and Transition . hope to do so . But the preferences of the urban constituents constituted " private knowledge " - - that is , they were known only by the urbanites themselves . As shown in panel 2 , the preferences of the urban dwellers may have lain closer to the ideal point of the dissidents than to that of the government ( U = A ) . But without perfect information , the dissidents could not be certain . The urbanites , they feared , may also have remained politically loyal ( U = S , or " satisfied " ) . Only the urbanites knew for sure whether they were loyal to the government or favored the opposition . The opposition thus faced a tactical problem . For should they mistake the true meaning of the clamor of the mob , they might then attempt to overthrow the government , only to find that the government’s core constituency remained intact . If the dissidents mounted an unsuccessful challenge , they would face reprisals ; if assured the support of the urban masses , an emboldened president could silence the parliamentary opposition . Alternatively , should urbanites truly alienated from the government riot , the dissidents might misperceive them as simply demanding better policies from the government , rather than its overthrow . The spatial model deployed thus far helps define the nature of the political dilemma facing the dissidents , but it does not lend itself to the analysis of its subsequent resolution . To address this dilemma , and hence to study the politics of transitions , we employ an alternative framework : games of incomplete information . The Model Figure 2 outlines the game . To capture the uncertainty that plagues the political actors , the first move is made by a nonstrategic player who we call " Nature . " Nature assigns preferences to urbanites probabilistically . With probability [ [ Pi ] . sub . 1 ] , Nature chooses S , so that U is satisfied and will support K ( Kaunda ) under any circumstances . With probability [ [ Pi ] . sub . 2 ] , Nature chooses M , so that U is moderate and will support K if - and only if Kaunda supports them economically by subsidizing the price of maize . If Nature chooses A , then U is alienated or angry and will not support Kaunda under any conditions ; this occurs with probability 1 - [ [ Pi ] . sub . 1 ] - [ [ Pi ] . sub . 2 ] . ( 52 ) Note that the move by Nature does not imply that the level of urban disaffection is determined immediately prior to the sequence of play . Rather , we use Nature’s move as a convenient way of representing the uncertainty of the dissidents and Kaunda about U’s true motivation . The next move is made by U , the urbanites , who choose among three actions : they can do nothing , riot , or riot and burn sacred symbols , such as Kaunda’s Land Rover . [ Figure 2 ILLUSTRATION OMITTED ] As shown by the extensive form , Kaunda ( K ) then responds . Given the choice made by the urban dwellers , Kaunda can either repress them , provide them costly subsidies , or do nothing . The next move is made by the dissidents , D . They have to decide whether to challenge Kaunda . The last move is conditional : if D , the dissidents , have chosen not to challenge , the game ends , and Kaunda retains power . If the dissidents challenge , however , then the urbanites must choose either to support the dissidents or to support Kaunda . As previously noted , a challenge by the dissidents will succeed only if supported by the urban dwellers ; otherwise , Kaunda remains in power . The game tree specifies both the sequence of moves and the structure of information . Only the urban dwellers know for certain their level of political alienation . To capture this feature , we represent U as knowing precisely the choice by Nature but Kaunda and the dissidents as knowing only the prior probability distribution of Nature’s choice : the urban dwellers , they believe , are S , M , or A , with probability [ [ Pi ] . sub . 1 ] , [ [ Pi ] . sub . 2 ] , and 1 - [ [ Pi ] . sub . 1 ] , - [ [ Pi ] . sub . 2 ] , respectively . We call these probabilities prior probabilities since they constitute estimates of the likelihood of the urban dwellers’ type formed prior to the events of the game . Finally , we make several assumptions about the preferences of the players . Kaunda and the dissidents . Both prefer to be in power rather than out . Both fear reprisals . The dissidents therefore prefer not challenging over challenging and losing . And Kaunda , if he is to be overthrown , prefers not to have repressed . He regards repression as costly . The urban dwellers . As shown in Table 1 , while satisfied urbanites ( type S ) always prefer Kaunda and alienated ones ( type A ) always prefer the dissidents , the moderate urbanites ( type M ) exhibit a political loyalty that is conditional : type M prefers K only if K addresses their economic needs by subsidizing the costs of maize . ( 53 ) Finally , the costs of rioting also depend on the urban dwellers’ type : only urbanites of type A will find burning the symbols of independence palatable . Further , if they are not willing to support a challenge by the dissidents , then the urbanites prefer that the dissidents not challenge . Finally , the urbanites prefer that Kaunda not repress and prefer any other regime to a repressive regime . ( 54 ) Our objective is to explore the mechanisms that allowed Kaunda to hold on to political power , despite the presence of food riots and political dissidents , and to account for his subsequent downfall . Both his persistence in power and his ouster , we argue , constitute equilibrium outcomes . One results from the strategic manipulation of informational Politics & Society Dec 1998 v26 i4 p603 ( 1 ) Page 7 - Reprinted with permission . Additional copying is prohibited . - G A L E G R O U P Information Integrity The Politics of Interpretation : Rationality , Culture , and Transition . advantages conferred by uncertainty , and the other results from the ability of angry urbanites to dispel uncertainty , thereby disabusing the dissidents of any presumption of urban loyalty to the Kaunda regime . If the probability of U being moderate is sufficiently high relative to the probability of U being satisfied and subsidies are sufficiently valuable , then the following strategies constitute an equilibrium to the game : ( 55 ) 1 . U will riot if either satisfied or moderate ; otherwise , U will riot and burn . 2 . K will subsidize if U riots ; otherwise , K will do nothing . 3 . D will challenge if ( 1 ) K represses , ( 2 ) U riots and burns , or ( 3 ) U riots and K does nothing ; otherwise , D will acquiesce . 4 . U will support D if ( 1 ) K represses , ( 2 ) U is alienated , or ( 3 ) U is moderate and K does nothing ; otherwise , U will not support D . Conditions 1 and 2 explain how Kaunda retained political power , while conditions 3 and 4 explain how he lost it . Rather than presenting a rigorous proof of this proposition , we instead focus on key portions of the reasoning . Kaunda Retains Power Kaunda’s rule was marked by repeated urban riots . Nonetheless , he remained in power . He responded to the riots with food subsidies , and the dissidents refrained from challenging . In explicating this portion of the equilibrium , we can best begin by noting a paradoxical implication : Kaunda always provided subsidies following riots . He did so even when subsidies may not have been necessary , that is , even though the urban dwellers might have been satisfied . ( 56 ) This unintuitive behavior underscores the importance of uncertainty and the strategic significance of " private " information . The urbanites stopped at rioting ; that is , they did not riot and burn . This subtle but important distinction conveys information for Kaunda . Because the urban dwellers did not riot and burn , this eliminated the possibility that they might be angry . It provided Kaunda no further information about the urban dwellers’ type : they might have been satisfied or moderate . ( 57 ) Were the urbanites satisfied , Kaunda need not have subsidized , but had they been moderate , then subsidies , although expensive , would have ensured his retention of power . Consider in greater detail Kaunda’s decision to provide maize subsidies when the urbanites riot . Assuming Kuanda does not repress , there are four possible outcomes from Kaunda’s perspective , depending on whether he retains power and whether he provides subsidies . We write these as the following : Kaunda retains power and subsidizes ( R , S ) , Kaunda retains power and does not subsidize ( R , ? ? ) , Kaunda loses power and subsidizes ( L , S ) , Kaunda loses power and does not subsidize ( L , ? ? ) , Kaunda would choose to subsidize if and only if [ MATHEMATICAL EXPRESSION NOT REPRODUCIBLE IN ASCII ] where [ U . sub . K ] indicates the utility to Kaunda of each outcome . We interpret this inequality as follows . The inequality reflects the fact that Kaunda’s decision to subsidize requires that his expected utility from subsidizing ( the left - hand side of the inequality ) outweigh the expected utility from not doing so ( the right - hand side of the inequality ) . When the urbanites have rioted , Kaunda will retain power for sure if he subsidizes . His utility for this outcome is [ U . sub . K ] ( R , S ) . Thus , the left - hand side of the inequality represents the certain payoff to retaining power by subsidizing . Now to the more complex left - hand side . If Kaunda chooses not to subsidize , he will retain power if the urbanites are satisfied but will lose power if the urbanites are moderate . The first part of the expression on the right - hand side , therefore , is the probability that the urban dwellers are satisfied given that they have rioted , [ [ Pi ] . sub . 1 ] / [ [ Pi ] . sub . 1 ] + [ [ Pi ] . sub . 2 ] , multiplied by the utility to Kaunda of retaining power without subsidizing , [ U . sub . K ] ( R , ? ? ) . The second part of the expression is the probability that the urban dwellers are moderate given that they have rioted , [ [ Pi ] . sub . 2 ] / [ [ Pi ] . sub . 1 ] + [ [ Pi ] . sub . 2 ] , multiplied by the utility to Kaunda of losing power without subsidizing , [ U . sub . K ] ( L , ? ? ) . Thus , the right - hand side of the expression represents the expected value of not subsidizing when the urbanites have rioted . Rearranging terms , we obtain ( 1 ) [ MATHEMATICAL EXPRESSION NOT REPRODUCIBLE IN ASCII ] The left - hand side of inequality ( 1 ) is the ratio of the prior probability that the urban dwellers are moderate to the prior probability that the urbanites are satisfied . As this ratio increases , the probability that the urban dwellers are moderate given that they have rioted also increases . Both the numerator and denominator of the terms on the right Politics & Society Dec 1998 v26 i4 p603 ( 1 ) Page 8 - Reprinted with permission . Additional copying is prohibited . - G A L E G R O U P Information Integrity The Politics of Interpretation : Rationality , Culture , and Transition . refer to the difference between Kaunda’s correctly guessing U’s type and mistakes . The numerator represents the case when the urban dwellers are satisfied . It is the difference in Kaunda’s utility between correctly not subsidizing the urban dwellers when they are satisfied , [ U . sub . K ] ( R , ? ? ) , and incorrectly subsidizing them , [ U . sub . K ] ( R , S ) . The denominator represents the case when the urban dwellers are moderate . It is Kaunda’s utility value of the difference between correctly subsidizing the urban dwellers when they are moderate , [ U . sub . K ] ( R , S ) , and thus retaining power , and failing to do so and losing power , [ U . sub . K ] ( L , ? ? ) In the numerator , a subsidy is wasted : with or without it , Kaunda remains in power . In the denominator , the saving on subsidies is gained at the expense of losing office . The expression then states that if the probability that the urban dwellers are moderate is large enough , Kaunda will not take a risk by failing to subsidize maize prices . Further , the loss of utility in the denominator is great ; the gains in the numerator are small by comparison . As a result , the prior probability that the urban dwellers are moderate , [ [ Pi ] . sub . 2 ] , need not be large relative to the prior probability that they are satisfied , [ [ Pi ] . sub . 1 ] , for Kaunda to continue to waste money . Satisfied urban dwellers therefore did better by " pooling " that is , acting as if , like the moderates , their loyalty was contingent . They thereby exploited the government’s informational disadvantage to secure low - cost grain . ( 58 ) We can thus understand the strategic calculations that underpinned the Kaunda regime : a regime beset with riots but capable of retaining power - - at the expense of wasteful subsidies . Kaunda Loses Power In explicating the second portion of the equilibrium - - one in which alienated urbanites separate and the regime is overthrown - - it is useful to recall the magnitude of Zambia’s economic decline . In terms of the model , economic decline would decrease [ [ Pi ] . sub . 1 ] while increasing both [ [ Pi ] . sub . 2 ] and 1 - [ [ Pi ] . sub . 1 ] - [ [ Pi ] . sub . 2 ] . One way of viewing these changes is that economic decline alters the distribution of preferences over policy ; that is , economic decline lowers both economic activity - - and hence jobs - - and the resources available to the state . Both decrease the value of the regime to its constituents , potentially resulting in a rise in political alienation . Another is as a change in political expectations . Put simply , with increased misery , Kaunda and the dissidents would expect urban dwellers to become less satisfied . With this change , those who sought to overthrow the government become disadvantaged by uncertainty surrounding Zambia’s politics . Unlike the satisfied urban dwellers , the alienated urban dwellers gain no advantage from pooling with the moderates . Such pooling would prevent the dissidents from recognizing the urbanites’ political sentiments and their own political opportunity . When alienated , the urban masses’ central problem is therefore how to credibly communicate their disaffection to the challengers . Recall that the challengers would only challenge if ( almost ) certain that they would be supported . The urban masses need some mechanism of communication . To achieve their desired outcome , alienated urban dwellers therefore need to separate themselves from satisfied or moderate types . They accomplish this by taking actions that those with moderate objectives would find too costly but which they do not . Burning the symbols of the UNIP regime constituted such a costly gesture . Among those activists who still recognized the UNIP’s role in securing political liberty and racial equality , the destruction of the party museum provided a measure of the depth of their disillusion with the government . Being more costly , the action therefore distinguished this riot from others , transforming it from the normal political turbulence occasioned by Zambia’s economic decline into a defining political moment . Counterfactual This analysis thus offers an understanding of the conditions that both underpinned and unseated the Kaunda regime . It helps to identify and unpack the processes that enable dramatic political gestures to generate a political transformation . The analysis thus helps to demonstrate the broader thrust of our argument : that rational choice and interpretative approaches to the study of politics constitute complements , not rivals . The complementarity of the two approaches becomes even more evident when exploring a further implication of the model : the counterfactual that it implies . Urbanites of all types feared repression , and if the urban masses were dissuaded from acting when alienated , the dissidents , themselves fearful , would not have risked a challenge to Kaunda’s regime . Had Kaunda made use of an effective repression , Zambia’s history could thus have been that of Zaire . This possibility is itself intriguing . But its importance for this argument lies elsewhere . It stems from the fact that the counterfactual story is implied by the equilibrium conditions . ( 59 ) Insofar as the counterfactual is plausible , it therefore lends support to our analysis of the conditions that account for the stability and overthrow of the Kaunda regime . Honing in more closely , we see that the factors that Politics & Society Dec 1998 v26 i4 p603 ( 1 ) Page 9 - Reprinted with permission . Additional copying is prohibited . - G A L E G R O U P Information Integrity The Politics of Interpretation : Rationality , Culture , and Transition . underlie the counterfactual , and thus the broader result , rely on two assumptions : one structural and one based on preferences . On one hand , repression did not significantly alter the strength of a coalition between the dissidents and urbanites . This meant that repression was of minimal utility to Kaunda , who wanted to retain power . Second , Kaunda preferred not to repress , all else equal . Qualitative accounts enhance our credence in this assumption and thus in the broader analysis that it supports . From fieldwork , we learn that irrespective of Kaunda’s actions , a coalition of dissidents and urbanites was sufficient to unseat the UNIP . From such accounts we also learn of Kaunda’s Christian upbringing , his humanistic values , and ultimate fear that the army would turn on him rather than repress its own citizens . ( 60 ) This qualitative information about constraint and preference bolsters our confidence in the assumptions that play a critical role in the formal analysis . The rational choice analysis must thus appeal to qualitative accounts for its completion . But note also the complementarities that flow the other way , that is , from the formal analysis . Biographers , historians , and political analysts have , of course , commented upon Kaunda’s vulnerability and personality and stressed their significance for Zambia’s politics . Our analysis suggests an important qualification . Kaunda’s preferences , for example , may have been necessary to explain political outcomes , but they were not sufficient . To be sufficient , other very precise conditions had to be fulfilled . His personal attributes generate the outcomes we observed only when in interaction with the specific choices and behaviors of other strategic actors . This interaction had to occur in a highly constrained manner , as captured in the equilibrium conditions of the model . The fine structure of political meaning , distinguishing the symbolism of rioting versus rioting and burning , was well beyond Kaunda’s control . Moreover , the signaling model captures the social and political significance of this type of distinction in meaning . As with interpretivism , game theory suggests that actions do not speak for themselves but must be ascribed meaning . This analysis thus helps to highlight the complementarity between formal theory and interpretative analysis . B . The Case of the Former Yugoslavia The transformation of Serbian politics can be portrayed in the following spatial diagrams . ( 61 ) In the mid - 1980s , economic and political reform provided the central dimension of politics . For simplicity , we represent these two aspects of reform as a single - issue dimension ranging from no reform on the left to complete marketization and democratization on the right ( see Figure 3 ) . ( 62 ) Milosevic and the incumbent former communist regime , M , are located on the left , preferring a system that liberalizes neither politics nor economics . At the opposite end of the spectrum stand the reformers , R , who seek to liberalize the economy and to institute democracy . Also located on the diagram is the status quo , Q , representing , by the late 1980s , a modest degree of reform over the old system , although nothing comparable to the program sought by R . At this time , most citizens preferred some degree of reform , and we represent this by placing the pivotal Serbian , P , closer to R than to Q . [ Figure 3 ILLUSTRATION OMITTED ] As the logic revealed in the diagram shows , it was only a matter of time before the reformers would succeed in replacing Milosevic and the incumbent regime . As the diagram suggests , the pivot supports R over M . Without a reinstatement of political repression or some other change in politics , M’s days were numbered . A general political strategy in settings of this type is for the losers to seek an alternative dimension of politics that holds the promise of breaking apart the opposing coalition . ( 63 ) In the Serbian case , such an issue would have to separate P from R . The issue of ethnicity could produce precisely that effect . If M could convince P to worry more about the threats from the Croatians and Muslims , then it could draw P’s support away from R . But how was this transformation accomplished ? This question can be reposed by introducing additional diagrams . We do so in two stages . The first shows the initial response to M’s raising of the ethnification issue ( see Figure 4 ) . This diagram adds a second ethnification dimension to Figure 3’s dimension of economic reform ; it depicts each actor’s preferences over the two dimensions . At the outset of M’s raising of the second dimension , the political situation was not substantially altered from that depicted in Figure 3 . Although M preferred the ethnification of politics , neither P nor R held such a preference ; indeed , the ethnic issue was initially met with indifference within Serbia . This is reflected in the structure of preferences assumed for P and R at this stage , which are shown in the diagram as ellipses . The short axis of the ellipse is depicted as horizontal , reflecting the fact that , at this time , a small change in economic policy mattered far more than a large change along the ethnic dimension . The status quo , Q , is also represented as unchanged . Under these circumstances , P prefers R to M , and M is still losing . [ Figure 4 ILLUSTRATION OMITTED ] The essence of Milosevic’s success is represented in Figure 5 , which exhibits new ideal points for the players . Politics & Society Dec 1998 v26 i4 p603 ( 1 ) Page 10 - Reprinted with permission . Additional copying is prohibited . - G A L E G R O U P Information Integrity The Politics of Interpretation : Rationality , Culture , and Transition . Although P still prefers a high degree of economic reform , the pivot’s preferences along the ethnification dimension have changed , now preferring a strong policy of ethnification . Two other aspects represented on the diagram are fundamental to the political transformation . First , notice that the orientation of the ellipse representing P’s preferences has shifted so that its short axis is now the vertical or ethnification dimension , not the reform dimension . Second , notice that R is represented as having also moved on the ethnification dimension , but not as far as P . The reason is that the reformers’ comparative political advantage is reform , not ethnification . Just as Milosevic could not compete with them along the reform dimension , the reformers could not compete with Milosevic as a hard - liner and potential defender of Serbia in an environment of ethnic hostility . [ Figure 5 ILLUSTRATION OMITTED ] These diagrams illustrate the transformation of the Serbian politics and of Milosevic’s success . They do not explain that success , however : they fail to tell us why the critical shift in P’s preferences occurred . Answering this question , therefore , requires additional steps , to which we now turn . Return to the General Framework The essence of the Serbian political transformation concerns the interaction of Milosevic and P , the pivotal supporter within Serbia . How did P come to believe Milosevic’s claims that the Croatians were intent upon anti - Serbian violence and , perhaps , genocide ? To address this question and thus the dynamics of the transition , we assume that the actual Croatian political type is not known to the pivot , although it is fixed in advance . ( 64 ) We model P’s uncertainty by positing that the Croatians are one of two types : with probability [ Gamma ] , the Croatians are aggressive , wanting not only independence but also to acquire as much territory and hegemony as possible ; with probability ( 1 - [ Gamma ] ) , they are not . We then explore the conditions under which P would give credence to Milosevic’s insistence that the defense of ethnic interests represented the fundamental issue of Serbian politics . The sequence of action is given in Figure 6 . First , Nature determines the Croatians’ type . ( 65 ) For simplicity , we assume that this information is revealed to Milosevic but not to the pivot , P . ( 66 ) We represent the aggressive type as A and the peaceful , unaggressive type as ~ A . Second , Milosevic can either escalate the tensions and militarize Serbia further , an action we label E , or take a more peaceful stance , labeled ~ E . Third , P must choose whether to support Milosevic or the reformers , represented in the diagram as M and R , respectively . The dashed lines represent the information sets for the pivot . Because P does not know the Croatians’ type but can observe M’s action , they cannot distinguish between being on the first or third branch or between the second or fourth . [ Figure 6 ILLUSTRATION OMITTED ] Next , we specify the preferences of the players . First , M prefers to retain power over all other outcomes . Second , the pivot P prefers Milosevic if they are facing an aggressive Croatia , and the reformers otherwise . In this setting , the following strategies are an equilibrium , if [ Gamma ] is sufficiently high : M plays E if the Croatians are type A , M plays E if the Croatians are type ~ A , and ( 2 ) P plays R if M has played ~ E , P plays M if M has played E . Note that the actions of M do not convey Milosevic’s information about the Croatian type ; in this sense , his action is what game theorists call " babbling . " According to the strategies in ( 2 ) , M plays E - - that is , recruits a larger and more effective army - - no matter what he observes about the Croatians . But note also that M can nonetheless win by playing the ethnic card . The pivot’s strategy calls for it to support R if M does not raise an army but to support M if he does raise one . For a game - theoretic model to capture the politics of transition , it must address the following question : why is it rational for the pivot to behave this way ? The answer comes from examining behavior on and off the equilibrium path . It is the latter that underscores the limitations of the rational choice perspective and its need for interpretivist accounts of choice and behavior . As shown in ( 2 ) above , in equilibrium , the pivot would support the reformers if Milosevic chose not to raise an army but would support Milosevic if he did choose to raise one . The first part of the pivot’s behavior is easy to comprehend . Given that M is a hard - liner , if he ever fails to raise an army , it implies that the Croatians are not aggressive . Under these circumstances , it would then be safe for P to support the reformers . ( 67 ) The difficulty arises in understanding why P supports Milosevic when he has raised an army , knowing full well that M might well have done so strategically , that is , hoping it will convince P that the Croatians are in fact aggressive . Politics & Society Dec 1998 v26 i4 p603 ( 1 ) Page 11 - Reprinted with permission . Additional copying is prohibited . - G A L E G R O U P Information Integrity The Politics of Interpretation : Rationality , Culture , and Transition . In this equilibrium , M’s actions do not fool P ; indeed , M’s actions convey no information . Rather , it is the underlying situation and the relevant values , given the uncertainty , that induce P to support M . Consider the choices and payoffs facing P , given that M has " played " E , that is , chosen to mobilize an army . Because P is uncertain about the Croatians’ type , the payoffs from supporting either M or R are also uncertain . If the pivot supports M , its payoffs are as follows . With probability [ Gamma ] , the Croats are aggressive , but Milosevic has prepared by raising troops and remains in power to defend Serbia . This yields P a payoff we label AM for an aggressive type facing a Milosevic who has retained power . But with probability ( 1 - [ Gamma ] ) , the Croats are not aggressive , though Milosevic has raised an army and remains in power to block reform , yielding a payoff of PM , for a peaceful type facing Milosevic . The expected payoffs from supporting M are thus [ Gamma ] AM + ( 1 - [ Gamma ] ) PM . Supporting R also yields uncertain payoffs . With probability [ Gamma ] , the Croats are aggressive , and although Serbia has an army , it remains without an effective leader to protect it , yielding a payoff of AR , for an aggressive Croatia facing reformers . With probability ( 1 - [ Gamma ] ) , the Croats are not aggressive . In this event , the Serbian reformers initiate democracy and economic reform , yielding P a payoff of PR , the best outcome for P , following the previous labels . Supporting R thus yields P an expected payoff of [ Gamma ] AR + ( 1 - [ Gamma ] ) PR . ( 68 ) For the pivot to support M , the expected payoffs to P from supporting M must be larger than if P supports R , that is , ( 3 ) [ Gamma ] AM + ( 1 - [ Gamma ] ) PM [ is greater than ] [ Gamma ] AR + ( 1 - [ Gamma ] ) PR . Rearranging terms , this implies that ( 4 ) [ Gamma ] ( AM - AR ) [ is greater than ] ( 1 - [ Gamma ] ) ( PR - PM ) . Inequality ( 4 ) yields a natural interpretation . On the left - hand side , the term ( AM - AR ) represents the difference between supporting M and R given that the Croatians are actually aggressive and that M has raised an army . When this is multiplied by [ Gamma ] , the probability that the Croats are aggressive , the left - hand side can be interpreted as the expected benefits from " correctly " supporting M when the Croatians are aggressive . On the right - hand side , the term ( PR - PM ) is the difference in supporting R and M given that the Croatians are not aggressive and that M has raised an army . When this is multiplied by ( 1 - [ Gamma ] ) , the probability that the Croats are not aggressive , the right - hand side can be interpreted as the expected benefits from " correctly " supporting R when the Croatians are not aggressive . Taken as a whole , the inequality says that , for it to be rational for P to support M , it must be that the expected benefits from supporting M over R when the Croats are aggressive exceed the expected benefits from supporting R over M when the Croats are not aggressive . Note that the probabilities work against satisfying this inequality : prior to the initiation of hostilities , the probability that the Croats are aggressive , [ Gamma ] , is likely to have been relatively low . This implies that although M possesses a comparative advantage in fighting the Croats , given that they are aggressive , the probability that this gain will be realized was low . What drives the " ethnification " of politics , then , is the difference in the stakes . Even assuming that the economic and political reform succeeds in generating positive increases in welfare , such increases are not likely to be high . The differences in growth rates under Milosevic versus the reformers is at most likely a few percentage points higher a year . In contrast , if Croatia is aggressive , Serbs stand to lose significant freedom and even modest prosperity if they are unprepared , an outcome that in comparison to making the " correct " choice is likely large in cost . Further , the model is extremely flexible in this regard since one can analyze potential actions under a range of possible Croatian types : the more aggressive Croatia might be , the lower the probability necessary for the pivotal Serb to choose Milosevic . In the extreme , if P believes Croatia is actually genocidal , a claim made by some observers , and Serbia is unprepared , Serbs stand to lose everything - - their property , their children , their lives - - and to do so in short order . The consequences of genocide are simply far larger then those from reform . In sum , the expected benefits of having Milosevic as president when the Croatians are aggressive therefore swamp the expected costs from supporting him instead of the reformers when they are not . Phrased differently , the ethnification of politics depends on whether the pivot’s assessment of the likelihood that the Croatians were aggressive was greater or lower than the minimal probability , [ Gamma ] * , necessary for the pivot to support Milosevic . ( 69 ) The disparity in the stakes implies that [ Gamma ] * is closer to 0 than to 1 . Further , as Croatia is believed to be a greater threat , [ Gamma ] * becomes smaller and smaller : even if the probability of genocide is small , it is enough to motivate action . Hence , the key to the transition lay in the shift of P’s subjective probability to a level above [ Gamma ] * , which enabled Milosevic to gain credence for his ethnic claims . Our explanation for Milosevic’s success thus far has relied on two elements ( section IV discusses a final and critical Politics & Society Dec 1998 v26 i4 p603 ( 1 ) Page 12 - Reprinted with permission . Additional copying is prohibited . - G A L E G R O U P Information Integrity The Politics of Interpretation : Rationality , Culture , and Transition . element ) : first , Milosevic’s attempts at misinformation and manipulation , here modeled as his decision to escalate tensions regardless of the Croatians’ true type ; second , the asymmetry of the stakes , which imply that [ Gamma ] * is closer to 0 than to 1 . We end this section with the discussion of a third point , focusing on behavior that does not occur in equilibrium . The analysis thus far has stressed behavior " on the equilibrium path , " as outlined in ( 2 ) . But this behavior is supported in equilibrium by beliefs about the value of the outcomes that would result were the players to make other choices - - the parts of the strategies that never occur condition the behavior that does . Were Milosevic to pick ~ E and thus stray off of the equilibrium path , then , by ( 2 ) , the pivot would support the reformers ( i . e . , choose R ) . An examination of the game tree suggests that the pivot would behave that way if ( rearranging inequality ( 4 ) ) ( 5 ) [ Gamma ] / 1 - [ Gamma ] [ is greater than ] PR - PM / AM - AR . The expression ( PR - PM ) represents the pivot’s evaluation of the net gain that would occur if the reformers rather than Milosevic were to rule when the Croats were peaceful . The expression ( AM - AR ) represents the pivot’s valuation of the net gain that would occur if Milosevic were to rule rather than the reformers when the Croats were in fact aggressive . Given the relative magnitude of these net gains , the odds of the Croats being aggressive need not be at all high for the inequality to hold and thus for the pivot to choose R . Knowing that , Milosevic would therefore not choose ~ E , that is , would not choose to deviate from his equilibrium choice of strategy . The response of the pivot that he could expect were he to do so constitutes , in effect , a threat that keeps Milosevic from altering his behavior . Condition ( 2 ) thus results from rational responses to information about the behavior of the Croats . But choices made along the equilibrium path also result from conjectures about behavior that is never observed : the choices that the pivot would make if Milosevic altered his choice of strategy . These choices depend upon assessments of likelihoods in situations that do not in fact occur . Whereas behavior along the equilibrium path can be analyzed using Bayes’s rule and the theory of rational choice under uncertainty , behavior off the equilibrium path cannot . For in calculating the probability of outcomes off the equilibrium path , the actors lack the data that would enable them to form rational beliefs ( i . e . , beliefs formed in accordance with Bayes’s rule ) . This observation has an important implication . As players never directly encounter off - the - path situations ( subgames off the equilibrium path ) , they must make decisions in response to their own conjectures or to interpretations advanced by others . Direct experience with these situations does not shape or constrain these interpretations . Perception , debate , persuasion , influence , and rhetoric : these processes , rather than rational decision making and experience , govern the calculations that inform the choice of strategies off the equilibrium path . Our analysis of the Serbian case thus helps us to demonstrate that a rational account of political choice in strategic settings requires an analysis of behavior both on and off the equilibrium path . Fear of what will result from departures from the equilibrium choice of strategies constitutes a major portion of the reason that they are chosen . Interpretivist accounts thus necessarily represent complements to rational choice explanations , in part because they offer insight into the " cautionary tales " that inform people’s behavior . IV . DISCUSSIONS In the case of Zambia , this paper has explored the politics of symbolic communication : the way in which alienated urban masses turned to the streets to signal their disaffection , thereby precipitating the return to democracy . In the case of Serbia , it has explored the politics of identity and revolutionary transformation : the redefinition of politics as a matter of ethnicity rather than economics , resulting in the costly abandonment of economic reform and the rise of ethnic violence . By analyzing these cases , this paper has explored the complementarities between interpretivist and rational choice approaches to the study of politics . The " cultural " knowledge required to complete a rational choice explanation reveals the complementarity of the approaches . Game theorists often fail to acknowledge that their approach requires a complete political anthropology . It requires detailed knowledge of the values of individuals , of the expectations that individuals have of each others’ actions and reactions , and of the ways in which these expectations have been shaped by history . Game - theoretic accounts require detailed and fine - grained knowledge of the precise features of the political and social environment within which individuals make choices and devise political strategies . To construct a coherent and valid rational choice account , then , one must " soak and poke " and acquire much the same depth of understanding as that achieved by those who offer " thick " descriptions . As John Ferejohn argues , Rational choice theory is , in this sense , an interpretive theory that constructs explanations by " reconstructing " patterns of meanings and understandings ( preferences and beliefs ) in such a way that agents’ actions can be Politics & Society Dec 1998 v26 i4 p603 ( 1 ) Page 13 - Reprinted with permission . Additional copying is prohibited . - G A L E G R O U P Information Integrity The Politics of Interpretation : Rationality , Culture , and Transition . seen as maximal given their beliefs . In this sense the logic of rational choice and the logic of interpretivist or culturalist approaches are similar : start with observed data ( behavior including documents and letters , practices , institutions ) , and reconstruct actors and their inner attributes ( meanings , beliefs , values ) in such a way that the data are as fully explained or accounted for as possible . ( 70 ) Interpretivists , focusing on symbols , significance , and meaning , argue that action and events do not speak for themselves but instead must be interpreted . The same events may have very different meanings in different cultures , and different distinctions surrounding particular events can have different meanings . Thus , in the Zambian game , the political significance of the actions of the crowd varied , depending not only on what they did but also upon the inferences drawn - - the interpretations attributed to them - - by others . Meaning was constructed through the process of interaction and emerged as part of the equilibrium of the game . The sequential game used to discuss the Zambia case reveals that signaling games capture precisely the same aspect of interpretation . The equilibrium of the game drew a distinction between rioting and rioting and burning . Rioting alone could indicate an attempt to convey dissatisfaction with the regime’s policies . Burning the hallowed party shrine , however , had a more precise symbolic meaning : it indicated the urban dwellers’ anger and alienation . Nothing inheres within this distinction to compel this meaning ; the distinction is symbolic in precisely the way interpretivists suggest . In this way , signaling games reflect the ways in which individuals and communities ascribe meaning to events . To further advance the agenda of intellectual complementarity , we turn to two key phenomena . One is the politics of ideas ; the other is the politics of interpretation . In addressing these two subjects , it should be noted that we omit discussion of a third : the literature on social movements . The linkages that run from Durkheim to Goffman and thus to Tarrow , Tilly , Kuran , and others run as well through our analysis . ( 71 ) Because the connections are so apparent , we feel little need to elaborate upon them . The Role of Ideas Rational choice theorists typically eschew the notion that ideas affect political choice . ( 72 ) As Shepsle illustrates , many instrumentalists believe that a simpler focus on interests alone is often adequate to explain the political event in question , relegating the " idea " to an epiphenomenon . ( 73 ) Those convinced of the power of ideas typically provide no evidence to counter Shepsle’s argument . They also fail to explain why some ideas gain intellectual hegemony over others . If any of ten thousand ideas are potentially relevant , then a theory of the role of ideas must explain why one idea gains prominence . That scholars believing in the role of ideas have not countered Shepsle’s objection does not mean ideas can safely be ignored , however . In this essay , we have sought insight into the mechanisms that underlie the politics of symbols , identities , and other subjective states . The approach we develop has significant implications for the literature on the role of ideas as well . ( 74 ) Consider the case of Yugoslavia , where the initial controversy in Serbia focused on the question of whether the Croatians were hostile . The resulting ethnification of politics hinged on Milosevic remaining in power , in turn requiring that the Serbian pivot accord sufficient likelihood to Milosevic’s characterization of the Croatians’ intentions . But given their initial implausibility , how did Milosevic’s ideas gain prominence , convincing Serbs that an aggressive response was the only path toward safety ? In answering this question , many emphasize Milosevic’s ruthlessness , his skillful use of the old communist apparatus , and his near monopoly control over the media . All may be true , but , in our view , they are insufficient to explain why his ideas gained sufficient hegemony to keep Milosevic in power and to support the ensuing ethnification of politics . Our approach provides insight into these matters . By embedding the problem in a model of choice under uncertainty - - here , a signaling game - - we translate the problem of the influence of ideas into the one about changes in the likelihood estimates held by decision makers . In this view , ideas matter because they affect how individuals interpret their world via the likelihoods they accord alternative possibilities . The cases presented here illustrate this point . Milosevic did not have to convince Serbians ( technically , the Serbian pivot ) that his idea - - his hypothesis that the Croatians were aggressive - - was correct . Rather , he had to convince them that his ideas were sufficiently plausible . In technical terms , the problem turns on the probability , [ Gamma ] , that the Croatians were aggressive . The model showed that the condition for the pivot to support M was that [ Gamma ] [ is greater than ] [ Gamma ] * , not that [ Gamma ] = 1 . And in this case , given the asymmetry in the stakes , [ Gamma ] * was , in fact , much closer to 0 than to 1 , and yet [ Gamma ] [ is greater than ] [ Gamma ] * was sufficient to generate the political transition . Similarly , in the Zambian case , for the urbanites’ riots to be effective in inducing Kaunda to subsidize grain prices , their meaning - - that urban dwellers would support a dissident - backed challenge unless they Politics & Society Dec 1998 v26 i4 p603 ( 1 ) Page 14 - Reprinted with permission . Additional copying is prohibited . - G A L E G R O U P Information Integrity The Politics of Interpretation : Rationality , Culture , and Transition . were subsidized - - had to be sufficiently plausible . If the probability that they were moderate , relative to their being satisfied , was small relative to the stakes for Kaunda , riots would not be effective . This result has important implications for the power of ideas . Scholars often emphasize the irrationality of an ideology , noting , for example , that the alternative idea was more plausible than the idea that gained intellectual hegemony . Our approach suggests that the influence of ideas does not depend on relative plausibility but rather on the balance between plausibility and the stakes , that is , between probabilities and payoffs . At the outset of the process of ethnification , the idea that the Croatians were hostile remained less plausible than the idea that they were not hostile and that their actions could easily be explained as defensive maneuvers . Nonetheless , our model suggests that Kaunda and the Serbians could have rationally acted on the ideas of urban disaffection and Croatian hostility because the costs of being wrong were large . Our perspective emphasizes that , to have an effect , an idea must not simply be announced and publicized ; endless repetition from a monopoly media is not sufficient . Rather , the idea must somehow gain some external validity , a process we model via Bayes’s rule its and effects on citizens’ likelihood estimates . The initial Serbian expectations about the Croatians held that the probability the latter were aggressive was low . Something had to convince Serbians that this probability was larger , and Milosevic could not accomplish that on his own . Events in Croatia served to " verify " Milosevic’s hypothesis . In terms of Bayes’s rule , these events increased the probability that Milosevic was correct . Consider Croatia’s move toward independence ; its adoption of the symbols of the Ustashe regime ; the emergence of its own hard - line , nationalist , and anti - Serbian politics ; its firing of domestic Serbs from police positions ; and , most important , the eruption of guerilla warfare - - all these events external to Milosevic served to increase the probability that Milosevic’s assertions were correct . Moreover , as we argued , this increase accords with the rationality inherent in Bayes’s rule . To gain credence , interpretations of politics and history cannot be unconstrained . As we illustrate in the case of the war between Croatia and Serbia , the rhetorical persuasiveness or emotional appeal of a particular leader is not sufficient to explain why individuals accept that leader’s ideas and interpretations . Individuals do not automatically or blindly endorse a leader’s claims . Interpretations must interact with events in a way that " makes sense " of the world . And that is not solely a matter of culture and identity . Similarly , the symbolic role of the burning of Kaunda’s Land Rover does not explain , in and of itself , the transition from an UNIP government in Zambia . The usefulness of these symbols are constrained by the process and context of interaction between all of the actors there . Thus , our interpretations are complemented by two factors . First , the process must be consistent with Bayes’s rule . The necessity for verification and for updating consistently with Bayes’s rule places striking constraints on what types of interpretations help make sense - - help provide meaning - - to the political audience , Second , actions - - symbolic or otherwise - - should only be understood in the context of interactions among actors and not as ends in themselves . Our analysis also helps to account for discontinuous change in both the saliency of ideas and in political behavior , that is , not just persuasion but also conversion . Events and information cause individuals to revise their beliefs about relevant probabilities . As these probabilities change , they may cross particular boundaries . In our models , an increase in the probability [ [ Pi ] . sub . 2 ] relative to [ [ Pi ] . sub . 1 ] in the Zambian case and of [ Gamma ] , from below to above [ Gamma ] * , in the Yugoslavian case causes individuals to change their actions : from ignoring riots to responding to them , from ignoring Milosevic’s ideas to embracing them . Thus , the model helps to explain how long periods of peace and quiescence , perhaps decades , can be followed by the sudden eruption of conflict . ( 75 ) Equally as important , the model suggests the conditions under which such transitions will occur . Returning to the Serbian case , two parameters proved critical : the probability , [ Gamma ] * that the Croatians were aggressive and the relative stakes , S , if violence erupts . Given the formula for calculating [ Gamma ] * , we can derive the intuitively plausible comparative statics result that [ Delta ] [ Gamma ] * / [ Delta ] S [ is less than ] 0 . [ is less than ] 0 . In other words , as the stakes of violence rise , the critical probability unleashing support among Serbians for Milosevic declines - - thus increasing the likelihood of abrupt transitions . This comparative statics result combines with the point about irrationality above : as the stakes get larger , not only does the critical probability unleashing violence go down , but the more likely that , ex post , violence was unleashed when it was not called for . High stakes imply a very low [ Gamma ] * . Under these conditions , [ Gamma ] [ is greater than ] [ Gamma ] * implies that individuals rationally support aggressive ( and defensively motivated ) violence , even when it is unlikely that the opponents are aggressive . Armed with these insights , we can return to Zolberg’s argument about " moments of madness . " These moments represent sharp , discontinuous change , when an old order disintegrates and a new one is born . Within our model of Yugoslavia , these moments occur when [ Gamma ] rises Politics & Society Dec 1998 v26 i4 p603 ( 1 ) Page 15 - Reprinted with permission . Additional copying is prohibited . - G A L E G R O U P Information Integrity The Politics of Interpretation : Rationality , Culture , and Transition . above [ Gamma ] * that is , when the pivot is convinced by circumstances to drop an old , well - established , and possibly long - held system of beliefs . Our model suggests one set of conditions for such a switch in ideas : the presence of great threats . Such threats imply that the value of the status quo is low and , possibly , deteriorating quickly . In the Serbian case , once he had convinced the pivot to reject the old belief system about the Croatians and to support him , Milosevic had considerable freedom in the degree of escalation of the conflict . Milosevic , and hence the content of his ideas and their consequences , could have located in any number of places in the political space and still have succeeded in supplanting the old idea . More generally , the worse the pivot judges the status quo , the greater the range of policies the pivot prefers to Q and hence the greater the discretion of the framer / agenda setter ( Figure 5 ) . In this sense , we agree with Zolberg that " all [ becomes ] possible . " ( 76 ) The critical insight offered by our model is that these moments are not created by rhetoric alone but by a specific type of interaction between the rhetoric and actual events . Our view suggests that moments of madness happen when the stakes are high and possibly highly asymmetric , that is , when there is a real danger . As a consequence , the pivot can support a large range of policies over the status quo , thus allowing not just for a discontinuous switch in ideas but for a dramatic switch from social cooperation to ethnic warfare . This discussion once again underscores the larger point of our paper : that interpretive and rational choice approaches are complementary and , together , provide a deeper and more powerful account than either alone . Zolberg’s study of moments of madness focused on a phenomenon outside the traditional ken of rational choice theory , and he explicitly doubted that instrumentalist approaches could explain it . We have demonstrated that a plausible instrumental account of these moments is possible . But this does not imply that either approach supplants the other . The advantage of the traditional approach is its rich characterization and understanding of the three phases of any crisis with a moment of madness : the ex ante belief system ; the crisis , including the events leading up to the undoing of the old system and the specific moment of madness ; and the consequences , often including a new belief system . The advantage of our approach is that it suggests something about the mechanisms associated with such moments . This includes a set of conditions showing that the specific pattern of the old belief system and events must serve to raise [ Gamma ] above [ Gamma ] * . The politics of interpretation . A key question , then , is where do beliefs come from ? ( 77 ) The interpretivist account of politics would point to two closely related answers . Rational choice theorists would disagree with neither . But taken together , the two suggest important limitations in rational choice theory and the need for further work . The first answer is from history or prior experience . The games analyzed in the text can be thought of as the last stage of a longer and more extended process , in which historical experience shapes beliefs . In an account based upon history , the eventual overthrow of the UNIP regime in Zambia and the tragic results captured in the Serbian signaling game represent the outcome of an extended process of ( Bayesian ) learning . Such an historical perspective can be assimilated into a rationalist account . In both games analyzed above , all of the probabilities - - [ [ Pi ] . sub . 1 ] and [ [ Pi ] . sub . 2 ] in the Zambia game , [ Gamma ] in the Yugoslavia game - - are treated as prior probabilities . But beliefs are revised in the light of new data . This suggests that these beliefs can be reconceptualized as posterior probabilities generated by a process antecedent to that modeled in the text . And the outcome of the game - - the choices that occur in equilibrium - - can thus be seen as the product of previous beliefs and encounters with historical experiences . To illustrate , suppose that the critical value that supported the pivotal player’s decision to abandon the reformers and to support Milosevic in the Yugoslavia game was [ Gamma ] * = 0 . 2 . Suppose as well that the pivot also believed that the Croatians , if aggressive , would claim independence with certainty and , if not aggressive , would do so with probability 0 . 5 . Finally , suppose that the pivotal players then observed that the Croatians demanded independence . The elementary laws of probability imply a precise value of the prior ( 0 . 11 ) that yields the subsequent posterior of 0 . 2 . The prior probability used in the game , [ Gamma ] , thus need not be taken as exogenous but rather can be regarded as the product of the sequential revision of prior beliefs based on historical experience . People do not respond to objective facts or new data , interpretivists argue , however . Rather , they respond to interpretations of events . Interpretivists therefore point to a second factor that shapes the beliefs underlying people’s choices of actions : their worldviews . Say , for example , that the Croatians claim independence . Are they then to be regarded as aggressive ? The answer depends upon beliefs about the relative likelihood of how different types of persons are likely to behave . Actions lead to revisions in beliefs only after being interpreted ; the way in which they will be interpreted depends upon the worldview brought to bear upon them . Politics & Society Dec 1998 v26 i4 p603 ( 1 ) Page 16 - Reprinted with permission . Additional copying is prohibited . - G A L E G R O U P Information Integrity The Politics of Interpretation : Rationality , Culture , and Transition . This argument , too , can enhance a rational choice approach to the study of politics . Once again , the prior probabilities in the signaling games - - [ [ Pi ] . sub . 1 ] , [ [ Pi ] . sub . 2 ] , and [ Gamma ] - - can be reconceptualized as a posterior probability of an antecedent process . But rather than being thought of as a belief revised in the light of objective experience , it can be thought of as a belief revised in the light of interpreted experience . After observing data , beliefs are formed by combining prior beliefs about the world with what interpretivists might call worldviews but what statisticians call likelihood functions . From this perspective , the two points made thus far simply represent an exegesis of Bayes’s rule . Label historical experience D ( for data ) ( e . g . , the Croats have declared independence ) . Assume a set H = { [ H . sub . 1 ] , . . . , [ H . sub . n ] } of mutually exclusive , collectively exhaustive hypotheses that assign probabilities of observing that data , given a hypothesized underlying causal process ( e . g . , the political proclivities of the Croatians ) . Then Bayes’s rule states ( 6 ) P ( [ H . sub . i ] | D ) = P ( [ H . sub . i ] ) P ( D | [ H . sub . i ] ) / [ P ( [ H . sub . 1 ] ) P ( D | [ H . sub . 1 ] ) + . . . + P ( [ H . sub . n ] ) P ( D | [ H . sub . n ] ) ] . The left - hand side constitutes the posterior distribution . It is a probability in precisely the same sense as [ Gamma ] ; in this case , it can be taken as an assessment of the aggressive nature of the Croats , given that they declare independence . The first term on the right - hand side , P ( [ H . sub . i ] ) , is the prior distribution : the original beliefs concerning the nature of the Croats . The second term constitutes the likelihood function ; it gives the probability of the Croats declaring independence , given beliefs about how they would be likely to behave given different hypotheses about their true nature . The posterior probability results when a decision maker revises his or her prior probability in light of the observed data and the likelihood function . By Bayes’s rule , historical experience and worldviews , then , both play a role in transforming prior beliefs into posteriors . Thus far , the arguments of interpretivists nudge rational choice theorists along well - trod paths . Both the first answer - - the appeal to history - - and the second - - the appeal to worldviews - - lead back to Bayes’s rule . But when taken together , they provoke a deeper reconceptualization . Recall the first point : that the game analyzed in the text be thought of as the last stage in a more extensive process , in which probabilities are revised over time . Recall the second : that subjective worldviews play a major role in shaping the way such beliefs are revised . Taken together , these two points imply that the struggle over subjective worldviews should itself be treated as a strategic process . Each equilibrium in the signaling games of section III depends upon a particular set of beliefs that supports a corresponding choice of strategies . The players will not be indifferent over the various equilibria , however . A sophisticated player will therefore seek to influence the choice of equilibrium . Given the lines of reasoning developed in this section , he or she might do so by seeking to alter other players’ beliefs in an effort to induce a change in their choice of strategy . And if recall or knowledge is imperfect , he or she might seek to reinterpret history , thereby altering the way in which prior probabilities are revised and other players’ assessments of their best strategies . Interpretivists have long realized that people seek to shape the future by reinterpreting the past . Comparativists have long acknowledged the political power of intellectuals , particularly in the kinds of situations studied in this article , in which the past is reinterpreted for today’s political purposes . The discussion in this section indicates the current limitations in the ability of rational choice theory to incorporate such insights . We have taken the first steps toward incorporating some of the fundamental insights of interpretivism within a rational choice approach . More are necessary . We have nonetheless shown how a healthy interplay between interpretivism and rational choice theory results in a better understanding of political phenomena . Taken together , they constitute a more powerful means for understanding than either alone . V . CONCLUSIONS In this paper , we have sought to build bridges between approaches that too often sit at " separate tables " : rational choice and especially game theory , on one hand , and interpretivist approaches , on the other . ( 78 ) We have argued that they should be seen as complements rather than rivals . In part because it was first developed to study the politics of advanced industrial democracies , rational choice theory has offered little insight into forms of politics characteristic of many regions of the world : the turbulent politics of culture and the unstable politics of political transition . In response to the challenges posed by such forms of politics , we have moved from the forms of rational choice analysis commonly applied to rule - governed settings to forms better suited to the analysis of symbolic gestures and precipitous political change . In doing so , we have found that , contrary to our own initial expectations and the expectations of others , interpretivist and rational choice theory stand as complements rather than as rivals . Interpretivist accounts illuminate the power of ideas , the Politics & Society Dec 1998 v26 i4 p603 ( 1 ) Page 17 - Reprinted with permission . Additional copying is prohibited . - G A L E G R O U P Information Integrity The Politics of Interpretation : Rationality , Culture , and Transition . influence of history , the significance of intellectuals , and the persuasive power of political rhetoric and dramaturgy . Rational choice analysis helps to explain the mechanisms that account for the impact of these political forces . The complementarity of these traditions thus stands as one lesson . A second lesson is that our analysis suggests how rational choice theory can illuminate aspects of political transition and discontinuity . Although the lion’s share of rational choice applications may be to the highly institutionalized politics of the developed West , these settings are not necessary for its application . A final lesson is a sense of the limitations of rational choice theory . To succeed in accounting for the forms of manipulation explored in this article , rational choice theorists must face the deeper challenge posed by interpretivist accounts : that the structure of beliefs is not exogenous . In the last section , we sketched several ways in which rational choice theory could approach this phenomenon . But we also encountered a major gap that must be spanned before rational choice theory can analyze the strategic manipulation of beliefs - - a fundamental property of the politics of culture and transitions . NOTES ( 1 . ) When we refer to " rational choice theory , " we refer to the theory of games and decisions . We therefore omit many alternative forms , such as the new institutionalism , open economy politics , theories of rent seeking , and collective action . See Douglass C . North , Institutions , Institutional Change , and Economic Performance ( New York : Cambridge University Press , 1990 ) ; Ronald Rogowski , Commerce and Coalitions : How Trade Affects Domestic Political Alignments ( Princeton , NJ : Princeton University Press , 1989 ) ; Robert H . Bates , Open Economy Politics ( Princeton , NJ : Princeton University Press , 1997 ) ; Anne O . Krueger , " The Political Economy of the Rent Seeking Society , " American Economic Review 64 ( 1974 ) : 291 - 303 ; Mancur Olson , The Logic of Collective Action ( Cambridge , MA : Harvard University Press , 1965 ) . ( 2 . ) See , for example , David P . Baron and John A . Ferejohn , " Bargaining in Legislatures , " American Political Science Review 83 ( 1989 ) : 1181 - 1206 ; Gary W . Cox and Mathew D . McCubbins , Legislative Leviathan : Party Government in the House ( Berkeley : University of California Press , 1993 ) ; Keith Krehbiel , Information and Legislative Organization ( Ann Arbor : University of Michigan Press , 1991 ) ; Kenneth Shepsle , " Institutional Arrangements and Equilibria in Multidimensional Voting Models , " American Journal of Political Science 23 ( 1979 ) : 27 - 51 ; and Barry R . Weingast and William J . Marshall , " The Industrial Organization of Congress ; or , Why Legislatures , Like Firms , Are Not Organized as Markets , " Journal of Political Economy 96 ( 1988 ) : 132 - 163 . ( 3 . ) See David Epstein and Sharyn O’Halloran , Delegating Powers : A Transaction Cost Politics Approach to Policy Making under Separate Powers ( New York : Cambridge University Press , 1999 ) . ( 4 . ) See William N . Eskridge , Jr . , " Reneging on History ? Playing the Court / Congress / President Civil Rights Game , " California Law Review 79 ( 1992 ) : 613 - 684 . ( 5 . ) Mathew McCubbins , Roger Noll , and Barry R . Weingast , " Structure and Process , Politics and Policy : Administrative Arrangements and the Political Control of Agencies , " Virginia Law Review 75 ( March 1989 ) : 431 - 482 ; Terry M . Moe , " The Political Structure of Agencies , " in John E . Chubb and Paul E . Peterson , eds . , Can the Government Govern ? ( Washington , DC : Brookings Institution , 1989 ) ; John A . Ferejohn and Charles R . Shipan , " Congressional Influence on Administrative Agencies : A Case Study of Telecommunications Policy , " in Lawrence C . Dodd and Bruce I . Oppenheimer , eds . , Congress Reconsidered , 4th ed . ( Washington , DC : Congressional Quarterly Press , 1989 ) . ( 6 . ) See Bruno S . Prey , Not Just for the Money : An Economic Theory of Personal Motivation ( Cheltenham , UK : Edward Elgar , 1998 ) . ( 7 . ) See , for example , Gary W . Cox , Making Votes Count ( New York : Cambridge University Press , 1997 ) ; Michael Laver and Kenneth A . Shepsle , Making and Breaking Governments ( New York : Cambridge University Press , 1996 ) ; J . Mark Ramseyer and Frances McCall Rosenbluth , Japan’s Political Marketplace ( Cambridge , MA : Harvard University Press , 1993 ) ; Geoffrey Garrett , Partisan Politics in the Global Economy ( New York : Cambridge University Press , 1998 ) ; and George Tsebelis , Nested Games ( Berkeley : University of California - Press , 1990 ) . ( 8 . ) See , for example , Barry M . Rubin , Islamic Fundamentalism in Egyptian Politics ( New York : St . Martin’s , 1990 ) ; American Academy of Arts and Sciences , Islamic Fundamentalism and the Gulf Crisis ( Chicago : American Academy of Arts and Sciences , 1990 ) . It is important to note that this is not exclusive to non - Western countries and cultures but is simply more stark . ( 9 . ) See , for example , Crawford Young , The Rising Tide of Cultural Pluralism ( Madison : University of Wisconsin Press , 1993 ) ; Donald Horowitz , Ethnic Groups in Conflict ( Berkeley : University of California Press , 1985 ) . Politics & Society Dec 1998 v26 i4 p603 ( 1 ) Page 18 - Reprinted with permission . Additional copying is prohibited . - G A L E G R O U P Information Integrity The Politics of Interpretation : Rationality , Culture , and Transition . ( 10 . ) Myron Weiner and Samuel P . Huntington , Understanding Political Development ( Boston : Little , Brown , 1987 ) . ( 11 . ) Recall Zolberg’s discussion of what he called " moments of madness " in which people detach themselves from prevailing political alignments and realize that " all is possible . " It is notable that Zolberg decries the blunt instruments offered by instrumentalist theories for the study of such defining political moments . " So much in the conventional paraphernalia of political science is founded on axiomatic instrumentalism , " he writes , " that we do not know what to make of [ such ] events . " Aristide R . Zolberg , " Moments of Madness , " Politics and Society 2 ( 1972 ) : 183 - 207 . But note also the recent contributions of Susanne Lohmann , " The Dynamics of Informational Cascades , " World Politics 47 ( 1994 ) : 42 - 101 , and Timur Kuran , Private Truths , Public Lies ( Cambridge , MA : Harvard University Press , 1995 ) . ( 12 . ) Adam Przeworski , Democracy and the Market ( Cambridge : Cambridge University Press , 1991 ) ; Robert H . Bates and Anne O . Krueger , " Generalizations Arising from the Country Cases , " in Robert H . Bates and Anne O . Krueger , eds . , Political and Economic Interactions in Economic Policy Reform ( Oxford , UK : Blackwell , 1993 ) . ( 13 . ) See , for example , Aletta Biersack , " Local Knowledge and Local History : Geertz and Beyond , " in Lynn Hunt , ed . , The New Cultural History ( Berkeley : University of California Press , 1989 ) ; Richard Johnson , " What Is Cultural Studies Anyway ? " Social Texts - 016 ( 1986 - 1987 ) : 38 - 80 . ( 14 . ) See , for example , Virginia Dominguez , White by Definition : Social Classification in Creole Louisiana ( New Brunswick , NJ : Rutgers University Press , 1988 ) . ( 15 . ) See , for example , Parthan Chatterjee , Nationalist Thought and the Colonial Worm ( London : Zed Books , 1986 ) ; Patrick Williams and Laura Chrisman , Colonial Discourse and Post - Colonial Theory ( New York : Columbia University Press , 1994 ) . ( 16 . ) See , for example , Michael Ignatieff , Blood and Belonging ( New York : Farrar , Straus , & Giroux , 1993 ) . ( 17 . ) See , for example , Benedict Anderson , Imagined Communities ( New York : Verso , 1991 ) . ( 18 . ) See , for example , Scott Michaelseon and David Johnson , eds . , Border Theory : The Limits of Cultural Politics ( Minneapolis : University of Minnesota Press , 1997 ) . ( 19 . ) See , for example , E . J . Hobsbawm and Terrence Ranger , eds . , The Invention of Tradition ( Cambridge : Cambridge University Press , 1983 ) . ( 20 . ) Murray Edelman , Constructing the Political Spectacle ( Chicago : University of Chicago Press , 1988 ) . ( 21 . ) See , for example , Clifford Geertz , Negara : The Theater State in Bali ( Princeton , NJ : Princeton University Press , 1980 ) ; Nicholas Dirks , Geoff Eley , and Sherry B . Ortner , Culture / Power / History ( Princeton , NJ : Princeton University Press , 1993 ) . ( 22 . ) Homik Bhabha , The Location of Culture ( London : Routledge Kegan Paul , 1994 ) . ( 23 . ) Erving Goffman , The Presentation of Self in Everyday Life ( New York : Doubleday , 1965 ) ; Erving Goffman , Strategic Interaction ( Philadelphia : University of Pennsylvania Press , 1969 ) ; Edelman , Constructing the Political Spectacle ; Joseph Gusfield , The Culture of Public Policies ( Chicago . : University of Chicago , 1980 ) . ( 24 . ) See John A . Ferejohn , " Rationality and Interpretation : Parliamentary Elections in Early Smart England " in Kristen Renwick Monroe , ed . , The Economic Approach to Politics ( New York : HarperCollins , 1991 ) ; David D . Laitin , Hegemony and Culture : Politics and Religious Change among the Yoruba ( Chicago : University of Chicago Press , 1986 ) ; and David D . Laitin , Identity in Formation : The Russian - Speaking Populations in the Near Abroad ( Ithaca , NY : Cornell University Press , 1998 ) . ( 25 . ) Samuel P . Huntington , The Third Wave ( Norman : University of Oklahoma Press , 1991 ) . ( 26 . ) See Cherry T . Gertzel , Carolyn Baylies , and Morris Szeftel , The Dynamics of the One - Party State in Zambia ( Manchester , UK : Manchester University Press , 1984 ) ; William Tordoff , ed . , Politics in Zambia ( Berkeley : University of California Press , 1974 ) ; William Tordoff , Administration in Zambia ( Manchester , UK : Manchester University Press , 1990 ) . ( 27 . ) See Carolyn Baylies , " Zambia’s Economic Reforms and Their Aftermath : The State and the Growth of Indigenous Capital " Journal of Commonwealth and Comparative Politics 20 ( 1982 ) : 235 - 263 . ( 28 . ) See the data given in D . Hywel Davies , ed . , Zambia in Maps ( London : University of London Press , 1971 ) . ( 29 . ) See Doris Jansen Dodge , Agricultural Policy and Performance in Zambia ( Berkeley , CA : Institute of International Studies , 1977 ) . Politics & Society Dec 1998 v26 i4 p603 ( 1 ) Page 19 - Reprinted with permission . Additional copying is prohibited . - G A L E G R O U P Information Integrity The Politics of Interpretation : Rationality , Culture , and Transition . ( 30 . ) For a discussion , see Gertzel , Baylies , and Szeftel , The Dynamics of the One - Party State in Zambia , and William Tordoff , " Residual Legislatures : The Cases of Tanzania and Zambia , " Journal of Commonwealth and Comparative Politics 15 ( 1977 ) : 234 - 249 . ( 31 . ) Robert H . Bates and Paul Collier , " Zambia , " in Robert H . Bates and Anne O . Krueger , eds . , Political and Economic Interactions in Economic Policy Reform ( Oxford , UK : Blackwell , 1993 ) , 420 - 421 . ( 32 . ) The Times [ London ] 29 June 1990 . ( 33 . ) This tradition draws on , among others , George Rude and Eric Hobsbawm , Captain Swing ( New York : Pantheon , 1968 ) . For studies of urban political protest , see Janice Perlman , The Myth of Marginality ( Berkeley : University of California Press , 1976 ) ; this tradition of political analysis draws on George Rude , The Crowd in History ( New York : John Wiley , 1964 ) . For studies of rural protest , see James C . Scott , Weapons of the Weak ( New Haven , CT : Yale University Press , 1985 ) and James C . Scott , Domination and the Arts of Resistance ( New Haven , CT : Yale University Press , 1990 ) . ( 34 . ) For studies emphasizing popular protest in defense of subsistence entitlements , see James C . Scott , The Moral Economy of the Peasant ( New Haven , CT : Yale University Press , 1976 ) . In addition to the studies by Rude noted above , see also Charles Tiny , ed . , The Formation of Nation States in Western Europe ( Princeton , NJ : Princeton University Press , 1975 ) . ( 35 . ) This account draws on Steven L . Burg , Conflict and Cohesion in Socialist Yugoslavia ( Princeton , NJ : Princeton University Press , 1983 ) ; Steven L . Burg and Michael L . Berbaum , " Community , Integration , and Stability in Multinational Yugoslavia " American Political Science Review 83 ( 1989 ) : 535 - 554 ; Aleksa Djilas , The Contested Country : Yugoslav Unity and Communist Revolution , 1919 - 1953 ( Cambridge , MA : Harvard University Press , 1991 ) ; V . P . Gagnon , " Serbia’s Road to War , " Journal of Democracy 5 ( 1994 ) : 117 - 131 ; V . P . Gagnon , " Ethnic Nationalism and International Conflict : The Case of Serbia , " International Security 19 ( 1994 - 1995 ) : 130 - 166 ; Misha Glenny , The Fall of Yugoslavia ( New York : Penguin , 1992 ) ; Ignatieff , Blood and Belonging ; Branka Magas , The Destruction of Yugoslavia : Tracking Yugoslavia’s Break - up 1980 - 92 ( New York : Verso , 1993 ) ; Claus Offe , " Strong Causes , Weak Cures , " East European Constitutional Review 1 ( 1992 ) : 21 - 23 ; William Pfaff , " Invitation to War , " Foreign Affairs 72 ( 1993 ) : 97 - 109 ; Laura Silber and Allan Little , Yugoslavia : Death of a Nation ( New York : TV Books / Penguin USA , 1995 ) ; and Susan Woodward , Balkan Tragedy : Chaos and Dissolution after the Cold War ( Washington , DC : Brookings Institution , 1995 ) . ( 36 . ) Robert D . Kaplan , Balkan Ghosts : A Journey through History ( New York : St . Martin’s , 1993 ) . Although Ignatieff and Pfaff argue against the primordial view , they both acknowledge its prevalence among observers and participants . Pfaff observes that " war in the Balkans is widely thought to be atavistic , the product of a perverse time warp that unloads fourteenth - century hatreds . " Pfaff , " An Invitation to War . " Ignatieff writes , " Nationalists everywhere turn the historical record into a narrative of self - justification . " Ignatieff , Blood and Belonging . ( 37 . ) Gagnon , " Ethnic Nationalism and International Conflict . " ( 38 . ) Horowitz , Ethnic Groups in Conflict ; David Laitin , Language Repertories and State Construction in Africa ( New York : Cambridge University Press , 1988 ) ; Donald Rothchild and Victor Olorunsula , State versus Ethnic Claims ( Boulder , CO : Westview , 1983 ) . ( 39 . ) Similarly , the comparative literature on nationalism emphasizes the systematic evolution of the locus of community over time in the modern era . See , for example , Anderson , Imagined Communities ; Ernst Gellner , Nations and Nationalism ( Ithaca , NY : Cornell University Press , 1983 ) ; and E . J . Hobsbawm , Nations and Nationalism since 1780 ( New York : Cambridge University Press , 1992 ) . Put simply , this historical perspective demonstrates that identity is not primordial but is a social process , if one not well understood . ( 40 . ) Gagnon , " Ethnic Nationalism and International Conflict . " ( 41 . ) Barry R . Weingast , " Institutionalizing Trust : The Politics and Economics of Ethnic and Regional Conflict , " Working paper ( Stanford , CA : Hoover Institution , Stanford University , 1994 ) . ( 42 . ) Burg , Conflict and Cohesion in Socialist Yugoslavia ; Djilas , The Contested Country ; Weingast , " Institutionalizing Trust . " ( 43 . ) Burg and Berbaum , " Community , Integration , and Stability , " 535 . ( 44 . ) Fearon’s discussion of credible commitments helps explain how this dismantling of the ancien regime threatened different groups , particularly minorities . See James D . Fearon , " Commitment Problems and the Spread of Ethnic Conflict , " in David A . Lake and Donald Rothchild , eds . , The International Spread of Ethnic Conflict ( Princeton , NJ : Princeton University Press , 1998 ) . Politics & Society Dec 1998 v26 i4 p603 ( 1 ) Page 20 - Reprinted with permission . Additional copying is prohibited . - G A L E G R O U P Information Integrity The Politics of Interpretation : Rationality , Culture , and Transition . ( 45 . ) He also emphasized problems in Kosovo , claiming discrimination against Serbians by the majority Albanians ; see , for example , Aleksa Djilas , " A Profile of Slobodan Milosevic , " Foreign Affairs 72 ( 1993 ) : 81 - 96 . Though this was an important antecedent to Serbia’s confrontation with Croatia , we do not treat it here . We also do not treat the important events surrounding Slovenia’s move to independence ; see , however , Silber and Little , Yugoslavia : Death of a Nation ; Woodward , Balkan Tragedy . ( 46 . ) Silber and Little , Yugoslavia : Death oft Nation ; Woodward , Balkan Tragedy . ( 47 . ) Substantive accounts , such as Woodward , Balkan Tragedy , provide the empirical details ; theoretical accounts , such as James D . Fearon , " Commitment Problems and the Spread of Ethnic Conflict " and Rui J . P . de Figueiredo , Jr . and Barry R . Weingast , " The Rationality of Fear : Ethnic Conflict and Political Opportunism " Working paper ( Stanford , CA : Stanford University , 1997 ) , emphasize the mechanisms that in part generate these fears . ( 48 . ) Glenny , The Fall of Yugoslavia ; Woodward , Balkan Tragedy . ( 49 . ) Silber and Little , Yugoslavia : Death of a Nation , 86 - 87 . ( 50 . ) Indeed , as many observers note , the similarities between these regimes and between their people stand out more than their differences ( Woodward , Balkan Tragedy ) . These areas do not contain starkly different people but people virtually identical in many respects . The differences between the Serbian and Croatian language , for example , are reported to be a few hundred words . See , for example , Glenny , The Fall of Yugoslavia , and Pfaff , " An Invitation to War . " ( 51 . ) Glenny , The Fall of Yugoslavia . ( 52 . ) Note that here the urbanites are so disaffected by the United National Independence Party ( UNIP ) regime that they are willing to accept a potentially austere dissident regime even over an UNIP government that could be willing to subsidize maize . ( 53 . ) Should Kaunda do nothing ( f ) or repress ( R ) , then the moderate urbanites support the dissidents . ( 54 . ) These assumptions about preferences over classes of the various ( 81 ) terminal nodes of the game are sufficient to yield the equilibrium we outline below . Proofs of the results are available from the authors upon request . ( 55 . ) Note that this result represents only the partial exposition of one equilibrium . ( 56 . ) But only when the probability of urban dwellers being only moderately happy is high relative to the probability of them being satisfied . ( 57 . ) We can further specify Kaunda’s estimates of , respectively , U being of type S and U being of type M , that a rational Kaunda could infer using Bayes’s rule . The probability of U being S given that they have rioted is given by Pr ( U = S | U riots ) = Pr ( U riots | U = S ) Pr ( U = S ) / Pr ( U riots | U = S ) Pr ( U = S ) + Pr ( U riots | U = M ) Pr ( U = M ) + Pr ( U riots | U = A ) Pr ( U = A ) = ( 1 ) [ [ Pi ] . sub . 1 ] / ( 1 ) [ [ Pi ] . sub . 1 ] + ( 1 ) [ [ Pi ] . sub . 2 ] + ( 0 ) ( 1 - [ [ Pi ] . sub . 1 ] - [ [ Pi ] . sub . 2 ] ) = [ [ Pi ] . sub . 1 ] / [ [ Pi ] . sub . 1 ] + [ [ Pi ] . sub . 2 ] . By a similar method , we can see that Pr ( U = M | U riots ) = [ [ Pi ] . sub . 2 ] / [ [ Pi ] . sub . 1 ] + [ [ Pi ] . sub . 2 ] ( 58 . ) For this result to hold , we require an auxiliary assumption about the preferences of the players . In particular , it must also be the case that ( 1a ) [ [ Pi ] . sub . 2 ] / [ [ Pi ] . sub . 1 ] [ is greater than ] [ U . sub . D ] ( NC ) - [ U . sub . D ] ( CL ) / [ U . sub . D ] ( CW ) - [ U . sub . D ] ( NC ) where [ U . sub . D ] indicates the utility to the dissidents for each outcome , NC indicates that the dissidents do not challenge and the UNIP retains power , CL indicates that the dissidents challenge and lose , and CW indicates that the dissidents challenge and win . This ensures that D has an ( off - path ) incentive to challenge if K does not subsidize after riots . Notice that only one of ( 1 ) and ( 1a ) will be binding . If ( 1a ) binds , [ p . sub . 2 ] must be higher than under ( 1 ) in order for Kaunda to subsidize following riots . ( 59 . ) Weingast explores the use of game theory for the construction of counterfactuals , in particular , for distinguishing one counterfactual from among all the possible events that did not happen . See Barry R . Weingast , " Off - the - Path Behavior : A Game - Theoretic Approach to Counterfactuals and Its Implications for Political and Historical Analysis " in Philip E . Tetlock and Aaron Belkin , eds . , Counterfactual Thought Experiments in World Politics ( Princeton , NJ : Princeton University Press , 1996 ) . Politics & Society Dec 1998 v26 i4 p603 ( 1 ) Page 21 - Reprinted with permission . Additional copying is prohibited . - G A L E G R O U P Information Integrity The Politics of Interpretation : Rationality , Culture , and Transition . ( 60 . ) Richard Hall , The High Price of Principles ( New York : Africana , 1970 ) ; interviews , Carter Center , Atlanta , Georgia ( 1992 ) . ( 61 . ) The following does not attempt to model the breakup of Yugoslavia but rather the behavior of pivotal groups in Serbia . Much that would be endogenous , given the first objective , can remain exogenous , given the second . In particular , for our purposes , we need not " endogenize " the behavior of groups in Croatia ; rather , we can focus on the impact of their behavior in Serbia while ignoring the obvious strategic interdependence . In a separate endeavor , we seek to address these issues , incorporating the approach pioneered by Timothy Groseclose , " Blame - Game Politics , " Working paper ( Columbus : Ohio State University , 1995 ) . ( 62 . ) The unidimensional construction reflects the idea that preferences over them were highly correlated and that politics of what followed did not attempt to exploit these differences . ( 63 . ) William M . Riker , The Art of Political Manipulation ( New Haven , CT : Yale University Press , 1986 ) . ( 64 . ) This model is a simplified version of a model we develop in de Figueiredo and Weingast , " The Rationality of Fear . " ( 65 . ) As in the Zambia game , this assumption does not literally imply that the Croats’ type was random or that it was chosen by " nature " as the first step of this game just prior to Milosevic’s move . Rather , this is a fictional device for representing the pivot’s uncertainty about the Croats . ( 66 . ) In practice , there is some doubt as to whether Milosevic actually knew the Croatians’ type and hence their intentions . Nonetheless , Milosevic and the Yugoslav state were better informed on this issue than the typical Serb , even if not fully informed . A modest adjustment in the model to account for this is omitted for ease of exposition . ( 67 . ) The technical conditions are a bit more complicated than this , but they need not detain us . ( 68 . ) Notice that P has a clear preference order over the four possible outcomes , from highest to lowest : PR , PM , AM , AR . ( 69 . ) The exact expression for [ Gamma ] * is [ Gamma ] [ is greater than ] [ Gamma ] * = PR - PM / AM + PR - AR - PM . ( 70 . ) Ferejohn , " Rationality and Interpretation , " 281 . ( 71 . ) Emil Durkheim , Suicide ( New York : Free Press , 1951 ) ; Emil Durkheim , The Division of Labor in Society ( New York : Free Press , 1956 ) ; Goffman , The Presentation of Self in Everyday Life ; Sidney Tarrow , Democracy and Disorder : Protest and Politics in Italy , 1965 - 1975 ( Oxford , UK : Clarendon , 1989 ) ; Sidney Tarrow , Power in Movement : Social Movements , Collective Action and Politics ( Cambridge : Cambridge University Press , 1994 ) ; Charles Tilly , ed . , Citizenship , Identity and Social History ( Cambridge : Cambridge University Press , 1996 ) ; Doug McAdam , Sidney Tarrow , and Charles Tilly , " Toward an Integrated Perspective on Social Movements , " in Mark I . Lichbach and Alan S . Zuckerman , eds . , Comparative Politics ( Cambridge : Cambridge University Press , 1997 ) ; Timur Kuran , " Now out of Never : The Role of Surprise in the East European Revolution of 1989 , " World Politics 44 ( 1991 ) : 7 - 48 ; Kuran , Private Truths , Public Lies ; Barry Barnes , Elements of Social Theory ( Princeton , NJ : Princeton University Press , 1996 ) ; Edelman , Constructing the Political Spectacle ; Russell Hardin , One for All : The Logic of Group Conflict ( Princeton , NJ : Princeton University Press , 1995 ) ; Lohmann , " The Dynamics of Informational Cascades . " ( 72 . ) An exception is the work of Douglass North ( see , for example , North , Structure and Change in Economic History , chap . 5 ) . ( 73 . ) Kenneth A . Sheplse , " Comment , " in Roger Noll , ed . , Regulatory Policy and the Social Sciences ( Berkeley : University of California Press , 1984 ) . ( 74 . ) See , for example , Judith Goldstein and Robert O . Keohane , Ideas and Foreign Policy : Beliefs , Institutions , and Foreign Policy ( Ithaca , NY : Cornell University Press , 1993 ) . ( 75 . ) See also Mark Granovetter , " Threshold Models of Collective Behavior , " American Journal of Sociology 83 ( 1978 ) : 217 - 224 ; Kuran , " Now out of Never " ; Doug McAdam , " Micromobilization Context and Recruitment to Activism " in Bert Klandermas , Hanspeter Kriesi , and Sidney Tarrow , eds . , International Social Movement Research , vol . 1 ( Greenwich , CT : JAI , 1988 ) ; and Lohmann , " The Dynamics of Informational Cascades . " ( 76 . ) Zolberg , " Moments of Madness . " ( 77 . ) Thomas Sargent , Bounded Rationality ( New York : Oxford University Press , 1993 ) provides an important investigation of this issue . This section has benefited greatly from discussions with , and formulations put forward by , Kenneth Shepsle ( personal communications ) . Politics & Society Dec 1998 v26 i4 p603 ( 1 ) Page 22 - Reprinted with permission . Additional copying is prohibited . - G A L E G R O U P Information Integrity The Politics of Interpretation : Rationality , Culture , and Transition . ( 78 . ) Gabriel Almond , " Separate Tables : Schools and Sects in Political Science , " PS : Political Science and Politics 21 ( 1988 ) : 828 - 842 ; Gabriel Almond , A Discipline Divided ( Newbury Park , CA : Sage , 1990 ) . The authors gratefully acknowledge the comments and criticisms received from James Alt , Cynthia Alvarez , Michael Barnett , Seyla Benhabib , Michael Bratton , Lawrence Broz , Marc Busch , David Epstein , James Fearon , V . P . Gagnon , Brian Gaines , Avner Grief , Peter Hall , Tom Hammond , Joel Hellman , Bonnie Honig , Torben Iversen , Erin Jeanne , David Holloway , David Laitin , Peter Lange , Margaret Levi , Lisa Martin , James Morrow , Roger Noll , Kenneth Oye , Robert Paarlberg , Robert Packenham , Daniel Posner , Robert Powell , Jean - Laurent Rosenthal , Andrew Rutten , Scott Sagan , Eric Schickler , Steve Solnick , David Soskice , Kenneth Shepsle , Olga Shvetsova , and Susan Woodward . We owe special thanks to Robert Keohane and Susan Stokes . This article was begun while Bates and Weingast were Fellows at the Center for Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sciences . They would like to acknowledge the support of the center and the National Science Foundation for its grant to the center ( SES - 9022192 ) and to Bates ( SES - 8821151 ) . Robert H . Bates is Eaton Professor of the Science of Government at Harvard University and faculty fellow of the Harvard Institutes of International Development . His most recent books include Open Economy Politics ( Princeton University Press , 1997 ) and Analytic Narratives ( coauthored with Avner Greif , Margaret Levi , Jean - Laurent Rosenthal , and Barry Weingast ) ( Princeton University Press , 1998 ) . Rui J . P . de Figueiredo , Jr . is an assistant professor in the Haas School of Business and Department of Political Science at the University of California , Berkeley . His research interests include bureaucratic organization and performance , applied game - theoretic modeling , and political methodology . Barry R . Weingast is the Ward C . Krebs Family Professor of Political Science at Stanford University and a senior fellow at the Hoover Institution . In addition to Analytic Narratives ( Princeton University Press ) , Weingast has recently edited Positive Theories of Congressional Institutions ( with Kenneth A . Shepsle ) ( University of Michigan Press , 1995 ) and has published " The Political Foundations of Democracy and the Rule of Law " in the American Political Science Review ( June 1997 ) . Politics & Society Dec 1998 v26 i4 p603 ( 1 ) Page 23 - Reprinted with permission . Additional copying is prohibited . - G A L E G R O U P Information Integrity