Developmental Science 7 : 3 ( 2004 ) , pp 325 – 339 © Blackwell Publishing Ltd . 2004 , 9600 Garsington Road , Oxford OX 4 2DQ , UK and 350 Main Street , Malden , MA 02148 , USA . Blackwell Publishing Ltd PAPER Attention and inhibition Attention and inhibition in bilingual children : evidence from the dimensional change card sort task Ellen Bialystok and Michelle M . Martin Department of Psychology , York University , Toronto , Canada Abstract In a previous study , a bilingual advantage for preschool children in solving the dimensional change card sort task was attributed to superiority in inhibition of attention ( Bialystok , 1999 ) . However , the task includes difﬁcult representational demands to encode and interpret the task stimuli , and bilinguals may also have proﬁted from superior representational abilities . This possibility is examined in three studies . In Study 1 , bilinguals outperformed monolinguals on versions of the problem containing moderate representational demands but not on a more demanding condition . Studies 2 and 3 demonstrated that bilingual children were more skilled than monolinguals when the target dimensions were perceptual features of the stimulus and that the two groups were equivalent when the target dimensions were semantic features . The conclusions are that bilinguals have better inhibitory control for ignoring perceptual information than monolinguals do but are not more skilled in representation , conﬁrming the results of the original study . The results also identify the ability to ignore an obsolete display feature as the critical difﬁculty in solving this task . Introduction Studies of the cognitive abilities of bilingual children have primarily been concerned with identifying develop - mental differences between monolinguals and bilinguals . However , the unique cognitive conﬁguration for bilin - guals in which two languages emerge and interact from a single conceptual system also provides a means for investigating aspects of cognitive development and cog - nitive organization itself . The present studies examine the ability of monolingual and bilingual children to solve a cognitive problem with the intention of under - standing both the impact of bilingualism on children’s solutions and the function of speciﬁc cognitive processes in development for both groups of children . The basis for the investigation is a distinction between two cognitive processes that have been shown to diverge in the development of monolingual and bilingual children ( Bialystok , 1993 ) . Evidence for developmental differences by monolingual and bilingual children in these aspects of cognitive processing not only isolates the effect of bilingualism on children’s cognition but also contributes to a broader understanding of the development of these cognitive processes ( review in Bialystok , 2001 ) . The two processes are called analysis of representations and control of attention . Analysis is the process of con - structing mental representations that are increasingly capable of recording information that is detailed , explicit and abstract . As mental representations become analysed , knowledge can be organized around abstract categories and details retrieved independently of their contexts . Analysis resembles the process of representational redescription proposed by Karmiloff - Smith ( 1992 ) as the primary mechanism of development . With development , mental representations increase in their explicitness , organiza - tion and abstractness , allowing access to more detailed knowledge and allowing children to break free of the modular constraints within which it was accrued . Control of attention is the process by which attention is selectively directed to speciﬁc aspects of a representation , particularly in misleading situations . Problem solving inevitably requires intentional focus on some types of information and the exclusion of others . This selective attention is more difﬁcult if a habitual or salient response contradicts the optimal one and must be overruled , making inhibition an essential component of control . Tipper and his colleagues ( Tipper , 1992 ; Tipper & McLaren , 1990 ; Tipper , Bourque , Anderson & Brehaut , 1989 ) have argued Address for correspondence : Ellen Bialystok , Department of Psychology , York University , 4700 Keele Street , Toronto , Ontario , M3J 1P3 , Canada ; e - mail : ellenb @ yorku . ca 326 Ellen Bialystok and Michelle M . Martin © Blackwell Publishing Ltd . 2004 that attention comprises independent and independently developing components , including a selection mechanism , along with a separate mechanism for ignoring conﬂict - ing , irrelevant stimuli . Tipper et al . ( 1989 ) point out that the ability to ignore conﬂicting , irrelevant information is common to a variety of different perceptual inputs and response outputs . Several researchers have documented the development of inhibition in young children and demonstrated its central role in a variety of cognitive tasks ( Dagenbach & Carr , 1994 ; Dempster , 1992 ; Diamond & Taylor , 1996 ; Harnishfeger & Bjorklund , 1993 ) . Bunge , Dudukovic , Thomason , Vaidya and Gabrieli ( 2002 ) compared children’s and adults’ performance on an interference suppression ( ﬂanker ) task and a response inhibition ( go / no - go ) task , both known to require inhibition . Children were less accurate and had longer reaction times than adults on both tasks , but fMRI data additionally revealed different loci of activation for children and adults . Bunge et al . ( 2002 ) concluded that immature prefrontal activation accounted for poor performance on inhibition tasks ; development brings both improved performance and a shift in the brain areas associated with these functions . Diamond and Taylor ( 1996 ) made a similar but broader claim by adding the important observation that most cognitive tasks , such as those used in Piagetian research ( e . g . conservation ) , require both inhibition and working memory in order to remember the rules and follow them in a distracting context . These demands are part of the executive function and both are aspects of the process of control . Children who become bilingual in early childhood might differ from monolinguals in the development of either analysis of representations or control of attention ( or both ) . The need to encode , interpret and associate words from two languages with a common concept of the world requires more advanced representation because the connections between the words exist at a higher or more abstract level than the connection between a particular word and its meaning . Therefore , the semantic structure of a bilingual might be more hierarchical than that of a monolingual , and the process of constructing this struc - ture could enhance children’s representational processes . Alternatively , the need to attend to one set of labels and ignore equally meaningful labels from the other language requires control of attention . Constant experience in attending to one of the languages and ignoring the other might enhance the ability of bilinguals to selectively attend to appropriate cues and inhibit attending to others . Tasks across various cognitive domains have shown that bilingual children develop control over attention more efﬁciently than monolinguals but that there is no differ - ence between the two groups in progress with analysis of representations ( summary in Bialystok , 2001 ) . In meta - linguistic tasks , bilingual children were better than mono - linguals at judging the grammaticality of sentences that contained distracting semantic anomalies ( Apples grow on noses ) but both groups were equivalent in detecting errors in sentences that had grammatical violations but no distracting information ( Apples on trees grow ) ( Bialystok , 1986 , 1988 ; Cromdal , 1999 ) . In concepts of print tasks , bilingual children were better than monolinguals at understanding that the meaning of a printed word does not change if it is moved to accompany a different picture , requiring them to suppress attention to the picture name but not necessarily better in understanding the detailed rules that specify how the print corresponds to the spoken word ( Bialystok , 1997 , 1999 ; Bialystok , Shenﬁeld & Codd , 2000 ) . In tasks assessing number cardinality , bilingual children were better than monolinguals at judging abso - lute quantity in the presence of distracting perceptual information but both groups were the same in judging equivalence when there were no distracting perceptual cues ( Bialystok & Codd , 1997 ) . A task that provides an incisive test of the hypothesis regarding a bilingual advantage in cognitive processing is the dimensional change card sort task , developed by Zelazo and his colleagues ( Frye , Zelazo & Palfai , 1995 ; Zelazo , Frye & Rapus , 1996 ) . The task requires children to sort a set of cards by one dimension and then to re - sort the same cards by a different dimension . Two com - partments are provided for the sorted cards , and each compartment is marked by a target stimulus . For exam - ple , the set of cards could contain items that are either blue squares or red circles . The target stimuli on the sorting compartments would be a red square and a blue circle . Children are ﬁrst told ( pre - switch phase ) to sort by one dimension , for example , colour , and place all the blue cards into the box indicated by a blue circle ( although that description is not used ) and all the red cards into the box indicated by a red square . In the post - switch phase , children are asked to sort by shape , so each card must now be re - assigned to the opposite box . The square cards must be placed into the box indicated by the red square ( instead of the blue circle ) and the circle cards into the box indicated by the blue circle . The ﬁnding is that preschool children persist in sorting the cards according to the ﬁrst dimension ( colour ) and continue to put the blue squares into the box indicated by the blue circle . Zelazo and his colleagues ( Frye et al . , 1995 ; Jacques , Zelazo , Kirkham & Semcesen , 1999 ; Zelazo & Frye , 1997 ; Zelazo et al . , 1996 ) have argued that children per - severate on the ﬁrst set of rules because they have not acquired the ability to represent a higher - order rule that embodies all the lower - order rules . The thrust of their Attention and inhibition 327 © Blackwell Publishing Ltd . 2004 explanation , called the cognitive complexity and control theory , is that the task requires children to construct complex embedded representations of rules and that they are unable to do this until they are about 5 years old . Three - year - olds fail this task because they are selecting the default rules they have already used in response to an experimenter’s request that they sort cards . This explanation places much of the burden for correct performance on the development of adequate representations of the rule structure of the task , the responsibility of analysis . The task requires that children’s level of representational analysis is sufﬁcient to encompass the hierarchical levels needed to solve the post - switch phase of the problem . Although previous studies have not found representational advantages for bilingual children , the representational demands of this problem are similar to those used by bilinguals to rep - resent two languages in a hierarchy . In both cases , the selection of the correct sorting response or the correct language is determined by contextual instructions or cir - cumstances . Therefore , if there is indeed a representa - tional advantage for bilinguals , it should emerge on this problem . The task also imposes high demands on con - trol of attention : Children must inhibit attention to a dimension that was previously valid and refocus on a different aspect of the same stimulus . These control demands resemble the processes in which bilingual chil - dren have been shown to excel using other tasks . In a study with children 4 and 5 years old solving the dimen - sional change card sort task , bilingual children solved the problem better than monolinguals , showing a per - formance advantage of about one year ( Bialystok , 1999 ) . Both analysis and control are involved in the solution to this problem . Children need to conceptualize both the stimuli and the rules by constructing appropriate mental representations , and , as noted by Zelazo and Frye ( 1997 ) , this is difﬁcult for young children . The representa - tional abilities needed to encode the relevant features of the stimuli and the necessary hierarchy of rules might not be the same , making different demands and develop - ing at different times . Additionally , children need to inhibit the response tendency set up by the initial stage of sorting . Two forms of inhibition are required . The ﬁrst , response inhibition , is needed to resist carrying out the familiar motor action that would place each card in the box with which it was ﬁrst associated . The second , conceptual inhibition , is needed to resist attending to the previously relevant feature ( e . g . colour ) in order to rep - resent the new feature ( e . g . shape ) as the classiﬁcation criterion . By this deﬁnition , conceptual inhibition entails both the inhibitory control to avoid attending to the obsolete feature and the representational skill to desig - nate the new feature as criterial . Our proposal is that the source of difﬁculty in the card sort problem is in concep - tual inhibition , the ability to inhibit attention to a pre - potent mental representation . Two recent studies provide converging support for this interpretation . Typically , the experimenter names each card before passing it to the child to be sorted , but children persist in sorting it according to the obsolete dimension . Kirkham , Cruess and Diamond ( 2003 ) revised the procedure by requiring the child to name the card before placing it into the sorting box . The modiﬁcation produced signiﬁcantly better performance , presumably by redirecting children’s attention to the new relevant feature . Furthermore , instructing children to place the cards in the container face up instead of face down as in the standard version made the task more difﬁcult as it increased children’s attention to the obsolete feature . Similarly , Towse , Redbond , Houston - Price and Cook ( 2000 ) presented a test card to children who had made post - switch errors and asked them to name the card . More than half of these children described the card by naming the pre - switch dimension ; they continued to see the card as a blue thing even though they had just been taught the shape game . These studies indicate that chil - dren persist in mentally encoding the cards according to the description relevant in the pre - switch phase . In the post - switch phase , they must inhibit those descrip - tions to reinterpret the card in terms of the new feature . This process is conceptual inhibition , and it is partly dependent upon children’s ability to construct and mani - pulate the necessary mental representations of the task stimuli . In sum , three processes are involved in the card sort task . Bilingual children may be better at representation ( hierarchically encoding the rules and representing relev - ant features of the stimuli ) , response inhibition ( resist - ing previous motor patterns ) or conceptual inhibition ( inhibiting attention to previous mental descriptions ) . The results of the previous study could not distinguish among these possibilities so the present studies were designed to disentangle them . Study 1 The card sorting task was instantiated in a computer program and adapted to vary the representational demands of both the sorting rules and the stimuli by creating four conditions . Representational complexity was manipulated in the number of dimensions depicted in the stimulus and the semantic content of those dimen - sions . The ﬁrst condition was based on one perceptual feature ; the second on two dimensions depicting colours or shapes ; the third on colour and object outlines ; the 328 Ellen Bialystok and Michelle M . Martin © Blackwell Publishing Ltd . 2004 fourth on semantic properties of objects . The hierarchical complexity of the sorting rules was the same for the last three conditions but simpler for the ﬁrst condition in which only one dimension was involved . Stimulus complexity increased across successive conditions as stimuli became more detailed . Response inhibition was identical in all conditions because the post - switch phase always required refraining from making the same response as in the pre - switch phase . The major difference between the con - ditions was in conceptual inhibition , namely , the type of information in the original representation that needed to be ignored when performing in the post - switch phase . It is important to be clear about the distinction between representation of the rules and representation of the stimuli . According to Zelazo and Frye ( 1997 ) , the task is difﬁcult because children cannot represent the rules as embedded components of a hierarchical structure . Our claim is that a further representational challenge is in properly selecting , encoding and representing features of the stimuli to match the previously represented features of the target . Aside from the inhibitory control needed to ignore the obsolete features , the representation itself is difﬁcult . The present study disentangles the challenge posed by rule representation and stimulus representation by holding constant the complexity of the rules across three of the conditions while varying the complexity of the stimuli that must be categorized by those rules . There are three possible outcomes . First , if the bilingual advantage in the previous study were from a greater rep - resentational ability , then that advantage should increase across the four conditions as the conceptual demands increase and present increasing challenges to children with weak representation abilities . It is more difﬁcult to represent an object than a simple colour because the object ﬁrst needs to be identiﬁed ; it is more difﬁcult to represent a semantic feature than an object because the identiﬁed object needs to be interpreted . Second , if the bilingual advantage reﬂected greater ability to execute response inhibition ( i . e . inhibit a prepotent motor response ) , then the bilinguals should outperform the monolinguals on all four conditions equally because all four require that the response be reversed in the second phase . Third , if the bilingual advantage came from enhanced ability in conceptual inhibition , then the prediction depends on an interaction between representation and inhibition demands . All the children would be equally able to represent the target feature , but the bilinguals would be better able to ignore the original representation to create a new one . Therefore , a problem based on only one dimen - sion will be solved equally by both groups because there is no conﬂicting dimension to ignore in constructing the rule for the post - switch phase . Problems based on two dimensions would be solved better by bilinguals because of their superior ability to ignore the dimension used in the pre - switch phase . The extra difﬁculty of the condi - tion based on semantic properties may beneﬁt bilinguals because of their ability to ignore the interpretation used in the pre - switch phase , but the additional representational burden may override this potential advantage , leaving both groups again equivalent on this last condition . Therefore , the three possible outcomes anticipate different inter - actions between the two language groups and the four conditions : the ﬁrst predicts an increasing bilingual advantage , the second predicts a constant bilingual advantage , and the third predicts a bilingual advantage only on selected conditions . Method Participants There were 67 children in the study , consisting of 36 English monolinguals ( 18 boys and 18 girls ) with a mean age of 59 . 1 months and 31 Chinese - English bilinguals ( 21 boys and 10 girls ) with a mean age of 58 . 9 months . The bilingual children spoke Cantonese at home and English in the community and at school and attended English - language childcare programmes in a neighbour - hood where there is a large Chinese population . The communities in which the monolingual and bilingual children lived were geographically close and similar in socioeconomic status . Although the task is traditionally used with 3 - year - olds , computerization of it made it appropriate for older children . The additional constraint for the present study was that 3 - year - olds rarely have enough proﬁciency in two languages to be classiﬁable as bilingual . Materials and procedure Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test - Revised The PPVT - R is a standardized test of English receptive vocabulary ( Dunn & Dunn , 1981 ) . Children are required to choose ( either verbally or by pointing ) one picture from a set of four that illustrates the word spoken by the experimenter . The items become more difﬁcult as testing progresses . A basal score is established , and testing con - tinues until the child makes six errors in eight consecut - ive responses . Standardized tables convert raw scores to percentiles , stanines and standard scores . The test was administered to all the children to estab - lish that the bilingual children had English proﬁciency that was similar to the monolingual children . Because they spoke Chinese at home , adequate English skills Attention and inhibition 329 © Blackwell Publishing Ltd . 2004 would conﬁrm their status as bilingual . Children were eliminated if they had a stanine of less than 3 , a proced - ure that was necessary to ensure that the participants were truly bilingual . In previous research , children with a weak knowledge of one of their languages , more appropriately called second - language learners , did not exhibit the same cognitive advantages as did children who were more balanced bilinguals ( Bialystok , 1988 ) . This process excluded 26 children intended for the bilin - gual group . The PPVT test was given ﬁrst , so children who failed to meet this criterion did not proceed with the other tests . Forward digit span This task is similar to that in the WISC - R ( Weschler , 1974 ) , and was used as a rough measure of working memory capacity . Children were presented with a series of digits and were required to repeat the string of digits back to the experimenter in the same order they had heard it . Children were allowed a second chance at a string length if they made an error . The test ended when the child made two consecutive errors at the same string length and the child’s digit span score was the number of digits in the last correct series . Raven’s Coloured Progressive Matrices This 36 - item test was originally designed as a measure of general intelligence ( Raven , Court & Raven , 1986 ) . It is considered a measure of reasoning by analogy , organiz - ing spatial perceptions into semantically related wholes and forming comparisons ( Sattler , 1988 ) . The intention was not to measure the intelligence of the children but to assure that the groups were functioning at a similar intellectual level . Computerized dimensional change card sort The task consisted of four conditions , or games , each based on a different level of conceptualization for the sorting rule . The games were presented on an IBM Thinkpad computer . A black cover was placed over the keyboard exposing only three keys : the ‘W’ , the ‘P’ and the spacebar . The ‘W’ and ‘P’ keys were selected for their symmetry to the monitor and were covered with labels marked ‘X’ and ‘O’ , respectively , and the spacebar was covered with a white label . An animated character appeared on the screen before each new game and each switch phase in order to explain the rules to the child . In the colour game , a square appeared centrally , and the child was required to respond with a key press . For the other three games , small target stimuli , simulating boxes with pictures on them , also appeared near the bottom of the screen directly aligned with one of the response keys . The child was told to press the button closest to the box they wanted the item to go in . This conﬁguration is ill - ustrated in Figure 1 for each condition . Three practice trials with feedback preceded the presentation of the pre - switch rule for each game . If the child was incorrect on one of the practice trials , the rule was repeated auto - matically and the child was allowed three more tries . This continued until the child was able to perform the three practice trials accurately . No practice trials were allowed in the post - switch phase , and there was no feedback on the actual trials . The experimenter remained with the child and repeated instructions if necessary . 1 . Colour game . The stimuli were ﬁve red squares and ﬁve blue squares presented in a random order . In one set of rules , children were told to press the button with the X on it when the red square appeared and to press the button with the O on it when the blue square appeared . Following completion of the 10 trials , children were told that the rule had changed . In this new game , they were to press the X button if the blue square appeared and the O button if the red square appeared . Again , there were 10 trials , and the squares were presented in a random order . 2 . Colour - shape game . This condition is a computerized version of the task used by Bialystok ( 1999 ) . The stimuli were red circles and blue squares . The screen showed two boxes at the bottom , each with a target stimulus over it . One box was indicated by a picture of a red square and the other by a picture of a blue circle . The stimulus to be sorted was presented in the centre of the screen . In the colour game , the child was told to put all the blue pictures in the box with the blue picture on it , and all the red pictures in the box with the red picture on it . Therefore , all the blue squares went into the blue box and the red circles into the red box . The child pressed the button ( marked X or O ) closest to the appropriate box and the picture visually ‘dropped’ into that space . There were 10 items in this phase . At the end of this phase , the animated ﬁgure appeared again and explained the post - switch rules . In this example , the next phase was the shape game , and children were told to place the squares in the box with the square on it and the circles into the box with the circle on it . The same target pictures remained on the sorting boxes . Again , there were 10 trials including ﬁve circles and ﬁve squares presented in a random order . 3 . Colour - object game . This was identical to the previous game except that meaningful objects were used instead of Cartesian shapes . Hence , the stimuli consisted of red ﬂowers and blue rabbits and the target stimuli on the sorting boxes were red rabbits and blue ﬂowers . 330 Ellen Bialystok and Michelle M . Martin © Blackwell Publishing Ltd . 2004 4 . Function - location game . In this condition , the sorting dimensions were abstract properties of the stimuli instead of perceptual features . The stimulus items consisted of a functional property – things to play with or things to wear – and a location property – things that go inside the house or things that go outside the house . The set consisted of ﬁve things to play with that went outside the house ( bicycle , skateboard , pail and shovel , skipping rope , kite ) and ﬁve things to wear that went inside the house ( slippers , nightgown , bib , ballet shoes , and baby pyjamas ) . The target pictures on the sorting boxes were a teddy bear ( play - inside ) and a winter jacket ( wear - out - side ) , reversing the dimensional pairings . In the function game , the instruction was to put all the things to play with in the box with the teddy bear and all the things to wear in the box with the jacket . In the location game , the rule was to put all the things that go inside the house in the box with the teddy bear and all the things that go outside the house in the box with the jacket . The four games were presented in the ﬁxed order of increasing difﬁculty that is listed above but the order in which the sorting rules were presented within each con - dition was counterbalanced . This was done to avoid the possibility of children doing worse on the most difﬁcult game simply because it was ﬁrst . The presentation order of the pictures was randomized for each game . Children participated in two sessions separated by about a week . The ﬁrst session consisted of the preliminary meas - ures and the second was devoted to the computerized sorting tasks . Each session took approximately 20 minutes . Results A series of t - tests was carried out on each of the PPVT - R standard scores , forward digit span scores , and Raven’s Matrices scores , to determine if there were differences between the groups . Despite a rigid selection criterion , the monolingual children ( M = 112 . 2 , SD = 15 . 2 ) outper - formed the bilingual children ( M = 87 . 8 , SD = 10 . 6 ) , on the PPVT , t ( 65 ) = 7 . 09 , p < . 01 . There was no difference between the groups on digit span ( M = 4 . 5 , SD = 1 . 07 ) , Figure 1 Schematic illustration of four games in sorting task in Study 1 . Attention and inhibition 331 © Blackwell Publishing Ltd . 2004 t < 1 , or Raven’s Matrices ( M = 13 . 9 , SD = 4 . 6 ) , t < 1 , conﬁrming that the children in the two groups were equivalent on basic cognitive skills . Scores from the sorting task included a score out of 10 for each of the pre - switch and post - switch phases in each of the four games . The mean scores for these data are shown in Figure 2a for the pre - switch trials and Fig - ure 2b for the post - switch trials . These scores were examined in a three - way repeated measures ANOVA for game ( 4 ) , phase ( 2 ) and language group ( 2 ) . 1 Typically , the only relevant data in analysing performance in this task is the post - switch scores . In the present study , however , the pre - switch data are necessary to establish that the groups do not differ in this phase , ideally expressed as an interaction of phase and group . There were main effects of game , F ( 3 , 183 ) = 10 . 62 , p < . 001 , phase , F ( 1 , 65 ) = 116 . 05 , p < . 0001 , indicating better performance on pre - switch than post - switch trials , and group , F ( 1 , 65 ) = 6 . 84 , p < . 01 , showing higher scores for the bilinguals . Contrast analyses on the game factor revealed that the function - location game was more difﬁ - cult than the other three , which did not differ from each other . There were two interactions with game : game and phase , F ( 3 , 183 ) = 5 . 84 , p < . 0008 , and game and group , F ( 3 , 183 ) = 2 . 71 , p < . 04 . The interaction of group and phase approached signiﬁcance , F ( 1 , 65 ) = 3 . 02 , p = . 08 . The interactions involving game were examined by a simple effects analysis holding the game factor constant . For the colour game , pre - switch scores ( M = 9 . 32 , SD = 1 . 25 ) were higher than post - switch ( M = 7 . 66 , SD = 3 . 15 ) items , F ( 1 , 65 ) = 19 . 74 , p < . 001 , with no effect of language group . For the colour - shape game , pre - switch ( M = 9 . 12 , SD = 1 . 62 ) items were better than post - switch ( M = 5 . 97 , SD = 3 . 87 ) scores , F ( 1 , 65 ) = 37 . 50 , p < . 001 , and bilingual children ( M = 8 . 15 , SD = 4 . 18 ) scored higher than mono - linguals ( M = 7 . 02 , SD = 2 . 95 ) , F ( 1 , 65 ) = 9 . 87 , p < . 002 . For the colour - object game , pre - switch items ( M = 9 . 40 , SD = 1 . 10 ) again were higher than post - switch items ( M = 4 . 93 , SD = 4 . 40 ) , F ( 1 , 65 ) = 61 . 98 , p < . 001 , and bilinguals ( M = 7 . 73 , SD = 2 . 53 ) outperformed monolin - guals ( M = 6 . 68 , SD = 2 . 78 ) , F ( 1 , 63 ) = 6 . 34 , p < . 01 . Finally , for the function - location game , pre - switch scores ( M = 8 . 46 , SD = 1 . 75 ) were higher than post - switch scores ( M = 5 . 16 , SD = 3 . 69 ) , F ( 1 , 65 ) = 46 . 09 , p < . 001 , and the interaction of phase and group approached sig - niﬁcance , F ( 1 , 65 ) = 3 . 24 , p = . 07 . The mean scores used in the ANOVA analyses are summary scores of all the children . Since some of the scores in the post - switch phase were approximately 50 % , they might reﬂect chance responding as opposed to per - severation . This would indicate that the children had not encoded the stimuli in any particular way , but were ran - domly placing the cards into the compartments , a beha - viour which cannot be properly interpreted . Therefore , an examination of individual performance based only on the post - switch scores was carried out to identify the possible role of guessing in children’s performance . Three categories were created . Children who obtained between 0 and 3 correct answers on the post - switch phase of a game were called perseverators . Children who obtained between 4 and 6 correct responses were called guessers . Those who successfully completed 7 to 10 items were called correct responders . The distributions for this classiﬁcation for each game by language group are shown in Table 1 . Chi - square analyses were used to determine whether the number of guessers was compar - able to the number of perseverators and the number of correct responders . In two of the analyses , the distribution was not different from chance : monolinguals in the colour - shape game and bilinguals in the function - location game . All other analyses were signiﬁcantly different from chance , indicating that children were not guessing . 1 We also analysed the data using only the post - switch scores in a two - way repeated measures ANOVA and obtained the same results . The overall bilingual advantage was signiﬁcant , F ( 1 , 65 ) = 5 . 65 , p < . 02 , and the interaction showed that the advantage was only reliable for the colour - shape game , F ( 1 , 65 ) = 5 . 59 , p < . 02 , and the colour - object game , F ( 1 , 65 ) = 4 . 25 , p < . 04 . In addition , there was no difference between the two groups in the relative difﬁculty of the four games . In both cases , the colour game was easier than the other three with no difference among those conditions . An analysis of only the pre - switch scores revealed a game effect , F ( 3 , 186 ) = 8 . 09 , p < . 0001 , because the colour game was easier than the other three . There were no other signiﬁcant results and no difference between the two language groups . Figure 2 Mean score by language group and phase in Study 1 . 332 Ellen Bialystok and Michelle M . Martin © Blackwell Publishing Ltd . 2004 Following the approach typically used in the literat - ure , children were classiﬁed as passing or failing based on a criterion of 8 / 10 correct responses . From the sam - ple of 36 monolinguals and 31 bilinguals , there were 25 monolinguals and 20 bilinguals who passed the colour game , 13 monolinguals and 20 bilinguals who passed the colour - shape game , 13 monolinguals and 17 bilinguals who passed the colour - object game , and 13 monolin - guals and 10 bilinguals who passed the function - location game . The 13 monolinguals who passed these games were not always the same children . A chi - square analysis showed that the bilingual advantage was signiﬁcant for the colour - shape game , χ 2 ( 1 ) = 5 . 4 , p < . 02 . Discussion The children in the two language groups were comparable on several cognitive measures ; if there was any bias , it was in favour of the monolingual children who obtained higher scores in receptive vocabulary . Research with preschoolers frequently indicates a vocabulary advantage for monolingual children in the language of testing ( Ben - Zeev , 1977 ; Bialystok , 1988 ; Merriman & Kutlesic , 1993 ; Rosenblum & Pinker , 1983 ; Umbel , Pearson , Fernández & Oller , 1992 ) . Nonetheless , the bilingual children who used Chinese at home still scored in a normal range of English functioning , even though it was lower than the monolinguals . More importantly , the scores from the Raven’s Coloured Matrices and digit span demonstrated no cog - nitive difference between the children in the two groups . In the card sort task , the bilinguals showed a selective advantage over the monolinguals in the colour - shape game in both analyses and in the colour - object game as well in the ANOVA . This is closest to the results predicted in the third hypothesized outcome in which the bilingual advantage is based on conceptual inhibition . The bilingual advantage was demonstrated by an ANOVA on the mean number of correct responses for both pre - and post - switch phases , and a chi - square comparing frequency of children passing in the post - switch phase . There was no difference between the groups in the colour game involving a simple one - dimensional classi - ﬁcation . The demands for response inhibition were con - stant in the four conditions , but the performance of the two groups diverged . In the colour game in which per - formance in the post - switch phase depended only on response inhibition , both groups were equally capable of suppressing a familiar motor response to execute the updated classiﬁcation . This pattern rules out response inhibition as the source of task difﬁculty . The prediction based on conceptual inhibition was that bilinguals would outperform monolinguals on the conditions involving two underlying dimensions . The results showed that this advantage was only reliable for the colour - shape and colour - object games . Why were the results different for the function - location game in spite of it having the same two - dimensional structure as the two previous games ? Conceptual inhibition depends on the complexity of the representation to which attention is directed . Chil - dren construct a mental description of the targets based on the rules in the pre - switch phase , for example , ‘the red one’ and ‘the blue one’ . The post - switch phase requires redescribing the same targets using different features , for example , ‘the square one’ and ‘the round one’ . This process of re - attributing the targets requires both inhibiting the original descriptions and representing the stimulus in Table 1 Distribution and chi - square analysis across three response categories for each game in Study 1 Condition Language group Perseverators Guessers Correct χ 2 ( 2 ) Colour Monolingual 4 4 28 32 . 00 p = . 001 Bilingual 6 4 21 16 . 71 p = . 001 Colour - shape Monolingual 14 6 16 4 . 67 n . s . Bilingual 8 2 21 18 . 26 p = . 001 Colour - object Monolingual 21 2 13 15 . 17 p = . 001 Bilingual 12 1 18 14 . 39 p = . 001 Function - location Monolingual 17 5 14 6 . 50 p = . 039 Bilingual 8 10 13 1 . 23 n . s . Attention and inhibition 333 © Blackwell Publishing Ltd . 2004 a new way . It is easier to represent the target dimension in terms of a perceptual feature ( red ) than a semantic feature ( toy ) , because it is more superﬁcial , salient , and directly codable without the need for interpretation . The greater difﬁculty of the function - location game results reﬂects these aspects of representation . Do bilingual children have greater representational ability than monolinguals ? The prediction that tested this possibility was that the performance gap between the groups would increase as the stimulus displays required more detailed representations . This was not found , so the conclusion was that the groups were equivalent in their ability to represent the stimuli . Conﬁrmation for this conclusion was sought using a paradigm in which the demands for attention and inhibition were separated from the demands for representation . A pilot study was conducted in which the need for response inhibition and rule representation was kept con - stant but the need for conceptual inhibition was removed . The colour - shape and function - location games were used because of their contrast in representational complexity . The standard version of the task in which children manually place cards into the compartments was used to enhance the role of response inhibition . Conceptual inhibition was eliminated by removing the target feature used during the pre - switch phase . If the target is a red circle and ‘red’ is the criterion in the pre - switch phase , then switching the sorting criterion to ‘circle’ should be easy if the target changes from a red circle to a yellow circle . The card still needs to be classiﬁed into the opposite compartment , redeﬁning it by shape rather than colour . Therefore , the demand for response inhibition remains intact . This manipulation is similar to one used by Zelazo and colleagues ( cited in Zelazo & Jacques , 1996 ) in a condition called total change that led to signiﬁcant improvement in children’s performance . In their study , children were asked to sort cards by either colour or shape , then in the post - switch phase , rather than having them re - sort the same cards , the deck was changed entirely . If the children began by sorting red ﬂowers and blue trucks by colour , the second phase was sorting green stars and yellow triangles by shape . As Zelazo and Jacques ( 1996 ) argue , perseveration under these circum - stances indicates that children were simply learning to sort a particular card into a particular box and not applying a classiﬁcation rule to a set of stimuli . Perform - ance on this version of the problem was good , indicating that children did conceptualize the stimuli in terms of the relevant features . Similarly , if children’s difﬁculty with the task is caused by conceptual inhibition , then changing the target stimuli should improve performance because the need for this inhibition is eliminated . Fifty 4 1 / 2 - year - olds , half of whom were bilingual , were compared on this version of the card sort . All the chil - dren performed at ceiling when the target stimulus was changed to match only the post - switch sorting rule . Although ceiling performance is only suggestive , it helps to rule out the role of response inhibition in children’s failure . Children did not execute the previously rein - forced response when the distracting target cue was removed . Put another way , removing the demands for conceptual inhibition allowed children to solve the prob - lem . In both the standard and altered versions , children had to construct a new representation for the target in the post - switch phase , but in Study 1 they had to do this while the feature in the original representation was still visible . Successful redescription required inhibiting atten - tion to the obsolete feature ; bilingual children could do this more successfully than monolinguals . The results of Study 1 and the pilot study with the altered target cues help to rule out differences between monolinguals and bilinguals in both representational ability and response inhibition . Three of the conditions required conceptual inhibition , and bilinguals per - formed better than monolinguals in two of them . Study 2 was designed to explore the differences between them that led to or did not lead to a bilingual advantage . Study 2 In Study 1 , the function - location game was more difﬁcult than the other three and both groups achieved lower scores in this condition . The function - location game differed from the other games in two ways . First , the pictures were more detailed than those used in the other conditions so they imposed a greater burden on repres - entation . Instead of being simple shapes , the stimuli were complex objects that children needed to interpret before they could extract and code the relevant feature . Second , there was no perceptual basis for classiﬁcation because each item was different . Therefore , children needed to identify each picture ( e . g . bicycle ) and then assign it to the two semantic categories ( e . g . toy that goes outside ) . In this way , the basis of classiﬁcation was different from that used in the other conditions where items could be directly assigned to categories on the basis of their perceptual properties ( e . g . redness or roundness ) . This may be responsible for performance differences on these problems . This explanation was pursued in Study 2 by compar - ing a new group of monolingual and bilingual children on two conditions that differed in this manner , the colour - shape game and the function - location game . The manual version was used to increase the need for inhibition . 334 Ellen Bialystok and Michelle M . Martin © Blackwell Publishing Ltd . 2004 Method Participants There were 15 English monolinguals with a mean age of 5 ; 1 and 15 French - English bilinguals with a mean age of 4 ; 6 . The monolingual children were recruited from day - care centres in a metropolitan area . All parents indicated their children had no knowledge of any language other than English . The French - English bilingual children were recruited from childcare programmes in a French school board . Children attending these schools require ﬂuent knowledge of French ( English is not introduced into the curriculum until the 3rd grade ) and typically speak French at home . These children live in predominantly English communities , participate in extra - curricular activities in English , and have monolingual English - speaking friends . The French - speaking community is less isolated from the English - speaking majority than the Chinese community was in Study 1 , so no child fell below the threshold level for the PPVT scores . The socioeconomic and educational background of children in both groups was comparable – they lived in similar suburbs and attended schools in comparable areas of the city . Materials and procedure All the children were given the PPVT - R and the forward digit span . The bilingual children also completed the Échelle Vocabulaire en Images Peabody ( EVIP ) , the standardized French version of the PPVT - R . Two manual versions of the dimensional change card sort task were used – colour - shape and function - location . Children were shown a colourful box with two sorting compartments on which the target stimuli were adhered with a velcro tab . In the colour - shape game , the target cards were a red square and a blue circle and in the function - location game they were a teddy bear and a winter jacket . The rules were explained to the children and they were given 10 cards to be sorted , one at a time . Each card was placed face down in the selected box . Children were then told that the game was changed , the new rule was explained , and the 10 cards were again classiﬁed one at a time . The games were presented to the children in counterbalanced order , half beginning with the colour - shape version and the other with the function - location version . Except for the EVIP for the bilinguals , all testing was conducted in English . Testing for the monolingual chil - dren occurred in one session and testing for the bilingual children occurred in two sessions to avoid giving both the PPVT - R and the EVIP on the same day . Results There was no difference between the digit span scores of the monolingual ( M = 6 . 1 , SD = 1 . 4 ) and bilingual children ( M = 6 . 0 , SD = 1 . 7 ) , F < 1 . As in Study 1 , the monolinguals ( M = 110 . 8 , SD = 11 . 2 ) outscored the bilinguals ( M = 89 . 6 , SD = 24 . 9 ) on the PPVT - R , F ( 1 , 28 ) = 8 . 64 , p < . 006 . The bilingual children scored the same on the PPVT - R ( 89 . 6 , SD = 24 . 9 ) and EVIP ( 98 . 8 , SD = 15 . 4 ) , F < 1 . The means scores out of 10 for the card sort task are reported in Table 2 . The scores were analysed in a three - way ANOVA for game ( 2 ) , phase ( 2 ) and language group ( 2 ) . The function - location game was more difﬁcult than the colour - shape game , F ( 1 , 28 ) = 13 . 89 , p < . 001 , and the post - switch phase was more difﬁcult than the pre - switch phase , F ( 1 , 28 ) = 30 . 56 , p < . 001 . There was a main effect of group , F ( 1 , 28 ) = 8 . 52 , p < . 01 , with the bilinguals outscoring the monolinguals on both condi - tions , and an interaction of phase and group , F ( 1 , 28 ) = 10 . 49 , p < . 01 , conﬁning that bilingual advantage to per - formance on the post - switch phase . Because the mean scores were not close to 5 / 10 , the three - way classiﬁcation to detect guessing was not used . Instead , children were classiﬁed as passing or failing based on a pass criterion of 8 / 10 in the post - switch phase . Chi - square analyses revealed a signiﬁcant bilingual advantage in the colour - shape game , χ 2 = 4 . 62 , p < . 05 ( monolinguals passing = 11 ; bilinguals passing = 15 ) , but not for the function - location game , χ 2 = 2 . 14 , p = . 14 ( monolinguals passing = 6 ; bilinguals passing = 10 ) . Discussion As in Study 1 , bilingual children performed better over - all , and the ANOVA indicated this superiority for both conditions . The group difference in the function - location game , however , was not reliable in the chi - square ana - lysis , replicating the results of Study 1 . Across the two studies , therefore , there is a clear bilingual advantage in the colour - shape game but a more sporadic advantage Table 2 Mean scores and standard deviation by language group in card sort task for Study 2 Condition Group Pre - switch Post - switch Colour - shape Monolingual 10 ( 0 ) 8 . 1 ( 3 . 7 ) Bilingual 10 ( 0 ) 10 ( 0 ) Function - location Monolingual 10 ( 0 ) 4 . 5 ( 4 . 2 ) Bilingual 9 . 8 ( 0 . 6 ) 7 . 9 ( 2 . 8 ) Attention and inhibition 335 © Blackwell Publishing Ltd . 2004 for the function - location game . The demands for response inhibition are the same in both games and the hierarchical rule structure identiﬁed by Zelazo and Frye ( 1997 ) is also the same . The difference is in the nature of the information that deﬁnes the sorting dimension . In the colour - shape game , the feature is perceptual and visible ; classiﬁcations can be made by directly matching the correct visual property in the stimulus to the sorting target . In the function - location game , the feature is a semantic property of the item ; classiﬁcations can be made only once the stimulus is labelled and then classi - ﬁed according to one of its properties . It is arguably more difﬁcult to ignore a perceptual feature , like ‘red’ , than a semantic property , like ‘toy’ . Since the two games are similar in every other respect , this difference must be responsible for the divergence in performance by the two groups . Study 3 attempts to conﬁrm this explanation by expanding the conditions based on this distinction between perceptual and semantic classiﬁcation . Study 3 In the studies so far , there was a reliable bilingual advant - age in conditions that require inhibiting attention to representations of perceptual information . The problem with the results of Study 2 , however , is that all the chil - dren performed very well in the colour - shape game and the bilingual children were at ceiling . Therefore , Study 3 was designed to replicate this ﬁnding and to extend it by including two examples of each of the perceptual and semantic classiﬁcation . The two perceptual games were the colour - shape game and the colour - object game from Study 1 ; the two semantic games were the function - location game and the kind - place game . This new game included 10 items that were either animals or vehicles ( things to ride in ) , and were either things that go on land or things that go in the water . The target pictures were a sailboat ( water vehicle ) and a squirrel ( land animal ) . Another feature makes this game slightly different from the function - location game . In the colour - shape and colour - object games , the sorting set consists of 10 cards , ﬁve of which are identical . In the function - location game , the sorting set involves 10 completely different cards ( e . g . bib , skateboard , sled , slippers ) . The cards in the kind - place game represent an intermediate position between these extremes . Like the function - location game , each card depicts a unique object ruling out hol - istic template matching as a sorting strategy . Unlike the function - location game , however , the members of each category resemble each other : all the vehicles were car - like objects and all the animals were ﬁsh - like entities , even though no two were exactly the same . The similar - ity made this condition closer to the perceptual games but retained the need to label and interpret the cards . Method Participants The participants were 27 English monolingual and 26 Chinese - English bilingual children . Both groups attended daycares in the same suburb of a large city . The bilingual children spoke Cantonese or Mandarin at home and English at school , using both languages daily . The Chi - nese community in this area is large , and it is possible to function entirely in Chinese . The bilingual children used Chinese regularly with their families but English outside the home . The monolingual children had no experience with any language other than English . The mean age of the children in the monolingual group was 4 ; 2 years , and the mean age for the bilingual children was 4 ; 4 , a differ - ence that was not signiﬁcant . Materials and procedure All the children were administered the PPVT - R to test English receptive vocabulary and four conditions of the card sort task . The English - Cantonese children were also given a Cantonese translation of the PPVT - R ( version L ) , but these results cannot be standardized so only provide a guideline for children’s language com - petence . Fourteen of the bilingual children were Man - darin speaking and so did not complete the Cantonese PPVT - R . The dimensional change card sort task was adminis - tered to the children manually . All the children com - pleted all four versions in counterbalanced order . Results The monolinguals ( M = 109 . 7 , SD = 11 . 8 ) scored higher than the bilinguals ( M = 84 . 3 , SD = 16 . 0 ) , t ( 50 ) = 6 . 35 , p < . 0001 , on the PPVT - standard scores . The bilingual children who completed both PPVT versions obtained a mean standard score of 89 . 5 ( 12 . 5 ) on the PPVT in Eng - lish and 70 . 8 ( 14 . 6 ) in Chinese , a difference that was also reliable , t ( 12 ) = 2 . 93 , p < . 01 . The results for the Chinese test , however , likely underestimate children’s knowledge of Cantonese . Because Cantonese is not strictly speaking a written language , different words ( based on Mandarin ) from those that are common in spoken language are often used in the written form . The translation of the PPVT tended to use the more formal written words for 336 Ellen Bialystok and Michelle M . Martin © Blackwell Publishing Ltd . 2004 many of the items , and these may have been unfamiliar to these young preliterate children . A three - way ANOVA for condition ( 4 ) , phase ( 2 ) and language group ( 2 ) was conducted on the mean number of correct classiﬁcations in the card sort task . These scores are presented in Figure 3 . There were main effects of condition , F ( 3 , 153 ) = 34 . 55 , p < . 0001 , and phase , F ( 1 , 51 ) = 66 . 9 , p < . 0001 , indicating the superiority of the pre - switch phase . For condition , the two perceptual conditions were easier than the two semantic conditions ( p < . 01 ) , with no differences between the two perceptual conditions , or between the two semantic conditions ( both F < 1 ) . For the perceptual conditions , the bilinguals were more successful than the monolinguals , F ( 1 , 48 ) = 5 . 46 , p < . 02 , but the interaction of language group and phase , F ( 1 , 51 ) = 6 . 36 , p < . 01 , restricted that advantage only to the post - switch condition . For the semantic conditions , the two groups were equivalent , F ( 1 , 48 ) = 2 . 42 , p = . 13 , and there was no interaction of language group and phase , F < 1 . Children were designated as perseverators ( 0 – 3 ) , guessers ( 4 – 6 ) or correct responders ( 7 – 10 ) based on post - switch scores . Chi - square analyses showed that dis - tributions were different from chance for both groups on the perceptual classiﬁcations but not for the semantic ones . The semantic classiﬁcations were much more difﬁ - cult for the children in both language groups . The fre - quency table is reported in Table 3 . Finally , chi - square analyses compared the number of monolinguals and bilinguals passing each condition , using a criterion of 8 / 10 correct . From the 27 monolinguals and 26 bilinguals , 15 monolinguals and 21 bilinguals passed the colour - shape condition , 12 monolinguals and 23 bilinguals passed colour - object , 9 children from each group passed the kind - place game , and 3 children from each group passed the function - location game . The chi - square analysis was signiﬁcant for colour - shape , χ 2 ( 1 ) = 3 . 9 , p < . 05 , and for colour - object , χ 2 ( 1 ) = 11 . 44 , p < . 001 , indicating that more bilinguals than monolinguals were successful in these problems . Discussion The results of this study replicated and extended those obtained in Study 2 . The difference between conditions based on perceptual or semantic criteria was signiﬁcant , and the two examples of each type of classiﬁcation did not differ from each other . Both the ANOVA and Figure 3 Mean score by language group and phase in Study 3 . Table 3 Distribution and chi - square analysis across three response categories for each game in Study 3 Condition Language group Perseverators Guessers Correct χ 2 ( 2 ) Colour - shape Monolingual 4 2 21 24 . 2 p = . 0001 Bilingual 3 2 21 26 . 3 p = . 0001 Colour - object Monolingual 6 5 16 8 . 2 p = . 02 Bilingual 2 1 23 35 . 6 p = . 0001 Kind - place Monolingual 6 9 12 2 . 0 n . s . Bilingual 11 4 11 3 . 8 n . s . Function - location Monolingual 7 11 9 0 . 9 n . s . Bilingual 8 7 11 1 . 0 n . s . Attention and inhibition 337 © Blackwell Publishing Ltd . 2004 chi - square analyses indicated that bilingual children out - performed the monolinguals in both perceptual con - ditions and that there were no group differences for performance in the semantic conditions . General discussion There were three main goals for this series of studies . The ﬁrst was to replicate the ﬁnding that bilingual chil - dren solve the dimensional change card sort problem more easily than comparable monolinguals . The second was to identify the component of the problem that was responsible for the bilingual advantage , considering the role of representation ( both in terms of the task rules and the stimuli ) , response inhibition and conceptual inhibition . The third was to use group differences in per - formance to understand the cognitive demands of the task and children’s development of those abilities . Across the studies , different groups of bilingual chil - dren matched with comparable monolinguals solved the card sort problem better than monolinguals when the sorting dimension was a perceptual feature of the stim - ulus ; the two groups were equivalent in carrying out the task using a semantic feature as the classifying dimen - sion . A summary of the results for the three studies com - paring performance on two - dimensional tasks based on perceptual and semantic features is shown in Table 4 . In Study 1 , a problem based on a single perceptual dimension was solved equally by both groups , but that condition is not included in the table . In two cases , the chi - square analysis produced more conservative results than the ANOVA . In the colour - object game in Study 1 and the function - location game in Study 2 , the ANOVA indic - ated a bilingual advantage that was not replicated by the chi - square analysis . An important difference between these analyses is that the ANOVA uses all the data from both pre - and post - switch trials but the chi - square exam - ines only post - switch performance . The second purpose was to determine the reason for the bilingual advantage . A pilot study ruled out the role of differences in the ability to simply represent the stim - uli and response inhibition . If representation ability were responsible , then bilinguals would outperform monolin - guals when these demands increased in the semantic conditions and the bilinguals , but not the monolinguals , would ﬁnd the task in this pilot study to be easy , since representation was manipulated but there were no inhibi - tion demands . None of these results was found , leaving little support for the interpretation that the bilingual advantage is based on superior ability to represent com - plex stimuli . Response inhibition was excluded because the task required the same alteration in the motor response associated with each card as did the other ver - sions of the problem but children were at ceiling because there was no misleading information in the display . Instead , the bilingual advantage was attributed to greater conceptual inhibition . The third purpose was to identify the reason that the dimensional change card sort task is so difﬁcult for chil - dren to solve . Our interpretation is that the source of the difﬁculty is in conceptual inhibition , the ability to inhibit attention to a mental representation and ignore mislead - ing cues so that a new representation can be constructed . The new representation is the basis for sorting in the post - switch phase . The problem requires children to rep - resent a target stimulus by reference to one type of fea - ture , then to ignore that feature and re - represent the same stimulus in a different way . Representation is clearly involved , but the crucial step is the ability to ignore the feature that was previously the basis for iden - tifying that stimulus . The representational demands required by stimulus complexity are part of conceptual inhibition , but the results of these studies do not support the conclusion that this ability is what distinguishes between the monolingual and bilingual children . When the stimuli were more complex and required interpreta - tion in order to represent the appropriate feature , as in the semantic conditions , the two groups performed the same . The burden of representation presented the same challenge to all the children . The most compelling argument against the interpreta - tion that the ability to represent the rules in a hierarchical structure determines success is that the perceptual and semantic conditions presented structurally equivalent representational problems but led to reliably different Table 4 Summary of group comparisons for both ANOVA and chi - square analyses by condition Game Study 1 Study 2 Study 3 ANOVA χ 2 ANOVA χ 2 ANOVA χ 2 Colour - shape B > M B > M B > M B > M B > M B > M Colour - object B > M B = M – – B > M B > M Place - kind – – – – B = M B = M Function - location B = M B = M B > M B = M B = M B = M 338 Ellen Bialystok and Michelle M . Martin © Blackwell Publishing Ltd . 2004 outcomes . All the conditions match the same hierarch - ical tree structure set out by Zelazo and Frye ( 1997 , p . 119 ) , consisting of two setting conditions , each encom - passing two antecedent conditions which led to speciﬁc consequences , but the semantic conditions were consist - ently more difﬁcult . Representation certainly contributes to the solution – the rules and relations among the stim - uli need to be properly interpreted and classiﬁed – but the ability to construct hierarchical representations is not sufﬁcient to explain these results . Our interpretation is that the crucial step is in the ability to reinterpret the tar - get stimulus for the post - switch phase , an achievement that requires ignoring its perceptual properties that had just been critical to the pre - switch phase . The lure of misleading information is most salient in the perceptual conditions , and it was in these that the bilinguals asserted an advantage . Other studies have investigated the role of inhibition in the solution to this task but ruled it out as decisive . Jacques , Zelazo , Kirkham and Semcesen ( 1999 ) devised a version in which children observed as a puppet sorted the cards and then stated whether the puppet had sorted correctly . Thus , children did not need to inhibit their own prior response to a particular card in the post - switch phase . Nonetheless , children were no better in solving this version of the task than they were in the standard version . Therefore , Jacques et al . ( 1999 ) argued that inhibition was not central to the solution , leaving representation as the logical candidate for determining children’s ability . However , the inhibition manipulated in their paradigm is response inhibition , the overuse of a familiar motor action or associative response . Their study provides important evidence that this type of in - hibition is indeed irrelevant to performance . Eliminating conceptual inhibition , as in the pilot study reported above , restores performance for all children . Our interpretation is compatible with evidence re - ported by Munakata and Yerys ( 2001 ) . They hypothes - ized that the reason that children fail the post - switch phase but pass a set of knowledge questions ( Where do the trucks go in the shape game ? ) is because of differ - ences between the two measurements and not because of an action – knowledge dissociation , as proposed by Zelazo et al . ( 1996 ) . The post - switch sorting is carried out in the presence of a misleading cue but the know - ledge question is asked without any misleading informa - tion . Therefore , they introduced a misleading context to the knowledge question : Where do the red trucks go in the shape game ? Their results replicated the ﬁndings reported by Zelazo et al . ( 1996 ) for the standard ques - tion , but the conﬂict knowledge question was just as difﬁcult as the post - switch sorting . They conclude that the central problem in solving this task is in dealing with the conﬂict presented by the misleading information . Our results extend this interpretation by showing that children who are better at inhibiting conﬂicting informa - tion are also better at performing the card sort task . Why would bilingualism alter the development of chil - dren’s inhibitory control ? In bilingual individuals for whom two language representations co - exist , one of the languages must be constantly inhibited to prevent on - going intrusions ( Green , 1998 ) . This inhibition of the non - relevant language is controlled by the same cortical centres used to solve tasks with misleading informa - tion , and the early and massive exercise of that function appears to have generalized effects for young children . These arguments are elaborated elsewhere ( Bialystok , 2001 ) . Another possibility follows from research by Kroll and de Groot ( 1997 ) . In their model , the two lan - guages of a bilingual access a common conceptual store , creating both one - to - many and many - to - one mappings of words and concepts . This arrangement may result in greater cognitive ﬂexibility and more acute attention strategies to select the appropriate option , both of which might generalize to problems such as the card sort . While this interpretation is compatible with the present studies , the data suggest that bilingual children’s ﬂexibil - ity is limited to situations involving misleading percep - tual information , favouring the conceptual inhibition hypothesis . Results from these studies converge on the conclusion that the crucial feature in solving the dimensional change card sort task is the demand for attention and inhibition , the function of control . The results also con - tribute to previous evidence showing that early child - hood bilingualism modiﬁes children’s development of control of attention while having little impact on their development of analysis of representations . The bilin - gual advantage was clearly asserted when the misleading context presented perceptual information that conﬂicted with the construction of a perception - based representa - tion . This is an important result because of the per - vasiveness of inhibition of attention for solving a wide variety of cognitive tasks . This methodology , then , is a means for understanding the distinctiveness of two essential cognitive processes and the experiences that can affect their development individually . Acknowledgements The experiment in Study 1 was done in partial completion of the degree of Master of Arts at York University by Michelle M . Martin . The research in this paper was sup - ported by a grant from the National Sciences and Engin - eering Research Council of Canada to the ﬁrst author . Attention and inhibition 339 © Blackwell Publishing Ltd . 2004 References Ben - Zeev , S . ( 1977 ) . The inﬂuence of bilingualism on cognitive strategy and development . Child Development , 48 , 1009 – 1018 . Bialystok , E . ( 1986 ) . Factors in the growth of linguistic aware - ness . Child Development , 57 , 498 – 510 . Bialystok , E . ( 1988 ) . Levels of bilingualism and levels of lin - guistic awareness . Developmental Psychology , 24 , 560 – 567 . Bialystok , E . ( 1993 ) . Metalinguistic awareness : the develop - ment of children’s representations of language . In C . Pratt & A . Garton ( Eds . ) , Systems of representation in children : Development and use ( pp . 211 – 233 ) . London : Wiley & Sons . Bialystok , E . ( 1997 ) . The effects of bilingualism and biliteracy on children’s emerging concepts of print . Developmental Psy - chology , 33 , 429 – 440 . Bialystok , E . ( 1999 ) . Cognitive complexity and attentional control in the bilingual mind . Child Development , 70 , 636 – 644 . Bialystok , E . ( 2001 ) . Bilingualism in development : Language , literacy , and cognition . New York : Cambridge University Press . Bialystok , E . , & Codd , J . ( 1997 ) . Cardinal limits : evidence from language awareness and bilingualism for developing concepts of number . Cognitive Development , 12 , 85 – 106 . Bialystok , E . , Shenﬁeld , T . , & Codd , J . ( 2000 ) . Language , scripts , and the environment : factors in developing concepts of print . Developmental Psychology , 36 , 66 – 76 . Bunge , S . A . , Dudukovic , N . M . , Thomason , M . E . , Vaidya , C . J . , & Gabrieli , D . E . ( 2002 ) . Immature frontal lobe con - tributions to cognitive control in children : evidence from fMRI . Neuron , 33 , 301 – 311 . Cromdal , J . ( 1999 ) . Childhood bilingualism and metalinguistic skills : analysis and control in young Swedish - English bilin - guals . Applied Psycholinguistics , 20 , 1 – 20 . Dagenbach , D . , & Carr , T . ( 1994 ) . Inhibitory processes in atten - tion , memory , and language . New York : Academic Press . Dempster , F . N . ( 1992 ) . The rise and fall of the inhibitory mechanism : toward a uniﬁed theory of cognitive develop - ment and aging . Developmental Review , 12 , 45 – 75 . Diamond , A . , & Taylor , C . ( 1996 ) . Development of an aspect of executive control : development of the abilities to remem - ber what I said and to ‘do as I say , not as I do’ . Developmen - tal Psychology , 29 , 315 – 334 . Dunn , L . M . , & Dunn , L . C . ( 1981 ) . Peabody Picture Vocabu - lary Test - Revised . Circle Pines , MN : American Guidance Service . Frye , D . , Zelazo , P . D . , & Palfai , T . ( 1995 ) . Theory of mind and rule - based reasoning . Cognitive Development , 10 , 483 – 527 . Green , D . W . ( 1998 ) . Mental control of the bilingual lexico - semantic system . Bilingualism : Language and Cognition , 1 , 67 – 81 . Harnishfeger , K . K . , & Bjorklund , D . F . ( 1993 ) . The ontogeny of inhibition mechanisms : a renewed approach to cognitive development . In R . Pasnak & M . Howe ( Eds . ) , Emerging themes in cognitive development , Volume 1 ( pp . 28 – 49 ) . New York : Springer Verlag . Jacques , S . , Zelazo , P . D . , Kirkham , N . Z . , & Semcesen , T . K . ( 1999 ) . Rule selection versus rule execution in preschoolers : an error - detection approach . Developmental Psychology , 35 , 770 – 780 . Karmiloff - Smith , A . ( 1992 ) . Beyond modularity . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Kirkham , N . , Cruess , L . , & Diamond , A . ( 2003 ) . Helping children to apply their knowledge to their behavior on a dimension - switching task . Developmental Science , 6 , 449 – 476 . Kroll , J . F . , & de Groot , A . M . B . ( 1997 ) . Lexical and conceptual memory in the bilingual : mapping form to meaning in two languages . In A . M . B . de Groot & J . F . Kroll ( Eds . ) , Tutorials in bilingualism ( pp . 169 – 199 ) . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . Merriman , W . E . , & Kutlesic , V . ( 1993 ) . Bilingual and monolin - gual children’s use of two lexical acquisition heuristics . Applied Psycholinguistics , 14 , 229 – 249 . Munakata , Y . , & Yerys , B . E . ( 2001 ) . All together now : when dissociations between knowledge and action disappear . Psy - chological Science , 12 , 335 – 337 . Raven , J . C . , Court , J . H . , & Raven , J . ( 1986 ) . Coloured Progress - ive Matrices . London : H . K . Lewis . Rosenblum , T . , & Pinker , S . A . ( 1983 ) . Word magic revisited : monolingual and bilingual children’s understanding of the word – object relationship . Child Development , 54 , 773 – 780 . Sattler , J . M . ( 1988 ) . The assessment of children ( 3rd edn . ) . San Diego , CA : J . M . Sattler . Tipper , S . P . ( 1992 ) . Selections for actions : the role of inhibitory mechanisms . Current Directions in Psychological Science , 1 , 105 – 112 . Tipper , S . P . , Bourque , T . A . , Anderson , S . H . , & Brehaut , J . C . ( 1989 ) . Mechanisms of attention : a developmental study . Journal of Experimental Psychology , 48 , 353 – 378 . Tipper , S . P . , & McLaren , J . ( 1990 ) . Evidence for efﬁcient visual selectivity in children . In J . T . Enns ( Ed . ) , The development of attention : Research and theory ( pp . 197 – 210 ) . North - Holland : Elsevier Science Publishers . Towse , J . N . , Redbond , J . , Houston - Price , C . M . T . , & Cook , S . ( 2000 ) . Understanding the dimensional change card sort : perspectives from task success and failure . Cognitive Develop - ment , 15 , 347 – 365 . Umbel , V . M . , Pearson , B . Z . , Fernández , M . C . , & Oller , D . K . ( 1992 ) . Measuring bilingual children’s receptive vocabular - ies . Child Development , 92 , 1012 – 1020 . Weschler , D . A . ( 1974 ) . Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children – Revised . San Antonio , TX : Psychological Corporation . Zelazo , P . D . , & Frye , D . ( 1997 ) . Cognitive complexity and con - trol : a theory of the development of deliberate reasoning and intentional action . In M . Stamenov ( Ed . ) , Language struc - ture , discourse , and the access to consciousness ( pp . 113 – 153 ) . Amsterdam & Philadelphia : John Benjamins . Zelazo , P . D . , Frye , D . , & Rapus , T . ( 1996 ) . An age - related dis - sociation between knowing rules and using them . Cognitive Development , 11 , 37 – 63 . Zelazo , P . D . , & Jacques , S . ( 1996 ) . Children’s rule use : repres - entation , reﬂection and cognitive control . In R . Vasta ( Ed . ) , Annals of child development ( Vol . 12 , pp . 119 – 176 ) . London : Jessica Kingsley . Received : 14 March 2003 Accepted : 16 August 2003