Dynamic Interactions of Cortactin and Membrane Type 1 Matrix Metalloproteinase at Invadopodia : Defining the Stages of Invadopodia Formation and Function Vira V . Artym , 1 , 3 Ying Zhang , 2 Franc¸oise Seillier - Moiseiwitsch , 2 Kenneth M . Yamada , 3 and Susette C . Mueller 1 1 Department of Oncology and 2 Division of Biostatistics and Bioinformatics , Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center , Georgetown University Medical School , Washington , District of Columbia ; and 3 Craniofacial Developmental Biology and Regeneration Branch , National Institute of Dental and Craniofacial Research , NIH , Bethesda , Maryland Abstract Metastatic tumor cells that actively migrate and invade surrounding tissues rely on invadopodia to degrade extracel - lular matrix ( ECM ) barriers . Invadopodia are membrane protrusions that localize enzymes required for ECM degrada - tion . Little is known about the formation , function , and regulation of invadopodia . Here , we show that invadopodia have two distinct aspects : ( a ) structural for organizing the cellular actin cytoskeleton to form membrane protrusions and ( b ) functional for using proteolytic enzyme ( s ) for ECM degradation . Small interfering RNA ( siRNA ) inhibition estab - lished that organization of invadopodia structure requires cortactin , whereas protease inhibitor studies identified mem - brane type 1 matrix metalloproteinase ( MT1 - MMP ) as the key invadopodial enzyme responsible for gelatin matrix degrada - tion in the breast carcinoma cell line MDA - MB - 231 . The inhibition of invadopodial structure assembly by cortactin depletion resulted in a block of matrix degradation due to failure of invadopodia formation . Either protease inhibition or MT1 - MMP siRNA depletion moderately decreased the formation of invadopodial structures that were identified as actin - cortactin accumulations at the ventral cell membrane adherent to matrix . The invadopodia that were able to form upon MT1 - MMP inhibition or depletion retained actin - cortac - tin accumulations but were unable to degrade matrix . Examination of cells at different time points as well as live - cell imaging revealed four distinct invadopodial stages : mem - brane cortactin aggregation at membranes adherent to matrix , MT1 - MMP accumulation at the region of cortactin accumula - tion , matrix degradation at the invadopodia region , and subsequent cortactin dissociation from the area of continued MT1 - MMP accumulation associated with foci of degraded ma - trix . Based on these results , we propose a stepwise model of invadopodiaformationandfunction . ( CancerRes2006 ; 66 ( 6 ) : 3034 - 43 ) Introduction Proteolytic degradation of extracellular matrix ( ECM ) is a critical step in tumor cell invasion ( 1 ) . Invadopodia are specialized membrane protrusions of invading tumor cells that extend into the ECM and mediate cellular digestion of , and invasion through , the ECM ( 2 , 3 ) . At the ultrastructural level , invadopodia are filament - like protrusions of the ventral cell membrane adherent to matrix that can range from 0 . 1 to 0 . 8 A m in diameter and reach > 2 A m in length ( 2 , 4 ) . Recent studies based on correlative light electron microscopy show that invading tumor cells at sites of ECM degradation form complex superstructures : cell membrane invaginations 8 A m wide and 2 A m deep containing multiple slender invadopodial protrusions ( 5 ) . Multiple proteins are associated with invadopodia and can be classified into four major functional groups ( for review , see ref . 6 ) . The first group is a minimal motility machine that includes actin and regulators of filamentous actin ( F - actin ) polymerization / branching ( 7 ) . Among these are Arp2 / 3 , N - WASP , Cdc42 , Nck , cofilin , capping proteins , cortactin , and dynamin . The second group includes adhesion proteins , such as multiple integrins , that mediate invadopodia interaction with ECM . The third group comprises signaling proteins that regulate the actin cytoskeleton and membrane remodeling ( tyrosine kinases and Ras - related GTPases ) . Membrane - associated proteases mediating ECM degradation at sites of invadopodia function constitute the fourth group . Among them are membrane type 1 matrix metalloproteinase ( MT1 - MMP ) , seprase , MMP - 2 , and the urokinase - type plasminogen activator ( uPA ) / uPA receptor proteolytic system ( 8 – 13 ) . It is generally accepted that the formation of cell protrusions is driven by actin polymerization at the leading edge . Indeed , it has been established that an N - WASP – Arp2 / 3 – cortactin – dynamin complex is essential for invadopodia formation ( 4 , 5 , 14 ) . Although invadopodia contain a variety of proteins , specific molecular markers unique to invadopodia have not been identified . Little is known about mechanisms of formation , function , and regulation of invadopodia . Therefore , to dissect the dynamic mechanisms that govern the formation and function of invadopodia , we have focused on two proteins , one of which allows the monitoring of cytoskeletal changes at invadopodia and another that yields information on the ECM - degrading function of invadopodia . These proteins are cortactin and MT1 - MMP . Cortactin , an actin - binding protein , has diverse cellular functions ( for review , see refs . 15 , 16 ) . Its acidic NH 2 - terminal domain mediates cortactin binding to the Arp2 / 3 complex , promoting actin filament branching and stabilization of branched networks ( 17 ) . Internal to the acidic NH 2 - terminal domain is the cortactin repeat region followed by a a - helical domain , a proline - rich domain with regulatory serine / threonine and tyrosine phosphorylation sites , and a Src homology 3 domain at the COOH terminus . The cortactin repeats mediate cortactin binding to F - actin . The cortactin Src homology 3 domain binds to a variety of targets providing a link Note : Supplementary data for this article are available at Cancer Research Online ( http : / / cancerres . aacrjournals . org / ) . Requests for reprints : Susette C . Mueller , Department of Oncology , Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center , Georgetown University , E301 Research Building , Box 571469 , Washington , DC 20057 - 1469 . E - mail : muellers @ georgetown . edu . I 2006 American Association for Cancer Research . doi : 10 . 1158 / 0008 - 5472 . CAN - 05 - 2177 Cancer Res 2006 ; 66 : ( 6 ) . March 15 , 2006 3034 www . aacrjournals . org Research Article Research . on October 29 , 2017 . © 2006 American Association for Cancer cancerres . aacrjournals . org Downloaded from between specific transmembrane receptors and the underlying actin cytoskeleton as well as recruiting particular binding proteins to regions of cortical actin and playing a role in a variety of vesicle transport pathways ( 16 , 18 ) . Cortactin is a target for phosphoryla - tion by tyrosine and serine / threonine kinases ( 19 ) . Differential regulation of cortactin by cellular kinases that effect cortical actin polymerization makes cortactin an important regulatory point . Moreover , the human gene EMS1 coding for cortactin is overex - pressed in 13 % of breast carcinomas and 29 % of head and neck tu - mors , mainly due to gene amplification ( 20 ) . Its overexpression in cells enhancescell migration , invasion , andtumorcell metastasis ( 21 – 24 ) . MT1 - MMP is a membrane - bound metalloproteinase with broad substrate specificity and multiple cellular functions . MT1 - MMP degrades multiple ECM components , including collagen types I , II , and III ; fibronectin ; and laminins 1 and 5 ( for a review , see ref . 25 ) . Furthermore , MT1 - MMP increases the range of proteolytic activities by activating MMP - 2 and possibly MMP - 13 . In addition , MT1 - MMP may proteolytically modify CD44 , a V integrin , and transglutaminase , thereby exerting regulatory effects on cell migration ( 25 ) . MT1 - MMP activity is crucial for both physiologic processes and the progression of cancer ( 26 , 27 ) . It is highly expressed in different invasive cancers . MT1 - MMP overexpression in cancer cells promotes cell migration , invasion , and metastasis in vitro and in vivo ( 25 , 28 , 29 ) . In invasive tumor cell lines , MT1 - MMP invadopodial localization requires membrane anchorage of the enzyme and its expression in cancer cells increases cell invasion by stimulating invadopodial activity ( 10 ) . Here , we show that both cortactin and MT1 - MMP are required for the assembly of functional invadopodia that degrade gelatin matrix in invasive MDA - MB - 231 carcinoma cells . Cortactin is necessary for the maintenance of F - actin - enriched invadopodial core structures . In the presence of functional MT1 - MMP , actin - cortactin aggregates of invadopodia support MT1 - MMP accumu - lation at invadopodia required for initiation and sustenance of matrix degradation . Depletion of endogenous MT1 - MMP levels results in the formation of actin - cortactin structural components of invadopodia that are functionally unable to mediate matrix proteolysis . After the initiation of MT1 - MMP accumulation at invadopodia to initiate matrix degradation , cortactin dissociates from invadopodial regions leaving abundant MT1 - MMP associated with foci of matrix degradation for continued matrix proteolysis . Based on our results , we propose a stepwise model of invadopodia formation and function . Materials and Methods Antibody . Anticortactin 4F11 monoclonal antibody ( mAb ) was from Upstate ( Lake Placid , NY ) , anti - MT1 - MMP AB815 from Chemicon ( Temecula , CA ) , polyclonal anti - Src and anti - phospho - Src pY 418 antibody from BioSource ( Camarillo , CA ) , and secondary antibody conjugated to Cy2 or Cy5 were from Jackson ImmunoResearch ( West Grove , PA ) . Cell lines and transfectants . Human breast carcinoma MDA - MB - 231 and MCF - 7 cell lines were obtained from Tissue Culture Shared Resource of the Lombardi Cancer Center . Cells were maintained in high glucose - DMEM ( HyClone , Logan , UT ) supplemented with 10 % fetal bovine serum ( HyClone ) , 2 mmol / L L - glutamine , 10 units / mL penicillin , and 10 A g / mL streptomycin . Stable lines of MDA - MB - 231 cells transfected with wild - type c - Src , Y527F constitutively active c - Src , and dominant - negative K295R c - Src were a gen - erous gift from Dr . Toshiyuki Yoneda ( Department of Medicine , University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio , San Antonio , TX ; ref . 30 ) . cDNA vectors and small interfering RNA . Human MT1 - MMP in the pEGFPN1 vector ( BD Biosciences Clontech , Palo Alto , CA ) was a kind gift from Drs . Henning Birkedal - Hansen and Sarah Netzel - Arnett ( National Institute of Dental and Craniofacial Research , NIH , Bethesda , MD ; ref . 31 ) . Stable cell populations expressing MT1 - MMP enhanced green fluorescent protein ( MT1 - MMP - eGFP ) were generated from parental MDA - MB - 231 and Y527F c - Src cells . Human cortactin cDNA was purchased from Invitrogen ( Carlsbad , CA ) . Twelve amino acids missing from the actin - binding domain compared with the original sequence ( GenBank ) was restored by site - directed mutagenesis . Complete cortactin cDNA was cloned into a modified monomeric dsRED pRFP1 - C1 vector ( BD Biosciences Clontech ) that was a kind gift from Dr . Roger Tsien ( Department of Pharmacology , University of California at San Diego , San Diego , CA ) . The cortactin monomeric dsRED [ cortactin - mRFP ( 1 ) ] vector was stably expressed in MDA - MB - 231 cells stably express - ing MT1 - MMP - eGFP . Stable cell populations expressing MT1 - MMP - eGFP as wellasMT1 - MMP - eGFPandcortactin - mRFP ( 1 ) wereselectedbasedonthree consecutive sortings for eGFP and mRFP fluorescence with a Becton Dickinson FACStarPlus system ( Becton Dickinson , Franklin Lakes , NJ ) . Pools of four small interfering RNA ( siRNA ) duplexes each were designed to target human cortactin ( accession no . NM _ 138565 ; Qiagen , Valencia , CA ) or human MT1 - MMP ( accession no . NM _ 004995 ; Dharmacon , Lafayette , CO ) . As a negative control , cells were transfected with nonspecific siRNA pool ( Dharmacon ) . All cDNA vectors and siRNA transfections were done with Lipofectamine 2000 ( Invitrogen ) according to the instructions of the manufacturer . Fluorescent - gelatin degradation assay . Gelatin was conjugated with AlexaFluor ( Molecular Probes , Eugene , OR ) using the protocol of the manufacturer . Coverslips ( 18 mm ) were precleaned with 20 % nitric acid for 30 minutes followed by extensive washing . Ethanol - sterilized coverslips were coated with 50 A g / mL poly - L - lysine for 20 minutes at room temperature , washed with PBS , and fixed with 0 . 5 % glutaraldehyde for 15 minutes followed by extensive washing . Then , the coverslips were inverted on an 80 A L drop of gelatin matrix ( 0 . 2 % gelatin and AlexaFluor - gelatin at an 8 : 1 ratio ) and incubated for 10 minutes at room temperature . After washing with PBS , the residual reactive groups in the gelatin matrix were quenched with sodium borohydride at 5 mg / mL for 15 minutes followed by extensive washing with PBS . To assess the ability of cells to form invadopodia and degrade matrix , cells were plated on coverslips coated with fluorescent gelatin matrix in 12 - well plates at 4 (cid:1) 10 3 / mL and incubated at 37 j C . Foci of degraded matrix were visible as dark areas f 0 . 2 to 1 . 2 A m in diameter that lack fluorescence and appear as ‘‘holes’’ in the bright fluorescent gelatin matrix . A cell degrading at least one hole under the cell or near the cell edge was counted as a cell able to degrade matrix . For image presentation , MetaMorph ( Molecular Devices , Sunnyvale , CA ) median ( 2 (cid:1) 2 ) filter was applied to fluorescent images of the matrix . Immunocytochemistry . Cells were fixed - permeabilized with 3 . 7 % formaldehyde / 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 for 10 minutes , washed with PBS , and labeled with 10 A g / mL primary antibodies for 1 hour followed by labeling with secondary fluorochrome - conjugated antibodies for 30 minutes . Actin filaments were visualized with Alexa - phalloidin ( Molecular Probes ) . Confocal fluorescence microscopy . Confocal images were collected using a Zeiss510 - META laser scanning confocal microscope ( Carl Zeiss , Thornwood , NY ) with Zeiss Plan - Neofluar 100 (cid:1) / 1 . 3 N . A . oil or Plan - Apochromat 63 (cid:1) / 1 . 4 N . A . oil objectives . For optimal confocality , all images were collected with the pinhole photodetector aperture set equal or < 1 Airy unit . Images were processed with AutoDeBlur ( AutoQuant Imaging , Watervliet , NY ) two - dimensional or three - dimensional blind deconvolution using a total of 30 iterations . Live fluorescence microscopy . Live cells expressing eGFP and mRFP proteinchimeraswereimagedwithaZeissAxiovert200Mmicroscopeequipped with an UltraVIEW - RS confocal live - cell imager ( Perkin - Elmer , Boston , MA ) with a Zeiss Plan - Apochromat 63 (cid:1) / 1 . 4 N . A . oil objective . An environmental chamber mounted on the microscope maintained constant 37 j C temperature , CO 2 , and humidity . For live fluorescence microscopy , cells were seeded in microwell dishes ( MatTek , Ashland , MA ) with glass bottoms coated with fluorescent - gelatin matrix as described above . To suppress formation of cytotoxic free radicals , Oxyrase ( Oxyrase , Mansfield , OH ) was added at a 1 : 100 dilution to culture medium immediately before cell imaging . Stages of Invadopodia Formation and Function www . aacrjournals . org 3035 Cancer Res 2006 ; 66 : ( 6 ) . March 15 , 2006 Research . on October 29 , 2017 . © 2006 American Association for Cancer cancerres . aacrjournals . org Downloaded from Transmission electron microscopy . Cells at 5 (cid:1) 10 5 / mL in complete culture medium were incubated in glass - bottom dishes coated with Gelatin - Alexa568 matrices for 3 hours . Cells were fixed with 2 . 5 % glutaraldehyde / 2 % paraformaldehyde for 2 hours , postfixed in 1 % osmium tetroxide for 1 hour , en bloc stained with uranyl acetate , and processed for conventional ultrathin section electron microscopy as described previously ( 4 ) . Layers of plastic - embedded cells on matrix were removed from the coverslips , reembedded in plastic , and sections were cut perpendicular to the original plane of the coverslip . Sections were poststained with uranyl acetate and lead citrate , and photographed with a Hitachi H - 7600 transmission electron microscope . Immunoblotting . Cells cultured overnight at 2 (cid:1) 10 5 / mL in six - well plates were extracted with radioimmunoprecipitation assay buffer , mixed with sample buffer containing h - mercaptoethanol , sonicated , and boiled for 5 minutes . SDS - PAGE was done using 4 % to 12 % Tris - glycine gels ( Novex , Invitrogen ) . Semiquantitative analysis of protein levels was done using ScionImage software ( Scion , Frederick , MD ) . Biotinylation and immunoprecipitation . Cell surface protein bio - tinylation and immunoprecipitation to identify surface MT1 - MMP was done as described ( 32 ) . Gelatin zymography . Cells at 3 (cid:1) 10 5 per well in six - well plates were incubated overnight . For culture medium samples , cells were cultured in serum - free DMEM for 48 hours . Cells were lysed with 1 % NP40 in 10 mmol / LTris ( pH 7 . 4 ) , 150 mmol / L NaCl , 1 mmol / L CaCl 2 , and 1 mmol / L MgCl 2 . To detect MMP - 2 activity , cell culture medium and cell lysates were concentrated six times and twice , respectively , by filtration on Microcon filter devices ( Millipore , Billerica , MA ) . Samples were mixed with sample buffer without reducing agent , incubated for 10 minutes at room temperature , and separated on 10 % polyacrylamide / 0 . 1 % gelatin gels . Then , gels were extensively washed in 2 . 5 % Triton X - 100 and incubated in 50 mmol / L Tris - HCl ( pH 7 . 5 ) , containing 0 . 2 mol / L NaCl , 5 mmol / L CaCl 2 , 1 A mol / L ZnCl 2 , 0 . 02 % Brij 35 , and 1 mmol / L p - aminophenylmercuric acetate at 37 j C for 36 hours . The gel was stained with 0 . 5 % Coomasie blue R - 250 . Gel loadings were normalized to total protein measured with a micro - BCA kit ( Pierce , Rockford , IL ) . Real - time PCR . MMP expression levels were measured by quantitative real - time PCR ( qRT - PCR ) . Cells plated in six - well plates at 2 (cid:1) 10 5 / mL were cultured overnight , then mRNA was collected using the RNAaqueous 4 - PCR kit ( Ambion , Austin , TX ) . cDNA was synthesized using a GeneAmp reverse transcription reaction kit ( Applied Biosystems , Foster City , CA ) . qRT - PCR was carried out with SYBR green PCR master mix ( Applied Biosystems ) using an ABI Prism7700 Sequence detector ( Perkin - Elmer ) . Thermal cycling variables for the qRT - PCR were 50 j C for 2 minutes , 95 j C for 10 minutes , 40 cycles of denaturation at 95 j C for 15 seconds , and annealing / extension at 65 j C for 30 seconds . The primers for human MMPs and internal controls used for RT - PCR are provided in Supplementary Fig . S1 A . The results were presented as fold change in gene expression . Statistical analysis . The data are represented graphically as a mean value with the corresponding SD , calculated after pooling three indepen - dent trials . For comparison between groups , t test was used . For analysis of live - cell imaging data , the sign and Wilcoxon signed - rank ( two - sided ) test were applied for pairwise comparisons between groups . Results Elevated levels of c - Src stimulate ECM degradation via increased invadopodia formation . To study invadopodial dynamics , we searched for a cell line with a high percentage of cells capable of degrading matrix with significant numbers of invadopodia per cell . Because c - Src increases cell invasive potential ( 30 , 33 – 37 ) , we investigated the effect of c - Src expression on gelatin degradation by the breast carcinoma cell line MDA - MB - 231 as a cell model . Degradation assays involved culturing cells on cover - slips coated with thin , fluorochrome - conjugated gelatin matrices that were not cross - linked with glutaraldehyde ( see Materials and Methods ) . Local proteolytic activity was identified by appearance of dark areas lacking fluorescence in the bright fluorescent matrix . According to electron microscopy , the thickness of our matrices is 48 . 9 F 2 . 9 nm ( Fig . 1 D , inset ) . Unlike widely used glutaraldehyde cross - linked fluorescent gelatin films , the fluorescent matrices that we developed provide better sensitivity , allowing precise detection of local cell proteolytic activity after short incubation periods . Incubation of parental carcinoma cells and cells expressing wild - type c - Src as well as mutant Y527F c - Src and K295R c - Src on fluorescent gelatin matrixes for different periods of time detected differences in numbers of cells degrading matrix ( Fig . 1 A ) . The percentage of parental carcinoma cells able to degrade the matrix gradually increased with time and reached f 20 % upon 3 hours of incubation . Elevated levels of wild - type c - Src or Y527F c - Src in these cells stimulated matrix degradation as detected by increases in the percentage of cells degrading matrix over time ( Fig . 1 A ) . Increased cellular Src conferred ability to f 40 % of the cells to degrade the gelatin matrix by 3 hours , whereas expression of Y527F c - Src increased the percentage to 55 % ( Fig . 1 A ) . Matrix degradation by cancer cells is mediated by invadopodia . Calculation of the mean number of invadopodia per cell showed substantial increases in formation of invadopodia with elevations in wild - type c - Src and dominant - active c - Src levels ( Fig . 1 A and D ) . Specifically , the mean number of invadopodia in our cell lines quadrupled after augmentation of c - Src levels compared with parental carcinoma cells , and it increased nearly 7 - fold with expression of Y527F c - Src . The expression of K295R c - Src decreased the mean number of invadopodia per cell by f 65 % compared with parental cell line . Because Src induced a high percentage of cells capable of cleaving gelatin matrix by forming abundant invadopo - dia , we chose wild - type c - Src and Y527F c - Src MDA - MB - 231 cells as convenient models to study the mechanisms of invadopodia formation and function in depth . We also examined the effect of Y527F c - Src on expression and activity of several MMPs capable of gelatin degradation . Quanti - tative RT - PCR detected increases in MT1 - MMP and MMP - 9 mRNA expression levels of 1 . 4 - and 16 - fold , respectively , in carcinoma cells expressing Y527F c - Src compared with parental ( Fig . 1 B ) . No effects were observed on the mRNA expression levels of MMP - 2 , MMP - 13 , MMP - 15 , or MMP - 16 . The increase in MT1 - MMP mRNA expression level correlated with the increase in amount of cell surface MT1 - MMP in Y527F c - Src cells ( Fig . 1 B ) . Gelatin zymography of cell culture medium and cell lysates detected elevated levels of pro - MMP - 9 ( 92 kDa ) in Y527F c - Src – expressing cells ( Fig . 1 C ) , consistent with qRT - PCR data . The active 86 kDa form of MMP - 9 appeared only in cell lysates and was elevated in Y527F c - Src cells . Gelatin zymography detected only pro - MMP - 2 ( 72 kDa ) in both cell lysates and culture medium with no difference in pro - MMP - 2 levels in Y527F c - Src cells compared with parental cells ( Fig . 1 C ) . Cortactin is indispensable for invadopodia formation . Early studies on invadopodia revealed that microinjection of anticortac - tin polyclonal antibodies decreased the number of matrix - degrading cells ( 4 ) . To assess the role of cortactin in the dynamics of formation and function of invadopodia , we implemented a siRNA - targeted protein depletion approach . Based on dose dependence analysis using parental MDA - MB - 231 to obtain f 90 % suppression of cortactin levels ( Supplementary Fig . S1 B ) , we treated parental , wild - type c - Src , and Y527F c - Src MDA - MB - 231 cells with 80 nmol / L cortactin - specific pools of four siRNAs for 72 hours ( Fig . 2 A ) . Cortactin depletion decreased cell migration on gelatin matrices ( Supplementary Fig . S1 C ) and inhibited matrix degradation Cancer Research Cancer Res 2006 ; 66 : ( 6 ) . March 15 , 2006 3036 www . aacrjournals . org Research . on October 29 , 2017 . © 2006 American Association for Cancer cancerres . aacrjournals . org Downloaded from ( Fig . 2 B ) . To evaluate the ability of cells to form invadopodia under conditions of depleted cortactin , the cells were immunolabeled for actin and cortactin ( Fig . 2 C ) . In the control cells , the majority of actin - cortactin aggregates were associated with sites of degraded matrix after 3 hours of incubation on the gelatin matrix , indicating that functional invadopodia were formed . Depletion of cellular cortactin inhibited formation of the actin - cortactin aggregates and was accompanied by strong inhibition of matrix degradation ( Fig . 2 B and C ) . These results indicate that cortactin is required for formation of invadopodia and they suggest that the inhibition of Figure 1 . Expression of wild - type c - Src or constitutively active c - Src increases cellular degradation of fluorescent matrix by stimulating invadopodia formation . A , effect of c - Src expression on the ability of cells to degrade gelatin matrix and form invadopodia . Parental , wild - type c - Src , and mutant Y527F c - Src and K295R c - Src – expressing MDA - MB - 231 cells were incubated on Alexa568 - labeled gelatin matrices for the indicated times . Cells degrading fluorescent matrix were identified by the appearance of dark areas ( ‘‘holes’’ ) at the sites of degraded fluorescent gelatin . The cell was counted as degrading matrix if at least one hole was identified under the cell body or in immediate proximity to the cell . To characterize the effect of c - Src and mutant c - Src expression on invadopodia formation , parental , wild - type c - Src , and c - Src mutant clones of MDA - MB - 231 cells were incubated on Alexa568 - gelatin matrices for 3 hours . After incubation , the cells were fixed , permeabilized , and stained for cortactin and MT1 - MMP . Invadopodia were identified by colocalization of cortactin and MT1 - MMP staining over a site of degraded matrix ( hole ) . Representative Western blots show levels of Src and tyrosine phosphorylated Src ( p418Src ) in parental , wild - type c - Src , Y527F c - Src , and K295R c - Src MDA - MB - 231 clones . The breast carcinoma cell line MCF - 7 , which is not able to cleave fluorescent gelatin matrices , was used as a negative control . B , quantitative RT - PCR analysis of the effect of Y527F c - Src expression on mRNA levels of gelatin - degrading MMPs in breast carcinoma cells . * , significant increase compared with parental ( P < 0 . 01 ) . The increase in MT1 - MMP mRNA expression in Y527F c - Src cells correlates with the elevation in cell surface MT1 - MMP measured by immunoprecipitation of biotinylated cell surface MT1 - MMP . IP , immunoprecipitation ; IB , immunoblotting . * , significant increase compared with parental ( P < 0 . 05 ) . C , elevated activity of MMP - 9 but not MMP - 2 detected by gelatin zymography of cell lysates and cell culture medium of carcinoma cells stably expressing Y527F c - Src . * , significant increase compared with parental ( P < 0 . 01 ) . D , representative micrographs of parental and Y527F c - Src – expressing MDA - MB - 231 cells incubated on gelatin - Alexa568 matrices for 3 hours . After fixation , cells were immunolabeled for MT1 - MMP ( primary AB815 followed by secondary Cy - 2 conjugated antibody ) and cortactin ( primary 4F11 antibody followed by secondary Cy - 5 conjugated antibody ) . Dark dot - like regions on bright fluorescent matrix are the foci of pericellular proteolysis mediated by the invadopodia . Invadopodia are identified as a colocalization of cortactin and MT1 - MMP immunostaining with the foci of degraded matrix . Bars , 5 A m . Electron microscopy ( inset ) shows the thickness and consistency of the fluorescent gelatin - Alexa568 matrix . Bar , 500 nm . Stages of Invadopodia Formation and Function www . aacrjournals . org 3037 Cancer Res 2006 ; 66 : ( 6 ) . March 15 , 2006 Research . on October 29 , 2017 . © 2006 American Association for Cancer cancerres . aacrjournals . org Downloaded from matrix proteolysis by cells with depleted cortactin is caused by the impairment of invadopodia formation . MT1 - MMP is required for invadopodia function but not for invadopodia initiation . Several proteases have been shown to be associated with invadopodia of cancer cells . In our cell model , Y527F c - Src expression stimulated MT1 - MMP and MMP - 9 expression . To establish which proteases are responsible for gelatin matrix degradation in MDA - MB - 231 carcinoma cells , we tested the effect of different protease inhibitors on matrix degradation ( Fig . 3 ) . Only tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase ( TIMP ) - 2 , an inhibitor of soluble and membrane - bound MMPs , including MT1 - MMP , was able to suppress matrix degradation at 0 . 3 A g / mL ( Fig . 3 A and D ) and completely inhibited at 3 A g / mL ( data not shown ) . In contrast , TIMP - 1 , which inhibits soluble MMPs but not membrane - type MMPs , did not reduce gelatin matrix degradation . Nevertheless , immunostaining of the TIMP - 2 - treated cells still revealed association of actin - cortactin aggregates with the cell membrane adherent to nondegraded matrix . These aggregates were identical in appearance and location to those in invadopodia of control cells . In wild - type c - Src and Y527F c - Src cells treated with TIMP - 2 , the total numbers of actin - cortactin aggregates were f 40 % and f 30 % less than those of the control , respectively ( Fig . 3 A ) . Similar results were obtained upon carcinoma cell transfection with siRNA targeting MT1 - MMP gene expression ( Fig . 3 B , C , and D ) . By suppressing MT1 - MMP expression , we observed strong inhibition of matrix degradation by parental , wild - type c - Src , and Y527F c - Src – expressing cells . However , the formation of actin - cortactin structures was only modestly reduced ( 60 - 70 % remained ) . Thus , we conclude that onset of invadopodia formation is inde - pendent of MT1 - MMP , whereas the matrix - degrading capacity of invadopodia requires availability of catalytically functional MT1 - MMP . Furthermore , matrix degradation of fluorescent type I collagen matrices by Y527F c - Src cells was observed at invadopodia ( data not shown ) , further implicating MT1 - MMP in invadopodia function . Cortactin and MT1 - MMP association at invadopodia is sequential . Given the conclusion that cortactin and MT1 - MMP are essential components of functional invadopodia in MDA - MB - 231 carcinoma cells capable of gelatin matrix degradation , we closely examined cells immunostained for cortactin and MT1 - MMP ( Fig . 4 A ) . The cells revealed four distinct patterns of protein accumulation and matrix degradation : accumulations of Figure 2 . Inhibition of cortactin expression blocks matrix degradation by carcinoma cells as a result of down - regulation of invadopodia formation . A , cortactin levels at different time points after transfection of cells with cortactin - specific siRNA . Parental , wild - type c - Src , and Y527F c - Src – expressing MDA - MB - 231 cells were transfected with 80 nmol / L siRNA pool targeting cortactin ( Cortactin siRNA ) or 80 nmol / L nonspecific siRNA pool as a control ( Control siRNA ) . Cell lysates were collected at 24 , 48 , and 72 hours posttransfection . Cortactin protein levels were calculated based on densitometric analysis of Western blots and normalized to the cortactin level of the siRNA control . Representative Western blot shows cortactin levels ( anticortactin 4F11 antibody staining ) for cortactin - specific siRNA - treated ( T ) and control siRNA - treated ( C ) cells at different time points . B , effect of cortactin - specific siRNA on cellular level of cortactin , ability of the cells to degrade matrix , and number of actin / cortactin aggregates per cell . Cortactin levels in the cells were determined as the integrated intensity of cortactin immunostaining of cells treated with cortactin - specific siRNA or control siRNA . Cellular capacity to degrade matrix is represented as normalized degradation , which was calculated as the area of degraded matrix normalized to the total area of adherent cell membrane per cell . The number of actin / cortactin aggregates per cell , which is used to represent the degree of invadopodia formation , was calculated as the mean number of immunofluorescently labeled actin and cortactin aggregates that colocalized . C , representative micrographs of Y527F c - Src – expressing MDA - MB - 231 cells transfected with cortactin - targeting siRNA or control siRNA and plated on gelatin - Alexa568 matrices at 72 hours posttransfection . The cells were incubated on gelatin matrices for 3 hours . Immunolabeling was done for actin with phalloidin - Alexa488 and cortactin with primary 4F11 antibody and secondary Cy5 - conjugated antibody . Bars , 5 A m . Cancer Research Cancer Res 2006 ; 66 : ( 6 ) . March 15 , 2006 3038 www . aacrjournals . org Research . on October 29 , 2017 . © 2006 American Association for Cancer cancerres . aacrjournals . org Downloaded from only cortactin at the cell adherence membrane , cortactin and MT1 - MMP aggregation overlying intact matrix , cortactin and MT1 - MMP accumulation localized to foci of degraded matrix ( single holes ) , and MT1 - MMP association with foci of degraded matrix . These four types of combinations of cortactin and MT1 - MMP over intact or degraded matrix were classified as invadopodia stages I , II , III , and IV , respectively . Next , we examined cortactin and MT1 - MMP temporal sequences relative to matrix degradation ( i . e . , appearance of matrix holes ) . Y527F c - Src cells stably expressing MT1 - MMP - eGFP chimeras were plated on fluorescent matrix and allowed to degrade it for 45 minutes to 3 hours ( Fig . 4 B ) . After fixation , cells were immunolabeled for cortactin . Figure 4 B shows the percentage of cell invadopodia at each stage after specific periods of incubation . After 45 minutes of incubation on matrix , f 60 % of the invadopodia formed by cells were at stage I , indicating that the initial step of invadopodia formation is linked to cortactin accumulation at the ventral cell membrane adherent to matrix . With time , the number of invadopodia at stage I decreased to f 50 % after 1 hour and then 10 % after 2 hours of cell incubation on matrix , although it rebounded slightly to f 20 % after 3 hours of incubation . The percentage of invadopodia at stage II remained relatively constant ( f 35 % ) after short periods of cell incubation on matrix ( 45 minutes and 1 hour ) , but then decreased to f 10 % with further incubation time . This time course indicates that invadopodial stage II ( accumulation of cortactin and MT1 - MMP above intact matrix ) is relatively short - lived . The number of invadopodia at stages III and IV increased progressively with longer cell incubation on matrix , and after 3 hours , stage IV became dominant . This pattern obviously suggests that upon MT1 - MMP accumulation at sites of cortactin aggregates , matrix degradation takesplace . Subsequently , cortactindissociatesfromtheinvadopodia , leavingbehind MT1 - MMPassociatedwiththefociofdegradedmatrix . Cortactin is an F - actin - binding protein that associates with the centers of active cortical actin remodeling . To assess the state of F - actin at each of the four invadopodial stages , we did multi - spectral microscopy of invadopodia ( Fig . 4 C ) . Y527F c - Src MDA - MB - 231 cells stably expressing MT1 - MMP - eGFP were plated on fluorescent gelatin matrices for different periods of time . The cells Figure 3 . Inhibition of MT1 - MMP protease activity of carcinoma cells inhibits matrix degradation by the cells , whereas invadopodia formation is affected only modestly . A , effect of protease inhibitors on matrix degradation by parental and Y527F c - Src MDA - MB - 231 cells and formation of invadopodia . The cells were pretreated with protease inhibitors for 15 minutes and plated on gelatin - Alexa568 matrices in the presence of inhibitors for 3 . 5 hours . The following protease inhibitors were compared : 0 . 3 A g / mL TIMP - 1 , 0 . 3 A g / mL TIMP - 2 , combination of 0 . 3 A g / mL TIMP - 1 and 0 . 3 A g / mL TIMP - 2 , 10 A g / mL plasminogen activator inhibitor - 1 ( PAI - 1 ) , and 100 A g / mL E - 64 . As a control , cells were treated with PBS . Control and protease inhibitor – treated cells were fixed , permeabilized , and immunolabeled for actin and cortactin . The number of actin - cortactin aggregates near the cell membrane adherent to the gelatin matrix was counted for each treatment ( only the data for control , TIMP - 1 , and TIMP - 2 treatments are shown ) . * , statistically significant decrease compared with control ( P < 0 . 01 ) . B , changes in MT1 - MMP and glyceraldehyde - 3 - phosphate dehydrogenase ( GAPDH ) gene expression after treatment with MT1 - MMP - targeted siRNA pool . Parental , wild - type c - Src , and Y527F c - Src MDA - MB - 231 cells were treated with 80 nmol / L MT1 - MMP - specific siRNA pool ( MT1 - MMP siRNA ) or 80 nmol / L nonspecific control siRNA pool ( Control siRNA ) . mRNA was extracted at 48 hours after siRNA transfection . The effect of siRNA treatment on mRNA level was assessed by qRT - PCR as fold change in mRNA level . C , effect of MT1 - MMP - targeted siRNA treatment on matrix degradation and number of actin - cortactin aggregates . Parental , wild - type c - Src , and Y527F c - Src cells at 48 hours after siRNA transfection were plated on gelatin - Alexa568 matrices . Percentage of cells degrading matrix and the number of actin - cortactin aggregates per cell were calculated after 3 - hour incubation of cells on gelatin matrix . * , significant decrease compared with control ( P < 0 . 01 ) . D , representative micrographs of Y527F c - Src – expressing cells treated with TIMP - 1 or TIMP - 2 , or transfected with MT1 - MMP - specific siRNA . Cells were incubated on gelatin - Alexa568 matrices for 3 hours , fixed , and labeled for actin ( phalloidin - Alexa488 ) and cortactin ( primary 4F11 mAb followed by secondary Cy5 - conjugated antibody ) . Invadopodia are identified as colocalization of actin and cortactin immunostaining with the foci of degraded matrix . Bar , 10 A m . Stages of Invadopodia Formation and Function www . aacrjournals . org 3039 Cancer Res 2006 ; 66 : ( 6 ) . March 15 , 2006 Research . on October 29 , 2017 . © 2006 American Association for Cancer cancerres . aacrjournals . org Downloaded from were then fixed and labeled for cortactin and F - actin . Representative micrographs of invadopodia at each stage are shown in Fig . 4 C . Cortactin was always associated with F - actin accumulation at invadopodia in stages I , II , and III . The dissociation of cortactin from the invadopodia enriched in MT1 - MMP - eGFP at stage IV was accompanied by disappearance of F - actin from that site . Live - cell imaging reveals the dynamics of stepwise formation of invadopodia and uncovers two types of cortactin associa - tion : long lived and short lived . To examine cortactin and MT1 - MMP dynamic interactions at invadopodia more extensively and to confirm our proposed four stages of invadopodia formation and function , we turned to live - cell imaging . Three - channel live - cell imaging was used to track the kinetics of matrix degradation by parental carcinoma cells stably expressing MT1 - MMP - eGFP and cortactin - mRFP ( 1 ) chimeras ( Fig . 5 ) . Upon cell adhesion to the fluorescent matrix , dynamic accumulations of cortactin near the ventral cell membrane were observed at multiple sites ( data not shown ) . Some of these cortactin aggregates dispersed whereas others became invadopodia . Invadopodia formation first involved the arrival of a cortactin aggregate to the cell membrane adherent to the matrix , followed by the accumulation of MT1 - MMP at the cortactin - rich regions ( Fig . 5 A and B ; Movies 1 and 2 in Supplementary Data ) . Accumulation of MT1 - MMP at invadopodia was accompanied by high motility of the aggregates of membrane - associated MT1 - MMP in and adjacent to invadopodia . The average time for onset of MT1 - MMP accumulation at cortactin - rich invadopodia after cortactin initially appeared was 2 . 25 minutes for migrating cells and 1 . 5 minutes for nonmigrating cells ( Table 1 ) . Accumulation of MT1 - MMP at cortactin - containing invadopodial structures resulted in subsequent degradation of matrix underlying the invadopodia . The onset of matrix degradation compared with cortactin arrival at invadopodia was 6 minutes for nonmigrating carcinoma cells and 4 . 5 minutes for migrating cells ( Table 1 ) . Live - cell imaging also revealed different patterns of cortactin association with invadopodia . In nonmigrating cells , cortactin remained associated with invadopodia for extensive periods of time . Imaging of invadopodia for 90 minutes showed continual presence of cortactin . However , the intensity of this long - lived invadopodial cortactin changed over the 90 - minute period ( Fig . 5 A , kymograph ) . These fluctuations may indicate dynamic actin remodeling at invadopodia . In striking contrast , imaging of carcinoma cells undergoing migration showed short - lived associa - tion of cortactin with invadopodia ( Fig . 5 B ) . In migrating cells , cortactin remained associated with invadopodia for only an average of 10 minutes ( median time for cortactin loss from invadopodia is 10 . 13 minutes ; interquartile range is 7 . 50 - 20 . 25 minutes ) . During this short period of time , invadopodia assembled and matrix degrada - tion was initiated . Cortactin disappearance from the invadopodia resulted in MT1 - MMP - enriched but cortactin - free invadopodia that were still able to continue matrix degradation . Finally , we characterized and compared the relative fluorescence intensities of fluorescently tagged MT1 - MMP , cortactin , actin , and matrix to assess relative amounts of each constituent and the extent of matrix proteolysis at each invadopodial stage ( Fig . 6 A ) . By semiquantitative determinations of pixel intensity integrated over the area of individual invadopodia , the levels of cortactin and actin were confirmed to be initially elevated at stage I . Cortactin and actin levels then rose moderately further at stages II and III , then dropped to zero at stage IV . In contrast , MT1 - MMP was absent at stage I and rose sharply to a plateau at stages II to III , and remained high or slightly increased at stage IV . Matrix staining was Figure 4 . Stages of invadopodia formation and function . A , identification of four stages of invadopodia with respect to cortactin and MT1 - MMP staining colocalization over intact or degraded matrix . After 3 hours of incubation on the fluorescent gelatin matrix , Y527F c - Src MDA - MB - 231 cells were fixed and labeled for cortactin ( primary 4F11 followed by secondary Cy - 5 - conjugated antibody ) andMT1 - MMP ( primary AB815followedbysecondaryCy - 2 - conjugated antibody ) . Representative micrographs of each invadopodial stage and the fluorescence intensity profile for anticortactin and anti - MT1 - MMP staining as well as gelatin matrix fluorescence are shown . Bar , 10 A m . B , Y527F c - Src MDA - MB - 231 cells stably expressing the MT1 - MMP - eGFP chimera were incubatedongelatin - Alexa568matricesfor45minutes , 1hour , 2hours , or3hours . At the end of each incubation period , cells were fixed / permeabilized and immunolabeledforcortactin . Fourstagesofinvadopodiaformationwereidentified : accumulationofcortactinattheadherentcellmembrane ( stageI ) , accumulationof cortactin and MT1 - MMP over intact matrix ( stage II ) , accumulation of cortactin and MT1 - MMP over a site of degraded matrix ( stage III ) , and continued associationofMT1 - MMPaggregateswiththeareasofdegradedmatrixbutwithout cortactin localization ( stage IV ) . Columns , percentage of invadopodia per cell present at a particular stage out of the total number of cell invadopodia present ( i . e . , all stages combined ) . C , representative micrographs of four stages of invadopodia imaged by multispectral laser - scanning microscopy . Y527F c - Src MDA - MB - 231 cells stably expressing MT1 - MMP - eGFP were incubated on gelatin - Alexa568matricesfor45minutes , 1hour , 2hours , or3hours . Attheendof each incubation period , cells were fixed / permeabilized and immunolabeled for cortactin ( 4F11 antibody followed by Cy5 - conjugated secondary staining ) and actin ( phalloidin - rhodamine , pseudocolored blue ) . Confocal image stacks of gelatin - Alexa568 and phalloidin - rhodamine were acquired at variable emission wavelengths using the META detector . Dye separation was done according to the Zeiss linear unmixing algorithm . Bar , 5 A m . Cancer Research Cancer Res 2006 ; 66 : ( 6 ) . March 15 , 2006 3040 www . aacrjournals . org Research . on October 29 , 2017 . © 2006 American Association for Cancer cancerres . aacrjournals . org Downloaded from the opposite : It was highest at stages I and II , then dropped as holes were formed at stage III and IV . Discussion Invadopodia are specialized membrane protrusions of invasive tumor cells that mediate focal pericellular proteolysis of ECM and promote tumor cell invasion and metastasis ( 6 ) . Consequently , understanding the mechanisms governing the formation and function of invadopodia should provide insights into the biology , regulation , and potential therapeutic approaches to cancer metastasis . In a current view , the induction of invadopodia—F - actin - rich membrane protrusions with matrix degradation activity—is Figure 5 . Live - cell imaging of invadopodia reveals the dynamics of assembly and function of invadopodia . A , a cell population that stably expresses MT1 - MMP - eGFP and cortactin - mRFP ( 1 ) was generated from the parental MDA - MB - 231 carcinoma line . For live - cell imaging , the cells were plated on gelatin - Alexa647 matrixes and allowed to adhere for 30 minutes . Images of live cells were captured every 45 seconds . Three - channel imaging allowed simultaneous visualization of the dynamics of MT1 - MMP - eGFP , cortactin - mRFP ( 1 ) at invadopodia compared with local matrix degradation ( hole formation ) . Invadopodia formation and function in nonmigrating ( A ) and migrating ( B ) cells is depicted in the form of kymographs and also as series of 32 consecutive frames that correspond to the range of the kymograph between the two vertical black lines . Magenta , cortactin - mRFP ( 1 ) ; green , MT1 - MMP - eGFP . Arrows , onset of cortactin ( blue arrow ) , onset of MT1 - MMP ( yellow arrow ) accumulation at the invadopodia , and onset of matrix degradation by the invadopodia ( red arrow ) . Table 1 . Onset times for MT1 - MMP accumulation and matrix degradation relative to initial cortactin accumulation at invadopodia Cell type NT * NI c MT1 - MMP onset , min b MT1 - MMP onset , interquartile range x P value cortactin vs MT1 - MMP Matrix degradation onset , min Matrix onset , interquartile range x P value MT1 - MMP vs matrix Migrating 3 30 2 . 25 1 . 50 - 3 . 00 0 . 001 4 . 50 3 . 00 - 6 . 00 < 0 . 001 Nonmigrating 6 28 1 . 50 0 . 75 - 3 . 00 < 0 . 001 6 . 00 3 . 75 - 9 . 00 < 0 . 001 NOTE : The sign and Wilcoxon signed - rank ( two - sided ) tests were applied for pairwise comparisons between groups . * Number of independent trials . c Total number of invadopodia examined . b Median values are presented . x 25th and 75th percentile . Stages of Invadopodia Formation and Function www . aacrjournals . org 3041 Cancer Res 2006 ; 66 : ( 6 ) . March 15 , 2006 Research . on October 29 , 2017 . © 2006 American Association for Cancer cancerres . aacrjournals . org Downloaded from associated with activation of integrin - mediated or growth factor – stimulated signaling events ( 3 , 8 , 14 , 38 ) . Requirements for cortical actin regulators N - WASP and Arp2 / 3 and their upstream regulators Nck1 , Cdc42 , and WIP have been shown for epidermal growth factor – stimulated formation of invadopodia in adenocarcinoma cells ( 14 , 39 ) . In addition , the regulators of actin remodeling cofilin , cortactin , Arf6 , and dynamin2 , which also play roles in membrane trafficking , remodeling , and recycling , localize to invadopodia , and their functional activities are required for invadopodia - mediated matrix degradation ( 4 , 5 , 14 , 40 , 41 ) . Nonetheless , current understanding of molecular mechanisms that govern invadopodia formation has been limited to the early events of actin polymerization induction through the Arp2 / 3 complex that drives invadopodia initiation ( 14 ) . In this study , based on an approach that combines the monitoring of the cytoskeletal core of invadopodia with the monitoring of invadopodia function , we substantially extend existing knowledge about the organization and proteolytic function of invadopodia . While establishing an in vitro cell model for invadopodia studies , we found that the expression of wild - type c - Src or a dominant - active c - Src stimulates the formation of invadopodia in breast carcinoma cells . The application of our thin and non - cross - linked fluorescent gelatin matrixes , which provide rapid and sensitive detection of proteolytic activity associated with invadopodia , allowed identification of distinct structural and functional features of invadopodial dynamics . The structural aspect includes the initiation , organization , and stabilization of the F - actin - rich core of invadopodia and invadopodial protrusion extension , all dependent on cortactin , whereas functional activity was associated with the recruitment and organization of proteolytic enzymes at invadopo - dia that were required for ECM degradation . We found that in MDA - MB - 231 carcinoma cells , invadopodial function in gelatin matrix proteolysis required MT1 - MMP activity . Down - regulation of MT1 - MMP activity blocked matrix degradation but only moder - ately affected actin / cortactin aggregation of the invadopodia , which otherwise appeared intact , suggesting that dynamic cell - matrix interactions initiate invadopodial actin core formation and dictate protease accumulation at invadopodia . During live - cell imaging , we also observed that only cortactin aggregates at the cell adherence membrane that are destined to become invadopodia initiate MT1 - MMP accumulation , indicating the existence of regulatory signaling events yet to be established . Several studies showed MT1 - MMP localization to the migration front of cells in parallel with actin cytoskeleton remodeling when cells are stimulated to migrate . Such reorganization of MT1 - MMP has been accompanied by enhancement of MMP - 2 activation , showing that MT1 - MMP is in an active state at the leading edge ( 42 – 44 ) . In this study , we revealed that MT1 - MMP , although present over the entire plasma membrane , is specifically concentrated at the invadopodia of carcinoma cells and promotes matrix degradation at these sites . MDA - MB - 231 cells plated on gelatin matrix and labeled for FAK or paxillin , in addition to invadopodia , show the formation of focal adhesions that do not overlap with invadopodial structures or degradation sites ( data not shown ) . We speculate that focal adhesions , by providing the main sites of cell adhesion to ECM and sites of signal transduction into the cell interior , might support local membrane attachment to permit initiation and extension of invadopodia into the matrix . The proteolytic activity accumulated at invadopodial tips degrades the ECM and promotes invasion by weakening matrix resistance . Some cell types engaged in matrix remodeling and tissue invasion form podosomes , actin - rich adhesion structures that share many Figure 6 . Stepwise model of invadopodia assembly and function . A , estimated levels of cortactin , actin , and MT1 - MMP at invadopodia and the degree of matrix degradation quantified for each invadopodial stage . Y527F c - Src MDA - MB - 231 cells stably expressing MT1 - MMP - eGFP were incubated on gelatin - Alexa568 matrices for 45 minutes , 1 hour , 2 hours , or 3 hours . At the end of each incubation period , cells were fixed / permeabilized and immunolabeled for cortactin ( 4F11 antibody followed by Cy5 - conjugated secondary staining ) and actin ( phalloidin - rhodamine ) . Confocal image stacks of gelatin - Alexa568 and phalloidin - rhodamine were acquired using the META detector . Dye separation was done according to the Zeiss linear unmixing algorithm . Intensity profiles for cortactin , actin , MT1 - MMP , and matrix for single invadopodia were obtained from line scans of fluorescent images . The fluorescence intensities were analyzed with Origin software ( OriginLab , Northampton , MA ) . For each stage , 25 to 30 invadopodia were analyzed . B , schematic representation of four stages of invadopodia formation and function . Cancer Research Cancer Res 2006 ; 66 : ( 6 ) . March 15 , 2006 3042 www . aacrjournals . org Research . on October 29 , 2017 . © 2006 American Association for Cancer cancerres . aacrjournals . org Downloaded from molecular components with invadopodia ( 45 , 46 ) . The classic podosome structure is a circular F - actin core surrounded by a ring of vinculin . In contrast , f 95 % of the invadopodia of c - Src - expressing carcinoma cells plated on gelatin matrix and labeled for actin and vinculin lackvinculin - rich rings ( data not shown ) . Thus , invadopodia of MDA - MB - 231 cells are distinct from classic podosomes . In summary , based on the results of examination of cells at different time points , live - cell imaging , and fluorescence intensity analysis , we have identified a stepwise mechanism of invadopodia formation and function ( Fig . 6 B ) . Invadopodia start as an invadopodial initiation site by accumulation of actin and cortactin at areas of cell membrane adherence to ECM . The onset of MT1 - MMP accumulation defines the full - fledged preinvadopodia stage . This stage involves ongoing increases in the amounts of actin and cortactin along with the increase in MT1 - MMP . The beginning of matrix degradation defines the formation of mature invadopodia , which are enriched in actin , cortactin , and MT1 - MMP . The dispersal of F - actin and cortactin from mature invadopodia results in the formation of late invadopodia , which remain enriched in MT1 - MMP capable of continuing focal degradation . Acknowledgments Received 6 / 21 / 2005 ; revised 1 / 10 / 2006 ; accepted 1 / 18 / 2006 . The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page charges . This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in accordance with 18 U . S . C . Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact . Stages of Invadopodia Formation and Function www . aacrjournals . org 3043 Cancer Res 2006 ; 66 : ( 6 ) . March 15 , 2006 References 1 . Basbaum CB , Werb Z . Focalized proteolysis : spatial and temporal regulation of extracellular matrix degra - dation at the cell surface . Curr Opin Cell Biol 1996 ; 8 : 731 – 8 . 2 . Chen WT . Proteolytic activity of specialized surface protrusions formed at rosette contact sites of trans - formed cells . J Exp Zool 1989 ; 251 : 167 – 85 . 3 . Coopman PJ , Do MT , Thompson EW , Mueller SC . Phagocytosis of cross - linked gelatin matrix by human breast carcinoma cells correlates with their invasive capacity . Clin Cancer Res 1998 ; 4 : 507 – 15 . 4 . Bowden ET , Barth M , Thomas D , Glazer RI , Mueller SC . An invasion - related complex of cortactin , paxillin and PKC A associates with invadopodia at sites of extracellular matrix degradation . Oncogene 1999 ; 18 : 4440 – 9 . 5 . Baldassarre M , Pompeo A , Beznoussenko G , et al . Dynamin participates in focal extracellular matrix degradation by invasive cells . Mol Biol Cell 2003 ; 14 : 1074 – 84 . 6 . Buccione R , Orth JD , McNiven MA . Foot and mouth : podosomes , invadopodia and circular dorsal ruffles . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2004 ; 5 : 647 – 57 . 7 . Wang W , Goswami S , Sahai E , Wyckoff JB , Segall JE , Condeelis JS . Tumor cells caught in the act of invading : their strategy for enhanced cell motility . Trends Cell Biol 2005 ; 15 : 138 – 45 . 8 . Mueller SC , Ghersi G , Akiyama SK , et al . A novel protease - docking function of integrin at invadopodia . J Biol Chem 1999 ; 274 : 24947 – 52 . 9 . Monsky WL , Lin CY , Aoyama A , et al . A potential marker protease of invasiveness , seprase , is localized on invadopodia of human malignant melanoma cells . Cancer Res 1994 ; 54 : 5702 – 10 . 10 . Nakahara H , Howard L , Thompson EW , et al . Transmembrane / cytoplasmic domain - mediated mem - brane type 1 - matrix metalloprotease docking to invado - podia is required for cell invasion . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1997 ; 94 : 7959 – 64 . 11 . Monsky WL , Kelly T , Lin CY , et al . Binding and localization of M ( r ) 72 , 000 matrix metalloproteinase at cell surface invadopodia . Cancer Res 1993 ; 53 : 3159 – 64 . 12 . Artym VV , Kindzelskii AL , Chen WT , Petty HR . Molecular proximity of seprase and the urokinase - type plasminogen activator receptor on malignant melano - ma cell membranes : dependence on h 1 integrins and the cytoskeleton . Carcinogenesis 2002 ; 23 : 1593 – 601 . 13 . Chen WT . Proteases associated with invadopodia , and their role in degradation of extracellular matrix . Enzyme Protein 1996 ; 49 : 59 – 71 . 14 . Yamaguchi H , Lorenz M , Kempiak S , et al . Molecular mechanisms of invadopodium formation : the role of the N - WASP - Arp2 / 3 complex pathway and cofilin . J Cell Biol 2005 ; 168 : 441 – 52 . 15 . Weed SA , Parsons JT . Cortactin : coupling membrane dynamics to cortical actin assembly . Oncogene 2001 ; 20 : 6418 – 34 . 16 . Daly RJ . Cortactin signalling and dynamic actin networks . Biochem J 2004 ; 382 : 13 – 25 . 17 . Weaver AM , Karginov AV , Kinley AW , et al . Cortactin promotes and stabilizes Arp2 / 3 - induced actin filament network formation . Curr Biol 2001 ; 11 : 370 – 4 . 18 . Cao H , Weller S , Orth JD , et al . Actin and Arf1 - dependent recruitment of a cortactin - dynamin complex to the Golgi regulates post - Golgi transport . Nat Cell Biol 2005 ; 7 : 483 – 92 . 19 . Martinez - Quiles N , Ho HY , Kirschner MW , Ramesh N , Geha RS . Erk / Src phosphorylation of cortactin acts as a switch on - switch off mechanism that controls its ability to activate N - WASP . Mol Cell Biol 2004 ; 24 : 5269 – 80 . 20 . Schuuring E . The involvement of the chromosome 11q13 region in human malignancies : cyclin D1 and EMS1 are two new candidate oncogenes—a review . Gene 1995 ; 159 : 83 – 96 . 21 . Patel AS , Schechter GL , Wasilenko WJ , Somers KD . Overexpression of EMS1 / cortactin in NIH3T3 fibroblasts causes increased cell motility and invasion in vitro . Oncogene 1998 ; 16 : 3227 – 32 . 22 . Huang C , Liu J , Haudenschild CC , Zhan X . The role of tyrosine phosphorylation of cortactin in the locomotion of endothelial cells . J Biol Chem 1998 ; 273 : 25770 – 6 . 23 . Chuma M , Sakamoto M , Yasuda J , et al . Over - expression of cortactin is involved in motility and metastasis of hepatocellular carcinoma . J Hepatol 2004 ; 41 : 629 – 36 . 24 . Li Y , Tondravi M , Liu J , et al . Cortactin potentiates bone metastasis of breast cancer cells . Cancer Res 2001 ; 61 : 6906 – 11 . 25 . Itoh Y , Seiki M . MT1 - MMP : an enzyme with multi - dimensional regulation . Trends Biochem Sci 2004 ; 29 : 285 – 9 . 26 . Holmbeck K , Bianco P , Caterina J , et al . MT1 - MMP - deficient mice develop dwarfism , osteopenia , arthritis , and connective tissue disease due to inadequate collagen turnover . Cell 1999 ; 99 : 81 – 92 . 27 . Seiki M , Yana I . Roles of pericellular proteolysis by membrane type - 1 matrix metalloproteinase in cancer invasion and angiogenesis . Cancer Sci 2003 ; 94 : 569 – 74 . 28 . Hotary KB , Allen ED , Brooks PC , Datta NS , Long MW , Weiss SJ . Membrane type I matrix metalloproteinase usurps tumor growth control imposed by the three - dimensional extracellular matrix . Cell 2003 ; 114 : 33 – 45 . 29 . Sabeh F , Ota I , Holmbeck K , et al . Tumor cell traffic through the extracellular matrix is controlled by the membrane - anchored collagenase MT1 - MMP . J Cell Biol 2004 ; 167 : 769 – 81 . 30 . Myoui A , Nishimura R , Williams PJ , et al . C - SRC tyrosine kinase activity is associated with tumor colonization in bone and lung in an animal model of human breast cancer metastasis . Cancer Res 2003 ; 63 : 5028 – 33 . 31 . Liu S , Netzel - Arnett S , Birkedal - Hansen H , Leppla SH . Tumor cell - selective cytotoxicity of matrix metal - loproteinase - activated anthrax toxin . Cancer Res 2000 ; 60 : 6061 – 7 . 32 . Remacle A , Murphy G , Roghi C . Membrane type I - matrix metalloproteinase ( MT1 - MMP ) is internalised by two different pathways and is recycled to the cell surface . J Cell Sci 2003 ; 116 : 3905 – 16 . 33 . Jacobs C , Rubsamen H . Expression of pp60c - src protein kinase in adult and fetal human tissue : high activities in some sarcomas and mammary carcinomas . Cancer Res 1983 ; 43 : 1696 – 702 . 34 . Rosen N , Bolen JB , Schwartz AM , Cohen P , DeSeau V , Israel MA . Analysis of pp60c - src protein kinase activity in human tumor cell lines and tissues . J Biol Chem 1986 ; 261 : 13754 – 9 . 35 . Verbeek BS , Vroom TM , Adriaansen - Slot SS , et al . c - Src protein expression is increased in human breast cancer . An immunohistochemical and biochemical analysis . J Pathol 1996 ; 180 : 383 – 8 . 36 . Egan C , Pang A , Durda D , Cheng HC , Wang JH , Fujita DJ . Activation of Src in human breast tumor cell lines : elevated levels of phosphotyrosine phosphatase activity that preferentially recognizes the Src carboxy terminal negative regulatory tyrosine 530 . Oncogene 1999 ; 18 : 1227 – 37 . 37 . Webster MA , Cardiff RD , Muller WJ . Induction of mammary epithelial hyperplasias and mammary tumors in transgenic mice expressing a murine mammary tumor virus / activated c - src fusion gene . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1995 ; 92 : 7849 – 53 . 38 . Nakahara H , Mueller SC , Nomizu M , Yamada Y , Yeh Y , Chen WT . Activation of h 1 integrin signaling stimulates tyrosine phosphorylation of p190RhoGAP and mem - brane - protrusive activities at invadopodia . J Biol Chem 1998 ; 273 : 9 – 12 . 39 . Nakahara H , Otani T , Sasaki T , Miura Y , Takai Y , Kogo M . Involvement of Cdc42 and Rac small G proteins in invadopodia formation of RPMI7951 cells . Genes Cells 2003 ; 8 : 1019 – 27 . 40 . Tague SE , Muralidharan V , D’Souza - Schorey C . ADP - ribosylation factor 6 regulates tumor cell invasion through the activation of the MEK / ERK signaling pathway . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2004 ; 101 : 9671 – 6 . 41 . Hashimoto S , Onodera Y , Hashimoto A , et al . Requirement for Arf6 in breast cancer invasive activities . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2004 ; 101 : 6647 – 52 . 42 . Itoh Y , Takamura A , Ito N , et al . Homophilic complex formation of MT1 - MMP facilitates proMMP - 2 activation on the cell surface and promotes tumor cell invasion . EMBO J 2001 ; 20 : 4782 – 93 . 43 . Galvez BG , Matias - Roman S , Albar JP , Sanchez - Madrid F , Arroyo AG . Membrane type 1 - matrix metal - loproteinase is activated during migration of human endothelial cells and modulates endothelial motility and matrix remodeling . J Biol Chem 2001 ; 276 : 37491 – 500 . 44 . Lehti K , Valtanen H , Wickstrom SA , Lohi J , Keski - Oja J . Regulation of membrane - type - 1 matrix metalloprotei - nase activity by its cytoplasmic domain . J Biol Chem 2000 ; 275 : 15006 – 13 . 45 . Linder S , Aepfelbacher M . Podosomes : adhesion hot - spots of invasive cells . Trends Cell Biol 2003 ; 13 : 376 – 85 . 46 . Osiak AE , Zenner G , Linder S . Subconfluent endothelial cells form podosomes downstream of cytokine and RhoGTPase signaling . Exp Cell Res 2005 ; 307 : 342 – 53 . Research . on October 29 , 2017 . © 2006 American Association for Cancer cancerres . aacrjournals . org Downloaded from 2006 ; 66 : 3034 - 3043 . Cancer Res Vira V . Artym , Ying Zhang , Françoise Seillier - Moiseiwitsch , et al . of Invadopodia Formation and Function Stages Matrix Metalloproteinase at Invadopodia : Defining the Dynamic Interactions of Cortactin and Membrane Type 1 Updated version http : / / cancerres . aacrjournals . org / content / 66 / 6 / 3034 Access the most recent version of this article at : Material Supplementary http : / / cancerres . aacrjournals . org / content / suppl / 2006 / 04 / 13 / 66 . 6 . 3034 . DC1 Access the most recent supplemental material at : Cited articles http : / / cancerres . aacrjournals . org / content / 66 / 6 / 3034 . full # ref - list - 1 This article cites 46 articles , 23 of which you can access for free at : Citing articles http : / / cancerres . aacrjournals . org / content / 66 / 6 / 3034 . full # related - urls This article has been cited by 100 HighWire - hosted articles . Access the articles at : E - mail alerts related to this article or journal . Sign up to receive free email - alerts SubscriptionsReprints and . pubs @ aacr . org Department at To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal , contact the AACR Publications Permissions . permissions @ aacr . org Department at To request permission to re - use all or part of this article , contact the AACR Publications Research . on October 29 , 2017 . © 2006 American Association for Cancer cancerres . aacrjournals . org Downloaded from