RESEARCH PAPER Dependence of PEI and PAMAM Gene Delivery on Clathrin - and Caveolin - Dependent Trafficking Pathways Mark E . Hwang & Rahul K . Keswani & Daniel W . Pack Received : 24 September 2014 / Accepted : 5 December 2014 / Published online : 17 December 2014 # Springer Science + Business Media New York 2014 ABSTRACT Purpose Non - viral gene delivery vehicles such as polyethylenimine and polyamidoamine dendrimer effectively con - dense plasmid DNA , facilitate endocytosis , and deliver nucleic acid cargo to the nucleus in vitro . Better understanding of intra - cellular trafficking mechanisms involved in polymeric gene delivery is a prerequisite to clinical application . This study investigates the role of clathrin and caveolin endocytic pathways in cellular uptake and subsequent vector processing . Methods We formed 25 - kD polyethylenimine ( PEI ) and gener - ation 4 ( G4 ) polyamidoamine ( PAMAM ) polyplexes at N / P 10 and evaluated internalization pathways and gene delivery in HeLa cells . Clathrin - and caveolin - dependent endocytosis inhibitors were used at varying concentrations to elucidate the roles of these important pathways . Results PEI and PAMAM polyplexes were internalized by both pathways . However , the amount of polyplex internalized poorly correlated with transgene expression . While the caveolin - dependent pathway generally led to effective gene delivery with both polymers , complete inhibition of the clathrin - dependent pathway was also deleterious to transfection with PEI polyplexes . Inhibition of one endocytic pathway may lead to an overall increase in uptake via unaffected pathways , suggesting the exis - tence of compensatory endocytic mechanisms . Conclusions The well - studied clathrin - and caveolin - dependent endocytosis pathways are not necessarily independent , and perturbing one mechanism of trafficking influences the larger trafficking network . KEY WORDS caveolin . clathrin . polymer gene delivery ABBREVIATIONS PEI Polyethylenimine PAMAM Polyamidoamine CTxB Cholera toxin subunit B Tf Transferrin DMEM Dulbecco ’ s modified Eagle ’ s medium RLU Relative light units M β CD Methyl - β - cyclodextrin INTRODUCTION Branched 25 - kDa polyethylenimine ( PEI ) has been a bench - mark for non - viral gene delivery since its use was first reported in 1995 ( 1 ) . Dendrimers such as polyamidoamine ( PAMAM ) have also been explored as gene delivery agents ( 2 , 3 ) due to their potential for modification and flexible chemistry . Both polymers complex effectively with negatively charged nucleic acids ( 4 ) and exhibit relatively efficient in vitro transfection ( 5 ) . In addition , PEI and PAMAM are prototypical “ proton - sponge ” polymers that are hypothesized to facilitate endo - some escape via their strong buffering capacity , which leads to osmotic swelling and rupture of acidified endocytic vesicles ( 6 , 7 ) . Thus , PEI and PAMAM serve as excellent models for investigating polymer - mediated gene delivery mechanisms , providing a basis for design of safer and more efficient vectors . M . E . Hwang : D . W . Pack Department of Bioengineering , University of Illinois Urbana - Champaign , Urbana , Illinois 61801 , USA R . K . Keswani : D . W . Pack Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering , University of Illinois , Urbana - Champaign , Urbana , Illinois 61801 , USA D . W . Pack ( * ) Department of Chemical and Materials Engineering and Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences , University of Kentucky , 467 Biological Pharmaceutical Building , 789 S . Limestone St . Lexington , Kentucky 40536 - 0596 , USA e - mail : dan . pack @ uky . edu Present Address : R . K . Keswani Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences , University of Michigan , Ann Arbor , Michigan , USA Pharm Res ( 2015 ) 32 : 2051 – 2059 DOI 10 . 1007 / s11095 - 014 - 1598 - 6 Cellular internalization and subsequent intracellular pro - cessing of polyplexes are key barriers to successful in vitro gene delivery . In particular , two endocytic pathways , clathrin - and caveolin - dependent endocytosis , have been extensively stud - ied in the past decade ( 8 , 9 ) . Clathrin - dependent endocytosis results in acidified vesicles ( pH 5 – 6 ) that fuse with lysosomes ( pH ~ 4 . 5 ) . Caveolin - dependent uptake is less well - characterized but is associated with formation of caveosomes that are less acidified and are believed to avoid trafficking to lysosomes ( 10 , 11 ) . The differences in endocytic vesicles and subsequent processing may significantly impact the intracellu - lar destination of associated cargo . Indeed , recent literature has demonstrated the importance of uptake pathway in the efficacy of gene delivery with polyplexes . We and others have shown that , surprisingly , the caveolar uptake pathway is pri - marily responsible for PEI / DNA polyplex transfection ( 12 – 15 ) . Several investigators have also reported the impor - tance of uptake pathway on PAMAM dendrimers . In partic - ular , Qi et al . suggested that , in contrast to PEI - mediated gene delivery , caveolin - dependent uptake does not play a role in PAMAM / DNA polyplex internalization ( 16 ) . To better understand the roles of clathrin - and caveolin - dependent pathways in polymer - mediated gene delivery , and to investigate the generality of the previous findings regarding the importance of the caveolar pathway in PEI - mediated gene delivery ( 12 – 15 ) , we have directly compared the role of uptake pathway on PAMAM / DNA and PEI / DNA polyplex uptake and transfection . Importantly , we employed endocytosis inhibiting drugs ( Table I ) over a range of concentrations to discern specific effects on uptake and reduce the impact of cytotoxicity . Confocal fluorescence micrographs also demon - strate colocalization of polymer - DNA polyplexes with clathrin - or caveolin - tagged endocytic vesicles , and provide further evidence that these vectors utilize both clathrin - and caveolin - dependent pathways . MATERIALS AND METHODS Materials YOYO - 1 dye , NHS - ester functionalized Alexa Fluor 488 , Alexa Fluor 647 cholera toxin subunit B ( CTxB ) conjugate , and Alexa Fluor 647 transferrin ( Tf ) conjugate were obtained from Invitrogen ( Carlsbad , CA ) . Methyl - β - cyclodextrin was obtained from Roquette America , Inc . ( Keokuk , IA ) . Generation 4 PAMAM dendrimer , 25 - kDa branched polyethylenimine , genistein , chlorpromazine , and amanta - dine were obtained from Sigma - Aldrich ( St . Louis , MO ) . Cells and Plasmids The HeLa human cervical carcinoma cell line used in this study was a gift from Dr . Sandra McMasters ( University of Illinois , Urbana , IL ) . The cells were cultured according to their ATCC protocols at 37°C and 5 % CO 2 in Dulbecco ’ s modified Eagle ’ s medium ( DMEM ) supplemented with 10 % fetal bovine serum and 1 % penicillin - streptomycin . Luciferase plasmid pGL3 ( Promega Corp . , Madison , WI ) carried the reporter gene used to assess gene delivery vehicle efficiency . The plasmid encodes the firefly luciferase protein , driven by the SV40 promoter and enhancer domains . Plasmid produc - tion and purification were conducted by Elim Biopharmaceuticals ( San Diego , CA ) . Polyplex Sizing Polyplexes were prepared using 3 . 0 μ g DNA diluted in 20 mM PIPES , 150 mM NaCl , and polymer was added to bring the total polyplex volume to 250 μ L for a given polymer - DNA ( N / P ) ratio . Following 20 min incubation at room temperature , polyplexes were transferred to a transpar - ent cuvette and diluted with deionized water to a final volume of 1 . 8 mL . Each sample was subjected to size measurement on a Brookhaven Instruments Corporation 90 Plus Particle Size Analyzer ( Holtsville , NY ) immediately after dilution , and again after 2 , 4 , 6 , and 24 h at room temperature . Polymer Buffering Capacity One milligram of each polymer was dissolved in 1 mL of deionized water and adjusted to pH 12 . 2 with 1 M NaOH . The polymer solution was titrated with 5 μ L aliquots of 2 M HCl , and the pH was read ( Accumet AB15 , Hudson , MA ) after each aliquot to generate a polymer pH buffering curve . Table I Endocytic Inhibitors , Endosomal Buffering Agents , and Mechanisms Drug Mechanism Highest non - toxic concentration Methyl - β - cyclo - dextrin Sequesters plasma membrane cholesterol , inhibiting lipid raft formation 12 . 5 mg / mL Genistein Inhibits tyrosine kinase necessary for caveolar vesicle trafficking 62 . 5 μ g / mL Amantadine Stabilizes intracellular clathrin and prevents recycling to plasma membrane 6 . 25 μ g / mL Chlorpromazine Stabilizes intracellular clathrin and prevents recycling to plasma membrane 1 . 25 mM 2052 Hwang , Keswani and Pack Transfections HeLa cells were seeded at 70 , 000 cells / well in 24 well plates 24 h prior to transfection . Polymer / pGL3 polyplexes were prepared at room temperature by mixing 1 mg / mL polymer in 150 mM NaCl , 20 mM PIPES , pH 7 . 2 , with 1 mg / mL pGL3 in endotoxin free water , to achieve the desired N / P ratio . Polyplexes were then incubated at room temperature for 10 min . Prior to transfection , the growth media was replaced with serum - free media and 50 μ l of polyplexes was added to each well . In experiments using endocytosis inhibiting drugs , drugs were added to serum free media 30 min before transfection . The transfection medium was removed and replaced with serum - supplemented media 4 h post - transfection . Luciferase expression was quantified 48 h post - transfection using the Promega luciferase assay system ( Promega , Madison , WI ) . Luciferase activity was measured in relative light units ( RLU ) using a Lumat LB 9507 luminometer ( Berthold , GmbH , Germany ) , and was subse - quently normalized by total cell protein using the Pierce BCA protein assay kit ( Pierce , Rockford , IL ) to yield RLU / mg protein . All results were normalized to gene delivery activity of G4 PAMAM or PEI at N / P 10 in the absence of drugs . Polyplex Uptake pGL3 plasmid was tagged with intercalating dye YOYO - 1 at 1 dye / 100 base pairs . Polyplexes were formed and cells were transfected as described above . Two hours post - transfection , the cells were rinsed twice with 0 . 001 % SDS in PBS and PBS , respectively , to remove surface - bound polyplexes . Next , 100 μ l of 0 . 25 % trypsin in PBS was added to each well . The cells and trypsin were allowed to incubate for 5 min , and 50 μ l of fetal bovine serum was added to each well . The cells were then collected and stored on ice . FACS analyses were per - formed on a Coulter EPICS XL - MCL flow cytometer ( Beckman - Coulter , Fullerton , CA ) . Uptake was measured using the following formula F sample − F blank (cid:1) (cid:3) x ; y F sample − F blank (cid:1) (cid:3) 10 ; 0 where F blank is autofluorescence of untreated cells , x = N : P ratio of sample , and y = drug concentration . Normalization was done by comparing the corrected fluorescence to N : P = 10 and in the absence of drugs . Time - Lapse Live Confocal Fluorescence Microscopy Primary amines on both polymers were reacted with NHS - ester functionalized Alexa Fluor 488 in 0 . 1 M sodium bicar - bonate buffer ( pH 8 . 3 ) for 1 h . Labeled polymer was purified from unreacted dye by gel filtration chromatography . HeLa cells were seeded at 50 , 000 cells / well and grown for 2 days prior to transfection in 60 mm Petri dishes ( Corning® , Manassas , VA ) . Alexa Fluor 647 - conjugated CTxB and Tf were added to the plates , followed by Alexa Fluor 488 labeled polyplexes ( N : P = 10 ) . Cells were visualized with the Multiphoton Confocal Microscope Zeiss 710 for a period of 1 h at 37°C with a 100× oil immersion lens to investigate colocalization with clathrin and caveolin vesicles . The videos were then analyzed via Imaris © software ( Bitplane , Belfast , UK ) . Cytotoxicity Cytotoxicity of endocytosis inhibiting drugs was characterized in HeLa cells using the CellTiter - Blue cell viability assay ( Promega , Madison , WI ) . Cells were seeded in 96 - well micro - plates at 2×10 4 cells / well and grown in medium containing 10 % fetal bovine serum and 1 % penicillin - streptomycin at 37°C , 5 % CO2 . Growth medium was replaced with serum free DMEM 24 h after seeding . Endocytosis inhibiting drugs were added at the following concentrations : genistein , 0 – 62 . 5 μ g / mL ; methyl - β - cyclodextrin , 0 – 12 . 5 mg / mL ; chlor - promazine , 0 – 6 . 25 μ g / mL ; amantadine , 0 – 12 . 5 mM . DMEM along with inhibiting drugs were aspirated after 4 h incubation and replaced with growth medium . The cells were incubated for a further 20 h . Subsequently , 20 μ l of the CellTiter - Blue reagent was added to each well and incubated for an additional 4 h . Absorbance was read at 570 nm . The background absorbance of cells killed with ethanol was subtracted from the viable cell absorbance . RESULTS PEI / DNA and PAMAM / DNA Polyplex Formation and Physicochemical Characterization The proton - sponge hypothesis suggests that buffering plays a key role in polyplex escape from the endosome by inducing endosomal rupture ( 1 , 7 , 17 ) . To compare the buffering capac - ities of PAMAM and PEI , aqueous polymer solutions were titrated with HCl between pH 12 – 2 ( Fig . 1 ) . Buffering capac - ity of the two polymers is defined here as the reciprocal slope of the titration plots over pH 7 . 5 – 4 . 5 ( units of μ L of 1 M HCl / pH unit , or simply μ L ) . PEI is a strong buffer , exhibiting a slope of 5 . 78 μ L . PAMAM buffering capacity ( 4 . 84 μ L ) was slightly less than PEI but appears to be sufficient to act as a “ proton sponge . ” Particle size may influence the mechanism of endocytosis and subsequent intracellular trafficking ( 18 ) . Polyplexes were prepared at N / P 10 – 50 , and sizes measured within 15 min . Sizes ranged from 90 to 150 nm for PAMAM , and from 105 Dependence of Polymer Gene Delivery on Uptake Pathway 2053 to 133 nm for PEI ( Table II ) . Polyplexes measured after 2 h incubation at room temperature showed variable increases in size , most likely due to aggregation ( not shown ) . Subsequent experiments were conducted with vectors across the range of N / P ratios , with only N / P 10 results shown here as the optimal vector for PEI and PAMAM . Cytotoxicity of Endocytosis Inhibitors We transfected HeLa cells in the presence of endocytosis inhibitors to understand the interplay of trafficking mecha - nisms and pathways at different degrees of inhibition . Cytotoxicity of inhibitors was evaluated over a range of con - centrations . Although the drugs exhibited cytotoxicity increas - ing with concentration , cell viability was not significantly affected at the highest drug concentrations ( red arrow ) used in our experiments ( 14 , 19 , 20 ) ( Fig . 2 ) ( p > 0 . 05 ) . Gene Delivery Activity and Uptake of PEI and PAMAM Polyplexes Recent work has demonstrated the importance of polymer - DNA binding ( 21 ) and endolysosomal escape ( 22 ) in polymeric gene delivery . However , we have also reported that PEI - mediated gene delivery does not correlate with buffering capacity ( 19 , 23 ) . We thus hypothesize that uptake pathway and intracellular trafficking are critical parameters for design of gene delivery vehicles . The goal of these transfection ex - periments is to determine the interplay of clathrin - and caveolin - dependent endocytosis in gene delivery with proton sponge polymers . Investigation of pathway - specific polyplex internalization and transfection is often accomplished by treatment of cells with well - known biochemical inhibitors of specific endocytosis pathways ( Table I ) . As we have previously validated that siRNA knockdown of clathrin and caveolin expression and chemical inhibition of clathrin - and caveolin - dependent path - ways are comparable ( 14 ) , we did not pursue further siRNA inhibition in this study . Amantadine prevents clathrin - mediated uptake by stabilizing clathrin - coated vesicles and preventing clathrin - lattice recycling to the cell surface , thus blocking the budding of clathrin - coated vesicles ( 24 ) . Chlorpromazine similar - ly prevents coated pit formation on the plasma membrane by promoting clathrin lattice assembly on endosomal membranes ( 25 , 26 ) and has a probable inhibitory effect on the formation of large intracellular vesicles ( 27 ) . Methyl - β - cyclodextrin ( M β CD ) sequesters membrane cholesterol and disrupts the lipid - rich do - mains on the cell surface that form caveolae . Acute plasma membrane cholesterol depletion at high M β CD concentrations also affects clathrin - coated pit formation ( 28 – 30 ) . Genistein pre - vents tyrosine phosphorylation of caveolin ( 31 ) and microtubule polymerization ( 32 ) , thereby inhibiting caveosome formation and subsequent trafficking of the caveolin - dependent pathway . Thus , lower uptake or transgene expression in the presence of aman - tadine and chlorpromazine indicate that clathrin - dependent en - docytosis and subsequent trafficking play an important role , while decreases in the presence of M β CD and genistein point to the importance of the caveolar pathway . In vitro transfection efficiency and uptake of PEI / DNA and PAMAM / DNA polyplexes was quantified in HeLa cells at N / P 10 , which was found to be optimal for transfection of both polyplexes , in the presence of each endocytic inhibitor ( Fig . 3 ) . Genistein resulted in greater than five - fold reduction ( p < 0 . 001 ) in transfection by both PEI / DNA and PAMAM / DNA at the highest drug concentration ( Fig . 3a , e ) . In con - trast , cellular internalization of PEI / DNA increased more than two - fold , while that of PAMAM / DNA increased by 30 % before decreasing over the same range of genistein concentrations . M β CD exhibited similar yet less dramatic behavior ( Fig . 3b , f ) . PEI / DNA and PAMAM / DNA trans - fection decreased greater than two - fold ( p < 0 . 01 ) at the highest M β CD concentration . As with genistein , PEI / DNA uptake in the presence of M β CD doubled at the highest concentration , while PAMAM / DNA uptake increased before decreasing over the same concentration range . The observed increase followed by decrease in our PAMAM / DNA uptake data with Fig . 1 Titration of aqueous polymer solutions ( 1 mg / mL ) with 2M HCl from pH 12 to 2 at room temperature . Solutions were adjusted to pH 12 with 1 M NaOH , and 5 μ L aliquots of 2 M HCl were subsequently added and the pH measured . Table II Polyplex Sizing Immediately After Formation in Water Polyplex size ( nm ) a N / P 10 20 30 50 PAMAM 150 . 7±15 . 6 101 . 0±11 . 2 89 . 3±7 . 8 119 . 1±11 . 5 PEI 133 . 3±14 . 1 108 . 1±6 . 5 112 . 7±9 . 5 105 . 7±4 . 5 a Polyplexes were prepared at N / P ratios 10 – 50 and subjected to dynamic light scattering on a particle size analyzer ( N = 4 , mean±SD ) 2054 Hwang , Keswani and Pack both caveolar inhibitors suggests that compensatory uptake via clathrin - mediated endocytosis and other alternative routes may occur when the caveolar pathway is progressively inhibited . In the presence of chlorpromazine and amantadine , PEI / DNA gene delivery decreased by greater than ten - fold ( p < 0 . 001 ) at the highest drug concentrations while uptake was minimally affected by either inhibitor ( Fig . 3g , h ) . In contrast , internalization of PAMAM / DNA decreased to less than 30 % of the control at maximum chlorpromazine and amantadine concentration ( p < 0 . 001 ) ( Fig . 3c , d ) . Additionally , both inhibitors had interesting effects on PAMAM / DNA transfection . PAMAM / DNA - mediated transgene expression increased 2 . 5 - fold at intermediate chlor - promazine concentrations ( p < 0 . 01 ) and 3 . 5 - fold at interme - diate amantadine concentrations ( p < 0 . 001 ) but , at the highest inhibitor concentrations tested , returned to levels similar to those in the absence of inhibitors ( Fig . 3c , d ) . Confocal Microscopy To further understanding of the uptake and trafficking path - ways , we performed confocal microscopy for visual corroboration via colocalization of fluorescently tagged polyplexes and pathway - specific ligands . Tf and CTxB are well - documented as cargo of clathrin - coated and caveolar vesicles , respectively ( 33 ) . PEI colocalized with both Tf and CTxB , while PAMAM colocalized more strongly with Tf than with CTxB ( Fig . 4 ) . Images were taken within 1 h of transfec - tion and are representative of early endocytic behavior . DISCUSSION Formation of well - condensed , cationic polyplexes is important for effective polymeric gene delivery . Particle size may influ - ence polyplex transport to the cell surface and subsequent internalization ( 34 , 35 ) . In our study , both PEI and PAMAM exhibited comparable sizes and buffering capacity ( Fig . 1 ) . Cell viability in the presence of endocytic inhibitors also was not a confounding factor based lack of significant cytotoxicity ( Fig . 2 ) and previously published research ( 14 , 19 , 20 ) . As summarized in Table I , the role of the various endocytic inhibitors is well documented in literature . Non - specific effects of these inhibitors have been reported ( 27 ) . However , we have Fig . 2 Cytotoxicity of caveolin - ( genistein , methyl - β - cyclodextrin ) and clathrin - dependent pathway ( chlorpromazine , amantadine ) inhibiting drugs was determined as the normalized metabolic activity of HeLa cell line in the presence of varying amounts of the drugs . Metabolicactivity was normalized to cells grown in the absence of drugs . Red arrows indicate the highest concentration at which drugs were administered during transfection and uptake experiments . The standard deviationisshown foreach data point ( N = 6 , mean±SD ) . Dependence of Polymer Gene Delivery on Uptake Pathway 2055 previously demonstrated that the effects of the inhibitors , at the concentrations used here , on polyplex uptake and trans - fection are the same as when clathrin or caveolin expression was knocked down using siRNA ( 14 ) . The relationship be - tween degree of inhibition and gene delivery has not been made clear , largely because most inhibition experiments are conducted at only one drug concentration . Our results broad - ly show that interfering with caveolin - dependent trafficking significantly decreases gene delivery activity of both PEI and PAMAM polyplexes ( Fig . 3a , b , e , f ) . In contrast , the role of clathrin - dependent trafficking in gene delivery is less easily generalized . Both polyplex uptake and gene delivery may increase or decrease in response to endocytic inhibition , and not necessarily concomitantly ( Fig . 3e , f , g , h ) . Depletion of plasma membrane cholesterol with M β CD resulted in moderate increases in PEI and PAMAM polyplex uptake , but poor gene delivery at high M β CD concentrations ( Fig . 3b , f ) . This supports previous findings demonstrating the importance of lipid raft and caveolar trafficking in polymeric gene delivery ( 14 , 36 ) . Increases in uptake despite decreased gene delivery may be explained by upregulation of endocytic mechanisms that do not involve cholesterol and do not lead to effective transfection . This compensatory uptake is a phenom - enon repeatedly seen in our data . In addition to the well - characterized clathrin - and caveolin - dependent pathways that are dynamin - dependent , less well - characterized , dynamin - independent mechanisms have also been identified that in - volve small GTPase ARF6 and flotillin ( 37 ) . Several studies have shown that endocytosis via caveolin - dependent and dynamin - independent mechanisms is often complicated by the possibility that the same cargo may be internalized by multiple routes or switch routes in a given cell line depending on environmental conditions ( 38 – 41 ) . In contrast to clathrin - dependent endocytosis , defined by cargo association with clathrin - coated pits , adaptor molecules for caveolin - dependent and dynamin - independent mechanisms have not been identified . Our results point to this condition - dependent interchangeability among clathrin - and caveolin - dependent , dynamin independent mechanisms as a likely explanation for “ compensatory uptake ” . As with M β CD , caveolar inhibition by genistein resulted in similar uptake and gene delivery patterns for both polymers ( Fig . 3a , e ) . The caveolar pathway is hence crucial for gene delivery via PAMAM / DNA and PEI / DNA polyplexes . Further , any compensatory uptake that occurs during caveolar inhibition appears to result in trafficking along an inefficient pathway that leads to poor gene delivery . In con - trast to the dissociation between uptake and gene delivery seen in our caveolar inhibition experiments , Gabrielson et al . re - ported decreased uptake and decreased gene delivery with genistein , albeit using PEI / DNA polyplexes at N / P 3 . 7 ( 14 ) . In our hands PEI gene delivery activity peaked between N / P ratios 5 – 10 , and we thus focused on this range of polyplex formulations in our analysis of polyplex trafficking . In concor - dance with studies from other groups showing that internali - zation of PAMAM polyplexes is mainly caveolin - independent in HeLa cells ( 16 ) , our uptake data demonstrated minimal change with genistein or M β CD . Minimal colocalization of Fig . 3 Normalized in vitro transfection efficiency ( RLU / μ g Protein ) ) and median uptake fluorescence ( YOYO - 1 Fluorescence ) of PAMAM ( a – d ) and PEI ( e – h ) polyplexes in HeLa cells in the presence of increasing concentrations of genistein ( a , e ) , M β CD ( b , f ) , amantadine ( c , g ) or chlorpromazine ( d , h ) . All results were normalized to polyplexes at N / P 10 , under inhibitor - free conditions . ( N = 6 ; error bars represent standard deviation ; * , + p < 0 . 05 ; * * , + + p < 0 . 01 ; * * * , + + + p < 0 . 001 compared to the same polyplex in the absence of drug ) . 2056 Hwang , Keswani and Pack PAMAM with CTxB , a caveosome marker , was also evident in our confocal fluorescence micrographs ( Fig . 4 ) . Inhibition of clathrin - dependent uptake with amantadine and chlorpromazine yielded more disparate results . Uptake decreased for PAMAM but not PEI polyplexes . In contrast , gene delivery dramatically decreased for PEI but not PAMAM polyplexes ( Fig . 3c , d , g , h ) . Thus , inhibition of either caveolin - or clathrin - dependent pathways was deleteri - ous for PEI gene delivery . Decreased PEI gene delivery upon inhibition of clathrin - dependent uptake has also been report - ed in several other cell lines ( 42 ) . Uptake was minimally affected upon either clathrin or caveolar pathway inhibition but is a poor indicator of successful PEI transfection ( Fig . 3e – h ) , possibly because multiple routes of PEI internalization are possible in HeLa cells ( 13 ) . Upon inhibition of clathrin - dependent uptake , PAMAM polyplex gene delivery increased to varying degrees despite decreased uptake ( Fig . 3c , d ) . We further observed that PAMAM gene delivery increased before decreasing at high levels of inhibition of clathrin - dependent uptake ( Fig . 3c , d ) . An explanation for this dissociation of uptake and transfection results is that partial inhibition of clathrin - dependent internal - ization resulted in PAMAM polyplex uptake along a non - clathrin - dependent pathway that led to high gene delivery activity . However , increased gene delivery via this alternate route was only maintained while clathrin - dependent uptake mechanisms were only moderately inhibited , suggesting clathrin - dependent trafficking is required at some level for successful PAMAM gene delivery . We further observed a high degree of colocalization be - tween PAMAM - containing polyplexes and Tf during the first 60 min of transfection . The Tf receptor is located in clathrin - coated pits and is a common marker for clathrin - coated vesicles . In contrast , minimal PAMAM colocalization was observed with CTxB . Our confocal microscopy colocalization studies with PEI polyplexes and both CTxB and Tf ( Fig . 4b , d ) indicated that while some association between the polyplex and each endocytic marker was noted , colocalization with neither marker was dramatic , consistent with PEI polyplex uptake data showing that internalization was not significantly decreased when either mechanism of endocytosis was inhibited . Interestingly , Rejman et al . reported 50 – 70 % de - creases in PEI polyplex uptake in the same cell line at a chlorpromazine concentration twice the maximum concen - tration used here ( 6 . 25 μ g / mL ) ( 13 ) . Because of the different effects of clathrin inhibition on the PEI and PAMAM gene delivery processes , we suggest that the importance of clathrin - dependent trafficking in gene delivery is polymer - specific , while that of the caveolar pathway is shared in common between PEI and PAMAM . In other words , successful gene delivery with both PAMAM and PEI is caveosome - dependent despite caveosomes playing a mini - mal role in initial internalization of the polyplexes ( Figs . 3 and 4 ) . Other groups have reported similar findings of caveosome dependence for dendrimer - based gene delivery but did not compare initial mechanism of uptake to gene delivery activity , a process that may take as long as 4 h ( 43 ) . While caveolar trafficking is important to both PEI and PAMAM , the precise role of the clathrin - dependent pathway Fig . 4 Confocal fluorescence micrographs of HeLa cells transfected with PEI or PAMAM ( Alexa - Fluor 488 , green ) , and endocytic vesicle marker transferrin or cholera toxin ( Alexa - Fluor 647 , red ) at 30 min post transfection . Polyplexes were formed at N / P ratio 10 . ( a ) PAMAM - Tf , ( b ) PEI - Tf , ( c ) PAMAM - CTxB , ( d ) PEI - CTxB . Left panel , combined cross - sectional view ; right panel , corre - sponding brightfield views . Dependence of Polymer Gene Delivery on Uptake Pathway 2057 is still unclear ( 36 , 44 ) . These pathways may not be entirely independent of each other . In the case of PEI polyplexes , activity of only clathrin - or caveolin - dependent pathways is insufficient for successful gene delivery . It is known that cave - olae do not undergo the same degree of endosomal acidifica - tion and targeting to endolysosomes as clathrin - coated vesicles ( 11 ) . However , lysosomal trafficking does not necessarily pre - clude efficient gene delivery . It is also known that both clathrin - dependent and caveolar pathways can lead to effec - tive gene delivery activity for lipoplexes and polyplexes ( 13 , 18 , 36 ) . The dependence of PEI on both pathways might indeed be evidence of trans - pathway sorting . Such a phenom - enon would also explain the poor correlation between polyplex uptake and gene delivery in this study and previous publications ( 36 ) . Recent studies have pointed to Golgi com - plex trafficking as a contributor to this clathrin - caveolin com - munication network ( 11 , 45 ) , showing that , like clathrin - coated vesicles , caveolae can localize to intracellular structures such as endosomes , endoplasmic reticulum or the Golgi complex ( 10 , 15 ) . Previous drug inhibition studies utilizing only one drug concentration were unable to demonstrate such interplay between clathrin - coated vesicles and caveolae . CONCLUSION The interaction between clathrin - and caveolin - dependent endocytosis is poorly understood . Polyplexes may be internal - ized via several mechanisms simultaneously . We suggest that intracellular trafficking , rather than initial endocytosis at the cell surface , regulates gene delivery efficiency . Early associa - tion of polyplexes with clathrin - coated vesicles or caveolae is of limited importance in predicting gene delivery effectiveness because these pathways may not be mutually exclusive . Further , inhibition of one pathway may lead to compensatory increases in another , resulting in unpredictable changes in gene delivery . 25 - kD PEI and G4 PAMAM share similar physical properties but exhibit different mechanisms of uptake and gene delivery . Successful PEI - mediated gene delivery is dependent on both clathrin - and caveolin - dependent path - ways . In contrast , uptake of PAMAM polyplexes is heavily clathrin dependent , while gene delivery is caveolin dependent . Thus , rather than relying on a single pathway for successful gene delivery , PEI and PAMAM polyplexes depend on the interplay between clathrin - dependent and caveolin - dependent pathways in HeLa cells . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS AND DISCLOSURES This work was supported by National Institutes of Health grants GM085222 and DK083875 ( to M . E . H . ) . We thank Sandy McMasters at the Cell Media Facility and Barbara Pilas at the Flow Cytometry facility at the University of Illi - nois . The authors have no competing financial interests relat - ing to the work reported . REFERENCES 1 . Boussif O , Lezoualc ’ h F , Zanta MA , Mergny MD , Scherman D , Demeneix B , et al . A versatile vector for gene and oligonucleotide transfer into cells in culture and in vivo : polyethylenimine . Proc Natl Acad Sci . 1995 ; 92 : 7297 – 301 . 2 . Eichman JD , Bielinska AU , Kukowska - Latallo JF , Baker Jr JR . The use of PAMAM dendrimers in the efficient transfer of genetic mate - rial into cells . Pharm Sci Technol Today . 2000 ; 3 : 232 – 45 . 3 . Braun CS , Vetro JA , Tomalia DA , Koe GS , KoeJG , Middaugh CR . Structure / Function relationships of polyamidoamine / DNA dendrimers as gene delivery vehicles . J Pharm Sci . 2005 ; 94 : 423 – 36 . 4 . Svenson S . Dendrimers as versatile platform in drug delivery appli - cations . Eur J Pharm Biopharm . 2009 ; 71 : 445 – 62 . 5 . Son S , Kim WJ . Biodegradable nanoparticles modified by branched polyethylenimine for plasmid DNA delivery . Biomaterials . 2010 ; 31 : 133 – 43 . 6 . Sonawane ND , Szoka FC , Verkman AS . Chloride accumulation and swelling in endosomes enhances DNA transfer by polyamine - DNA polyplexes . J Biol Chem . 2003 ; 278 : 44826 – 31 . 7 . Behr J - P . The Proton Sponge : a trick to enter cells the viruses did not exploit . Chimia ( Aarau ) . 1997 ; 2 : 34 – 6 . 8 . Doherty GJ , McMahon HT . Mechanisms of endocytosis . Biochemistry . 2009 ; 78 : 857 – 902 . 9 . Sahay G , Alakhova DY , Kabanov AV . Endocytosis of nanomedicines . J Control Release . 2010 ; 145 : 182 – 95 . 10 . Pelkmans L , Helenius A . Endocytosis via caveolae . Traffic . 2002 ; 3 : 311 – 20 . 11 . Parton RG , Simons K . The multiple faces of caveolae . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol . 2007 ; 8 : 185 – 94 . 12 . Van der Aa MAEM , Huth US , Häfele SY , Schubert R , Oosting RS , Mastrobattista E , et al . Cellular uptake of cationic polymer - DNA complexes via caveolae plays a pivotal role in gene transfection in COS - 7 cells . Pharm Res . 2007 ; 24 : 1590 – 8 . 13 . Rejman J , Bragonzi A , Conese M . Role of clathrin - and caveolae - mediated endocytosis in gene transfer mediated by lipo - and polyplexes . Mol Ther . 2005 ; 12 : 468 – 74 . 14 . Gabrielson NP , Pack DW . Efficient polyethylenimine - mediated gene delivery proceeds via a caveolar pathway in HeLa cells . J Control Release . 2009 ; 136 : 54 – 61 . Elsevier B . V . 15 . Reilly M , Larsen J , Sullivan M . Polyplexes traffic through caveolae to the Golgi and endoplasmic reticulum en route to the nucleus . Mol Pharm . 2012 ; 9 : 1280 – 90 . 16 . Qi R , Mullen DG , Baker JR , Holl MMB , Dendrimers DI , Polymers OD . The mechanism of polyplex internalization into cells : testing the GM1 / caveolin - 1 lipid raft mediated endocytosis pathway . Mol Pharm . 2010 ; 1517 – 26 17 . Pack D , Putnam D , Langer R . Design of imidazole - containing endosomolytic biopolymers for gene delivery . Biotechnol Bioeng . 2000 ; 67 : 217 – 23 . 18 . Rejman J , Oberle V , Zuhorn IS , Hoekstra D . Size - dependent inter - nalization of particles via the pathways of clathrin - and caveolae - mediated endocytosis . Biochem J . 2004 ; 377 : 159 – 69 . 19 . Gabrielson NP , Pack DW . Acetylation of Polyethyleminimine en - hances gene delivery via weakened polymer / DNA Interactions . Biomacromolecules . 2006 ; 7 : 2427 – 35 . 20 . Vercauteren D , Vandenbroucke RE , Jones AT , Rejman J , Demeester J , De Smedt SC , et al . The use of inhibitors to study 2058 Hwang , Keswani and Pack endocytic pathways of gene carriers : optimization and pitfalls . Mol Ther Nat Publ Group . 2009 ; 18 : 561 – 9 . 21 . Hartmann L , Hafele S , Peschka - Suss R , Antonietti M , Borner HG . Tailor - made poly ( amidoamine ) s for controlled complexation and condensation of DNA . Chemistry ( Easton ) . 2008 ; 14 : 2025 – 33 . 22 . Forrest ML , Pack DW . On the kinetics of polyplex endocytic traf - ficking : implications for gene delivery vector design . Mol Ther . 2002 ; 6 : 57 – 66 . 23 . Forrest ML , Meister GE , Koerber JT , Pack DW . Partial Acetylation of Polyethylenimine enhances in vitro gene delivery . Pharm Res . 2004 ; 21 : 365 – 71 . 24 . Phonphok Y , Rosenthal KS . Stabilization of clathrin coated vesicles by amantadine , tromantadine and other hydrophobic amines . FEBS . 1991 ; 281 : 188 – 90 . 25 . Blanchard E , Belouzard S , Goueslain L , Wakita T , Dubuisson J , Wychowski C , et al . Hepatitis C virus entry depends on clathrin - mediated endocytosis . J Virol . 2006 ; 80 : 6964 – 72 . 26 . Sofer A , Futerman A . Cationic amphiphilic drugs inhibit the inter - nalization of cholera toxin to the golgi apparatus and the subsequent elevation of cyclic AMP . J Biol Chem . 1995 ; 270 : 12117 – 22 . 27 . Ivanov AI . Pharmacological inhibition of endocytic pathways : is it specific enough to be useful ? Methods Mol Biol . 2008 ; 440 : 15 – 33 . 28 . Shogomori H , Futerman AH . Cholesterol depletion by methyl - beta - cyclodextrin blocks cholera toxin transport from endosomes to the Golgiapparatusinhippocampalneurons . JNeurochem . 2001 ; 78 : 991 – 9 . 29 . SubtilA , Gaidarov I , Kobylarz K , LampsonMA , KeenJH , McGraw TE , et al . Acute cholesterol depletion inhibits clathrin - coated pit budding . Proc Natl Acad Sci . 1999 ; 96 : 6775 – 80 . 30 . Rodal SK , Skretting G , Garred O , Vilhardt F , van Deurs B , Sandvig K . Extraction of cholesterol with methyl - beta - cyclodextrin perturbs forma - tionofclathrin - coatedendocyticvesicles . MolBiolCell . 1999 ; 10 : 961 – 74 . 31 . Aoki T , Nomura R , Fujimoto T . Tyrosine phosphorylation of caveolin - 1 in the endothelium . Exp Cell Res . 1999 ; 253 : 629 – 36 . 32 . Mukherjee S , Acharya BR , Bhattacharyya B , Chakrabarti G . Genistein arrests cell cycle progression of A549 cells at the G2 / M Phase and depolymerizes interphase microtubules through binding to a unique site of tubulin . Biochemistry . 2010 ; 49 : 1702 – 12 . 33 . Conner SD , Schmid SL . Regulated portals of entry into the cell . Nature . 2003 ; 422 : 37 – 44 . 34 . Ogris M , Steinlein P , Carotta S , Brunner S , Wagner E . DNA / polyethylenimine transfection particles : influence of ligands , polymer size , and PEGylation on internalization and gene expression . AAPS Pharm Sci . 2001 ; 3 : E21 . 35 . Wagner E . Polymers for siRNA delivery : inspired by viruses to be targeted , dynamic and precise . Acc Chem Res . 2012 ; 45 : 1005 – 13 . 36 . McLendon PM , Fichter KM , Reineke TM . Poly ( glycoamidoamine ) vehicles Promote pDNA uptake through multiple routes and efficient gene expression via caveolae - mediated endocytosis . Mol Pharm . 2010 ; 7 : 738 – 50 . 37 . Mayor S , Pagano RE . Pathways of clathrin - independent endocytosis . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol . 2007 ; 8 : 603 – 12 . 38 . Singh RD , Puri V , Valiyaveettil JT , Marks DL , Bittman R , Pagano RE . Selective caveolin - 1 – dependent endocytosis of glycosphingolipids . Mol Biol Cell . 2003 ; 14 : 3254 – 65 . 39 . Damm E - M , Pelkmans L , Kartenbeck J , Mezzacasa A , Kurzchalia T , Helenius A . Clathrin - and caveolin - 1 - independent endocytosis : entry of simian virus 40 into cells devoid of caveolae . J Cell Biol . 2005 ; 168 : 477 – 88 . 40 . Massol RH , Larsen JE , Fujinaga Y , Lencer WI , Kirchhausen T . Cholera toxin toxicity does not require functional Arf6 - and dynamin - dependent endocytic pathways . Mol Biol Cell . 2004 ; 15 : 3631 – 41 . 41 . Torgersen ML , Skretting G , Van Deurs B , Sandvig K . Internalization of cholera toxin by different endocytic mechanisms . J Cell Sci . 2001 ; 114 : 3737 – 42 . 42 . Gonçalves C , Mennesson E , Fuchs R , Gorvel J - P , Midoux P , Pichon C . Macropinocytosis of polyplexes and recycling of plasmid via the clathrin - dependent pathway impair the transfection efficiency of human hepatocarcinoma cells . Mol Ther . 2004 ; 10 : 373 – 85 . 43 . Manunta M , Tan PH , Sagoo P , Kashefi K , George AJT . Gene delivery by dendrimers operates via a cholesterol dependent path - way . Nucleic Acids Res . 2004 ; 32 : 2730 – 9 . 44 . Gersdorff V , K S , Nn V , R DS , Sc W , E , et al . The internalization route resulting in successful gene expression depends on both cell line and polyethylenimine polyplex type . Gene Ther . 2006 ; 14 : 745 – 53 45 . Kirkham M , Parton RG . Clathrin - independent endocytosis : new insights into caveolae and non - caveolar lipid raft carriers . Biochim Biophys Acta . 2005 ; 1745 : 273 – 86 . Dependence of Polymer Gene Delivery on Uptake Pathway 2059