Introduction In eukaryotic cells , controlled actin polymerization underlies cell motility , contractility and maintenance of cell polarity . Protrusion of the leading edge represents the ﬁrst locomotory response of a cell to external signals and occurs within two organelles : ﬂat broad lamellipodia and thin long ﬁlopodia ( Small et al . , 2002 ) . Lamellipodia and ﬁlopodia have a strikingly different organization of the actin polymerization machinery and they are controlled by different signaling pathways ( Hall , 1998 ; Svitkina and Borisy , 1999a ) . In lamellipodia , short actin ﬁlaments form an extensively branched network ( Svitkina et al . , 1997 ; Svitkina and Borisy , 1999b ) . The critical element of network assembly is dendritic nucleation of actin ﬁlaments mediated by the Arp2 / 3 complex ( Mullins et al . , 1998 ) . Newly nucleated ﬁlaments generate the pushing force that drives lamellipodial protrusion . Capping of growing ﬁlaments at their barbed ends after some period of elongation is required to maintain a steady - state of ﬁlament number ( Borisy and Svitkina , 2000 ) . In ﬁlopodia , long parallel actin ﬁlaments are tightly cross - linked to form a stiff bundle ( Wood and Martin , 2002 ) . Protrusion of ﬁlopodia occurs by elongation at barbed ends facing the membrane ( Mallavarapu and Mitchison , 1999 ) . The cross - linking protein fascin is considered to be the major bundler in ﬁlopodia ( Kureishy et al . , 2002 ) , which cross - links ﬁlaments and makes them efficient at pushing . Ena / VASP ( vasodilator - stimulated phosphoprotein ) family proteins allow for continuous ﬁlament elongation by binding to growing barbed ends and protecting them from capping ( Bear et al . , 2002 ) . Small GTPases of the Rho family are key regulators of the actin cytoskeleton ( Hall , 1998 ) . Among them , Cdc42 and Rac1 are known to control ﬁlopodial protrusion and to regulate lamellipodia , respectively . The signaling pathways leading from these GTPases to actin polymerization are not completely established . However , critical roles belong to proteins of the WASP family , which activate the intrinsically inactive Arp2 / 3 complex ( Machesky and Insall , 1998 ; Higgs and Pollard , 2001 ) . At this key point , signaling meets the protrusive machinery . The mammalian genome contains at least ﬁve members of the WASP † family organized in two subfamilies : one containing the closely related N - WASP and WASP members and the other containing WAVE 1 , 2 and 3 , also known as Scar from its founding Dictyostelium orthologue ( Bear et al . , 1998 ) . N - WASP ( Rohatgi et al . , 2000 ) and WASP ( Higgs and Pollard , 2000 ) are activated by Cdc42 , whereas Scar / WAVEs become activated downstream of Rac1 ( Miki et al . , 2000 ; Eden et al . , 2002 ) . Consistent with the speciﬁcs of their upstream GTPases , the downstream cellular effects of WASPs and Scar / WAVEs are thought to lead to the formation of ﬁlopodia and lamellipodia , respectively ( Takenawa and Miki , 2001 ) . Therefore , the current paradigm for actin - based protrusion is that Cdc42 activates N - WASP , which induces ﬁlopodia , whereas Rac1 activates WAVEs , which induce lamellipodia . This parallel pathway model predicts that in the absence of WAVEs , a cell would be able to form ﬁlopodia , but 837 The protrusion of two distinct actin - containing organelles , lamellipodia and ﬁlopodia , is thought to be regulated by two parallel pathways : from Rac1 through Scar / WAVEs to lamellipodia , and from Cdc42 through N - WASP to ﬁlopodia . We tested this hypothesis in Drosophila , which contains a single gene for each WASP subfamilies , SCAR and WASp . We performed targeted depletion of SCAR or WASp by dsRNA - mediated interference in two Drosophila cultured cell lines expressing lamellipodial and ﬁlopodial protrusion . Knockdown was veriﬁed by laser capture microdissection and RT - PCR , as well as western blotting . Morphometrical , kinetic and electron microscopy analyses of the SCAR - depleted phenotype in both cell types revealed strong inhibition of lamellipodial formation and cell spreading , as expected . More importantly , ﬁlopodia formation was also strongly inhibited , which is not consistent with the parallel pathway hypothesis . By contrast , depletion of WASp did not produce any signiﬁcant phenotype , except for a slight inhibition of spreading , showing that both lamellipodia and ﬁlopodia in Drosophila cells are regulated predominantly by SCAR . We propose a new , cascade pathway model of ﬁlopodia regulation in which SCAR signals to lamellipodia and then ﬁlopodia arise from lamellipodia in response to additional signal ( s ) . Key words : Actin , SCAR , WASp , Lamellipodia , Filopodia , Drosophila cell lines , LCM Summary Cascade pathway of ﬁlopodia formation downstream of SCAR Assel Biyasheva 1 , * , Tatyana Svitkina 1 , Patricia Kunda 2 , Buzz Baum 2 and Gary Borisy 1 1 Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine , Chicago , IL 60611 , USA 2 Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research , University College London Branch , London W1W 7BS , UK * Author for correspondence ( e - mail : a - biyasheva @ northwestern . edu ) Accepted 3 October 2003 Journal of Cell Science 117 , 837 - 848 Published by The Company of Biologists 2004 doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 00921 Research article † WASP / WASPs indicate mammalian proteins , whereas WASp is used for the Drosophila protein . JCS ePress online publication date 3 February 2004 838 not lamellipodia , whereas removal of WASPs would have the converse effect . Recent data , however , have challenged the idea of strict specialization of different WASP family members with respect to the type of induced protrusions . For example , cells derived from N - WASP knockout mice successfully formed ﬁlopodia ( Snapper et al . , 2001 ; Lommel et al . , 2001 ) . Also , some WAVEs were found to localize to ﬁlopodia , not only to lamellipodia ( Nozumi et al . , 2003 ) . We have recently shown in mouse melanoma cells that ﬁlopodia are formed by reorganization of the lamellipodial dendritic network ( Svitkina et al . , 2003 ) , suggesting that lamellipodia represent an important intermediate in ﬁlopodial formation . Finally , in vitro data do not support a model in which a lamellipodial or ﬁlopodial mode of actin organization is determined by speciﬁc activators of the Arp2 / 3 complex ( Vignjevic et al . , 2003 ) . Taken together , these considerations suggest that signaling pathways leading to the formation of lamellipodia and ﬁlopodia may not be entirely parallel and independent . In this study , we have tested the predictions of the parallel pathway model and have investigated the contribution of individual Arp2 / 3 activators to lamellipodial and ﬁlopodial protrusion in vivo . Because of the complexity of the mammalian genome , we addressed these issues in Drosophila , which has a single gene for each WASP subfamily , SCAR and WASp ( Ben - Yaacov et al . , 2001 ; Zallen et al . , 2002 ) . The roles of SCAR and WASp in lamellipodial and ﬁlopodial protrusion were analyzed using Drosophila cultured cell lines in which we performed targeted depletion of SCAR or WASp by the RNAi technique . Also , we characterized Drosophila culture cells at the electron microscopic level and showed that they are suitable for cell motility studies . Our results suggest an alternative to the conventional parallel pathway hypothesis . We propose a new model , which we call the cascade pathway model . In the cascade mechanism , activation of any WASP family protein leading to stimulation of the Arp2 / 3 complex may induce formation of the dendritic network , which subsequently may be reorganized into ﬁlopodial bundles if additional signals are received . Materials and Methods Cell culture and RNAi Drosophila permanent cell lines , S2R + and Dm - BG2 - c2 ( referred to as BG2 throughout the paper ) , and culture conditions have been described previously ( Ui et al . , 1994 ; Yanagawa et al . , 1998 ) . Cells were split every 4 - 5 days . RNAi was performed according to the procedure of Clemens ( Clemens et al . , 2000 ) . The following sequences were used for ampliﬁcation of ~ 500 bp fragments for the target proteins . SCAR ( CG4636 , FBan0004636 ) : 5 ¢ - CAGTCGATGA GGACGCACTA - 3 ¢ ; 5 ¢ - GTCTGTTCAG CTTCTTGCCC - 3 ¢ . WASp ( CG1520 , FBan0001520 ) : 5 ¢ - TCATTAAATC GCTGCGTGAG - 3 ¢ ; 5 ¢ - AGAGCAACA ATGTCCTGGCT - 3 ¢ . Antibodies WASp rabbit polyclonal antibodies were raised against a peptide NNAKDKKRKV TKADISRPTN , corresponding to Dm WASp ( protein id is NP 788755 . 1 in NCBI ) amino acids 220 - 239 . GP12 SCAR antibody was a generous gift from Jen Zallen ( Princeton University , Princeton , NJ ) . 5G2 antibody to Enabled was from Hybridoma Bank , Iowa . Arp3 antibody was a gift from William Theurkauf ( University of Massachusetts , Worchester , MA ) . Monoclonal a - tubulin ( clone B - 5 - 1 - 2 ) antibody , polyclonal anti - actin A5060 and rhodamine - labeled secondary antibody were from Sigma . HRP - labeled goat anti - mouse and goat anti - rabbit antibodies were from Jackson or KPL . AlexaFluor 488 - phalloidin was from Molecular Probes . Microscopy Light microscopy was performed using an inverted microscope ( Nikon Eclipse ) equipped with a Plan 100 · , 1 . 3 NA or a 40 · , 1 . 3 NA objective and a back - thinned , cooled CCD camera ( model CH250 ; Roper Scientiﬁc ) driven by MetaMorph ® imaging software ( Universal Imaging Corp . ) . For morphometrical analyses , cell projected area ( A ) and perimeter ( P ) were determined using automated functions in MetaMorph ® software . Ratio P / A 1 / 2 served as an index of shape irregularity . Data from experiments were analyzed by using a Student’s t - test . Presented values are expressed as mean ± s . d . The number of cells counted is indicated in each ﬁgure legend . Statistical signiﬁcance was accepted at P < 0 . 05 . For ﬂuorescence microscopy , different conditions were used depending on the particular antibody . For SCAR - speciﬁc staining cells were ﬁxed with 4 % formaldehyde in cytoskeleton buffer ( 10 mM PIPES buffer pH 6 . 1 , 138 mM KCl , 3 mM MgCl 2 , 2 mM EGTA , 320 mM sucrose ) for 20 minutes , washed with the same buffer and then with PBS , and permeabilized with 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 in PBS for 5 minutes . For Arp3 - speciﬁc staining , cells were extracted for 3 - 5 minutes with 1 % NP - 40 ( Pierce ) in PEM buffer ( 100 mM PIPES , pH 6 . 9 , 1 mM MgCl 2 and 1 mM EGTA ) , containing 4 % polyethylene glycol 40 , 000 ( SERVA ) , protease inhibitors cocktail ( Sigma - Aldrich ) and 2 m M phalloidin ( Sigma - Aldrich ) followed by ﬁxation with 0 . 2 % glutaraldehyde in 0 . 1 M Na - cacodylate ( pH 7 . 3 ) and quenching with 1 mg / ml NaBH 4 . For Ena staining , ﬁxation with 0 . 25 % glutaraldehyde , 0 . 5 % NP - 40 and 10 m m phalloidin in PEM buffer ( pH 6 . 9 ) was followed by a 20 minute quenching with 1 mg / ml NaBH 4 . For all protocols , after blocking for 1 hour in 1 % glycine in PBS with 1 % Triton X - 100 or 5 % BSA in PBS , cells were incubated with primary antibody to SCAR ( GP12 , 1 : 50 ) , Ena ( 5G2 , 1 m g / ml ) or Arp3 ( 1 : 25 ) for 1 hour followed by rhodamine - labeled secondary antibody ( 1 : 100 ) for 40 minutes . For phalloidin staining , AlexaFluor 488 - labeled phalloidin was added to the secondary antibody . FITC and Cy3 ﬁlter sets were used for imaging of AlexaFluor 488 - phalloidin or rhodamine - labeled antibody , respectively . To measure levels of F - actin , cells were ﬁxed with 0 . 2 % glutaraldehyde without extraction and stained with AlexaFluor 488 - phalloidin . Fluorescence was integrated over individual cells using MetaMorph ® software and expressed as a number in arbitrary units per cell . For platinum replica electron microscopy , cells on glass coverslips were extracted as described for Arp3 staining above , then washed twice with PEM , ﬁxed with 2 % glutaraldehyde and processed for electron microscopy as described previously ( Svitkina and Borisy , 1998 ) . Laser Capture Microdissection ( LCM ) and RT - PCR LCM technology ( Arcturus ) was used to capture cells with the desired morphology from a heterogeneous population . A CapSure TM cap bearing a transparent polymer ﬁlm was positioned over the microdissection target area . Low - energy laser pulse causes the ﬁlm to melt , extend and adhere to individual target cells . Lifting the cap separates targeted cells from unselected population . Cells were grown on microscope slides , ﬁxed with 70 % ethanol , dehydrated according to the Arcturus instructions and captured onto CapSure TM caps using the following settings : laser power = 40 mW , duration = 1 ms . 100 cells were captured for each sample . PicoPure RNA isolation kit ( Arcturus ) was used to isolate and purify total RNA . Regular conditions and a SuperScript First - Strand Synthesis kit ( Invitrogen ) were used for RT - PCR . Primers for PCR reaction were as follows : SCAR forward 1020 - 1039 : ATACACGTCC GCCACGTCCT ; SCAR reverse 1561 - 1580 : TTGCCCGTCA TACCGATGCT . r49 forward 42 - Journal of Cell Science 117 ( 6 ) 839 Cascade pathway of ﬁlopodia formation 61 : GCGCACCAAG CACTTCATCC ; r49 reverse 362 - 381 : GCGACCGTTG GGGTTGGTGA . Sequence used for rp49 is : NM 170461 , [ gi : 24651275 ] in NCBI database . Immunoblotting and densitometry analysis Regular conditions were used for SDS - PAGE and immunoblotting . Antibodies to SCAR and to WASp were used in 1 : 1000 dilutions overnight . Actin - speciﬁc antibody was diluted 1 : 250 . Densitometry analysis was performed using NIH Image software . Representative blots obtained in at least three independent experiments with similar results are presented . Results Drosophilacell lines as a model system for motility Because Drosophila cells were not previously used as a model system for in vitro motility , we ﬁrst characterized the protrusive behavior and structural organization of lamellipodia and ﬁlopodia in two cultured cell lines , S2R + and Dm - BG2 - c2 ( hereafter referred to as BG2 ) . The S2R + cell line is a derivative of the S2 line expressing a wingless pathway receptor ( Yanagawa et al . , 1998 ) . These cells are thought to be derived from embryonic hemocytes , although the exact origin is unknown . BG2 cells are thought to be cells of neuronal origin ( Ui et al . , 1994 ) . Both types of cells are able to attach and spread on the substratum . S2R + cells Although we found the populations of S2R + cells to be rather heterogeneous , the dominant morphology was large ﬂat cells with broad and thin circumferential lamellipodia , which had a rather smooth outline ( Fig . 1A ) . Kinetic analysis of cell motility in culture revealed that lamellipodia of these cells displayed constant protrusive - withdrawal activity ( Fig . 1B ) , but cell translocation was not very efficient , presumably because of lack of cell polarity . Staining with ﬂuorescently labeled phalloidin suggested that lamellipodia of S2R + cells were ﬁlled with a dense actin network ( Fig . 1C ) , which constituted the major part of the actin cytoskeleton in these cells . Platinum replica electron microscopy ( EM ) conﬁrmed this impression . It showed that lamellipodia were ﬁlled with a dense highly branched actin network consisting of relatively short ﬁlaments ( Fig . 1D ) . Filopodial - like bundles were rare in S2R + cells , and the small number observed consisted of a few relatively long loosely bundled ﬁlaments ( data not shown ) . BG2 cells BG2 cells were rather small in size and had polar morphology , in that ﬂat and thin lamellar regions were not present all around the cell perimeter ( Fig . 2A ) . Kinetically , BG2 cells displayed efficient locomotion over the substratum . At the leading edge active lamellipodia and ﬁlopodia were observed , with ﬁlopodia being particularly prominent ( Fig . 2B ) . Phalloidin staining ( Fig . 2C ) revealed bright actin ﬂuorescence in ﬁlopodia and in numerous stress - ﬁbers in the cell interior ; weaker diffuse ﬂuorescence was present in lamellipodia . EM analysis showed that BG2 lamellipodia contained a branched actin network , whereas the abundant ﬁlopodia contained classical tight bundles of long actin ﬁlaments ( Fig . 2D ) . Thus , we showed that both cell lines display actin - based protrusive activity similar to that described in other animal cells . We found that S2R + cells use a predominantly lamellipodial type of protrusion , whereas BG2 cells are rich in ﬁlopodia . This makes these two cell lines good models in which to study the roles of SCAR and WASp in lamellipodial and ﬁlopodial protrusion . We ﬁrst present results Fig . 1 . Characterization of S2R + cells . ( A ) Morphology of cell population ( by phase contrast microscopy ) . Many cells display broad circumferential lamellipodia . ( B ) Protrusive activity ( time - lapse sequence ) . Lamellipodium protrudes with regular and smooth outline . Dotted line shows the initial position of the cell edge . Time in min : sec . ( C ) Actin cytoskeleton ( phalloidin staining ) . Circumferential lamellipodium is rich in actin ; ﬁlopodia are not seen . ( D ) Structural organization of lamellipodia ( EM ) . Actin ﬁlaments form dense , highly branched dendritic network . Circled region is enlarged in the inset to show actin branches . Bars , 10 m m ( A ) , 5 m m ( B , C ) and 0 . 5 m m ( D ) . 840 on SCAR knockdown in S2R + and BG2 cells and then on WASp knockdown . SCAR knockdown in S2R + cells S2R + cells cultured in the presence of SCAR - speciﬁc dsRNA ( dsSCAR ) developed a distinct phenotype which became especially obvious by day 3 - 4 . The phenotype was characterized by decreased spreading and formation of a highly irregular shape ( Fig . 3A ) . To test whether SCAR was speciﬁcally depleted by the knockdown procedure , we analyzed the levels of SCAR protein and mRNA after RNAi treatment for the entire cell population ( by western blotting ) and for individual cells ( by RT - PCR and immunostaining ) . Journal of Cell Science 117 ( 6 ) Fig . 2 . Characterization of BG2 cells . ( A ) Morphology of cell population ( phase contrast ) . Cells display polarized lamella . ( B ) Protrusive activity ( time - lapse sequence ) . Leading edge moves forward by combination of ﬁlopodial ( arrowheads ) and lamellipodial protrusion . Dotted line shows the initial position of the cell edge . Time in min : sec . ( C ) Actin cytoskeleton ( phalloidin staining ) . Leading edge contains diffuse network in lamellipodia and distinct bundles in ﬁlopodia and microspikes ; stress ﬁbers are present in the cell interior . ( D ) Structural organization of lamellipodia ( EM ) . Actin ﬁlaments form dendritic network in lamellipodia and bundles of long ﬁlaments in ﬁlopodia . Circled region is enlarged in the inset to show actin bundle . Bars , 10 m m ( A ) , 5 m m ( B , C ) and 1 m m ( D ) . Fig . 3 . SCAR knockdown in S2R + cells . ( A ) Morphological phenotype developed after SCAR - speciﬁc RNAi . Cell spreading is compromised ; numerous long processes appear along cell edges . ( B ) Immunoblotting . Extracts of S2R + cells subjected to SCAR RNAi for 0 - 4 days ( lanes 0 - 4 , respectively ) were probed with antibodies to SCAR or WASp . Lane 4 + 5 WO shows restoration of SCAR level after washout of dsRNA on day 4 and culturing of cells for an additional 5 days under regular conditions . Equal load of protein was ensured by tubulin probing ( not shown ) . Positions of markers are indicated . Reduction of SCAR is > 95 % by day 4 of treatment . ( C ) RT - PCR after Laser Capture Microdissection ( LCM ) . 100 control cells ( lanes labeled ‘ – ’ ) and 100 cells subjected to SCAR RNAi for 4 days ( lanes labeled ‘ + ’ ) were captured by LCM ( see text for details ) and analyzed by RT - PCR using SCAR or rp49 speciﬁc primers . Reduction of SCAR mRNA is ~ 95 % by densitometry ; rp49 mRNA serves as an internal control , and its levels do not change . The positions of DNA markers and number of PCR cycles are indicated . ( D ) Immunostaining . Control cells ( top row ) and cells treated with dsSCAR for 4 days ( bottom row ) were stained with phalloidin to reveal actin ( left panels ) and with SCAR antibody ( middle ) . Merged images ( right ) show that in control cells SCAR is enriched at the leading edge of lamellipodium ( arrow ) , and in dsSCAR - treated cells , SCAR is not detected in peripheral protrusions . Bars , 10 m m ( A ) , 2 m m ( D ) . 841 Cascade pathway of ﬁlopodia formation In immunoblots , Drosophila SCAR - speciﬁc antibody recognized a ~ 78 kDa protein in extracts prepared from Drosophila S2R + cells ( Fig . 3B , lane 0 ) . After SCAR RNAi , band staining gradually decreased over time ( Fig . 3B , lanes 1 - 4 ) , reaching > 95 % depletion by day 4 , as determined by densitometry . WASp levels were not affected ( Fig . 3B ) . The reduction of SCAR protein was reversible , as the protein level was restored when SCAR - depleted cells were re - plated and cultured for an additional 4 - 5 days in the absence of dsRNA ( Fig . 3B , lane 4 + 5 WO ) . Concurrently , cell shape returned to normal ( not shown ) . Although the penetration of the SCAR RNAi phenotype was high , the development of an abnormal morphology was asynchronous , leading to a certain heterogeneity in the morphological phenotype at any given time point , especially at early stages . To verify that the cells with a profound morphological defect lack SCAR , we analyzed SCAR mRNA levels in these cells . For this purpose we used laser capture microdissection technique ( LCM , Arcturus ) , which allows cells with the desired morphology to be captured on a special cap and separated from a heterogeneous population . Target cells were subjected to RNA extraction and RT - PCR . We used the LCM technique to capture 100 control cells and 100 cells subjected to SCAR RNAi for 4 days . Well - spread cells with prominent lamellipodia were chosen from the control population , and cells showing pronounced phenotype with numerous spiky protrusions similar to that shown in Fig . 3A were selected from the dsSCAR - treated population . Total RNA was isolated from these two subpopulations and subjected to RT - PCR . From densitometry analysis of samples after 30 PCR cycles , we estimated that SCAR mRNA levels were reduced by > 95 % in dsSCAR - treated cells ( Fig . 3C ) . By contrast , RT - PCR of the same samples for ribosomal protein rp49 mRNA did not show any signiﬁcant difference . These results conﬁrm that SCAR mRNA is speciﬁcally depleted in cells exhibiting the characteristic SCAR RNAi phenotype . Immunoﬂuorescence staining for SCAR protein was used as an additional assay to determine the levels of SCAR in cells with a speciﬁc phenotype ( Fig . 3D ) . In control cells , SCAR was enriched at the leading edge of lamellipodia . After dsSCAR treatment , speciﬁc staining in peripheral protrusions was abolished , consistent with the expected depletion of SCAR protein . In all samples , a nonspeciﬁc background staining was observed in the center of cells because of the low affinity of the available antibody . SCAR depletion inhibits lamellipodia formation in S2R + cells Phenotype development during SCAR depletion was monitored over a period of 7 days . During this time , cells became more compact and developed a highly irregular shape , Fig . 4 . SCAR RNAi in S2R + cells inhibits lamellipodial protrusion . ( A ) Morphometry . Projected area ( left ) and P / A 1 / 2 cell shape index ( right ) of control ( gray bars , n = 24 ) and dsSCAR - treated for 4 days ( black bars , n = 26 ) S2R + cells . Higher values of the index correspond to more irregular cell shape ( see text for details ) . ( B , C ) . Kinetics of lamellipodial protrusion on day 3 ( B ) and day 4 ( C ) of SCAR RNAi . Time series of enlarged boxed regions are shown on the right . Time in sec . ( B ) Cell is able to form lamellipodia , but protrusion is not coordinated along the edge . Formation of individual protuberances is indicated by arrowheads . ( C ) Cell is not able to form lamellipodia ; it forms long narrow curved processes , which express dynamics at their tips and along their length ( arrowheads ) . ( D , E ) . Structure of actin cytoskeleton on day 3 ( D ) and day 4 ( E ) of SCAR RNAi ( EM ) . ( D ) Lamellipodia - like protrusions contain very sparse dendritic actin ﬁlament network . ( E ) Long processes contain branched ﬁlament network , but not bundles of long ﬁlaments . Bars , 10 m m ( B , C ) and 0 . 2 m m ( D , E ) . 842 displaying long narrow processes ( Fig . 3A and Fig . 4B , C ) . Although the pace and extent of phenotype development varied among cells in the population , the penetration of the phenotype was essentially 100 % . To quantify the reduction in cell spreading , we compared the projected area of control and SCAR - depleted cells ( Fig . 4A , left ) . After 4 days of SCAR RNAi , the cell projected area decreased by an average of > 75 % . The irregularity of cell shape was evaluated using a dimension - less index – namely , the ratio of perimeter ( P ) over the square root of projected area ( A ) ( Fig . 4A , right ) . For a circle , this index has a minimal value equal to 3 . 56 [ P / A 1 / 2 = 2 p R / ( p R 2 ) 1 / 2 = 2 p 1 / 2 = 3 . 56 ] . The value of the index grows with the irregularity of cell shape . Control S2R + cells had an average P / A 1 / 2 value close to 4 , indicating that their normal cell shape intrinsically was highly regular and circular . Depletion of SCAR led to a fourfold increase in the value of P / A 1 / 2 index , reﬂecting the development of a highly irregular cell shape . The decreased cell spreading and the irregular shape suggested an impaired protrusive behavior in SCAR - depleted cells . To test how the SCAR phenotype arose , we performed a kinetic analysis of leading edge activity by time - lapse phase contrast microscopy at different levels of SCAR depletion – namely , after 3 , 4 and 5 days of SCAR RNAi . At 3 days of treatment , cells still were able to protrude lamellipodia , although their activity was more erratic compared with untreated cells , and lamellipodia protruded with discrete protuberances instead of a smooth regular outline ( Fig . 4B ) . At 4 - 5 days treatment , cells were unable to form lamellipodia ; instead , they protruded long narrow processes , which expressed dynamics at their tips , as well as along their length ( Fig . 4C ) . Over time , such discontinuous protrusion , in combination with retraction elsewhere along the cell perimeter , led to the formation of long processes , which although resembled ﬁlopodia superﬁcially , were both curved and ﬂaccid . With continued depletion , cells were not able to form any protrusions and detached from the substratum . The inefficient protrusive activity of SCAR - depleted cells suggested an impairment in actin cytoskeleton assembly . Therefore , we analyzed actin organization by phalloidin staining ( Fig . 3D ) and EM ( Fig . 4D , E ) . After 4 days of dsSCAR treatment , the level of phalloidin staining at the cell periphery was markedly reduced ( Fig . 3D ) . Average F - actin content per cell , as estimated by quantiﬁcation of phalloidin ﬂuorescence , dropped approximately eightfold in SCAR - depleted cells ( from 50 . 4±35 . 2 , n = 20 to 5 . 8±3 . 5 arbitrary units ( AU ) , n = 34 ) , which is consistent with the idea that the primary pathway of actin polymerization is through SCAR - activated , Arp2 / 3 - mediated nucleation . Levels of total actin as shown by western blotting also decreased but only by 1 . 6 - 3 - fold ( n = 3 ) ( blot not shown ) . Because G - actin has been shown to provide autoinhibitory regulation of actin expression ( Lyubimova et al . , 1997 ) , the lower total actin levels are probably a secondary effect of SCAR depletion because of net actin depolymerization and transient increase of G - actin levels . By EM , residual lamellipodia of SCAR - depleted cells contained very sparse ﬁlament networks that retained dendritic features ( Fig . 4D ) . In the narrow processes , actin ﬁlaments were also organized into a branched network of rather short actin ﬁlaments ( Fig . 4E ) , but not into parallel bundles as is characteristic of ﬁlopodia . Occasionally , microtubules penetrated into some processes from the cell interior , possibly because of low density of actin network there . These structural data indicate that the processes , although superﬁcially looking like ﬁlopodia , may represent residual protrusive activity by the dendritic nucleation mechanism . To test this idea , we examined the distribution of lamellipodial and ﬁlopodial markers in the peripheral narrow processes ( Fig . 5 ) . The lamellipodial marker Arp3 was enriched in the lamellipodia of control S2R + cells ( Fig . 5A ) and was also detected at much lower levels in processes of SCAR - depleted cells ( Fig . 5B ) ; this was consistent with the EM data , which showed sparse dendritic network in these structures . We used Ena as a ﬁlopodial marker because its mammalian homologues Mena ( Lanier et al . , 1999 ) and VASP ( Rottner et al . , 1999 ) are highly enriched at ﬁlopodial tips and are present – although less concentrated – at the lamellipodial edge ( Rottner et al . , 1999 ) . In Drosophi la cells , Ena formed a thin punctate line at the very leading edge of lamellipodia , but could not be detected at the tips of processes in SCAR - depleted cells ( Fig . 5D ) . This result strongly indicates that narrow processes of SCAR - depleted cells are not ﬁlopodia , because normal ﬁlopodia in Drosophila BG2 cells display bright Ena staining at their tips ( not shown ) . Thus , we found that depletion of SCAR in S2R + cells resulted in progressive inhibition of cell spreading , lamellipodial protrusion and assembly of the actin network . SCAR depletion inhibits lamellipodia and ﬁlopodia formation in BG2 cells Immunoblotting data showed that SCAR levels in BG2 cell Journal of Cell Science 117 ( 6 ) Fig . 5 . Lamellipodial and ﬁlopodial markers in peripheral processes after SCAR - depletion . Control ( A , C ) and SCAR - depleted ( B , D ) S2R + cells were stained with phalloidin ( left panels ) and Arp3 ( A , B ) or Ena ( C , D ) antibody ( middle panels ) . Merged images are shown in right panels with phalloidin staining in green , and antibody staining in red . Peripheral processes of SCAR - depleted S2R + cells are weakly stained for Arp3 ( B ) , but no Ena signal is detected ( D ) , in contrast to normal ﬁlopodia of BG2 cells which have strong Ena staining at their tips ( not shown ) . Bars , 2 m m . 843 Cascade pathway of ﬁlopodia formation extracts were reduced by 90 - 95 % following RNAi , whereas WASp was unaffected ( Fig . 6A ) . The morphological phenotype of SCAR - depleted BG2 cells resembled that of S2R + cells , although it appeared less dramatic ( Fig . 6B ) . Cell spreading was decreased by ~ 45 % , and the P / A 1 / 2 index increased by ~ 40 % ( Fig . 6C ) . The increase in the irregularity of shape reﬂected the formation of long narrow processes . Fluorescence microscopy using phalloidin showed that actin ﬁlament levels were markedly reduced in dsSCAR - treated cells , although some stress ﬁbers in the cell interior remained ( Fig . 6B ) . EM analysis revealed that neither normal lamellipodia nor ﬁlopodia were present in SCAR - depleted cells ( Fig . 6D ) . The cell processes usually contained distal patches of a sparse dendritic network , presumably representing residual lamellipodial - like protrusions , which were associated with more central actin ﬁlament bundles . These bundles probably corresponded to stress ﬁbers , but they also might represent modiﬁed ﬁlopodial bundles and thus point to sustained ﬁlopodia formation in SCAR - depleted cells . To evaluate this latter possibility , we analyzed de novo ﬁlopodia formation in SCAR - depleted BG2 cells . Untreated BG2 cells and cells subjected to RNAi for 4 days were re - plated and allowed to spread for 30 - 120 minutes . Untreated cells expressed intense ﬁlopodial formation , whereas dsSCAR - treated cells formed very few ﬁlopodia during spreading ( Fig . 6E ) . To quantify the rate of ﬁlopodia formation , we counted the number of newly formed ﬁlopodia in 2 minute time - lapse sequences of individual cells and found that de novo ﬁlopodia formation was reduced approximately eightfold in SCAR - depleted BG2 cells ( Fig . 6F ) . Thus , depletion of SCAR in BG2 cells inhibited the formation of both lamellipodia and ﬁlopodia , which led to reduced leading edge protrusion and cell spreading . WASp knockdown in S2R + and BG2 cells As a tool for this study , we generated a polyclonal antibody against a peptide of WASp ( see Materials and Methods ) . The Fig . 6 . SCAR RNAi in BG2 cells inhibits lamellipodia and ﬁlopodia . ( A ) Immunoblotting . Extracts of BG2 cells subjected to SCAR RNAi for 4 days were probed with antibodies to SCAR and WASp . Reduction of SCAR is 90 - 95 % . WASp is not changed . ( B ) Morphology and actin distribution . Overall cell shape shows decreased spreading and formation of long narrow processes . Phalloidin staining reveals decreased amount of actin , especially at the periphery . ( C ) Morphometry . Projected area ( left ) and P / A 1 / 2 cell shape index ( right ) of control ( gray bars , n = 14 ) and BG2 cells treated with dsSCAR for 4 days ( black bars , n = 18 ) . ( D ) Cytoskeleton organization of SCAR - depleted BG2 cells ( EM ) . Left : overview ; neither normal lamellipodia nor ﬁlopodia are seen . Right : enlarged is boxed region from left panel ; cell processes contain central actin ﬁlament bundles ( arrowheads ) and distal patches of the dendritic network ( arrows ) . ( E ) Filopodia formation during spreading of control ( upper row ) or SCAR - depleted for 4 days ( lower row ) BG2 cells . Time - lapse sequences were acquired 2 hours after cell re - plating . Newly formed ﬁlopodia are indicated by arrowheads . Time in seconds . ( F ) Rate of ﬁlopodia initiation . Number of de novo formed ﬁlopodia per 2 minutes interval in control cells ( gray bar , n = 14 ) or cells treated with dsRNA ( black bars , n = 15 ) speciﬁc for SCAR ( dsS ) or WASp ( dsW ) . SCAR - depleted BG2 cells have a signiﬁcantly reduced ability to form ﬁlopodia . Bars , 10 m m ( B ) , 1 m m ( D ) and 5 m m ( E ) . 844 affinity puriﬁed antibody recognized a protein with a molecular weight of ~ 65 kDa in extracts from Drosophila S2R + or BG2 cells ( Fig . 7A ) . Four to eight days following the treatment of cells with WASp - speciﬁc dsRNA ( dsWASp ) , the intensity of the immunoreactive band was reduced to 25 - 30 % of the control level ( Fig . 7A ) . However , this band remained unaltered in cells treated for 4 days with dsSCAR ( Fig . 3B and Fig . 6A ) . From these results , we conclude that our antibody speciﬁcally recognizes Drosophila WASp and that the RNAi treatment was effective in eliminating ~ 70 - 75 % of WASp protein from both S2R + and BG2 cells . Unfortunately , the antibody was not efficient for immunostaining so we were not able to determine WASp localization in cells . In contrast to results with SCAR depletion , we were unable to identify a phenotype following WASp depletion in both cell lines tested . By live - cell imaging and phalloidin staining , WASp - depleted cells were essentially similar to respective nontreated controls ( Fig . 7B , C ; compare with Fig . 1A and Fig . 2A ) . One difference was a decrease in the projected cell area , by ~ 45 % in S2R + and ~ 30 % in BG2 cells ( Fig . 7D ) , although the P / A 1 / 2 index , and therefore cell shape , did not change . The EM analysis also did not reveal signiﬁcant structural changes in WASp - depleted cells , except slightly longer ﬁlaments and a little more ‘translucent’ actin meshwork in S2R + cells ( Fig . 7E ) . In addition , ﬁlopodial formation was unaffected in spread BG2 cells ( Fig . 7F ) or in the ﬁlopodia re - formation assay ( Fig . 6F ) . We conclude that WASp makes only a minor contribution to lamellipodial and ﬁlopodial protrusion in both S2R + and BG2 cells . Discussion In this study we investigated the relative contributions of two key regulators , SCAR and WASp , in actin - dependent protrusion in order to distinguish between two models of regulation of ﬁlopodia and lamellipodia : the conventional model , which predicts parallel regulatory pathways from N - WASP to ﬁlopodia and from Scar / WAVEs to lamellipodia ( Takenawa and Miki , 2001 ) , and an alternative model suggesting cascade regulation , in which WASP and / or Scar / WAVEs initiate lamellipodia , which are subsequently transformed into ﬁlopodia by additional signals ( Fig . 8A , B ) . Journal of Cell Science 117 ( 6 ) Fig . 7 . WASp knockdown in S2R + and BG2 cells . ( A ) Immunoblots of WASp in extracts prepared from S2R + ( left ) and BG2 ( right ) cells subjected to WASp RNAi for 4 days . WASp is reduced by 70 - 75 % in both cell lines after dsWASp - treatment . Tubulin ( Tb ) is shown as a loading control . Morphology of cell population and actin distribution in WASp - depleted S2R + ( B ) and BG2 cells ( C ) ( phalloidin staining ) . Both cell types do not display changes in morphology compared with respective controls . ( D ) Morphometry of S2R + ( left ) and BG2 ( right ) cells . WASp inhibition causes slight decrease in cell area , but does not signiﬁcantly change cell shape . Gray bars represent controls , black bars show WASp - depleted cells ; n = 18 ( S2R + control ) , n = 22 ( S2R + dsWASp ) , n = 22 ( BG2 control ) , n = 21 ( BG2 dsWASp ) . ( E , F ) Organization of actin ﬁlaments in protrusions of WASp - depleted S2R + ( E ) and BG2 ( F ) cells ( EM ) . No signiﬁcant alterations in architecture of lamellipodia in both cells or ﬁlopodia in BG2 cells was observed . Magniﬁcation is the same in ( B - C ) and ( E - F ) . Bars , 10 m m ( B ) and 1 m m ( E ) . 845 Cascade pathway of ﬁlopodia formation Our results do not support the parallel pathway model , but are consistent with lamellipodia functioning as a necessary preliminary step in the formation of ﬁlopodia . Drosophilacells as a model system for investigating roles of WASP family proteins in protrusion The Drosophila genome contains a single orthologue for each subfamily of WASP family proteins , WASp and SCAR ( Ben - Yaacov et al . , 2001 ; Zallen et al . , 2002 ) . By analogy with mammalian cells , one might assume that in Drosophila WASp and SCAR will regulate ﬁlopodial and lamellipodial protrusion , respectively . During development , Drosophila WASp and SCAR perform distinct , nonoverlapping functions upstream of the Arp2 / 3 complex ( Ben - Yaacov et al . , 2001 ; Hudson and Cooley , 2002 ; Tal et al . , 2002 ; Zallen et al . , 2002 ) , but it remains unclear whether SCAR and WASp are specialized at the subcellular level with respect to the mode of actin polymerization they induce . We chose two adherent Drosophila cell lines as potential model systems for in vitro motility to analyze the protrusive behavior of these cells . When plated onto glass or plastic , both cell types spread to form protrusions which structurally and kinetically are similar to those observed in other motile cells . As in mammalian cells , protrusions were ﬁlled with actin ﬁlaments organized into dendritic networks in lamellipodia or into parallel bundles in ﬁlopodia . On the basis of these data , we conclude that Drosophila cell lines display conventional actin - based protrusive behavior and can be used for genetic analysis , which may give insight into mechanisms of cell motility in general . The availability of cell lines that express either lamellipodia ( S2R + ) or lamellipodia and ﬁlopodia ( BG2 ) allowed for the possibility of determining the pathways for these two distinctive actin protrusions . SCAR is the major regulator of lamellipodia in S2R + cells We found that depletion of SCAR from S2R + cells correlated with the development of a strong , penetrant and highly reproducible phenotype , which reﬂected the declining ability of cells to form lamellipodia and spread over the substratum . Although some heterogeneity inevitably accompanied the development of the phenotype ( probably due to uneven dsRNA uptake ) , the progression clearly occurred from the appearance of slight irregularity of the lamellipodial outline to the formation of long narrow processes to virtual failure of a cell to spread . The formation of linear processes reminiscent of ﬁlopodia during SCAR depletion could have resulted from the undepleted activity of WASp leading to the induction of ﬁlopodia , as is predicted by the model of two parallel signaling pathways . However , a detailed analysis of these aberrant processes showed that they are more like extremely narrowed residual lamellipodia than ﬁlopodia . The curved shape , uneven thickness and kinetic behavior of these processes were distinct from those seen during normal ﬁlopodial protrusion . Structurally , the processes of SCAR - depleted cells did not contain bundles of long parallel ﬁlaments that are characteristic of ﬁlopodia . Instead , they were ﬁlled with a sparse dendritic network like that seen in lamellipodia . The weak presence of the lamelipodial marker Arp3 and absence of the ﬁlopodial marker Ena in these processes also suggests that they are not ﬁlopodia . Thus , the depletion of SCAR in S2R + cells did not induce ﬁlopodia , but produced narrow aberrant processes , probably by a combination of residual SCAR activity and retraction elsewhere along the cell perimeter . Our ﬁndings in Drosophila cells are in agreement with the previous work in Dictyostelium ( Bear , 1998 ) , where SCAR - deﬁcient cells manifested abnormal cell size and morphology , and instead Rac Cdc42 Lamellipodia Filopodia SCAR / WAVEs WASPs A B Cdc42 Lamellipodia SCAR / WAVEs Filopodia WASPs additional signals Rac Rac Lamellipodia Filopodia Cdc42 SCAR IRSp53 , Drf3 WASPs Other functions C Fig . 8 . Models of regulation of lamellipodia and ﬁlopodia . ( A ) Parallel pathways model . Lamellipodia and ﬁlopodia are regulated by two parallel pathways : from GTPase Rac through Scar / WAVEs to lamellipodia , and from Cdc42 through WASPs to ﬁlopodia . ( B ) Cascade pathways model . Small GTPases signal to Scar / WAVEs and WASPs to initiate lamellipodia , which are subsequently transformed into ﬁlopodia by additional signals . ( C ) Reﬁned cascade model for Drosophila . Our data emphasize SCAR as the main regulator of lamellipodia formation , whereas WASp in Drosophila cells is dispensable for both lamellipodia and ﬁlopodia and may play a role in other actin - dependent activities . Additional signals driving reorganization of lamellipodia in ﬁlopodia may originate from Cdc42 and act through effectors other than WASP , e . g . IRSp53 ( Krugmann et al . , 2001 ) and Drf3 ( Peng et al . , 2003 ) . 846 of normal broad lamellipodia formed ‘pseudopodia - like extensions’ depleted of F - actin . The formation of narrow lamellipodia following depletion of SCAR provides an additional insight into the function of SCAR . Scar / WAVEs in mammalian ( Hahne et al . , 2001 ; Nozumi et al . , 2003 ) and Drosophila cells ( this study ) are localized to the extreme edge of protruding lamellipodia . Possibly , SCAR acts cooperatively in the process of protrusion . That is , protrusion at the leading edge may be more probable at sites of a pre - existing protrusion . A consequence of SCAR depletion would be that protrusion would become progressively restricted to smaller domains . In contrast to the striking effect of SCAR depletion , WASp depletion did not generate a phenotype in S2R + cells aside from a minor , albeit statistically signiﬁcant , reduction in the cell projected area . One possible explanation for the lack of a signiﬁcant phenotype might be the incomplete knockdown of WASp , as we were able to achieve only ~ 75 % depletion of WASp compared with > 95 % depletion of SCAR . However , considering that we used several diverse assays for phenotypic analysis , we believe that if WASp made a signiﬁcant contribution to protrusive behavior , a phenotype would have been detectable . Taken together , our results using S2R + cells indicate that SCAR is the major regulator of protrusive activity in these cells . It is necessary for the assembly of the actin dendritic network , formation of lamellipodia and cell spreading onto the substratum . By contrast , WASp makes little , if any , contribution to actin - based protrusion in these cells . SCAR is the major regulator of lamellipodia and ﬁlopodia in BG2 cells The lack of ﬁlopodia formation in S2R + cells after SCAR inhibition may be explained by an intrinsic deﬁciency of the ﬁlopodial machinery in these cells . Therefore , to test the role of SCAR in ﬁlopodial formation we switched to BG2 cells , which , in addition to lamellipodia , are very rich in ﬁlopodia , similar to other cells of neuronal origin . The parallel signaling hypothesis predicts that depletion of the lamellipodial regulator , SCAR , will not affect ﬁlopodia , which , according to the model , would be induced by WASp . By contrast , the cascade model predicts that SCAR depletion will inhibit not only lamellipodia , but also ﬁlopodia . Our results support the latter prediction . We conﬁrmed that SCAR in BG2 cells , like in S2R + cells , regulates lamellipodia . Indeed , depletion of SCAR in BG2 cells inhibited lamellipodia , leading to decreased spreading and altered shape similar to results obtained with S2R + cells . By EM criteria , the lamellipodial dendritic network in BG2 cells was signiﬁcantly reduced ; only a few small patches of the dendritic network remained at some cell edges . The conclusive evidence allowing us to distinguish between two alternative models of regulation was expected from effects of SCAR depletion on ﬁlopodia formation . Our results clearly show that SCAR RNAi in BG2 cells inhibits not only lamellipodia , but also ﬁlopodia . Although light microscopic evaluation of static cultures per se gave an impression of ﬁlopodia sustaining in SCAR - depleted BG2 cells , more detailed analyses , namely , EM structural assay and a quantitative kinetic analysis of ﬁlopodial initiation during cell spreading , revealed that ﬁlopodia formation , in fact , was strongly inhibited . These results allowed us to rule out the parallel pathway model and validate the cascade pathway model for actin - based protrusions in Drosophila cell lines . In contrast to SCAR , depletion of WASp in BG2 cells did not result in any changes in cell morphology , kinetics of protrusion or cytoskeletal architecture except for a slight inhibition of spreading , similar to what we observed in S2R + cells . BG2 cells after WASp depletion retained not only lamellipodia , but also numerous perfectly looking ﬁlopodia indistinguishable from those in control cells . These results show that WASp does not play a distinctive role for ﬁlopodia formation , thus further corroborating the priority of the cascade pathway model over the parallel pathway model . Regulation of lamellipodia and ﬁlopodia The requirement of SCAR activity in Drosophila cells for both lamellipodial and ﬁlopodial protrusion is fully consistent with the idea that ﬁlopodial initiation in motile cells occurs downstream of lamellipodial protrusion , as suggested by our previous studies ( Svitkina et al . , 2003 ; Vignjevic et al . , 2003 ) . Therefore , we propose a model stipulating a two - step cascade regulation of ﬁlopodial protrusion in Drosophila cells ( Fig . 8C ) . SCAR activates the Arp2 / 3 complex which then induces assembly of the dendritic network in lamellipodia . The lamellipodium by itself represents an important part of the protrusive machinery , but we suggest that it also provides a foundation for subsequent reorganization into ﬁlopodial bundles . Such reorganization would be dependent on additional as - yet - unspeciﬁed signals . Indirect evidence in support of the cascade regulation model comes from in vivo studies of Drosophila . In mutations removing all three Drosophila isoforms of Rac , both lamellipodia and ﬁlopodia were abolished during dorsal closure ( Hakeda - Suzuki et al . , 2002 ) . Such a result would not be predicted if Rac signaled only to lamellipodia and a parallel pathway existed for ﬁlopodia . Cascade signaling may also underlie ﬁlopodia formation in mammalian cells , even though they have a more complex complement of WASP family proteins . Because all WASP family members are potent activators of the Arp2 / 3 complex , any one of them may potentially contribute to the ﬁrst step of the cascade , the formation of the dendritic network . However , the unimpaired ﬁlopodial formation in N - WASP knockout cells ( Snapper et al . , 2001 ; Lommel et al . , 2001 ) suggests that the contribution of N - WASP to formation of the dendritic network is unlikely to be essential . The expression of mammalian WASP is limited to cells of hematopoietic origin . Interestingly , WASP - deﬁcient platelets from Wiscott - Aldrich syndrome patients were able to form lamellipodia and ﬁlopodia ( Falet et al . , 2002 ) , suggesting that WASP does not play an essential role in the protrusive activity of crawling cells in the hematopoietic lineage . On the basis of these considerations , we predict that the Scar / WAVE subfamily may play an essential role for ﬁlopodial formation in mammalian cells similar to that observed in Drosophila cells . The functional roles of WASP subfamily proteins remain to be clariﬁed . Our data indicate that WASp in Drosophila cells is dispensable for protrusive motility – both lamellipodial and ﬁlopodial . Then , what is WASp doing ? As potent activators of the Arp2 / 3 complex , WASP subfamily members are likely to Journal of Cell Science 117 ( 6 ) 847 Cascade pathway of ﬁlopodia formation play a role in the formation of some dendritic actin arrays . The Arp2 / 3 complex and other proteins of the actin machinery are involved in processes other than lamellipodial protrusion , including endocytosis ( Schafer , 2002 ; Qualmann et al . , 2002 ) , formation of certain junctions , such as podosomes ( Linder et al . , 2000 ) , and establishment of immunological synapses ( Thrasher , 2002 ) . It is possible that the regulation of specialized dendritic arrays relies on WASP subfamily members . In general , our results and interpretations of the roles of SCAR and WASp at the cellular level are consistent with conclusions drawn from studies on Drosophila development in vivo : SCAR mutations resulted in more severe phenotypes and affected many structures , whereas mutations in WASp had very little phenotype ( Ben - Yaacov et al . , 2001 ; Zallen et al . , 2002 ; Hudson and Cooley , 2002 ; Tal et al . , 2002 ) . SCAR , rather than WASp , was the major mediator of Arp2 / 3 function during Drosophila oogenesis and in the development of the central nervous system ( Zallen et al . , 2002 ) . SCAR and Arp2 / 3 were essential for proper spatial distribution of nuclei during cortical divisions , as well as for metaphase furrow formation and ring canal formation . Overall actin levels were lower in SCAR and Arp2 / 3 mutant cells . By contrast , WASp function seemed to be restricted to speciﬁc processes in development , such as the proper execution of asymmetrical cell divisions in neural lineages ( Ben - Yaacov et al . , 2001 ) or in bristle formation in ommatidia ( Zallen et al . , 2002 ) . Nevertheless , WASp performed its role via the Arp2 / 3 complex ( Tal et al . , 2002 ) . Although WASp did not seem to contribute to protrusive activity in the Drosophila cell lines tested in our experiments , consideration of mutant developmental phenotypes suggests that WASp can activate the Arp2 / 3 complex in certain cellular contexts and induce downsteam events that are dependent on dendritic nucleation of actin ﬁlaments . If WASP subfamily members are not essential for ﬁlopodia formation , then what are the signaling molecules for the second step of our postulated cascade pathway ? We have suggested recently that a key element driving network reorganization into ﬁlopodial bundles is a multiprotein complex at ﬁlopodial tips ( Svitkina et al . , 2003 ) . We propose that the tip complex is a site at which the second step of the cascade signaling is directed . In favor of this hypothesis , IRSp53 , an effector of Cdc42 , induces ﬁlopodia by recruiting Mena ( Krugmann et al . , 2001 ) , a protein which localizes to the ﬁlopodial tips ( Lanier et al . , 1999 ) and promotes the elongation of actin ﬁlaments by protecting them from capping ( Bear et al . , 2002 ) . Also , a formin family protein Drf3 has recently been shown to be a downstream effector of Cdc42 , localize to ﬁlopodial tips and play a role in ﬁlopodia formation ( Peng et al . , 2003 ) . The IRSp53 or Drf3 pathway or an as - yet - unidentiﬁed pathway , rather than N - WASP , may be responsible for Cdc42 signaling to ﬁlopodia . Irrespective of the speciﬁc molecules involved in the signaling pathway , our structural - kinetic analyses suggest that they share the property of targeting the ﬁlopodial tip complex to drive ﬁlopodial formation . Note added in proof While this paper was in review , two relevant studies consistent with our ﬁndings on the role of SCAR were published . Rogers and co - workers recognized SCAR as a major regulator of lamella formation in Drosophila S2 cells in a screen of proteins implicated in actin function , and gave insights on regulation of the SCAR complex ( Rogers et al . , 2003 ) . Kunda et al . , focused on the role of Sra - 1 , kette , and Abi in stability , localization , and function of the SCAR complex downstream of GTPase signaling ( Kunda et al . , 2003 ) . We thank John Peloquin for preparing antibodies to WASp , and Dr Jen Zallen and Dr William Theurkauf for gifts of the SCAR and the Arp3 antibody . The 5G2 monoclonal antibody to Enabled developed by Dr Corey Goodman was obtained from the Developmental Studies Hybridoma Bank developed under the auspices of the NICHD and maintained by The University of Iowa , Department of Biological Sciences , Iowa City , IA 52242 . Supported by grant NIH GM 62431 to G . G . B . References Bear , J . E . , Rawls , J . F . and Saxe , C . L . , III ( 1998 ) . SCAR , a WASP - related protein , isolated as a suppressor of receptor defects in late Dictyostelium development . J . Cell Biol . 142 , 1325 - 1335 . Bear , J . E . , Svitkina , T . M . , Krause , M . , Schafer , D . A . , Loureiro , J . J . , Strasser , G . A . , Maly , I . V . , Chaga , O . Y . , Cooper , J . A . , Borisy , G . G . et al . ( 2002 ) . Antagonism between Ena / VASP proteins and actin ﬁlament capping regulates ﬁbroblast motility . Cell 109 , 509 - 521 . Ben - Yaacov , S . , le Borgne , R . , Abramson , I . , Schweisguth , F . and Schejter , E . D . ( 2001 ) . Wasp , the Drosophila Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome gene homologue , is required for cell fate decisions mediated by Notch signaling . J . Cell Biol . 152 , 1 - 13 . Borisy , G . G . and Svitkina , T . M . ( 2000 ) . Actin machinery : pushing the envelope . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 12 , 104 - 112 . Clemens , J . C . , Worby , C . A . , Simonson - Leff , N . , Muda , M . , Maehama , T . , Hemmings , B . A . and Dixon , J . E . ( 2000 ) . Use of double - stranded RNA interference in Drosophila cell lines to dissect signal transduction pathways . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 97 , 6499 - 6503 . Eden , S . , Rohatgi , R . , Podtelejnikov , A . V . , Mann , M . and Kirschner , M . W . ( 2002 ) . Mechanism of regulation of WAVE1 - induced actin nucleation by Rac1 and Nck . Nature 418 , 790 - 793 . Falet , H . , Hoffmeister , K . M . , Neujahr , R . and Hartwig , J . ( 2002 ) . Normal Arp2 / 3 complex activation in platelets lacking WASp . Blood 100 , 2113 - 2122 . Hahne , P . , Sechi , A . , Benesch , S . and Small , J . V . ( 2001 ) . Scar / WAVE is localised at the tips of protruding lamellipodia in living cells . FEBS Lett . 492 , 215 - 220 . Hakeda - Suzuki , S . , Ng , J . , Tzu , J . , Dietzl , G . , Sun , Y . , Harms , M . , Nardine , T . , Luo , L . and Dickson , B . J . ( 2002 ) . Rac function and regulation during Drosophila development . Nature 416 , 438 - 442 . Hall , A . ( 1998 ) . Rho GTPases and the actin cytoskeleton . Science 279 , 509 - 514 . Higgs , H . N . and Pollard , T . D . ( 2000 ) . Activation by Cdc42 and PIP ( 2 ) of Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein ( WASp ) stimulates actin nucleation by Arp2 / 3 complex . J . Cell Biol . 150 , 1311 - 1320 . Higgs , H . N . and Pollard , T . D . ( 2001 ) . Regulation of actin ﬁlament network formation through ARP2 / 3 complex : activation by a diverse array of proteins . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 70 , 649 - 676 . Hudson , A . M . and Cooley . L . ( 2002 ) . A subset of dynamic actin rearrangements in Drosophila requires the Arp2 / 3 complex . J . Cell Biol . 156 , 677 - 687 . Krugmann , S . , Jordens , I . , Gevaert , K . , Driessens , M . , Vandekerckhove , J . and Hall , A . ( 2001 ) . Cdc42 induces ﬁlopodia by promoting the formation of an IRSp53 : Mena complex . Curr . Biol . 11 , 1645 - 1655 . Kunda , P . , Craig , G . , Dominguez , V . and Baum , B . ( 2003 ) . Abi , Sra1 , and Kette control the stability and localization of SCAR / WAVE to regulate the formation of actin - based protrusions . Curr . Biol . 13 , 1867 - 1875 . Kureishy , N . , Sapountzi , V . , Prag , S . , Anilkumar , N . and Adams , J . C . ( 2002 ) . Fascins , and their roles in cell structure and function . Bioessays 24 , 350 - 361 . Lanier , L . M . , Gates , M . A . , Witke , W . , Menzies , A . S . , Wehman , A . M . , Macklis , J . D . , Kwiatkowski , D . , Soriano , P . and Gertler , F . B . ( 1999 ) . Mena is required for neurulation and commissure formation . Neuron 22 , 313 - 325 . 848 Linder , S . , Higgs , H . , Hufner , K . , Schwarz , K . , Pannicke , U . and Aepfelbacher , M . ( 2000 ) . The polarization defect of Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome macrophages is linked to dislocalization of the Arp2 / 3 complex . J . Immunol . 165 , 221 - 225 . Lommel , S . , Benesch , S . , Rottner , K . , Franz , K . T . , Wehland , J . and Kuhn , R . ( 2001 ) . Actin pedestal formation by enteropathogenic Escherichia coli and intracellular motility of Shigella ﬂexneri are abolished in N - WASP - defective cells . EMBO Rep . 2 , 850 - 857 . Lyubimova , A . , Bershadsky , A . D . and Ben - Ze’ev , A . ( 1997 ) . Autoregulation of actin synthesis responds to monomeric actin levels . J . Cell Biochem . 65 , 469 - 478 . Machesky , L . M . and Insall , R . H . ( 1998 ) . Scar1 and the related Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein , WASP , regulate the actin cytoskeleton through the Arp2 / 3 complex . Curr . Biol . 8 , 1347 - 1356 . Mallavarapu , A . and Mitchison , T . ( 1999 ) . Regulated actin cytoskeleton assembly at ﬁlopodium tips controls their extension and retraction . J . Cell Biol . 146 , 1097 - 1106 . Miki , H . , Yamaguchi , H . , Suetsugu , S . and Takenawa , T . ( 2000 ) . IRSp53 is an essential intermediate between Rac and WAVE in the regulation of membrane ruffling . Nature 408 , 732 - 735 . Mullins , R . D . , Heuser , J . A . and Pollard , T . D . ( 1998 ) . The interaction of Arp2 / 3 complex with actin : nucleation , high affinity pointed end capping , and formation of branching networks of ﬁlaments . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 95 , 6181 - 6816 . Nozumi , M . , Nakagawa , H . , Miki , H . , Takenawa , T . and Miyamoto , S . ( 2003 ) . Differential localization of WAVE isoforms in ﬁlopodia and lamellipodia of the neuronal growth cone . J . Cell Sci . 116 , 239 - 246 . Peng . J . , Wallar , B . J . , Flanders , A . , Swiatek , P . J . and Alberts , A . S . ( 2003 ) . Disruption of the Diaphanous - related formin Drf1 gene encoding mDia1reveals a role for Drf3 as an effector for Cdc42 . Curr . Biol . 13 , 534 - 545 . Qualmann , B . , Kessels , M . M . , Roos , J . , DiGregorio , P . J . and Kelly , R . B . ( 2002 ) . Endocytosis and the cytoskeleton . Int . Rev . Cytol . 220 , 93 - 144 . Rogers , S . L . , Wiedemann , U . , Stuurman , N . and Vale , R . D . ( 2003 ) . Molecular requirements for actin - based lamella formation in Drosophila S2 cells . J . Cell Biol . 162 , 1079 - 1088 . Rohatgi , R . , Ho , H . Y . and Kirschner , M . W . ( 2000 ) . Mechanism of N - WASP activation by CDC42 and phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate . J . Cell Biol . 150 , 1299 - 1310 . Rottner , K . , Behrendt , B . , Small , J . V . and Wehland , J . ( 1999 ) . VASP dynamics during lamellipodia protrusion . Nat . Cell Biol . 1 , 321 - 322 . Schafer , D . A . ( 2002 ) . Coupling actin dynamics and membrane dynamics during endocytosis . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 14 , 76 - 81 . Small , J . V . , Stradal , T . , Vignal , E . and Rottner , K . ( 2002 ) . The lamellipodium : where motility begins . Trends Cell Biol . 12 , 112 - 120 . Snapper , S . B . , Takeshima , F . , Anton , I . , Liu , C . H . , Thomas , S . M . , Nguyen , D . , Dudley , D . , Fraser , H . , Purich , D . , Lopez - Ilasaca , M . et al . ( 2001 ) . N - WASP deﬁciency reveals distinct pathways for cell surface projections and microbial actin - based motility . Nat . Cell Biol . 3 , 897 - 904 . Svitkina , T . M . and Borisy , G . G . ( 1998 ) . Correlative light and electron microscopy of the cytoskeleton of cultured cells . Methods Enzymol . 298 , 570 - 592 . Svitkina , T . M . and Borisy , G . G . ( 1999a ) . Progress in protrusion : the tell - tale scar . Trends Biochem . Sci . 24 , 432 - 436 . Svitkina , T . M . and Borisy , G . G . ( 1999b ) . Arp2 / 3 complex and actin depolymerizing factor / coﬁlin in dendritic organization and treadmilling of actin ﬁlament array in lamellipodia . J . Cell Biol . 145 , 1009 - 1026 . Svitkina , T . M . , Verkhovsky , A . B . , McQuade , K . M . and Borisy , G . G . ( 1997 ) . Analysis of the actin - myosin II system in ﬁsh epidermal keratocytes : mechanism of cell body translocation . J . Cell Biol . 139 , 397 - 415 . Svitkina , T . M . , Bulanova , E . A . , Chaga , O . Y . , Vignjevic , D . M . , Kojima , S . , Vasiliev , J . M . and Borisy , G . G . ( 2003 ) . Mechanism of ﬁlopodia initiation by reorganization of a dendritic network . J . Cell Biol . 160 , 409 - 421 . Takenawa , T . and Miki , H . ( 2001 ) . WASP and WAVE family proteins : key molecules for rapid rearrangement of cortical actin ﬁlaments and cell movement . J . Cell Sci . 114 , 1801 - 1809 . Tal , T . , Vaizel - Ohayon , D . and Schejter , E . D . ( 2002 ) . Conserved interactions with cytoskeletal but not signaling elements are an essential aspect of Drosophila WASp function . Dev . Biol . 243 , 260 - 271 . Thrasher , A . J . ( 2002 ) . Wasp in immune - system organization and function . Nat . Rev . Immunol . 2 , 635 - 646 . Ui , K . , Nishihara , S . , Sakuma , M . , Togashi , S . , Ueda , R . , Miyata , Y . and Miyake , T . ( 1994 ) . Newly established cell lines from Drosophila larval CNS express neural speciﬁc characteristics . In Vitro Cell Dev . Biol . Anim . 30A , 209 - 216 . Vignjevic , D . , Yarar , D . , Welch , M . D . , Peloquin , J . , Svitkina , T . and Borisy , G . G . ( 2003 ) . Formation of ﬁlopodia - like bundles in vitro from a dendritic network . J . Cell Biol . 160 , 951 - 962 . Wood , W . and Martin , P . ( 2002 ) . Structures in focus - ﬁlopodia . Int . J . Biochem . Cell Biol . 34 , 726 - 730 . Yanagawa , S . , Lee , J . S . and Ishimoto , A . ( 1998 ) . Identiﬁcation and characterization of a novel line of Drosophila Schneider S2 cells that respond to wingless signaling . J . Biol . Chem . 273 , 32353 - 32359 . Zallen , J . A . , Cohen , Y . , Hudson , A . M . , Cooley , L . , Wieschaus , E . and Schejter , E . D . ( 2002 ) . SCAR is a primary regulator of Arp2 / 3 - dependent morphological events in Drosophila . J . Cell Biol . 156 , 689 - 701 . Journal of Cell Science 117 ( 6 )