Research Article 1425 Introduction The notion that focal adhesions ( FAs ) are force - sensing structures was proposed over a decade ago , on the basis of experiments with agents that perturb the mechanical properties of cytoskeletal actomyosin ( Volberg et al . , 1994 ; Chrzanowska - Wodnicka and Burridge , 1996 ) . Indeed , all known inhibitors of myosin II light chain phosphorylation , as well as the drug blebbistatin , which interferes with actin - dependent myosin II ATPase activity ( Kovacs et al . , 2004 ) , were shown to prevent the formation of mature FAs , and induce rapid disassembly of existing ones ( Geiger et al . , 2009 ; Wolfenson et al . , 2009a ) . The myosin IIA isoform was later shown to have a primary role in the growth and maintenance of FAs ( Sandquist et al . , 2006 ; Even - Ram et al . , 2007 ; Vicente - Manzanares et al . , 2007 ) . The mechanosensory function of FAs was corroborated by experiments in which FA growth was induced by local mechanical stimulation ( Riveline et al . , 2001 ; Sniadecki et al . , 2007 ) . Notably , the incorporation of some protein components into FAs can even be triggered by stretching detergent - demembranated cytoskeletons ( Sawada and Sheetz , 2002 ) . In the search for molecular mechanisms underlying FA mechanosensitivity , several pathways were recently discovered . Binding of vinculin to talin was shown to be strongly enhanced by stretching the talin rod , an act that unfolds cryptic vinculin - binding sites ( del Rio et al . , 2009 ) . Moreover , stretching forces applied to an integrin molecule enhanced its interactions with extracellular matrix ( ECM ) proteins in a ‘catch - bond’ fashion ( Friedland et al . , 2009 ; Kong et al . , 2009 ) . Signaling components of FAs , such as p130Cas , were also shown to display mechanosensory characteristics ( Sawada et al . , 2006 ) . Recently , it was shown that recruitment of vinculin to FAs is mediated by myosin II contractility - induced paxillin phosphorylation by focal adhesion kinase ( FAK ) ( Pasapera et al . , 2010 ) . Several other mechanisms were also suggested , based on theoretical models of FA organization ( Nicolas et al . , 2004 ; Bruinsma , 2005 ; Shemesh et al . , 2005 ; Besser and Safran , 2006 ) . Morphological monitoring of FA precursors ( nascent FAs or focal complexes ) has shown them to be short - lived adhesions that can either disassemble or grow into FAs , a process that is apparently driven by mechanical stress ( Riveline et al . , 2001 ; Vicente - Manzanares et al . , 2007 ) . In addition to monitoring FAs at the structural level , FA dynamics were also studied at the molecular level : FRAP studies have shown that FA proteins exchange with cytoplasmic proteins at varying rates ( Ballestrem et al . , 2001 ; Hamadi et al . , 2005 ; Lele et al . , 2006 ; Wolfenson et al . , 2009b ) ; fluorescence correlation microscopy demonstrated that the binding or unbinding of FA proteins depends on FA assembly or disassembly status , location in the cell and apparent translocation ( Digman et al . , 2008 ; Digman et al . , 2009 ) ; additional studies gave a measure of the integrin – actin linkage ( Brown et al . , 2006 ) and of the coupling between the centripetal flow of FA proteins and actin , through FAs ( Hu et al . , 2007 ; Gardel et al . , 2008 ; Ji et al . , 2008 ) . Taken together , the above data indicate that FAs are mechanosensitive , dynamic structures that undergo structural reorganization on a time scale of minutes to hours , and that molecular turnover of their plaque components occurs within seconds . However , the mechanism ( s ) whereby mechanical force affects FA structure and , in particular , the effects of force on the turnover of individual proteins within FAs , remain enigmatic . Here we show , in both live and permeabilized cells , that actomyosin - generated forces regulate the molecular kinetics of vinculin , paxillin and zyxin . Interestingly , inhibition of actomyosin tension using the drug blebbistatin had distinct , often opposite Summary Focal adhesions ( FAs ) have key roles in the interaction of cells with the extracellular matrix ( ECM ) and in adhesion - mediated signaling . These dynamic , multi - protein structures sense the ECM both chemically and physically , and respond to external and internal forces by changing their size and signaling activity . However , this mechanosensitivity is still poorly understood at the molecular level . Here , we present direct evidence that actomyosin contractility regulates the molecular kinetics of FAs . We show that the molecular turnover of proteins within FAs is primarily regulated by their dissociation rate constant ( k off ) , which is sensitive to changes in forces applied to the FA . We measured the early changes in k off values for three FA proteins ( vinculin , paxillin and zyxin ) upon inhibition of actomyosin - generated forces using two methods – high temporal resolution FRAP and direct measurement of FA protein dissociation in permeabilized cells . When myosin II contractility was inhibited , the k off values for all three proteins changed rapidly , in a highly protein - specific manner : dissociation of vinculin from FAs was facilitated , whereas dissociation of paxillin and zyxin was attenuated . We hypothesize that these early kinetic changes initiate FA disassembly by affecting the molecular turnover of FAs and altering their composition . Key words : Focal adhesions , Actomyosin contractility , Mechanosensitivity Accepted 23 December 2010 Journal of Cell Science 124 , 1425 - 1432 ©2011 . Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 077388 Actomyosin - generated tension controls the molecular kinetics of focal adhesions Haguy Wolfenson 1 , Alexander Bershadsky 2 , Yoav I . Henis 1 and Benjamin Geiger 2 , * 1 Department of Neurobiology , George S . Wise Faculty of Life Sciences , Tel Aviv University , Tel Aviv 69978 , Israel 2 Department of Molecular Cell Biology , Weizmann Institute of Science , Rehovot 76100 , Israel * Author for correspondence ( benny . geiger @ weizmann . ac . il ) J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e effects on the three proteins : paxillin dissociation from FAs was attenuated by blebbistatin - mediated relaxation , zyxin displayed a similar ( albeit weaker ) response , whereas vinculin dissociation was facilitated by this treatment . At a later stage , inhibition of actomyosin contractility by blebbistatin led to the gradual disassembly of FAs . This effect was also differential , as the three proteins exited FAs at different onset times , and at different rates . Based on these findings , we suggest that changes in the molecular kinetics of FA components following inhibition of actomyosin - based contractility ultimately lead to changes in FA molecular composition and to gradual FA disassembly . Results Inhibition of myosin II contractility leads to long - term FA disassembly at varying rates , depending on the FA protein To determine the effects of the relaxation of mechanical stress on FA organization , we analyzed time - lapse movies for changes induced by blebbistatin in the local intensities of YFP - tagged FA plaque proteins in HeLa cells . We focused on paxillin , vinculin and zyxin because of their diverse turnover rates within FAs ( Lele et al . , 2006 ; Wolfenson et al . , 2009b ) . For paxillin and vinculin , the observed differences in turnover rates are particularly intriguing , because they were shown to directly interact with each other ( Turner and Miller , 1994 ; Salgia et al . , 1995 ; Mazaki et al . , 1997 ) . Also , zyxin and vinculin have been shown to be highly mechanosensitive ( Zaidel - Bar et al . , 2003 ; Mierke et al . , 2008 ) , but the dependence of paxillin organization on mechanical stress has not been characterized . In line with previous studies ( Nayal et al . , 2006 ; Zaidel - Bar et al . , 2007a ) , blebbistatin induced major changes in the distribution of all three proteins , manifested by partial disruption of large FAs and accumulation of small FAs along the cell periphery ( Fig . 1A ) . Quantitative analysis of large FAs located at cell lamella indicated that the rate of intensity loss differed for each protein ( Fig . 1B ) . Paxillin displayed a delayed response to blebbistatin , which was only apparent 8 – 10 minutes after applying the drug , and its levels within FAs decreased gradually to ~ 20 % of the initial intensity over 60 minutes . Vinculin levels in FAs began to decline earlier ( after ~ 2 minutes ) and at a faster rate , stabilizing at 15 – 20 % of the initial intensity within 35 – 40 minutes of blebbistatin treatment . Changes in zyxin levels were apparent at ~ 1 minute after addition of the drug , followed by a rapid decrease in its FA levels , which stabilized at ~ 10 % of the initial intensity after 20 minutes . Notably , the FA - associated fluorescence of the three proteins in untreated cells ( no blebbistatin ) remained relatively stable over time , showing only small , transient fluctuations ( Fig . 1C and supplementary material Fig . S1 ) . These results indicate that different plaque proteins exit FAs at varying rates , following blebbistatin treatment , with typical half - times ranging from 10 – 15 minutes for zyxin and vinculin , to ~ 40 minutes for paxillin . Notably , this time frame is considerably longer than the exchange rates of the respective proteins , as determined by FRAP ( see below ) . Specifically , the values of the characteristic fluorescence recovery time for the molecular exchange process (  ex , the time required to attain half of the recoverable fluorescence by exchange in a FRAP experiment ) , measured for the same proteins in HeLa cells in the absence of blebbistatin , were 9 . 1 seconds for paxillin , 40 . 1 seconds for vinculin and 2 . 8 seconds for zyxin ( see below ) . These values are about 260 , 20 and 220 times less than the corresponding half times for exit of these proteins from FAs following blebbistatin treatment . Performing the opposite experiment , using the serine / threonine phosphatase inhibitor calyculin A ( 5 nM ) for 10 minutes to increase actomyosin contractility ( Ishihara et al . , 1989 ; Henson et al . , 2003 ) , resulted in a gradual increase in FA area , without influencing the intensity of paxillin – YFP ( Fig . 2A ) . Interestingly , in the 10 minutes after addition of calyculin A , there were no noticeable differences in paxillin – YFP FRAP when the laser beam was focused on the 1426 Journal of Cell Science 124 ( 9 ) Fig . 1 . Effect of blebbistatin on FA reorganization in HeLa cells expressing YFP - tagged paxillin , vinculin or zyxin . Frames from time - lapse movies were analyzed by temporal ratio imaging . ( A )  Ratio between the intensity at time point 0 ( first column ) and time points 10 , 30 and 60 minutes . Scale bar : 5  m m . Red shift denotes structures with decreased intensity ; blue shift denotes an increase in intensity ; green and yellow hues mark unchanged pixels . Whereas paxillin showed a delayed reaction to blebbistatin , vinculin and zyxin responded much faster ( compare time points 0’ : 10’ and 0’ : 30’ ) . ( B , C )  Mean relative FA fluorescence ( ± s . e . m . , in lighter hues ) over time , as derived from the time - lapse movies ( n  10 – 15 ) . FAs in cells treated with blebbistatin disassemble over time , resulting in very small FAs ( B ) , whereas FAs in untreated cells remain stable over time , and their mean relative fluorescence levels fluctuate around 100 % ( C ) . J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e center of FAs ( to avoid regions of FA growth ; Fig . 2B ) . These results suggest that there is an apparent plateau in the dependence of the exchange rate on force , so that the added contraction in the calyculin - A - treated cells does not affect the exchange kinetics . Relaxation of actomyosin - generated tension rapidly changes the rate of molecular turnover of different FA components in a protein - specific manner The discrepancy between the rates of net loss of FA proteins and their normal exchange rates , seen when myosin - II contractility was inhibited , raises an intriguing question : what is the relationship between the molecular kinetics of FA proteins and their overall structural reorganization , when mechanical force is reduced ? To address this issue , we took advantage of the fact that the local intensity of each of the FA proteins did not decline substantially during the initial 5 minutes after addition of blebbistatin ( Fig . 1 ) . Within this time frame , no major alterations in actin filament organization were noticed ( data not shown ) . However , the reduction in traction force was almost immediate , as could be deduced by observing wrinkles produced by HeLa cells plated onto flexible silicone rubber substrate ( Harris et al . , 1980 ) ; blebbistatin treatment led to the disappearance of such wrinkles in less than 20 seconds ( Fig . 3A ) . Also , all three proteins showed similar kinetics of reduction in FA area within 8 minutes of blebbistatin treatment , and differences only appeared later ( Fig . 3B ) . The reduction in FA area typically occurred at the distal edge of the FA ( the edge pointing towards the cell periphery ) , and was sometimes accompanied by inward translocation of the FAs , in line with previous studies ( Zamir et al . , 2000 ; Ballestrem et al . , 2001 ) . Notably , it was shown that the turnover rate of FA plaque proteins at this edge is much slower than that seen at the center of FAs ( Webb et al . , 2003 ; Wolfenson et al . , 2009b ) . In view of these findings , we chose to focus on the initial 5 minutes after the addition of blebbistatin , and conduct FRAP experiments in the center of FAs ( to avoid regions of FA reduction or translocation ) within this timeframe . Notably , we have recently shown ( Wolfenson et al . , 2009b ) that FA plaque proteins exist in four dynamic states at steady state : a fast - diffusing cytoplasmic pool ; a juxtamembrane cytoplasmic fraction surrounding FAs and displaying attenuated diffusion ; an FA - associated fraction undergoing exchange with the juxtamembrane fraction ; and an immobile FA - bound fraction . To explore the mechanosensitivity of these kinetic processes , we now performed FRAP studies on live cells before or within 5 minutes of blebbistatin treatment . These measurements indicated that force reduction by blebbistatin had no effect on the cytoplasmic - diffusing and juxtamembrane - diffusing fractions ( supplementary material Fig . S2 ) , but did alter the kinetics of the exchanging and immobile fractions of all three proteins inside FAs ( Fig . 4 ) . For paxillin and zyxin , the effects of blebbistatin were similar , manifested by a reduction in both the mobile fraction ( R f ) and the exchange rates of the exchanging population , as determined by fitting the FRAP data to the analytical expression for FRAP by diffusion in the juxtamembrane region , followed by exchange ( see the Materials and Methods ) ( Wolfenson et al . , 2009b ) . For vinculin , however , treatment with blebbistatin increased both the exchange rate and R f ( Fig . 4 ) . Similar effects on the three proteins were observed within ~ 1 – 2 minutes of treatment with the Rho kinase inhibitor Y - 27632 ( 25 m M ) , which is known to reduce cell contraction ( supplementary material Fig . S3 ) , supporting the notion that the effects observed are controlled by mechanical force . A similar effect on paxillin recovery was also seen when the same experiments were performed on nontransformed cells ( REF52 rat embryo fibroblasts ) . Here , force reduction by blebbistatin ( measured 1 – 5 minutes after addition of the drug ) induced an increase in  ex of paxillin – YFP , from 10 . 5 seconds to 133 seconds . These findings indicate that the force - reduction effect is general , and not limited to transformed cells . Taken together , the results presented here indicate that changes in turnover kinetics following force reduction differ , among individual FA - associated proteins . Reduction of actomyosin - generated forces regulates the dissociation of plaque proteins from FAs In principle , modulation of the exchange rate of specific proteins from FAs could involve a change in either k off or k on ( the dissociation and association rate constants , respectively ) , or in both . Using blebbistatin and detergent - permeabilized cells , we were able to gain direct information on the force dependence of the processes that control the exchange rates of paxillin , vinculin and zyxin in FAs . To this end , we directly measured the dissociation rates of these FA proteins in Triton X - 100 - permeabilized cells , in which 1427 Mechanical forces regulate FA dynamics Fig . 2 . Effects of calyculin A treatment on FA area , fluorescence intensity and FRAP in HeLa cells expressing paxillin – YFP . ( A )  Live - cell imaging was used to monitor the relative FA area ( green ) and fluorescence intensity ( purple ) in response to calyculin A treatment . Images were taken every 30 seconds , and the resulting data were analyzed using ImageJ . During the 10 minute incubation with calyculin A , a gradual increase in FA area was noticed , without influencing paxillin – YFP intensity . Values are means ± s . e . m . ( B )  Typical FRAP curves of YFP - tagged paxillin before ( blue ) and after ( red ) treatment with calyculin A . Solid lines denote the best fit of a least squares regression analysis . Empty data points below the dashed line correspond to recovery by diffusion ; the slower phase represents proteins that recover by exchange ( Wolfenson et al . , 2009b ) . No significant change in the exchange rate of paxillin – YFP was noted within the 10 minute interval following calyculin A treatment . J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e actomyosin contractility was either maintained or inhibited . When permeabilized , cytoplasmic proteins are diluted to near infinity as they diffuse into the extracellular medium , dramatically reducing the cytoplasmic concentrations of plaque proteins , and effectively preventing their re - association with FAs . Thus , in these permeabilized cells , association with FAs is negligible , and dissociation from FAs prevails . We permeabilized the cells in HEPES buffer ( pH 6 . 8 ) containing Triton X - 100 , which provides conditions under which the cells preserve their contractile properties , as evidenced by their capacity to maintain the deformation of the flexible substrate to which they adhere ( Fig . 3A ) . Under these conditions , the permeabilized cells lost ~ 80 % of FA - associated paxillin ( Fig . 5 ) . Incubating the cells with blebbistatin before permeabilization , or permeabilizing the cells in MES buffer , pH 6 . 2 ( tension - relaxing conditions ) ( Metzger and Moss , 1990 ) , 1428 Journal of Cell Science 124 ( 9 ) Fig . 3 . Effects of force reduction on cell contraction and FA area . ( A )  Phase - contrast images of HeLa cells plated on coverslips pre - coated with elastic silicon substrata . Contraction of the cells induces wrinkling of the silicon surface ( Harris et al . , 1980 ) . Once the wrinkles are created by the cells , they usually persist for several hours . Top panels , HeLa cells in medium , before ( left ) and after ( right ) addition of Triton X - 100 ( 0 . 1 % final concentration in 20 mM HEPES buffer , pH 6 . 8 , for 10 minutes ) . Virtually no change in the wrinkles is evident following permeabilization of the cells , suggesting that the cellular tension is unaltered under these conditions . Middle panels , cells before ( left ) and after addition of blebbistatin ( Blb ) to a final concentration of 50  m M ( right ) . Note that the wrinkles vanish almost completely . Bottom panels , cells before ( left ) and after ( right ) permeabilization with Triton X - 100 in 50 mM MES buffer , pH 6 . 2 ( tension - relaxing conditions ) ( Metzger and Moss , 1990 ) . The wrinkles disappear within 1 – 2 minutes of permeabilization at the lower pH . ( B )  Effect of blebbistatin on FA area in HeLa cells expressing YFP - tagged paxillin , vinculin or zyxin . Mean relative FA areas ( ± s . e . m . , in lighter hues ) over time were derived from time - lapse movies ( n  10 – 15 ) of cells treated with blebbistatin . For all three proteins , the total FA area decreased essentially instantaneously following blebbistatin treatment , reaching a value of ~ 60 % of the initial areas within 8 minutes . From that point onwards , the rates at which the area decreased differed among the three proteins : for paxillin , the FA area decreased gradually to 20 % of the initial area after 60 minutes ; for vinculin , the FA area continued to drop at a similar rate for an additional 4 minutes , and then gradually decreased to 10 % of the initial area after 60 minutes ; for zyxin , the FA area continued to drop at a similar rate for an additional 4 minutes , but unlike vinculin , it then stabilized at 40 % of the initial area , within 60 minutes after treatment with blebbistatin . Fig . 4 . Effect of blebbistatin treatment on FRAP in FAs . Typical FRAP curves ( left panels ) of YFP - tagged paxillin , vinculin or zyxin , with ( red ) or without blebbistatin ( blue ) . Solid lines denote the best fit of a least squares regression analysis . Average  ex and k off values for each protein are shown ( n  20 – 30 ) . Empty data points below the dashed line correspond to recovery by diffusion ; the slower phase represents proteins that recover by exchange ( Wolfenson et al . , 2009b ) . Mean ± s . e . m . ( n  20 – 30 ) of the fractions undergoing exchange are shown on the right ( * P < 10 – 4 ; Student’s t - test ) . For paxillin and zyxin , blebbistatin induced a decrease in the exchange rates , accompanied by lower exchanging fractions . For vinculin , blebbistatin induced the opposite effect , increasing both the exchange rate and the exchanging fraction . J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e induced instantaneous relaxation of the cells ( Fig . 3A ) , and dramatically reduced the loss of paxillin from FAs ( Fig . 5 ) . These results suggest that relaxation of actomyosin - generated tension attenuates paxillin dissociation from FAs . We next adapted the permeabilized cell models for real - time monitoring of the effects of mechanical force on the k off of paxillin , vinculin and zyxin . As shown in Fig . 6 , all three proteins followed first - order dissociation kinetics from FAs , enabling us to extract the k off values from the half - time of the fluorescence loss curves ( t 1 / 2 ) . Notably , for all three proteins , these k off values were essentially identical to those derived from the FRAP experiments ( compare Figs 4 and 6 ) . Analogous studies of cells treated with 50 m M blebbistatin for 1 minute before permeabilization were in excellent agreement with the FRAP data . Thus , k off for paxillin and zyxin in the presence of blebbistatin decreased from 0 . 1 second – 1 to 0 . 011 second  – 1 and from 0 . 35 second  – 1 to 0 . 22 second  – 1 , respectively . However , k off for vinculin increased from 0 . 027 second  – 1 to 0 . 078 second  – 1 . Permeabilizing the cells at pH 6 . 2 reduced k off for paxillin and zyxin , and increased k off for vinculin ( data not shown ) , which is similar to the effects induced by blebbistatin . These results corroborate the findings from the FRAP experiments , and show that the molecular turnover of proteins within FAs is primarily regulated by k off ( see below ) , which , in turn , is sensitive to changes in the forces applied to the FA . Discussion The current study provides the first direct evidence for the involvement of mechanical force in regulating the molecular kinetics of FA components . In an earlier report ( Lele et al . , 2006 ) , FRAP was used for monitoring the effects of force on FA dynamics ; however , the limited temporal resolution in that study did not allow for proper analysis of the initial phase of the FRAP curves . Furthermore , the possible differential effects on different FA plaque proteins were not investigated . The assumption in that study was that recovery in the cytoplasm is instantaneous ; as shown in our studies , this assumption is not valid for the juxtamembrane cytoplasm above FAs , where FA plaque proteins display attenuated diffusion ( Wolfenson et al . , 2009b ) . Moreover , the studies presented herein provide the first direct measurement of k off from FAs using the detergent - mediated dissociation assay , and enable comparison between this biochemical assay and FRAP measurements conducted on live cells . Our use of permeabilized cell models , coupled with an ability to conduct FRAP measurements at a temporal resolution high enough to record the initial phase of the FRAP curves , and to fit the experimental data to a model of diffusion plus exchange , shed new light on the mechanical regulation of FA molecular kinetics . Dissociation of plaque proteins from FAs is the rate - limiting step in their molecular turnover One of the assumptions in the proposed model in our previous study ( Wolfenson et al . , 2009b ) was that protein exchange within FAs at steady state obey first - order kinetics , where k off C m  k on C c [ C m and C c represent protein concentrations in the membrane and the cytoplasm , respectively ( Wolfenson et al . , 2009b ) ] . Here , we present direct evidence that the dissociation of paxillin , vinculin and zyxin from FAs is indeed a first - order process ( Fig . 6 ) . Moreover , the dissociation rates measured in the permeabilized cell models were essentially identical to those obtained by fitting the FRAP data to the analytical expression based on the above model . Given the fact that in the permeabilized cells , the only process effectively measured is dissociation from FAs , we suggest that the dissociation of FA plaque proteins from the membrane is the rate - limiting step in the exchange process . Thus , in order for a cytoplasmic molecule to bind to a FA , a bound molecule has to first dissociate from its binding partner ( s ) on the membrane . Otherwise , a second - order process , in which association is the rate - limiting step , would occur ( i . e . proteins entering the FA would cause the dissociation of pre - bound proteins ) . This latter mechanism is possible , but rather unlikely , because two independent methods for k off determination ( FRAP and loss of fluorescence from FAs in permeabilized cells ) yielded essentially the same values , although in the latter method , re - association was negligible as a result of dilution of the dissociating protein into the medium . Although one cannot fully exclude the possibility that treatment with Triton X - 100 might have some differential effects on the kinetics of individual FA components , the fact that we obtained essentially the same k off values for all three proteins tested as those measured by FRAP in intact cells , strongly suggests that if such effects exist , they do not significantly interfere with our measurements . It should be noted that association of proteins with FAs does occur in the unperturbed cells measured in the FRAP experiments ; however , because dissociation is the rate - limiting step , and the cytoplasmic reservoir of plaque proteins is large enough so that association with FAs does not alter their effective concentrations in the cytoplasm , the product of k on C c can be regarded as a constant . 1429 Mechanical forces regulate FA dynamics Fig . 5 . Effect of reduction of actomyosin - generated forces on paxillin dissociation from FAs . Fluorescent ( left ) or phase - contrast images ( right ) of HeLa cells plated on FN - coated coverslips . Cells were incubated ( 5 minutes ) in either HEPES buffer , pH 6 . 8 , supplemented with Triton X - 100 , with or without 1 minute pre - incubation with blebbistatin , or in MES buffer , pH 6 . 2 , supplemented with Triton X - 100 . Cells were then fixed and immunolabeled for paxillin . At pH 6 . 8 , in the absence of blebbistatin , almost no FAs were detected . However , substantial amounts of FAs were identified in cells pre - incubated with blebbistatin at pH 6 . 8 , or incubated at pH 6 . 2 . J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e Model for the observed differential effects of actomyosin contractility on the turnover of specific proteins within FAs Quantification of blebbistatin - induced relaxation on FAs showed that it affected the three plaque proteins in differing ways : paxillin dissociation from FAs was strongly attenuated and zyxin was similarly affected , although less dramatically ; however , dissociation of vinculin from FAs was facilitated by blebbistatin . These results indicate that inhibition of actomyosin contractility does not merely enhance long - term FA disassembly , but has specific effects on the exchange kinetics of different FA components . To illustrate this principle , we propose a hypothetical model that could account for the observed differential effects of actomyosin relaxation on the turnover of distinct FA proteins . Conceptually , this model suggests that the FA multiprotein scaffold is subject to mechanical forces generated by the contractile machinery of the cell . These forces can deform the scaffold ( which is probably elastic ) , thereby changing the distribution of binding sites , and hence , the apparent affinity of different FA components ( e . g . paxillin , vinculin and zyxin ) . An intriguing feature is that reduction of actomyosin - generated stress might reduce k off for some components ( paxillin , zyxin ) but increase k off for others ( vinculin ) . A schematic representation of such a hypothetical model is shown in Fig . 7 . This model suggests that the availability of binding sites for specific components is differentially regulated following force - induced extension , or upon relaxation of the elastic FA - associated scaffold . Specifically , for paxillin and zyxin , force reduction resulted in decreased dissociation rates , while at the same time , a long - term FA disassembly process was observed . This indicates that even though dissociation is the rate - limiting step in the process of molecular turnover , it is not the only determining factor in long - term FA disassembly ; rather , effects on the association rates of plaque proteins with FAs might have a major role later . This notion is in line with the model presented here , because changes in the availability of binding sites might affect both k on and k off . Interestingly , zyxin was shown to translocate from FAs to stress fibers upon application of force , whereas paxillin did not ( Yoshigi et al . , 2005 ) , suggesting either an increase in the affinity of zyxin to actin under stretching forces , or greater availability of zyxin in the cytoplasm , as a result of its dissociation from FAs . Our findings indicate that under force relaxation , k off for zyxin is reduced ( Figs 4 , 6 ) and zyxin levels in FAs are rapidly diminished ( within ~ 1 minute ; unlike paxillin , which showed a delayed response ; see Fig . 1430 Journal of Cell Science 124 ( 9 ) Fig . 6 . Typical curves of fluorescence loss from FAs after treatment with Triton X - 100 . Time - lapse movies of HeLa cells expressing YFP - tagged paxillin , vinculin or zyxin , treated with Triton X - 100 at pH 6 . 8 , with or without pre - incubation with blebbistatin , were analyzed for loss of fluorescence from FAs . The same data for each protein are presented on linear ( top ) and logarithmic scales ( bottom ) . Blebbistatin reduced the fluorescence loss rates for paxillin and zyxin , but enhanced the loss rate for vinculin . k off ± s . e . m . values ( calculated using k off  ln ( 2 ) / t 1 / 2 for a first - order process ; see the Materials and Methods ) are presented for untreated ( blue ) or blebbistatin - treated cells ( red ) ( n  15 – 20 ) . Note the similarities between the k off values presented here , and those in Fig . 4 . Fig . 7 . A hypothetical scheme depicting the dynamics of FA proteins at steady state and immediately after relaxation of the force applied to the FA . FAs are represented by an elastic scaffold to which molecules are transiently bound , and exchange with similar molecules outside the FA ( red and green symbols ) . ( A )  When an FA experiences a threshold pulling force ( black arrow ) , the conformation of the binding modules and their mutual organization permit the steady - state level of exchange of FA components ( which differ between proteins ) . ( B )  When the pulling force drops , the conformation and organization of the modules change , due to contraction of previously stretched internal elements . As a result , dissociation of some proteins from the modules is facilitated ( green symbols ) , whereas others become more strongly tethered , and their dissociation is inhibited ( red symbols ) . These changes in dissociation rates create an imbalance in the module composition , which eventually leads to FA disassembly ( data not shown ) . J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e 1 ) . These observations suggest that the reduction in the association rate of zyxin is more drastic than in its dissociation rate , in line with former observations ( Yoshigi et al . , 2005 ) . Apparently , this is not the case for paxillin , because the initial rate of loss of paxillin fluorescence from FAs after blebbistatin treatment ( Fig . 1 ) is relatively low . Testing of the model presented here will require extensive characterization of the molecular and physical properties of the FA scaffold , as well as the hierarchy of molecular interactions that regulate the recruitment of specific components from the cytoplasm . In this regard , the differences noted between the response of paxillin and vinculin to force reduction might at first seem surprising , because the two are known to directly bind each other at FAs . However , we suggest that under these conditions , other pathways could have a role in determining the exchange kinetics of these proteins . These include interactions with other components of the integrin adhesome ( Zaidel - Bar et al . , 2007b ) , conformational changes in proteins that could affect their interactions ( Grashoff et al . , 2010 ; del Rio et al . , 2009 ) , or post - translational modifications that might regulate the binding and dissociation of the proteins ( Nayal et al . , 2006 ; Zaidel - Bar et al . , 2007a ) . Interestingly , it was recently shown that treatment with blebbistatin for 1 hour results in disruption of the paxillin – vinculin interaction , because of the reduced phosphorylation levels of paxillin ( as a result of decreased FAK recruitment to FAs ) ( Pasapera et al . , 2010 ) . We propose that such long - term , signaling - dependent effects are important for regulation of the composition of FAs , whereas the immediate short - term effects on the turnover of plaque proteins in response to force reduction might provide the underlying mechanism for the initiation of FA disassembly . The results of the current study , and in particular , the fact that the turnover of individual FA plaque proteins is differentially regulated by mechanical force , imply that changes in stress at FAs ultimately lead to changes in their molecular composition . This might be attributed to the variable rates of dissociation and onset of response , following alterations in local stress ( Fig . 1 ) . This notion is in line with the measured effect of actomyosin relaxation on FA molecular composition ( Zamir et al . , 2008 ) . Moreover , it is conceivable that under conditions of long - term stress reduction , alterations in composition underlie the changes in FA area and stress fiber induction . Notably , however , such global changes occur at rates that are 1 – 2 orders of magnitude slower than the molecular exchange rate of the corresponding proteins ( compare the timescales in Figs 1 , 4 and 6 ) . These new findings on FA dynamics present a novel perspective on FA organization at steady state . At this stage , this perspective is necessarily incomplete , because out of the vast repertoire of FA proteins , we focused here on only three , and a detailed study of other key proteins is still missing . In addition , the link between mechanosensitivity at the molecular and structural levels should be studied thoroughly , perhaps by observing its effects on these levels under different known force regimes with quantitative measurement of the force generated by the actomyosin machinery . Materials and Methods Reagents , plasmids and buffers MES , HEPES , PBS , HBSS , polyethylene glycol ( PEG ) 8000 , EGTA and fibronectin ( FN ) were supplied by Sigma . TransIT - LT1 transfection reagent was purchased from Mirus . Blebbistatin was purchased from Calbiochem . The buffers used for experiments involving live cell permeabilization consisted of HBSS supplemented with 2 % PEG8000 , 1 m M EGTA , either with 20 mM HEPES , pH 6 . 8 or 50 mM MES , pH 6 . 2 . In all experiments , a concentration of 50 m M blebbistatin was used . Cell lines and transfection The HeLa - JW cell line expressing paxillin – YFP was previously described ( Paran et al . , 2006 ) . For experiments involving transient expression ( vinculin – YFP , zyxin – YFP ) , cells were transfected with TransIT - LT1 transfection reagent . All cell lines were cultured in DMEM , supplemented with 10 % FCS , 100 U / ml penicillin , 100 m g / ml streptomycin and 4 mM glutamine . In all experiments , cells were plated on 20 m g / ml fibronectin - coated coverslips . All cell culture reagents were supplied by Biological Industries . FRAP measurements FRAP studies were conducted on live cells expressing distinct YFP - tagged FA proteins . The cells were taken for FRAP experiments 24 hours after plating on glass coverslips coated with 20 m g / ml fibronectin . Measurements were taken in HBSS supplemented with 20 mM HEPES , pH 7 . 2 , at 37°C . An argon ion laser beam ( Innova 70C ; Coherent ) was focused through a fluorescence microscope ( AxioImager D . 1 ; Carl Zeiss MicroImaging ) to a Gaussian spot of 0 . 77±0 . 01 m m ( plan - apochromat 63 (cid:2) / 1 . 4 NA oil - immersion objective ) . After a brief measurement at monitoring intensity ( 528 nm , 1 m W ) , a 5 mW pulse ( ~ 10 ms ) was used to bleach 50 – 75 % of the fluorescence in the spot . The time course of fluorescence recovery was tracked by the attenuated monitoring beam . In Fig . 4 , the k off and R f values were extracted ( except in the case of paxillin in blebbistatin - treated cells , where k off could not be determined owing to inability to fit such shallow curves ) from the averaged FRAP curves by nonlinear regression analysis , fitting to the analytical expression for a combination of lateral diffusion and exchange ( Wolfenson et al . , 2009b ) . In short , this analytical expression was derived to fit FRAP curves in which fluorescence recovery is composed of two mechanisms : ( 1 ) diffusion in the cytoplasm ; and ( 2 ) exchange of membrane molecules with cytoplasmic molecules . We previously showed that in the case of FAs , the rates of the two processes are well separated , and it is possible to approximate the data as two populations , one recovering by relatively fast diffusion and the other by slow exchange . This enables extraction of the mobile fraction ( R f ) and the rate constant for dissociation from FAs ( k off ) ( Wolfenson et al . , 2009b ) . In supplementary material Fig . S2 , the characteristic diffusion time ,  D , was extracted from fitting the FRAP curves to the analytical expression only for diffusion ( Axelrod et al . , 1976 ) . Immunolabeling , imaging and analysis For immunofluorescence labeling ( Fig . 5 ) , cells were incubated for 5 minutes either with HBSS / HEPES buffer , pH 6 . 8 , supplemented with 2 % PEG8000 , 1 m M EGTA and 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 , with or without pre - incubation for 1 minute with 50 m M blebbistatin ; or , alternatively , incubated with HBSS / MES buffer , pH 6 . 2 , supplemented with 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 . Under these conditions , the cells maintain their general structure , despite the rapid extraction of cytoplasmic content ( Crowley and Horwitz , 1995 ) . After fixation with 4 % paraformaldehyde , cells were labeled with 5 m g / ml mouse anti - paxillin ( BD Transduction Laboratories ) , followed by 3 m g / ml Cy3 - goat anti – mouse IgG ( Jackson Immunoresearch Laboratories , Inc . ) . For time - lapse movies ( representative frames shown in Fig . 1 ) , cells were imaged at 37°C , using a TILL iMIC digital microscope ( TILL Photonics ) equipped with a plan - apochromat 100 (cid:2) / 1 . 45 NA oil - immersion objective ( Olympus ) . The imaging set - up consisted of an epi - illumination Polychrome V monochromator set at 514 nm for YFP excitation , a 520 – 550 nm band - pass filter for emitted light ( Chroma Technology ) and an Andor iXon 888 EMCCD camera ( Andor Technology ) . Live imaging was controlled by Live Acquisition software ( TILL Photonics ) . Temporal ratio imaging analysis following treatment with 50 m M blebbistatin ( Fig . 1 ) was performed as previously described ( Zamir et al . , 1999 ) . In general , dividing the intensity values of each pixel at time point 0 by the intensity in the same pixel 10 , 30 and 60 minutes later , created the temporal ratio images , which are presented in color scale according to the look - up table . For measurements of fluorescence loss from FAs after treatment with Triton X - 100 , cells were imaged at a rate of 1 Hz for 10 – 15 frames . Triton X - 100 was then added to a final concentration of 0 . 1 % ( with or without pre - incubation with 50 m M blebbistatin for 1 minute ) , and imaging continued until no differences in fluorescence intensity over time could be detected . Quantification of fluorescence intensity in FAs over time ( Figs 1 , 2 , 6 and supplementary material Fig . S1 ) and of changes in FA area ( Figs 2 , 3 ) was performed using ImageJ software ( NIH ) , after correcting for fluorescence bleaching over time , using data from untreated cells . Quantification of fluorescence loss from FAs ( Fig . 6 ) began immediately after the fluorescence from the surrounding cytoplasm disappeared , due to leakage from the permeabilized cells . Mapping the fluorescence loss from FA data on logarithmic graphs enabled us to establish that this process follows first - order kinetics ( Fig . 6 ) ; we could then extract k off for each protein , using k off  ln ( 2 ) / t 1 / 2 ( for a first - order process ) . Y . I . H . is the incumbent of the Zalman Weinberg Chair in Cell Biology . B . G . is the incumbent of the Professor Erwin Neter Chair in Cell and Tumor Biology . This study was supported by a grant from the NIH Cell Migration Consortium ( U54GM64346 ) and the NIH Nanomedicine Development Center Network ; NIH grant PN2 1431 Mechanical forces regulate FA dynamics J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e EY016586 ) to B . G . , and by a DFG - DIP grant ( KL 1948 / 1 - 1 , GA 309 / 10 - 1 ) to Y . I . H . Deposited in PMC for release after 12 months . Supplementary material available online at http : / / jcs . biologists . org / cgi / content / full / 124 / 9 / 1425 / DC1 References Axelrod , D . , Koppel , D . E . , Schlessinger , J . , Elson , E . and Webb , W . W . ( 1976 ) . Mobility measurement by analysis of fluorescence photobleaching recovery kinetics . Biophys . J . 16 , 1055 - 1069 . Ballestrem , C . , Hinz , B . , Imhof , B . A . and Wehrle - Haller , B . ( 2001 ) . Marching at the front and dragging behind : differential  V  3 - integrin turnover regulates focal adhesion behavior . J . Cell Biol . 155 , 1319 - 1332 . Besser , A . and Safran , S . A . ( 2006 ) . Force - induced adsorption and anisotropic growth of focal adhesions . Biophys . J . 90 , 3469 - 3484 . Brown , C . M . , Hebert , B . , Kolin , D . L . , Zareno , J . , Whitmore , L . , Horwitz , A . R . and Wiseman , P . W . ( 2006 ) . Probing the integrin - actin linkage using high - resolution protein velocity mapping . J . Cell Sci . 119 , 5204 - 5214 . Bruinsma , R . ( 2005 ) . Theory of force regulation by nascent adhesion sites . Biophys . J . 89 , 87 - 94 . Chrzanowska - Wodnicka , M . and Burridge , K . ( 1996 ) . Rho - stimulated contractility drives the formation of stress fibers and focal adhesions . J . Cell Biol . 133 , 1403 - 1415 . Crowley , E . and Horwitz , A . F . ( 1995 ) . Tyrosine phosphorylation and cytoskeletal tension regulate the release of fibroblast adhesions . J . Cell Biol . 131 , 525 - 537 . del Rio , A . , Perez - Jimenez , R . , Liu , R . , Roca - Cusachs , P . , Fernandez , J . M . and Sheetz , M . P . ( 2009 ) . Stretching single talin rod molecules activates vinculin binding . Science 323 , 638 - 641 . Digman , M . A . , Brown , C . M . , Horwitz , A . R . , Mantulin , W . W . and Gratton , E . ( 2008 ) . Paxillin dynamics measured during adhesion assembly and disassembly by correlation spectroscopy . Biophys . J . 94 , 2819 - 2831 . Digman , M . A . , Wiseman , P . W . , Horwitz , A . R . and Gratton , E . ( 2009 ) . Detecting protein complexes in living cells from laser scanning confocal image sequences by the cross correlation raster image spectroscopy method . Biophys . J . 96 , 707 - 716 . Even - Ram , S . , Doyle , A . D . , Conti , M . A . , Matsumoto , K . , Adelstein , R . S . and Yamada , K . M . ( 2007 ) . Myosin IIA regulates cell motility and actomyosin - microtubule crosstalk . Nat . Cell Biol . 9 , 299 - 309 . Friedland , J . C . , Lee , M . H . and Boettiger , D . ( 2009 ) . Mechanically activated integrin switch controls alpha5beta1 function . Science 323 , 642 - 644 . Gardel , M . L . , Sabass , B . , Ji , L . , Danuser , G . , Schwarz , U . S . and Waterman , C . M . ( 2008 ) . Traction stress in focal adhesions correlates biphasically with actin retrograde flow speed . J . Cell Biol . 183 , 999 - 1005 . Geiger , B . , Spatz , J . P . and Bershadsky , A . D . ( 2009 ) . Environmental sensing through focal adhesions . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 10 , 21 - 33 . Grashoff , C . , Hoffman , B . D . , Brenner , M . D . , Zhou , R . , Parsons , M . , Yang , M . T . , McLean , M . A . , Sligar , S . G . , Chen , C . S . , Ha , T . et al . ( 2010 ) . Measuring mechanical tension across vinculin reveals regulation of focal adhesion dynamics . Nature 466 , 263 - 266 . Hamadi , A . , Bouali , M . , Dontenwill , M . , Stoeckel , H . , Takeda , K . and Ronde , P . ( 2005 ) . Regulation of focal adhesion dynamics and disassembly by phosphorylation of FAK at tyrosine 397 . J . Cell Sci . 118 , 4415 - 4425 . Harris , A . K . , Wild , P . and Stopak , D . ( 1980 ) . Silicone rubber substrata : a new wrinkle in the study of cell locomotion . Science 208 , 177 - 179 . Henson , J . H . , Kolnik , S . E . , Fried , C . A . , Nazarian , R . , McGreevy , J . , Schulberg , K . L . , Detweiler , M . and Trabosh , V . A . ( 2003 ) . Actin - based centripetal flow : phosphatase inhibition by calyculin - A alters flow pattern , actin organization , and actomyosin distribution . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton 56 , 252 - 266 . Hu , K . , Ji , L . , Applegate , K . T . , Danuser , G . and Waterman - Storer , C . M . ( 2007 ) . Differential transmission of actin motion within focal adhesions . Science 315 , 111 - 115 . Ishihara , H . , Martin , B . L . , Brautigan , D . L . , Karaki , H . , Ozaki , H . , Kato , Y . , Fusetani , N . , Watabe , S . , Hashimoto , K . , Uemura , D . et al . ( 1989 ) . Calyculin A and okadaic acid : inhibitors of protein phosphatase activity . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 159 , 871 - 877 . Ji , L . , Lim , J . and Danuser , G . ( 2008 ) . Fluctuations of intracellular forces during cell protrusion . Nat . Cell Biol . 10 , 1393 - 1400 . Kong , F . , Garcia , A . J . , Mould , A . P . , Humphries , M . J . and Zhu , C . ( 2009 ) . Demonstration of catch bonds between an integrin and its ligand . J . Cell Biol . 185 , 1275 - 1284 . Kovacs , M . , Toth , J . , Hetenyi , C . , Malnasi - Csizmadia , A . and Sellers , J . R . ( 2004 ) . Mechanism of blebbistatin inhibition of myosin II . J . Biol . Chem . 279 , 35557 - 35563 . Lele , T . P . , Pendse , J . , Kumar , S . , Salanga , M . , Karavitis , J . and Ingber , D . E . ( 2006 ) . Mechanical forces alter zyxin unbinding kinetics within focal adhesions of living cells . J . Cell . Physiol . 207 , 187 - 194 . Mazaki , Y . , Hashimoto , S . and Sabe , H . ( 1997 ) . Monocyte cells and cancer cells express novel paxillin isoforms with different binding properties to focal adhesion proteins . J . Biol . Chem . 272 , 7437 - 7444 . Metzger , J . M . and Moss , R . L . ( 1990 ) . Effects of tension and stiffness due to reduced pH in mammalian fast - and slow - twitch skinned skeletal muscle fibres . J . Physiol . 428 , 737 - 750 . Mierke , C . T . , Kollmannsberger , P . , Zitterbart , D . P . , Smith , J . , Fabry , B . and Goldmann , W . H . ( 2008 ) . Mechano - coupling and regulation of contractility by the vinculin tail domain . Biophys . J . 94 , 661 - 670 . Nayal , A . , Webb , D . J . , Brown , C . M . , Schaefer , E . M . , Vicente - Manzanares , M . and Horwitz , A . R . ( 2006 ) . Paxillin phosphorylation at Ser273 localizes a GIT1 - PIX - PAK complex and regulates adhesion and protrusion dynamics . J . Cell Biol . 173 , 587 - 589 . Nicolas , A . , Geiger , B . and Safran , S . A . ( 2004 ) . Cell mechanosensitivity controls the anisotropy of focal adhesions . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 101 , 12520 - 12525 . Paran , Y . , Lavelin , I . , Naffar - Abu - Amara , S . , Winograd - Katz , S . , Liron , Y . , Geiger , B . and Kam , Z . ( 2006 ) . Development and application of automatic high - resolution light microscopy for cell - based screens . Methods Enzymol . 414 , 228 - 247 . Pasapera , A . M . , Schneider , I . C . , Rericha , E . , Schlaepfer , D . D . and Waterman , C . M . ( 2010 ) . Myosin II activity regulates vinculin recruitment to focal adhesions through FAK - mediated paxillin phosphorylation . J . Cell Biol . 188 , 877 - 890 . Riveline , D . , Zamir , E . , Balaban , N . Q . , Schwarz , U . S . , Ishizaki , T . , Narumiya , S . , Kam , Z . , Geiger , B . and Bershadsky , A . D . ( 2001 ) . Focal contacts as mechanosensors : externally applied local mechanical force induces growth of focal contacts by an mDia1 - dependent and ROCK - independent mechanism . J . Cell Biol . 153 , 1175 - 1186 . Salgia , R . , Li , J . L . , Lo , S . H . , Brunkhorst , B . , Kansas , G . S . , Sobhany , E . S . , Sun , Y . , Pisick , E . , Hallek , M . , Ernst , T . et al . ( 1995 ) . Molecular cloning of human paxillin , a focal adhesion protein phosphorylated by P210BCR / ABL . J . Biol . Chem . 270 , 5039 - 5047 . Sandquist , J . C . , Swenson , K . I . , Demali , K . A . , Burridge , K . and Means , A . R . ( 2006 ) . Rho kinase differentially regulates phosphorylation of nonmuscle myosin II isoforms A and B during cell rounding and migration . J . Biol . Chem . 281 , 35873 - 35883 . Sawada , Y . and Sheetz , M . P . ( 2002 ) . Force transduction by Triton cytoskeletons . J . Cell Biol . 156 , 609 - 615 . Sawada , Y . , Tamada , M . , Dubin - Thaler , B . J . , Cherniavskaya , O . , Sakai , R . , Tanaka , S . and Sheetz , M . P . ( 2006 ) . Force sensing by mechanical extension of the Src family kinase substrate p130Cas . Cell 127 , 1015 - 1026 . Shemesh , T . , Geiger , B . , Bershadsky , A . D . and Kozlov , M . M . ( 2005 ) . Focal adhesions as mechanosensors : a physical mechanism . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 102 , 12383 - 12388 . Sniadecki , N . J . , Anguelouch , A . , Yang , M . T . , Lamb , C . M . , Liu , Z . , Kirschner , S . B . , Liu , Y . , Reich , D . H . and Chen , C . S . ( 2007 ) . Magnetic microposts as an approach to apply forces to living cells . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 104 , 14553 - 14558 . Turner , C . E . and Miller , J . T . ( 1994 ) . Primary sequence of paxillin contains putative SH2 and SH3 domain binding motifs and multiple LIM domains : identification of a vinculin and pp125Fak - binding region . J . Cell Sci . 107 , 1583 - 1591 . Vicente - Manzanares , M . , Zareno , J . , Whitmore , L . , Choi , C . K . and Horwitz , A . F . ( 2007 ) . Regulation of protrusion , adhesion dynamics , and polarity by myosins IIA and IIB in migrating cells . J . Cell Biol . 176 , 573 - 580 . Volberg , T . , Geiger , B . , Citi , S . and Bershadsky , A . D . ( 1994 ) . Effect of protein kinase inhibitor H - 7 on the contractility , integrity , and membrane anchorage of the microfilament system . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton 29 , 321 - 338 . Webb , D . J . , Brown , C . M . and Horwitz , A . F . ( 2003 ) . Illuminating adhesion complexes in migrating cells : moving toward a bright future . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 15 , 614 - 620 . Wolfenson , H . , Henis , Y . I . , Geiger , B . and Bershadsky , A . D . ( 2009a ) . The heel and toe of the cell’s foot : a multifaceted approach for understanding the structure and dynamics of focal adhesions . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton 66 , 1017 - 1029 . Wolfenson , H . , Lubelski , A . , Regev , T . , Klafter , J . , Henis , Y . I . and Geiger , B . ( 2009b ) . A role for the juxtamembrane cytoplasm in the molecular dynamics of focal adhesions . PLoS ONE 4 , e4304 . Yoshigi , M . , Hoffman , L . M . , Jensen , C . C . , Yost , H . J . and Beckerle , M . C . ( 2005 ) . Mechanical force mobilizes zyxin from focal adhesions to actin filaments and regulates cytoskeletal reinforcement . J . Cell Biol . 171 , 209 - 215 . Zaidel - Bar , R . , Ballestrem , C . , Kam , Z . and Geiger , B . ( 2003 ) . Early molecular events in the assembly of matrix adhesions at the leading edge of migrating cells . J . Cell Sci . 116 , 4605 - 4613 . Zaidel - Bar , R . , Milo , R . , Kam , Z . and Geiger , B . ( 2007a ) . A paxillin tyrosine phosphorylation switch regulates the assembly and form of cell - matrix adhesions . J . Cell Sci . 120 , 137 - 148 . Zaidel - Bar , R . , Itzkovitz , S . , Ma’ayan , A . , Iyengar , R . and Geiger , B . ( 2007b ) . Functional atlas of the integrin adhesome . Nat . Cell Biol . 9 , 858 - 867 . Zamir , E . , Katz , B . Z . , Aota , S . , Yamada , K . M . , Geiger , B . and Kam , Z . ( 1999 ) . Molecular diversity of cell - matrix adhesions . J . Cell Sci . 112 , 1655 - 1669 . Zamir , E . , Katz , M . , Posen , Y . , Erez , N . , Yamada , K . M . , Katz , B . Z . , Lin , S . , Lin , D . C . , Bershadsky , A . , Kam , Z . et al . ( 2000 ) . Dynamics and segregation of cell - matrix adhesions in cultured fibroblasts . Nat . Cell Biol . 2 , 191 - 196 . Zamir , E . , Geiger , B . and Kam , Z . ( 2008 ) . Quantitative multicolor compositional imaging resolves molecular domains in cell - matrix adhesions . PLoS ONE 3 , e1901 . 1432 Journal of Cell Science 124 ( 9 ) J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e