Intracellular pH Transients in Squid Giant Axons Caused by CO2 , NH3 , and Metabolic Inhibitors WALTER F . BORON and PAUL DE WEER From the Department of Physiology and Biophysics , Washington University School of Medicine , St . Louis , Missouri 63110 A B S 1 " R A C T The intracellular pH ( pH , ) of squid giant axons has been measured using glass pH microelectrodes . Resting pHi in artificial seawater ( ASW ) ( pH 7 . 6 - 7 . 8 ) at 23°C was 7 . 32 _ + 0 . 02 ( 7 . 28 if corrected for liquid junction potential ) . Exposure of the axon to 5 % CO2 at constant external pH caused a sharp decrease in pHi , while the subsequent removal of the gas caused pH ~ to overshoot its initial value . If the exposure to CO2 was prolonged , two additional effects were noted : ( a ) during the exposure , the rapid initial fall in pH ~ was followed by a slow rise , and ( b ) after the exposure , the overshoot was greatly exaggerated . Application of external NH4C1 caused phi to rise sharply ; return to normal ASW caused pH ~ to return to a value below its initial one . If the exposure to NH4CI was prolonged , two additional effects were noted : ( a ) during the exposure , the rapid initial rise in pH ~ was followed by a slow fall , and ( b ) after the exposure , the undershoot was greatly exaggerated . Exposure to several weak acid metabolic inhibitors caused a fall in pH ~ whose reversibility depended upon length of exposure . Inverting the electrochemi - cal gradient for H + with 100 mM K - ASW had no effect on pHi changes resulting from short - term exposure to azide . A mathematical model explains the pH , changes caused by NH4CI on the basis of passive movements of both NHs and NH4 + . The simultaneous passive movements of CO2 and HCO ~ - cannot explain the results of the CO ~ experiments ; these data require the postulation of an active proton extrusion and / or sequestration mechanism . INTRODUCTION Since the pioneering work of Caldwell ( 1954 ) , several workers ( Caldwell , 1958 ; Spyropoulos , 1960 ; Kostyuk et al . , 1969 ; Carter et al . , 1967 ; McLaughlin and Hinke , 1968 ; Paillard , 1972 ; Bicher and Ohki , 1972 ; and Thomas , 1974 a , b ) have studied the intracellular pH ( pHi ) of excitable tissues by means of microelec - trodes . They have established normal values and examined factors responsible for pHi alteration . With the exception of Carter et al . ( 1967 ) , all the above investigators found that the intracellular proton activity is substantially lower than that predicted by a passive Donnan distribution . In studies on axons of the squid Loligoforbesi , Caldwell ( 1958 ) reported that pHi was normally near 7 . For axons of Loligo pealei , Spyropoulos ( 1960 ) found that pHi was approximately 7 . 35 , while Bicher and Ohki reported a value of 7 . Although pHi is relatively insensitive to experimental manipulation , increases in pco2 cause a rapid acidifi - cation in squid axon ( Caldwell , 1958 ) . Similarly , Thomas ( 1974 a ) , working with snail neurons , found that NH3 and CO2 cause rapid and large pHi changes , THE JOURNAL OF GENERAL PHYSIOLOGY " VOLUME 67 , 1976 . pages 91 . - . 112 91 92 ThE JOURNAL OF GENERAL PHYSIOLOGY " VOLUME 67 • 1976 whereas anoxia , Na azide , and 2 , 4 - dinitrophenol ( DNP ) produce smaller altera - tions ( Thomas , 1974 a ) . We now report a study of phi in squid giant axons . Special attention was given to the calibration of pH - sensitive , glass microelectrodes . The pH - sensitive area of these electrodes was at least two orders of magnitude smaller than that of those previously used in squid axons ( Caldwell , 1958 ; Spyropoulos , 1960 ) . A series of steady - state measurements were made in normal seawater previous to further manipulations . These experiments establish that the intracellular pH / of the giant axon of Loligo pealei in artificial seawater ( ASW ) is near 7 . 3 . In addition , we examined the kinetics of phi transients created by sudden changes in external conditions , such as addition or removal of CO2 , NH4C1 , NaCN , DNP , and azide . The temporal pHi changes observed in these weak electrolyte experiments are complex , and are not all intuitively interpretable . It has long been known that the rate of permeation and distribution of weak acids and bases across cell membranes is dependent on extra - and intracellular pH , and also that exposure of cells to solutions containing certain weak acids or bases could lead to rapid intracellular pH changes . Jacobs ( 1940 ) clearly identified the fundamental principles governing these phenomena . On the assumption that only the uncharged partner of the conjugate pair is permeant , he derived an equation for the steady - state transmembrane distribution of a weak acid or base as a function of its dissociation constant and both intra - and extracellular pH . In their study of the excretion of ammonia and other weak bases by the kidney , Orloff and Berliner ( 1956 ) employed an equilibrium treatment which included a finite permeability to the charged partner of the conjugate pair . However , their approach required that there be no electrical potential difference across the epithelium . Finally , a rigorous steady - state analysis of the transmembrane distri - bution of a weak acid was provided by Roos ( 1965 , 1971 , 1975 ) who took into account membrane potential as well as the permeability to both the charged and uncharged forms . The extreme case of exclusive permeability to the neutral species reduces the equation of Roos to that of Jacobs ( 1940 ) , whereas exclusive permeability to the charged species ( provided pH ~ pKa ' ) simplifies Roos ' equation to that of Donnan ( 1924 ) . We have developed a mathematical model which describes the kinetics of the movement of both partners of a conjugate pair of a weak electrolyte across the cell membrane and the attendant changes in pHi . This model satisfactorily explains the transients observed in our experiments and provides a means of estimating several system parameters . Certain aspects of the experiments with CO2 require the additional postulation of an active proton extrusion and / or consumption mechanism responsive to proton loads . As expected , our equa - tions , when constrained to the conditions of steady state , reduce to those of Roos ( 1965 , 1975 ) . Part of this work has been communicated in preliminary form ( Boron and De Weer , 1975 ) . M E T H O D S General The experiments were performed at the Marine Biological Laboratory in Woods Hole , Mass . , during the months of June 1974 and May 1975 . Giant axons ( average diameter , 540 WALTER F . BOaON AND PAUL DE WEER lntracellularpH Transients 93 / zm ) from the hindmost stellar nerve of live specimens of the squid Loligo pealei , were cleaned and both ends were tied to glass cannulae . The axons were incubated in a horizontal dialysis chamber ( Brinley and Mullins , 1967 ) kept at 23°C . The chamber ( vol , 0 . 15 ml ) was continuously perfused with seawater at a rate of 2 ml / min . Solutions ASW , used in all experiments , had the following composition ( in mM ) : 425 NaCI , 10 KCI , 25 MgCI2 , 10 CaC12 , 25 MgSO4 . Tris - HEPES ( 5 raM ) buffered all solutions ( including COs - containing media ) to pH 7 . 6 - 7 . 8 . When CO2 was used , we equilibrated solutions in the supply reservoir with 5 % CO ~ - 95 % 02 for at least 1 h before and continuing throughout the experiment ; 50 mM NaHCO3 was substituted for 50 mM NaC1 . In the CO2 seawater , CaCI ~ was added just before the experiment began , and some precipitate was noted by the experiment ' s end . Either 10 , 9 , or 3 mM NH4CI , nominally 2 mM NaCN , 1 mM 2 , 4 - dinitrophenol , and 3 mM NaN3 were added directly to normal seawater . In 100 K - ASW , 90 mM KCI was substituted for NaCI , although in K - free or 1 mM K - ASW , no substitution was made for the absent KCI . Electrodes We inserted membrane and pH electrodes through cannulae at opposite ends of the axon . The pH electrodes were constructed of Corning 0150 pH - sensitive glass and Corning 0120 lead glass ( Corning Glass Works , Corning , N . Y . ) according to the design of Hinke ( 1967 ) . They had exposed , pH - sensitive glass tips of approximately 10 - 15 - / xm diameter × 50 - / zm length , and lead glass shanks which maintained a diameter of less than 100 / ~ m for at least the terminal 3 cm . The drift of these electrodes was less than 1 mV over 24 h ; they responded to changes in pH within a few seconds , were linear over the pH range 5 . 87 - 7 . 89 , and had an average slope of 56 . 9 mV / pH . The borosilicate glass membrane potential electrodes had dimensions similar to those of the pH electrodes , tip potentials of approximately - 0 . 5 mV , and resistances of 0 . 8 to 1 . 1 MI ~ . Membrane potentials recorded from these electrodes were very stable , and reproducibility was routinely better than - + 0 . 3 mV when the membrane potential was changed with pulses of K - free ASW . The external electrodes were similar to the mem - brane potential electrodes . pH Standards From theoretical considerations , Bates ( 1973 ) has stated that primary pH standards should be dilute , aqueous solutions of simple solutes in the intermediate pH range ( 2 . 5 - 11 . 5 ) . In making test measurements the composition of the unknown should match the standard ' s as closely as possible , a condition which is not met when measuring the pH of a concentrated and ionically undefined intracellular medium after standardization with a primary standard . Thus , the inaccuracy of pHi measurements with respect to primary standards is of unknown magnitude . Another major difficulty is the drift in electrode output often seen when the solution in which a pH electrode is immersed is suddenly changed to one with a very different ionic strength . This latter problem has been overcome after a suggestion of Bates ( personal communication ) . We have prepared a series of six secondary buffers using different ratios of primary to secondary potassium phosphates ( at a constant total phosphate concentraticn of 50 mM ) plus enough potas - sium chloride to make the total ionic strength 0 . 600 M , similar to the buffers of Valensi and Maronny ( Bates , 1973 ) . Using primary standards of the National Bureau of Stand - ards of the United States ( NBS ) ( 0 . 05 m KH phthalate and 0 . 025 m KH2PO4 / 0 . 025 m K ~ HPO4 , obtained from Harleco , Philadelphia , Pa . ) to calibrate a standard macro combi - 94 THE JOURNAL OF GENERAL PHYSIOLOGY • VOLUME 67 . 1976 nation pH electrode and an Instrumentation Laboratory , Inc . , Lexington , Mass . , model 245 pH meter , we measured the pH of each of the six buffers at several temperatures . The pH measured in each of the new buffers was then assigned to that solution . It was not necessary to oven - dry the salts of the high ionic strength buffers before weighing , since their assigned pH values were determined solely by comparison with NBS stand - ards . We used these high ionic strength buffers to calibrate all intracellular pH elec - trodes . It should be pointed out that the use of these secondary standards does not increase the accuracy of our measurements with respect to primary NBS standards ; the advantage is that drift is minimized . Electrical Connections We coupled the 3 M KC1 membrane and external reference electrodes ( via calomel half cells ) and the pHi electrode to individual 311K electrometers ( Analog Devices , Inc . , Norwood , Mass . ) in the single - ended configuration ( input impedance , 10 TM 12 ) . A gold wire in the chamber was connected to the system ' s ground . Operational amplifiers ( Burr - Brown Research Corp . , Tucson , Ariz . , 3500 A and Analog Devices lI8A ) electronically subtracted the signals of the membrane electrode from that of the pHi electrode to produce the potential due to intracellular pH ( Vvn ) , and the signal of the external reference electrode from that of the membrane electrode to yield the membrane poten - tial ( Vm ) . We could display each potential on a digital voltmeter ( read to the nearest millivolt ) and record them on a strip chart recorder . A filter with a time constant of 9 s was used at the input of each channel of the strip chart recorder . Calculations The intracellular pH was calculated using the following equation : pHi = pH , - Vs - VvH S where pHs is the pH of one of the standards , Vs the potential recorded in that Standard , VpH the net potential due to pHi , and S the slope ( millivolts per pH ) between two or more standards . The pHi values given in the figures in this paper do not include corrections for liquid junction potential . RESULTS Normal IntraceUular pH For 22 axons in normal ASW of pH 7 . 61 - 7 . 80 , the uncorrected pHi was 7 . 32 + - 0 . 013 ( SEM ) and the membrane potential - 56 . 5 + - - 0 . 7 mV . If the junction potential correction of Cole and Moore ( 1960 ) is made for our data , the mean pH ~ would drop to 7 . 28 . This pH ~ is significantly higher than pH 6 . 73 , predicted from Donnan theory using Vm = - 56 . 5 mV . Spyropoulos ( 1960 ) found a value for pHi of 7 . 40 + - 0 . 10 before , or 7 . 35 + - 0 . 10 after applying a correction for liquid junction potential . Caldwell ( 1958 ) reports that the normal pH ~ of Loligo forbesi is near 7 , although examination of his Fig . 17 yields an average normal pH ~ of near 7 . 10 . It is not clear whether Caldwell applied any correction for junction potentials occurring with 3 M KC1 electrodes . Bicher and Ohki ' s data ( 1972 ) yielded an intracellular pH of 7 . 0 . The nonlinearity of their antimony WALTER F . BORON AND PAUL DE WEER IntracellularpH Transients 95 electrodes in the physiological range and the very large uncertainty ( + 0 . 2 pH units ) in their measurements make the interpretation of their results difficult . Carbon Dioxide Experiments In his experiments with squid axons , Caldwell ( 1958 ) found that only application of CO2 ( pKa ' = 6 . 00 ) produced rapid and large changes in pHi . He did not examine the reversibility of the CO2 effect . As illustrated in Fig . 1 A , we similarly found that exposure to 5 % COs produced a sharp fall in pHi , averaging 0 . 38 - - - 0 . 05 ( SEM ) pH units ( n = 8 ) . After termination of short - duration exposures to CO2 ( approximately 5 rain ) , pHi promptly returned to a value which was consistently higher than the initial one . In the experiment of Fig . 1 A this overshoot amounted to about 0 . 04 pH units . In three experiments , we maintained exposure of the axon to CO2 for as long as 80 rain , as illustrated in Fig . 1 B . As usual , pHi initially fell sharply . However , after about 5 rain pH ~ began to slowly climb at an average rate of 0 . 10 - 0 . 04 pH units / h ( we shall call such a period of relatively slow pHi change a " plateau phase " ) . When we removed the CO2 - ASW , pHi rapidly rose beyond the axon ' s initial pHi to a value considerably more alkaline . The size of the overshoot was positively related to the magnitude of the pHi rise during the plateau phase . We observed only small changes in membrane potential ( Fig . 1 A and B ) during and after exposures to COz . There is little doubt that in these experiments , the passive entry of CO2 and its subsequent hydration and dissociation to form H + and HCO3 - causes the initial decline in pHi ( Jacobs , 1940 ) . During the first few instants of exposure to CO2 an inward gradient for HCOa - also exists , though the influx of this ion ( which would blunt the acidification produced by CO2 influx ) may be small due to either a low permeability and / or the effects of membrane potential . Soon thereafter , however , the concentration of intracellular CO2 approaches that of external CO2 . If the pK for COs is the same on either side of the membrane , the following identities hold : H + iHCOa - i = Ka ' CO2 ~ = Ka ' CO2o = H + oHCO3 - o , and therefore HCOs - i reaches levels high enough to make the equilibrium poten - tials for H + and HCOz - equal . Its electrochemical gradient having now been reversed , HCOz - would tend to leave the cell . This would result in a reduction of COzi , thus maintaining an inward gradient for CO2 ( see Fig . 1 C ) . These simultaneous , passive fluxes of HCOz - and COs would then be expected to lead to a further acidification during the plateau phase , yet , an alkaline drift was actually observed . This alkaline drift can only be explained by outward H + pumping ( or its formal equivalent : pumping of HCOa - or OH - in the opposite direction ) , or , possibly , by an intracellular proton sequestration mechanism . Furthermore , this alkaline drift indicates that the rate of proton pumping exceeds any proton accumulation due to passive shuttling by the COz / HCOa - couple . Upon removal of external CO2 , intracellular CO2 will passively diffuse out - ward whereas most intracellular HCO ~ - will combine with H + and likewise leave as CO2 , thereby nullifying nearly the entire intracellular proton load brought 96 THE JOURNAL OF GENERAL PHYSIOLOGY ' VOLUME 67 " 1976 5ZC02 I I z4 " " ~ . : 7 ' 3 f ~ ' , : Z2 : " ' " " - ' ~ J : 7 , 1 e - 52 - 54 I , . 5 rain I 7 . 5 t 7 . 4 7 . 5 . _ 7 . 2 ~ ' 7 . 1 ' ~ , , 7 . O ; 6 . 9 6 . 8 ~ - se F - ~ . ~ L 5 % CO2 t / / / t I0 min I B C02 H2C03 HCO < FIGURE 1 . ( A ) Effect of short - term CO2 exposure on pHi and membrane po - tential . During the indicated time the axon was exposed to 5 % CO2 at constant pH , , ( 7 . 70 ) . Note the slight overshoot of pHi upon return to the control ASW . All rec - ords have been traced by an artist from original copies . The broken lines which appear during periods of rapid voltage changes are a consequence of the recording pen ' s alternately tracing the pHi and V m curves . ( B ) Effect of long - term C ( ) 2 ex - posure on phi and membrane potential . The conditions were similar to those in Fig . 1 A except for the longer exposure to 5 % COs . Note the slow alkalinization during the plateau phase and the exaggerated overshoot upon return to ASW . ( C ) Inward shuttling of protons by the COJHCOa - couple during the plateau WALTER F . BORON AND PAUL DE WEER lntraceUularpH Transients 97 about by CO2 entry . However , since additional protons had been pumped out during the CO2 exposure , pHi , upon removal of external CO2 , should be higher than its initial value . The magnitude of this overshoot should be a function of the algebraic sum of protons pumped from the axon and those passively shuttled in the opposite direction . It might be pointed out that any passive exit of HCOz - during the CO2 efflux phase would only serve to blunt this overshoot , and that the amount of HCOz - exiting after the removal of COz would be expected to be much greater than the amount which entered during the first moments of CO2 exposure , due to the effect of membrane potential . The small overshoots seen after CO2 exposures of short duration ( Fig . 1 A ) were most likely caused by the proportionately smaller amounts of H + pumped . It is interesting to note that in one experiment several successive short CO2 exposures had the effect of progressively increasing the value to which pHi rebounded after COz removal . This is to be expected , since the H + pumping which occurs during the short COz exposures is cumulative in its effects on pHi . A mathematical formulation of these events has successfully mimicked the observed changes in pHi seen with COz application and removal ( see Appendix ) . Ammonia Experiments Exposure of axons to 9 - 10 mM NH4 + ( pKa ' = 9 . 5 ) at pH 7 . 7 resulted in a rapid increase in pHi by 0 . 51 + - 0 . 02 pH units ( n = 8 ) , as illustrated in Fig . 2 A . A smaller increase ( 0 . 34 pH ) was noted in one axon where 3 mM NH4 + was used . Return to ASW within 8 - 25 rain caused pHi to drop to a value 0 . 07 + 0 . 02 ( n = 4 ) below the starting point . These undershoots were observed after a period of exposure to NH4 + so brief that pHi was still increasing with time when the NH4 + was removed . During the period of exposure to NH4 + , the membrane potential depolarized by 2 . 4 ± 0 . 1 mV ( n = 8 ) and , upon removal of NH4 + , returned to its initial level within ± 0 . 1 mV . It is interesting to note that a change from 10 K to 20 K - ASW caused a similar degree of depolarization , 2 . 7 + 0 . 1 mV ( n = 4 ) . The initial alkalinization seen during the first moments of exposure to NH4 + is presumably caused by the rapid , passive entry of NHz and its subsequent hydration to form NH4 + and OH - ( Jacobs , 1940 ) . If the membrane exhibits a finite permeability to NH4 + as well , this would result in an influx of this ion early during the exposure to NH4C1 . Such an influx would temper the alkalinization due to NH3 influx , since a small fraction of these ions dissociate to form protons and NHz . Thus , even as pHiis rising , some H + would be carried into the axon by the incoming NH4 + . Removal of external NH4 + , at this point , will result in an exit of NHz and NH4 + . However , since the driving force for net efflux of NH4 + is less than for the previous influx of these ions ( due to the effect of membrane potential ) , the fiber should lose fewer of these proton carriers than it has gained . For this reason it is expected that after withdrawal of NH4CI from the medium , pHi will be lower than before exposure , as can be seen in Fig . 2 A . phase . Any efflux of HCO3 - down its electrochemical gradient would maintain an intracellular sink for COz . The inward proton shuttling produced by such a mechanism during the plateau phase of Fig . 1 B would have to be more than offset by H + extrusion to account for the observed slow alkalinization . 98 THE JOURNAL OF GENERAL PHYSIOLOGY " VOLUME 67 " 1976 If exposure to N H4 + is prolonged ( Fig . 2 B ) , the rate of N H3 influx will decline and eventually vanish . At this point ( assuming pKa ' for ' ammonium to be identical on both sides of the membrane ) , the following identities will hold : H + / NH4 + i = Ka ' / NH3 ~ = Ka ' NH3o = H + o / NH4 + o . In other words , the ~ OmM NH4CI I 7 . 8 7 . 7 / I " / i 7 . 6 / ~ 7 . 5 7 . t 70 6 . 9 I - " r E - 60 ' S _ / 10ram NH4CI 115 rain I ? 6 75 74 73 72 71 ZO 6 . 9 - 58 ~ - 60 NH ~ NH 3 , . FIGURE 2 . ( A ) Effect of short - term NH4C exposure on pHi and membrane potential . During the time indicated , the ASW bathing the axon contained 10 mM NH4CI at constant pHo ( 7 . 70 ) . Note the undershoot of phi upon return to control ASW . ( B ) Effect of long - term NH4CI exposure on pHi and membrane potential . During the time indicated , the axon was exposed to ASW containing 10 mM NH4CI . Note that the prolonged NH4CI treatment leads to a slow acidification following the initial decrease in pHi . ( C ) Suggested mechanism for inward shuttling of protons by the NH ~ / NH4 + couple during the plateau phase of Fig . 2 B . The continuing influx of NH4 + down its electrochemical gradient maintains an intracellular source of NH3 . The net proton influx produced by this shuttling mechanism is presumably responsible for the slow acidification observed during the plateau phase of Fig . 2 B . Although the electrochemical gradient for protons is inward , the absolute flux of H + per se is expected to be very small due to the low concentration of this ion . equilibrium potential for NH4 + will be identical to that for H + ( i . e . , less negative then Vm ) . Consequently , since its electrochemical gradient remains inward , NH4 + continues to enter . Moreover , since a fraction of these ions dissociate upon entry to form NH3 and H + , an outward gradient for NH3 will be created . The net effect of these two simultaneous fluxes is the inward shuttling of protons ( see Fig . 2 C ) , which should lead to a gradual acidification of the cell . This is indeed WALTER F . BORON AND PAUL DE WEER IntraceUularpH Transients 99 what we observed during prolonged exposures to NH4 + ( see the plateau phase of Fig . 2 B ) : pH ~ declined at an average rate of 0 . 08 + 0 . 02 pH / h ( n = 4 ) . After return to ASW the undershoot of pH ~ was greatly exaggerated . A mathematical statement of these events is given in the Appendix . The triphasic time - course of Vm during the first moments of exposure to NH4CI was consistently observed in other experiments , and may have several explanations . The rapid initial depolarization plainly results from the K + - like effect of external NH4 + . The second ( hyperpolarizing ) phase may be due to the intracellular accumulation of NH4 + , the osmotic exit of water , or to a combina - tion of both . A third ( depolarization ) phase would be expected if a significant loss of K + occurs or if NH4 + accumulation lags appreciably behind the water movement . Cyanide Experiments The exposure of axons to nominally 2 mM NaCN at pH 7 . 70 , after a 5 - min de - lay , caused a slow fall in pH ~ which continued for 30 - - 60 min ( see Fig . 3 A ) . The total decrease in pH ~ averaged 0 . 27 - + 0 . 02 pH units in four experiments . In each of these experiments , the membrane voltage showed a slight depolarization , fol - lowed by a marked hyperpolarization of as much as 7 mV or more after 1 h . The existence of these peculiar effects of CN on membrane potential has been noted by De Weer and Geduldig ( 1975 ) and is the subject of continuing investigation . Removal of external CN led to a partial recovery of pHi , which after approxi - mately 5 min averaged 0 . 12 - + 0 . 01 pH units . The membrane potential re - sponded by depolarizing to a value near its initial level . Since the pKa ' for HCN ( approx . 10 ) is so much larger than pHi , the entry of HCN produces very few protons by dissociating to form CN - + H + . Thus , a fairly rapid intracellular acidification , analogous to that seen with the onset of CO2 exposure , is not to be expected with HCN . Furthermore , because CN - ~ is so low ( we calculate - 2 / ~ M ) , the permeability of the membrane to CN - would have to be exceedingly large to explain the long - term intracellular acidification on the basis of the shuttling hypothesis . It is more likely that the acidification seen is due to some metabolic inhibitory effect of HCN , and the resultant build - up of intracellular acids . DNP and Azide Experiments Fig . 3 B and C show the effects of long - term exposure of an axon to DNP and azide , respectively . Each type of experiment was performed on three axons . Mitchell ( 1961 ) has interpreted the ability of DNP ( pKa ' - - - 4 . 0 ) to uncouple oxidative phosphorylation on the basis of its acting as a proton shuttler across mitochondrial inner membrane . Thus , exposure to DNP may decrease pHi in at least three ways : ( a ) by penetrating the plasma membrane as DNP and dissociat - ing to form H + and dinitrophenoxide ions ( DNP - ) , ( b ) by shuttling H + across the plasma membrane via the influx of DNP and the efflux of DNP - , and ( c ) by causing a buildup of metabolic acids due to its effect on mitochondria . It is very difficult to distinguish among the three alternatives experimentally . It should be pointed out that the initial fall in pH ~ started shortly after exposure to DNP , and 100 THE JOURNAL OF GENERAL PHYSIOLOGY • VOLUME 67 • 1976 A , CN - ASW ~ 7 . o7 ' 1L - ~ ~ " ~ - - - - ~ ~ , _ _ _ ~ - _ , ~ 6 . 9 - 56 - 57 - 58 - 59 : ~ - 60 : > E - 61 - 62 - 63 - 64 - 65 5 rain I I B DNP - ASW I I Z3 7 " 2f ~ ~ 7 . 1 ~ ~ ' ' " ~ " ~ ' f - 7 . 0 L " r Q . . 4 ° - 4 . 7 ~ - 48 > ~ - 49 t p . . - 501 - - - 51 C Aztde - ASW I I 74 7 . 1 f > E WALTER F . BORON AND PAUL DE WEER IntracellularpH Transients 101 that its initial rate of fall was more than five times greater than that produced by CN . We have no explanation for the changes in Vm . Azide ( pKa ' = 4 . 7 ) , which also uncouples oxidative phosphorylation ( Mitch - ell , 1961 ) , produces an abrupt fall in pHi , whose reversibility depends upon the length of exposure ( see Figs . 3 C and 4 ) . This sequence of pHi changes is qualitatively similar to that seen with CO , ; the initial fall in pH ~ is probably caused by an influx of HN3 which then dissociates to form N3 - and H + intracellu - larly . The slow fall in pHi seen during chronic exposure may be due to proton shuttling . Accumulation of metabolic acid and the reduced activity of the proton pump cannot be ruled out . It should be noted that azide pulses had identical effects on pH , in the presence of either 100 or 10 mM K - ASW ( two experiments ) even though the directions of the electrochemical gradients for H + in the two cases are opposite ( see Fig . 4 ) . If poisoning of a proton pump in the face of a continuing proton influx were responsible for the acidification produced by azide in 10 mM K + , as has been suggested as a possibility in the snail neuron by Thomas ( 1974 a ) , then reversing the H + electrochemical gradient should produce alkalinization , even in the absence of pumping ; this is clearly not the case . It therefore seems more probable that the immediate fall in pH ~ observed under both conditions is due to the influx and subsequent dissociation of the acid HN3 . DISCUSSION Normal pHi Because of the wide discrepancy among published values for pHi in squid giant axons , a major aim of this work was to attempt to measure pH ~ in carefully prepared axons using glass pH microelectrodes characterized by their high stability and small size . Apart from its intrinsic interest , a precise knowledge of pHi is important in a number of calculations ( for instance , those involving the stability constants of such metal - ligand complexes as Mg - nucleotide and Mg - or Ca - EGTA , some of which are quite pH sensitive ) . " Normal pHi " values must be interpreted with caution . Ours were determined in nominally CO2 - free ASW . When these same axons were bathed in natural seawater ( NSW ) , however , the pHi values often were 0 . 02 - 0 . 04 pH units lower ( presumably because NSW contains a significant amount of HCOa - ) . Furthermore , the in vivo environment FIGURE 3 . ( A ) Effect of long - term exposure to CN on pHi and membrane poten - tial . During the indicated time , the axon was exposed to nominally 2 mM NaCN at constant pHo ( 7 . 70 ) . Note the 5 - min delay between the introduction of CN - and the initial fall in pHi . See text for additional information . ( B ) Effect of long - term exposure to DNP on pH ~ and membrane potential . During the indicated time the axon was exposed to ASW containing 1 mM DNP at constant pHo ( 7 . 70 ) . Note that the onset of the initial acidification is more rapid and that the initial rate of pH ~ fall is much greater than in the case of CN . This axon was previously exposed to DNP for about 5 min . ( C ) Effect of long - term exposure to azide on pHi and membrane potential . The axon was exposed to ASW containing 3 mM NaNz at constant pH0 ( 7 . 70 ) during the indicated time . Note the very rapid rate of initial acidification . 102 THE JOURNAL OF GENERAL PHYSIOLOGY ' VOLUME 67 " 1976 of these axons is probably very different from ASW . If the pco ~ of the extracellu - lar fluid , for instance , is appreciable , transferring the axons to CO2 - free ASW will cause a rapid rise in pHi , the size of which is a function of the squid ' s normal Pco2 . Furthermore , it has been clearly documented ( Howell et al . , 1970 ) for several poikilotherms that blood pH rises as temperature decreases . And Reeves ( 1972 ) , using the DMO method to estimate pHi in frog muscle , has found that IOOK - ASW ) i Azide - ASW Azlde - ASW 7 . 4 r 7 . 2 k . : - - 15 - 20 - 25 - 30 - 35 - 40 - 45 - 50 - 55 - 6 ( 5 rnin I i i i I I f I I l I I I I I i FIGURE 4 . Effect of short - term exposure to azide on the pH ~ of normal and depolarized squid axons . The axon was briefly exposed to 3 mM NaN3 before and during membrane depolarization with 100 mM K - ASW . Note that pH , changes are virtually identical and independent of the direction of the H + gradient . The axon had previously received an identical set of azide pulses . pH ~ also is inversely related to acclimated temperature . For these reasons one must be careful in comparing values for pHi . Neither Caldwell ( 1958 ) nor Spyropoulos ( 1960 ) report the composition of their " normal " seawaters or clearly state the temperatures at which their experiments were performed . Our data ( pHi - ~ 7 . 3 ) agree more closely with those of Spyropoulos , but would not be inconsistent with Caldwell ' s results if his seawater contained significant amounts of bicarbonate , or if his axons were incubated at a tempera - ture substantially higher than 23°C . WALTER F . BORON AND PAUL DE WEER IntracellularpH Transients 103 Experiments with C02 Our experiments on squid axons exposed to CO2 and NH4 + have confirmed and extended several of the findings of Thomas ( 1974 a , b ) who worked with snail neurons . This agreement is significant in view of the differences in species and the style of pH electrode used . In order to achieve a quantitative understanding of the events underlying the changes in pHi which occur during and after exposure to CO2 , NH4C1 , and other weak acids and bases , we have developed a mathematical model ( see Appendix for derivation and examples ) which has proven a useful tool , not only in the interpretation of our data , but also , in predicting possible events that have thus far not been tested . The model takes into account the simultaneous passive fluxes across the plasma membrane of both the protonated and unprotonated forms of a weak acid or base . Several physicochemical parameters , including the dissociation constant of the weak electrolyte , the permeability of the membrane to both members of the conjugate pair , intracellular buffering power , and membrane potential , are used in calculating the net fluxes of both forms of the weak electrolyte and their effect on pHi as a function of time . Data which cannot be reconciled with the model , after reasonable manipulation of the system parameters , constitute arguments in favor of some additional process , such as intracellular acid generation or consumption , or changes in the rate of proton extrusion . The model is readily expanded to include a proton pump with arbitrarily defined parameters . In applying this model to the pHi changes obtained with exposure to CO2 , we found several aspects of the time - course of pHi which necessitate the introduc - tion of such additional processes . We refer to the overshoot seen after removal of CO2 ( see Fig . 1 A ) and also to the slow increase in pHi observed during prolonged CO2 exposure ( see Fig . 1 B ) . As to the rebound upon CO2 removal , if no pumping mechanism were present , pH ~ would return to a value equal to or ( if H + is shuttled by the CO2 / HCO3 - couple ) less than the initial pHi . Yet , we consistently found overshoots . As to the pH ~ time - course during prolonged exposure to CO2 , in the absence of proton pumping the initial acidification should be followed by a plateau phase which is flat or ( if a finite permeability of the membrane to HCO3 - is assumed , allowing proton shuttling ) sloping down - wards . Yet , the observed slope was upward . An active proton extrusion mecha - nism will acount for both anomalies . It is obvious that the proton pumping rate must be high enough not only to produce alkalinization at the observed rate , but also to compensate for any acidification resulting from proton shuttling by the CO2 / HCO3 - couple . However , numerical solution of the differential equations describing our model ( see Appendix ) shows that with a bicarbonate permeability similar to that for chloride ( approximately 10 - 7 cm / s ; calculated from the data of Caldwell and Keynes , 1960 ) , the expected acidification due to proton shuttling will not exceed 0 . 01 pH / h of exposure to CO2 . An intuitive grasp for the effect of this proton pumping on pHi may be gained by examining a HCO3 - vs . pH diagram with various CO2 isopleths . Fig . 5 A has been constructed for squid axoplasm using the data of Harned and Davis ( 1943 ) and Harned and Bonner 104 THE JOURNAL OF GENERAL PHYSIOLOGY " VOLUME 67 • 1976 ( 1945 ) for the solubility and first pKa ' of COs in solutions of 0 . 5 M NaCl . At the start of an experiment Pc % is very low , and pHi is described by point A . Introduction of 5 % COs ( 37 mm Hg ) raises intracellular pco2 to nearly the same level and causes a shift in pH ~ along the line AB ( the slope , which is an expression of the buffering power , is selected to fit the data ) to point B . If , at constant pc02 , protons are pumped out of the cell , pH ~ moves along the 5 % CO2 - g 5 A D 0 . I ~ 6 . 8 Z0 Z2 Z4 Z6 phi NH3 : 0 . 159 NH3 : 0 . 016ram C B ' B 2 : 6 . 8 Z0 Z2 7 . 4 7 . 6 7 . 8 8 . 0 pHi FIGURE 5 . ( A ) Plot of intracellular bicarbonate concentration vs . pH ~ at various concentrations of CO2 . The dependence of HCOa - ~ upon pH ~ at constant CO2 has been calculated from the Henderson - Hasselbalch relationship for a variety of CO ~ levels ( 0 . 1 , 2 , 5 , and 15 % CO2 ) . The value for buffering power , assumed to be constant ( fl = - 25 mM ) , was chosen because it gave the best fit . In a system containing CO2 / HCOa - in addition to other buffers , the buffering power of these other buffers is given by / 3 = AHCOa - / ApHi . Values for pK , ' ( 6 . 00 ) and the solubility of CO2 ( 0 . 0346 raM / ram Hg ) in 0 . 5 M NaCI at 20°C have been taken from the data of Harned and Davis ( 1943 ) and Harned and Bonner ( 1945 ) , respectively . Boldface lines represent the path the system follows in the course of a typical COs experiment . See text for detailed description . ( B ) Plot of intracellular ammonium concentration vs . pH ~ at various concentrations of NHa . The Henderson - Hassel - balch equation has been used to calculate NH4 + ~ as a function of pH ~ at constant intracellular NHa , using pKa ' = 9 . 5 . The three " constant NHa " curves represent NHa concentrations of 0 . 0016 , 0 . 016 , and 0 . 159 mM . The slope of the lines AB and DC is determined by the intracellular buffering power , / 3 ; / 3 = - 9 mM fit the data best . In a buffering system which includes NHa / NH4 + in addition to other buffers , the buffering power of these other buffers is described by / 3 = - ANHa + / ApHi . See text for additional description . isopleth to point C . Upon removal of CO2 , pH ~ returns to point D , where pH ~ is now greater than the initial pHi . Because of the differing slopes among the COs isopleths , pH ( C ) - pH ( B ) < pH ( D ) - pH ( A ) . Inspection of the diagram also illustrates that upon return to the original low pco2 level , virtually no HCO3 - remains inside the cell . It is instructive to note two predictions of the model regarding chronic COz exposure : ( a ) pHi in the plateau phase should progres - sively increase ( because of continual proton extrusion ) ; ( b ) subsequent removal WALTER F . BORON AND PAUL DE WEER lntraceUularpH Transients 105 of CO2 should produce an overshoot which is greater , the longer the preceding CO2 exposure . Experiments with NH 4Cl Two remarkable features of the response of pHi in our NH4CI experiments are the slow acidification seen during the plateau phase ( Fig . 2 B ) in chronic treatments and the sizable undershoot of pHi ( Fig . 2 A ) which is elicited after even brief exposures to the salt . These phenomena could be explained in several ways : the axon might respond to high values of pHi by pumping protons inward ; there may be a passive efflux of an endogenous weak base ; some intracellular process could generate protons ; or the NH4 + / NH3 couple could shuttle protons inward . None of these possibilities can presently be ruled out . However , there are a priori reasons for expecting the last to occur . Namely , NH3 is known to be permeant , and the membrane permeability for NH4 + must be similar to that for K + in order to explain changes in Vm attending changes in NH4 + o ( see section entitled Estimation of System Parameters ) . It can be shown that a permeability of this magnitude is sufficient to account for the observed undershoots and the plateau phase acidifications . Thus , we feel that this simple model , which con - siders the simultaneous flux of both NH4 + and NH3 , warrants a more detailed analysis . In this context , a graphic representation of the events taking place during and after exposure to NH4CI is provided by a NH4 + ~ vs . pHi diagram ( Fig . 5 B ) , analogous to the graph ( Fig . 5 A ) discussed in connection with the CO2 experi - ments . Since during the plateau phase the internal NH3 concentration will remain essentially unchanged , and nearly identical to that in the external fluid , one may construct a background grid of " constant intracellular NH3 " curves by means of the Henderson - Hasselbalch equation applied to the equilibrium : NH4 + - ~ - NH3 + H + ( pKa ' = 9 . 50 ) . Let us assume an arbitrarily low NH3 concentration of 0 . 0016 mM and pHi = 7 . 30 at the start ( point A ) . The introduction of 10 mM NH4 + - ASW ( NH3 = 0 . 159 mM ) causes the system to move from A toward B . The slope of the line AB is determined by the buffering power of the intracellu - lar fluid , while the curve BB ' C represents the external NH3 concentration , 0 . 159 mM . If the membrane were permeable to NH3 only , and enough time were allowed for equilibration , then point B would characterize the new condition ; conversely , removal of NH4C1 from the medium would lead to a return , along AB , to A . However , a finite permeability to NH4 + ( but PNH3 ~ > PNn , ) leads to an influx of this ion and a reduction of the intracellular alkalinization produced by the influx of NH3 . The system ' s new composition would eventually be described by B ' , rather than by B . If the axon is returned to ASW before B ' is reached ( that is , before the net entry of NH3 is complete ) , the system will return to curve AD ' D by a path nearly parallel to AB . This is so because , due to the effect of membrane potential on ion fluxes , fewer ammonium ions will leave the axon upon removal of NH4C1 than entered during exposure to the salt . Thus , pHi after an exposure to NH4CI will be lower than that preceding exposure . During prolonged exposures to NH4CI , the system not only reaches B ' ( indi - cating that internal and external NH3 levels are nearly identical ) but even moves toward C on the curve BB ' C . This reduction in pHi , which manifests itself as 106 THE JOURNAL OF GENERAL PHYSIOLOGY " VOLUME 67 • 1976 a drift in the acid direction during the plateau phase , is caused by the continuing addition of protons derived from the dissociation of the entering NH4 + , while NHa leaves the cell . This inward proton shuttling will continue until either one of two conditions is met : ( a ) H + and NH4 * reach Donnan equilibrium and net fluxes of both NHs and NH ~ - fall to zero , or ( b ) the rate of proton pumping keeps pace with shuttling and pH ~ remains constant . A steady - state scenario where shuttling by the lactic acid system in rat diaphragm muscle is balanced by proton pumping has been developed by Roos ( 1975 ) . Our model predicts that pHi should slowly fall in the plateau phase , and that , with increasing lengths of exposure to NH4CI , return to ASW should cause increasing amounts of under - shoot . This is illustrated in Fig . 5 B , where point C represents conditions after some prolonged exposure , On removal of external NH4C1 , point D would be reached ( DC parallel to AB ) if only NHa were permeable . If NH4 + is also permeable , the new condition is described by point D ' , slightly more alkaline than D . A further prediction is that reversal of the H + gradient ( by depolariza - tion , for instance ) should result in a reverse shuttling and a slow alkalinization during the plateau phase . At this point the question may be considered as to whether , and how , pHi will ever revert to its original value after a prolonged exposure to either COs or NH4C1 . Clearly , the challenge imposed upon the cell during experiments of the type described above ( intermittent exposure to relatively high levels of CO2 and NH4CI ) will not normally be encountered under physiological circumstances . After prolonged exposure to COz or NH4CI , we have monitored pH ~ over - and undershoots for 5 - 10 rain after the attainment of an apparent new steady state , and have not seen any convincing evidence for a return to " normal " phi . However , one can envisage several mechanisms by which the axon , given more time , would eventually recover its initial pH ~ value . For example , the excess protons remaining inside the axon after removal of external NH4CI could eventually be extruded via a H + pump . On the other hand , no single mechanism immediately suggests itself for replenishing the proton deficit accrued during removal of COs . Possibilities include ( a ) the passive influx of protons , ( b ) an inward proton pump , or ( c ) the loss of an intracellular weak base . Experiments with Metabolic Inhibitors The interpretation of our work with weak electrolyte metabolic inhibitors must remain uncertain , since it has not yet been possible to sort out metabolic effects from those expected from our proton shuttling model . It seems very likely that exposure of a cell to any weak acid or base can lead to significant alterations in pHi . Therefore , due caution should be exerted when interpreting pH ~ effects of metabolic inhibitors which are also weak electrolytes . Metabolic effects resulting from interference with mitochondrial activity would be expected to be in the acid direction , while changes due to proton shuttling would be in the direction determined by the H + electrochemical gradient . Estimation of System Parameters As indicated in the Appendix , our model can be used to select such values for WALTER F . BORON AND PAUL DE WEER IntraceUularpH Transients 107 the parameters : buffering power , permeabilities , and proton pumping rates , as will yield a theoretical curve which fits the observed one . Rapid changes in pHi produced by azide , CO2 , and NH + require a buffering power / 3 ( see Eq . 6 of the Appendix for definition ) in the range - 9 to - 33 mM . These estimates are not inconsistent with the values for / 3 extracted from Spyropoulos ' ( 1960 ) titration of extruded squid axoplasm , which extend from - 14 to - 52 mM over the pH range 6 - 8 . Although we have treated / 3 as a constant in our preliminary calcula - tions , variations with pHi would be compatible with our results , and would not affect the qualitative aspects of our argument . The permeability of the membrane to NH + should be the major factor in determining the rate of proton shuttling during the plateau phase . From the relative effect on Vm of increasing by 10 mM either external NH + or K + concentrations in ASW ( see page 97 ) we estimate that PNn4 is of the same order of magnitude as PK . If K + influx is normally about 50 pmol / cm2s ( Caldwell and Keynes , 1960 ) , then the constant field assumption leads to a PK of about 6 . 7 x 10 - s cm / s . Thus , PNH4 may be about 6 × 10 - s cm / s . A similar value for PNa ~ , when employed in the mathematical model , leads to a predicted proton shuttling rate close to that actually observed in our long - term NH + experiments . Attempts to estimate the permeability of the membrane to NHn and especially to CO2 are complicated by the 9 - s time constant of the recording apparatus . Furthermore , the uncatalyzed hydration reaction : CO2 + H20 ~ H2COa has a time constant of about 27 s at 25°C ( Edsali and Wyman , 1958 ) . Thus , in the absence of carbonic anhydrase , intracellular acidification resulting from the influx of CO2 can be expected to be a rather slow process . It follows that it will be difficult to distinguish between the absence of carbonic anhydrase and a low permeability to CO2 as causes for the relatively slow ( 1 - 2 min ) fall in pHi at the onset of an exposure to CO2 . Consequently , in our mathematical treatment of the data ( see Appendix ) , we have lumped permeation and hydration of CO2 into a single event governed by a parameter conveniently termed " permeability . " Proton pumping rates needed to explain our data on both short - and long - term CO2 exposures cannot be estimated without defining the parameters that determine the H + pumping rate . If the total rate at which protons are pumped is given by kH + i , where k is a rate constant , and the rate at which protons are pumped during the control period is kH + ~ then we define the rate of additional proton pumping in response to an intracellular acid load ( Mn ) by MH = k ( H + - H + ' ) . Here we have assumed that the background rate of passive proton influx ( and thus the background proton pumping rate kH + ' ) during experimental condi - tions is identical to the total acid flux ( and to the total pumping rate ) during control conditions . Our data indicate that k is at least 75 s - ' . APPENDIX Kinetics of Intracellular pH Changes upon Exposure to Weak Acids or Bases In this section we derive the differential equations for the time - course of pH ~ as determined 108 THE JOURNAL OF GENERAL PHYSIOLOGY • VOLUME 67 • 1976 by the intracellular buffering power and by the " proton load " ( positive or negative ) imposed upon the cell after exposure to a weak acid . Similar equations can also be derived for the case of a weak base . Derivation We assume Fick ' s law to govern the net passive flux of uncharged particles , and the constant field equation ( Goldman , 1943 ; Hodgkin and Katz , 1949 ) to describe that of charged species : MHA = Pea ( HA , , - HAi ) , ( 1 a ) ma - PAV , , , F ao - A ~ E , ( 2 a ) RT 1 - where M ~ A and MA represent the net inward fluxes of the weak acid and conjugate base , respectively ; PnA and PA are permeabilities ; the subscripts i and 0 refer to internal and external concentrations , respectively ; Vm is the membrane potential ; E represents exp ( - V , ~ F / RT ) ; and F , R , and T have their usual meaning . These two fluxes , and the area / volume ratio of the cell ( p ) , determine the time rate of change of total intracellular weak acid concentration ( TA0 : dTAi - ( MHA + MA ) p . ( 3 a ) dt A fraction ( a ) of the total intracellular weak acid remains undissociated : HA ~ H , ez = - ( 4 a ) HA , + Al Hi + K where K is the acid dissociation constant . Thus , a fraction ( a ) of the entering A - will combine with H + , and a portion ( 1 - a ) of the entering HA will dissociate into A - + H + . The proton load imposed upon the cell interior is then determined by ( a ) the production of protons from entering HA , or ( 1 - ot ) Mna , and ( b ) their consumption by enteringA - , or OMA . Consequently , if dQ / dt represents the rate at which protons are added to the cell per unit volume , we have dQ - - = p ( 1 - ot ) MttA - - txmA - - Mn , ( 5 a ) dt where the additional term Mn represents the rate ( in mol cm - 2 s - 1 ) of intracellular consumption and / or active extrusion of protons in excess of that occurring in the control state . The time rate of changes of the free proton concentration is a function of intracellular buffering power , classically defined as / 3 = dQ / dpH . Since 2 . 303 pH = In H , or 2 . 303 dpH = - dH / H , we have dH , _ - 2 . 303 H ~ - - • dQ , ( 6 a ) dt / 3 and , combining Eqs . 5 a and 6 a , d / - / ~ - 2 . 303 H ~ p T = - ~ ( 1 - - oI ) MHA - - txm a - MH . ( 7 a ) Substitution of HA ~ = aTA , and Ai = ( 1 - a ) TAi into Eqs . 3 a and 7 a yields the de - sired set of differential equations in terms of TA ~ and Hi : WALTER F . BORON AND PAUL DE WEER lntraceUular pH Transients 109 dTA , dt - p PnA ( HAo - n ~ H ~ + K + _ _ TA , ) K Ao - TA # PAVmF Hi + K RT 1 - • I - dH , _ - 2 . 303 H , p K Pna ( HAo - H , TA3 fl L ~ / ~ , , + K Hi + K A o - K TA , • q Hi PAV , , d 7 Hi + K - MnJ • Hi + K RT 1 - • ( 8 a ) ( 9 a ) I . HBo - dHi = - 2 . 303 Hip K P nsV ~ F dt / 3 H ~ + K RT K H ~ + K - - TB ~ ) + PnnVmF RT HBo - q - H - - - - - - L ~ ' Pn ( B , , - - - K TB0 - Mn , Hi + K Hi + K _ J where TB ~ is the intracellular concentration of total base , PHs and PB are permeabilities , and • ' = exp ( V , , F / RT ) . Fig . 6 B illustrates typical examples of the numerical solutions to Eqs . 10 a and 11 a for the case of exposure to NH4CI . Again , certain aspects of the pHi time - course are primarily affected by specific parameters : the initial rate of pH , increase Hi TB , C Hi + K • t _ 1 H ~ TB ~ C Hi + K • t _ 1 I ( 10 a ) ( 11 a ) dTB ~ I - - ~ - P PB ( Bo - These simultaneous equations , which have no general analytical solution , were solved numerically by computer . ( The time - course of the concentrations of HA and A - individ - ually can be computed from H ~ , TA ~ , and K . ) Fig . 6 A illustrates the result of such computations applied to a typical CO2 experiment . By systematically altering the various parameters , the mathematical model can be made to fit the experimental results : the initial rate of pH decrease is approximately proportional to the permeability of the membrane to CO2 ; the extent of this initial change is nearly proportional to the buffering power ; and the rate of pH change during the plateau phase is determined by the extent to which proton pumping exceeds proton entry via the COflHCO ~ - shuttle . Obviously , a lower limit for the rate of additional H + pumping is obtained in the case where the permeability to HCO ~ is put equal to zero . Weak Base An analogous derivation for the case of a weak base ( BH + , ~ - B + H + ) leads to the fi ) llow - ing equations : 110 THE JOURNAL OF GENERAL PHYSIOLOGY • VOLUME : 67 • 1976 8 . 2 8 . 0 Z8 Z6 o . Z4 7 . 2 7 , 0 5 % CO 2 k k * 300 k : O 10 ' ~ k , 75 k , lO - k : O ' I Q _ A ~ omM NH4CI 8 . 0 7 . 0 6 . 8 6 . 6 5m , ° : - 6 . 4 B ~ NH4 : I0 - 4 6 . 2 FIGURE 6 . ( A ) Computer - simulated pH ~ time - course during and after exposure to CO2 . Variations in k , the proton pump rate constant ( given in s - l ) , result in changes in the plateau phase slope and the amount of overshoot . When k = 0 ( no pumping ) pH ~ actually declines in the plateau phase and fails short of the initial pH ~ upon removal of the CO ~ . In these plots , pKa ' = 6 . 00 , fl = - 26 mM , PHCO3 (cid:127) 5 X 10 - 7 tin / s , Pco ~ = 6 X 10 - 3 cm / s , pHo = 7 . 70 , Pco2 = 37 mm Hg ( 5 % CO2 ) , T = 23 ° , and fiber diameter = 500 / zm . ( B ) Computer - simulated pH ~ time - course during and after exposure to NH4CI . Variations of PNm , the permeability of the membrane to NH4 + ( given in centimeters per second ) , produce changes in the plateau phase slope and the amount of undershoot . When PNm = 0 , the plateau phase is nearly horizontal , and pH , returns to exactly the initial pH ~ after removal of external NH4C1 . When PNm is very large proton shuttling takes place at a very rapid pace . and pH , soon approaches the value predicted from Donnan theory . In these plots , pKa ' = 9 . 50 , / 3 = - 9 mM , PNH3 = 6 X 10 - 3 cm / s , NH4CIo = 10 mM , pH , , = 7 . 70 , k ( H + pump rate constant ) = 0 , T = 23 ° , and fiber diameter = 500 ~ m . is determined mainly by PNn : , , the extent of the initial change in pHi by fl , and the slope of the plateau phase by PNH4 . Special Case : Constant pHi Consider the case of Eqs . 8 a and 9 a in which dHJdt = 0 . This condition is met by assuming either an infinite buffering power ( fl - - ~ - ~ ) or , more realistically , a rate of proton extrusion equal to the rate at which protons are carried into the cell by the HA ~ A - shuttle . Note that constant pH ~ does not necessarily imply a steady state with respect to the other variables . The analytical solution to the remaining equation ( 8 a ) is readily obtained and describes the time - course of total intracellular acid concentration : TA i = P , AHA , , + PAVmFA , RT ( 1 - E ) P Ha " Hi + P AVmFe K Hi + K RT ( 1 - e ) H , + K • - exp t " p HA " Hi + K RT ( 1 - E ) Hi + K " ( 12 a ) WALTER F . BORON AND PAVE DE WEER lntracellular pH Transients 111 At infinite time , TAi reaches a constant value . If TAi ( t = ~ ) is substituted into Eqs . 1 a and 2 a , Mna = - MR . This special case is essentially a restatement of the equation developed by Roos ( 1965 ) for the steady - state distribution of a weak acid across a cell membrane . We are indebted to M . P . Blaustein , E . L . Boulpaep , B . G . Kennedy , and C . M . Rovainen for critical comments on an earlier draft of this paper and especially to A . Roos for many helpful discussions during the course of this work . One of us ( W . F . B . ) is grateful toJ . A . M . Hinke in whose laboratory the technique for fabricating pH ~ electrodes was learned . We thank E . Y . Rodin for verifying the mathematics , and thank the Director of the Marine Biological Laboratory , Woods Hole , Massachu - setts for facilities placed at our disposal . The expert assistance of V . Creasy in the construction of the horizontal chamber , of G . Jerman in preparing the manuscript , and of S . McConnell with some of the drawings , is gratefully acknowledged . Supported by a fellowship from the Grass Foundation ( to W . F . B . ) , and by NIH Grants NS 11223 ( to P . D . W . ) and HL 00082 ( to A . Roos ) . Boron is supported by Medical Scientist Training Program Fellowship , GM 02016 . Received Jbr publication 10 March 1975 . REFERENCES BATES , R . G . 1973 . Determination of pH . Theory and Practice . John Wiley & Sons , New York . BICHER , H . , and S . Ongl . 1972 . Intracellular pH electrode experiments on the giant squid axon . Biochim . Biophys . Acta . 255 : 900 . BORON , W . F . , and P . DE WEER . 1975 . Studies on the intracellular pH of squid giant axons . Biophys . J . 15 : 42a . BRINLEY , F . J . , JR . , and L . J . MULLINS . 1967 . Sodium extrusion by internally dialyzed squid axons . J . Gen . Physiol . 50 : 2303 . CALDWELL , P . C . 1954 . An investigation of the intracellular pH of crab musle fibres by means of micro - glass and micro - tungsten electrodes . J . Physiol . ( Lond . ) . 126 : 169 . CALDWELL , P . C . 1958 . Studies on the internal pH of large muscle and nerve fibres . J . Physiol . ( Lond . ) . 142 : 22 . CALDWELL , P . C . , and R . D . KEYNES . 1960 . The permeability of the squid giant axon to radioactive potassium and chloride ions . J . Physiol . ( Lond . ) . 154 : 177 . CARTER , N . W . , F . C . RECTOR , JR . , D . S . CAMPION , and D . W . SELDIN . 1967 . Measurement of intracellular pH of skeletal muscle with pH - sensitive glass microelectrodes . J . Clin . Invest . 46 : 920 . COLE , K . S . , and J . W . MOORE . 1960 . Liquid junction and membrane potentials of the squid giant axon . J . Gen . Physiol . 43 : 971 . DE WEER , P . , and D . GEDULDIG . 1975 . Effect of cyanide on the resting membrane po - tential of squid giant axon . Biophys . J . 15 : 42a . DONNAN , F . G . 1924 . The theory of membrane equilibria , Chem . Rev . 1 : 73 . EDSALL , J . T . , and J . WYMAN . 1958 . Biophysical Chemistry , Vol . I . Academic Press , Inc . , New York . GOLDMAN , D . 1943 . Potential , impedance and rectification in membranes . J . Gen . Physiol . 27 : 37 . HARNED , H . S . , and F . T . BONNrR . 1945 . The first ionization of carbonic acid in aqueous solutions of sodium chloride . J . Am . Chem . Soc . 67 : 1026 . HARNED , H . S . , and R . DAVIS , . JR . 1943 . The ionization constant of carbonic acid in water 1 12 THE JOURNAL OF GENERAL PHYSIOLOGY ' VOLUME 67 " 1976 and the solubility of carbon dioxide in water and aqueous salt solutions from 0 to 50° . J . Am . Chem . Soc . fi5 : 2030 . HINKE , J . A . M . 1967 . Cation - selective microelectrodes for intracellular use . In Glass Electrodes for Hydrogen and Other Cations . G . Eisenman , editor . Marcel Dekker , New York . 464 . HODGKIN , A . L . , and KATZ , B . 1949 . The effect of sodium ions on the electrical activity of the giant axon of the squid . J . Physiol . ( Lond . ) . 108 : 37 . HOWELL , B . J . , F . W . BAUMGARDNER , K . BOND1 , and H . RAHN . 1970 . Acid - base balance in cold - blooded vertebrates as a function of body temperature . Am . J . Physiol . 218 : 600 . JAco ~ s , M . H . 1940 . Some aspects of cell permeability to weak electrolytes . Cold Spring Harbor Symp . Quant . Biol . 8 : 30 . KOSTYUK , P . G . , Z . A . SOROK1NA , and Y . D . KHOLODOVA . 1969 . Measurement of activity of hydrogen , potassium , and sodium ions in striated muscle fibers and nerve cells . In Glass Microelectrodes . M . Lavall6e , O . F . Schanne , and N . C . H6bert , editors . John Wiley & Sons , Inc . , New York . 322 . MCLAUGBLIN , S . G . A . , and J . A . M . HINKE . 1968 . Optical density changes of single muscle fibers in sodium - free solutions . Can . J . Physiol . Pharmacol . 46 : 247 . MITCHELL , P . 1961 . Conduction of protons through the membranes of mitochondria and bacteria by uncouplers of oxidative phosphorylation . Biochem . J . 81 : 248 . ORLOFr , J . , and R . W . BERLINER . 1956 . The mechanism of the excretion of ammonia in the dog . J . Clin . Invest . 35 : 223 . PAILLA ~ D , M . 1972 . Direct intracellular pH measurement in rat and crab muscle . J . Physiol . ( Lond . ) . 223 : 297 . REEVES , R . B . 1972 . An imidazole alphastat hypothesis for vertebrate acid - base regula - tion : tissue carbon dioxide content and body temperature in bull frogs . Respir . Physiol . 14 : 219 . Roos , A . 1965 . Intracellular pH and intracellular buffering power of the cat brain . Am . J . P , ~ ysiol . 209 : 1233 . Roos , A . 1971 . lntracellular pH and buffering power of rat muscle . Am . J . Physiol . 221 : 182 . Roos , A . 1975 . Intracellular pH and distribution of weak acids across cell membranes . A study of t ~ - and L - lactate and of DMO in rat diaphragm . J . Physiol . ( Lond . ) . 249 : 1 . SPYROPOULOS , C . S . 1960 . Cytoplasmic pH of nerve fibres . J . Neurochem . 5 : 185 . THOMAS , R . C . 1974 a . Intracellular pH of snail neurones measured with a new pH - sensitive glass microelectrode . J . Physiol . ( Lond . ) . 238 : 159 . THOMAS , R . C . 1974 b . The effect of bicarbonate on the intracellular buffering power of snail neurones . J . Physiol . ( Lond . ) . 241 : 103P .