Food Democracy in the Making : Designing with Local Food Networks Sebastian Prost 1 , Clara Crivellaro 1 , Andy Haddon 2 and Rob Comber 3 1 Open Lab , Newcastle University Newcastle upon Tyne , UK { s . prost2 , clara . crivellaro } @ ncl . ac . uk 2 Earth Doctors Ltd Wylam , UK andy @ earthdoctors . co . uk 3 RISE SICS Stockholm , Sweden rob . comber @ ri . se ABSTRACT This paper introduces the concept of ‘food democracy’ as a theoretical framing for HCI to engage in human - food inter - action . Extending existing foci of health and environmental sustainability , food democracy requires thinking through as - pects of social and economic justice , and democratic govern - ance as directions for the study and design of technologies for alternative food movements . To exemplify food democ - racy , we report on field observations and interviews about the opportunities and challenges for supporting the develop - ment of local food networks with communities in deprived neighbourhoods using an online direct food marketing plat - form . Using a food democracy framing , we identify tensions around environmental , social , and economic goals ; chal - lenges of local food businesses operating within the existing economic paradigm ; and differing perspectives on ownership and governance in the network . We discuss the need for HCI to design for systems change and propose a design space for HCI in supporting food democracy movements . Author Keywords food democracy ; local food networks ; social justice ; modernism ; system change ; design ACM Classification Keywords H . 5 . m . Information interfaces and presentation ( e . g . , HCI ) : Miscellaneous INTRODUCTION It is widely recognised that the globalised food system in its current form is unsustainable on many levels [ 43 ] . Neoliber - alism , e . g . , through the ongoing process of deregulation of the food system , causes problematic developments . Indus - trial agriculture , intense and monoculture farming practices and their reliance on fossil fuels have severe environmental consequences , including air pollution , contribution to cli - mate change , loss of biodiversity , and low animal welfare . Neoliberal economies and related policies have undermined the power of the state to regulate , and thus the ability of civil society to influence , where , how and by whom , the food we eat is produced [ 71 ] . Corporate control of food production , market concentration and food commodification means that today , 60 % of the retail price of food goes to wholesalers and retail , and as little as 10 % of the retail price of food goes to the producer , [ 66 ] . Meanwhile , overproduction and free trade agreements flood and destroy local markets of developing and developed countries alike [ 43 ] . Furthermore , the prolif - eration of highly processed , energy - rich but nutrient poor food contributes to the increase in diet - related diseases , as well as rising hunger and malnutrition rates throughout the world [ 50 , 80 ] . Traditionally , technologies have played a critical role in the automation of food production . More recently , digital tech - nologies have also begun to take on a significant role in the way we consume food [ 17 ] . In the last few years , HCI’s en - gagement with food has moved from a modernist framing of people as rational actors that need to be educated or per - suaded , to a more nuanced understanding of the material cir - cumstances and social practices surrounding food [ 14 ] . These food practices are commonly explored using a health or environmental sustainability lens [ 17 ] . This paper comple - ments these lines of research by introducing to HCI the con - cept of ‘food democracy’ , as coined by Lang [ 48 ] . Food de - mocracy aims at structural change in the dominant corporate food regime towards ‘ethical food practices’ , as character - ised by the values of social and economic justice , environ - mental sustainability , and democratic governance . Within a food democracy , people are considered ‘food citizens’ rather than just consumers or producers [ 80 ] . The producing , dis - tributing and consuming of food all become democratic prac - tices , widening opportunities to examine HCI’s role in sup - porting the development of radical alternatives to current ne - oliberal food systems . We contextualise this work in an empirical study of ‘Civic Food Networks’ ( CFNs ) [ 71 ] in deprived neighbourhoods in the UK . CFNs are civil society movements attempting to in - fluence market and state governance mechanisms of the cor - porate food regime and constitute exemplars of doing ‘food democracy’ in practice [ 48 , 71 ] . Technology plays a signifi - cant role in CFNs , as in the case of The Open Food Network CHI 2018 , April 21 – 26 , 2018 , Montreal , QC , Canada © 2018 Copyright is held by the owner / author ( s ) . ACM ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 5620 - 6 / 18 / 04 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3173574 . 3173907 CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018 , April 21 – 26 , 2018 , Montréal , QC , Canada Paper 333 Page 1 ( OFN ) 1 , an open source online platform that allows local pro - ducers to sell food directly to consumers and food hubs , thus forming local food networks . CFNs can therefore be seen as socio - technical processes aiming at ‘making food democ - racy’ , and therefore a starting point for exploring HCI’s role in this space . We contribute the theoretical framing of food democracy to open up possibilities for the role of HCI researchers as advo - cates for , and agents in , food democracies . We report on field observations , informal conversations and semi - structured in - terviews over the course of six months , during which we en - gaged with actors in a local food network - in - the - making that included community organisations , producers , transport pro - viders and food charities . The analysis exposes the socio - po - litical and economic tensions and challenges of realising CFNs in deprived communities within the existing economic paradigm . Motivated by this complex problem , this paper opens up an area for HCI to explore designs to support a food democracy agenda that aspires to a fairer , more sustainable and socially just food system . RELATED WORK Over the last decade , HCI has increasingly engaged with food and the potential for digital technology to play a role in its production and consumption [ 17 ] . Researchers have de - signed and studied ICT that shapes how we produce ( pre - dominantly through growing of vegetables in community gardens ) [ 42 , 54 , 62 , 78 ] , shop [ 14 , 15 , 45 , 75 ] , prepare [ 16 , 32 ] , eat [ 1 , 13 , 14 , 18 ] , share [ 34 , 36 ] , and dispose of [ 3 , 19 , 30 , 33 ] food . Within this , HCI has historically focused on the house - hold level [ 18 , 35 ] , with the community level primarily re - searched through community gardening and urban agricul - ture studies [ 54 , 78 ] . Little attention has been given to transport and logistics , with only a few examples on prove - nance [ 51 ] or at international workshops ( e . g . [ 70 ] ) and work with interest groups ( e . g . [ 11 , 44 ] ) . The dominant framings of HCI and food have traditionally been health , wellbeing , and environmental sustainability [ 17 ] . Within this , a popular approach has been the design of ‘persuasive technologies’ that aim at raising awareness of undesired behaviour and motivating change . This approach takes a modernist and reformist position that assumes that system change can come from within , through incremental changes to the constituent parts – particularly consumer be - haviour . This has been criticised as using both an optimisa - tion and deficit framing . First , food , and particularly the sustainability of food sys - tems , is framed narrowly as an optimisation problem that ig - nores lived reality [ 9 , 25 , 56 ] . Within this modernist framing , citizens are positioned as ‘mere’ consumers , who receive dis - proportionate blame for ‘inefficiencies’ in food systems , and are expected to change their behaviour to meet expert - de - 1 https : / / openfoodnetwork . org . uk rived targets and guidelines . By understanding citizens as ra - tional - choice actors , modernist perspectives disempower cit - izens from system - level decision - making and distance them from the food system . For example , the existing practice of food labelling as ‘organic’ , for example , denies consumers an active role in or access to information on the process of articulating the meaning , standards or evaluation of the label . Second , a progressive perspective on food systems in HCI , ‘celebratory technologies’ , has been proposed . This supports positive and successful food practices , such as creativity , pleasure , connectedness , and self - fulfilment [ 35 ] , as opposed to focusing on a deficit model . Celebratory approaches seek to innovate in food systems , through embracing top - down social and techno - centric progress [ 57 ] , including new inter - action paradigms ( e . g . Food VR [ 60 ] , Food Communication [ 79 ] ) and frameworks for interaction ( multisensory design , e . g . [ 61 ] ) ; and in novel food technologies , e . g . [ 22 ] , and through combining progressive and traditional practices , for instance , by embracing bottom - up movements of everyday food scientists [ 46 ] . The latter seek to regain control over their own food production and consumption , engaging with digital technologies , increasing food literacy and reducing the environmental impact of their food practices . These two critiques – that HCI has focused too heavily on optimisation and deficit approaches – have been embraced with a broader focus on understanding food as a ‘social prac - tice’ [ 12 ] . The practice lens avoids seeing food as an element of isolated behaviour and connects food activities and expe - riences with sensory , physiological , psychological , socio - de - mographic and social factors . HCI has explored these factors in relation to food sourcing , consumption , and disposal [ 14 , 33 ] . This approach explores mundane food practices and the material and social circumstances that shape them [ 18 ] , and allows us to examine both the experiential and struc - tured , dynamic , relational , and occasioned contexts that shape behaviour on an individual level . In particular , work with community gardening groups has shown that reasons for participation in these sites can range from personal fulfil - ment , to social or cultural integration , to political activism through reclaiming the commons [ 42 , 62 ] . Other examples include food sharing movements as protest against wasteful food practices [ 34 ] and more direct engagement between consumers and producers , through a collaborative recipe platform that opens a discursive space about the conditions of food production and the wider agro - food system [ 32 ] . Mirroring the empowerment of everyday citizen science [ 46 ] , these sites and practices entangle notions of rights to the city [ 68 ] , to the digital and to food systems [ 66 ] . Here , this work builds on the rich body of work on Participatory Design ( PD ) in public sector innovation in local governments ( e . g . [ 5 , 29 ] ) , socially relevant HCI research through Action Research ( AR ) [ 41 ] , and the more recent turn towards ‘civic CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018 , April 21 – 26 , 2018 , Montréal , QC , Canada Paper 333 Page 2 technology’ in HCI . With these traditions and trends , re - searchers are increasingly exploring the “design and use of technology to support both formal and informal aspects of government and public services” [ 6 ] . This broader under - standing of design and technologies has been envisioned and developed to shape public life , encourage new modes of cit - izen empowerment , and support grassroots movements [ 5 ] . Civic food technologies aim at supporting ‘alternative food movements’ such as permaculture , urban gardening , ‘locavorism’ , food cooperatives or slow food [ 4 ] . This paper complements this body of work by introducing the concepts of ‘food democracy’ [ 48 ] and ‘food citizenship’ [ 80 ] as a the - oretical framing for socially just design . Introducing Food Democracy As with other forms of democracy , food democracy is best understood not as a final state , but as a continued process of developing “a democratic , socially and economically just , and environmentally sustainable food system” [ 81 : 271 ] . There is a great diversity in alternative food movements and their degree of opposition to the global corporate ‘food re - gime’ [ 43 ] . While reformist concepts such as ‘food security’ focus on aid within the dominant system [ 43 ] , progressive concepts such as ‘food justice’ aim at equity in access to food [ 24 ] . Radical models , such as ‘food democracy’ , stand for a redistribution of power and a democratisation of the food system , i . e . a shift towards increased control by civil society over state regulation and market forces [ 71 ] . The term ‘civic food networks’ ( CFNs ) has been proposed to describe forms of alternative food initiatives that engage in processes of food democracy . Here , ‘food citizens’ move be - yond the limited neoliberal understanding of participation in the food system as mere consumers or producers [ 55 , 59 ] to embrace the right and the responsibility to actively engage in deliberation , sharing of knowledge and ideas about food and the food system , activities towards the community good and ethical business practices [ 39 , 40 , 71 ] . Examples of CFNs in - clude community supported agriculture ( CSA ) , food swaps , consumer co - operatives , community gardening groups and food movements such as Slow Food [ 7 ] and La Via Cam - pesina [ 76 ] . The latter coined the term ‘food sovereignty’ , emphasising the right to food production , i . e . ownership and control over land , trade and markets [ 66 , 82 , 83 ] . However , promises of food democracy have been criticised . First , the self - organising and bottom - up character of food de - mocracy movements could be seen to make them complicit in fulfilling the neoliberal agenda . Rather than reclaiming food production and consumption , they simply fill in the gaps in the safety net left by a smaller state [ 59 ] . This criti - cism can also be made of civic technologies and their orien - tation towards self - organisation [ 65 ] . Moreover , many pro - gressive alternative food systems , such as Slow Food [ 7 ] , have been seen as being predominantly top - down prescrip - tions of practices [ 57 ] that establish a vision towards which consumers , producers and , in HCI , designers and research - ers , must work . In the context of urban agriculture , it has been argued that both views are justified – that self - organi - sation can be idealised as both ghettoising and as empower - ing . However , it is helpful to look beyond this dualism by acknowledging the need for a long incremental shift that can eventually challenge wider policy frameworks [ 59 ] . Additionally , a celebratory and unreflexive use of the rheto - ric of ‘local’ or ‘organic’ has been criticised as romanticising and depoliticising [ 28 ] attributes of food that are not innately positive [ 33 , 49 ] . To avoid this ‘local trap’ [ 7 ] , the study and practice of food democracy needs to critically reflect on the context and form of specific food initiatives . This should not be used to dismiss the concept of local food altogether ; ra - ther , it should highlight its complexities [ 27 ] . The strongest criticism of food democracy , however , portrays it as an elitist’s dream world : [ . . . ] Regular people cannot af - ford to buy high - priced organic food , shop at farmers’ markets , or worry about whether their steaks are lo - cally grown or humanely raised [ 37 : 15 ] While highlighting this concern , Hamilton [ 37 ] rejects the argument that proponents of food democracy do not care if poorer people can afford to eat . He acknowledges that local and organic food can cost more , but this is no ground to argue against it . Doing so stays strictly within a neoliberal framing and risks conflating , for instance , economic poverty with food poverty ( the inability to obtain healthy , nutritious food ) and ignoring possibilities for alternative economic ap - proaches . Economies of scale through collective purchasing could also be a way to make local food more affordable [ 52 ] . However , food democracy highlights the notion of solidarity and ethical ways of doing economy , questioning not only the way food is produced , distributed , consumed and disposed of , but also the capitalist free market model . Thus , CFNs align with solidarity movements [ 69 ] and their creation of social economies and cooperatives as practical responses to social and economic crisis . Such alternative ethical econo - mies move beyond market and state and have been concep - tualised as ‘human economies’ [ 38 ] . The sharing economy and its promises of alternative , bottom - up driven business models has become a popular research avenue for HCI . How - ever , the benefit of sharing platforms like AirBnB and Uber for deprived communities remains questionable and needs further investigation [ 21 ] , with platform cooperativism being proposed as an alternative , more humane concept of doing peer - to - peer economy [ 74 ] . Recently , HCI has started to re - search and design socially just and human markets [ 47 ] , and solidarity movements and economies [ 77 ] . In particular , so - cial justice has been proposed for HCI as a design principle to address large scale societal issues [ 23 , 31 ] and the corpo - rate food regime specifically [ 24 ] . Building on Lötter [ 53 ] , Dombrowski et al . [ 23 ] propose six strategies for designing for social justice : designing through a fluid understanding of the design space ( transformation ) , identifying of unjust prac - tices ( recognition ) , development of mutually beneficial ar - rangements ( reciprocity ) , facilitate action ( enablement ) , and holding responsible ( accountability ) . Food democracy must CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018 , April 21 – 26 , 2018 , Montréal , QC , Canada Paper 333 Page 3 take these strategies forward , particularly in light of the structural inequalities evident in the global food system and identified in alternative economies . More pragmatically , Hamilton [ 37 ] argues that local food and ‘Big Food’ can coexist , since more affordable options do not have to disappear . As an aspiration to work towards , the values of food democracy – a fair and transparent food sys - tem – are truly democratic and not elitist . Similarly , Carolan [ 10 ] discusses that with a proliferation of digital ordering platforms , food democracy can move the normative from a ‘you must’ ( buy at the supermarket ) to a ‘you may’ ( partici - pate in alternative food networks ) . Food democracy is , there - fore , a process towards system change that acknowledges within the current neoliberal system , not everyone can par - ticipate in CFNs . This paper contributes insights on the chal - lenges and opportunities of technology - supported develop - ment of CFNs with low - income communities . We do this by using the theoretical lens of food democracy to discuss a case study with the Open Food Network in the UK as a potential technology to coordinate a local food network . FOOD HUBS AND THE OPEN FOOD NETWORK The OFN is an open source online platform that provides a directory and marketplace for local food producers and food hubs . According to the U . S . Department of Agriculture ( USDA ) , food hubs “manage aggregation , distribution , and marketing of source - identified food products primarily from local and regional producers” [ 58 : 44 ] . Food hubs , therefore , act as an intermediary between producers and consumers of local food . On the OFN , food hubs can take various forms , including loose buyer groups , cooperatives , or stores or farmers’ markets offering a click - and - collect service . Pro - ducers can also be hubs and offer their own products next to others . From a consumer’s perspective , a hub offers a unified shop front for food from local producers . A hub runs regular , usually weekly , cycles during which consumers can place or - ders and pay online . At the end of each cycle , aggregated or - ders are sent to the producers , who deliver to the physical location of the hub ; orders are then sorted and picked up by shoppers during a set time window . An evaluation of the OFN in Australia showed that the plat - form is perceived positively [ 45 ] . It offers an efficient and accessible way to administrate orders , acts as a direct mar - keting tool , increases access to fresh and local food and re - duces transaction costs . From a civic technology perspective , the open source nature of the OFN aligns with the principles of food democracy and differentiates it from functionally similar , but proprietary , price - setting platforms like FarmDrop 2 . Carolan [ 10 ] argues that while the latter offer alternatives to the mainstream food system , these private software providers create new dependencies to a single mar - ket player with no participation in governance . The OFN , on the other hand , can be used at low cost – it is free for produc - ers , and hubs get six months trial for free , after which there 2 https : / / www . farmdrop . com is a £1 monthly fee and a suggested contribution of 2 % of sales on a ‘pay as you feel’ basis [ 63 ] . The open source na - ture also means that the development of OFN is community - driven , giving hubs and producers greater autonomy and ownership over the system [ 10 ] . Thus , while much of the op - portunities the OFN offers focus on the market and its opti - misation , this paper this paper discusses it using the lens of food democracy and the values it comprises . METHODS & PROCEDURE This work adopts an Action Research ( AR ) approach , an ap - proach which is increasingly being taken up by the HCI com - munity [ 41 ] . A social enterprise bakery that delivers publicly funded baking classes with communities in deprived neigh - bourhoods was the core partner and starting point of an on - going collaboration to establish a local food network in two deprived neighbourhoods in the North East of the UK . AR generally follows a cyclical action - reflection - action struc - ture . For this work , we engaged in two AR cycles over the course of six months with local organisations and individuals through informal conversation and observations . These in - cluded 3 community centres , 5 producers , 1 food waste char - ity , 1 OFN representative , 3 local councillors , 2 food co - op - eratives , 2 community gardens , 1 delivery business and 2 community groups focusing on food . Potential partner organ - isations were usually researched online and were supported by personal referrals from other members of our research lab . Potential food hubs were generally organisations that already have trusted relationships with local people , are already en - gaged in food related activities and possess the willingness and capacity to act as a food hub . These food hubs would provide the space to handle the delivery , sorting , pick - up and storage of food . A key requirement of such a network is find - ing an effective way of coordinating the purchasing and dis - tribution of food ; the OFN promised to provide the technol - ogy platform to do this . In the first cycle , engagements included meetings , guided tours , volunteering , as well as chats with staff , volunteers , and residents . We documented conversations and observa - tions with field notes and photographs , resulting in approxi - mately 30 hours of notes . The engagements were both of practical nature , but also revealed the complexities surround - ing setting up a local food network . We coded and analysed the field notes using thematic analysis [ 8 ] . In this six - step process ( familiarisation with the data , generating initial codes , searching for themes , reviewing themes , defining and naming themes , and producing a report ) , the first author gen - erated initial codes that were then discussed with co - authors to generate three themes around value tensions , barriers , and opportunities to establish a local food network . In the second cycle , we conducted semi - structured inter - views to explore the themes of the first cycle in more detail . Interview partners included the director of the community CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018 , April 21 – 26 , 2018 , Montréal , QC , Canada Paper 333 Page 4 bakery ( BA ) , an organic farmer ( FA ) , the director of a com - munity centre ( CC ) , a community engagement coordinator from a food charity ( CE ) and the coordinator of an existing food hub that uses the OFN ( FH ) . Interviews focused on is - sues of values , ownership and drive to action in relation to food and community . Again , applying thematic analysis we developed themes that capture the challenges of ‘making food democracy’ on the ground with a local food network . FINDINGS Based on our analysis of the data collected in both cycles , we identified three central themes around making food democ - racy through a local food network : tensions between local food values and affordability ; the challenges of developing ethical practices within the existing neoliberal system ; and the complexities of developing civic food networks through co - development and community participation . While there is a clear rejection of the current state of affairs and an aspira - tion to change it , these themes illustrate how the constituent parts of food democracy are configured against the reality in which CFNs need to take shape and operate . Local Food Values and Affordability The first theme discusses the frictions that arose between the values and goals of building a local food network and the economic reality of low - income communities , given the higher production costs of local food . A central aim of the organisations we engaged with is to de - liver wider social impact , such as a low - carbon economy or happier and healthier communities . Food can be a vehicle to achieve this . For them , there is a fundamental quality to food that engages people and brings enjoyment . As a response to the negative impacts of the dominant food system , local food , then , has more than just a ( varying ) geographical meaning ; rather , it connotes values echoing food democracy . For our research partners , local food has the power to con - nect consumers and producers , deliver positive environmen - tal impacts by reducing food miles , support the local econ - omy , cut out intermediaries in the supply chain , provide an pathway to employability for deprived communities and de - liver high quality food that is healthy , often organic and GMO ( genetically modified organism ) free . Our partners also connect local food with practices that are seen as both satisfying and educational , such as growing and cooking yourself . However , unsurprisingly perhaps , organisations differ in how they prioritise different values . For one of the farms , en - vironmental sustainability and growing organic vegetables is more important than achieving social justice . To stay eco - nomically viable , they accept the fact that only higher - in - come customers can afford their produce . This situation is reflected on the OFN in general . Established food hubs can usually be found in affluent areas : At the moment , it is a case of in order to run a com - mercial food hub it is necessary to appeal to the envi - ronmental motivations of higher income shoppers to make the food hub viable . ( FH ) In contrast , for the community centre we interviewed , social justice is more important than environmental sustainability . They are currently running a community pizza business that uses local , organic flour . To keep the pizzas affordable , they are considering switching to conventional flour : At the moment , they use organic local flour for the pizza . The rest is not organic because that would make it even more expensive . They charge £2 - 3 . 50 for an 8 - or 10 - inch Pizza . And people are already complaining that the higher priced ones are too ex - pensive . ( Researcher field notes , 16 / 6 / 2017 ) The fact that “locally supplied food does tend to cost more” ( CE ) , and thus becomes unaffordable , has been a key con - cern for the local food network partners . Some of our part - ners see potential in digital technologies to overcome this , primarily by simplifying the ordering process and aggregat - ing demand . Delivering to a hub instead of individual house - holds also simplifies delivery and keeps costs low . The OFN as an open source platform is additionally seen as offering flexibility in terms of the business model used by the local food network and as a way to keep costs low , as the capital investment does not need to be repaid . For our partners , the hub model has the potential to become a catalyst for benefits in the wider area beyond just giving access to local food . The model does , however , also intro - duce new complexities and impact upon costs . Coordinating orders , deliveries , pick - ups and marketing all require a dedi - cated manager and resources . Additionally , our partners per - ceive that the delivery logistics are currently not well sup - ported by the OFN . Thus , the biggest concern expressed is that , despite optimi - sation and aggregation , local food remains to be more expen - sive and becomes unaffordable for the communities our part - ners work with . Technology can streamline logistics , help to take out intermediaries and reduce transaction costs , thus keeping money where food is produced and consumed . These savings are , however , not enough for deprived com - munities . The experience of our partners shows that food poverty is also connected with poor housing , poor health or unemploy - ment . Ultimately , the specific local context of this study – low - income communities – highlights that the unaffordabil - ity of local food for them is a symptom of the underlying injustice the corporate food regime is built upon . In a fair system , producers would be paid fairly , consumers could af - ford the food and the environment would be treated fairly . However , policy reforms to improve the welfare or food sys - tem remain unlikely in the UK policy context of government - imposed austerity ; indeed , our partners did not mention pol - icy reforms as options to work towards or hope for . CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018 , April 21 – 26 , 2018 , Montréal , QC , Canada Paper 333 Page 5 Limits of Ethical Practice within Neoliberalism The second theme examines how our partners struggle to overcome the neoliberal logic enacted in their current prac - tices and to envision a model of local food networks that aligns with the values of food democracy in the context of low - income communities . All our partners agree that fairness in the local food system is a challenging goal . At the moment , local food is not seen as fair for consumers , since it is not affordable for parts of the population . Nevertheless , the ways our partners talked about achieving a viable local food network largely remained within a modernist and neoliberal framework . Suggestions on viability were largely either addressing cost - savings or providing additional income . Reducing costs for buyers would come at the expense of other participants in the food network . Producers argue that they could produce more cheaply by using unsustainable pro - duction methods , but this would exploit the environment . They could also sell food at production costs , basically run - ning their business as a charity , but that would mean no in - come from food production . Community organisations said that they could provide their service for free by relying on volunteers , but this would not only exploit them , it would call into question the sustainability of this system as volunteers might eventually “burn out” ( FH ) . It is important , therefore , to grow structures only as needed . Additionally , the hub should aim at using as much of existing infrastructure ( tech - nology platforms , established logistics links , space and stor - age capacity ) as possible . Upscaling , i . e . growing operations , and ‘outscaling’ , i . e . joining up many smaller initiatives , is seen as a way of introducing economies of scale that would help to reduce the costs of production , processing and distri - bution . However , this seems to be no option in the short - and mid - term . One of the largest food hubs on the OFN has about 85 suppliers and several hundred regular shoppers , but has so far not achieved a scale that would enable them to make food more affordable . To generate additional income , one approach that some OFN food hubs currently practise is to mark - up prices or charge membership fees . In its simplest form , this primarily covers the running costs of the food hub . More complex models in - troduce differentiated pricing for different people , effec - tively using wealthier members to subsidise food for poorer members . Furthermore , many of the organisations we en - gaged with are charities and currently rely on public funding . They suggested that this could be a model for the local food network as well . Funding can be particularly important in the start - up phase to cover costs , but also long - term to finance the social impact work of the food hub . Most partners , how - ever , have an ambivalent relationship with funding schemes , as they were subject to significant cuts in the UK in recent years and are therefore not seen as a reliable income source . Some partners operate as social enterprises , thus aiming at combining commercial activity and social benefit . The char - ities we engaged with also report that they increasingly look - ing for routes to generate income through trade or paid ser - vices that , in turn , finance non - profitable and charitable work : We’ve been quite successful in attracting grant money up to now , but that won ' t go on forever . And so , the question is , what we do about that , and what our strategy is going forward . And that at the moment is [ . . . ] looking for routes where we can generate money . ( CC ) The challenge for charities is to find a balance between com - mercial activities and acquiring funding . At the ( arguably ) progressive end of capitalism , partners suggested social in - vestments or social impact bonds as ways of getting private investors to finance the operation of a food hub . Models that avoid the neoliberal dichotomy , i . e . relying on mechanisms of cost - saving or income - generation , were only hinted at . One example is how some partners argued that , due to the high retail mark - ups , some types of food can actually be produced cheaper locally than in supermarkets . As an - other example , some partners suggested that people could , to some extent , grow and make food themselves , which would reduce their spending on food . It has , however , been ques - tioned that subsistence through growing can reach a substan - tial level for most people . Moreover , local food is seen to provide employability pathways and both community centres we engaged with offer , for example , food - related apprentice - ships . While this would bring in additional money into the neighbourhood , the scale it can take again remains to be ex - plored . Co - Development and Community Participation Perhaps as a response to the seemingly inescapable neoliber - alism discussed above , the third theme discusses how demo - cratic values of shared ownership , collaboration and commu - nity participation are envisioned as routes to long - term and structural change . As a local food network is a network of organisations and people , ownership and control over it needs to be shared across all participants : “I think it would have to be shared ownership , I don ' t think it could be controlled by one partic - ular organisation” ( CE ) . The mechanisms frequently pro - posed to realise this follow , perhaps surprisingly , a very spe - cific model of democratic governance . They are based on a formalised constitution and an elected steering group or board of trustees that decides on important questions . Some partners criticised co - ownership and lengthy group discus - sions as potentially inefficient and resource - hungry . Addi - tionally , co - ownership is seen as challenging to realise , as individual agendas and objectives might be seen as more im - portant than the benefit for the community . A key task of such a steering group would be to develop the network . The aim of co - development is to “bring in people around the table” ( CE ) to discuss and develop an idea collab - CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018 , April 21 – 26 , 2018 , Montréal , QC , Canada Paper 333 Page 6 oratively from the start . This is believed to ensure broad sup - port and engagement from everyone involved early on . If only a small group develops the idea and tries to get others on board , they could run the risk of burning out . Addition - ally , working with local people and volunteers [ helps ] to develop activities that would help [ to ] address some of the needs that people identify ( CC ) . Co - development is therefore seen as not only empowering , but also as delivering outcomes that actually benefit the com - munity . To ensure that a food hub is embedded in the com - munity it aims to serve , partners stress the importance of col - laborating with an organisation that is already embedded there and has established trust relationships with residents . Collaboration and co - ownership are also believed to help to overcome an environment of competition and distrust , in which not only commercial companies compete on the mar - ket , but also charities compete for the same funding pots . However , our partners acknowledge that it needs time to de - velop a trusted collaboration environment , and open and transparent communication is seen as important for this . In reframing ‘competition’ as a multitude of goals and ap - proaches that are all oriented towards the community good , diverging agendas can be acknowledged and worked with in a collaborative setting . Most of all , collaboration is pointed out as the way to go to achieve structural change . Currently , most collaborations are small - scale and transactional . There are numerous reasons for this . One of the aims of charities is to respond to the needs of their community , and this often require immediate action and remedy . Charities also have multiple agenda items that need their constrained resources . A long - term , strategic ven - ture is therefore a complex risk factor and less manageable than smaller interventions . This practice is reinforced by public intervention programmes , which are defined by short political election cycles , and funding structures that prefer short projects with immediate benefits . Some partners believe that structural change can be achieved through a collective of small interventions that all correspond to a broader agenda . Others criticise the short - term impact of such practices and argue for the need to develop a strategic vision : You have people who are passionate and [ . . . ] they are often very engaging within the local community , [ . . . ] but they don’t have any vision of scale of how they get to viability . They don’t , generally they don ' t . They ' re fragmented , because you can use these exam - ples in the [ region ] , there’s multiple orchard projects , but how do you scale it so that it creates a significant alternative to the global food system . ( BA ) To overcome this fragmentation , several partners talked about developing a shared vision that everyone subscribes to . Our partners stressed that while such should be co - devel - oped , it still needs an individual or a group to drive it . While this vision should aim at system change , the day - to - day work needs to be at a scale that is practical and compatible with other activities and responsibilities . Whether new ap - proaches work or fail can only be tested by trying them out . Piloting , therefore , reduces the risk of investing a lot of re - sources into a project that will never work . Nevertheless , they require commitment and resources . Co - development also includes working with local communi - ties . This is seen as at least partly involving elements of ed - ucation , in particular about healthy eating , growing and cooking skills . In the context of food hubs , it is also about the ethics of the food system : Some people have a very purist community develop - ment methodology , and so they basically would say , we wouldn’t do anything unless the local people want it . No , I don’t personally subscribe to that really , be - cause I think that you only know what you know . [ … ] There’s to my mind something about community de - velopment , where we actually come together and we bring our skills and expertise and we start to open people’s minds , because I’ve had different experi - ences to folk around here , and they’ve got different experiences to me . ( CC ) Participation is a fundamental value of local food network development , but it can be configured in different ways with - out being tokenistic . For our partners , it is equally important to bring in new ideas and experiences into the community from people who are not part of that geographical commu - nity in order to show that other ways of thinking and doing are possible and thus nurturing opportunities for mutual learning . In this way , food democracy can also be understood as a form of community development . Collaboration at scale for structural impact is no easy task . As our findings show , realising food democracy in its multi - tude of dimensions is challenging within the current UK so - cio - economic context . While co - development might be seen as a way to overcome this , it bears tensions in itself about the forms of shared ownership and community participation . DISCUSSION : MAKING FOOD DEMOCRACY The concept of food democracy allows to expand the framing of civic technology – through reformist ( within the system ) , and radical ( outside the system ) perspectives on achieving more socially and environmentally just food systems . Here , we expand on our findings to highlight the ways in which the challenges encountered can be worked with constructively to outline how HCI can play a unique role in supporting CFNs , unpicking the ways in which technology , both as a force of modernism and as an actor for equality and equity , can be incorporated in changing the food system . Designing within the Current System The OFN provides a means to imagine and start to put into action a model of food democracy that places its primary em - phasis on connecting citizens with local food producers . Es - CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018 , April 21 – 26 , 2018 , Montréal , QC , Canada Paper 333 Page 7 tablishing these short - chain routes to market is seen to bene - fit the producers , to create opportunities to open up choice for consumers , and to create space for co - production of food and food systems in the relationships that evolve from the network . Our partners view this as an alternative to the dom - inant food system . Yet , as a democratic practice , the local food network in our study , is one that is embedded in the global food system , is bounded by the economic models and limitations of local charities and food businesses , and , to ‘fill the gaps’ [ 59 ] , and at times even seeks to replicate the “successes” , of the global food system . As with the possible replication of inequalities in the sharing economy identified by Dillahunt and Malone [ 21 ] , it is unclear how a local food network opens access to food for those who need it most , and it remains uncertain if the economics of local food can be realistically thought of as a response to the crises of the global food system . In fact , the findings of this paper illustrate how ideas of modernism , ra - tionality and efficiency , are entrenched in ideas of local food networks and the role of technology in them . Here , modern - ism is closely entangled with neoliberalism and its dictate to strive for profit and saving costs as the primary way of achieving economic viability . Thus , affordability and the quest to keep the costs down become primary concerns , above those for social or environmental justice . Paradoxi - cally then , even though food hubs and OFN values are noble , they may be problematically celebratory – by operating within the current system , they end up reinforcing the current spatial organisation of social injustices [ 72 ] . Food hubs and local food networks proliferate in affluent areas that can af - ford the luxury of locally sourced , organic , and ethically pro - duced food . The ‘rest’ has to resort to the very cheapest food ( both in price and quality ) , or , worse , rely on potentially dis - empowering charitable formats , such as food banks . For HCI , this is visible in the way technology is seen as an aggregator and coordinator . The primary role of the OFN and thus of the food hub is to aggregate supply from producers and aggregate demand from customers . The OFN thus repro - duces a market model where goods are exchanged against money . The food hub as an intermediary runs risk of separat - ing consumers from producers , simply replacing the super - market in the conventional system . And while the platform itself provides a model of more democratic software devel - opment , through a community forum that creates a direct connection between users of the system and developers , its setup as a central platform hides certain costs from its users . While the pay - as - you - feel system covers the costs of devel - opment and maintenance through contributions from food hubs , the ‘external costs’ of operating the cloud service in - frastructure , in particular the environmental impact of the in - formation technology [ 67 ] , are less visible . Thus , while the OFN aims to create a visible and efficient local food network , it works to obscure the logistics and costs of digital media - tion in the food network . Yet , as has been argued in the context of urban agriculture [ 59 ] and for food democracy in general [ 37 ] , it is not useful to reject the OFN based on these observations . While in some respects it is reproducing the neoliberal agenda , in others it is creating a meaningful alternative to it and a step towards food democracy [ 27 , 37 ] . It is important to recognise that we all exist in the current system , the rhetorics and power of which is hard to avoid or change [ 25 ] . Food democracy , and thus the complex issue of transforming the global food sys - tem is not achieved by the sum of individual rational actors purchasing sustainable food on the OFN [ 59 ] . However , the market is the only format we are used to in order to partici - pate in the food system . As Dourish [ 25 ] discussed for envi - ronmental sustainability in general , this needs to be ques - tioned by design , to avoid making sustainable food a moral choice , thus blaming those who can’t afford it . Instead , we have to understand the OFN as a network of people – food citizens – who are working to find ways to achieve a more just and sustainable food system . As our findings have shown , people are themselves faced with difficult decisions – most often about the survival of their own food businesses and any hope to affect change through them . The power of modernism as a narrative for the self - preservation of demo - cratic food practices is then perhaps the biggest challenge for food democracy . Given the dominance of the current system , should we work within the system and embrace the power of the market to advance the causes we support ? Is this market even avoida - ble for us [ 25 ] ? We want to argue that HCI research can de - sign technologies that operate within the current neoliberal market - based configuration of the food system [ 47 ] and sim - ultaneously question it . A food democracy framing can guide the design of systems and tools that support concerted action towards connecting and scaling up small food initiatives , in - cluding models for their economic viability . Active food cit - izenship in a digital form might also involve activities we recognise as strongly market - driven , like search engine opti - misation for local food hubs , or developing tools for targeted localised marketing of food offers . We need to ask ourselves what our ethical ways of doing business are or might be , and to what extent we are willing to work within the current sys - tems of food distribution , marketing , and consumption to try to achieve change . By more closely and critically examining the underexplored digital practices of the global food system , engaging with strategies of recognition and accountability [ 23 ] , we may unpick them and make use of them to subvert the dominant system . Designing towards Food Democracy As we have presented in our findings , there is a momentum and motivation to change . Our partners have expressed their criticism , or even frustration , with current food interventions , as they do not have a lasting impact . Charities , funding struc - tures , politics , and research practices are currently oriented towards short - term interventions and respond to immediate needs , such as food poverty or unhealthy eating . As such , it CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018 , April 21 – 26 , 2018 , Montréal , QC , Canada Paper 333 Page 8 is at best treating the symptoms or tinkering with the existing system . HCI researchers are then faced with questions of how to move beyond this , and design for system change . We think that food democracy , besides a theoretical framing for under - standing local food networks , can also provide a useful way to guide HCI design for more structural impact . Abercrombie et al . [ 2 ] developed a practical guide for system change , con - sisting of six principles for planning and doing system change . In planning , they propose to understand needs and assets , engage with multiple actors , and to map the systems in which change is to be achieved . We believe that HCI is traditionally well equipped to work with these principles , as they are core elements of user - centred design . In doing sys - tem change , Abercrombie et al . suggest to do it together , dis - tribute leadership , and foster a learning culture . Again , in HCI , participatory design offers similar principles of collab - oration , shared ownership , and an iterative process of action and reflection . More specifically , we can combine the six strategies for de - signing for social justice outlined earlier [ 23 ] with a food de - mocracy framing to guide practical interventions in this field . First , transformation as a design principle points to food de - mocracy as ongoing and evolving , not a static end - goal . Whatever food citizenship and food democracy might mean , or be in practice , needs to be understood as a situated ongo - ing process [ 18 ] that cannot be designed for communities , but must be co - produced with them . Thus , while modernist and deficit models in HCI have been criticised primarily for their focus on efficiencies and optimisation , we must also recognise the disenfranchising effect of ‘interventions’ in the food system . It appears , given the significant challenges in overcoming the neoliberal cultures organisations operate in today , we need to embrace incremental changes . System change requires , however , thinking in decades instead of years . Doing so , we should be wary of working just with small isolated interventions that sees researchers dipping in and out of communities and contexts [ 73 ] . Instead we should aim to design longitudinal studies and find ways to better connect and document [ 68 ] localised interventions as part of a bigger , long - term system transformation . As a starting point , HCI should therefore design and research tools and platforms to better understand the issues , problematics , con - cerns , causes and catalysts of the current food system and alternative initiatives . Additionally , better tools are needed to connect individuals with organisations ( NGOs , busi - nesses , governmental / regulatory institutions ) . Second , food democracy serves as a lens to design for the recognition of the voices of marginalised communities . For this HCI research can leverage technologies to support the identification of unjust practises in food businesses , and the laws and regulations that support them . Additionally , tech - nologies can help to surface different and conflicting values around food [ 20 ] – in particular on environmental sustaina - bility , affordability , and economic viability . There is a need for tools that reflect such polyvocality in the food system . In the case of a local food network , they can provide spaces to negotiate these between consumers , workers , and producers , or – generally – different food citizens , to find compromises or alternatives on e . g . criteria for products , working condi - tions , or distribution channels . Third , reciprocity in a food democracy calls for mutually beneficial social and technical arrangements between more and less privileged food citizens . HCI should therefore en - gage in design to shift power relations to support disadvan - taged groups and critically evaluate how well systems , such as those in the sharing economy [ 21 ] , achieve this . The OFN represents one of such systems already , as it creates a mar - ketplace for small local producers to counterbalance the mar - ket places dominated by large global actors . As we have shown in the findings , the OFN , however , does provide little beyond an ordering system . Our engagement showed that there is need to support networking of actors , marketing , de - livery logistics , and governance mechanisms of CFNs . Fourth , designing for enablement in a food democracy refers to tools that create opportunities to change both individual food practices and the wider food system . Reflecting on the findings , where we discussed some of the complexities of democratic governance and community participation that our partners face today , HCI research should design systems that foster active participation of people as citizens , beyond , for example , being simple suppliers or buyers for a food hub . Extending examples of activist communities [ 34 ] , this might also include facilitation of social activities like cooking clas - ses or shared meals , relational platforms that enable citizens to participate more actively in decision - making on the crite - ria of food production and distribution through , for example , commissioning , or platforms to lobby for policy change . Fifth , transforming current market models means an equita - ble ( re ) distribution of food , money , information , and power within a food democracy . This might require thinking about what business models might better reflect food democracy values . Design should support such ethical alternatives , for example by facilitating pathways to employment for the local community or pooling of distributed assets , such as skills , practices , and means . Sixth , designing for food democracy should create systems of accountability . HCI here can support the exploration of technologies that support new forms of democratic decision making and accountability through shared ownership and governance in CFNs , such as cooperatives . Accountable feedback tools can show how a rebalancing of benefits to and participation of a wider range of social groups , particularly deprived communities , is actually achieved [ 26 ] . Learning from Others Realising food citizenship and food democracy in practice is a work of both imagination ( design ) and a work of craft . What emerged from this study and previous work ( e . g . , [ 28 , 66 ] ) is that the struggle to create a fairer food system is CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018 , April 21 – 26 , 2018 , Montréal , QC , Canada Paper 333 Page 9 one that requires collaborations between many actors in civil society , governments , and the commercial sector – some of whom may be passionate for change , and others who may be capable of thinking through the logistics of change . Consid - ering the complexity and magnitude of the challenge at hand , an important first step might entail learning from success sto - ries [ 68 ] , and thus share , and in fact celebrate such stories with others [ 35 ] . While CFNs are a localised response to the global food regime , and as such not directly transferable from one place and context to another , they can be a rich re - source for other developments . Here , we discuss how HCI might support sharing and learning among CFNs . Internationally , consumer cooperatives provide compelling examples to move local food beyond an ‘elitist’ niche market and experiment with creative ways of community - driven work social justice [ 52 ] . The same aspiration is true for the Open Food Network , as the slogan on its homepage demon - strates : “Sometimes the best way to fix the system is to start a new one . . . ” [ 64 ] . One potential way to achieve this is to look at ways of scaling up collective purchasing . Examples of consumer cooperatives range from groups with a few friends buying in bulk , up to groups that have existed since the 1960s and have several thousand members , one of the largest being Seikatsu Club in Japan with 250 , 000 + mem - bers . Additionally , they have ‘scaled out’ by forming um - brella organisations such as G . A . S . ( Gruppo Acquisto Soli - dale ) in Italy ( 3 , 000 members ) , which provides infrastructure support to individual groups [ 52 ] . Technology is one such infrastructure and the OFN is one of many examples of or - ganising collective purchase . Thus , while the OFN and sim - ilar platforms certainly provides value , this work has also discussed OFN’s limitations . HCI research should therefore reach out to existing groups to learn about their practices and challenges to improve such platforms in the future . Cooperatives also play a critical role in the response to the current social and economic crisis in Greece . About 80 % of the Greek population are today served through informal dis - tribution of food through the solidarity economy . These in - formal associations , such as RA . ME , operate a solidarity net - work that organises the collection and distribution of food , directly from farmers to consumers below retail prices , while at the same time aiming at changing perceptions of liberal economies [ 69 ] . In this context , HCI has begun to explore more relational models of economies to inform the design of digital platforms that support ongoing transformation [ 77 ] . The OFN as an independent project then represents such a model of technology development that is produced to last long - term and is co - produced by the community that uses it . It has furthermore been argued that communities who are growing food in urban spaces provide examples of how citi - zens can successfully claim and enact their right to the city [ 68 ] . Equally , digital platforms can be tools for food citizens to engage in a similar form of autogestion ( or ‘self - manage - ment’ ) of their political and economic relations , as well as the spatial arrangements of food . HCI research for food de - mocracy could design platforms that help to tell and share such small and large success stories that act as a resource for new CFNs to take inspiration and guidance for local work , but also to build coalitions among researchers and commu - nities to begin to tackle the ambitious but worthy goal to sys - tem change globally . CONCLUSION This paper introduced food democracy as a useful theoretical framing for both understanding of and designing with local food networks . The proposed theoretical lens broadens HCI’s engagement with food beyond health and environ - mental sustainability and helps to engage with questions of social and economic justice and democratic governance of our food system . Through empirical analysis of our engage - ments with a variety of actors and organisations , this paper begun to explore some of the concrete challenges organisa - tions face in developing a collaborative network for local food that aim at changing the underlying system . Digital platforms , like the Open Food Network , can support local food networks by managing order processes and aggre - gating demand . While such technology can increase effi - ciency , our findings show how locally produced food can re - main inaccessible for deprived communities . We highlighted tensions between ambitions of our partners in realising ideas and values aligning with food democracy and the affordabil - ity of food . This is largely due to the fact that ethical practise still has to operate within the existing system of neoliberal market economics . Collaboration across organisations and community development to achieve a system change , faces significant hurdles . Discussions and proposals remained largely within the neoliberalist and modernist logic . We argue therefore for HCI to engage in design of technol - ogy and models of civic food networks that moves beyond the transactional interactions between ‘consumers’ and ‘pro - ducers’ towards food citizenship . We discuss that this change needs to happen through incremental changes within the cur - rent system that in the long run question the condition of the market as a ‘natural’ fact and realise alternative models . In particular , in designing with local food networks , we discuss a research and design agenda for HCI that follows the six principles of social justice within a food democracy framing . Finally , we conclude with a call for HCI to support sharing of and learning from success stories internationally . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank our partners in enabling this research . In particular , we want to thank Nick Weir from OFN and the team at Meadow Well Connected community centre for their support and collaboration . This research was funded through the EPSRC Centre for Doctoral Training in Digital Civics ( EP / L016176 / 1 ) . Data supporting this publication is openly available under an ' Open Data Commons Open Database Li - cense ' . Additional metadata are available at : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 17634 / 154300 - 73 . Please contact New - castle Research Data Service at rdm @ ncl . ac . uk for access in - structions . CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018 , April 21 – 26 , 2018 , Montréal , QC , Canada Paper 333 Page 10 REFERENCES 1 . Sofiane Abbar , Yelena Mejova , and Ingmar Weber . 2015 . You Tweet What You Eat : Studying Food Consumption Through Twitter . In CHI ’15 Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 3197 – 3206 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2702123 . 2702153 2 . Rob Abercrombie , Ellen Harries , and Rachel Wharton . 2015 . Systems Change : A Guide To What It Is and How to Do It . New Philanthrophy Capital . 3 . Ferran Altarriba , Stefano Eugenio Lanzani , Ana Torralba , and Mathias Funk . 2017 . The Grumpy Bin . Proceedings of the 2016 ACM Conference Companion Publication on Designing Interactive Systems - DIS ’17 Companion : 90 – 94 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3064857 . 3079125 4 . Eli Blevis and Susan Coleman Morse . 2009 . Food , Dude . Interactions 16 , 2 : 58 – 62 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1487632 . 1487646 5 . Susanne Bødker and Pär - Ola Zander . 2015 . Participation in Design between Public Sector and Local Communities . In Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on Communities and Technologies - C & T ’15 , 49 – 58 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2768545 . 2768546 6 . Kirsten Boehner and Carl DiSalvo . 2016 . Data , Design and Civics : An Exploratory Study of Civic Tech . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 2970 – 2981 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2858036 . 2858326 7 . Branden Born and Mark Purcell . 2006 . Avoiding the Local Trap . Journal of Planning Education and Research 26 , 2 : 195 – 207 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 0739456X06291389 8 . Virginia Braun and Victoria Clarke . 2006 . Using Thematic Analysis in Psychology . Qualitative Research in Psychology 3 , 2 : 77 – 101 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1191 / 1478088706qp063oa 9 . Hrönn Brynjarsdóttir and Maria Håkansson . 2012 . Sustainably unpersuaded : How persuasion narrows our vision of sustainability . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 947 – 956 . 10 . Michael Carolan . 2016 . Agro - Digital Governance and Life Itself : Food Politics at the Intersection of Code and Affect . Sociologia Ruralis 0 , 0 : 1 – 20 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / soru . 12153 11 . Winyu Chinthammit , Henry Been - Lirn Duh , Jun Rekimoto , Winyu Chinthammit , Henry Been - Lirn Duh , and Jun Rekimoto . 2014 . HCI in food product innovation . In Proceedings of the extended abstracts of the 32nd annual ACM conference on Human factors in computing systems - CHI EA ’14 , 1111 – 1114 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2559206 . 2559213 12 . Jh Choi , Rob Comber , and C Linehan . 2013 . Food for thought : designing for critical reflection on food practices . In DIS 2012 Workshops , 793 – 794 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2317956 . 2318077 13 . Adrian K . Clear , Rob Comber , Adrian Friday , Eva Ganglbauer , Mike Hazas , and Yvonne Rogers . 2013 . Green food technology : UbiComp opportunities for reducing the environmental impacts of food . In UbiComp ’13 Adjunct , 553 – 558 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2494091 . 2497316 14 . Adrian K . Clear , Adrian Friday , and Mike Hazas . 2016 . Bearing an Open “Pandora’s Box” : HCI for Reconciling Everyday Food and Sustainability . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction ( TOCHI ) 23 , 5 : 1 – 25 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2970817 15 . Adrian K . Clear , Adrian Friday , Mark Rouncefield , and Alan Chamberlain . 2015 . Supporting Sustainable Food Shopping . IEEE Pervasive Computing 14 , 4 : 28 – 36 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / MPRV . 2015 . 78 16 . Adrian K Clear , Mike Hazas , Janine Morley , Adrian Friday , and Oliver Bates . 2013 . Domestic food and sustainable design : A Study of University Student Cooking and its Impacts . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’13 ) , 2447 – 2456 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2470654 . 2481339 17 . Rob Comber , Jaz Hee Jeong Choi , Jettie Hoonhout , and Kenton O’Hara . 2014 . Designing for human - food interaction : An introduction to the special issue on “food and interaction design . ” International Journal of Human Computer Studies 72 , 2 : 181 – 184 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijhcs . 2013 . 09 . 001 18 . Rob Comber , Jettie Hoonhout , Aart van Halteren , Paula Moynihan , and Patrick Olivier . 2013 . Food practices as situated action . In CHI ’13 , 2457 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2470654 . 2481340 19 . Rob Comber , Anja Thieme , Ashur Rafiev , Nick Taylor , and Nicole Krämer . 2009 . BinCam : Designing for Engagement with Facebook for Behavior Change . In Interact 2009 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 642 - 03655 - 2 20 . Clara Crivellaro , Alex Taylor , Vasilis Vlachokyriakos , Rob Comber , Bettina Nissen , and Peter Wright . 2016 . Re - Making Places : HCI , “Community Building” and Change . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 2958 – 2969 . 21 . Tawanna R . Dillahunt and Amelia R . Malone . 2015 . The Promise of the Sharing Economy among Disadvantaged Communities . In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - CHI ’15 , 2285 – 2294 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2702123 . 2702189 CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018 , April 21 – 26 , 2018 , Montréal , QC , Canada Paper 333 Page 11 22 . Markéta Dolej š ová and Denisa Kera . 2017 . Soylent Diet Self - Experimentation . In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing - CSCW ’17 , 2112 – 2123 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2998181 . 2998365 23 . Lynn Dombrowski , Ellie Harmon , and Sarah Fox . 2016 . Social Justice - Oriented Interaction Design . In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM Conference on Designing Interactive Systems - DIS ’16 , 656 – 671 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2901790 . 2901861 24 . Lynn Susan Dombrowski . 2015 . Sociotechnical Food Justice : Examining and Designing Public Interventions for Systemic Social Issues . UC Irvine . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1300 / J122v22n03 _ 06 25 . Paul Dourish . 2010 . HCI and environmental sustainability : the politics of design and the design of politics . In Proc . DIS ’10 , 1 – 10 . 26 . Andy Dow , John Vines , Toby Lowe , Rob Comber , and Rob Wilson . 2017 . What Happens to Digital Feedback ? In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - CHI ’17 , 5813 – 5825 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3025453 . 3025943 27 . E . Melanie DuPuis and Sean Gillon . 2009 . Alternative modes of governance : Organic as civic engagement . Agriculture and Human Values 26 , 1 – 2 : 43 – 56 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10460 - 008 - 9180 - 7 28 . E . Melanie DuPuis and David Goodman . 2005 . Should we go “home” to eat ? : Toward a reflexive politics of localism . Journal of Rural Studies 21 , 3 : 359 – 371 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jrurstud . 2005 . 05 . 011 29 . Sheena Erete and Jennifer O . Burrell . 2017 . Empowered Participation : How Citizens Use Technology in Local Governance . In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - CHI ’17 , 2307 – 2319 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3025453 . 3025996 30 . Geremy Farr - Wharton , Jaz Hee - Jeong Choi , and Marcus Foth . 2014 . Food Talks Back : Exploring the Role of Mobile Applications in Reducing Domestic Food Wastage . In Proceedings of the 26th Australian Computer - Human Interaction Conference on Designing Futures the Future of Design - OzCHI ’14 , 352 – 361 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2686612 . 2686665 31 . Sarah Fox , Mariam Asad , Katherine Lo , Jill P . Dimond , Lynn S . Dombrowski , and Shaowen Bardzell . 2016 . Exploring Social Justice , Design , and HCI . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems - CHI EA ’16 , 3293 – 3300 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2851581 . 2856465 32 . J K Frawley , L E Dyson , and J Underwood . 2014 . Rewriting , redesigning and reimagining the recipe for more sustainable food systems . In 26th Australian Computer - Human Interaction Conference , OzCHI 2014 , 366 – 369 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2686612 . 2686667 33 . Eva Ganglbauer , Geraldine Fitzpatrick , and Rob Comber . 2013 . Negotiating food waste : Using a Practice Lens to Inform Design . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction 20 , 2 : 1 – 25 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2463579 . 2463582 34 . Eva Ganglbauer , Geraldine Fitzpatrick , Özge Subasi , and Florian Güldenpfennig . 2014 . Think Globally , Act Locally : A Case Study of a Free Food Sharing Community and Social Networking . In Proceedings of the 17th ACM conference on Computer supported cooperative work & social computing - CSCW ’14 , 911 – 921 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2531602 . 2531664 35 . Andrea Grimes and Richard Harper . 2008 . Celebratory Technology : New Directions for Food Research in HCI . In CHI ’08 , 467 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1357054 . 1357130 36 . Shad Gross , Austin Toombs , Jeff Wain , and Kevin Walorski . 2011 . Foodmunity : designing community interactions over food . In CHI ’11 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 1019 – 1024 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1979742 . 1979504 37 . Neil D . Hamilton . 2005 . Food Democracy II : Revolution or Restoration ? Journal of Food Law & Policy 1 , 1 : 8 – 23 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3868 / s050 - 004 - 015 - 0003 - 8 38 . Keith Hart , Jean - Louis Laville , and Antonio David Cattani ( eds . ) . 2010 . The Human Economy . Polity Press , Malden , MA . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 5465 / AMR . 1977 . 4281882 39 . Neva Hassanein . 2003 . Practicing food democracy : A pragmatic politics of transformation . Journal of Rural Studies 19 , 1 : 77 – 86 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0743 - 0167 ( 02 ) 00041 - 4 40 . Neva Hassanein . 2008 . Locating Food Democracy : Theoretical and Practical Ingredients . Journal of Hunger & Environmental Nutrition 3 , 2 – 3 : 286 – 308 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 19320240802244215 41 . Gillian R . Hayes . 2011 . The relationship of action research to human - computer interaction . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction 18 , 3 : 1 – 20 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1993060 . 1993065 42 . Sara Heitlinger . 2013 . Sustainable HCI for Grassroots Urban Food - Growing Communities . In ozCHI ’13 , 1 – 4 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2494091 . 2497617 43 . Eric Holt - Giménez and Annie Shattuck . 2011 . Food crises , food regimes and food movements : rumblings of reform or tides of transformation ? The Journal of peasant studies 38 , 1 : 109 – 44 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 03066150 . 2010 . 538578 44 . Rohit Ashok Khot , Deborah Lupton , Markéta CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018 , April 21 – 26 , 2018 , Montréal , QC , Canada Paper 333 Page 12 Dolej š ová , and Florian “Floyd” Mueller . 2017 . Future of Food in the Digital Realm . In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems - CHI EA ’17 , 1342 – 1345 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3027063 . 3049283 45 . Sherah Kurnia , Serenity Hill , Md Mahbubur Rahim , Kirsten Larsen , Patrice Braun , and Danny Samson . 2015 . Open Food Network : the Role of ICT to Support Regional Food Supply Chains in Australia . In Australasian Conference on Information Systems . 46 . Stacey Kuznetsov , Christina J . Santana , and Elenore Long . 2016 . Everyday Food Science as a Design Space for Community Literacy and Habitual Sustainable Practice . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - CHI ’16 , 1786 – 1797 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2858036 . 2858363 47 . Airi Lampinen and Barry Brown . 2017 . Market Design for HCI : Successes and Failures of Peer - to - Peer Exchange Platforms . Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems : 4331 – 4343 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3025453 . 3025515 48 . Tim Lang . 2007 . Food security or food democracy ? Pesticides News , 78 : 12 – 16 . 49 . Charles Z . Levkoe . 2013 . Food sovereignty in Canada : creating just and sustainable food systems . Journal of Peasant Studies 40 , 1 : 293 – 297 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 03066150 . 2012 . 725542 50 . Charles Zalman Levkoe . 2011 . Towards a transformative food politics . Local Environment 16 , 7 : 687 – 705 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 13549839 . 2011 . 592182 51 . Ann Light . 2014 . The Allure of Provenance : Tracing Food through User - Generated Production Information . In Eat , Cook , Grow : Mixing Human - Computer Interactions with Human - Food Interactions , Jaz Hee - jeong Choi , Marcus Foth and Greg Hearn ( eds . ) . MIT Press , 213 – 226 . 52 . Ruth Little , Damian Maye , and Brian Ilbery . 2010 . Collective purchase : Moving local and organic foods beyond the niche market . Environment and Planning A 42 , 8 : 1797 – 1813 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1068 / a4262 53 . H . P . P . Lötter . 2013 . Poverty , ethics and justice . University Of Wales Press . 54 . Peter Lyle , Jaz Hee - jeong Choi , and Marcus Foth . 2015 . Growing food in the city . C & T ’15 : 89 – 97 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2768545 . 2768549 55 . Thomas A . Lyson . 2005 . Civic Agriculture and Community Problem Solving . Culture Agriculture 27 , 2 : 92 – 98 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1525 / cag . 2005 . 27 . 2 . 92 56 . Julie Maitland , Matthew Chalmers , and Katie A . Siek . 2009 . Persuasion not required Improving our understanding of the sociotechnical context of dietary behavioural change . In Proceedings of the 3d International ICST Conference on Pervasive Computing Technologies for Healthcare , 1 – 8 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 4108 / ICST . PERVASIVEHEALTH2 009 . 5928 57 . Enzio Manzini . 2014 . Making Things Happen : Social Innovation and Design . Design Issues 30 , 1 : 57 – 66 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1162 / DESI _ a _ 00248 58 . James Matson and Jeremiah Thayer . 2013 . The role of food hubs in food supply chains . Journal of Agriculture , Food Systems , and Community Development 3 , 4 : 43 – 47 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 5304 / jafscd . 2013 . 034 . 004 59 . Nathan McClintock . 2014 . Radical , reformist , and garden - variety neoliberal : coming to terms with urban agriculture’s contradictions . Local Environment 19 , 2 : 147 – 171 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 13549839 . 2012 . 752797 60 . Takuji Narumi , Yuki Ban , Takashi Kajinami , Tomohiro Tanikawa , and Michitaka Hirose . Augmented Perception of Satiety : Controlling Food Consumption by Changing Apparent Size of Food with Augmented Reality . 61 . Marianna Obrist and Marianna . 2017 . Mastering the Senses in HCI . In Proceedings of the 12th Biannual Conference on Italian SIGCHI Chapter - CHItaly ’17 , 1 – 2 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3125571 . 3125603 62 . William Odom . 2010 . “Mate , we don’t need a chip to tell us the soil s dry” Opportunities for Designing Interactive Systems to Support Urban Food Production . In Human - Computer Interaction , 232 – 235 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1858171 . 1858211 63 . OFN . 2017 . Get on the Open Food Network ! Showcase your beautiful food . Open Food Nerwork UK . Retrieved August 22 , 2017 from https : / / openfoodnetwork . org . uk / sell 64 . OFN . 2017 . Welcome to Open Food Network . Open Food Network . Retrieved August 24 , 2017 from https : / / openfoodnetwork . org . uk / 65 . Patrick Olivier and Peter Wright . 2015 . Digital Civics : Taking a Local Turn . Interactions 22 , 4 : 61 – 63 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2776885 66 . Michel Pimbert . 2009 . Towards Food Sovereignty : Reclaiming Autonomous Food Systems . London . 67 . Chris Preist , Daniel Schien , and Eli Blevis . 2016 . Understanding and Mitigating the Effects of Device and Cloud Service Design Decisions on the Environmental Footprint of Digital Infrastructure . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - CHI ’16 , 1324 – 1337 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2858036 . 2858378 68 . Mark Purcell and Shannon K . Tyman . 2015 . Cultivating food as a right to the city . Local Environment 20 , 10 : 1132 – 1147 . CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018 , April 21 – 26 , 2018 , Montréal , QC , Canada Paper 333 Page 13 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 13549839 . 2014 . 903236 69 . Theodoros Rakopoulos . 2014 . The crisis seen from below , within , and against : From solidarity economy to food distribution cooperatives in Greece . Dialectical Anthropology 38 , 2 : 189 – 207 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10624 - 014 - 9342 - 5 70 . Ankita Raturi , Juliet Norton , Bill Tomlinson , Eli Blevis , and Lynn Dombrowski . 2017 . Designing Sustainable Food Systems . In CHI EA ’17 , 609 – 616 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3027063 . 3027075 71 . Henk Renting , Markis Schermer , and Adanella Rossi . 2012 . Building Food Democracy : Exploring Civic Food Networks and Newly Emerging Forms of Food Citizenship . International Journal of Sociology of Agriculture and Food 19 , 3 : 289 – 307 . 72 . Edward W . Soja . 2010 . Seeking Spatial Justice . University of Minnesota Press . 73 . Nick Taylor , Keith Cheverst , Peter Wright , and Patrick Olivier . 2013 . Leaving the wild . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - CHI ’13 , 1549 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2470654 . 2466206 74 . Trebor Scholz . 2014 . Platform Cooperativism vs . the Sharing Economy . Medium . Retrieved September 19 , 2017 from https : / / medium . com / @ trebors / platform - cooperativism - vs - the - sharing - economy - 2ea737f1b5ad 75 . Pia Tukkinen and Janne Lindqvist . 2015 . Understanding Motivations for Using Grocery Shopping Applications . IEEE Pervasive Computing 14 , 4 : 38 – 44 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / MPRV . 2015 . 65 76 . Via Campesina . 2007 . Declaration of Nyéléni . Nyéléni 2007 - Forum for Food Sovereignty . Retrieved August 21 , 2017 from https : / / viacampesina . org / en / declaration - of - nyi / 77 . Vasillis Vlachokyriakos , Matt Jones , Shaun Lawson , Patrick Olivier , Clara Crivellaro , Pete Wright , Evika Karamagioli , Eleni - Revekka Staiou , Dimitris Gouscos , Rowan Thorpe , Antonio Krüger , and Johannes Schöning . 2017 . HCI , Solidarity Movements and the Solidarity Economy . In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - CHI ’17 , 3126 – 3137 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3025453 . 3025490 78 . Xiaolan Wang , Ron Wakkary , Carman Neustaedter , and Audrey Desjardins . 2015 . Information sharing , scheduling , and awareness in community gardening collaboration . C & T ’15 : 79 – 88 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2768545 . 2768556 79 . Jun Wei , Xiaojuan Ma , and Shengdong Zhao . Food Messaging : Using an Edible Medium for Social Messaging . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2556288 . 2557026 80 . Jennifer Welsh and Rod MacRae . 1998 . Food Citizenship and Community Food Security : Lessons from Toronto , Canada . Canadian Journal of Development Studies / Revue canadienne d’études du développement 19 , December : 237 – 255 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 02255189 . 1998 . 9669786 81 . Jennifer L . Wilkins . 2005 . Eating right here : Moving from consumer to food citizen : 2004 presidential address to the agriculture , food , and human values society , Hyde Park , New York , June 11 , 2004 . Agriculture and Human Values 22 , 3 : 269 – 273 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10460 - 005 - 6042 - 4 82 . Michael Windfuhr and Jennie Jonsén . 2005 . Food Sovereignty : Towards Democracy in Localized Food Systems . 83 . Hannah Wittman . 2009 . Reworking the metabolic rift : La Vía Campesina , agrarian citizenship , and food sovereignty . Journal of Peasant Studies 36 , 4 : 805 – 826 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 03066150903353991 CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018 , April 21 – 26 , 2018 , Montréal , QC , Canada Paper 333 Page 14