Institut f¨ur Maschinelle Sprachverarbeitung Universit¨at Stuttgart Pfaﬀenwaldring 5B D - 70569 Stuttgart Detecting Ambiguity in Statutory Texts Tom Zeller Bachelor thesis Studiengang : Informatik Pr¨ufer : Prof . Dr . Uwe Reyle Betreuer : Prof . Dr . Uwe Reyle Beginn der Arbeit : 09 . 03 . 2018 Ende der Arbeit : 09 . 09 . 2018 Contents 1 Introduction 3 2 Ambiguity and Vagueness 4 2 . 1 The Concept of Linguistic Ambiguity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4 2 . 2 Lexical Ambiguity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5 2 . 3 Syntactic Ambiguity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5 2 . 3 . 1 PP Attachment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7 2 . 3 . 2 Other Structural Ambiguities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8 2 . 4 Semantic Ambiguity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9 2 . 4 . 1 Scopal Ambiguity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9 2 . 4 . 2 Anaphoric Ambiguity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10 2 . 5 Vagueness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11 3 Requirements on Texts in the Legal Domain 12 3 . 1 Interpretation of Statutory Text . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13 3 . 2 Requirements on Statutory Text . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14 4 Parsing and Ambiguity 15 4 . 1 Statistical Parsing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16 4 . 2 Preserving Ambiguity through Underspeciﬁcation . . . . . . . 16 5 Subcategorization 17 6 Selectional Restrictions 18 7 Ontologies as a Representation of Domain Knowledge 19 7 . 1 Ontology Engineering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20 7 . 2 Top - Level and Domain Ontologies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21 8 WordNet as a Lexical Database 21 8 . 1 WordNet as an Ontology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22 9 A System for the Detection and Filtering of Ambiguities in Statutory Texts 23 9 . 1 Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23 9 . 2 Parsing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24 9 . 3 Subcategorizational Lexicon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26 9 . 4 Creation of a Legal Domain Ontology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27 9 . 5 Disambiguation by Ontological Relatedness . . . . . . . . . . . 28 9 . 6 Disambiguation through Domain - Speciﬁc Selectional Prefer - ences . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31 9 . 7 A Score - based System for the Attachment Decision . . . . . . 33 9 . 8 Detection of Potential Scopal Ambiguities and Coordination Ambiguities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34 10 Testing the System on the DUBLIN3 Regulation 35 10 . 1 Overview of the Evaluation Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35 10 . 2 Evaluation Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37 10 . 3 Discussion of the Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38 10 . 4 Proposed Improvements on the Semantic Disambiguation . . . 40 11 Conclusion 42 2 1 Introduction Ambiguity is ever - present in natural language production . A human typi - cally has no diﬃculties in selecting the right interpretation for an ambiguous expression by using lexical and pragmatic knowledge . While the inclusion of broad semantic knowledge poses a challenge for general disambiguation systems and parsers , its utilization might be a feasible approach for disam - biguation in a restricted context . A domain that is very sensitive to ambiguity is the legal domain , especially in the wording of statutory text . Some parsing systems deal with ambiguous input by specifying all possible interpretations without explicitly choosing a solution or by returning multiple parses along with their respective probability . This work serves two purposes : An applica - tion is created which allows the input of statutory texts or single text excerpts and which detects included structural ambiguities in the form of prepositional phrase attachments and coordination ambiguities , and semantic ambiguity in the form of scopal ambiguity . Furthermore , the found ambiguities are ﬁltered by including subcategorizational information and by utilizing domain - speciﬁc semantic knowledge which is encoded in the form of a legal domain ontol - ogy and selectional preferences for common legal expressions . The ﬁltering capability and the eﬀect of including the semantic knowledge are evaluated on the DUBLIN3 Regulation . 3 2 Ambiguity and Vagueness 2 . 1 The Concept of Linguistic Ambiguity Ambiguity can be described as the property of a sign to be related to more than one meaning . A sign might be any physical or abstract object that can be interpreted , like a picture , but most often , the term is used to refer to some kind of linguistic expression . Consider the sentence The man fed her cat food . This sentence can be interpreted as a man feeding a woman’s cat some food or alternatively , as a man feeding a woman food made for cats . Ambiguity is a phenomenon which can be found in many domains , litera - ture , visual art , social interaction , but this work will be focusing on linguistic ambiguity in the restricted domain of legal texts . With diﬀering backgrounds , the perceived role of ambiguity varies : In the literary domain , which is a mode of communication special to what Bauer et al . ( 2010 ) calls normal communi - cation , expressions conveying multiple meanings are often intended , to invoke contrasting associations and to move liberty of interpretation to the reader . In other domains , the range of possible interpretations shall be as restricted as possible . Obvious examples would be the ﬁeld of requirements engineering , a discipline which aims to provide exact speciﬁcations of the properties of a product , or maths , where universally equal interpretation of signs forms a necessity to be able to operate on common ground . In general , the tol - erance for ambiguity is low in all domains that use a formal language or subsets of natural language , as this is the case for programming languages or for Controlled Natural Language ( CNL ) . As Wasow et al . ( 2005 ) empha - size , in these formal or restricted languages , a sign denotes some kind of information , and to communicate this information to another human or to a machine , the sign must be correctly assigned to its corresponding deno - tation . ( Wasow et al . ( 2005 ) , 271 ) A legal text is expressed in unrestricted , natural language , but the same conditions on its deﬁniteness as for formal 4 or controlled language apply . Requirements that are special to the domain of legal texts will be discussed in chapter 3 . If ambiguity is regarded from a purely linguistic perspective , a common distinction is made between lexical , syntactic and semantic ambiguity , whose characteristics will be explained in the following . 2 . 2 Lexical Ambiguity This type of ambiguity can be characterized as a lexem denoting two or more diﬀerent meanings . An often used example is bank , which can refer either to the ﬁnancial institution or to a riverside . This property is called homonymy , which is attributed to words having the same lexem , but diﬀering and un - related meanings . Related to this is the concept of polysemy , which is the property of a word to refer to a palette of related meanings . Contrary to homonymy , which is conicidential , the contained meanings of a polyseme of - ten stem from a common etymological origin . The above mentioned example of bank is a polyseme too , given its reading as the building where a bank ( ﬁnancial institution ) is located . So bank is polysemous in its meanings ﬁ - nancial institution and location of said institution and homonymous in its meanings ﬁnancial institution and riverside . It is up to debate , if polysemy is distinct from lexical ambiguity , or if it is a subset of it ( Wilson , 2001 ) . 2 . 3 Syntactic Ambiguity Syntactic ambiguity ( often called structural ambiguity ) occurs on the sen - tence level . A sentence is syntactically ambiguous if two or more possible sentence structures can be assigned to it . The classic example for a struc - turally ambiguous sentence is I saw the man with the telescope . whose ambiguity is present in the german translation as well : 5 Ich sah den Mann mit dem Fernglas . The two constituent structures that can be inferred from the sentence are illustrated below . Figure 1 : Attachment to Mann Figure 2 : Attachment to sah Figure 1 and 2 illustrate the most common form of syntactic ambiguity which concerns the attachment of prepositional phrases and which will be 6 introduced in detail in the next subchapter . By deﬁnition , syntactic ambi - guity cannot occur on single words like lexical ambiguity , it is however not restricted to whole sentences . An example for local syntactic ambiguity is illustrated by the english sentence The old man the boat . This sentence is globally unambiguous , which means there is only one sentence structure we can assign to it . However , when processing the sentence , a human typically assumes man to be part of a nominal phrase the old man , although it is actually a ﬁnite verb . In psycholinguistics , sentences that induce this eﬀect of interpreting them incorrectly ﬁrst , and reach the correct interpretation with more context ( having advanced further in the sentence ) are called garden path sentences . This type of structural ambiguity is very apparent though , and it can be safely assumed , that human proof readers of any legal document will notice them . Ambiguities resulting from multiple possible attachments as illustrated by the former two examples are much more widespread , and of greater importance for this work . 2 . 3 . 1 PP Attachment One of the most prevalent forms of structural ambiguity concerns the attach - ment of prepositional phrases . Niles and Pease ( 2003 ) report that from a set of 710 prepositional phrases , 501 phrases ( 70 , 7 % ) could not be identifed by a human to clearly either belong to a noun or a verb . However , humans often have little diﬃculty in assigning the correct structure to a sentence . If we reconsider the example from above , Ich sehe den Mann mit dem Fernglas . pragmatic knowledge tells us that mit dem Fernglas is more likely to be attached to sehen than to Mann . This kind of knowledge needed for dis - ambiguation poses a problem for Natural Language Processing and will be 7 further discussed in chapter 4 . As Mehl et al . ( 1998 ) point out , in German , the problem of attachment gets even more complicated through its comparably free word order . A PP may not only be attached to its direct NP predecessor , as the following example shows : die Unterhaltung der Teilnehmer ¨uber m¨ogliche Anbindungen It may be attached to a noun following it as well : Er steht mit ihm in Verbindung . As this kind of ambiguity is so prevalent , its detection and resolution in legal domain texts will be a major focus of the system . 2 . 3 . 2 Other Structural Ambiguities Relative Clause Attachment This kind of ambiguity occurs when it is unclear , to what part of the preceding main clause a relative clause is refer - ring to . An example would be : Ich sah den Sohn meines Nachbarn , der mein Fernglas hat . The relative clause der mein Fernglas hat can be attached to either Sohn or Nachbarn . In German , this kind of ambiguity occurs more sparsely than prepositional phrase attachment , due to the fact that the relative clause’s grammatical properties are determined by the associated noun . If the neigh - bour was female , the relative clause attachment would be unambiguous : Ich sah den Sohn meiner Nachbarin , der mein Fernglas hat . Coordination Coordination ambiguity is a kind of structural ambiguity that generally arises if a coordinated structure ( e . g . CNP or CVP ) is used in combination with a modiﬁer . A frequent coordination and modiﬁer com - bination consists of a coordinated noun phrase along with an adjective or adjective phrase . Expressions like reife Bananen und ¨Apfel can be interpeted as reife referring to both , Bananen and ¨ Apfel , or only to the former . Another 8 possible manifestation is exempliﬁed by the combination of verb phrases and NP arguments , as the following example illustrates : Ich las und schrieb einige B¨ucher . Einige B¨ucher can be argument to both verbs or only to the latter . Two further possible sources of coordination ambiguity are : Ich verstand und reagierte sofort . ( Coordinated verb phrase and adverbial modiﬁer ) Er ist nicht geeignet und interessiert . ( Coordinated adjective phrase and adverbial modiﬁer ) 2 . 4 Semantic Ambiguity A sentence may have an unambiguous syntactic structure , but still oﬀer mul - tiple interpretations . Mark und Lisa sind verheiratet can either be interpreted as the two persons being married to each other or as both being married , but to diﬀerent people . The two most important subclasses of semantic ambigu - ity , scopal and anaphoric ambiguity will be introduced in the following . 2 . 4 . 1 Scopal Ambiguity Scope in linguistic terms denotes the area of eﬀect of an expression within the boundary of a sentence . The german negation nicht ( not ) is an example of a scoped expression , which demands to determine the part of the sentence which has to be negated . Word classes that exhibit scope are quantiﬁers like alle ( all ) , jede - ( every ) , manche - ( some ) that are prepended to a NP , negations like nicht ( not ) , or modal adverbs like vielleicht ( maybe ) or modal verbs ( m¨ussen ( must ) , sollen ( shall ) ) . 9 Pafel ( 2006 ) identiﬁes the following sentence structure to be generally scope ambiguous in German ( Pafel ( 2006 ) , 52 ) : [ DP acc ein - ] - V ﬁn - [ DP nom jed - ] ( - V nonﬁn ) An exemplary sentence with this structure would be : Einen Kandidaten hat jede Partei nominiert . In this case , the determiner einen is an existential quantiﬁer , whereas the determiner jede is universal . Alle Klagen sind nicht gerechtfertigt is another example , the negation nicht can have scope over alle or vice versa , resulting in two diﬀerent interpetations of this sentence . In ﬁrst - order logic , the ﬁrst interpretation , where nicht has scope over alle would be expressed as ∃ x ( Klage ( x ) ∧ ¬ gerechtfertigt ( x ) ) while the interpretation of alle having scope over nicht can be expressed as ∀ x ( Klage ( x ) ⇒ ¬ gerechtfertigt ( x ) ) A relative clause can exhibit scope too , the sentence die Filme , die jeder gesehen hat can be interpreted as die Filme , f¨ur die gilt , dass jeder sie gesehen hat or as f¨ur jede einzelne Person , die Menge an Filmen , die er oder sie gesehen hat . Proposed strategies to resolve scopal ambiguities include statistical approaches ( Andrew and MacCartney , 2004 ) or resolution based on semantic argument structure ( Gamb¨ack and Bos , 1998 ) . 2 . 4 . 2 Anaphoric Ambiguity This class of semantic ambiguity occurs when the antecedent of a referring expression , which can be a personal pronoun or a demonstrative pronoun , 10 is unclear . In the sentence Mark hatte seinen Freund Tim eingeladen , aber er musste das Treﬀen leider absagen , the pronoun er may refer to either Mark or Tim . As for scopal and PP attachment ambiguites , the resolution of anaphoric ambiguity demands pragmatic knowledge and world knowledge . 2 . 5 Vagueness Tuggy ( 1993 ) deﬁnes vagueness as follows : ” Two or more meanings associated with a given phonological form are united as non - distinguished subcases of a single , more general meaning . ” Often a predicate is considered vague if bordercases exist , for which it is un - clear , whether the predicate applies or not ( Wilson ( 2001 ) , 861 ) . The term groß can be considered vague , as it does not deﬁne what size boundaries are contained within it . The border between polysemy and vagueness is fuzzy , in general , a vague term is not clearly deﬁned at its ’boundaries’ whereas a polsemyic term may refer to two or more well - deﬁned terms , that are related to each other . It might be argued that vagueness applies to most terms in a language , because to not be vague , a term would have to include its exact boundaries of meaning . The question if vagueness poses a problem for legal text is under debate , some researchers argue , that it is not the vagueness in natural language terms which challenges interpretation , but rather the con - text sensitivity of natural language , which is the basis for assigning concrete meaning to vague terms . ( Kompka in Keil and Poscher ( 2016 ) , 205 - 224 ) . It shall be emphasized here that the detection of vagueness is out of scope for this work . 11 3 Requirements on Texts in the Legal Do - main In 1985 , a trial was held at the Supreme Court . The defendant had illegally aquired food stamps . The corresponding statute reads : . . . whoever knowingly uses , transfers , acquires , alters , or possesses coupons or authorization cards in any manner not authorized by [ the statute ] or the regulations . ( Liparota , 1985 ) This case became famous for the defendant’s choice of strategy . The struc - tural ambiguity which is inherent in this sentence made him argue that the court had to prove that he was aware of the illegality of his actions , inter - preting the sentence as Figure 3 : The defendant’s interpretation Whereas the prosecution argued that the statute had to be interpreted as Figure 4 : The prosecution’s interpretation 12 Although this example stems from the US justice system , it is no less rele - vant for the german jurisdiction , as it demonstrates , how the simple structural interpretation of a sentence can be of life - changing importance in an extreme case . 3 . 1 Interpretation of Statutory Text The aim of interpreting statutory texts is the mappping of abstract terms to a concrete meaning . For Larenz ( 2013 ) the diﬃculty in this task grounds in the use of natural language which naturally introduces vagueness as opposed to the more formally language used for example in scientifc contexts ( Larenz ( 2013 ) , 312 ) . To guide the interpetational process , legal methodology has developed a set of criteria , originating in the work of Friedrich Carl von Savigny . These criteria , which Savigny called canones , are given below . Word Sense / Grammatical Interpretation This category addresses the interpretation using common language meaning , which is grounded in the assumption that the creator of a legal utterance aimed to communicate with his audience in a generally understandable lan - guage , and that the probability for an expression to be meant in its common sense is the highest . Systematic Interpretation This category emphasizes the importance of the connections between an ex - pression that has to be evaluated and its legal context . Historical Interpretation If the grammatical and systematic interpretations fail to eliminate all but one possible interpretation , the historical context has to be taken into con - sideration . This context is composed of the text creator’s normative values 13 and what is assumed to have been his intention with the creation of the given text . To gain insight into these normative values , available historical evidence like protocols , reports and personal writings have to be examined . Teleological Interpretation This category emphasizes the relevance of the objective of a law , thus it is related to the historical interpretation , but diﬀers by abstracting away from the creator , since he or her might not have been aware of the entirety of meaning of his work ( Larenz ( 2013 ) , 333 ) . As Larenz ( 2013 ) emphasizes , these interpretational categories are not mutually exclusive , nor is there a clear hierarchy between them , instead , the jurisdiction should include all of them in their reasoning about a law’s mean - ing . As Reyle pointed out , the grammatical interpretation is of fundamental importance ( Reyle ( 2016 ) , 23 ) , as it sets a frame for the possible interpreta - tions which have to be narrowed down by reasoning in the other categories . In the german jurisdiction , the grammatical category is of special impor - tance . This stems from Germany’s special historical context and grounds in the reasoning that the literal text has a democratic legitimation , whereas all other categories are more prone to abusive interpretation . 3 . 2 Requirements on Statutory Text As this work will make use of both , german law texts and european law texts in their german translations , two references concerning the textual quality could be determined . The ﬁrst , the Joint practical guide of the European Par - liament , the Council and the Commission for persons involved in the draft - ing of European Union legislation ( EU - Kommission , 2003 ) is a collection of practical , non - binding advice for the creation of european law texts . Reyle ( 2016 ) determined two passages that concern the role of ambiguity . The ﬁrst guidance note reads The drafting of a legal act must be : clear , easy to un - derstand and unambiguous . The only clear reference to syntactic ambiguity 14 is found in ( EU - Kommission ( 2003 ) , 5 . 2 . 3 ) which denotes : The grammatical relationship between the diﬀerent elements of the sentence must be clear . The text also emphasizes the general principle of legal certainity , which states that ”it should be possible to foresee how the law will be applied” ( EU - Kommission ( 2003 ) , 1 . 2 ) . For the creation of german laws , the equivalent would be the Handbuch der Rechtsf¨ormlichkeit , which contains ” general rec - ommendations for the phrasing of legal texts ” ( Bundesministerium der Jus - tiz ( 2008 ) , translation by the author ) , which states in chapter 1 . 4 : ” Ebenso muss auf die Beziehung der W¨orter zueinander und den Sinnzusammenhang geachtet werden . ( Furthermore , the relationship among the words and the con - text of meaning should be taken into consideration . Bundesministerium der Justiz ( 2008 ) , 1 . 4 , Translation by the author ) ” . As stated in chapter 2 . 5 , the role of vagueness in legal text is under debate , but , as Solan writes in ( Keil and Poscher ( 2016 ) , chapter 10 ) , vagueness is inherent to natural language , and thus is inseparable from statutory language . As this work is focussing on structural and semantic ambiguity , the reader interested in the relation between vagueness and jurisdiction may consider ( Keil and Poscher , 2016 ) for a survey of diﬀerent positions . 4 Parsing and Ambiguity Ambiguity in natural language input is a notorious problem for the computa - tional processing of text . To reach human levels of disambiguation facilities , a parser would have to incorporate structural information , pragmatic knowl - edge , and lexical information ( Manning and Sch¨utze ( 1997 ) , 18 ) . This poses a problem for NLP systems , which have to operate with limited resources compared to humans . In the following , two approaches to handle ambiguity are discussed . 15 4 . 1 Statistical Parsing One approach to handle ambiguous input in constituency parsing are proba - bilistic context free grammars ( PCFGs ) . These grammars are constructed by assigning probabilities to each production rule in the grammar . These proba - bilities are derived from manually annotated treebanks . PCFG grammars can be used by dynamic programming algorithms such as the CYK algorithm , to ﬁnd the highest scoring parse tree for a given sentence . The Earley parser ( Earley , 1970 ) in particular is able to output a parse forest , which is a set of parse trees , weighted by their respective probabilities . Outputting multiple parses may either demand to restrict the number of parses to the top k ( most likely ) parses , or to ﬁnd an eﬃcient representation of their shared structure , as the number of potential parses for an english or german sentence of average length of 10 to 20 words can already be very high : Church ( 1982 ) noted that the number of possible interpretations for a given sentence like Put the block in the box . , which produces a single parse tree , grows exponentially ( Church ( 1982 ) , 141 ) . One can increase the number of valid parses by appending an - other PP , which already introduces syntactic ambiguity in the form of two possible PP attachments : Put the block in the box on the table . If another PP is added , the number of interpretations grows to ﬁve . Put the block in the box on the table in the kitchen . The number of possible interpretations for n attached PPs equates to 2 n − 1 . This property of natural language text to produce a large number of syntac - tically valid parses is called combinatorial explosion paradox ( Poesio ( 1994 ) , 1 ) . 4 . 2 Preserving Ambiguity through Underspeciﬁcation Underspeciﬁcation in parsing aims to avoid uncertain decisions by including in its output any ambiguities it could not solve given its available infor - mation . Schiehlen ( 2003 ) developed a rule - based dependency parser called 16 FsPar , which aims to preserve ambiguous dependencies in its output , in the form of context variables . The parser operates by chunking the text into simple clauses , in a cascaded manner , while the clauses from each previous iteration are used as input for the next iteration . Schielen states the main mo - tivation for this approach as keeping the speed of a deterministic parser , while keeping structural ambiguities for later disambiguation by ’expert modules’ 1 ( Schiehlen ( 2003 ) , 166 ) . 5 Subcategorization Subcategorization frames are a way of formally describing the argument structure of predicates 2 . The verb trinken for example has the frames [ NP nom ] [ NP nom NP akk ] [ NP nom ( PP aus ( NP dat ) ) ] This means that trinken can be either used without a direct object , as in ich trinke , with a direct object as in ich trinke das Wasser or with a prepo - sitional phrase starting with aus containing a NP . This example is obviously not exhaustive , as there are other possible PPs like von ( NP dat ) . Subcat - egorizational lexicons can be either manually constructed or automatically extracted from corpora . The latter approach typically involves some kind of measure of co - occurrence , which means , the strength of association between a verb and an argument or adjunct is represented by the relation # of occurrences of verb - argument # of occurrences of verb 1 This work may be considered as such an expert module for the legal domain . 2 Subcategorization is not restricted to verbs , for example a prepositional phrase starting with in would require a nominal phrase in dative , as in im Himmel . 17 The ﬁrst automatically derived subcategorization lexicon for the german lan - guage was built by Schulte im Walde ( 2002 ) , who used a lexicalized PCFG along with a hand - written grammar to infer subcategorization counts from a corpus of newspaper text . Roberts et al . ( 2014 ) presented a similar sys - tem , speciﬁcally designed for free word order languages like german , which was used to parse a subset of 3 million sentences from the SdeWaC corpus , which is in turn a subset of the deWaC corpus ( consisting of 10 9 parsed web searches ) . Subcategorization frames may diﬀer in their detail , they may distinguish between arguments and adjuncts , or specify a diﬀerent number of frame types ( Schulte im Walde ( 2009 ) , 3 ) . 6 Selectional Restrictions Similar to the concept of subcategorization , selectional restrictions are re - strictions that verbs impose on their arguments or adjuncts . The following example illustrates this behaviour : Der Zirkusartist isst einen Salat . ( The circus artist is eating a salad . ) The ambitransitive verb essen is most commonly used with an argument that could be denoted as belonging to the semantic class of edible or food . Selectional restrictions can be seen complementary to the notion of sub - categorization , where the latter imposes a syntactical restriction , selectional restrictions limit the range of possible arguments semantically . These con - straints are not to be regarded as equal to the membership in a predeﬁned class of words . Resnik ( 1993 ) describes a statistical approach that models selectional restrictions as probability distributions over a taxonomy of word classes . In this regard , the term selectional restriction is often referred to as selectional preference . 18 If we reconsider the example given above , the sentence Der Zirkusartist isst Glas . ( The circus artist is eating glass . ) is sensical , but the argument to essen does not ﬁt in the semantic class of edi - ble or food . Similar to the acquisition of subcategorization frames , selectional preferences can be derived from large corpora by measuring the association strength between a predicate and a semantic class in terms of co - occurrence . This association can be expressed as a function σ : ( v , r , c ) (cid:55)→ a which maps a verb v , a role r ( subject , object , < preposition > ) and a class c to a scalar a which denotes the strength of association . Approaches in inducing this association strength diﬀer , used are statistical signiﬁcance measures , Hidden Markov Models ( HMM s ) , or bayesian reasoning . ( Light and Greiﬀ , 2002 ) 7 Ontologies as a Representation of Domain Knowledge Knowledge about the world we are living in assists us in resolving ambiguity . In the ﬁrst chapter , an example for lexical ambiguity was given in the form of the homonymous word bank . If we consider the sentence I brought all my money to the bank . it is evident to any recipient of this sentence , that bank does not denote riverside in this context , but rather the ﬁnancial institute . World knowledge tells us that money is brought to a bank with a much higher possibility than it is thrown into a river . NLP systems however typically don’t have access to this knowledge . It has to be encoded in a form that is accessible and understandable to a com - 19 puter . The domain of ontology engineering tries to solve this problem by representing knowledge in a formal , standardized way . Stemming from greek philosophy , the concept of an ontology has been used by various philosphers with sometimes diﬀering meaning . The general notion of the discipline of on - tology is the study of the nature and structure of reality . ( Staab et al . ( 2010 ) , 1 ) This subdiscipline of metaphysics is concerned with the question of what exists and what relations can be drawn between what is existing . 7 . 1 Ontology Engineering Ontology Engineering is a subﬁeld of information engineering , and is con - cerned with the practical development of ontologies . Ontologies have been put to use in information management systems , biomedical assistance systems ( Gruber , 1995 ) , for data processing in bioinformatics ( Staab et al . ( 2010 ) , 735 ) or for recommender systems ( Staab et al . ( 2010 ) , 779 ) . While in the philosphical ﬁeld of ontology , the question of the existance of categories plays an important role , in ontology engineering , this question is answered from a more pragmatic point of view : If something can be represented , it exists . ( Gruber ( 1995 ) , 1 ) Thomas Gruber gave a widely used deﬁnition of ontologies in the ﬁeld of information engineering : ”An ontology is an explicit speciﬁca - tion of a conceptualization” . ( Gruber ( 1995 ) , 1 ) This conceptualization can be deﬁned as tuple ( D , R ) with D being the universe of discourse and R being a set of relations on D . The universe of discourse is the set of ” objects , concepts and other entities that are assumed to exist in some area of interest ” ( Gruber ( 1995 ) , 1 ) . The three fundamental components of formal ontologies are classes , relations and individuals . 3 A class corresponds to a category or collection of entities while individuals are concrete objects , persons , or ab - stract objects like words . The relations in an ontology often take the form of taxonomical relations like the is - a relation or a mereological relation like 3 The terminology may vary , classes are sometimes called terms and individuals may be denoted as instances . 20 part - of , but are not restricted to these . Relations may be deﬁned between individuals , classes , or between classes and individuals . 7 . 2 Top - Level and Domain Ontologies A domain ontology aims to be a representation of the entities and relations of a speciﬁc ﬁeld , which means its universe of discourse is restricted . The ﬁeld of ontology engineering is usually concerned with the creation of domain ontologies . Top - level or upper ontologies aim to provide a basic foundation for the creation of domain ontologies , by deﬁning general concepts that are common to all speciﬁc domains ( Hoehndorf , 2010 ) . Often employed concepts are time , space , objects or processes . Several implementations for top - level ontologies exist , like the Basic Formal Ontology ( BFO ) , the General Formal Ontology ( GFO ) or the Descriptive Ontology for Linguistic and Cognitive Engineering ( DOLCE ) . 8 WordNet as a Lexical Database In 1985 , Miller et . al . began the development of a lexical database for english , called WordNet . This database can be seen as an enhanced thesaurus , which contains nouns , verbs , adjectives , and adverbs , originally restricted to english ( Miller et al . ( 1990 ) , 2 ) . Entries are grouped into collections called synsets . A synset is a group of words of the same word class , whose entries can be seen as synonyms of each other . It therefore expresses a lexical commonal - ity . The homonymous word Bank can be assigned to at least two synsets , one corresponding to the ﬁnancial institute , along with words like Geldhaus , or Finanzinstitution and one referring to the seating - accommodation along with Sitzbank . These diﬀerent conceptual groups a word can belong to are identiﬁed as senses in WordNet terminology , the word Bank would include at least two senses for the two synsets illustrated above . WordNet deﬁnes ﬁve relations between synsets : 21 Synonymy and antonymy are the two lexical relations that WordNet includes , the former being of a central importance , because it is , as stated above , the relation responsible for grouping into synsets . Synonymy between two expressions can be deﬁned as one expression being interchangeable with the other in a given textual context , without changing the truth value of the proposition ( Miller et al . ( 1990 ) , 241 ) . The other lexical relation , antonymy , is used to relate adjectives and adverbs . In WordNet , antonymy does not connect synsets , which would be a semantic relation , rather it is restricted to single expressions . Hypernymy and hyponymy connect synsets that can be seen as forming a superset - subset connection . It is therefore a semantic relation . The noun Geb¨aude is a hypernym of B¨urogeb¨aude . Hypernymy and hyponymy can thus be seen as building a taxonomy of synsets . Meronymy is the last semantic relation and expresses a part - of relation - ship between two synsets . The synset containing Raum and Zimmer is a meronym of the synset containing Geb¨aude and Bauwerk . 8 . 1 WordNet as an Ontology WordNet shares many features of an ontology : The hypernymy and hyponymy relations can be seen as is - a / parent - of subclassing resp . superclassing re - lations , and meronymy as part - of is a fundamental structuring relation in most ontologies as well . However , WordNet does not distinguish between hy - ponyms that would be subclasses in ontological terms and hyponyms that would be instantiations or individuals of a class . 22 9 A System for the Detection and Filtering of Ambiguities in Statutory Texts 9 . 1 Overview This chapter describes the approach used in this thesis to detect and ﬁlter PP attachment , coordination and scopal ambiguities in german statutory texts . The results will be discussed in the next chapter . The detection step will apply to both , prepositional phrase attachments and possible scopal / coordination ambiguities , however only the former will be ﬁltered . The procedure of the working system can be divided into the following steps : 1 . Sentence extraction 2 . PCFG parsing of the extracted sentences 3 . Pattern matching on generated parse trees for PP attachments 4 . Pattern matching on parsed sentences for possible scopal ambiguities 5 . Pattern matching on parsed sentences for possible coordination ambi - guities 6 . For each potential PP ambiguity : ( a ) Query subcategorizational lexical resource ( b ) Query selectional preferences ( c ) Query for ontological connections 7 . Give a graphical report of the processing results In the following , the steps and their underlying implementations are pre - sented . 23 9 . 2 Parsing The sentence extraction and parsing step are performed by the Stanford CoreNLP pipeline ( Manning et al . , 2014 ) . This framework includes a PCFG parser trained on the NEGRA corpus , using the STTS tagset ( Raﬀerty and Manning , 2008 ) . The advantage of this framework lies in the inclusion of various preprocessing tools , such as a tokenizer and a module for sentence extraction . A drawback is the absence of a parser that allows for explicit underspeciﬁcation of attachments , which means , these have to be extracted from the generated parse trees . Obtaining ambiguous PP attachments The approach used to infer the possible ambiguities with the output of the parser can be described as fol - lows : The PCFG parser assigns each parse a score indicating the probability it assigns to the given result . After a sentence is processed , the ordered list of the 50 most probable parse trees according to their score is retrieved . The count of 50 was chosen for practical reasons , for a smaller set of parse trees , the variation of possible attachments was found to be too low , and for higher numbers , the performance of the system drops . The obtained list is iterated , checking each tree for a set of predeﬁned patterns of POS tags , that signal PP attachment . This will be illustrated by the parse for the sentence Eine solche Formel sollte auf objektiven und f¨ur die Mitgliedstaaten und die Betroﬀenen gerechten Kriterien basieren . The tree to which the parser attaches the highest score , contains the follow - ing subtree : 24 Figure 5 : A subtree of the most probable parse This subtree contains a prepositional phrase which is part of an adjective phrase ( AP ) whose head is the adjective gerechten . The pattern to detect this attachment includes the head of the common phrase ( AP ) and the sequence of its child constituents : PARENT : AP , SEQUENCE : PP ADJA Figure 6 : A subtree of the second - most probable parse The second - most probable parse interprets the PP to be part of a clause 25 together with the ﬁnite verb basieren . The corresponding pattern would be PARENT : S , SEQUENCE : PP VFIN If two or more parse trees are found , that diﬀer in the attachment of a given PP phrase , it is considered ambiguous . An alternative approach would be to utilize an underspeciﬁed dependency parser , like the FsPar ( Schiehlen , 2003 ) , which preserves the possible attachments as features in its output . 9 . 3 Subcategorizational Lexicon For the disambiguation using subcategorizational information , a lexical re - source was used . This resource was obtained by Roberts et al . through parsing the SdeWaC corpus ( Roberts et al . , 2014 ) . Each entry in the generated ﬁle contains , amongst other contextual information , the lemmatized form of the verb , the extracted subcategorizational frame , the information whether the complement is a prepositional phrase along with the head of the complement phrase . This means that if a verb has multiple possible argument structures , it is likely that the resource contains multiple entries with the given verb lemma . This list was processed into the form of a map , that contains the lemma as key , and the found subcategorised prepositions as values , which is queried for every found ambiguous attachment . For the determination of possible attachments , it is of special importance to keep a the number of false negatives ( incorrectly ruled out attachments ) low . The usage of statisti - cally built subcategorization frames is beneﬁcial in this aspect , as uncommon attachments are included as well . 4 4 Roberts et al . ( 2014 ) set a threshold of at least 5 occurrences in the used corpus . 26 9 . 4 Creation of a Legal Domain Ontology Figure 7 : As part of the disambiguation process , attachments are checked for connections in the loaded ontology An important aspect in this work is the inclusion of domain knowledge in the disambiguation process . The approach of using ontological information for disambiguation tasks has already been used by Kang and Lee ( 2001 ) for word - sense dismbiguation , Batista et al . ( 2012 ) utilized semantic simi - larity between toponyms ( location names ) and ontological classes for disam - biguation and Cimiano et al . ( 2005 ) have used ontological information for information extraction systems in the biomedical domain . As the creation of an ontology for the legal domain is not a trivial task in itself , the focus on the engineered ontology was laid more on the inclusion of ’practical’ do - main knowledge than on an exact and thorough representation of the legal domain . 5 As a base structure , the top level ontology LKIF Core was utilized , which aims to provide a grounding for knowledge representation in the legal domain ( Hoekstra et al . , 2007 ) . The class names and relations were translated into German , and additional classes , relations and especially individuals ( the original top - level domain contains none ) were added . 5 It can be safely assumed that the internal structure of the created ontology does not accurately represent the amount of or relations between ontological concepts a thorough representation of this domain would contain . This task would require a domain expert and an experienced ontology engineer . 27 Figure 8 : An excerpt from the created ontology , not all relations shown The full ontology in OWL syntax is included in this work . 9 . 5 Disambiguation by Ontological Relatedness The utilization of the ontology in the disambiguation process can be described as follows : Given a pair of a possible attachment target t and a prepositional phrase p , the ontology is queried for the following connections : 28 Figure 9 : Connections searched for Where * denotes a placeholder . The general approach can be described as trying to ﬁnd a connection in the ontology between the given expressions t and p . It is expected that if such a connection has been found , the attachment is more likely . This connection can appear in the form of one expression cor - responding to a class name that appears in a relation , either on the left side ( in OWL terms : the domain ) or on the right side ( in OWL : range ) . Another possible connection would be two classes , connected through some unknown relation , or an individual which is of a class that is connected to some other 29 class or individual . The last three cases denote no connection , instead the two terms t and p are combined and matched against a class name , indiv - didual name , or relation name , either p appended by t or vice versa . The matching between an ontological entity and a given expression is a diﬃcult task , as the ontology contains single terms for each of its entities , and the text excerpt may morphologically deviate from its base form . Another diﬃ - culty is posed by the inevitable encountering of synonyms or paraphrasings . The mapping thus has to take lexical and semantic similarity into account . This issue is addressed in two ways . Morphological diﬀerences are smoothed through stemming both , the ontological entity’s name and the text excerpt , and by using Levenshtein distance to measure the similarity between the two terms . The diﬃculty in mapping proves to be a more challenging task . San - ﬁlippo ( 2006 ) pointed out that most ontologies do not contain much lexical information , and proposed a transformation of WordNet concepts to ontolog - ical classes . As this work is restricted to a speciﬁc domain , the approach will diﬀer slightly . The ontology is created ﬁrst , and , to introduce a notion of se - mantic similarity , classes and relations in the ontology are related to synsets from the Open - de - WordNet , which is an open - source WordNet initiative for the german language 6 . This approach has been put to use already by Niles and Pease ( 2003 ) who annotated SUMO , a top - level ontology with WordNet synsets . As the domain and thus the created ontology is restricted for this work , this assignment can be done manually , by querying the Wordnet for classes and relations from the ontology . If the term which is used for the ontology component is not found in the wordnet , the synonym ( if existing ) which appears closest in meaning is used . Most expressions result in multi - ple senses and thus synsets , which are sighted , and the sets which are most similar to a human judge are linked to the class or relation in the ontology . An exemplary linkage is illustrated in the following example . The ontology contains a relation Einhaltung , that links an Agent to Norm or juristisches Dokument . The chosen synsets for Einhaltung contain entries 6 https : / / github . com / hdaSprachtechnologie / odenet 30 such as Befolgung , Recht und Gesetz , Gesetz , Disziplin or Anerkennung . The corresponding verb form einhalten yields akzeptieren , befolgen , im Sinne , gem¨aß , and je nach . For a possible attachment of the prepositional phrase von Artikel 3 des Grundgesetzes to the noun Befolgung , a connection would be found in the form of the relation Einhaltung which has a Norm as domain . With the mapping of Gesetz to Einhaltung , a connection between the terms Gesetz ( maps to the relation Einhaltung ) and Gesetz ( which maps to Norm ) will be found too , which in this case might be sensical , but might prove as misleading for other mappings . Concerning the attachment decision between Befolgung and von Artikel 3 des Grundgesetzes , suppose that the set of pos - sible attachments for the PP contains the term Staatsb¨urger . In this case , the ontological relatedness would lose its decisiveness , as there are now two connections : Agent ( ’Staatsb¨urger’ ) - Norm ( ’Artikel 3 des Grundgesetzes’ ) Befolgung ( ’Einhaltung’ ) - Norm ( ’Artikel 3 des Grundgesetzes’ ) This is actually a case , where subcategorizational information could not help in the disambiguation process either , as both , Staatsb¨urger and Einhaltung allow a PP with von . A possible solution for this problem will be presented in the next subsection . 9 . 6 Disambiguation through Domain - Speciﬁc Selectional Preferences The concept of using selectional preferences for PP attachment disambigua - tion has already been proposed by Calvo et al . ( 2004 ) , who automatically aquire preferences in the form of WordNet synsets from a corpus . However , as the disambiguation task is not restricted to a domain , these synsets are very broad ( like place or substance ) ( Calvo et al . ( 2004 ) , 5 ) . In this system , the third disambiguation module makes use of selectional preferences that are special to the legal domain . The noun Verpﬂichtung for example kann be used without a complement , or with a prepositional phrase starting with 31 aus , von , durch , or zu : [ NP Verpﬂichtung [ PP aus / durch / zu ] ] If we consider the clause , dann entsteht durch seine Verpﬂichtungen aus der geltenden Verordnung die Notwendigkeit f¨ur eine eindeutige Zuweisung . the PP aus der geltenden Verordnung may be attached to either Verpﬂich - tungen or entsteht . Both , entstehen and Verpﬂichtung allow for a PP starting with aus . However , in legal texts , the noun Verpﬂichtung is likely to be linked to a member of the semantic class of Norm or Abkommen . These selectional preferences are encoded in rules of the following form : Verpﬂichtung - aus < Norm > | aus < Abkommen > These preferences are obtained by parsing a corpus of legal documents , and manually sighting all possible PP attachments for a given noun , verb or adjective . The legal texts employed in this task are taken from both , german translations of european laws and regulations and from the german body of laws . In particular , the texts used where : The Bundesdatenschutzge - setz BDSG ( Federal Data Protection Act ) , the Straßenverkehrsgetz ( Road Transport Law ) , the Grundgesetz ( German Basic Law ) , the Verordnung des europ¨aischen Parlaments ¨uber eine gemeinsame Einfuhrregelung ( Common Rules for Import ) and the Vertag von Lissabon ( Treaty of Lisbon ) . These texts were chosen to represent a broad scope of legal texts , with specialized vocabulary ( import , data protection ) and texts that use a vocabulary that includes more basic legal terms like the Basic Law and the Treaty of Lisbon . To further illustrate this approach , an excerpt of found attachments with selectional preferences is given below . verletzen - in < Recht > Best¨atigung - durch < judikative Instanz > erlassen - gem¨aß < Norm > | gem¨aß < juristisches Dokument > 32 The semantic classes in these preferences are not refering to WordNet synsets , instead they point to ontological classes . Open - de - WordNet does not contain a Synset judikative Instanz , but the ontological class Judikative Instanz has the subclasses Gericht , which in turn is instantiated by diﬀerent individuals like Amtsgericht or Landesgericht . This allows for both , leverag - ing the internal taxonomy of the ontology which is more detailed in the given domain ( Amtgericht and Landesgericht are both not present in the wordnet ) and utilizing the synsets that may be linked to an individual or class . 9 . 7 A Score - based System for the Attachment Deci - sion The primary aim of the analysis of legal texts with the built system is the ﬁltering of possible attachment ambiguities , that means , attachments like Anschlag - ¨uber m¨ogliche Gefahren shall be ruled out , in the given case due to Anschlag not subcategorizing a PP starting with ¨uber . However , in many cases , nouns allow for the presence of many diﬀerent prepositional phrases . The noun Gesetz allows for PPs starting with zu - , ¨uber , von , betreﬀs . The common auxiliary verb haben allows for the attachment of zu and von too , as in ich habe den Tipp von dir . As it is not unlikely to have both haben and Gesetz in the same sentence , and as intitial tests have shown , many ambiguous PP attachments could not be fully resolved . For this purpose , the lexical resource of selectional preferences and the search for ontological connections shall be used as decisive elements . If two or more attachments are possible for a given prepositional phrase , the attachments are ranked according to a simple score : The attachment’s score is incremented by 1 point , if the subcategoriza - tion frame of the target matches the PP’s beginning : Verweis : [ ( PP auf - ) ] 33 and by another point if the selectional preference of the PP is met as well : Verweis : [ ( PP auf < Norm > ) ] If a connection between Verweis and Norm is found in the legal ontology , the attachments score is incremented by one point . The highest - scored attachment will be the one which is selected . If a selectional preference is met , often an according ontology connection will be found too , as in the above case between Verweis and < Norm > . The reason for the stronger weighting of the selectional preferences is the reasoning that there is evidence that these attachments are likely to be seen in legal texts ( as they have been manually sighted ) whereas a found ontology connection does not always indicate the right attachment , as the evaluation will show . 9 . 8 Detection of Potential Scopal Ambiguities and Co - ordination Ambiguities The detection of potential scope ambiguities is performed by matching for predeﬁned patterns that include two or more scope - bearing operators . This search is performed per clause , as the scope of of a quantiﬁer is restricted to its minimal surrounding clause ( Pafel ( 2006 ) , 4 ) . In a ﬁrst version , all clauses that contained two or more terms from a predeﬁned list of operators where included in the output . This proved to include too many false positives , as terms like ein - are included in many sentences . Subsequently , a list of com - mon patterns was created , which is exempliﬁed by the following examples : ( alle / jeder / manche / einige / . . . ) . . . ( nicht / nie / gelegentlich / manchmal / . . . ) ”Jeder macht gelegentlich einen Fehler . ” ( keine / nicht / niemals / nur / . . . ) . . . ( k¨onnen / m¨ussen / d¨urfen / sollen ) ” . . . , die nur zur Erf¨ullung der gesetzlichen Regelung angewandt werden d¨urfen . ” 34 ( k¨onnen / m¨ussen / d¨urfen / sollen ) . . . ( nur / niemals / nicht / . . . ) ”Der Mitgliedstaat darf diese Regelung nicht verletzen . ” ein . . . ( jeder / alle / die meisten / manche / einige / zwei / . . . ) ”Ein gesetzlicher Vertreter spricht f¨ur jeden Minderj¨ahrigen . ” The output of the PCFG parser is also used for the detection of possible coordination ambiguities . These are extracted by pattern matching on the ﬂattened parse tree . Patterns in the form of ( VAFIN * ) ( NP * ) ( CVP ( VP . . ( VVPP * ) ) ( KON * ) ( VP . . ( VVPP * ) ) habe einige Briefe . . gelesen und . . geschrieben are deﬁned for the diﬀerent types of coordination ambiguities illustrated in chapter 2 . 3 . 2 . The full list of deﬁned scope and coordination patterns can be sighted in the accompanying source code . 10 Testing the System on the DUBLIN3 Reg - ulation 10 . 1 Overview of the Evaluation Procedure The system was tested on the DUBLIN3 regulation , which is the legal text that Reyle examined in her work in ( Reyle , 2016 ) . This choice oﬀers the advantage of having been manually examined already , which allows for com - parison with the automated approach . The experiment was performed in the following steps : 1 . Manual preprocessing of the text To smooth the process of sentence extraction and parsing , the source text was trimmed of headings , annotations of date , and all other fragments of text that did not form a complete sentence . 2 . Loading the text in the application and processing it 35 3 . Manual examination of the generated report The report document lists all sentences that have been determined to either contain a PP attachment ambiguity , a potential scopal ambiguity or a coordination ambiguity , in the order in which they appear in the source text . Figure 10 : The attachment could not be decided Figure 11 : Subcategorizational information excludes one possibility Each ambiguous PP attachment is listed along with its possible attach - ment targets . If the subcategorization frame or the selectional preference of the attachment target matches the prepositional phrase , a visual indicator in form of a label is given , the same goes for any found ontological connec - tion . Attachment targets that where found to not subcategorize for the given PP are ruled out . If a decision of attachment could be made according to the score , it is presented as well . If any clause in the sentence was found to contain a possible scopal ambiguity , it is marked and listed at the bottom of each entry , along with any detected coordination ambiguity . The PCFG parser sometimes includes incorrect bounded prepositional phrases , which , if they are ambiguous in their attachment , are included in the output . This is illustrated in ﬁgure 11 . 36 Figure 12 : Incorrectly bounded PP In such a case , only the correctly determined phrase is valued in the ex - perimental result . The generated report is measured by the following metrics : 1 . Share of possible attachments that could be ruled out due to subcate - gorizational information 2 . Share of attachments where only one possibility remained 3 . Accuracy of attachment assignments based on the scoring system 4 . Accuracy of selectional preferences as single predictor 5 . Accuracy of ontological relations as single predictor 6 . Accuracy and recall of detected scopal ambiguities 7 . Accuracy and recall of detected coordination ambiguities 10 . 2 Evaluation Results The processing of the document yields a total of 459 sentences , of which 438 ( 95 . 4 % ) contain at least one prepositional phrase . Of these , a count of 389 sentences ( 88 . 81 % ) is considered ambiguous in the sense that at least one contained PP can be attached to more than one target . 28 sentences are marked to contain potential scopal ambiguities . The evaluated statistics from the manual sighting are given below . 37 Metric Value Share of ruled out attachments 19 . 44 % Share of attachments where only one possibility remained 17 . 94 % Accuracy of attachment assignments based on the scoring system 73 . 84 % Accuracy of selectional preferences as single predictor 92 . 4 % Accuracy of ontological relations as single predictor 67 . 1 % Accuracy of detected scopal ambiguities 75 . 0 % Recall of detected scopal ambiguities 100 % Accuracy of detected coordination ambiguities 42 . 30 % Recall of detected coordination ambiguities 87 . 02 % Table 1 : Evaluation results 10 . 3 Discussion of the Results This work serves two main purposes : 1 . The creation of a system that allows for the detection and reporting of ambiguities in legal texts . 2 . The evaluation on how syntactic ( in the form of subcategorization frames ) and semantic ( in the form of selectional preferences and a domain ontology ) information can be used to help in the disambiguation process . The ﬁrst goal ( detection and reporting ) can , in the case of ambiguous prepo - sitional phrases , not easily be measured numerically , as the count of reported possible attachments depends on the utilized parser . 38 Figure 13 : A report is generated that can be viewed in the application or saved as . pdf ﬁle . Note : The displayed count of PPs is that high because all incorrectly bounded PPs are included as well . The system identiﬁed all scopally ambiguous sentences that were found by manual sighting , it included however some false positives as the accuracy of 75 . 0 % shows . A majority of the contained coordination ambiguities were found ( 87 . 02 % ) , however , a majority ( 57 . 70 % ) was found to be unambiguous to a human reader . The majority of attachments could not be resolved by excluding candidates for which the subcategorization frame did not match , however , 19 . 4 % of the possiblities could be excluded . Selectional preference rules proved to be very accurate in predicting the right attachment . Yet , they could be applied only to a subset of the ambiguous sentences , as not all attachments contain domain - speciﬁc vocabulary , e . g . Informationen and ¨uber ihre F¨ahigkeiten . The average count of possible attachment targets in the tested document was 2 . 86 , which equates a 34 . 96 % chance of choosing the correct attachment randomly . Ontological connections as sole predictor reached an accuracy 7 of 67 . 1 % , which leaves space for improvement , but which supports the thesis that terms which are connected in the ontology 7 As for selectional preferences , this accuracy was measured over sentences where only one connection was found . 39 have a higher probability of being attached . Connections between two classes or instances of two classes have been found with a higher frequency than class - relation pairs . Relation and class names on their own did not match any expression , and only one expression ( Recht auf Asyl ) could be matched with the name of an individual ( which is why it is excluded in ﬁgure 12 ) . Class - Class 72 % Class - Relation 28 % Figure 14 : Ontological connections by type It shall be emphasized here that the used approach might not be feasible for disambiguation in the parsing process , if performance is of importance . Especially the process of querying the ontology for connections proves to be very time - consuming ( the total runtime for the tested document was about 7 minutes ) . 10 . 4 Proposed Improvements on the Semantic Disam - biguation One possible approach , which could improve the coverage through selec - tional preferences would be to automatically derive these preferences from 40 a domain - speciﬁc corpus . The ontological creation and linking to wordnet classes would remain the same , but prepositional attachments , which strongly associate with a given ontology class would be determined statistically , as Calvo et al . ( 2004 ) did for WordNet classes from an untagged corpus . The ontological connections might proﬁt of a weighting scheme , that takes the ’granularity’ of the found connection into consideration : As most ontologies contain some kind of internal taxonomy , the distance between a matched class and the top level entity ( in OWL : thing ) can be measured , and a con - nection between two classes might be weighted according to their summed distances from the top level . If two terms correspond to highly specialized en - tities in the ontology that are linked together , an attachment might be more probable . In general , a matching individual name should be weighted higher than a matching class name , as individuals in the legal domain often have proper names ( an example out of the test document , that could have been detected by a matching indivudal name is Europ¨aisches Unterst¨utzungsb¨uro - f¨ur Asylfragen ) . In this regard the performance could be improved by further increasing the granularity of the ontology , although it might be debatable if a term like the aforementioned Europ¨aisches Unterst¨utzungsb¨uro f¨ur Asylfra - gen falls under he scope of a legal domain ontology . Another improvement which might be worth investigating is the inclusion of other sentence parts in the decision process : The ontology contains the connection Person - wohnhaft - in - Staat . Suppose the attachment in question was Wohnsitz and im Ausland . If the subject of the sentence mapped to Person too , as in ( Der Staatsangeh¨orige < Person > ) muss seinen ( Wohnsitz < wohnhaft - in > ) im ( Ausland < Staat > ) registrieren , the connection might indicate a higher probability of attachment . y 41 11 Conclusion Ambiguity is an integral feature of human language . However , in legal texts , it has to be minimized . The presented system allows for the detection of scopal , coordination and prepositional phrase ambiguities in statutory texts , although its basic approach can be generalized to many domains . Research has shown that in many cases , lexical and world knowledge are needed for the correct solving of ambiguous expressions . While for general ambiguity resolu - tion , the inclusion of world knowledge poses a challenging task , it is a feasible approach for smaller domains . This work utilizes domain - speciﬁc knowledge in the form of selectional preferences and by querying a domain ontology , to reduce the number of possible readings . The detection of scopal ambigui - ties has proven to be precise in terms of recall , however , a human survey is still needed for the decision about whether a true ambiguity is present or not . Additionally , the applicability of ontological connections and selectional pref - erences as features in an attachment decision process has been investigated , and found to be promising . As the disambiguation in the described system is time - intensive , the possible integration into a parser is questionable . How - ever , subcategorization frames , ontological relatedness and and selectional preferences might be used as features in an expert disambiguation module . An information extraction system for the legal domain would be an example of an application that might proﬁt of a more costly disambiguation process , since , as it has been shown , exact representation of meaning is of special importance in the jurisdiction . 42 References J¨urgen Pafel . Quantiﬁer Scope in German . John Benjamins Publishing Company , Germany , 2006 . Galen Andrew and Bill MacCartney . Statistical resolution of scope ambiguity in natural language . Citeseer , 2004 . Thomas Ede Zimmermann and Wolfgang Sternefeld Introduction to Seman - tics : An Essential Guid to the Composition of Meaning . Walter de Gruyter , 2013 . Bj¨orn Gamb¨ack and Johan Bos Semantic - head based resolution of scopal ambiguities . COLING Proceedings of the 17th international conference on Computational linguistics , Vol . 1 , 1998 . Sanford Schane Ambiguity and Misunderstanding in the Law . HeinOnline , T . Jeﬀerson L . Rev . Vol . 25 , 2002 . Christopher Kennedy Ambiguity and Vagueness - An Overview . Semantics : An international handbook of natural language meaning , Vol . 1 , pages 507 - 535 , 2011 . Matthias Bauer , Joachim Knape , Peter Koch Dimensionen der Ambiguit¨at . Springer , Zeitschrift f¨ur Naturwissenschaft und Linguistik ( 40 ) , pages 7 - 75 , 2010 . Edward N . Zalta and others Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Stanford University , The Metaphysics Research Lab , 2003 . Robert Andrew Wilson and Frank C . Keil The MIT Encyclopedia of Cogni - tive Sciences . MIT Press , 2001 . M . K . Anjali and Anto P . Babu Ambiguities in Natural Language Processing . International Journal of Innovative Research in Computer and Communi - cation Engineering , India , 2014 . 43 Liparota v . United States . Supreme Court Database , ID : 1984 - 093 , Case No . 471 U . S . 419 . Karl Larenz Methodenlehre der Rechtswissenschaft . Springer - Verlag , 2013 . Hannah Reyle Rechtsunsicherheit durch Ambiguit¨aten . Universit¨at zu K¨oln , 2016 . Dick Grune and Ceriel Jacobs Parsing Techniques - A Practical Guide . Springer , Monographs in Computer Science , 2007 . Dan Jurafsky and James H . Martin Speech and Language Processing - An introduction to natural language processing , computational linguistics , and speech recognition . Pearson London , 2014 . Sandra K¨ubler , Ryan MacDonald , Joakim Nivre Dependency Parsing . Mor - gan and Claypool Publishers , Synthesis Lectures on Human Language Technologies 1 , pages 1 - 127 , 2009 . Andrew Carnie Constituent Structure . Oxford University Press , 2009 . Joakim Nivre Algorithms for Deterministic Incremental Dependency Parsing . MIT Press , Computational Linguistics 34 , pages 513 - 553 , 2008 . Joakim Nivre An eﬃcient Algorithm for Projective Dependency Parsing . Proceedings of the 8th International Workshop on Parsing Technologies , 2003 . Massimo Poesio Ambiguity , Underspeciﬁcation And Discourse Interpreta - tion . Proceedings of the First International Workshop on Computational Semantics , pages 151 - 160 , 1994 . Kenji Sagae and Alon Lavie A Classiﬁer - Based Parser with Linear Run - Time Complexity . Association for Computational Linguistics , Proceedings of the Ninth International Workshop on Parsing Technology , pages 125 - 132 , 2005 . 44 Kenneth Church and Ramesh Patil Coping with Syntactic Ambiguity or How to Put the Block in the Box on the Table . MIT Press , Computational Linguistics 8 , pages 139 - 149 , 1982 . Jay Earley An Eﬃcient Context - Free Parsing Algorithm . ACM , Communi - cations of the ACM 13 , pages 94 - 102 , 1970 . David Tuggy Ambiguity , Polysemy And Vagueness . De Gruyter , Cognitive Linguistics 4 , pages 273 - 290 , 1993 . Geert Keil and Ralf Poscher Vagueness and Law . Oxford Unversity Press , 2016 . Steﬀen Staab and Rudi Studer Handbook on Ontologies . Springer Science and Business Media , 2010 . Thomas R . Gruber Toward Principles for the Design of Ontologies Used for Knowledge Sharing . Elsevier , International Journal of human - computer studies 43 p . 907 - 928 , 1995 . Cristina Romero Tris , Riao D . , Real F . Ontology - Based Retrospective and Prospective Diagnosis and Medical Knowledge Personalization . in : Knowl - edge Representation for Health - Care , Springer , Lecture Notes in Computer Science 6512 , 2011 . Robert Hoehndorf What is an upper level ontology ? . Ontogenesis , 2010 . Philip Stuart Resnik Selection and Information : A Class - Based Approach to Lexical Relationships . IRCS Technical Reports Series , 1993 . Christopher Manning , Mihai Surdeanu , John Bauer , Jenny Finkel , Steven Bethard , David McClosky The Stanford CoreNLP Natural Language Pro - cessing Toolkit . Proceedings of 52nd annual meeting of the association for computational linguistics : system demonstrations p . 55 - 60 , 2014 . 45 Anna N . Raﬀerty and Christopher D . Manning Parsing Three German Tree - banks : Lexicalized and Unlexicalized Baselines . Association for Computa - tional Linguistics , Proceedings of the Workshop on Parsing German , pages 40 - 46 , 2008 . Will Roberts and Markus Egg and Valia Kordoni Subcategorisation acquisi - tion from raw text for a free word - order language . Association for Compu - tational Linguistics , Proceedings of the 14th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics , pages 298 - 307 , 2014 . Philipp Cimiano and Uwe Reyle and Jasmin Saric Ontology - driven discourse analysis for information extraction . Elsevier , Data and Knowledge Engi - neering Vol . 55 , pages 59 - 83 , 2005 . S . Kang and J . H . Lee Ontology - Based Word Sense Disambiguation by Using Semi - Automatically Constructed Ontology . In Proceedings of MT Summit 8 , Spain , 2001 . David S . Batista , Joao Ferreira , Francisco M . Couto , Mario J . Silva Toponym Disambiguation using Ontology - based Semantic Similarity . Springer , In - ternational Conference on Computational Processing of the Portuguese Language , pages 179 - 185 , 2012 . Hiram Clavo and Alexander Gelbukh Acquiring Selectional Preferences from Untagged Text for Prepositional Phrase Attachment Disambiguation . Springer , International Conference on Application of Natural Language to Information Systems , pages 207 - 216 , 2004 . Rinke Hoekstra , Joost Breuker , Marcello Di Bello , Alexander Boer and others The LKIF Core Ontology of Basic Legal Concepts . LOAIT Journal , Vol . 321 , pages 43 - 63 , 2007 . George A . Miller , Richard Beckwith , Christiane Fellbaum , Derek Gross , Katherine J . Miller Introduction to WordNet : An On - line Lexical Database . 46 Oxford University Press , International Journal of Lexicography Vol . 3 , pages 235 - 244 , 1990 . Sanﬁlippo , Antonio P and Tratz , Stephen C and Gregory , Michelle L and Chappell , Alan R and Whitney , Paul D and Posse , Christian and Paulson , Patrick R and Baddeley , Bob and Hohimer , Ryan E and White , Amanda M Ontological Annotation with WordNet . Paciﬁc Northwest National Lab . ( PNNL ) , Richland , WA ( United States ) , 2006 . Ian Niles and Adam Pease Linking Lexicons and Ontologies : Mapping Word - Net to the Suggested Upper Merged Ontology . Ike , pages 412 - 416 , 2012 . Mehl , Stephan and Langer , Hagen and Volk , Martin Statistische Verfahren zur Zuordnung von Pr¨apositionalphrasen . Proceedings of the 4th Confer - ence on Natural Language Processing , Vol . 98 , 1998 . Langer , Hagen and Mehl , Stephan and Volk , Martin Hybride NLP - Systeme und das Problem der PP - Anbindung . Berichtsband des Workshops” Hy - bride konnektionistische , statistische und symbolische Ans¨atze zur Verar - beitung nat¨urlicher Sprache” , 1997 . Christopher D . Manning and Hinrich Sch¨utze Foundations of Statistical Nat - ural Language Processing . MIT Press , 1999 . Europ¨aische Kommission Gemeinsamer Leitfaden des Europ¨aischen Parla - ments , des Rates und der Kommission f¨ur Personen , die in den Gemein - schaftsorganen an der Abfassung von Rechtstexten mitwirken . Amt f¨ur amtliche Ver¨oﬀentlichungen der europ¨aischen Gemeinschaften , Luxem - burg , 2003 . Bundesministerium der Justiz Handbuch der Rechtsf¨ormlichkeit . Bunde - sanzeiger , Bundesministerium der Justiz , Jahrgang 60 , 2008 . Sabine Schulte im Walde A subcategorisation lexicon for German verbs induced from a lexicalised PCFG . in LREC , 2002 . 47 Sabine Schulte im Walde The induction of verb frames and verb classes from corpora . In Corpus Linguistics . An International Handbook , Chapter 61 , De Gruyter , Berlin , 2009 . Marc Light and Warren Greiﬀ Statistical models for the induction and use of selectional preferences . Weiley Online Library , in Journal of Cognitive Science , Vol . 26 , pages 269 - 281 , 2002 . Michael Schiehlen A cascaded ﬁnite - state parser for German . Proceedings of the tenth conference on European chapter of the Association for Com - putational Linguistics , Vol . 2 , pages 163 - 166 , 2003 . Thomas Wasow , Amy Perfors and David Beaver The Puzzle of Ambiguity . CSLI Publications , Stanford , Morphology and the web of grammar : Essays in memory of Steven G . Lapointe , Vol . 2 , pages 265 - 282 , 2005 . 48 Statement of Authorship I hereby declare that the work presented in this thesis is entirely my own . I did not use any other sources and references that the listed ones . I have marked all direct or indirect statements from other sources contained therein as quotations . Neither this work nor signiﬁcant parts of it were part of another examination procedure . I have not published this work in whole or in part before . The electronic copy is consistent with all submitted copies . Date and Signature : 49