Opposing functions of F - BAR proteins in membrane protrusion , tubule formation and neurite outgrowth Kendra Taylor , Russell Taylor , Karl Richters , Brandon Huynh , Justin Carrington , Maeve McDermott , Rebecca Wilson , and Erik Dent DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 26508 / lsa . 201800288 Corresponding author ( s ) : Erik Dent , University of Wisconsin - Madison Review Timeline : Submission Date : 2018 - 12 - 20 Editorial Decision : 2019 - 01 - 28 Revision Received : 2019 - 04 - 12 Editorial Decision : 2019 - 05 - 06 Revision Received : 2019 - 05 - 15 Accepted : 2019 - 05 - 17 Scientific Editor : Andrea Leibfried Transaction Report : ( Note : With the exception of the correction of typographical or spelling errors that could be a source of ambiguity , letters and reports are not edited . The original formatting of letters and referee reports may not be reflected in this compilat ion . ) January 28 , 2019 1st Editorial Decision January 28 , 2019 Re : Life Science Alliance manuscript # LSA - 2018 - 00288 - T Prof . Erik Dent University of Wisconsin - Madison Department of Anatomy Department of Neuroscience 5431 WIMR2 1111 Highland Ave . 1111 Highland Ave . Madison , WI 53705 - 2275 Dear Dr . Dent , Thank you for submitting your manuscript entitled " Opposing functions of F - BAR proteins in membrane protrusion , tubule formation and neurite outgrowth " to Life Science Alliance . The manuscript was assessed by expert reviewers , whose comments are appended to this letter . As you will see , the reviewers all point out that the technical quality is overall good though a few controls are missing . However , they also think that the overall value provided to the field is quite limited and that the overexpression system used impedes advancing our understanding of biological function . Furthermore , they would have expected inclusion of an analysis on the interplay of Cip4 and FBP17 with Rho GTPases . Given this input , we concluded that we could invite you to submit a revised version of your work , should you be prepared to not only addressing the technical issues noted ( lack of controls noted by reviewer # 1 as well as reviewer # 2 , point 3 ) , but to also extending the work along the lines suggested by the reviewers . We would need strong support from the reviewers on such a revised version for publication here . To upload the revised version of your manuscript , please log in to your account : https : / / lsa . msubmit . net / cgi - bin / main . plex You will be guided to complete the submission of your revised manuscript and to fill in all necessary information . We would be happy to discuss the individual revision points further with you should this be helpful . While you are revising your manuscript , please also attend to the below editorial points to help expedite the publication of your manuscript . Please direct any editorial questions to the journal office . The typical timeframe for revisions is three months . Please note that papers are generally considered through only one revision cycle . When submitting the revision , please include a letter addressing the reviewers ' comments point by point . We hope that the comments below will prove constructive as your work progresses . Thank you for this interesting contribution to Life Science Alliance . We are looking forward to receiving your revised manuscript . Sincerely , Andrea Leibfried , PhD Executive Editor Life Science Alliance Meyerhofstr . 1 69117 Heidelberg , Germany t + 49 6221 8891 502 e a . leibfried @ life - science - alliance . org www . life - science - alliance . org - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - A . THESE ITEMS ARE REQUIRED FOR REVISIONS - - A letter addressing the reviewers ' comments point by point . - - An editable version of the final text ( . DOC or . DOCX ) is needed for copyediting ( no PDFs ) . - - High - resolution figure , supplementary figure and video files uploaded as individual files : See our detailed guidelines for preparing your production - ready images , http : / / life - science - alliance . org / authorguide - - Summary blurb ( enter in submission system ) : A short text summarizing in a single sentence the study ( max . 200 characters including spaces ) . This text is used in conjunction with the titles of papers , hence should be informative and complementary to the title and running title . It should describe the context and significance of the findings for a general readership ; it should be written in the present tense and refer to the work in the third person . Author names should not be mentioned . B . MANUSCRIPT ORGANIZATION AND FORMATTING : Full guidelines are available on our Instructions for Authors page , http : / / life - science - alliance . org / authorguide We encourage our authors to provide original source data , particularly uncropped / - processed electrophoretic blots and spreadsheets for the main figures of the manuscript . If you would like to add source data , we would welcome one PDF / Excel - file per figure for this information . These files will be linked online as supplementary " Source Data " files . * * * IMPORTANT : It is Life Science Alliance policy that if requested , original data images must be made available . Failure to provide original images upon request will result in unavoidable delays in publication . Please ensure that you have access to all original microscopy and blot data images before submitting your revision . * * * - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Reviewer # 1 ( Comments to the Authors ( Required ) ) : Cip4 and FBP17 are two related F - BAR proteins that are able to bind membrane phospholipids , initiate membrane curvature and scission via Src homology - 3 ( SH3 ) domain interaction with their diverse binding partners , thus regulating fundamental cellular functions , including endocytosis , phagocytosis , filopodial / lamellipodial protrusions , cytokinesis , adhesion , and podosome formation , via distinct signaling pathways determined by specific domain - binding partners . In the present manuscript " Opposing functions of F - BAR proteins in neuronal membrane protrusion , tubule formation and neurite outgrowth " , Taylor et al . follow up on their previous studies on Cip4 and FBP17 localization and filopodia formation ( please see Saengsawang , et al . , 2012 and Saengsawang , et al . , 2013 ) . Again , the authors used an in vitro cell culture approach / strategy using primary cortical neurons transfected with different EGFP - tagged Cip4 - and FBP17 - constructs . By overexpressing distinct EGFP - tagged deletion and swaping constructs they identified an important role of the first linker region ( L1 ) of Cip4 and FBP17 in defining localization and filopodia formation activity . They further conclude that the L1S linker together with the Cdc42 - interacting HR1 domain determines lamellipodial localization , whereas neurite ( filopodial ) outgrowth inhibition depends on the SH3 domain . The paper is a diligent piece of work with numerous main and supplemental figures ( 13 ! ) , overall well written , and most data are well documented and described . However , this work is too descriptive and the physiological relevance of the gain - of - function in vitro data remains unclear . The overexpression data suggest a differential domain requirement for localization and neurite morphology Cip4 and FBP17 , but without additional functional data the overall findings of this manuscript are quite limited . Here , a more sophisticated structure - function analysis in mutant background would be required that allows further novel insights into the in vivo function and regulation of both similar proteins , beyond their previous published papers in 2012 and 2013 . Additional functional experiments should also address important questions , such as what makes the differences in the localization and gof phenotypes in neuronal and epithelial / non - neuronal cell types ? Are there distinct binding partners that differentially bind to first linker region ( L1 ) , HR1 or the SH3 domains , and thereby their activity ? If Rac1 , but not Cdc42 , „is serving the role of recruiting CIP4S to the protruding plasma membrane " , what is the function of the HR1 domain in FBP17 ? Members of the Cip4 / Toca - 1 F - BAR subfamily are also known inhibitors of Diaphanous - related formins . Do formins mediate FBP17 - induced neurite outgrowth ? Minor points : 1 ) Co - immunoprecipitation experiments lack essential controls ( e . g . IP with preimmune sera ) . 2 ) The authors found that expression of the F - BAR / EFC ( 1 - 300aa ) domain of either CIP4 or FBP17 was not sufficient to localize these proteins to membranous structures in either neurons or COS - 7 cells . However , this interesing observation was already made 10 years ago . What makes the difference between membrane binding in vitro and in vivo ? 3 ) For statistics , quantifications were often done on samples consisting of very small cell numbers ( 22 - 30 cells ) , and should be increased . Most images only showed single cells ? What is the transfection efficiency of these primary neurons ? Reviewer # 2 ( Comments to the Authors ( Required ) ) : Comments for Taylor et al . This paper contains significant effort to describe the different localization of CIP4 to FBP17 in neuronal cells , not in the other cultured cells . They examined the localization of a lot of domain swapping mutants and found the important region for the protein localizations . The overall study appeared to be performed under good technical quality . However , I think the reason for the differential localization in neurons are not clear enough . I would like to point several issues to improve the manuscript . 1 . The localization difference of CIP4 to FBP17 was observed only in the neuronal cells , and therefore it would be reasonable to think the binding proteins to these proteins are different dependent on the cell types . Then , FBP17 / Rapostlin was shown to bind to the small GTPase Rnd2 ( The Journal of Biological Chemistry277 , 45428 - 45434 ) , while CIP4 binds to Cdc42 . The difference in the preference to the small GTPases appeared to be another reasonable reason . The HR1 domain swapping also resulted in the differential localizations , supporting this idea ( Figure2 ) . 2 . To test the small GTPase - dependency , it might be better to examine the role of small GTPases by the expression of the dominant negative mutants or siRNA - induced reduction of the proteins . 2 . I agree the poly - basic region and the proline - rich region contribute to the localizations of FBP17 and of CIP4 . However , these regions are conserved between these two proteins , and therefore appeared to be unlikely to the reason for differential localizations . The sequence comparison of FBP17 to CIP4 should be included in Figure 6A . 3 . The expression levels of overexpressed proteins should be shown by western blot , in comparison with the endogenous protein expression levels . 4 . The detailed construct information including the linker sequences from EGFP to CIP4 / FBP17 is helpful , because the difference in the linker might induce the difference in the localizations . The domain swapped constructs are a little bit confusing , and I prefer to put the alignment of all of the amino - acid sequences of the constructs they used . Reviewer # 3 ( Comments to the Authors ( Required ) ) : First of all , I would like to mention that I liked reading the paper by Taylor et al . , and I find the conclusions to be sound . The article deals with the unique and opposing function of the two F - BAR domain - containing proteins CIP4 and FBP17 . There are several splice variants of each of these two proteins but of specific interest for neuronal cells are the short splice variant of CIP4 ( CIP4S ) and the long splice form of FBP17 ( FBP17L ) . The authors have made a major effort to characterize the domains and motifs responsible for the respective phenotype of CIP4S and FBP17L . I find the data highly convincing . I think the figures are sufficient as they are . Having this said , there is one parameter that I am lacking and that I think the authors should analyze , that is the interaction to Rho GTPases . CIP4 was originally identified in a yeast two - hybrid screen for Cdc42 - interacting proteins ( hence its rather boring name ) . The original article ( Aspenström , Curr Biol . , 1997 ) indicated that Cdc42 induced CIP4 localization to the cell periphery and to cellular structures that in retrospect must have been membrane tubules , which is in contrast to what the authors claim in the last paragraph of the Discussion . They rather put forward Rac1 as responsible for membrane targeting of CIP4 but I cannot find the evidences for this notion . There are also conflicting views on if FBP17 actually binds Rho GTPases at all . Therefore , I think it would be of significance to examine the interaction between the CIP4 / FBP17 chimeras and Cdc42 and to see if any of the chimeras can be specifically targeted to the cell periphery / membrane tubules in response to Cdc42 ( and Rac1 - since the authors propose that CIP4 is targeted to the cell periphery in a Rac1 - dependent manner ) . I do not request the authors to test all the mutants , just the key chimeras . 1 1st Authors ' Response to Reviewers April 12 , 2019 Reviewer # 1 … . In the present manuscript " Opposing functions of F - BAR proteins in neuronal membrane protrusion , tubule formation and neurite outgrowth " , Taylor et al . follow up on their previous studies on Cip4 and FBP17 localization and filopodia formation ( please see Saengsawang , et al . , 2012 and Saengsawang , et al . , 2013 ) . The reviewer is correct that we have studied CIP4 in these two publications , but we have never published on FBP17 . There are no FBP17 data in either of those two publications . Again , the authors used an in vitro cell culture approach / strategy using primary cortical neurons transfected with different EGFP - tagged Cip4 - and FBP17 - constructs . By overexpressing distinct EGFP - tagged deletion and swaping constructs they identified an important role of the first linker region ( L1 ) of Cip4 and FBP17 in defining localization and filopodia formation activity . They further conclude that the L1S linker together with the Cdc42 - interacting HR1 domain determines lamellipodial localization , whereas neurite ( filopodial ) outgrowth inhibition depends on the SH3 domain . The paper is a diligent piece of work with numerous main and supplemental figures ( 13 ! ) , overall well written , and most data are well documented and described . Thank you for appreciating the amount of work that went into this manuscript . However , this work is too descriptive and the physiological relevance of the gain - of - function in vitro data remains unclear . The overexpression data suggest a differential domain requirement for localization and neurite morphology Cip4 and FBP17 , but without additional functional data the overall findings of this manuscript are quite limited . Here , a more sophisticated structure - function analysis in mutant background would be required that allows further novel insights into the in vivo function and regulation of both similar proteins , beyond their previous published papers in 2012 and 2013 . We believe this work goes well beyond our 2012 and 2013 papers . The 2012 and 2013 publications do not contain any FBP17 data , thus all FBP17 data presented here is novel . Indeed , this the first publication to show any role for FBP17 in neurite outgrowth . We are not sure what the reviewer means by a “more sophisticated structure - function analysis in a mutant background” . Although many studies use point and deletion mutants to determine the function of proteins , few studies swap protein domains to make chimeric proteins . We made 20 + chimeric proteins , in addition to deletion mutants , and quantified their effects with four different protein localization and morphological measurements , as well as measuring neurite and axon outgrowth through three stages of development in living neurons . 2 Regarding a mutant background , we confirmed that full length proteins ( Fig . S1K ) and a few of the chimeras ( L1 swap ( Fig . S4B ) and data not shown ) act exactly the same in wild - type and CIP4 KO neurons . We also provide reasoning in the results why we cannot use knockdown of FBP17 ( see second paragraph on page 6 of Results ) . If the reviewer is suggesting that we conduct more experiments in the mouse , we believe that is a request that goes well beyond the scope of this paper . Additional functional experiments should also address important questions , such as what makes the differences in the localization and gof phenotypes in neuronal and epithelial / non - neuronal cell types ? We believe this is an important question , but is beyond the scope of this study . Our present hypothesis is that differential localization of CIP4 in neurons and non - neuronal cells may be due to : ( 1 ) differential expression of specific proteins in neurons and non - neuronal cells , ( 2 ) differential activation of GTPases in these two cell types and / or ( 3 ) differential post - translational modifications of F - BAR proteins in these two cell types . We are actively pursuing these avenues in a separate study and believe it is likely to be a combination of all of these possibilities . Nevertheless , we have added a figure ( Fig . S8A ) showing that CA - Rac1 expression is sufficient to cause CIP4 L to relocate from tubules to the peripheral protruding membrane in neurons . However , the same treatment in COS - 7 cells does not result in CIP4 L re - localizing to the periphery ( Fig . S8B ) . Thus , activation of Rac1 plays an important role in targeting CIP4 to the periphery in neurons but Rac1 is not sufficient to localize CIP4 to the periphery in COS - 7 cells . Are there distinct binding partners that differentially bind to first linker region ( L1 ) , HR1 or the SH3 domains , and thereby their activity ? We do not know if the CIP4 or FBP17 L1 regions bind different partners but they seem indistinguishable when we swap them . In Figure 5C - H we show that swapping the short FBP17 linker into CIP4 S has no effect on any of our measures . We address the HR1 domain below . We have not directly tested if there are different binding partners of the SH3 domain of CIP4 and FBP17 , but it is well established in the literature that they are known to bind different , but overlapping , sets of proteins . However , we find very little difference when we swap the SH3 domain of CIP4 and FBP17 ( Fig . S2A - G ) . If Rac1 , but not Cdc42 , „is serving the role of recruiting CIP4S to the protruding plasma membrane " , what is the function of the HR1 domain in FBP17 ? We have added data that Cdc42 affects FBP17 L , potentially through the HR1 domain . This figure shows inhibition of Cdc42 , either through expression of dominant negative Cdc42 ( Fig . S3A , B ) or inhibition of Cdc42 pharmacologically ( Fig . S3C , D ) , reduces the number of FBP17 L - containing tubules . However , the pharmacological inhibition of Rac1 does not have any effect on the number of FBP17 L tubules ( Fig . S3E ) . Thus , the HR1 domain of FBP17 is likely functioning with Cdc42 , either directly or indirectly . These results are exactly opposite of what we previously showed for CIP4 ( Saengsawang et al . , 2013 ) , where Rac1 , but not Cdc42 , affects localization and function of CIP4 . Members of the Cip4 / Toca - 1 F - BAR subfamily are also known inhibitors of Diaphanous - related formins . Do formins mediate FBP17 - induced neurite outgrowth ? 3 This is an interesting question and we hope to determine if these filopodia are Diaphanous - related formin - or Ena / VASP - dependent in the future . We showed previously that both the Diaphanous - related formin DAAM1 and the actin polymerase Ena / VASP are associated with CIP4 - based protrusions ( Saengsawang et al . , 2013 ) and we know from another previous study ( Dent et al . , 2007 ) that embryonic cortical neurons do not contain mDia2 . Thus , we hope to conduct future studies that will test both of these proteins , and possibly others , in FBP17 - induced filopodia . However , we feel this question does not directly relate to the conclusions of the study . Minor points : 1 ) Co - immunoprecipitation experiments lack essential controls ( e . g . IP with preimmune sera ) . We used magnetic beads coated with anti - HA antibodies . Beads coupled to preimmune sera are not available . To show specificity of our blots we have now included the GFP lane as a negative control to show it does not IP with the anti - HA beads ( Fig . 1K ) . We also reprobed the blot with an anti - HA antibody to show CIP4 is expressed in all lysate lanes and it comes down in all IP lanes ( positive control ) . Furthermore , we reprobed the blot a second time for tubulin to show it is in all of the lysate lanes but does not IP with anti - HA ( a second negative control ) . In this new blot we present there is less FBP17 L , compared to CIP4 S , in the lysate because FBP17 L does not express as well as CIP4 S in these cells . Nevertheless , we never found FBP17 L coming down with CIP4 S in three separate experiments and in Fig . 1L we normalized the amount of pulldown to the levels of input in each experiment . These new data confirm that CIP4 S is not immunoprecipitating with FBP17 L . 2 ) The authors found that expression of the F - BAR / EFC ( 1 - 300aa ) domain of either CIP4 or FBP17 was not sufficient to localize these proteins to membranous structures in either neurons or COS - 7 cells . However , this interesing observation was already made 10 years ago . What makes the difference between membrane binding in vitro and in vivo ? We apologize for not including the reference to Fricke et al . , 2009 , where this observation , to which the reviewer is referring , was made . This paper showed the F - BAR region of Drosophila CIP4 ( dCIP4 / Toca - 1 ) was able to induce membrane tubules in vitro but did not appear to form tubules in Drosophila S2 cells ( although it did concentrate on unknown elongated structures in the cytoplasm of these cells ) . We have now included this reference in the discussion and indicate that our results are consistent with this observation ( although when we expressed the F - BAR alone it was simply diffuse in both cell types , rather than forming unknown elongated structures , as it did in S2 cells ) . Since dCIP4 does not appear to have a poly - basic region after the F - BAR / EFC domain ( see amino acid sequence alignment in Fig . S7A ) the data in Fricke et al . , are consistent with our data showing that the poly - basic region is necessary for membrane binding and bending in mammalian cells . We suspect that the membrane structure in cells is more complex than liposomes with regard to both the phospholipids and proteins that are present . Thus , the poly - basic region in CIP4 and FBP17 may be required to bind and bend this more complex form of membrane . 3 ) For statistics , quantifications were often done on samples consisting of very small cell numbers ( 22 - 30 cells ) , and should be increased . Most images only showed single cells ? What is the transfection efficiency of these primary neurons ? 4 Our transfection efficiency is in the neighborhood of 20 - 40 % . However , we specifically plated the primary neurons at low density so that they were not in contact with other cells , which would impede our ability to take measurements on stage 1 neurons , as well as compromise our measurement of stage progression ( neurite and axon outgrowth ) . As far as cell numbers , all of the data shown in the paper were quantified from cultures of cortical neurons from at least three separate litters of mice in which we took a random sampling of approximately seven to ten living neurons from each preparation . For quantifying neuron maturation ( stage 1 - 3 ) our numbers were higher ( 50 - 80 neurons from at least three separate experiments ) . These numbers were based upon previous studies we have conducted ( Dent et al . , 2007 ; Saengsawang et al . , 2012 , 2013 ) . In all of the graphs we have highly significant differences ( p < 0 . 01 to p < 0 . 0001 ) between certain conditions and insignificant differences between others , indicating that the statistical power of the experiments is appropriate with the number of neurons used . Reviewer # 2 Comments for Taylor et al . This paper contains significant effort to describe the different localization of CIP4 to FBP17 in neuronal cells , not in the other cultured cells . They examined the localization of a lot of domain swapping mutants and found the important region for the protein localizations . The overall study appeared to be performed under good technical quality . However , I think the reason for the differential localization in neurons are not clear enough . I would like to point several issues to improve the manuscript . 1 . The localization difference of CIP4 to FBP17 was observed only in the neuronal cells , and therefore it would be reasonable to think the binding proteins to these proteins are different dependent on the cell types . Then , FBP17 / Rapostlin was shown to bind to the small GTPase Rnd2 ( The Journal of Biological Chemistry277 , 45428 - 45434 ) , while CIP4 binds to Cdc42 . The difference in the preference to the small GTPases appeared to be another reasonable reason . The HR1 domain swapping also resulted in the differential localizations , supporting this idea ( Figure2 ) . These are logical hypotheses that we are pursuing in a separate study ( see response to reviewer # 1 ) . We are in the process of performing immunoprecipitations , followed by mass spectrometry to determine the set of proteins that interact with CIP4 in neurons vs . COS - 7 cells ( FBP17 shows tubule localization in both cell types ) . With regard to small GTPases , we have published that CIP4 localization to the periphery of cortical neurons depends on Rac1 , rather than Cdc42 ( Saengsawang et al . , 2013 J Cell Science , 126 : 2411 - 2423 ) . Cdc42 appears to be the primary GTPase associated with CIP4 in non - neuronal cells ( several studies ) , where CIP4 localizes to tubules . Thus , we favor the idea of associations with different GTPases in different cell types , but to thoroughly determine the answer to this question is beyond the scope of this paper . Regarding the assertion that the HR1 domain swapping resulted in differential localizations ( Fig . 2 ) , we do believe that the CIP4 HR1 domain is distinct from the FBP17 HR1 domain . Indeed , in Fig . 5 we show that FFsC - - has a peripheral localization , while FFsF - - has a tubule localization ( the only difference being the HR1 domains ) . Moreover , we have included two new figures ( Figs . S3 and S8 ) showing that Rac1 activity is sufficient to localize CIP4L ( normally on 5 tubules ) to the peripheral protruding membrane in neurons , but not in COS - 7 cells . We also present data showing that FBP17 L is dependent on Cdc42 ( Fig . S3A - D ) but not Rac1 ( Fig . S3E and Fig . S8A ) . Thus , we favor the interpretation that the HR1 domain of CIP4 is associating with Rac1 , while FBP17 is associating with Cdc42 in neurons . In COS - 7 cells ( Fig . S8B ) CIP4 may be slightly affected by activating Rac1 , but it is not sufficient to localize CIP4L from tubules to peripheral protruding membrane . 2 . To test the small GTPase - dependency , it might be better to examine the role of small GTPases by the expression of the dominant negative mutants or siRNA - induced reduction of the proteins . We have used dominant negative mutants and constitutively active mutants of Cdc42 , Rac1 and RhoA , as well as pharmacological compounds , in our previous study ( Saengsawang et al . , 2013 ) . This study showed that the peripheral localization of CIP4 in neurons is increased with CA - Rac1 and decreased with CA - Cdc42 , while CA - RhoA had no effect on CIP4 peripheral localization . We have also included two new figures as mentioned in point 1 above . 2 . I agree the poly - basic region and the proline - rich region contribute to the localizations of FBP17 and of CIP4 . However , these regions are conserved between these two proteins , and therefore appeared to be unlikely to the reason for differential localizations . The sequence comparison of FBP17 to CIP4 should be included in Figure 6A . As we describe in the model in Figure 7 , the reason for the different localizations of CIP4 and FBP17 in neurons is because only the short form of CIP4 ( CIP4 S ) and the long form of FBP17 ( FBP17 L ) are expressed in neurons . The short form of CIP4 , which does not contain the PxxP region , but does contain the CIP4 HR1 domain , localizes to the peripheral protruding membrane . However , the long form of FBP17 ( FBP17 L ) localizes to tubules , as does the long form of CIP4 ( CIP4L ) , when they are exogenously expressed in neurons . Instead of adding the polybasic sequence comparisons in Fig . 6A , which focuses exclusively on CIP4 , we have added the sequence comparisons of the polybasic region for FBP17 and CIP4 in Fig . 6G . The sequence comparison for both the polybasic and poly - PxxP regions are in Supplemental Figure 7A as well . 3 . The expression levels of overexpressed proteins should be shown by western blot , in comparison with the endogenous protein expression levels . It is very difficult to directly compare levels of overexpressed protein in neurons because , ( 1 ) only a percentage of cells are transfected ( ~ 30 % , but this varies from prep to prep ) and ( 2 ) there is not an available antibody to CIP4 that is specific for immunocytochemistry ( all antibodies label knockout tissue and dissociated cells – which we have mentioned in a previous publication – Saengsawang et al . , 2012 ) . Thus , we cannot compare brightness between transfected and untransfected individual cells . Importantly , the cells we chose to image and quantify have low to medium levels of expression of GFP / RFP fluorescence , compared to other transfected neurons in the dish . We have added this information in the Results section . 6 Additionally , we have very recently generated mouse embryonic stem cells with endogenously labeled CIP4 ( via CRISPR / Cas9 editing ) , which can be differentiated into forebrain neurons via treatment with EGF , FGF and Heparin to generate neuronal progenitor cells , and then subsequent removal of these factors to generate neurons . This endogenously labeled CIP4 localizes to the protruding periphery in stage 1 lamellar neurons ( see image below – for reviewers only ) . Thus , we don’t believe that overexpressing CIP4 at low - to - medium levels in mouse cortical neurons results in overexpression artifacts . 4 . The detailed construct information including the linker sequences from EGFP to CIP4 / FBP17 is helpful , because the difference in the linker might induce the difference in the localizations . The domain swapped constructs are a little bit confusing , and I prefer to put the alignment of all of the amino - acid sequences of the constructs they used . All of our constructs are C - terminally labeled with no linker sequence in identical pCAX plasmids ( as we now outline in the Methods ) . Our previous work indicated that labeling this end of the protein , compared to the N - terminus , resulted in less labeled protein in the cytoplasm ( presumably non - functional ) and more protein either at the periphery or on tubules . The fluorescent protein ( either EGFP or mScarlet ) is fused just after the final amino acids of the protein , with no linker . We used this same methodology in our previous two publications ( Saengsawang et al . , 2012 ; 2013 ) . Recently , we have made a construct with a longer linker ( GGGGSx3 ) between the protein and EGFP . This construct results in an indistinguishable phenotype to the fusion protein without the linker . Thus , for the present study we have used plasmids with no linker between the protein of interest and EGFP or mScarlet to be consistent with our previous studies . We have added these data to the Methods section . Reviewer # 3 First of all , I would like to mention that I liked reading the paper by Taylor et al . , and I find the conclusions to be sound… . The authors have made a major effort to characterize the domains and motifs responsible for the respective phenotype of CIP4S and FBP17L . I find the data highly convincing . I think the figures are sufficient as they are . Thank you . We appreciate the acknowledgement of our efforts . Reviewer Only Figure This image shows a living , newly differentiated neuron after CRISPR - Cas9 insertion of mScarlet at the C - terminus of endogenous CIP4 in mouse stem cells that were differentiated into neurons . The montage at top ( taken from the area outlined by the rectangle ) shows CIP4 concentrating along a protruding lamellipodium ( arrow ) over a period of 72 seconds . This peripheral localization at protrusions in stage 1 neurons is similar to the exogenously transfected CIP4 in stage 1 neurons in the manuscript , indicating we are not inducing an aberrant localization or phenotype in the neurons . 7 Having this said , there is one parameter that I am lacking and that I think the authors should analyze , that is the interaction to Rho GTPases . CIP4 was originally identified in a yeast two - hybrid screen for Cdc42 - interacting proteins ( hence its rather boring name ) . The original article ( Aspenström , Curr Biol . , 1997 ) indicated that Cdc42 induced CIP4 localization to the cell periphery and to cellular structures that in retrospect must have been membrane tubules , which is in contrast to what the authors claim in the last paragraph of the Discussion . They rather put forward Rac1 as responsible for membrane targeting of CIP4 but I cannot find the evidences for this notion . The evidence that Rac1 , instead of Cdc42 , is responsible for membrane targeting of CIP4 to the cell periphery in neurons is in Figure 2 of our previous paper ( Saengsawang et al . , 2013 J Cell Science , 126 : 2411 - 2423 ) . In that figure we show , using both DN - Rac1 and CA - Rac1 , as well as the Rac inhibitory compound NSC23766 , that CIP4 localization at the protruding edge of stage 1 neurons is due to Rac1 activity . Furthermore , we show that DN - Cdc42 increases the concentration of CIP4 at the periphery . We present a model at the end of the Saengsawang ( 2013 ) paper showing that membrane targeting of CIP4 to the periphery is associated with PIP3 , WAVE , Rac1 , Mena and DAAM1 . We have also included an additional figure in this manuscript that shows that CIP4L , which normally is localized to tubules , localizes to the periphery if expressed with CA - Rac1 in neurons , but not COS - 7 cells ( Fig . S8 ) . These data indicate that active Rac1 is responsible for localizing CIP4 to the periphery in neurons . There are also conflicting views on if FBP17 actually binds Rho GTPases at all . Therefore , I think it would be of significance to examine the interaction between the CIP4 / FBP17 chimeras and Cdc42 and to see if any of the chimeras can be specifically targeted to the cell periphery / membrane tubules in response to Cdc42 ( and Rac1 - since the authors propose that CIP4 is targeted to the cell periphery in a Rac1 - dependent manner ) . I do not request the authors to test all the mutants , just the key chimeras . We have added another figure ( Figure S3 ) showing that the localization of FBP17 to membrane tubules requires active Cdc42 . Using both DN - Cdc42 ( Fig . S3A , B ) and a drug that inhibits Cdc42 ( ZCL278 ) ( Fig . S3D ) we show that the number of FBP17 tubules decreases , while inhibition of Rac1 with NSC23766 has no effect on FBP17 tubule number ( Fig . S3E ) . However , CA - Cdc42 did not increase the number of tubules ( Fig . S3B ) . Although tubule number decreases with DN - Cdc42 or pharmacological inhibition of Cdc42 , we never see FBP17 go to the periphery when Cdc42 is activated ( Fig . S3A ) . Even when we include CA - Rac1 , FBP17 L does not go to the periphery ( Fig . S8A ) , indicating it is not responsive to Rac1 activity . Moreover , we have shown in our previous study ( Saengsawang et al . , 2013 ) that activation of Rac1 increases levels of CIP4 S at the cell periphery , while activation of Cdc42 decreases levels of CIP4 S at the periphery . May 6 , 2019 1st Revision - Editorial Decision May 6 , 2019 RE : Life Science Alliance Manuscript # LSA - 2018 - 00288 - TR Prof . Erik W Dent University of Wisconsin - Madison Department of Neuroscience 5431 WIMR2 1111 Highland Ave . Madison , WI 53705 - 2275 Dear Dr . Dent , Thank you for submitting your revised manuscript entitled " Opposing functions of F - BAR proteins in membrane protrusion , tubule formation and neurite outgrowth " . As you will see , the reviewers appreciate the introduced changes and we would thus be happy to publish your paper in Life Science Alliance pending final minor revisions : - please address reviewer # 2 ' s remaining comments - please upload all figures ( also suppl figures ) as individual files and the manuscript text as a docx file - please add the p - values depicted to the figure legends - I appreciate that you provide the necessary information in the material & methods section , but think that it would be useful for readers to find the information in the legends as well If you are planning a press release on your work , please inform us immediately to allow informing our production team and scheduling a release date . To upload the final version of your manuscript , please log in to your account : https : / / lsa . msubmit . net / cgi - bin / main . plex You will be guided to complete the submission of your revised manuscript and to fill in all necessary information . Please get in touch in case you do not know or remember your login name . To avoid unnecessary delays in the acceptance and publication of your paper , please read the following information carefully . A . FINAL FILES : These items are required for acceptance . - - An editable version of the final text ( . DOC or . DOCX ) is needed for copyediting ( no PDFs ) . - - High - resolution figure , supplementary figure and video files uploaded as individual files : See our detailed guidelines for preparing your production - ready images , http : / / www . life - science - alliance . org / authors - - Summary blurb ( enter in submission system ) : A short text summarizing in a single sentence the study ( max . 200 characters including spaces ) . This text is used in conjunction with the titles of papers , hence should be informative and complementary to the title . It should describe the context and significance of the findings for a general readership ; it should be written in the present tense and refer to the work in the third person . Author names should not be mentioned . B . MANUSCRIPT ORGANIZATION AND FORMATTING : Full guidelines are available on our Instructions for Authors page , http : / / www . life - science - alliance . org / authors We encourage our authors to provide original source data , particularly uncropped / - processed electrophoretic blots and spreadsheets for the main figures of the manuscript . If you would like to add source data , we would welcome one PDF / Excel - file per figure for this information . These files will be linked online as supplementary " Source Data " files . * * Submission of a paper that does not conform to Life Science Alliance guidelines will delay the acceptance of your manuscript . * * * * It is Life Science Alliance policy that if requested , original data images must be made available to the editors . Failure to provide original images upon request will result in unavoidable delays in publication . Please ensure that you have access to all original data images prior to final submission . * * * * The license to publish form must be signed before your manuscript can be sent to production . A link to the electronic license to publish form will be sent to the corresponding author only . Please take a moment to check your funder requirements . * * * * Reviews , decision letters , and point - by - point responses associated with peer - review at Life Science Alliance will be published online , alongside the manuscript . If you do want to opt out of this transparent process , please let us know immediately . * * Thank you for your attention to these final processing requirements . Please revise and format the manuscript and upload materials within 7 days . Thank you for this interesting contribution , we look forward to publishing your paper in Life Science Alliance . Sincerely , Andrea Leibfried , PhD Executive Editor Life Science Alliance Meyerhofstr . 1 69117 Heidelberg , Germany t + 49 6221 8891 502 e a . leibfried @ life - science - alliance . org www . life - science - alliance . org - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Reviewer # 1 ( Comments to the Authors ( Required ) ) : Overall , I am satisfied with the improved version of the manuscript . The authors have addressed my concerns sufficiently to recommend publication . Reviewer # 2 ( Comments to the Authors ( Required ) ) : I Comments for Taylor et al . The manuscript appeared to be significantly improved , but sometimes the results and the role of each region of the FBP17 or CIP4 are difficult to be followed . There is a summary cartoon , but also I would suggest to put the result table showing the localization at the periphery and the filopodia as well as the phenotyping ( cell staging ) dependent on the each region of the chimeric protein . Reviewer # 3 ( Comments to the Authors ( Required ) ) : My summary and comments were included in my previous report , it is not necessary to repeat my statements . The authors have satisfactorily responded to my questions ( and the questions by the other reviewers as far as I can judge ) . I recommend the article to be published . May 17 , 2019 2nd Revision - Editorial Decision May 17 , 2019 RE : Life Science Alliance Manuscript # LSA - 2018 - 00288 - TRR Prof . Erik W Dent University of Wisconsin - Madison Department of Neuroscience 5431 WIMR2 1111 Highland Ave . Madison , WI 53705 - 2275 Dear Dr . Dent , Thank you for submitting your Research Article entitled " Opposing functions of F - BAR proteins in membrane protrusion , tubule formation and neurite outgrowth " . It is a pleasure to let you know that your manuscript is now accepted for publication in Life Science Alliance . Congratulations on this interesting work . The final published version of your manuscript will be deposited by us to PubMed Central upon online publication . Your manuscript will now progress through copyediting and proofing . It is journal policy that authors provide original data upon request . Reviews , decision letters , and point - by - point responses associated with peer - review at Life Science Alliance will be published online , alongside the manuscript . If you do want to opt out of this transparent process , please let us know immediately . * * * IMPORTANT : If you will be unreachable at any time , please provide us with the email address of an alternate author . Failure to respond to routine queries may lead to unavoidable delays in publication . * * * Scheduling details will be available from our production department . You will receive proofs shortly before the publication date . Only essential corrections can be made at the proof stage so if there are any minor final changes you wish to make to the manuscript , please let the journal office know now . DISTRIBUTION OF MATERIALS : Authors are required to distribute freely any materials used in experiments published in Life Science Alliance . Authors are encouraged to deposit materials used in their studies to the appropriate repositories for distribution to researchers . You can contact the journal office with any questions , contact @ life - science - alliance . org Again , congratulations on a very nice paper . I hope you found the review process to be constructive and are pleased with how the manuscript was handled editorially . We look forward to future exciting submissions from your lab . Sincerely , Andrea Leibfried , PhD Executive Editor Life Science Alliance Meyerhofstr . 1 69117 Heidelberg , Germany t + 49 6221 8891 502 e a . leibfried @ life - science - alliance . org www . life - science - alliance . org