Does Higher Education Improve Student Scientific Reasoning Skills ? Lin Ding & Xin Wei & Katherine Mollohan Received : 3 August 2014 / Accepted : 13 November 2014 / Published online : 11 December 2014 # Ministry of Science and Technology , Taiwan 2014 Abstract An ultimate goal of higher education is to prepare our future workers with needed knowledge and skills . This includes cultivating students to become proficient reasoners who can utilize proper scientific reasoning to devise causal inferences from observations . Conventionally , students with more years of higher education are expected to have a greater level of scientific reasoning . Also expected traditionally is that studying science and engineering or attending top - rated universities can better promote students ’ scientific reasoning than studying other majors or attending lower ranked institutions . In this study , we used Lawson ’ s Classroom Test of Scientific Reasoning ( LCTSR ) with 1 , 637 Chinese students in different years of study , different fields , and different university tiers . It was found that regardless of which major or university students entered , their scientific reasoning measured by the LCTSR showed little variation across the entire 4 years of undergraduate education . Simply put , there was little association between tertiary - level learning and scientific reasoning . This study calls our attention to the status quo of higher education and motivates researchers across the globe to look into this issue in their own nations . Keywords Scientific reasoning . Content learning . Higher education Introduction A primary goal of undergraduate education is to increase students ’ content knowledge as well as their general skills ( National Research Council ( NRC ) , 2012 ; Ruiz - Primo , Li , Wills , Giamellaro , Lan , Mason & Sands , 2012 ; Schunn & Anderson , 1999 ) . Scientific Int J of Sci and Math Educ ( 2016 ) 14 : 619 – 634 DOI 10 . 1007 / s10763 - 014 - 9597 - y Electronic supplementary material The online version of this article ( doi : 10 . 1007 / s10763 - 014 - 9597 - y ) contains supplementary material , which is available to authorized users . L . Ding ( * ) : K . Mollohan Department of Teaching and Learning , The Ohio State University , Columbus , OH 43210 , USA e - mail : lding @ mps . ohio - state . edu X . Wei Physics Editorial Department , People ’ s Education Press , 100081 Beijing , People ’ s Republic of China reasoning , as one of those general thinking skills , plays a crucial role in science , technology , engineering , and mathematics ( STEM ) . Students in these areas need to grow continuously in both specialized knowledge and scientific reasoning during undergraduate programs in order to succeed in their future careers ( National Academy of Sciences ( NAS ) , 2010 ) . There is a general consensus within the education community that the skills of scientific reasoning are transferrable and can be trained ( Coletta & Phillips , 2005 ; Fencl , 2010 ; Klahr , Zimmerman & Jirout , 2011 ; Kuhn , 2002 ; Moore & Rubbo , 2012 ; Nieminen , Savinainen & Viiri , 2012 ; Schauble , 1996 ) . However , it is still largely a controversy as to whether and how scientific reasoning can be effectively enhanced through content learning ( Koslowski , Marasia , Chelenza & Dublin , 2008 ; Metz , 1995 ; Zimmerman , 2007 ) . One common view is that as students accumulate more content knowledge , a higher level of reasoning is expected . Another traditional wisdom is that learning science and engineering can better promote scientific reasoning than studying other disciplines . Yet another conventional assumption is that top - tiered universities can better prepare students in their reasoning skills than lower - ranked institutions . In this article , we demystify these views by examining how students ’ performance on the Lawson ’ s Classroom Test of Scientific Reasoning ( LCTSR ) compares across different years , majors , and tiers of higher institutions in China . Here , we focus on Chinese students for a case study primarily because there is a growing interest in this nation due to its rapid rise in research and development as well as the outstanding performance of Chinese students in recent international assessments . We hope the results of our study can stimulate researchers across the globe to look into the status of higher education in their own nations , particularly in terms of student scientific reasoning skills . Background Scientific Reasoning in Higher Education The goal of higher education has long been a subject of debate . The traditional “ enlightenment ” view of higher education portrays universities as a place where pursuit of knowledge takes place and thereby capable professionals can be created to challenge the dominant paradigm ( Barrow , 2004 ) . A more current “ skill - based ” view , on the other hand , pays closer attention to students ’ employability and emphasizes their higher - order intellectual skills such as reasoning , problem solv - ing , and information gathering ( Barrow , 2004 ; Star & Hammer , 2008 ) . While these two views may represent different positions on the role of higher education , they should by no means be taken as two extremes of a dichotomy . In fact , even from the traditional perspective , key skills like reasoning and critical thinking , albeit not explicitly addressed , are valued at the tertiary level ( Star & Hammer , 2008 ) . Parallel to the above two perspectives , higher education in China , in some sense , has experienced both the knowledge - driven and skill - focused eras ( DeHaan , 2008 ; Yu , Stith , Liu & Chen , 2012 ) . Deeply rooted in Confucius philosophies in which 620 Lin Ding et al erudition , morality , and benevolence are highly valued , Chinese higher education has traditionally underscored knowledge transmission from authorities and rote memorization by learners ( Min , 2004 ) . This practice of teaching and learning spanned most of its tertiary education history including the period of the mid - and late twentieth century when the Soviet models were predominantly adopted to promote science and technology for developing the nation ’ s economy . It was not until recently — from late 1980s to the present — that the view favoring cultivation of sophisticated cognitive skills in post - secondary training started to garnish signifi - cant attention in China ( DeHaan , 2008 ) . Given the continuously increasing demand for top - quality workforce since the beginning of the economic reform policy , Chinese higher institutions have been expected and in fact are under great pressure to produce a large number of college graduates that possess much - needed intellec - tual skills — skills that cannot be easily automated by machines ( Min , 2004 ) . To catalyze the mass production of such skilled workers , the central govern - ment has injected considerable funds into educational reform efforts . The recent so - called 211 and 985 projects ( Yu et al . , 2012 ) , launched by the Ministry of Education ( MOE ) with the aim of strengthening tertiary - level education , channeled hundreds of millions of dollars to support the key programs of STEM and STEM education in the nation ’ s top institutions . The goal of these efforts is to help Chinese universities emulate their Western counterparts , thereby creating more scientists , engineers , entrepreneurs , and leaders capable of using their acquired skills to deal with emerging challenges in today ’ s global commu - nity . This no doubt places an unprecedented expectation on higher institutions . In response to the heightened standards , Chinese higher institutions have started to imitate the instructional reforms commonly seen in the USA during the late 1990s and early 2000s ( DeHaan , 2008 ) . Efforts are now more directed to promoting student - centered inquiry - based learning experiences with an emphasis on learners ’ higher - order cognition ( Min , 2004 ) . College students are more than ever expected to become progressively sophisticated in their intellectual skills as they go through tertiary level education . As much as this expectation may seem reasonable , a reality check is needed . In the USA , for example , the current status of undergraduate education does not look promising at all , although similar expectations are held for their university students . A recent study conducted by Arum & Roksa ( 2010 ) in 24 four - year institutions revealed that American students ’ critical , analytical , and communica - tion capacities showed little or no improvement during their first 2 years of college education . The researchers lamented the findings and called the state of undergraduate learning in the USA as “ academically adrift . ” In light of this current status , it is worth asking whether or not a reality check with Chinese higher education will yield any promising results , especially given the nation ’ s rapid expansion in education and its high expectation of college students ’ intellectual skills . Scientific reasoning , as one of the key intellectual skills that are expected of many STEM university graduates , has increasingly become the focus of contemporary researchers and educators . According to Lawson ( 2004 ) , scientific reasoning can be conceptualized as using a set of mental rules , plans , or strategies to devise causal inferences for a phenomenon that is beyond direct observation . Simply put , it pertains Scientific Reasoning in Chinese Higher Education 621 to the thinking skills of making sense of observable phenomena to infer unobservable mechanisms ( Lawson , 2004 ; Lawson et al . , 2000 ) . This description is echoed by Kuhn & Dean ( 2004 ) , who argued that scientific reasoning in essence is connected to causal inferences where individuals avail a repertory of strategies or rules to coordinate between evidence and theoretical hypothesis . Under this definition of scientific reasoning , 1 five subsets of skills emerge as crucial components , including hypothetical - deductive reasoning , control of variables , proportional reasoning , cor - relation reasoning , and probabilistic reasoning ( Koslowski , 1996 ; Lawson , 2004 ; Zimmerman , 2000 ) . These skills represent multiple processes that are commonly deemed as necessary for effective science inquiries ( Braaten & Windschitl , 2011 ; Lawson , 2004 ; Zimmerman , 2000 ) . Specifically , when encountering a puzzling phenomenon , curious individuals often rely on hypothetical - deductive thinking processes to generate tentative theories ( “ working ” hypotheses ) and account for possible underlying mechanisms . In testing these hypotheses , valid experimentation strategies about what variables to control and how to control them are invoked to facilitate data ( evidence ) collection . Conceivably , analyzing and interpreting the collected data ( for the purpose of making credible inferences ) largely involves application of correlation , probabilistic and proportional thinking . These aforementioned skills of scientific reasoning , to a great extent , cut across many STEM and STEM related disciplines ( NRC , 2011 ) . A primary basis for this stance rests on the common features of hypothesis formation and evaluation through analysis of evidence — key aspects that are shared among successful professionals in different areas of investigation ( Kuhn , Schauble & Garcia - Mila , 1992 ; Schunn & Anderson , 1999 ) . Note that this is not to negate the existence of uniqueness of thinking required in individual disciplines , but rather it is meant to recognize some of their similarities . As Schunn & Anderson ( 1999 ) argued , while reasoning within a particular research area calls for specific skills , the generality of expertise in scientific reasoning cannot be ignored . Similarly , Kuhn et al . ( 1992 ) carried out a series of studies and concluded that developing effective general skills of scientific reasoning can be achieved by cross - domain designs in pedagogy . The significance of scientific reasoning in learning at the tertiary level has been well documented . A body of literature shows that university students ’ academic success measured by their course achievement can be predicted by their scientific reasoning skills ( See , for example , Coletta & Phillips , 2005 ; Moore & Rubbo , 2012 ; Nieminen et al . , 2012 ) . Empirical studies along a similar line of inquiry have been broadly conducted with students across different disciplines ( Coletta & Phillips , 2005 ; Ding , 2014a ; Johnson & Lawson , 1998 ; Meltzer , 2002 ; Simpson , Rensburg & Ryneveld , 2010 ; Tsaparlis , 2005 ) . In light of these findings , Coletta & Phillips ( 2005 ) and Coletta , 1 It is worth noting that the framing of scientific reasoning in the present study is anchored in the theoretical basis of evidence - based hypothesis generation and evaluation — a framework grounded in the relevant literature ( see , for example , Braaten & Windschitl , 2011 ; D . Kuhn & Dean , 2004 ; Lawson , 2004 ; Lawson et al . , 2000 ; Zimmerman , 2000 ) . It is true that scientific reasoning may involve pure mathematic - logical processes , which without considering any science content will only yield either true or false outcomes . However , scientific statements in essence are human - constructed descriptions or explanations about the natural world ( Kuhn & Hacking , 2012 ; Popper , 2002 ) . They are tentative , subject to change , and cannot be oversimplified into dichotomies of absolutely true or false ( Akerson , Abd - El - Khalick & Lederman , 2000 ; Lederman , 2007 ) . In this study , we follow the aforementioned literature on scientific reasoning and focus on key skills needed for constructing evidence - based causal inferences . 622 Lin Ding et al Phillips & Steinert ( 2007 ) contended that scientific reasoning perhaps has a direct , causal impact on student learning content knowledge . 2 To this end , investigations of university students ’ scientific reasoning as previously framed hold important values for both research and educational practices . It is worth noting that the conceptualization of scientific reasoning as introduced above is not intended to be comprehensive . Recent attempts on this research topic have further extended to investigate learners ’ communication and argumentation capabilities as well as epistemological views about evidence and theory ( Kuhn , 2002 ; Osborne , 2010 ; Zeineddin & Abd - El - Khalick , 2010 ; Zimmerman , 2000 ) . This fact notwithstand - ing , the aforementioned five skill sets by and large remain at the core of scientific reasoning needed for a wide range of science practices ( Dunbar & Klahr , 2012 ; Kuhn & Dean , 2004 ; Lawson , 2004 , 2005 ; Zimmerman , 2007 ) . Classroom Test of Scientific Reasoning Although a few instruments have been developed to gauge students ’ scientific reason - ing , the majority of them are in fact intended to target a broader construct of scientific literacy that encompasses students ’ understanding of the nature of science and its role in sociocultural settings . For instance , the Scientific Reasoning Test Version 9 ( SR - 9 ) ( Sundre & Thelk , 2010 ) contains a large portion of questions that address topics regarding the “ relationship between developments in science and social and ethical issues ” as well as topics about “ use and misuse of scientific information in public policy . ” Similarly , the Test of Scientific Literacy Skills ( TOSLS ) ( Gormally , Brickman & Lutz , 2012 ) , albeit partly aimed at scientific reasoning , is primarily designed to focus on students ’ understanding of ethical use of scientific data and argumentation . Of direct relevance to the conceptualization of scientific reasoning , which draws on hypothesis formulation and testing through evidence evaluation in successful practices of science inquiries , is LCTSR ( see Coletta & Phillips , 2005 for the latest version ) . This test is a multiple - choice instrument designed to operationally measure students ’ key skills of scientific reasoning . As consistent with the previously mentioned framework , the skills targeted by the test include hypothetical - deductive reasoning ( hypothesis formulation ) , control of variables ( experimentation strategies for hypothesis testing ) , and proportional , correlation , and probabilistic reasoning ( evidence analysis and evaluation ) . Initially published in 1978 , the LCTSR in its antecedent form was a classroom demonstration test where instructors used physical materials and apparatuses to carry out experiments for students to make observations and construct explanations ( Lawson , 1978 ) . Considering the constraints of equipment availability and its limitations for large - scale assessment , Lawson revised the original LCTSR into a pencil - and - paper - based multiple - choice test . In addition , the questions on the test were augmented from only addressing the aspect of evidence evaluation ( proportional , correlation , and probabilistic reasoning ) in the early versions to embracing more substantive aspects 2 Scientific reasoning and content knowledge are often intertwined , forming a mutually corroborative relation ( see , for example , Coletta & Phillips , 2005 ; Nieminen et al . , 2012 ; Schauble , 1996 ; Schunn & Anderson , 1999 ; Zimmerman , 2007 ) . The philosophical debate on whether acquisition of content knowledge should precede formation of reasoning ( or vice versa ) is beyond the scope of the study . Scientific Reasoning in Chinese Higher Education 623 of hypothetical - deductive reasoning and control of variables in the later version ( Coletta & Phillips , 2005 ; Lawson et al . , 2000 ) . The most recent version , which came into being in 2000 , contains 12 pairs of questions depicting various physical events or phenomena ( Coletta & Phillips , 2005 ) . For each of them , students need to predict an outcome as well as choose a reason to explain their predictions . Due to its demonstrable value in research and teaching , the LCTSR has been broadly adopted in many empirical investigations at various academic levels . At the tertiary level , in particular , the LCTSR has been frequently used to gauge university students ’ reasoning skills in relation to their academic achievement ( Bao et al . , 2009 ; Coletta & Phillips , 2005 ; Ding , 2014a ; Moore & Rubbo , 2012 ; Nieminen et al . , 2012 ) . In fact , many recent studies have taken the skills measured by the LCTSR as a benchmark for judging the success of undergraduate courses in terms of educa - tional outcomes beyond content knowledge ( see , for example , Carmel & Yezierski , 2013 ; Koenig , Schen , Edwards & Bao , 2012 ; Marusic & Slisko , 2012 ; Thoron & Myers , 2012 ) . It is worth noting that the LCTSR is not a catch - all type of instrument that measures all kinds of thinking required in every discipline . Rather , it is meant to focus on core aspects of reasoning that are both shared by successful practices of inquiries and valued by a wide range of professionals . It is because of this nature that the LCTSR holds great relevance to teaching and research at various academic levels and across different areas of investigations . Research Questions Drawing on the above framework of scientific reasoning , this study is aimed at investigating student scientific reasoning skills across different years , majors , and institutions in China . Here , we use the LCTSR to quantitatively measure student scientific reasoning . Since the LCTSR ( albeit previously validated ) has not been examined for its factor structure , it is necessary that we establish empirical evidence for the structural components that the test is claimed to cover ( including the aforemen - tioned skills of hypothetical - deductive reasoning , control of variables , and proportional , correlation , and probabilistic reasoning ) . Specifically , this study seeks to answer the following two research questions . RQ1 : To what extent can the LCTSR questions be mapped onto the target skills of scientific reasoning as claimed by the test designers ? RQ2 : How do students ’ scientific reasoning skills measured by the LCTSR compare across different years of education , different majors of study , and different types of institutions ? Context of Study and Design Research Methods The decision of choosing the LCTSR for the study is made primarily because of the following considerations . First , the LCTSR targets a clearly delineated construct of scientific reasoning that draws on formulation and testing of hypothesis through 624 Lin Ding et al evaluation of evidence — key aspects of reasoning that are valued by various profes - sionals and are typically expected of our STEM graduates . Additionally , the questions on the LCTSR are all situated in the context of natural events or phenomena , thereby familiar to a wide range of students while at the same time minimizing potential affective influences of sociocultural divergences . Moreover , the LCTSR is designed for large - scale assessment and therefore is suitable for the current study that is aimed at uncovering cross - year , cross - major , and cross - institution patterns of student scientific reasoning in China . We used the translated Chinese LCTSR for the study . The translation process involved multiple steps to ensure its validity . First , a group of bilingual physical scientists and science education experts translated the original English LCTSR into Chinese . This version of the Chinese LCTSR was first used in a study published in 2009 by Bao et al . ( 2009 ) . To further ensure the validity of the translation , we proceeded with the following steps . Two additional bilingual researchers who were unfamiliar with the test at that time translated the Chinese LCTSR back to English . The back - translated test was then compared against the original test for further revision and refinement . In addition , we interviewed a dozen Chinese students to check whether or not they interpreted the translated questions as intended . No misinterpretations were detected , and hence the translation was finalized . In our study , the overall Kuder - Richardson - 20 reliability ( KR - 20 ) of the Chinese LCTSR was 0 . 76 , above the typical threshold of 0 . 70 for group measurement and thus indicating a decent reliability ( Kline , 1986 ) . In addition , the factor structure of the Chinese LCTSR was examined through confirmatory factor analysis ( RQ1 ) — a commonly used technique for establishing test structural validity ( Blunch , 2008 ; Hatcher , 1994 ) . Participants and Contextual Backgrounds of Chinese Higher Education We used the translated LCTSR with students across 4 years of undergraduate education in three majors and two tiers of universities in China . The three majors were physical sciences ( physics and chemistry ) , engineering ( electrical and computer engineering ) , and education ( science education majors intending to become pre - college science teachers ) . Note that in China students are required to select their majors prior to entering universities ; changing majors during undergraduate studies is discouraged and rarely occurs in higher institutions . We investigated five universities at two different tiers . According to the national rankings , two of the participating universities were ranked 30 or higher nationally and were at tier 1 . The other three were ranked between 100 and 150 nationally and were at tier 2 . Tier 1 universities in China are directly overseen by the MOE to prepare students for leading - edge research or academic positions ( MOE , 2004 ) . The STEM and STEM education programs in tier 1 institutions emphasize students ’ foundational insights and theoretical knowledge ( MOE , 2012 ) . Students are required to participate in inquiry - oriented laboratories and are encouraged to join research projects funded by govern - ment or private agencies to enrich their learning experiences . On the other hand , tier 2 institutions are primarily geared toward preparing students with occupational readiness ( MOE , 2012 ) . STEM and STEM education programs at these institutions focus on practical or applied knowledge more so than on foundational or theoretical insights . Less expected of the students in tier 2 institutions are fundamental research experiences . Scientific Reasoning in Chinese Higher Education 625 From this perspective , the intended learning in tier 2 institutions is qualitatively different from that in tier 1 institutions . We administered the Chinese LCTSR as an in - class pencil - and - paper test ( within 45 minutes ) to a total of 1 , 637 students near the mid - point of an autumn semester . Table 1 provides the breakdown of these participants in terms of their years , majors , and university tiers . Student performances on the LCTSR were then analyzed using between - group comparisons across different years , majors , and university tiers ( RQ 2 ) . Analysis and Results Confirmatory Factor Analysis of LCTSR Although the LCTSR has been previously validated , its factor structure still remains largely unverified . Besides , we used a translated version of the test for the study ; therefore , it is necessary that we establish evidence for the structural validity of the instrument to allow for further analysis . Confirmatory factor analysis of student responses was used to examine whether the pertinent LCTSR questions can be mapped onto the five target skills of scientific reasoning as intended by the original design of the test ( hypothetical - deductive reason - ing , control of variables , and proportional , correlation , and probabilistic reasoning ) . Based on the standard benchmarks suggested by the prior literature ( Blunch , 2008 ; Hatcher , 1994 ) , we used seven measures to evaluate the fit of our empirical data ; they are chi - square / degree of freedom ( χ 2 / df ) , standardized root - mean - square residual ( RMSR ) , root - mean - square error of approximation ( RMSEA ) , goodness - of - fit index ( GFI ) , adjusted goodness - of - fit index ( AGFI ) , comparative fit index ( CFI ) , and Tucker - Lewis index ( TLI ) . All these indices are established to examine the extent to which our measurement conforms to the intended structure ( Blunch , 2008 ; Hatcher , 1994 ) . Our results yield satisfactory values in all measures ( see Table 2 ) and thereby provide empirical support for the structural validity of the instrument . Student Scientific Reasoning Skills We examined student performance on the overall test as well as on the individual subsets of skills ( hypothetical - deductive reasoning , control of variables , and , propor - tional , correlation , and probabilistic reasoning ) . Figure 1 shows the overall results for Table 1 The number of students in each year , major , and institution tier Tier 1 university Tier 2 university Science Engineering Education Science Engineering Education Year 1 105 63 55 50 47 59 Year 2 74 83 60 45 62 57 Year 3 70 85 65 45 93 95 Year 4 65 69 54 51 91 94 626 Lin Ding et al the 4 years , three majors , and two university tiers . As seen , student scientific reasoning remained nearly constant among the entire 4 years of undergraduate education ( ANOVA main effect of year , p > 0 . 74 ) . This suggests that as students entered their later years of higher education , they showed no advantage over their early - year peers in scientific reasoning . This result in fact is a recurring pattern for all the three majors and two tiers of institutions , as no significant interactions between year , major , and univer - sity tier were detected ( ANOVA interactions , p values > 0 . 23 ) . Another prominent feature is that students in the science and engineering majors consistently outperformed their peers in the education majors ( pair - wise comparisons , p values < 0 . 01 , effect sizes > 0 . 56 ) , with the former two being similar . Also , students at tier 1 universities exhibited noticeably higher scientific reasoning than those at tier 2 universities ( ANOVA main effect of university tier , p < 0 . 001 ) . Now , the question here is : do the differences between majors and university tiers suggest that science and engineering programs at top - ranked institutions can better promote student scientific reasoning skills ? Our results indicate that regardless of which major or university students entered , the variation in their scientific reasoning was consistently small among the entire 4 years of higher education . In other words , studying science and engineering at top universities does not necessarily make the association between years of tertiary learning and scientific reasoning any stronger than studying other majors or attending lower ranked universities . Here , the cross - major and between - institution differences we observed likely reflected the variations in what students had already gained at the end of their high school ( as competitive programs and top - tiered institutions tended to admit higher achieving students ) . In this sense , our higher education appeared to have merely maintained student reasoning skills but contributed little to improving them ( also see discussion ) . Had the differences been truly due to the undergraduate education , we would have been able to see some cross - year variations , with later - year students exhibiting higher - level scientific reasoning . Student performance on the individual subsets of skills revealed similar results . As seen in Fig . 2 , the cross - year lines varied within a narrow range and were mostly entangled together with little divergence . For the skills of control of variables and proportional , correlation , and probabilistic reasoning ( Fig . 2a – d ) , there were significant interactions between year , major , and university tier . Although we detected some statistical differences in these factors , all of the pair - wise comparisons yielded an effect size smaller than 0 . 06 . This means that the differences we saw here represented no Table 2 Confirmatory factor analysis results and benchmarks ( Blunch , 2008 ; Hatcher , 1994 ) Measures Acceptable fit Empirical results of LCTSR χ 2 / df 0 ≤ χ 2 / df ≤ 2 1 . 96 RMSR 0 ≤ RMSR ≤ 0 . 05 0 . 006 RMSEA 0 ≤ RMSEA ≤ 0 . 05 0 . 025 GFI 0 . 90 ≤ GFI ≤ 1 . 00 0 . 976 AGFI 0 . 90 ≤ AGFI ≤ 1 . 00 0 . 970 CFI 0 . 90 ≤ CFI 0 . 925 TLI 0 . 90 ≤ TLI 0 . 912 Scientific Reasoning in Chinese Higher Education 627 practical significance . Simply put , students ’ performance on these skills of scientific reasoning showed no meaningful variations across years , majors , and university tiers . Interestingly , the pattern of hypothetical - deductive reasoning as shown in Fig . 2e was found to be strikingly similar to that of the overall result ( c . f . Fig . 1 ) . That is , no significant interactions between year , major , and university tier were detected ( ANOVA interactions , p values > 0 . 09 ) ; nor was the cross - year divergence ( ANOVA main effect of year , p > 0 . 72 ) . As before , there were differences between majors and university tiers ( ANOVA main effects of major and university tier , p values < 0 . 001 ) , which again likely reflected students ’ variations at the end of high school . These differences , together with the little divergence in the other skills ( Fig . 2a – d ) , seem to suggest that in terms of students ’ scientific reasoning , what separated those entering science or engineering programs at top - ranked universities from others was mostly their differences in hypothetical - deductive reasoning . Extension and Discussion We recognize that this study is cross - sectional , not longitudinal . In other words , we took a snapshot of different years of students rather than tracking the same student cohort over multiple years . Nevertheless , given the following considerations , it is reasonable to take the cross - sectional results of the study as an approximation of a growth pattern for student scientific reasoning in Chinese higher education . In China , public universities are directly overseen by the federal government . The MOE has long established a set of curriculum standards and evaluation criteria to rank higher institutions nationwide every 4 years ( MOE , 2012 ) . Many universities closely adhere to these standards and criteria in order to maintain their national standings . In a sense , this provides stability to the design and implementation of undergraduate programs in Chinese higher education . Also , radical changes in Chinese education rarely occur in a short period of time of several years . To this end , it is fair to say that Fig . 1 Student overall scientific reasoning measured by the LCTSR . Each data point indicates an average score of each group . The error bars represent standard errors 628 Lin Ding et al what early - year university students are experiencing nowadays in their undergraduate programs is similar to what senior - year students experienced a few years ago . In this study , the participating institutions and programs have consistently maintained their national rankings in the past 8 years ( MOE , 2012 ) . Because of their relatively stable national standings , these institutions have likely attracted and admitted students with similar academic backgrounds over the years . Therefore , there is also a sense of stability in student backgrounds across time . Moreover , in our study , we deliberately drew students from each year for every selected major and institution . This further Fig . 2 Student scientific reasoning sub - skills measured by the LCTSR : a control of variables ; b proportional reasoning ; c correlation reasoning ; d probabilistic reasoning ; and e hypothetical - deductive reasoning . Each data point indicates an average score of each group . The error bars represent standard errors Scientific Reasoning in Chinese Higher Education 629 ensures that student participants across different years in each category share compa - rable educational settings in their undergraduate studies . Given these above considerations , the cross - sectional comparisons in our study by - and - large sketch out a general picture of what the growth pattern of student scientific reasoning may look like at the tertiary level . To this end , the above findings have significant educational implications . First is the persistent inertia in university student scientific reasoning , a recurrent pattern we observed regardless of how long students have been in higher education , what major they study , or which tier of university they attend . This clearly contradicts some conventional wisdom , such as studying science and engineering at top - rated institutions can better increase student scientific reasoning , or individuals with more years of higher education will have better scientific reasoning . Secondly , our results raise a critical question : what could have been missing in our higher education ? Since students enter college already with some reasoning skills , a growth must have occurred during their K - 12 education . In fact , in a separate research effort , we used the LCTSR to evaluate Chinese pre - college students ’ scientific reasoning , ranging from grade 4 to grade 12 ( see Appendix ) . The results are displayed in Figs . 3 and 4 . As seen , there is a rapid upturn in student reasoning skills measured by the LCTSR across the middle - high school grade levels . In other words , students seem to demonstrate a noticeable growth in reasoning skills during the pre - college stage . But if so , why can ’ t they keep the momentum and continue to develop at the tertiary level ? As suggested in the prior literature , college instruction in China ( although striving to improve through reform efforts ) still focuses on knowledge as a product more so than on the making of knowledge as a process ( Bao et al . , 2009 ) . Authentic inquiries that emphasize critical thinking , meta - level strategies , or evidence - based modeling and reasoning have yet to be fully integrated into learning outcomes ( Arum & Roksa , 2010 ; Ding , 2014b ; Min , 2004 ) . But aren ’ t these also true for K - 12 Fig . 3 Chinese pre - college students ’ scientific reasoning measured by the LCTSR . Each dot indicates an average score at each grade level . The error bars indicate standard errors . The solid line is the best fitting logistic trend line 630 Lin Ding et al education ? If so , why could students develop some reasoning skills during their pre - college studies but not so much in higher education ? Could it be possible that brain maturation plays a crucial role in the early stage of skill development but it alone without any deliberate training likely has limits , thereby leading to a plateau in learners ’ reasoning capabilities during their tertiary - level schooling ? Should Chinese university students be challenged more in their academic programs as should their American counterparts ( Arum & Roksa , 2010 ) ? All these questions Fig . 4 Chinese pre - college student sub - skills of scientific reasoning measured by the LCTSR . Each dot indicates an average score at each grade level . The error bars indicate standard errors . The solid lines are best fitting logistic trend lines Scientific Reasoning in Chinese Higher Education 631 beg our attention and indeed are worth further long - term investigations . One point , however , is clear ; that is , transforming undergraduate education to better produce a future knowledgeable and skillful workforce continues to remain a pressing task . Conclusion This study uses the LCTSR to investigate reasoning skills among students across different years of higher education , different majors of study , and different types of institutions in China . The factor structure of the LCTSR is empirically verified with evidence suggesting that the test can be validly used for gauging students ’ key skills of scientific reasoning ( including hypothetical - deductive reasoning , control of variables , and proportional , correlation , and probabilistic reasoning ) . Results of student perfor - mances on the LCTSR show that regardless of what programs students study or where they attend higher education , there is little variation across the entire 4 years of undergraduate study — a pattern consistently recurring in our findings . Given the expectation that university graduates and particularly those in the STEM or STEM - related fields are expected to gain increasingly higher levels of reasoning skills throughout higher education , the surprising results from our study paint a disappointing ( if not an alarming ) picture . Certainly , this is not to contend that higher education adds nothing to students ’ intellectual development . It is , however , reasonable to say that the kinds of scientific reasoning skills , which are both valued by various professionals and expected of our university graduates , have not been sufficiently promoted in Chinese higher institutions . Acknowledgment This study is partially supported by the National Science Foundation ( NSF Grant No . DRL 1252399 ) . References Akerson , V . , Abd - El - Khalick , F . & Lederman , N . ( 2000 ) . Influence of a reflective explicit activity - based approach on elementary teachers ’ conceptions of nature of science . Journal of Research in Science Teaching , 37 ( 4 ) , 295 – 317 . Arum , R . & Roksa , J . ( 2010 ) . Academically adrift : Limited learning on college campuses . Chicago , IL : University of Chicago Press . Bao , L . , Cai , T . , Koenig , K . M . , Fang , K . , Han , J . , Wang , J . , . . . Wu , N . ( 2009 ) . Learning and scientific reasoning . Science , 323 ( 5914 ) , 586 – 587 . Barrow , M . ( 2004 ) . Student assessment and knowing in contemporary Western societies . Proceedings of the 2004 Annual International Conference of the Higher Education Research and Development Society of Australasia ( HERDSA ) . Retrieved from http : / / www . herdsa . org . au / wp - content / uploads / conference / 2004 / PDF / P001 - jt . pdf Blunch , N . ( 2008 ) . Introduction to structural equation modeling . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . Braaten , M . & Windschitl , M . ( 2011 ) . Working toward a stronger conceptualization of scientific explanation for science education . Science Education , 95 ( 4 ) , 639 – 669 . Carmel , J . H . & Yezierski , E . J . ( 2013 ) . Are we keeping the promise ? Investigation of students ’ critical thinking growth . Journal of College Science Teaching , 42 ( 5 ) , 71 – 81 . Coletta , V . P . & Phillips , J . A . ( 2005 ) . Interpreting FCI scores : Normalized gain , preinstruction scores , and scientific reasoning ability . American Journal of Physics , 73 ( 12 ) , 1172 – 1182 . Coletta , V . P . , Phillips , J . A . & Steinert , J . J . ( 2007 ) . Interpreting Force Concept Inventory scores : Normalized gain and SAT scores . Physical Review Special Topics - Physics Education Research , 3 ( 1 ) , 010106 . 632 Lin Ding et al DeHaan , R . L . ( 2008 ) . National cultural influences on higher education . In R . L . DeHaan & V . Narayan ( Eds . ) , Education for innovation : Implication for India , China and America . Rotterdam , Netherlands : Sense . Ding , L . ( 2014a ) . Verification of causal influences of reasoning skills and epistemology on physics conceptual learning . Physical Review Special Topics - Physics Education Research , 10 ( 2 ) , 023101 . doi : 10 . 1103 / PhysRevSTPER . 10 . 023101 . Ding , L . ( 2014b ) . Long live traditional textbook problems ! ? – Constraints on faculty use of research - based problems in introductory courses . International Journal of Science and Mathematics Education , 12 ( 1 ) , 123 – 144 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s10763 - 013 - 9400 - 5 . Dunbar , K . & Klahr , D . ( 2012 ) . Scientific thinking and reasoning . In K . Holyoak & R . Morrison ( Eds . ) , The Oxford handbook of thinking and reasoning ( pp . 701 – 718 ) . New York , NY : Oxford University Press , Inc . Fencl , H . S . ( 2010 ) . Development of students ’ critical - reasoning skills through content - focused activities in a general education course . Journal of College Science Teaching , 39 ( 5 ) , 56 – 62 . Gormally , C . , Brickman , P . & Lutz , M . ( 2012 ) . Developing a test of scientific literacy skills ( TOSLS ) : Measuring undergraduates ’ evaluation of scientific information and arguments . CBE - Life Sciences Education , 11 ( 364 - 377 ) , 364 . Hatcher , L . ( 1994 ) . A step - by - step approach to using the SAS system for factor analysis and structural equation modeling . Cary , NC : SAS . Johnson , M . & Lawson , A . E . ( 1998 ) . What are the relative effects of reasoning ability and prior knowledge on biology achievement in expository and inquiry classes ? Journal of Research in Science Education , 35 ( 1 ) , 89 – 103 . Klahr , D . , Zimmerman , C . & Jirout , J . ( 2011 ) . Educational interventions to advance children ’ s scientific thinking . Science , 333 ( 6045 ) , 971 – 974 . Kline , P . ( 1986 ) . A handbook of test construction : Introduction to psychometric design . New York , NY : Methuen . Koenig , K . , Schen , M . , Edwards , M . & Bao , L . ( 2012 ) . Addressing STEM retention through a scientific thought and methods course . Journal of College Science Teaching , 41 ( 4 ) , 23 – 29 . Koslowski , B . ( 1996 ) . Theory and evidence : The development of scientific reasoning . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Koslowski , B . , Marasia , J . , Chelenza , M . & Dublin , R . ( 2008 ) . Information becomes evidence when an explanation can incorporate it into a causal framework . Cognitive Development , 23 ( 4 ) , 472 – 487 . Kuhn , D . ( 2002 ) . What is scientific thinking and how does it develop ? In U . Goswami ( Ed . ) , Blackwell handbook of childhood cognitive development ( pp . 371 – 393 ) . Malden , MA : Blackwell . Kuhn , D . & Dean , D . ( 2004 ) . Connecting scientific reasoning and causal inferences . Journal of Cognition and Development , 5 ( 2 ) , 261 – 288 . Kuhn , T . & Hacking , I . ( 2012 ) . The structure of scientific revolutions . Chicago , IL : The University of Chicago Press . Kuhn , D . , Schauble , L . & Garcia - Mila , M . ( 1992 ) . Cross - domain development of scientific reasoning . Cognition and Instruction , 9 ( 4 ) , 285 – 327 . Lawson , A . E . ( 1978 ) . The development and validation of a classroom test of formal reasoning . Journal of Research in Science Teaching , 15 ( 1 ) , 11 – 24 . Lawson , A . E . ( 2004 ) . The nature and development of scientific reasoning . International Journal of Science and Mathematics Education , 2 ( 3 ) , 307 – 338 . Lawson , A . E . ( 2005 ) . What is the role of induction and deduction in reasoning and scientific inquiry ? Journal of Research in Science Teaching , 42 ( 6 ) , 716 – 740 . Lawson , A . E . , Clark , B . , Cramer - Meldrum , E . , Falconer , K . A . , Sequist , J . M . & Kwon , Y . - J . ( 2000 ) . Development of scientific reasoning in college biology : Do two levels of general hypothesis - testing skills exist ? Journal of Research in Science Teaching , 37 ( 1 ) , 81 – 101 . Lederman , N . ( 2007 ) . Nature of science : Past , present , and future . In S . Abell & N . Lederman ( Eds . ) , Handbook of research on science education ( pp . 831 – 880 ) . New York , NY : Routledge . Marusic , M . & Slisko , J . ( 2012 ) . Influence of three different methods of teaching physics on the gain in students ’ development of reasoning . International Journal of Science Education , 34 ( 2 ) , 301 – 326 . Meltzer , D . E . ( 2002 ) . The relationship between mathematics preparation and conceptual learning gains in physics : A possible “ hidden variable ” in diagnostic pretest scores . American Journal of Physics , 70 ( 12 ) , 1259 – 1268 . Metz , K . E . ( 1995 ) . Reassessment of developmental constraints on children ’ s science instruction . Review of Educational Research , 65 ( 2 ) , 93 – 127 . Min , W . ( 2004 ) . Chinese higher education : The legacy of the past and the context of the future . In P . Altbach & T . Umakoshi ( Eds . ) , Asian universities : Historical perspectives and contemporary challenges ( pp . 53 – 83 ) . Baltimore , MD : Johns Hopkins University Press . Scientific Reasoning in Chinese Higher Education 633 Ministry of Education of China . ( 2004 ) . Regulations on academic degrees of the People ’ s Republic of China . Beijing : Ministry of Education of the People ’ s Republic of China ( MOE - PRC ) . Ministry of Education of China . ( 2012 ) . 2012 National Ranking of Higher Education . Beijing : Ministry of Education of the People ’ s Republic of China ( MOE - PRC ) . Moore , J . C . & Rubbo , L . J . ( 2012 ) . Scientific reasoning abilities of nonscience majors in physics - based courses . Physical Review Special Topics - Physics Education Research , 8 ( 1 ) , 010106 . National Academy of Sciences . ( 2010 ) . Rising above the gathering storm , revisited : Rapidly approaching category 5 . Washington , D . C . : National Academies Press . National Research Council . ( 2011 ) . A framework for K - 12 science education : Practices , crosscutting con - cepts , and core ideas . Washington , DC : National Research Council , Board on Science Education , Division of Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education . National Research Council . ( 2012 ) . Discipline - based education research : Understanding and improving learning in undergraduate science and engineering . Washington , DC : National Academies Press . Nieminen , P . , Savinainen , A . & Viiri , J . ( 2012 ) . Relations between representational consistency , conceptual understanding of the force concept , and scientific reasoning . Physical Review Special Topics - Physics Education Research , 8 ( 1 ) , 010123 . Osborne , J . ( 2010 ) . Arguing to learn in science : The role of collaborative , critical discourse . Science , 328 ( 23 ) , 463 – 466 . Popper , K . ( 2002 ) . Popper — the logic of scientific discovery . New York , NY : Routledge . Ruiz - Primo , M . A . , Li , M . , Wills , K . , Giamellaro , M . , Lan , M . - C . , Mason , H . & Sands , D . ( 2012 ) . Developing and evaluating instructionally sensitive assessments in science . Journal of Research in Science Education , 49 ( 6 ) , 691 – 712 . Schauble , L . ( 1996 ) . The development of scientific reasoning in knowledge - rich contexts . Developmental Psychology , 32 ( 1 ) , 102 – 119 . Schunn , C . & Anderson , J . R . ( 1999 ) . The generality / specificity of expertise in scientific reasoning . Cognitive Science , 23 ( 3 ) , 337 – 370 . Simpson , Z . , Rensburg , J . V . & Ryneveld , M . V . ( 2010 ) . Student performance against levels of cognitive demand in a material science course . Paper presented at the ASME 2010 International Mechanical Engineering Congress and Exposition , Vancouver , BC , Canada . Star , C . & Hammer , S . ( 2008 ) . Teaching generic skills : Eroding the higher purpose of universities , or an opportunity for renewal ? Oxford Review of Education , 34 ( 2 ) , 237 – 251 . Sundre , D . L . & Thelk , A . D . ( 2010 ) . Advancing assessment of quantitative and scientific reasoning . Numeracy , 3 ( 2 ) , 1 – 12 . Thoron , A . C . & Myers , B . E . ( 2012 ) . Effects of inquiry - based agriscience instruction on student scientific reasoning . Journal of Agricultural Education , 53 ( 4 ) , 156 – 170 . Tsaparlis , G . ( 2005 ) . Non - algorithmic quantitative problem solving in university physical chemistry : A correlation study of the role of selective cognitive factors . Research in Science & Technological Education , 23 ( 2 ) , 125 – 148 . Yu , K . , Stith , A . L . , Liu , L . & Chen , H . ( 2012 ) . Tertiary education at a glance : China . Boston , MA : Sense . Zeineddin , A . & Abd - El - Khalick , F . ( 2010 ) . Scientific reasoning and epistemological commitments : Coordination of theory and evidence among college science students . Journal of Research in Science Teaching , 47 ( 9 ) , 1064 – 1093 . Zimmerman , C . ( 2000 ) . The development of scientific reasoning skills . Developmental Review , 20 ( 1 ) , 99 – 149 . Zimmerman , C . ( 2007 ) . The development of scientific thinking skills in elementary and middle school . Developmental Review , 27 ( 2 ) , 172 – 223 . 634 Lin Ding et al