Tilburg University Proximity and inter - organizational collaboration Knoben , J . ; Oerlemans , L . A . G . Published in : International Journal of Management Reviews DOI : 10 . 1111 / j . 1468 - 2370 . 2006 . 0012 . x Publication date : 2006 Link to publication Citation for published version ( APA ) : Knoben , J . , & Oerlemans , L . A . G . ( 2006 ) . Proximity and inter - organizational collaboration : A literature review . International Journal of Management Reviews , 8 ( 2 ) , 71 - 89 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1468 - 2370 . 2006 . 0012 . x General rights Copyright and moral rights for the publications made accessible in the public portal are retained by the authors and / or other copyright owners and it is a condition of accessing publications that users recognise and abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights . - Users may download and print one copy of any publication from the public portal for the purpose of private study or research - You may not further distribute the material or use it for any profit - making activity or commercial gain - You may freely distribute the URL identifying the publication in the public portal Take down policy If you believe that this document breaches copyright , please contact us providing details , and we will remove access to the work immediately and investigate your claim . Download date : 22 . May . 2019 International Journal of Management Reviews Volume 8 Issue 2 pp . 71 – 89 71 © Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2006 , 9600 Garsington Road , Oxford OX4 2DQ , UK and 350 Main Street , Malden , MA 02148 , USA International Journal of Management Reviews ( 2006 ) doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1468 - 2370 . 2006 . 00121 . x Blackwell Publishing Ltd Oxford , UK IJMRInternational Journal of Management Reviews 1460 - 8545 © Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2006 82 ORIGINAL ARTICLE Proximity and inter - organizational collaboration : A literature review XX Proximity and inter - organizational collaboration : A literature review J . Knoben and L . A . G . Oerlemans The proximity concept is used in many different ways in the literature . These dimensions of proximity are , however , defined and measured in many different ( sometimes even contradictory ) ways , show large amounts of overlap , and often are under - or over - specified . The goal of this paper is to specify the different dimensions of proximity relevant in inter - organizational collaboration more precisely and to provide definitions of these dimensions . The research presented contributes to reducing the ambiguity of the proximity concept as used in the literature . Based on the above , the following research question is addressed in this paper : ‘Which dimensions of proximity are relevant in inter - organizational collaboration and how are they defined ? ’ A systematic literature review is presented in order to disentangle the dimensions of the proximity concept . Based on this literature review , three dimensions of proximity relevant in inter - organizational collaboration are distinguished : geographical proximity , organizational proximity and technological proximity . Examples ( case studies ) from the literature are used to illustrate the current conceptual ambiguity as well as to clarify how the proposed dimensions of proximity reduce this conceptual ambiguity . Introduction The proximity concept has captured a prom - inent position in the scientiﬁc literature deal - ing with inter - organizational collaboration ( IOC ) ( e . g . Sternberg 1999 ) , innovation ( e . g . Oerlemans et al . 2001 ) and regional economic develop - ment ( e . g . MacKinnon et al . 2002 ) . It is an important emerging concept in several ﬁelds of science , for example in innovation studies , organization science and regional science . When the proximity concept is used , what is often actually meant is geographical prox - imity . However , other forms of proximity , such as institutional proximity ( Kirat and Lung 1999 ) , organizational proximity ( Meisters and Werker 2004 ) , cultural proximity ( Gill and Butler 2003 ) , social proximity ( Bradshaw 2001 ) and technological proximity ( Greunz 2003 ) are used as well . Even though all of these dimensions of the concept of proximity refer to ‘being close to something measured 72 © Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2006 Proximity and inter - organizational collaboration : A literature review on a certain dimension’ , they are certainly not identical . Many of the dimensions of the proximity concept are , however , deﬁned and measured in many different ( sometimes even contradictory ) ways , show large amounts of overlap , and often are under - or over - speciﬁed . The goal of this paper is to specify the differ - ent dimensions of proximity relevant in IOC more precisely and to provide useful deﬁni - tions of these dimensions . This topic is argued to constitute one of the main gaps in the liter - ature on proximity , as is shown in a recent special issue of Regional Studies ( February 2005 ) , and especially in the contribution of Boschma ( 2005 ) . Previous studies have , how - ever , done little more than signal the existing conceptual ambiguity , whereas the main goal of this paper is to reduce the ambiguity of the proximity concept as well . Based on the above , the following research question has been formulated : ‘Which dimen - sions of proximity are relevant in inter - organizational collaboration and how are they deﬁned ? ’ This speciﬁc focus was chosen because proximity in general is often seen as an important pre - condition for knowledge sharing , knowledge transfer and technology acquisition ( Gertler 1995 ) , processes which , in turn , are often seen as the primary goals of IOC ( Hagedoorn and Schakenraad 1994 ) . Moreover , through inter - organizational know - ledge sharing , transfer and technology ac - quisition , ﬁrms are assumed to improve their competences , capabilities and resources , which enable them to strengthen their competitive position . Therefore , in an intricate process , different types of proximity facilitate the performance and survival of organizations . To answer the research question presented above , a review of the available literature that makes use of the concept of proximity is pre - sented and discussed . The papers yielded by the literature review were categorized based on the dimension of proximity that was used in the study . Subsequently , the different dimensions of proximity used in the literature are discussed to provide detailed insights into the existing conceptual ambiguity . Based on this discussion , three dimensions of proximity are identiﬁed as being of speciﬁc importance in IOC , and deﬁnitions of these three dimen - sions are given . Examples ( case studies ) from the literature are used to illustrate the current conceptual ambiguity as well as to clarify how the proposed dimensions of proximity reduce this conceptual ambiguity . Finally , the ﬁndings of the paper are summarized , and its implications for future research are discussed . Research Approach To gain insight into the different dimensions of proximity and their deﬁnitions , a literature search has been conducted . This literature search speciﬁcally focused on the dimen - sions of proximity being used by scholars . A research approach similar to the one applied by Oliver and Ebers ( 1998 ) has been used for this literature review . The ISI database and the ABI / Inform database were used to perform literature searches with the keywords : ( 1 ) pro - ximity , innovation and organization ; ( 2 ) pro - ximity and regional economic development ; and ( 3 ) proximity , network ( s ) and inter - ﬁrm collaboration . These keywords correspond to the three main ﬁelds of science in which proximity is studied ( Caniëls and Romijn 2003 ) . The papers were ﬁnally selected on the basis of their abstracts . 1 These searches yielded 37 , 21 and 21 papers , respectively . Furthermore , the literature search yielded seven papers that turned up in more than one of the litera - ture groups . Papers were categorized accord - ing to the type of proximity used by the authors , and the theoretical mechanisms specifying the function of proximity . This method of searching literature has a few disadvantages . First , only papers are included in these databases , leading to the omission of books and book chapters from the search . Second , the ISI database includes only papers from the period 1984 – 2005 , whereas the ABI / Inform database includes papers from the period 1971 – 2005 . As a result , papers published before 1971 are excluded from the search . Nevertheless , the literature reviewed gives © Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2006 73 June 2006 a reliable overview of the content of the leading journals with regard to inter - organizational proximity . Therefore , it can be assumed to contain the most relevant insights concerning this ﬁeld of science . The Dimensions of Proximity in the Literature Discussing all papers yielded by the literature search in detail is beyond to the scope of this paper . Therefore , only the dimensions of proximity studied in the papers were used as criteria for this analysis . The main results of this analysis can be found in Table 1 . The cells in Table 1 represent the frequency with which a certain dimension of proximity has been used in a certain part of the literature . Since a paper can use more than one dimen - sion of proximity , the cells do not add up to the total number of papers in that part of the literature . The construction of this table was , in fact , not as straightforward an activity as might be expected ( see Figure 1 ) . First , different authors sometimes use different labels for identical dimensions of proximity . For example , the dimension ‘personal proximity’ ( Schamp et al . 2004 ) and the dimension ‘relational proxim - ity’ ( e . g . Coenen et al . 2004 ) are identical to the more commonly used dimension ‘social proximity’ ( Boschma 2005 ) . Even though this is a clear sign of conceptual ambiguity by itself , these different labels for identical dimensions of proximity have been condensed into one dimension in order to make Table 1 more comprehensible . Second , some of the dimensions of proxim - ity used in the literature are actually blanket dimensions . As a result , they deﬁne different dimensions of proximity under a single head - ing . For example , Goessling ( 2004 ) uses the concept of non - spatial proximity , without making its content explicit . Thus , what at ﬁrst glance seem to be different concepts of proximity are sometimes blanket concepts that had to be decomposed in order to construct Table 1 . In order to clarify what each dimension of proximity presented in Table 1 encompasses , the different dimensions of proximity are discussed in detail in this section . Speciﬁc attention will be paid to the differences in the deﬁnitions and measurements by different authors within the dimensions of proximity . The main goal is to create detailed insights into the scope and composition of the existing conceptual ambiguity . Finally , the link between each dimension of proximity and IOC will be discussed in this section as well . Geographical Proximity Geographical proximity , which is denoted as territorial , spatial , local or physical proximity Table 1 . Types of proximity used in the literature Type of proximity Literature search Geographical Organizational Cultural Technological Cognitive Institutional Social Proximity , organization and innovation ( 37 papers ) 35 9 3 3 2 3 3 Proximity and regional development ( 21 papers ) 19 0 1 0 0 0 1 Proximity and collaboration ( 21 papers ) 19 2 1 1 1 0 2 Overlapping papers ( 7 papers ) 7 2 1 0 1 0 1 74 © Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2006 Proximity and inter - organizational collaboration : A literature review as well , is the most frequently used dimension of proximity in the literature . Many studies do not even explicitly state that geographical proximity is being used , but just use the term ‘proximity’ . The deﬁnition of this dimension of proximity differs slightly between different authors . Some studies deﬁne the level of geo - graphical proximity as the absolute geograph - ical distance that separates actors , whereas others use the distance relative to the means of transport ( travel times ) or the perception of these distances by actors . Differences also exist with regard to the scale at which geo - graphical proximity is deﬁned . Some studies look at the distance between two interaction organizations ( dyadic distance ) , whereas others look at the presence of groups of ﬁrms in a geographical unit ( agglomerations ) . Nevertheless , the deﬁnitions of geograph - ical proximity are all fairly similar and use the same underlying mechanism for explaining the importance of geographical proximity . Therefore , the level of ambiguity within this dimension of proximity is fairly low . The importance of geographical proximity in IOC lies in the fact that small geographical distances facilitate face - to - face interactions ( both planned and serendipitous ) and , there - fore , fosters knowledge transfer and innova - tion . The main reasoning behind these effects is that short geographical distances bring organizations together , favor interaction with a high level of information richness and facilitate the exchange of , especially tacit , knowledge between actors ( Torre and Gilly 2000 ) . The larger the distance between actors , the more difﬁcult it is to transfer these tacit forms of knowledge . This is even argued to be true for the exchange and use of codiﬁed knowledge , because its interpretation still requires tacit knowledge and thus spatial proximity ( Howells 2002 ) . Recently , several authors have put forward the notion of temporary geographical prox - imity ( e . g . Gallaud and Torre 2004 , 2005 ; Hyypiä and Kautonen 2005 ; Torre and Rallet 2005 ) . This notion implies that actors need not be in constant geographical proximity when collaborating , but that meetings , short visits and temporary co - location might be sufﬁcient for actors to build other forms of proximity ( such as organizational ) , which sub - sequently allow collaboration over large geo - graphical distances . Moreover , it can be argued that geographical proximity is only necessary in certain phases of ( innovative ) collabor - ations , such as during the production of fundamental and tacit knowledge or during negotiations , but not during others , such as the codiﬁcation or commercialization phase ( Gallaud and Torre 2004 , 142 ; 2005 , 138 ) . Even though the idea of temporary geographical Figure 1 . The ( de ) composition of the dimensions of proximity . © Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2006 75 June 2006 proximity seems plausible , empirical testing of this idea is lacking so far . Organizational Proximity Organizational proximity suffers from a rela - tively high level of conceptual ambiguity . First , different authors deﬁne organizational prox - imity in slightly different ways . For example , Oerlemans and Meeus ( 2005 ) deﬁne organiza - tional proximity as ‘actors that belong to the same space of relations’ . Torre and Rallet ( 2005 ) , however , deﬁne organizational proximity as ‘actors whose interactions are facilitated by ( explicit or implicit ) rules and routines of behavior and that share a same system of representations , or set of beliefs’ , based on the idea of communities of practice ( cf . Brown and Duguid 1991 ) . Even though these deﬁnitions are similar to a certain extent , the second deﬁnition is broader than the ﬁrst . Burmeister and Colletis - Wahl ( 1997 ) deﬁne organizational proximity as a composite dimen - sion consisting out of a geographical and a circulatory scale . This deﬁnition is extremely problematic , since it deﬁnes this circulatory scale as a ‘rapid , reliable and well - adapted circulation of goods and information as well as the efﬁcient mobilization of external resources’ . What is seen as a consequence of organizational proximity by most authors is included as a determinant of organizational proximity in the study by Burmeister and Colletis - Wahl ( 1997 ) . Finally , Schamp et al . ( 2004 ) deﬁne organizational proximity as ‘the proximity between employees of a multi - plant ﬁrm who identify with each other as a result of belonging to the same ﬁrm and of their knowledge of ﬁrm speciﬁc routines’ ( p . 609 ) . Even though this definition is similar to the ﬁrst part of the deﬁnition used by Torre and Rallet ( 2005 ) , it is clearly different from the deﬁnition used by Burmeister and Colletis - Wahl ( 1997 ) and , to a lesser extent , by Oerlemans and Meeus ( 2005 ) . Second , organizational proximity can be distinguished at two different levels , namely the structural and the dyadic level . Some authors explicitly include these two different levels in their deﬁnition of organizational proximity ( e . g . Torre and Rallet 2005 ) . In these cases , no ambiguity is likely to arise . In other cases , however , only one of the two levels is used . Authors that use the structural deﬁnition of organizational proximity often focus on features such as the structural equival - ence of actors ( e . g . Rice and Aydin 1991 ) or whether or not ﬁrms belong to the same net - work ( e . g . Oerlemans and Meeus 2005 ) . As a consequence , these authors focus on the charac - teristics of networks rather than on the char - acteristics of a relationship between two ﬁrms . Other authors do look at speciﬁc relationships and thereby focus on the so - called dyadic level ( e . g . Wilkof et al . 1995 ) . In this approach , the similarity in organizational context in which members of different organizations operate determines the level of organizational proximity . The fact that these two levels of analysis are used throughout the literature is likely to lead to ambiguity about the concept , since one can assume that mechanisms at work at the dyadic level will differ from those at the network level ( cf . Granovetter 1985 ) . The reasoning behind the importance of organizational proximity for IOC is that IOCs are more efﬁcient and lead to better results when the organizational context of both inter - acting partners is similar due to the fact that this similarity facilitates mutual understand - ing . As such , organizational proximity gener - ates a capacity to combine information and knowledge from the collaborating parties , to transfer tacit knowledge and other non - standardized resources between collaborating parties ( Burmeister and Colletis - Wahl 1997 ) . Thus , this form of proximity is seen as a prerequisite for dyadic and collective learning and in the joint creation of new resources and innovation ( Kirat and Lung 1999 ) . Cultural Proximity Cultural proximity is used throughout the literature , albeit at a relatively low frequency . 76 © Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2006 Proximity and inter - organizational collaboration : A literature review The deﬁnitions of culture are relatively consistent between authors . A deﬁnition of culture found in the papers reviewed is : Culture is the pattern of thoughts , feelings , behaviors , symbols and so forth that give meaning to actions and behaviors , and provide interpretations of situations for people . Culture is publicly shared and accepted by a given group at a given time , binding members together and deﬁning or separating one group from others groups . ( Adapted from : Burns and Stalker 1961 ; Pettigrew 1979 ; Wilkof et al . 1995 ) However , two different levels of analysis of cultural proximity can be distinguished ( Gertler 1995 ) . The ﬁrst level of analysis looks at cultural differences between con - tinents , nations or regions . In these studies , it is assumed , but often not researched empirically , that organizations within these geographical areas share the same culture . The literature shows , however , that this is not always the case ( Lenartowicz and Roth 1999 ) . The second level of analysis focuses on differences in organizational culture between collaborating actors and measures these differences at the relational level ( e . g . Wilkof et al . 1995 ) . When organizational cultures are similar , organizations are expected to interact more easily and with better results , because common interpretations and routines allow organizations to interpret and give meaning to actions without making all these difﬁcult interpretations explicit . The dimension of cultural proximity deﬁned at the organiza - tional level is very similar to the deﬁnition of organizational proximity discussed earlier . Both dimensions facilitate the interpretation of actions and allow for smoother collabo - ration without the difﬁcult process of mak - ing implicit actions and knowledge explicit . Therefore , it can be argued that , especially when focusing on IOC , cultural proximity at the organizational level is overlapping with the conceptualization of organizational proximity . Institutional Proximity As with cultural proximity , the deﬁnition of institutional proximity is largely undisputed . Most of the deﬁnitions are based on the one by North : Institutions are the humanly devised constraints that structure political , economic and social interaction . They consist of both informal constraints ; ( sanctions , taboos , customs , traditions , and codes of conduct ) , and formal rules ( constitutions , laws , property rights ) . ( North 1991 , 97 ) However , ambiguity arises from the fact that the concept of institutional proximity is stud - ied on two different levels of analysis , which often are conﬂated by scholars . At the general level , the concept of institutional proximity is often based on similarities between the institutional frameworks of countries and regions , such as legislative conditions , labor relations , business practices , accounting rules and training systems ( e . g . Zeller 2004 ) . Formal institutions ( such as laws and norms ) and informal institutions ( cultural norms and habits ) inﬂuence the way in which actions are co - ordinated ( Kirat and Lung 1999 ) . How - ever , at a lower level of analysis one can also determine the effects of these national institu - tions on the norms and routines present in an organization , which are not by deﬁnition identical to their national counterparts . The level of similarity of the norms and routines between organizations determines the level of institutional proximity at the organizational level . Institutional proximity facilitates collective learning by allowing free knowledge transfer among agents based on a common space of representations , models , norms , procedures and rules being applied to thought and action ( Capello 1999 , 356 ; Kirat and Lung 1999 , 30 ) . When deﬁnitions are compared , it becomes clear that institutional proximity is almost identical to cultural proximity . Institutions and culture are strongly inter - related and are almost impossible to disentangle , as is illustrated by the fact that some authors deﬁne institutions © Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2006 77 June 2006 as ‘cultural artifacts’ ( e . g . Morgan 1997 , 493 ) . Moreover , Hofstede ( 2001 , 10 – 11 ) argues that culture determines institutions , which , in turn , re - enforce the existing culture . As such , it can be argued that , especially in the context of IOCs , cultural proximity and institutional proximity are identical . Moreover , since the dyadic level of analysis of institutional proximity includes organiza - tional norms and routines , institutional prox - imity at the dyadic level as well as cultural proximity at the dyadic level could simply be seen as a part of organizational proximity . Nevertheless , the literature treats organiza - tional , cultural and institutional as separate dimensions of proximity , resulting in concep - tual ambiguity . Cognitive Proximity The concept of cognitive proximity has been developed by Nooteboom ( 1999 ; 2000 ) . Cognitive proximity is commonly deﬁned as the similarities in the way actors perceive , interpret , understand and evaluate the world ( Wuyts et al . 2005 ) . The underlying rationale is that different conditions , such as organiza - tional culture , customs , norms and routines inﬂuence the way actors see and know the world . In order to communicate and transfer ( new ) knowledge effectively and efﬁciently , actors need to have similar ( but not necessar - ily identical ) frames of reference . Cognitive proximity as deﬁned by Noote - boom is a relational attribute , and it is used as such by several authors ( Tremblay et al . 2003 ; Wuyts et al . 2005 ) . However , several other authors also use the term cognitive proximity to refer to groups of people that belong to a ‘community of practice’ and therefore can communicate efﬁciently despite large geo - graphical distances . It should be noted that this second group of authors commonly see cognitive proximity as a part of organizational proximity ( e . g . Rallet and Torre 1999 ; Torre and Rallet 2005 ) . Comparing the deﬁnition and the underly - ing rationale of cognitive proximity makes it clear that the concept is strongly linked to the concepts of cultural proximity and institu - tional proximity . Cognitive proximity can be considered to be a ‘translation’ of these two concepts from the national or regional level to the organizational level and applied to a con - text in which knowledge transfer is important . Therefore , it seems logical to consider cognitive proximity as a part of organizational prox - imity , since it is also based on the notion that sharing routines , cultures , values and norms facilitates the interaction of actors over geographical distances . Technological Proximity Technological proximity is based on shared technological experiences and knowledge bases . Technology can be deﬁned as those tools , devices and knowledge that mediate between inputs and outputs ( process tech - nology ) and / or that create new products or services ( product technology ) ( Tushman and Anderson 1986 ) . Technological proximity refers not to these technologies themselves , but to the knowledge actors possess about these technologies . Similarities in technolo - gical knowledge , which is sometimes denoted as virtual proximity ( Schamp et al . 2004 ) , facilitate technological learning as well as the anticipation of technological developments ( Tremblay et al . 2003 ; Zeller 2004 ) . Techno - logical proximity between actors facilitates the acquisition and development of tech - nological knowledge and technologies . The ambiguity with regard to this dimension of proximity arises from the fact that two different levels of analysis , the general and the dyadic level , can be found in the literature . The importance of technological proximity at the general level is based on the concept of absorptive capacity . Absorptive capacity is ‘a ﬁrm’s ability to recognize the value of new , external knowledge , assimilate it and apply it to commercial ends’ ( Cohen and Levinthal 1990 , 128 ) . Cohen and Levinthal state that , in order to collaborate successfully , the prior ( technological ) knowledge of a ﬁrm must be 78 © Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2006 Proximity and inter - organizational collaboration : A literature review similar to the new knowledge on the basic level , but fairly diverse on the specialized level ( 1990 , 136 ) . Basic knowledge refers to the general understanding of the techniques upon which a scientiﬁc discipline is based , whereas specialized knowledge refers to the speciﬁc knowledge used by the actors in its everyday functioning . The concept of absorp - tive capacity is an actor level concept , which implies that a ﬁrm with a certain absorptive capacity can learn from all other organizations equally . The importance of technological proximity at the dyadic level is explained by the con - cept of relative absorptive capacity ( Lane and Lubatkin 1998 ) . Contrary to the general con - cept of absorptive capacity , which assumes that a ﬁrm’s capacity to learn depends only on the ﬁrm itself , the concept of relative absorp - tive capacity states that this capacity also depends on the source of the knowledge exchanged . The dyadic level of technological proximity states that ﬁrms must have compar - able knowledge bases in order to be able to recognize the opportunities offered by collabor - ation , but a different specialized knowledge base in order to permit effective and creative utilization of new knowledge ( Colombo 2003 ) . In other words , ﬁrms need to be similar enough in knowledge bases to be able to recognize the opportunities that the other actor’s knowledge gives , but different enough to contribute new knowledge to the IOC . The more different ﬁrms are in knowledge bases , the more there is to learn , but the more difﬁ - cult is becomes to learn as well . The know - ledge base of ﬁrms is commonly measured by looking at the products they produce or the scientiﬁc or technological ﬁelds in which they ﬁle patents ( Fung 2003 ) . Technological proximity seems similar to the concept of cognitive proximity , but there is an important difference . Cognitive proximity is a much broader concept that refers to the extent to which actors can communicate efﬁciently , whereas technological proximity refers to the extent to which actors can actu - ally learn from each other . One might argue that cognitive proximity deals with the issue of ‘how’ actors interact , whereas technologi - cal proximity deals with the issue of ‘what’ they exchange and the potential value of these exchanges . Social Proximity Social proximity , sometimes denoted as per - sonal proximity ( Schamp et al . 2004 ) or as relational proximity ( Coenen et al . 2004 ) as well , is seen by several authors as part of organizational proximity ( e . g . Filippi and Torre 2003 ) , whereas others use it as an independent type of proximity ( Coenen et al . 2004 ) . This , by itself , is a source of ambiguity . However , both groups of authors do use largely similar deﬁnitions of the dimension . Social proximity always refers to actors that belong to the same space of relations ( Oerlemans and Meeus 2005 ) . This view is strongly linked to the concepts of structural equivalence ( Mizruchi 1993 ) and embeddedness ( Granovetter 1985 ) in which the economic action and outcomes of ﬁrms is affected by their dyadic relations and by the structure of the overall network of relations ( Oerlemans and Meeus 2005 ) . Another source of ambiguity is the fact that relational proximity can be studied at two dif - ferent levels . On the one hand , one can look at whether ﬁrms belong to the same ‘community of practice’ or occupy structurally equivalent positions in networks . On the other hand , one can determine to what extent the IOCs of two ﬁrms with third - party ﬁrms are similar ( Rice and Aydin 1991 ) . The ﬁrst approach focuses on characteristics of groups of ﬁrms or net - works , whereas the second approach focuses on characteristics of the collaborating organi - zations themselves . The main reasoning underlying the impor - tance of social proximity ( on both levels of analysis ) for IOC lies in the fact that social relations not only co - ordinate transactions but are also vehicles that enable the exchange of knowledge because of mutual trust , kinship and experience as well as external resources to be mobilized ( Boschma 2005 ; Oerlemans © Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2006 79 June 2006 and Meeus 2005 ) . As such , it seems logically to include the notion of social proximity in the concept of organizational proximity when looking at IOCs , as several authors already do ( e . g . Filippi and Torre 2003 ; Oerlemans and Meeus 2005 ; Torre and Rallet 2005 ) . The preceding discussion of the different dimensions of proximity indicates that the concept of proximity suffers from a certain degree of conceptual ambiguity . The sources of ambiguity that are identiﬁed are : • Different labels are used for identical dimensions of proximity ( e . g . spatial prox - imity and geographical proximity ) . • Blanket dimensions of proximity are being used ( e . g . non - spatial proximity ) . • Different dimensions of proximity show large amounts of overlap and cannot be disentangled ( e . g . cultural and institutional proximity ) . • Different deﬁnitions exist of the same dimension of proximity ( e . g . the relational deﬁnition vs the spatial deﬁnition of organ - izational proximity ) . • The dimensions of proximity are being used at different levels of analysis ( e . g . geo - graphical proximity as groups of ﬁrms in a geographical unit or as the geographical distance between two collaborating ﬁrms ) . Dimensions of Proximity Relevant in Inter - organizational Collaboration : A Proposal Figure 2 illustrates the different types of proximity , their levels of analysis and the existing overlap between them . Based on their deﬁnitions , the distinction between institutional and cultural proximity seems artiﬁcial . Both are integrated into a single dimension of proximity ( arrow 1 in Figure 2 ) . Furthermore , the general level of analysis of relational proximity as well as organizational proximity and cognitive proximity is based on the concept of communities of practice ( cf . Brown and Duguid 1991 ) ( arrow 2 ) and are integrated into a single dimension . Arrow 3 in Figure 2 illustrates that institutions and cul - ture are only of importance for IOC if these institutional and cultural characteristics have Figure 2 . Condensing the dimensions of proximity . 80 © Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2006 Proximity and inter - organizational collaboration : A literature review seeped through to the organizational level ( Kirat and Lung 1999 , 29 ) . This is not neces - sarily the case , as it is possible , for example , to have an organization with an Asian organi - zational culture and institutions located in Europe or the US . When this is the case , how - ever , the rationales underlying the importance of these characteristics are identical to the rationales underlying the importance of organ - izational proximity and social proximity . All of these assume that shared routines , values , norms , cultures and relations facilitate interac - tions between actors . Therefore , these can be integrated into a single dimension of proxim - ity . This integration is in line with Capello ( 1999 ) , Torre and Gilly ( 2000 ) and Torre and Rallet ( 2005 ) , who state that organizational ( in their deﬁnition including social proxim - ity ) , institutional and cultural proximity com - bined allow interaction between economically separated actors . Based on this discussion , it can be argued that the dyadic dimensions of organizational proximity combined with geographical and technological proximity are able to capture all the effects of different types of proximity on IOC . Figure 3 depicts the three dimensions of proximity proposed in the above and their composition at the dyadic level . Technological proximity is deﬁned as ‘the level of overlap of the knowledge bases of two collaborating actors’ ( Lane and Lubatkin 1998 ) . Geograph - ically , proximity is deﬁned as ‘the extent to which two collaborating actors can have daily face - to - face relations without pro - hibitive costs’ ( Capello 1999 , 357 ) . Finally , organizational proximity is deﬁned as ‘the set of routines – explicit or implicit – which allows coordination without having to deﬁne beforehand how to do so . The set of routines incorporates organizational structure , organi - zational culture , performance measurements systems , language and so on’ ( Rallet and Torre 1999 ) . This deﬁnition clearly reﬂects all the components of organizational proximity as depicted in Figure 3 . The three dimensions of proximity proposed and deﬁned in the above reduce the existing conceptual ambiguity in several ways . First , the plethora of names used in the proximity literature is reduced to three clear - cut names . Second , existing blanket dimensions are abolished . Third , the existing overlap between different dimensions is reduced considerably . Fourth , the different deﬁnitions of one dimen - sion of proximity are abolished , allowing for more comparability between studies and more cumulative knowledge building . Finally , the level of analysis of the dimensions of proxim - ity is made explicit . Illustrating the Reduction of Conceptual Ambiguity To illustrate the effects of the three proposed dimensions of proximity on the existing con - ceptual ambiguity , several case studies found Figure 3 . Dimensions of proximity at the dyadic level . © Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2006 81 June 2006 in the literature will be discussed . To ﬁnd these case studies , another literature search was performed . The ISI database and the ABI / Inform database were searched for several key words that correspond to the three proposed dimensions of proximity , such as ‘technologi - cal’ , ‘geographical’ and ‘organizational’ . Fur - thermore , terms like ‘distance’ , ‘dispersion’ and ‘mismatch’ as well as ‘case’ and ‘qualita - tive’ were used . The strategy was not to dis - cuss all and any of the papers that would ﬁt in one of the cells of Figure 4 , but rather to ﬁnd illustrative cases for each of these cells . The cases have not been randomly drawn from the available population , but they were primarily selected on the richness of their data descrip - tion . The discussion of these cases serves only to illustrate the existing conceptual ambiguity and to clarify the effect of the proposed dimensions of proximity , rather than as a formal test of the proposed dimensions . Figure 4 depicts the three dimensions of proximity proposed in the above . In this ﬁgure , the case studies are classiﬁed based on the descriptions of the original authors . Not all cells of Figure 4 are ﬁlled , since no appli - cable case studies could be found for some conﬁgurations of proximity . Subsequently , these cases will be discussed on the basis of the newly proposed dimensions of proximity and their working deﬁnitions . These discussions are not meant to show that the original authors were ‘wrong’ , but serve to illustrate the effects of the use of the three proposed dimensions of proximity on the ﬁndings of existing studies . Proximate on All Dimensions Saxenian ( 1991 ) describes the well - known case of Silicon Valley . Silicon Valley repre - sents a case in which actors are able to have frequent ( in ) formal face - to - face contacts , work with many different applications of the same technology and share the same cultural and organizational norms and routines even though entrepreneurs from many different cultures and backgrounds work in the region ( Castells Figure 4 . Dimensions of proximity positioned according to authors . 82 © Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2006 Proximity and inter - organizational collaboration : A literature review and Hall 1994 ) . Therefore , Silicon Valley represents a case in which actors are proxi - mate on all three dimensions . As a result , a climate that facilitates collaboration , know - ledge exchange and innovation has ensued . The case of Silicon Valley will serve as a benchmark for discussing the other cases . Geographical Proximity Developments in communication technologies have made it feasible for actors to work together despite physical dispersion of group members . The study by Cramton ( 2001 ) focuses on an experiment in which team members had to collaborate without meeting face - to - face and therefore had trouble building mutual know - ledge . Cramton ( 2001 ) proceeds by linking certain problems in building mutual knowl - edge to the lack of face - to - face contacts and thereby attributes all problems in the IOC to the lack of geographical proximity . The prob - lems she described are : failure to communi - cate and retain contextual information , unevenly distributed information , differences in the salience of information , relative differences in the speed of access to information and differences in interpreting the meaning of silence . When looking at these problems in detail , however , other explanations than the lack of face - to - face contacts can be derived from the paper . For example , it is described that actors had trouble creating and updating a mental ‘map’ of their distant partners’ situation , which includes the failure to com - municate and retain ( ﬁrm - speciﬁc ) goals of the collaboration or even very basic informa - tion such as upcoming holidays that might be speciﬁc to one of the parties in the IOC . Furthermore , differences in the interpretation of silence also lead to problems in the IOC . Silence can mean anything from ‘I agree’ to ‘I don’t know’ , ‘I strongly disagree’ or ‘I am having technical problems and am unable to respond at the moment’ . Both examples illustrate that the collaborating actors were unable to co - ordinate their actions . When applying the three proposed dimen - sions of proximity to the study of Cramton ( 2001 ) , it becomes clear that both geographi - cal proximity ( the lack of frequent face - to - face contacts ) and organizational proximity ( the lack of routines that enabled co - ordination ) were present . No characteristics of technological proximity were found , however . Organizational Proximity Wilkof et al . ( 1995 ) study a case with two col - laborating partners with completely different organizational cultures in the computer indus - try . However , the description of the organiza - tional cultures given by Wilkof et al . ( 1995 ) includes the ﬁrms’ structure , their ( in ) formal rules and their type of governance . This deﬁ - nition of organizational culture includes char - acteristics of institutional and organizational proximity as well and can , therefore , be characterized as organizational proximity , instead of cultural proximity . Firm A buys hardware from ﬁrm B , which programs it with its own software and resells the complete systems . Firm A is a mechanistic organization with a formal , hierarchical and bureaucratic structure , whereas ﬁrm B is an organic organization with an informal , decen - tralized and non - bureaucratic structure . Firm A used only established rules and procedures , whereas ﬁrm B used a ‘do the right thing from a win – win perspective’ mechanism to guide task accomplishment . These large differences in almost every aspect of the organizational culture had a large impact on the success of the collaboration between both ﬁrms . Differ - ences in procedures between the two ﬁrms often led to mutual frustration or loss of faith in the partner’s capabilities , whereas differ - ences in problem - solving tactics between the ﬁrms often led to the problem not being solved at all . Furthermore , the management of both ﬁrms constantly misinterpreted the other ﬁrm’s actions and motives . Rather than work - ing together and solving the conﬂicts , both ﬁrms began blaming each other , which ulti - mately led to the demise of the collaboration . © Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2006 83 June 2006 A closer examination of the arguments presented by Wilkof et al . ( 1995 ) reveals that , besides the cultural differences , there were difﬁculties resulting from technological differences as well . For example , both ﬁrms disagreed as to whether the systems produced by ﬁrm A were high availability or medium availability ones , which resulted from the different technological background of both ﬁrms . 2 According to the deﬁnitions of proximity proposed in this paper , this case is actually studied by focusing on both technological proximity and organizational proximity , instead of only organizational culture . Geographical proximity was not an issue in this paper , as both ﬁrms were located close to each other . Interestingly , the topic is touched upon when it is mentioned that ﬁrm A had no trouble getting mechanics of ﬁrm B to its own site ( Wilkof et al . 1995 , 379 ) . Technological Proximity Shane ( 2000 ) uses the concept of technologi - cal proximity to analyze the case of a research institute that developed three - dimensional printing ( 3DP TM ) and the ensuing collabora - tion with other organizations to commercialize this invention . Shane ﬁnds that entrepreneurs will discover only those opportunities that are related to their prior knowledge ( Shane 2000 , 499 ) . This is the case since the search for new knowledge can only be undertaken if the searcher is aware of what is not known and how this unknown might complement its own knowledge . This notion is used to explain many of the problems that arise during the ensuing collaboration that result from a lack of technological proximity , as is illustrated in the following examples : I absolutely could not have seen the business concepts that the other licensees were doing . I knew nothing about casting . Also , you could not make metal parts using the 3DP TM process . And I do not think that it would have ever occurred to me in a thousand years that you could print pills . . . . ( Shane 2000 , 456 ) The effects of differences in technological knowledge bases between collaborators nicely ﬁt the working deﬁnition of technological proximity used in this paper . No characteristics of other dimensions of proximity could be found in the paper . Geographical and Technological Proximity Sole and Edmondson ( 2002 ) discuss a case in which dispersed collaboration ( without face - to - face contacts ) has central stage . The main difference with the study of Cramton ( 2001 ) is that Sole and Edmondson explicitly pay attention to the differences in ( technological ) knowledge bases between the collaborators by focusing on cross - functional product develop - ment teams . The effects of these differences are that team members from different functions often struggle to understand each other ( Sole and Edmondson 2002 ) , as is illustrated in the following quotations : On each of these dispersed projects , our big challenge is that we just don’t get together as a team because we are spread so far apart . ( Sole and Edmondson 2002 , 17 ) We in the US were getting frustrated that our Japanese colleagues were not providing the information that we wanted . It was an ah - ha for us when we realized that they truly do not have the right [ information ] . ( Sole and Edmondson 2002 , 26 ) However , when relating these quotations to deﬁnitions of proximity proposed in this paper , they reﬂect a lack of geographical and organ - izational proximity . Based on their case study , Sole and Edmondson conclude that , when knowledge from another location is needed , they must ﬁrst recognize , and adjust for , location - speciﬁc practices within which that knowledge is embodied before they can use it ( Sole and Edmondson 2002 ) . This ﬁnding , however , bears many characteristics of organizational proximity and is not directly related to the differences in technological knowledge bases . 84 © Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2006 Proximity and inter - organizational collaboration : A literature review The presence of the characteristics of organi - zational proximity is illustrated by the fact that different locations manifested substan - tially different , typically taken for granted approaches to similar work , as can be seen in the following quote : In site C , research folk are more experimentalist ; they tend to do a lot of lab work on a small scale . In site W , the research people are more involved with paper studies , concepts and ideas . They wouldn’t do lab work to evaluate those . ( Sole and Edmondson 2002 , 23 ) The above reﬂects characteristics of working routines and organizational culture , but in the same ﬁeld of knowledge . As such , this paper incorporates both organizational and geographical proximity , but not technological proximity . Geographical and Organizational Proximity Lam ( 1997 ) describes an IOC in which , besides being geographically dispersed ( one in the UK and one in Japan ) , both ﬁrms are characterized by completely different organi - zational structures , processes and routines . Both ﬁrms , however , do work with the same technology and are known as very innovative . The large geographical distance between both ﬁrms was largely negated by ( temporarily ) co - locating engineers from both ﬁrms at one of the two ﬁrms . Nevertheless , the differences in routines , skill formation , utilization prac - tices and labor division between both organi - zations were so large that engineers became frustrated , as is illustrated by the following quote : The Japanese tend to get everybody involved . For example , obviously this project involved a lot of their different groups . . . Before they commit to anything , all the groups have to be involved . Whereas we tend to make the decision , then go back to sort it out later with all the different groups . It is very frustrating and we don’t know how to cope with the long discussion that goes on . ( Lam 1997 , 985 ) When the working deﬁnitions of proximity are applied to Lam’s study , it can be con - cluded that , owing to the co - location of engi - neers , frequent face - to - face contacts were possible . As such , the level of geographical proximity can be considered to be high . Furthermore , the described differences in rou - tines , skill formation , utilization practices and labor division between both organizations reﬂect a low level of organizational proximity . Interestingly , co - locating engineers at the same location could not negate the large organiza - tional distance between both ﬁrms as is sug - gested by several authors ( e . g . Filippi and Torre 2003 ; Kirat and Lung 1999 ; Rallet and Torre 1999 ) . The level of technological proximity was high since both ﬁrms work with the same technologies . Discussion and Conclusion After analyzing the case studies using the deﬁnitions of the dimensions of proximity proposed in this research , several changes can be made to Figure 4 . In Figure 5 , the cases are repositioned on the basis of the deﬁnitions of proximity formulated in this research . Figure 5 reﬂects the fact that many of the case studies that were analyzed contain characteristics of dimensions of proximity that are not made explicit in these studies or vice versa . As a result , several characteristics of IOCs are wrongfully attributed to certain dimensions of proximity . Cramton ( 2001 ) , for example , attributes many communication problems to a lack of geographical proximity , even though these problems actually arise from a low level of organizational proximity . The main contribution of the proposed three dimensions of proximity is that a large part of the conceptual ambiguity is negated . The plethora of different dimensions of prox - imity is reduced to three dimensions that can be theoretically disentangled . Blanket dimen - sions of proximity are abolished , and the level of analysis is made explicit . Finally , the deﬁ - nitions of each of the dimensions are made more precise . By reducing the conceptual © Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2006 85 June 2006 ambiguity , this research adds to the existing research , which has only signaled the exist - ence of the ambiguity . As a result , ﬁndings of different studies become more comparable , which allows for , hopefully , more consistent ﬁndings and more cumulative knowledge development . It should be noted , however , that even though the proposed dimensions of proximity can be separated theoretically as well as empirically , this does not imply that the three dimension of proximity do not inﬂuence each other . First , the dimensions of proximity can interact over time . For example , several authors claim that the development of organiza - tional proximity can be facilitated by ( temporarily ) creating geographical proximity ( e . g . Kirat and Lung 1999 ) . The notion of tem - porary geographical proximity is triggered by the increased mobility of individuals , infor - mation and goods ( Gallaud and Torre 2004 ) . As a result of this increase in mobility , the constraints of collaborating over large geographical distances can be temporarily overcome through travelling , but without the prohibitive costs of permanent co - location . Since the need for geographical proximity is generally assumed to be not permanent , creating temporary geographical proximity might be a sufﬁcient precondition for efﬁcient IOC . Furthermore , different types of proximity can strengthen or weaken each other’s effect at a certain point in time . For example , two collaborating partners that are geographically dispersed face difﬁculties arranging face - to - face contacts . Firms that are proximate on the technological and organizational dimension might be able to substitute these face - to - face contacts with modern communication techno - logies and , thereby , overcome the problems caused by large geographical distances . For ﬁrms with low levels of technological or organizational proximity , however , trying to do so might result in even more problems due to miscommunication and misinterpretations of electronic communication , as is illustrated in the study by Cramton ( 2001 ) . Figure 5 . Newly positioned dimensions of proximity . 86 © Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2006 Proximity and inter - organizational collaboration : A literature review These interactions present difﬁculties when studying the effects of one dimension of pro - ximity in isolation , as these cases might not be very common . Therefore , simulation stud - ies , such as the one by Cowan et al . ( 2004 ) , might prove valuable . Furthermore , longitudi - nal research is necessary to test whether or not different dimensions of proximity really inter - act over time . Such claims are impossible to test in cross - sectional research designs , but published longitudinal research on this topic seems lacking . Future research should aim to take these types of interactions into account or to make sure that only one type of proximity is really studied ( e . g . in experiments ) . From a scientiﬁc point of view , disentangling effects of the different types of proximity on IOC can provide very valuable information . On the other hand , speciﬁcally because the different forms of proximity are heavily correlated , these correlations should be incorporated in future theoretical and empirical research . The three dimensions of proximity distinguished in this paper might provide a starting point for this research and could prevent further ambiguity with regard to the concept of proximity . Besides the scientiﬁc lessons that can be drawn from this paper , several managerial implications can be formulated as well . Even though alliances are considered to create value by most managers ( Anand and Khanna 2000 ) , alliances appear to be notoriously difﬁcult to manage , as is evidenced by the large number of failures among alliances ( Park and Russo 1996 ) . Therefore , the questions ‘what makes IOCs succeed ? ’ and ‘what are the roles of different forms of proximity related to this ? ’ remain prominent questions for managers and scientists alike ( Lambe et al . 2002 ) . First , the notion of temporary geographical proximity seems promising for organizations that seek knowledge but cannot ﬁnd it in their own vicinity . Creating permanent geo - graphical proximity , by co - location , is prohib - itively expensive for most ﬁrms and is highly impractical , since each new IOC would have to lead to a reconsideration of the location of the ﬁrm . The use of temporary geographical proximity to build organizational proximity seems a logical strategy to follow in such cases . Another important consideration for man - agers is that the ability of a ﬁrm to beneﬁt from an alliance is largely a function of the dyad in question , rather than of either of the individual ﬁrms ( Anand and Khanna 2000 ; Lambe et al . 2002 ; Lane and Lubatkin 1998 ) . Therefore , organizations that start an IOC should be prepared to invest in building organizational proximity . Doing so costs time and resources , and even several failures , or at least disappointing results , in the beginning of an IOC should be seen as learning and not as failure . That ﬁrms can indeed ‘learn’ to collaborate is proven empirically in several papers ( e . g . Anand and Khanna 2000 ; Lambe et al . 2002 ; de Man 2005 ) . Given the fact that building organizational proximity asks for investments , organizations should focus on a relatively small number of collaborations . Empirical research has shown that organizations can manage at most six collaborations simultaneously ( Draulans et al . 2003 ) . Furthermore , research has also shown that it is more sensible for organizations to implement similar types of collaborations . Different types of collaborations have differ - ent requirements . Consequently , the building of organizational proximity takes place faster when similar types of collaborations are set up ( Draulans et al . 2003 ) . However , even when organizational prox - imity can successfully be developed and either temporary or permanent geographical proxim - ity has overcome the problems of geographi - cal distance , success is not guaranteed . The match between organizations in terms of strategy , structure and culture is an important aspect , but only facilitates the exchange of ( technological ) knowledge . A certain amount of technological proximity is also required in order to be able to use the knowledge and capabilities of the other actor . As such , ﬁrms have to take the ﬁeld knowledge in which their partner is active into account . © Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2006 87 June 2006 From the above , it can be concluded that managers should , when considering an alli - ance with a certain potential partner , take into account all three dimensions of proximity speciﬁed in this paper . When over - valuing one form of proximity and failing to recognize the importance of other types of proximity , it might be difﬁcult to harvest the potential gains of such an alliance ( Höyssä and Sand - berg 2005 ) . A ﬁrm could focus , for example , on creating ( temporary ) geographical proxim - ity , but it seems unlikely that , without enough organizational and technological proximity , such an effort will be very fruitful . Notes 1 Omitted papers usually came from a completely different ﬁeld of science ( such as chemistry ) , excluding these parts of the databases would have resulted in fewer omitted papers . However , some papers , in particular those dealing with innova - tions and technological collaborations , would have been lost as well . Therefore , it was decided to include these parts of the databases in the search . 2 High availability systems are ones that are always ‘up and running’ , either because there is enough redundancy built into the main systems or because there is a redundant backup system ( Wilkof et al . 1995 ) . References Anand , B . N . and Khanna , T . ( 2000 ) . Do ﬁrms learn to create value ? The case of alliances . Strategic Man - agement Journal , 21 ( 3 ) , 295 – 315 . Boschma , R . A . ( 2005 ) . Proximity and innovation : a critical assessment . Regional Studies , 39 ( 1 ) , 61 – 74 . Bradshaw , M . ( 2001 ) . Multiple proximities : culture and geography in the transport logistics of news - print manufactured in Australia . Environment and Planning A , 33 ( 10 ) , 1717 – 1739 . Brown , J . S . and Duguid , P . ( 1991 ) . Organizational learning and communities of practice : toward a uni - ﬁed view of working , learning and innovation . Organization Science , 2 ( 1 ) , 40 – 57 . Burmeister , A . and Colletis - Wahl , K . ( 1997 ) . Proxim - ity in production networks : the circulatory dimen - sion . European Urban and Regional Studies , 4 ( 3 ) , 231 – 241 . Burns , T . and Stalker , G . M . ( 1961 ) . The Management of Innovation . London : Tavistock . Caniëls , M . J . C . and Romijn , H . ( 2003 ) . Firm - level knowledge accumulation and regional dynamics . Industrial and Corporate Change , 12 ( 6 ) , 1253 – 1278 . Capello , R . ( 1999 ) . Spatial transfers of knowledge in high technology milieux : learning versus collective learning processes . Regional Studies , 33 ( 4 ) , 353 – 366 . Castells , M . and Hall , P . ( 1994 ) . Technopoles of the World : The Making of Twenty - ﬁrst - century Indus - trial Complexes . London : Routledge . Coenen , L . , Moodysson , J . and Asheim , B . T . ( 2004 ) . Nodes , networks and proximities : on the know - ledge dynamics of the Medicon Valley biotech cluster . European Planning Studies , 12 ( 7 ) , 1003 – 1018 . Cohen , W . M . and Levinthal , D . A . ( 1990 ) . Absorptive capacity : a new perspective on learning and inno - vation . Administrative Science Quarterly , 35 ( 1 ) , 128 – 152 . Colombo , M . G . ( 2003 ) . Alliance form : a test of the contractual and competence perspectives . Strategic Management Journal , 24 ( 12 ) , 1209 – 1229 . Cowan , R . , Jonard , N . and Özman , M . ( 2004 ) . Knowledge dynamics in a network industry . Tech - nological Forecasting and Social Change , 71 , 469 – 484 . Cramton , C . D . ( 2001 ) . The mutual knowledge problem and its consequences for dispersed collaboration . Organization Science , 12 ( 3 ) , 346 – 371 . Draulans , J . , de Man , A . - P . and Volberda , H . W . ( 2003 ) . Building alliance capability : management techniques for superior alliance performance . Long Range Planning , 36 ( 2 ) , 151 – 166 . Filippi , M . and Torre , A . ( 2003 ) . Local organisations and institutions . How can geographical proximity be activated by collective projects ? International Journal of Technology Management , 26 ( 2 – 4 ) , 386 – 400 . Fung , M . K . ( 2003 ) . Technological proximity and co - movements of stock returns . Economics Letters , 79 ( 1 ) , 131 – 136 . Gallaud , D . and Torre , A . ( 2004 ) . Geographical prox - imity and circulation of knowledge trough inter - ﬁrm cooperation . In Wink , R . ( ed . ) , Academia – Business Links : European Policy Strategies and Lessons Learnt . Basingstoke : Palgrave Macmillan , pp . 137 – 158 . Gallaud , D . and Torre , A . ( 2005 ) . Geographical prox - imity and the diffusion of knowledge : the case of 88 © Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2006 Proximity and inter - organizational collaboration : A literature review SME’s in biotechnology . In Koch , A . ( ed . ) , Rethinking Regional Innovation . Dordrecht : Klu - wer , pp . 127 – 146 . Gertler , M . S . ( 1995 ) . Being there – proximity , organ - ization , and culture in the development and adop - tion of advanced manufacturing technologies . Economic Geography , 71 ( 1 ) , 1 – 26 . Gill , J . and Butler , R . J . ( 2003 ) . Managing instability in cross - cultural alliances . Long Range Planning , 36 ( 6 ) , 543 – 563 . Goessling , T . ( 2004 ) . Proximity , trust and morality in networks . European Planning Studies , 12 ( 5 ) , 675 – 689 . Granovetter , M . S . ( 1985 ) . Economic action and social structure : the problem of embeddedness . American Journal of Sociology , 91 ( 3 ) , 481 – 510 . Greunz , L . ( 2003 ) . Geographically and technologi - cally mediated knowledge spillovers between Euro - pean regions . Annals of Regional Science , 37 ( 4 ) , 657 – 680 . Hagedoorn , J . and Schakenraad , J . ( 1994 ) . The effect of strategic technology alliances on company per - formance . Strategic Management Journal , 15 ( 4 ) , 291 – 309 . Hofstede , G . ( 2001 ) . Culture’s Consequences : Com - paring Values , Behaviors , Institutions , and Organi - zations Across Nations . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . Howells , J . R . L . ( 2002 ) . Tacit knowledge , innovation and economic geography . Urban Studies , 39 ( 5 – 6 ) , 871 – 884 . Höyssä , M . and Sandberg , B . ( 2005 ) . Proximity in the Strategic Alliances of Small Knowledge - Intensive Firms . Copenhagen : The Copenhagen Conference on Strategic Management . Hyypiä , M . and Kautonen , M . ( 2005 ) . Dimensions of Proximity in Relationships between Knowledge Intensive Business Service Firms and Their Clients . Aalborg : Regional Studies Association International Conference on Regional Growth Agendas . Kirat , T . and Lung , Y . ( 1999 ) . Innovation and proxim - ity – Territories as loci of collective learning pro - cesses . European Urban and Regional Studies , 6 ( 1 ) , 27 – 38 . Lam , A . ( 1997 ) . Embedded ﬁrms , embedded know - ledge : problems of collaboration and knowledge transfer in global cooperative ventures . Organiza - tion Studies , 18 ( 6 ) , 973 – 996 . Lambe , C . J . , Spekman , R . E . and Hunt , S . D . ( 2002 ) . Alliance competence , resources , and alliance suc - cess : conceptualization , measurement , and initial test . Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science , 30 ( 2 ) , 141 – 158 . Laneh , P . J . and Lubatkin , M . H . ( 1998 ) . Relative absorptive capacity and interorganizational learn - ing . Strategic Management Journal , 19 ( 5 ) , 461 – 477 . Lenartowicz , T . and Roth , K . ( 1999 ) . A framework for culture assessment . Journal of International Business Studies , 30 ( 4 ) , 781 – 798 . MacKinnon , D . , Cumbers , A . and Chapman , K . ( 2002 ) . Learning , innovation and regional develop - ment : a critical appraisal of recent debates . Progress in Human Geography , 26 ( 3 ) , 293 – 311 . Man , A . - P . de ( 2005 ) . Alliance capability : a compar - ison of the alliance strength of European and American companies . European Management Jour - nal , 23 ( 3 ) , 315 – 323 . Meisters , C . and Werker , C . ( 2004 ) . Physical and organizational proximity in territorial innovation systems : introduction to the special issue . Journal of Economic Geography , 4 ( 1 ) , 1 – 2 . Mizruchi , M . S . ( 1993 ) . Cohesion , equivalence , and similarity of behavior : a theoretical and empirical assessment . Social Networks , 15 ( 3 ) , 275 – 307 . Morgan , K . ( 1997 ) . The learning region : institutions , innovation and regional renewal . Regional Studies , 31 ( 5 ) , 491 – 503 . Nooteboom , B . ( 1999 ) . Innovation and inter - ﬁrm linkages : new implications for policy . Research Policy , 28 ( 8 ) , 793 – 805 . Nooteboom , B . ( 2000 ) . Learning and Innovation in Organizations and Economies . Oxford : Oxford University Press . North , D . C . ( 1991 ) . Institutions . Journal of Economic Perspectives , 5 ( 1 ) , 97 – 112 . Oerlemans , L . A . G . and Meeus , M . T . H . ( 2005 ) . Do organisational and spatial proximity impact on ﬁrm performance ? Regional Studies , 39 ( 1 ) , 89 – 104 . Oerlemans , L . A . G . , Meeus , M . T . H . and Boekema , F . W . M . ( 2001 ) . On the spatial embeddedness of innovation networks : an exploration of the proxim - ity effect . Tijdschrift voor Economische en Sociale Geograﬁe , 92 ( 1 ) , 60 – 75 . Oliver , A . L . and Ebers , M . ( 1998 ) . Networking net - work studies : an analysis of conceptual conﬁgura - tions in the study of inter - organizational relationships . Organization Studies , 19 ( 4 ) , 549 – 583 . Park , S . H . and Russo , M . V . ( 1996 ) . When competi - tion eclipses cooperation : an event history analysis of joint venture failure . Management Science , 42 ( 6 ) , 875 – 889 . Pettigrew , A . M . ( 1979 ) . On studying organizational cultures . Administrative Science Quarterly , 24 ( 4 ) , 570 – 581 . © Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2006 89 June 2006 Rallet , A . and Torre , A . ( 1999 ) . Is geographical prox - imity necessary in the innovation networks in the era of global economy ? Geo Journal , 49 ( 4 ) , 373 – 380 . Rice , R . E . and Aydin , C . ( 1991 ) . Attitudes toward new organizational technology : network proximity as a mechanism for social information - processing . Administrative Science Quarterly , 36 ( 2 ) , 219 – 244 . Saxenian , A . ( 1991 ) . The origins and dynamics of production networks in Silicon Valley . Research Policy , 20 ( 5 ) , 423 – 437 . Schamp , E . W . , Rentmeister , B . and Lo , V . ( 2004 ) . Dimensions of proximity in knowledge - based net - works : the cases of investment banking and auto - mobile design . European Planning Studies , 12 ( 5 ) , 607 – 624 . Shane , S . ( 2000 ) . Prior knowledge and the discovery of entrepreneurial opportunities . Organization Sci - ence , 11 ( 4 ) , 448 – 469 . Sole , D . and Edmondson , A . ( 2002 ) . Situated know - ledge and learning in dispersed teams . British Jour - nal of Management , 13 ( Special issue ) , S17 – S34 . Sternberg , R . ( 1999 ) . Innovative linkages and pro - ximity : empirical results from recent surveys of small and medium sized ﬁrms in German regions . Regional Studies , 33 ( 6 ) , 529 – 540 . Torre , A . and Gilly , J . P . ( 2000 ) . On the analytical dimension of proximity dynamics . Regional Stud - ies , 34 ( 2 ) , 169 – 180 . Torre , A . and Rallet , A . ( 2005 ) . Proximity and local - ization . Regional Studies , 39 ( 1 ) , 47 – 59 . Tremblay , D . , Klein , J . , Fontan , J . and Roussaeau , S . ( 2003 ) . Territorial proximity and innovation : a survey in the Montreal region . Revue d’Economie Region - ale et Urbaine , ( 5 ) , 835 – 852 . Tushman , M . L . and Anderson , P . ( 1986 ) . Technolog - ical discontinuities and organizational environ - ments . Administrative Science Quarterly , 31 ( 3 ) , 439 – 465 . Wilkof , M . V . , Brown , D . W . and Selsky , J . W . ( 1995 ) . When the stories are different : the inﬂuence of cor - porate culture mismatches on interorganizational relations . The Journal of Applied Behavioral Sci - ence , 31 , 373 – 388 . Wuyts , S . , Colomb , M . G . , Dutta , S . and Nooteboom , B . ( 2005 ) . Empirical tests of optimal cognitive dis - tance . Journal of Economic Behavior & Organiza - tion , 58 ( 2 ) , 277 – 302 . Zeller , C . ( 2004 ) . North Atlantic innovative relations of Swiss pharmaceuticals and the proximities with regional biotech arenas . Economic Geography , 80 ( 1 ) , 83 – 111 . J . Knoben is from the Department of Organisa - tion Studies , Tilburg University , Warandelaan 2 , PO Box 90153 , 5000 LE Tilburg , The Netherlands . L . A . G . Oerlemans is from the Department of Organisation Studies , Tilburg University , Warandelaan 2 , PO Box 90153 , 5000 LE Tilburg , The Netherlands , and from the Department of Engineering and Technology Management , University of Pretoria , Republic of South Africa .