Hawkish Biases and Group Decision - Making ⇤ Joshua D . Kertzer † , Marcus Holmes ‡ , Brad L . LeVeck § , and Carly Wayne ¶ April 14 , 2021 11458 words A bstract : How do cognitive biases relevant to foreign policy decision - making aggregate in groups ? Many tendencies identiﬁed in the behavioral decision - making literature – such as re - active devaluation , intentionality bias , and risk - seeking in the domain of losses – have all been hypothesized to increase hawkishness in foreign policy preferences , potentially increasing the risk of conﬂict , but the way in which these “hawkish biases " operate in the small group con - texts in which foreign policy decisions are often made is unknown . We ﬁeld three large - scale group experiments ( n = 3973 ) to test how these tendencies translate in both hierarchical and horizontally - structured groups . We ﬁnd that groups are just as susceptible to these hawkish biases as individuals , with neither group decision - making structure signiﬁcantly attenuating the magnitude of bias . Moreover , diverse groups perform similarly to more homogeneous ones , exhibiting similar degrees of bias and marginally increased risk of dissension and deci - sion paralysis . These results suggest that the “aggregation problem " may be less problematic for psychological theories in IR than some critics have argued , as many core cognitive biases known to affect individual decision - making appear to have a similar impact in small group contexts . This has important implications for understanding the psychology of political con - ﬂict , foreign policy - making , and the role of group processes in international politics . ⇤ This research was funded by the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency ( DARPA ) Award # W911NF1920162 . † Professor of Government , Department of Government , Harvard University . Email : jkertzer @ gov . harvard . edu . Web : http : / people . fas . harvard . edu / ~ jkertzer / ‡ Associate Professor , Department of Political Science , College of William and Mary . Email : mholmes @ wm . edu . Web : http : / / www . marcusholmes . com § Associate Professor , Department of Political Science , University of California - Merced . Email : bleveck @ ucmerced . edu . Web : https : / / faculty . ucmerced . edu / bleveck / ¶ Assistant Professor , Department of Political Science , Washington University in St . Louis . Email : carlywayne @ wustl . edu Web : https : / / www . carlywayne . com 1 The past several decades have seen a surge of interest in the study of psychological approaches to the study of international politics ( for a review , see Levy , 2013 ; Mintz , 2007 ; Hafner - Burton et al . , 2017 ; Kertzer and Tingley , 2018 ; Davis and McDermott , 2020 ) . Unlike structural realist or rationalist approaches that largely study features of the environments in which actors are embedded ( Waltz , 1979 ; Lake and Powell , 1999 ) , psychological theories of international politics turn to the properties of actors themselves ( Larson , 1985 ; McDermott , 1998 ; Vertzberger , 1998 ; Saunders , 2011 ; Rathbun , 2014 ; Kertzer , 2016 ; Renshon , 2017 ; Yarhi - Milo , 2018 ; Holmes , 2018 ; Landau - Wells , 2018 ; Powers , 2021 ) . A large volume of literature has thus emerged studying the psychology of political elites : their operational codes ( Leites , 1951 ; George , 1969 ) , personality traits and leadership styles ( Greenstein , 1969 ; Etheredge , 1978 ; Hermann , 1980 ) , and so on . One of the central insights of this literature is that leaders are imbued with many of the same psychological mechanisms as ordinary citizens ( LeVeck et al . , 2014 ; Sheffer et al . , 2018 ; Kertzer , Forthcoming ) : they are prone to misperceptions ( Jervis , 1976 ; Stein , 1988 ) , engage in motivated reasoning ( Baekgaard et al . , 2017 ; Kertzer , Rathbun and Rathbun , 2020 ) , and rely on heuristics and biases ( Poulsen and Aisbett , 2013 ; Brooks , Cunha and Mosley , 2015 ; Johnson , 2020 ) . The presence of these biases in decision - making is of particular importance . As Kahneman and Ren - shon ( 2007 ) note , in the context of foreign policy , nearly all of the cognitive biases uncovered by psycholo - gists would lead political leaders to make more hawkish decisions , all else equal . 1 That is , these tendencies increase suspicion , hostility and aggression towards potential adversaries ( Kahneman and Renshon , 2009 ) , increasing the risk of political conﬂict and violence . 2 Individuals’ tendency to take risks to avoid a loss ( Kahneman and Tversky , 1979 ) , for example , could encourage leaders to prolong wars beyond the point at which victory is achievable , engaging in risky offensives with little chance of success ( McDermott , 1998 ) . Likewise , leaders may become less willing to make concessions and more willing to risk large losses when bargaining ( Levy , 1996 ) . The biased ways in which people assess the motives of adversaries could also increase the potential for conﬂict ( Jervis , 1976 ) . For instance , individuals tend to assess the intention - 1 See also Johnson ( 2020 , 268 ) . While our interest here is on three biases that tend to move in a hawkish direction with respect to decision - making , it may be that others have a tendency to move in a dovish direction , or create misperceptions that lead to cooperation rather than the use of force – see , e . g . Grynaviski 2014 . 2 We follow Kahneman and Renshon ( 2007 ) in referring to these phenomena as “hawkish biases " , but we do not use the term in a pejorative sense , or to imply that these tendencies are inherently irrational – see , e . g . Gigerenzer and Gaissmaier 2011 ; Johnson 2020 . We can think of these tendencies more generally as what behavioral scientists refer to as “non - standard " preferences , beliefs , and decision - making , behavioral regularities traditionally excluded from canonical rational choice models ( DellaVigna , 2009 ; Hafner - Burton et al . , 2017 ) . For an application of hawkishness to IR more generally , see Mattes and Weeks ( 2019 ) . 2 ality of an act by its consequences , rather than by a thorough examination of the perpetrator’s motives ( Knobe , 2003 ) . As a result , wartime actions that produce morally bad outcomes are more likely to be deemed intentional than identical actions that produce morally good outcomes ( Chu , Holmes and Traven , Forthcoming ) . Yet another cognitive bias that can prolong or worsen conﬂict is reactive devaluation – the tendency of individuals to immediately discount or devalue proposals coming from an adversary , as compared to identical proposals offered by one’s own side or a third party mediator ( Ashmore et al . , 1979 ; Maoz et al . , 2002 ) . Yet for all of its rich insights , this literature has wrestled with a challenge . Most of what scholars know about psychological biases in decision - making comes from the study of individuals , but many foreign policy decisions are made in group contexts . Indeed , often , groups are used in foreign policy decision - making settings precisely due to their ( presumed ) ability to counter the decision - making pathologies or shortcomings of individuals acting in isolation ( ’t Hart , Stern and Sundelius , 1997 ) . As such , the theoretical and empirical value of insights from the behavioral sciences on the pathologies of individual decision - making are often criticized in the study of foreign policy for a lack of clear understanding of how preferences , information , or even traits , aggregate into group - level decisions ( Powell , 2017 ) , typically arguing that these psychological biases should be mitigated or otherwise cancel out in group settings ( Saunders , 2017 , S220 ) . Even proponents of psychological approaches have noted this limitation . In an important review of prospect theory , for example , Levy ( 1997 , 102 ) , notes that “Most of what we want to explain in international politics involves the actions and interactions of states . . . each of which is , in principle , a collective decision - making body . The concepts of loss aversion , the reﬂection of risk orientations , and framing were developed for individual decision making and tested on individuals , not on groups , and we cannot automatically assume that these concepts and hypotheses apply equally well at the collective level . " Writing two decades later , Hafner - Burton et al . ( 2017 , S18 - S21 ) express a similar concern , noting that institutional structures are often designed precisely to mitigate psychological biases . Ultimately , however , the question of how psychological biases in foreign policy aggregate in groups – and whether groups indeed attenuate these biases – remains an empirical one , as theories of aggregation provide few guarantees . For example , Arrow’s famous “Impossibility Theorem” shows that , even if all individuals within a group are perfectly rational and calculating , many aggregation mechanisms can still 3 produce irrational choices ( Arrow , 1950 ) . Meanwhile , other theorems show that aggregation can lead to more optimal decison - making . However , such improvement often requires a set of fairly restrictive as - sumptions . For example , the well - known Condorcet Jury Theorem shows that sufﬁciently large groups can make better decisions if each individual votes independently and makes the right choice with prob - ability greater than 50 % ( Austen - Smith and Banks , 1996 ) . Yet , violating any of these assumptions may actually cause groups to make worse decisions than individuals ( Austen - Smith and Banks , 1996 ) . This could be particularly concerning in many foreign policy decision - making contexts , where policy is often decided by small groups of individuals who inﬂuence one another and who may be systematically biased towards the wrong decision ( e . g . Janis , 1972 ) . In this piece , we offer what we believe to be the ﬁrst direct experimental test of the aggregation of psychological biases in foreign policy . We ﬁeld three large - scale online experiments , where nearly 4000 participants work through a series of foreign policy scenarios , which they randomly completed either as individuals , or in one of two different types of group structures . We ﬁnd that three prominent tendencies from the behavioral decision - making literature — risk - taking to avoid a loss , the intentionality bias and reactive devaluation — replicate in small group contexts . We ﬁnd no evidence that these tendencies are signiﬁcantly reduced in group settings , and ﬁnd that in some decision - making contexts they may even be exacerbated . Moreover , we ﬁnd little evidence that more experienced leaders can improve group decision - making or that more diverse groups are less prone to hawkish biases . These ﬁndings have important implications for how we understand the role of group processes in foreign policy - making , suggesting that groups are not a panacea for producing optimal policy decisions , and that we should not inherently assume that the psychological tendencies that shape individual decision - making do not appear in collective contexts as well . 1 Biases & Group Decision - Making The question of how group processes impact decision - making is not a new one . Indeed , outside of inter - national politics , there is a rich and diverse set of literature that has explored the ways in which group set - tings impact bias and judgment . In legal studies , for example , research on jury decision - making explores 4 how juror - level characteristics aggregate in shaping jury - level decisions ( Devine et al . , 2001 ) . In business administration , organizational behavior research focuses on how the traits of team - members have varying effects on team performance depending on the types of tasks ( Moynihan and Peterson , 2001 ) . In social network analysis , scholars have experimentally studied the conditions under which collective decision - making outperforms individual decision - making ( Bernstein , Shore and Lazer , 2018 ) . Indeed , a small cottage industry has now formed that includes interdisciplinary approaches to “small group decision - making , ” which investigates , among other things , individual cognitive biases and under what conditions they might be overcome ( or exacerbated ) in a group setting . Even non - human animal models might offer relevant insights . A school of ﬁsh can follow light too weak for any individual ﬁsh to follow ( Berdahl et al . , 2013 ) , for example . While this diverse scholarship may offer crucial insights for the study of foreign policy , there are important limitations . Many invocations of the “aggregation problem " in political science are more philo - sophical than empirical , assuming ex ante that aggregation is a challenge rather than empirically testing the speciﬁc contexts in which psychological variables should or should not aggregate ( e . g . Mercer , 1995 , 237 - 238 ; Wendt , 2004 ; Johnson , 2015 ; Powell , 2017 ; Gildea , Forthcoming ) . Because of the high cost of bring - ing large numbers of people into the lab , many of the canonical experimental tests of aggregation in group decision - making have traditionally been somewhat underpowered , in which scholars are testing the im - pact of relatively small numbers of groups ( e . g . Lewin , Lippitt and White , 1939 ) . This limitation has meant that it has been difﬁcult to causally identify what aspects of group decision - making affect outcomes . Per - haps most importantly , foreign policy decision - making involves three theoretically relevant institutional structures and task properties that differentiate it from some of the main conﬁgurations frequently studied in literature outside of political science . First , foreign policy decision - making , particularly over security issues , often features ill - structured problems ( Voss and Post , 1988 ; Brutger and Kertzer , 2018 ) , where the probability distributions may be unknown . Actors may not know , or disagree , on the parameters of the decision - making task or even disagree on the ultimate goal with respect to the decision to be taken . These situations stand in contrast to much , though not all , of the small group research and analysis of aggregation that occurs in other dis - ciplines . Studies investigating cognitive biases , for example , often utilize well structured problems with 5 clear probability distributions . Alternatively , studies that investigate the so - called “wisdom of the crowds” ( e . g . LeVeck and Narang , 2017 ) will often utilize difﬁcult , but nevertheless clearly structured , math prob - lems . It therefore remains unclear how generalizable insights from clearly structured problems may be to decision - making in the more amorphous context that characterizes much of international politics . Second , foreign policy decision - making often involves hierarchically structured groups , where the chain of command and decision - making rules are known to all of the actors involved . Much of the existing research on small group dynamics and aggregation of preferences in groups has tended to focus on “ﬂat” or horizontal groups , such as teams . In these cases , the institutional structure and chain of command may not be provided . Hierarchies may emerge over time as a result of speciﬁc group members’ personalities ( Strodtbeck , James and Hawkins , 1957 ) , but this is theoretically very different than ingrained hierarchies built on formal and clear roles and decision - making rules . It is partly because of the hierarchical nature of many foreign policy institutions that much of the foreign policy decision - making literature focuses on leaders , rather than advisers ( though see Kaarbo , 1998 ; Redd , 2002 ; Ausderan , 2013 ; Weeks , 2014 ; Saunders , 2017 ) . Finally , the substantive interests of scholars of foreign policy decision - making , including distinct traits , group composition characteristics , and outcomes of interest , are often very different than those studied in existing small group research in other domains . Analysts of foreign policy are often interested in explain - ing speciﬁc dependent variables , such as a decision to use force , sets of traits that may have an effect in crafting those decisions , such as hawkishness or military experience , and the ways in which information is distributed across group members . These are quite different than those often studied in small group research , such as team morale or workplace satisfaction in a business context , or performance on mathe - matical exercises . Similarly , it may be that the speciﬁc decisions of interest , such as the use of force , engage different aggregation processes than these types of decisions , limiting the utility of extrapolating ﬁndings from small group research to foreign policy . Indeed , existing work in political science has tended to focus on the ways in which groups might im - prove decision - making , which brings in a normative component , and has returned a mixed bag of results , ﬁnding that factors such as group size , composition , decision - making rules , political context , and leader - ship can all impact the quality of the decision - making process and outcome ( Kerr , MacCoun and Kramer , 6 1996 ) . For example , groupthink ( Janis , 1972 ) , the most famous psychological dynamic documented in political group decision - making , whereby group members striving for unanimity exacerbates decision - making pathologies is hypothesized to be a contingent phenomenon ( ’t Hart , Stern and Sundelius , 1997 ) , most likely to emerge under conditions of strong social unit cohesion and external stress . Driven by this ﬁnding , as well as more recent research afﬁrming the danger of group members’ striv - ing for unanimity ( Esser , 1998 ; Sunstein , Hastie et al . , 2014 ) , many of the most prominent proposals for improving the quality of foreign policy decision - making focus on constructing a diverse decision unit , led by an experienced leader who fosters healthy debate and dissent in the policy - making process . These prin - ciples guide decision - making models such as multiple advocacy ( George , 1972 ) , the competitive advisory system ( Johnson , 1974 ) , and distributed decision - making ( Schneeweiss , 2012 ) . Indeed , the perceived value of diversity as a tool to harness the mental power of groups and improve decision - making ( Horowitz et al . , 2019 ; Page , 2019 ) is a hallmark of much recent scholarship . However , diversity is not without risk , and may also present potential downsides , potentially increasing the risk of intragroup conﬂict and decision paralysis ( Mintz and Wayne , 2016 ) . As such , the beneﬁts of diversity in improving decision - making may depend on the presence of a leader that is well - positioned to actually channel that diversity in productive directions . For example , research has suggested that a leader’s prior experience ( Horowitz and Fuhrmann , 2018 ; Saunders , 2017 ) , leadership style ( Hermann and Preston , 1994 ; Preston , 2001 ) , predispositions and personality ( Schafer and Crichlow , 2010 ) can all shape their ability to harness the information processing power of groups to improve decision - making . However , most existing research in political science on group decision - making relies on small - N case studies , which limits our ability to causally identify how different attributes of the group setting , such as the distribution of information individuals have or the experience they bring to the table , impact the quality of decision - making . In sum , while there are impressive cognate bodies of literature on aggregation outside of political science and rich descriptive evidence on group dynamics in policy - making settings , we do not yet have strong experimental evidence regarding the affects of groups in the complex settings that characterize foreign policy decision - making , nor do we fully understand the ways in which different decision rules , group composition , and leader attributes shape these processes . 7 2 Research Design The present study thus aims to examine the relative efﬁcacy of groups in reducing the impact of " hawkish biases” on decision - making using three large - scale online group experiments conducted in Fall 2019 - Winter 2020 , whose structure is summarized in Figure 1 . 3 By manipulating both the group setting and decision - rule , this study provides us with causal leverage to examine how the cognitive biases of individ - uals aggregate in different types of group decision - making units . The study proceeds as follows . After completing an individual difference and demographic battery , respondents are randomly assigned to one of three group conditions . In the individual condition , 760 respondents are asked to make decisions on various foreign policy scenarios individually , taking notes as they think through their options . In the two group conditions , respondents are assigned to a group of four other survey - takers , in which they participate in a group chatroom , discussing their options together before deciding on a course of action . Subjects in the group conditions are assigned to one of two types of groups — a “horizontal” group , where subjects are asked to try to come to a collective , unanimous decision and each participant has equal say in the decision - making process , or a “hierarchical” group in which one of the ﬁve participants is randomly assigned as the leader of the group who gets to make the ﬁnal choice , in consultation with the four other participants who take on the role of advisor . In the analysis below , the group conditions consist of 3213 respondents , forming 771 groups ( 406 in horizontal , 365 in hierarchical ) of up to ﬁve members each . We paid an average of $ 10 per subject in respondent incentives , and altogether , the effective sample size in our study is N = 3987 . 4 After being assigned to one of these treatments , respondents pass through three separate experimental modules using canonical experimental setups to examine the prevalence of various biases in the context of foreign policy decision - making scenarios . Respondents in the individual condition complete these mod - 3 Respondents were a sample of adults in the United States recruited using Qualtrics . Qualtrics is a panel aggregator , such that they have access to a much larger sample than any single online panel , necessary to produce a sufﬁcient ﬂow of respondents for suc - cessful synchronous group interaction . In addition , compared to panels such as MTurk , where many respondents are “professional survey takers” familiar with psychological manipulations , many respondents on Qualtrics are more casual survey - takers . 4 These groups of ﬁve – as well as the assigned leader in hierarchical groups – stay the same throughout each of three experimental modules . That is , group members do not change from module to module , though some groups do become smaller due to dropouts ; our analysis below only includes groups with no fewer than 3 members ( in the hierarchical condition the group must also include a leader ) in a given experiment . We also manually screened the respondents for “bots " , removing any individual ( or group , in the group conditions ) from the analysis that displayed bot - like behavior in the chat logs . For a detailed set of attrition tests and sensitivity analyses that show the robustness of our ﬁndings , see Appendix § 2 . 2 . 8 Figure 1 : Study design Dispositional & demographicbattery Individual : respondents take studies solo Horizontal : respondents take studies in groups of 3 - 5 Hierarchical : respondents take studies in groups of 3 - 5 w leader 3 . Prospect theory experiment 2 . Group assignment Domain of gains Domain of losses 4 . Intentionality bias experiment No fatalities Fatalities 5 . Reactive devaluation experiment US China Manipulate fatalities Manipulate loss frame Rescue scenario to save stranded personnel Justification / deliberation Policy choice US naval vessel sunk off North Korean shores Justification / deliberation Assess intentionality Manipulate authorship Proposal in US - China trade talks Justification / deliberation Indicatesupport 1 . Demographics 9 ules as individuals , writing down their justiﬁcations for their decisions and making decisions themselves , whereas respondents in the group conditions complete these modules as groups , deliberating as a group before reaching decisions . 5 A sample group deliberation is shown in Figure 2 . Respondents were generally engaged in the group deliberations ; in the horizontal condition , 74 - 76 % of group members participated more than once in each deliberation , and in the hierarchical condition , 76 - 82 % of group members par - ticipated more than once in each deliberation , with leaders displaying more frequently than advisers — though as we show in Appendix § 4 , our ﬁndings are robust and do not signiﬁcantly vary across different levels of group participation . The ﬁrst experimental module examines sensitivity to gain and loss frames on policy preferences — a canonical ﬁnding from Prospect Theory . Subjects are presented with a scenario in which “600 lives are at stake in a war - torn region . ” Subjects are asked to choose one of two courses of action ( Policy A or Policy B ) . Policy A will deﬁnitively lead to 200 people dying and 400 people being saved . Policy B has a probabilistic outcome , with a 1 / 3 probability that 0 people will die ( 600 people will be saved ) and a 2 / 3 probability that 600 people will die ( 0 people will be saved ) . The experimental treatment within this module is whether the results of each policy is presented in the domain of gains ( e . g . " 200 people will be saved " ) versus the domain of loss ( e . g . " 400 people will die " ) . Half of respondents in each experimental condition ( individual , horizontal group , hierarchical group ) receive the “gains” treatment and half receive the “loss” treatment . 6 The second experimental module tests susceptibility to the intentionality bias — the degree to which assessments of intentionality are affected by the ( negative ) results of an event . In this module , respondents are asked to assess how likely it is that a US navy vessel sunk 100 miles off the coast of North Korea was intentionally versus accidentally targeted by the North Koreans . The randomly assigned treatment in this module is the number of casualties the sinking of this vessel has caused : zero verus all 100 servicepeople on board . Half of respondents in each experimental condition receive each treatment . The ﬁnal experimental module explores the prevalence of reactive devaluation of a trade negotiations proposal between the United States and China . Subjects view a short proposal that purports to resolve on - 5 Respondents in the group conditions deliberated using chat platform constructed in SMARTRIQS ( Molnar , 2019 ) . 6 All members of a single group receive the same treatment . For example , the ﬁve members of a horizontal group that have been randomly grouped together would all receive only the “gains” frame . 10 going US - Chinese disputes over trade . The experimental treatment is the authorship of the text – whether the United States or China drafted the proposal . As with the ﬁrst two modules , half of respondents in each experimental condition receive each treatment . Instrumentation for each of the three experiments is shown in Appendix § 1 . Figure 2 : Sample group deliberation transcript * * * Advisor1 has joined the chat * * * * * * Advisor4 has joined the chat * * * * * * Advisor3 has joined the chat * * * * * * Leader has joined the chat * * * * * * Advisor2 has joined the chat * * * Advisor3 : Everyone got rescued , but by whom ? Advisor1 : I’m inclined to believe it is unlikely that the ship was attacked as all survived . Leader : Given the past erratic behavior of North koreas leaders I would say it is extremely likelyAdvisor3 : If NK attacked , they wouldn’t have rescued anyone . Advisor3 : Unless it was an accident , and they felt bad . Advisor4 : no one said they rescued the crew Advisor2 : We should understand the details of the situation before coming to any conclusion . It is unlikely that this was a provocation . It may be an accident Advisor1 : An attack to me would mean at least a few would not have survived Advisor4 : I would assume its an unfortunate accident . assuming nk did it will cause more panic . unless another incident occur Advisor3 : It could be purely coincidental that the ship sank in the location it did . I still want to know who did the search and rescue . Advisor2 : All service people survived . So is is unlikely that this was an attack Leader : I agree advisor 2 , we need more details to come to a informed decision Advisor4 : we can aummer somewhat unlikely and just monitor any suspicious activities Advisor1 : search & rescue is moot . The question is NK attacked it or didn’t Advisor3 : It would be best to not accuse NK of anything until a reason for sinking is determined . Advisor2 : I think this need more detailed investigation Advisor3 : Accusations could escalate quickly given their leader’s nature . * * * Advisor1 has left the chat * * * Advisor3 : I say it is unlikely . * * * Advisor4 has left the chat * * * * * * Advisor3 has left the chat * * * * * * Leader has left the chat * * * Figure 2 displays the transcript of a group deliberation session from one of the hierarchical groups in the intentionality bias experiment . Note that one of the group members points to the absence of fatalities as a sign the act was unintentional , consistent with the logic of intentionality bias . 2 . 1 Hypotheses Our core hypotheses examine the extent to which hawkish biases replicate in individual settings and the degree to which group discussion – and the structure and composition of those groups – affect their prevalence . 11 To begin , we expect that , in individual decision - making contexts , we will replicate canonical cognitive biases that could lead decision - makers to support more “hawkish” solutions to political conﬂict : H1 . Hawkish Biases in Individual Decision Making : • H1a . Risk - Taking to Avoid Loss : Individuals will be more risk - seeking in the domain of losses than the domain of gains . • H1b . Consequences & Assessments of Intentionality : Individuals will be more likely to assess an incident as intentional when its costs are higher . • H1c . Devaluation of Proposals from Adversaries : Individuals will evaluate a proposal from an adversary more negatively than the same proposal from their own side . Given the competing ﬁndings from the extant literature on the efﬁcacy of groups in reducing biases , however , the effect of groups could go in many directions – increasing , decreasing , or having no impact . H2 . The Relative Efﬁcacy of Groups : • H2a . Beneﬁt of Groups : Group dialogues and debate may reduce the prevalence of biases , as compared to individual decision - making . • H2b . Risks of Groups : Group pathologies such as the desire for conformity or group polarization may exacerbate biases , as compared to individual decision - making . • H2c . Negligible Impact of Groups : The deeply ingrained , subconscious nature of most hawkish biases may cause groups to have no effect on the prevalence of these biases . 3 Analysis To test these hypotheses , we ﬁrst look within each group treatment ( individual , horizontal , hierarchical ) to examine the prevalence of each tested bias across the vignette treatments ( gain / loss frame , 0 / 100 fatalities , US / China - authorship ) . We then compare these differences across groups to assess the extent to which these different decision - making structures affect susceptibility to each of the tested biases . Finally , we probe the 12 robustness of our ﬁndings , assessing the degree to which various types of leader characteristics or group diversity impacts susceptibility to biases and the ability to reach a decision in the ﬁrst place . 3 . 1 Susceptibility to Gains / Loss Framing We begin by examining the prevalence of a canonical hawkish bias across our three group formulations — the effects of loss versus gains framing on individuals’ acceptance or avoidance of risky choice . Figure 3 : Prospect theory framing effects replicate in groups 0 . 33 0 . 4 0 . 51 0 . 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 Individual Hierarchical group Horizontal group Condition E ff e c t o f do m a i n o f l o ss e s on p r ( r i sky c ho i c e ) Figure 3 displays the effect of the domain of losses on the probability of risky choice , within each group context ( individual , hierarchical , horizontal ) . The ﬁgure shows that the canonical prospect theory result replicates in both hierarchical and horizontal groups , and is exacerbated in hierarchical groups . Point estimates are cell means with 90 % and 95 % bootstrapped conﬁdence intervals . Horizontal group decisions calculated here using the median voter decision rule . See Figure 4 for additional decision rule results . In the individual condition , we ﬁnd that our results strongly replicate the core ﬁnding of Prospect Theory . When choices are framed as a potential loss ( e . g . of life ) individuals are signiﬁcantly more likely to choose the probabilistic policy – that is , they are more accepting of the risk that all 600 lives will be lost in order to preserve the possibility of an outcome where 0 people die . In contrast , those presented with a gains framework , where people may be saved , are much more risk averse , preferring Policy A ( 200 people 13 will be saved ) . Do groups reduce susceptibility to this bias ? Our results suggest they do not and , if anything , may increase the effect of frames on choice . In both types of groups , groups randomly presented with loss frames are signiﬁcantly more likely to prefer the probabilistic outcome than groups that were presented with a gain frame . Figure 3 illustrates these results . Examining the magnitude of these effect sizes across decision - making structures , we ﬁnd that hierarchical groups in particular are signiﬁcantly more sensitive to framing effects than are individuals . 7 Comparing the horizontal groups to individual decision - makers , Figure 4 suggests that the suscep - tibility to gain / loss frames may depend on the speciﬁc decision - rule used to assess these groups . For example , examining horizontal groups that succeeded in reaching a unanimous decision , we ﬁnd similar results as in the hierarchical condition : the group setting increases susceptibility to these framing effects ( p < . 004 ) . However , if we examine the full set of horizontal groups using a less stringent decision rule , such as a majority rule ( p < . 08 ) or median voter ( p < . 16 ) , we do not ﬁnd evidence that horizontal groups perform signiﬁcantly differently than individuals . Either way , it is clear that horizontal groups do not reduce susceptibility to prospect theory’s framing effects . 3 . 2 Intentionality Bias Next , we turn to examine the relative prevalence of the intentionality bias across group settings . While the Prospect Theory module examines a fairly well - deﬁned decision - problem ( e . g . choose policy A or B ) , the intentionality bias module examines a more complex choice : how likely do you think it is that an event was caused by a purposeful attack by an adversary ? In the individual condition , we , once again , ﬁnd that our results strongly replicate the canonical intentionality bias ﬁnding . When the consequences of an event are more negative , in this case , causing fatalities , individuals are signiﬁcantly more likely to assess the event as an intentional provocation rather than the result of an accident or miscommunication . Group settings do little to attenuate this tendency – both horizontal and hierarchical groups are signiﬁcantly 7 When comparing across groups , we use a variety of different methods to account for potential covariate imbalance between individual and group conditions . Results are substantively similar regardless . Without controls , we ﬁnd a p - value < 0 . 02 , with a series of controls for leader - level characteristics p < 0 . 003 and with group - level controls ( demographic characteristics averaged across all group members ) , p < 0 . 002 . See Appendix § 2 . 1 . 14 Figure 4 : Prospect theory framing effects by horizontal decision rule 0 . 52 0 . 4 0 . 42 0 . 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 Horizontal ( Majority rule ) Horizontal ( Median voter ) Horizontal ( Unanimity rule ) Horizontal decision rule E ff e c t o f do m a i n o f l o ss e s on p r ( r i sky c ho i c e ) Figure 4 displays the effect of the domain of losses on the probability of risky choice , within horizontal groups using different decision rules . The ﬁgure shows that the canonical prospect theory result replicates across all three types of horizontal decision rules ( majority rule , median voter , unanimity rule ) , but is the largest in unanimous groups ( signiﬁcantly larger than in the individual condition : p < 0 . 004 ) . Point estimates are cell means with 90 % and 95 % bootstrapped conﬁdence intervals . 15 more likely to assess the sinking of a U . S . navy ship as the consequence of an intentional attack by the North Koreans when there are fatalities reported ( see Figure 5 ) . Figure 5 : Intentionality bias replicates in groups 0 . 1 0 . 1 0 . 09 0 . 0 0 . 1 0 . 2 Individual Hierarchical group Horizontal group Condition E ff e c t o f f a t a li t i e s on pe r c e i v ed i n t en t i ona li t y Figure 5 displays the degree of perceived intentionality , given fatalities , within each group context ( individual , hierarchical , horizontal ) . The ﬁgure shows that the canonical intentionality bias result replicates in both hierarchical and horizontal groups . Point estimates are cell means with 90 % and 95 % bootstrapped conﬁdence intervals . Horizontal group decisions calculated here using the median voter decision rule . See Figure 6 for additional decision rule results . However , unlike the prospect theory experiment , with intentionality bias , we ﬁnd that groups have no effect on the severity of this tendency . While certain group conﬁgurations tended to make our respondents more susceptible to framing effects , in this case groups perform similarly to individuals . 8 Figure 6 shows that as before , horizontal groups that reach a unanimous decision display a more pronounced bias than those assessed with less stringent decision rules ( majority rule or median voter ) . However , these differences are not statistically signiﬁcant . Regardless of the decision rule , both horizontal and hierarchical groups increase their assessments of intentionality in response to negative outcomes by a 8 Comparing across groups : the difference in the effect of fatalities between the individual and horizontal condition ( using the median voter rule ) : p < 0 . 94 without controls , p < 0 . 91 with controls . The difference in the effect of fatalities on assessments of intentionality between the individual and hierarchical condition is : p < 0 . 86 without controls , p < 0 . 84 with controls at the leader - level , p < 0 . 85 with controls at the group - level . See Appendix § 2 . 1 . 16 similar extent as individuals do . Figure 6 : Intentionality bias effects by horizontal decision rule 0 . 13 0 . 1 0 . 1 0 . 0 0 . 1 0 . 2 Horizontal ( Majority rule ) Horizontal ( Median voter ) Horizontal ( Unanimity rule ) Horizontal decision rule E ff e c t o f f a t a li t i e s on pe r c e i v ed i n t en t i ona li t y Figure 6 displays the degree of perceived intentionality , given fatalities , within horizontal groups using different decision rules . The ﬁgure shows that the canonical intentionality bias result replicates across all three types of horizontal decision rules ( majority rule , median voter , unanimity rule ) . As was the case in Figure 4 , the tendency appears slightly larger in unanimous groups , but the difference is not statistically signiﬁcant . Point estimates are cell means with 90 % and 95 % bootstrapped conﬁdence intervals . 3 . 3 Reactive Devaluation Finally , we turn to examine the third hawkish bias tested in this study : reactive devaluation . As Figure 7 shows , here we unexpectedly do not replicate the standard reactive devaluation result across two of the three decision - making units . Namely , individuals are not signiﬁcantly less likely to support a proposal authored by China as compared to one authored by the United States . Likewise , hierarchical groups – where the decision is ultimately made by a single individual after group discussion – also do not prefer US - authored proposals . On the one hand , this ﬁnding is surprising , as the theoretical expectation is that proposals written by an adversary ( e . g . China ) should be automatically devalued as compared to proposals written by 17 one’s own side ( the United States ) . However , work on reactive devaluation also suggests that there are two distinct mechanisms by which proposals are devalued – reactance processes that lead individuals to devalue that which is available compared to what is not ( Brehm and Brehm , 2013 ) and reliance on source credibility as a heuristic for value ( Hovland and Weiss , 1951 ) . Our treatment aims to test this second mechanism : American respondents should devalue a China proposal relative to a US proposal because they would assume the Chinese do not have America’s best interests in mind , so their proposal must not be as good for Americans . However , to the extent that source credibility drives reactive devaluation , reactive devaluation should be strongest when individuals are presented with ambiguous proposals that would necessarily increase their reliance on source heuristics ( Maoz et al . , 2002 ) . When the proposal is detailed and speciﬁc , subjects may be less likely to automatically devalue it because the proposal itself provides enough information to make an assessment . In our study , the proposal subjects received was quite speciﬁc and detailed , with bullet points outlining the exact compromises each side would make in the ongoing trade war . This level of detail may have attenuated reactive devaluation to some extent , making it easier for subjects to look past the purported authorship of the proposal to evaluate the actual proposal content . Another possibility is that the conﬂict tested in this study – contested trade negotiations in the shadow of Trump - era trade wars – resulted in less reactive devaluation simply because the rivalry was less clear - cut than the violent , intractable conﬂicts in which this bias has historically been studied . In others words , Israelis may be more suspicious and distrusting of Palestinians ( Maoz et al . , 2002 ) and Americans more distrusting of the Soviet Union or North Vietnamese during the Cold War ( Ross and Ward , 1995 ; Ash - more et al . , 1979 ) than Americans today are of China , with whom the United States has a less directly confrontational relationship . However , even with the speciﬁcity of this proposal and ambiguity of the rivalry , we do see the phe - nomenon of reactive devaluation replicating in horizontal groups , particularly those groups that reached a unanimous decision ( see Figure 8 ) . Unanimous horizontal groups are marginally more likely than indi - viduals ( p < . 06 ) to devalue the Chinese proposal relative to the American one . This suggests that , to the extent that the potential for reactive devaluation occurs in this context , groups are , if anything , increasing this tendency . 18 Figure 7 : Reactive devaluation experiment displays mixed results - 0 . 02 - 0 . 06 0 . 01 - 0 . 2 - 0 . 1 0 . 0 0 . 1 0 . 2 Individual Hierarchical group Horizontal group Condition E ff e c t o f C h i na au t ho r s h i p on s uppo r t f o r ag r e e m en t Figure 7 displays the effect of Chinese ( vs American ) authorship on support for the policy proposal within each group context ( individual , hierarchical , horizontal ) . The ﬁgure shows that we fail to replicate the canonical reactive devaluation result in the individual and hierarchical group conditions , but replicate the result in the horizontal condition . Point estimates are cell means with 90 % and 95 % bootstrapped conﬁdence intervals . Horizontal group decisions calculated here using the median voter decision rule . See Figure 8 for additional decision rule results . 19 Figure 8 : Reactive devaluation effects by horizontal decision rule - 0 . 1 - 0 . 06 - 0 . 06 - 0 . 2 - 0 . 1 0 . 0 0 . 1 0 . 2 Horizontal ( Majority rule ) Horizontal ( Median voter ) Horizontal ( Unanimity rule ) Horizontal decision rule E ff e c t o f C h i na au t ho r s h i p on s uppo r t f o r ag r ee m en t Figure 8 displays the effect of Chinese ( vs American ) authorship on support for the policy proposal within horizontal groups using different decision rules . The ﬁgure shows the canonical reactive devaluation result replicates in two of the three decision rules ( median voter , and unanimity ) . And , as with the other two experiments , this tendency appears to be larger for unanimous groups . Point estimates are cell means with 90 % and 95 % bootstrapped conﬁdence intervals . 20 3 . 4 Extensions and limitations Thus far , our results suggest that a trio of canonical biases in the judgment and decision - making literature – sensitivity to framing effects in prospect theory , intentionality bias , and reactive devaluation of adversary proposals — all persist or become even more pronounced in group settings . However , there are a number of important limitations and caveats worth discussing . First , our stylized experiments lack many of the social dynamics of real foreign policy decision - making groups , where group members are subject to social pressure , prior history working with one another , op - portunities for issue linkage , the prospect of future interaction , bureaucratic interests , and so on ( Allison , 1971 ) . In contrast , our respondents participate anonymously , in novel groups formed explicitly for the pur - poses of this study , with little social pressures for cohesion or shadow of future interaction . 9 On the one hand , we encourage future researchers to build on these studies by incorporating some of these features into their experimental designs to determine the impact of differing levels of social pressure on group susceptibility to bias . However , it is important to note that the absence of these features likely makes our ﬁndings a more conservative test of groups’ ability to reduce bias , since the features missing from our studies are also the very features typically linked to biased information - processing and pathological group dynamics such as groupthink ( Janis , 1972 ) . In that sense , the fact that we replicate these three biases even without the distorting effects of social conformity pressures should increase our conﬁdence in the pervasiveness of these tendencies . Second , in the real world , leaders are not randomly assigned , but strategically selected for particular skills , attributes , or experiences . On the one hand , this is precisely why experiments are helpful : in a naturalistic setting , it would be difﬁcult to identify the effect of group structures independently of the properties of actors in speciﬁc roles in the group . Experiments , in contrast , let us harness the power of random assignment and sidestep these concerns about endogeneity . On the other hand , this also leads to an important empirical question : are groups with certain types of leaders better able to avoid these biases ? To test this question , we take advantage of the lengthy battery of individual differences administered 9 Although the fact that respondents complete multiple experimental modules in the same groups means that there is some opportunity for repeated interaction and social learning — and we do not ﬁnd that the magnitude of the bias in our data decays over multiple experimental interactions — as a test of social pressure it is relatively modest . 21 to respondents at the beginning of the study . Since there are a large number of potential traits that could moderate the impacts of framing effects , intentionality bias , and reactive devaluation , we adopt a data - driven approach , estimating a sparse Bayesian method for variable selection , ﬁtting a LASSOplus model ( Ratkovic and Tingley , 2017 ) regressing our dependent variable on the treatment , a vector of 21 individual differences ( foreign policy orientations , personality traits , demographic characteristics , histories of leadership , and so on ) , and interactions between these leader - level traits and the treatment using data from the hierarchical condition . This machine learning approach thus lets us test whether certain kinds of leaders ( such as leaders high in need for cognition , or with prior experience ) better help their groups avoid these biases . Crucially , none of these leader - level characteristics signiﬁcantly moderate the treatments . We thus ﬁnd no evidence that groups with better leaders are less likely to display these patterns . 10 Third , even if leader - level traits don’t seem to minimize these three biases , another possibility is that group - level ones do . One of the most - studied attributes of groups hypothesized to improve decision - making is diversity ( Horowitz et al . , 2019 ; Page , 2019 ) . Diverse groups are thought to lead to more extensive debate , increase exposure to other viewpoints , introduce differences in risk preferences , and avoid group pathologies such as groupthink ( Janis , 1972 ) , where striving for uniformity may overwhelm accuracy motives . Yet groups that are too diverse may move too far in the other direction , become so divisive that they suffer from a polythink dynamic ( Mintz and Wayne , 2016 ) in which they are unable to reach consensus at all . We therefore examine the potential mitigating effect of diversity on susceptibility to bias , assessing whether groups with a more diverse composition are affected less by these various hawkish biases . Rather than employ Herﬁndahl indices , which ﬂatten diversity onto a single dimension , we operationalize diver - sity in a multidimensional fashion , calculating the group - level variance of a given trait in each group , and averaging across diversity scores for three types of traits , to produce measures of three different types of diversity . We begin by considering groups whose members hold different ex ante attitudes about politics – including right - wing authoritarianism , political ideology and social dominance orientation . Next , we 10 It is of course possible that groups composed of actual elite decision - makers would display signiﬁcantly different ﬁndings , although a recent meta - analysis of paired experiments on elite and mass samples suggests some grounds for skepticism ( Kertzer , Forthcoming ) . Moreover , we urge caution to scholars seeking to ﬁeld similar studies on elite samples : studies on real foreign policy decision - makers invariably involve smaller sample sizes – effectively made smaller still once analyzed at the group - level – raising concerns about statistical power . 22 Figure 9 : More diverse groups are no less susceptible to these three biases 0 . 31 0 . 39 0 . 58 0 . 55 0 . 33 0 . 05 0 . 11 0 . 06 0 . 01 0 . 1 - 0 . 08 0 . 04 0 . 08 0 . 07 - 0 . 02 0 . 45 0 . 35 0 . 31 0 . 7 0 . 33 0 . 02 0 . 12 0 . 17 0 . 09 0 . 1 - 0 . 14 - 0 . 1 0 . 03 - 0 . 03 - 0 . 02 0 . 48 0 . 39 0 . 53 0 . 44 0 . 33 0 . 09 0 . 02 0 . 1 0 . 09 0 . 1 - 0 . 06 - 0 . 11 0 . 02 - 0 . 01 - 0 . 02 Attitudes Demographics Experience P r o s pe c t t heo r y I n t en t i ona li t y b i a s R ea c t i v e de v a l ua t i on Individual Horizontal ( Median voter ) Hierarchical Individual Horizontal ( Median voter ) Hierarchical Individual Horizontal ( Median voter ) Hierarchical 0 . 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 - 0 . 1 0 . 0 0 . 1 0 . 2 - 0 . 2 - 0 . 1 0 . 0 0 . 1 0 . 2 Treatment condition A v e r age t r ea t m en t e ff e c t Diversity a a a High Low NA Figure 9 studies the effects of group diversity on susceptibility to hawkish biases by comparing the average treatment effect for low - ( 25th percentile and below ; in turquoise ) and high - ( 75th percentile and above ; in red ) diversity groups in the horizontal and hierarchical conditions , benchmarking each result with the average treatment from the individual condition ( in grey ) . Each row depicts the result from a different experimental module , and each column operationalizes diversity using a different metric ( based on group members’ attitudes , demographic characteristics , or prior experiences ) . The plot illustrates two ﬁndings : i ) more diverse groups are not signiﬁcantly less prone to hawkish biases than less diverse groups ( both by comparing the red point estimates with the turquoise point estimates , as well as by formally estimating interactions between each diversity measure and the submodule - level treatment condition ) . ii ) more diverse groups are not signiﬁcantly less prone to hawkish biases than individuals are ( both by comparing the red point estimates with the grey point estimates , as well as by formally estimating interactions between group status and the submodule - level treatment condition ) . Point estimates are cell means with 90 % and 95 % bootstrapped conﬁdence intervals . Horizontal group decisions calculated here using the median voter decision rule . 23 examine diversity from a demographic perspective , whereby more diverse groups are those whose mem - bers come from different socio - economic , racial , and religious backgrounds and include a mixture of men and women . Finally , we explore diversity of experience within groups , where different members of the group have varying levels of past experience in leadership ( political or otherwise ) . Figure 10 : More diverse groups more likely to experience dissension 0 . 39 - 0 . 04 0 . 54 - 0 . 13 0 - 0 . 55 0 . 02 - 0 . 06 0 . 42 - 0 . 05 0 . 03 0 . 21 0 . 01 0 . 22 0 . 36 0 . 22 - 0 . 05 0 . 58 Prospect theory Intentionality bias Reactive devaluation Horizontal ( Median voter ) Hierarchical Horizontal ( Median voter ) Hierarchical Horizontal ( Median voter ) Hierarchical - 0 . 25 0 . 00 0 . 25 0 . 50 0 . 75 - 0 . 25 0 . 00 0 . 25 0 . 50 0 . 75 - 1 . 0 - 0 . 5 0 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 Group condition E ff e c t o f d i v e r s i t y on d i ss en s u s Type a a a Attitudes Demographics Experience Figure 10 studies the effects of group diversity on dissensus within each group condition . Each panel depicts the result from a different experimental module , operationalizing diversity using our three different metrics ( based on group members’ attitudes ( in red ) , demographic characteristics ( in green ) , or prior experiences ( in blue ) ) . The plot shows more diverse groups are often more likely to experience dissensus ( especially in the reactive devaluation experiment ) . Point estimates are cell means with 90 % and 95 % bootstrapped conﬁdence intervals . Horizontal group decisions calculated here using the median voter decision rule . Regardless of how we operationalize diversity , however , we ﬁnd no effects of diversity on suscepti - bility to any of the hawkish biases we examine . As Figure 9 shows , diverse groups are just as likely to exhibit these biases as are relatively homogeneous groups . And , diverse groups are also no less likely to display these tendencies as individuals are . 11 It is not the case , however , that diversity displays no effects whatsoever : as Figure 10 shows , we ﬁnd that more diverse groups – particularly those with more diverse attitudes – are more likely to fail to reach agreement at all . This is particularly the case in the intentionality bias and reactive devaluation experiments , where respondents are assessing adversarial interactions with 11 As a robustness check , we also examine the effect of gender composition in groups in particular , both in absolute terms ( e . g . the number of group members who do not identify as male ) and relative ones ( the proportion of group members who do not identify as male ) . The number of non - male group members in the horizontal condition doesn’t signiﬁcantly interact with the treatment regardless of the functional form used , while the LASSOplus results above suggest that leader gender does not signiﬁcantly affect group decisions in the hierarchical condition either . 24 China and North Korea . Groups whose members hold different social and political attitudes are more likely to lead to dissensus and disagreement among group members . 12 Nonetheless , it does not appear to be the case that more diverse groups are less likely to display these three tendencies . Finally , there are two other alternative caveats of the results worth noting , which also serve as alter - native interpretations for our results . One is that for the ameliorative effects of aggregation to take place , group members need to interact face - to - face ( Holmes , 2018 ) rather than deliberate at a distance . Another is that for the ameliorative effects of aggregation to take place , groups need to be much larger ; after all , foreign ministries are comprised of groups on the order of hundreds and thousands of individuals . While small groups might replicate individual - level biases , the " wisdom of the crowds " ( e . g . Surowiecki 2005 ) might suggest greater rationality as groups grow in size . On the one hand , these interpretations are obvi - ously in tension with one another , since as groups increase in size , the rate of face - to - face communication decreases . On the other , there are a number of empirical tests we can employ to speak to some of these questions directly . First , we can exploit variation in group size in our results ; Appendix § 3 shows that the magnitude of the hawkish biases we observe does not signiﬁcantly shrink with group size , and simulation methods suggest that some of these tendencies might actually increase as groups grow in size . This pattern comports with archival evidence from the U . S . context regarding leaders’ frustrations with the pathologies of large decision - making units and perception that larger groups in fact had more problematic tendencies than smaller ones . As a result , while there was variation from administration to administration , a number of high - proﬁle decisions , from the Cuban Missile Crisis to the 1990 Gulf War , often involve the president and a relatively small number of inﬂuential advisors ( for a review , see Jordan et al . 2009 ) . John F . Kennedy , for example , was disappointed by the results of a large number of advisors as it related to the failed Bay of Pigs invasion . “The advice of every member of the Executive Branch brought in to advise was unanimous - and the advice was wrong . ” In response to these perceived failings of larger groups , Kennedy created a smaller “Executive Committee” ( ExComm ) , and often relied on ad - hoc meetings of even smaller groups within the ExComm . Similarly , George H . W . Bush relied on ad hoc small groups of advisors when deciding whether 12 The dissensus measure is the variance in the dependent variable provided among members of the group . Greater variance in the preferred decision each group member selects equates to more dissensus . 25 to invade Iraq . Our results from this study are likely directly applicable to these types of cases of relatively small group decision - making , which have been quite common in historical U . S . foreign policy - making . Second , although all our respondents participated in online experiments — and the COVID - 19 pan - demic prevented us from being able to ﬁeld a follow - up study in person — if we think about face - to - face interaction in terms of the added information it conveys ( Holmes , 2018 ) , we can test this informational mechanism directly by testing whether groups where respondents exchanged more information with one another as part of their deliberations displayed weaker biases than groups where respondents communi - cated less . Interestingly , across all three experiments , for both horizontal and hierarchical groups , we ﬁnd no evidence that the magnitude of the biases groups display signiﬁcantly decreases with the amount of group participation ( see Appendix § 4 ) . 13 One reason may relate to behavioral modiﬁcations that are made when more information rich envi - ronments , such as face - to - face , are unavailable . Faced with the prospect of not being able to communicate with visual expressive behaviors , individuals use textual proxies for visual cues that , in some cases may enhance , rather than degrade , social bonding processes ( Walther , 1992 ) . Research in social information processing theory suggests that when individuals meet for the ﬁrst time , as is the case in our study , text - based communication can enhance intimacy and self - disclosure , positively affecting relationship - building ( Antheunis , Valkenburg and Peter , 2007 ; Tidwell and Walther , 2006 ) . For example , Wheeler and Holmes ( 2021 ) argue that face - to - face interactions as a quotidian practice of international politics is a relatively recent phenomenon , which means that text - based communication was , historically , the only route to re - lationship building . Particularly as global pandemics take diplomacy online , we see questions about the role of interaction modality in group decision - making as an important question for future research . 4 Conclusion In a recent review of the problem of aggregation , Gildea ( Forthcoming , 1 - 2 ) notes that " how psychologi - cal mechanisms , which are primarily individually - embodied , may operate and exercise inﬂuence within complex group and institutional environments remains a crucial and contested question . " To date such 13 Importantly , these tests also suggest that our replication of these biases in the group conditions is unlikely to be an artifact of group members not taking the study seriously . 26 concerns have remained largely conceptual in nature and the answer to this question has proven elusive , as studying it empirically introduces a number of difﬁcult methodological and substantive challenges . We offer a direct test of how a particular class of psychological biases aggregate in foreign policy contexts by experimentally testing how a trio of so - called “hawkish biases” linked to foreign policy aggregate in groups . Our results , which suggest the aggregation problem may be less problematic than some scholars have alleged , and that individual - level psychological biases need not cancel out in groups , may be sur - prising for some . If " the whole point of government is to ensure multiple voices and checks and balances so that rational decisions can , in theory , persist despite individual preferences and biases " Johnson ( 2015 , 760 ) , we may need to revisit the assumption that multiple voices lead to more rational outcomes . Our results suggest that the biases that manifest in lone voices are similarly present in group decision - making . One important theoretical implication of our ﬁndings is that we should be more comfortable envi - sioning individual level biases scaling up to small groups in decision - making contexts . In an important application of prospect theory to foreign policy , McDermott ( 1998 ) applied the bias to a number of cases , focusing " on a unitary actor embodied by the president " ( p . 187 ) , noting that " prospect theory is less eas - ily applied to the dynamics of group decision making , except to the extent that all members are assumed to share similar biases in risk propensity , although each may possess a different understanding of such crucial features as appropriate frame for discussion , applicable reference point , domain of action , and so on . " By analyzing prospect theory’s applicability to groups experimentally , we are able to control many of these elements , including the domain of action and parameters for discussion , and our results suggest that such an application of individual psychology to groups may therefore not be as infeasible as some may fear . Further empirical work is required to assess how the experimental results we obtain here generalize to those in historical cases , while additional experimental work will likely be helpful in establishing how the group decision - making process operates . One such questions concerns the study of reference point in groups . As Kameda and Davis ( 1990 , 58 ) ask , " What happens if a group is composed of some members who have experienced certain losses recently and others who have experienced certain gains recently ? " Randomly assigning group members with treatments that condition their individual reference points may allow researchers to trace the effects of those reference points in the group decision - making process . An additional potential implication concerns our failure to detect beneﬁcial effects of diversity on 27 group decision - making . One reason why we may fail to ﬁnd beneﬁcial effects of diversity on group decision - making relates to the nature of the tasks we employ here : unlike the protocols used in experi - mental tests of much of the wisdom of the crowd literature that test the “miracle of aggregation " using math problems , none of these studies have an objective right answer . In this sense , though , they better resemble the ill - structured problems that characterize much of foreign policy decision - making ( Brutger and Kertzer , 2018 ) , suggesting that the wisdom of the crowds may be a poor analogy for many of the questions IR scholars care about – although we also examine this question directly in follow - up work , using incentivized group bargaining experiments . Another interpretation may have to do with the robustness of the biases themselves . Perhaps the three cognitive biases we study here are particularly ubiqutitous and resistant to attempts at mitigation . We have some empirical evidence on this front : we use the same LASSOplus approach we used in the leader characteristic analysis , but testing for heterogeneous treatment effects by individual - level traits in the individual condition . As before , none of these individual differences signiﬁcantly moderate the treatments . Thus , one potential reason why we fail to ﬁnd diversity has mitigating effects has to do with the robustness of the regularities we study here . Yet the fact that these “non - standard preferences " appear to be so robust also suggests the merits of rational choice approaches incorporating these regularities into their models ( Kertzer , 2016 ; Stein , 2017 ; Mintz , Valentino and Wayne , 2022 ) . In other experimental work , we build on these ﬁndings by examining how individual - speciﬁc traits relevant to foreign policy decision - making – rather than these judgment and decision - making biases that appear to be fairly robust across individuals – aggregate in group decision - making contexts . This is not to say that groups do not exhibit their own peculiarities that may lead to sub - rational or irrational outcomes . It may be , for example , that not only do groups not reduce the effects of cognitive biases , they introduce new dynamics that may exacerbate deviations from expected utility models . Early psychological research on group conformity ( Sherif , 1935 ; Asch and Guetzkow , 1951 ; Janis , 1972 ) spurred over half a century of theorizing , and empirically investigating , under what conditions groups create con - formity dynamics in foreign policy situations , particularly as they relate to perceived policy failures ( e . g . Badie 2010 ) . It may be , however , that groupthink is receiving unfair blame . As Whyte ( 1989 , 40 ) has argued , " history and the daily newspaper provide examples of policy decisions made by groups that re - 28 sulted in ﬁascoes . The making of such decisions is frequently attributed to the groupthink phenomenon , " though it may be that " prospect polarization " instead is the culprit . Precisely because cognitive biases have largely been studied at the individual - level , and not believed to be a group - level phenomenon , group - level theories such as groupthink have taken on heavy explanatory burden . By relaxing the assumption that we need group - level theories to explain “non - standard decision - making " , new explanatory frameworks become available . It is also conceivable that the persistence of cognitive bias in groups exacerbates confor - mity dynamics , by facilitating premature consensus , a possibility worthy of future research . Finally , while our focus here is on the aggregation of biases that IR scholars have argued are particularly important in foreign policy decision - making , it is worth noting that our ﬁndings are relevant for the study of collective decision - making in a wide range of contexts . Prospect theory is frequently applied to a wide range of questions in American and comparative politics ( McDermott , 2004 ; Sheffer et al . , 2018 ) , intentionality bias is central to questions of blame attribution in politics more generally ( McGraw , 1991 ; Malhotra and Kuo , 2008 ) , and reactive devaluation is tightly linked to our theories of negative partisanship ( Brutger , 2021 ) . These ﬁndings should therefore be of interest to scholars of collective decision - making across a broad set of domestic political issues , rather than just foreign ones . Yet in treating aggregation as an empirical rather than conceptual question , our study also has impor - tant implications beyond the three biases studied here . While we focused on studying group decision - making in the context of foreign policy decision - making , similar group processes are present in a wide range of complex institutional environments . Practice theorists , for example , have argued that diplomacy in an organization such as the North Atlantic Treaty Organization ( NATO ) is comprised of both micro dyadic interactions between individual diplomats , as well as collective decision - making in which diplo - mats conform with logics of practice or habit ( McCourt , 2016 ) . During NATO decision - making sessions regarding the proposed use of force in Libya in 2011 , for example , Adler - Nissen and Pouliot ( 2014 ) report how diplomats drew upon the taken - for - granted nature of the decision - making , noting that “at some point you just know where the wind blows " , and that in these discussions , “the diplomatic process gradually gains a life of its own . " One of the criticisms levied at this type of approach , however , is that the mechanism by which a group comes to know which way the wind is blowing , or how diplomacy gains a life of its own , is often underspeciﬁed ( Ringmar , 2014 , 6 ) , making it difﬁcult to know a priori when and what types 29 of practices are likely to affect outcomes in any given setting . Our methodological approach offers one step towards a potential solution . By studying aggregation empirically , group experiments such as those reported here may help us better identify the ways in which group practical sense is created , providing an incremental step in building microfoundations for practice theories . Altogether , then , this research shows the value of treating the “aggregation problem " in foreign policy as a phenomenon that deserves to be studied empirically , rather than just assumed . 30 References Adler - Nissen , Rebecca and Vincent Pouliot . 2014 . “Power in practice : Negotiating the international inter - vention in Libya . ” European Journal of International Relations 20 ( 4 ) : 889 – 911 . Allison , Graham . 1971 . Essence of Decision . Boston : Little Brown and Company . Antheunis , Marjolijn L . , Patti M . Valkenburg and Jochen Peter . 2007 . “Computer - Mediated Communica - tion and Interpersonal Attraction : An Experimental Test of Two Explanatory Hypotheses . ” CyberPsy - chology & Behavior 10 ( 6 ) : 831 – 836 . Arrow , Kenneth J . 1950 . “A difﬁculty in the concept of social welfare . ” Journal of political economy 58 ( 4 ) : 328 – 346 . Asch , Solomon E and Harold Guetzkow . 1951 . “Effects of group pressure upon the modiﬁcation and distortion of judgments . ” Organizational inﬂuence processes pp . 295 – 303 . Ashmore , Richard D , David Bird , Frances K Del Boca and Robert C Vanderet . 1979 . “An experimental investigation of the double standard in the perception of international affairs . ” Political Behavior 1 ( 2 ) : 123 – 135 . Ausderan , Jacob Thomas . 2013 . International Conﬂict and the Strategic Selection of Foreign Policy Advi - sors PhD thesis Florida State University . Austen - Smith , David and Jeffrey S Banks . 1996 . “Information aggregation , rationality , and the Condorcet jury theorem . ” American political science review 90 ( 1 ) : 34 – 45 . Badie , Dina . 2010 . “Groupthink , Iraq , and the War on Terror : Explaining US Policy Shift toward Iraq . ” Foreign Policy Analysis 6 : 277 – 296 . Baekgaard , Martin , Julian Christensen , Casper Mondrup Dahlmann , Asbjørn Mathiasen and Niels Bjørn Grund Petersen . 2017 . “The Role of Evidence in Politics : Motivated Reasoning and Persuasion among Politicians . ” British Journal of Political Science Forthcoming . Berdahl , Andrew , Colin J Torney , Christos C Ioannou , Jolyon J Faria and Iain D Couzin . 2013 . “Emergent sensing of complex environments by mobile animal groups . ” Science 339 ( 6119 ) : 574 – 576 . Bernstein , Ethan , Jesse Shore and David Lazer . 2018 . “How intermittent breaks in interaction improve collective intelligence . ” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 115 ( 35 ) : 8734 – 8739 . 31 Brehm , Sharon S and Jack W Brehm . 2013 . Psychological reactance : A theory of freedom and control . Academic Press . Brooks , Sarah M . , Raphael Cunha and Layna Mosley . 2015 . “Categories , Creditworthiness , and Contagion : How Investors’ Shortcuts Affect Sovereign Debt Markets . ” International Studies Quarterly 59 ( 3 ) : 587 – 601 . Brutger , Ryan . 2021 . “The Power of Compromise : Proposal Power , Partisanship , and Public Support in International Bargaining . ” World Politics 73 ( 1 ) : 128 – 166 . Brutger , Ryan and Joshua D . Kertzer . 2018 . “A Dispositional Theory of Reputation Costs . ” International Organization 72 ( 3 ) : 693 – 724 . Chu , Jonathan , Marcus Holmes and David Traven . Forthcoming . “Intentions from Consequences : How Moral Judgments Shape Citizen Perceptions of Wartime Conduct . ” Journal of Experimental Political Science . Davis , James W and Rose McDermott . 2020 . “The Past , Present , and Future of Behavioral IR . ” International Organization Forthcoming : 1 – 31 . DellaVigna , Stefano . 2009 . “Psychology and economics : Evidence from the ﬁeld . ” Journal of Economic literature 47 ( 2 ) : 315 – 372 . Devine , Dennis J , Laura D Clayton , Benjamin B Dunford , Rasmy Seying and Jennifer Pryce . 2001 . “Jury decision making : 45 years of empirical research on deliberating groups . ” Psychology , public policy , and law 7 ( 3 ) : 622 . Esser , James K . 1998 . “Alive and well after 25 years : A review of groupthink research . ” Organizational behavior and human decision processes 73 ( 2 - 3 ) : 116 – 141 . Etheredge , Lloyd S . 1978 . “Personality Effects on American Foreign Policy , 1898 - 1968 : A Test of Interper - sonal Generalization Theory . ” American Political Science Review 72 ( 2 ) : 434 – 451 . George , Alexander L . 1969 . “The “operational code” : A neglected approach to the study of political leaders and decision making . ” International Studies Quarterly 13 ( 2 ) : 190 – 222 . George , Alexander L . 1972 . “The Case for Multiple Advocacy in Making Foreign Policy . ” The American Political Science Review 66 ( 3 ) : 751 – 785 . Gigerenzer , Gerd and Wolfgang Gaissmaier . 2011 . “Heuristic Decision Making . ” Annual Review of Psychol - ogy 62 : 451 – 482 . 32 Gildea , Ross James . Forthcoming . “Psychology and Aggregation in International Relations . ” European Journal of International Relations . Greenstein , Fred I . 1969 . Personality and politics : Problems of evidence , inference , and conceptualization . Chicago , IL : Markham . Grynaviski , Eric . 2014 . Constructive Illusions : Misperceiving the Origins of International Cooperation . Ithaca , NY : Cornell University Press . Hafner - Burton , Emilie M , Stephan Haggard , David A Lake and David G Victor . 2017 . “The behavioral revolution and international relations . ” International Organization 71 ( S1 ) : S1 – S31 . Hermann , Margaret G . 1980 . “Explaining foreign policy behavior using the personal characteristics of political leaders . ” International Studies Quarterly 24 ( 1 ) : 7 – 46 . Hermann , Margaret G and Thomas Preston . 1994 . “Presidents , advisers , and foreign policy : The effect of leadership style on executive arrangements . ” Political Psychology pp . 75 – 96 . Holmes , Marcus . 2018 . Face - to - Face Diplomacy : Social Neuroscience and International Relations . Cambridge , UK : Cambridge University Press . Horowitz , Michael , Brandon M Stewart , Dustin Tingley , Michael Bishop , Laura Resnick Samotin , Mar - garet Roberts , Welton Chang , Barbara Mellers and Philip Tetlock . 2019 . “What makes foreign policy teams tick : Explaining variation in group performance at geopolitical forecasting . ” The Journal of Politics 81 ( 4 ) : 1388 – 1404 . Horowitz , Michael C and Matthew Fuhrmann . 2018 . “Studying Leaders and Military Conﬂict : Conceptual Framework and Research Agenda . ” Journal of Conﬂict Resolution 62 ( 10 ) : 2072 – 2086 . Hovland , Carl I and Walter Weiss . 1951 . “The inﬂuence of source credibility on communication effective - ness . ” Public Opinion Quarterly 15 ( 4 ) : 635 – 650 . Janis , Irving L . 1972 . “Victims of groupthink : A psychological study of foreign - policy decisions and ﬁascoes . ” . Jervis , Robert . 1976 . Perception and Misperception in International Politics . Princeton , NJ : Princeton University Press . Johnson , Dominic D . P . 2020 . Strategic Instincts : The Adaptive Advantages of Cognitive Biases in International Politics . Princeton , NJ : Princeton University Press . 33 Johnson , Dominic D . P . 2015 . “Survival of the Disciplines : Is International Relations Fit for the New Millennium ? ” Millennium 43 ( 2 ) : 749 – 763 . Johnson , Richard Tanner . 1974 . Managing the White House : An intimate study of the presidency . HarperCollins Publishers . Jordan , Amos A , William J Taylor Jr , Michael J Meese and Suzanne C Nielsen . 2009 . American national security . JHU Press . Kaarbo , Juliet . 1998 . “Power politics in foreign policy : The inﬂuence of bureaucratic minorities . ” European Journal of International Relations 4 ( 1 ) : 67 – 97 . Kahneman , Daniel and Amos Tversky . 1979 . “Prospect theory : an analysis of decision under risk . ” Econo - metrica 47 ( 2 ) : 263 – 291 . Kahneman , Daniel and Jonathan Renshon . 2007 . “Why hawks win . ” Foreign policy pp . 34 – 38 . Kahneman , Daniel and Jonathan Renshon . 2009 . “Hawkish biases . ” American Foreign Policy and the Politics of Fear : Threat Inﬂation Since 9 ( 11 ) : 79 – 96 . Kameda , Tatsuya and James H Davis . 1990 . “The function of the reference point in individual and group risk decision making . ” Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 46 ( 1 ) : 55 – 76 . Kerr , Norbert L , Robert J MacCoun and Geoffrey P Kramer . 1996 . “Bias in judgment : Comparing individ - uals and groups . ” Psychological review 103 ( 4 ) : 687 – 719 . Kertzer , Joshua D . 2016 . Resolve in International Politics . Princeton , NJ : Princeton University Press . Kertzer , Joshua D . Forthcoming . “Re - Assessing Elite Public Gaps in Political Behavior . ” American Journal of Political Science . Kertzer , Joshua D . , Brian C . Rathbun and Nina Srinivasan Rathbun . 2020 . “The Price of Peace : Motivated Reasoning and Costly Signaling in International Relations . ” International Organization 74 ( 1 ) : 95 – 118 . Kertzer , Joshua D . and Dustin Tingley . 2018 . “Political Psychology in International Relations : Beyond the Paradigms . ” Annual Review of Political Science 21 : 319 – 339 . Knobe , Joshua . 2003 . “Intentional action and side effects in ordinary language . ” Analysis 63 ( 3 ) : 190 – 194 . Lake , David A . and Robert Powell , eds . 1999 . Strategic Choice and International Relations . Princeton , NJ : Princeton University Press . Landau - Wells , Marika . 2018 . “Dealing with danger : threat perception and policy preferences . ” Doctoral 34 dissertation , Massachusetts Institute of Technology . Larson , Deborah Welch . 1985 . Origins of Containment : A Psychological Explanation . Princeton , NJ : Princeton University Press . Leites , Nathan . 1951 . The Operational code of the Politburo . McGraw - Hill . LeVeck , Brad L . , D . Alex Hughes , James H . Fowler , Emilie Hafner - Burton and David G . Victor . 2014 . “The role of self - interest in elite bargaining . ” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 111 ( 52 ) : 18536 – 18541 . LeVeck , Brad L and Neil Narang . 2017 . “The democratic peace and the wisdom of crowds . ” International Studies Quarterly 61 ( 4 ) : 867 – 880 . Levy , Jack S . 1983 . “Misperception and the Causes of War : Theoretical Linkages and Analytical Problems . ” World Politics 36 ( 1 ) : 76 – 99 . Levy , Jack S . 1996 . “Loss aversion , framing , and bargaining : The implications of prospect theory for international conﬂict . ” International Political Science Review 17 ( 2 ) : 179 – 195 . Levy , Jack S . 1997 . “Prospect Theory , Rational Choice , and International Relations . ” International Studies Quarterly 41 ( 1 ) : 87 – 112 . Levy , Jack S . 2013 . Psychology and Foreign Policy Decision - Making . In Oxford Handbook of Political Psy - chology , ed . Leonie Huddy , David O . Sears and Jack S . Levy . 2nd ed . ed . Oxford University Press pp . 301 – 333 . Lewin , Kurt , Ronald Lippitt and Ralph K White . 1939 . “Patterns of aggressive behavior in experimentally created “social climates” . ” The Journal of social psychology 10 ( 2 ) : 269 – 299 . Malhotra , Neil and Alexander G Kuo . 2008 . “Attributing blame : The public’s response to Hurricane Katrina . ” The Journal of Politics 70 ( 1 ) : 120 – 135 . Maoz , Ifat , Andrew Ward , Michael Katz and Lee Ross . 2002 . “Reactive devaluation of an “Israeli” vs . “Palestinian” peace proposal . ” Journal of Conﬂict Resolution 46 ( 4 ) : 515 – 546 . Mattes , Michaela and Jessica L . P . Weeks . 2019 . “Hawks , Doves and Peace : An Experimental Approach . ” American Journal of Political Science 63 ( 1 ) : 53 – 66 . McCourt , David M . 2016 . “Practice Theory and Relationalism as the New Constructivism . ” International Studies Quarterly 60 ( 3 ) : 475 – 485 . 35 McDermott , Rose . 1998 . Risk - Taking in International Politics : Prospect Theory in American Foreign Policy . University of Michigan Press . McDermott , Rose . 2004 . “Prospect theory in political science : Gains and losses from the ﬁrst decade . ” Political Psychology 25 ( 2 ) : 289 – 312 . McGraw , Kathleen M . 1991 . “Managing blame : An experimental test of the effects of political accounts . ” American Political Science Review pp . 1133 – 1157 . Mercer , Jonathan . 1995 . “Anarchy and Identity . ” International Organization 49 ( 2 ) : 229 – 52 . Mintz , Alex . 2007 . “Why Behavioral IR ? ” International Studies Review 9 ( 1 ) : 157 – 162 . Mintz , Alex and Carly Wayne . 2016 . The polythink syndrome : US foreign policy decisions on 9 / 11 , Afghanistan , Iraq , Iran , Syria , and ISIS . Stanford , CA : Stanford University Press . Mintz , Alex , Nicholas Valentino and Carly Wayne . 2022 . Beyond Rationality : Behavioral Political Science in the 21st Century . Cambridge University Press . Molnar , Andras . 2019 . “SMARTRIQS : A Simple Method Allowing Real - Time Respondent Interaction in Qualtrics Surveys . ” Journal of Behavioral and Experimental Finance 22 : 161 – 169 . Moynihan , Lisa M and Randall S Peterson . 2001 . “A contingent conﬁguration approach to understanding the role of personality in organizational groups . ” Research in organizational behavior 23 : 327 – 378 . Page , Scott E . 2019 . The diversity bonus : How great teams pay off in the knowledge economy . Princeton , NJ : Princeton University Press . Poulsen , Lauge N Skovgaard and Emma Aisbett . 2013 . “When the claim hits : Bilateral investment treaties and bounded rational learning . ” World Politics 65 ( 02 ) : 273 – 313 . Powell , Robert . 2017 . “Research bets and behavioral IR . ” International Organization 71 ( S1 ) : S265 – 277 . Powers , Kathleen E . 2021 . Nationalisms in International Politics . Princeton , NJ : Princeton University Press . Preston , Thomas . 2001 . The president and his inner circle : Leadership style and the advisory process in foreign policy making . New York , NY : Columbia University Press . Rathbun , Brian C . 2014 . Diplomacy’s Value : Creating Security in 1920s Europe and the Contemporary Middle East . Ithaca : Cornell University Press . Ratkovic , Marc and Dustin Tingley . 2017 . “Sparse Estimation and Uncertainty with Application to Sub - group Analysis . ” Political Analysis 25 ( 1 ) : 1 – 40 . 36 Redd , Steven B . 2002 . “The Inﬂuence of Advisers on Foreign Policy Decision Making : An Experimental Study . ” Journal of Conﬂict Resolution 46 ( 3 ) : 335 – 364 . Renshon , Jonathan . 2017 . Fighting for status : Hierarchy and conﬂict in world politics . Princeton , NJ : Princeton University Press . Ringmar , Erik . 2014 . “The search for dialogue as a hindrance to understanding : practices as inter - paradigmatic research program . ” International Theory 6 ( 1 ) : 1 – 27 . Ross , Lee and Andrew Ward . 1995 . Psychological barriers to dispute resolution . In Advances in experimental social psychology . Vol . 27 Elsevier pp . 255 – 304 . Saunders , Elizabeth N . 2011 . Leaders at War : How Presidents Shape Military Interventions . Ithaca , NY : Cornell University Press . Saunders , Elizabeth N . 2017 . “No Substitute for Experience : Presidents , Advisers , and Information in Group Decision - Making . ” International Organization 71 ( S1 ) : S219 – S247 . Schafer , Mark and Scott Crichlow . 2010 . Groupthink versus high - quality decision making in international rela - tions . New York , NY : Columbia University Press . Schneeweiss , Christoph . 2012 . Distributed decision making . Heidelberg : Springer Science & Business Media . Sheffer , Lior , Peter John Loewen , Stuart Soroka , Stefaan Walgrave and Tamir Sheafer . 2018 . “Nonrepresen - tative Representatives : An Experimental Study of the Decision Making of Elected Politicians . ” American Political Science Review 112 ( 2 ) : 302 – 321 . Sherif , Muzafer . 1935 . “A study of some social factors in perception . ” Archives of Psychology ( Columbia University ) . Stein , Janice Gross . 1988 . “Building Politics into Psychology : The Misperception of Threat . ” Political Psychology 9 ( 2 ) : 245 – 271 . Stein , Janice Gross . 2017 . “The Micro - Foundations of International Relations Theory : Psychology and Behavioral Economics . ” International Organization 71 ( S1 ) : S249 – S263 . Strodtbeck , Fred L , Rita M James and Charles Hawkins . 1957 . “Social status in jury deliberations . ” Ameri - can Sociological Review 22 ( 6 ) : 713 – 719 . Sunstein , Cass R , Reid Hastie et al . 2014 . “Making dumb groups smarter . ” Harvard Business Review 92 ( 12 ) : 90 – 98 . 37 Surowiecki , James . 2005 . The wisdom of crowds . Anchor . ’t Hart , Paul , Eric Stern and Bengt Sundelius . 1997 . Beyond groupthink : Political group dynamics and foreign policy - making . University of Michigan Press . Tidwell , Lisa Collins and Joseph B . Walther . 2006 . “Computer - Mediated Communication Effects on Dis - closure , Impressions , and Interpersonal Evaluations : Getting to Know One Another a Bit at a Time . ” Human Communication Research 28 ( 3 ) : 317 – 348 . Vertzberger , Yaacov Y . I . 1998 . Risk Taking and Decisionmaking : Foreign Military Interventions . Stanford , CA : Stanford University Press . Voss , James F . and Timothy A . Post . 1988 . On the Solving of Ill - structured Problems . In The Nature of Expertise , ed . Michelene H . Chi , Robert Glaser and Marshall J . Farr . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum pp . 261 – 285 . Walther , Joseph B . 1992 . “Interpersonal Effects in Computer - Mediated Interaction : A Relational Perspec - tive . ” Communication Research 19 ( 1 ) : 52 – 90 . Waltz , Kenneth N . 1979 . Theory of International Politics . Boston : McGraw - Hill . Weeks , Jessica L . P . 2014 . Dictators at War and Peace . Ithaca , NY : Cornell University Press . Wendt , Alexander . 2004 . “The state as person in international theory . ” Review of International Studies 30 ( 2 ) : 289 – 316 . Wheeler , Nicholas J . and Marcus Holmes . 2021 . “The Strength of Weak Bonds : Substituting Bodily Co - Presence in Diplomatic Social Bonding . ” European Journal of International Relations Forthcoming . Whyte , Glen . 1989 . “Groupthink Reconsidered . ” The Academy of Management Review 14 ( 1 ) : 40 – 56 . Yarhi - Milo , Keren . 2018 . Who Fights for Reputation in International Politics ? Leaders , Resolve , and the Use of Force . Princeton , NJ : Princeton University Press . 38 Hawkish Biases & Group Decision - Making : Supplementary Appendix Contents 1 Experimental Instrumentation A1 1 . 1 Sensitivity to Gain / Loss Framing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A1 1 . 2 Intentionality Bias . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A1 1 . 3 Reactive Devaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A1 2 Survey Flow A3 2 . 1 Survey Flow and Attrition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A3 Table 2 . 2 : Prospect theory experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A5 Table 2 . 3 : Intentionality bias experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A6 Table 2 . 4 : Reactive devaluation experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A7 2 . 2 Sensitivity analyses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A8 Table 2 . 5 : Prospect theory sensitivity analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A10 3 Group size analysis and simulations A10 Table 2 . 6 : Intentionality bias sensitivity analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A11 Table 2 . 7 : Reactive devaluation sensitivity analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A12 Figure 3 . 2 : Hawkish biases do not aggregate in larger groups . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A14 4 Group participation analysis A15 Table 4 . 8 : Little evidence of heterogeneous effects by participation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A17 1 1 Experimental Instrumentation 1 . 1 Sensitivity to Gain / Loss Framing LOSS FRAME : In a war - torn region , the lives of 600 stranded people are at stake . Two response plans with the following potential outcomes have been proposed by your advisors : • Policy A : 400 people will die • Policy B : There is a 1 / 3 probability that nobody will die , and a 2 / 3 probability that 600 people will die . GAIN FRAME : In a war - torn region , the lives of 600 stranded people are at stake . Two response plans with the following potential outcomes have been proposed by your advisors : • Policy A : 200 people will be saved • Policy B : There is a 1 / 3 probability that 600 people will be saved , and a 2 / 3 probability that no people will be saved 1 . 2 Intentionality Bias NO FATALITIES : Suppose that you are US policy - makers working on the North Korea conﬂict . You have just received a report that a US navy vessel has sunk 100 miles northeast of North Korean shores . Fortunately , there were no fatalities as all servicepeople on the boat were rescued . ALL FATALITIES : Suppose that you are US policy - makers working on the North Korea conﬂict . You have just received a report that a US navy vessel has sunk 100 miles northeast of North Korean shores . Unfortunately , there were 100 fatalities as none of the servicepeople on the boat could be rescued . 1 . 3 Reactive Devaluation CHINA AUTHORSHIP : Recently , the United States and Chinese governments held low - level talks with the aim of trying to resolve ongoing disputes over trade . Last week , the Chinese government submitted a brief proposal to the United States government containing their conditions for continuing higher - level talks on the core A1 issues ( including tariffs , currency manipulation , and intellectual property ) . The main components of this proposal are listed below : 1 . China will remove up to 50 % of the new tariffs introduced since January 2018 , in exchange for parallel removal of tariffs imposed by the US government . 2 . The US Department of Treasury will remove their recent designation of China as a currency manip - ulator in exchange for China increasing the value of the Chinese Yuan back to 2018 levels . 3 . The mutual opening of new areas of domestic commerce to foreign direct investment , including reducing regulations that currently mandate foreign companies to transfer technology as a condition for securing investment approvals . 4 . The establishment of a new UN watchdog agency speciﬁcally responsible for ensuring the protection of US and Chinese intellectual property and patent rights . Collectively , China hopes that these measures will reduce current tensions and ensure a productive , mu - tually beneﬁcial trade relationship moving forward . US AUTHORSHIP : Recently , the United States and Chinese governments held low - level talks with the aim of trying to resolve ongoing disputes over trade . Last week , the United States government submitted a brief proposal to the Chinese government containing their conditions for continuing higher - level talks on the core is - sues ( including tariffs , currency manipulation , and intellectual property ) . The main components of this proposal are listed below : 1 . The United States will remove up to 50 % of the new tariffs introduced since January 2018 , in ex - change for parallel removal of tariffs imposed by the Chinese government . 2 . The Central Bank of China will increase the value of the Chinese Yuan back to 2018 levels in exchange for the US Department of Treasury’s removing their recent designation of China as a currency ma - nipulator . 3 . The mutual opening of new areas of domestic commerce to foreign direct investment , including reducing regulations that currently mandate foreign companies to transfer technology as a condition for securing investment approvals . 4 . The establishment of a new UN watchdog agency speciﬁcally responsible for ensuring the protection of US and Chinese intellectual property and patent rights . Collectively , the United States hopes that these measures will reduce current tensions and ensure a pro - A2 ductive , mutually beneﬁcial trade relationship moving forward . 2 Survey Flow 2 . 1 Survey Flow and Attrition In this paper we test a series of hypotheses utilizing experiments ( prospect theory , intentionality bias , and reactive devaluation ) in three conditions : an individual condition , horizontal group , and hierarchical group . 1 The latter two conditions utilized an online software package . SMARTRIQS , to create real - time respondent interaction environments in Qualtrics ( Molnar , 2019 ) . After completing an individual difference and demographic battery and passing a set of attention checks , respondents were randomly assigned to one of these conditions . In the individual condition respondents were presented with the three experiments and dependent variables of interest measured . In the two group conditions , respondents were paired with other respondents after completing the demographics but before being presented with the experimental vignettes . There are several points worth mentioning with respect to the design of the interactive environment created . First , respondents were only able to move on to the experimental modules once there were ﬁve respondents successfully paired , forming a full group . To accomplish this , we built a waiting room in SMARTRIQS , where respondents are held until ﬁve are present . Once a full group formed , they would move on together to the ﬁrst experiment . After each module , respondents were placed in a similar waiting room while the respondents in the group ﬁnished completing their responses . Unlike the ﬁrst waiting room . These waiting rooms were not used to pair new participants . Instead , these subsequent waiting rooms were used to keep members of the same group in sync throughout the study . The initial matching wait time ( for pairing participants initially ) lasted a maximum of ﬁve minutes . If subjects were not able to be matched within that ﬁve minutes the survey was terminated , and subjects did not complete any of the modules . Subsequent , post - matching waiting rooms ( for keeping group members in sync ) were limited to a four minute wait time . If all members of a group did not arrive at a wait room before time was up ( perhaps because a group member had dropped out due to a faulty connection ) the group was allowed to continue on to the next module without the missing group members . 1 On the virtue of experimental methods in political science more generally , see McDermott ( 2002 ) . A3 As we discuss below , if groups complete a module with fewer than three members ( or in the hierarchi - cal condition , if a leader was not present ) , we did not include that group in our main analysis , although we employ a variety of robustness checks below to show that our results are not sensitive to these inclusion criteria . Prior to each group decision group members deliberated in an online chatroom . In the chatroom each group member had a unique identiﬁer . In the Hierarchical condition , the identiﬁers were : Leader , Advisor - 1 , Advisor - 2 , Advisor - 3 , Advisor - 4 . In the Horizontal condition , the identiﬁers were : Group - member - 1 , Group - member - 2 , Group - member - 3 , Group - member - 4 , Group - member - 5 . Participants were notiﬁed of their identiﬁer prior to each chat , and there was a reminder below the chat box ( so that participants would not forget who they were in the chat ) . The group chatroom included a timer that identiﬁed how much time remained . Once the allotted time was up , respondents would all move to the next screen , typically one where dependent variables of interest were measured . Because subjects in the group conditions had to interact in real time , there were several points in the survey where subjects could drop out . There are three types of attrition or missingness one might be concerned about , each of which we investigate in detail below . First , if ﬁve respondents were not present at initial matching then the experimental section did not begin and therefore the survey automatically ended for these respondents having only completed the demographics section . Attrition prior to or during initial matching is the least problematic type of at - trition for our purposes , as this type of attrition happens before any of the treatments are administered . Therefore , attrition at this stage cannot introduce post - treatment bias , in that exposure to the submodule - level treatment itself could not have caused subjects to drop from our study . However attrition at this stage could still lead to compositional differences between participants in the group conditions ( who had to be matched ) vs participants in the individual condition ( who did not have to be matched with other participants ) . We guard against this threat by statistically controlling for a wide array of pre - treatment variables , including demographic characteristics ( age , gender , education , income , religion , race ) , political attitudes ( partisanship , interest in politics , and foreign policy orientations like hawkishness and isolation - ism ( Kertzer et al . , 2014 ) ) , and a plethora of individual differences from political psychology ( including need for cognition ( Cacioppo and Petty , 1982 ) , social dominance orientation ( Pratto et al . , 1994 ) , right - wing authoritarianism ( Altemeyer , 1981 ) , aggression ( Buss and Perry , 1992 ) , risk attitudes ( Kertzer , 2017 ) , and the “big 5 " personality traits ( McCrae and Costa , 1987 ) ) . Crucially , as the results in Tables 2 . 2 - 2 . 4 show , our results hold both with and without including these controls . A4 T a b l e 2 . 2 : P r o s p e c t t h e o r y e x p e r i m e n t I n d i v i d u a l v s H o r i z o n t a l I n d i v i d u a l v s H i e r a r c h i c a l ( 1 ) ( 2 ) ( 3 ) ( 4 ) ( 5 ) ( 6 ) ( 7 ) L o ss f r a m e 0 . 329 ⇤⇤⇤ 0 . 323 ⇤⇤⇤ 0 . 324 ⇤⇤⇤ 0 . 324 ⇤⇤⇤ 0 . 329 ⇤⇤⇤ 0 . 322 ⇤⇤⇤ 0 . 324 ⇤⇤⇤ ( 0 . 033 ) ( 0 . 033 ) ( 0 . 033 ) ( 0 . 033 ) ( 0 . 033 ) ( 0 . 033 ) ( 0 . 033 ) H o r i z o n t a l c o n d i t i o n   0 . 018   0 . 017   0 . 058   0 . 020 ( 0 . 040 ) ( 0 . 041 ) ( 0 . 053 ) ( 0 . 041 ) L o ss x H o r i z o n t a l 0 . 068 0 . 079 0 . 198 ⇤⇤⇤ 0 . 098 ⇤ ( 0 . 056 ) ( 0 . 056 ) ( 0 . 070 ) ( 0 . 057 ) H i e r a r c h i c a l c o n d i t i o n   0 . 117 ⇤⇤⇤   0 . 120 ⇤⇤⇤   0 . 120 ⇤⇤⇤ ( 0 . 042 ) ( 0 . 043 ) ( 0 . 043 ) L o ss x H i e r a r c h i c a l 0 . 176 ⇤⇤⇤ 0 . 173 ⇤⇤⇤ 0 . 182 ⇤⇤⇤ ( 0 . 057 ) ( 0 . 058 ) ( 0 . 058 ) C o n s t a n t 0 . 438 ⇤⇤⇤ 0 . 483 ⇤⇤⇤ 0 . 483 ⇤⇤⇤ 0 . 487 ⇤⇤⇤ 0 . 438 ⇤⇤⇤ 0 . 573 ⇤⇤⇤ 0 . 489 ⇤⇤⇤ ( 0 . 023 ) ( 0 . 159 ) ( 0 . 162 ) ( 0 . 160 ) ( 0 . 023 ) ( 0 . 140 ) ( 0 . 158 ) C o n t r o l s N o Y e s Y e s Y e s N o Y e s Y e s H o r i z o n t a l d e c i s i o n r u l e M e d i a n M e d i a n U n a n i m i t y M a j o r i t y v o t e r v o t e r r u l e r u l e H i e r a r c h i c a l c o n t r o l s L e a d e r G r o u p N 1 , 164 1 , 164 979 1 , 146 1 , 127 1 , 127 1 , 127 A d j u s t e d R 2 0 . 133 0 . 136 0 . 155 0 . 140 0 . 160 0 . 161 0 . 162 ⇤ p < . 1 ; ⇤⇤ p < . 05 ; ⇤⇤ ⇤ p < . 01 . M o d e l s 2 - 4 a n d 6 - 7 a l s o c o n t r o l f o r a g e , g e n d e r , e d u c a t i o n , i n c o m e , r e li g i o n , r a c e , p a r t y I D , p o li t i c a l i n t e r e s t , n ee d f o r c o g n i t i o n , S D O , R W A , a gg r e ss i o n , r i s k a tt i t u d e s , m ili t a n t i n t e r n a t i o n a li s m , i s o l a t i o n i s m , e x t r a v e r s i o n , a g r ee a b l e n e ss , c o n s c i e n t i o u s n e ss , n e u r o t i c i s m , o p e nn e ss . A5 T a b l e 2 . 3 : I n t e n t i o n a li t y b i a s e x p e r i m e n t I n d i v i d u a l v s H o r i z o n t a l I n d i v i d u a l v s H i e r a r c h i c a l ( 1 ) ( 2 ) ( 3 ) ( 4 ) ( 5 ) ( 6 ) ( 7 ) F a t a li t i e s 0 . 097 ⇤⇤⇤ 0 . 103 ⇤⇤⇤ 0 . 104 ⇤⇤⇤ 0 . 103 ⇤⇤⇤ 0 . 097 ⇤⇤⇤ 0 . 101 ⇤⇤⇤ 0 . 102 ⇤⇤⇤ ( 0 . 017 ) ( 0 . 016 ) ( 0 . 017 ) ( 0 . 016 ) ( 0 . 017 ) ( 0 . 017 ) ( 0 . 017 ) H o r i z o n t a l c o n d i t i o n 0 . 017 0 . 014 0 . 024 0 . 014 ( 0 . 022 ) ( 0 . 022 ) ( 0 . 035 ) ( 0 . 022 ) F a t a li t i e s x H o r i z o n t a l 0 . 003   0 . 003 0 . 027   0 . 003 ( 0 . 031 ) ( 0 . 030 ) ( 0 . 050 ) ( 0 . 030 ) H i e r a r c h i c a l 0 . 012 0 . 017 0 . 007 ( 0 . 021 ) ( 0 . 021 ) ( 0 . 021 ) F a t a li t i e s x H i e r a r c h i c a l   0 . 005   0 . 006   0 . 006 ( 0 . 030 ) ( 0 . 029 ) ( 0 . 029 ) C o n s t a n t 0 . 592 ⇤⇤⇤ 0 . 547 ⇤⇤⇤ 0 . 551 ⇤⇤⇤ 0 . 547 ⇤⇤⇤ 0 . 592 ⇤⇤⇤ 0 . 538 ⇤⇤⇤ 0 . 568 ⇤⇤⇤ ( 0 . 012 ) ( 0 . 079 ) ( 0 . 083 ) ( 0 . 079 ) ( 0 . 012 ) ( 0 . 071 ) ( 0 . 080 ) C o n t r o l s N o Y e s Y e s Y e s N o Y e s Y e s H o r i z o n t a l d e c i s i o n r u l e M e d i a n M e d i a n U n a n i m i t y M a j o r i t y v o t e r v o t e r r u l e r u l e H i e r a r c h i c a l c o n t r o l s L e a d e r G r o u p N 1 , 044 1 , 044 838 1 , 044 1 , 113 1 , 113 1 , 113 A d j u s t e d R 2 0 . 042 0 . 110 0 . 117 0 . 110 0 . 037 0 . 100 0 . 095 ⇤ p < . 1 ; ⇤⇤ p < . 05 ; ⇤⇤⇤ p < . 01 . M o d e l s 2 - 4 a n d 6 - 7 a l s o c o n t r o l f o r a g e , g e n d e r , e d u c a t i o n , i n c o m e , r e li g i o n , r a c e , p a r t y I D , p o l i t i c a l i n t e r e s t , n ee d f o r c o g n i t i o n , S D O , R W A , a gg r e ss i o n , r i s k a tt i t u d e s , m ili t a n t i n t e r n a t i o n a li s m , i s o l a t i o n i s m , e x t r a v e r s i o n , a g r ee a b l e n e ss , c o n s c i e n t i o u s n e ss , n e u r o t i c i s m , o p e nn e ss . A6 T a b l e 2 . 4 : R e a c t i v e d e v a l u a t i o n e x p e r i m e n t I n d i v i d u a l v s H o r i z o n t a l I n d i v i d u a l v s H i e r a r c h i c a l ( 1 ) ( 2 ) ( 3 ) ( 4 ) ( 5 ) ( 6 ) ( 7 ) C h i n a a u t h o r e d   0 . 019   0 . 019   0 . 019   0 . 020   0 . 019   0 . 021   0 . 019 ( 0 . 017 ) ( 0 . 017 ) ( 0 . 017 ) ( 0 . 017 ) ( 0 . 018 ) ( 0 . 017 ) ( 0 . 017 ) H o r i z o n t a l c o n d i t i o n 0 . 064 ⇤⇤⇤ 0 . 059 ⇤⇤ 0 . 129 ⇤⇤⇤ 0 . 067 ⇤⇤⇤ ( 0 . 023 ) ( 0 . 023 ) ( 0 . 031 ) ( 0 . 025 ) C h i n a x H o r i z o n t a l   0 . 045   0 . 049   0 . 084 ⇤   0 . 049 ( 0 . 034 ) ( 0 . 033 ) ( 0 . 044 ) ( 0 . 037 ) H i e r a r c h i c a l   0 . 008   0 . 019   0 . 020 ( 0 . 022 ) ( 0 . 022 ) ( 0 . 022 ) C h i n a x H i e r a r c h i c a l 0 . 032 0 . 034 0 . 035 ( 0 . 031 ) ( 0 . 031 ) ( 0 . 031 ) C o n s t a n t 0 . 625 ⇤⇤⇤ 0 . 577 ⇤⇤⇤ 0 . 557 ⇤⇤⇤ 0 . 570 ⇤⇤⇤ 0 . 625 ⇤⇤⇤ 0 . 470 ⇤⇤⇤ 0 . 592 ⇤⇤⇤ ( 0 . 013 ) ( 0 . 084 ) ( 0 . 084 ) ( 0 . 085 ) ( 0 . 013 ) ( 0 . 075 ) ( 0 . 084 ) C o n t r o l s N o Y e s Y e s Y e s N o Y e s Y e s H o r i z o n t a l d e c i s i o n r u l e M e d i a n M e d i a n U n a n i m i t y M a j o r i t y v o t e r v o t e r r u l e r u l e H i e r a r c h i c a l c o n t r o l s L e a d e r G r o u p N 988 988 852 934 1 , 075 1 , 075 1 , 075 A d j u s t e d R 2 0 . 010 0 . 057 0 . 082 0 . 063   0 . 001 0 . 041 0 . 042 ⇤ p < . 1 ; ⇤⇤ p < . 05 ; ⇤⇤⇤ p < . 01 . M o d e l s 2 - 4 a n d 6 - 7 a l s o c o n t r o l f o r a g e , g e n d e r , e d u c a t i o n , i n c o m e , r e li g i o n , r a c e , p a r t y I D , p o l i t i c a l i n t e r e s t , n ee d f o r c o g n i t i o n , S D O , R W A , a gg r e ss i o n , r i s k a tt i t u d e s , m ili t a n t i n t e r n a t i o n a li s m , i s o l a t i o n i s m , e x t r a v e r s i o n , a g r ee a b l e n e ss , c o n s c i e n t i o u s n e ss , n e u r o t i c i s m , o p e nn e ss . A7 Second , participants might drop out during or between each of the three modules . Attrition at these stages occurred after subjects had been treated with one or more of our experimental conditions . This raises the possibility of post - treatment bias . That is , one of the between - group treatments could have caused differential attrition , which might then cause differences in the distribution of potential outcomes across subsequent treatments . While we cannot exclude this possibility entirely , we can run a variety of sensitivity analyses to ascertain the robustness of our ﬁndings . This is also particularly important given the possibility that differential attrition occurred along an unmeasured dimension that cannot be controlled for in the regression analyses in Tables 2 . 2 - 2 . 4 . Finally , there is a third and related type of attrition that can occur , which we also incorporate into the sensitivity analyses below , which refers not to respondents who drop out from the study , but respon - dents who are removed from the sample by the experimenters . Our analyses in the main text exclude respondents who complete a given experiment in a group below a certain size ( in the horizontal condi - tion , groups must have at least three members , and in the hierarchical condition , groups must have at least three members , one of whom is also the leader of the group ) . These criteria are included both for reasons of construct validity ( a hierarchical group is no longer hierarchical if it doesn’t have a leader ) , and because it makes our results in the main text a more conservative test ( if we’re interested in investigating whether group interaction causes hawkish biases to dissipate , we want the groups to be larger than just two members ) . However , these criteria might also raise concerns if the types of groups that meet these criteria are ﬁlled with systematically different types of people than in the individual condition . Therefore , we also relax these criteria as part of our sensitivity analyses below . 2 2 . 2 Sensitivity analyses To assess the impact of these different types of attrition on our results , we therefore adopt a three - step sensitivity analysis . • First , we re - estimate our analysis from the main text , but dropping the group size exclusion criteria ( i . e . including horizontal and hierarchical groups that have fewer than three members ; hierarchical groups are still only included in this analysis if one of the members is the group leader ) . These complete observation results , shown in models 5 and 11 of Tables 2 . 5 - 2 . 7 , ﬁnd strikingly similar patterns as the results depicted in the main text ( reproduced here in models 4 and 10 ) . 2 There is one additional exclusion criterion in the studies , which we preserve in the analyses below : we remove any group from the analysis where one respondent was ﬂagged as a “bot " ; since bots produce random responses , inclusion of bot responses in our analysis adds noise but does not substantively change our results . A8 • Second , we then conduct an “extreme bounds " analysis , similar in spirit to Manski bounds ( Manski , 1990 ) . 3 This analysis , shown in models 2 - 3 , 6 - 7 and 12 - 13 of Tables 2 . 5 - 2 . 7 , replaces missing values with maximum or minimum possible values on the dependent variable to get bounds on how biased our data could possibly be due to non - random missingness . 4 As its name suggests , extreme bounds analysis is necessarily conservative , since replacing missing values with maximum or minimum possible values creates relatively large conﬁdence intervals around the true effect . Nonetheless , we obtain strikingly similar results as in our base models , consistently replicating the prospect theory and intentionality bias results in all three group conditions , and the reactive devaluation result in just the horizontal condition , as was the case in the main text . • Third , to conduct a more theoretically motivated sensitivity test , we use a machine learning ap - proach . We ﬁt a neural net on the individual data as the training set , using our treatment condition and extensive pre - treatment demographic battery as predictors , tuning the model using a cross - validation approach ( Kuhn and Johnson , 2013 ) . We then use that model to create predicted values for the missing responses in the horizontal and hierarchical data using the treatment conditions and demographic covariates observed for those respondents . We then consider two test cases . – First , what would happen if our missing respondents were “antisocial " , behaving in the group condition exactly as the neural net suggests they would have in the individual condition , rather than being inﬂuenced by other members of the group ? To assess the stability of our ﬁndings in this case , in the horizontal condition we calculate the new median vote for each group , taking the input of the predicted votes from the neural net into account ( model 8 in Tables 2 . 5 - 2 . 7 ) . For hierarchical groups with missing leaders , we similarly replace the missing leader votes with these predicted votes ( model 14 in Tables 2 . 5 - 2 . 7 ) . In both cases , we obtain the same ﬁndings as in the main text . – Second , what would happen if our missing respondents were “inﬂuencers " , the most persuasive members of their groups , convincing others to come on board ? To estimate the results for this case , in the horizontal condition , we treat the missing group member as the pivotal vote ( model 3 For a similar extreme bound application in political science , see Margalit ( 2021 ) . 4 Our approach differs somewhat from traditional Manski bounds because of the group - level structure of the data in the group conditions ; we thus adopt a two - stage strategy . For horizontal groups we ﬁrst replace missing values for each respondent ( setting them to either the maximum or the minimum value ) , and then use the same median - voter rule from the main text to calculate the decision . For hierarchical groups , the approach is simpler , since the hierarchical group decision is equivalent to the imputed leader choice by design . A9 9 in Tables 2 . 5 - 2 . 7 ) . 5 As before , we replicate the results from the main text . Altogether , this analysis suggests that even under relatively extreme assumptions , we still ﬁnd evidence in support of our central ﬁnding in the manuscript , which is that hawkish biases do not aggregate away in group contexts . Table 2 . 5 : Prospect theory sensitivity analysis Individual Horizontal ( 1 ) ( 2 ) ( 3 ) ( 4 ) ( 5 ) ( 6 ) ( 7 ) Loss Trt 0 . 329 ⇤⇤⇤ 0 . 329 ⇤⇤⇤ 0 . 329 ⇤⇤⇤ 0 . 398 ⇤⇤⇤ 0 . 350 ⇤⇤⇤ 0 . 348 ⇤⇤⇤ 0 . 347 ⇤⇤⇤ ( 0 . 033 ) ( 0 . 033 ) ( 0 . 033 ) ( 0 . 043 ) ( 0 . 032 ) ( 0 . 032 ) ( 0 . 032 ) Intercept 0 . 438 ⇤⇤⇤ 0 . 438 ⇤⇤⇤ 0 . 438 ⇤⇤⇤ 0 . 421 ⇤⇤⇤ 0 . 435 ⇤⇤⇤ 0 . 431 ⇤⇤⇤ 0 . 441 ⇤⇤⇤ ( 0 . 024 ) ( 0 . 024 ) ( 0 . 024 ) ( 0 . 031 ) ( 0 . 023 ) ( 0 . 023 ) ( 0 . 023 ) Model Base Extreme Extreme Base Complete Extreme Extreme Min Max Obs Min Max N 760 760 760 404 735 736 736 Adjusted R 2 0 . 112 0 . 112 0 . 112 0 . 175 0 . 138 0 . 136 0 . 136 Horizontal Hierarchical ( 8 ) ( 9 ) ( 10 ) ( 11 ) ( 12 ) ( 13 ) ( 14 ) Loss Trt 0 . 354 ⇤⇤⇤ 0 . 354 ⇤⇤⇤ 0 . 506 ⇤⇤⇤ 0 . 439 ⇤⇤⇤ 0 . 435 ⇤⇤⇤ 0 . 432 ⇤⇤⇤ 0 . 440 ⇤⇤⇤ ( 0 . 032 ) ( 0 . 032 ) ( 0 . 044 ) ( 0 . 036 ) ( 0 . 036 ) ( 0 . 036 ) ( 0 . 036 ) Intercept 0 . 434 ⇤⇤⇤ 0 . 434 ⇤⇤⇤ 0 . 321 ⇤⇤⇤ 0 . 366 ⇤⇤⇤ 0 . 361 ⇤⇤⇤ 0 . 376 ⇤⇤⇤ 0 . 368 ⇤⇤⇤ ( 0 . 023 ) ( 0 . 023 ) ( 0 . 033 ) ( 0 . 027 ) ( 0 . 027 ) ( 0 . 027 ) ( 0 . 027 ) Model Neural Net Neural Net Base Complete Extreme Extreme Neural net Antisocial Inﬂuencer Obs Min Max N 736 736 367 581 589 589 589 Adjusted R 2 0 . 141 0 . 141 0 . 261 0 . 199 0 . 194 0 . 194 0 . 200 ⇤ p < . 1 ; ⇤⇤ p < . 05 ; ⇤⇤⇤ p < . 01 3 Group size analysis and simulations One potential interpretation of our ﬁndings is that we replicate hawkish biases in group decision - making contexts because our groups are too small for the “miracle of aggregation " to kick in . There are per - haps two potential implications of this argument , each of which we test here . First , if hawkish biases decrease with group size , we should expect that group size display a negative interaction effect with the 5 In the hierarchical condition , the inﬂuencer case is the same as the antisocial case , since the leader’s decision is automatically pivotal by design . Note that there is also a third potential case , where our missing respondents are highly persuadable , and side with a majority of their group . This case is important for our purposes , since for the horizontal condition , this would be equivalent to the results from the main text , since the median vote of each group would remain the same . For the hierarchical condition , this would imply leaders who defer to their advisers . When we estimate the results of this third case in the hierarchical condition , we once again replicate our ﬁndings from the main text . A10 Table 2 . 6 : Intentionality bias sensitivity analysis Individual Horizontal ( 1 ) ( 2 ) ( 3 ) ( 4 ) ( 5 ) ( 6 ) ( 7 ) Fatal Trt 0 . 097 ⇤⇤⇤ 0 . 088 ⇤⇤⇤ 0 . 099 ⇤⇤⇤ 0 . 099 ⇤⇤⇤ 0 . 075 ⇤⇤⇤ 0 . 044 ⇤ 0 . 071 ⇤⇤⇤ ( 0 . 017 ) ( 0 . 018 ) ( 0 . 017 ) ( 0 . 026 ) ( 0 . 019 ) ( 0 . 025 ) ( 0 . 018 ) Intercept 0 . 592 ⇤⇤⇤ 0 . 586 ⇤⇤⇤ 0 . 597 ⇤⇤⇤ 0 . 609 ⇤⇤⇤ 0 . 620 ⇤⇤⇤ 0 . 467 ⇤⇤⇤ 0 . 714 ⇤⇤⇤ ( 0 . 012 ) ( 0 . 012 ) ( 0 . 012 ) ( 0 . 018 ) ( 0 . 014 ) ( 0 . 018 ) ( 0 . 013 ) Model Base Extreme Extreme Base Complete Extreme Extreme Min Max Obs Min Max N 748 760 760 296 600 722 722 Adjusted R 2 0 . 041 0 . 031 0 . 042 0 . 045 0 . 022 0 . 003 0 . 020 Horizontal Hierarchical ( 8 ) ( 9 ) ( 10 ) ( 11 ) ( 12 ) ( 13 ) ( 14 ) Fatal Trt 0 . 083 ⇤⇤⇤ 0 . 077 ⇤⇤⇤ 0 . 092 ⇤⇤⇤ 0 . 080 ⇤⇤⇤ 0 . 050 ⇤ 0 . 072 ⇤⇤⇤ 0 . 085 ⇤⇤⇤ ( 0 . 015 ) ( 0 . 014 ) ( 0 . 025 ) ( 0 . 023 ) ( 0 . 028 ) ( 0 . 022 ) ( 0 . 018 ) Intercept 0 . 614 ⇤⇤⇤ 0 . 618 ⇤⇤⇤ 0 . 604 ⇤⇤⇤ 0 . 610 ⇤⇤⇤ 0 . 498 ⇤⇤⇤ 0 . 682 ⇤⇤⇤ 0 . 607 ⇤⇤⇤ ( 0 . 010 ) ( 0 . 010 ) ( 0 . 018 ) ( 0 . 016 ) ( 0 . 020 ) ( 0 . 015 ) ( 0 . 013 ) Model Neural Net Neural Net Base Complete Extreme Extreme Neural Net Antisocial Inﬂuencer Obs Min Max N 722 722 365 474 589 589 589 Adjusted R 2 0 . 041 0 . 042 0 . 032 0 . 023 0 . 004 0 . 017 0 . 033 ⇤ p < . 1 ; ⇤⇤ p < . 05 ; ⇤⇤⇤ p < . 01 A11 Table 2 . 7 : Reactive devaluation sensitivity analysis Individual Horizontal ( 1 ) ( 2 ) ( 3 ) ( 4 ) ( 5 ) ( 6 ) ( 7 ) China Trt   0 . 019   0 . 021   0 . 016   0 . 063 ⇤⇤   0 . 089 ⇤⇤⇤   0 . 087 ⇤⇤⇤   0 . 045 ⇤⇤ ( 0 . 017 ) ( 0 . 018 ) ( 0 . 017 ) ( 0 . 030 ) ( 0 . 022 ) ( 0 . 027 ) ( 0 . 019 ) Intercept 0 . 625 ⇤⇤⇤ 0 . 603 ⇤⇤⇤ 0 . 637 ⇤⇤⇤ 0 . 687 ⇤⇤⇤ 0 . 700 ⇤⇤⇤ 0 . 483 ⇤⇤⇤ 0 . 797 ⇤⇤⇤ ( 0 . 012 ) ( 0 . 014 ) ( 0 . 013 ) ( 0 . 020 ) ( 0 . 015 ) ( 0 . 019 ) ( 0 . 013 ) Model Base Extreme Extreme Base Complete Extreme Extreme Min Max Obs Min Max N 732 760 760 258 540 706 706 Adjusted R 2 0 . 0003 0 . 0005   0 . 0002 0 . 013 0 . 028 0 . 013 0 . 007 Horizontal Hierarchical ( 8 ) ( 9 ) ( 10 ) ( 11 ) ( 12 ) ( 13 ) ( 14 ) China Trt   0 . 065 ⇤⇤⇤   0 . 043 ⇤⇤⇤ 0 . 013   0 . 004 0 . 005   0 . 008   0 . 004 ( 0 . 015 ) ( 0 . 013 ) ( 0 . 028 ) ( 0 . 024 ) ( 0 . 029 ) ( 0 . 023 ) ( 0 . 018 ) Intercept 0 . 678 ⇤⇤⇤ 0 . 662 ⇤⇤⇤ 0 . 617 ⇤⇤⇤ 0 . 620 ⇤⇤⇤ 0 . 452 ⇤⇤⇤ 0 . 723 ⇤⇤⇤ 0 . 620 ⇤⇤⇤ ( 0 . 011 ) ( 0 . 009 ) ( 0 . 019 ) ( 0 . 017 ) ( 0 . 020 ) ( 0 . 015 ) ( 0 . 012 ) Model Neural Net Neural Net Base Complete Extreme Extreme Neural Net Antisocial Inﬂuencer Obs Min Max N 706 706 343 433 589 589 589 Adjusted R 2 0 . 024 0 . 013   0 . 002   0 . 002   0 . 002   0 . 002   0 . 002 ⇤ p < . 1 ; ⇤⇤ p < . 05 ; ⇤⇤⇤ p < . 01 A12 experimental treatments . We therefore estimate a series of regression models interacting each study - level treatment with group size , for both horizontal groups , and hierarchical groups . Crucially , in no case are the interaction effects statistically signiﬁcant . Second , it is possible that even our groups of ﬁve are too small . If this were the case it would be an important limitation on the applicability of the miracle of aggregation for foreign policy decision - making , since the “inner circle " in many foreign policy decision - making groups can often be rather small ( Jost , 2021 ) . Nonetheless , we investigate this claim using a simulation - based approach building on LeVeck and Narang ( 2017 ) . • Randomly assign treatment conditions to 1000 groups ( e . g . rbinom ( 1000 , 1 , 0 . 5 ) ) • Populate each group with N respondents , sampling with replacement from the observations in the individual condition ( but only sampling from the same experiment - level treatment condition within each group ) . • Use the median voter rule to determine each group decision . • Use the data from these 1000 groups to calculate the ATE . • Repeat the above , resampling B = 1500 times . • Repeat the above for all group sizes , varying N from 1 to 20 . The results of the simulations , plotted in Figure 3 . 2 , fail to support the claim that hawkish biases aggregate away in larger groups . For the intentionality bias and reactive devaluation experiments , the effect magnitude stays fairly constant as we increase the size of our simulated groups ( although the reactive devaluation effect becomes statistically signiﬁcant once we increase our group size ) . For the prospect theory experiment we ﬁnd a sharp increase in the magnitude of the effect as we increase our simulated group size , consistent with other research on group decision - making that has found that social inﬂuence and voting over binary alternatives ampliﬁes the majority opinion regardless of its accuracy ( Becker , Guilbeault and Smith , 2018 ) . A13 Figure 3 . 2 : Hawkish biases do not aggregate away in larger groups Prospect theory Intentionality bias Reactive devaluation 0 5 10 15 20 0 5 10 15 20 0 5 10 15 20 - 0 . 050 - 0 . 025 0 . 000 0 . 025 0 . 00 0 . 05 0 . 10 0 . 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 Simulated group size A T E Each panel displays the results of the simulations from each experimental module , where we resample data from respondents in the individual condition to create artiﬁcial groups of sizes ranging from 1   20 , imputing the group decision using the median voter rule . These simulations suggest that hawkish biases do not aggregate away in larger groups : if anything , the treatment effect in the prospect theory experiment increases logarithmically with simulated group size . A14 4 Group participation analysis As noted in the main text , we ﬁnd evidence that a trio of biases from the judgment and decision - making literature that scholars have deemed relevant for foreign policy — risk - taking in the domain of losses , intentionality bias , and reactive devaluation — replicate in group decision - making contexts , and are some - times even larger in group contexts than individual ones . One potential question that these ﬁndings provoke is whether our results are simply due to respon - dents in the group condition are not taking the study seriously . We have a number of reasons to believe this is not the case . First , as noted in Appendix § 2 . 1 , respondents in all conditions had to pass a serious of attention checks in order to make it to the experimental modules , such that the least attentive respondents would have been excluded prior to randomization . Second , as noted in the main paper , an analysis of the deliberation transcripts ( an example of which is shown in Figure 2 in the main text ) shows respondents were relatively engaged in the group deliberations : in the horizontal condition , 74 % of group members participate more than once in the deliberation in the prospect theory experiment , 75 % do so in the inten - tionality bias experiment , and 74 % in the reactive devaluation experiment . In the hierarchical condition , 86 % of group leaders and 80 % of advisers participate more than once in the deliberation in the prospect theory experiment , 82 % of leaders and 76 % of advisers do so in the intentionality bias experiment , and 77 % of leaders and 75 % of advisers do so in the reactive devaluation experiment . Perhaps most importantly , we can exploit variation in participant engagement in our group conditions , to test empirically whether groups that featured greater rates of participation display weaker treatment effects than groups that featured lower rates of participation . One concern might be that absolute levels of group participation are confounded with group size , since groups with more members will also feature more participation ; while we know from the analyses in Appendix § 3 that our biases do not signiﬁcantly vary with group size , we nonetheless sidestep this concern by calculating per capita participation rates per group . We then interact this group participation rate with the study - level treatments , and present the results in Table 4 . 8 , which also conducts an analogous test in the individual condition by seeing whether individuals who wrote more in their deliberations display signiﬁcantly larger treatment effects . As Table 4 . 8 shows , we ﬁnd no evidence that either horizontal or hierarchical groups that featured higher per - capita participation in the deliberation sessions displayed signiﬁcantly smaller treatment ef - fects than groups that featured lower per - capita participation . In the individual condition , we ﬁnd that individuals who made more extensive justiﬁcations in the intentionality bias condition tended to be less A15 T a b l e 4 . 8 : L i tt l e e v i d e n c e o f h e t e r o g e n e o u s e ff e c t s b y p a r t i c i p a t i o n P r o s p e c t t h e o r y I n t e n t i o n a li t y b i a s R e a c t i v e d e v a l u a t i o n H o r i z . H i e r . I n d i v . H o r i z . H i e r . I n d i v . H o r i z . H i e r . I n d i v . ( 1 ) ( 2 ) ( 3 ) ( 4 ) ( 5 ) ( 6 ) ( 7 ) ( 8 ) ( 9 ) T r e a t m e n t 0 . 4 20 ⇤⇤⇤ 0 . 644 ⇤⇤⇤ 0 . 336 ⇤⇤⇤ 0 . 058 0 . 117 ⇤⇤ 0 . 150 ⇤⇤⇤   0 . 038   0 . 017   0 . 054 ⇤ ( 0 . 095 ) ( 0 . 113 ) ( 0 . 055 ) ( 0 . 057 ) ( 0 . 056 ) ( 0 . 029 ) ( 0 . 063 ) ( 0 . 057 ) ( 0 . 030 ) G r o u p p a r t i c i p a t i o n   0 . 008 0 . 010   0 . 003 0 . 003   0 . 006   0 . 014 ( 0 . 022 ) ( 0 . 023 ) ( 0 . 010 ) ( 0 . 008 ) ( 0 . 011 ) ( 0 . 010 ) T r t x G r o u p p a r t i c i p a t i o n   0 . 007   0 . 043 0 . 014   0 . 008   0 . 007 0 . 011 ( 0 . 029 ) ( 0 . 032 ) ( 0 . 017 ) ( 0 . 016 ) ( 0 . 016 ) ( 0 . 014 ) I n d i v i d u a l p a r t i c i p a t i o n 0 . 001   0 . 0001   0 . 002 ⇤⇤⇤ ( 0 . 002 ) ( 0 . 001 ) ( 0 . 001 ) T r t x I n d i v . p a r t i c i p a t i o n   0 . 0004   0 . 002 ⇤⇤ 0 . 001 ( 0 . 003 ) ( 0 . 001 ) ( 0 . 001 ) C o n s t a n t 0 . 4 44 ⇤⇤⇤ 0 . 287 ⇤⇤⇤ 0 . 424 ⇤⇤⇤ 0 . 618 ⇤⇤⇤ 0 . 590 ⇤⇤⇤ 0 . 594 ⇤⇤⇤ 0 . 706 ⇤⇤⇤ 0 . 658 ⇤⇤⇤ 0 . 679 ⇤⇤⇤ ( 0 . 070 ) ( 0 . 083 ) ( 0 . 042 ) ( 0 . 036 ) ( 0 . 032 ) ( 0 . 021 ) ( 0 . 042 ) ( 0 . 040 ) ( 0 . 023 ) N 4 04 367 760 296 358 748 258 333 732 A d j u s t e d R 2 0 . 173 0 . 262 0 . 110 0 . 041 0 . 027 0 . 055 0 . 011   0 . 001 0 . 011 ⇤ p < . 1 ; ⇤⇤ p < . 05 ; ⇤⇤⇤ p < . 01 A16 responsive to the the fatalities treatment . Altogether , then , these results suggest little evidence that varia - tion in participant engagement in the group condition is associated with different group decisions . A17 References Altemeyer , Bob . 1981 . Right - wing Authoritarianism . Winnipeg : University of Manitoba Press . Becker , Joshua , Douglas Guilbeault and Ned Smith . 2018 . “Against Voting ? The Crowd Classiﬁcation Problem . ” Working paper . Buss , Arnold H and Mark Perry . 1992 . “The aggression questionnaire . ” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 63 ( 3 ) : 452 – 459 . Cacioppo , John T . and Richard E . Petty . 1982 . “The Need for Cognition . ” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 42 ( 1 ) : 116 – 131 . Jost , Tyler . 2021 . “National Security Institutions and Miscalculations in International Politics . ” Book manuscript . Kertzer , Joshua D . 2017 . “Resolve , Time , and Risk . ” International Organization 71 ( S1 ) : S109 – S136 . Kertzer , Joshua D . , Kathleen E . Powers , Brian C . Rathbun and Ravi Iyer . 2014 . “Moral Support : How Moral Values Shape Foreign Policy Attitudes . ” Journal of Politics 76 ( 3 ) : 825 – 840 . Kuhn , Max and Kjell Johnson . 2013 . Applied predictive modeling . New York , NY : Springer . LeVeck , Brad L and Neil Narang . 2017 . “The democratic peace and the wisdom of crowds . ” International Studies Quarterly 61 ( 4 ) : 867 – 880 . Manski , Charles F . 1990 . “Nonparametric bounds on treatment effects . ” The American Economic Review 80 ( 2 ) : 319 – 323 . Margalit , Yotam . 2021 . “How Markets Shape Values and Political Preferences : A Field Experiment . ” American Journal of Political Science 65 ( 2 ) : 473 – 492 . McCrae , Robert R . and Jr . Costa , Paul T . 1987 . “Validation of the Five - Factor Model of Personality Across Instruments and Observers . ” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 52 ( 1 ) : 81 – 90 . McDermott , Rose . 2002 . “Experimental Methods in Political Science . ” Annual Review of Political Science 5 : 31 – 61 . Molnar , Andras . 2019 . “SMARTRIQS : A Simple Method Allowing Real - Time Respondent Interaction in Qualtrics Surveys . ” Journal of Behavioral and Experimental Finance 22 : 161 – 169 . Pratto , Felicia , Jim Sidanius , Lisa M . Stallworth and Bertram F . Malle . 1994 . “Social Dominance Orienta - tion : A Personality Variable Predicting Social and Political Attitudes . ” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 67 ( 4 ) : 741 – 763 . A18