JOURNAL OF ULTRASTRUCTURE AND MOLECULAR STRUCTURE RESEARCH 94 , 199 - 208 ( 1986 ) Configuration of Clathrin Trimers : Evidence from Electron Microscopy T . KIRCHHAUSEN , * S . C . HARRISON , ~ AND J . HEUSER + * Department of Anatomy and Cellular Biology , Harvard Medical School , 25 Shattuck Street , Boston , Massachusetts 021 I5 TDepartment of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology , Harvard University , 7 Divinity Avenue , Cambridge , Massachusetts 02138 ; and $ Department of Physiology and Biophysics , Washington University , 660 Euclid Avenue , St . Louis , Missouri 63110 Received July 7 , 1986 We used a combination of electron microscopic techniques - negative staining , glycerol spraying with rotary shadowing , and quick - freezing followed by deep - etching - to study the configuration of clathrin trimers . All three approaches provide images indicating that the molecule is nonplanar and rather puckered at its center . Viewed from the convex ( cytoplasmic ) side , its arms display a consistent clockwise slew at their proximal / distal hinge . The most flexible part of the heavy chain may be the links between the distal portion of the leg and the terminal domain . 0 1986 Aca - demic Press , Inc . Clathrin , the protein that forms the outer lattice of coated vesicles , can reassemble rapidly into well - defined and completely closed empty cages ( I ) . These cages have a variety of polyhedral structures similar to those found in undisrupted coated vesicles . Rapid and efficient self - assembly is char - acteristic of viral coat subunits , actin , tu - bulin , and other cytoskeletal proteins , but in these examples the associating structures are relatively compact and of limited flex - ibility . Specific protein - protein contacts , of defined directionality , and reliable switch - ing between alternative states of these con - tacts , determine the accuracy of assembly ( 5 ) . Clathrin is not a compact protein , how - ever ( IO , 17 ) . It is a trimer of three heavy chains and three light chains , and each heavy chain forms an extended leg , 50 nm in length ( 10 , 17 ) . The distal end of the heavy chain ( 180 kDa ) folds into a compact terminal domain that comprises about 30 % of the total mass ( 52 kDa ) ( I I ) . This domain can be isolated by limited proteolysis of assem - bled cages ( II , 14 ) . The light chains lie along the proximal part of a leg ( 12 , 16 , 18 ) . Previous electron microscopic studies of negatively stained samples of clathrin ad - sorbed to carbon films have suggested that the disposition of its legs displays a constant slew ( I , 10 ) . In contrast , electron micro - scopic pictures obtained in several labora - tories by the technique of glycerol spray and rotary shadowing showed images of clathrin where the legs had a clockwise and / or coun - terclockwise slew ( 12 , 14 , 17 , 20 ) . From this , it was inferred that the hinge between the proximal and distal segment of the heavy chain is highly flexible ( 14 , 20 ) . Using the quick freezedeep etch tech - nique , we have recently reported that clath - rin molecules that adsorb to mica chips in solutions containing Tris tend to display their heavy chain legs with a predominantly clockwise orientation ; in the absence of Tris , the adsorbed molecules appear less three - fold symmetric and display straight or counterclockwise orientation of their legs ( 8 ) . Here , we use electron microscopy to study further the configuration of clathrin , in or - der to determine the constraints on flexi - bility of its legs . We have used several tech - niques - negative staining , glycerol spray with rotary shadowing , and quick - freeze - deep - etching - to contrast the molecules , and analysis of the images indicates that 199 0889 - 1605 / 86 $ 3 . 00 Copyright 0 1986 by Academic Press , Inc . All rights of reproduction in any form reserved . 200 KIRCHHAUSEN , HARRISON , AND HEUSER clathrin trimers are nonplanar and puckered at their center , that the legs have consistent clockwise slew when viewed from their cy - toplasmic side , and that the most flexible part of the chain may be the links between distal leg and terminal domain . MATERIALS AND METHODS 1 . Purification of Clathrin Clathrin was obtained from calf - brain coated vesi - cles and kept as free trimers ( cont . - 0 . 8 mg / ml ) in 50 mM TEA , pH 7 . 0 , 1 mM EDTA , 0 . 5 mM DTT , 0 . 02 % NaN , , and 0 . 5 mit4 PMSF ( II ) . Clathrin was dissociated and separated into heavy - chain mimers and light chains as described by Winkler and Stanley ( 20 ) with slight modifications . The dissociation buffer used was 50 mMTEA , pH 8 . 0 , 1 . 4 MKSCN , 2 mMEDTA , 0 . 5 mM DTT , and 0 . 02 % NaN , ; gel filtration was car - ried out on a Sephacryl S - 300 ( Pharmacia ) column ( 0 . 7 x 60 cm ) equilibrated with the same buffer . The extent of dissociation was checked by SDS - PAGE and Coomassie brilliant blue ( Sigma ) staining . All proce - dures were carried out at 4°C and samples were used within 1 week of purification . 2 . Electron Microscopy Samples of cl . @ in for negative staining ( cont . - 10 & ml ) were adsorbed onto freshly glow - discharged car - bon - coated grids , washed with a few drops of 1 . 5 % uranyl acetate , blotted , and air - dried . Samples ad - sorbed to mica were prepared by either the glycerol spray ( 3 , 15 ) or quick - freeze / freeze - dry ( 7 ) techniques and visualized by rotary shadowing with platinum . For glycerol spraying , samples were directly diluted SO - to loo - fold ( to a cont . of - 10 & ml ) into a solution of 45 % glycerol with the appropriate ionic composition . Alternatively , samples ( cont . - 0 . 8 mg / ml ) were hrst dialyzed against the appropriate buffer and then diluted into the glycerol mixture . At this point , samples were sprayed onto freshly cleaved mica and dried in vacua . With this technique , adsorption at low ionic strength ( - 1 mM ) generated clathrin images with a clockwise slew ; at higher ionic strength ( > 25 mM ) , images show a preferential counterclockwise slew . The number of adsorbed molecules did not vary with ionic compo - sition . For freeze - drying , samples were first diluted 50 - to loo - fold with the solution of interest and mixed briefly with a slurry of mica chips before quick - freez - ing . Clockwise images were generated by applying clathrin to mica in low ionic strength buffers ( 10 mM Tris , pH S ) , although under these conditions the affinity ofthe mica was extremely low . Alternatively , clockwise images were generated in 10 - 50 mM Tris , pH 8 , 50 - 100 rnYt4 NaCI . Counterclockwise images were gen - erated by applying clathrin to mica in 50 - 100 mM TEA , pH 8 . 0 . Grids were examined in a standard trans - mission electron microscope operating at 80 - i20 kV . Negatively stained bacteriophage T4 tails were used as magnification standards , taking 4 . 1 nm as the repeat distance . The micrographs were printed so that the negatively stained or rotary - replicated molecules lie facing the viewer on the “upper” surface of carbon or mica , respectively . 3 . Graphic Simulation and Data Analysis Three - dimensional graphic simulation of negatively stained clathrin trimers was performed with the pro - gram GRAMPS ( 13 ) using an Evans and Sutherland multi - picture system linked to a VAX 111780 . A line representation ofa clathrin molecule , with its legs span - ning two edges , was placed at each vertex of a simulated cage . The surface lattice of the cage formed the edges ofa truncated icosahedron ( the “soccer ball” structure ) , which corresponds to a frequently found design in in vitro reassembled cages ( II ) , in situ visualization of coated vesicles ( 6 ) , and in purified preparations of coat - ed vesicles obtained from calf brain and liver and hu - man placenta ( Turkewitz , Kirchhausen and Harrison , unpublished observations ) . Various parameters that define the shape of the trimer ( apical pucker , “bond angle” at the elbow and torsion angle about the prox - imal leg ) and its position and orientation in the lattice were systematically changed until a good visual agree - ment with electron micrographs of cages was obtained ( not shown ) . The simulated image of the trimer was rigidly rotated to obtain a match with the electron mi - crographs of negatively stained clathrin trimers . For analysis of leg lengths and end - to - end distance of terminal domains , images of samples adsorbed to mica were enlarged from negatives and traced with a camera lucida . Contour leg lengths were measured with a digitizing tablet ( Evans and Sutherland multi - picture system ) and corrected by the average diameter of Pt grains in the background of the same fields ( range , 1 . 7 - 4 nm ) . RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 1 . The Nonplanar Shape of a Clathrin Trimer Clathrin trimers negatively stained on glow - discharged carbon - coated grids pre - sent a variety of shapes ( Figs . l - 3 ) . We be - lieve that these are best‘interpreted as flat - tened projections of triskelions with quite restricted flexibility . Most fields show im - ages of clathrin molecules with a clockwise slew of their distal legs when viewed from the molecule toward the carbon substrate ( Fig . l ) , as reported in previous negative stain studies ( I , 10 ) . We cannot find images ELECTRON MICROSCOPY OF CLATHRIN 201 that present uniform counterclockwise di - rectionality , but certain fields show primar - ily trimers with at least one counterclock - wise leg ( Fig . 2 ) . We have indeed been able to obtain grids from the same clathrin sam - ple ( Figs . 1 and 2 ) showing either largely one kind of field or largely the other , indi - cating that the two classes of images rep - resent different modes of adsorption to the carbon rather than different states of the trimer . It is difficult to explain those images that do not show uniform slew ( e . g . , Fig . 2 ) by assuming a random “flip” of the distal segments . In a complete count of 154 mol - ecules in two different fields , images with two legs apparently counterclockwise and one clockwise are reasonably frequent and are about as numerous as those with one leg counterclockwise and two clockwise ( see caption to Figs . l - 3 ) . If these images were due to flexibility of the proximal / distal link - ages , fully counterclockwise images should then also occur . Such images were not ob - served and , in general , are extremely infre - quent . All the views can , in fact , readily be interpreted as flattened projections of a three - dimensional object , with uniformly slew legs and significant overall pucker . This is illustrated by the gallery in Fig . 3 , which compares trimer micrographs with corre - sponding computer - graphic simulations of the three - dimensional shape of a clathrin trimer . ( A similar comparison between im - ages of clathrin adsorbed to mica and the simulated model was less satisfactory . ) The computer - generated views assume that the trimer has a fixed pucker at its apex and fixed angles between proximal and distal segments . The apical pucker and the “bond angle” between proximal and distal seg - ments were chosen to simulate the shape of a triskelion packed into a truncated icosa - hedral cage ( see Materials and Methods ) . The distal legs hang down from the apex , giving the molecule a strongly curved as - pect . The simulation produces an orthog - onal projection , which does not adequately model the flattening that occurs when a tri - mer is dried down in stain . Legs in the im - ages are less foreshortened than in the pro - jected views . Nonetheless , it is clear that a strongly curved trimer with legs of constant slew can produce the entire range of images we have observed . The absence of fully counterclockwise images implies that ad - sorption to the carbon film is particularly unlikely for certain angles of approach or that clathrin adsorbed from these angles is poorly stained ( 1 , 10 ) . The agreement of simulated views with the shape of negatively stained trimers ( Fig . 3 ) shows that clathrin legs have a uniform slew and suggests that the molecule may be relatively stiff , with a few joints of restricted angular freedom . The intrinsic curvature of such a structure implies that only small changes in the three - dimensional organi - zation of its legs are needed in order to ac - commodate to different packing environ - ments in the assembled lattice of the coat ( I , 10 ) . It is also consistent with the rapid and efficient reassembly of coats that is ob - served in vitro ( I ) and that is believed to occur in vivo during formatndn of coated vesicles and of their intermediates , coated pits ( for reviews , see 2 , 4 , 6 , 9 ) . 2 . Clathrin Can Absorb to Mica with Two Different Orientations Figures 4 and 5 show fields of clathrin that have been adsorbed to mica and vi - sualized by the glycerol spray - rotary shad - owing technique . Figure 4 illustrates that when the experiment is carried out at a very low ionic strength ( < 1 mA4 ) most of the trimers display a uniform clockwise slew , with a relatively sharp bend at points half - way along their legs . By contrast , Fig . 5 shows that a similar adsorption at a higher ionic strength ( 25 mM or more ) generates images of clathrin trimers with extended legs that are frequently bent in a counterclock - wise orientation . A consistent correlation between the apparent handedness of the im - age and the ionic strength ( same number of adsorbed molecules ) can be obtained with various buffers : TRIS - HCl ( pH 7 . 1 ) , am - 202 KIRCHHAUSEN , HARRISON , AND HEUSER monium acetate ( pH 6 . 6 - 7 . 5 ) , and trietha - nolamine ( pH 7 . 0 - 8 . 0 ) . The simplest explanation for these two classes of images is that ionic conditions determine which side of the trimer attaches to the mica . To test this interpretation , we have prepared specimens by quick - freezing combined with freeze - etching ( Figs . 6 - 8 ) . Advantages of this method include ( 1 ) the absence of glycerol , ( 2 ) a reduction of the distorting effects upon drying , and ( 3 ) a bet - ter preservation of structural details in the molecules . This approach yields the same two classes of images that we see with the glycerol - spray technique . These are ( 1 ) im - ages with legs slewed in a uniformly clock - wise direction and ( 2 ) images with legs that appear straight or bent in a counterclock - wise orientation . Unlike the observation made with the glycerol - spray technique , in this case , we do not observe a simple cor - relation between ionic strength and appar - ent handedness of the images , but rather a dependence in the presence of Tris - contain - ing solutions for the generation of clockwise slewed images of clathrin . This effect ap - pears to be independent of ionic strength . In addition , we note that there are some differences between images in each slew class , as seen by the two methods . With the glycerol - spray technique , the apparent con - tour length of a leg is slightly larger and the tendency of molecules to spread out ( as measured by the distance between terminal domains within a trimer ) appears to be greater . The qualitative characteristics of the two classes of images are the same with both methods , however , and we believe that the interpretation outlined below applies to both . Legs in the first ( clockwise ) group are gen - erally sharply bent . Their contour length , measured from the center of the trimer to the most distal part of the terminal domain , is about 47 nm in the quick - freeze images and about 50 nm in glycerol spray ( Table FIGS . l - 3 . Electron micrograph ofclathrin trimers ( in 1 mMTris - HCl , pH 7 . 2 ) , adsorbed to glow - discharged carbon - coated grid and negatively stained with 1 . 5 % uranyl acetate ( x 105 000 ) . Most of the images show uniform clockwise slew of the legs . ( Fig . 1 ) Similar micrograph of a field ( same clathrin sample ) in which most images show at least one leg with counterclockwise slew ( Fig . 2 ) . We have analyzed the slew of distal legs on all the trimers in several fields , showing both kinds of images . Molecules with 3 , 2 , 1 , and 0 clockwise directed legs account for 53 , 14 , 14 , and 0 % of 154 trimers ; 19 % have one or more legs with indiscernible slew . Figure 3 shows a gallery of views of simulated trimers compared with images of negatively stained clathrin . For the purpose of the comparison , a simulated clathrin trimer with no terminal domain and with fixed pucker , torsion , and bond angles was rigidly rotated in three dimensions and graphically displayed . The views show the best agreement between the model and various negatively stained clathrin trimers . The parameters used to simulate the trimer correspond to those that best fit a cage with “soccer ball” design ( truncated icosahedron with 12 pentagonal hollow facets , each surrounded by 5 hexagonal ones , giving a total of 32 facets ) . In some other cases ( not shown ) , the agreement between the simulated trimer and the negatively stained molecule couldbe improved by an increase of up to 55” in the torsion angle of the distal leg about the proximal leg . FIGS . 4 AND 5 . Effect of ionic composition on the appearance of glycerol spray - h rotary - shadowed clathrin trimers . Two microliters of stock solution of clathrin ( 0 . 8 mg / ml , in 10 mM ammonium acetate , pH 6 . 7 ) was mixed with 0 . 1 ml of 45 % ( v / v ) glycerol , sprayed onto mica , and rotary - shadowed with platinum . In this low ionic strength condition 75 % of trimers display a uniform clockwise slew of their legs . ( Fig . 4 ) Two microliters of same stock clathrin solution was mixed with 0 . 1 ml of buffer containing 45 % ( v / v ) glycerol and 50 mM ammonium acetate , pH 6 . 7 . Less than 1 % of trimers display a uniform clockwise bent of their legs ( Fig . 5 ) . x 62 500 . FIGS . 6 - 8 . Appearance of clathrin trimers adsorbed to mica and visualized after quick - freezing , freeze - drying , and rotary - replication . Clathrin ( cont . 10 & ml ) was adsorbed to mica flakes in the presence of 10 n04 Tris - HCl , pH 8 . 0 , 100 mMNaC1 ( Fig . 6 ) , or 100 mMTEA , pH 8 . 0 ( Figs . 7 and 8 ) . Note that in Fig . 7 , one molecule ( arrow ) has attached in the clockwise configuration that predominated in Tris - containing solutions ( e . g . , Fig . 6 ) . These stereo figures can be viewed with a pocket stereo viewer . x 26 1 500 . 205 206 KIRCHHAUSEN , HARRISON , AND HEUSER TABLE I DETERMINATIONOFLEGCONTOURLENGTHSANDEND - TO - ENDDISTANCEBETWEENTERMINALDOMAINSOF CLATHRIN TRIMERS Appearance of clathrin legs Clockwise Counterclockwise End - to - end End - to - end Type of sample Leg length bm - 4 distance ( nm ) Leg length ( nm ) distance ( nm ) Clathrin” ( quick - freeze ) 47 . 2 + 0 . 7 ( 75 ) 45 . 5 + 1 . 0 ( 75 ) 50 . 0 k 0 . 5 ( 90 ) 60 . 7 f 1 . 7 ( 90 ) Clathrir @ ( glycerol spray ) 50 . 7 + 1 . 1 ( 72 ) 57 . 2 t 1 . 2 ( 72 ) 52 . 2 k 0 . 7 ( 60 ) 61 . 4 f 2 . 2 ( 60 ) Clathrin heavy chain’ 47 . 9 2 0 . 6 ( 72 ) 56 . 6 k 1 . 1 ( 72 ) 52 . 1 f 0 . 7 ( 60 ) 66 . 6 f 2 . 1 ( 60 ) ( glycerol spray ) 50 . 8 + 0 . 7 ( 84 ) 55 . 8 k 1 . 3 ( 84 ) 51 . 7 k 0 . 7 ( 84 ) 64 . 9 + 1 . 7 ( 84 ) Note . Unambiguous images were scored as indicated . Clockwise refers to images of clathrin where the three legs display a clockwise slew . The counterclockwise category includes all other molecules with one or more legs which either display counterclockwise slew or had rather extended disposition . Leg lengths were measured from tracings along the leg from center of trimer to distal end of its terminal domain and were corrected for average platinum grain diameter in the background of same field . End - to - end distance between terminal domains is the linear distance between the center of terminal domains in a single trimer . Measurements are expressed as aver - age + SE . 0 Clockwise images , obtained by incubation of clathrin with mica in 50 mM Tris , pH 8 . 3 , and 50 mM NaCl . Counterclockwise images obtained in 50 m & f TEA , pH 8 . 3 . * Data from two independent experiments : Clathrin stock solution ( - 0 . 8 mg / ml ) in either 10 mM Tris - HCl , pH 7 . 1 , 0 . 1 mM EDTA , or 10 mM ammonium acetate , pH 6 . 6 ; 0 . 1 mM EDTA was diluted 50 fold into 45 % glycerol ( 60 and 75 % of images with clockwise slew , respectively ) , or 45 % glycerol , 50 mM Tris , pH 7 . 1 , or 50 rr ~ W ammonium acetate , pH 6 . 6 , respectively ( 98 % counterclockwise images in both cases ) . c At least 95 % of light chains were removed as determined by SDS - PAGE . Heavy chains ( cont . 0 . 5 mg / ml in 25 mM Tris - HCl , pH 7 . 2 ) were diluted into 45 % glycerol ( 27 % of images show clockwise slew ) or 45 % glycerol , 50 m & f ammonium acetate , pH 6 . 6 ( 95 % of images with counterclockwise slew ) . I ) . ( Variability in apparent contour length can arise from differences in the configu - ration of the link between distal leg and ter - minal domain , as discussed in more detail below . ) The separation between terminal domains within a given trimer is a measure of how extended are its legs at the“elbow . ” This separation is about 45 . 5 nm in clock - wise freeze - etched images and about 57 nm in clockwise glycerol sprayed images . Com - parison of Figs . 4 and 6 illustrates this dif - ference directly ; legs of freeze - etched mol - ecules do indeed appear more “curled . ” Furthermore , freeze - etched trimers in the clockwise configuration show an additional deposition of platinum at the center or ver - tex of each molecule ( arrow , Fig . 6 , see also 7 ) . This decoration does not seem to reflect the presence of light chains at the vertex , because we find that clathrin depleted of light chains by the KSCN procedure of Winkler and Stanley ( 20 ) still displays this feature when adsorbed in the clockwise ori - entation ( picture not shown ) . These observations on clockwise images are consistent with the notion that a puck - ered and relatively stiff clathrin trimer has struck the mica like a spider ( terminal do - mains first ) when approaching from its con - cave side ( Figs . 4 , 6 , and 9 ) . It would then collapse internally , perhaps with a screwing motion that would retain the threefold sym - metry , until its vertex also contacted the mica ( see schematic drawing , Fig . 11 ) . Thus , the - 45 ~ nm separation of terminal do - mains in the quick - freeze images would rep - resent a three - point landing or “footprint” and should reflect how extended the mol - ecule was in solution . We note that this val - ue is very close to the distance between any two of the three noncontiguous vertices oc - cupied by the distal ends of a single trimer in a clathrin lattice . ( For this calculation , we constructed a plane that intercepted all three ELECTRON MICROSCOPY OF CLATHRIN 207 of these vertices , and then measured their linear separation . In the case of the soccer - ball design - truncated icosahedron - a 45 nm spread was obtained . ) This observation is thus consistent with the notion that ter - minal domains would tend to “hang down” under the vertices of an assembled cage . This in fact appears to be the case as nicely shown in the recent work of Vigers et al . ( 19 ) , who used a three - dimensional reconstruction made from electron micrographs of frozen hydrated samples to study the structure of clathrin cages . Under each vertex of the coat they find finger - like projections that are as - signed to the terminal domains . Legs in the second ( counterclockwise ) class of images have a comparatively larger spread ( Figs . 5 , 7 . , and 8 , Table I ) . The average distance between terminal domains in a tri - mer is about 6 1 nm ( quick - freeze ) or 62 nm ( glycerol spray ) , both values significantly larger than the corresponding values for clockwise images . The average apparent contour length of an leg is about 50 nm ( quick - freeze ) or 52 nm ( glycerol spray ) . The interpretation we propose for this class of images is that they have been generated by trimers that approach and strike the mica from their convex side ( vertex first , see Fig . 10 ) . The legs are not constrained during col - lapse and thus undergo more distortion , limited only by their intrinsic stiffness . In - deed , these images show relatively greater loss of threefold symmetry at the vertex and loss of the sharp bend at the proximal / distal joint . The overall spread between adjacent terminal domains is thus larger and more variable than in images of the clockwise and more symmetrical class . Molecules oriented in this way do not display any additional platinum decoration at their vertices ( whether or not light chains are present ) , and thus they appear smooth ( see Figs . 7 and 8 ) . This striking difference in the vertex appearance between the two classes of im - ages further substantiates the notion that they correspond to views from opposite sides of the clathrin trimer . These experiments constitute the first di - FIGS . 9 - l 1 . Schematic representation of the ad - sorption of clathrin to mica . Puckered clathrin trimers are shown approaching a mica surface from their con - cave ( Fig . 9 ) or convex sides ( Fig . 10 ) . ( For simplicity , the drawings show only the proximal legs . The stippling is intended to suggest that some sort of “charge cloud” may extend from the surface of the mica and affect the orientation of the molecules just before they strike . ) The diagram in Fig . 11 provides a top and side view of a trimer showing the consequences of adsorption to mica . The dotted line illustrates the outcome of the internal collapse that would result from a three - point landing ( e . g . , approach from the concave side , as in Fig . 8 ) . This collapse would probably include a “screw - ing” motion that would increase the observed bends of the proximal / distal hinges . rect evidence for the absolute hand of the clathrin triskelion . Our analysis indicates that clathrin legs display a clockwise slew when viewed from what would be the cy - toplasmic ( convex ) side of the intact coat . This interpretation is in agreement with a previously postulated orientation of the legs , based on the inhibition ofassembly of clath - rin lattices while adsorbing to an electron microscope grid ( I ) . We wish to emphasize the significance of ionic conditions during adsorption to mica for the orientation of adsorbed molecules and for the consequent appearance of their 208 KIRCHHAUSEN , HARRISON , AND HEUSER legs . Apparent random direction of slew and loss of threefold symmetry should not be taken as evidence for extensive flexibility at the center or at the elbow , since those dis - tortions correlate with adsorption from the convex face . We also observe that the light chains do not appear to change the apparent stiffness of the leg as judged by the spread of distal ends ( Table I ) . 3 . A Flexible Hinge between the Distal Leg and the Terminal Domain The total apparent length of a leg , in im - ages from any of the mica adsorption tech - niques we have used , varies between 47 and 52 nm . We believe that this variation is due to flexible disposition of the terminal do - main . We find that the best images to illus - trate this point are obtained with the quick - freeze , deep - etch samples ( 8 ) . Improved preservation obtained with this technique confirms our previous assertion that the ter - minal domain is a distinct , globular struc - ture ( I I ) . In trimers that attach to mica from their concave side ( clockwise slew ) , legs are on the average - 47 nm long and usually end with no clear demarcation between the terminal domain and the rest of the leg ( Fig . 6 ) . In trimers that attach from their convex side ( counterclockwise slew ) , legs are - 50 nm long and end with a short and narrow segment to which the globular terminal do - main is attached ( Figs . 7 and 8 ) . We pre - sume that in concave - side adsorption , the terminal domain tends to fold back against the leg , making the apparent contour length shorter ; in convex - side adsorption , the ter - minal domain lies beside the leg , the con - nection with the leg can be traced unam - biguously , and the apparent total leg length is greater . Analysis of a number of fields shows no strong correlation of terminal - do - main orientation and slew of the leg . The various orientations of the terminal domain suggest a flexible joint . The same suggestion has previously been made because of the relative ease with which the terminal do - main can be cleaved from the rest of the leg ( 10 . This work was supported by a National Science Foundation Grant PCM - 82 - 02821 and a National In - stitute of Health Grant 5ROlCA - 13202 to S . C . H . and by a National Institute of Health Grant 3R0 l GM - 29647 to J . E . H . T . K . is an Established Investigator of the American Heart Association . Thanks to Robyn Roth for producing the deep - etch replicas and Lori Van Hou - ten for preparing the final EM plates . REFERENCES 1 . CROWTHER , R . A . , AND PEARSE , B . F . M . ( 1981 ) J . Cell . Biol . 91 , 790 - 797 . 2 . FINE , R . E . , AND OCKLEFORD , C . D . ( 1984 ) Znt . Rev . Crystallogr . 91 , l - 43 . 3 . FOWLER , W . E . , AND ERICKSON , H . P . ( 1979 ) J . Mol . Bio . 134 , 241 - 249 . 4 . GOLDSTEIN , J . L . , ANDERSON , R . G . W . , AND BROWN , M . S . ( 1979 ) Nature ( London ) 279 , 679 - 685 . 5 . HARRISON , S . C . ( 1984 ) TZBS9 , 345 - 351 . 6 . HEUSER , J . E . ( 1980 ) J . Cell Biol . 84 , 560 - 583 . 7 . HEUSER , J . E . ( 1983 ) J . MoZ . Biol . 169 , 155 - 195 . 8 . HEUSER , J . E . , AND KIRCHHAIJSEN , T . ( 1985 ) J . Ultrastruct . Res . 92 , 1 - 27 . 9 . KEEN , J . H . ( 1985 ) in Pastan I . and Willingham M . C . ( Eds . ) , Endocytosis , pp . 85 - 130 , Plenum , New York . 10 . KIRCHHAUSEN , T . , AND HARRISON , S . C . ( 1981 ) Cell 23 , 755 - 76 1 . 11 . KIRCHHAUSEN , T . , AND HARRISON , S . C . ( 1984 ) J . Cell Biol . 99 , 1725 - 1734 . 12 . KIRCHHAUSEN , T . , HARRISON , S . C . , PARHAM , P . , AND BRODSKY , F . M . ( 1983 ) Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 80 , 2481 - 2485 . 13 . O’DONELL , T . J . , AND OLSON , A . J . ( 198 1 ) Comput . Graphics 15 , 133 - 142 . 14 . SCHMID , S . L . , MATSUMOTO , A . K . , AND ROTHMAN , J . E . ( 1982 ) . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 79 , 91 - 95 . 15 . SHOTTON , D . M . , BURKE , B . E . , AND BRANTON , D . ( 1979 ) . I . Mol . Biol . 131 , 303 - 329 . 16 . UNGEWICKELL , E . ( 1983 ) EMBO J . 2 , 1401 - 1408 . 17 . UNGEWICKELL , E . , AND BRANTON , D . ( 198 1 ) Na - ture ( London ) 289 , 420 - 422 . 18 . UNGEWICKELL , E . , AND BRANTON , D . ( 1982 ) Cold Spring Harbor Symp . Quant . Biol . 46 , 723 - 73 1 . 19 . VIGERS , G . P . A . , CROWTHER , R . A . , AND PEARSE , B . M . F . ( 1986 ) EMBO J . 5 , 529 - 534 . 20 . WINKLER , F . K . , AND ST . ~ NLEY , K . K . ( 1983 ) EMBO J . 2 , 1393 - 1400 .