Towards an Information Architecture for Flexible Reuse of Digital Media * Gerard Oleksik , † Hans - Christian Jetter , ‡ Jens Gerken , ^ Natasa Milic - Frayling , ˚ Rachel Jones * Dovetailed Ltd , Studio 151 , 23 Kings Street , Cambridge , United Kingdom † University College London , Gower Street , WC1E 4BT , London , United Kingdom ‡ ICT AG , Erscheckweg 1 , 72664 Kohlberg , Germany ^ Microsoft Research , 21 Station Road , Cambridge , United Kingdom ˚ Instrata Ltd , 12 Warkworth Street , Cambridge , United Kingdom * gerard @ dovetailed . com , † h . jetter @ ucl . ac . uk , ‡ jg . gerken @ gmail . com , ^ natasamf @ microsoft . com , ˚ racheljones @ instrata . co . uk ABSTRACT Our research is concerned with designing support for ubiquitous access , organization , and interpretation of digital assets that users produce and store across multiple devices and computing platforms . Through a co - design study with scientists we identified specific aspects of conceptual maps they wish to create for their projects in order to make sense of diverse collections of digital media related to their individual and collective work . By the use of a technology probe called DeskPiles we observed the mechanisms involved in such a process . We identified the practice of using sub - document elements to compose the views of digital collections and diverse linking strategies to express semantic relations among concepts and ideas and to enable access to supporting digital assets . Our findings reveal the need to expand traditional information architectures and include ( 1 ) an extended range of content reference options and ( 2 ) transformation services to enable extraction , conversion , and linking of digital content . We advocate a granular and multi - format representation of content as the basis for reuse and ubiquitous access of digital media in diverse multi - device environments . Categories and Subject Descriptors H5 . m . Information interfaces and presentation ( e . g . , HCI ) : Miscellaneous . General Terms Design , Human Factors . Keywords Information architecture ; content re - appropriation ; compositions ; digital content assemblies ; collection views ; cloud architecture . 1 . INTRODUCTION Contemporary information workers are using a wide range of mobile and ubiquitous computing devices and information management technologies to author , organize , access , and consume a variety of digital media . In scientific environments , such practices are intertwined with a tight knowledge generation and sharing cycle that requires additional support for intermediary stages of knowledge structuring , interpretation , and repurposing [ 15 ] . In our recent study [ 16 ] of an advanced technology lab we observed an evolving computing infrastructure that involves portable computing devices to facilitate lab experimentation and shared devices to enable collaborative work , including a tabletop computer ( Figure 1 ) . The study participants expressed a concern about the growing body of digital media they produce across devices and platforms and a desire to create project spaces and project maps that support easy discovery and ubiquitous access of content related to a specific topic or a project . Similarly to the previous work on constructing knowledge representations and spatial hypertext ( [ 12 ] , [ 13 ] , [ 17 ] ) , the researchers were keen to adopt practices for spatially organizing ideas , experimental findings , and supporting resources . However , as they embraced a variety of software packages , information services , and hardware and software platforms , the complexity of the information space increased and restricted the scope at which information could be integrated , represented , and interpreted . As a consequence , the researchers are faced with technologically restricted information environments [ 20 ] and suffer the problem of information and project fragmentation ( [ 2 ] , [ 8 ] ) . In order to investigate possible solutions , we engaged the same researchers in a co - design study based on which we then created a technology probe , DeskPiles , and explored further the support that researchers required to create project spaces and project maps . We implemented DeskPiles for the first generation Microsoft Surface tabletop computer ( MS Surface v . 1 ) that the researchers used in meetings and research discussions in conjunction with pen - enabled Tablet PCs . Through a task focused study with DeskPiles we observed the users’ actions and uncovered essential requirements for supporting their objectives . The findings of the DeskPiles study led us to the design recommendations for an extendible information architecture that would , in effect , bring us closer to Weiser’s vision of a ubiquitous computing with pad , tabs , and boards in which “the real power of the concept comes not from any of these devices ; it emerges from the interaction of all of them” [ 22 ] . In order to support seamless use of diverse media across devices , it is necessary to provide adequate content organization models and services for effective Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from Permissions @ acm . org . MUM ' 13 , December 02 - 05 2013 , Luleå , Sweden Copyright 2013 ACM 978 - 1 - 4503 - 2648 - 3 / 13 / 12… $ 15 . 00 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2541831 . 2541866 access and re - use of digital artifacts . The proposed information architecture ( section 5 ) takes us beyond the traditional file based paradigm and extends the prior research on abstracting content organization from files [ 4 ] . In this paper we present the details of the empirical work , the findings that support the proposed architecture , and the conceptual design of the architecture . The actual implementation of the architecture is beyond the scope of this paper and will be covered in future publications . In the following sections we first provide the context of our explorations as part of the long - term observations of the scientific lab environment and describe in detail ( 1 ) the co - design study and ( 2 ) the task - focused study with DeskPiles . These studies deepened our understanding of the users’ needs and directed our attention to the mechanisms involved in the re - appropriation of the digital content during map creation . We discuss our findings in the context of the prior research on content organization and management and then focus on the requirements and conceptual design of the supporting information architecture . We conclude by summarizing our work and outlining further research . 2 . CO - DESIGN STUDY Our research is conducted in a technologically advanced scientific center within university setting where students and researchers run experiments in several locations using sophisticated laser equipment and purposely made material samples . Table 1 . Participants profiles for the Co - Design Study and the DeskPiles Technology Probe Co - Design Study Participants DeskPiles Exp . Participants 1 . Professor . Founder of the Centre S4 2 . Post Doc – multiple projects S1 3 . Post doc – multiple projects 4 . PhD Student – Nano group , 3 rd Year S2 5 . PhD Student – Nano group , 1 st Year S3 6 . PhD Student – Nano group 7 . PhD Student – Nano group 8 . PhD Student – Engineering group Lab experiments are enabled through standalone lab computers that control the scientific equipment and are not connected to the computer network . All other work is supported through the use of tablet PCs connected to the shared computing network . The portability of the tablet PCs made them particularly amenable to note taking , capturing ideas , and sharing knowledge . The students and the research leader had regular individual and team meetings supported by a PC with a large display for shared content viewing . They expended the meeting place with the tabletop PC as we started investigations of their sense - making and knowledge consolidation practices . In our recent study of the same environment [ 16 ] , we conducted interviews and ethnographic investigation of the research practices for a period of two weeks . Our particular focus was on the creation , management , storage and communication of information and the collaborative practices . As discussed in the introduction , our findings showed that participants expressed concern about the growing body of digital media they produce across devices and platforms and their difficulties in discovering and accessing content related to a specific topic or a project . From the observations and participants’ interviews , two particular issues emerged as causing such difficulties : information silos and project silos . With regards to the information silos , it transpired that the researchers used several computing platforms and applications to complete their work and create information artifacts that were not immediately usable across applications . Thus , it was difficult to reuse content and provide unified view of the related research material : digital artifacts were locked into the application storage , e . g . , databases , and could be associated only if placed within the same file folder . The project silos , on the other hand , stemmed from the highly specialized and focused work by individual researchers or research teams . In order to leverage each other’s work it was important to create opportunities for knowledge sharing and information reuse . We observed that such knowledge sharing was achieved primarily through social knowledge networks [ 11 ] and through regular group meetings . In order to optimize the effectiveness of group meetings , they would have benefited from support for knowledge structuring and interpretation . Unfortunately , such support was not provided by the applications that were at their disposal . Thus , we decided to focus on designing a tool that would help them bridge the gap between information silos and support them in knowledge sharing . Figure 1 . Portable Tablet PCs facilitate scientific experiments in different lab locations ( top ) . Multi - device meeting environment with the large display , tabletop computer , and the portable computers supports individual and collective sense - making ( bottom ) . In order to generate specific design ideas we ran a co - design workshop with 8 participants from the study reported in [ 16 ] ( Table 1 ) . We structured the co - design session into two parts . In the first part we discussed the observed needs and then followed with two 45 minute sessions focused on generating specific ideas to improve personal and shared information management within the group . We encouraged the participants to use pencil , paper , and sticky notes to express their ideas ( Figure 2 and 3 ) . 2 . 1 Co - design Outcomes Two major themes arose from the co - design sessions : 1 ) the desire for improved information linking across projects and 2 ) the desire for visual project spaces to bring together relevant information from application silos and disparate file stores . The participants articulated the importance of these for a number of scenarios , from facilitating group meetings that often require a drill - down from presentation documents to raw data to encapsulating key moments of breakthrough and knowledge milestones . The participants also expressed a strong desire for performing such linking operations within visual project spaces that offer methods for viewing , arranging , annotating , and creating new links between the connected data sources . While they provided some specific suggestions , for example a ‘zoomable tree - shaped’ map which expressed project development ( Figure 3 ) , the precise nature of such representations was left open . The participants stated that the visual space should provide overview of projects , expose links between different projects and resources , and create a place where comments could be recorded and thoughts about a project collected . They expressed preference for the natural interaction with digital artifacts through touch , as supported by the tabletop PC they recently adopted . The co - design workshop offered design directions for such a system . However , considering the diversity of the digital artifacts and linking functions , there were many open questions about - The expected user interaction with the project spaces and the project maps —What are the requirements for visual project spaces ? How is the spatial arrangement used ? How would linking be used ? - The information architecture and facilities that are needed to support the application —How is the content represented and included into the project map ? What supporting tools are required to enable content import ? How are the maps and constituent elements stored , accessed , replicated , and shared ? Thus , we decided to implement DeskPiles as a tool for aggregation , linking , and annotation of information artifacts . Our aim was to use DeskPiles to explore these questions in further depth . Our expectation was that an interactive system would uncover additional aspects that were not easy to capture in the co - design study . 3 . TECHNOLOGY PROBE : DESKPILES Essential drivers for the DeskPiles design were the purpose of the prototype and the implementation strategy . Based on the co - design findings , we chose to provide support for creating project maps from distributed and heterogeneous collections of digital media . As for the implementation approach , we decided to leverage the MS Surface tabletop computer which served as a focal point for information exchange and sense - making of research findings . The combination of the multi - touch tabletop computer with the personal pen - enabled PC Tablets connected to the lab network infrastructure provided an opportunity to observe the issues that arise from the cross - platform content management and use . All the devices in the lab used the MS Windows operating system . However , individual devices were supplied with different sets of content viewing and authoring applications . The DeskPiles technology itself was provided only for the MS Surface and limited by the application development support on the MS Surface device at the time . Figure 2 : Representation of a visual project space created by a group of participants during co - design . Arrows indicate links between resources . Small post - it notes indicate resources , notifications , information sources , and annotations within the space . Dotted line shows resources from individual people who brought them into the collaborative project space . Figure 3 : A project summary map shows branches of research segments . By zooming into a particular branch , the user would view details of the milestone ( top ) . The knowledge map ( bottom ) shows a tree of incremental knowledge ( rising from the bottom root to the branches ) with indications of knowledge milestones along the branches . This set - up gave rise to constraints that we consider realistic and representative of the evolving ecosystem of mobile and ubicomp devices and services . As new technologies are added , their interaction with existing technologies may be limited and gradually expanded to support emerging usage scenarios . Our aim was to learn about the nature of such constraints and the implications for enabling ubiquitous and contextually rich access and reuse of digital assets . In particular , we focused on : - What types of content individuals chose to collect and include into the project maps - What types of artefacts they created using the tool - What issues they encountered while using the tool to manipulate the content . To that effect , we designed DeskPiles to support various transformations of document objects and enable the participants to create content representations that are suitable and sufficiently expressive for their task . This approach extends the argument put forward by Truong & Hayes [ 21 ] that ubiquitous access to information needs to be supported at an appropriate level of detail , with optimal effort . As it will be discussed in the following sections , our study adds to this work by revealing the principles by which this appropriate level of detail is determined and facilitated . It transpires that the requirements are not solely driven from the system’s perspective but also by the users’ preferences and assessment of the semantic value of information items . That , in turn , implies the need for tools and services that users can apply to extract , transform , and compose digital items and for an information architecture that provides adequate storage , linking , access , and reuse of such digital artefacts . 3 . 1 DeskPiles Design The design and functionality of the DeskPiles tool addressed three themes that emerged during the co - design workshop : ( 1 ) gathering and linking of information items , ( 2 ) spatial arrangement of information items , and ( 3 ) flexible ‘idea space’ with methods to view , arrange , annotate , and create new links . Gathering and Linking Information Items . Users of the DeskPiles application can import information artifacts into a visual workspace on the MS Surface tabletop that is partitioned into a regular grid with adjustable size and zoom levels . Files can be dragged directly into the visual workspace using drag & drop from the Microsoft Windows Explorer . The documents appear as a group of interconnected images , e . g . , images of pages and slides that serve as visual proxies of the original content ( Figure 4 ) . The user can view the content at high resolution by zooming in . The prototype was aimed at seamless import of documents to be used in creating project maps . Since MS Surface applications did not natively support viewing and manipulating typical content such as MS Word files , web pages , or PDFs , we integrated an automatic conversion into the natively supported XPS or JPG formats and partitioning of documents into page - level images . Spatial Arrangements . DeskPiles enables the user to arrange and manipulate the content using a Zoomable User Interface ( ZUI ) . In order to simplify the interaction for moving , scaling or aligning content , the workspace is equipped with a multi - scale variant of a “snap - to - grid” mechanism . The grid cells help to arrange items in regular layouts within clear geometric boundaries . Visual Project Space . DeskPiles enables the user to view , arrange , annotate , and create new links between information resources . In order to annotate an item , the user can zoom into any object and access associated color palette and drawing tools . By using simple touch interaction , they can trace markings , symbols , or coarse - grained handwriting on items . For creating visual representations of new ideas , abstract concepts , sketches , or notes , the user is given an option to create a rectangular note object , similar to physical post - it notes . The text can be entered using a physical or on - screen keyboard or through drawing tools that support hand - traced annotations . Unlike other objects , the note objects float above the multi - scale grid and can be moved , resized , and rotated freely . This facilitates labeling and association of multiple objects . The user can also create links between any two objects in the workspace , including the notes . They appear as curved lines between the objects . 3 . 2 DeskPiles Study We conducted a three stage study by inviting 4 participants from the co - design study to use DeskPiles : a post - doc working on multiple projects ( S1 ) , a third year PhD student ( S2 ) , a first year PhD student ( S3 ) and the research leader and found of the group ( S4 ) ( see Table 1 ) . In preparation for the study , S1 - S3 were asked to bring a list of digital artifacts , i . e . , resources that they wish to use for creating an overview of their projects or research topics . In stage 1 ( 3 sessions ) , each participant S1 – S3 sat as a single user at the MS Surface and imported resources from the file system Figure 4 : DeskPiles interface is supported by a mode based menu shown at the corners of the zoomable canvas . By selecting the appropriate mode ( top figure ) , the user can move / delete objects , link objects , and add annotation ( bottom figure ) . into the tool using the prepared list as a guide ( Figure 4 , top image ) . They used the tool features and multi - touch interaction to arrange resources and create links and notes . We refer to the resulting artifacts as project maps . In stage 2 ( 1 session ) , the three participants S1 - S3 sat around the MS Surface together and collaboratively created a shared project map . In order to provide participants with visual access to the individual project maps created during stage 1 , we projected them onto the wall ( Figure 5 , middle image ) . One person took charge of importing images and arranging resources to create the shared project map . In stage 3 all the participants S1 - S4 sat around the table ( Figure 5 , bottom image ) . The session began by asking the research leader ( S4 ) to interpret the shared project map from stage 2 . After that , a spokesperson from the group of the three participants S1 - S3 explained outstanding aspects of the map . The research leader sat in the control position , and made additions and alterations to the map through the session ( Figure 5 , bottom ) . Sessions were held in situ in the research leader’s office where group meetings were regularly held . Each two hour session was broken into a 90 minute use of the tool and a 30 minute semi - structured interview . Interviews focused on the artifact that the participants created , their experience with using the tool , and generation of design ideas . All the sessions were video - taped , transcribed , and then analyzed using Thematic Coding [ 14 ] . Furthermore , we took automated screenshots of the MS Surface tabletop display every 15 seconds . That enabled us to record and analyze how the content representations evolved . 4 . FINDINGS The study data provided insights into both the resulting digital artifacts , i . e . , the project maps , and the use of DeskPiles features while creating them . We discuss the findings according to the workflow that characterized the participants’ use of the tool . First , we investigate the information resources that participants imported into the interactive space and the ways they used them as information units . We then analyze the techniques that participants applied to connect information units and to compose project maps as a new representation of original resources . 4 . 1 Decoupling of Document and Content Units Summary : From the list of pre - gathered resource , participants imported sub - parts of the documents . This was not fully supported across file types and required participants to rely on workarounds such as cut & paste operations . This affirmed that the document file is too course grain for creating project maps . A detailed analysis of the participants’ activities shows that across all stages in the study , participants imported into DeskPiles a total of 47 resources . From the co - design study we expected researchers to import full documents into the tool . Instead , the users decomposed documents into information units at two different levels , the page level and individual concept or object level . Overall , information units accounted for 57 % percent of the resource imported into the tool . Single image files , depicting experimental setups , samples or data accounted for 34 % percent of imported resources . Entire PowerPoint and XPS documents , i . e . , paginated documents and complete set of slides , accounted for the remaining 9 % . Page level items . In DeskPiles , the PowerPoint and XPS files are automatically paginated when imported into the tool . Once imported , the user can delete and arrange composite slides and pages . All the participants used this feature to manipulate information units that contained images and diagrams they wished to refer to . For example , S1 imported a 10 slide PowerPoint deck and deleted all but one slide which gave an overview of one of his research areas that he wished to refer to . Such instances accounted for 19 % of the total resources imported into the tool . In the majority of cases this technique was insufficient since participants wished to import items of a finer granularity . Figure 5 : Stage 1―a participant sits at MS Surface ( top ) ; Stage 2―participants work together with individual maps projected on the wall ( middle ) ; Stage 3―the research leader reviews the map created by the students ( bottom ) . Sub - page level items . Information units from individual pages or slides accounted for 38 % of resource that participants imported into the tool . Participants used print screen options and an image cropping tool to extract and shape relevant visual content and import it into the tool . For example , S2 included 5 individual images from a poster that he had created , and 3 images from 2 PowerPoint presentations ( see Figure 8 ) . Implications . In addition to supporting file organization through metadata enhancement and management ( [ 4 ] , [ 16 ] ) , we need to refine the architecture to support the use of sub - document information units . This implies the need for services to extract information units and convert into a digital form that is appropriate for the target application . From the interviews , we learnt that the participants used extracted information units for two reasons : ( 1 ) a single image could represent a class of items and ( 2 ) an image extracted from a document could communicate information quicker than text of a full document . 4 . 2 Re - composition of Information Units Summary : The participants used space , links , and annotations to express relationships among information items in the map . While they tend to create semantic regions within the map , those could be ambiguous to third parties and require a rich semantic layer to mitigate the ambiguity , e . g . , through textual or voice annotations . We reflect in more details on the three techniques used to construct project maps : spatial semantic grouping , resource linking , and note based annotation . Semantic grouping . As expected from the previous findings by Marshall et al . [ 12 ] and Shipman et al . ( [ 17 ] , [ 18 ] ) , all the participants used space as a key organization principle to group resources imported into the tool . They created ‘zones’ in the grid space by either clustering resources in specific areas or laying resources vertically to create columns . Participant S1 ( Figure 6 ) used the grid to separate commercial and scientific work by creating a single column for commercial work on the left ( Figure 6 , bottom image , section 1 ) , and a cluster of resources related to the scientific work on the right ( Figure 6 , section 3 ) . Near the center he placed a high level overview ( Figure 6 , section 2 ) . Participant S2 ( Figure 7 ) , on the other hand , created three broad semantic zones that are not spatially demarcated . In the center to the right , he placed resources related to well understood areas of his work ( Figure 7 , bottom image , section 3 ) . Below and the left of this , he placed resources related to areas of research which were not well understood ( Figure 7 , section 2 ) . He used the surrounding cells ( Figure 7 , section 1 ) to explain the relationship and dependencies among resources in zones 2 and 3 . Implications . The re - composition of the information units causes further separation of the information organization , e . g . , file store , from the document organization . At the same time , the resulting resource maps , supported by the rich metadata , provide the Figure 8 : Detail of inter - item linking in S2’s map Figure 6 : Map created by S1 and highlighted grouping strategies ( bottom ) . Figure 7 : Map created by S2 and highlighted grouping strategies ( bottom ) . connection between the derived information organization and the underlying document collection . Linking and proximity . In addition to spatial proximity , participants used explicit links to represent connections between two or more resources . They designated complex inter - relationships between resources , including connections of spatially distant objects in the map . S2 made extensive use of linking , creating 20 links to form a dense network of connected resources and notes ( see Figure 7 ) . Whereas other participants created relatively simple groupings ( Figure 7 ) , S2 created a complex representation , with interconnections across spatial groupings ( Figure 7 ) . Similar use of explicit links is seen in the flow of questions in section 4 of the consolidated map ( see Figure 9 ) . Participants jointly created a large number of links to form connections between information units and the notes that contain research questions and goals . Since resources were grouped in the left part of the map , links were used to bridge the distance in the map and express the relationships which could not be shown through spatial proximity . In the review session , S4 further refined the map by creating additional links among existing resources . He also extended the map with new links between existing resources and the resources that he brought into the map . While links proved useful for making connections explicit , participants expressed dissatisfaction with their relatively simple nature . They proposed a richer linking language , including animated links to show flow of data , directional links , colored links , and links of different thickness to indicate critical and non - critical paths . Implications . The use of DeskPiles revealed the need for three types of links : ( 1 ) the inheritance link that connects document excerpts with the source documents , ( 2 ) the spatial proximity of map objects and , ( 3 ) the explicit links that connect resources and notes . These need to be differentiated and persisted in the map encoding for further use since the project map itself represents a digital artifact and , thus , a reusable object . 5 . DISCUSSION As we noted in section 2 , the need for connecting information and project silos stems from both the technology issues , such as disconnect between diverse software platforms and applications , and the specific focus and specialty of individuals and research teams . By observing the use of DeskPiles to create project maps we gained new insights into this problem area . In this section we first reflect upon the support and purpose of creating projects maps and then focus on the requirements for the information architecture , services , and tools that are essential to support the creation of such maps and ubiquitous , context rich access and re - use of digital assets that are represented in the maps . 5 . 1 Design of Project Maps Aligned with our work , Kerne et al . [ 9 ] suggest that the support for gathering , connecting , and making sense of information requires an extension and abstraction of the traditional notions of files and folders to a generalized concept of collections . The collections are represented through surrogates of digital containers , i . e . , visual representations of the digital artifacts that range from traditional files and folders to RSS feeds and streaming media . By arguing to complement the traditional file management and desktop with the composition spaces , Kerne et al . [ 9 ] provide support for the user to create surrogates of the digital objects and devise meaningful and semantically rich compositions . A composition created through their combinFormation system represents a visually rich spatial representation of the collection and enables interaction with the referenced information artifacts . In their work , Kerne et al . [ 9 ] emphasize the need for providing an assisting service , through a mixed - initiative agent , to support the user in creating the surrogates and compositions in the PC environment . Signer [ 19 ] advocates a specific conceptual model for structural cross media content compositions . They propose the use of references to the structural elements within the documents . This enables effective reuse of content via structural relationships and dynamic adaptation of documents as the referred document elements are updated . 5 . 1 . 1 Study implications Our research confirms the importance of semantically rich compositions in the context of scientific work and complements work by Kerne et al . [ 9 ] by providing empirical data about the manual creation of compositions as part of the sense - making activity . It uncovered the need for richer referencing and linking capabilities in order to achieve both the access to the referenced content and the ability to convey semantic links within the specific compositional view of the digital collection . This was illustrated by the project maps created by the participants as a support for interpretation , common understanding , and critical examination of the scientific work . Similarly to the spatial hypertext system discussed by Marshall et al . [ 12 ] , the specific representations offered a framework for rationalizing and examining the results of the work . However , the nature of the resulting map artifacts was different from expected . During the co - design workshop we received strong Figure 9 : Joint representation of the maps composed by S1 , S2 , and S3 , analyzed for spatial grouping ( bottom ) . indications that scientists wanted to connect important artifacts and to indicate milestones and breakthrough . The use of DeskPiles revealed a different trend . In the resulting maps , only 17 % of artifacts actually represented full documents . The rest were information units created from excerpts of documents , some linked to the source document and others serving as independent representations of concepts and embodiments of ideas . At the same time , the participants voiced a need to access a broader body of material associated with the objects in the map yet not manually included in the map . This implies a need for intelligent linking of resources through automated discovery of related content . One such method has been explored by Kerne et al . [ 9 ] . Alternative source of meaningful associations can be enabled through a practice of activity based organization of resources , e . g . , through light weight tagging explored by Oleksik et al . [ 16 ] . Furthermore , the study revealed that knowledge structuring and linking ensued during discussions and contemplations of maps . These were not reflected in any of the digital artifacts in the maps . Thus , an important requirement is to capture the process of idea linking that is more ephemeral than the traces of interaction with the digital artifacts . We expect that audio and video recordings during interactive sessions would be a step forward in that direction . Overall , these aspects can be summarized as requirements to : 1 . Support the extraction , manipulation and presentation of sub - file items . 2 . Support the capture of important context , knowledge and idea linking not expressed in the visual workspace . 3 . Support the drilling down to source documents and drilling up to higher level , cross project representations . We now take these considerations a step further from the work on collections and compositions ( [ 9 ] , [ 19 ] ) to the design of the information architecture and fundamental services that underpin the manipulation , management , and access to the digital information items . 5 . 2 Information Architecture In their work Abowd & Mynatt [ 1 ] introduce the vision of everyday computing that continuously supports informal and unstructured activities typical of our everyday lives , e . g . , orchestrating tasks or managing information . However , in order to design suitable information environments and study their use , it is necessary to frame the broad nature of such everyday information management activities . Blandford & Attfield [ 3 ] offer a conceptual framework for libraries in terms of information journeys . Lehikoinen et al . [ 10 ] recommend GEMS model for mobile personal content experience . They both provide structures for understanding and formalizing different phases of information interaction and management in their specific domain . Work by Oleksik et al . [ 16 ] propose the use of tagging as a generic mechanism for assembling , structuring and referencing collections of digital content based on emerging or established user activities . All these efforts are in line with Fitzmaurice et al . [ 5 ] who suggest that , in today’s post - desktop mobile and ubiquitous environments , we require alternatives to the traditional hierarchical file system and its metaphors . To that effect , Dourish et al . [ 4 ] introduce the Presto architecture that uses a meta - layer of “placeless documents” to separate document organization from the file storage organization . The central aspect of the architecture is the Presto Document Object Layer that implements the document model and provides documents with attributes that underpin the document organization . Using Presto as the infrastructure , one can operate a variety of interfaces and support users in perceptual explorations of attribute - based information structures and their spatial arrangements . With regards to creating different views above the file system , Hess & Campbell [ 6 ] suggest to replace it entirely with a context - aware alternative that makes information storage “follow” its users , so that they are always in the center of their “personal data cloud” . Our study takes these considerations to another level of detail and , based on the empirical evidence , offers a set of requirements to support re - use of digital content across multiple devices , applications , and computing platforms , as observed in knowledge sharing and consolidation activities . 5 . 2 . 1 Design Recommendations The user practices we observed established the need for an extended information architecture . Work on Presto by Dourish et al . [ 4 ] and the ‘sentient data access’ by Fitzmaurice et al . [ 5 ] already enhance the standard file organizations through : Separation of Content and Format . Fitzmaurice et al . [ 5 ] advocate the need to transform documents into the most appropriate representation of information for a given location and the properties of a given terminal , by default . This subsumes the storage agnostic and the file agnostic manipulation of the digital objects . The latter involves the transformation into a file format that is compatible with the viewing environment . Separation of Physical and Logical Organization through Metadata Referencing . Dourish et al . [ 4 ] consider the storage agnostic approach by providing a meta - layer of “placeless documents” above the file space . This approach relies upon services that create and manage metadata about the document files , including user assigned attributes or tags , to provide natural interaction with the documents as information items rather than files . This has the effect of decoupling the physical and logical storage of files from their representation in a document space . Our study findings indicate that individuals - Used subparts , i . e . , content units extracted from the documents to serve as surrogates for the entire document , relevant parts of the document , or a concept and its meaning independent from the context of the original documents . The extraction and storage of such units is currently not well supported . - Applied implicit and explicit linking of content units within the project map to express context specific semantics . This information cannot be directly saved within current file systems , for example . - Created representations of document collections , i . e . , project maps , that are complex digital objects , comprising multi - format digital units , explicit linking and proximity associations , file referencing , and sub - file hyperlinking . This raises two issues : ( 1 ) how to represent collections with rich semantic structure , including spatial positioning and multiple types of links , and ( 2 ) what services and tools to provide in order to support use of heterogeneous collections and their rich representations . We first introduce two concepts : 1 . Digital Content Assembly —an assembly of files that represent content units , i . e . , excerpts and derivatives of the original digital content . The study showed that both single - file formats , such as PDF and JPEG , and multi - file documents , such as OpenXML and HTML , need to include results of extraction , aggregation , and format transformation . Each extracted unit , for example , may need to be persisted in several formats . Furthermore , the units are not bound by the document object structure of the document formats ; they can be created using various extraction and transformation tools during the content reuse , e . g . , document rendering . 2 . Collection View —a digital artifact that provides a semantic representation of the content collections . As illustrated by the observed project maps , such views can represent logical organizations of content beyond the file storage organization , including a mixture of spatial and hypertext organization of annotated digital objects . Furthermore , we propose services and tools to support content assemblies and collection views and to address the workarounds applied by the study participants . For example , one such service would enable an equivalent of a cut & paste operation between applications that reside on different platforms and devices . Thus , we recommend two types of services : 1 . Reference Resolution and Notification Services —support multiple types of references among elements in the document content assembly and inform of changes to the elements in the content assembly that may affect the reference resolution . 2 . Content Transformation Service —in addition to standard file format transformations , support extraction of content units through operations on the document object models or rendered documents . 5 . 2 . 2 Implementation Considerations Support for Content Reuse . The notion of digital content assemblies is akin to the logical organization that can be facilitated by file attributes [ 4 ] and activity based metadata , independent from the physical storage , as suggested by [ 16 ] . Our study , however , indicates the need to support the persistence and referencing of content units that are sub - parts of the existing documents ( Figure 10 ) . This raises two immediate issues : the file format in which to persist the excerpts and the mechanism to create and retain or discard provenance information . For example , we have observed the reuse of content units from the PowerPoint files and a poster in a Word Documents ( Figure 6 ) . When the re - used content corresponds to objects in the Document Object Model , e . g . , an image or table , we have an option to reference the imbedded objects instead of persisting it separately from the document . However , when the content units are more diverse , e . g . , created by using a screen capture of the rendered document , we create a new digital object with its own content type and content format . The decision about the format of the content unit is made based on the anticipated context of reuse , i . e . , the target medium in which the content is to be used . One possible approach to representing the set of content units is to associate a Digital Content Assembly to each given document , allowing overlaps or duplication across documents as required . The Digital Content Assembly keeps together all the content units that originate from the document and , at the time of extraction , require the provenance record . If the latter is not requested , the content unit becomes an independent digital artifact disconnected from the original . This can be viewed a generalization of the multi - file document formats such a HTML and Open XML where additional file components are generated during usage , linked to the original document but not necessarily part of the document object model used for rendering or other processing . Content Transformation Services . The most prolific tool for enabling reuse across applications is the Clipboard used in Cut & Paste operations within the desktop environment . A generalization of such a function needs to include the extraction and appropriate transformation of content to fit the format of the target application . This can be achieved by providing - Middleware to facilitate the document exchange between the devices , e . g . , MS Surface , and the devices and services that store the documents . - A cloud - based proxy service that communicates with individual devices to gain access to documents , performs content transformations , and delivers the appropriate information unit . As a feasibility test , we implemented an early prototype of MS Azure services for content transformation by leveraging the cloud blob storage for content store and worker roles for implementing specific transformation functions . The architecture is expandable and flexible , allowing new transformation services to be introduced and the results conveniently stored and ready for use . References to the related documents are held in a relational database hosted on Azure . Reference Resolution and Notification Services . Although limited in its scope , the DeskPiles task experiment revealed the need for diverse reference support among content units and to the original documents or their subpart . In the multi - device environment this , again , calls for a global referencing system , possibly supported by a cloud platform . Furthermore , in a complex and dynamic information environment where value is derived from repurposing content , it is critical to ensure that the changes to the collections and collection views are appropriately reflected in the referencing system . Without due care this would lead to the broken references as often encountered in complex hyperlinked environments like the World Wide Web . 6 . CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK In this paper we report on our investigation of information management practices in a technologically advanced scientific lab Figure 10 . Evolution of the information management models , from tightly coupled storage of files and document organization ( top ) to the decoupling of file storage and document organization [ 4 ] ( middle ) , to the proposed decomposition and re - configuration of information units from document content ( bottom ) . that aspires to ubiquitous and effective use of digital information . By using a technology probe to engage participants in creating project maps , we collected data about the digital artifacts they created and the mechanisms they employed during that process . The project maps illustrate a more general concept of collections and collections views that capture semantically rich representation of the digital resources . Our findings reveal the need to expand traditional information architectures and include ( 1 ) an extended range of content reference options in order to express the relationship among information items and ( 2 ) a range of services to enable extraction , conversion , linking , and access to digital content across devices and applications . By advocating a granular , multi - format , and interlinked representations of content units we aim to support a number of usage scenarios such as sense - making and knowledge consolidation as observed among the study participants . In general , we argue that the flexibility in utilizing information units is critical for deriving value from digital resources . Our study has its limitation due to the relatively specialized and selective set of participants who are inclined to engage in abstract thinking and use highly visual artifacts in their work . However , there is evidence that similar practices of content reuse through extraction , composition , and linking occur regularly with the users of the desktop PC environment in different tasks as reported by Jensen et al . [ 7 ] . Thus , the proposed information architecture has a potential benefit for a broader range of usage scenarios . 7 . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We wish to thank Toni Schmidt for his assistance with the DeskPiles implementation and user study . We are also grateful to Prof . Jeremy Baumberg , Director of the Nanophotonics Centre at the University of Cambridge , UK , and his team of researchers for their participation and invaluable input during user studies . 8 . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Abowd , G . D . and Mynatt , E . D . 2000 . Charting past , present , and future research in ubiquitous computing . ACM Trans . Computer - Human Interaction 7 , 1 ( March 2000 ) , 29 - 58 . [ 2 ] Bannon , L . and Bødker , S . 1997 . Constructing common information spaces . In Proceedings of the 5th European Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work , ( Lancaster , UK , September 7 - 11 , 1997 ) . ECSCW’97 . Springer Netherlands , 81 - 96 . [ 3 ] Blandford , A . and Attfield , S . 2010 . Interacting with Information . Synthesis Lectures on Human - Centered Informatics . Morgan & Claypool . [ 4 ] Dourish , P . , Edwards , W . K . , LaMarca , A . , and Salisbury , M . 1999 . Presto : an experimental architecture for fluid interactive document spaces . ACM Trans . Computer - Human Interaction 6 , 2 ( June 1999 ) , 133 - 161 . [ 5 ] Fitzmaurice , G . W . , Khan , A . , Buxton , W . , Kurtenbach , G . , and Balakrishnan , R . 2003 . Sentient Data Access via a Diverse Society of Devices . Queue 1 , 8 ( Nov . 2003 ) , 52 - 62 . [ 6 ] Hess , C . K . and Campbell , R . H . 2003 . An application of a context - aware file system . Personal Ubiquitous Computing 7 , 6 ( December 2003 ) , 339 - 352 . [ 7 ] Jensen , C . , Lonsdale , H . , Wynn , E . , Cao , J . , Slater , M . and Dietterich , T . G . 2010 . The life and times of files and information : a study of desktop provenance . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . CHI 2010 , ACM , 767 - 776 . [ 8 ] Karger , D . R . 2007 . It ' s All the same to me : data unification in personal information management . In Personal Info . Management , W . Jones and J . Teevan , Ed . 127 - 152 . [ 9 ] Kerne , A . , Koh , E . , Smith , S . M . , Webb , A . , and Dworaczyk , B . 2008 . combinFormation : Mixed - initiative composition of image and text surrogates promotes information discovery ACM Trans . on Info . Systems ( Dec . 2008 ) 27 1 , 1 - 45 . [ 10 ] Liebreskind , J . P . , Oliver , A . L . , Zuker , L . , and Brewer , M . 1996 . Social networks , learning and flexibility : sourcing scientific knowledge in new biotechnology firms . Organization Science 7 , 4 , 428 - 443 . [ 11 ] Lehikoinen , J . , Aaltonen , A . , Huuskonen , P . , and Salmine , L . 2007 . Personal content experience : managing digital life in the mobile age . John Wiley & Sons , Chichester , England . [ 12 ] Marshall , C . C . and Rogers , R . A . 1992 . Two years before the mist : experiences with Aquanet . In Proceedings of the ACM conference on Hypertext . ACM , 53 - 62 . [ 13 ] Marshall C . C . and Shipman , F . M . 1995 . Spatial Hypertext : Designing for Change . Communications of the ACM 38 , 8 ( August 1995 ) , 88 - 97 . [ 14 ] Miles , M . B . and Huberman , A . M . 1994 . Qualitative data analysis : An expanded sourcebook . Sage . [ 15 ] Oleksik , G . , Wilson , M . L . , Tashman , C . , Rodrigues , E . M . , Kazai , G . , Smyth , G . , Milic - Frayling , N . , and Jones , R . 2009 . Lightweight tagging expands information and activity management practices . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . CHI’09 . ACM , 279 - 288 [ 16 ] Oleksik , G . , Milic - Frayling , N . , Jones , R . 2012 . Beyond data sharing : artifact ecology of a collaborative nanophotonics research centre . In Proceedings of the ACM 2012 conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work . CSCW’12 . ACM , 1165 - 1174 . [ 17 ] Shipman , F . M . , Hsieh , H . , Maloor , P . , and Moore , J . M . 2001 . The visual knowledge builder : a second generation spatial hypertext , In Proceedings of the 12th ACM conference on Hypertext and Hypermedia , 14 - 18 . [ 18 ] Shipman , F . M . , Hsieh , H . , Moore , M . J . , and Zacchi , A . 2004 . Supporting personal collections across digital libraries in spatial hypertext . In Proceedings of the 4th ACM / IEEE - CS Joint Conference on Digital libraries , 358 - 367 . [ 19 ] Signer , B . 2010 . What is wrong with digital documents ? A conceptual model for structural cross - media content composition and reuse . Conceptual Modeling – ER 2010 . Springer Berlin Heidelberg , 391 - 404 . [ 20 ] Tabard , A . , Eastmond , E . , and Mackay , W . E . 2008 . From individual to collaborative : the evolution of Prism , a hybrid laboratory notebook . In Proceedings of the 2008 ACM conference on Computer supported cooperative work . CSCW’08 . ACM , 569 - 578 . [ 21 ] Truong , K . N . and Hayes , G . R . 2008 . Ubiquitous Computing for Capture and Access . Foundation and Trends in Human - Computer Interaction 2 , 2 , 95 - 173 . [ 22 ] Weiser , M . 1991 . The computer for the 21st century . Scientific American 265 , 3 , 94 - 104 .