ANRV413 - BI79 - 25 ARI 27 April 2010 21 : 38 Physical Mechanisms of Signal Integration by WASP Family Proteins Shae B . Padrick and Michael K . Rosen Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Department of Biochemistry , University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center , Dallas , Texas 75390 ; email : Shae . Padrick @ UTSouthwestern . edu , Michael . Rosen @ UTSouthwestern . edu Annu . Rev . Biochem . 2010 . 79 : 707 – 35 First published online as a Review in Advance on April 5 , 2010 The Annual Review of Biochemistry is online at biochem . annualreviews . org This article’s doi : 10 . 1146 / annurev . biochem . 77 . 060407 . 135452 Copyright c (cid:2) 2010 by Annual Reviews . All rights reserved 0066 - 4154 / 10 / 0707 - 0707 $ 20 . 00 Key Words actin regulation , allostery , Arp2 / 3 complex , Rho GTPase , signal transduction Abstract The proteins of the Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein ( WASP ) fam - ily are activators of the ubiquitous actin nucleation factor , the Arp2 / 3 complex . WASP family proteins contain a C - terminal VCA domain that binds and activates the Arp2 / 3 complex in response to numerous inputs , including Rho family GTPases , phosphoinositide lipids , SH3 domain – containing proteins , kinases , and phosphatases . In the archetypal mem - bers of the family , WASP and N - WASP , these signals are integrated through two levels of regulation , an allosteric autoinhibitory interac - tion , in which the VCA is sequestered from the Arp2 / 3 complex , and dimerization / oligomerization , in which multi - VCA complexes are bet - ter activators of the Arp2 / 3 complex than monomers . Here , we review the structural , biochemical , and biophysical details of these mechanisms and illustrate how they work together to control WASP activity in re - sponse to multiple inputs . These regulatory principles , derived from studies of WASP and N - WASP , are likely to apply broadly across the family . 707 A nnu . R e v . B i o c h e m . 2010 . 79 : 707 - 735 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g A cce ss p r ov i d e d by Y a l e U n i v e r s it y - L a w L i b r a r y on 02 / 01 / 15 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV413 - BI79 - 25 ARI 27 April 2010 21 : 38 WASP : Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein Arp2 / 3 complex : the actin - related protein 2 / actin - related protein 3 complex Contents INTRODUCTION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 708 DOMAIN ORGANIZATION OF WASP AND NEURAL WASP . . . . . 709 ALLOSTERIC REGULATION OF WASP AND N - WASP . . . . . . . . . 712 The WASP Autoinhibitory Mechanism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 712 Mechanism of Allosteric Activation and Inhibition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 714 ACTIVATION BY OLIGOMERIZATION . . . . . . . . . . . . 717 The VCA Dimerization Effect . . . . . . 717 Oligomerization by EspF U . . . . . . . . . 717 Oligomerization by SH3 Ligands . . . 718 Activation by High - Density PIP 2 . . . 719 INTEGRATION OF MULTIPLE SIGNALS BY WASP PROTEINS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 719 Allosteric Activation of WASP by Two Ligands . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 720 Integration of Multiple Oligomerizing Signals . . . . . . . . . . . 721 Combining Allosteric Activation and Oligomerization . . . . . . . . . . . . 722 HIGHER - ORDER OLIGOMERIZATION FURTHER STIMULATES WASP ACTIVATION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 724 Clustering of EspF U . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 724 Clustering by Endogenous Effectors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 724 OTHER WASP FAMILY MEMBERS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 726 Regulation of WAVE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 726 Other Family Members . . . . . . . . . . . . 727 ACTIN FEEDBACK . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 727 CONCLUDING REMARKS . . . . . . . . . 728 INTRODUCTION Cells are constantly bathed in a multitude of signals from the environment . Proper cellu - lar function requires integration of these sig - nals to yield complex processes and behaviors suchasdifferentiation , division , andmovement . Often signal integration is the speciﬁc response of individual molecules to multiple simultane - ous physical interactions . The mechanisms of this processing are a fascinating and important area of research in biochemistry , biophysics , and structural biology . Dynamic rearrangements of the actin cy - toskeleton underlie many cellular processes , including division , endocytosis , and move - ment . Control over actin dynamics is achieved through the integration of numerous signals , which together guide the assembly , disassem - bly , architecture , and movement of the actin ﬁlament network in a spatially and temporally deﬁned manner . Members of the Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein ( WASP ) family are central hubs in the signaling networks that control actin . These proteins integrate a huge range of inputs . In response , they activate the ubiquitous actin - nucleating machine , the Arp2 / 3 complex ( 1 , 2 ) . By controlling the degree , rate , and location of ﬁlament nucleation by the Arp2 / 3 complex , WASP proteins shape the structure and dynam - ics of ﬁlament networks throughout biology . Several excellent reviews have recently dis - cussed the cellular functions of WASP proteins , highlighting genetic and cell biological ﬁnd - ings ( 2 – 6 ) . Here , we focus on complementary structural , biophysical , and biochemical ﬁnd - ings , with an eye toward illustrating how these data inform biology . The central concept that pervades our discussion is that the activity of WASP proteins toward the Arp2 / 3 complex is controlled at two levels . First , an allosteric pro - cess involving transitions between inactive and active conformations controls the accessibility of the Arp2 / 3 - stimulatory element of WASP proteins . Second , oligomerization modulates that ability of an active WASP to stimulate the Arp2 / 3 complex , with dimers or higher - order oligomers having much greater potency than monomers . These two mechanisms function synergistically to allow WASP family members to integrate diverse signals and control Arp2 / 3 activity with precision . This view provides a unifying lens through which WASP biology can be understood in quantitative terms . 708 Padrick · Rosen A nnu . R e v . B i o c h e m . 2010 . 79 : 707 - 735 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g A cce ss p r ov i d e d by Y a l e U n i v e r s it y - L a w L i b r a r y on 02 / 01 / 15 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV413 - BI79 - 25 ARI 27 April 2010 21 : 38 DOMAIN ORGANIZATION OF WASP AND NEURAL WASP The WASP family is deﬁned by a conserved C - terminal VCA domain ( Figure 1 a ) named for its three sub - elements , the verprolin ( V ) homology ( also called WASP homology 2 or WH2 ) , central ( C ) hydrophobic , and acidic ( A ) regions . The VCA domain strongly stimulates actin nucleation by the Arp2 / 3 complex ( 1 , 7 , 8 ) . The three elements have distinct functions during this process . The C - terminal A region contributes substantial binding afﬁnity toward the Arp2 / 3 complex ( 9 – 12 ) . There is also a connection between the A region and activ - ity ; different WASP family VCAs have quite VCA domain : the verprolin homology , central hydrophobic , and acidic C - terminal regions of WASP family proteins different maximal activities , which correlate with the A region sequence ( 11 ) . The C region also contributes both to binding afﬁnity and to an afﬁnity - independent aspect of activation ( 10 , 13 ) , as well as to autoinhibitory regulation ( see below ) . The C region appears to contact the Arp2 / 3 complex using the hydrophobic face of an amphipathic helix ( 13 ) . TheVregionbindstoG - actinanddeliversit to the Arp2 and / or Arp3 subunits of the Arp2 / 3 complex ( both are homologous to actin ) , creating a pseudotrimer / tetramer nucleus for ﬁlament growth ( 7 , 9 , 10 , 14 – 18 ) . A recent small - angle X - ray scattering study suggests that a high - afﬁnity site for the VCA : actin complex is PIP 2 Cdc42 SH2 B GBD layer 1 β 1 β 2 α 2 α 3 α 4 α 1 GBD layer 2 WASP N - WASP WAVE1 WAVE2 WAVE3 WASH WHAMM JMY V C A PRD B SHD V C A PRD B SHD V C A PRD B SHD V C A V NTD CC P R D V C A B PRD EVH1 GBD V C A V B PRD EVH1 GBD WHD1 V C A WHD2 PRD V C A V V NTD CC P R D NTD b a KKRSGKKKISKADIGAPSGFKHVSHVGWDPQNGFDVNNLDPDLRSLFSRAGISEAQLTDAETSKLIYDFIEDQGGLEAVRQEMRRQ Figure 1 The Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein ( WASP ) family of proteins . ( a ) Domain structure of human WASP family proteins . Different domains are abbreviated as follows : A , acidic region ; B , basic region ; C , central hydrophobic region ; CC , coiled - coil domain ; EVH1 , Ena / VASP homology domain 1 ; GBD , GTPase - binding domain ; NTD , N - terminal homology domain ; PRD , proline - rich domain ; SHD , Scar homology domain ; V ( also WH2 ) , verprolin homology domain ; WHD1 , WASH homology domain 1 ; WHD2 , WASH homology domain 2 . In JMY , the NTD has an insertion of > 100 amino acids when compared to WHAMM . There are multiple closely related WASH proteins in humans ; shown here is WASH1 ( National Center for Biotechnology Information reference number NP 878908 ) . ( b ) WASP has distinct binding sites for different ligands . Human WASP B - GBD sequence is shown with domains colored as in panel a . The secondary structure from the WASP GBD - C - autoinhibited structure is shown ( see Figure 2 c – e ) . Bars indicate the binding sites for phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - diphosphate ( PIP2 ) , Cdc42 , and SH2 domains . Other annotations : dashed box , Cdc42 - Rac - interactive - binding or CRIB ; orange ovals , X - linked neutropenia WASP mutations ; green triangle , tyrosine 291 . www . annualreviews . org • Signal Integration by WASP Proteins 709 A nnu . R e v . B i o c h e m . 2010 . 79 : 707 - 735 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g A cce ss p r ov i d e d by Y a l e U n i v e r s it y - L a w L i b r a r y on 02 / 01 / 15 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV413 - BI79 - 25 ARI 27 April 2010 21 : 38 WIP : WASP - interacting protein positioned to deliver actin to the Arp2 subunit ( 18 ) ; it is also possible that a second VCA bind - ing to a different site ( see below ) could deliver actin to Arp3 . V region peptides form an am - phipathic helix that inserts into the hydropho - bic groove between actin subunits 1 and 3 , followed by an extended segment that traverses up the actin face toward the nucleotide - binding cleft ( Figure 2 a ) ( 16 , 19 ; see also the Research Collaboratory for Structural Bioinformatics , http : / / www . rcsb . org , database entry for Pro - tein Data Bank number 2vcp ) . As detailed in recent reviews , V / WH2 repeats are also found in many other proteins , and can act to either se - quester an actin monomer or , when in tandem arrays , nucleate ﬁlaments directly ( 20 , 21 ) . An important caveat to this straightforward characterization of the V , C , and A functions is a b c d e f g h β 1 β 1 β 2 β 2 α 1 α 1 α 2 α 5 α 3 α 4 α 5 WASP Actin EVH1 domain Proline motif WIP WIP Tyr291 Cdc42 GBD EspFU Wiskostatin GBD layer 2 C region of the VCA domain GBD layer 1 CRIB and flanking sequence 710 Padrick · Rosen A nnu . R e v . B i o c h e m . 2010 . 79 : 707 - 735 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g A cce ss p r ov i d e d by Y a l e U n i v e r s it y - L a w L i b r a r y on 02 / 01 / 15 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV413 - BI79 - 25 ARI 27 April 2010 21 : 38 that nearly all experiments to date do not take into account the recent discovery of a second VCA - binding site on the Arp2 / 3 complex ( 22 ) . This ﬁnding requires new experiments ( and re - consideration of previous data ) to analyze these functions in the context of the individual sites . In general , the VCAs could have quite different actionsatthetwosites , perhapsevenpromoting temporally distinct steps in the nucleation pro - cess . Understanding both the thermodynamic andkineticaspectsofArp2 / 3activationthrough the two VCA - binding sites represents an im - portant avenue for future research . N - terminal elements of WASP family pro - teins control localization , association with lig - ands , and biochemical activity of the VCA . These elements are divergent among differ - ent family members , affording the proteins distinct molecular details of regulation . How - ever , as argued below , the physical regula - tory principles are likely similar across the family . These principles have emerged from studies of the archetypal members , WASP and neural Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein ( N - WASP ) . The N - terminal Ena / VASP homology 1 ( EVH1 ) domain of WASP and N - WASP ( Figure 1 ) binds to a conserved proline mo - tif in members of the WIP family ( 23 ) . This PIP 2 : phosphatidylinositol4 , 5 - diphosphate interaction stabilizes and localizes WASP and N - WASP in cells ( 23 – 25 ) . Structural studies show that the WIP proline motif contacts the canonical EVH1 ligand - binding site through a type II polyproline helix ( Figure 2 b ) ( 26 ) . The ﬂanking sequences extend linearly around the EVH1 domain in opposite directions , wrap - ping over halfway around the domain . Muta - tions that disrupt this interface decrease WIP binding , leading in vivo to proteolytic degra - dation of WASP ( 25 ) and many forms of WAS ( 27 ) . WIP binding also negatively regulates the N - WASP VCA ( 28 , 29 ) . The EVH1 domain is followed by a hy - drophilic , low - complexity sequence , without an ascribed function for either WASP or N - WASP . Following this is a sequence of basic residues known as the basic ( B ) region ( Figure 1 ) . In both proteins , the B region stabilizes autoinhibitory interactions ( see below ) ( 30 – 32 ) . In N - WASP , it is clear that this element also binds PIP 2 and mediates many PIP 2 effects on activity ( 31 – 34 ) ( see below ) . The element probably plays a similar role in WASP , but additional regions appear necessary for this functional interaction ( 35 ) . As elaborated below , the B region also plays an important role in selective binding of the WASP activator , Cdc42 ( 36 ) . ←−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−− Figure 2 Structures of Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein ( WASP ) . ( a ) The structure of WASP verprolin homology / WASP homology 2 ( V / WH2 ) region in complex with actin . Actin is shown as a gray surface , and WASP is shown as an orange ribbon . ( b ) Structure of the neural Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein Ena / VASP homology 1 domain ( EVH1 ) in complex with WASP - interacting protein ( WIP ) residues 451 – 485 ( only the ordered WIP residues 454 – 481 are shown ) . The EVH1 domain is gold , and the proline motif ( 461DLPPPEPY468 ) and ﬂanking regions of WIP are magenta and blue , respectively . ( c - e ) Structure of autoinhibited WASP GTPase - binding domain fused to the C - region of the VCA ( GBD - C ) . ( c ) Structure of the GBD - C protein . The three layers of this structure are colored yellow ( GBD layer 1 ) , blue ( GBD layer 2 ) and red ( C region of the VCA domain ) , respectively . Secondary structure elements are labeled . ( d ) Structure of the GBD - C protein , rotated 180 ◦ from panel c . GBD and C elements are shown in surface and ribbon representations , respectively . ( e ) Surface representation of GBD - C protein , rotated ∼ 90 ◦ from panel c , showing the Y291 phosphorylation site in green . ( f , g ) Structures of active WASP complexes . ( f ) Structure of the Cdc42 : WASP GBD complex . Cdc42 is a green ribbon , with GMPPNP in sticks . Ordered GBD residues ( 231 – 277 ) are shown in orange [ Cdc42 - Rac - interactive - binding ( CRIB ) motif and ﬂanking sequence ] and yellow ( layer one as in panel c ) ribbon . ( g ) Structure of the WASP GBD : EspFU 1R complex . GBD is colored as in panel c and shown in surface representation . EspFU is shown as a green ribbon . ( h ) Structure of the WASP GBD - C : wiskostatin complex , orientation and color as in panel e , with wiskostatin shown as van der Waals spheres . www . annualreviews . org • Signal Integration by WASP Proteins 711 A nnu . R e v . B i o c h e m . 2010 . 79 : 707 - 735 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g A cce ss p r ov i d e d by Y a l e U n i v e r s it y - L a w L i b r a r y on 02 / 01 / 15 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV413 - BI79 - 25 ARI 27 April 2010 21 : 38 GBD : GTPase - binding domain PRD : proline - rich domain After the B region , WASP and N - WASP contain an ∼ 85 - residue element termed the GTPase - binding domain ( GBD ) ( Figure 1 ) . The ﬁrst 20 residues of this element contain a Cdc42 - Rac - interactive - binding ( CRIB ) mo - tif ( 37 ) , which mediates nucleotide - dependent binding of numerous effectors of the Cdc42 and Rac GTPases . The GBD in WASP and N - WASP binds the VCA intramolecularly and plays a central role in controlling activity to - ward the Arp2 / 3 complex ( 38 , 39 ) . Between the GBD and the VCA , WASP and N - WASP contain a 100 – 125 - residue proline - rich domain ( PRD ) ( Figure 1 ) . The PRD con - tains approximately six canonical binding sites for SH3 domains and three proﬁlin - binding sites ( 40 ) . This segment mediates interactions with SH3 domains of a large and diverse range of ligands . As WIP also contains a PRD , WASP : WIP complexes will have even more SH3 - binding sites . The ﬁve functional elements of WASP allow binding to multiple ligands simultaneously . A central concept developed in the following sec - tions is that the ligands can act through two dis - tinct regulatory mechanisms to control the bio - chemical activity of WASP toward the Arp2 / 3 complex : allostery , which controls accessibil - ity of the VCA to the Arp2 / 3 complex , and oligomerization , which controls how strongly the exposed VCA can stimulate the Arp2 / 3 complex . When multiple ligands engage one or both of these mechanisms simultaneously , they actcooperativelytocontrolWASPactivity , thus integrating multiple signals . ALLOSTERIC REGULATION OF WASP AND N - WASP The idea of autoinhibition in WASP , mediated by intramolecular binding of the GBD to the VCA , has guided thinking in the ﬁeld since its discovery in 1998 ( 38 ) . A large body of work has revealed structural and thermodynamic mechanisms of autoinhibition and its relief by upstream signals . We discuss these data in the context of single activators here and show how autoinhibition contributes to integrative behavior , below . The WASP Autoinhibitory Mechanism Physical studies have shown that isolated GBD and VCA peptides are largely unfolded in solution ( 39 , 41 ) . Upon binding , the C region of the VCA and most of the GBD , except for the CRIB motif , fold together to make a small domain ( 39 ) ( Figures 2 c , d ) . From a functional standpoint , the structure can be considered in three layers . The ﬁrst consists of a short β - hairpin and an α - helix ( α 1 ) . This layer represents the minimal high - afﬁnity Cdc42 - binding element . The second layer is formed by three additional helices organized into a planar C shape . Layer three consists of the C helix region of the VCA . This element lies behind layer two with its hydrophobic face contacting predominantly helices α 2 – α 4 and also the C terminus of helix α 1 through the open end of the layer two C . A number of C region side chains , which are buried in the layer two - layer three interface ( Figures 2 c , d ) , also contribute substantially to the activity and afﬁnity of the VCA for the Arp2 / 3 complex ( 10 , 13 ) . Thus , occlusion of these residues in the GBD : VCA complex is an important mechanis - tic component of autoinhibition in WASP and N - WASP . Mutations of the GBD , including L270P , I294T , and S272P , disrupt autoinhibi - tion and cause the immunodeﬁciency disease X - linked neutropenia ( Figure 1 ) ( 42 , 43 ) . A variety of data suggest that additional elements in WASP contribute to binding of the GBD to the VCA , and consequently to autoinhibition . Partial deletion of the A region increases N - WASP activity in vitro ( 12 ) , and complete removal ( including several residues typically classiﬁed as being in the C region ) greatly decreases the afﬁnity of GBD - containing constructs for the VCA in both WASP and N - WASP ( 31 , 39 ) . Similarly , partial truncation of the B region in WASP and N - WASP decreased autoinhibition ( 30 – 32 ) , concomitant with decreased unfolding stability 712 Padrick · Rosen A nnu . R e v . B i o c h e m . 2010 . 79 : 707 - 735 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g A cce ss p r ov i d e d by Y a l e U n i v e r s it y - L a w L i b r a r y on 02 / 01 / 15 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV413 - BI79 - 25 ARI 27 April 2010 21 : 38 of the BGBD - VCA WASP ( 30 ) . The potential for favorable electrostatic contacts between the A and B regions has led to suggestions that these elements may interact to stabilize the BGBD - VCA . Finally , the EVH1 domain can bind weakly to the VCA , and GBD constructs containing the EVH1 domain bind the VCA more strongly than those that do not ( 31 ) . Truncation of the EVH1 has also been reported to cause a small increase in the basal activity of N - WASP ( 31 ) , although this has not been universally observed ( 12 ) . The structural basis for the interaction of the EVH1 domain with the VCA and the contribution of the EVH1 domain to autoinhibition remain unknown . The thermodynamics of autoinhibition in WASP have been analyzed through a quan - titative two - state allosteric model , which is based on classical Monod - Wyman - Changeux ( MWC ) formalism ( Figure 3 a ) ( 30 , 44 , 45 ) . In this model , WASP exists in equilibrium between an inhibited state , where the GBD C V A B GBD 42 C V A B GBD C V A B GBD C V A B GBD B GBD A C V B GBD A C V 42 PIP 2 PIP 2 42 PIP 2 PIP 2 42 42 B GBD A C V B GBD A C V B GBD A C V B GBD A C V 42 B GBD A C V B GBD A C V C V A B GBD C V A B GBD C V A B GBD C V A B GBD C V A B GBD PIP 2 PIP 2 f act = K D , inact K D , act 1 1 + L f act , sat = 1 1 + C 1 C 2 L f act , sat = K D 2 K D 1 α K D 2 α K D 1 1 1 + CL 42 C V A B GBD 42 a b c d Figure 3 Thermodynamic models of allostery in a Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein ( WASP ) . ( a ) The two - state Monod - Wyman - Changeux ( MWC ) - based allosteric model for WASP regulation by controlling access to the C - helix through association with the GTPase - binding domain ( GBD ) . ( b ) Two - state allosteric model with one activator . ( c ) Two - state allosteric model with two activators . Equations describing the fraction of WASP in the active state , either free ( f act ) or in the presence of saturating ligand ( f act , sat ) are given below the images . L is deﬁned as [ WASP inactive ] / [ WASP active ] ; C is the ratio of dissociation constants of a ligand for the active and inactive states , K D , act / K D , inact . ( d ) Simpliﬁed allosteric model for response to two activators . K D 1 and K D 2 are the dissociation constants of the two ligands for free WASP ; α is the cooperativity constant between the ligands . Abbreviations : A , acidic region ; B , basic region ; V , verprolin homology / WH2 region ; 42 , Cdc42 . www . annualreviews . org • Signal Integration by WASP Proteins 713 A nnu . R e v . B i o c h e m . 2010 . 79 : 707 - 735 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g A cce ss p r ov i d e d by Y a l e U n i v e r s it y - L a w L i b r a r y on 02 / 01 / 15 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV413 - BI79 - 25 ARI 27 April 2010 21 : 38 is bound to the VCA , and an active state , where the elements are dissociated . Because the GBD and the VCA are both unfolded in isolation , the allosteric equilibrium can be described as the folding equilibrium . Thus , for any given WASP , the free energy of the allosteric transition is equal to the stability of the GBD - VCA domain against unfolding . As the latter can be directly measured by standard denaturation assays , the model provides a ready means of quantifying the allosteric equilibrium in WASP . This model quantitatively predicted the activity of many WASP proteins simply on the basis of their free energies of unfolding ( 30 ) . These proteins contained various linkers between the GBD and the VCA , different por - tions of the B region , and different destabilizing mutations in the GBD . As described below , this thermodynamic view of WASP as existing in equilibrium between a folded , inhibited state and an unfolded , active state is also an effective means of understanding activation by effectors . The combined structural , biochemical , and biophysical data have led to a straightforward mechanism of autoinhibition in WASP . The structure of the GBD - C construct shows that residues of the C region needed for activation of and afﬁnity toward the Arp2 / 3 complex are buried in the interface ( 10 , 13 , 39 ) . Biochemical data show that BGBD fragments compete with the Arp2 / 3 complex for VCA binding in cis ( 30 ) and trans ( 31 , 35 ) . Finally , the activity of a large range of GBD - VCA and BGBD - VCA proteins toward the Arp2 / 3 complex correlates quantitatively with the allosteric equilibrium of the free proteins ( 30 ) . Thus , autoinhibition is due to sequestration of the C region by the GBD . Additional functional regions outside of the GBD enhance autoinhibition by further stabilizing the GBD - C fold ( e . g . , interactions between the B and A regions in BGBD - VCA proteins ) . A distinct inhibitory mechanism has been proposed in which the closed protein ( BGBD bound to the VCA ) binds to and actively in - hibits the Arp2 / 3 complex through contacts of the B and A regions ( 32 ) . It is difﬁcult to reconcile this second model with the data de - scribed above , and we favor the ﬁrst model for its consistency with the more extensive and quantitative body of evidence . Importantly , both models lead to essentially identical ther - modynamic descriptions of the system , because both invoke inhibited states that are stabilized by multiple interactions , and an active state in - volving the free VCA . Thus , they lead to nearly identical descriptions of signal integration , and we will not distinguish them in our discussions of this issue below . Mechanism of Allosteric Activation and Inhibition Physical studies have revealed diverse structural mechanisms by which the allosteric equilibrium in WASP / N - WASP can be controlled by lig - ands . The unfolded nature of the GBD in active WASP plays an important role in enabling this diversity by allowing a wide range of confor - mationstoberecognized . Thispropertyalsoaf - fords novel means of WASP inhibition through conformational stabilization . These ideas can be incorporated into thermodynamic descrip - tions of WASP regulation . Structural basis of Cdc42 activation . Cdc42 is the best - characterized activator of WASP and N - WASP . GTP - bound Cdc42 binds the WASP GBD , destabilizing its interactions with the VCA and leading to activation . In the solution structure of the Cdc42 : GBD complex ( Figure 2 f ) , the CRIB motif extends in a linear fashion along the β 2 strand and con - tiguous switch I region of the GTPase , form - ing an irregular β - strand ( 41 ) . This interac - tion is very similar to that seen in complexes of Cdc42 with the CRIB domains from PAK1 ( 46 , 47 ) , PAK6 ( X . Yang , E . Ugochukwu , J . Elkins , M . Soundararajan , J . Eswaran , A . C . W . Pike , N . Burgess , J . E . Debreczeni , O . Gileadi , S . Knapp , D . Doyle , unpublished , RCSB accession num - ber 2odb ) and PAR6 ( 48 ) , and the interaction is more distantly related to the complex with the longer CRIB motif of ACK ( 49 ) . Contacts to switch I enable CRIB effectors to distinguish 714 Padrick · Rosen A nnu . R e v . B i o c h e m . 2010 . 79 : 707 - 735 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g A cce ss p r ov i d e d by Y a l e U n i v e r s it y - L a w L i b r a r y on 02 / 01 / 15 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV413 - BI79 - 25 ARI 27 April 2010 21 : 38 the GTP and GDP nucleotide states of Cdc42 and Rac ( 41 , 49 ) . Hydrogen bonds between the side chains of the conserved HXXH element in the CRIB motif with the side chain of D38 in Cdc42 ( and Rac ) appear to select against Rho , which contains a Glu at this position ( 41 ) . WASP sequences between the CRIB motif and B region contribute to selectivity against Rac ( 50 ) . Contacts of the B region to the β 2 - β 3 turn and α 5 also make signiﬁcant contribu - tions to the interactions between WASP and Cdc42 ( 36 ) . Neutralizing mutations to the B region of WASP can decrease the association rate and afﬁnity for Cdc42 by over two orders of magnitude . This electrostatic steering ef - fect also contributes to the speciﬁcity of WASP for Cdc42 over the closely related GTPase , TC10 . The CRIB motif is unstructured in the au - toinhibited GBD - VCA protein ( 39 ) . Thus , its interactions with Cdc42 do not drive WASP activation directly . In the Cdc42 : WASP com - plex , WASP residues following the CRIB motif form a β - hairpin and α - helix , which make hy - drophobic contacts to the switch I and switch II regions of Cdc42 ( 41 ) . These interactions also likely contribute to nucleotide switch sensitiv - ity . Thesecondarystructureelementsarenearly identical to those observed in the autoinhibited structure ( compare panels c and f in Figure 2 ) . However , packing of these conserved elements against Cdc42 is incompatible with the autoin - hibiteddomain . Extractionofthe β - hairpinand α 1 from the autoinhibited domain by Cdc42 thus greatly destabilizes the domain , releasing the VCA . This structural model is consistent with a 400 - fold increase in hydrogen exchange rates in the core of the GBD upon binding to Cdc42 ( 45 ) . A highly analogous regulatory mechanism is also found for Pak , where Cdc42 binding disrupts a similar autoinhibitory do - main , leading to activation of the adjacent ki - nase domain ( 51 ) . Structural basis of activation by Src family SH2 domains . In response to various stim - uli , the GBD of WASP / N - WASP becomes phosphorylated by Src family kinases on a con - served tyrosine side chain , Y291 / Y256 ( 52 – 56 ) . This modiﬁcation is needed for processes that include T cell activation ( 52 ) , neuronal differ - entiation ( 53 ) , and intracellular movement of the pathogen Shigella ﬂexneri ( 54 ) , and provides a mechanism for WASP activation by SH2 do - mains ( 57 , 58 ) . In the autoinhibited GBD - C structure , Y291 ( on α 3 ) is > 90 % buried in the inter - face between layers one and two , with only the phenolic hydroxyl group exposed ( Figure 2 e ) . The sequence surrounding Y291 comprises a consensus binding motif for the SH2 domains of Src family kinases ( 59 ) . Structural studies have shown that Src family SH2 domains bind their ligands in extended conformation ( 60 ) , which is incompatible with the helical confor - mation of α 3 in the autoinhibited structure . Thus , SH2 domain binding destabilizes the α 3 helix of phosphorylated WASP / N - WASP , dis - rupting the GBD - C domain , leading to release of the VCA ( 57 , 58 ) . Structural basis of activation by EspF U . En - terohemorrhagic E . coli ( EHEC ) isafood - borne human pathogen that adheres to the surface of intestinal epithelial cells and injects a protein named EspF U into the host cytoplasm ( 61 , 62 ) . EspF U binds and locally activates N - WASP , leading to formation of actin - rich “pedestals” beneath the bound bacterium ( 63 ) . EspF U contains 2 – 6 nearly exact repeats of a 27 - residue hydrophobic segment and a 20 - residue proline - rich segment ( 63 , 64 ) . The hydrophobic segment binds the GBD of WASP and N - WASP with nanomolar afﬁnity , displac - ing the VCA ( 65 , 66 ) . In the solution structure of a complex of the WASP GBD bound to a single EspF U repeat , the GBD adopts a conformation that is essentially identical to that observed in the autoinhibited GBD - VCA structure ( Figure 2 g ) ( 65 ) . The hydrophobic EspF U segment forms an amphipathic helix , which closely mimics the GBD layer two interactions with the VCA . Mutagenesis of the contact sites showed that side chains of the www . annualreviews . org • Signal Integration by WASP Proteins 715 A nnu . R e v . B i o c h e m . 2010 . 79 : 707 - 735 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g A cce ss p r ov i d e d by Y a l e U n i v e r s it y - L a w L i b r a r y on 02 / 01 / 15 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV413 - BI79 - 25 ARI 27 April 2010 21 : 38 helix contribute appreciably to afﬁnity between the two molecules ( 65 , 66 ) . EspF U residues C - terminal to the helix form an extended arm , which lies across the top of the GBD and contributes an additional ∼ 4 kcal · mol − 1 to the stability of the complex . EspF U has thus developed a high - afﬁnity ligand for WASP / N - WASP that acts by mimicking the VCA and by competitively displacing it from its binding site on the GBD . Structural basis of inhibition by wiskostatin . Chemical screens for small - molecule inhibitors of actin assembly by the PIP 2 / Cdc42 / N - WASP / Arp2 / 3 system have yielded a cyclic peptide , termed 187 - 1 ( 67 ) , and a modiﬁed carbazole compound , named wiskostatin ( 68 ) , which both target N - WASP . Both compounds appeartoactbystabilizinginteractionsbetween the GBD and the VCA . In the solution structure of a complex be - tween wiskostatin and WASP GBD - C , the small molecule binds in a shallow hydropho - bic pocket between layers one and two , at the interface of the β - hairpin and α 3 helix , with the carbazole ring directed inward and the amino alcohol side chain directed toward solvent ( Figure 2 h ) ( 68 ) . Wiskostatin makes no direct contacts to the VCA or the GBD - VCA interface . However , NMR studies showed that wiskostatin can stabilize the autoinhibited conformation of the isolated GBD ( 68 ) . Such stabilization of the VCA - bound conformation should increase the afﬁnity of the GBD for the VCA , accounting for increased autoinhibition . One important caveat regarding wiskostatin is that in both published ( 69 ) and unpub - lished ( C . W¨ulﬁng , personal communication ) accounts , the effects of the compound in cells do not seem to be speciﬁc to inhibition of WASP / N - WASP . Thus , wiskostatinmaynotbe a useful reagent to probe the function of these proteins in cells . Nevertheless , its discovery and effects in vitro demonstrate the basic principle that allosteric equilibriums can be targeted by small molecules for inhibitory effect ( 70 ) . Thermodynamics of activation and inhibi - tion . In MWC formalism , activity of an al - losteric protein in the presence of a given con - centration of regulatory ligand can be described by three parameters . These are the allosteric equilibrium constant in the free protein ( L ) , the afﬁnity of the ligand for the inhibited state of the protein , and the afﬁnity of the ligand for the active state of the protein ( 44 ) . The ra - tio of the afﬁnities ( K D , active / K D , inhibited ) , deﬁned as C , provides the driving force to change the allosteric equilibrium ( Figure 3 b ) . Activators have higher afﬁnity for the active state ( C < 1 ) , and inhibitors have higher afﬁnity for the inactive state ( C > 1 ) . As described above , in the allosteric model for WASP , L is equal to the folding stability of the GBD - VCA domain and can be measured directly ( 45 ) . For WASP activation , C can also be measured directly , on the basis of the afﬁnity of Cdc42 : GTP for the GBD ( as a mimic of the active state ) and GBD - C ( as a hyperstabilized mimic of the fully inhib - ited state ) ( 30 , 45 ) . These measurements have provided C ∼ 2 . 5 × 10 − 3 , indicating that at saturation Cdc42 : GTP will shift the allosteric equilibrium by 1 / C ∼ 400 - fold . Using this pa - rameter , the model was able to quantitatively predict the effect of Cdc42 on hydrogen ex - change rates in cores of the GBD - C and the GBD - VCA , the afﬁnities of Cdc42 for WASP proteins with a large range of stabilities , and the effect of Cdc42 on the activity of WASP toward the Arp2 / 3 complex ( 30 , 45 ) . One surprising ﬁnding of this work was that the nucleotide state of Cdc42 controls not only afﬁnityforWASP , ashadbeenpreviouslyshown for the GBD , but also the degree to which the GTPase can drive the allosteric equilibrium ( 30 ) . That is , Cdc42 : GTP not only has a higher afﬁnity for WASP than does Cdc42 : GDP , but also a ﬁvefold smaller value of C . Thus , for a given degree of saturation , Cdc42 : GTP causes a larger shift in the allosteric equilibrium of WASP upon binding than does Cdc42 : GDP . This effect was postulated to increase the ﬁ - delity of WASP signaling to the nucleotide switch in Cdc42 . 716 Padrick · Rosen A nnu . R e v . B i o c h e m . 2010 . 79 : 707 - 735 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g A cce ss p r ov i d e d by Y a l e U n i v e r s it y - L a w L i b r a r y on 02 / 01 / 15 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV413 - BI79 - 25 ARI 27 April 2010 21 : 38 ACTIVATION BY OLIGOMERIZATION Autoinhibition and its relief by upstream sig - nals can explain many aspects of WASP / N - WASP function . However , several observa - tions could not be explained by this mecha - nism . This conundrum was resolved through discovery of an additional regulatory mecha - nism in which dimerization of active WASP proteins greatly increases their potency toward the Arp2 / 3 complex ( 22 ) . Below , we explain this effect and show how it clariﬁes the actions of several WASP activators . The VCA Dimerization Effect In 2000 , Higgs & Pollard ( 35 ) reported that glutathione S - transferase ( GST ) - VCA dimers are roughly 100 - fold more potent activators of the Arp2 / 3 complex than VCA monomers . This observation , which suggested a potentially important aspect of regulation independent of autoinhibitory control , was recently pursued systematically ( 22 ) . These efforts led to the realization that enhanced potency results gen - erally from VCA dimerization . Thus , several VCAs dimerized through GST , or covalently or using the FKBP : mTOR : rapamycin system , gave similarly high activity . Surprisingly , light - scattering and sedimentation velocity ultracentrifugation experiments showed that a single Arp2 / 3 complex binds to a VCA dimer , suggesting the presence of a previously unrecognized VCA - binding site on the as - sembly . Competition experiments suggested that this site is the same as that occupied by a distinct class of Arp2 / 3 activators , the cortactin proteins , which are known to bind the complex simultaneously with a VCA monomer . Impor - tantly , ﬂuorescence binding data showed that VCA dimers bind the Arp2 / 3 complex with ∼ 100 - fold higher afﬁnity than do monomers . Higher afﬁnity provides a potential explanation for the enhanced actin polymerization kinetics produced by VCA dimers , and current research in several laboratories aims to understand this effect in detail . Hyperactivation : activity of a WASP protein above that of an equal concentration of isolated VCA , usually owing to oligomerization or clustering Back titration : the reduced activity of a WASP protein that has been hyperactivated by a dimerizing ligand upon addition of an analogous monomeric ligand TheincreasedafﬁnityofVCAdimersforthe Arp2 / 3 complex provides several predictions regarding the biochemical behavior of dimeriz - ingWASPligands ( 22 ) . First , atlowWASPcon - centrations , ligands that create WASP dimers ( Figure 4 a ) can produce higher Arp2 / 3 activ - ity than can a VCA monomer ( Figure 4 b ) . Such ligand - mediated stimulation of WASP beyond the level of the free VCA is termed hyperacti - vation . Next , at high concentrations , a dimer - izing ligand competes for its own binding site and breaks up the WASP dimer ( Figure 4 a ) , reducing observed activity ( Figure 4 b ) . Thus , titrations of WASP with dimerizing ligands do not produce a monotonic increase in Arp2 / 3 activity but rather show a peaked response as WASP 2 species are populated and then decay ( Figure 4 b ) . Finally , monovalent ligands can compete with their divalent counterparts for a binding site on WASP ( Figure 4 a ) . Thus , addi - tion of a monovalent ligand to a hyperactivated system disrupts WASP dimers and returns the activity to that of a monomeric VCA or less ( Figure 4 c ) , a process termed back titration . These effects have been explicitly researched in three disparate systems , EspF U , SH3 ligands , and membrane phosphoinositides . Oligomerization by EspF U The strongest evidence that dimerization plays a role in WASP / N - WASP regulation derives from studies of EspF U and its function during pathogenesis of EHEC . EspF U contains mul - tiple repeat elements , each of which is capable of driving allosteric activation ( 65 ) . However , constructs with two repeats ( 2R ) or more are better activators of both WASP and N - WASP ( 22 , 66 , 71 , 72 ) . Consistent with the dimer - ization model , 2R produces a peaked activity proﬁle when added to N - WASP in Arp2 / 3 - mediated actin assembly assays , with strong hyperactivation at the maximum ( 22 ) . 1R can block hyperactivation by 2R , resulting in back - titration behavior . 2R : ( N - WASP ) 2 and 2R : ( N - WASP ) 2 : ( Arp2 / 3 ) complexes have been directly observed by analytical ultracentrifugation and gel ﬁltration chromatography , respectively ( 66 , www . annualreviews . org • Signal Integration by WASP Proteins 717 A nnu . R e v . B i o c h e m . 2010 . 79 : 707 - 735 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g A cce ss p r ov i d e d by Y a l e U n i v e r s it y - L a w L i b r a r y on 02 / 01 / 15 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV413 - BI79 - 25 ARI 27 April 2010 21 : 38 GBD GBD 3 2 1 1 Activator A c t i v e A r p 2 / 3 c o m p l e x Monovalent Divalent b c a Monovalent activator A c t i v e A r p 2 / 3 c o m p l e x VCA activity VCA activity 2 2 4 3 4 GBD VCA GBD VCA VCA VCA GBD VCA GBD VCA GBD VCA GBD VCA Dimeric activating ligand Monomeric ligand Figure 4 Simulated titrations of mono - and divalent Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein ( WASP ) activators . ( a ) Cartoons of the WASP : activator mixtures . WASP is shown as a blue GTPase - binding domain ( GBD ) fused to a red VCA . Inactive WASP ( 1 ) is bound and activated by either a dimeric activating ligand [ green dumbbells in ( 2 ) and ( 3 ) ] or a monomeric ligand [ green ovals in ( 4 ) ] . ( b ) Computationally modeled titration of a divalent activator into autoinhibited WASP ( purple line ) . Allosteric activation of WASP proteins occurs concomitantly with activator binding . Activity is modeled by the concentration of WASP bound to the Arp2 / 3 complex . In the absence of activator , only inactive WASP is present , and activity is low ( 1 ) . As divalent activator is added , active dimeric WASP species are formed ( 2 ) , and activation exceeds that of free VCA ( blue line ) . When high concentrations of divalent activator are added , competition for WASP proteins results in disassembly of the dimers , and activity approaches that of free VCA ( 3 ) . Monovalent activator titration ( orange line ) monotonically increases WASP activity to that of free VCA . ( c ) Computationally modeled titration of monovalent activator into a maximal activity mixture of WASP and divalent activator ( dashed gray line ) . The initial conditions are identical to those at ( 2 ) in panel b . As monovalent activator is added , dimers are disrupted , and activity drops to that of free VCA ( blue line ) . Mixtures indicated by circled numbers in panels b and c are those in the subpanels of a with the same number . Figure adapted with permission from Cell Press , Molecular Cell ( 22 ) , copyright c (cid:2) 2008 . BAR domain : Bin , amphiphysin , and Rvs161 / 167 domain 72 ) . Finally , increasing EspF U repeat number correlates with increased actin assembly in cells ( 22 , 66 , 71 , 72 ) . These data indicate that EspF U activates WASP / N - WASP by engaging both the allosteric and dimerization mechanisms . Oligomerization by SH3 Ligands WASP family proteins bind dozens of SH3 domain – containing ligands through the nu - merous proline motifs in the PRD and in the distinct proline - rich domain of the constitu - tively associated WIP ( 23 ) . These ligands can largely be grouped into three categories as re - cently detailed ( 6 ) . Most contain multiple SH3 domains , either by the nature of their primary sequence or through homo - oligomerization . In the ﬁrst category are the multi - SH3 signaling proteins , including Nck and Grb2 . The second category , oligomerized SH3 ligands , includes many proteins that contain the dimeric BAR domain , such as PACSIN , Toca - 1 , and SNX9 proteins . A ﬁnal major category of WASP fam - ily SH3 ligands are the nonreceptor tyrosine kinases , which typically contain only a single SH3 domain . Activation of WASP proteins has been studied for about half of the known SH3 ligands . Of these , Nck , Grb2 , WISH , Abi , Cor - tactin , Abp1 , and a number of BAR proteins have been shown to directly enhance WASP ac - tivity in vitro ( 22 , 29 , 73 – 84 ) . Members of the dimeric BAR domain family coordinate membrane dynamics and actin as - sembly in a variety of processes ( 6 , 85 ) . They act by simultaneously binding membrane through the BAR domain and WASP proteins through an adjacent SH3 domain , potentially dimeriz - ing the WASP proteins . Several BAR proteins directly activate WASP proteins : FBP17 ( 29 , 83 ) , SNX9 ( 84 ) , PACSIN2 / syndaptin ( 22 ) , EndophilinA ( 86 ) , and Nwk ( 79 ) . When examined with an eye toward dimerization , this activation shows the hallmarks of the dimer - ization mechanism . PACSIN2 and CIP4 can hyperactivate an N - WASP mutant in which autoinhibition is disrupted ( 22 ; S . B . Padrick , unpublished ) . In addition , hyperactivation by PACSIN is lost at high concentrations or when the free PACSIN SH3 domain is added , fulﬁlling the peaked titration and back - titration predictions of the dimerization mechanism , respectively . Analogous behavior is seen for GST - Nck ( 22 ) , suggesting that dimerization - mediated N - WASP activation is likely to be widespread among SH3 proteins . 718 Padrick · Rosen A nnu . R e v . B i o c h e m . 2010 . 79 : 707 - 735 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g A cce ss p r ov i d e d by Y a l e U n i v e r s it y - L a w L i b r a r y on 02 / 01 / 15 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV413 - BI79 - 25 ARI 27 April 2010 21 : 38 Interestingly , cortactin , which also appears to have two binding sites on the Arp2 / 3 complex ( S . B . Padrick , unpublished ) , shows similar peaked activation through SH3 - proline interactions by GST fusions with faciogenital dysplasia protein ( Fgd1 ) ( 87 ) . Activation by High - Density PIP 2 N - WASP is both allosterically activated and oligomerized by the phosphoinositidePIP 2 ( 31 , 32 ) . The N - WASP basic region is a disordered cluster of arginine and lysine residues that likely engages multiple headgroups simultaneously . Thus , the afﬁnity of N - WASP for liposomes depends on their fractional PIP 2 content ( i . e . , the PIP 2 surface density ) , as shown in a detailed analysis ( 34 ) . However , in that study , although strong activation was observed at high PIP 2 density , intermediate densities that were still capable of binding N - WASP did not activate well ( 34 ) , suggesting that density itself is a pa - rameter of activation . Interpreted in light of the dimerization model , at high density , VCA do - mains from two different N - WASP molecules could have access to the same Arp2 / 3 complex . This will result in high - level activation through effective dimerization . In more recent work , high - density PIP 2 li - posomes were found to hyperactivate an N - WASP mutant lacking GBD - VCA contacts ( 22 ) . Activation declined at the highest lipo - some concentrations . Similar effects were ob - served previously in PIP 2 - mediated activation of WASP puriﬁed from tissue ( 35 ) . This behav - ior is similar to the peaked titrations seen with dimerizing ligands , where N - WASP dimers were disrupted by excess ligand . Here , effec - tive N - WASP dimers were disrupted by in - creased vesicle surface area and consequent de - creased N - WASP density . Hyperactivation , but not vesicle binding of N - WASP , was lost when PIP 2 density on individual vesicles was de - creased , holding total PIP 2 in solution constant ( 22 ) . This is analogous to the back - titration phenomenon with dimeric ligands . Thus , acti - vation of WASP proteins by phosphoinositides , and likely membrane recruitment in general , Peaked titration : the activity of a WASP protein that rises and then falls as a dimerizing ligand is added shows the hallmarks of dimerization - mediated activation . We note that a similar effect was also suggested in recent studies of actin assembly by the intracellular pathogen , Listeria monocyto - genes ( 88 ) . During infection , Listeria displays its own Arp2 / 3 activator , the ActA protein , on its surface to usurp the actin cytoskeleton . ActA is arrayed at a density equivalent to a GST - mediated dimer , suggesting that the bacterium uses the density - mediated dimerization effect to more potently activate the Arp2 / 3 complex . INTEGRATION OF MULTIPLE SIGNALS BY WASP PROTEINS The combination of allostery and oligomer - ization leads to a hierarchical mechanism of WASP regulation ( Figure 5 ) ( 22 ) . Within this mechanism , allostery controls availability of the VCA to the Arp2 / 3 complex , and dimeriza - tion controls afﬁnity for the Arp2 / 3 complex . Activator Activator Activator Activator Activator Activator Activator Allostery Oligomerization Active monomericWASP Dimerizer Active dimericWASP InactiveWASP GBD VCA GBD VCA GBD VCA GBD VCA GBD VCA GBD VCA Arp2 / 3 Arp2 / 3 Arp2 / 3 Arp2 / 3 GBD VCA VCA K D K D 100 Figure 5 The hierarchical model of Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein ( WASP ) regulation . WASP proteins are regulated hierarchically . An inner layer of allostery controls access to the VCA ( verprolin homology , central hydrophobic , and acidic regions ) , and an outer layer of dimerization / oligomerization controls the afﬁnity of the VCA for the Arp2 / 3 complex . The two layers are thermodynamically coupled , so that binding of the Arp2 / 3 complex to a VCA dimer will also shift the allosteric equilibrium toward the active state . Figure adapted with permission from Cell Press , Molecular Cell ( 22 ) , copyright 2008 . Abbreviations : Arp2 / 3 , the actin - related protein 2 / actin - related protein 3 complex ; K D , dissociation constant ; GBD , GTPase - binding domain . www . annualreviews . org • Signal Integration by WASP Proteins 719 A nnu . R e v . B i o c h e m . 2010 . 79 : 707 - 735 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g A cce ss p r ov i d e d by Y a l e U n i v e r s it y - L a w L i b r a r y on 02 / 01 / 15 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV413 - BI79 - 25 ARI 27 April 2010 21 : 38 L parameter : in the MWC - based model of two - state allosteric equilibrium , the population ratio of inactive to active states of the free protein C parameter : in the MWC - based model of two - state allosteric equilibrium , the ratio of dissociation constants of a ligand for active and inactive states ( K D , act / K D , inact ) Maximal activation of the WASP - Arp2 / 3 path - way will occur when both branches are si - multaneously engaged . We note that the two branches are mechanistically distinct , but ther - modynamically coupled , such that binding of the Arp2 / 3 complex to a VCA dimer will also shift the allosteric equilibrium toward the ac - tive state . Here , we show how cooperativity be - tween multiple inputs arises in each branch , and how the branches function cooperatively together . These two layers of regulation thus allow WASP proteins to act as powerful signal integration devices in the cell . Allosteric Activation of WASP by Two Ligands The autoinhibited state of WASP is stabi - lized by multiple inhibitory interactions ( e . g . , GBD : C and B : A contacts , see above ) that act together to repress the activity of the VCA . Ac - tivators such as Cdc42 , PIP 2 , and SH2 domains target distinct sequences in the autoinhibited fold . However , because the ligands all act on the same allosteric equilibrium , their binding and effects on that equilibrium are thermodynami - callycoupled . Thus , twoligandsactingtogether will provide greater engagement and activation of WASP than either acting alone . Two related formalisms have been devel - oped to describe this underlying concept quan - titatively ( Figures 3 c , d ) . The ﬁrst posits that WASP acts in a binary fashion , where it is com - pletely inactive in free form and completely ac - tive when bound to any single ligand ( 32 ) . Be - cause activating ligands bind more tightly to the active form , when one ligand activates WASP , the second can bind with higher afﬁnity . The degreeofthermodynamiccouplingbetweenthe two ligands can be expressed as a cooperativity factor whereby the afﬁnity of a second activa - tor is enhanced by a ﬁrst ( Figure 3 d ) ( 32 ) . As described below , this formalism nicely explains cooperative binding to and synergistic activa - tion of WASP / N - WASP by the Cdc42 - PIP 2 and Cdc42 - SH2 activator pairs ( 32 , 58 ) . The second formalism extends the ﬁrst by including the WASP allosteric equilibrium quantitatively ( 30 , 45 ) , giving a multiligand version of the MWC allosteric model described in previous sections ( Figure 3 c ) . In this model , the autoinhibitory equilibrium in the presence of multiple saturating ligands is given by L (cid:2) C i , where L is the equilibrium constant in free WASP ( [ inactive ] / [ active ] ) , and C i is the ratio of afﬁnity for the active and inactive states of WASP for each ligand , respectively . Thus , the cooperative effects of multiple ligands are reﬂected in their multiplicative action on the regulatory equilibrium in WASP . This model allows inhibitory ligands such as WIP to be accounted for , in addition to activators ; activation of a WASP : WIP complex ( where C WIP > 1 , favoringtheinhibitedstateofWASP ) can be described as requiring an activator with a strong binding preference for the active state ( smaller C (cid:5) 1 ) or cooperation between multiple activators ( each with their own C < 1 ) . In general , this model explains how the balance of L and C parameters tunes the system to respond to one or more activators . Synergy between Cdc42 and PIP 2 . The minimal autoinhibited GBD - VCA WASP construct is further stabilized by additional in - hibitory contacts such as those of the B re - gion . Although B region inhibition may derive from B - A contacts or from B - Arp2 / 3 - A con - tacts ( see above ) , the effects on binding and ac - tivation are the same . Activation by Cdc42 is understood structurally ( 39 ) . PIP 2 vesicles en - gage the allosteric mechanism by interacting with the B region ( 31 ) , thus destabilizing its contacts with A or the Arp2 / 3 complex . They also engage the oligomerizing mechanism ( see above ) . Individually , Cdc42 and PIP 2 can each activate weakly inhibited systems ( e . g . , the trans complex of BGBD + the VCA ) . But combina - tions of the two are required to activate more strongly inhibited constructs ( 32 , 35 , 89 ) . Im - portantly , Cdc42 and PIP 2 activate WASP and N - WASP by binding to distinct regions of the BGBD element ( Figure 1 ) . Thus , their bind - ing is coupled through the autoinhibitory equi - librium . Systematic measurement of N - WASP activation by the two ligands found a binding 720 Padrick · Rosen A nnu . R e v . B i o c h e m . 2010 . 79 : 707 - 735 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g A cce ss p r ov i d e d by Y a l e U n i v e r s it y - L a w L i b r a r y on 02 / 01 / 15 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV413 - BI79 - 25 ARI 27 April 2010 21 : 38 cooperativity factor of 350 ( Figure 3 d ) ( 32 ) . In theMWCformalism , theBregionshiftstheau - toinhibitory equilibrium toward the inhibited state such that L (cid:6) 1 ( 30 ) . Thus C Cdc42 ∗ L re - mains greater than one , and the GTPase alone cannot strongly activate . PIP 2 has a similarly small effect . However , the combination of the two together can activate N - WASP ( 29 , 32 ) ( at saturation C Cdc42 C PIP2 L < 1 ) . Even though this analysis only considers the allosteric part of the interaction , it explains the requirement for multiple allosteric effectors in activation of the endogenous WASP : WIP complex , which has additional autoinhibitory contacts . Synergy between Cdc42 and WASP phos - phorylation . Phosphorylation of WASP / N - WASPontheconservedY291 / Y256 ( seeabove ) exempliﬁes signal integration through the al - losteric equilibrium in several respects . Tyro - sine 291 is > 90 % buried by layer two - layer three contacts in the autoinhibited GBD - C structure and thus is a poor substrate for ki - nasesandphosphatases ( Figure 2 e ) ( 57 ) . Desta - bilization of the GBD - C domain by Cdc42 accelerates phosphorylation and dephosphory - lation by 40 - fold and 30 - fold , respectively ( 58 ) . The fact that Y291 / pY291 are only accessible in the open state couples allosteric effectors to covalent modiﬁcations . This results in WASP having a covalently encoded memory of recent activation . Phosphorylation of Y291 / Y256 has two bio - chemical effects ( 57 ) . First , phosphorylated GBD - VCA is destabilized , enhancing the basal activity of WASP ( i . e . , decreasing L in the MWC formalism ) . Second , phosphorylation creates a binding site for SH2 domains , which serveasallostericactivatorsofWASP ( discussed above ) . Because SH2 and Cdc42 bind different regions of the GBD ( Figure 1 ) , they can bind simultaneously and thus act cooperatively on the allosteric equilibrium . A cooperativity fac - tor of 50 was measured for the two ligands act - ing on phosphorylated WASP ( 58 ) . Thus , the location of Y291 / 256 in the autoinhibited fold enables WASP / N - WASP to integrate signals in both the phosphorylation event itself and in the functional consequences of phosphorylation . Engineering WASP . WASP has proven to be an excellent platform for illustrating the principles of allostery and its evolution through protein design ( 34 , 90 , 91 ) . By appending ad - ditional interaction modules to the GBD - VCA core , Lim and colleagues ( 91 ) showed that a wide variety of switch - like behaviors can be readily created . These include “OR gates , ” where only a single ligand can activate ; “AND gates , ” where multiple ligands are required for activation ; and even antagonistic functionality , where multiple ligands oppose each other’s actions , depending on the balance between autoinhibitory stability and cooperativity in effector binding . When multiple identical in - hibitory modules are appended , ultrasensitivity akin to that observed in hemoglobin can be created ( 90 ) . These data suggest that evolution - ary shufﬂing of modular elements in signaling proteins provides a mechanism to readily create allosteric systems with complex behaviors . Integration of Multiple Oligomerizing Signals When multiple dimeric / oligomeric ligands contact distinct regions of WASP simultane - ously , their binding will occur cooperatively . That is , when one ligand dimerizes WASP , a second will bind tightly owing to an avidity ef - fect . Thus , ligands acting in combination will produce WASP oligomers at lower concentra - tions than any individual ligand acting alone . This will provide an additional mechanism of integrating signals to enhance WASP activity that is distinct from the allosteric mechanisms discussed above . SH3 interactions are a likely source of such cooperativity , but similar principles will hold for any combination of oligomerizing fac - tors . WASP proteins and WASP : WIP com - plexes ( 23 ) have numerous proline motifs that bind SH3 domains . The speciﬁcity of an SH3 dimer for the different motifs will determine its propensity to engage a single WASP molecule www . annualreviews . org • Signal Integration by WASP Proteins 721 A nnu . R e v . B i o c h e m . 2010 . 79 : 707 - 735 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g A cce ss p r ov i d e d by Y a l e U n i v e r s it y - L a w L i b r a r y on 02 / 01 / 15 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV413 - BI79 - 25 ARI 27 April 2010 21 : 38 in bivalent fashion or to dimerize two WASP molecules . Only the latter binding mode will strongly affect WASP activity ( see above ) . Thus , the activation strength of a given SH3 dimer will be dictated signiﬁcantly by its bind - ing speciﬁcity . An analogous but more complex argument can be made for SH3 ligands with multiple , different SH3 domains ( e . g . , Nck , which has three SH3 domains ) . This reason - ing is consistent with the wide variability in the effects of SH3 dimers on WASP activity ( e . g . , Reference 74 ) . SH3 speciﬁcity will also affect cooperativity between different ligands . For ex - ample , two dimeric SH3 ligands , each highly speciﬁc for a single proline motif in WASP , will strongly reinforce each other’s binding and pro - duce an avidity - enhanced multi - WASP com - plex . But ligands with overlapping speciﬁcities will compete for the same proline motifs and will not act cooperatively . SH3 ligand speci - ﬁcity for the different proline motifs in the mammalian WASP proteins has not been ex - tensively explored ( although see Reference 92 forarecentexample ) . However , suchananalysis was done for the proline motifs in the Saccha - romyces cerevisiae WASP protein , Las17p / Bee1 ( 93 ) . There , the ﬁve proline motifs in the PRD were systematically mapped against all SH3 proteins in the yeast genome . Some SH3 do - mainsinteractedstronglywithonlyasinglemo - tif ( e . g . , Bbc1 , Sho1 , and Myo3 ) , and others ( e . g . , Ygr136 , Rvs167 , and Bzz1 ) bound mul - tiple motifs . Three of the motifs bound only a single SH3 domain , whereas two bound many . Clearly , there is potential for cooperative , neu - tral , and competitive interactions in this sys - tem . This type of analysis will be instrumental in predicting the effects of SH3 proteins act - ing individually and in combination to control WASP protein assembly and activity . Localization of WASP proteins to mem - branes can similarly cooperate with dimerizing ligands . Oligomerization can allow WASP pro - teins to bind membranes in multivalent fashion , increasing afﬁnity . Thus , assembly and mem - brane binding of complexes can be synergis - tic . For example , association of N - WASP with PIP 2 vesicles is relatively weak ( 34 ) . However , N - WASP dimers created by GST - Nck will havetwobasicregionsandthusagreaterafﬁnity for PIP 2 vesicles , consistent with strongly co - operative activation of N - WASP by GST - Nck and PIP 2 ( 80 ) . Combining Allosteric Activation and Oligomerization Few WASP activators are purely allosteric or purely oligomerizing factors . At high density , membrane - associated Cdc42 will be both an al - losteric activator and a clustering effector . This is consistent with its high activity relative to soluble Cdc42 ( 35 ) . Likewise , PIP 2 both desta - bilizes BGBD - VCA interactions ( 31 ) and can be an oligomerizer at high density ( 22 , 34 , 80 ) . Thus , the actions of ligands functioning indi - vidually and in combination should be consid - ered in terms of both aspects of regulation . IQGAP1 is a well - studied signaling pro - tein that can activate N - WASP . IQGAP1 func - tions through allostery , as it can activate a BGBD : VCA complex assembled in trans ( 94 ) . However , full - length IQGAP1 is oligomerized through an N - terminal domain , and its acti - vation of N - WASP showed a peaked titration similar to that of PACSIN2 ( 22 , 95 ) . Thus , IQGAP1 likely acts through both altering the allosteric equilibrium in N - WASP and creating high - potency N - WASP oligomers . The Toca proteins ( Toca - 1 , CIP4 , and FBP17 ) provide a more complex example ( Figure 6 a ) . Toca proteins have BAR , SH3 , and Cdc42 - binding HR1 domains ( 29 , 96 ) . When active Cdc42 and PIP 2 are both present in membranes , N - WASP , Toca , Cdc42 , and PIP 2 will assemble a multiply reinforced complex . Toca will bind membranes through cooperative BAR - lipid and HR1 - Cdc42 in - teractions . N - WASP can then simultaneously associate in a high - afﬁnity , trivalent fashion with the Toca SH3 domain , PIP 2 , and Cdc42 , through its PRD , B region , and GBD , respec - tively . This will provide high - level engagement of N - WASP by Cdc42 and consequently potent allosteric activation . Finally , as the Toca protein is a dimer , two N - WASP molecules 722 Padrick · Rosen A nnu . R e v . B i o c h e m . 2010 . 79 : 707 - 735 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g A cce ss p r ov i d e d by Y a l e U n i v e r s it y - L a w L i b r a r y on 02 / 01 / 15 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV413 - BI79 - 25 ARI 27 April 2010 21 : 38 G B D E V H 1 G B D E V H 1 E V H 1 G B D SH3 SH3 SH3 SH2 pY pY pY N e p h r i n pY pY pY N e p h r i n SH3 SH3 SH3 SH2 Membrane SH3 SH3 SH3 SH2 SH3 SH3 SH3 SH2 N - W A S P N - W A S P Nck Nck Nck Nck pY pY pY SH3 SH3 SH3 SH2 SH3 SH3 SH3 SH2 SH3 SH3 SH3 SH2 SH3 C o r t a c t i n N t A VV VV W I P W I P S H 3 S H 3 S H 3 S H 2 N - W A S P N - W A S P Nck Nck Nck N c k a b c M e m b r a n e 42 4 2 42 H R 1 G B D E V H 1 E V H 1 E V H 1 S H 3 BAR H R 1 S H 3 Toca EVH1 G B D V C A N - W A S P V C A N - W A S P M e m b r a n e S H 3 BAR R a c R a c B B W R C W R C IRSp53 WRC architecture P R D P R D Dimer Trimer Sra Nap Abi WAVE HSPC300 V C A V C A VCA SH3 G B D VCA V C A VCA V C A PIP 2 PIP 3 42 d S H 3 Figure 6 Cooperative activation of the N - WASP / WAVE regulatory complex ( WRC ) by higher - order complex formation . Multiprotein complexes bring two or more VCAs ( verprolin homology , central hydrophobic , and acidic regions ) together . ( a ) Schematic illustration of the complex formed by N - WASP , Toca ( dark blue , with the BAR , SH3 and HR1 domains labeled ) , Cdc42 ( 42 ) , and PIP 2 ( red circles ) at membranes . ( b ) Schematic illustration of the complex formed by the WRC , IRSp53 ( blue , with the BAR and SH3 domains labeled ) , Rac , and PIP 3 ( orange circles ) at membranes . Inset shows organization of the WRC . ( c ) Schematic illustration of the complex formed by phosphorylated Cortactin , Nck , N - WASP , and WIP . ( d ) Schematic illustration of the complex formed by phosphorylated nephrin , Nck ( purple ovals and green square ) and N - WASP ( domain colors as in Figure 1 ) . Abbreviations : Abi , Abl interactor ; B , basic region ; BAR , Bin / amphiphysin / Rvs homology domain ; EVH1 , Ena / VASP homology 1 ; GBD , GTPase - binding domain ; HR1 , protein kinase C - related kinase homology region 1 ; IRSp53 , insulin receptor tyrosine kinase substrate p53 ; Nap1 , Nck - associated protein ; N - WASP , neural Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein ; PIP 3 , phosphatidylinositol 3 , 4 , 5 - triphosphate ; PRD , proline - rich domain ; pY , phospho - tyrosine ; Rac , GTP bound Rac GTPase ; SH3 , Src - homology domain 3 ; Sra1 , speciﬁcally Rac - associated protein ; Toca , transducer of Cdc42 - dependent actin assembly family protein ; V , verprolin homology region ; WAVE , WASP family verprolin - homologous protein ; WIP , WASP interactin protein . can be brought together to allow potent recruitment and activation of the Arp2 / 3 complex . As these interactions all contribute thermodynamically to a single assembly , the individual contacts will reinforce one another . Furthermore , the multivalency of N - WASP ( PRD ) and Toca ( SH3 ) could also provide mechanisms of higher - order oligomerization , www . annualreviews . org • Signal Integration by WASP Proteins 723 A nnu . R e v . B i o c h e m . 2010 . 79 : 707 - 735 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g A cce ss p r ov i d e d by Y a l e U n i v e r s it y - L a w L i b r a r y on 02 / 01 / 15 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV413 - BI79 - 25 ARI 27 April 2010 21 : 38 leading to spatial clustering of all components and sustaining transiently high local activation levels . As discussed below , such assemblies are abundant in WASP biology and likely play an important role in governing the speciﬁcity and dynamics of actin regulatory signaling . HIGHER - ORDER OLIGOMERIZATION FURTHER STIMULATES WASP ACTIVATION Allostery and dimerization are the core ele - ments of the hierarchical model of WASP reg - ulation . However , a probablistic argument sug - gests that higher - order oligomerization may further enhance WASP activity by increasing the likelihood that two active WASP molecules will be spatially proximal ( 22 ) . This effect may explain the frequent appearance of WASP pro - teins in large assemblies in vivo . Below we explain two related versions of higher - order oligomerization that lead to WASP activation and illustrate how this effect could play a role in a number of signaling systems . Clustering of EspF U Two - repeat fragments of EspF U hyperactivate WASP by engaging both allostery and dimer - ization . However , EspF U proteins with > 2 re - peats produce even greater activation ( 22 , 62 , 66 , 72 ) . Statistical considerations provide a likely explanation for this effect . When the fractional saturation of each EspF U repeat by WASP is small ( P (cid:5) 1 ) , the fraction of EspF U 2R molecules with two bound WASP molecules is equal to P 2 . However , as the number of re - peats ( n ) in EspF U increases , there are more ways that any two repeats can bind WASP . So the probability of creating a WASP dimer increases . For a ﬁxed total repeat concentra - tion , the fraction of complexes containing two or more WASP molecules scales with ( n - 1 ) ( 22 ) . Thus , higher - order multimerization of WASP further enhances actin polymerization by EspF U . EspF U and its relative EspF from en - teropathogenic E . coli have mechanisms to un - dergo oligomerization in vivo . Each repeat of these proteins contains both a WASP - binding element and a proline - rich element . The lat - ter has been shown to bind the SH3 domain of dimeric BAR proteins , EspF to Snx9 ( 97 ) and EspF U to IRSp53 ( 92 ) and IRTKS ( 98 ) . These interactions , which can provide additional clus - tering of EspF / EspF U - bound WASP molecules ( 98 ) , are necessary for bacterially induced actin assembly in cells ( 92 , 97 , 98 ) . Moreover , EspF and EspF U are both recruited to the trans - membrane protein Tir , which is itself clustered through extracellular interactions with the in - timin protein expressed on the bacterial surface ( 63 , 92 , 98 ) . Thus , actin is assembled by this system through N - WASP molecules that are clustered at multiple levels , consistent with the idea that creation of large WASP arrays can en - hance activation of the Arp2 / 3 complex . Clustering by Endogenous Effectors WASP proteins oligomerized by natural lig - ands can be viewed analogously ( 22 ) . In a WASP cluster of size n , if the probability of any molecule being in the active state is P ( dic - tated by the allosteric equilibrium ) , then the probability of any two molecules being simulta - neously active is approximately ( n - 1 ) × P 2 ( for low values of P ) . For example , a cluster con - taining ten WASP proteins is nine times more likely to have an active VCA dimer than a clus - ter containing only two WASP proteins . Thus , oligomerization , or arraying WASP proteins in close proximity on a membrane , lowers the de - gree of WASP allosteric activation needed for high - level stimulation of the Arp2 / 3 complex . Geometric considerations should limit this ef - fect in very large clusters . But the long linkers connecting the VCA to other elements , and the ability of some clusters to rearrange , suggest that it should remain signiﬁcant out to large sizes ( see below ) . This effect is likely signiﬁcant to the actions of BAR proteins , which bind membranes in close - packed , high - density arrays , causing for - mationoftubularstructures ( 83 , 99 , 100 ) . Many BAR proteins contain SH3 domains that recruit WASP / N - WASP and the Arp2 / 3 complex to 724 Padrick · Rosen A nnu . R e v . B i o c h e m . 2010 . 79 : 707 - 735 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g A cce ss p r ov i d e d by Y a l e U n i v e r s it y - L a w L i b r a r y on 02 / 01 / 15 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV413 - BI79 - 25 ARI 27 April 2010 21 : 38 these arrays , causing actin polymerization ( 85 , 101 ) . Recent studies have shown a high de - gree of cooperativity between membrane bind - ing of BAR proteins and actin polymerization through the N - WASP - Arp2 / 3 complex ( 29 , 86 ) . The surface of BAR - induced membrane tubulesiscoatedwithSH3domainsathighden - sity . These structures are known to recruit N - WASPs ( 83 , 102 ) . Given the geometry of the BAR domain array on membranes ( 100 ) , and the spacing between VCA elements in known hyperactive N - WASP dimers , clusters of more than ten N - WASP molecules should be able to access a single Arp2 / 3 complex ( 22 ) . Thus , the dimerization effect likely contributes to actin assembly by BAR domain arrays . The idea that SH3 clusters will result in larger , better Arp2 / 3 - activating WASP com - plexes is consistent with in vitro biochemical data . Dimeric SNX9 was shown to activate N - WASP in solution , but SNX9 aggregates were more potent ( 84 ) . Addition of PIP 2 lipids pro - duced even more potent SNX9 - dependent ac - tivation . Similarly , Toca - 1 and FBP17 activated the N - WASP : WIP complex in the presence of added membranes ( 29 ) ( discussed above ) . The less - autoinhibited N - WASP ( without WIP ) was activated by FBP17 alone , but FBP17 acti - vation was enhanced by a phospholipid surface . Finally , endophilinAshowedasimilarenhance - ment of N - WASP stimulatory activity in the presence of acidic lipids ( 86 ) . Thus , activation of N - WASP by many BAR proteins appears to be generally enhanced by assembly onto lipo - somes . A distinct assembly containing cortactin , Nck , WIP , and N - WASP has been elegantly dissected biochemically ( Figure 6 c ) ( 81 ) . Cor - tactin is a weak activator of the Arp2 / 3 complex that can also act as a molecular scaffold . Cor - tactin is phosphorylated on three tyrosine sites near its C terminus upon cell stimulation , and these sites bind the Nck SH2 domain ( 81 ) . The SH3 domains in the p - cortactin : Nck complex ( one from cortactin and three from each Nck ) can bind the proline motifs in WIP ( 103 ) and N - WASP ( 80 ) to form a large assembly . The high multivalency in this system ( three pTyr on p - cortactin ; numerous proline motifs in N - WASP and WIP ; and three SH3 domains in Nck ) suggests a very cooperative assembly of the components , consistent with surface plas - mon resonance data ( 81 ) . Moreover , the size of the complex , although not measured in this work , is expected to be large . A key ﬁnding in this study was that phosphorylation of cortactin greatly increased the Arp2 / 3 - mediated actin as - sembly of mixtures of cortactin , Nck , and N - WASP . Thus , assembling Nck : N - WASP com - plexes on p - cortactin increases activity toward the Arp2 / 3 complex . The further enhancement seen when WIP was also added suggests an advantage to creating even higher - order as - semblies . In the future , it will be interesting to examine correlations between complex stoi - chiometry , size , and activity in this system . A conceptually related system controls the assembly of actin - rich podocytes in the kidney ( Figure 6 d ) ( 104 , 105 ) . These cellular struc - tures require phosphorylation of multiple ty - rosine residues on the intracellular tail of the cell surface receptor , nephrin ( 104 , 105 ) . Anal - ogous to p - cortactin , these phosphotyrosines each recruit the SH2 domain of Nck , allow - ing activated nephrin to display an array of Nck SH3 domains . This results in actin assembly , likely through recruitment of N - WASP : WIP complexes . Interestingly , strong actin assembly by this system in cells requires multiplicity , ei - ther in the number of pTyr sites on nephrin or the number of SH3 domains in Nck ( 104 ) , consistent with the idea that larger clusters of N - WASP have higher activity and are func - tionally important . This effect is similar to the antibody - dependent clustering to Nck , leading to N - WASP - dependent actin polymerization ( 106 ) . Finally , there are additional multicompo - nent complexes that probably contain multiple WASPproteinsbuthavenotbeencharacterized in detail . These include the WASP : WIP : Nck : SLAP : SLP76 : VASP assembly formed in T cells upon T cell receptor ligation ( 24 , 107 ) , and the Las17p : Vrp : Myo3 : Myo5 : Bzz1 : Bbc1p : Hsp70p complex that can be isolated from budding yeast ( 108 ) . Physical characterization of these www . annualreviews . org • Signal Integration by WASP Proteins 725 A nnu . R e v . B i o c h e m . 2010 . 79 : 707 - 735 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g A cce ss p r ov i d e d by Y a l e U n i v e r s it y - L a w L i b r a r y on 02 / 01 / 15 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV413 - BI79 - 25 ARI 27 April 2010 21 : 38 WAVE : WASP family verprolin homologous protein ( also known as Scar ) WAVE regulatory complex ( WRC ) : a complex comprising WAVE / Scar , Abi , HSPC300 , Nap1 / Hem2 , and Sra1 / Pir121 / CYFIP PIP 3 : phosphatidylinositol 3 , 4 , 5 - triphosphate complexes to understand their energetics , stoichiometry , structural organization , and dynamics as well as the relation of these properties to activity represents an exciting and challenging area for future investigation . OTHER WASP FAMILY MEMBERS InadditiontoWASPandN - WASP , theWAVE , WASH , WHAMM , and JMY proteins have VCA domains capable of activating the Arp2 / 3 complex . Many of the regulatory principles dis - cussed above for WASP and N - WASP appear to hold for these proteins as well . Regulation of WAVE Shortly after the discovery of WASP and N - WASP , the WAVE / Scar ( WASP family verprolin - homologous protein / suppressor of cyclic AMP receptor ) proteins were iden - tiﬁed in Dictyostelium ( 109 ) and vertebrates ( Figure 1 ) ( 15 , 109 , 110 ) . A variety of data indicate the WAVEs function downstream of the Rac GTPase is to stimulate actin assembly through the Arp2 / 3 complex ( 3 , 4 ) . WAVE proteins contain a C - terminal VCA domain , but unlike WASP , isolated WAVEs are not autoinhibited ( 8 ) . Instead , WAVEs are regulated by constitutive incor - poration into a heteropentameric complex ( Figure 6 b , inset ) , consisting of WAVE , Abi ( Abl interactor ) , HSPC300 ( hematopoi - etic stem progenitor cell 300 ) , Nap / Hem ( Nck - associated protein / hematopoietic pro - tein ) and Sra1 / Pir121 / CYFIP ( speciﬁcally Rac - associated protein / p53 - inducible mRNA 121 / cytoplasmic FMRP interacting protein ) , which we term the WAVE regulatory complex ( WRC ) ( 111 ) . The complex appears to be organized as a trimer held together by contacts between HSPC300 and N - terminal elements of WAVE and Abi , and an Sra : Nap dimer ( 22 , 112 – 116 ) . Contacts between Nap and Abi link the dimer and trimer ( 112 ) . Homologs of WRC components all incorporate into similar complexes ( 111 , 112 , 116 , 117 ) . Since its initial biochemical puriﬁcation ( 111 ) , genetic studies have shown that the WRC is conserved in plants , slimemold , ﬂies , worms , andvertebrates ( 3 , 4 ) . As reviewed elsewhere , cell biological and genetic data have established the functional importance of the WRC in cellular processes , including spreading , motility , and cell - cell adhesion ( 3 , 4 ) . Recent studies have shown that , although the molecular details are different , the basic principles of WAVE and WASP regulation are highly analogous . Although the basal activity of the WRC toward the Arp2 / 3 complex has been controversial ( 111 , 115 , 118 , 119 ) , recent , deﬁnitive studies have shown that both the human and ﬂy complexes are strongly inhibited ( 114 , 120 ) . Inhibition involves binding of the Sra : Nap dimer to a constitutively active trimer ( 114 ) . This behavior suggests an analogy to GBD - VCA contacts in WASP , although the molecular mechanism of inhibition awaits fur - ther studies . Highly puriﬁed inactive WRC can be activated in a nucleotide - dependent fashion by Rac , which is known to bind Sra1 ( 121 ) , sim - ilar to WASP activation by Cdc42 ( 111 , 114 ) . Rac may function with other factors , as acti - vation requires relatively high concentrations of the GTPase ( 5 – 10 μ M ) . For example , PIP 3 binds a conserved basic region near the center of WAVE ( 122 ) . This interaction is needed for proper WAVE localization and also contributes to in vitro activation by Rac , although the mechanism of this effect is not known ( 122 , 123 ) . WAVE is phosphorylated at numerous tyrosine , serine , and threonine sites in its N - terminal PRD and VCA elements ( reviewed in Reference 3 ) . VCA phosphorylation increases afﬁnity for the Arp2 / 3 complex but paradoxi - cally decreases activity ( 124 , 125 ) . WAVE2 can be phosphorylated on the conserved Tyr150 by Abl upon cell stimulation , but its effects on WRC activity have not been examined ( 113 ) . It is not yet known whether any of the phosphorylation events occur cooperatively with Rac binding , as in the Cdc42 - WASP system ( 57 ) . Finally , the large PRD in WAVE and an analogous region in Abi endow the WRC with numerous SH3 - binding sites . Many SH3 proteins bind these elements , including 726 Padrick · Rosen A nnu . R e v . B i o c h e m . 2010 . 79 : 707 - 735 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g A cce ss p r ov i d e d by Y a l e U n i v e r s it y - L a w L i b r a r y on 02 / 01 / 15 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV413 - BI79 - 25 ARI 27 April 2010 21 : 38 multi - SH3 adaptors [ e . g . , Nck ( 111 ) and Grb2 ( 126 ) ] and dimeric BAR proteins [ e . g . , IRSp53 ( 123 ) , Wrp ( 127 ) , and Tuba ( 128 ) ] . Thus , the WRC appears to be regulated by the same hierarchical process as WASP , with collections of allosteric and dimerizing / oligomerizing ligands acting in a cooperative fashion to control activity toward the Arp2 / 3 complex . Both WASP and WAVE have similar responses to the same classes of signals , suggesting that there is an evolutionary driving force for WASP proteins to stimulate actin assembly in response to phosphoinositide , SH3 , and Rho GTPase cues . Recent reports illustrate how many of these interactions could work together to cluster and activate the WRC at membranes ( Figure 6 b ) . Takenawa and colleagues ( 123 ) have shown that the combination of Rac , IRSp53 , and PIP 3 activates the WRC better than any of the individual effectors alone . This system is highly analogous to the activation of N - WASP by Cdc42 , Toca - 1 , and PIP 2 ( see above ) . In both cases , the GTPase , BAR protein , and phospholipid recognize different elements of the WRC / N - WASP and likely can bind it simultaneously . When the ligands are present together at a membrane , they should act in a multivalent fashion to strongly recruit the WRC / N - WASP . The ligands become cou - pled through WRC / N - WASP , strengthening membrane association of the BAR protein and causing a clustering of all components . Clustering should be further enhanced by the dimeric nature of the BAR protein . In the case of the WRC , these cooperative interactions should effectively overcome the modest afﬁnity of Rac , enabling the WRC to be engaged and allosterically activated to a high degree . Thus , through the combination of all three ligands , both the allosteric and oligomerization mechanisms can be engaged , leading to strong , localized activation of the Arp2 / 3 complex . Other Family Members Several vertebrate WASP family members have been discovered only recently : WASH ( 129 ) , WHAMM ( 130 ) , and JMY ( Figure 1 ) ( 131 ) . All of these proteins have a C - terminal VCA domain , which in isolation can activate the Arp2 / 3 complex , and an adjacent PRD that can bind SH3 domains . Their more N - terminal el - ements are distinct , and their molecular mech - anisms of regulation are not yet known . Cur - rent work shows that WASH is incorporated into a multiprotein complex of a size and com - plexity similar to the WRC ( D . Jia , T . Gomez , D . Billadeau , unpublished ) , as is WHAMM ( K . Campellone and M . Welch , personal commu - nication ) . However , it is not known whether these assemblies are active toward the Arp2 / 3 complex and thus how functionally analogous they are to the WRC . WASH activity has also been linked to the GTPase Rho ( 132 ) , suggest - ing analogies to WASP and WAVE , although it is unclear if Rho acts directly or indirectly . Characterization , reconstitution , and assay of these complexes is still needed to understand their mechanisms of regulation and their rela - tionships to WASP and / or WAVE . ACTIN FEEDBACK This review focuses on upstream signals that act on WASP proteins . However , there is increas - ingevidencethatthedownstreamactinnetwork also feeds back into the WASP proteins and their assemblies . Taunton and coworkers ( 17 ) have shown that the V region of membrane - associated N - WASP , after delivering actin to the Arp2 / 3 branch , can remain attached to the ﬁlament - barbed end . This tethers the actin net - work to membranes and may enhance mem - brane recruitment and / or clustering of WASP proteins . Thisideaisconsistentwithrecentdata showing Arp2 / 3 complex - dependent polariza - tion of N - WASP on rocketing vesicles ( 133 ) . Interactions with the actin network should fur - ther stabilize the multiprotein assemblies that recruitandactivateWASPatmembranes . Para - doxically , the interaction of the VCA with the Arp2 / 3 complex is also necessary for rapid ex - change of N - WASP into and out of mem - brane complexes created by vaccinia viruses ( 134 ) . N - WASP exchange is necessary for www . annualreviews . org • Signal Integration by WASP Proteins 727 A nnu . R e v . B i o c h e m . 2010 . 79 : 707 - 735 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g A cce ss p r ov i d e d by Y a l e U n i v e r s it y - L a w L i b r a r y on 02 / 01 / 15 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV413 - BI79 - 25 ARI 27 April 2010 21 : 38 efﬁcient actin - based movement of the virus . Such negative feedback between the actin - Arp2 / 3 complex and the VCA may also ac - count for the rapid membrane dissociation of the WRC , observed in mobile waves of actin assembly during cell spreading and motility ( 135 ) . As more complete biochemical descrip - tions of WASP activation emerge , the feedback from the actin network needs to be included to advance beyond bulk biochemical descriptions into descriptions of cellular processes . CONCLUDING REMARKS Thehierarchicalmodelprovidesaunifyingreg - ulatory framework for the WASP family . The allosteric arm quantitatively explains autoinhi - bition and its relief by individual or combined ligands that act on the folding equilibrium of the GBD - VCA element . The dimerization / oligomerization arm explains how formation of assemblies of WASP proteins by multivalent ligands and membrane association enhances stimulation of the Arp2 / 3 complex . Together , the two arms explain how WASP proteins are endowed with the ability to integrate a large number of diverse signals through interactions of multiple domains to precisely control actin assembly in cells . The model also raises many new questions . How do two WASP molecules engage and activate the Arp2 / 3 complex ? What are the physical properties of the large , multi - valent assemblies that contain WASP proteins ; how do these affect and respond through feedback to downstream actin dynamics ? Can other more recently discovered WASP family members also be described by the hierarchical model , and if so , what signals control the two arms and allow them to work together ? These questions and others that extend from them will drive research in this exciting area for years to come . SUMMARY POINTS 1 . WASP proteins are regulated by two processes , allostery and dimerization . 2 . AllosterycontrolsaccessoftheVCAtotheArp2 / 3complexandisunderstoodstructurally and energetically . 3 . Dimerization controls afﬁnity of WASP protein for the Arp2 / 3 complex and explains aspects of WASP activation by a variety of ligands . 4 . Allostery and dimerization work together to integrate multiple , simultaneous , diverse signaling inputs . 5 . Probablistic considerations suggest that higher - order assemblies will further enhance WASP activity and sensitize it toward allosteric activators . 6 . The ﬁve - component WAVE assembly is regulated analogously to WASP . FUTURE ISSUES 1 . Where are the two VCA - binding sites on the Arp2 / 3 complex , what are the functions of each VCA , and which elements of the VCA are needed at each site ? What is the kinetic pathway of nucleation ? 2 . What are the quantitative principles that underlie coupling between membrane binding , oligomerization , and allosteric activation of WASP proteins ? 3 . What are the physical properties ( stoichiometries , stabilities , dynamics ) of multi - WASP assemblies , and how do these lead to enhanced actin assembly activity ? 728 Padrick · Rosen A nnu . R e v . B i o c h e m . 2010 . 79 : 707 - 735 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g A cce ss p r ov i d e d by Y a l e U n i v e r s it y - L a w L i b r a r y on 02 / 01 / 15 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV413 - BI79 - 25 ARI 27 April 2010 21 : 38 4 . How does interaction with the actin network modulate the kinetic and thermodynamic properties of WASP assemblies ? 5 . How is the activity of the WAVE regulatory complex controlled structurally and energetically ? 6 . How are the recently discovered WASP family members WASH , WHAMM , and JMY regulated ? What are the components of their regulatory complexes , and how do these control VCA activity and respond to signals ? What signals control them ? DISCLOSURE STATEMENT The authors are not aware of any afﬁliations , memberships , funding , or ﬁnancial holdings that might be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS M . K . R . thanks all past and present members of the Rosen lab for their efforts , insights , and enthusiasm in understanding regulation of actin assembly by proteins in the WASP family . Work in the Rosen lab is supported by the Howard Hughes Medical Institute and grants from the National Institutes of Health ( NIH ) ( R01 - GM56322 ) and Welch Foundation ( I - 1544 ) . S . B . P . was supported by a fellowship from the NIH ( 1F32 - GM06917902 ) . LITERATURE CITED 1 . Pollard TD . 2007 . Regulation of actin ﬁlament assembly by Arp2 / 3 complex and formins . Annu . Rev . Biophys . Biomol . Struct . 36 : 451 – 77 2 . Chhabra ES , Higgs HN . 2007 . The many faces of actin : matching assembly factors with cellular struc - tures . Nat . Cell Biol . 9 : 1110 – 21 3 . Pollitt AY , Insall RH . 2009 . WASP and SCAR / WAVE proteins : the drivers of actin assembly . J . Cell Sci . 122 : 2575 – 78 4 . Kurisu S , Takenawa T . 2009 . The WASP and WAVE family proteins . Genome Biol . 10 : 226 5 . Stradal TE , Scita G . 2006 . Protein complexes regulating Arp2 / 3 - mediated actin assembly . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 18 : 4 – 10 6 . Takenawa T , Suetsugu S . 2007 . The WASP - WAVE protein network : connecting the membrane to the cytoskeleton . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 8 : 37 – 48 7 . Machesky LM , Insall RH . 1998 . Scar1 and the related Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein , WASP , reg - ulate the actin cytoskeleton through the Arp2 / 3 complex . Curr . Biol . 8 : 1347 – 56 8 . Machesky LM , Mullins RD , Higgs HN , Kaiser DA , Blanchoin L , et al . 1999 . Scar , a WASp - related protein , activatesnucleationofactinﬁlamentsbytheArp2 / 3complex . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 96 : 3739 – 44 9 . HufnerK , HiggsHN , PollardTD , JacobiC , AepfelbacherM , LinderS . 2001 . Theverprolin - likecentral ( VC ) region of Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein induces Arp2 / 3 complex - dependent actin nucleation . J . Biol . Chem . 276 : 35761 – 67 10 . Marchand JB , Kaiser DA , Pollard TD , Higgs HN . 2000 . Interaction of WASP / Scar proteins with actin and vertebrate Arp2 / 3 complex . Nat . Cell Biol . 3 : 76 – 82 11 . ZalevskyJ , LempertL , KranitzH , MullinsRD . 2001 . DifferentWASPfamilyproteinsstimulatedifferent Arp2 / 3 complex - dependent actin - nucleating activities . Curr . Biol . 11 : 1903 – 13 12 . SuetsuguS , MikiH , TakenawaT . 2001 . Identiﬁcationofanotheractin - relatedprotein ( Arp ) 2 / 3complex bindingsiteinneuralWiskott - Aldrichsyndromeprotein ( N - WASP ) thatcomplementsactinpolymeriza - tion induced by the Arp2 / 3 complex activating ( VCA ) domain of N - WASP . J . Biol . Chem . 276 : 33175 – 80 www . annualreviews . org • Signal Integration by WASP Proteins 729 A nnu . R e v . B i o c h e m . 2010 . 79 : 707 - 735 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g A cce ss p r ov i d e d by Y a l e U n i v e r s it y - L a w L i b r a r y on 02 / 01 / 15 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV413 - BI79 - 25 ARI 27 April 2010 21 : 38 13 . Panchal SC , Kaiser DA , Torres E , Pollard TD , Rosen MK . 2003 . A conserved amphipathic helix in WASP / Scar proteins is essential for activation of Arp2 / 3 complex . Nat . Struct . Biol . 10 : 591 – 98 14 . Miki H , Miura K , Takenawa T . 1996 . N - WASP , a novel actin - depolymerizing protein , regulates the cortical cytoskeletal rearrangement in a PIP 2 - dependent manner downstream of tyrosine kinases . EMBO J . 15 : 5326 – 35 15 . Miki H , Suetsugu S , Takenawa T . 1998 . WAVE , a novel WASP - family protein involved in actin reorga - nization induced by Rac . EMBO J . 17 : 6932 – 41 16 . ChereauD , KerffF , GraceffaP , GrabarekZ , LangsetmoK , DominguezR . 2005 . Actin - boundstructures of Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein ( WASP ) - homology domain 2 and the implications for ﬁlament assembly . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 102 : 16644 – 49 17 . Co C , Wong DT , Gierke S , Chang V , Taunton J . 2007 . Mechanism of actin network attachment to moving membranes : barbed end capture by N - WASP WH2 domains . Cell 128 : 901 – 13 18 . Boczkowska M , Rebowski G , Petoukhov MV , Hayes DB , Svergun DI , Dominguez R . 2008 . X - ray scattering study of activated Arp2 / 3 complex with bound actin - WCA . Structure 16 : 695 – 704 19 . Hertzog M , van Heijenoort C , Didry D , Gaudier M , Coutant J , et al . 2004 . The beta - thymosin / WH2 domain ; structural basis for the switch from inhibition to promotion of actin assembly . Cell 117 : 611 – 23 20 . Qualmann B , Kessels MM . 2009 . New players in actin polymerization—WH2 - domain - containing actin nucleators . Trends Cell Biol . 19 : 276 – 85 21 . Chesarone MA , Goode BL . 2009 . Actin nucleation and elongation factors : mechanisms and interplay . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 21 : 28 – 37 22 . Padrick SB , Cheng HC , Ismail AM , Panchal SC , Doolittle LK , et al . 2008 . Hierarchical regulation of WASP / WAVE proteins . Mol . Cell 32 : 426 – 38 23 . Ramesh N , Geha R . 2009 . Recent advances in the biology of WASP and WIP . Immunol . Res . 44 : 99 – 111 24 . SasaharaY , RachidR , ByrneMJ , delaFuenteMA , AbrahamRT , etal . 2002 . Mechanismofrecruitmentof WASP to the immunological synapse and of its activation following TCR ligation . Mol . Cell 10 : 1269 – 81 25 . Konno A , Kirby M , Anderson SA , Schwartzberg PL , Candotti F . 2007 . The expression of Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein ( WASP ) is dependent on WASP - interacting protein ( WIP ) . Int . Immunol . 19 : 185 – 92 26 . Peterson FC , Deng Q , Zettl M , Prehoda KE , Lim WA , et al . 2007 . Multiple WASP - interacting protein recognition motifs are required for a functional interaction with N - WASP . J . Biol . Chem . 282 : 8446 – 53 27 . JinY , MazzaC , ChristieJR , GilianiS , FioriniM , etal . 2004 . MutationsoftheWiskott - Aldrichsyndrome protein ( WASP ) : hotspots , effect on transcription , and translation and phenotype / genotype correlation . Blood 104 : 4010 – 19 28 . Martinez - Quiles N , Rohatgi R , Anton IM , Medina M , Saville SP , et al . 2001 . WIP regulates N - WASP - mediated actin polymerization and ﬁlopodium formation . Nat . Cell Biol . 3 : 484 – 91 29 . Takano K , Toyooka K , Suetsugu S . 2008 . EFC / F - BAR proteins and the N - WASP - WIP complex induce membrane curvature - dependent actin polymerization . EMBO J . 27 : 2817 – 28 30 . Leung DW , Rosen MK . 2005 . The nucleotide switch in Cdc42 modulates coupling between the GTPase - binding and allosteric equilibria of Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 102 : 5685 – 90 31 . Rohatgi R , Ho HY , Kirschner MW . 2000 . Mechanism of N - WASP activation by CDC42 and phos - phatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate . J . Cell Biol . 150 : 1299 – 310 32 . Prehoda KE , Scott JA , Mullins RD , Lim WA . 2000 . Integration of multiple signals through cooperative regulation of the N - WASP - Arp2 / 3 complex . Science 290 : 801 – 6 33 . Suetsugu S , Miki H , Yamaguchi H , Takenawa T . 2001 . Requirement of the basic region of N - WASP / WAVE2 for actin - based motility . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 282 : 739 – 44 34 . Papayannopoulos V , Co C , Prehoda KE , Snapper S , Taunton J , Lim WA . 2005 . A polybasic motif allows N - WASP to act as a sensor of PIP 2 density . Mol . Cell 17 : 181 – 91 35 . Higgs HN , Pollard TD . 2000 . Activation by Cdc42 and PIP 2 of Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein ( WASp ) stimulates actin nucleation by Arp2 / 3 complex . J . Cell Biol . 150 : 1311 – 20 36 . HemsathL , DvorskyR , FiegenD , CarlierMF , AhmadianMR . 2005 . Anelectrostaticsteeringmechanism of Cdc42 recognition by Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome proteins . Mol . Cell 20 : 313 – 24 730 Padrick · Rosen A nnu . R e v . B i o c h e m . 2010 . 79 : 707 - 735 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g A cce ss p r ov i d e d by Y a l e U n i v e r s it y - L a w L i b r a r y on 02 / 01 / 15 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV413 - BI79 - 25 ARI 27 April 2010 21 : 38 37 . Burbelo PD , Drechsel D , Hall A . 1995 . A conserved binding motif deﬁnes numerous candidate target proteins for both Cdc42 and Rac GTPases . J . Biol . Chem . 270 : 29071 – 74 38 . Miki H , Sasaki T , Takai Y , Takenawa T . 1998 . Induction of ﬁlopodium formation by a WASP - related actin - depolymerizing protein N - WASP . Nature 391 : 93 – 96 39 . Kim AS , Kakalis LT , Abdul - Manan N , Liu GA , Rosen MK . 2000 . Autoinhibition and activation mech - anisms of the Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein . Nature 404 : 151 – 58 40 . Li SS . 2005 . Speciﬁcity and versatility of SH3 and other proline - recognition domains : structural basis and implications for cellular signal transduction . Biochem . J . 390 : 641 – 53 41 . Abdul - Manan N , Aghazadeh B , Liu GA , Majumdar A , Ouerfelli O , et al . 1999 . Structure of Cdc42 in complex with the GTPase - binding domain of the ‘Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome’ protein . Nature 399 : 379 – 83 42 . Devriendt K , Kim AS , Mathijs G , Frints SG , Schwartz M , et al . 2001 . Constitutively activating mutation in WASP causes X - linked severe congenital neutropenia . Nat . Genet . 27 : 313 – 17 43 . Ancliff PJ , Blundell MP , Cory GO , Calle Y , Worth A , et al . 2006 . Two novel activating mutations in the Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein result in congenital neutropenia . Blood 108 : 2182 – 89 44 . Monod J , Wyman J , Changeux JP . 1965 . On the nature of allosteric transitions : a plausible model . J . Mol . Biol . 12 : 88 – 118 45 . Buck M , Xu W , Rosen MK . 2004 . A two - state allosteric model for autoinhibition rationalizes WASP signal integration and targeting . J . Mol . Biol . 338 : 271 – 85 46 . Morreale A , Venkatesan M , Mott HR , Owen D , Nietlispach D , et al . 2000 . Structure of Cdc42 bound to the GTPase binding domain of PAK . Nat . Struct . Biol . 7 : 384 – 88 47 . GizachewD , GuoW , ChohanKK , SutcliffeMJ , OswaldRE . 2000 . StructureofthecomplexofCdc42Hs with a peptide derived from P - 21 activated kinase . Biochemistry 39 : 3963 – 71 48 . Garrard SM , Capaldo CT , Gao L , Rosen MK , Macara IG , Tomchick DR . 2003 . Structure of Cdc42 in a complex with the GTPase - binding domain of the cell polarity protein , Par6 . EMBO J . 22 : 1125 – 33 49 . Mott HR , Owen D , Nietlispach D , Lowe PN , Manser E , et al . 1999 . Structure of the small G protein Cdc42 bound to the GTPase - binding domain of ACK . Nature 399 : 384 – 88 50 . Owen D , Mott HR , Laue ED , Lowe PN . 2000 . Residues in Cdc42 that specify binding to individual CRIB effector proteins . Biochemistry 39 : 1243 – 50 51 . Lei M , Lu W , Meng W , Parrini MC , Eck MJ , et al . 2000 . Structure of PAK1 in an autoinhibited conformation reveals a multistage activation switch . Cell 102 : 387 – 97 52 . Badour K , Zhang J , Shi F , Leng Y , Collins M , Siminovitch KA . 2004 . Fyn and PTP - PEST - mediated regulation of Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein ( WASp ) tyrosine phosphorylation is required for cou - pling T cell antigen receptor engagement to WASp effector function and T cell activation . J . Exp . Med . 199 : 99 – 112 53 . Suetsugu S , Hattori M , Miki H , Tezuka T , Yamamoto T , et al . 2002 . Sustained activation of N - WASP through phosphorylation is essential for neurite extension . Dev . Cell 3 : 645 – 58 54 . Burton EA , Oliver TN , Pendergast AM . Abl kinases regulated actin comet tail elongation via an N - Wasp - dependent pathway . Mol . Cell . Biol . 25 : 8834 – 43 55 . Wu X , Suetsugu S , Cooper LA , Takenawa T , Guan JL . 2004 . Focal adhesion kinase regulation of N - WASP subcellular localization and function . J . Biol . Chem . 279 : 9565 – 76 56 . Yokoyama N , Lougheed J , Miller WT . 2005 . Phosphorylation of WASP by the Cdc42 - associated kinase ACK1 : dual hydroxyamino acid speciﬁcity in a tyrosine kinase . J . Biol . Chem . 280 : 42219 – 26 57 . Torres E , Rosen MK . 2003 . Contingent phosphorylation / dephosphorylation provides a mechanism of molecular memory in WASP . Mol . Cell 11 : 1215 – 27 58 . Torres E , Rosen MK . 2006 . Protein - tyrosine kinase and GTPase signals cooperate to phosphorylate and activate Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein ( WASP ) / neuronal WASP . J . Biol . Chem . 281 : 3513 – 20 59 . Yaffe MB , Leparc GG , Lai J , Obata T , Volinia S , Cantley LC . 2001 . A motif - based proﬁle scanning approach for genome - wide prediction of signaling pathways . Nat . Biotechnol . 19 : 348 – 53 60 . Waksman G , Shoelson SE , Pant N , Cowburn D , Kuriyan J . 1993 . Binding of a high afﬁnity phospho - tyrosyl peptide to the Src SH2 domain : crystal structures of the complexed and peptide - free forms . Cell 72 : 779 – 90 www . annualreviews . org • Signal Integration by WASP Proteins 731 A nnu . R e v . B i o c h e m . 2010 . 79 : 707 - 735 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g A cce ss p r ov i d e d by Y a l e U n i v e r s it y - L a w L i b r a r y on 02 / 01 / 15 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV413 - BI79 - 25 ARI 27 April 2010 21 : 38 61 . Campellone KG , Robbins D , Leong JM . 2004 . EspF U is a translocated EHEC effector that interacts with Tir and N - WASP and promotes Nck - independent actin assembly . Dev . Cell 7 : 217 – 28 62 . Garmendia J , Phillips AD , Carlier MF , Chong Y , Schuller S , et al . 2004 . TccP is an enterohaemorrhagic Escherichiacoli O157 : H7typeIIIeffectorproteinthatcouplesTirtotheactin - cytoskeleton . CellMicrobiol . 6 : 1167 – 83 63 . Hayward RD , Leong JM , Koronakis V , Campellone KG . 2006 . Exploiting pathogenic Escherichia coli to model transmembrane receptor signalling . Nat . Rev . Microbiol . 4 : 358 – 70 64 . Garmendia J , Ren Z , Tennant S , Midolli Viera MA , Chong Y , et al . 2005 . Distribution of tccP in clinical enterohemorrhagic and enteropathogenic Escherichia coli isolates . J . Clin . Microbiol . 43 : 5715 – 20 65 . Cheng HC , Skehan BM , Campellone KG , Leong JM , Rosen MK . 2008 . Structural mechanism of WASP activation by the enterohaemorrhagic E . coli effector EspF U . Nature 454 : 1009 – 13 66 . Sallee NA , Rivera GM , Dueber JE , Vasilescu D , Mullins RD , et al . 2008 . The pathogen protein EspF U hijacks actin polymerization using mimicry and multivalency . Nature 454 : 1005 – 8 67 . Peterson JR , Lokey RS , Mitchison TJ , Kirschner MW . 2001 . A chemical inhibitor of N - WASP reveals a new mechanism for targeting protein interactions . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 98 : 10624 – 29 68 . PetersonJR , BickfordLC , MorganD , KimAS , OuerfelliO , etal . 2004 . ChemicalinhibitionofN - WASP by stabilization of a native autoinhibited conformation . Nat . Struct . Mol . Biol . 11 : 747 – 55 69 . Bompard G , Rabeharivelo G , Morin N . 2008 . Inhibition of cytokinesis by wiskostatin does not rely on N - WASP / Arp2 / 3 complex pathway . BMC Cell Biol . 9 : 42 70 . HardyJA , WellsJA . 2004 . Searchingfornewallostericsitesinenzymes . Curr . Opin . Struct . Biol . 14 : 706 – 15 71 . Garmendia J , Carlier MF , Egile C , Didry D , Frankel G . 2006 . Characterization of TccP - mediated N - WASP activation during enterohaemorrhagic Escherichia coli infection . Cell Microbiol . 8 : 1444 – 55 72 . Campellone KG , Cheng HC , Robbins D , Siripala AD , McGhie EJ , et al . 2008 . Repetitive N - WASP - binding elements of the enterohemorrhagic Escherichia coli effector EspF U synergistically activate actin assembly . PLoS Pathog . 4 : e1000191 73 . Carlier MF , Nioche P , Broutin - L’Hermite I , Boujemaa R , Le Clainche C , et al . 2000 . GRB2 links signaling to actin assembly by enhancing interaction of neural Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein ( N - WASp ) with actin - related protein ( ARP2 / 3 ) complex . J . Biol . Chem . 275 : 21946 – 52 74 . Fukuoka M , Suetsugu S , Miki H , Fukami K , Endo T , Takenawa T . 2001 . A novel neural Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein ( N - WASP ) binding protein , WISH , induces Arp2 / 3 complex activation independent of Cdc42 . J . Cell Biol . 152 : 471 – 82 75 . Innocenti M , Gerboth S , Rottner K , Lai FP , Hertzog M , et al . 2005 . Abi1 regulates the activity of N - WASP and WAVE in distinct actin - based processes . Nat . Cell Biol . 7 : 969 – 76 76 . Kowalski JR , Egile C , Gil S , Snapper SB , Li R , Thomas SM . 2005 . Cortactin regulates cell migration through activation of N - WASP . J . Cell Sci . 118 : 79 – 87 77 . Martinez - Quiles N , Ho HY , Kirschner MW , Ramesh N , Geha RS . 2004 . Erk / Src phosphorylation of cortactin acts as a switch on - switch off mechanism that controls its ability to activate N - WASP . Mol . Cell . Biol . 24 : 5269 – 80 78 . Pinyol R , Haeckel A , Ritter A , Qualmann B , Kessels MM . 2007 . Regulation of N - WASP and the Arp2 / 3 complex by Abp1 controls neuronal morphology . PLoS ONE 2 : e400 79 . Rodal AA , Motola - Barnes RN , Littleton JT . 2008 . Nervous wreck and Cdc42 cooperate to regulate endocytic actin assembly during synaptic growth . J . Neurosci . 28 : 8316 – 25 80 . Rohatgi R , Nollau P , Ho HY , Kirschner MW , Mayer BJ . 2001 . Nck and phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate synergistically activate actin polymerization through the N - WASP - Arp2 / 3 pathway . J . Biol . Chem . 276 : 26448 – 52 81 . Tehrani S , Tomasevic N , Weed S , Sakowicz R , Cooper JA . 2007 . Src phosphorylation of cortactin enhances actin assembly . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 104 : 11933 – 38 82 . Tomasevic N , Jia Z , Russell A , Fujii T , Hartman JJ , et al . 2007 . Differential regulation of WASP and N - WASP by Cdc42 , Rac1 , Nck , and PI ( 4 , 5 ) P2 . Biochemistry 46 : 3494 – 502 83 . Tsujita K , Suetsugu S , Sasaki N , Furutani M , Oikawa T , Takenawa T . 2006 . Coordination between the actincytoskeletonandmembranedeformationbyanovelmembranetubulationdomainofPCHproteins is involved in endocytosis . J . Cell Biol . 172 : 269 – 79 732 Padrick · Rosen A nnu . R e v . B i o c h e m . 2010 . 79 : 707 - 735 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g A cce ss p r ov i d e d by Y a l e U n i v e r s it y - L a w L i b r a r y on 02 / 01 / 15 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV413 - BI79 - 25 ARI 27 April 2010 21 : 38 84 . Yarar D , Waterman - Storer CM , Schmid SL . 2007 . SNX9 couples actin assembly to phosphoinositide signals and is required for membrane remodeling during endocytosis . Dev . Cell 13 : 43 – 56 85 . Frost A , Unger VM , De Camilli P . 2009 . The BAR domain superfamily : membrane - molding macro - molecules . Cell 137 : 191 – 96 86 . Otsuki M , Itoh T , Takenawa T . 2003 . Neural Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein is recruited to rafts and associates with endophilin A in response to epidermal growth factor . J . Biol . Chem . 278 : 6461 – 69 87 . Kim K , Hou P , Gorski JL , Cooper JA . 2004 . Effect of Fgd1 on cortactin in Arp2 / 3 complex - mediated actin assembly . Biochemistry 43 : 2422 – 27 88 . Footer MJ , Lyo JK , Theriot JA . 2008 . Close packing of Listeria monocytogenes ActA , a natively unfolded protein , enhances F - actin assembly without dimerization . J . Biol . Chem . 283 : 23852 – 62 89 . Rohatgi R , Ma L , Miki H , Lopez M , Kirchhausen T , et al . 1999 . The interaction between N - WASP and the Arp2 / 3 complex links Cdc42 - dependent signals to actin assembly . Cell 97 : 221 – 31 90 . Dueber JE , Mirsky EA , Lim WA . 2007 . Engineering synthetic signaling proteins with ultrasensitive input / output control . Nat . Biotechnol . 25 : 660 – 62 91 . Dueber JE , Yeh BJ , Chak K , Lim WA . 2003 . Reprogramming control of an allosteric signaling switch through modular recombination . Science 301 : 1904 – 8 92 . Weiss SM , Ladwein M , Schmidt D , Ehinger J , Lommel S , et al . 2009 . IRSp53 links the enterohemor - rhagic E . coli effectors Tir and EspF U for actin pedestal formation . Cell Host Microbe 5 : 244 – 58 93 . Tong AH , Drees B , Nardelli G , Bader GD , Brannetti B , et al . 2002 . A combined experimental and computational strategy to deﬁne protein interaction networks for peptide recognition modules . Science 295 : 321 – 24 94 . Le Clainche C , Schlaepfer D , Ferrari A , Klingauf M , Grohmanova K , et al . 2007 . IQGAP1 stimulates actin assembly through the N - WASP - Arp2 / 3 pathway . J . Biol . Chem . 282 : 426 – 35 95 . Bensenor LB , Kan HM , Wang N , Wallrabe H , Davidson LA , et al . 2007 . IQGAP1 regulates cell motility by linking growth factor signaling to actin assembly . J . Cell Sci . 120 : 658 – 69 96 . Ho HY , Rohatgi R , Lebensohn AM , Le M , Li J , et al . 2004 . Toca - 1 mediates Cdc42 - dependent actin nucleation by activating the N - WASP - WIP complex . Cell 118 : 203 – 16 97 . Alto NM , Weﬂen AW , Rardin MJ , Yarar D , Lazar CS , et al . 2007 . The type III effector EspF coordinates membrane trafﬁcking by the spatiotemporal activation of two eukaryotic signaling pathways . J . Cell Biol . 178 : 1265 – 78 98 . Vingadassalom D , Kazlauskas A , Skehan B , Cheng HC , Magoun L , et al . 2009 . Insulin receptor tyro - sine kinase substrate links the E . coli O157 : H7 actin assembly effectors Tir and EspF U during pedestal formation . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 106 : 6754 – 59 99 . Itoh T , Erdmann KS , Roux A , Habermann B , Werner H , De Camilli P . 2005 . Dynamin and the actin cytoskeleton cooperatively regulate plasma membrane invagination by BAR and F - BAR proteins . Dev . Cell 9 : 791 – 804 100 . Frost A , Perera R , Roux A , Spasov K , Destaing O , et al . 2008 . Structural basis of membrane invagination by F - BAR domains . Cell 132 : 807 – 17 101 . Dawson JC , Legg JA , Machesky LM . 2006 . Bar domain proteins : a role in tubulation , scission and actin assembly in clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Trends Cell Biol . 16 : 493 – 98 102 . Shin N , Ahn N , Chang - Ileto B , Park J , Takei K , et al . 2008 . SNX9 regulates tubular invagination of the plasma membrane through interaction with actin cytoskeleton and dynamin 2 . J . Cell Sci . 121 : 1252 – 63 103 . Kinley AW , Weed SA , Weaver AM , Karginov AV , Bissonette E , et al . 2003 . Cortactin interacts with WIP in regulating Arp2 / 3 activation and membrane protrusion . Curr . Biol . 13 : 384 – 93 104 . Blasutig IM , New LA , Thanabalasuriar A , Dayarathna TK , Goudreault M , et al . 2008 . Phosphorylated YDXV motifs and Nck SH2 / SH3 adaptors act cooperatively to induce actin reorganization . Mol . Cell . Biol . 28 : 2035 – 46 105 . Jones N , Blasutig IM , Eremina V , Ruston JM , Bladt F , et al . 2006 . Nck adaptor proteins link nephrin to the actin cytoskeleton of kidney podocytes . Nature 440 : 818 – 23 106 . Rivera GM , Briceno CA , Takeshima F , Snapper SB , Mayer BJ . 2004 . Inducible clustering of membrane - targeted SH3 domains of the adaptor protein Nck triggers localized actin polymerization . Curr . Biol . 14 : 11 – 22 www . annualreviews . org • Signal Integration by WASP Proteins 733 A nnu . R e v . B i o c h e m . 2010 . 79 : 707 - 735 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g A cce ss p r ov i d e d by Y a l e U n i v e r s it y - L a w L i b r a r y on 02 / 01 / 15 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV413 - BI79 - 25 ARI 27 April 2010 21 : 38 107 . Krause M , Sechi AS , Konradt M , Monner D , Gertler FB , Wehland J . 2000 . Fyn - binding protein ( Fyb ) / SLP - 76 - associated protein ( SLAP ) , Ena / vasodilator - stimulated phosphoprotein ( VASP ) proteins and the Arp2 / 3 complex link T cell receptor ( TCR ) signaling to the actin cytoskeleton . J . Cell Biol . 149 : 181 – 94 108 . SoulardA , FriantS , FittererC , OrangeC , KanevaG , etal . 2005 . TheWASP / Las17p - interactingprotein Bzz1p functions with Myo5p in an early stage of endocytosis . Protoplasma 226 : 89 – 101 109 . BearJE , RawlsJF , SaxeCLIII . 1998 . SCAR , aWASP - relatedprotein , isolatedasasuppressorofreceptor defects in late Dictyostelium development . J . Cell Biol . 142 : 1325 – 35 110 . Suetsugu S , Miki H , Takenawa T . 1999 . Identiﬁcation of two human WAVE / SCAR homologues as gen - eral actin regulatory molecules which associate with the Arp2 / 3 complex . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 260 : 296 – 302 111 . Eden S , Rohatgi R , Podtelejnikov AV , Mann M , Kirschner MW . 2002 . Mechanism of regulation of WAVE1 - induced actin nucleation by Rac1 and Nck . Nature 418 : 790 – 93 112 . Gautreau A , Ho HY , Li J , Steen H , Gygi SP , Kirschner MW . 2004 . Puriﬁcation and architecture of the ubiquitous Wave complex . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 101 : 4379 – 83 113 . Leng Y , Zhang J , Badour K , Arpaia E , Freeman S , et al . 2005 . Abelson - interactor - 1 promotes WAVE2 membrane translocation and Abelson - mediated tyrosine phosphorylation required for WAVE2 activa - tion . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 102 : 1098 – 103 114 . Ismail AM , Padrick SB , Chen B , Umetani J , Rosen MK . 2009 . The WAVE regulatory complex is inhibited . Nat . Struct . Mol . Biol . 16 : 561 – 63 115 . Innocenti M , Zucconi A , Disanza A , Frittoli E , Areces LB , et al . 2004 . Abi1 is essential for the formation and activation of a WAVE2 signalling complex . Nat . Cell Biol . 6 : 319 – 27 116 . Stovold CF , Millard TH , Machesky LM . 2005 . Inclusion of Scar / WAVE3 in a similar complex to Scar / WAVE1 and 2 . BMC Cell Biol . 6 : 11 117 . Weiner OD , Rentel MC , Ott A , Brown GE , Jedrychowski M , et al . 2006 . Hem - 1 complexes are essential for Rac activation , actin polymerization , and myosin regulation during neutrophil chemotaxis . PLoS Biol . 4 : e38 118 . Kim Y , Sung JY , Ceglia I , Lee KW , Ahn JH , et al . 2006 . Phosphorylation of WAVE1 regulates actin polymerization and dendritic spine morphology . Nature 442 : 814 – 17 119 . Steffen A , Rottner K , Ehinger J , Innocenti M , Scita G , et al . 2004 . Sra - 1 and Nap1 link Rac to actin assembly driving lamellipodia formation . EMBO J . 23 : 749 – 59 120 . Derivery E , Lombard B , Loew D , Gautreau A . 2009 . The Wave complex is intrinsically inactive . Cell . Motil . Cytoskelet . 66 : 777 – 90 121 . Kobayashi K , Kuroda S , Fukata M , Nakamura T , Nagase T , et al . 1998 . p140Sra - 1 ( speciﬁcally Rac1 - associated protein ) is a novel speciﬁc target for Rac1 small GTPase . J . Biol . Chem . 273 : 291 – 95 122 . Oikawa T , Yamaguchi H , Itoh T , Kato M , Ijuin T , et al . 2004 . PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P3 binding is necessary for WAVE2 - induced formation of lamellipodia . Nat . Cell Biol . 6 : 420 – 26 123 . Suetsugu S , Kurisu S , Oikawa T , Yamazaki D , Oda A , Takenawa T . 2006 . Optimization of WAVE2 complex - induced actin polymerization by membrane - bound IRSp53 , PIP ( 3 ) , and Rac . J . Cell Biol . 173 : 571 – 85 124 . Nakanishi O , Suetsugu S , Yamazaki D , Takenawa T . 2007 . Effect of WAVE2 phosphorylation on acti - vation of the Arp2 / 3 complex . J . Biochem . 141 : 319 – 25 125 . Pocha SM , Cory GO . 2009 . WAVE2 is regulated by multiple phosphorylation events within its VCA domain . Cell . Motil . Cytoskelet . 66 : 36 – 47 126 . Miki H , Fukuda M , Nishida E , Takenawa T . 1999 . Phosphorylation of WAVE downstream of mitogen - activated protein kinase signaling . J . Biol . Chem . 274 : 27605 – 9 127 . Soderling SH , Binns KL , Wayman GA , Davee SM , Ong SH , et al . 2002 . The WRP component of the WAVE - 1 complex attenuates Rac - mediated signalling . Nat . Cell Biol . 4 : 970 – 75 128 . Salazar MA , Kwiatkowski AV , Pellegrini L , Cestra G , Butler MH , et al . 2003 . Tuba , a novel protein containing Bin / amphiphysin / Rvs and Dbl homology domains , links dynamin to regulation of the actin cytoskeleton . J . Biol . Chem . 278 : 49031 – 43 129 . Linardopoulou EV , Parghi SS , Friedman C , Osborn GE , Parkhurst SM , Trask BJ . 2007 . Human sub - telomeric WASH genes encode a new subclass of the WASP family . PLoS Genet . 3 : e237 734 Padrick · Rosen A nnu . R e v . B i o c h e m . 2010 . 79 : 707 - 735 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g A cce ss p r ov i d e d by Y a l e U n i v e r s it y - L a w L i b r a r y on 02 / 01 / 15 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV413 - BI79 - 25 ARI 27 April 2010 21 : 38 130 . CampelloneKG , WebbNJ , ZnameroskiEA , WelchMD . 2008 . WHAMMisanArp2 / 3complexactivator that binds microtubules and functions in ER to Golgi transport . Cell 134 : 148 – 61 131 . Zuchero JB , Coutts AS , Quinlan ME , Thangue NB , Mullins RD . 2009 . p53 - cofactor JMY is a multi - functional actin nucleation factor . Nat . Cell Biol . 11 : 451 – 59 132 . Liu R , Abreu - Blanco MT , Barry KC , Linardopoulou EV , Osborn GE , Parkhurst SM . 2009 . Wash func - tionsdownstreamofRhoandlinkslinearandbranchedactinnucleationfactors . Development 136 : 2849 – 60 133 . Delatour V , Helfer E , Didry D , Le KH , Gaucher JF , et al . 2008 . Arp2 / 3 controls the motile behavior of N - WASP - functionalized GUVs and modulates N - WASP surface distribution by mediating transient links with actin ﬁlaments . Biophys . J . 94 : 4890 – 905 134 . Weisswange I , Newsome TP , Schleich S , Way M . 2009 . The rate of N - WASP exchange limits the extent of ARP2 / 3 - complex - dependent actin - based motility . Nature 458 : 87 – 91 135 . WeinerOD , MarganskiWA , WuLF , AltschulerSJ , KirschnerMW . 2007 . Anactin - basedwavegenerator organizes cell motility . PLoS Biol . 5 : e221 www . annualreviews . org • Signal Integration by WASP Proteins 735 A nnu . R e v . B i o c h e m . 2010 . 79 : 707 - 735 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g A cce ss p r ov i d e d by Y a l e U n i v e r s it y - L a w L i b r a r y on 02 / 01 / 15 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . AR413 - FM ARI 28 April 2010 16 : 43 Annual Review of Biochemistry Volume 79 , 2010 Contents Preface The Power of One James E . Rothman (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) v Prefatory Article Frontispiece Aaron Klug (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) xiv From Virus Structure to Chromatin : X - ray Diffraction to Three - Dimensional Electron Microscopy Aaron Klug (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 1 Recent Advances in Biochemistry Genomic Screening with RNAi : Results and Challenges Stephanie Mohr , Chris Bakal , and Norbert Perrimon (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 37 Nanomaterials Based on DNA Nadrian C . Seeman (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 65 Eukaryotic Chromosome DNA Replication : Where , When , and How ? Hisao Masai , Seiji Matsumoto , Zhiying You , Naoko Yoshizawa - Sugata , and Masako Oda (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 89 Regulators of the Cohesin Network Bo Xiong and Jennifer L . Gerton (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 131 Reversal of Histone Methylation : Biochemical and Molecular Mechanisms of Histone Demethylases Nima Mosammaparast and Yang Shi (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 155 The Mechanism of Double - Strand DNA Break Repair by the Nonhomologous DNA End - Joining Pathway Michael R . Lieber (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 181 The Discovery of Zinc Fingers and Their Applications in Gene Regulation and Genome Manipulation Aaron Klug (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 213 vii A nnu . R e v . B i o c h e m . 2010 . 79 : 707 - 735 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g A cce ss p r ov i d e d by Y a l e U n i v e r s it y - L a w L i b r a r y on 02 / 01 / 15 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . AR413 - FM ARI 28 April 2010 16 : 43 Origins of Speciﬁcity in Protein - DNA Recognition Remo Rohs , Xiangshu Jin , Sean M . West , Rohit Joshi , Barry Honig , and Richard S . Mann (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 233 Transcript Elongation by RNA Polymerase II Luke A . Selth , Stefan Sigurdsson , and Jesper Q . Svejstrup (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 271 Biochemical Principles of Small RNA Pathways Qinghua Liu and Zain Paroo (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 295 Functions and Regulation of RNA Editing by ADAR Deaminases Kazuko Nishikura (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 321 Regulation of mRNA Translation and Stability by microRNAs Marc Robert Fabian , Nahum Sonenberg , and Witold Filipowicz (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 351 Structure and Dynamics of a Processive Brownian Motor : The Translating Ribosome Joachim Frank and Ruben L . Gonzalez , Jr . (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 381 Adding New Chemistries to the Genetic Code Chang C . Liu and Peter G . Schultz (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 413 Bacterial Nitric Oxide Synthases Brian R . Crane , Jawahar Sudhamsu , and Bhumit A . Patel (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 445 Enzyme Promiscuity : A Mechanistic and Evolutionary Perspective Olga Khersonsky and Dan S . Tawﬁk (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 471 Hydrogenases from Methanogenic Archaea , Nickel , a Novel Cofactor , and H 2 Storage Rudolf K . Thauer , Anne - Kristin Kaster , Meike Goenrich , Michael Schick , Takeshi Hiromoto , and Seigo Shima (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 507 Copper Metallochaperones Nigel J . Robinson and Dennis R . Winge (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 537 High - Throughput Metabolic Engineering : Advances in Small - Molecule Screening and Selection Jeffrey A . Dietrich , Adrienne E . McKee , and Jay D . Keasling (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 563 Botulinum Neurotoxin : A Marvel of Protein Design Mauricio Montal (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 591 Chemical Approaches to Glycobiology Laura L . Kiessling and Rebecca A . Splain (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 619 Cellulosomes : Highly Efﬁcient Nanomachines Designed to Deconstruct Plant Cell Wall Complex Carbohydrates Carlos M . G . A . Fontes and Harry J . Gilbert (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 655 viii Contents A nnu . R e v . B i o c h e m . 2010 . 79 : 707 - 735 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g A cce ss p r ov i d e d by Y a l e U n i v e r s it y - L a w L i b r a r y on 02 / 01 / 15 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . AR413 - FM ARI 28 April 2010 16 : 43 Somatic Mitochondrial DNA Mutations in Mammalian Aging Nils - G¨oran Larsson (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 683 Physical Mechanisms of Signal Integration by WASP Family Proteins Shae B . Padrick and Michael K . Rosen (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 707 Amphipols , Nanodiscs , and Fluorinated Surfactants : Three Nonconventional Approaches to Studying Membrane Proteins in Aqueous Solutions Jean - Luc Popot (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 737 Protein Sorting Receptors in the Early Secretory Pathway Julia Dancourt and Charles Barlowe (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 777 Virus Entry by Endocytosis Jason Mercer , Mario Schelhaas , and Ari Helenius (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 803 Indexes Cumulative Index of Contributing Authors , Volumes 75 – 79 (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 835 Cumulative Index of Chapter Titles , Volumes 75 – 79 (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 839 Errata An online log of corrections to Annual Review of Biochemistry articles may be found at http : / / biochem . annualreviews . org Contents ix A nnu . R e v . B i o c h e m . 2010 . 79 : 707 - 735 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g A cce ss p r ov i d e d by Y a l e U n i v e r s it y - L a w L i b r a r y on 02 / 01 / 15 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . AnnuAl Reviews it’s about time . Your time . it’s time well spent . AnnuAl Reviews | Connect with Our experts Tel : 800 . 523 . 8635 ( us / can ) | Tel : 650 . 493 . 4400 | Fax : 650 . 424 . 0910 | Email : service @ annualreviews . org New From Annual Reviews : Annual Review of Statistics and Its Application Volume 1 • Online January 2014 • http : / / statistics . annualreviews . org Editor : Stephen E . Fienberg , Carnegie Mellon University Associate Editors : Nancy Reid , University of Toronto Stephen M . Stigler , University of Chicago The Annual Review of Statistics and Its Application aims to inform statisticians and quantitative methodologists , as well as all scientists and users of statistics about major methodological advances and the computational tools that allow for their implementation . It will include developments in the field of statistics , including theoretical statistical underpinnings of new methodology , as well as developments in specific application domains such as biostatistics and bioinformatics , economics , machine learning , psychology , sociology , and aspects of the physical sciences . Complimentary online access to the first volume will be available until January 2015 . table of contents : • What Is Statistics ? Stephen E . Fienberg • A Systematic Statistical Approach to Evaluating Evidence from Observational Studies , David Madigan , Paul E . Stang , Jesse A . Berlin , Martijn Schuemie , J . Marc Overhage , Marc A . Suchard , Bill Dumouchel , Abraham G . Hartzema , Patrick B . Ryan • The Role of Statistics in the Discovery of a Higgs Boson , David A . van Dyk • Brain Imaging Analysis , F . DuBois Bowman • Statistics and Climate , Peter Guttorp • Climate Simulators and Climate Projections , Jonathan Rougier , Michael Goldstein • Probabilistic Forecasting , Tilmann Gneiting , Matthias Katzfuss • Bayesian Computational Tools , Christian P . Robert • Bayesian Computation Via Markov Chain Monte Carlo , Radu V . Craiu , Jeffrey S . Rosenthal • Build , Compute , Critique , Repeat : Data Analysis with Latent Variable Models , David M . Blei • Structured Regularizers for High - Dimensional Problems : Statistical and Computational Issues , Martin J . Wainwright • High - Dimensional Statistics with a View Toward Applications in Biology , Peter Bühlmann , Markus Kalisch , Lukas Meier • Next - Generation Statistical Genetics : Modeling , Penalization , and Optimization in High - Dimensional Data , Kenneth Lange , Jeanette C . Papp , Janet S . Sinsheimer , Eric M . Sobel • Breaking Bad : Two Decades of Life - Course Data Analysis in Criminology , Developmental Psychology , and Beyond , Elena A . Erosheva , Ross L . Matsueda , Donatello Telesca • Event History Analysis , Niels Keiding • Statistical Evaluation of Forensic DNA Profile Evidence , Christopher D . Steele , David J . Balding • Using League Table Rankings in Public Policy Formation : Statistical Issues , Harvey Goldstein • Statistical Ecology , Ruth King • Estimating the Number of Species in Microbial Diversity Studies , John Bunge , Amy Willis , Fiona Walsh • Dynamic Treatment Regimes , Bibhas Chakraborty , Susan A . Murphy • Statistics and Related Topics in Single - Molecule Biophysics , Hong Qian , S . C . Kou • Statistics and Quantitative Risk Management for Banking and Insurance , Paul Embrechts , Marius Hofert Access this and all other Annual Reviews journals via your institution at www . annualreviews . org . A nnu . R e v . B i o c h e m . 2010 . 79 : 707 - 735 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g A cce ss p r ov i d e d by Y a l e U n i v e r s it y - L a w L i b r a r y on 02 / 01 / 15 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y .